Mr. COLMANS ELECTION SERMON On Wednesday, May 28th. 1718.

Massachusetts. At a COUNCIL held in the Council Chamber in Boston, upon
Thursday May 29. 1718.
Ordered, THAT PENN TOWNSEND and ADDINGTON DAVENPORT Esqrs; give the Thanks of
the Board to the Reverend Mr. BENJAMIN COLMAN for his Sermon preached Yesterday
before the GENERAL ASSEMBLY, and desire a Copy thereof in order to its being
Printed.

J. WILLARD Secr.

The Religious Regards we owe to our COUNTRY, and the Blessing of Heaven
assured thereunto.

A SERMON Preached before His Excellency SAMUEL SHUTE Esquire His MAJESTY's
COUNCIL, and the ASSEMBLY of the PROVINCE of the Massachusetts Bay in
NEW ENGLAND, May 28. 1718.

Being the Day for the ELECTION of His Majesty's Council there.

By BENJAMIN COLMAN A. M. Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Nec sibi, sed toti natum se credere Mundo BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B Green,
Printer to His Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. 1718.

To the Honorable Sir WILLIAM ASHURST-Kt. AND JOHN BARRINGTON SHUTE Esquire
HAVING in the following Discourse presumed to mention your Honorable Names,
as distinguished among the Generous Friends and Patrons of my dear Country, to
whom should I now Inscribe it but to Your Selves, if indeed it may be seemly
and excusable to tender You such a mite of respect and gratitude.

THE Subject is such as must needs be acceptable to worthy and Superior
Persons, born and raised for the good of others, whose Ambition it is to be
extensive Blessings to the World, and who like the Orbs of Light that roll over
us are dispensing their benign Influences to distant Regions.

GRATITUDE to our Benefactors is one of the first points of Justice and
Honesty: But if a private Benefit and personal Obligation demand a most
grateful Acknowledgment, how much more those of a common and public nature to
a People; which like the light and rain of Heaven are of unknown extent, and of
inestimable price.

I OWE this Duty therefore to my Country, to render You the best and most
public Thanks I am able for all the Services and Benefits You have done it, and
to ask your continued kind concern on all Occasions for a PROVINCE, whose
distinguishing Loyalty and dutiful Affection to the KING's most Excellent
Majesty, and the Protestant Succession in His Illustrious HOUSE, has already
commended it unto your just and noble Regards.

I hope You will have the Prayers of an Obliged pious People, and that their
GOD will think upon You for Good according to all that you have done, or may
yet do for them; and which is much more, according to all you may have done, or
shall do, for the Religious and Civil Interests of GREAT BRITAIN, where it has
pleased the DIVINE PROVIDENCE to make You some of the Ornaments and Blessings
of your Age.

THAT You may still live so, is the Prayer of

GENTLEMEN Your most Humble Obliged and Obedient Servant Benjamin Colman.
Boston in New England, June 4. 1718.
An ELECTION SERMON*
NEHEMIAH V. 19. Think upon me, my GOD, for Good; according to all that I have
done for this People.
A VERY short, but a very serious, pathetical and pleasant Prayer this* Happy
the man that is able to make it, and happy the People among whom there are many
that can solemnly make it. It is an Appeal to God respecting the faithful love
and religious regards we bear to our Country, and to the Interests of God in
it. It is a lifting up our hand to Heaven, and swearing by Him that lives and
rules there, and to him to whom we owe and should bear true Faith and
allegiance for ever and ever; that in our respective places we do and will live
and act for Him and his People. It is in effect to say (and how awful is such
an Oath to God) so think upon me my God for Good, as I think upon this People
with a sincere desire of their Good. Who of us now dare assume the Words before
the LORD, our King and our Judge? And yet who of us is there that may be
Excusable before him if we are not able to do it? The man whose Conscience
tells him that he bears an honest heart to his Country and the Religion of God
in it, he may humbly make the Prayer and take the Comfort of it.

LET us now consider the Man that first made it, the Time and the Occasion of
his making it, and then the Prayer by it self.

1. THE great and good Man that made it was Nehemiah, who was twelve years
Governor of Judea under Artexerxes King of Persia. He was a very pious and
excellent Ruler, a Man that came to seek the Welfare of the Children of Israel.
His whole story discovers a very deep Tincture of serious Piety in his Soul,
that he was a man of much Devotion and very frequent and solemn in Prayer. The
spirit of Moses and Joshua and Samuel and David, and of Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah
and Josiah rested upon him in this respect.

WE may profitably observe what bro't him to his Government, and with what
Disposition of Mind he came, and on what Motives. He came not for Honor, or
Riches, for he had eno' of these before, and knew, when he had eno', and had a
heart large eno' not only to use 'em for his own Comfort, but to spend 'em for
the public Good. He had been the Kings Cup Bearer; an Office of high Honor and
great Favor, and the Profit was to be sure equal to the Dignity of the Post.
By this he stood in the Presence of the King, and attended at his Table in the
Month of his Waiting, and gave the Wine into his Hand.

NEITHER did he come to enjoy Ease and Pleasure. He might have had more of
these at the Court. They that dwell in Kings Palaces go in soft Clothing, live
sumptuously and fare deliciously every day. The danger there is of surfeiting
in soft pleasures. It may be that Nehemiah the rather left it for that Reason.
And for what, in Exchange, did he forsake the Voluptuous scene? for Jerusalem
in its Ruins! and the Remnant of the Captivity in great affliction and
Reproach? This was what well became his Virtue and Devotion. He preferred the
very dust of Zion to the Gardens of Persia, the broken Walls and Gates of
Jerusalem to the Palaces of Shushan. He had ^ather come to repair these than to
dwell a^ ease in them.

IN a word, as the Case was truly Extraordinary, and so the Reason of Nehemiahs
seeking the Government of Judah, even the Melancholy account that was given him
of the present State of Jerusalem; so in a very Extraordinary manner he
prepared himself for the service of his Country; He sat down and wept, and
mourned certain days, and fasted and prayed to the God of Heaven; and his most
excellent Prayer which he prayed on this Occasion is recorded in the first
Chapter of this Book. Now it must be acknowledged that the like Solemnity is
not necessary in every Commission for the Government of a Province; No, far
otherwise; it may be much rather esteemed a Circumstance of life calling for a
devout Thanksgiving to God: But only let there be an Acknowledgement of the
Divine Providence governing our Changes and choosing for us our respective
Offices; let us have a sense of our Dependence on God, our Obligations to him
and our Accountableness, and let us be humbly seeking his Presence, Influence
and Help always, without which we shall never discharge the Duties of the most
Inferior Trust.

BUT so much for the Person here praying, Nehemiah, the Excellent Governor of
poor Judea; Who in my Eye (says a late pious Expositor) though he never wore a
Crown, nor commanded an Army, nor conquered any Country, nor was famed for
Philosophy or Oratory; yet being a pious praying Man and a singular Servant of
the Church of God in his day, was really a Greater Man and more Honorable, not
only than any of the Roman Consuls or Dictators, but than Xenophon, or
Demosthenes or Plato himself, who lived at the same time the bright Ornaments
of Greece.

2. LET us observe at what time and upon what Occasion it was that Nehemiah
prayed the Words of my Text; It was some time after his arrival at his
Government, and entrance upon the administration thereof. For as soon as he
came to Jerusalem and had published his Commission, he did instantly and with
great Diligence apply himself to the Work he came about, the Duties of his High
Station. This he did with great Integrity and Honor: He did not lose a day in
Diversions, but set himself to Business. He built the Wall of Jerusalem, and
took care for the Replenishing the Holy City He took the Number of his People,
he redressed their Grievances, and reformed diverse great Disorders and Abuses.
He looked to their Morals and led them in the Worship of God. He called 'em to
those solemnities of Religion which their present State made suitable, even to
Fasting and Prayer, and their Renewing their Covenant with GOD.

IN this pious and princely manner did his Zeal, Piety and Charity work, with
unknown Industry and Labor. And it is scarce to be said in what his Virtue
most appeared, or in what Virtue he most Excelled; whether in Generosity to the
public, in Tenderness to the poor and needy, in Compassion to the Oppressed, in
Courage toward the Rich and Great, the Rulers and Nobles; or in Indignation
against the wicked, the sensual, the profane; the cruel and unjust man.

INDEED there are some things here recorded of this most Excellent Governor,
which though they were truly Glorious in Him, yet strictly are not to be bro't
into Example. Particularly we are told in the Verses just before the Text, that
from the Time he took the Government He did not eat the Bread of the Governor.
He was not chargeable to 'em as his Predecessors had been. He served 'em for
nothing, he was so rich and they so poor, and his heart was as big as his
purse; nay he made his servants work for the public Gratis, whereas the
servants of the former Governors bare rule over the people; squeezing them
with one pretended Perquisite or another. But Nehemiah was too much a Father to
his People, and a Fearer of God to allow this. He neither durst do it nor was
he Inclined to do it.

YET he kept the Table of a Prince, while he would not require or accept the
Bread of the Governor. There were at his Table daily an hundred and fifty of
the Jews and Rulers, besides Strangers; and accordingly there was daily
prepared for him one Ox and six choice Sheep; with Fowls in some proportion,
and once in ten days store of all sorts of Wine; and yet for all this he did
not require the Bread of the Governor, because the Bondage was heavy upon the
People.

NOW I say this is not to be bro't into Example to oblige Governors in other
places and times, and not in like Circumstances, to do the like. No, It would
be very vain and ridiculous to pretend it. All that a Governor or Ruler is to
learn from this Noble spirit and action is this, to be Generous, to be tender
of a People, to consider his own and their Circumstances; to moderate his
Desires after Gain, not to extort and squeeze himself, nor to let any that are
under him do so.

NEHEMIAH had the Heart of a Christian, (for the Godly are just alike under
both Testaments) and who can read the Record of his noble Deeds without
remembering the Words of our Lord Jesus which he spoke, It is more blessed to
give than to receive. Act. 20.25. It argues a more blessed Disposition, and
infers a more blessed State.

AFTER all, Few Governors are rich like Nehemiah. He had amassed great Riches
in the Persian Court, and had been wont to live magnificently. And now he
piously (and I had almost said profusely) spends it in the Service of the poor
afflicted Church. He lived of his own in great State and Expense, for he had
(he knew) wherewith to do it. And blessed be God, Our Circumstances are not
like those of the Remnant of the Captivity. We are poor eno' it is true, but not
like them; nor are our Spirits lowr'd like theirs with our Condition. Look on
us, and judge how poor we be! Look on our Clothing, our Furniture; our Tables,
our Children; and if it were not for shame I had said our Balls, and say if we
be Poor! Judge by our Idle hours and Idle Expenses! if we are rich in these we
must not be poor only to the State and Church. We are well able to do much more
than ever we yet have done for the honorable Support both of the Magistracy
and the Ministry, and should be never the poorer for it.

AND so much for the time wherein Nehemiah uttered this prayer, a prayer which
every now and then we find him repeating, and always beautiful in him because
seasonably uttered.

3. I COME now to consider the Prayer by it self: Think upon me my God for
Good, according to all that I have d ne for this People.

IF ever the words can become a Mortals mouth they became his. We must put an
humble Christian sense upon 'em, which excludes Boasting. Here Is nothing in 'em
but what is modest, lowly and abasing before God; Nothing Vainglorious, but
altogether gracious and devout. He could comfortably remember what he had done,
and pray over it; and he knew how to pray, was used to it, even to remember God
of his Covenant Faithfulness and promised Mercies.

HERE Observe,

1. THE happy Freedom and Confidence with which he addresses God. My God. He
claims, he pleads an Interest in him, a Relation to him. My God, whose I am and
whom I serve. By God he ruled, and for him only; by his Word and according to
his Will, and for his Glory.

2. HIS Request. Think upon me. In which I would remark two things, his Modesty
and his Faith.

First, THE Modesty of his Petition. He asks to be though it upon. Bestow a kind
though it upon me, my God. That shall be eno' to me, if my God will but think upon
me! that shall be my pay and my exceeding Great Reward for all my Services to
the Public. He looked for no Recompense from men, nay some of them it may be
might think, speak and reward to him Evil for Good; but if God will remember
his Good Deeds and not blot them out, he desires no more.

AND yet it is a Great thing that Nehemiah asks, and what the Greatest and best
of men are not worthy of. What, for the Great GOD of Heaven to bestow a Though It
upon man that is a Worm, and the son of man that is a Worm! When we consider
his Heavens, -- Lord what is man that thou art mindful of him! Yet many O Lord,
and wonderful are thy Tho'ts to usward! It is a Request meet for a Favorite to
his Prince. Let my Lord remember his Handmaid. If he says, I Will think of you,
I Will remember you, it is eno'.

Secondly, THE Faith of this prayer is remarkable. Nehemiah believed in God,
and trusted that he would remember him for Good. He comforted himself thus, My
God thinks on me. He came to God believing that he is a Rewarder. He believed
that his God would think upon him? 1. for Good. 2. according to all his Good
Deeds.

1. FOR Good. Such are God's Tho'ts; thoughts of Good and not of Evil. Think
upon me my God, but not to mark my sin. No, for then who could stand? let these
be blotted out for ever and cast away. Remember them no more. But if there has
been any thing ever done in sincerity let my good God remember it. According to
thy Goodness remember me, for thy mercy sake; O Lord.

THINK upon me my God and assist, encourage, protect, succeed and prosper me.
Think upon me and accept me in my desires to serve thee and thy people: Let me
find Grace in thy sight. Think upon me to remunerate as thou please, of thy
free Grace, rich bounty and sovereign Mercy: Bless me my God, both in Temporals
and Spirituals, but especially the latter.

2. ACCORD^^G to his Deeds. Without good works done by us we may not presume to
look that God will ever think of us for good. For we may know then that there
is neither any good thing wro't in us, nor in reserve for us. Yet our best
Doings can never merit any Favor from God. 'The Reward is not of debt, but of
Grace altogether. If Abraham our Father were justified by Works, he had whereof
to glory. He believed in God which justifies sinners, and his Faith was
counted to him for Righteousness. Yet his Faith wro't in his Works, and by
Works his Faith was made perfect. In like manner Nehemiah claimed nothing as of
debt, but manifestly asks all of mere Grace, -- Think upon me, my God. Indeed
he expresses the Conscience he had of his own Sincerity before God, and his
Faith in the Promise and Righteousness of God. He spoke upon the Principle
which David lays down, Psalm. 18.24, -- 28. With an upright man Thou will show
thy self Upright, with the pure thou will show thy self pure, and with the
froward thou will show thy self froward. This is the equal and righteous Rule
of God's Government and Judgment.

BUT this excellent man is yet more particular and exact in his Petition. 1. He
speaks of all that he had done. 2. he speaks of it as all done for this People.

1. THERE was a great deal that he had done; and all in a very small space of
time. All that I have done. God will remember all the Good we do. No one thing,
not the least, sincerely meant to his Glory shall be overlooked by him. A Book
of Remembrance is written by him. What we forget he keeps in mind. Of all not
the least shall be forgotten; No not a cup of cold water to one of his. 1 Samuel
26.23. The Lord render to every man his Righteousness and his faithfulness.

BUT what all is this which poor, wretched, imperfect men may presume to speak
of before God? A poor all at the best! defective and defiled by Sin! less than
nothing in the Eyes of a Good man, whose Desires so vastly exceed his
seize. What have we ever done meet for the Great and Holy God to think
upon! When ye have done all say, We are Unprofitable servants. Lord, remember
not the defects and the defilements of my best Deeds! Judge me not according to
the little that I have done. And yet Comparatively one Man does a great deal
more Good in the world than many others. Some do a great deal of evil here, and
some if not so much hurt yet very little Good, but even in Comparison of those
that do good among men some vastly excel. I labored more th^n they all. As the
Stars are not all of one Magnitude and brightness, so neither are all men
Equal. Let us compare our selves with our betters, and think what abundance of
Good some others have done more than we have. Let us consider in particular
Nehemiahs excellent spirit, diligence and labor, and comparing him with most
other men, we may allow him to say, -- Think upon me, my God, according to all
that I have done.

2. IT was all done for this People, and therefore what God he knew would think
upon.

THIS people? why what People was it? the poor Remnant of a miserable
Captivity? a people that were not now a Nation, nor scarce a Province! and in
great affliction and reproach. Chap. 1.3. These feeble Jews; as their Enemies
called them with much Contempt. Chap. 4.2. The Bondage was heavy upon them, as
Nehemiah himself says in the words before my Text.

BUT yet they were 1. Gods people; and 2. Nehemiahs own People.

THEY were the Seed of Abraham, and beloved for their Fathers sake. When God
first chose 'em they were the fewest of any people, and continued so for a
great while after they were chosen, while other Families increased into Nations
and Kingdoms round about them. What advantage then had the Jew? very much in
their visible Adoption of God, and peculiar Separation for himself; He gave his
Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel; he has not dealt
so with any Nation besides For did God ever go and take him a Nation by like
Temptations, signs and wonders? by a stretched out Arm and by great Terrors,
according to all that God did for Israel in Egyp^? Wherefore he well concludes
that the Lord would think upon him for Good according to all that he did for
this people. For he could plead with Moses respecting 'em, Lord they are thy
people, and thine Inheritance; and he could pray with Asaph* Remember thy
Congregation which thou have purchased of old* the Rod of thine Inheritance
which thou have redeemed; this Mount Zion wherein thou have dwelt What then
though they were few in Number, poor and despised, Zion the Outcast whom no man
regarded; yet were they still Gods small Peculiar upon Earth. What though the
Church were now but as a few Myrtle Trees in a Bottom, as the Prophet saw them
represented in Vision, yet the Son of God at the Head of his Angels there
guarded and protected 'em.

BUT then, this people were this good Man's own people. Jerusalem was indeed
waste and its Gates consumed with fire, but it was still the place of his
Fathers Sepulchers. He dearly loved his Country and the Religion of it, and did
all that lay within his power for the Good of it.

BEHOLD then a noble and singular Instance of one that generously and
religiously served the Public; 1. from a natural affection to it as his own
People, 2. from a pious and devout Consideration of them as the People of God.
His Relation to them, and their Relation to God, jointly Influenced him to all
that he did for them. See Chap. 1.10. Now these are thy servants and thy
people, whom thou have redeemed by thy great power and by thy strong hand: and
that parallel place, Chap. 13.14. Remember me O my God concerning this, and
blot not out my good Deeds that I have done for the House of my God, and for
the Offices thereof.

SO copious, if not tedious, I have been in Opening the Words; in excuse
whereof I can only plead that the Meditation was too pleasant to me to restrain
my tho'ts, and has seemed to me too pertinent to the present Occasion to be
suppressed. Let us therefore make a close and serious Application of the whole
to our selves in these two or three plain and short Doctrinal Notes.

I. THAT we should do all that we can, every one in his place and according to
his power and ability, for the Good of this People. II. THAT more especially
the Government over us are Indispensably bound to do so. III. GOD will think
upon all them for Good that do so.
I. THAT we should do all that we can, every one in his place and according to
his power and ability for the Good of our Country. Let us Emulate Nehemiahs
Piety in this Heroic Instance of it. And indeed this is the true Heroic Virtue
and Piety, to endeavor in our places to deserve well of Mankind, and in the
most extensive manner wherein we can to honor God in the world.

NO man is made only for himself and his own private affairs, but to serve
profit and benefit others. We are manifestly formed for Society, and designed
by our Great Creator for a mutual dependence on and serviceableness unto each
other here in the body. Both the Safety and the Pleasure of life depend upon
our joint proposing and pursuing this design. As soon as we read but of two men
in the world, we find that God expected the one should be the others Keeper. It
were yet a Cainish temper to doubt or deny this Obligation. He was both a
murderer and a liar that first denied this, and it is pity that he has left any
Children behind him in his cursed Image. Cain flew in the face of God, and did
violence to nature, did outrage to his own Conscience, when he asked -- Am I my
Brothers Keeper? Ignorant and impudent man! did he not feel that within
himself, that he ought to be so. As Cain was of that wicked one, so is he of
Cain who thinks himself not born for the Welfare of others, but merely for
himself and his own petty private and temporal Concerns. And like Cain he
deserves to be cursed from the earth, and driven from the face of men, as well
as hid from the face of God; a fugitive and a vagabond, and afraid of every one
he sees. This is a due punishment of so barbarous a Principle. For as the man
renounces others, so must they him; and while he declares that others must look
for no Good from him, they may well apprehend all imaginable Evil and mischief
from him, and he from them again. For his Principle runs him into all manner of
Injustice and Injury, barbarity and bloodiness, as it did Cain; and the Earth
cannot bear the monster, but cries for vengeance against him.

A man's private and domestic affairs are too petite to engross his noble Soul;
they are too small and narrow a Compass for him to confine himself within. He
is endowed for much greater things, and he much debases himself if he do not
think so.

BUT our Country, and the particular Places where we dwell, are ordinarily the
bounds of our Influence. Especially is it so as to common and ordinary people,
who are known only in their own Nei'bourhood, and find eno' near home to keep
'em employed. And here prudence as well as charity teaches us to begin.

EVERY one is to act in his own place, studying to be quiet and to do his own
business, in the Relation Trust and Office which the governing Providence of
God assigns him, and according to the Talents which the great Lord and Master
has committed to him: But in his place he is to improve unto the utmost extent,
the Powers which God gives him and the Opportunities which Providence presents
him with, for the doing good in the world; Modesty and Prudence directing him
and preserving him.

WHATEVER for kind and whatever for degree the Gift of our bountiful and
gracious God be to us, so we must minister to the common Good, as good Stewards
of the manifold Grace of God. For as there are many members in one body, and
every member has its several place and service; so how many and various soever
we be, we are at last but one Body, and all members one of another: and having
Gifts differing according to the Grace of God bestowed on us, we must so
minister in proportion and for kind, with diligence and cheerfulness. To whom
much is given of him God demands the more, and of every one according to that
he has received; as the Husbandman looks to reap that which he sowes, and in
proportion to the measure sown.

IF a man receive Wisdom (and largeness of heart like Solomon) from the Father
of light, he must be liberal and communicative thereof for the benefit of the
world; as men do not light a candle and put it under a bushel, but set it on a
Candlestic and it gives light to all that are in the room. If a man have
Learning, and be able to speak or write well, he is to consecrate this also to
the service of God and the world; whereby he may become the Father of an
immortal Offspring, and teach the Generations to be born after his own decease.
If a man has Riches and a heart to do good with it, he may be not only a Father
to the Poor but to his Country also; defending it from dangers and redeeming it
from misery. If a man have Rule and Authority it is given him immediately for
the Public Service, for he is Gods Minister attending continually on this very
thing. Or if a man has Reputation and Credit, and an Interest in those that
have Power, this also is a happy Advantage to be improved carefully after the
Example of Esther and Mordecai for the welfare of their People. Again, if a man
have Courage and boldness of Spirit, or bodily Strength, let him not employ it
in injurious hectoring and brutal insulting his Nei'bours, but as the Worthies
of David who so't immortal fame and got their Names enrolled among the first
and second Three by the Dangers which they faced in the cause of God and his
Israel. 2 Samuel 10.12. Be of good Courage and let us play the Men, for our
People, and for the Cities of our God. Or again, if Policy and depth for
Counsel be a man's Accomplishment, let him make good use of it, as Hushai did in
defeating the subtle and pernicious counsel of Ahitophel, and for the
preservation of his King and Country. But if a person have Nothing considerable
in his own outward Circumstances or inward Endowments to distinguish him, yet
if he have but an honest and willing Mind to do what he can, he will find many
an Opportunity to serve the Public, and contribute to the weal of his Country.
The meanest must not be discouraged, nor may be excused: he must not say of
himself, I am a dry tree, a low and useless shrub; nor may others despise him
as insignificant: for though he may not be likely to do much, yet God will accept
his little, and it may prove a great deal more than he thinks for. Yea indeed a
vast deal of good we sometimes see done by Persons of small powers, either
natural or acquired, where there is but discretion and application. And this
being in fact a matter of Experience does infer a strong Obligation upon all,
and is a powerful Motive for the least to be doing what they can. For small
Attempts and less Expectations have been sometimes crowned with vast effects.

IF what has been already said be not sufficient to convince us of our
Obligation to propose and pursue the common good of our Country, I appeal then
to the Conscience of every man, Whether his own heart do not approve and
applaud such a Disposition as very excellent in it self. What else can at
present fully answer the End of thy Being, rational Endowments, and the
Relation thou bear to Mankind? can you be good, and just in your Place
without it? can the Being and End of Humane Society be answered without it? is
not this one point wherein men have pre-eminence above the beasts? Nay is it
not a kind of Instinct in Nature, which is unaccountable and irresistible; a
secret invincible affection to ones Country, as unto some natural Relation in
blood? and does it not afford a man a noble and lasting satisfaction if he has
been honored to do it service? is it not agreeable to humane nature to be
generous, compassionate, obliging, grateful, beneficent? and is it not the
Image of the Great Creator instamp'd upon us, who is good to all and has a
tender Care over all his Works? Nay are not the worst of men themselves ashamed
to avow Self-interest as a Principle of their actions, as being conscious to
themselves that it is the basest of all Principles? The practice of benignity,
of courtesy, of clemency (says Dr. Barrow) do at first sight without the aid
of any discursive reflection, obtain approbation and applause from men; being
acceptable and amiable to their mind as beauty to their sight, harmony to their
hearing, fragrancy to their smell, and sweetness to their taste. It cannot be
(says Mr. Collier) that God should give man Solitary Principles and yet intend
him for Public Converse? make his Interest depend upon Mutual Affection, and at
the same time create him so as natually to care for nothing but himself.

BUT while I am upon this head, proving our Obligation to a General Kindness
and Public Spirit from the light of Nature, it may not be amiss to remark
something of the noble sense that the Romans had in this matter. I will name
three only, Cato, Cicero, and the Emperor Marcus Antoninus; and add to them the
Principles of the Stoics.

CATO the Younger was an admired and celebrated lover of his Country, and a
very faithful zealous asserter of the rights and liberties of it. Plutarch
tells us among other things, that when his friends could not persuade him to
stand for the Tribune-ship, yet when Metellus was put up from whom he feared
danger to the State, he presently stood for the Place himself and carried it;
for the People looked upon him (says the Historian) not as one that desired a
favor of them, but one that sought it to do his Country a kindness, and that
he might defend their Liberty and Government. Wherefore at another time when by
his courage and wisdom in opposing Clodius, he had driven him out of Town, (he
had made him appear so infamous) and Cicero came to thank him for it; he
answered, Thank the Commonwealth, for whose sake alone it is that I do every
thing.

INDEED Cicero was of the same noble Spirit, and a like worthy Patriot to his
Country. He was the man among the Romans that first had that singular Style of
honor decreed him, Pater patriae, the Father of his Country A dignity
preferable to the being born to Empire over it. And it is remarkable that
Caesar himself who had Sacrificed him to the Malice of Antonius for his own
Advancement to the Imperial Chair, yet honored his Memory for his faithful
Opposition to him in that design: for Caesar visiting his Dau'ters Son found
him with a Book of Cicero's in his hand; the Boy for fear endeavored to hid it
under his gown; which Caesar perceiving took it from him, and after he had
turned over a great part of it gave it him again, saying, My Child, this was a
Learned man and a lover of his Country.

I will only add a saying of Marcus Antoninus, one of the best of the Roman
Emperors. As you are a member of a Society, so every action of yours should
tend to the benefit and improvement of it. So that when you do any thing that
has neither immediate nor remote reference to general advantage, you make a
breach in the common Interest, destroy the Unity of Public life, and are as
really guilty of Seditious behavior as a Malcontent that imbroils the
Government.

THIS Principle was well worthy of Him that was at the Head of the World, and
indeed the Happiness and Glory of the Empire seemed to expire in him. Such were
the Principles of the Stoics, "That we should love all Man kind heartily,
Gatakers Prelim. disc.
solicit their Interests, bear with their Infirmities, and do no manner of
injury to any man: "That a man should not think himself born for his private
Satisfaction, but exert himself for the Public, and make his life as
significant to the world as it is possible: "That the Conscience of a good
action should content a man, without the prospect of fame and reward: that he
ought never to be tired with the exercise of good nature, -- but look upon a
generous action as a reward to it self. These are some of the noble Sentences
which we find in the writings of the Stoics, which Christians may read with
blushes, reflecting on their own defects in practice.

NOT but that the Precepts of CHRIST OUR SAVIOR do far excel all that Seneca,
Cicero, Epictetus, Antoninus or all the Masters of Morality have said on this
Argument; and from hence it is that our Obligations rise higher than theirs
could to live unto the benefit of others. And as it much rather becomes me in
this desk, so it should be much more acceptable unto a Christian Audience, to
observe the excelling Institutions of the Gospel on this Argument. For we are
instructed from the Divine Oracles, "To love our Nei'bours as our selves;
"Whatsoever we would that men should do to us to do the same to them, and "as
we have opportunity to do good to all men, especially unto the household of
faith; "That we should deny our selves, and that NONE OF US LIVES TO HIMSELF;
"That no man should seek his own singly, but every man his brothers wealth;
"That we look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things
of others; "That we be kindly affectioned one to another in brotherly love, in
honor preferring one another; "That nothing be done through strife and vain
glory, but in lowliness of mind that each esteem other better than himself.

WHEN I look over these Superior Laws of revealed Religion, and contemplate
the Divine Life of our SAVIOR, and how his Prophets and Apostles excelled
after him in a noble living to the Good of others, Temporal and Eternal; it
puts out all the Lights of the Gentile world, as the Stars do disappear at the
rising of the Sun. The Phylanthropy of our Savior was more than humane. It was
a God-like life of love to mankind. No words can at all adorn the Pattern and
the Precept of Goodness and Benignity which he has left us. And this is his
Commandment that we love one another, that we love Mankind as he has done. And
among mere men who ever lived so entirely devoted to the good of others as the
Apostles of our Lord Jesus? The Spirit of Christ and his Glory rested on them,
and they slighted all concerns of their own, their safety, their liberty, their
ease, their reputation, their very lives, for the welfare of others; even of
those who did spitefully malign, and cruelly abuse 'em. And this they did on
those Spiritual Principles, Reasons and Motives, which never entered into the
Morals of the Heathen, but are peculiar to the Gospel of the Grace of God. Such
was the life of the blessed Apostle St. Paul, whose Story well laid together
affords many bright and shining Instances of a great and noble Soul, entirely
formed by the love of God to seek the Weal of Mankind, private and public,
present and future, with such a passion and courage, humility and meekness,
disinterestedness and self-denial, as at once lets us into the defects and
meaness of all the Grecian and Roman Characters, See the Christian Hero:
written by Sir Richard Steel. An Argument proving that no Principles but those
of Religion are sufficient to make a Great Man. Chap. 2. and ^.
and shows that the Christian Principles if acted up to do produce a much more
perfect Hero; scil. A Man that does greater things for Mankind without noise
and oftentation; vain glory and worldly veiws: A Man that can act zealously and
constantly for the good of the World, not only without the prospect of fame,
riches, honors or authority; but in the face of injustice, ingratitude,
neglect, shame and suffering; which was what the proud Roman Spirit could not
bear or submit to, but run 'em rather upon their Swords, as it did Cato, Brutus
and others, not having the Christian Courage and Grandeur to suffer shame in a
noble Cause, and not ingloriously run from it, when there remained only a
Passive Testimony further to be born to it. In its Extremity they deserted it,
having no sense of the Sovereignty of a Governing Providence which may if it
pleases call us to Sufferings as well as to Action. And I wish that a sort of
Christians would consider this, who in defiance to true reason as well as to
their Savior espouse the old Roman Notions of Greatness of Soul, and form
themselves from Plutarchs Lives despising the glorious Records of the great and
godly Men whose Story we have in the Holy Scripture, which were written for our
Learning, and to form us to be Blessings in the world while we live, and
blessed in the presence and favor of the Great GOD, the Supreme Governor of
the world, when we die.

LET me therefore address You, who are a People of Religion by profession, That
on the principles of Christianity you would conscientiously, in Obedience to
the word of God, in Conformity to the Life of the Blessed Jesus and the bright
Cloud of Saints that do encompass us, imploring and relying on that Grace of
his, which is sufficient for you as it has been for others, proposing to you^
selves the Glory of God, the love of Men, both as to Soul and Body, the welfare
of these Churches of Christ, the flourishing of true Virtue and Piety and the
reverend worship of God in them, and in all your own Eternal Salvation, and the
giving up your Account at last with joy; -- Let me (I say) beseech you every
one, the greater and the less, to do all that you can for the good of this
People.

LET the least and lowest, the poorest and the most obscure Pray for their
Country. The weakest and the most infirm, the Women and the Children can do
this. And your fervent Prayers may be very powerful and effectual for the
obtaining the Presence and Blessing of God with your People. And God forbid
that any of us should Sin against the Lord in ceasing to Pray for our Country.
A true Spirit of Religion will make us to say with the sw^^^ Psalmist of
Israel, If I forget t^^e, then let my tongue cleave to the roof of my Mouth.

BUT especially let the Ministers of Religion (...) themselves gladly in secret
Intercessions, in private Studies, in public Labors, yea and in Sufferings too
if called to them; not seeking our own profit but the profit of many that they
may be saved; enduring all things for the Elects sake that they may obtain
Salvation by Jesus Christ; Approving our selves as Ministers of God in
Patience, -- in necessities, -- in labors, -- by pureness, by knowledge, by
long-suffering, by kindness -- by love unfei'ned, by the word of truth, -- by
the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left, by honor and
dishonor, by evil report and good report, as deceivers and yet true, as
unknown and yet well known, -- as poor and yet making many rich, as having
nothing and yet possessing all things --: So let our Mouth be open to this
People and our heart enlarged; that they may never be straightened in us how much
soever they may be in their own bowels; and let us look for no other recompense
from them but this, which we would wish from our Children into whom if we could
we would infuse all that is good and pious and generous in our own Souls, that
they also might have their hearts enlarged "to receive the Grace of the Gospel
according to that fullness in which it is tendered to them. (See 2 Cor. 6.4, --
13.)

MIGHT we have this Wish, My Brethren, we should see you all gladly denying
your selves for the Public good, improving your Interests for the service of
your Country, venturing your Estates for it, yea running greater hazards than
that, even to lay down your lives for the Brethren: as the Noble Queen Esther
said, when she put her life in her hand for her people, And if I perish I
perish. Nor can a man venture his Name, his Estate, his Ease, his Life in a
more glorious Cause, than for the defense of the Civil and Religious Liberties
of his Country.

WHAT then shall we think of that Meager, hungry, sordid, ill-favored kine, a
vicious Self-love, Self will and Self interest, that devours all the goodly and
the fat that comes in its way, and like a famine eats up a Peoples plenty and
prosperity. God save us from this brand and bane of the latter days, those
perilous times of which the Apostle spoke so long ago and which we have seen
come. 2 Timothy ^.2, 3, 4. For men shall be lovers of their own selves, covetous,
boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, unholy;
without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, feirce,
despisers of those that are good; traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of
pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form of Godliness, but denying the
power of it.

THESE are the viprous brood of a base, private Selfish Spirit, and into the
woeful time of the reign of this wretched lust our days is cast. For with our
own eyes we have lately seen the Apostles words fulfilled in the Character of a
restless party in our own Nation, (a parcel of proud, feirce, false, perjured
traitors; ungrateful, unnatural, hau'ty, heady, boasting, sensual men) who in
the most perfidious and shameless manner have attempted, by secret Conspiracies
and by open rebellions, to sacrifice the Civil and Religious Interests of the
Nation to their own private Interests. Nay indeed we have lived to see not only
the Interest and Glory of a single Nation, a Queen and a Ministry then the
Wonder and terror of the World; but also a Victorious and triumphant
Confederacy, and the common Interest of all Europe, and which is more of God in
the world, basely betrayed by a few Statesmen for their own advancement.

O inhumane and inglorious conduct, that has covered their Names with
everlasting infamy! equally enemies in the end to themselves and to the Public!
So may such selfish and treacherous men ever perish! but let them that love the
People of God be as the Sun when it goes forth in its strength.

THIS Self-interest (says Dr. Barrow) is the great Enemy to the Commonweal,
which perverteth all right, which confounds all order, which spoileth all the
convenience and comfort of Society. It is the chief spring of injustice, making
men violate all laws and rules of Conscience; they falsify their Trusts, they
betray their Friends, they supplant their Nei'bour, they detract from the worth
and virtue of any Man, they forge and vent odious flanders, they commit any
sort of wrong or outrage, they without regard or remorse do any thing which
seems to further their design. From hence are those fierce Animosities, fiery
Contentions, bitter Emulations, rancorous Grudges, calumnious Supplantings,
perfidious Cozenages, outrageous, Violences, factious Confederacies, seditions
Murmurings, tumultuous Clamours, which embroil the World in discord and
disorder. Thus He.

O then that we could agree to banish it for ever from Christian Society, and
root it both out of Church and State. Let us not harbor it in our own breasts,
let us not suffer it in one another. Let us every one be Emulous who shall best
love the Public, let us honor none that don't, let us love all that do. Let
factions and parties cease among us, let us be grateful to all that seek our
good, let us detest the vices that are destructive of a People; profaness,
fraud, drinking, leudness; let us abhor the principles of Libertinism on one
hand, and of Slavery on the other; and let us put a special remark on the
spirit of lying that began on the other side the water in the late Reign, and by
dint of slander overset the most generous and wise Ministry that ever a Nation
was blessed with, and whose Reputation was established by a course of Victories
scarce to be paralleled in History; which lying spirit follows party-men every
where, and assaults most the best Administration. Finally, let our holy
Religion direct us in our principles, in our aims and in all our measures, and
we shall do well: let us not be content to act from a mere humane virtue, but
from a principle of Grace rooted deep in our Souls; that what we do for the
Public may be indeed done for God, an offering to Him of a sweet savor.

THUS far I have run on, and yet have but hinted at what might have been said
on the First Proposition, That we ought every one in his place, and according
to his power and ability, to lay out our selves for the Good of our Country.

I come now to the Second, which brings me yet nearer to the Business of the
Day, and to the Honorable Persons who have called me now to speak before them.

II. THAT more especially those in Government over us are indispensably bound
to do what they can for the Good of their People. We may suppose they have it
more in their power to do us good, and it would be very hard to doubt their
will and inclination. They if any are obliged to be Public blessings, and God
and Man both do expect more of them than others: for surely they have more
capacity and opportunity, and have also Sworn to do it. The People are their
Charge and care, committed to them as a Flock to the Shepherd, to feed them
according to the integrity of their hearts, and to guide them by the
skilfulness of their hands. The Rulers of a People are their Heads, and
accordingly are to think and see and speak for them. They are Fathers, and
should naturally and tenderly care for us with a Parental affection. Numb.
11.12. Have I conceived all this People? have I begotten them? that thou
should say unto me, Carry them in thy bosom, as a nursing father bears
his sucking child. These Public Relations imply a singular trust, and infer a
singular duty to the Public. Besides that Authority and Power enables a Man to
do a great deal of good; and is usually attended with riches and reputation;
and we ought to suppose with wisdom and knowledge; all which procure Men more or
less interest abroad and influence at home. Moreover, Magistracy is appointed
of God for this very end, and the Oath of God is upon Rulers to intend the
Public Good. There is no power but of God, and the Powers that be are ordained
of Him; and to Him they are accountable. They are raised by his Providence, and
must themselves be governed in their high station by his Word, and rule for his
Glory and the welfare of their People. Romans 13.4. For he is the Minister of God
to thee for good. To serve hereunto is the true honor and noble pleasure of
Life; but the damage and mischief is infinite if the Ruler departs from this
point, either by negligence or wilful abuse of his Power. The good Providence
which is equally over us all, and which concerns itself for every Individual,
and much more for the Body of a People collectively, immediately takes notice
of the Indignity to Heaven and the Injury to Men: What is thy Mother? a
lioness? a She-bear, that should have been a Parent and a nursing Mother.

WHETHER we consider the Ruler in his Legislative or Executive trust, the
making Laws or the seeing to the execution of them, he is in both a Servant to
the Public, and is to have the weal of his People at heart. Both the Lawmaker
and the Judge are in the discharge of their several trusts to promote the
virtue and religion of a People, the public peace and prosperity, to defend the
legal rights, liberties and privileges both civil and religious, to suppress
vice and wickedness, to support learning, and the means of Education, which is
for ever a principal Interest of any People. And the Subject is also obliged to
obey and observe the laws in these cases provided, and to assist the Officers
of Justice in a legal prosecution of the Transgressors of them.

IF therefore the Question be, In what Insta^ces we would humbly supplicate and
claim the faithful Care and Endeavor of all in power over us for the good of
this People; holding our selves in our respective places bound to serve under
them and assist in the same noble design; I would name,

1. THE reverend Worship of God among our People. This was ever the first Care
of the Godly Princes of Israel, from the days of Moses down to the Reign of
good Josiah, and how pleasing to God and beneficial to the Public this pious
care was* let the whole history of the Kings of Judah witness. The chief care
of Moses was for the Tabernacle and Altar of God, and so was David's and
Solomon's first Regard to the Ark and Temple; and the reforming Kings of Judah
afterward, who were such Blessings in their day, and under whose Administration
the lost glory and prosperity of the Kingdom recovered strangely from time to
time, began their glorious Reigns with the Restoration of the Temple worship,
reviving the pure Institutions of God, and destroying the Idols and the Groves.
Wherefore,

YOUR first care ^or your People should be to see that God is with them and
that they keep with God; and therefore that his holy Sabbaths be sanctified,
his Institutions adhered to, his Sanctuary be set up and frequented every
where, his Word be faithfully Preached, his Worship be supported, and his
Ministers be comforted and honored in the discharge of their duty to the Souls
of Men. This is the truest Charity to the Public, and the least Reverence to
God that the Government of a People can express; and as the prosperity of a
People depends on the favor and blessing of God, so it has been ever
experienced that the keeping close to the Institutions of God respecting his
worship, is the way to secure the Divine favor and blessing to a People;
whereof the story of Asa and Jehoshaphat and Hezekiah are notorious and famous
Evidence, and an Example to the Church for ever.

IF then ( our honored Fathers) you think in your Consciences that the Worship
of God in these Churches, the Ministry of the Land and the Orders of Gods house
here, are as near to the Rule of Gods word, and answer as well the Great Ends
of Holiness and Devotion, if not better that what others may more esteem and
prefer; then as you honor God and value the best Interest of this People,
spiritual or temporal, abide by and adhere to the support and defense of those
Methods of religious Worship which we are in.

BUT do it with Meekness and Charity; for your Platform pretends not to
perfection, nor to impose an Uniformity on the Churches; which is neither
necessary nor conducive to external Order nor unto Christian Unity, to peace,
truth or vital Piety.

BUT if it might please the Government to go further into the Counsel, the
expense and travel, for the Instruction of the Natives, the Mission of
Ministers into the dark and loose places of the land, where the Inhabitants are
averss to the Settlement of the Ordinances of the Gospel among them, and the
assisting our New Plantations in their Infancy to have the Preaching of Gods
word among them; I judge these would be so many acts of Piety highly acceptable
to heaven, and from which under the blessing of Providence both Church and
State would reap unknown Benefit.

2. LET Moral Virtue, Sobriety and Purity, Justice and Righteousness, be a
special part of your Care for us. Righteousness exalts a Nation; but Sin is
the reproach of any People, Prove. 14.34. The formal and solemn worship of God
is but a mockery of the Holy One, where vice and wickedness is not
discountenanced and suppressed. The Sword is put into the Rule^s hand to be a
Terror to evil doers, and a protection of the virtuous and pious: Romans 13.4. He
is a revenger to execute wrath upon them that do evil, but do that which is
good and thou shall have praise of the same. Wherefore as you would seek the
good of this People, save 'em from Self-destruction, and from the Judgments and
wrath of God. Exert the power with which God has armed and honored you against
Vices and Immoralities which pollute a land and provoke the Divine anger. Let
the Laws in force against profaness, cursing and swearing, and Sabbath-breaking
be openly reverenced and zealously executed; and so the Laws against unchastity
and uncleaness, and drunkenness; as well as those against unrighteousness and
dishonest practices. For these vices sap the foundation of society, peace,
safety and mutual comfort; and are therefore so vehemently abhorred and
forbidden by God, who has given us his laws for our good. And for the
maintaining the honor of those immutable laws of Justice and Charity, whereby
the peace, rights, purity and good Order of Mankind are preserved, God has made
Government and Magistracy a universal and perpetual Ordinance among men.
Wherefore let Justice have a free Course and be impartially administered, and
let virtue and goodness have your Countenance and be recommended by your good
Example; for the virtue of a People is everlastingly necessary to their
happiness. This was the great Good that Nehemiah did for his People; he not
only built the wall of Jerusalem and led them in the solemnities of Religion,
in fasting and prayer and renewing their Covenant with God; but he set himself
to reform their manners, and particularly expressed his zeal against those that
profaned the Sabbath and defiled themselves: for which two things especially he
begs of God to remember him for good. Chap. 1^. v. 22, 31.

3. AS you would consult and pursue the true and lasting Good of the Province,
and particularly the Virtue and Morals of this People, Let the Invaluable
Privileges which we enjoy by the Royal Favor, and the CHARTER in which, they
are granted and secured to us by the best of Princes, be a special Object of
your watchful care. By this we enjoy great quietness, and very worthy fruits we
reap continually from this Grace of the Divine Providence unto us; and we ought
to accept it always and in all places with all Thankfulness unto God and the
King. This Day is a witness to you, in the whole solemnity thereof; of the
Privilege God has put into your hands to choose from among your Brethren Men of
Piety and Virtue* Wisdom and Understanding, Integrity and Justice; Men of a
Public Spirit and lovers of their Country; without whose advise or consent not
a Judge or a Magistrate can receive a Commission for the Peace. He that
estimates not our Charter Privileges must be either very Ignorant of the
Interests of this People, or very unfriendly to them. He that is Inimical to
the one, must be greatly so to the other. We have those that envy us our
Advantages, and are striking at our Charter on any trivial pretense and foreign
occasion; but God has hitherto guarded it, and raised up Generous Friends whom
he has spirited to stand up in the defense of it in time of danger, among whom
the Names of ASHURST and SHUTE will always (I trust) be had in Remembrance by
an obliged and grateful People; whose God requite to 'em all the kindness and
affection they have shown us.

TRULY, might it become me to speak my tho'ts freely before my Superiors,
there is no Expense should be esteemed too much which may be at any time
necessary for the defense of the Charter. And I hope the Loyalty and Fidelity
of this People to His Majesty's Government, will ever be such and so
conspicuous as to render us not unworthy of the Continuance of his Royal Favor
to us.

4. IN the next place I would humbly recommend the honorable and careful
support of Learning among this People. It is this that has honored us among
the Provinces, and been the support of that Religion and virtue which is left
among us. Our wise and pious Fathers in the Settlement of the Country planted
Schools as well as Churches in every Town. Religion and Learning were their
equal Care; and I trust will be their Childrens. Hence it is that they have
left an Instructed Seed as at this day. That happy foundation the COLLEGE,
supplied from the Grammar Schools through the Province, has not only sent forth a
number of worthy men for the Pulpit, but also for every Chair of honor in the
Government. Not only have our Churches had a succession of Pastors, but the
State also of Judges and Counselors, and some most Excellent Governors have
our Provinces seen, the fair Sons of that beautiful Academy. And whatever
Decays the Province languishes under in other respects the College seems to
renew its Youth, and has been sending out of late a vigorous Issue, who in
brightness of Parts, and also in Virtue promise to excel. And now we have the
Joy to come before You, our civil Fathers, as the Sons of the Prophets once did
to Elisha, saying, Behold now the Place is too strait for the increased numbers
of your Sons! will you please to enlarge the House for them to dwell in? We
trust you will kindly answer so reasonable, so welcome a desire; and most
readily build on a Foundation which our Fathers laid and which our God has
signally blessed. For what Parents are there that being able, do not naturally
delight thus to settle their hopeful Progeny!

BUT, my Fathers, what signifies a College if there be not a previous care
about inferior Schools, in your several Towns? Let these live I beseech you;
let 'em be worthily supplied and decently supported; let not the Law in that
matter be any where scandalously evaded. If our Schools languish so will the
State and Church too. We shall soon grow an Irreligious and a contemptible
People if we decay in good Literature. The Education of our Youth is of the
last Importance to our future flourishing in virtue, in piety, in arts, in
riches, in wisdom and reputation. What had we been at this day if it had not
been for the pious care of our Ancestors in this matter? and what will our
Posterity become if we degenerate from them in this point? What will the
Government become? and what the Ministry? We shall have no strong Rods to bear
rule, nor able Ministers of the New Testament. Nor will the world believe that
we are the Sons of New England, whose distinguishing Character among the
Plantations has been Sobriety, Modesty and Literature. But we have found so
much the Benefit of Learning that I will not give my self leave to doubt of
your faithful care for it. So let your Love abound in knowledge and in all
judgment.

5. THE present Necessity and strait loudly calls upon you to show your regard
to the Public in consulting the flourishing of Trade, to find out a just Medium
of Exchange, to redress the miserable fall of Money, and the extravagant prices
of all the necessaries of life in proportion thereunto; to give a better
reputation to the Province Bills, and to prevent every man extorting upon his
Nei'bour in raising the prices of his own Ware; which like a great many little
runs of water unite at last in one mighty overflowing stream, and sweep away as
a flood the small Salaries you allow your poor Ministers and Schoolmasters;
and not them only but all the faithful and honorable Servants of the Public in
the State likewise; while what we call a hundred Pound is really but as
seventy, if so much; and in effect proves the same injury to the Receiver as
the unjust Stewards treachery did to his lord; who when he asked the debtor,
How much owe thou unto my lord, and he said, an hundred measures of oil; he
said unto him, take thy bill, and sit down quickly and write fifty.

I know well that the Public are very Innocent of this wrong, which has been a
great while growing by degrees upon us, and I think has risen from the gross
want of a Public Spirit in private persons; every one sacrificing the common
good (and in the end his own and his Childrens welfare) to a little present
gain. Every body foresaw what it would bring us to many years ago, and this day
Sixteen years you were faithfully warned by a venerable Servant of God yet
alive with us, and present before the Lord at this time, Dr. Increa^^ Math^.
that you would not go on to endanger the Province by sending all the Money in
it away from a private narrow Self-seeking Spirit. And now I should not have
presumed to have gone into a particular of this nature before this Honorable
Audience, if it had not been to bewail the lamentable want of a generous regard
to the Public good in our Trade and Merchandise; and to drop a tear over an
impoverished Country that has sold it self from a private Spirit; all men
seeking their own only. And now this private Spirit grows manifestly upon us
from year to year; every body raising the price of their own Commodity, and
those the Necessaries of life more than the Superfluities; and every body
acting by one common rule of Mutual Oppression, namely to get what they can,
without any conscientious tender regards to the rule of Justice and Mercy, at
least in the present distress. And I would in particular offer it to the
Consideration of my People, Whether the poorer Tradesmen among us are not too
much oppressed in the payments that are now in use. They are forced to take
half in Goods when they need it not for their Families, and so are led to go
above their degree in clothes, and to take unnecessary furniture for their
houses; and what must be the End of this at long run but great damage, not to
say ruin, to the Public?

TRULY I fear, unless it pleases God to rebuke this private Spirit among us,
that in a little time the oppression of our Poor may come to be near as great
as that of the Jews, whereof there was so great a cry made in our Context,
whose sufferings Nehemiah did as well set himself to redress, as he did the
Sabbath-breaking and impure mixtures. The Poor had run themselves in debt for
corn that they might eat and live; they had mortgaged their lands, their
vineyards and houses to buy bread; they had borrowed money for the Kings
Tribute, to pay their taxes; by which means they and their children were bro't
into bondage, and it was no ways in their power to redeem themselves. When
Nehemiah heard this his Anger was very great at the Oppressors. He rebuked 'em,
he called a General Assembly to redress the wrong. He reasoned the case with
'em and convinced 'em by his Arguments. He pressed 'em to release their poor
debtors, and never to exact again upon them in like manner. He got a promise of
'em, he made 'em swear it, and then he bound 'em by a Curse to keep their Oath;
He shook his lap and said, -- So God shake out every man from his house and
from his labor, that performs not this promise; even thus be he shaken out
and emptied: -- And all the Congregation said Amen, and praised the Lord: And
the People did according to this promise.

O how they loved and honored the Governor for his Justice, impartiality,
compassion and severity. They were some of the Nobles and Rulers that were in
the fault, but he feared not to rebuke 'em for it; which they themselves
admired him for, while the poor were even ready to worship him, we may think.
Both rich and poor joined in praising God for such a Governor.

SUCH let our Honorable Rulers be exhorted from God to approve themselves unto
this People* and they shall be like Nehemiah the repairers of the breach, the
restorers of paths to dwe^l in; And like the venerable Mordecai, who knew no
Interest of his own, nor feared any danger to himself, in the cause of his God
and his Countrymen, You shall be accepted of the Multitude of your Brethren,
seeking the wealth of your People, and speaking peace to all your seed, Esth.
10.3.

BUT before I finish this Address unto our Rulers, let me be permitted to leave
with them a single Rule or Caution, and a double Motive.

THE Rule or Caution which I would commend to you in the fear of God is this,
That you take heed and beware of Covetousness; that you be Men fearing God and
hating Avarice. This is the Character which the Holy Ghost has given of a just
and upright Ruler: for whatever a man's Accomplishments may be, if Covetousness
bear rule in him, that man is not fit to bear rule over others. For a Gift
blinds the eyes of the wise, and he that will take bribes can never be safe
himself, nor any under him. It sinks a brave Soul into all that is mean and
base, and betrays a man insensibly into the most unjust actions. I know that
some of the noblest Heroes and Patriots that the English Nation has ever had,
were a few years ago branded and blasted as persons of a sordid covetous
Spirit: I suppose because they were not such men of leisure and luxury,
vainglory and extravagance as some others; who though they had hearts big eno'
to spend for their own fame, yet had not heads strong eno' to think day and
night for the Public good. But I have never been able to believe those great
Servants of the Public any more capable of injustice and bribery, than if I had
heard want of courage and council imputed to 'em. It was the vile slander of
those that envied their merit, and have since betrayed Europe. And I desire to
thank God that I stand to day in the presence of a RULER, and Rulers who I
believe heartily approve all that I can say in detestation of this ugly Vice of
bribery. Particularly I do truly believe that Your EXCELLENCY desires the
Public weal of this People in all respects, and that as much is in your power
so you are desirous to improve all your Interest at Home in defense of our
Charter Privileges, and those secured to us by many happy subsequent Laws. And
this Confidence in Your Excellency ought to endear you to us, and must needs
oblige us unto all that Gratitude, Reverence and dutiful affection, which may
ever make you easy and happy in your Government. We trust that as you have
received the Congregation, the Government of this great Province, so that you
will Judge Uprightly. It is a People worthy of your affectionate and tender
care; for after all our poverty, and our weaknesses and faults, we are a
considerable Interest of the Kings Majesty, nor has He a more dutiful and loyal
People; and it is a People of God committed to you by the gracious Governing
Providence of Heaven.

AND now that I have presumed to name the KING, how can I better illustrate the
Subject I am upon, or what like powerful and acceptable Argument can I set
before your Excellency and his Majesty's Council, the Honorable House of
Representatives and all his Liege People, as his own Illustrious Example, and
generous extensive will for the Good of his Kingdoms, and of all Mankind. This
largeness of heart like the sand upon the Seashore is the singular gift of
Heaven, first to a Prince himself and then to his People. And blessed be the
LORD our GOD who has delighted in the Person of our rightful King GEORGE, to
set him on the British Throne; and because the LORD had a favor yet to us
therefore made He Him King to do judgment and justice. Now Regis ad Exemplum:
Let us imitate the best of Kings and love our Country, and lay our selves out
to serve it. What vile degenerate heart is there that will not feel the
Influence! -- And yet I have before named an infinitely greater Example, scil.
that of the Great and Good GOD by Whom he reigns, and of whom in his gracious
and just Administration He is (by His grace) so bright an Image. I have said ye
are Gods, -- then be Good to your People.

MOREOVER, This day of our yearly Solemnity happily falling on the Anniversary
of the Birth of the KINGS most Excellent Majesty, as it must needs add to the
Public Joy, so let it make us Pray the more fervently for the long life and
happy Reign of the King, and the best Blessings of Heaven upon the Head and
Heart of their Royal Highnesses the PRINCE and PRINCESS of Wales, and their
Illustrious ISSUE; that in long Successions they may ever reign in the hearts
of all that have at heart the Interests of Justice and Piety, the Protestant
Religion and the Liberties of Britain; and be still unto such through the latest
Posterity, as the KING is to us, like the Light of the Morning and as the
breath of our Nostrils.

I have but one Motive more to urge you with, my Honored Fathers, and it is a
very Melancholy one, the mention whereof should be very affecting to us this
day. It is this, Your time of Public Action for the Service of God, your King
and Country is very short. We seldom come much into Public Service and
influence, till we are descending from the Hill of life to our graves. You must
be working therefore the works of him that sends you while it is day, the night
comes. You have awfully seen this dark year that you must die like other men.
No less than four of His Majesty's Council have we buried in this Town since
the last Election, and I hear of no less than ten of the House of
Representatives deceased this last Winter, besides a Generation of pious useful
Men through the Province, and mostly Aged persons, a great part of our glory and
defense. It becomes me in this Audience and on this Occasion again to bewail
those breaches on the Public, and to drop a fresh tear over the graves of so
many worthy persons lately taken from our heads. And while we rise up and bless
their Memory, let men in Public place hear the Voice of God more immediately
directed unto them, and remember the Account they must shortly give every one
of himself to God.

YOUR WINTHROP, and your HUTCHINSONS were sincere and hearty lovers of this
People, and proved themselves so in the Evil times as well as the Good which
have passed over us. And the Name of BELCHER ought also to be endeared to us in
all future times, for that one generous Order which he sent to his Son in
London, when a black cloud was gathering over us which threatened our Charter.
-- I am just going off the Stage (said he in his Letter) and may not live to
see the distressing Inconveniences of such a loss; yet I cannot but be in pain
for my Country and People, whose prosperity has been always dear to me. -- I do
therefore with all tender Concern for the good of this People recommend it to
you that you improve all the Interest you can possibly make to secure our
Charter privileges. Upon mature deliberation my mind and desire is, that if
there be any rational prospect to preserve these Privileges, you spare no Money
to effect it. -- It matters little how your Endeavors may be entertained by
men, I am well satisfied you will do what is pleasing to heaven. And if
Providence should honor you to be an Instrument to lengthen out the
Tranquillity of this People, you will upon a just reflection never repent it.
And whatever the event may be, I shall lay down my head in the Grave in greater
peace, under this sense that I and mine have labored to our utmost in this
critical Juncture to serve the prosperity of our Country.

THUS that Letter: And to it we very much owe the satisfactions we enjoy to
day. I esteem the mention I have made of it the least piece of Gratitude and
Justice due from me, as a lover of my Country; and if by it I may provoke to
Emulation You that are my flesh; I mean all the Sons of New England.

AND now to enforce all that I have said, I come to the third and last part of
my Text, which is,

III. AN Assurance from GOD unto you, that He will think upon you for good
according to all that any of you have done or shall do for this People. You may
humbly look over it all, and then look up to Heaven with a lowly satisfaction,
and say -- think upon me my GOD for Good. God is not unrighteous to forget your
work and labor of love. Act for his glory, in his fear, by his word, seek his
conduct, regard his Judgment and depend on his reward.

HE will think upon you and furnish you for Service, while you think of Him and
ask wisdom of him. He Will think upon you and accept your goodwill to his Name
and People. He Will think upon you and direct an honest heart into proper and
suitable measures; for the way of man is not in himself. He Will think upon you
and protect and prosper you, while you commit the keeping of your Souls to him
in well-doing. As Jehoshaphat said to his Judges, Deal courageously and the
Lord shall be with the good. He Will think upon you and bless you it may be in
^^mporals, as he did Solomon, Asa, Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah and others; with
riches and worldly goods, with reputation and esteem, honor and fame; the love
of them that are good and the ill word only of the vile and wicked; besides the
Recompense which is sure and certain in the Resurrection of the Just. Wherefore
as Azariah said to Asa in a mighty Audience, -- Be strong and let not your
hands be weak, for your Work shall be rewarded, 2 Chronicles. 15.7.

IN a word, Think you as you ought of God and the Public, and God will think of
you though men forget and neglect you, or though they may censure and reproach you,
injure and abuse you. If worn out with Age you prudently withdraw your selves,
and receive an honorable Quietus, or if you are laid by before in displeasure
or with slight, yet God will be with you in your easy recess. But above all
when you come to die, and take the final leave (as in a little time you must)
whether of a grateful or an ungrateful world; then God will think upon you, and
the Conscience of a well spent life, a faithful Stewardship, shall brighten
your last hours it may be, and be a blessed Earnest of the Joy of the Lord.

AND now,

1. LET this be a comfortable and encouraging Word to all such as love and
serve their Country. Let the blessing of God ever come on that Man! may the
Great GOD ever think upon him for good! and let all the People say, Amen. Let
such a one know that however low or ill he may think of himself, yet God thinks
well of him. Whether you ever appear a Servant of the Public, or if it be never
known to men that you served it, yet God knows and notices it. Be you Young and
entering the world with good and generous desires to do good in it; Go in this
thy might, -- the Lord is with thee thou worthy Man! Or has God already put
honor upon you, and called you forth upon the Public Stage; see to it that you
serve your Generation according to the will of God; do worthily in Ephratah,
and be famous in Bethlehem. Or be you quitting the Stage of action under the
decays of age, God will still think upon you in the time of old age, and not
forsake you when your strength fails.

LET me present before you the Record of the Consolation enjoyed by three brave
and pious Men, the one laid by by Men, the second thrown by by Providence, and
the last called to die suddenly after a life of Public Service to the Israel of
God.

THE first was Samuel, whom the Lord called when but a child, and continued at
the head of Israel unto old age; but when the People grew weary of him, and God
bid him acquiesce and lay down, he did it gloriously after an unspotted
Administration. He presented himself in a vast Assembly of Israel, and dared to
say to 'em, I am now old and gray headed and my Sons are with you; and I have
walked before you from my Childhood unto this day; Behold here I am, witness
against me before the Lord and before his Anointed; Whose ox have I taken? or
whose ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of
whose hand have I received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? And they
said, Thou have not defrauded us, nor oppressed us; neither have thou taken
ought of any man's hand. And he said unto them, The Lord is witness, and his
Anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand.

THE second was Job, that perfect and upright man, who refreshed himself in his
ashes and boils when Providence seemed to have thrown him by as a broken
vessel; for his Righteousness he hold fast and would not let it go; and his
heart did not reproach him within, though his ulcers were nauseous and painful
without. He remembered how he was wont to go out to the Gate, and when he
prepared his seat in the street; how when the ear heard him it blessed him, and
when the eye saw him it bare witness to him; how he delivered the poor that
cried and the fatherless, and how he brake the jaws of the wicked; and he
appeals to God if his step had turned out of the way, and his heart walked
after his eyes, or any blot had cleaved to his hand. Thus his witness was in
Heaven, and his record was on high.

THE third was Hezekiah that great and good King of Judah, who being sick unto
death received a message from God to set his house in order; upon which he was
able to look up to God and say -- Remember now O Lord I beseech thee, how I
h^ve walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which is good in thy sight. A mighty Prayer for a dying King! happy the Ruler
that can Pray thus in his last hours! in such peace and comfort we have seen
some of our faithful Rulers lately expire. And may the Consolations of God
abound to all that survive in their Spirit.

2. WILL God think of Public Spirited Persons for good? then let it be a Rule
and law to us to do so too. It is but Justice and Gratitude in a People to
remember and reward the Public Services and Benefits done them by any. Never
let our Benefactors be forgotten by us. That Country little deserves any that
is not careful and just to acknowledge and honor 'em. Who will think upon that
People for good, who do not gratefully think on them that do 'em great and
manifest kindnesses? Nay will God think upon 'em, to raise 'em up more friends?

THE Rulers of a People are the Judges of benefits or injuries done to the
Public; and 'its a matter wherein they ought to set themselves to judge calmly
and impartially. And I am bold to say, they are not Public Spirited if they do
it not. And if they judge in their consciences that great Good has been done to
their Country by any Person or Persons, the Public thanks and regards (as the
matter may require) are due to such Persons, be they of our selves or be they
Strangers, by the strictest rules of honor and honesty, as well as wisdom and
policy. This is an eternal Principle of truth, and rule of righteousness.

WHEREFORE let this People ever think of them for good who are honored of God
to do 'em good. Be they dead? let their Names live with us: let them be had in
everlasting remembrance: Do they yet remain with us? let us always think of 'em
with love and honor, let us bless and pray for 'em, ( May they live and not
die, and let not their Names be few) and if need be let us stand by and defend
'em; accounting 'em among the Good Men for whom one would even dare to die.

BUT God forbid among us that base and hellish spirit, which we our selves have
known in other Places wiser and greater than we, whereby the best Friends and
Servants of the Public have been by some factiously and maliciously defamed,
belied, reviled; and the vile slanders as easily taken up and weakly given into
by others; to the ruin of the Public, and to the grief and shame of good men
that love it. Such was the guilt and wretchedness of Israel in the day of
Abimelech, and the Moral of Jothams fable was to reprove and reproach the base
ingratitude. Mind how he introduces it, -- Hearken to me ye men of Shechem that
God may hearken to you! -- and how he closes it, -- Now therefore if ye have
done truly and sincerely, if ye have dealt well with Jerubbaal and his house,
and have done unto him according to the deserving of his hands --. But was this
only Jothams private resentment? No, the Ingratitude was first to Heaven which
had raised up Gideon for them, and the Holy Ghost speaks of it with
indignation, Judges 8.34, 35. And the children of Israel remembered not the
Lord their God who had delivered 'em, neither showed they kindness to the house
of Gideon, according to all the Goodness which he had shown to Israel. -- But
far be any thing like this from this People.

ONCE more,

3. IF God will think of Public Spirited Persons for good? then how do you
think he will remember them for evil that hurt and injure his People? and what
a melancholy reflection does our Text lead them into, who are careless of
doing any thing for its good?

WHAT is there for God to think upon, done by too many in the places and with
the talents assigned them? Go wicked and slothful Servant, carry thy Lord his
Money, and tell him thou have hid it in the earth, but that he has his own
again, though without use or improvement: but tremble to think what you will hear
from him again, Take the unprofitable wretch away, and cast him into utter
darkness.

BUT the hurtful and injurious to his People, God will remember them to judge
'em: as Nehemiah imprecated against spiteful Tobiah and false Sanballat, Neh.
6.14. My God think thou upon them according to their works, and on the rest
that would have put me in fear. These rest were from among themselves, baser to
this good man than his Samaritan foes; for there were many in Judah sworn to
Tobiah, (a thing most horrible to hear) and of them some Prophets and Nobles
treacherously corresponded with him by Letters; Men that slily spoke well of
him to Nehemiah, and who as basely betrayed him to Tobiah. (See Chap. 6.17, 18,
19.) Thus they vexed their good Governor, trying to dispirit him and weary him
out. All their tho'ts were against him for evil, but his God though it upon him.

IF any that hear me this day bear an ill will against this People, let me
cordially advise 'em to forbear, and to fear to injure 'em; for God sees
mischief and spite to requite it with his hand; he remembered the children of
Edom, their insult and cruelty in the day of Jerusalem. And we know the times
when he suffered no man to do them wrong, yea he reproved Kings for their sake;
and they that touched 'em touched the apple of his eye.

BUT i^ is time that I draw to a Close, and from all that (...) been said let
us be earnestly entreated, persuaded, exhor^^^, admonished to love the Religion
and Liberties of our Country, and live as much as we can in our respective
places to the glory of God and the benefit of Mankind. Let us disdain to (...)
useless, desire to be significant, and yet preserve humility and modesty which
ever adorns them that excel. Let integrity and uprightness preserve us, and
commend us to (...) favor of God. Let it content us to do good and not be seen
by men, and look for our reward in the unseen glory honor and Immortality.
Finally, let us refresh our selves with the frequent meditation of the glorious
Rest into which our Fathers are entered, who with a pious zeal ventured and
spent their lives and their estates to subdue this Wilderness for God, and laid
the foundation of this our Zion through unknown difficulties, hardships and
hazards. Let us recount to our Children the worthy deeds they did, and all the
wonderful works God did for them: in what Spirit, to what end, in what manner,
with what veiws they acted; much the same with those which acted Nehemiah, on
whose holy mind the pure laws and worship of God lay uppermost: And then let us
contemplate how God owned, protected and prosper'd 'em, how he drove out the
heathen and planted 'em, how they got the Land by his arm and the light of his
Countenance; and so relying on the same grace and presence of God with us, let
us tread in their steps and be animated with their Spirit, till we also are
gathered to them in peace and honor.

AND now blessed be the Lord that has given rest unto his People. -- The Lord
our God be with us as he was with our Fathers, let him not leave us nor forsake
us -- Let your heart therefore be perfect with the Lord (...) to walk in his
Statutes and to keep his Com^^^^^ents. -- And the Lord maintain the Cause of
(...) at all times* as the matter shall require.

FINIS.

