A Caveat against Covetousness IN A SERMON AT THE Lecture in Boston, N. E.
February 20. 1717/18.

By JOSEPH SEWALL, A. M. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston.

1 Timothy vi. 8, 9. And having food and raiment let us be therewith content. But
they that will be rich, fall into temptation, and a snare, and into many
foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destruction and perdition.

Job, xiii. 15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish, and Sold at his Shop. 1718.

A Caveat against Covetousness.
LUKE, XII. 15. And He said unto them, Take heed, and beware of Covetousness:
--


THESE are the Words of our Blessed Savior. The occasion of them was this. One
of the Company said unto Him, Master, Speak to my Brother, that he divide the
inheritance with me. Some Expositors suppose that he intended to injure his
brother. However that be, our Lord informs him that he came to a wrong Person,
Man, Who made me a Judge, or a divider over you? Christ's Kingdom was not of
this World, nor did He take to Himself a Civil Authority to judge, and dispose
of Men's civil Rights and Properties. No, He came into the World to Purchase an
Heavenly Inheritance for His People, and to give them a sure Title to it; but
not to Settle their Earthly Possessions. Though He was the Lord and Heir of all
things; yet He had not where to lay his head. And He calls upon His Disciples
to be ready to forsake all, and follow Him.

No doubt our Savior discerned Covetous Worldly Spirit in this Man, who
instead of seeking to Him about the Spiritual concerns of his Immortal Soul,
was so Eager to have Him concern himself in his temporal Affairs which was a
thing foreign from that great Errand upon which our Lord Jesus Christ came into
the World. Our Savior therefore takes this Opportunity to Caution his Hearers
against Covetousness. Take heed, The Word (...)is often referred to the Mind.
It signifies, to behold with our bodily Eyes, and also with the Eye of the
Soul, the Understanding. To see a thing with Consideration, and Observation, to
Know. And sometimes it is rendered, Take heed, and Observe your selves.

And Beware: The Word in the Original signifies to keep Watch, to keep as a
Prison is kept, to take heed or beware of " Preserve your selves from
Covetousness. (...). The word signifies; says Beza, an immoderate desire of
getting, even with the Detriment of others. It is translated, greediness, Ephesians.
4.19. It signifies an unlawful desire of having more; Word for Word, a having
more. It is here translated Covetousness. Which is an undue Valuation of, and
immoderate craving this World's Goods. This Sin discovers it self in an
Excessive Esteem of Worldly Riches, in an Idolatrous trust and confidence
placed in them; in Unrighteous acts, and the taking unlawful Measures for the
getting of Wealth; and in an immoderate Love to it, and delight in it when
gotten; and a criminal backwardness and unwillingness to part with it to Pious,
Public, and Charitable Uses. It discovers it self also in a Coffeehouse
with God's Allotment, and an irregular Endeavor after more than God-is pleased
to allow us: In beholding our Neighbors Estate with a Covetous Eye; our Eye
being Evil because God is good. It discovers it self in an immoderate
Solicitude of Mind about getting and keeping; in an inordinate fear of losing
what we have gotten, and in excessive grief upon the account of Worldly losses
and disappointments. This Sin discovers it self in a Niggardly withholding
from our selves that which is Meet for our comfortable and decent Subsistence;
and in with holding from others that which the Law of Charity requires us to
bestow upon them: or in the temper and disposition with which we give; when we
do it grudgingly, and not of a ready Mind. The Doctrine may be this.

DOCTRINE.
It is a great Duty incumbent on us, to take heed, and beware of the Sin of
Covetousness. Under this Doctrine, We may Consider what it is to take heed, and
beware of Covetousness. And then offer a few things to show the Obligations we
are under to beware of this Sin.

I. What is it to take heed, and beware of Covetousness? When may we be said to
Obey this Command?

For answer to this Inquiry.

1. To take heed, and beware of Covetousness implies, That we heedfully observe
the Temper of our Minds; and Examine whether this Lust does not prevail in us.
If we would take heed, and beware of this Evil, We must observe our selves
Carefully; We must compass a diligent Search, and look narrowly into the State
of our Souls, and seriously Consider whether this I fist have not the
Possession of us. The Distemper must be known, the wound (...), before a proper
Remedy can be applied. Our hearts are naturally deceitful, and desparately
wicked. A deceived heart oftentimes leads Men aside when they are not duly
sensible of it. Particularly, Men are very prone to flatter themselves in this
iniquity. How often does it lie hid under the Specious Names of Frugality, and
good Husbandry? How often are Men guilty of it under a fair pretense of a due
concern about their Temporal Affairs? Certainly then if we would beware of this
Sin, we must turn the Eyes of the Soul inward, and by a reflex act of the Mind
look and see whether this Lust does not give Law to us in the Course of our
lives; or at least, in some degree, prevail. We should Pray to God to Search
us; and we should search and try our ways, that we may know if this way of
wickedness be found in us. We must put that general Rule into practice
respecting this particular Case; 2 Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, -- prove
your own seves. Know ye not your own selves, -- We should Examine by the rules
of God's Word, whether our Desire, Esteem and Trust be not inordinately placed
on Worldly Riches; whether our hearts do not go out after them with too much
Vehemence; and whether our pursuit of them be not too Eager and Earnest.

2. We must look to our selves, and Watch against the First Motion and
Inclination of our hearts toward this dreadful Evil. We must watch that we may
Espy and Suppress this hurtful Lust in the beginning and rise of it; that it
may not Conceive and bring forth. We should labor to stifle these Corrupt
Inclinations in the birth, and not suffer them to grow, and gather strength. It
is difficult to raise our Minds to heavenly things, and to set our Affections
on things above; but the descent is Easy, and the Motion of the Soul toward
the Earth as it is Center, will be so much the Stronger and Swifter by how much
the longer it is continued, and by how much the nearer we approach to it in our
desires and affections. Here then it is a good Rule, Obsta Principiis, Resist
this Sin in the beginning of it. And for this End we should be jealous over our
selves with a godly jealousy. 3. By the Grace of God, we must Mortify the
inward Inclination and Principle; that Root of bitterness whereby we are
defiled. This is implied in the duty which we are here Exhorted to. There are
the fruitful Seeds of all Sin in our Corrupt Natures. Our Original Sin is the
Root from whence all Actual Transgressions do Spring. Now we must strike at the
Root. We must Cry to God for the influences of His Holy Spirit to subdue our
Corruptions. By the Spirit we must Mortify the deads of the Flesh, and change
the corrupt biass of our Minds, whereby we are inclined to this, and other
Sins. Particular Lusts are as the Limbs or Members of that body of Death which
is in us; and we must by the Spirit Mortify them. Col. 3.5. Mortify therefore
your Members which are upon the Earth; Fornication -- and Covetousness, which
is Idolatry. It is not enough that this Lust be Restrained as to the outward
acts, and more Notorious out-breakings of it; but it must be Crucified and
Slain. It must be put off, and laid aside. By looking to JESUS in the Exercise
of Faith we should draw Strength from Him, who is our Head of Influence, to
Subdue this Sin in the Principle of it, that it may not reign in our Mortal
Bodies. We must Pray that we may Experience the Power of Christ's death, this
Sin being Nailed to his Cross and Crucified with Him.

4. We must heedfully observe our Temptations to this Sin, and beware of
yielding to them. Many are the Temptations which our Subtle Adversary the Devil
makes use of to draw us into this Sin; and therefore we must be Watchful, not
being ignorant of his devices; and resist him steadfastly in the Faith. He that
will carelessly run into the way of Temptation, will be in the utmost Danger of
being foiled and overcome. Now there is no Condition or Circumstance of Life
that is Exempted from this Temptation. If we are rising in the World, and have
fullness of business, we may be tempted to Consume too much of our Time and
Tho'ts in the Eager pursuit of Earthly things, under this pretense, that when
we have gotten a great Estate, We will then Seek the things which are Above:
Whereas we are Commanded to seek First the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness. And he that will not do this Presently, has no true desire to
do it at all. We must therefore Watch against such a Temptation as this. Again,
If we have gotten an Estate, Satan will be ready to tempt us to deny God, and
to say, Who is the Lord? To make Idols of our Silver and Gold, and to bow down
and worship them. And thus also if we are Poor, Satan will be ready to take
occasion from hence to tempt us to Covet our Neighbors Goods; to Steal and
take the Name of God in vain. This Lust is called the Lust of the Eye, and
therefore we should make a Covenant with our Eyes, and beware of looking upon
any thing that is our Neighbor's, with an Envious, Coveting Eye. We should
Watch and Pray lest we enter into this Temptation.

5. We must take heed, and beware of a Selfish Spirit; and Exercise our selves
in acts of Charity and Bounty. A Narrow contracted Spirit is in an especial
manner disposed to this Vice. 2 Timothy 3.2. -- Men shall be lovers of their own
selves, Covetous, --! But now an heart enlarged in love to God and Men: an
heart generously inclined to do good to others; will fly this base Lust. Such a
Man will be freely willing to lay out himself, and to spend a suitable
proportion of his Estate in doing good to others, instead of cleaving to it
with an immoderate affection. As far as a selfish Spirit prevails, we shall
think that lost, which we bestow on our Neighbor; and shall be ready to seek
our own, without a due regard to his profit; yea by doing wrong to him. Whereas
we are Exhorted, 1 Cor. 10.24. Let no Man seek his own, but every Man another
Wealth. We must therefore seek after a contrary frame of Mind, a liberal and
charitable Spirit: and watch for suitable opportunities to Exercise this Grace.
We should devise liberal things, be ready to distribute, willing to
communicate. The more the Grace of Charity is strongthned in us, the more will
this vile affection be weakened: for these are contrary.

6. We must take care to lay up our Treasure in Heaven. If we are diligent in
the pursuit of heavenly Riches, our hearts will in a good Measure, be raised
above the things of this World; for where our Treasure is, there will our
hearts be also. If we are Spiritually-Minded, we shall sit loose from Earthly
things. If we set our Affections on things Above, we shall take them off from
things below. And therefore he that would beware of Covetousness must take off
his Eyes from beholding Vanity, the Riches of this World, which perish in the
using; and look at the things which are not seen, which are Eternal. As far as
our love to Jesus Christ, and our Esteem of his Unsearchable Riches, do
prevail; so far will our love of this World abate; and we shall not seek it
with so much Earnestness and Greediness.

7. We must look to it, and improve the Means of Grace which GOD has appointed
to preserve us from this, and other Iniquities. There are Ordinances and Means
of Grace appointed by God, in the diligent attendance upon which, the People of
God are kept from falling, and preserved blameless to his heavenly Kingdom.
These must therefore be diligently improved. We must look to it, and take heed
that our worldly Cares and Business do not make us neglect them; or attend upon
them in a cold and formal Manner. If we would beware of Covetousness, we must
see to it that we do not rob God, and defraud our own Souls, by not allowing
Sufficient time for religious Duties. We should Read God's Word with Care,
Attend upon the Preaching of it with Heedfulness and Constancy; not neglecting
the Assembling our selves together for the Public Worship of God. Psalm.
119.36. Incline my heart to thy Testimonies, and not to Covetonsness. These two
are here opposed, and therefore if we receive God's Word into good and honest
hearts, we shall be delivered from this base Lust. If we would beware of
Coretousness, we must diligently husband the Precious Opportunities, the Golden
Seasons, which we enjoy on the Lord's Day: We should Watch, and take heed that
we be not hindered by the hurries of Worldly business from Remembering the
Sabbath, and preparing for it. And thus we should also be careful to Attend on
the Public Solemnities on other days, whether Stated or Occasional. Again, We
must be instant in Prayer. We should go to the Throne of Grace daily in Secret
Prayer, to ask Grace and Strength to help us against this, and other
Iniquities. We should Cry to God that He would not lead us into Temptation to
this Sin; but deliver us from this deadly Evil. We must Watch also, and see to
it that we reserve Sufficient and Seasonable Time for Family Prayer. If we
suffer our Worldly business to shut out this Duty, the Spirit of the World has
already obtained a dreadful ascendent over us, and will still further prevail.
Again, We should take Time to Meditate on what we Read or Hear. In a particular
Manner, when we come from the House of God on the Lord's Day, it would be very
profitable for us to Retire, and Apply our Minds to the Truths we have heard,
by close Meditation; that these may be well digested, and so become Food and
Nourishment to our Souls. To conclude this head, We should seriously consider
of the Vanity of all Earthly things, of the Shortness, and Uncertainty of the
Time of this present Life, which is the Only Time wherein we can enjoy them. We
should consider that our Worldly Goods are Talents lent to us by God, to be
improved in His Service; and not to be consumed on our Lusts: And He will
shortly call us to a strict Account what use we have made of them. Such
Meditations as these by God's blessing, might help to Mortify our inordinate
love to this World and the things of it.


I might have said, that if we would beware of Covetousness, We must take Care
that we be not involved in too much Worldly Business. We must take heed, and
beware of such a Multiplicity of Worldly Concerns as shall necessarily swallow
up too much of our Time.

II. Why should we take heed and beware of Covetousness? What Obligations are
we under to beware of this Sin?

1. We must beware of Covetousness, Because Covetousness is an heinous
Iniguity, forbiden in the Law of God. Covetousness is in Scripture called
Idolatry, and is ranked with some of the most atrocious Crimes. The Covetous
Man says to Gold, Thou art my hope, and to fine Gold, Thon art my Confidence.
Instead of making the Name of the Lord his strong Tower, he makes Riches his
strong City; and they are as an high Wall in his Conceit. He gives his Earthly
Possessions that Esteem and Love, which are due to God alone. Surely then this
Sin is heinous in the Sight of God. And accordingly it is strictly forbiden in
His Word. The Tenth Commandment is, Thou shall not Covet, -- Ephesians. 5.3. But
Fornication, and all Uncleanness, or Covetousness, let it not be once named
amongst you, as becomes Saints. This Sin is so contrary to the Spirit of
Christianity; so unbecoming the holy Vocation of Saints; that the Apostle would
have them take care that it might not so much as once be said that it was found
among them.

2. Because a Man's Life consists not in the Abundance of the things which he
possesses. Thus it follows in the Verse wherein is our Text. This is the
Argument which our Blessed Savior makes use of to dissuade His Disciples from
this Sin; and there is great weight in it. The true Comfort of Life does not
flow from great Plenty, nor depend upon it. No, Nature is Content with a
little. If we have Food and Raiment, we may live joyfully; provided the temper
of out Minds be suited to our Condition. The ground of true Peace, and good
Living lies within; in a Spirit weaned from the World, and resigned to the
Disposals of Providence. He is not the happy Man that has a great Portion of
the things of this World; but he that has an heart to make a good use of that
which he has, and to take the Comfort of it. Now this is the Gist of God.
Eccl. 3. 13. And also that every man should Eat and Drink, and Enjoy the good
of all his labor, it is the gift of God. And this rich Gift is often befrowed
on them that are not the Rich of this World; so that the little which a
Righteous Man has is better to him than the abundance of many wicked.

3. Covetousness is a Sin which dreadfully defiles the Mind, and Exposes to
other hurtful Lusts. Where this undue Valuation of Earthly Riches prevails, it
Estrangeth the heart from God, and renders it Earthly, Sensual, Devilish. It
indisposeth the Mind to all that is Spiritually good, and fills it with corrupt
Desires and vile Affections; Our worldly gain does then become filthy lucre. We
read, Mark 7.21. and 23. From within, out of the heart of men proceed evil
Thoughts, Adulteries, Fornications, Murders, Thefts, Covetousness. -- All these
Evil things come from within, and desile the Man. O Polluted Soul that lie
grovelling in the dust: How art thou debased! How art thou desiled! And this
Lust leads to the Commission of other Sins. 1 Timothy 6.9. But they that will be
rich, fall into Temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful
lusts: -- The immoderate desire of Wealth many times prevails on Men to Lie,
Steal, Oppress and Overreach their Neighbors. Yes, sometimes to Murder them.
Thus when Athan saw the goodly Babylonish Garment, and Two hundred. Shekels of
Silver, and a Wedge of Gold; he Coveted, and took them, Joshua 7. 21. Thus Ahab
Coveted Naboth's Vineyard, and slew him.

4. If we are under the government of this Sin We shall despise and reject the
Offers of the Gospel. In the dispensation of the Gospel, perishing Sinners have
the Unsearchable Riches of Christ hid open, and freely offered to them upon the
most reasonable Terms. The Lord Jesus Christ calls upon us to come to Him, that
we may obtain durable Riches and Righteousness. He has purchased Spiritual
Blessings suited and proportioned to the Wants of our Souls; and offers to
bestow them upon all such as are willing to receive them in the Gospel-way. He
calls upon us to Come and Buy without Money, and without Price. But that man
whose heart goes out after his Covetousness, will have no heart, no
inclination to Come and receive these Blessings. When invited to come to
Christ, and feast on that Provision which He has made, he will say, in his
heart at least, I must go to my Farm, to my Merchandise; pray have me Excused.
Or if he does come and sit under the Outward Dispensation of the Word, yet he
will not truly Come to Jesus Christ that he may have Life. His case will be
like that of the Young man, who, when Commanded to Sell that he had, and give
to the Poor, Went away sorrowful, Matthew. 19.23. Now we must in the frame and
temper of our Minds be ready to lay down all our Temporal Interests at Christ's
feet; or we cannot be His Disciples. Luke 14.33. -- Whosoever he be of you, that
forsakes not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple. But how shall we be
able to do this while the World has the possession of our hearts? It is as
easy for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle. We cannot serve God (...),
While we pant after the dust of the Earth, we cannot hunger and thirst after
Righteousness; we shall not obey the Gospel-call, and seek First the Kingdom of
God. If this Lust prevails, it will choke the good Seed of the Word, so that we
shall not bring forth fruit to perfection. Matthew. 13.22. He that received Seed
among the thorns, is he that hears the Word, and the care of this World, and
the deceitfulness of Riches choke the Word, and he becomes unfruitful. Worldly
minded men may have some good Motions, some Convictions in hearing God's Word;
but then alas! this treacherous Lust renders them fruitless and ineffectual.

5. This Sin will Expose us to Sorrow in this Life, and if persisted in, to
Eternal Misery in the World to come. 1. Tim. 6.10. For the love of Money is the
root of all Evil; which while some coveted after, they have erred from the
Faith, and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. There is a Woe
denounced against such as live in this Sin: Woe to him that Coveteth an Evil
Covetousness: -- There are many who by their greedy pursuit of worldly gain do
pierce themselves through with many Sorrows. God is provoked to blast them in
their worldly business, or to Curse their blessings. And in the conclusion they
will be Miserable indeed. When the Covetous man may be ready to bless himself
with the rich Fool, and to say, Soul thou haft much goods laid up for many
Years; take thine Ease, Eat, Drink and be Merry; then GOD may say, Thou Fool
this Night shall thy Soul be required of thee, For so is he that lays up
Treasure for himself; and is not Rich toward God. By this Sin the Souls of
Multitudes have been plunged into Perdition. The Laws of Men do not punish this
Abominable Vice; but though such Sinners may Escape the Punishment of Men, yet
they cannot Escape the righteous Judgment of God. O No! They that live and die
under the guilt and dominion of this Sin, must be shut out of Heaven, and
suffer the vengegeance of Eternal fire. Ephesians. 5.5, 6. For this ye know, that no
Whoremonger, nor-Unclean person, nor Covetous man who is an Idolater, has any
Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. Let no Man deceive you with
vain Words; for because of these things comes the Wrath of God upon the
Children of disobedience. And Riches will not profit in that day of Wrath.


APPLICATION.
USE, I. Learn hence, The Folly of such as take no Care to preserve themselves
from the Sin of Covetousness.

The Wisdom or Folly of Men is very much discovered in the judgment and
estimate which they make of things. Surely then every Covetous Person deferres
that appellation, Thou Fool! For they prefer Earth before Heaven, the vain
short-lived Enjoyments of this Life before Substantial blessings; the things
that are not, before Eternal Realitics. Their way is their Folly. Such may
think themselves Wise in their Generation, but their Egregious Folly appears in
the value which they put on Worldly Riches. They prefer the dust of the Earth
before the Pearl of great Price. They Sell their Souls for very naught. For
what shall it profit a Man if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his Soul?
Or what shall a Man give in Exchange for his Soul? O that such might be
Convinced of their folly before it be too late!

II. Learn, That the Prevalency of this Sin calls for Humiliation and
Lamentation.

It is Lamentable indeed to see how much a Worldly Spirit prevails among us,
and that notwithstanding the many frowns of GOD upon us in our Trade and
Business. Alas! alas! How apt are we to have our Hearts full of the World; to
be cumbered about many things, so as to neglect the One Thing Needful? How apt
are we to be over much concerned about what we shall Eat and Drink, and
where-withal we shall be Cleathed; and at the same time to be cold and
indifferent in the great Concerns of our Souls? Alas! There are many who do not
take heed, and beware of Covetousness, and hence it is in a great Measure that
we grow so Careless in the great Matters of Religion. Many are very Hot and
Eager in their pursuit of the World, and therefore Slothful in business, and
Not fervent in Spirit, serving the Lord. Is not a Glorious SAVIOR lightly
Esteemed? Are not the precious Privileges of the Gospel Low-priz'd Commodities
with many? O that our Heads were Waters, and our Eyes a fountain of Tears. that
we might weep Day and Night for this! O that we could Mourn with such a godly
Sorrow as shall work in us a Repentance never to be repented of! The Lord Rain
down Righteousness upon us, and Revive His Work in the midst of us! The Lord
pour out His Holy Spirit upon us, and help us to Seek the Things that are Above
more generally, more fervently. This must bring on the golden Age which we are
looking and waiting for.

III. Let us all be Exhorted to take beed, and beware of Covetousness.

This is a Sin which does Easily beset us, and it is of very fatal Consequence.
O let us then be prevailed with to Observe our selves, and to use our Earnest
Endeavors to Preserve our selves from this Vice! We must by the Grace of God
Mortify and Subdue this Lust, or it will prove ruinous and destructive to us.
Let us then Cry to God that He would vanquish this Enemy of our Salvation.

Let such as are under the Government of this, and other Iniquities, be
Exhorted to break off their Sins by Repentance. Be Earnest with God to cleanse
you from this and all other Sins; to heal your Souls; and particularly to Cure
this Distemper. You are destitute of true Grace, and cannot Engage in this great
Duty you are Exhorted to, unless GOD by His Almighty Power Change the biass and
temper of your Minds.

Let the Children of God be more Careful and Watchful over themselves. Keep
your Hearts with all diligence, and beware of all approaches toward this Sin.
If you would keep your selves in the Love of GOD, you must not love the World,
neither the things that are in the World.

To Conclude, Let them that are Rich in this World, take heed that they do not
trust in uncertain Riches; but in the Living GOD, who gives us all things
richly to Enjoy: That they do good, that they be Rich in Good Works, ready to
distribute, willing to Communicate. Laying up in store for themselves a good
Foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold on Eternal Life.

Let the Poor of the Flock Trust in the Lord and do good, and verily they shall
be fed. Heb. 13.5. Let your Conversation be without Covetousness, and be
content with such things as ye have; for He has sold, I will never leave thee,
nor forsake thee.

FINIS.

