A VINDICATION OF THE Government of New England Churches. Drawn from Antiquity;
the Light of Nature; Holy Scripture; its Noble Nature; and from the Dignity
Divine Providence has put upon it.

By John Wise A. M. Pastor to a Church in Ipswich.

There is none to guide her among all the Sons whom she has brought forth;
neither is there any that takes her by the hand of all the Sons that she has
brought up, Isa. 51.18.

Say ye unto your Brethren Ammi, and to your Sisters Ruhamah, Hos. 2.1.

BOSTON, Printed by J. Allen, for N. Boon, at the Sign of the BIBLE in
Cornhill, 1717.

The Constitution of New England CHURCHES, as settled by their Platform, may be
fairly Justified, from Antiquity; The Light of Nature; Holy Scripture; and from
the Noble and Excellent Nature of the Constitution it self. And lastly from the
Providence of God dignifying of it.
1. The first Demonstration contains the Voice of Antiquity in the following
Chapters.

CHAP. I To Distribute the whole Christian Era into three Parts may serve to
Raise a Clearer Light, and make a Brighter Aspect in this Essay.
1. THE first Division contains the first Three hundred years of Christianity,
which may be accounted the most Refined and purest Time, both as to Faith and
Manners, that the Christian Church has been Honored with; for that within this
space, is contained the Ministry of the Apostles and Holy Evangelists, and
other Emment persons Authorized by them; and such others who succeeded in
Office-Trust through the several Ages, within the space before named. This was
the time of an Immense Effusion of the Spirit of God upon the World, when there
was such a Flux and Inundation of the Waters from the Sanctuary, mentioned,
Ezekiel. 47. This was the Age of Miracles; A time of Extraordinary Gifts, and when
Grace and true Piety was in the greatest Elevation. Christian Religion was now
a Dangerous Business; Every Man that took it up, lays down his Life, Honor and
Fortune at Stake; He that owns Christ must bid defiance to all the Celebrated
Deities of the Roman Empire; and thereby Run Counter to the Religion of the
Imperial Court. So that Rationally we may expect to find the Churches of Christ
in the purest Capacity they were ever in; In all points, both of Principles and
Practice. That whatever their Government was if they continue the same from the
days of the Apostles, we may fairly conclude it to be Authentic, and Agreeable
with their Grand and Original Copy. It is most Apparent, that the Churches in
those Ages, were under too good an Influence Internally, and the Eye of too
direful a guard, externally to prevaricate with God in the known Principles of
their Order, any more then in their Faith, though they were not without Errors.
Two or three hundred years, is a long time in the World, to keep up our
constant Mode, and Custom, either in Religious or Civil affairs amongst Men,
who are so inclined to Err, and apt to Change their fashions; Nam est Natura
hominum Novitatis Avida. That for the Churches through those many Ages and in
their several Communities, to agree in their Discipline amongst themselves; and
not Essentially to differ from those Churches that were truly Apostolical,
invincibly Infers, that their Original was Divine. But this will appear more
plainly when we have made and finished our Survey.

2. The Second Grand Division of Time, contains the space of the next Twelve
hundred years, downward, more or less: within which Circuit is included the
Commencement, and Progress of a Direful Apostasy, both as to Worship, and
Government in the Churches. Some Symptoms of these things were rising within
the former Division of time; but, in this they grew a great pace, and to that
degree, that the Christian World became a Notorious Apostare. For as we have it
in the Idea of the Reformation, the Great Lord of time allowed a space, wearing
the Denomination of Time, Times, and half a Time: or in plainer Expressions,
twelve hundred and sixty years; in which space, all the Effects of a horrible
Apostasy made a very Gehennon of that which was called Christendom. And says
Dr. Owen, [in his Preface, to the Inquiry, into the Original of the Churches]
Ambros judged, that it was the Pride, or Ambition of the Doctors of the Church,
which Introduced the Alteration in its Order. And moreover says the Dr.
somewhat after this manner, viz. the Ambition of Church Rulers, in the fourth
and fifth Centuries openly proclaimed it self to the scandal of the Christian
Religion; for that their Interest lead them to a Deviation from the Order and
Discipline of the Church according to its first Institution? For that the
Directions given about it in Scripture, make it a matter so weighty in it self,
and attended with so many Difficulties, it being laid under such severe
Interdictions of Lordly power, or seeking either of Wealth or Dignity; That
it is no pleasant thing to Flesh, and Blood, to engage in the conduct, and
oversight of Christ's volunteers; to bear with their manners; to exercise
patience toward them in all their Infirmities; and in all their weaknesses, to
continue a high valuation for them, as the Flock of God, which he has
purchased with his own Blood: All this requires abundance of selfdenial; And if
so, then it is no wonder, that many of their Prelates were willing gradually to
Extricate themselves out of this uneasy Condition; and embrace all
Opportinities of Introducing another Order into the Churches, that might tend
more to the Exaltation of their own power and Dignity. And this was done
accordingly; for the Bishops by their Arbitrary Rules shared the Flock of
Christ amongst themselves, and that without the consent of the People, as
though they had Conquered them by the Sword. For thus they divide the spoil.
This Bishop say they, shall have such a share and number of them under his
power; And that Other Bishop shall have so many; And so far shall the
Jurisdiction of one Extend, and so far another; that they soon Canton out the
whole Roman Empire under a few Patriarchs, and head Men. These things were the
subject of their Decrees and Laws, which [those of Christ's being thrown by]
were now become a Rule for the Churches. But yet neither did the Bishops long
keep within those Bounds and Limits, which their more modest Ambition had at
first Prescribed unto them; but went on, and took Occasion from these
beginnings to contend amongst themselves about Preheminency, Dignity, and
Power: in which Contest, the Bishop of Rome, at length remained Master of the
Field; And so Rome obtained the second Conquest of the World. And then his
Holiness the head of it came to ride Admiral of all the Sees; and then soon
became Lord of Heaven and Earth by the same Rule of Process which brought him
to his high Trust. Hence

Quaery. What cannot wakeful Ambition, Learning and Fraud do, if jointly agreed,
at rifling the greatest Treasures bequeathed to Mankind; especially when the
World is generally gotten into a sleepy fit?

3. Toward the latter End of this space of time began a glorious Reformation.
Many famous Persons, memorable in Ecclesiastical History, being moved by the
Spirit of God, and according to Holy Writ, lead the way in the face of all
danger; such has Wickliff, who openly Decryed the Pope, as the very Antichrist;
in the fourteenth Century, and others in that Age. And in the next Century
Martin Luther pursued the Reformation with great Boldness, Resolution, and
Constancy; This is that famous Luther, says my Author, of whom they who
acknowledge the least, must yet make as much as Dr. More makes of him; for
says the Dr. I cannot think so very highly of Luther as some do; and yet I
think him to have been, a very happy Instrument in the hand of God, for the
good of Christendom against the horrid Enormities of the Papal Hyrarchy. And
though he might not be allowed to be the Elias, the Conducter and Chariot of
Israel, as some have styled him; yet I think at least he might be accounted a
faithful Postilion in that Chariot, who was well accoutred with his Wax Boots,
Oiled Coat, and Hood; and who turned the Horses Noses into a direct way from
Babylon toward the City of God, and held on in a good round Trot, through thick
and thin, not caring to bespatter others in this high fogg, as he himself was
finely bespattered by others: About which Time Zuinglius, Occolampadius,
Melancthan and other Christian Heroes also Listed into the same Quarrel, and
with great bravery and self denial went forward with the Reformation. Yet after
the endeavors of such Men, and others without number, through several Ages
downward; the Churches, which are called Reformed, attained to a very imperfect
Reformation, as Dr. Increase Mather says. And the defect has not been so much
in Doctrine, as in Worship and Discipline. And nowithstanding says the Dr. in
this Respect also, some Churches have gone beyond others* Now to come to what I
aim at; These Churches in New England, as to their Order and Discipline have
surpassed all Churches of the Reformation. And under the head of Discipline, it
seems to me, that Christ the Captain of Salvation, has given out his Word to
these Churches, as to his Troops coming up in the Rear of Time; And his Word of
Command is, -- as you were; make good the Old front; or place your selves in
that Regimental Order, which the Primitive Churches were in, whilst they
marched under my Banners, and encountered the Devil in their heathen Persecuters
for the first Three hundred years. For that the Churches in New England; and
the Primitive Churches are Eminently parallel in their Government. Those first
Ages of the Church it is certain were many times much annoyed with many
Pestilent and Damnable Heresies; and many Usages in Worship, too Superstitious
crept in amongst them; yet they continued in the Constitution of their Church
Order very Uniform and Apostolical; And it is very Obvious that these Churches
in this Wilderness, in the Essentials of Government; are every way Parallel to
them.

I shall Represent this Business by a Collection of Parallel Notes out of
several Authors of unquestionable veracity; and shall principally follow the
Guidance of one who has concealed his Name; and styles his Treatise, An Inquiry
into the Constitution, Discipline, Unity and Worship of the Primitive Churches.
This Author in his Praeface gives this fair account of his doings; says he,
What I have written I have wholly Collected out of the Genuine, and
Unquestionably Authentic Writing's of those Ages; meaning such as writ in, or
of the Three first Centuries of Christianity. And says he, I have been every
may Honest and Vnbiast. And being well assured of his Fidelity; I shall
endeavor to imitate his Faithfulness, in Transcribing what I find in him
suiting my present purpose. And I shall be well and sufficiently furnished when
I have laid before the Reader the notion which the Ancients had of the Church
in its Constituent parts both of Officers and People, with the several
Authorities, Powers, Rights, Immunities and Prerogatives belonging unto each.
And if we find that the Primitive Churches in their Order and Discipline, did
exactly agree in the Essentials of Government; with the Churches in
New England; we may Rationally then conclude that if they were Apostolical, so
are we.

CHAP. II. Of the Church.
TO Pass over all other Observations, the most usual and common Acceptance of
the word Church, of which we must chiefly Treat, is that of a Particular
Church; which consists of a Society of Christians, meeting together in one
Place, under their proper Pastors, for the performance of Religious Worship,
and the Exercising of Christian Discipline. This description of a Church is
agreeable with the Idiom both of Scripture and Antiquity. Thus Tertullian, who
Lived about the End of the Second Century, gives us an account of the State,
Order and Worship of the Churches. ( Apol. ad Genesis Cap. 39.) The Description of
a Church he first lays down in these words, viz. Corpus sumus de Conscientia
Religionis, et Disciplinae Vnitate, et Spei Foedere. We are a Body united in
the Conscience of Religion, or for the Conscientious Observation of the Duties
of Religion; by an Agreement in Discipline, and in a Covenant of Hope. For
whereas such a Body, or Religious Society could not be United but by a
Covenant; he calls it a Covenant of Hope, because the principal respect therein
was had unto the things hoped for. This Religious Body, or Society thus United
by Covenant, did meet together in the same Assembly, or Congregation. For says
he, Corpus sumus, Coimus in Coetum, et Congregationem ut ad Deum, etc. We are a
Body, and meet in an Assembly, and Congregation, to offer up our Prayers unto
God, and attend the Duties of the Christian Religion. So Iraeneus also in the
Second Century, tells us, That some of the Brethren, and sometimes the whole
Church of some certain Place, -- by Fasting and Prayer have Raised the Dead.
Thus our own Platform agrees in sense with the Opinion of the Ancients. Plat.
Chap. 2. Sect. 6. A Congregational Church, is by the Institution of Christ, a
part of the Militant Church, Consisting of a Company of Saints by Calling,
United into one Body by an holy Covenant, etc. But as to the Independency, or
real distinction between Church and Church; this will more clearly appear in
what follows. Therefore I shall proceed to consider the Constituent Parts of a
Church, as divided,

1. Into the People who Composed the Body of the Church, called the Elect, or
the Called and Sanctified by the Will of God; and sometimes they are called the
Brethren, because of their Brotherly Love, etc.

2. Into those Persons who were set apart for Office, or for a Peculiar and
Ecclesiastical Improvement. And each Party under this distribution, had their
particular Immunities and Employments And under these Heads, I shall confine
the Discourse to a parallel in the Essentials in Government or Church Order,
between the Churches of Christ in the First Ages of Christinity, and the
Churches of New England, as settled by their Platform

CHAP. III.
I Shall Proceed to distribute and Enumerate the Operations and Immunities of
the Churches.

1. With relation to the Peculiar Acts of the Officers.

2. The Peculiar Acts of the Laity, or Fraternity.

3. The Joint Acts of them both; as performing the Work and Business of an
Organick Church, or complete Corporation. And

4. I shall Lastly, make some Observations upon the Union of Distinct Churches,
by Acts of Sisterly Fellowship or Communion. And hereby I shall complete the
Parallel, in the Essentials of Order, between the Primitive Churches, and those
of this Country.

1. The Peculiar Acts of the Officers or Clergy. Under this Head might be
considered the Functions of every Particular Order, and Degree of the Clergy;
which we may say were according to the purest Antiquity, but three, viz.
Bishops, Priests or Presbyters, and Deacons. I shall principally consider the
Bishop as the Chief Officer in Trust and Dignity, in the Primitive Church. And
in order to it,

1. In general Observe, That though there were some Distinctions in point of a
Titular Dignity and Degree, between a Bishop and Presbyter; yet they were
really equal in Order, and in the Nature of their Trust. For that in an
Ecclesiastical Sense, Bishop and Presbyters are Synonimous Terms, setting forth
the same Office; and signify no more but an Elder, a Pastor, Ruler, or
Overseer of a Church. Ignatius calls the Apostles themselves the Presbyters of
the Church; and Theodonet renders the reason of the Appellation, for says he,
The Holy Scriptures called the Chief Men of Israel, the Senate or Eldership
Wills. Dict. And indeed according to the Apostle himself, Presbyters, or Elders,
and Bishops, are plainly Terms of Office; and of equal signification. As in
Tit. 1.5, 7. For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou should -- Ordain
Elders. -- For a Bishop must be Blameless, as the Steward of God, etc.

In this Discourse I shall represent the Bishop in the sense of the Primitive
Churches, as Head and Chief Officer of the Church; for according to Cyprian,
there was but one Bishop, strictly so called, in a Church at a time, though at
the same time there were many Elders or Presbyters in the same Church; and the
Bishop in a peculiar manner was Related to his Flock, as a Pastor to his Sheep
and a Parent to his Children. Cyp. Epist. 38. 1. p. 90. And the Titles of this
Supreme Church Officer, are most of them reckoned up in one place, in Cup.
Epist. 96 viz. Bishop, Pastor, President, Governor, Superintendant or Priest.
And this Officer is he, which in the Revelation, is called, The Angel of the
Church, at Origin thinks.

2. We may consider more distinctly, the Object of his Care, or the Dimensions
of the Bishops Diocese. It Is very obvious, that this Great and Superior
Officer, as has been said; had but one Church under his Pastoral Care. The
Diocesses Government or Dominion of these Reverend Prelates, are never
[according to Antiquity] said to contain Churches, in the Plural, but only a
Church, in the Singular Number. And the Bishop was usually called the Bishop of
this or that Church. As Tertullian says, Polycarp was Ordained Bishop of the
Church of Smyrna, etc. And moreover it is accurately to be observed, that the
most frequent word used to Denominate the Extent of the Bishops Care, or to set
out the Limits of his Diocese, was that of a Parish. So in the Synodical
Epistle of Irenaeus to Victor. The Bishoprics of Asia are called Parishes: And
in the History of Exsebius the word is so applied in several hundred places.
It Is very usual there to Read of Bishops of this and that Parish. As the Bishop
of the Parish in Alexandria, the Bishop of the Parish in Ephesus, and in
Corinth, etc. For that the word Paroikia, which we render Parish, signifies
Housing, or Living together. And in Ordinary and Civil Use, it notes a Village,
small Town, or part of a Town, of People or Persons Dwelling together. And in a
Church sense it signifies a competent Number of Christians Dwelling near
together, and having one Bishop, Pastor or Minister, or more, set over them;
with whom they meet at one Time or Place, to Worship and Serve God. So that
Parish in this sense, is the same with a Particular-Church or Congregation. And
this is plainly agreeable with the Sense, Custom and Platform of New England
Churches.

3. That the Bishops Diocese exceeded not the Bounds of a Parish, or a small
Town, or part of a Town, is very evident from the following Demonstrations,
according to Antiquity.

Demonst. 1. For that all the People of a Diocese did every Sunday, meet
together in one Place, to Celebrate Divine Service. Thus says Justin Martyr, [
Apol. 2. p. 98.] All Assemble together in one Place, where the Bishop Preaches,
and Prays.

Demonst. 2. The Bishop had but one Altar, or Communion Table in his Diocese,
at which his whole Flock Received the Sacrament from him. There is but one
Altar says Ignatius [ Epist ad Phila. p. 41.] as there is but one Bishop. So
says Cyprian, we Celebrate the Sacrament; the whole Brotherhood being present.
And thus it was in Justin Martyrs Days. The Bishops whole Diocese met together
on Sunday, when the Bishop gave them the Eucharist.

Demonst. 3. All the People of a Diocese were present at Church Censures; as
Origin describes an Offender, as appearing before the whole Church. In Mar.
Tom. 13. Page 133. Vol. 1. So Clemens Romanus calls the Censures of the Church,
the things Commanded by the Multitude.

Demonst. 4. No Offenders were Restored again to the Churches Peace, without
the Knowledge and Consent of the whole Diocese; they were to plead their Cause
before the whole People, etc.

Demonst. 5 When the Bishop of a Church was Dead, all the People of that Church
met together in one Place to Choose a new Bishop. So Sacinus was Chosen Bishop
of Emetria, by the Suffrage of all the Brotherhood. The whole Diocese of the
Bishops did meet together to manage Church Affairs. Thus when the Schism of
Felicissimus, in the Bishopric of Carthage was to be Debated, it was to be
done according to the Will of the People, and by the Consent of the Laity. And
when there were some hot Disputes about the Restitution of the Lapsed, Cyprian
promised his whole Diocese, that all those things should be Examined before
them, and judged by them. So that from the Premises, it is very evident, that
that Diocese cannot possibly be more than one single Congregation; nor that
Church more than a Congregational Church, where all the People and Members of
that Church meet together at one time, and in one place to Pray together, to
Receive the Sacrament together; Assist at Church Censures together, and
Dispatch Church Affairs together. And it is very apparent, that this was the
Method and Way of the Primitive Churches, according to the Preceding
Observations. And New England Churches harmonize exactly in their common
Practice, as though they had taken their Directions from them.

4. The Bishops Duty, or the several Particular Operations of his Honorable
Office, were such as these, viz. Preaching of the Word, Praying with his
People, Administering the Sacraments, taking care of the Poor, Ordaining of
Ministers, Governing his Flock, Excommunicating of Offenders, and absolving of
Penitents. In a word, Whatever can be comprised under those three General Heads
of Preaching, Worship, and Government, were parts of the Bishops Function and
Office. And this also is very agreeable with our Platform: Cap. 10 Sex. 8. The
Power which Christ has Committed to the Elders, is to Feed and Rule the Church
of God, etc.

CHAP. IV. The Prerogatives, or Peculiar Immunities of the Laity.
THE Fraternity or Body of the People had several high Immunities Inherent in
them; and Exercised by them as a Church. As,

1. Voting and giving their Suffrage, for the Admission and Censure of Members.
To this purpose before.

2. The Electing their own Officers. For when a Parish, or Bishopric was
vacant through the Death of the Incumbent, the Members of that Parish met in
Church to choose a fit person for his Successor; to whom they might commit the
Care and Government of the Church. When Alexander was chosen Bishop of
Jerusalem, [says Eusebius, Lib. 6. Cap. 11.] it was by compulsion or choice of
the Members of that Church. And so in the Church of Rome when their Bishop was
deceased; all the People met in the Church to choose a Successor. Eusebius. Lib.
6. Cap. 28. Though it is certain that after some time the aspiring Clergy robbed
the People of this as well as of other of their Rights. As it is well
Represented by a late very worthy Anomolous Author, writing de Ordinatione P.
30. Crescente Paulatim Cleri Potestate ad se magis indies, etc. The Power of
the Clergy gradually increasing, they daily drew more new Rights to themselves,
which they took from the People; Thinking that the dignity which they had
obtained, was not ample enough, if the People had any share with them in
Elections. Therefore at length snatch or take the whole Business into their own
hands; The People through their supine negligence not much opposing of them.
Yet that the People might be hushed into quiet [with much Grace] they grant them
the favor of Beggars, viz. Postulare; To ask for an Officer. But this
plundering of the Churches falls within the Second Grand Division of Time. Not
within the first three hundred years.

3. Of Approbating of Ordination. All the People were consulted; and none were
Admitted into holy Orders without their Approbation. As we are assured by
Cyprian [ Epist. 33.] who tells us it was his constant custom, in all
Ordinations to consult his People, and with their conmmon Counsel to weigh the
Merit of every Candidate of the Sacred Orders.

4. Of Deposing of their own Officers the way. Page 96. Sect. 2. For if their
Bishops proved Scandalous and Wicked in Life; Heretical and Apostates from the
Faith, the Churches had Power to degrade and depose them, and choose others in
their Room. There is a peculiar Example of this kind in a Letter from the
Church of Rome to the Church of Corinth, written by Clemens Romanus* Eusebius.
Lib. 3. Cap. 14. upon which Dr. Owen makes this Observation, viz. That the
Church of Corinth was fallen into a sinful Excess in the deposition of their
Elders, whom the Church of Rome judged to have presided amongst them Laudibly
-- But yet in the whole Epistle the Church of Corinth is no where reproved, for
assuming the Authority to themselves which did not belong (...) them. It seems
what Cyprian afterward affirmed, was then acknowledged, namely, that the Right
of choosing the Worthy, and Rejecting the Unworthy was in the Body of the
People. But the Corinthian Church is severely reproved for the abuse of their
Liberty and Power, State of Churches, P. 94. Also when two Spanish Bishops
were deposed by their Churches, that the said Churches might not seem to act by
a Power which belonged not to them; they sent into Africa to several Bishops to
know their Judgment thereupon, who being Convened in a Synod [ Anno. 258.]
whereof Cyprian was President; they commended, and approved their Procedings;
assuring them it was according to the Divine Law, which was Express, that none
but those that were holy and blameless, should approach Gods Altar; that if
they had continued to have communicated with their Profane Bishops, they would
have been accessory to their Guilt and Villainy, and would have contradicted
those Examples, and Commands in Scripture, which obliged a People to separate
from Wicked, and Ungodly Ministers, that they had not acted Irregularly in what
they had done; since the People had the chief Power in choosing worthy Bishops,
so also of refusing those who were unworthy. And many other passages there are
in that Epistle which flatly assert the Peoples Power of deposing scandalous
Bishops. Yet where the Churches were Associated to render their action more
unquestionable, they had assistance from others; but yet the Power is plainly
acknowledged to be inherent in the Church. Epist. 68. Apud Cyp.. 1.2.3. P. 200.
These Premises are very Harmonious with the Constitution of these Churches.
Platf. C. 10. Sect. 5.6. The Power which is granted by Christ to the Body of
the Church, and Brotherhood is a Prerogative.

1. In choosing their own Officers.

2. In the Admission, and Censures of their own Members. And,

3. In case an Elder offend incorrigibly etc. as they had Power to call him to
Office; so they have Power according to Order to remove him from his Office,
etc.

CHAP. V.
3. WE come nextly to consider the Joint acts of Officers and People, carrying
on, as an Organick Body. And these Peculiarly referr to the Discipline, and
good Government of the Church. And though Ministerial trust [precisely
considered] was solely devolved on the Officers; yet still the Fraternity stood
interested in, and possessed of a share in the Juridical part of Government,
the whole Church in ordinary Cases were the Judges which composed the
Ecclesiastical Consistory. So that the Power of the Keys was so lodged both in
the Bishops and People, as that each had a share to Exercise and Improve in
Joint acts of Judicature, and thus the Clergy and Laity conjunctly made up that
Supreme Court which was in every Parish, where all Church Offenders were tried,
and when found Guilty, were Sentenced and Condemned. That the Laity did
Exercise Judicial Power in the Church, is further evident from several
Testimonies. As in that of Clemens Romanus. [ Epist. 1. Ad Corinth, p 69.]
where he writes: Who will say according to the Example of Moses. If Seditions,
Contentions, and Schisms are happened because of me, I will depart, I will go
whethersoever you please, and I will do what shall be enjoined me by the
People, so the Church of Christ be in Peace. So Origin describes a Criminal
appearing before the whole Church. In Mat. Tom. 13. Cyprian, when some had
committed some great misdemeanors, professes himself not a sufficient Judge,
but they ought to be tried by all the People, Epist. 28. p. 64. And to the same
purpose, he writes of other Delinquents; viz. That such matters should be
adjusted according to the Arbitrament, and common Council of the People. And
that the Lapsed in admitting them to Communion, should plead their cause before
the Clergy, and before all the People. And concerning such matters he writes to
the People, that when it should please God to restore Peace to the Church, and
reduce him from Exile, then the case of the Delinquents should be examined in
their Presence, and according to their Judgment. And Cyprian writes in another
Place, that all things were debated in common amongst them. And that whoever
was Excommunicated it was by the Suffrages of the People. And though the Elders
were Principally concerned, in preparing cases for the Churches Cognizance; yet
its plain that the Decisive Suffrage was [in part] the Prerogative of the
People. To this purpose we have an instance in some that joined in the Schism
of Novatus; who being sensible of their fault, came into the Presbitery, and
desired the Churches Peace; the Presbytery accepted their submission, and
proposed it to the whole Church, who readily embraced it. Now it is to be
observed, that agreeably with the forecited Practice of the Primitive
Churches, our own Platform has decided the Question concerning the Subject, and
Exercise of Government, Platf. C. 10 Sect. 11. The Ordinary Power of Government
belongs only to the Elders; and Power of Privilege remains with the
Brotherhood, [as the Power of Judgment in matters of Censure, and Power of
Liberty in matters of Liberty] thence it follows, that in an Organick Church,
and Right Administration, all Church acts proceed after the manner of a mixed
Administration, so that no Church act can be consummated, or perfected without
the consent of both.

CHAP. VI.
4. I Shall nextly consider the Fellowship and Communion that Distinct Churches
had and held one with another.

It is very obvious by this Time, [and he must blind his own Eyes that will not
see it] That the Primitive Churches [according to the Account we have of their
Regiment for the first three hundred years from Christ] were distinct Political
Bodies; and neither Diocaesan, National, Provincial nor Classical, but properly
Congregational Churches. And as such, were perfect and complete Societies
Incorporate; so that they had a Power, and Capacity of carrying on all
Church-work within themselves, and wanted not to borrow, or receive from
others, for the support of their Being, and so were Independent. Yet
considering they were imperfect in their Matter, and therefore to help, forward
their Well-being, wanted the advantage of all good means; with the influence of
the Grace, Love, Knowledge, Experience, Wisdom, and Counsel of each other; so
they were dependent, and became mutually Officious, and accountable each to
other: Somewhat after the manner, as Mr. Hooker distinguishes on the
Independency, and Dependency of Gospel Churches. Pol. Lib. 2. Chap. 3. Says he,
Independency implies two things. Either,

1. An absolute Supremacy, opposed to Subordination; and so a Particular Church
is not Independent, it being accountable to Civil Government, etc. and also to
the Consociation of Churches. Or,

2. Independency signifies a sufficiency in its kind, for the attainment of its
End. And in this sense, Independency is opposed to Imperfection: And if we take
it thus, then a Particular Church may be said to be Independent, it being
sufficient to attain the end it was Instituted for; it having complete power,
when rightly Constituted, to Exercise all the Ordinances of God. And thus we
find, that the Primitive Churches in this sense were Independent Churches: That
is, every Particular Church had a sufficient Right and Power, without the
Concurrence and Authority of any other Church, to carry on the Worship of God,
and Exercise of Discipline in their distinct Society. And yet as they were
Parts of the Universal Church, held themselves obliged to a suitable Communion.
And for the support of Unity, Love, and Concord amongst them, and to advise
about their common Circumstances and Condition; and also to Regulate their
Ecclesiastical Affairs within their general Limits, for their mutual advantage;
did therefore form themselves into Synodical Assemblies, and were governed in
common by them; for that their Synodical Decrees, Canons or Institutions, were
accounted Obligatory to all the Churches, who had their Representatives in the
Synods. For indeed to what purpose else did they draw up their Resolves, but
for the good and benefit of the whole Community. And it would have been very
fruitless to have made we arisome Journeys, with great cost and pains to
determine such things, as they judged expedient for the Churches Well-being; if
after all, it were indifferent whether they were obeyed or no: Or that when the
whole was agreed, some should reluct, and remonstrate; and especially when
things were fairly settled by a joint Suffrage in Synods, some small seat of
Wise Men should hold themselves wiser than whole Synods; and afterward should
of their own heads in their more private Apartments set forward new Schemes,
which in it self is disorderly, and a way to keep the Churches constantly
fluctuating, and restless, like the unstable Ocean. And indeed, considering the
Regularity, Wisdom and Union in Synodical Settlements, whilst that all sorts of
persons interested, both Officers and People having had their full liberty in
Debates, and their free Votes and Suffrages, in drawing up the Decrees and
Settlements; it is a bold intrusion, and little better than defying and
trampling under foot the Unity, Love, Honor and Authority of the Churches, to
run counter with Synodical Settlements, till they are fairly Repealed by the
like Power which made the Settlements. And thus we come to consider the Members
of the Synods of the Primitive Churhes.

And these were Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons, and Deputed Laymen, in behalf of
the People of their Respective Churches. At a great Synod at Antioch, which
condemned Paul^^ Samasatenus, there were present Bishops, Presbyters, Deacons,
and the Church of God; that is Laymen, who represented the People of their
several Churches. Eusebius. l. 7 Cap. 30. Also when the Heresy of the Montanists,
was fixed and preached, the Faithful in Asia met together several times to
Examine it, and upon Examination condemned it. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 16. Also
there being some heats in the Church of Carthage, about the Restitution of the
Lapsed, Cyprian, Bishop of that Church, writes from Exile, That there should be
Convened a Synod of Bishops, and of the Laity, who had stood firm through the
Persecution, to Consult about, and Determine their Affairs. Epist. 14. And
moreover at a great Synod held at Carthage, Anno 258. there were present Eighty
Seven Bishops, together with Presbyters and Deacons, and a great part of the
Laity. Apud Cypri. p 443.

The Principles of the Churches in New England, Asserting the Right of the
People in Synodal Meetings, is fully set down in the Chapter concerning Synods.
Platf. And the Practice of these in Harmony with the Primitive Churches has
been all along agreeable to it. In the last Synod which was in New England, in
the year 1679. Some Churches sent only their Elders without their Brethren,
with which the Synod was so far unsatisfyed, as that they would not allow those
Pastors to Sit with them, until they had prevailed with their Churches to send
Brethren also; being very tender of Admitting any thing, that should look like
the Infringement of that Liberty and Privilege, which does by the Institution
of Christ belong to the Brotherhood in Particular Churches. Dr. Mathers Order.
Q. 11. I shall conclude this Head or Demonstration with these Weighty and
Solemn Words of the Learned and Famous Mr. Oaks, Praesident of the College,
in his Election Sermon. Consider (says he) what will be the End of Receding, or
making of a Defection from the way of Church Government Established amongst us.
I profess that I look upon the Discovery and Settlement of the Congregational
Way, as the Boon, the Gratuity, the largess of Divine Bounty, which the Lord
graciously bestowed on this People, that followed him into this Wilderness, and
who were, separated from their Brethren. Those Good People who came over had
more Love, Zeal, and affectionate desire of Communion with God, in pure Worship
and Ordinances, and did more in order to it, than others; and the Lord did more
for them than for any People in the World, in showing them the Pattern of his
House, and the truer Scriptural-way of Church Government and Administrations.
God was certainly in a more than ordinary way present with his Servants, in
laying of our Foundations; and in settling Church Order, according to the Will
and Appointment of Christ. Consider what will be the sad issue of Revolting
from the way fixed on to one extreme or to another, whether it be to
Presbyterianism or Brownism. As for the Presbyterians, it must be acknowledged,
that there are amongst them, as Pious, Learned, Sober, Orthodox Men, as the
World affords; and that there is as much of the Power of Godliness among that
Party, and of the Spirit of the good old Puritans, as among any People in the
World. And as for the Ways of their Church Government, it must be confessed,
that in the day of it, it was a very considerable step to Reformation. The
Reformation in King Edward's Days, was a blessed work; and the Reformation of
Geneva and Scotland, was then a larger step, and in many respects purer than
the other. And for my part, I fully believe that the Congregational-way far
exceeds both, and is the highest step that has been taken toward Reformation;
and for the substance of it, it is the very same way that was Established and
Practiced in the Primitive Times, according to the Institution of Jesus Christ.
Thus ends my first Demonstration in a fair parallel drawn up between the
Holiest Churches that ever were in the World, and the Churches of New England;
and however they may differ in their Morals, they are very harmonious in their
Order. And considering that the former cannot rationally be thought but they
derived their Constitution from the Apostles, and so it must needs be of a
Divine Original: And if so, then these in New England who are fashioned so
exactly like them, must needs be of the same Pedigree, etc. But I shall wave
all Improvement of the Premises, and leave the whole to the serious and
judicious thoughts of every Impartial Reader, not doubting but he will find
sufficient evidence of the Divine Original of these Churches in what has been
said. And that I might now obtain a Supersedeas, and forbear adding any further
Plea in their Defense. But yet to gratify my own Curiosity, and divert the
Reader, I shall proceed to Inquire into the Natural Reason of the Constitution
of those Churches we have been comparing, In this Question I shall go out of
the Common Road, and take into an unusual and unbeaten Path; wherein possibly I
may fall into some Thickets now and then, and be somewhat entangled; yet I hope
the Candid Reader will afford some succor by his tender Clemency, and his
friendly Interpretation of my good Intentions. For though I may in so devious a
way, miss of some part of the Truth; yet I have a great presumption that I may
open a Road to Men of greater Learning, and a deeper Search, that will lead to
a rich Treasure of Knowledge, and Wisdom, for Ease and Relief under those many
Questions and crabbed Debates concerning Church Government in the Christian
World; for to me it seems most apparent, that under Christ the reason of the
Constitution of these and the Primitive Churches, is really and truly owing to
the Orginal State and Liberty of Mankind, and founded peculiarly in the Light
of Nature. And thus I come to the

2. Demonstration in Defense of our Platform, which is founded in the Light of
Nature.

CHAP. I.
THE Divine Establishment in Providence of the forenamed Churches in their
Order is apparently the Royal assent of the supreme Monarch of the Churches, to
the grave Decisions of Reason in favor of Man's Natural state of Being, and
Original Freedom. For it we should make a new Survey of the Constitution before
named under the brightest Light of Nature, there is no greater Example of
natural Wisdom in any setlement on Earth; for the present and future security
of Humane Beings in all that is most Valuable and Grand, then in this. That it
seems to me as though Wise and Provident Nature by the Dictates of Right Reason
excited by the moving Suggestions of Humanity; and awed with the just demands
of Natural Liberty, Equity, Equality, and Principles of Self-Preservation,
Originally drew up the Scheme, and then obtained the Royal Approbation. And
certainly it is agreeable that we attribute it to God whether we receive it
nextly from Reason or Revelation, for that each is equally an Emanation of his
Wisdom, Prove. 20.27. The Spirit of Man is the Candle of the Lord, searching all
the inward parts of the Belly. There be many larger Volumns in this dark Recess
called the Belly to be read by that Candle God has Light up. And I am very well
assured the fore named Constitution is a Transcript out of some of their Pages,
Joh. 1.4, 9. And the Life was the Light of Men, which Lights every Man which
comes into the World. This admirable Effect of Christ's Creating Power in
hanging out so many Lights to guide man through a dark World, is as Applicable
to the Light of Reason, as to that of Revelation. For that the Light of Reason
as a Law and Rule of Right, is an Effect of Christ's goodness, care and
creating Power, as well as of Revelation; though Revelation is Natures Law in a
fairer and brighter Edition. This is granted by the London Ministers, P. 8. C.
3. That, that which is evident by, and consonant to the true Light of Nature,
or Natural Reason, is to be accounted, Jure Divino, in matters of Religion. But
in the further and more distinct management of this Plea; I shall,

1. Lay before the Reader several Principles Natural Knowledge.

2. Apply or Improve them in Ecclesiastical affairs.

3. Infer from the Premises, a Demonstration that these Churches, if not
properly Formed; yet are fairly Established in their present Order by the Law
of Nature.

CHAP II.
1. I Shall disclose several Principles of Natural Knowledge; plainly
discovering the Law of Nature; or the true sentiments of Natural Reason, with
Respect to Man's Being and Government. And in this Essay I shall peculiarly
confine the discourse to two heads, viz

1. Of the Natural [in distinction to the Civil] and then,

2. Of the Civil Being of Man. And I shall Principally take Baron Puffendorff
for my Chief Guide and Spokes-man.

1. I shall consider Man in a state of Natural Being, as a Freeborn Subject
under the Crown of Heaven, and owing Homage to none but God himself. It is
certain Civil Government in General, is a very Admirable Result of Providence,
and an Incomparable Benefit to Mankind, yet must needs be acknowledged to be
the Effect of Humane Free-Compacts and not of Divine Institution; it is the
Produce of Man's Reason, of Humane and Rational Combinations, and not from any
direct Orders of Infinite Wisdom, in any positive Law wherein is drawn up this
or that Scheme of Civil Government. Government [says the Lord Warrington] is
necessary -- in that no Society of Men can subsist without it; and that
Particular Form of Government is necessary which best suits the Temper and
Inclination of a People. Nothing can be Gods Ordinance, but what he has
particularly Declared to be such; there is no particularly Form of Civil
Government described in Gods Word, neither does Nature prompt it. The
Government of the Jews was changed five Times. Government is not formed by
Nature, as other Births or Productions; If it were, it would be the same in all
Countries; because Nature keeps the same Method, in the same thing, in all
Climates. If a Common Wealth be changed into a Monarchy, is it Nature that
forms, and brings forth the Monarch? Or if a Royal Family wholly Extinct [as in
Noah's Case, being not Heir Apparent from Descent from Adam] is it. Nature that
must go to work [with the King Bees, who themselves alone preserve the Royal
Race in that Empire] to Breed a Monarch before the People can have a King, or a
Government sent over them? And thus we must leave Kings to Resolve which is
their best Title to their Crowns, whether Natural Right, or the Constitution of
Government settled by Humane Compacts, under the Direction and Conduct of
Reason. But to proceed under the head of a State of Natural Being, I shall more
distinctly Explain the State of Humane Nature in its Original Capacity, as Man
is placed on Earth by his Maker, and Clothed with many Investitures, and
Immunities which properly belong to Man separately considered. As,

1. The Prime Immunity in Man's State, is that he is most properly the Subject
of the Law of Nature. He is the Favorite Animal on Earth; in that this Part of
Gods Image, viz. Reason is Congenate with his Nature, wherein by a Law
Immutable, Instampt upon his Frame, God has provided a Rule for Men in all
their Actions, obliging each one to the performance of that which is Right, not
only as to Justice, but likewise as to all other Moral Virtues, the which is
nothing but the Dictate of Right Reason founded in the Soul of Man. Malloy, De.
Mao, Praef. That which is to be drawn from Man's Reason, flowing from the true
Current of that Faculty, when unperverted, may be said to be the Law of Nature;
on which account, the Holy Scriptures declare it written on Men's hearts. For
being endowed with a Soul, you may know from your self, how, and what you ought
to act, Romans 2.14. These having not a Law, are a Law to themselves. So that the
meaning is, when we acknowledge the Law of Nature to be the dictate of Right
Reason, we must mean that the Understanding of Man is Endowed with such a
power, as to be able, from the Comtemplation of humane Condition to discover a
necessity of Living agreeably with this Law: And likewise to find out some
Principle, by which the Precepts of it, may be clearly and solidly
Demonstrated. The way to discover the Law of Nature in our own state, is by a
narrow Watch, and accurate Contemplation of our Natural Condition, and
propensions. Others say this is the way to find out the Law of Nature. scil. If
a Man any ways doubts, whether what he is going to do to another Man be
agreeable to the Law of Nature, then let him suppose himself to be in that
other Man's Room; And by this Rule effectually Executed. A Man must be a very
dull Scholar to Nature not to make Proficiency in the Knowledge of her Laws.
But more Particularly in pursuing our Condition for the discovery of the Law of
Nature, this is very obvious to view, viz.

1. A Principle of Self-Love, and Self-Preservation, is very predominant in
every Man's Being.

2. A Sociable Disposition.

3. An Affection or Love to Mankind in General. And to give such Sentiments
the force of a Law, we must suppose a God who takes care of all Mankind, and
has thus obliged each one, as a Subject of higher Principles of Being, then
mere Instincts. For that all Law properly considered, supposes a capable
Subject, and a Superior Power; And the Law of God which is Binding, is
published by the Dictates of Right Reason as other ways: Therefore says
Plutarch, To follow God and obey Reason is the same thing. But moreover that
God has Established the Law of Nature, as the General Rule of Government, is
further Illustrable from the many Sanctions in Providence, and from the Peace
and Guilt of Conscience in them that either obey, or violate the Law of Nature.
But moreover, the foundation of the Law of Nature with relation to Government,
may be thus Discovered. scil. Man is a Creature extremely desirous of his own
Preservation; of himself he is plainly Exposed to many Wants, unable to secure
his own safety, and Maintenance without the Assistance of his fellows; and he
is also able of returning Kindness by the furtherance of mutual Good; But yet
Man is often found to be Malicious, Insolent, and easily Provoked, and as
powerful in Effecting mischief, as he is ready in designing it. Now that such a
Creature may be Preserved, it is necessary that he be Sociable; that is, that
he be capable and disposed to unite himself to those of his own species, and to
Regulate himself toward them, that they may have no fair Reason to do him
harm; but rather incline to promote his Interests, and secure his Rights and
Concerns. This then is a Fundamental Law of Nature, that every Man as far as in
him lies, do maintain a Sociableness with others, agreeable with the main end
and disposition of humane Nature in general. For this is very apparent, that
Reason and Society render Man the most potent of all Creatures. And Finally,
from the Principles of Sociableness it follows as a fundamental Law of Nature,
that Man is not so Wedded to his own Interest, but that he can make the Common
good the mark of his Aim: And hence he becomes Capacitated to enter into a
Civil State by the Law of Nature; for without this property in Nature, viz.
Sociableness, which is for Cementing of parts, every Government would soon
moulder and dissolve.

2. The Second Great Immunity of Man is an Original Liberty Instampt upon his
Rational Nature. He that intrudes upon this Liberty, Violates the Law of
Nature. In this Discourse I shall wave the Consideration of Man's Moral
Turpitude, but shall view him Physically as a Creature which God has made and
furnished essentially with many Enobling Immunities, which render him the most
August Animal in the World, and still, whatever has happened since his
Creation, he remains at the upper-end of Nature, and as such is a Creature of a
very Noble Character. For as to his Dominion, the whole frame of the Lower Part
of the Universe is devoted to his use, and at his Command; and his Liberty
under the Conduct of Right Reason, is equal with his trust. Which Liberty may
be briefly Considered, Internally as to his Mind, and Externally as to his
Person.

1. The Internal Native Liberty of Man's Nature in general implies, a faculty of
Doing or Omitting things according to the Direction of his Judgment. But in a
more special meaning, this Liberty does not consist in a loose and ungovernable
Freedom, or in an unbounded License of Acting. Such License is disagreeing with
the condition and dignity of Man, and would make Man of a lower and meaner
Constitution then Bruit Creatures; who in all their Liberties are kept under a
better and more Rational Government, by their Instincts. Therefore as Plutarch
says, Those Persons only who live in Obedience to Reason, are worthy to be
accounted free: They alone live as they Will, who have Learnt what they ought
to Will. So that the true Natural Liberty of Man, such as really and truly
agrees to him, must be understood, as he is Guided and Restrained by the Ties
of Reason, and Laws of Nature; all the rest is Brutal, if not worse.

2. Man's External Personal, Natural Liberty, Antecedent to all Humane parts, or
Alliances must also be considered. And so every Man must be conceived to be
perfectly in his own Power and disposal, and not to be controuled by the
Authority of any other. And thus every Man, must be acknowledged equal to every
Man, since all Subjection and all Command are equally banished on both sides;
and considering all Men thus at Liberty, every Man has a Prerogative to Judge
for himself, viz. What shall be most for his Behoof, Happiness and Well-being.

3. The Third Capital Immunity belonging to Man's Nature, is an equality amongst
Men; Which is not to be denied by the Law of Nature, till Man has Resigned
himself with all his Rights for the sake of a Civil State; and then his
Personal Liberty and Equality is to be cherished, and preserved to the highest
degree, as will consist with all just distinctions amongst Men of Honor, and
shall be agreeable with the public Good. For Man has a high valuation of
himself, and the passion seems to lay its first foundation [not in Pride, but]
really in the high and admirable Frame and Constitution of Humane Nature. The
Word Man, says my Author, is thought to carry somewhat of Dignity in its sound;
and we commonly make use of this as the most proper and prevailing Argument
against a rude Insulter, viz. I am not a Beast or a Dog, but am a Man as well
as your self. Since then Humane Nature agrees equally with all persons; and
since no one can live a Sociable Life with another that does not own or Respect
him as a Man; It follows as a Command of the Law of Nature, that every Man
Esteem and treat another as one who is naturally his Equal, or who is a Man as
well as he. There be many popular, or plausible Reasons that greatly Illustrate
this Equality, viz. that we all Derive our Being from one stock, the same
Common Father of humane Race. On this Consideration Boethius checks the pride
of the Insulting Nobility.

Quid Genus et Proavos Strepitis?
Si Primordia Vestra,
Auteremque Deum Spectas,
Nullus Degener Extat
Nisi vitiis Pejora sovens,
Proprium Deserat Orturn.
Fondly our first Descent we Boast;
It whence at first our Breath we Drew,
The common springs of Life we view,
The Airy Notion soon is Lost.
The Almighty made us equal all;
But he that slavishly complyes
To do the Drudgery of Vice,
Denies his high Original.
And also that our Bodies are Composed of matter, frail, brittle, and liable to
be destroyed by thousand Accidents; we all owe our Existence to the same Method
of propagation. The Noblest Mortal in his Entrance on to the Stage of Life, is
not distinguished by any pomp or of passage from the lowest of Mankind; and our
Life hastens to the same General Mark: Death observes no Ceremony, but Knocks
as loud at the Barriers of the Court, as at the Door of the Cottage. This
Equality being admitted, bears a very great force in maintaining Peace and
Friendship amongst Men. For that he who would use the Assistance of others, in
promoting his own Advantage, ought as freely to be at their service, when they
want his help on the like Occasions. One Good turn Requires another, is the
Common Proverb; for otherwise he must need esteem others unequal to himself,
who constantly demands their Aid, and as constantly denies his own. And whoever
is of this Insolent Temper, cannot but highly displease those about him, and
soon give Occasion of the Breach of the Common Peace. It was a Manly Reproof
which Charact^cus gave the Romans. Number Si vos Omnibus etc. What! because you
desire to be Masters of all Men, does it follow therefore that all Men should
desire to be your Slaves, for that it is a Command of Natures Law, that no Man
that has not obtained a particular and special Right, shall arrogate to himself
a Larger share then his fellows, but shall admit others to equal Privileges
with himself. So that the Principle of Equality in a Natural State, is
peculiarly transgressed by Pride, which is when a Man without sufficient reason
prefers himself to others. And though as Hensius, Paraphrases upon Aristotle's
Politics to this Purpose. viz. Nothing is more suitable to Nature, then that
those who Excel in Understanding and Prudence, should Rule and Control those
who are less happy in those Advantages, etc. Yet we must note, that there is
room for an Answer, soil. That it would be the greatest absurdity to believe,
that Nature actually Invests the Wise with a Sovereignity over the weak; or
with a Right of forcing them against their Wills; for that no Sovereignty can
be Established, unless some Humane Deed, or Covenant Precede: Nor does Natural
fitness for Government make a Man presently Governor over another; for that as
Vlpian says, by a Natural Right all Men are born free; and Nature having set
all Men upon a Level and made them Equals, no Servitude or Subjection can be
conceived without Inequality; and this cannot be made without Usurpation or
Force in others, or Voluntary Compliance in those who Resign their freedom, and
give away their degree of Natural Being And thus we come,

2. To consider Man in a Civil State of Being; wherein we shall observe the
great difference between a Natural, and Political State; for in the latter State
many Great disproportions appear, or at least many obvious distinctions are
soon made amongst Men; which Doctrine is to be laid open under a few heads.

1. Every Man considered in a Natural State, must be allowed to be Free, and at
his own dispose; yet to suit Man's Inclinations to Society; And in a peculiar
manner to gratify the necessity he is in of public Rule and Order, he is
Impelled to enter into a Civil Community; and Divests himself of his Natural
Freedom, and puts himself under Government; which amongst other things
Comprehends the Power of Life and Death over Him; together with Authority to
Enjoin him some things to which he has an utter Aversation, and to prohibit him
other things, for which he may have as strong an Inclination; so that he may be
often under this Authority, obliged to Sacrifice his Private, for the Public
Good. So that though Man is inclined to Society, yet he is driven to a
Combination by great necessity. For that the true and leading Cause of forming
Governments, and yielding up Natural Liberty, and throwing Man's Equality into a
Common Pile to be new Cast by the Rules of fellowship; was really and truly to
guard themselves against the Injuries Men were liable to Interchangeably; for
none so Good to Man, as Man, and yet none a greater Enemy. So that,

2. The first Humane Subject and Original of Civil Power is the People. For as
they have a Power every Man over himself in a Natural State, so upon a
Combination they can and do bequeath this Power unto others; and settle it
according as their united discretion shall Determine. For that this is very
plain, that when the Subject of Sovereign Power is quite Extinct, that Power
returns to the People again. And when they are free, they may set up what
species of Government they please; or if they rather incline to it, they may
subside into a State of Natural Being, if it be plainly for the best. In the
Eastern Country of the' Mogul, we have some resemblance of the Case; for upon
the Death of an absolute Monarch, they live so many days without a Civil Head;
but in that Interregnum, those who survive the Vacancy, are glad to get into a
Civil State again; and usually they are in a very Bloody Condition when they
return under the Covert of a new Monarch; this project is to indear the People
to a Tyranny, from the Experience they have so lately had of an Anarchy.

3. The formal Reason of Government is the Will of a Community, yielded up and
surrendered to some other Subject, either of one particular Person, or more,
Conveyed in the following manner.

Let us conceive in our Mind a multitude of Men, all Naturally Free and Equal;
going about voluntarily, to Erect themselves into a new Commonwealth. Now
their Condition being such, to bring themselves into a Politic Body, they must
needs Enter into diverse Covenants.

1. They must Interchangeably each Man Covenant to join in one lasting Society,
that they may be capable to concert the measures of their safety, by a Public
Vote.

2. A Vote or Decree must then nextly pass to set up some Particular speecies
of Government over them. And if they are joined in their first Compact upon
absolute Terms to stand to the Decision of the first Vote concerning the
Species of Government: Then all are bound by the Majority to acquiesce in that
particular Form thereby settled, though their own private Opinion, incline them
to some other Model.

3. After a Decree has specified the Particular form of Government, then there
will be need of a New Covenant, whereby those on whom Sovereignty is conferred,
engage to take care of the Common Peace, and Welfare. And the Subjects on the
other hand, to yield them faithful Obedience. In which Covenant is Included
that Submission and Union of Wills, by which a State may be conceived to be but
one Person. So that the most proper Definition of a Civil State, is this. viz.
A Civil State is a Compound Moral Person. whose Will [United by those Covenants
before passed] is the Will of all; to the end it may Use, and Apply the
strength and riches of Private Persons toward maintaining the Common Peace,
Security, and Well-being of all. Which may be conceived as though the whole State
was now become but one Man; in which the aforesaid Covenants may be supposed
under Gods Providence, to be the Divine Fiat, Pronounced by God, let us make
Man. And by way of resemblance the aforesaid Being may be thus Anatomized.

1. The Sovereign Power is the Soul infused, giving Life and Motion to the
whole Body.

2. Subordinate Officers are the Joints by which the Body moves.

3. Wealth and Riches are the Strength.

4. Equity and Laws are the Reason.

5. Counselors the Memory.

6. Salus Populi, or the Happiness of the People, is the End of its Being; or
main Business to be attended and done.

7. Concord amongst the Members, and all Estates, is the Health.

8. Sedition is Sickness, and Civil War Death.

4. The Parts of Sovereignty may be considered: So,

1. As it Prescribes the Rule of Action: It is rightly termed Legislative Power.

2. As it determines the Controversies of Subjects by the Standard of those
Rules. So is it justly Termed Judiciary Power.

3. As it Arms the Subjects against Foreigners, or forbids Hostility, so its
called the Power of Peace and War.

4. As it takes in Ministers for the discharge of Business, so it is called the
Right of Appointing Magistrates. So that all great Officers and Public
Servants, must needs owe their Original to the Creating Power of Sovereignty.
So that those whose Right it is to Create, may Dissolve the being of those who
are Created, unless they cast them into an Immortal Frame. And yet must needs
be dissoluble if they justly forfeit their being to their Creators.

5. The Chief End of Civil Communities, is, that Men thus conjoined, may be
secured against the Injuries, they are liable to from their own Kind. For if
every Man could secure himself singly; It would be great folly for him, to
Renounce his Natural Liberty, in which every Man is his own King and Protector

6. The Sovereign Authority besides that it inheres in every State as in a
Common and General Subject. So farther according as it resides in some One
Person, or in a Council [consisting of some Select Persons, or of all the
Members of a Community] as in a proper and particular Subject, so it produces
different Forms of Commonwealths, viz. Such as are either simple and regular,
or mixed.

1. The Forms of a Regular State are three only, which Forms a rise from the
proper and particular Subject, in which the Supreme Power Resides. As,

1. A Democracy, which is when the Sovereign Power is Lodged in a Council
consisting of all the Members, and where every Member has the Privilege of a
Vote. This Form of Government, appears in the greatest part of the World to
have been the most Ancient. For that Reason seems to show it to be most
probable, that when Men [being Originally in a condition of Natural Freedom and
Equality] had thoughts of joining in a Civil Body, would without question be
inclined to Administer their common Affairs, by their common Judgment, and so
must necessarily to gratify that Inclination establish a Democracy; neither
can it be rationally imagined, that Fathers of Families being yet Free and
Independent, should in a moment, or little time take off their long delight in
governing their own Affairs, and Devolve all upon some single Sovereign
Commander; for that it seems to have been thought more Equitable, that what
belonged to all, should be managed by all, when all had entered by Compact into
one Community. The Original of our Government, says Plato, [speaking of the
Athenian Commonwealth] was taken from the Equality of our Race. Other States
there are composed of different Blood, and of unequal Lines, the Consequence of
which are disproportionable Sovereignty, Tyrannical or Oligarchycal Sway; under
which men live in such a manner, as to Esteem themselves partly Lords, and
partly Slaves to each other. But we and our Countrymen, being all Born
Brethren of the same Mother, do not look upon our selves, to stand under so
hard a Relation, as that of Lords and Slaves; but the Parity of our Descent
incline us to keep up the like Parity by our Laws, and to yield the precedence
to nothing but to Superior Virtue and Wisdom. And moreover it seems very
manifest that most Civil Communities arose at first from the Union of Families,
that were nearly allied in Race and Blood. And though Ancient Story make
frequent mention of Kings, yet it appears that most of them were such that had
an Influence rather in persuading, then in any Power of Commanding. So Justin
discribes that Kind of Government, as the most Primitive, which Aristotle
styles an Heroical Kingdom. viz. Such as is no ways Inconsistent with a
Democratical State. De Princip. Reru. 1. L. 1. C.

A democracy is then Erected, when a Number of Free Persons, do Assemble
together, in Order to enter into a Covenant for Uniting themselves in a Body:
And such a Preparative Assembly has some appearance already of a Democracy; it
is a Democracy in Embrio] properly in this Respect, that every Man has the
Privilege freely to deliver his Opinion concerning the Common Affairs. Yet he
who dissents from the Vote of the Majority, is not in the least obliged by what
they determine, till by a second Covenant, a Popular Form be actually
Established; for not before then can we call it a Democratical Government, viz.
Till the Right of Determining all matters relating to the public Safety, is
actually placed in a General Assembly of the whole People; or by their own
Compact and Mutual Agreement, Determine themselves the proper Subject for the
Exercise of Sovereign Power. And to complete this State, and render it capable
to Exert its Power to answer the End of a Civil State: These Conditions are
necessary.

1. That a certain Time and Place be Assigned for Assembling.

2. That when the Assembly be Orderly met, as to Time and Place, that then the
Vote of the Majority must pass for the Vote of the whole Body.

3. That Magistrates be appointed to Exercise the Authority of the whole for
the better dispatch of Business, of every days Occurrence; who also may with
more Mature diligence, search into more Important Affairs; and if in case any
thing happens of greater Consequence, may report it to the Assembly; and be
peculiarly Serviceable in putting all Public Decrees into Execution. Because a
large Body of People is almost useless in Respect of the last Service, and of
many others, as to the more Particular Application and Exercise of Power.
Therefore it is most agreeable with the Law of Nature, that they Institute
their Officers to act in their Name, and Stead

2. The Second Species of Regular Government, is an Aristocracy; and this is
said then to be Constituted when the People, or Assembly United by a first
Covenant, and having thereby cast themselves into the first Rudiments of a
State; do then by Common Decree, Devolve the Sovereign Power, on a Council
consisting of some Select Members; and these having accepted of the
Designation, are then properly invested with Sovereign Command; and then an
Aristocracy is formed.

3. The Third Species of a Regular Government, is a Monarchy which is settled
when the Sovereign Power is confered on some one worthy Person. It differs from
the former, because a Monarch who is but one Person in Natural, as well as in
Moral account, and so is furnished with an Immediate Power of Exercising
Sovereign Command in all Instances of Government; but the fore named must needs
have Particular Time and Place assigned; but the Power and Authority is Equal
in each.

2. Mixed Governments, which are various and of diverse kinds [not now to be
Enumerated] yet possibly the fairest in the World is that which has a Regular
Monarchy; [in Distinction to what is Dispotick] settled upon a Noble Democracy
as its Basis. And each part of the Government is so adjusted by Pacts and Laws
that renders the whole Constitution an Elisium It is said of the British
Empire, That it is such a Monarchy, as that by the necessary subordinate
Concurrence of the Lords and Commons, in the Making and Repealing all Statutes
or Acts of Parliament; it has the main Advantages of an Aristocracy, and of a
Democracy, and yet free from the Disadvantages and Evils of either. It is such
a Monarchy, as by most Admirable Temperament affords very much to the Industry,
Liberty, and Happiness of the Subject, and reserves enough for the Majesty and
Prerogative of any King, who will own his People as Subjects, not as Slaves. It
is a Kingdom, that of all the Kingdoms of the World, is most like to the
Kingdom of Jesus Christ, whose Yoke is easy, and Burden light. Present State
of England 1st Part 64 p Thus having drawn up this brief Scheme concerning Man,
and the Nature of Civil Government, he is become sole Subject of. I shall
nextly proceed to make Improvements of the Premises, to accommodate the main
Subject under our Consideration.

2. I shall now make some Improvement of the foregoing Principles of Civil
Knowledge, fairly deduced from the Law of Nature. And I shall peculiarly referr
to Ecclesiastical Affairs, whereby we may in probability discover more clearly
the Kind, and something of the Nature of that Government, which Christ has
placed in and over his Church. The Learned Debates of Men, and Divine Writ
sometimes seems to cast such a Grandeur on the Church and its Officers, as though
they stood in Peerage with Civil Empire. Rev. 1.6, 9 1 Pet. 2.9. 1 Cor. 4.8. 1
Cor. 12.28. 2 Cor. 10.8. But all such Expression must needs be other-ways
Interpreted. God is the highest Cause that acts by Council; and it must needs
be altogether repugnant, to think he should forecast the State of this World
by no better a Scheme, than to Order two Sovereign Powers, in the same Grand
Community, which would be like placing two Suns in the Firmament, which would
be to set the Universe into a Flame: That should such an Error happen, one must
needs be forthwith Extinguished, to bring the Frame of Nature into a just
Temper, and keep it out of harms way. But to proceed with my Purpose, I shall
go back upon the Civil Scheme, and inquire after two things: First of Rebellion
against Government in general, and then in special; whether any of the
aforesaid Species of Regular Government can be predicable of the Church of God
on Earth.

1. In General concerning Rebellion against Government for Particular Subjects
to break in upon Regular Communities duly Established, is from the premises to
Violate the Law of Nature; and is a high Usurpation upon the first grand
Immunities of Mankind. Such Rebels in States, and Usurpers in Churches affront
the World, with a presumption that the Best of the Brotherhood are a Company of
Fools, and that themselves have fairly Monopolized all the Reason of Humane
Nature. Yea, they take upon them the Boldness to assume a Prerogative of
trampling under foot the natural original Equality and Liberty of their
Fellows; for to push the Proprietors of Settlements out of possession of their
old, and impose new Schemes upon them, is vertually to declare them in a state
of Vassalage, or that they were Born so; and therefore will the Usurper be so
gracious as to insure them they shall not be Sold at the next Market: They must
esteem it a favor, for by this time all the Original Prerogatives of Man's
Nature are intentionally a Victim, smoking to satiate the Usurpers Ambition.
It is a very tart Observation on an English Monarch, and where it may by
proportion be applied to a Subject must needs sink very deep, and serve for
evidence under this Head. It is in the Secret History of K. C. 2. and K J. 2.
p. 2. Says my Author, Where the Constitution of a Nation is such, that the Laws
of the Land are the Measures both of the Sovereigns Commands, and the Obedience
of the Subjects, whereby it is Provided; that as the one are not to Invade what
by Concessions and Stipulations is granted to the Ruler; so the other is not to
deprive them of their lawful and determined Rights and Liberties; then the
Prince who drives to subvert the Fundamental Laws of the Society, is the
Traitor and the Rebel, and not the People, who endeavor to Preserve and Defend
their own. It Is very applicable to particular Men in their Rebellions or
Usurpations in Church or State.

2. In special I shall now proceed to Enquire, Whether any of the aforesaid
Species of regular, unmixt Governments, can with any good show of Reason be
predicable of the Church of Christ on Earth. If the Churches of Christ, as
Churches, are either the Object or Subject of a Sovereign Power entrusted in
the hands of Men, then most certainly one of the forecited Schemes of a
perfect Government will be applicable to it.

Before I pursue the Enquiry, it may not be improper to pause, and make some
Caution here, by distinguishing between that which may have some Resemblance of
Civil Power, and the thing it self; and so the Power of Churches is but a faint
Resemblance of Civil Power; it comes in reality nothing near to the thing it
self; for the one is truly Coercive, the other persuasive; the one is Sovereign
Power, the other is Delegated and Ministerial: But not to delay, I shall
proceed with my Enquiry, and therein shall endeavor to humor the several
great Claimers of Government in the Church of Christ. And

1. I shall begin with a Monarchy. It Is certain, his Holiness, either by
reasonable Pleas, or powerful Cheats, has assumed an absolute and universal
Sovereignty; this fills his Cathedral Chair, and is adorned with a Triple
Crown, and in Defense thereof does protest, The Almighty has made him bath
Key-keeper of Heaven and Hell, with the adjacent Territories of Purgatory, and
vested in him an absolute Sovereignty over the Christian World. And his Right
has so far prevailed, that Princes and Civil Monarchs hold their Crowns and
Donations as his Dutiful Sons, and Loyal Subjects; he therefore decks himself
with the Spoils of the Divine Attributes, stiling himself, Our Lord God,
Optimum, Maximum et supremum numen in Terris; a God on Earth, a visible Deity,
and that his Power is absolute, and his Wisdom infallible. And many of the
great Potentates of the Earth have paid their Fealty, as though it was really so.
One of them Clad in Canvas, going Barefoot in the depth of Winter, [in
Obedience to the Decree, stinting the Penance in proportion to the Wickedness
of Princes] has waited many days for absolution at hpious Gates. Another has
thrown himself down prostrate a humble Penitent before him: He has placed his
Holy Foot on the Monarchs profane Neck as crushing a Vermin, crawling out of
the Stable of his Soveraighty; and others frequently kiss his Toes with very
profound Devotion. These and such like Triumphant Signals of his Sovereign
Power does he wear. And indeed if he is the Universal Monarch of the Catholic
Church, Princes that are Members of it must needs knock under; for that in one
World there can not possibly be two Most High's, any more than two Infinites.
Thus you see the Clergy, or Gospel Ministry of the Christian World have so
wisely handled business, and managed the Gospel, that they have fairly [as they
avouch] sound a Sovereign Power bequeathed in it to the Ministry of Christ, and
romaging more warily and nicely, at last found a Spiritual Monarch, very
completely furnished with the Keys of all sorts of Power hanging at his Girdle;
and may we not pronounce the wiser they! seeing the World growing weary of
Religion, was willing to loll it self down to Sleep, and leave them in sole
Trust with the whole Interest of God's Kingdom. But the sad Enquiry is, Whether
this sort of Government has not plainly subverted the Design of the Gospel, and
the end for which Christ's Government was Ordained, viz. the Moral, Spiritual,
and Eternal Happiness of Men?

But I have no occasion to pursue this Remark with tedious Demonstrations: It Is
very plain, it is written with Blood in Capital Letters, to be Read at Midnight
by the Flames of Smithfield, and other such like consecrated Fires. That the
Government of this Ecclesiastical Monarch has instead of Sanctifying,
absolutely Debaucht the World, and subverted all good Christianity in it. So
that without the least show of any vain presumption we may Infer, That God and
wise Nature were never Propitious to the Birth of this Monster.

An Aristocracy which places the Supreme Power in a Select Company of choice
Persons. Here I freely acknowledge were the Gospel Ministry Established the
Subject of this Power, viz. To Will and Do, in all Church Affairs without
control, etc. This Government might do to support the Church in its most
valuable Rights, etc. If we could be assured they would make the Scripture, and
not their private Will, the Rule of their Personal and Ministerial Actions: And
indeed upon these terms any Species of Government, might serve the great design
of Redemption; but considering how great an Interest is imbarkt, and how frail
a bottom we trust, though we should rely upon the best of Men, especially if we
remember what is in the hearts of Good Men, [ viz. Much ignorance, abundance of
small ends, many times cloked with a high Pretense in Religion; Pride Skulking
and often breeding revenge upon a small affront; and blown up by a pretended
Zeal; Yet really and truly by nothing more Divine then Interest, or ill Nature]
and also considering how very uncertain we are of the real goodness of those we
esteem good Men; and also how impossible it is to secure the Intail of it to
Successors: And also if we remind how Christianity by the foresaid Principle
has been peeled, robbed and spoiled already; it cannot consist with the Light of
Nature to venture again upon such Perils, especially if we can find a safer way
home. More Distinctly.

It is very plain [allowing me to speak Emblematically] the Primitive
Constitution of the Churches was a Democracy, as appears by the foregoing
Parallel. But after the Christian Churches were received into the favor of the
Imperial Court, under the Dominion of Constantine the Great; there being many
Praeliminaries which had furnished the Ministers with a disposition thereunto,
they quickly deprived the Fraternities of their Rights in the Government of the
Churches, when they were once provided of a plentiful maintenance through the
Liberality of Constantine, that when Christianity was so Luxuriantly treated,
as by his great Bounty, and Noble settlement, it is said there was a Voice
heard from Heaven, saying, Now is Poison poured into the Church. But the
subversion of the Constitution, is a story too long now to tell. Take therefore
part of it, out of a late Author well versed in Antiquity, which may give some
brief Image of the whole.

Non Multa secula jus Plebis Illaesum Mansit, neque Aliter Evenir^ Potuit, Quin
Illud, vel amittatur, vel saltem diminuatur, etc. De Ordina; Diss. Hystorica.
P. 36.40.41.

The Right of the People did not remain unhurt through many Ages; neither could
it well be otherways, but that it must be lost, or much diminished. Zonaras
does confess that heretofore Bishops were chosen by the Suffrage of the People.
But many Seditions happening among them; it was Decreed that every Bishop
should hereafter be chosen by the Authority of the Bishops of every Province.
The cause seemed to be so very specious, that nothing could be more Decent, or
more Conducive to the safety of the Commonwealth.

Yet [says my Author] if you do well weigh the business, you must needs
acknowledge nothing could have happened more Pernicious or Destructive to the
Church of God. For soon after these things came to pass, it is very obvious,
that Tyranny over the Consciences of the faithful; and an Intolerable Pride
every where grew Rampant among the guides of the Church. Yet there was one
thing still very needful to be done; and that was to Establish or Confirm the
Power which the Metropolitans and Bishops had acquired to themselves. Therefore
they fell to it Tooth and Nail to drive away the Fraternity from all Interest
in Elections: And alas Poor hearts! They began to sleep with both Ears; that
then was scarce any Enemy left to Interrupt, or Control the Conquerors. This
was the manner of the Clergy till they had made themselves the Subjects of all
Power and then acted Arbitrarily, and did what they pleased in the Church of
God.

But let the learned, knowing World, consider, what the Issue of all this was,
scil. what a wretched capacity the drowsiness and cowardice of the People; and
the Usurpation and Ambition of the Ministry brought the Professing World into.
If those who were truly Godly on both sides had in a few Ages looked down from
Heaven, and had Eyed the following Centurys, they might have beheld a world of
matter for sorrowful Impressions; to think that they themselves had Occasioned
the Ruin of Millions, by their remiss and passive temper in one sort; and too
much humouring, and nourishing Pride, and high conceits of themselves and
others, in the other; when as if they had stood firm to the Government as left
settled by the Apostles; they had certainly prevented an Apostasy that has
damned, and confounded a great part of about Thirty Generations of Men, Women,
and Children. That for my own part I can upon Experience, in some measure truly
say [to the History of the Primitive Churches in the loss of their Government;
and the Consequents which followed, when I am Impelled to repeat it to my self]
as one Eneas said to Queen Dido.

Infandum Regina Jubes Renovare Dolorem
-- Quis taliae fando
Temperet e Lacrimis! --
So doleful a Contemplation is it to think the World should be destroyed by
those Men, who by God were Ordained to save it!

In a Word, an Aristocracy is a dangerous Constitution in the Church of Christ,
as it possesses the Presbytery of all Church Power: What has been observed
sufficiently Evinces it. And not only so but from the Nature of the
Constitution, for it has no more Barrier to it, against the Ambition, Insults,
and Arbitrary measures of Men, then an absolute Monarchy. But to abbreviate; it
seems most agreeable with the Light of Nature, that if there be any of the
Regular Government settled in the Church of God it must needs be.

3. A Democracy. This is a form of Government, which the Light of Nature does
highly value, and often directs to as most agreeable to the Just and Natural
Prerogatives of Humane Beings. This was of great account, in the early times of
the World. And not only so, but upon the Experience of several Thousand years,
after the World had been tumbled, and tossed from one Species of Government to
another, at a great Expense of Blood and Treasure, many of the wise Nations of
the World have sheltered themselves under it again; or at least have
blendished, and balanced their Governments with it.

It is certainly a great Truth, scil. That Man's Original Liberty after it is
Resigned, [yet under due Restrictions] ought to be Cherished in all wise
Governments; or otherwise a man in making himself a Subject, he alters himself
from a Freeman, into a Slave, which to do is Repugnant to the Law of Nature.
Also the Natural Equality of Men amongst Men must be duly favored; in that
Government was never Established by God or Nature, to give one Man a
Prerogative to insult over another; therefore in a Civil, as well as in a
Natural State of Being, a just Equality is to be indulged so far as that every
Man is bound to Honor every Man, which is agreeable both with Nature and
Religion, 1 Pet. 2.17. Honor all Men. -- The End of all good Government is to
Cultivate Humanity, and Promote the happiness of all, and the good of every Man
in all his Rights, his Life, Liberty, Estate, Honor, etc. without injury or
abuse done to any. Then certainly it cannot easily be thought, that a company
of Men, that shall enter into a voluntary Compact, to hold all Power in their
own hands, thereby to use and improve their united force, wisdom, riches and
strength for the Common and Particular good of every Member, as is the Nature
of a Democracy; I say it cannot be that this sort of Constitution, will so
readily furnish those in Government with an appetite, or disposition to prey
upon each other, or imbezle the common Stock; as some Particular Persons may be
apt to do when set off, and Entrusted with the same Power. And moreover this
appears very Natural, that when the aforesaid Government or Power, settled in
all, when they have Elected certain capable Persons to Minister in their
affairs, and the said Ministers remain accountable to the Assembly; these
Officers must needs be under the influence of many wise cautions from their own
thoughts [as well as under confinement by their Commission] in their whole
Administration: And from thence it must needs follow that they will be more
apt, and inclined to steer Right for the main Point, viz. The peculiar good,
and benefit of the whole, and every particular Member fairly and sincerely. And
why may not these stand for very Rational Pleas in Church Order?

For certainly if Christ has settled any form of Power in his Church he has
done it for his Churches safety, and for the Benefit of every Member: Then he
must needs be presumed to have made choice of that Government as should least
Expose his People to Hazard, either from the fraud, or Arbitrary measures of
particular Men. And it is as plain as day light, there is no Species of
Government like a Democracy to attain this End. There is but about two steps
from an Aristocracy, to a Monarchy, and from thence but one to a Tyranny; an
able standing force, and an Ill Nature, Ipso facto, turns an absolute Monarch
into a Tyrant; this is obvious among the Roman Caesar's, and through the World.
And all these direful Transmutations are easier in Church affairs [from the
different Qualities of things] then in Civil States. For what is it that
cunning and learned Men cannot make the World swallow as an Article of their
Creed, if they are once invested with an Uncontrollable Power, and are to be
the standing Orators to Mankind in matters of Faith and Obedience? Indeed some
very wise and learned Men are pleased to Inveigh, and Repraoch the Notion of a
Democracy in the Church, which makes the Cetu fidelium or Community of the
Faithful the first Subject of the Power of Government. This they say tends to
Brownism, and abhorred Anarchy; and then say they upon such praemises, it must
needs follow that very Member of the Body must be an Officer; and then every
one must Preach and Dispense the Sacraments, etc.

Reply. Certainly such Gentlemen, either designs to pose and baffle their
Reader with fallacy; or they themselves never took up, or understood the true
Ideas of the several Species of Government; in that a Democracy is as Regular a
form, and as particular as any other. For,

1. An absolute or limited Monarch cannot manage the Power or Government
Devolved upon him, without the great Officers of the Crown, or a large Set of
Ministers; though possibly he may with quicker dispatch issue out his Decrees,
yet he must Execute all by his Ministry. And why may not a Democracy be
indulged the same Liberty? and this will prevent all Anarchy or Confusion most
apparently. But,

2. The bitter Pill to swallow in this Doctrine of a Democracy in the Church,
is the terrible power of Life and Death; or the accountableness of particular
Members to the Assembly, and especially those in the Ministry; but yet this is
agreeable with the Nature of the Constitution, and easily managed without
Anarchy, or popular Confusion also, which would be made very Evident, if we
should but run the parallel in all points between the Democracy of the State
and Church. But nextly from the Premises, I shall

3. Infer, That if these Churches are not properly formed, yet are fairly
Established in their present Order by the Law of Nature. And will they be
advised, I would Exhort them to try who will be so bold as to dare to disseize
them. A Monarchy has been tried in the Church with a witness, but it has
absolutely failed us. An Aristocracy in a deep Calm threw the Democracy
Overboard, and took not only the Helm in hand, but seized Ship and Cargo as
their Right and Title; but after some time brought all to Ship-wreck, and that
in a good Harbor too.

A Democracy was the noble Government which beat out in all the bad Weather of
Ten Bloody Persecutions under the management of Antiquity. And this is our
Constitution, and what cannot we be pleased? This Constitution is as agreeable
with the Light and Laws of Nature as any other whatsoever, as has been fairly
laid down, and fully Evinced, and more accommodated to the Concerns of Religion
than any other. Therefore I shall now conclude my Demonstration with this brief
Appeal to the common Reason of Mankind, viz.

How can it consist with the Honorable Terms man holds upon here on Earth;
that the best sort of Men that we can find in the World; such men as are
adorned with a double set of Enobling Immunities, the first from Nature, the
other from Grace; that these men when they enter into Charter-party to manage a
Trade for Heaven, must ipso facto be clapped under a Government, that is
Arbitrary and Dispotick; yea that carries the plain symptoms of a Tyranny in
it, when the Light of Nature knows of a better Species, and frequently has made
use of it? It wants no farther Demonstration, for it is most apparent, that
Nature is so much Mistress of her self, that man in a Natural State of Being,
is under God the first Subject of all Power, and therefore can make his own
Choice, and by deliberate Compacts settles his own Conditions for the
Government of himself in a Civil State of Being: And when a Government so
Settled shall throw its self from its Foundations, or the Subjects of Sovereign
Power shall subvert or confound the Constitution, they then degrade themselves;
and so all Power returns again to the People, who are the first Owners. And
what! Is Man become so unfortunate, degraded and debased, as to be without all
Power in settling a Government over himself, relating to the Matters of his
Eternal Well-Being? Or when he comes back to a Fathers House, must he fall into
the Capacity of a mere passive Being, and be put under such Tutors, as can
easily turn Tyrants over him, and no relief left for him in his own hands; this
is certainly most repugnant to the Light of Nature, and very disagreeable with
the liberty and free Genius of a Gospel State. Nay, In a word, If the
Government of the Churches be settled by God, either in the hands of a Church
Monarch, or Aristocracy, and the People are no ways the Subject of
Church Power: Nay, if they are not under Christ, the fountain of Power; then
the Reformation so called, is but a mere Cheat, a Schism, and notorious
Rebellion; neither is there room left for the least palliation, or shadow of
Excuse, for the Reformers in renouncing their Obedience to their Public
Governors. And the Martyrologies which pretend to immortalize the Fame of
eminent Heroes, must be changed into Chronicles, handing along an account of
the just and deserved fate of a crew of Rebels against God and Government; for
what business had such a Company of illeterate and crack brained fellows to
meddle with their Rulers, or Examine into their Administrations? For if they
have no right of Power in Government, they stand absolutely bound to yield a
passive Obedience and Non-Resistance; and if they are so hardy and daring as to
oppose their lawful Rulers, the sharpest penalty in this World, is too easy
for them; the Inquisition is but dallying and playing with them, Hell is their
desert. But how it comes about that a state of Grace, when in want of a
suitable Government, is become such a Vassal, and wise and cunning Nature is by
her Creator entrusted, and adorned with more enobling Prerogatives, I must
leave; and resign unto those Learned Men to Solve, who plead for an Aristocracy
in the Churches of Christ.

But to wind up the whole Discourse in a few words, I acknowledge many
Objections may be here made, and several Questions of Moment might here fall
under Debate; but having obtained what I have principally sought for, in
traversing the paths of Nature, in the three following Particulars; therefore
with them, and with one Objection answered; and also with some brief
Improvement of the Grand Hypothesis in this Demonstration, I shall finish the
Argument.

1. Three Particulars; or so many golden Maxims, securing the Honor of
Congregational Churches.

Particular 1. That the People or Fraternity under the Gospel, are the first
Subject of Power; or else Religion sinks the Dignity of Humane Nature into a
baser Capacity with relation to Ecclesiastical, then it is in, in a Natural
State of being with relation to Civil Government.

Particular 2. That a Democracy in Church or State, is a very honorable and
regular Government according to the Dictates of Right Reason. And therefore,

Particular 3. That these Churches of New England, in their ancient
Constitution of Church Order; it being a Democracy, are manifestly Justified
and Defended by the Law and Light of Nature.

2. The Objection. The Plea from the Law of Nature for a Democracy in the
Church, is as forceable for any other Species of Government; because Nature is
furnished with such a variety of Schemes as has been pleaded to: And why may
not the wise Christian Nations take which likes them best?

Answ. We must distinguish between man left solely to the Direction of the Law
of Nature, and as the Subject of Revelation, wherein Divine Wisdom may
interpose; and determine on some particular Species, without hurting or
crossing the Law of Nature. Therefore,

1. I readily grant and acknowledge, a Christian People may settle what Species
of Government they please, when they are solely left to determine by the Law of
Nature, what Government in the Church they will have. But then we must
remember, that by the Argument or Concession, the Power is originally in the
People; and then our own Case is secure and safe enough; both on the account of
the Reversion of Power, and especially, for that the People the first Subjects
of Power, have been pleased to settle a Democracy for their Government, in the
Churches of this Country. And if after the peaceable Possession of about an
hundred years, any persons can persuade them to alter their Government into any
other Species, this will be less worthy of blame, then craftily, or unfairly to
force it out of their hands.

2. It Is granted, that according to the Light of Nature, there be various
regular Models of Government; but if Divine Wisdom is pleased to interpose and
overruled Natures agitations, and cast the Scales for this or that particular
Form, Nature will be but fair mannered to submit to its Author and Rector. So
that if we find that God has Disclosed his Mind by Revelation, that his
Churches be the Subjects of a Democracy, then all stand obliged to comply under
a double Bond. And so we come under a proper Crisis to enquire in the next
place for Scripture-evidence in the Justification of these Churches.

But before I proceed to it, I shall

3. Make some brief Improvement of the main Hypothesis in the Demonstration;
that is to say, If the Government of the Gospel Churches, be a Democracy, these
Consequences must necessarily follow, scil.

1. Cons. That the Right of Convoking Councils Ecclesiastical, is in the
Churches.

2. Cons. That such a Council has only Consultative, not a Juridical Power in
it. A Juridical Power committed to such a Representative Body is both needless,
and also dangerous to the distinct and perfect States they derive from.
Complete States settled upon a Body of immutable and imperial Laws as its
Basis, may want Council; but to Create a new Subject of Juridical Power, is
some way to endanger the Being of the Creators.

3. Cons That all the Members of an Ecclesiastical Council, deriving from a
Democracy are Subjects of equal Power. Whatever the Power is, the several
Delegates must from the nature of the Government they derive from, be equal
sharers in it. Democratical States, in their Representative Body can make but
one House, because they have but one Subject of Supreme Power in their Nature,
and therefore their Delegates, let them be who or what they may be, are under
equal Trust; so that none can justly claim Superiority over their Fellows, or
pretend to a higher power in their Suffrage. Indeed, in such Kingdoms, where
the Sovereign Power is distributed and settled in diverse Subjects, that the
balance of Power may be more Even, for the safety of the whole, and of all
parts under all Acts of Sovereign Power: From such a Settlement of Power, there
arises several distinct States in the same Government, which when Convened as
one Subject of Sovereign Power, they make different Houses in their Grand
Sessions; and so one House or State can Negative another. But in every distinct
House of these States, the Members are equal in their Vote, the most Ayes makes
the Affirmative Vote, and most No's the Negative: They don't weigh the
intellectual furniture, or other distinguishing Qualifications of the several
Voters in the Scales of the Golden Rule of Fellowship; they only add up the
Aves, and the No's, and so determine the Suffrage of the House.

Demonstration III. From Holy Scripture.
THis Plea has with such variety of Argument, and Illustration, and by many
Repetitions, been pursued, by a great Number of Persons eminent for Learning
and Piety, that I might here very fairly release my self from this task. But
yet to complete the Number of my Arguments, I will briefly sum up the
Demonstration for the Readers use under a few heads.

1. Head. It must needs be allowed, as a fundamental Principle relating to
Government, that [under God] all Power is Originally in the People. No Man I
think will deny it to be a very sound Principle in Civil Knowledge. But if any
Man will, I imagine it is sufficiently set forth in the former Demonstration.
And it is very plain that Religion does always Cultivate, and Increase rather
then Diminish any of Natures just Prerogatives. That it must needs stand for a
Paradox, or a Riddle not to be Expounded; if Man is more of a Slave by his
Religion then by his Nature. But let us take a brief view of Man by Scripture
Account under a Religious Notion, as the Subject of Grace, and he seems then
not to have the least speck of Vassalage in him; but is represented as though
Lord of himself and owner of Heaven and Earth both, 1 Cor. 3.22. -- all are
yours.

And though its very certain that Man has greatly debased himself by his
Apostasy; yet still God puts abundance of Honor upon him in his Reduction. As
we may consider Man in a remark or two, under the measures of Divine Grace in
restoring him (...) favor. First, God treats him as a Creature of a very
Honorable Character, as tree and at his own dispose. Or as though he were some
high and mighty State placed at the Top of this Glob: Therefore he Courts him
into an Alliance as though he were likely to yield great Honor to the Crown.
We are Ambassadors -- as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you in
Christ's stead -- be reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20. This is much the Tenor of
Gods Heralds in their Addresses of Capitulation. That certainly if God did not
highly estimate Man, as a Creature Exalted, by his Reason, Liberty and
Nobleness of Nature, he would not caress him as he does in order to his
Submission; but rather with some peevish and haughty Monarch, or the Bloody
Mahomet, send his demands at the Mouth of his Cannon. But instead of such harsh
measures, they are treated with the highest Reason, attended with Lenity and
great Acts of Condescension. Nay, Divine Menaces are frequently clothed with
such soft Language as this; Turn ye! Turn ye! Why will ye Die? Yea under all
impulsive means, which God Wisely and Graciously makes use of to gain Man's
consent, he sets the Will to turn about it self without forcing it, that so
man's Religion may be the free and candid Emanations of his Noble and Exalted
Nature. But when God has thus gained Man; may we rationally imagine that in
Erecting his Trophies he will assign and make him over to some Petty and
Arbitrary Potentates in matters of Religion? or settle him under a Dispotick
Government as though he was the spoils of a spiteful War? No certainly, but Man
must now be considered as some high Allie invested with more Power then ever.
This would still be more evident if we should consider what Christ has done and
how they stand Joint Heirs with him in his Purchase and Kingdom, Romans 8.1, 16,
17.

2. Head. The Power placed in Man that enables him to manage Religious affairs,
is not Sovereign, but limited and confined Power. (1.) All Laws are Enacted
already, and, (2.) There is no Coercive Power needful in the Church. The
highest Act in Administering Judicature, is Excluding a Person out of the
Society. In the Church there is no fees or fines, etc. In Civil Empire to keep
Mankind in any good Daecorum, there is much hard work to be done, in Peace and
War; under mein Process, and in Criminal Causes. There Is forming of Armies,
raising the posse Comitatus, building of Castles etc. Cropping of Ears,
Chopping off of heads and what not! So that Civil Government has need of an
Immense Power as well as Treasure, and to be clothed with Brass, and Iron. But
as for the Church of God, Faith, Prayers and Tears, are generally their best
Weapons against the Hostility of Foreigners; and in the Government of their
home-born, it may be done by soft words, or hard words, 1 These. 5. 12. Heb.
3.13. -- 10.24.25. So that the business does not require abundance of External
force, or form of Government. That it is a Thousand pitties to make such a great
noise and bustle in the World about Church Power, as though the Subjects of it
were to furnish Armies and Navies to encounter half the Potentates on Earth in
defense of the Church. When alas good men! As to all Occasion for Power its
quite another thing; and the Exercise of it generally falls within reach of an
ordinary Reason. That certainly whatever the Right of the Brotherhood is as to
the Original of Power; there cannot be abundance of bad Omens in allowing them
some share in Church Judicatory.

3. Head. Power -- this Word seems to be all thunder. But however; it is very
Copious and may be applied to God and his Creatures. It is predicable of the
latter, in their differing Classes and Orders of Being, and none so weak but
have some share of it. But to confine the Word to Polity, etc. It is by some
thus defined. viz.

Power or Authority -- Is that whereby a Man may claim, or challenge any thing
to ones self, without the Injury of another, upon a supposition: This is a true
definition.

Query. Whether Christian People may not claim or challenge the following
Rights or Prerogatives without doing injury to any. viz.

1. Whether if they are pleased [a suitable number of them] to enter into a
Religious Society, by punctual and voluntary Compacts to support the Worship of
God in the World; whether this may not be done without injuring any? and then

2. When so united, whether they may not choose their own Officers. (3.)
Discipline their own Members (4.) Represent themselves upon Proper Emergencies,
by their Delegates; [all which are the Principle Pillars of a Democracy,]
whether I say, they cannot do all these, without injury done to any others? But
to proceed a little farther in opening the Nature of Power. If we unite Dunamis
and Exousia, viz. Strength of Nature, and Authority of Institution into one
Proposition. Then Political Power may be thus defined. scil.

Power is an Ability, furnished with a Lawful Right to Act. Now upon a
presumption of the validity of this Proposition; Power may be easily
apprehended as vested in every Church, and in every Member and Officer of a
Church, according to the Nature, Degree and Duty of each Subject of Power; and
may act and exert their several Powers and Authorities without any Incongruity,
or Interfering one with another.

4. Head. That a Gospel Church Essentially considered as a Body Incorporated,
is the Subject of all Church Power. Though a Church thus considered cannot
formally Exercise all Branches of Power belonging to it: Neither can the
Subject of Sovereign Power it self exert all Acts of Power till fitted with
proper Organs or a suitable Ministry, and yet it cannot be denied but that all
Power really, and all Acts of Power Virtually, must needs be in it. And so in a
Church.

Therefore as to Church Power in the Exercise of it; it may be distributed into
what belongs (1.) To the Combination of many, viz. The Power of Judgment and
Donation. Or, (2.) To what belongs to one or more set off for that end, viz.
The Power of Office. This Distribution Mr. P^cker pursues with great
Illustration. Sur^. P. 1. p. 187. Here I shall confine my self to the
consideration of the Exercise of that Power which belongs to the Brotherhood in
distinction to Office Power. Which Principle I shall pursue by evincing the
Truths of the following Proposition. scil.

That the Scripture does Warrant a Government in Gospel Churches, consisting of
the Exercise of several distinct Powers Inherent in the Fraternity, in
distinction to Office Trust. This may be Evinced.

1. By the Recitation of the several distinct Powers themselves.

2. By the Dignity which the Scriptures puts upon the Churches as free States,
and Subjects of Power in distinction from their Officers.

1. By the Recitation of the several distinct Powers; both Preparatory to, and
Resulting from their Combination.

1. There is a Preparatory Power in them both as Rational and Sanctified Beings
of forming themselves into Churches. This Affirmation seems to me as fully
contained in the genuine sense of Scripture, as though written in some Divine
Manifesto, in such terms as these. viz. Let this be proclaimed through all the
Earth, that I the Lord Jesus Christ, have invested all Holy and good Christian
People, both by Nature and Grace with Power, to enter into Church Order, for
the advance of my Name, and their own Edification. If we had such an Article in
Scripture written in terms, we should have made great use of it in justifying
our Constitution; for it plainly settles all Power Originally [under Christ] in
the People. And then if such a Power or Faculty be in them when in separate
parts, as to Assemble, and enter into solemn Engagements, and thereby to enter
into a Church State; it necessarily follows, that having imbodied they may
easily go forward and provide for their own well-being. He that has read the
Gospel, and observed how many Churches are mentioned, without Notice taken, of
the manner of their Origination, must needs allow the observation to be a fair
Consequence from it. It being so agreeable with the Light of Nature.

2. The Powers Resulting from their Combination may be more distinctly Recited.

1. Power. The Election of Officers. Officers are for the well-being, and
completing of any State. There is no Regular Government can well subsist
without them; these are the Hands, the Eyes, the Ears and Feet of Government in
Administration. To separate Qualifyed Persons to the highest Office Trust in a
State, is by Civilians attributed to the Creating Power of Sovereignty. So that
it must needs be a great Power belonging to the Church under this head, and
that it is the Churches Prerogative I might Reason; Ex Jure Superioritatis. For
that the Church is Superior to its Officers; and not the Officers to the
Church. For that Churches are not made for Officers, but Officers for Churches;
therefore says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.22. All things are yours -- whether Paul,
or Apollos or Cephas. But I shall principally depend upon the Example and
Practice of the Apostolical Church under this head. It is a Celebrated saying
of Cyprian in pressing, Acts 1.26. To confirm the Power of the People in
choosing and refusing their Officers. Plebs Christiana maxim potestatem habet,
vel Dignos Sacerdotes Eligendi, vel indignos Recusandi. The highest Power of
Electing worthy Officers and Rejecting unworthy is in the People. For the whole
Church, says Turrettinus [de Jure Vo.] Duos Eligit, chooses two to undergo the
Lot for the Apostleship, that they might supply the vacancy by the Death of
Judas, Act. 1. 23, 26 And indeed it is contrary to all Civility and Reason to
imagine the Apostles would be so trivial in their Ministry, or prodigal of
their own Authority, as to indulge the Fraternity in such actions, viz. Such as
Electing an Extraordinary Officer, if the Election of Officers did not belong
to them. So in the choice of the Deacons mentioned, Act. 6. 2, 3, 5. The twelve
called the Multitude of the Disciples unto them, and said -- Brethren look you
out seven Men, whom we may appoint over this Business. The saying pleased the
whole Multitude and they chose Stephen etc. It must needs be very surprising,
if the Apostles should thus Dignify, and Entrust the Brethren with a
Prerogative of Electing these Officers, if the Power of Election was not
Inherent in them. That unless any one can fairly make it out that the Apostles
were either in Jest, or did they know not what, in directing the Brethren, to
do as they did in the Recited Examples; it must needs stand for a Truth, that
the Power of Electing Officers is in the Fraternity of the Church, by the
Judgment of Christ's Apostles.

2. Power Judicatory, Mat. 18. 15, 20. This Paragraph of Holy Writ, lays open a
Scheme of Juridical Power in the Subject of it; that is the Church: And this is
to be observed, That from the first Commencement of the Process to the final
issue in the Execution of the obstinate (...) criminal Member, all is to be
ascribed to (...) Authority of the Church; for what business has one man to
interrupt another in his Crimes and unlawful Pleasures, unless he has power so
to do? And how comes one man to have power over another, unless Conquest,
Hostility, or Compacts have made them liable, as Members of the same Community,
or Subjects of the same Government? Therefore the offended Person, proceeding
regularly for detecting a Delinquent, must needs be supposed to derive his
power from the same fountain, viz. the Sessions where the Case is finally to
issue by Execution. And the Subject of this Power is the Church. Tell the
Church.

But moreover, let it be considered, That to speak by way of allusion, there be
several Removes of the Action of Trespass, from one hearing to another; as though
it go from an Inferior to a Superior Sessions, and that Christ was here in
this Precept, settling Inferior and Superior Assizes in his Kingdom. And
indeed there cannot be a wiser Scheme drawn up, that shall carry the aspect of
more Grace, Love, Humility, tender regard to Honor, and also Justice then
this; both for the encouragement of Religion, the awing of Spectators, and
keeping the Church pure. But to proceed,

1. In making out Process, the first Trial is to be had at the Assizes of a
man's own intellectual Powers, Reason, Conscience, etc. being Assembled, are to
Sit in Judgment, hear the Pleas, and the Indictment being read and justified,
must pass Sentence; and at this Bar the Case may be fairly Issued. If he shall
hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother. So that most certainly the Plaintiff
has a right to enter his Case at this Sessions, and here we see it may be
issued; then certainly this is a Branch of the Power of Judicature; otherwise
an agrieved person might expect a very severe Repulse from a sturdier Offender,
for interrupting a man's repose of mind in his own actions. What saucy Clown is
that? who dare challenge my Conscience with the Cognizance of any Crime?
Bold-face! where is your Commission; Who made thee a Ruler, Acts 7.27. In Civil
Affairs particular men when injured, must not make bold to correct an ordinary
Trespass upon their Persons, or Interests, but by Forms of Law; if they do,
especially if by measures which are grievous, they may be Indicted themselves
for disturbers of the Peace: That certainly this branch of the Text refers to a
legal Bar, and lawful Power. So that the complaining Party may Commence his
Suit with boldness, produce his Pleas, and demand Justice. But the critical
Question is, Who is Judge of this Court? Certainly it is some Lay-mans Powers,
supposed to be very competent Judges, as sufficiently skilled in the Rules of
Court, and how to apply them. And why may not all the Judges contained in the
whole Series of Judicatory laid open in this Text, be of the same sort? for
that the Case is not so deep, but that the first Judges and Sessions it comes
before, are supposed by our wise Savior and Lawgiver, capable fully to
understand and traverse it; and do Judgment and Justice upon it; and bring it
to a final Issue. But,

2. Upon a Defeat the Process goes forward, by removing the Suit by an Appeal,
to a more impartial Hearing. The next Sessions therefore by Review, is to
consist of one or two of the Brethren. [ Take one or two more] But possibly
some may be ready to say, Ah! We are like to have very good Justice, before so
wise a Sessions! Well, it is what Christ has appointed, and let us keep his
Path, and it will bring us safe home; for that these persons are Commissionated
by Christ, as capable Judges, and therefore are to Exercise one branch of the
Power fixed in the Church. But when the Case is gone thus far through the Law,
and the adverse Party will not submit to the last Verdict that is brought in,
the Case most be Removed again. For that,

3. It is allowed to have one Trial more, and no more; and that is to be before
the Church. For if he hear not the Church, he shall be as an Heathen man, etc.
that is to say, the Church shall then Issue out Execution, which is the End of
the Law.

Object. But the great and stupendous Objection, which crosses our way, is,
That the Governing Church is here meant; that is to say, The Presbytery in
their Classes, and several Sessions, till you come to the last Appeal?

Answ. 1. It is very Unscriptural to force such an Interpretation on the Text;
for if we consider the Etimology, and universal Acceptance of the word Church,
the Objection will be found very defective, both in its Rhetoric and Divinity.
There being no harbor for it, within the sense of Farniby's, Tropes or
Figures. And as for its Divinity, let the Objection but Cite one Text more,
wherein Church is mentioned, and Officers are intended, and we will Resign. But
without it to yield so great an Interest upon so slender a Claim is repugnant
to Justice and Honor. But,

2. How can Wise Men manage their Souls, or bring them into such a figure as to
think that Christ should have such a far reach in his thoughts in such easy
Cases as are plainly contained in the Text? The Notions in the Objections are
plainly ridiculous to the Light of Nature, in that Civil Measures adjust
according to the Degree and Nature of Suits and Cases. A Cause of Twelve-pence
is Tryable by a single Justice, and one Appeal brings the Suit to the end of
the Law. Indeed Cases which are of greater weight and value have a larger scope
in the Law allowed them, etc. And what! Is there the least shadow for a
pretense that such Cases is are within our Text, viz. such as may be Issued by
one single Brother making his Suit to his Brothers Reason and Conscience, etc.
or by two at the most, and that at the sole Charge of a few honest Pleas from
the heads of Charity or Piety? I say, Are these Cases so Grand as to be
Transmitted from one Classis to another, till they arrive at the chief Seat
where the definitive Sentence is to be given forth? There is apparently some
great fallacy in the Objection, or certainly our Blessed Savior did not state
his Cases right; for let us again consider, who must sign the Bill of Cost at
last? or who must bear all the Charges of Writings, Witnesses, Travels of
Horses and Men; and for all Expense of Time and Money, from the Sessions first
mentioned, and so from Sessions to Sessions, and from Clas^^ to Classis, until
all is brought to a final (...)? When as possibly the Original Writ of Process,
or first Action, might not contain i^ real Civil Damage, a Farthing more than
about a Great or Sixpence. And what can we think that our wise Savior would
adjust his Settlements at no better a rate than this comes to? vah! proh Dolor!
Men have plainly made a Fool of Mankind by corrupting this Text, whereby they
have set the Discipline of the Church at such a Charge, that Millions of
Millions have run out in waste, to humor their Ambition; when as the wise and
innocent Churches of God in their single Capacities would have done better
Justice, and have drained nothing more from you, than some Tears of Contrition.
For,

3. What is more natural, than to imagine a Church of Believers, with their
set of Graces, and common Prudence, [especially when under the influence of a
Regular Ministry] should be held capable to Execute this Rule, according to the
full sense of it; yea, though they bring the Delinquent in the Traverse of the
Case, to the highest Censure. Indeed it must be acknowledged, that
Excommunication, major or minor, is an awful Result of Authority; yet not
really in every respect, and in all degrees quite so bitter as Death it self:
And yet Death is very frequently dispensed to Capital Sinners, and that solely
by the Verdict of their Peers, viz. Twenty four good and lawful men of the
Vicinage, are in forms of Law a sufficient Judicatory to take away a Man's Life,
and the Venerable Bench of Judges must not Overruled, but stand and say, Amen,
in that good Justice is done in the World by such a small Company of illiterate
Men, the Law having assigned them to this Service. To the foregoing Precept,
let us join Col. 4.17. 1 Cor. 5.12. Rev. 2.20. 1 These. 5.14 Gal. 6.1.

Now to conclude, Let the Reader lay all these Scriptures together, which
contain Rules of Judicatory for the Churches; and then let him answer me with
good reason if he can, and tell me why these Scriptures may not be esteemed the
Churches Magna Charta, in matters of Censure and Judicature; as well as that be
held such a Golden Rule in the Judicial Proceedings of English Government,
mentioned in the Great Charter of English Liberties, Chap. 29. No Freeman shall
be Taken, or Imprisoned, or be Disseised of his Freehold, Liberty or free
Customs, or be Out-lawed or Exiled, or any other ways destroyed, nor will we
press upon him, nor condemn him, but by lawful Judgment of his Peers. Now
Gentlemen! Don't you think that the Lord Jesus Christ, the King of Heaven, is
as careful and tender of his Subjects, as the King of England is of his? And
indeed, why should not each set of Subjects be equally and alike guarded from
the hazard of Oppression, or the Arbitrary Measures of each Ministry? unless
those that belong to the Gospel, are formed out of a Distinct Clay from each
other?

3. Power. To represent themselves in Synodical Conventions, for the
Establishment of this Power in the Churches. See Acts 15.2.22, 23. And for a
more ample Display and Confirmation of this Point, I Refer the Reader to the
Excellent Treatise of Dr. Increase Mather, in his Disquisition concerning
Ecclesiastical Councils.

2. The Dignity which the Scripture puts upon the Churches as Free States, and
Subjects of Power in distinction from their Officers.

It is very plain that most of the Epistles of St. Paul which make up a great
part of the Canon of Scripture, were directed to the Body of the Brotherhood,
and peculiarly adapted for their use, with little or no Notice at all taken of
the Ministry therein,

In sum, when he was just concluding his Letter and winding up his discourse
with his Grace and Respects to some choice Christian Friends, he puts the
Officers in with them, and Orders the Brotherhood to give his Salutations to
them as Persons unconcerned with the Contents of the Epistle, Heb. 13.24. In
the last Verse but one in the whole Epistle, says the Apostle, Salute all them
that have the Rule over. That what ever other meanings may be in such Methods
of Divine Writings, they must needs Respect some high Powers and Trust vested
in the Churches. Those Epistles sent to the Angels of the Churches of Asia; the
Principal share of those Letters, literally taken, which belonged to the
Officers, is but the Superscription; the Contents of the Letters are
immediately directed to the Fraternity. Where there is any thing amiss the
Fraternity is Reprehended: Where there is any thing worthy of Credit, they are
Commended. Or if there is any thing in point of Order or Discipline to be done
they are directed and Commanded. All is to the Churches. Therefore it is said
again and again, He that has an Ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit
says unto the Churches, Rev. 1.7. etc. Finally, Let any considerate Man but
read and well ponder the Epistles to the Corinthian, Ephesian, etc. Churches,
and observe the Characters of the Brotherhood; with the Precepts how they shall
Act Personally and with Authority one toward another etc. he must then needs
subject of his mind to the force of this Conclusion, scil. That Christ's Gospel
Churches in their Fraternities, are not such Ciphers as they stand in some Men's
accounts; but are really and truly proper Bodies full of Powers, and
Authorities, for the Government of themselves and all their concerns, as all
Democracys are.

Demonstration IV.
From the Excellent Nature of the Constitution, in that it exceeds all that
have been yet Extant in the Christian World. This I shall endeavor to
Illustrate by three Pleas.

Plea. I.
In that it best suits the Great and Noble Designs of the Gospel, and that in a
peculiar manner as it tends to the promoting Holiness in the World; not only
from the strict Nature of the Constitution in the Admission of Members, whence
the Churches become a more exact Emblem of Heaven, both for the illuminating
and dreading of others, that beholding their Goodness, may Glorify God in the
day of Visitation. 1 Pet. 2.12. But from the great advantage put into the hands
of the best sort of men, [solid, pious, wise and unbyas'd men] of furnishing a
Country with Persons eminently Qualified for the Ministry, and keeping them so.
There is no lurking place for Symony in this Constitution. There is no buying
and selling of Offices, whereby the World has been miserably cheated, and
debauched Here is no back Stairs for Cousins and Favorites to Climb up to high
Seats without Desert; it is merit and intrinsic Worth set the value, and holds
the strongest plea for Preferment here. Hence every Village, and corner of a
Town, where Religious Congregations are Settled, are furnished with Persons for
the Gospel Ministry of such Learning, and bright Saints, and of such real and
distinguishing Virtue and Zeal, that they must needs be very prevalent in
carrying on the main design, etc. But this Plea is fully pursued by Dr. Owen,
in his Enquiry, etc. [ p. 120 and so on] whither I refer the Reader that wants
more satisfaction.

Plea II.
For that it has the best balance belonging to it of any Church Government in
the World. Other Governments have generally too high a Top, and are very
lopsided too: Nay the best we can meet with without vanity or Envy it may be
said, that not only seemingly like Grantham Steple, but really it stands awry,
and being so over loaded on Natures corrupt side, with Learning, Power and high
Trust it plainly hangs over several Degrees from a true perpendicular, toward
Babylon: And if it falls it burys you; and then you must remember it has
Monopolized all Power, so that you have none left to stir under your load, or
creep out with. But here is a Government so exactly poyzed, that it keeps its
Motions Regular like the stupendous Spheres, unless some Phaeton chance to
mount the Chariot Box, and becomes the driver. I have sufficiently, I think,
evinced the Power in the Brotherhood; and though every Church is a Body
consisting of very numerous Parts and a noble Ministry, yet the balance of
Power is very exactly and with great advantage preserved; both between the
Members of the Body in general, and between themselves, and their Public
Ministry in special.

1. Between the Members of the Body. For besides, the Wisdom, Love and other
enobling Principles, in some measure actuating every member. The Venerable
Major Vote, which Guides and Governs the August States of Parliaments; nay all
Assembly's, Superior and Inferior, that have any Equality of Power dispersed
amongst the Members, Ordinarily keeps the whole Body, in all points of
Administration, in an exact Equipoize.

2. And as for the state of the Ministry; there is no grain of allowance wanted
on their side, to make their Office Power, if not an even balance
Arithmetically upon an accurate, and distressing Trial: Yet in the series of a
laudable Ministration, it is an Equivalent of Power; at least according to the
terms of our Constitution, Platf. C. 10 Sect. 11. But let the case be stated as
accurately as may be; and let every fair Principle which grants the Power to be
Originally in the People, be yielded: and also Establish a proper Judicature in
the Brotherhood; yet its apparent in all Examples, that the Ministry of this
Constitution are held, if not in proper speaking; yet in Conscience, and
Religious Courtesy, as though all Power were invested in them; or at least to
such a Degree that there is no appearance of what may render the Government
grievous to them, if they are but contented, to be the Masters of an Assembly
of Free Men, and not of Slaves. Amongst abundance of Illustrations I will
mention two.

1. The great Veneration in Man's mind toward those who are sensibly clothed
with Authority. If I am a Father where is my Honor, if a Master where is my
Fear, Mat. 1.6. The Prophet Reasons from the Law of Nature; there being such a
property planted in the Soul by its Maker to revere Superiors, and especially
Men in public trust. And also the Authority shining in them, being such bright
Rays both of the Divine Majesty and Benignity, there being such a sensible Good
and Benefit accruing thereby, to the rest of Mankind, hence springs a universal
disposition to Obedience and Submission, this is obvious through the whole
Civil Ministry of the World; there is no need to make every Judge in
Commission, or chief Magistrate a Sovereign Prince to gain Homage to him. No!
but as soon as a Man appears vested with Authority, there is that in the Soul
of another which teaches Reverence and Obedience to him in his Trust, both from
the Suggestions of fear and sense of Interest. So that a Learned, Painful and
Pious Ministry Entrusted with the Souls and happiness of Men; and taking
Indefatigable care to secure Eternal Life for them, has a most charming and
endearing Aspect and Influence upon all the Rational Powers. In so much that
Nature it self has a high value for such Subjects of Trust. And as for Grace
its ready to be lavish of its Victims. -- ye -- received me as an Angel of God
even as Christ Jesus. -- If it had been possible ye would have plucked out your
own Eyes, and have given them to me, Gal. 4.14, 15. If any Man doubts of the
validity this Plea, let him but view what Conquests have been made by the abuse
of these Principles, and you will find the Ministry of the Christian World have
far exceeded Caesar, in subduing Mankind; for from an honest Obedience they
have brought them to lie down, and be trampled on by their Spiritual owners.
That there is no danger on the Peoples side when things are well stated, if
there be but a wise and due management on the other. And still it is more
evident.

2. From the Extent of Commission, with the many enobling Prerogatives fixed in
their Trust. Though they are the Ministry, and but the Ministry of a Democracy,
their Commission is so Large, and High-Prerogatives so numerous, they carry so
great an appearance, as though in reality they were the Subjects of all Power.
And I think it is so from the Nature and Modes of all Regular Government; for
when a Government has Enacted their Laws and Precepts, and settled their
Ministry, they leave the sway of things to them; that it is as though they had
Resigned all the Power to their Ministry: So it is peculiarly in the affairs of
Gospel Churches. That let men at their leisure view this Illustration by the
Scripture, our Platform, and by the Laws and Customs of Nations, and they will
find it a Truth. That certainly a painful Ministry may easily be reconciled to
our Constitution, unless they are raised to that Temper of mind as he was, who
had this for his Motto, Aut Caesar aut Nihil, A Caesar or nothing.

Plea III.
From the near Affinity our Constitution holds with the Civil Governments of
some of the most flourishing Commonwealths in the World. It Is certain, every
Species of Government simple and mixed, have their various Excellencies and
Defects; much may be said in honor of each, and also every Constitution may
have something wanting; at least it may seem so, under a more critical survey
of its Nature, Principles, Ill-conveniencies, corrupt Ministry, Misfortunes,
etc. And many times a Government falls under Scandal from Distemper of Mind,
from false Ends and corrupt Interests, which sway and overruled men's tho'ts
relating to Government, more than from the Constitution it self. But however,
to Evade all circular Discourses, we may very fairly Infer, where we find
Nations flourishing, and their Liberty and Property, with the rest of the great
Immunities of Man's Nature nourished, secured, and best guarded from Tyranny,
we may venture to pronounce this People to be the Subjects of a noble
Government, and there be many such on Earth, whose Constitution will serve to
justify ours. I shall instance in three, and no more.

1. The Venetian Commonwealth; though some are pleased to call the Government of
this free State, an Aristocracy; but it seems more properly a limited
Democracy; for that the Seat of Sovereign Power is their ancient Commons,
called their Families, Enrolled in the Golden Book; these make up the grand
Council of the Nation, settle the Public Ministry, and Enact Laws, etc. This
People have by this mode of Government raised themselves into so august and
flourishing a Capacity, that from a very obscure Original, they are grown to
that degree, as to bridle and curb the pride and haughtiness of Turk and Pope
This Example must needs be no small Honor to our Constitution. But,

2. The Belgic Provinces are without Interruption allowed to be the Subjects
of a formed Democracy, They in some Ages past being insulted, and unmercifully
trampled upon by that august Tyrant, the Spanish Monarch; they being his
Subjects broke loose from him, and set up for themselves. They assumed to
themselves their Original Power, and when they had got it into their hands, had
the wit, and kept it, and have improved it in the form of a Democracy to this
day, and God has blessed them: That from the poor States of Holland, they are now
grown to wear the splendid Title of Their High Mightinesses, and are a Match
for most Monarchs on Earth. Says Gordon of their Government: The seven
Provinces of Holland being under a Democratical Government, are as it were
several Common wealths; each Province being a distinct State; yea, and every
City having an Independent Power within it self to Judge of all Causes, whether
Civil or Criminal, and to inflict even Capital Punishments; but all joining
together, make one Republic, the most considerable in the World.

Query. Whether such Examples of Popular Governments now Extant on Earth, and
yielding such vast advantages to the Subjects, and being so regular and
practicable; I say, whether they may not justly deter all men from reproaching
our Constitution with the scandalous Title of Anarchy, unless they will allow
us to prepare a Chronicle for them, and therein publish to the World their
profound Ignorance of the several Species of Governments; and the distinct way
of Placing and Exercising various Powers in them.

3. The English. This Nation is reputed to be the Subjects of the finest and
most incomparable Government in the World. And this Original happy Form of
Government, is [says one] Truly and properly called an English Man's Liberty: A
privilege to be freed in Person and Estate from Arbitrary Violence and
Oppression* and a greater Inheritance than we derive from our Parents. And this
Birth right of English Men shines most conspicuously in two things.

1. In Parliaments; wherein the Subject has by his Representatives, a share in
Legislative Power: And so makes his own Laws, and disposes of his own Money.

2. In Jury's; whereby he has a share in the Executive part of Law, so that no
Causes are Tried, nor any man Adjudged to lose his Life, Member or Estate, but
upon the Verdict of his Peers; his Equal or Neighbors, and of his own
Condition. These two grand Pillars of English Liberty, are the fundamental
vital Privileges whereby we have been, and are still preserved more free and
happy, than any other People in the World; and we trust shall ever continue so.
For whosoever shall design to impair, pervert, or undermine either of these, do
strike at the very Constitution of our Government, and ought to be prosecuted
and punished, with the utmost zeal and vigor. For to poison all the Springs
and Rivers in the Kingdom, could not be a greater mischief; for this would only
affect the present Age, but the other would Ruin and Inslave all our
Posterity. I shall improve this Example by three Quaeries.

Quaery 1. Ah! What Is the matter with English Men, Men of such Courage to be
surprised with such fear, as though they were like to be taken Captive, and
turned into Slaves in their own Home? Why, in good truth, there may be a Reason
for it; therefore it becomes them to be very careful under this head; for if
they make themselves Slaves in their own Country, or let others do it for them,
when they can prevent it, they both deny God who Made and Redeemed them, and
plainly Violate the Law of Nature?

Quaery 2. Who is it English Men are thus afraid of? Who do they thus Reflect
upon in their frights and fears? It is neither France nor the Great Turk which
dreads them! therefore it must needs be some body or another nearer home that
threatens their Liberty. And may not New-England's Gospel Liberties deserve so
much fear and caution, although it should so happen that some body should be
Reflected upon by their Cautiousness.

Quaery 3. If the settling such Immunities, as the privilege of Parliaments
and Juries in the hands of the People be such effectual Barriers to preserve a
Nation from Tyranny and Slavery; then whether when Gospel Churches have the
Means in their own Power, it been't their wisdom to keep up the like Barrier,
or something equivalent thereto; that they may preserve themselves safe from
the Arbitrary Measures of their own Ministry? or thus, Whether for English Men,
when their Liberties in Church or State are fast locked up for them and their
Posterity by Law and regular Settlements, it been't their best way to beware
how they Repeal those Laws, or weaken those Settlements?

But at present I shall leave it to other men to run the Parallel between our
Constitution, and the several Governments I have mentioned, and infer what more
they shall think proper; only leaving to my self the liberty to conclude, that
the several Examples of Civil States, which I have named, do serve abundantly
to justify the noble Nature of our Constitution in Church Order; for that the
several famous and august Nations which I have mentioned, in all their Glory at
Home, and Success in Arms and Trade Abroad; their several Governments which
have brought them to all this, are either a perfect Democracy, or very much
mixed and blendished with it.

Then why should we in New England be any more ashamed, or less careful of our
Church Government, which keeps us from Tyranny and Slavery in the concerns of
our Consciences, then those Nations are of their Civil Government, whereby they
are preserved from the like damnable Circumstances in the Concerns of their
outward Life, and Natural Rights and Fortunes?

Demonstration V.
FRom the Dignity which the Providence of God has put upon the Constitution,
both in the First Ages of the Christian Churches, and in the last Century.

1. In the first Ages of the Christian Churches God has put many Marks of
distinguishing Favor upon this Constitution, both in the smiles and frowns of
his Providence.

1. In the smiles of Providence upon the Churches whilst they continued
complete in their Constitution. I shall offer but three Particulars, to
justify this Observation.

1. In the great and admirable Success of the Gospel, in the Conversion of so
many Nations.

2. In their singular Purity, and Virtuous Deportment in the midst of a corrupt
World. That [as Mr. Cotton observes] was a general Eulogy belonging to their
Members, and ascribed to them by the wiser sort of Heathen, scil. Bonus vir,
tantum Christianus, He is a Good Man only is a Christian.

3. They were eminently supported and carried on by the Grace and Providence of
God through all their direful Sufferings; the more they were wasted and
destroyed, the more they grew and increased, as Israel in Egypt Indeed whilst
they remained firm to their Constitution, they were not only like an Army in
Banners, but in reality the greatest Conquerours that ever appeared on Earth.
They merely baffled the bravery of the old Roman Spirit, and were quite too
hard for those who had vanquished the World. I have seen, says Eusebius, the
Executioner [tyred with tormenting them] lie down panting and breathing, etc.
But I never saw the Martyrs weary of Sufferings, nor heard them desire a Truce:
Nay, were rather ambitious of the longest and most terrible Sufferings, that
they might be Martyrs in every Member. Thus the Churches endured hardness as
good Soldiers of Christ, through ten bloody Persecutions; and at last Retreated
by Divine Providence, under the Umbrage of the Great Constantine. And there the
Churches of God made the finest show that ever was seen on Earth, next to
Christ in his Transfiguration. Till this time the Churches remained the
Subjects of their Democratical Government in some good measure though there were
some symptoms of an alteration in the last Century, but indeed after the
Churches were freed from the rage of Heathen Persecutors, there quickly
followed the perfect subversion of their Order. So we come,

2. To Consider the frowns of Providence that pursued the Christian World after
the Subversion of their Primitive Constitution. Sufficient observations have
been made under the foregoing Demonstrations, setting forth the Change of
Government which was made in the Churches. And in short, it was really and
properly the altering the Ministry of a Democracy into an Aristocracy; for to
speak plainly, the Public Officers to gratify their ambition, took all the
Power into their own hands, and settled all Affairs and Concerns according to
their own minds without control. But let us Eye the Providence of God, and we
may observe that God did soon stain the pride and glory of these men;
especially in two eminent Instances of his Displeasure, which I shall only
mention.

Instance 1. In the fatal Arian Haeresy, that spread it self like some mortal
Contagion, through the Christian World; that it was said the whole World was
become an Arian. Arius, was the Author of this Damnable Doctrine, viz. That our
Savior Christ was neither God, nor Eternal, but a Creature; and that he
assumed only the Body, not the Soul of Man, etc. This Damnable Haeresy soon
spread it self far and wide; the Author was in the height of his wickedness,
and fell a Victim to Divine Vengeance in the latter part of Constantine's
Reign: But his Haeresy continued and prevailed, and especially amongst the
Clergy. But this is very awful to observe, That when these men by their wit and
cunning had once cousened and cheated the Fraternity of their ancient Rights
and Prerogatives, and left the Devil to cheat and deceive them, as Wise and
Learned as they were, of their true Religion and Souls together. What good did
all their Legerdemane do them now? had not they better have kept holy and
humble Pastors, confined to their Parochial Diocesses, and known and Loved and
Preached Christ the Eternal Son of God, and him Crucified, rather then stretched
their Boundary like Sovereign Princes, and so left to perish under such a
dreadful Dispensation, as the fruit of their Ambition and Infidelity?

To me [considering the Commencement, the deadly Nature, the Rage, the
universal Prevalence and Continuance of this damnable Heresy] it seems as
though God had looked down from Heaven, and viewed the Sacrilegious Robbery
committed upon the Churches with Detestation. And therefore summoned a Congress
of the several States of the other World. [1 King. 22.19, I saw the Lord
sitting on his Throne] and issuing out Proclamation. -- Be it known! That never
has a Nobler Cause been so baffled and Sacrilegiously betrayed by the Dignified
Trustees of it as this. I have been down amongst my Golden Candlesticks, my
famous Churches; I find the Fraternity drowsy and remiss, setting too low a
value on their inestimable Rights. And those who should rowse them from their
Security and Incogitancy, rather esteem it a Lucky Omen; and therefore to
satiate their own Ambition [instead of advising, and directing the Churches in
the study of their Constitution; and so plead their Cause for them] they
consult how to defraud them, they wrest the Scripture, darken all places which
settle their titles, and to end all disputes threaten them Diotrephes like, [3 John 10.] with the secular Power that is now on their side. That they have at
last absolutely supplanted them, stripped and taken away the Rights belonging to
the Churches, and purchased at so dear a Rate. That as though the Almighty
should say, my Patience is out! And my Justice has prepared a Cup of Confusion
for them; Who! of all this Convocation will go and hand it to them; And there
came forth several Legions with an Arch-Devil at the head of them, and stood
before the Lord, and said, we will go and persuade them; and God said, you
shall persuade them, and prevail also; therefore go forth and do so, 1 King.
22.22. As though God should say, I have now in displeasure abandoned them to
Ruin; they who should have had a zealous regard to my settlements; (...) Chief
end of their Ministry, should have sought the happiness of the People, and not
their own ease, vain Glory, Pride and Luxury: now leave them exposed to
obliterate the Essentials of their Faith, and so fall a Sacrifice to Divine
fury. Go you malignant Powers do your worst, the Hedges are now down.

Instance 2. The universal Apostasy that has followed the subversion of the Old
Constitution. We may in some degree date Gods departure from his Churches when
they began to subvert the order them, and so gradually withdrew, till he -- at
last left them to perish by whole Ages together. It must not, indeed, be
thought, or said, but that God had a Remnant through many Ages, who continued
Orthodox in Faith, both in the Ministry and Brotherhood. But yet it is very
obvious that Christianity Grada^im, declined till all was swallowed up in a
Universal and Direful Apostasy, never sufficiently to be deplored; neither
fully Expressed, unless we Transcribe the Volumns that contain it. I do account
indeed that the destruction of the Churches, in moral speaking, may be
attributed immediately and nextly, to other Causes, as Ignorance, Pride,
Hypocrasy, etc. But remotely to the dissolution of the Order of them. For that
the Constitution forenamed was adjusted by Divine Wisdom for preventing and
remedying such Maladies as proved the ruin of the Churches; that when the
remedy was quite taken away, bad Humors Predominate, and Symptoms of a deadly
Aspect appear, and so Death inevitably follows.

2. In the last Century God has been very Admirable in the works of Providence,
and has therein highly Dignifyed our Constitution. And we want no other
evidence under this head then the Recognition of what God has done for these
famous English Colonys in North- America; who have all along distinguished
themselves, from all the World, by their singular regard both to the Faith and
Practice of the true Religion. Now let any other Constitution on Earth but
Parallel ours; in the eminent shines of Providence and in Religious Effects,
and we will resign the whole Cause. But whilst then, we will go on, and rejoice
in the Grace of God, that we in these Countries, are by his good Providence over
us, the Subjects of the most Ancient, Rational and Noble Constitution in Church
Order that ever was, will be, or can be; whilst the Laws of Nature and Grace
remain unrepealled. For that it is a Constitution which Infinite Wisdom has
Authorized and founded in the Law of Nature; and his Omniscient Providence has
eminently Honored, and Dignifyed, both by the Smiles and Frowns of his
Countenance, through all the Ages of the Christian World to this very Morning.
And though some of the Reverend Churches within this grand Consociation [who
settled upon the same Platform with us] have with too great a Precipitation
made a Defection from the Constitution: Yet this is our Comfort, that their
alteration is not so firm, as the Laws of the Medes and Persians; for that
those who turned them off, may by the same Power bring them on to their old
Basis again. And let Christ pity, and help them. For certainly their present
State is Portentous, from what may be observed from the Proceedings of
Providence through the whole Christian Era, unto this Day.

The Conclusion.
I shall now Conclude my whole Essay, by annexing the Joint Testimony of those
eminent Men, Fathers in these Churches, now in Glory. viz. The Reverend Mr.
John Higginson, and the Reverend Mr. William Hubbard. And the rather because
Mr. Hubbard did some time before his Death, desire to have their Testimony
Reprinted, and Live with some other Book which it might properly accompany. I
am well satisfied the foregoing Subject is the most proper Companion, their
Testimony could have Light on, in its Travels through the World: I therefore
make bold to invite the said Testimony, to set out again with fresh Courage,
and improve its Excellent Language, together with former acceptance it found
with the Churches, to ingraciate and bespeak favor for this small Treatise,
its new Allie and Fellow-Traveller.

And let the Holy Churches [for whom these now appear in Joint Testimony, to
confirm their Divine Pedigree] flourish in their Strength, Beauty and Order,
after this Triumvirate shall sink under the Tyranny of Moths, and Humane
forgetfulness, and lie down in the House of oblivion; where I hope the Enemies
of the Constitution will be gotten down before them, and there fast Buried in
their own Bones and Dust.

But least any should think it absurd, that I here produce such Venerable
Authority in way of Epilogue, which should rather in Honor have been placed in
the front of this attempt. To this I reply, that in Honor and Prudence I choose
here to place these Worthies. For you must note; I am now Retreating out of the
field of Battle, and I hope upon Honorable terms too; and then the Rear is the
highest place in dignity; so that though they are bringers-up, its no
diminution to them. And not only so, but out of Prudent Conduct; for though I
presume the Enemy is fairly Vanquished, yet some forlorn party may rally, and
to gratify their desperate fortune may disturb us, but I hope these valiant and
wise. Commanders thus posted, will secure our Rear, beat back the Enemy, and
bring all off with Triumph.

FINIS.
A TESTIMONY To the Order of the Gospel, in the Churches of New England: Left
in the Hands of the Churches, by the two most Aged Ministers of the Gospel, yet
surviving in the Country.
1. ABove Seventy Years have passed away, since one of us, and above Sixty,
since the other of us came into New England, and having obtained Help from God,
we continue to this Day.

We are therefore capable to make some Comparison, between the Condition of the
Churches, when they were first Erected in this Country, and the Condition into
which they are now Fallen, and more Falling every day.

But we wish, that in making this Comparison, we had not cause to take the
place, and the part of those Old Men, that saw the Young men shouting aloud for
Joy, at the New Temple, Ezra. 3.12. Ancient men that had seen the First House;
when the Foundation of this House was laid before their Eyes, Wept with a loud
Voice.

2. We are under a daily Expectation of our call to appear before our Lord
Jesus Christ; and we have reason to be above all things concerned, that we may
give up our Account with Joy unto Him That we may be the better able to do so,
we judge it necessary for us, to leave in the Hands of the Churches, a brief
Testimony, to the Cause of God, and His People in this Land. And this the
rather, because we are sensible that there is Risen and Rising among us, a
Number who not only forsake the Right ways of the Lord, wherein these Holy
Churches have walked, but also labor to carry away as many others with them as
they can.

We are also informed, that many Younger men of great worth, and hearty Friends
unto the Church State of the Country, scarce know what Interpretation to put
upon it; but find it a sensible Disadvantage unto them, that the Elder Men are
so silent, and remiss upon the manifest occasions, that call aloud for us to
open our Mouth in the cause of Churches that we should be loath to see Led unto
Destruction.

3. We that saw the Persons, who from Four Famous Colonies, Assembled in the
Synod, that agreed on our Platform of Church Discipline, cannot forget their
Excellent Character. They were Men of Great Renown in the Nation, from whence
the Laudian Persecution Exiled them; their Learning, their Holiness, their
Gravity, struck all men that knew them with Admiration. They were Timothies in
their Houses, Chrysostomes in their Pulpits, Augustines in their Disputations.
The Prayers, the Studies, the Humble Enquiries, with which they sought after
the mind of God, were as likely to prosper as any men's upon Earth. And the
Sufferings where in they were Confessors for the Name and the Truth of the Lord
Jesus Christ, add unto the Arguments which would persuade us, that our Gracious
Lord would Reward and Honor them, with Communicating much of His Truth unto
them. The Famous Brightman had foretold, Clariorem lucem adhuc Solitudo dabit,
etc. God would yet Reveal more of the true Church State unto some of His
Faithful Servants, whom He would send into a Wilderness, that He might there
have Communion with them. And it was Eminently accomplished in what was done
for and by the Men of God, that first Erected Churches for Him in this American
Wilderness.

We do therefore in the first place, Earnestly Testify, That if any who are
given to Change, do Rise up to Unhinge the well Established Churches in this
Land, it will be the Duty and Interest of the Churches, to examine, whether the
men of this Trespass, are more Prayerful, more Watchful, more Zealous, more
Patient, more Heavenly, more Universally Conscient. (...) and Harder Students,
and better Scholars, and more willing to be Informed and Advised, than those
Great and Good men, who Left unto the Churches what they now enjoy: If they be
not so, it will be Wisdom for the Children to forbear pulling down with their
own Hands, the Houses of God, which were Built by their Wiser Fathers, until
they have better satisfaction.

It is not yet forgot by some surviving Earwitnesses of it, that when the Synod
had finished the Platform of Church Discipline, they did with an Extraordinary
Elevation of Soul and Voice, then Sing together, The Song of Moses the Servant
of God, and the Song of the Lamb, in the fifteenth Chapter of the Revelation:
God forbid, that in the loss of that Holy Discipline, there should be hereafter
occasion to Sing about breaking down the Carved work of the Houses of God, with
Axes and Hammers; or take up the Eightieth Psalm for our Lamentatious.

4. It was a Joy unto us, to See and Read, a Book which the Reverend Praesident
of our College lately Published, under the Title of The Order of the Gospel,
Professed and Practiced by the Churches of Christ in New England: A Book most
highly needful, and Useful, and Seasonable; a most Elaborate and well-composed
work, and well suited unto those two worthy designs; 1st, the maintaining the
Congregational-Church-Discipline; and 2dly, the maintaining the sweet Spirit of
Charity and Communion toward Reforming Presbyterians, who are our United
Brethren. But we must herewithal Testify, that in that worthy Book, there is
nothing obtruded upon the Churches, but what they who were here, capable of
observing what was done Sixty Years ago, do know to have been Professed and
Practiced in the Churches of New England; (except in one or two) Then and ever
since, until of late, some who were not then Born, have suggested otherwise.
Yea, it is well known, that the Churches then Publicly maintained those
Principles, in several Judicious Discourses, which were never confuted by any
men whatever, unto this present time. And we do therefore most Heartily commend
that Book, of the Order of the Gospel, unto the perusal and acceptance of the
Churches of the Lord.

5. It was one of the Songs (as the Jewish Masters tell us) in the Feast of
Tabernacles, Blessed be our Youth, which have not made our Old Men ashamed. But
alas, we that are Old men must confess our selves Ashamed, when we see after
what manner some of our Youth, have expressed and behaved themselves, and with
what Scoffs they have assaulted the Order of the Gospel, in some things lately
Published, and Scattered about the Country: Which have been so far from
Answering the Arguments brought for our Church Order, That they have been by
the wonderful Providence of Christ, made useful to Establish the minds of
Serious Christians, in those very points, which they see so weakly and so
rudely opposed. We have taught our Children in the Catechism, called Milk for
Babes, that there is to be a Covenant of God in the Churches, wherein they give
up themselves, first unto the Lord to be his People, and then to the Elders and
Brethren of the Churches to set forward the Worship of God, and mutual
Edification. And it cannot but be grievous unto us, as well as unto all serious
Christians, for my Children of New England, Scornfully to vomit it up their
Milk with Scoffs upon that and other Sacred Actions in our Churches, too
Horrible to be repeated.

If they take away from us, one of the Songs among the Ancient Jews, they would
however leave us room for one of the Sighs uttered by a Rabby among them; The
worst Fruit which we Eat in our Youth, Excelled the best which we now Eat in
our Old Age, for in our days the World is changed.

6. Concerning all Sinful Attempts to overturn the Order of the Gospel,
hitherto upheld in the Churches of New England, and to spoil that Glorious Work
of God, which we have seen him doing, with a Series of Remarkable Providence,
in erecting such Congregational Churches in these ends of the Earth; We would
now therefore bear our Testimony, that they are doubtless Displeasing to our
Lord Jesus Christ, who walks in the midst of these Golden Candlesticks, and
they will prove Bitterness in the latter End.

And this we Declare with the more concern upon our minds, because of an
observation, so plain, that he that runs may Read it.

It is too observable, that the Power of Godliness, is exceedingly Decaying and
Expiring in the Country; and one great point in the Decay of the Power of
Godliness, is men's growing weary of the Congregational Church Discipline, which
is evidently Calculated for to maintain it.

If that Church Discipline were more thoroughly and vigorously kept alive, even
by those that make profession of it, it might be hoped, that the Lord would
Sanctify it, for the Revival of all Godliness in the Land.

But if this Church Discipline come to be given up, we think it our Duty, to
leave this Warning with the Churches, that probably the Apostasy will not Stop
there: For the same Spirit that will dispose the next Generation to change
their way, in one point, will dispose them to more, and more changes (even in
Doctrine and Worship as well as in Manners) until it may be feared, the
Candlestick will quickly be removed out of its place.

7. We do therefore Humbly propose it, unto all the Churches, as a great
Expedient, for the preservation of our Church State, that more Prayer (even in
whole days of Prayer set apart for that end) with other appointed means, may be
used in the Churches to obtain from the Lord, the Out-pourings of the Spirit of
Grace on the Rising Generation. If so Rich a Blessing were obtained, (and our
Heavenly Father will give his Holy Spirit unto them that ask it,) and if the
Rising Generation might be a Praying, Pious, Devout and Regenerate Generation,
there will not be such danger as now there is, of their Easily giving away the
precious Legacy which their Father's (now beholding the Face of the Lord Jesus
Christ in Glory,) lest unto them, or of their Doting upon Innovations Fatal to
the Order of the Gospel among us.

8. Now as Aged Joseph said, I Die, and God will surely visit you; Even so, we
the unworthy Servants of the Lord, whose Age bids us every day look for Death,
and our Call to that World, where to be is by far the best of all, do Conclude
with our Prayers unto the Lord for these Holy Churches, that He would Surely
visit them, and Grant much of His Gracious Presence and Spirit in the midst of
them; and Raise up from time to time, those who may be Happy instruments of
bringing down the Hearts of the Parents into the Children. The Lord Bless these
His Churches, and keep them Steadfast, both in the Faith and in the Order of
the Gospel, and be with them, as he was with their Fathers, and never leave
them nor forsake them.

John Higginson.
William Hubbard.

Postscript.
THat our Testimony to the Old Principles of New England, may be the more
distinctly apprehended, we recommend unto Consideration, three Pages in the
Life of Mr. John Cotton, written by his Grandson, Mr. Cotton Mather. p. 33,
34, 35.

NOW that the World may know, The Firct Principles of NEW ENGLAND, it must be
known that until the Platform of Church Discipline, Published by a Synod in the
year 1648. next unto the Bible, which was the professed, perpetual, and only
Directory of these Churches, they had no Platform of their Church Government,
more Exact than their Famous JOHN COTTONS well known Book of The Keys; which
Book, endeavors to lay out, the Just Lines and Bounds, of all Church Power,
and so defines the matter; That as in the State, there is a Dispersion of
Powers into several Hands, which are to concur into all Acts of common
concernment; from whence arises the Healthy Constitution of a Commonwealth: In
like sort, he assigns the Powers in the Church, unto several Subjects, wherein
the United light of Scripture, and of Nature, have placed them with a very
Satisfactory Distribution.

He asserts, That a Presbyterated Society of the Faithful, has within it self,
a complete Power of Self-Reformation, or if you will, of Self-Preservation; and
may within it self, manage its own Choices of Officers, and Censures of
Delinquents. Now a special Statute Law of our Lord, having excepted Women and
Children, from enjoying any part of this Power, he finds only Elders and
Brethren to be the Constituent Members, who may Act in such a Sacred
Corporation; the Elders he finds the First Subject entrusted with Government;
the Brethren endowed with Privilege, in so much that though the Elders are to
Rule the Church, and without them there can be no Elections, Admissions, or
Excommunications, and they have a Negative upon the Acts of the Fraternity, as
well as it is they only that have the Power of Authoritative Preaching and
Administering the Sacraments: Yet the Brethren have such a Liberty that without
Their Consent, nothing of Common Concernment may be Imposed upon them.
Nevertheless, because Particular Churches of Elders and Brethren may abuse
their Powers, with manifold miscarriages, he Asserts the Necessary Communion of
Churches in Synods, who have Authority to Determine, Declare and Enjoin, such
things as may Rectify the Male-Administrations, of any Disorders, Dissentions
and Confusions of the Congregations which fall under their Cognizance. But
still so as to leave unto the Particular Churches themselves, the Formal Acts,
which are to be done pursuant unto the Advice of the Council; upon the
Scandalous and obstinate Refusal whereof, the Council may Determine to withdraw
Communion from them, as from those who will not be counseled, against a
Notorious Mismanagement of the Jurisdiction which the Lord Jesus Christ has
given them. This was the Design of that Judicious Treatise, wherein was
contained the substance of our Church Discipline; and whereof we have one
Remarkable thing to Relate as we go along. That Great Person, who afterward
proved one of the Greatest Scholars, Divines and Writers in this Age, then
under Prejudices of conversation, set himself to write a Confutation of this
very Treatise, of the Keys; but having made a considerable Progress in his
undertaking, such was the strength of this Unanswerable Book, that instead of
confuting it, it conquered him; and this Book of the Keys, was happily so
Blessed of God for the conveyance of Congregational Principles into the now
Opened mind of this Learned man, that he not only wrote in Defense of Mr.
Cotton, but also exposed himself to more than a little Sorrow and Labor all
his days, for the maintaining of those Principles. Upon which occasion the
words of the Doctor [ Owen, in his Review of the true Nature of Schism] are,
This way of Impartial Examining all things by the Word, and laying aside all
prejudicate Respect unto persons, or present Traditions, is a course that I
would Admonish all to beware of, who would avoid the danger of being made (what
they call) Independants. Having said thus much, of that Book, all that we shall
add concerning it, is, That the Eminent Mr. Rutherford himself, in his Treatise
Entitled, A survey of the Spiritual Antichrist, has these words, Mr. Cotton in
his Treatise of the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, is well sound in our way; if
he had given some more Power to Assemblies, and in some lesser points.

John Higginson.
William Hubbard.

FINIS.

