The Great Salvation Revealed and Offered in the GOSPEL Explained, and an
hearty Acceptance of it Urged. In Several SERMONS On HEBREWS II. 3.

By William Williams, A.M. and Pastor of the Church in Hatfield.

Luke 19.42. -- If thou had known even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy peace!

1 Pet. 4.17. -- What shall the end of them be, that obey not the Gospel of God?

Romans 11.20.21. Because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by
Faith. Be not high-minded but fear. For if etc.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Crump, for S. Gerrish, and D. Henchman, and Sold at
their Shops. 1717.

TO THE READER.
HAVING been favored with the Reading the Ensuing Treatise, I desire heartily
to bless GOD, who has graciously directed and led his Servant into, and
assisted him in the Composing it, and inclined him to Publish it. The Subject
is certainly the best chosen that can be for Universal and perpetual Use to
Souls, both for the Convincing and Converting Sinners, and the quickening of
Saints. The Design of this Epistolary Preface is, if it may please God, to
impress the Readers Soul with a serious Consideration of the Importance of the
great and necessary Truths here prepared for him, and to bespeak a very serious
Attention to them while he reads them. For how awful, affecting and awakening
should it be to Mankind to hear of that Great and Glorious Salvation revealed
and offered to Sinners in and by the Gospel, and the great and unavoidable
Misery which the Neglect of it will bring upon us. This Great Subject is here
handled in the most plain and serious manner, with a pure Aim and sincere Zeal
(to make the most upright Judgment of Charity I am able to form) to inform the
Minds and enter into the Consciences of Men.

Sinners are here shown the Need they stand in of Salvation; the Way of
Salvation is opened; the great and glorious Nature of the offered Salvation is
considered; the proneness which there is in Men to neglect it is discovered;
the actual neglect of it among Men is lamented; and the great and unavoidable
Misery which this Neglect will bring upon Men is faithfully and solemnly
declared. These great Things (which are the whole of Man and the one thing
needful) are here discoursed in a Scriptural and rational manner; and the whole
Argument is managed in a Method and Style very solid and judicious, clear and
distinct, earnest and moving; such as the Weight, Gravity and Solemnity of the
Subject calls for.

These are the great points which the Souls of Ministers should be intently
fixed on, if they would take heed to the Ministry which they have received of
the LORD that they fulfill it: And these things must perpetually employ the
Minds of serious Christians in the working out their own Salvation, as well as
be continually Inculcated upon careless Sinners for their Awak'ning and
Conversion.

But the great thing now to be desired and endeavored is, that the Reader may
bring a Mind seriously disposed to receive the Truth. And O that Men would
suffer themselves to be wro't upon to consider thoroughly these Three things:
The Greatness of that Salvation which is purchased by the LORD JESUS CHRIST for
them and freely offered to them: the Shameful Neglect of it by Christians; and
the insupportable Miseries which Men unavoidably bring upon themselves by this
Neglect.

No wit or words of Man can at last rep^^sent, no tongue of Men or Angels can
say, how GREAT this SALVATION is. It is incomprehensibly Great in its Blessed
and Glorious Author, the Great GOD and our SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST. It is
transcendently Great in the Price that purchased it, the Blood of the SON of
GOD. Inestimably Great is the Subject of this Salvation, the many Millions of
Immortal Souls redeemed from the Earth. And inconceivably Great are the
Benefits to us: Great are the Evils, mischiefs and miseries our Souls are saved
from, and ineffable the positive Mercies and Blessings we are redeemed to: A
Salvation with Eternal Glory.

But how sad is it to consider how shamefully Men despise their own Souls, and
neglect the Great Salvation! O the infatuation and stupidity of Christians, and
O their Guilt and Misery herein! how lightly do they esteem themselves, how
lightly the Rock of their Salvation! how light do Men set by CHRIST, their
Souls and Heaven! and how light do they make of Hell and Damnation! with an
equal profaness they set light by the Wrath and Curse of the Eternal GOD, and
by his Favor, Love and Blessing. This neglect of our selves is a most criminal
Contempt of GOD: and the one is not more impious and ungrateful, than (...)
other is unnatural, unjust, cruel and barba^^us. And what a dominion of Sin and
Lust, what possession of Satan, what disbelief of the glorious Gospel, and what
aversation ^ true Godliness, do either of them infer?

What need is there often to put the awful Question to our selves, How shall we
escape --? Is our Salvation too small an Interest for our Concern? Are the
matters of our Eternal Welfare mean and trivial? Have we any greater and more
worthy care to take us up?

O therefore that Sinners would but give way to those just Fears which the Word
of the Living GOD would excite in them! Would they but sit down and solemnly
ask themselves, How think I to escape the Vengeance of GOD? What will become of
me at long run? Is not GOD's Word true? Is the Wrath therein revealed against
Impenitent Sinners sufferable? Can I be content to be the Object of it? What
can be more terrible than the Words of his Curse? Why should I bless my self
and say, I shall have Peace? Can my heart endure, or my hands be strong, in the
day when he shall deal with me? How can I read or hear the Threatenings of GOD's
Law and not exceedingly fear and quake? Why should they not be to me in GOD's
Word, and in the Mouth of his Ministers, as if I heard them from the burning
Mountain, uttered in Thunders? from the dark Cloud bursting with flashes of
Fire? Can I be willing to be Damned? Am I come to that point, and easy in the
Apprehension? Am I a Stock or a Stone? Is my Soul Iron or Marble? Will nothing
make Impression on it? Do I not fear GOD being under Condemnation, and indeed
justly? Have I considered what Damnation is? Is there any thing so fearful? Are
any of our Fears equal to it? Why then do I not fear and fly from the Wrath of
the Almighty? Why do I run upon his Bosses, and on the point of his Sword? Why
do I dare his Vengeance? Why am I so secure and quiet while I lie open to it?
Why do I not hearken now to my own Conscience and take its Alarms, before it
change from a faithful Monitor into my Eternal furious Enemy, Avenger and
Tormentor? Are its remorses and reproaches too uneasy now already to bear? But
O the lashes and stings of it will be infinitely more torturing and peircing in
the place of Devils and of Despair; when the offer of Salvation is never, never
to be made again, and the Misery of Excision from GOD comes into actual bearing!

Thus methinks Sinners under the Gospel should be making their Reflections,
cherishing those wise and proper Fears which are necessary to their effectual
Excitation unto an instant and most earnest care for their own Salvation.

But the Treatise it self will supply the Reader with a more labored and
regular Train of tho'ts to this end. That which remains now for me to add is
some Apology for my Self, that I have suffered my self to be prevailed on by a
dear Friend, my Reverend Brother, to put my Name before his Honored Parents
Book, who is also to me a Father in Grace and Learning, and almost in Years.
This Service to the Public was intended by the late Reverend Mr. Pemberton, of
whose just Esteem and high Veneration for the Reverend Author, I have been long
a Witness.

The Intelligent Reader will easily perceive how great a Master the Author is
in practical Preaching, and how well studied and experienced he is in the Great
Doctrines of our Holy Religion; and with what Art and Labor he adapts his
Studies to the Glory of God, and the Good of Souls. GOD the Father of Light,
from Whom every good and perfect Gift comes down, has truly given him the
Tongue of the Learned, to divide to every one his Portion, to please and
profit, convince, persuade and direct. It is in the calm and still Voice that
the SPIRIT of GOD here comes near to the Soul; but O with what Light and Power,
had the Words and the Will of Man any power to enlighten the mind, and
constrain the heart. The Pages are here crowded, so that the Reader will find
very much in a little room, and indeed many Heads in a few lines. The Gold may
be gathered in Ingots, and does not lie scattered in dust, nor beaten into
leaves. And in short I esteem it a Book worthy of the attentive Reading of
Younger Ministers, and to be well digested by them; who may form themselves not
a little by it for the Pulpit; whereof such sort of Preaching is the true
Glory; and serves most under the Blessing of GOD to the forming Souls for
Heaven.

I Pray GOD that the Reverend Author may live long, to see the good Effect of
these and all his Labors; in the just and high Esteem of his People, and in
their profiting under his Ministry; and to see his Learned Sons shining after
him in an Excelling Sanctity and Usefulness.

Benjamin Colman.
Boston, Sept. 5. 1717.
Advertisement.
LAtely Published: Several SERMONS Preached at the Lecture in Boston, from Luke
XI 21, 22. Showing,

I. That the Soul of Man is a noble Palace which the Great GOD built for
Himself.

II. That it is now become as a Garrison or strong Hold, which Satan keeps
against GOD.

III. That there is a wretched Peace and cursed Quiet, which the carnal heart
lies in under Satan's Tyranny.

IV. That the Victorious SAVIOR rescues whom He pleases, and will rescue all
His Chosen, from Satan's Power and Tyranny.

To which is added, A Discourse from Psalm CXXII. 1. I was glad when they said
unto me, let us go into the house of the LORD.

By the Reverend Mr. Colman, Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Sold by Samuel Gerrish and Daniel Henchman, Booksellers in Boston.

The Great Salvation Revealed and Offered in the GOSPEL.
HEBREWS II. 3. -- How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation.


THE more Light and Grace God manifests to Men in his transactions with them
about their Spiritual and Eternal Welfare, the greater Obligation they are
under to get a right understanding of their duty, and to yield a ready and
willing obedience to it. The neglect hereof will most certainly make their
ignorance and sinfulness more voluntary and inexcusable, and their punishmen^
more intolerable, The sinning against the Law and Light of Nature, which
discovered the Being and several of the Perfections of God, and directed to an
honest, righteous and virtuous behavior sufficiently vindicated the
righteousness of God in leaving the Gentle World to such dismal effects of his
displeasure as he did. As the Apostle shows in Romans First and Second
Chapters. But the giving the Law to Moses, and by him to the People of Israel
in the Wilderness was a dispensation attended with more singular advanvantages;
and therefore the contempt and violation of it exposed to greater and severer
penalties, Romans 2.9.

AND since this, the Revelation of the gracious purposes of God in the Gospel
for reconciling and saving of both Jews and Gentiles by Jesus Christ, does in
an especial manner challenge the greatest regard from all those that are
privileged with it, and the neglect hereof will bring on a porportionable
punishment. This is what we are informed in the Text now read.

OUR blessed Apostle Paul who showed an unparalled zeal for the Salvation of
his Countrymen, as we read, Romans 9. begin. is most probably concluded to have
wrote this Epistle to them (which in some Greek Copies of it is expressed) the
special design whereof is to persuade them to, and confirm them in, the truth
of the Lord Jesus Christ, as being the promised Savior of the World, in whom
all the Types and Sacrifices of the Law had received their accomplishment,
however he had been rejected and slighted by that unbelieving Generation. To
which end he instructs them in the transcendent Excellency of his Person, both
with respect to his Deity and Humanity; and of his Offices; That as a Prophet
he exceeded Moses, as a Priest he exceeded Aaron, as King and Priest he
exceeded Melchisedeck. Having in the 1st verse exhorted to an earnest
application and intention of mind to the Doctrine of the Gospel delivered to
them, he does by several Arguments enforce it in the Three following Verses.
(1.) By a comparison taken from the Punishment annexed to disobedience to the
Law, whence he argues a proportionable punishment shall be inflicted upon the
neg^ecters of the Gospel Salvation. Verse 2. if the word spoken by Angels was
steadfast, and ev^^y transgression received a just recompense of reward, how
shall we escape! God in giving ^he Law made use of the Ministry of Angels: ^ut
he employed a more Glorious Person even ^is own Son in publishing his Grace in
the Gospel; so that the slighting of this is more ^ggravated than the contempt
of the Law, both with respect to the gloriousness of the Person delivering it;
God justly expecting that they who had slighted his Servants would yet
reverence his Son, and receive his Message: and also with respect to the Grace
and Love promised in it, beyond what any enjoyed before. Therefore the neglect
hereof would be more sinful, than disobedience to the Law, and the punishment
would be answerable. What the punishment shall be he does not here expressly
declare, but we may gather it from other Scriptures Mark 16.16. He that
believes not shall be damned. and Joh. 3.36. 2 These. 1.89. But the manner of
expression that the Apostle uses shows it to be very great. How shall we
escape? It implies, there will be no way or means of escape, but certain
unavoidable and inexpressible evil and misery will befa^ those that neglect,
that is, slight, disregard, undervalue or refuse the Great Salvation. It is the
Gospel which is intended by this expression, is evident from the preceding
Verse* for that which is there called the Word which we have heard, is here
called Great Salvation, as also from the following Words, where it is said to
be declared by the Lord, and further propagated by them that heard him. And the
Gospel is called Salvation by a Metonimy o^ the office, for the ca^se; for it
is the Grace o^ God bringing Salvation, Tit. 2.11. And he calls it so great
Salvation; thereby further to amplify the Grace of God in the revealing of it,
and to show the Sin of neglecting it: on what accounts especially, it is said
to be Great may be afterward shown. He further inforceth this (2.) By the
Persons that delivered this Doctrine to them. Which were First the Lord Jesus
Christ himself, and next to him the Apostles, who were his constant hearers,
and attendants. (3.) By the Divine Testimony that was given to this Doctrine,
by the presence and power of the Holy Ghost accompanying the first Preachers of
it. With signs, wonders diverse miracles and extraordinary Gifts, ver. 4.

I shall not further insist on these things, but proceed to the Doctrine, which
by Divine help I would speak to.

DOCTRINE. THE Salvation revealed and offered to Sinners in and by the Gospel
is great and glorious, and the neglect of it will bring upon Men great and
unavoidable misery.
I shall speak to this Doctrine under the following Propositions.

PROP. I. THAT Men need Salvation, even such as God offers them. PROP. II.
THERE is a way of Salvation, revealed and proposed to them in and by the
Gospel. PROP. III. THAT this Salvation is Great and Glorious. PROP. IV. THAT
notwithstanding the Greatness of it, there is a proneness in Men to neglect it,
and many actually do so. PROP. V. THAT hereby Men will bring upon themselves
great and unavoidable Misery, such as they will not know how to bear, and shall
not be able to escape.
PROP. I. THAT Men need Salvation, even such Salvation as the Gospel reveals.
This is a Truth necessarily implied in the Text, and the very offer of it
supposes Man's necessity of it. It would be a reflection upon the Wisdom, Care
and Mercy of God in contriving a way of Salvation, and revealing it to us, and
urging it by so many arguments upon us if we had no need of it. But it may be
evidenced that the state of Men, yea of all Men is such, that they have great
and absolute need of Salvation, and a real sense and conviction hereof will be
greatly serviceable to awaken and excite Men to a due concernment and
solicitude, that they may be interested in the Salvation offered to them. They
that are pinched with a sense of wants are glad of relief. They that feel their
Sickness will prize a Physician. The Truth of this Proposition must be granted
by all those that acknowledge Man's Apostasy and defection from his primitive
Estate; and consider aright what are the dismal effects of it. Experience shows
Man to be a creature full of, and subject to, abundance of misery; and the
Scriptures gives us an account of the cause of it. Romans 5.12. By one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned. The first Adam has conveyed Sin and Death to all his
wretched Progeny. All the Children of Adam by ordinary generation are together
with him become sinful and miserable, and consequently do stand in absolute
need of Salvation. The Truth of the Proposition may be cleared up by
considering,

1. WHAT Man's natural Estate at present is.

2. WHAT is like to be consequent upon it here^fter. And,

3. HOW unable he is to relieve himself ^^^able he is to relieve himself under
his present misery or prevent what is future.

1. IF we look into Man's present natural Estate it will appear to be such as
shows his absolute need of Salvation. For,

(1.) EVERY man is naturally destitute of the Image of God, even of that
knowledge of God, Righteousness and true Holiness, which was especially the
Image of God upon him, according to which he was at first created. This was
Man's peculiar dignity at first, which nothing else in this lower World was
capable of; this was a greater honor to Man, than his Empire and Dominion over
the World, because this render^d him capable to glorify God and converse with
him, which is the highest honor that can be put upon a Creature; but this Man
lost, and all Men have lost it together with him. Romans 3.23. All have sinned
and come short of the glory of God. Hence no Man naturally has a Heart to
know, to choose and love God as his chief good; to serve and glorify him as his
last end; to seek after conformity to him, and communion with him as his true
blessedness: but has a disposition quite contrary hereunto. Now such a loss as
this is an inconceivable misery: for by reason hereof the primitive rectitude,
harmony and beauty of the Soul is lost. Man is not like what he was when he
came out of the hands of God. Surely Man needs to have such a loss repaired,
and thereby his primitive health and beauty restored.

(2.) THE Nature of Man is universally corrupted. Original purity and rectitude
being lost, there naturally follows an universal defilement and deformity upon
the whole Soul, and it is wholly disordered and out of course in all those ways
wherein it exerts itself. Gods Image being lost, Satan's Image is introduced.
Instead of a holy there is a sinful nature, instead of purity, pollution. God
himself gives that testimony concerning Man, Genesis 6.5. That the imagination of
the thoughts of his heart, were only evil continually. Sinful motions do as
naturally rise out of the heart as sparks from the Fire, or filthy steams from
a Dunghill. And we find many holy Men in Scripture acknowledging and lamenting
this natural pollution, confessing its close adherence to them, from their
first being and acting. So David, Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity,
and in sin did my mother conceive me. So the Apostle Paul, Romans 7.18 I know
that in me (that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing, i e. Nature considered
in and of it self has no holy dispositions in it, and therefore will not
produce any holy actions. In the same Context, he speaks of it not only as,
impotent to good but full of contra^^ry against it. Rising and rebelling
against any thing that is holy when presented to, and excited in it; and holy
Job is understood as bewailing the corruption of nature in that expression, Job
14.4. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean: intimating that all are by
nature stained and defiled. And as this pollution extends to all Men so its
contagion overspreads the whole man. Man is wholly corrupt; both Soul and Body
are tainted with Sin, to allude to that, Isai. 1.6. From the crown of the head,
to the sole of the foot, there is no part clean. Hence the Soul is naturally
running to evil, and readily embracing the solicitations (...) it meets with;
and the members of the Body are ready instruments of unrighteousness.

THIS may be a little Illustrated in the several Faculties of the Soul.

1. THE Understanding, the leading Faculty of the Soul is wholly corrupted.
Hence full of mistakes and darkness in its apprehensions: erroneous in its
judgment, foolish in its reasonings, evil in its designs, vain in its thoughts.
Hence arises low and mean and unworthy thoughts of God. Psalm. 50.21. When God
offers himself as a fit portion and happiness for the Soul, it can see no
amiableness in him, but prefers broken Cisterns before the Fountain of living
waters. Hence it is so hardly and not without the powerful irradiation of the
Spirit, convinced of its misery and wretchedness in its distance and
estrangement from God. Sets light by the Offers of his Mercy and Favor that he
makes. Cannot see the evil of Sin, nor the good of Obedience. But calls evil
good and good evil: and if at any time any thing that is virtuous be esteemed,
its rather from some respect it bears to himself, then from its respect to the
nature and will of God. How susceptive and tenacious of Error? How many carnal
reasonings against the most Spiritural truths? What swarms of foolish
impertinent, yea wicked and hellish thoughts are starting up in the imagination
and fancy, and too often brooded and cherished there? What a treasure of folly
and vanity is the mind of Man? Who that sees it and considers it will not with
the Apostle see cause, to cry out, Oh wretched Man that I am, Romans 7.24.

2. THE Will is corrupt, and discovers it self so to be in the various ways of
its actings. Perverse in the choices it makes, preferring evil before good, or
a seeming and imaginary before a real good: servile in its consent; being
overruled by a corrupt judgment or vicious appetite. Though there be a natural
instinct after happiness, yet through the corruption of it, it refuses it when
offered, and doats upon a Sensual rather than a Spiritual felicity, suited to
the nature and capacity of the Soul: is tyrannical in i^s commands, without and
against all sanctified reason; obstinate in evil and against good. So they
express themselves, Jer. 1.25. We have loved strangers and after them we will
go. And this is the ground of Christ's complaint against the Jews in his time,
Joh. 5.49. Ye will not come to me, that ye may have life. And thus God
complains of his People: Their neck is as an iron sinew, Isai. 38.4. That would
not hearken to him, Ezekiel. 3.7.

3. THE Memory which should be the Treasury and Storehouse of the Soul of
proper and seasonable Truths, for its direction and comfort, how unfaithful in
its office? how ready to receive and entertain and produce what is evil, and to
exclude and let slip what is good? How often does God condemn and upbraid his
people for their forgetfulness and incogitancy: Psalm. 106.21. They forgot God
their Savior. Psalm. 106.7. They remembered not the multitude of thy mercies,
yea they soon forgot his works. And how much of the same disposition may we
find; a forgetfulness of mercies and benefits, forgetfulness of vows and
promises, forgetfulness of command's that are often urged, and repeated. Our
memories are too like Sieves that let out the flower and retain the bran. Through
the corruption of this faculty the same Sin becomes often repeated by us.

4. THE Affections of the Soul are depraved and out of course. Hence those
things that should be loved, desired and delighted in, are disliked, rejected
and hated; and those things which should be hated are loved. God himself who is
an infinite, immutable and everlasting Good, and should be loved with all the
heart, soul and strength, is disregarded and slighted, and the perishing
objects that the World offers, preferred above him. Hence you read, 2 Timothy 3.4.
That they are lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God. Jer. 2.13. They have
forsaken the fountain of living waters, and hewed out to themselves cisterns,
broken cisterns that can hold no water. The Creature is preferred above the
Creator, and Men are naturally seeking a false happiness in the profits,
honors and pleasures of the present life, and neglecting a true and solid
felicity in God. Yea not only the perishing things of time are idoliz^d and
doated upon, but carnal and sinful objects, forbidden pleasures, such as
corrupt, defile and debilitate the Soul, are eagerly pursued and inordinately
delighted in. The like may be said of the passions of the Soul, grief, anger,
fear, sorrow, these are readily carried to wrong objects.

5. THE Conscience is also woefully corrupted. Conscience is that power in Man
whereby he was made capable to consider, review and pass a judgment upon his
own actions. It is Gods monitor in the Soul, to accuse when we act contrary to
the rule he has given us, and to approve when we do what is right. But the
mind being defiled Conscience is defiled also. Tit. 1.15. Sometimes through
ignorance it is sleepy and senseless, don't observe and condemn for sin as it
ought, and sometimes approves what it should condemn. Sometimes through the
prevailency of corrupt affections, it loses its authority, don't discharge
its office, yea sometimes said to be seared as with a hot iron. There Is no
remorse for sin: no dread of future Judgment: no care to have the guilt of Sin
removed, the heart purified, and Justice attoned, as a preparation for it. Now
the Soul in all its faculties being thus corrupted and vitiated, does
indispensably need Salvation. Hence follows,

(3.) A disposition and proneness to all kinds of actual Sin. Such a darkened
understanding, such a stubborn will, such a depraved state of Soul, must needs
render it inclinable to all kind of evil, and though through the temperament of the
Body, Education, Employment or Company that persons are linked with. Corrupt
nature discovers and exerts it self in some more in one way, in others more in
another: as the stream will run where the channel is cut. Yet there are no
particular acts of sin that any have fallen into, but there is in the corrupt
nature of all, a disposition to act the same, that spirit of pride and
self-love, that naturally governs in every man would carry him hereunto, were
an occasion and temptation offered. But though many are withheld from many
particular ways of Sin that others commit: yet there are none in their natural
state but are under the reigning power of Sin, and miserable tyranny of Satan;
so that they run into numerous transgressions, in thought word and deed every
day. The sense whereof caused that complaint in the Psalmist, Psalm. 19.12. Who
can understand his errors? and of that lamentation, Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable
evils compass me about, mine iniquities are gone over my head. If our actual
sins are looked into, they are like the hairs of our heads, or like the sands
on the seashore, numerous and beyond account. He that makes the exactest
inquiry into his life and actions that is possible, cannot give account of one
of a thousand, Job 9.3. Where he takes notice of one, a thousand will escape
his observation. What duty, what act of our lives can we find that is free from
sin? Yea should you single out the best duty that ever you performed, there
might be found many sins intermingled with it. Now, the wages due to sin is
death, Romans 6.23. Every act of sin makes the sinner obnoxious to it, and binds
the curse upon him. The righteous law of God condemns for every transgression
of it: every sinful word, thought or action draws down vengeance on your head.
So that every sinner stands liable to bear the curse of the Law whenever the
justice of God will demand it of him. Were but Men's eyes opened to see their
sins, the truth of the threatening, the inflexible severity of Justice, they
would readily own that they are under an absolute necessity of Salvation.

2. THAT Men in their natural state ^eed Salvation will further appear if we
consider, What misery is consequent upon a sin^ul state and sinful course of
life. Sin is in itself the Souls greatest misery, and it has the greatest
evils entailed upon it. These might be enlarged upon, but I shall only hint at
some under these Three Heads.

(1.) ALL Temporal evils are the bitter fruits of Sin. Death with all its train
of diseases, pains, wants, reproaches, jars and divisions among Mankind, which
prove means of embittering life and hastening of death are the offspring of
Sin. Moses in Deuteronomy. 28.16, to the end, gives us a large account of the curses
that Sin would bring upon the people of Israel. A sinner is in danger to be
cursed in his Body, in his Posterity, in his Name, in his Estate, in all his
Designs and Undertakings. Should any attempt to give a summary of the numerous
evils that have befallen Mankind since the entrance of Sin, and which have been
the penal effects of it, they would soon be at a nonplus. These have been so
various that it is impossible any impenitent sinner should know when he is
secure, or be able to foresee what evils may befall him, while he is here in
this World. While a sinner lies obnoxious to the curse of the Law in an
impenitent and unreconcil^d estate, he is in daily danger of one temporal
misery or other, which may either put a period to his life or embitter it to
him; yea to that degree as to give him a kind of pre-possession of Hell upon
Earth. Now were there no more then the present miseries that mankind are either
groaning under or obnoxious to, they might justly awaken desires in them of the
removal or moderation or sanctification of them; which is a part of the
Salvation to be expected by Christ. But what is worse than this,

(2.) SIN exposes Men to be Judicially left of God to Spiritual evils, and that
of all sorts, of which Scripture and Experience affords abundance of sad
Instances: Of some that have been left to sottishness and blindness of mind, to
security, sleepiness, searedness and benumedness of conscience, so that their
foolish hearts are darkened with false conceptions about the plainest and most
important truths, and their consciences smite not as they ought for the vilest
sins. Of others that have been left to embrace errors. Others have been given
up to vile affections, and whose hearts have been incurably hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. And hence with a desperate boldness rush on (...) till
despairing fears overwhelm their spirits, and a fearful expectation of Gods
fiery indignation possesses their Souls, and they become like Pashur, who was
threatened to be made a terror to himself and to his friends. No Sinner can tell
how far a righteous God in way of punishment for Sin may suffer any of these
spiritual plagues to befall him, in this life: therefore to be delivered from
the danger of them ought to looked upon as a most desirable mercy. And yet
beyond these,

(3.) EVERY Sinner is in danger of Eternal miseries in the life to come.
Eternal Death is a part of sins wages, Romans 6.23. Now this comprehends in it,
all forts of evils both privative and positive, that either Body or Soul are
capable of: and this in the extremity and eternity of them. Our Lord Jesus
Christ who will be the glorious Judge of the World tells us what sentance shall
be passed upon the wicked at the last Day Mat. 25.41. Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels, ver 40. These
shall go away into everlasting punishment. The sentance is full of terror, and
may justly rouse up the most sleepy and insensible sinners to tremble at it,
and engage them with greatest intention of Soul, to apply themselves to the
Blessed Jesus that saves from wrath to come. What comfort can he hope ever to
enjoy, that shall never enjoy God? What ease can he ever hope to find that will
be surrounded with everlasting flames? How vainly does he bless himself, whom
Christ will curse? I proceed,

3. TO show Man's impotency to relieve himself under his present misery, or
prevent what is future. Right thoughts whereof will evidence Salvation by
another, to be of absolute necessity. Man has destroyed himself, but it is
beyond his power to save himself. Many have attempted it, and it is no easy
thing to convince Men of their insufficiency to do it. But it is a most certain
truth that Men cannot do this, For,

(1.) HE has not power to recover his primitive holiness. Without holiness Man
cannot be happy; for the want of this renders him unmeet to enjoy God, wherein
his happiness consists. That he cannot recover this is evident; partly, because
the Image of God was put upon man at first by a creating power, and wherever
this is renewed it requires a like power. Nothing less than Almighty Grace is
sufficient to determine the will of Man unto the choice and love of holiness.
Psalm. 10.3. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, and Ephesians. 2.10.
Ye are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus to good works. Partly, because
the depravation of the Soul through sin is universal; all the faculties of it are
corrupted; they are all indisposed, none remain sound by which the rest should
be repaired: the greatest arguments, the strongest persuasions, the greatest
encouragements, that are set before Men, will not incline them to it, till
victorious Grace effectually does it. Phil. 2.13. It is God that works in you
both to will and to do of his own good pleasure, and 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we
are sufficient of our selves to think, any thing as we ought, but our
sufficiency is of God. And partly, because there is a natural, rooted enmity in
the heart unto holiness. So that Man left to himself would never choose
holiness for his happiness. Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God,
and is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be. There is a
fleshliness in the mind as well as in the affections which diverts the Soul
from God, and inclines him to love himself above God; and the more holy and
spiritual any command is the greater resistance and renitence there is in the
corrupt heart against it. The great controversy that Men have against Christ is
his Government, They will not have him to rule over them.

(2.) HE can never recover the favor of God, nor by any act of his own regain
the former peace and friendship that was between God and him, or do any thing
that may entitle him to life. He cannot fulfill the duty required in the First
Covenant, which was perfect obedience to the law of God. Now every mere Man
fails of this; he has not only broken the law of God in his surety, but in his
own person. Eccl. 7.20. There is not a just man upon earth that does good and
sins not* and Jam. 3.2. In many things we all offend. The Apostle Paul once
had a great opinion of his own righteousness: he was alive as he thought, Rom,
7.9. counted his observance of the law entitled him to life; but he afterward
knew himself better, and tells us, When the commandment came sin revived and he
died. When he understood the spiritual meaning and latitude of the law, all his
confidence failed him, and he despaired of life that way, and was willing not
only to account his privileges but his conscientiousness too to be, loss and
dung that he might win Christ, and be found in him, Phil. 3.6, -- 9. It is not
partial but perfect obedience that the law promises life unto. If a Man has
observed it in a thousand instances, and after fails but in one, the law
condemns him presently, Gal. 3.10.

NEITHER can he bear the penalty threatened, so as to satisfy the law, and
procure his own release from the condemnatory sentence of of it that way; it is
Death, even eternal Death that is the wages of sin. Whether God might not have
pitched upon a lesser punishment for sin, and established it in his law is not
for Man to determine. Reason tells us, that the punishment God has threatened
is suitable both in regard of the Majesty of God against whom sin is committed,
and because it is little enough to deter Men from sin; but God having
established this, will proceed accordingly: now it is impossible that a sinner
should procure his own discharge by bearing such a punishment. And indeed if
Men could have satisfied for their own sins, Christ's Sufferings might have
been spared.

I shall add a Word or two of APPLICATION, before I pass to the next
Proposition.

1. TO Reprove the security and carelessness of such persons who live as if
they had no need of Salvation: Though still in their sins, under the guilt and
power of them, and obnoxious to all the misery that they expose them unto. It
might be justly expected that they who have the guilt of all the sins of their
whole lives lying upon them, and every day liable to the strokes of Divine
wrath and vengeance, which they are neither able to bear nor escape, should
give themselves no rest till they are delivered from this guilt and danger;
that nothing in the World should be able to afford any ease or peace to them in
this condition. But alas! how many are to be found with whom it is quite
otherwise, who are full of carnal mirth and jollity, altogether unconcerned and
insensible about any Soul wants or dangers: the guilt of sin is no burden to
them, the wrath of God is no terror to them. And though they have the offers of
Salvation daily sounding in their Ears, and repeated calls and encouragements
to put in for a share in the blessedness offered, yet are unaffected and
unconcerned about them. To promote the awakening of such sottish and sleepy
sinners, let me propose two or three things.

(1.) IF you are not convinced of your need of Salvation as in season duty to
seek after it, Damnation will certainly be your portion. For there is no middle
state between these: it is not only a matter very probable that you will fall
under the wrath and curse of God, and be cut off from hopes of mercy and
comfort hereafter if you neglect this, but it is certain: the ruin of
impenitent and unbelieving sinners is positively declared, Mar. 16.16. He that
believes not shall be damned* and Romans 2.4, 9. While those who receive and
obey Christ, and accept Salvation by him, shall be admitted into Mansions of
Joy and Glory, of Light and Immortality: you must be cast out into outer
darkness where will be sorrow and shame, pain and grief, vexation and anguish.
Were there any hopes of being hid from the revenging hand of God, or after a
while that you should be annihilated and cease from the number of beings; or
that your Spirits at Death like the Beasts should go downward, never any more
to be regarded: this would be some plea to excuse your carelessness and
security in this matter: but when it is certain that damnation and misery is
like to be your portion and punishment, continuing in this estate, your
carelessness is inexcusable. Is Hell so easy a place, is the wrath of God so
slight a matter, that you need not trouble your self with any concern to escape
it? Can you tell what it is to bear the revenges of despised Mercy and incensed
Justice? Can you bear the weight of an Omnipotent One? The anguish of the never
dying Worm? The burning heat of those Flames that never shall be extinguished?
Surely destruction from God should be a terror to you! And the dread of
damnation should make you concerned to obtain Salvation, and diligently to
improve your opportunities in order to it!

(2.) THERE is nothing in the world will make up the want of Salvation, or be a
ground of comfort to you under the feeling of Damnation. There are many things
which secure sinners who are careless of their Salvation divert themselves
with, and spend their time and thoughts about; some are anxiously pursuing the
profits of the World, panting after the dust of the Earth, as if the acquiring
of it would afford satisfying felicity to them, and they should be happy enough
in compassing their desires for such things, though they had nothing laid up
for Eternity; others are eagerly set to gratify the pleasures of sense, delight
in mirth and jollity, in drinking, gaming, wanton dalliances; shun serious
thoughts as uncomfortable companions: others are big with desires and hopes of
Honor and Perferment, of places of trust and distinction, and seek not the
honor of being God's Children and Favorites; but supposing you could obtain
all that profit, pleasure and honor that your largest wishes are reaching
after, and in the end fail of Salvation, will these comfort you in the want of
it? Surely our Savior ought to be believed, when he tells us that Man will not
be profited who gains the whole world and loses his own soul, Mat. 16.26. He
makes a sad Bargain of it. Admit but a little serious debate with your own
hearts and consciences now, and say, if such things can quiet and comfort you
now, when you compare your condition with those whom you have reason to think
are got into a state of Salvation. What though they have got their sins pardoned,
which you have not, yet you have had these and those sensual delights and
carnal pleasures, which they have not. While they have gotten a title to the
Promises, an Heavenly Inheritance, you have got you a good House well
furnished, and plentiful accommodations for the World, which they want. While
they are beloved of God, you are applauded, respected and honored among Men.
Will such thoughts refresh and satisfy you now, or rather will not conscience
make sad reflections upon you? And how much more will it do so at the
approaches of Death, and when you must appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ? when all such things shall appear to be trifles and vanities, no more
able to relieve you than Dives's former splendour did him when horribly
tormented in the flames of Divine wrath.

(3.) YOUR present carelessness and security is a sad symptom upon you, and
plainly bespeaks your condition to be very dangerous. For from whence arises
this indifferency and regardlessness about Salvation? Not from thence that they
have no need of it, or can be safe without it: But it arises from the
sleepiness of their consciences, and the blindness of their minds, and the
hardness of their hearts. From the power that sin has in them, or the
influence that Satan has over them: some are hardened through the deceitfulness
of sin; that hearken to the flattering promises that it makes of profit and
pleasure, that it will yield them; and their love to it blinds them that they
cannot see the evil of it, nor believe the danger attending of it, but presume
they shall have peace though they walk after the imagination of their evil
hearts: Please themselves that God either minds not their sins, or is not
offended at them; or they put far away the evil day. Or it is from the power
and influence of Satan over them, they are infatuated by him. The Apostle
speaks of some, 2 Cor. 4.4. Whose eyes the god of this world has blinded,
least the light of the glorious gospel of Christ should shine into them. And
there are abundance of methods he uses to this purpose, to strengthen false
peace and an ungrounded hope in them; which I shall not go about to enumerate.
Now, the direct tendency of this security is to divert you from a due
application of mind to the improvement of the means of Salvation; so that this
blindness and security is a sad preludium and forerunner of Damnation, and
eventually proves so to many.

2. DOES Man in his fallen estate need Salvation, let all such be persuaded, to
apply themselves to get a right understanding, and thorough conviction of their
need of it. Though all need it, yet, as you have heard, too many han't a sense
of their need of it: but are entertaining presumptuous and self flattering
conceits of themselves; like Laodicea, Rev. 3.17. Think they are rich and
increased with goods and have need of nothing: they have not a sense of their
wants and Soul dangers, and don't trouble themselves to seek after a remedy.
It Is not only a duty enjoined by God but a point of wisdom for Men to know
their own state; to pass a right judgment upon themselves; to know what the
state of their Souls is, with reference to Eternity, it being of dangerous
consequence for Men to think themselves something when they are nothing.

I shall only urge by way of MOTIVE here,

TILL you have a sense of your absolute and perishing need of Salvation, you
will not be thoroughly concerned to obtain it. It Is sense of the want, or
apprehension of the worth of things that inkindles desires and excites
endeavors in Men to obtain them. Now such is Man's natural aversion to God, and
proneness to be at rest in his sins, that he will not be heartily concerned for
his favor and pardoning mercy, till he understands and feels his guilt and
misery. It Is the Curse drives Men to the Promise, and the dread of Justice to
the Throne of Grace; a sight and sense of sin, that makes a Savior with all
his benefits become precious, is necessary in the eyes of a sinner. The
Prodigal Son never thinks of returning to his Father till he apprehends himself
perishing for want of Bread: Luke 15.17. And when he came to himself he said
how many hired servants of my father have bread enough and to spare, and I
perish with hunger. And Christ tells us, Mat. 9.12, 13. The whole need not the
physician but they that are sick. I came not to call the righteous but sinners
to repentance. And accordingly the invitations of the Gospel (...) directed to
such. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you rest. And, Isai. 55.1. Ho every one that thirsts come to the
waters of life, and he that has no: ^^^ey. Heb. 6.18. Who have fled for refuge
to lay hold of the hope set before them. According to the sense Men have of
their disease, so will be their cure and remedy. They that think they all
nothing, or think that Kitchen Physic will cure them, enquire not after a
Physician. They who ^eel not their load, regard not offers of ease, none will
prize Bread but the hungry, nor value Waters but the thirsty; or make haste to
the City of Refuge, but those that see the Avenger of Blood at their heels.
Insensible sinners will make but little account of a Savior; they who think
they can atone for their own sins will not prize the Blood of Christ: they who
think they can subdue their own lusts, and purify their own hearts, will not
apply themselves to the regenerating, and sanctifying Spirit to do it for them.
The slight careless person does the work of an Age in a breath; we are all
Sinners, but God is merciful; Christ died for Sinners; and there is an end of
their Law and Gospel work: This slightiness and superficialness is the great
occasion why Men deceive and destroy themselves: It is for this reason
especially therefore that this Proposition is so much insisted upon, that
persons may be awakened from their self-flattering dreams, to serious
consideration of their indispensible need of the Salvation that the Gospel
reveals. Now to further a right sense hereof, let me offer the following Advice.

1. HAVE a care of judging and determining your state by false rules, of
comforting your selves with hopes of the goodness of your state upon fallible
and uncertain grounds. This is one thing that misleads many and hardens them in
their security. If the rule be fallible the judgment you pass upon your selves
by it cannot be certain. Now there are many false rules by which Men are
comforted. Some think their condition good because of their frequency in
attending the external duties of Religion. This was the confidence of the
Pharisees, Luke 18.11. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I
possess. It is represented as a plea that shall be rejected by Christ, which
yet some will make: Luke 13.26. We have eaten and drank in thy presence, and
thou have taught in our streets. External duties of Religion may be frequently
attended and that with much seeming devotion and seriousness, from custom,
example and education, terrors of conscience, where there is no principle of
Grace in the heart. Others are comforted upon account of their moral
strictness, and the conscientiousness of their carriages; they live soberly and
righteously among Men, and dare not indulge themselves in such loose, vain and
disorderly practices as some do: This was the confidence of the Young Man that
came to Christ, Mar. 10.20. All these have I observed from my youth. Morallity
is amiable and commendable, but Men may be put upon this either out of respect
to their Interest, or to promote their reputation and esteem among Men, or may
be scared into it through terrors of Conscience and fears of Hell. Conscientious
Men are not all holy. Again, Some comfort themselves because of the good
affections that they feel many times stirring; they have relentings for sin,
and can mourn for their sinful carriages; their hearts are sometimes enlarged
in the duties of Worship they attend; they find some delight and joy in hearing
of the Word, they are affected with the Sufferings of Christ, with the Glory of
Heaven, have desires after Grace, etc. but there are religious which are not
gracious affections. There is a Legal as well as an Evangelical sorrow for sin.
Judas was much affected with his sin, and as you read, repented. Ahab humbled
himself. The Stony ground hearers received the word with joy, were much
affected with it. Of John's Baptists hearers you read, Joh. 3.35. That they were
willing for a season to rejoice in his light; were much awakened by and
affected with his Ministry. The Foolish Virgins as you read, Mat. 25. Desired
oil, and that with some earnestness and concern^^ Balaam was affected with the
blessedness of the righteous and desired it, Numh. 23.10. So that such working
of affection can be no solid ground on which you may conclude your estate to be
good; and to add no more, Some are attempting to comfort themselves because of
some resemblances of Grace that they have; They desire to be justified by the
Righteousness of Christ, they have a Love to some of the People of God; they
have a Heart open to relieve those that are poor and necessitous; they have a
zeal against Sin; they are willing to own and defend the Cause of God, and to
improve their Estates for the support of his Worship and Ordinances. But many
such things as these may be found where there is no true Grace. A Man may
desire to be justified by Christ's Righteousness, and yet not close with him
upon the terms of the Gospel. Men desire abundance of things that they never
attain. There may be Love to Good Men upon selfish motives, because they are
related to them, or because they have been beneficent toward them; not because
they Love God or his Image appearing in them: and as for zeal against Sin, it
is many times partial or selfish. Jehu was zealous against the Idolatry of
Baal; but his zeal was wild fire, not the fruit of holy Anger against Sin, and
Love to the purity of God's Worship. And Men may be serviceable with their
Estates to the Worship of God, where there is no true Grace. 1 Chronicles. 26.28.
You read of things dedicated to the Treasury of the House of God, by Saul, by
Abner, by Joab as well as others. Many carnal considerations may induce Men to
such things.

2. BE willing to take pains to come to the knowledge of your condition, that
you may see your state as it is. There are several Helps which should be used
in order to it.

1. SEARCH into and lay weight upon the Testimony God gives in his Word
concerning it. The Word of God is a Glass that truly represents Man's natural
deformity and misery. It is the great discoverer of the hearts of Men; it lays
open the evil nature of sin, and shows the sad issues of it: it is greatly
profitable for conviction as well as for comfort. It would be greatly to
Sinners advantage diligently to search into it, and meditate upon it. By the
Law is the knowledge of sin, Romans 3.20. By the Word of God you are acquainted
that there is an universal corruption and defilement cleaving to your natures.
Genesis 6.5. Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother
conceive me. And Joh. 3.6. That which is born of the flesh is flesh. Sin like a
strong poison has diffused itself through all the Blood and Spirits of Adam's
miserable progeny. It informs us that the noblest Faculties of the Soul are
corrupted by it. Tit. 1.15. Their mind and conscience is defiled: and if the
leading and governing Faculties of the Soul are thus depraved, no wonder that
the affections and passions are tumultuous and disordered. God whose
prerogative it is to know the heart gives us this account of it. Jer. 17.9.
That it is, deceitful above all things and desperately wicked. So that from
such a heart nothing but Sin is propagated into the life and actions. Hence it
comes to pass, that the plowing of the wicked is sin; and their very praying an
abomination to God. And again, see the account the Scripture gives you of your
danger, it tells you, Ephesians. 2.3. That you are Children of wrath by nature. It
declares that the curse lies upon all that fail of the obedience that the Law
requires. Gal. 3.10. It tells you, that God is angry with the wicked every day,
Psalm. 7.11. and in abundance of other places of alike nature God testifies to
this truth. Now certainly you have reason to credit God's Testimony, who has a
most exact knowledge of Men and things, is of unspotted truth and of such
infinite perfection, that he can be under no temptation to impose upon or
deceive us.

2. LOOK over your past Lives, and review what numerous Sins have been acted in
them. God has endowed you with a power of reflecting upon your selves and your
past actions, and surely Conscience is not always so sottish and asleep but it
may he summoned to do its office, even to bring Sin to remembrance, to show you
your transgressions, wherein you have either exceeded the limits of the command
or been wanting to the duty he has required. Why may you not retire your
selves sometimes, and compare the Law of God and your Lives together? and
seriously demand, Has it been the business of your Lives to get the knowledge
of God in his Nature, Subsistences, Properties? and to have a heart disposed to
love him, trust in him, and reverence him as becomes his Perfections? Has it
been your care to worship him according to his prescriptions? to sanctify his
Name in your hearts, and to sanctify his Sabbaths, and account them holy of the
Lord and honorable? or has not the contrary hereunto been obvious in
abundance of instances? And view your carriages toward Men; Has there not
been numerous defects in the several Relations you have stood in, of a Ruler or
a Subject, as a Husband, or a Wife: as a Parent or a Child; as a Master or
Servant, have you filled up the Duty of these Relations, or has there not been
numerous deficiencies and disorders in them? Has there been no rash and
excessive anger boiling in your hearts against, and sometimes breaking out in
injuries against the Bodies of others? No wanton or lascivious carriages: No
obscene and filthy words whereby yo^ have defiled your selves, or corrupted
others* have you no ways wronged your Neighbou^ in his Estate or good Name, by
any fraud o^ injustice or causless defamation? Have yo^ never been envious at
your Neighbors condition, or been discontented with your own* These hints may
serve to excite Conscience t^ a more exact and particular survey of the various
passages of life, and upon a review of them may doubtless lead you to say wit^
the Psalmist, Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable evi^ have compassed me about, mine
iniquities have taken hold upon me; they are more than the hai^ of my head
therefore my heart fails me! or ^ in Psalm. 38.4. Mine inquities are gone over
n^ head, as an heavy burden they are too heavy f^^ me!

3. BE at pains to look into and get t^^ knowledge of your own hearts, the deep
polluti^^ of them, and the various workings of sin in the^ Self-flattery and
security arises very much from self-ignorance, especially from Men ignorance of
their own hearts. Too often there is a great deal of vain and groundle^
confidence of the goodness of their hearts even in those that will acknowledge
the errors of their lives; if therefore Men would observe their own hearts and
the manifold workings of sin in them, they would certainly acknowledge their
need of sanctifying and pardoning Grace. Although the corruption of the heart
maybe under restraint sometimes in natural Men; yet it does not ordinarily lie
so still and quiet but it may be seen upon a serious observation of your own
hearts corruption, as well as Grace is an active principle, and like the
ointment of the right hand will bewray it self. There are several ways whereby
Persons may come to a considerable insight into their own hearts, though
exceeding deep and deceitful. As,

1. BY tracing their actual Sins to their proper scource and fountain. Our
Savior teaches us this, when he tells us. Mat. 15.19. Out of the heart proceed
evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, thefts, fornication, false witness,
blasphemies. The heart is that root of bitterness that bears gall and wormwood.
Jam. 4.1. From whence come wars and fightings among you, come they not hence,
even of your lusts. Whence come Men's vain glorious boastings, and proud
carriages, but from the pride of their hearts? Whence are their eager pursuits
of the World to the neglect of their Souls, and to the unjust prejudice of
their Neighbors, but from the worldliness of their hearts? Whence are their
injurious defamations of their Neighbors, their murmuring against their
Rulers, but from the envy and frowardness of their hearts? There is not a
sinful word that ever came out of the Mouth, or an evil action done in the
Life, but it was first conceived in the heart: besides innumerable motions of
lust there which are suppressed by the restraints of Grace or Providence. How
vile then must the heart be!

2. OBSERVE the present actings of your own hearts. Much of the evil of the
heart might be seen if Persons would take notice of them. The Apostle Paul upon
experience of his own heart could say, that Sin wrought in him all manner of
concupiscence, Romans 7.8. Sin in the heart is working upon all occasions; Men
may observe it upon the application of the command. When duty is enforced the
heart is working in a way of enmity against it, murmuring at the strictness and
holiness of the command; as though God were a hard Master. When sin is threatened
or punished Men may observe the workings of the heart in a way of quarrelling,
or repining at the justice of God; saying the way of the Lord is not equal. Men
may observe the corrupt workings of their hearts under the Providence of God,
whether merciful or afflictive. If God bestows Prosperity, how soon do Men
forget God, and despise their Neighbors? How ready to fall into
self-admiration as if their own righteousness had deserved it? and how apt with
him, Luke 12.20. to please themselves with the hopes of lasting felicity here?
and presently to pervert the blessings of God to wrong ends? If God brings
Affliction upon a Man and crosses him in some darling comfort or interest, how
presently may a Man observe his heart to swell with impatience, and to vent
itself in undue complainings or repinings against God? Why it should be thus
with them when others are spared from the like mishaps. See this exemplified
in, Psalm. 73. begin. Again, Observe the heart in Duties of Religion, either as
to the manner of doing them; with what relunctancy or formality and
superficialness. What dullness, weariness? without the exercise of that Faith in
God, holy breathings of Soul after him, or real brokenness of heart for the
sins confessed before him* or as to your Ends in them. What h^pocrisy,
self-seeking, and carnal respects governs the heart, rather than respect to the
Divine Command, or gracious breathing; after Communion with God? You might see
reason from these and such like workings to assent to that of the Apostle, Romans
7.18. I know that in me (that is in my flesh) dwelieth no good thing Or to cry
out with the Leper, Unclean, Unclean!

3. GO and earnestly beg the Spir^^ of God t^ teach you. This is one great end
for which the holy Spirit is promised, Joh. 16.8. T^ convince the world of sin.
No help like hi^ He can effectually apply the Word; can thoroughly awaken
Conscience; can lay open the secret windings of the heart, and lead you into
the labarinths of deciet, that lie lurking in it: He can keep a Man and his own
heart together, engage him into a diligent search into it, bring home the
command with authority, help to see the latitude and extent of it, set the sins
of a Man Life in a clear light before him, cause him to know his abominations.
Unless his help be superadded to all our endeavors they come to little: you
have therefore great need t^ go and ask this of God, and to do so wit^ the
greatest fervor of Soul: considering the absolute need you have of it, and
God's gracious encouragement who bids you ask it, and tells you he knows how to
give it to them that ask him, Luke 11.13. And you find when God had promised
the gracious operations of his Spirit in working a blessed change in the frame
or their hearts toward him, he says, Ezekiel. 36.37. I will for this be inquired
of by the house of Israel to do it for them. And if once you are by the
powerful teachings of the holy Spirit enlightened to see sin and wrath due to
it; it will be impossible you should be unconcerned about an interest in the
Salvation that the Gospel reveals to you. But will immediately besiege Heaven
with cries, for the application of it.

PROPOSITION II. THERE is a way of Salvation revealed and proposed to Men in
and by the Gospel.
NOW the way of Salvation herein revealed is such as is suited to the
necessitous state of miserable Man. The Gospel reveals a way for Man's recovery
and complete happiness; how he may be delivered from the guilt and power of his
sins; restored to Gods Image and favor; prepared for the enjoyment of God and
communion with him, wherein his happiness does consist. Tit. 2.3. The grace of
God that brings Salvation has appeared to all men. By the Grace of God, here
is meant, the Doctrine of Grace delivered by the Gospel, that reveals a way of
Salvation to all Men, that is, to all sorts of Men. It is not now appropriated
to a particular Nation, but tendered to Men universally: on which account its
called, The common Salvation. This Doctrine of Salvation was first clearly
Preached by the Lord Jesus Christ himself, and afterward ^ his Apostles, as
our Text informs us; and the great benefit that it brought Mankind w^^ one
thing that encouraged the Apostle i^ Preaching notwithstanding the difficulty
h^ met with. Romans 1.16. I am not ashamed ^ the gospel of Christ, for it is the
power of God (...) to salvation, to every one that believes: (i. e.) a
powerful instrument which God uses ^ And in, 2 Tit. 1.10. Life and immortalit^
are said to be brought to light by the Gospe^ The way leading to it is thereby
laid down It may be hereby enquired.

Quest. HOW the Gospel reveals a way ^ Salvation?

1. IT reveals the gracious and eternal purpose and counsel of God concerning
Man's Salvation. That Man so deeply sinful, so justly miserable may be saved:
natural light could not reveal how this should be; though much of the glory of
God is displayed in his Works But the wisest of Men in the Heathen World were
at a loss both wherein Man's happines^ consisted, and how he should arrive at it
The World by wisdom knew not God, 1 Cor 1.21. The way of Man's reconciliation to
God was a thing hidden from them. I^ said to be a mystery hid in God, Ephesians. 3.9.
In his own breast, in the secret purpose of his own will; and to be kept secret
since the world began, Romans 16.25. It was gradually revealed first to Adam in
that promise of the Seed of the Woman, Genesis 3.15. which was the Gospel of the
Antediluvian Patriarchs, and of those that succeeded till Abraham: it was
further revealed to him and to succeeding Prophets. But the clear and full
revelation of God's gracious purpose in the matter was reserved for the Days of
the Gospel. Hence it is said, Joh. 1.17. Grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.
He who came from the Bosom of the Father was able to lay open the purposes of
his heart concerning Man's restoration by the Gospel; this matter is revealed
in such a measure as the wisdom of God has seen fit.

2. THE Gospel reveals that God has provided a SAVIOR for perishing Sinners;
and shows us who and what he is. One great design of the Gospel is to describe
the Person, and show forth the Glory of the LORD JESUS CHRIST. It tells us,
Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world that he give his only begotton son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. It
informs us that Jesus of Nazareth who is the Son of God, is the Person designed
for this work; that it is he of whom Moses and the Prophets di^ write. Joh.
1.45. It is he whose Birth w^^ celebrated by a multitude of bright and heave^ly
Spirits; testifying to the Shepherds, L^ 2.10. Unto you is born this day in the
city ^ David a Savior which is Christ the Lord. ^ is he who has therefore the
Name JESUS given him, because he should save his people fr^^ their sins, Mat.
1.21. He came to take o^ the load of sin from wounded and burden^ Consciences,
and in the days for his Humiliatio^ invited such to come to him for this
blessin^ GOD the Father has many ways testified concerning him, that he is the
Person appointe^ by him for this work, and accepted of him especially by his
Exaltation, Act. 3.31. Hi^ has God exalted with his own right hand to be
prince and a savior. It was the misery ^ well as sin of the Heathen World,
that they ha^ Gods many, and Lords many. Many Mediators of intercession between
those the^ thought Superior Gods. But it is the privilege of those to whom
the Gospel is afforded, that they are assured that there is but o^^ God and one
Mediator between God and Men, t^^ Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. They ar^
plainly directed whom to apply themselves to, to transact with God for them.

AND again, The Gospel shows us what ^ is, what manner of Person; One who^^
Name is Wonderful, and is eminently so in his Person, having the Natures of God
and Man, mysteriously united in One Person: in which work the glorious
condescension, wisdom and grace of God eminently shines forth: we needed such a
Days Man as might lay his hand upon both; a meet Person to transact with an
offended God, and to personate and be a surety for Man. Now that he is such a
One our Apostle particularly shows in the Two First Chapters of this Epistle,
as you may read at leisure. The realliy of both Natures in the Person of Christ
the Scriptures take care particularly to inform us. The Gospel declares him to
be truly Man; it gives us the History of his Birth, of his Childhood and
Manhood, and that by degrees he arrived at it, as is common for all Men. He
grew in wisdom and stature, Luke 2.52. He did the actions, and had the
properties of a real Body: he eat, he drank, he slept, he walked, he
discoursed. He had not the mere appearance of a Body, (as some Heretics
formerly have taught,) but a true and real Body, that was prepared for him.
This is undeniably evident by his SUFFERRINGS; his Sufferings were real which
procured groans and tears, as they are wont to do from humane Bodies; and his
Death was real, He became obedient unto death even the death of the cross; and
he therefore took our Nature that he might be a Redeemer for us and not for
Angels, Heb. 2.16.

AND the Scripture shows that he was truly God. This is plain from express
Scripture Testimonies. Heb. 1.3. The express image of hi^ Person: and, Joh.
1.14. We beheld his glory a^ the glory of the only begotten Son. Joh. 10.30 ^
and my Father are one, (i.e.) One in Essence His Godhead appeared by the many
miraculous operations that he wrought. The incredulity of the Jews,
notwithstanding these Christ shows to be inexcusable. The Miracle which Christ
wrought were done by his ow^ power: not as those which were done by Moses,
Elijah and Elisha, and others, which were not done by their own power, but
through the extraordinary presence of God with them But Christ wrought his by the
power of hi^ own Godhead. Hence he ascribes them t^ himself, Joh. 14.12. The
works that I do: and Joh. 11.11. The Apostles were careful to disclaim their
own power and sufficiency in the miracles that they wrought; but they ascribe
them to the power of Christ co-working with them, Acts 3.16. Now he that had
power to work miracles himself, and could enable others to work them is truly
GOD.

IT might also be argued from his Authority to forgive sins, His clear
knowledge of Me^ hearts; from the Properties ascribed to him, the Titles given
him. But I design only some hints at these Great Truths, which are among the
Fundamentals of our Faith, and on which so much of our Comfort by Christ does
depend.

THE necessity of his being such a Wonderful Person, is shown in the Gospel,
that he might be qualified for the Offices he sustains, Prophetical, Priestly
and Kingly; that he might reveal Divine Truths clearly, convincingly and
effectually to the hearts and consciences of Men, and yet in such a way as Men
might be able to bear them: that he might perform perfect Obedience to the Law
for us, to purchase a right to Life according to the First Covenant, and to
suffer the Curse and Penalty of the Law for us, that satisfaction might be
given to offended Justice in our name and stead, and that these Sufferings
might be acceptable and meritorious. As God he could not suffer, as Man he
could not satisfy by suffering, but as God-Man he could do both. And that he
might render his Government amiable to us he appears in our nature, and that
his power in the execution of his Authority might be sufficient to restrain and
destroy all his and our enemies, he exercises it in his Divine Nature. Some of
these things may be hereafter further enlarged upon.

3. THE Gospel makes an Offer of Salvation to those that are privileged with
it. By the Gospel Salvation is as it were brought and laid before Men. Act.
13.26. To y^ is the word of this Salvation sent. The Apostl^ does not say, we
have brought it you, bu^ God has sent it. And in, 1 Timothy 1.15. It said, This
is a faithful saying and worthy of a^ acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into
the wor^ to save sinners. God in the Gospel not onl^ declares that there is
Salvation to be had, tha^ it is a thing attainable, but he invites on^ and
another to put in for a share: in a feelin^ sense of their misery, to accept
the remed^ that is offered: under the sense of their So^^ Sickness and
Distempers to apply themselves to a Soul Physician It shows that it is n^
presumption for them but their duty to d^ so: yea God does not barely propose
i^ but backs the proposal with most proper an^ pressing arguments, such as in
themselves an^ suited to work upon the hearts of Men* from the Excellency of
the blessing itself; and from the danger and misery that Sinners wi^ bring upon
themselves, by the refusal: by which God's serious regard to Man's welfare is
plainly discovered.

4. THE Gospel propounds the Terms upon which Salvation may be had. What Man
mu^^ do on his pare that the Righteousness an^ Merit of Christ may be
graciously applied to him: though the Salvation revealed in the Gospel is a
Doctrine of Grace, yet it is not promiscuously thurst upon Men whether they
will or no: but God dispenses it in a way suitable to his own Honor and the
Sinners Comfort. God expects not from the sinner a valuable compensation for
it, or any personal worthiness to recommend the sinner to his acceptance.
Salvation is for the miserable; Pardon for the Guilty. But yet there are Duties
to be done by those that expect to be the subjects of it, and it hinders not
their being our duties, though it is by his Grace efficaciously working in us
that we are enabled to do them: they may not unfitly be called parts of the
Salvation which the Gospel offers, or the Inchoation of it. Now these are,

(1.) FAITH in the Lord Jesus Christ. Which is a Grace variously expressed and
described in the Scripture, suitably to the state of a sinner: it is said to be
a Coming to Christ. Joh. 6.37. Him that comes to me I will in no wise cast out.
Which implies the lost state of a Soul wandering up and down for succor and
finding none, upon Christ's call comes to him. It Is expressed by receiving
Chirst. Joh. 1.12. As many as received him. etc. This implies the gracious
offer that God makes of him to needy famishing Souls as the Bread of God that
gives life to the World. It Is expressed by fleeing to Christ for refuge to lay
hold of the hope set before us, Heb. 6.18. Because the Soul concerned for
safety and life by Christ is driven by the terrors of the Law, is pursued by
revenging Justice, and unable to deliver itself: it is expressed by Leaning upon
Christ. Cant. 8.5. Who is this that comes out of the wilderness, leaning on
her beloved. This implies that such a Soul is sinking under the burden of guilt
and wrath, and betakes itself to Christ for support. Again, it is expressed by
sitting under Christ's shadow, Cant. 2.3. Because such Souls are as it were
scorched with a sense of God's wrath. The wrath of a provoked God is a terrible
thing to a sensible sinner, which none can screen and defend the Soul from.
Christ Jesus is the only shelter. The Holy Ghost makes use of such Metaphors
from things so plain and familiar, that the nature of this necessary Grace may
be the better understood. That Faith which justifies a sinner is not merely an
assent to a Proposition, but is an act of the will, as well as of the
understanding, whereby a sensible and law-condemned sinner, convinced of the
truth of the Gospel, and of the sufficiency of Christ to answer the necessities
of his Soul, accepts the offer of him that God makes, consents to take him as a
complete Savior, entirely depends and relies upon him for Righteousness, Grace
and Life. This Faith is God's Gift, Ephesians. 2.8. and the effect of the Fathers
drawing, Joh. 6.44.

(2.) REPENTANCE is another duty which the Gospel requires, and which Christ as
a Savior bestows, Act. 5.31. That Faith which is true is ever accompanied with
Evangelical mourning and brokenness of heart for sin, Zech. 12.10. This is
necessarily required to our participation in the comforts of the Gospel. It is
a part of Christ's Office to bind up the broken hearted, Isai. 61.1.
Accordingly Repentance is a duty often pressed in the Gospel, and has promises
annexed to it. It was the command of Christ to his Apostles when he sent them
forth, Luke 24.47. That Repentance and remission of Sins, should be Preached in
his Name, and accordingly they did so, Acts 2.38. Repent and be baptized every
one of you, for the remission of sins. And, Act. 3.19. Repent and be converted,
that your sins may be blotted out. In vain do impenitent Sinners promise
themselves Salvation by Christ: while Men love their sins, and live in them, or
don't relent for them, or unaffected with the dishonor and wrong done to God
by them, they have the hearts of Enemies toward God, and must expect to be
dealt with accordingly.

(3.) A Life of sincere Obedience is also required of those that would be the
heirs of Salvation. You read, Heb. 5.9. He became the author of eternal
Salvation to all them that obey him. It was one end of Christ's Sufferings,
that he might purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit.
2.13. And it is the property of a true Faith to purify the heart, Act. 15.9.
The more it is exercised the more the work of Sanctification is carried on: it
not only shows the reasonableness of Obedience, for the honor of the Redeemer,
but it directs the Soul to Christ as the Fountain of all Grace and spiritual
Life: it realizes the truth of the Promises, encourages and enables the Soul to
submit to Christ's Government, to choose his Laws, to follow the conduct of his
Word and Spirit, to have a respect to all his Commands, knowing that none but
the pure in heart shall see God, Mat. 5.8. I shall add,

5. THE Gospel is the great Means or Instrument God makes use of for the
Application of the Salvation that it reveals, to the Souls of Men. Hence the
Apostle, Romans 1.6. calls it, the power of God unto Salvation. Inasmuch as God
in and by it is wont to exert the power of his Grace in gaining the hearts of
Men to a thankful acceptance of the Salvation therein offered unto them. The
Gospel does not barely bring a report to us, that Salvation is attainable, but
it is a Doctrine propounded in God's Name, clothed with his Authority, and
accompanied with his Presence, so far (as to some at least) that it becomes
effectual to convey the privileges purchased by Christ and contained in it.
Hence St. Paul commits Believers unto God and the word of his Grace, as that
which is able to build them up and give them an inheritance among them that are
sanctified, Acts 20.32. And it is called, Jam. 1.24. The ingrafted word which
is able to save our Souls. This may more fully appear by looking upon some
special benefits that are ascribed to it.

1. IT is the special means made use of by the Spirit in the work of
Regeneration. For this reason as well as others, it may be that it is called
the Word of Life. The conveying of spiritual Life to a Soul dead in sins and
trespasses is the first thing that prepares a Soul for an actual interest in
the Salvation purchased by Christ. Till there be a spirit of Life, there can be
no acts of Life in Faith, Repentance, or any other Graces. Now this is wrought
by the Word. 1 Pet. 1.23. We are born again, not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible by the word of God. And, Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us
by the word of truth. As God created all things at first by his Almighty Word,
he spoke and it was done, he commanded and it flood fast. So when any Soul is
created again in righteousness and true holiness, it is done by his Almighty
power accompanying his Word; this power is not inherent in the Word itself, but
it is mighty through God whenever he pleases to give efficacy to it.

(2.) IT is the special means of begetting of Faith, that Faith whereby Men are
united to Christ, and made partakers of his Righteousness. This is declared,
Romans 10.17. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. In order to
believing, it is necessary that there be a Revelation of a suitable object of
Faith, that there be an offer of this to the sinner, that this revelation and
offer be credibly attested to be from God. Now God does all this by the Gospel:
Christ is there revealed as the end of the Law for righteousness, to every one
that believes. There is an offer made and plentiful assurance given to the
truth of its being from God. What Paul said to the convinced Jailer is the
voice of the Gospel to every Sinner. Acts 16.31. Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and thou shall be saved. It is the Promise of the Gospel that is the
Warrant for Faith.

(3.) THE Word is the great means of Sanctification, of purging out sin and
perfecting holiness in the heart. Christ prays for his Disciples. Joh. 17.17.
Sanctify them by thy truth, thy word is truth. Sanctification is a work that is
carried on progressively, the New Creature gradually arrives to its Perfection.
Now as a means of advancing this we are directed, 1 Pet. 2.2. As new born babes
to desire the sincere milk of the word, that we may grow thereby. God in the
Gospel prescribes us rules of holiness, tells us how we should walk and please
God; how we should walk in every Relation and Condition: it teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in
the World, Tit. 2.12. And it gives the most proper encouragements to holiness,
and the most weighty and pressing dehortations from sin. Now when these are
believed they become greatly serviceable to promote holiness both in heart and
life.

(4.) THE Gospel is the means of conveying, Comfort, Joy and Peace, to the
Souls of Believers. They stand in need of Comfort upon many accounts; partly,
in regard of the various troubles, trials and sufferings that they are exposed
to in the World. The World hates them because of their love to Christ: partly,
in respect to the temptations and accusations of Satan, he envies them their
happiness and their hopes of it, does what in him lies to weaken it, and
suggests many discouragements to their hearts, that they are sometimes ready to
sink under: and partly, in respect to those guilty fears that arise in their
own Consciences. Man being a guilty is thereby become a very jealous suspicious
Creature, and needs some powerful supports against these accusations and fears.
Now the way of Comfort which God has provided is not by Visions and Voices
from Heaven, but by the Word of promise in the Gospel; by this he gives strong
Consolation unto the heirs of salvation, Heb. 6.17, 18. Applying of them
according to the various conditions and necessities of his People. I pass to
some APPLICATION of this.

USE I. HOW exceeding thankful ought we to be for the Gospel upon this account,
that it lays open and reveals a way of Salvation for guilty Man. A thing so
great that all the wisdom of the World could never have discovered. A perpetual
night of darkness had for ever overspread the face of the World, and the whole
race of Mankind had been involved in guilt and despair, and under a fearful
expectation of God's fiery indignation, if God has not scattered it, by the
breaking forth of the Light of the Gospel. We that are privileged with it are
under special Obligations to be thankful for it.

(1.) IN that it is an Act of special Grace and Mercy. God was under no
obligation to Man to do this for him. Men have no moral excellencies to commend
them to God. Sin had distroyed him of his native beauty, made him loathsome
before God, Who is of purer Eyes then to behold iniquities. There was no such
thing due to Man in a way of Justice. Yea, Justice was engaged against him, and
with its flaming Sword, kept the way to the tree of Life. God stood in no need
of Man's Friendship and Salvation: he could otherways have provided for his own
honor; or had he seen meet, contented himself to have glorified his Mercy upon
the holy Angels, and his Justice upon fallen Angels and Men. God's
manifestation of his Glorious Perfections is purely Arbitrary. He might have
concealed them as through a vast Eternity he had done. Further God was in no
fear of Man, to move him to it. Men spare Offenders sometimes through fear, but
God fears no Man's anger. All nations are counted to him lighter than nothing
and vanity. Had God executed upon Adam, and all his sinful progeny, the
threatening of the first Covenant, there could have been no injustice or
unreasonable severity imputed to him. I know that the carnal minds of Men are
prone to cavil at the Justice of God in the imputation of Adam's Sin, to them
who had no actual being at that time, and never gave their personal consent to
the Covenant transaction between God and him: but the Equity of this might be
evinced, partly, from the unspotted purity of God, who is righteous in all his
ways, and holy in all his works, Psalm. 147.17. is subject to no error or
partiallity in any of his Administrations: partly, from the common reason of
Mankind, which allows it to be both just and necessary in many cases for
Children to act by their Parents, and People by their Representatives, and
count themselves bound by their Act. Besides, had all Mankind been in being at
that time, and called to put in their Suffrage for a fit Person to represent
them, no doubt they would with one consent have pitched upon their common
Father; especially considering how he was qualified for the trust reposed in
him. The execution therefore of the threatening being a thing in it self just,
the Revelation of it must be an act of Grace; The Scripture ascribes our
Salvation here unto, Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace are ye saved. Yea so illustrious is the
grace and good will of God herein, that our most enlarged praises cannot duly
celebrate it; nor our highest thoughts sufficiently comprehend it.

(2.) IT is such Grace as is not the common lot of Mankind. Though the Divine
Mercy has enlarged itself in these latter Ages of the World beyond what it did
in elder Times, yet there are many vast Nations of the World who are covered
with dross darkness, and in the region of the shadow of Death. The curse of God
lies upon them from Generation to Generation. God who is the sovereign Lord of
his own Grace shows his liberty in this matter, and it is free Mercy that is to
be acknowledged in the manifestations of it to some, while he denies it to
others. Our Savior attributes it hereunto, Mat. 11.25, 26. What did God see in
you more than in them? You are not less defiled by nature than they, nor less
obnoxious to Justice; Children of wrath by nature as well as they; have no
greater propensions to any thing that is good than they. The Apostle speaking
of himself and others, before the Grace of God appeared in Conversion, says,
Tit. 3.3. We our selves were sometime foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving
diverse lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one
another. You are as unworthy as they, and they as capable as you of a share in
this Salvation; had the sovereign pleasure of God so determined. Now to be the
Subjects (...) such distinguishing Mercy, deserved calls for your Praises to
God.

(3.) IN that it is a Mercy we had such gr^^^ and absolute need of. The more
necessar^ any mercy is the more it is wont to be valued among Men. Hence food
and clothing which are necessary for the preservation o^ life, are valued
above all things else; b^^ the Eternal Salvation of the Soul is more necessary
than these. We are undone without a Savior. View the doleful state of the
H^^then who perish through lack of Vision: esp^cially the desperate state of
Devils who never had a Savior provided for them; an^ say, if it ben't a Mercy
you have need o^ Look over your past Lives and consider a little with your
Consciences, and say, if yo^ don't need Salvation: can you bear a lo^^ of
Heaven, undergo the pains of Hell* Dwell with devouring fire, inhabit
everlasting burnings? In the Gospel God does not treat with you about trifles;
your Eternal welfare depends upon it, and ten thousand woes are seizing upon
you if you go without it: a Mercy so infinitely necessary is deservedly to be
valued. All other mercies may be better spared than the Salvation of your
Souls. It were better never to have seen the light of the Sun, than not to have
enjoyed the light of the Gospel that brings Salvation.

(4.) IT further inhances the Mercy and calls for Thankfulness that it is
continued after it has been so much neglected and disregarded. How often have
you received the Grace of God in vain? though you have so much need of
Salvation, yet you have not had a heart to seek after it: though it has been
brought to your doors, and laid before you in the Promises of the Gospel, yet
you have not had a heart to accept it. May not God complain of you as of them,
Prove. 1.24. I have called and ye have refused, I have stretched out my hands,
and no man regarded. Or as Christ of them, Mat. 23.37. How often would I have
gathered you? and ye would not. With what coldness and indifferency, with what
careless and unperswadable hearts have you heard the most earnest wooings of
Grace in the Gospel? And yet Gospel Salvation is still tendered to you. Is
there not cause to wonder that Divine patience has not been as weary of
waiting upon you, as it has been of waiting upon others? that God has not
entered that protest against you, as he did against them, Luke 14.24. None of
these men that were bidden shall taste of my supper. Or as, Acts 13.46. The
wonderful patience of God in this matter can be ascribed to nothing but his
undeserved Mercy, and justly calls for your grateful acknowledgments* Oh that
the long-suffering of God, might be Salvation to you!

USE II. IS there a way of Salvation lai^ before you, and propounded to you in
the Gospel, Let it put you upon the Trial of your selves, what are you the
better for it? God takes notice, where he gives this privilege t^ Men, what
improvement they make of i^ As in that Parable of the Fig Tree in the Vineyard,
is evident, Luke 13.7. He observe whether his Ends be obtained, whether the
offers of Grace he makes to Men, be duly prized and received; or whether they
ar^ neglected and slighted. Our Savior call those to account that sometime
flocked to John Baptists Ministry, Mat. 11.7. Wha^ went ye out into the
wilderness to see? Wha^ aim they had and what profit they got by his Ministry?
And be sure at the Great Day of Account when the secret of Men's hearts shall be
judged according to the Gospel; this will be enquired into: What improvement
they made of, and what entertainment they gave to the offers of Gospel Grace.
Therefore it concerns every one in particular to enquire into his own case,
what real saving benefit and advantage you have got by it? It may be you have
got more Knowing Heads then others, but have you got better Hearts? Has the
Gospel been the power of God to Salvation to you? This is that you have need to
search into; if it is not so, it had been as good you had never heard of the
Gospel. Nay, as to your own comfort (if you continue thus,) it had been better
never to have heard of it? It Is some excuse for Men's sin and security that
live in places of Ignorance; but to live so in the clear Light of the Gospel
cuts off all plea and excuse, Joh. 15.22. To have frequent calls to Repentance,
and yet be impenitent and hard-hearted! to be persuaded to accept tenders of
Grace by Christ, and yet reject them, and live in unbelief! to be called into
Fellowship with Christ in Eternal Glory, and yet at last to fall into Eternal
Misery! How dismal and withal how inexcusable will this be? Here Consider,

1. HAVE YOU been made sensible of your undone and perishing Condition, till
interested in this Salvation which the Gospel offers? That you are Sinners
there is no doubt you will acknowledge; but have your eyes been opened to see
the numerous sins of your Lives, and to see them in their horrid and heinous
aggravations of them? Have you seen and been brought to say, with the sensible
Prodigal, Luke 15.21. Father I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight.
Have you seen it to be an evil thing and bitter that you have forsaken the
Lord? Have your excuses and apologies for sin been beaten dow^ and taken away?
Has sin been made a^ insupportable burden to you? that you have sighed for the
bondage you have been under to Satan and to your own lusts? Have yo^ seen and
trembled under the terror of Divine wrath due to your sins, and impendi^^ over
you for them? Have you been led (...) your own hearts, to see the manifold
sinf^ness of them, to cry out in good earne^^ under your heavy load? and in the
sense (...) your pinching wants saying with the Prodig^^ I perish with hunger?
It is only Sin-f^^ Souls that will truly prize a Savior. Till si^ners see
themselves perishing, and all hop^ of saving themselves are taken away, the
will not in earnest apply themselves to a S^viour. They who think, their sins
are few o^ small, or hope they can atone for the^ will live upon themselves,
and not prize ^ Savior.

2. HAVE you gotten a Spiritual knowledge of Christ's Excellency and
Sufficiency by the Go^pel, for those ends for which he is offered (...) you? In
believing the Soul acts und^^ standingly, is persuaded of the sufficien^ of
Christ who is propounded in the Gospe^ as the object of his trust: sees it to
be a safe thing to venture his Soul in his hands, 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I
have believed and I ^n persuaded he is able to keep that which I have committed
to him against that day. An awakened sinner has a deep sense of the
preciousness of his Soul, has a high value for it, but yet he is willing to
trust Christ for the Salvation of it, and he is made to see an excellency,
suitableness, and preciousness in him: and this because God has given him a
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Christ, Ephesians. 1.17. He is
enlightened by the Spirit of God to see him to be a Divine Person; a Savior
able to save to the uttermost them that come to God by him, Heb. 7.27. One whom
the wisdom and love of God has provided, whom divine Justice has accepted;
One that has justly vindicated the honor of the (...); has brought in
everlasting Righteo^^ness, and completely satisfied the penalty and curse of
it. One in whom a Divine fullness dwells. As such a one the Gospel reveals him,
as such, a Soul taught of God sees him to be; and therefore worthy of all
acceptance: willingly trusts in him, and consents to take him for a complete
Savior, when he has nothing else to trust to. He has a high esteem of
Christ. Christ is precious to him, 1 Pet. 2.7. Yea such a transcendent
valuation of him, as that all ^ther things are lessened in his opinion and
e^^^mation of them, and respect unto them, ^ comparison of Christ. Phil. 3.8. I
count ^ things but loss, for the excellency of the knowle^^ of Christ Jesus my
Lord, for whom I have suff^^ed the loss of all things, and do count them (...)
dung that I might win Christ. Where there such an understanding and esteem of
Christ Excellency there the Gospel has had so^^ saving effect upon the Soul.

3. HAS the Gospel come with po^^^ to your hearts, to subdue your Corruptions
(...) Lusts? This is a part of the Salvation t^ Christ has designed for his
People, and ^ preparatory to the completing of it. Th^^ is a Spirit of life
and power accompany (...) the Gospel, where it works effectually, as ^ does in
them that believe: it discovers sin ^ the exceeding sinfulness of (...) and
carries t^ strongest obligations and en^^uragements (...) mortify it. Partly,
as it shows us that it w^^ Christ's design to destroy the works of the D^vil:
Now Sin is eminently his Work, he w^^ the first author and actor of it; the
first tem^ter to it, and the great promoter of it, and i^stigator to it in the
World. Now it becom^ those that are Christ's to fail in with his d^sign, to
make it their serious business an^ concern; that they may, through the pow^^ if
his Grace, mortify sin in themselves; that sin might no longer live and reign,
which Christ came to destroy: and partly, as it represents the exceeding evil
of sin, in the Sufferings of the Lord Jesus. That infinite weight of Divine
wrath which lay upon the Lord Jesus Christ, was the effect of vindictive
Justice for sin, and is the most forcible argument in the World to induce to
Repentance for sin, and the Mortification of it. If you hope you have an
interest in the Death of Christ, how can you live any longer in sin? How
incongruous and unsuitable will it be? Sin will be burdensome if a Savior be
precious to you. The weakness of your love to him, the coldness of your hearts
in his service will be a burden; and much more the aversion and opposition of
your hearts against him; and those corrupt affections that incline and excite
you to do that which is offensive and dishonorable to him. Consider therefore,
Has the Gospel such an effect upon you? Does it teach you to deny ungodliness
and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.12. Does it subdue the opposition that is in your
hearts to the Kingdom of Christ? Does it humble you for Sin, excite Repentance,
engage to Watchfulness against it? that its interest and influence may daily be
growing weaker in you?

4. DO the hopes of the Gospel animate^ excite you to a life of holiness? and
to a lo^ to the duties of it, to perform them with wi^lingness and
cheerfulness? The Grace (...) God that brings Salvation, teaches us, not ^^ly
to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, but live soberly, righteously and godly
in this pres^^^ world, Tit. 2.12. Thus to live is to answ^^ the design of
Christ, ver. 14. Who gave hi^ self for us, that he might redeem us from all
i^^quity, and purify to himself a peculiar people ^^lous of good works. And a
well groun^ hope of the blessings of the Death of Ch^^ is wont to have this
effect. 1 John 3.3. T^ Gospel is not only the great means of co^veying the
Spirit, who is the glorious A^thor of holiness; but it presents the stronge^^
Arguments to further holiness, it gives t^^ most excellent Pattern of it, the
most suit^ble Rules for it; makes the most precio^^ Promises to it, the richest
and most amp^ Rewards of it. Both our present benefits (...) Christ, and future
hopes from him should constrain and engage unto it. 2 Cor. 5.1^ Therefore one
special trial of our pro^^ting by it, is the observing what efficacy ^ has to
promote holiness: Does the sen^ of Divine Grace in the gift of Christ, for such
glorious ends, stir up a grateful spirit toward God? to be willing to put
hono^ upon God the utmost you are capable of? Do you see the excellency, wisdom
and goodness of divine Commands? This will make you not to account them
grievous, but worthy of your choice. Can you be desirous to meet Christ in the
Day of his Glorious Appearing as your Bridegroom, and not desire to be as a
Bride adorned for her Husband? Do you hope shortly to be with the Lord, to see
him as he is, to be made like him, and not love and labor to be like him now?
Surely if the Promises of the Gospel be believed, they will excite you to purge
your selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and to perfect holiness in
the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1.

5. WHAT support does the Gospel afford you against the Troubles of Life or the
Fears of Death? They who have taken the Testimonies and Promises of Divine
Grace as their heritage for ever, do doubtless make them their Songs in the
house of their Pilgrimage. Thus to do is one way whereby God will have his
People be witnesses to his Covenant truth and faithfulness. Our blessed Lord
has foretold his Disciples, Joh. 16.33. In the world they shall have trouble,
but in him they shall have peace. Here they meet with Afflictions of various
sorts, sickness, pains, losses, reproaches, hatred and persecution from the
World; temptations from Satan, manifold miseries and infelicities: so that they
groan being burdened, Now do the Consolations of God bear up and revive your
Spirits under these Sorrows? enable you to patience, meekness, and a quiet
submission to the Divine Will in these exercises? Can you live upon Spiritual
comforts, when Outward fail? See enough in Christ and the New Covenant, when
other Streams are dried up? With David encourage your selves in the Lord your
God, (1 Samuel 30.6.) when other thin^ fail? This is one great end for which
Divine comforts are promised, Joh. 15.1^ Though I grant, Christians need the
assistanc^ of the Holy Spirit to apply them to their support in times of need.
And again, Do the ^ comfort you against the Fears of Death? Ca^ you by Faith
see and hope for a better Inh^ritance then any that the World affords ^ you? It
is the special privilege of Believers that they are begotten to a lively hope
of ^ inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, reserved in heaven for them, 1
Pet. 1.3, 4. And the hope of this enables them not only with a composedness of
spirit, and submission; but sometimes with joyfulness to resign their Spirits
into the Hands of God when Death comes to summons them to pay the last debt to
Nature.

PROPOSITION III. THAT the Salvation Revealed and Offered in the Gospel is very
Great and Glorious.
CARRYING in it the brightest displays of the Divine Glory; containing in it
the greatest Mercy. The Apostle calls it, Great Salvation: the manner of his
expression is worth our Observation, SO Great Salvation. Which may denote the
inexpressible, yea, inconceivable Greatness of it! A Salvation beyond any other
that God has ever vouchsafed to Men. Many great Salvations God has wrought
since the beginning of the World, but the Salvation of Sinners by Jesus Christ
is beyond all comparison. We have an expression parallel hereunto, Joh. 3.16.
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son. So as cannot be told.
The love appearing in this Gift is inexpressible! We read concerning the Works
of God in general that they are Great! Honorable and Glorious, Psalm. 111.2, 3.
The works of Creation and Providence are so, they may fill the hearts of
considerate beholders, with wonder and astonishment; such as the highest
flights of humane understanding cannot penetrate into: and it is eminently true
of this Work of Redemption, or the Salvation of Sinners by Jesus Christ; for
which the Praises of God will be celebrated throughout the days of Eternity.
There are so many great and mysterious things concurring to it and contained in
it, such inestimable blessings accompanying of it as may justly render it
mavelous in our eyes. Fully to declare the greatness of this Salvation is
possible only u^ an understanding capable of comprehending it. I shall only
attempt at some few him that may give us reason to assent to the manner of
expression as highly suitable.

1. IF we consider how great difficulties la^ in the way of it, and what a
glorious display of the Divine Perfections there is in bringing it to pass.
Such works as are not without great difficulty brought to pass are wo^ to be
accounted great. Now this work o^ saving Sinners had such difficulties in the
way of it, as quite exceeded the Wisdom of Men or Angels to remove. It was
beyond them to determine how the Sinner should be saved, and Sin condemned. How
Mercy might be exercised, and the rights of Justice not impaired. How the
honor of Gods Truth in the threatening of Death to sin could be vindicated
without the Death of the Sinner. How the ruling Wisdom of God in establishing a
Law by which Mankind should be governed, could be manifested unless Divine
Justice did proceed according to it: and how this could be done and Man
preserved from everlasting ruin was above their comprehension. But the Wisdom
of God has surmounted all these difficulties, in bringing about this great
work, it is so established that there is no breach in the harmony of the Divine
Attributes. The Wisdom of God has pitched upon such a way wherein his Truth,
Justice and Mercy might all be Glorified. As the Psalmist observes, Psalm.
85.10. Mercy and truth have met together, righteousness and peace have kissed
each other. Beside there is a glorious display of the Godhead and its
perfections. Much of the Divine Glory and particularly that sacred Mystery of
the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, is more revealed in this work than ever
it was before: God the Father contriving, God the Son performing, God the Holy
Ghost applying Salvation for and to fallen Man. This Counsel of Peace was among
these Sacred Persons before time, but their particular and distinct operations
in and about it are in time exhibited in the Gospel to raise our admiration and
praises! and herein the glorious Perfections of the Godhead are displayed more
than in any other Works. The Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God, which appeared
in Creation, in the variety of Creatures that were made, and adapting of them
to their respective ends, appears in this work with a yet greater luster; and
over and above, God's Holiness, Truth, Justice and Mercy, shine forth in their
transcendent excellencies: the glory of the Divine Perfections did never so
display itself as it does in this wonderful work of bringing about Salvation
for sinful Man. Insomuch that you read that the Heavenly Spirits desire to
stoop down and look into this wonderful work, 1 Pet. 1.12. that they might
solace themselves with the manifestations of divine Glory appearing herein, and
have their love and praise excited upon the occasion of it.

2. IT may appear so if we consider how great and glorious a Person was
employed ^ purchase Salvation for us. This work was undertaken by the Son of
God himself, and obtained through his Incarnation, Obedience, Sufferings,
Resurrection and Intercession. We may justly infer the greatness of the work
from the glorious dignity of the Person employed about it. No other than the
only Son of God's love, in whom he was well pleased, was found worthy or
capable to manage such an affair. Now the Son of God being so highly esteemed,
so dearly beloved of him* never have been employed about a trifle or small
matter. The conservation and manifestation of the divine Glory required that so
great a Person should be entrusted with this work. You read in 1 Pet. 1.18. We
are not redeemed with, corruptible things, as silver and gold. No such price
was of value sufficient for the Redemption of a Soul; much less of all the
Souls of the Elect; but it must be the precious Blood of Christ, of God
Incarnate to procure such an inestimable benefit, otherways that might be
thought of were insufficient. There was no hopes of Man's re-entry into Paradise
to make a new trial of his Fidelity to the first Covenant; that made no
promises to Repentance being once broken, and that was guarded against him:
there was no hope of having life by the Law that was become weak through the
flesh, Romans 8.3. Man's sinfulness had rendered him obnoxious to Death by it, and
incapable to perform the righteousness it required of him, so far as would be
accepted for his Justification; nor would any of the Sacrifices or Ceremonial
purifications of the Law avail hereunto. It was not possible that the blood of
bulls and goats should take away sin. All these Ceremonial rites could not take
away the guilt of sin; nor any further relieve the consciences of Men, then as
they directed them to look to the Great Sacrifice which they were appointed to
Typifie and represent; nor were they ever designed by God in their institution
and establishment to an higher end. Yea it was a work too great for an Angel to
have performed: for an infinite wrath would have been a burden too heavy for
any mere creature to have endured. Nor would there have been that worth and
value in the services and sufferings of any creature, or indeed of all
creatures, as the^ is in the satisfaction made by Christ. Now the greatness of
this Salvation in respect of the Person employed for the purchase of it* might
be here further Illustrated by considering what he does in order to it.

(1.) HE assumes an humane Nature into personal union with his Divinity. This
is a Doctrine that the Scriptures do very expressly and largely insist upon, as
might be shown in abundance of Places, and do also declare to us why it was
necessary he should do this; that he might be a fit Person to sustain the
office of a Surety in our stead, being one that had a true humane Nature, was
fit to personate Man, and to satisfy for him, Heb. 2.16. The reason why the
fallen Angels are not saved is, because there is no Surety provided in their
Natures, to transact for them. But Christ Jesus assumed the Nature of Man that
he might make satisfaction in the Nature that had sinned; and therefore a body
was prepared for him, as he informs us; because other Sacrifices were not
sufficient, Heb. 10.5, -- 10. Now this was a great, a glorious and wonderful
thing! that the Humane Nature should be thus exalted, and that he who was the
brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his Person. Who
thought it not robbery to be equal with God, should be made in the likeness of
Men, Phil. 2.6, 7. That God was manifest in the flesh, the Apostle calls the
great mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16. This astonishing condescension is that
which Saints and Angels will admire throughout the Ages of Eternity.

(2.) IN submitting to a life of Obedience. It Is said, Gal. 4.4. He was made
under the Law. He who was the Supreme Lord, who had given, and who had right to
give Laws to Angels and Men; being made Man, becomes subject to his own Laws,
he was obedient both to the Moral Law and to the (...) of the Mediator. He
fulfilled all Righ^^^^^ness. The disobedience of the First (...) off him and
all his Seed from ho^ (...) by the works of the Law. No^ (...) Second Adam
performs this (...) acquires a right to Life f^^ (...) Seed. The dignity of his
(...) excellency and value into his obedience, that it became highly acceptable
and meritorious; he submitted to the Law of a Mediator, he came from Heaven not
to do his own will but the will of his Father, and this he delighted in and
submitted to. So that in this Relation he became obedient unto Death even the
Death of the cross, Phil. 2.8. which is,

3. THE Third Thing to set forth the greatness of this Work. There was a debt
of punishment that sinful Man owed to the Law, and this must be discharged. The
wisdom of God saw it necessary that the Law should not be abrogated and laid
aside: but the threatenings of it must be endured, that Justice might be
glorified. Therefore the Lord Jesus Christ sustaining the Relation of a
Mediator, undertakes to suffer, to die, to shed his Blood, to make his Soul an
offering for sin, that he might redeers his Church with his own Blood, Acts
20.28. Hence it was that he submitted most freely and willingly to a state of
suffer^^^, was as a Lamb dumb before his shear^ at he endured that grievous and
unpa^ (...) Agony in the Garden, wherein he sweat (...) ^reat drops of Blood.
Hence it was (...) ^mitted to that barbarous treat^ (...) ^th Priests, their
Officers and (...) the indignities and con^ (...) ^his M^n of War, to the cruel
and unjust Scourging, Condemnation, and Contumely of Pilate and the Roman
Soldiers, that he was Crucified, and laid in a Grave. Thus our glorious Lord
Jesus endured an accursed Death that he might redeem us from the Curse of the
Law. For the Scripture abundantly informs us that his Death and Sufferings had
the nature of a Sacrifice, and that it was for sin, yea that he died for our
Sins, not for his own; for he was of perfect purity and innocence, none could
ever convince him of sin, or charge any manner of fault upon him; tho his
enemies with the greatest subtilty and malice attempted it. But he was made sin
for us who knew no sin himself, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. and, Isai. 43.4, 5.6. Now this being a necessary means for
the bringing about our Salvation, shows it to be inexpressibly, yea
inconceivably Great! There is no higher demonstration of love among the dearest
friends that have ever been in the World, then to expose their lives for each
other, but Christ has commended his love beyond this, that while we were
enemies he died for us, Romans 5.8, 10. That so glorious a Person as God-Man
should groan and sigh under the burden of Divine Wrath, should be exposed to
such painful and ignominious Sufferings! even to Death itself! was such a Work
as astonished the Creation! and made all ^remble, besides the obstinate hearts
of his Persecutors. It is such a work as never had been done from the beginning
of the World, nor shall ever be again to the end of it.

4. HAVING performed the work of his Humiliation, our Lord Jesus Christ, as a
Conqueror over Death and Hell, rose from the Grave, ascended into Heaven, is
crowned with Glory, and lives continually to make Intercession for his People.
His Resurrection was a glorious and eminent proof of his Satisfaction to the
Law, in what he had suffered: the Law had threatened Death to sin, therefore
that the Sinner might live, the Surety must die: but that the sufficiency and
acceptableness of his Death unto the ends for which he suffered might appear he
must rise again, and not be held under the power of Death.

HIS Resurrection plainly shows that God has accepted the Death of Christ,
as a sufficient ransom for our Sins. The active and passive Obedience of the
Lord Jesus Christ was every way enough to free us from sin and from
condemnation by sin. But his Resurrection was a visible evidence of the
satisfactoriness of his Death. This had the nature of a solemn acquittance and
discharge; it is ascribed to the Father as his discharge of him, Heb. 13.20.
The God of Peace which brought again from th^^ dead our Lord Jesus Christ. And
from hence, there is special ground of comfort afforded to Believers, in
expectation of the blessings of a pardoned estate 1 Cor. 14.17. If Christ be
not risen then are you yet in your sins. And again, Romans 4.25. He died for our
offenses, and rose again for our justification. This act of his is a convincing
proof that he is indeed the Son of God, and Savior of the World: not an
Impostor or deceiver, as the Jews wickedly traduced him: his own living also
shows him to be capable to convey life to others; which if he had remained in a
state of Death he could not have done, Joh. 14.19. And then the acceptableness
and value of it, is further discovered in that he not only rose but ascended to
the right hand of God. This is a pledge and proof of his complete Victory over
all his Enemies, and shows how fully he was accepted of the Father. Having such
glorious dignity and honor put upon him, it carries strong ground of
encouragement to his people to commit themselves and all their concernments
into his Hands, Ephesians. 1.20, 21. 1 Pet. 3.22. He is gone into Heaven, Angels,
Authorities and Powers being made subject to him. A further privilege
following hereupon is his INTERCESSION for his People, ant that this must needs
be prevalent and successful is sufficiently obvious from the reallity of his
Death, the satisfactoriness of it, and the high honor that is now put upon him
as the Reward of it. He is in all respects accomplished for this work, and a
Person so tenderly loved and so highly honored that he shall not be rejected
in any of the requests that he makes for his People, 1 John 2.1. If any man sin
we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Heb. 2.14, 15,
16, 17. And it is upon these several Acts of the Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, and Intercession of Christ, that the Holy Apostle lays the
Foundation of his own Triumph and of all Believers, Romans 8.33, 34. and so on.
From the consideration of the things spoken there is ground to conclude that if
the manifestation of the glory of God in the Salvation of his Elect had not
been a thing of great weight and importance, such great things had never been
in order to it.

3. THE greatness of this Salvation might also be argued from the necessary,
gracious and effectual Operation of the Holy Spirit in applying of it to the
Souls of Men. Not only the coming of Christ, but the coming of the Holy Spirit
which are the most signal favors that God manifests to Mankind, give us reason
to conclude that they are some great and weighty ends for which they are
bestowed. Now there was a necessity of both these to the bringing home
Salvation to the Souls of Men. Had not care been taken for the Application as
well as the Impetration of Redemption, the case of fallen Man considering his
impenitency and obstinacy, had been still deplorable: But the Lord Jesus Christ
having satisfied the Justice of God, and procured favor for sinful Man, he
informs us that the descent of the Spirit should be one eminent fruit and
testimony of it. And by minding them of this, comforts his Disciples when
greatly dejected with the thoughts of his bodily absence from them, Joh. 16.7.
And though the Church in all Ages have been in some degree privileged with the
presence of the Spirit, yet the more large and plentiful communications of it
has been reserved to the times of the Gospel; it being the great and special
promise that had been given for those times, as may be seen in many Texts of
Scripture, Joh. 7.37, 37. Act. 2.38. Accordingly the Apostle calls the Gospel
by way of eminency, The ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. And on this
account checks the folly of the Judaizing Galatians, that they were grown fond
of the Mosaic Rites, and had abated in their valuation and esteem of the
Gospel, by minding them of the privilege they had had by it. Gal. 3.2. This
on-would I learn of you, received you the spirit by the works of the law or by
the hearing of faith; by which he intends the Preaching of the Gospel. In 1
Pet. 1.12. The Gospel is said to be Preached with the Holy Ghost, sent down
from Heaven. Now the reason of this communication of the holy Spirit was not
only to prepare the World to give entertainment to it, by the extraordinary
Operations that did accompany it at its first publishing, but that also by its
efficacious and powerful operations upon the Souls of Men they might be
actually interested in the Salvation that the Gospel reveals. In order to this
there are several gracious operations of the Spirit, in Convictions of Sin,
Opening the Eyes, and Awakening the Consciences of Sinners, to show them their
guilty, polluted, perishing condition without a Savior, and leading them into
the knowledge of the sufficiency and suitableness of the remedy, which is
revealed in it; in Regenerating the Soul, disposing and inclining of it to a
new Life, and assisting it thereunto in the work of Sanctification, of which
the Holy Spirit is the principal Author, who destroys the life of sin by
degrees, and cherishes and confirms those gracious dispositions that he has
wrought: and as a Spirit of Consolation, refreshing the hearts of Believers in
the expectation of promised Glory; helping them to see the truth of Promises,
and enabling them to discern their own interest in them: on which accounts he
is called some^imes a Spirit of Bondage; sometimes a Spirit of Grace; and
sometimes a Comforter; from the different effects that he works. Now that so
gracious a Person as the Holy Ghost should be employed in this work by such
operations upon the hearts of Men in order to their Salvation, shows the work
to be Great. But further,

4. THAT it is great Salvation will appear if we consider, From what evil and
misery we are saved. The greater any evil is from which a Person is delivered,
the more affected he is wont to be with it. To be delivered from some
tormenting pain, from some cruel bondage and slavery; from the apprehensions of
present Death, are wont to be accounted great things: but they are the most
formidable of all evils, from which Christ delivers his People. This might be
largely opened, but I shall only insist upon some things briefly.

(1.) IT is a Salvation from Sin. For this reason Christ has the Name Jesus
put upon him, Mat 1.21. Because he saves his People from their sins. It was
upon account of sin in a peculia^ manner, that Man needed a Savior. Sin had
invaded the whole race of Mankind. The whole nature of Mankind (the Man Christ
Jesus excepted) is stained and corrupted with it. All are under Sin. Now sin is
of all evils the greatest: it is an evil, yea an only evil. It has no good in
it, and it tends to no good. It is a worse evil than any affliction that Men
have ^^ffered or can suffer in this World: it is worse than Death, yea then
Death in the most frightful aspect that it ever appeared in: hence many of the
wisest and best of Men have chosen to suffer all sorts of tortures, and the
most cruel Death that their enemies could inflict than yield to Sin. Yea Sin is
really worse than Hell itself. Sin is such an evil as is immediately against
God; it is an opposition to his will and glory, a rebellion against God, a
fighting against him, a blemishing his manifold Perfections; his Wisdom,
Knowledge, Justice, Truth, H^lin^^s, Power, Goodness, Patience, Mercy; as might
be largely shown, and therefore makes the Sinner loathsome and abominable in
the eyes of a holy God. Sin is an evil that ^ebases defiles and destroys the
Soul, Prove. 8.36. It has taken away the primitive beauty of it, and it entails
the most dreadful curses upon it. Sin is a resemblance and imitation of the
Devil, Joh. 8.34. 1 John 3.8. The more Men commit it the more they strengthen
the Devils Kingdom, and fall in with his design. Now this being the universal
inclination of depraved nature to choose and love and serve Sin, though under
various appearances and disguises, it must needs be acknowledged a great and
glorious work of Divine Grace to save and recover Man from it, to change this
wretched disposition in him, to subdue a heart to God that is so full of
rebellion and opposition against him, to cleanse a Soul so deeply defiled; to
create a clean heart, and to renew a right spirit in him; to turn a (...) ^l
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, Psalm. 51.19. Acts
26.18. to make such a Soul holy, and to prepare it to love, fear and glorify
God, and live unto him. And it will further appear so, if we consider, Man's
impotency to work such a change in his own Soul; yea his reluctance against it,
and various methods he uses to continue in it, and frustrate the designs of
Divine Grace to effect it in him, and the insufficiency of all other means to
do it.

(2.) IT is a Salvation from Hell. Sin is the worst of moral evils, and Hell is
the worst of penal evils; but this also Christ saves his People from. 1 These.
1.10. Jesus which delivered us from wrath to come. Sin had entailed this upon
all the miserable progeny of Adam. Evil pursues Sinners. Offended Justice has
prepared Hell for the vindication of Divine Glory, in the everlasting
punishment of Sinners, and there they must feel the full weight of Divine
Wrath; in a privation of all good, and the sense of all that is evil. Now the
Lord Jesus Christ by satisfying for Sin and bearing the curse of the Law saves
his People from it; so that they shall not come into condemnation. The miseries
of Hell a^e inconceivable! and therefore Salv^^^^n from it is deservedly to be
accounted a great Salvation: and however Men blinded by sensible objects,
through unbelief not apprehending the terror or certainty of it, may account
otherwise of it; yet when there shall be the actual execution of the curse upon
the ungodly; and the Lord Jesus Christ shall appear in terrible Majesty to
perform the work of the Last and Great Judgment, and the doom shall be passed
upon Sinners, and they shall be sent away into everlasting punishment, there
will be a full discovery that it is great indeed.

(3.) I might add, that it is a Salvation that comprehends in it the mitigation
and sanctification of all temporal evils, that the People of God are in this
World exposed unto. It is one great and gracious fruit of the love of God in
Christ toward Sinners, and a part of that Salvation which is wrought for them;
that though in his Fatherly wisdom he corrects them, yet their chastisements are
Medicinal, not Penal and Vindictive: designed by Love, and overruled to their
Spiritual Profit, and have many comfortable Promises belonging to them. And
these are all ordered in such seasons and in such a measure as Divine Wisdom
and Love see to be best: and through the Grace of Christ they have many supports
and consolations under them, and a seasonable release from them. Nor ought this
to be accounted a small or dispicable privilege.

5. THAT it is a great Salvation which the Gospel reveals and offers to Sinners
by Christ, may further appear, if we consider, What Blessings it contains in
it, and what Privileges it intitles Believers unto. Besides the freedom from
the forementioned evils, there are many positive Blessings belonging to it, and
these such as are invaluably great. The usefulness profit or comfort of any
outward blessing is wont to recommend it to our desires, and raise our esteem
of it: the more available it is to our present or future good, the more it is
wont to be sought after. Now the Salvation which is brought us by the Gospel
contains in it the best Good, and such as we have the greatest reason to desire
and to be concerned for. I shall instance in some of the Privileges of it, but
not enlarge upon them.

THEY who are brought to close with the offers of it are brought into a state
of Peace and Reconciliation with God. The dreadful breach that sin had made
between God and the Sinner is made up, Romans 5.1. Peace with Men is desirable,
Peace of Conscience is more desirable: but Peace with God is most of all so!
and indeed this lays the surest foundation for the other.

AGAIN, Their Sins are Forgiven, and they are made righteous before God, through
the imputation of the righteousness of Christ unto them by Faith, Romans 8.12.
That vast debt which they owed, is cancelled: God has received full
satisfaction for it, in their Surety, and does upon believing freely, fully and
for ever discharge them from it. Now this is a blessed Privilege, and makes
those happy that obtain it. Psalm. 32.1, 2.

AND Further hereupon their Persons and Services are accepted, Ephesians. 1.6. Their
hearts are sanctified, and they are graciously renewed and restored to some
conformity to the Divine Image and Likeness, 2 Pet. 1.4. And have the Promises
of Preservation in a state of Grace; that the good Work begun in them shall not
be so obstructed, either by remaining sinfulness, or the many artifices of the
Tempter; but shall in due time be perfected in them. Those weak beginnings of
Grace through the powerful and abiding presence of the Spirit of Grace shall be
preserved and cherished, till they arrive at the stature of perfect Men in
Christ. Such a Promise was never given to Adam in his state of innocence.

THEY have also Liberty of Access to the Throne of Grace, and encouragement to
expect that they shall obtain mercy and find grace to help in all times of
need, Ephesians. 2.18. Heb. 4.16. How much comfort and sollace does this afford to
gracious Souls? That they have such a wise, powerful and gracious God to go to
in all their wants, fears and temptations? Hence also they have gracious
Communion with God: there are special Seasons wherein he makes them glad with
his Countenance, leads them into the understanding of his Excellencies, shows
them the stability of his Covenant; shines upon their Graces, and fills them
with unspeakable Consolation.

FURTHER, They have the privilege of Adoption, they are honored not only with
the Title of Children, but have the real privilege of such. Joh. 1.12. 2 Cor.
6.18. They have a Child-like Spirit of love, reverence and obedience toward
God. They have his Fatherly care of them while here; and they have a Child's
Portion and Inheritance, reserved for and promised to them. Romans 8.17. And this
is so rich and great, so full and complete as will exceed all their desires and
expectations; nothing shall be wanting to their satisfaction and felicity. On
all these accounts the Privileges of Salvation are great: but were there no
more than this one act of Divine Grace, their full enjoyment of God in a state
of Heavenly Glory; this might abundantly convince us that it is so. To be ever
with the Lord, to behold his face in righteousness, is a thing great, to
astonishment!

I proceed to some APPLICATION of this Proposition.

USE I. HOW greatly concerned Men ought to be for the Salvation of their own
Souls, and with what weight this matter should lie upon their Spirits. It is
the Soul in a principal manner that is the subject of this great Salvation we
have been speaking of, (though it is readily granted that the Body according to
its state and capacity shall share in it,) had not Man been enobled with a Soul
of an Immortal nature, there had been no reason to have expected that such
great things should ever have been done for his Salvation. It was the Soul
especially that was stained and corrupted with sin, that needed to be restored
by sanctifying Grace; it was the Soul that was firstly subject to the
impressions of divine Wrath, and that can have the deepest sense of it. It is
the Soul that is capable to know, love, fear, glorify and enjoy God, and it was
the tender compassions of our Lord Jesus Christ working toward our precious
but perishing Souls which (next to the Glory of his Father) moved him to do
what he has done for the Salvation of them. Has then the Wisdom of the
Father, the Love of the Son, the Grace of the Spirit been thus employed to
bring about Salvation for our lost and dying Souls? How abundantly may it
convince us of the great value of them, and engage to a deep concern for them,
and solicitude that it may be well with them. There Is no design that Men have
to carry on, no business that they have to do, of equal weight with this: and
which deserves such regard from them. Surely would Persons consider these
things as they ought, it would be impossible that their Souls should be
neglected as they are. As means to awaken hereunto, Consider,

(1.) SURELY GOD knows the worth of Souls. He that made them must needs know
the value of them: He knows their nature, their capacity, what vast desires
they are filled with, and what an eternal felicity they are capable of: and
shall we have such mean thoughts of them, as only to think them fit to continue
for the Body, to be employed in searching into the works of Nature or Art, or
much less be enslaved to flesh and sense, that we might be a wiser sort of
Beasts. It were a shame to us to think so, and not turn our Souls to the
contemplation of their nature and use, and to think with our selves, Has God
been thus concerned for the Salvation of them, what a sin and shame will it be
for us to be careless of and unconcerned for them.

(2.) Consider, HOW great danger you are in of losing your Souls, and failing
of the Salvation of them. The Soul as precious as it is may be lost, and too
many are in every Generation of Men; and there is danger of every one of your
Souls in particular, being lost, that are not interested in the great
Salvation, that the Gospel reveals to you. For there is a Sentence of Death and
Condemnatien now lies upon you: this seizes upon you so soon as you become one
of the Children of Adam, Ephesians. 2.3. We are Children of Wrath by nature, and it
continues upon you while you abide in unbelief, Joh. 3.18. None but Christ can
deliver you from it by presenting himself to Justice in your stead. There Is
danger, because of your ignorance of Christ's Excellency, and your natural
aversion and unwillingness through pride, sloth, love of sin, the snares and
allurements of the World, to come unto him, for the Salvation he has
purchased: there is danger in regard of the many and unwearied subtle attempts
that Satan the great Adversary is using to destroy your Souls. He goes about as
a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.6. And he hunts for the
precious life; they are the Souls of Men that he would prey upon. He has
already drawn you into abundance of sins, and is daily tempting you to more,
that he might bring upon you a dreadful and irremedilous destruction: now
should not the danger you are in of losing them awaken your care of them and
thoughtfulness for them.

(3.) Consider, THE loss of your Souls will be very dreadful. Persons have
deeply lamented other losses that they have met with, but who can conceive what
will be the doleful outcries and bitter complaints of them that lose their
Souls? The loss of the Soul does not consist in the annihilation of it; but in
its separation and banishment from God; and in the impressions of divine wrath
upon it, and its being sentenced to the eternal regions of darkness and
despair. How doleful will it be to be excluded out of the Kingdom of Heaven,
when others shall be admitted into it! to be thrust down with infernal Spirits
and damned Souls! when others shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in
the kingdom of God, Mat. 8.12. How doleful will it be to be sentenced to depart
from God! to be excluded from any comfortable sight of God, when others shall
be encircled in the Arms of his love, and admitted to a state of satisfying
Fellowship and Communion with him? How doleful will it be, to be a monument of
Divine Wrath, to feel the weight of revenging Justice, when others shall taste
and experience the love of God, and drink of the river of his Pleasures? These
things are dreadful beyond what our narrow understanding can now comprehend!
and it will yet further inhance these miseries, that when these Spiritual evils
shall light upon impenitent Sinners, there will be no Temporal good things,
such as they now enjoy, to alleviate them, nor to divert their thoughts from
the afflicting sense of them: The rich Man in the Parable, Luke 16.24. is not
able to command a drop of Water to cool his tongue, when horribly scorched in
those Flames: but especially the Eternity of these miseries shows them to be
inexpressibly dreadful! if there were any hope that there might ever be an end
of them, though it were after Thousands or Millions of Years, this would be some
mitigation of them, but this thought, that the Worm never dies, that the Fire
is never quenched, fills the Soul with the most tormenting rage and despair!

USE II. HOW much reason we have to admire the riches of divine Wisdom, Grace
and Love which has provided so great and glorious a Salvation for us. We read,
Psalm. 111.4. He has made his wonderful works to be remembered. God would not be
forgotten in the World, therefore he has set before us evident marks of his
Perfections in his works of Creation and Providence, which are with heedful
observation and intention of mind to be reflected upon. But the Divine
Perfections do yet more illustriously shine forth in the work of Redemption;
and in this especially our thoughts should be employed: that our Souls might be
filled with suitable apprehensions of them. And for this great work God should
ever be Glorious in our Eyes! The Psalmist contemplating the Works of God cries
out with admiration and praise! Psalm. 8.4. What is man that thou art mindful of
him, and the son of man that thou visitest him! So great is the distance
between the Great and Holy God, and mean and sinful Man; that we have reason to
look upon it wonderful condescension that he should express his regards in the
lowest instances of it. So holy Jacob thought, Genesis 32.10. But it is much more
to be admired, that he should employ his Wisdom in such a wonderful contrivance
as that of our Redemption: give his Son to assume our nature, to obey and
suffer and die, that he might redeem and save us, send forth his Almighty
Spirit, to make application of that Redemption notwithstanding the rebellion
and reluctance of our hearts against it: and it should the more endear it to
us, considering that as great and wonderful as it is, it was no more then we
had absolute need of, and had been for ever lost and undone, if infinite
Wisdom, Love and Grace had not been in this way concerned for us. The Scripture
sets it forth by such expressions as may abundantly raise our esteem and
admiration of it. It tells us, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world that he gave
his only begotten Son. And Romans 5.8. God commended his love toward us in that
while we were yet sinners Christ died for us! It calls it riches of Grace:
Treasures of Wisdom: Exceeding Greatness of Power! That it contains such
wonderful displays of the Divine Perfections, that the Angels desire to stoop
down and look into it, 1 Pet. 1.12. that they may have fresh occasions to
excite their Praises. How can we enough bewail the stupidity, earthliness and
sottish inconsiderateness of our hearts? that are looking upon other objects
with esteem and admiration, while this great design of divine Wisdom and Love
is no more admired, esteemed and delighted in by us. But to excite hereunto,
Consider Two or Three Things.

1. THIS is one special way of putting honor upon God for it, to entertain
high and honorable thoughts of it. God's last and highest end in all his Works
is his own Glory, and it seemed good to the divine Wisdom to pitch upon this
way for the manifestation of it; and he will be admired in and for it
throughout the days of Eternity. Now none can doubt but that they, for whom
these great things are done should be peculiarly concerned to give him the
glory of it. Did the blessed God design to glorify himself in this work, to
give occasion to Men and Angels to do it? How unworthy a thing will it be if we
don't fall in with this great design? Now we shall not do this if we content
our selves with some formal verbal acknowledgements of God for it, and han't
hearts deeply affected with it, and don't admire the Divine Perfections shining
in it. If we don't often view with wonder and praise the glory of his Grace and
Love in the Incarnation and Humiliation of the Son of God, the glorious
discoveries of his Holiness, Truth, Justice, Wisdom and Power, the sweet
concurrence of his several Attributes, and the luster they cast one upon
another in the carrying on this great design, and the immense and infinite
Goodness of God that appears in the gracious effects procured for us by it. How
justly offended was God with the People of Israel when they lost a sense of his
Mercy in their deliverance from the Egyptian tyranny; that they remembered not
the multitude of his mercies; nor the great things he had wrought for them. Yet
this was but a temporal Mercy, and a shadow of this glorious Work: therefore
not to admire God in this will be the blackest ingratitude. What greater thing
can be supposed that God should ever do to endear himself to us, and engage the
highest esteem of him, and readiness to put honor upon him, then he has done
in this astonishing work?

2. DUE apprehensions and admirations of the Divine Glory appearing in this
great Work will be greatly subservient to your own comfort. It will be a good
evidence of your interest in the privileges of Redemption. It is ever the
property of those that have been sharers of this deliverance from sin and wrath
to have high thoughts of their Deliverer, and of the ways and means whereby
deliverance has been brought about. 1 Pet. 2.7. Unto you that believe he is
precious. The Proposition is convertible: They to whom Christ is precious do
believe: a high valuation of Christ in his Person, Offices, Benefits, is ever a
concomitant of Faith, and evidential of it. They who have been led into the
spiritual understanding of the Glory of the Person of Christ, the
acceptableness of his Obedience, the sufficiency of his Satisfaction, the glory
of divine Wisdom, in the contrivance and carrying on the work of our
Redemption, will and do undoubtedly close with it, and actually depend upon
this glorious Savior. Men show their dependence upon created helps by their
high thoughts of the sufficiency of them. Such a high esteem of the sufficiency
and excellency of Christ will discover your affiance and complacency in him.
Thus the Apostle discovered his interest in Christ by his transcendent respect
to and esteem of him, Phil. 3.8. I count all things but loss for the excellency
of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. And thus the sincere Christian,
represented by the wise Merchant, is characterized by his transcendent esteem
of Christ, and willingness to part with all for him, Mat. 13.45, 6. The kingdom
of Heaven is like unto a merchant-man seeking goodl^s pearls who when he had
found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had and bought it. So
the Church, Cant. 5.10. Esteems her Beloved as the chief among ten thousand.

USE III. IS the Salvation which the Gospel reveals so Great and Glorious, as
you have heard, Be hence exhorted, to secure an interest in it. This is the
great design of the Revelation of it; this is the unquestionable duty of those
that have the offer of it made to them. If this be not your serious concern and
endeavor, you receive the Grace of God in vain, are nothing the better for the
discovery of it. The Apostle tells us, 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners. It Is no fiction or idle report, but that which is true and certain;
and what sinners have the highest reason to busy themselves about, and be
deeply concerned for. The report of it is justly acceptable and should be
welcome to perishing sinners. Had the deliverance been a great deal less then
it is, it had been worthy of acceptance: had it been only a reprieve from Hell
for some Hundreds of Years, or a release from it after so many Years enduring
the torment and misery of it: this had been worthy of acceptance. Men are
willing to take a great deal of pains for a few Years comfort. If it had been
only some mitigation of the Curse that Christ had obtained for us, much more if
there had been a total release and discharge from the sufferings of it, though
there had been no future happiness ever to have been expected; if sinful Man
might have been annihilated, and made incapable of sin or misery, this
considering what an evil sin is, and what dreadful and astonishing miseries it
brings with it, had been worthy of our thankful acceptance. But when far beyond
these God is pleased to provide a Salvation, whereby we may have not a partial
but a full deliverance from all the effects of Sin, and be made partakers of
peace and friendship with God, to enjoy all needful Spiritual blessings, and to
be sharers with Angels in the everlasting fruition of God in Heavenly Glory!
This ought to be most earnestly sought after by all that have the offer of it
made unto them. Now to urge this matter.

1. Consider, THE absolute necessity of complying with the terms of the Gospel,
and being interested in the Salvation that it offers. Men will take a pretty
deal of pains to procure the conveniences of Life: but universal reason
acknowledges it to be wisdom to take care of things that are necessary,
especially what is absolutely so, that they may have Bread to eat and Raiment
to put on. Men usually say, they must have these, and will stick at nothing in
pinching necessities to obtain them. And can these be more necessary then the
Bread of Life, or the Garments of Salvation? What shall become of you if Christ
ben't a Savior to you? God han't left Men to have their choice of several ways
whereby they may be accepted, justified and saved: but he has limited it to
this; if you don't obtain Salvation upon the terms of the Gospel there is no
hope of being saved at all. There never were but two ways proposed to Man by
which he might obtain Eternal Life, either by Innocence and sinless Obedience;
or by the Righteousness of Jesus Christ: either by the works of the Law, or the
Grace of Christ appearing in the Gospel. The First of these is become
impossible to Man in his now fallen estate: none that understand themselves or
the Law, can pretend to put in any plea for life upon the terms of the First
Covenant. The whole world is become guilty before God, Romans 3.19. and are
obnoxious to the curse and condemnation of a broken Law. By the works of the
law shall no flesh be justified, Gal. 2.16. None of the race of sinful Man, how
blamelesly, soberly, conscienciously soever they have lived, have been able to
put in any plea for life, that might be accepted before God. It is the
righteousness of Christ alone that can profit a guilty creature to procure
absolution, and acceptance for him before God; this only can endure the trial
of God's Tribunal. This the Apostle prized as his invaluable treasure, in
comparison wherewith he accounted all his own, to be but dross and dung, Phil.
3.9. God never justified any of the sinful Children of Men upon any other
account; nor does he give the least encouragement that he ever will. In vain
the^^ are the hopes of life that any sinners cherish, if the Salvation that the
Gospel offers be neglected, and the terms of it disaccepted.

2. Consider, THE compleatness of the Salvation that the Gospel offers, such as
is most suitable to your necessities. There were many hindrances in the way of
Man's Salvation, God was offended and must be satisfied; the Law was broken and
must be vindicated; Satan had usurped a power over sinful Man as a Prisoner and
Captive to him: The World had got possession of his heart and affections: These
must be overcome. But the Wisdom and Love of God has graciously consulted
Man's necessity, and provided a most suitable and complete remedy. Concerning
the Lord Jesus Christ it is said, that He is able to save to the uttermost all
that come unto God by him, Heb. 7.25. to the uttermost of our wants, and the
uttermost of our desires. Offended Justice was fully satisfied by what Christ
suffered, and the authority of the Law was maintained; and the Holiness and
Wisdom of God in establishing of it, displayed in the Obedience and Death of
the Lord Jesus Christ; so that they put in no bar in the way of the Salvation
of a Believer: and Christ by his Merit satisfies Justice, and vindicates the
Law, so by his power he rescues from the hand of Satan, the power of Sin, and
the Snares of the World. He has triumphed over all the powers of Darkness: he
holds a bridle of restraint upon their rage and malice, he takes the prey out
of the hand of the mighty, and rescues the lawful Captive whenever he pleases:
he encourages Believers with this assurance, Romans 16.20. The God of peace shall
bruise Satan under your feet shortly. And comforts them against the snares of
the World with this encouragement, Joh. 26.33. Be of good cheer, I have
overcome the World. There is in Christ Jesus not only a fullness of Merit, but
an overflowing fullness of the Spirit, to sanctify and preserve to a state of
Heavenly Glory, as well as to purchase it for us. Surely such a Savior should
be highly acceptable to your Souls, and most thankfully embraced.

3. THE clearness of the revelation of Gospel Light that you enjoy, should be
an argument to get the understanding of it, and a special interest in the
blessings that it offers. God Was pleased to instruct the Church of Israel in
the Doctrine of Salvation by Jesus Christ, by many Types and Ceremonies which
were shadows of good things to come. Their light was glorious in comparison
with the state of the Pagan World, but obscure in comparison with the
New Testament dispensation. As the Apostle at large shows, 2 Cor. 3.7, etc. Now
Old Testament Prophecies are interpreted in their accomplishment. Types
unveil^d in their Antitype. Things that were dark are now made plain. Now light
has broken forth with great evidence and authority, so that it is said, Light
and Immortality are brought to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.19. On this
account our Savior says to his Disciples, Mat. 13.16, 17. Blessed are your
eyes for they see, and your ears for they hear. For verily I say unto you that
many prophets and righteous men have desired to see these things which ye see,
and have not seen them, and to hear these things which ye hear, and have not
heard them. Now what can you reasonably think is the expectation of God in this
dispensation? Surely not that you should turn it into wantonness; that you
should indulge sin or cherish a spirit of presumption: but that it be
diligently and thankfully improved, that you may be led into the understanding
of the Glory of Christ in his Natures, Person, and Offices: might have right
apprehensions of the riches of divine Grace and Love: might have your desires
after this Salvation suitably enflamed and directed: that after such wonderful
Grace has appeared, you might not perish in your sins.

4. GOD graciously tenders this Salvation to you, and is still persuading your
acceptance of it. There is a special Providence of God directing the
dispensation of the Gospel, both as to the times and places where it shall be
afforded. The Apostles Journeys were ordered by the Spirit, as you may see,
Acts 8.26, -- Chap. 16.7. Now by the gracious designation and choices of
Providence it is brought and laid before you. It may be said to you as was
sometime to them, Act. 13.26. To you is the word of this Salvation sent. You
are often acknowledging it as a fruit of special Mercy, that God has brought
it to you; that your time is a time of Light and Grace. An accepted time and a
day of Salvation! And great reason there is to acknowledge the distinguishing
Grace of God in this matter toward you: when so many are to be found in the
World covered with ignorance and barbarism, and what Superstitions and Heresies
prevail even in Christianized parts of the World. But especially the
condescension of God is astonishing, that he has not contented himself barely
to reveal it, but to press and urge your acceptance of it, with the most proper
and forcible Arguments. Yea to direct his Ambassadors to entreat Sinners to
accept the offer that is made; as in that wonderful expression, 2 Cor. 5.20. As
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead he ye reconciled
to God. The great and glorious God who neither wants the friendship or service
of any of his Creatures is pleased to become a suitor for them, to use the most
melting arguments with them, to pursue their own happiness; by accepting the
Grace provided in Christ. Now let your own Judgment and Consciences determine
whether it ben't a most becoming and reasonable thing, that you should put a
due value upon the offer! that you may not be guilty of receiving the Grace of
God in vain; and ill requiting of such great and astonishing Mercy. God does
not offer it to you out of necessity, but out of choice and by way of trial. So
that both his Mercy and your own Interest should oblige you to accept of it. If
you slight God's offers, he can find those that will be glad of them. As the
Apostle said to them, Acts 28.28. The Salvation of God is sent unto the
Gentiles, and they will hear it. And especially should this Argument prevail,
considering how long this offer has been neglected: how often Gospel offers
have been repeated without success. How long the arms of Mercy have been
stretched out in vain to you: how many Calls have been refused: how ill you
have requited the Lord for his Mercy. Shall it still be so? Can you find in
your hearts to tire out Divine Patience, to trample upon Divine Mercy, and to
refuse your own happiness, to hearken to the insnaring delusions of the grand
Enemy of your Souls, notwithstanding all the care God has taken to promote the
Salvation of them? Who can express the sin and folly of refusing Salvation thus
graciously provided and so freely offered and brought to your doors? It was
this gave occasion to that passionate lamentation of Christ over Jerusalem,
because they knew not the time of their visitation, Luke 19.42.

5. YOUR neglect of Salvation will be very sinful and inexcusable. The
sinfulness of it is manifest in its contrariety to the express declaration of
the Divine Will discovering your duty; and its aggravated by the clearness of
Light and fullness of Grace manifested in the Gospel. What more can be desired
to persuade and convince the judgment and consciences of Men of the truth of
the Gospel, and of the sincerity of God in the offer of it, than what God has
done? And how inexcusable then will be your sin if you neglect it? You cannot
pretend you did not know of it, or that Salvation was to be expected in any
other way, or that there wanted sufficient assurance of the truth of the
Gospel; or that you had not a warrant to look for an interest in the blessings
of it. Much less will you be able to plead that you had business of greater
weight and necessity to busy your time and thoughts about: that you had no
leisure to apply your self to it. Every mouth will be stopped in the great
Trial. But Gospel Sinners will be most of all inexcusable and self-condemned.
It is certain that if you cannot satisfy your Consciences now, you will be much
less able to clear your selves before God hereafter.

I proceed to the Fourth Proposition. PROPOSITION IV. HOW Great and Glorious
soever the Salvation is that the Gospel reveals, it is by too many Neglected.
THE Apostle evidently intimates this by the supposal that he makes of the
fearful hazard that will be consequent upon it. This is a truth too frequently
obvious to experience, that there is often ground to renew the Prophets
complaint, Isai. 53.1. Who has believed our report. From one Age and
Generation to another it has been thus, among those that the Gospel has been
Preached to. This is a dismal proof of the deplorable state of Man by the Fall,
which has not only brought guilt and wrath upon him, but a fearful blindness
and obstinacy; a most wretched aversion from God; that though he is perishing
for want of Salvation, yet when it is brought him, and most graciously tendered,
he has not a heart to accept it and close with the offer of it. This gave
occasion to those complaints of our Savior, Mat. 23.37. How often would I have
gathered you, and ye would not. Joh. 5.40. Life was to be had by Christ but
they cared not for it, would not come to Christ for it: it is too much the
spirit of Men still. Salvation is provided by Christ, revealed in the Gospel,
offered to Men in the Ministry, urged upon them by the motions of the Holy
Spirit, and the voice of their own Consciences. But yet there are abundance who
are nothing the better for it, who obtain no peace or pardon, no grace or
comfort by it. Now this arises from the neglect of it: not improving the
opportunities and offers of it that are afforded them.

UNDER this Proposition it may be showed,

I. THAT it is so, or that many to whom the offers of Salvation are made do
neglect it.

II. WHENCE it comes to pass, that they do so.

1. THAT many do neglect the Salvation that be Gospel Offers. This is the Case,

1. OF those that slight and disregard the offers of it, when made to them. We
read of such, Mat. 22.5. Who when invited to partake in the privileges of the
Gospel, made light of it; heard it as a matter of little use and concern to
them. There are too many careless inconsiderate sleepy hearers of the Word;
that hear as if they heard not, don't seriously regard the Messages sent them
by God from day to day: they don't attend to the things that are spoken as such
whereon their eternal welfare depends. It Is strange to see what ignorance there
is in many about the necessary Doctrines of Salvation that are often inculcated
upon them; and what insensibleness and sottishness there is in many more, of
the worth of that Salvation which the Gospel reveals. This comes to pass from
their not minding and weighing the truths that are delivered to them. How many
live as if they were only born for time, and the interests and pleasures of the
present Life, and had nothing to do for Eternity? Hence they spend their days
in mirth and jollity, their lives are a continual diversion, from one carnal
pleasure and delight to another, their thoughts run continually upon these
things, that they regard no proposals that are made to them of things that
refer to their Eternal safety and welfare. Are sottishly ignorant of the state
their Souls are in. A spirit of deep sleep is fallen upon them: they will own
that they are Sinners; but their being so is no burden, no terror to them. And
hence though they hear of a Savior; and all his glorious sufficiency is set
before them to remove their guilt and restore their Souls. Yet they mind it
not, lay no weight upon it.

2. OF those that don't seriously make it their concern to get a right
understanding of the way of Salvation, which the Gospel reveals, and to be
interested in it. They truly neglect Salvation that are not concerned to be
saved. That don't set themselves in good earnest to understand the terms and
method in which it may be obtained. Many have a superficial knowledge of the
Doctrine of the Gospel, being all their days educated under it: yet are
negligent in improving it. They have no delight to employ their minds in
meditating on it, or to know the Spirit, and feel the power of it upon their
hearts: don't by serious consideration set themselves to get an understanding
of the excellency and suitableness of it to their condition, and of what
importance it is to them: how much the command of God and a respect to their
own safety and welfare obliges them to hearken to the proposals of it, and to
make it their present serious concern to have a special and real interest in
it; that Christ with all his Benefits may be theirs; and they may be sharers in
the glorious privileges of Pardon, Peace, Holiness, and a Title to Eternal
Life by him. Some have a desire to be saved, now and then have a good pang upon
them, express some concern about it under some awakening Truth, or Providence
that they meet with: but for the most part it is a matter of indifferency to
them; their minds are intent upon other matters, and they can content
themselves to live in a state of estrangement from God, without any interest in
the graces of his Spirit, or any well-grounded hope in his Promises. That which
should be their grand concern, and pursued with the greatest application of
mind is laid aside, and other things are preferred before it. They cannot tell
how to be contented to want Corn and Cattle, and Lands, or such worldly
interests, conveniences and honors that they see others enjoy: but they can
bear it well enough to want spiritual and eternal mercies. These things not
being obvious to sense, seem to them like the Poets Elizeum, but as a dream or
fancy.

3. IT is also the case of those that thrust it from them, and put away the
offer of it as not belonging to them. There are two sorts of Persons here
comprehended,

(1.) THOSE that purposely delay and put off this grand concern of securing
Salvation to themselves by closing with the offers of the Gospel: and leave it
as a matter of future care, presume there is no present danger that their Souls
are in; but that they may safely indulge their security and sloth, and yield to
other designs. They will grant the work of Faith to be necessary, they would
not dare to die without it; but they see not a present necessity of it, but as
Felix dealt with his Convictions under the Apostles Preaching; deferred them to
a more convenient season; so they put off this great duty of believing in
Christ, 'till some other businesses are dispatched, or 'till the approach of
Death. They truly neglect the Salvation of the Gospel that neglect to improve
the Season allotted to them for the obtaining of it.

(2.) THOSE that are under the power of an unbelieving heart. It Is a fruit of
the natural corruption of the heart, to discredit and question God's Truth, as
well as to resist his Authority. And Men are very prone when they hear of the
abundant Grace of God in Christ toward Sinners, to question the truth of the
report, to doubt whether the thing be so or not; to contract the infiniteness
of God's Mercy and Christ's Merit: and to look upon the offers made them too
great to be true. They are ready to measure God by themselves, and to think him
prone to Revenge and slow to Mercy: their guilt sills them with jealousies and
suspicions of God; they look upon him as one hard to be entreated, and that
Mercy is with great difficulty wrested from him; they must do some great thing
to procure it, and move God to the exercise of it, or they may not expect it: or
though some others whose sins han't been of such a heinous nature, so
circumstanc'd and aggravated as theirs have been, may hope for favor from God
and acceptance in Christ, yet think they may not dare to do it; they don't look
upon themselves to be Persons intended in the offer that is made; that it would
be too much boldness and arrogance in them to venture upon it; they dare not
stay on Christ as a sure Anchor against all the tossings of fear and
temptation, arising from the sense of their own guilt and unworthiness: but are
like a Ship tossed upon the waves. This is not so openly frequent among us as
Presumption and Security, there being more Presumers than Despairers. But yet
it is the case of many who spend their days in fruitless complaints and
dejection of Spirit; who entertain and cherish jealousies of God, and of the
authority and divinity of the Scriptures, and of the sufficiency of the Grace
and Power of Christ, as though there were not shelter enough under his Wings to
defend them.

II. I proceed to show, Whence, it is that so many neglect this Great
Salvation. There are abundance of blameable causes to which it might be
assigned.

I shall only hint at the more General.

1. A prevailing love to some Lust. The Lusts of Men frequently have a great
interest in their affections, Partly, from their suitableness to their corrupt
natures; partly, through custom in the service of them: and partly, from the
many carnal advantages which they propose to themselves by them. Men's lusts are
dear to them. They are represented in Scripture sometimes by a right hand or a
right eye. Hence they roll them as a sweet morsel under their tongues. They
hide and spare them, and will not let them go. Men will venture abundance from
their love to them. It Is out of love to their lusts that some will blast their
Reputation. Others will ruin their Estates; grieve their Friends, wound their
Consciences, impair their Bodies: and it is from their excessive love to them
that many will expose their Souls to perish for ever. They are not willing that
Christ should be a Jesus to them to save them from their sins; that he should
exert the power of his Grace in mortifying their lusts; they could be glad to
be saved from Hell, but they cannot bear to part from some sweet bosom sins;
they are got into a way of Wantonness, or a way of Intemperance, or a way of
Dishonesty, or a way of Worldliness, and the profit or pleasure of these lusts
blinds them. They are hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. They could be
glad of Christ to pacify their consciences, but they must have their lusts to
gratify their corrupt and carnal affections. They are not willing that Christ
should do the whole work of a Savior for them, which is in effect to refuse
that he should do any part of it: For the receiving of and submitting to Christ
in all his Offices is a condition indispensibly requisite to our partaking of
the benefit of his Sufferings and Mediation. Now Men's natural aversion
hereunto, and their strong and fixed love to sin is the reason why abundance of
Persons neglect and refuse the Salvation which the Gospel offers to them.

2. AN immoderate desire of and an inordinate complacency in the lawful
enjoyments of the World, is another cause of it. Worldly comforts are present
and sensible, such things as Men find a want of, and taste sweetness in:
therefore the temptations from them is the more forcible: Their cares for the
present life, makes Men neglect a future. Things of Time are so pressing and
urgent, that Eternal Mercies are but little accounted of. This is represented
to us, Luke 14.17, -- 20. This was then, and still is the great hindrance to
Men's prizing and accepting of Christ. Fears of Poverty prevail more upon them
than fears of Damnation. Desires of Grandeur and Pomp of living, or to equal or
outshine their Neighbors in Riches and Honors is of more value to them then
to have their Souls adorned with Grace, and pollish'd and prepared for Glory.
Their heads and hands are so full of their worldly designs, and they are so
wholly swallowed up in the thoughts and cares about it, that they have no heart
or time to think of the state of their Souls, or to provide for the future
welfare of them; they live as if they were born only to mind the interests of
back and belly, and after a while like the beasts to perish, and be forgotten
for ever. Hence it comes to pass that many who have some Convictions of the
guilt of sin, and the dangerous state of their Souls, and their need of Christ,
quench and suppress these Convictions from worldly considerations. They cannot
listen to them till this or the other design and business they have in hand for
the World, is dispatched. It Is the prevalency of this spirit that makes some
Men neglect duties of Worship in their Families or Closets; and to omit
spiritual opportunities that might be for Soul advantage; that makes others
cold and dead and dull and formal in what they do in Religion. Something is
carried on as the World will give leave, in a sleepy, customary way, that is
neither pleasing to God nor profitable to themselves. This worldly spirit is as
great a hindrance to the Souls of Men in this great duty as any one thing seems
to be; and its to be feared is the principal cause of it at this day.

3. IT arises also from causeless prejudices which Man take up against the way
of Salvation, or the means of the application of it. Our Savior ( Mat. 11.6.)
pronounces such blessed as are not offended in him; too many are, and thereby
further their own misery. Some take offense at the strict and self-denying
terms of the Gospel; they are loath to sell all for the Pearl of great price.
They hear they must part with every lust, and they may be put upon it to part
with their dearest enjoyments for Christ's sake. This they are loath to engage
themselves to. Some are prejudiced at the strictness of a Spiritual Life. They
would have more liberty than Christ will allow. Christ does not abridge Men of
any lawful liberty, but some Men will take a licentious liberty. The great
objection that abundance have against Christ is, that they will not have him to
rule over them, Luk 10.27. The Laws of Christ are too strict for them. Some are
prejudiced at the Falls and Miscarriages of some Professors of Religion, and
this indeed is a fatal rock. We have a Woe pronounced to the World because of
offenses! Mat. 18.7. It is indeed no reasonable vindication of those that
neglect the Profession of Christ and Subjection to him, because some that own
him carry it badly; for we are forewarned that there will be Hypocrites in the
visible Church. The Laws of Christ give no countenance to these misbehaviours;
but yet too many nourish a base and vile opinion of Religion upon this account,
and reject the proposals of it: and not only the loose and vain take offense at
it, but sometimes those that have had some impressions of Religion upon their
hearts grow shy of it upon this account. Some are prejudiced against the
Instruments by whom the offer of Salvation is brought to them. Either some
natural or moral imperfection they have to object against them, their outward
meanness or infirmities; or it may be some personal grudge they have taken up
against them; they don't regard the Message because they slight and dis-esteem
the Messenger that brings it. Thus the Jews were stumbled at the outward
meanness of Christ and the Apostles, because they were Men of no note and fame
in the World.

4. IT comes to pass from the influence of bad Examples. Ones neglect and
carelessness is a temptation to another. There are some Seasons wherein there
are fresh and plentiful effusions of the Spirit of God upon a place: at such a
Season many will be pressing into the Kingdom of God. The zeal of some provokes
others, then Persons will be helpful to awaken and quicken one another. But
again there are times of great deadness and security, few that have any real
pressing sense upon their hearts of their need of Salvation. At such a time Men
do exceedingly harden one another. They are ready thus to reason with
themselves; such and such are careless about it, and think they may also
without any hazard, especially when those do so whom they esteem Men of
Prudence, and whose Judgment they value in other cases. This is a Temptation to
them, to think that if it were a matter of such dangerous consequence to
neglect it, such Persons would never do so. It was made an objection against
the reception of Christ in his time. Joh. 7.48. Have any of the Rulers or the
Pharisees believed on him? Men are very much led by Example, especially by
those of the same standing with them. This is a Temptation unquestionably to
many Young Persons; they see their Companions are light, vain and careless
Persons. Hereby they are emboldned in their Sins, and in the neglect of the
Grace offered them by Christ.

5. IT is in many upon the account of a legal temper and spirit that prevails
in them. Such a spirit there is in Men naturally, and indeed universally
inclining them to seek Justification by their own works. Every Man comes into
the World under the obligation of that Covenant, and naturally runs to it for
Life: is attempting to do something that may answer his obligation, and abate
the rigor and severity of the Law that is in force against him; and partly,
from the pride of his heart whereby he is ready to overvalue his own services,
and think them much better than really they are. A spirit of self-love is apt
to blind Men, that they cannot see their own defects, and it is a thing Men are
exceeding prone to, to choose to live upon their own poor stock rather then to
be beholden to others for relief in their necessities: they had rather have a
few rags of their own then be beholden to Christ for the Robes of his
Righteousness: And it is partly from ignorance, not understanding the
excellency and sufficiency of Christ's Righteousness, or its acceptableness to
God, unto the end for which it is proposed; not understanding or being
satisfied with the glorious design of God to exalt his Grace in the free
Justification of a Sinner by the imputation of Christ's Righteousness alone,
without the works of the Law. This was the case of the Jews at the first
Preaching of the Gospel, Romans 10.3. No Doctrine was more disrelish'd by them
than this of Justification by the Righteousness of Christ through Faith. And it
is this Doctrine that the great enemy of God's Grace, both in the times of
Popery, and since by other Instruments has endeavored to obscure and resist;
and he finds the corrupt hearts of Men ready to fall in with this design. It is
the case of awakened Sinners, who are deeply concerned for Salvation to
withstand the way which the Gospel reveals by Christ; and so reject the promise
for want of suitable qualifications in themselves. They would fain get better
hearts, better frames and affections, do duties in a better manner: if once
they could prepare themselves for Christ, they would venture upon him: but for
want of such preparations they neglect and are afraid to do it.

6. IT arises also from the influence and activity that Satan has to blind and
darken the minds of Men, and set them against this duty. To this the Apostle
ascribes it. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. If our Gospel be hid it is hid to them that are
lost, in whom the god of this world has blinded the minds of them that believe
not. Satan is the great promoter of all sin, the enemy of all righteousness.
But he especially engages himself and uses his utmost policy and power to
harden Men in unbelief, and keep them off from a due closure with Christ upon
the terms of the Gospel, and he uses abundance of methods to bring about this
design, by suggesting many carnal reasonings and cavils against the truth;
perverting the truth to the prejudice of Men's Souls, by quenching convictions,
following them with temptations to procrastinate and delay the matter; or
flattering them with vain hopes of the goodness of their estate, because of
their orderly lives, frequency in duties, religious affection, reformation, and
the like; that they need not trouble themselves about a better righteousness:
Or tempting them to take up with an image of Faith instead of that which is
saving, to rest upon their good desires of being saved by Christ, while they
neglect to venture their Souls upon him, on the encouragement of the Promise
From such causes as these arises the too great and common neglect of the
Salvation offered to Men by the Gospel. I proceed to the IMPROVEMENT of this
Head.

USE I. THIS shows what cause of Humiliation and Lamentation there is upon this
account, that the Salvation provided by Christ, and offered in the Gospel is so
much under-valued and neglected in our days. The Mercy and Grace of God has
signally appeared toward us, in giving us the privileges of the Gospel, which
are denied to abundance of others in the World; and the Salvation herein
revealed and proposed has been already showed; the blessings and Promises of
it are of a spiritual and eternal nature, and therefore of highest importance
to the Souls of Men. The things which Christ tenders to sinners by it, are
reconciliation with God, remission of Sin, redemption from the curse of the
Law, a title to Eternal Life, and to all the felicity that the Eternal Fruition
of God in a state of Heavenly Glory can afford; but how few comparatively prize
it, regard it, and are concerned to have an interest in it. The glad tidings of
the Gospel grow stale and common in our times; it is other News that Men
generally listen after, it is the world and worldly enjoyments and interests
that Men are enquiring after, and busying themselves about. The favor of God,
and Eternal Life seem to be small and inconsiderable things in comparison with
the great expectations they have from the World. The prevailing of such a
spirit calls for our Humiliation, and should be for a Lamentation, and that on
several Accounts.

1. ON account of the greatness of the Sin. It is a Sin that has the greatest
ingratitude unkindness in it: it is a sin against the freest Love and richest
Mercy that ever was manifested to the World, and therefore must needs have a
great deal of provocation in it. The Apostle in our Context, and Heb. 10.28, 9.
aggravates it by a comparison taken from sins against the Law. The bold
transgressions of the Law were punished with the Death of the transgressor; but
the Apostle puts a how much more! unto the voluntary transgressions against the
Gospel: and in proportion the slighting and neglecting the Grace tendered in
the Gospel, will bring an answerable degree of punishment: even wrath to the
uttermost! What wonderful love was it that when the whole World was become
guilty before God, and nothing but certain Death could have been expected by
any of the sinful Children of Men: That then the kindness and love of God
should so appear, as to send his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, to be
a Surety and Sacrifice for us? to be made sin, and a curse for us, to take upon
himself the obligation we were under to discharge it in our stead, in such a
costly way as by the offering of himself to make expiation for our Sin? and not
only to procure deliverance from sin and all the penal effects of it, but to
purchase and offer Eternal Life and Glory in the World to come: That God should
single out you to be the subjects of these offers, what astonishing Grace is
this! How great then is the ingratitude to slight, disregard and neglect the
offer of it? that you should carry your self so toward God as if his Image and
Favor were things of little worth! toward Christ as if he spent his Life and
endured his Sufferings for things of very little value and account? not worth
your esteem and acceptance! How highly are Men offended often times when their
favors are slighted. And how much more may the blessed God, when such rich and
glorious offers as he makes, are not regarded by the Children of Men.

2. ON account of the sad effects this sin is attended with, even in this
world, and those judgments that it brings with it. When the Jews rejected
Christ, God destroyed that Nation by astonishing Judgments. God has for a long
time been pleading a controversy with this Land, showing his displeasure by
many awful humbling rebuk^s in his Providence; and undoubtedly there are many
things which God has been provoked by, and been testifying against us for: The
Unrighteousness, Oppression, Fraud, Falsehood, Intemperance, Wantonness,
Uncleanness, Prophanations of God's Sabbaths, Murmurings, Pride, Contempt of
Superiors; and other evils that too frequently break out: But there is reason
to conclude that one main branch of God's controversy with us, is the not
prizing and accepting the Grace of Christ offered in the Gospel. Our Blood has
been spilt as water upon the ground, because the Blood of Christ has been so
lightly esteemed. The jealousy of God has been provoked to blast those things
which have been idolized and preferred before Christ, and the Grace of God by
him. There is the greater ground to conclude that God is angry for this upon a
double account. Partly, because of the general prevalency of this sin. As to
many other sins there are but few comparatively chargeable with them. But the
neglecters of the Great Salvation preached to, and pressed upon Men in the
Gospel are many; they are to be found in all our Towns, from one end of the
Land to another. It is the prevailing sin of our days. We may take up the
Prophets complaint, Isai. 53.1. Who has believed our report? The minds and
thoughts of the most are intent upon other things. The general cry is, What
shall we eat, What shall we drink? etc. Not, What must we do to be saved? And
partly, because of the influence and tendency that this has to draw Men to,
and harden them in other sins. Did Persons duly understand and consider how
great a blessing Salvation from sin is, and improve the help offered them by
Christ for that end, it would be their care to watch against it, to mortify it,
to resist and suppress the motions of it, and not indulge and cherish it as now
they do. But this neglect of the Grace of Christ and over-valuing the things of
the World disposes Men to Irreligion and Unrighteousness, to entrench upon
God's Sabbaths, to omit Duties of Worship in their Closets or Families; or to
be slight and superficial in them, to neglect spiritual Opportunities, to grow
weary of God's Ordinances because of the labor and charge of them. It disposes
Men to acts of unrighteousness, to defraud, overreach and injure their
Neighbors, to break their Promises, to be uncharitable and covetous. All must
bow to this admired idol. This sin is fruitful and not only produces abundance
of other sins, but keeps Men from the only remedy and preservative from all
sin; and is in its nature most vile, as being opposite to what is God's
greatest design, to exalt the Glory of his Grace toward sinners by Jesus
Christ. So that it is no wonder that the anger of God is so awfully manifested
on account the of it.

3. IN regard of the certain and fearful danger such Persons are in of Eternal
Judgments. It is a sin that not only provokes God to shorten Men's lives, to
put an end to their opportunities of Gospel Light and Grace, to bring many
outward Calamities upon Men in this World, but it will also bring upon them
fearful and unavoidable destruction in the World to come. If this way of
Salvation be neglected, there is no remedy, no way to escape remaining for
guilty sinners: God has provided no other Sacrifice for sin: and if you
continue impenitent and unbelieving, that does most certainly cut you off from
any claim to the benefits of Christ. The Law of Faith, like that of the Medes
and Persians may no man reverse. He that believes not the son, shall not see
life. Except Men repent, they must perish. Unbelief is eminently the mortal sin
that certainly damns sinners, and leaves them to have Judgment without Mercy.
It is not the preparation of a sovereign remedy that cures a disease, but the
application of it. The Righteousness and Spirit of Christ however sufficient
for the ends to which they are provided; yet they convey no pardon life and
comfort to any Soul, that is not by Faith united to Christ. It is not from any
defect of Mercy in God or Merit in Christ that so many perish, but from their
obstinate refusal of it. That precious Blood which in itself speaks better
things then the Blood of Abel, calls for Mercy upon penitent and believing
sinners, calls aloud for vengeance and damnation upon the heads of the
unbelieving and impenitent; and such must expect the amazing and terrible
executions of them. Now how greatly to be lamented is this, that the last end
of so many of the miserable Children of Adam will be to perish for ever?
Temporal miseries that some endure are very sorrowful; the spiritual Judgments
that others undergo are more sorrowful: but Eternal evils vastly and
inconceivably exceed both. To see Men and Women endued with rational and
understanding Souls, capable of eternal Blessedness and Glory, and under the
gracious offers of it, insensible of their need of it, and regardless of the
Grace and Love that has done so much to procure it; miserably infatuated and
hardened in the love of sinful pleasures, and unperswadable by all counsels;
voluntarily rushing forward to their own amazing and eternal ruin, justly
calls for our deepest Lamentation.

4. THEY are to be lamented over on this account also that there is great hazard
their opportunities for avoiding the miseries they are in danger of, and
obtaining the mercies offered them, will quickly be gone. God declares to those
whom he privileges with the light and liberty of the Gospel as, 2 Cor. 6.1.
Behold! now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation! And calls upon
them to hear his voice while it is called to day, Heb. 3.7. But he lets Men
know that though in respect of clearness of Light the Gospel dispensation that
they are under is a Day, yet in respect to the shortness of it, it is but a
Day, a Day that will quickly terminate, and is continually wasting. The glass
of Patience is continually running down and will soon run out: whether sinners
improve it or no, its continually flying from them; many through their
carelessness have lost much of it already: some are got to an advanced age, and
with respect to nature, cannot expect a much longer opportunity; and some by a
course of sinning have increased their natural obstinacy. Others have
contracted evil habits, or brought themselves under Spiritual Judgments, and
have provoked God to put a period to them. Now the loss of such an opportunity
is of doleful consequence. It was the consideration of this that drew out our
Savior's Tears over Jerusalem, Luke 16.44. That she knew net the time of her
visitation. It is a very melancholy consideration to see multitudes of
Mankind, daily sliding as it were upon the stream of Time into the ocean of
Eternity, and in the mean while full of sottish carelessness, security and
sloth, not considering whither they are going, or now they shall be disposed of
in that Eternal state!

USE II. OF Examination, to stir you up to Consider, Whether you are not guilty
of this Sin of neglecting the Great Salvation which is revealed and offered to
you in the Gospel. The commonness of this evil, and the dangerousness of it may
justly awaken all to a due solicitude in this matter. Few will acknowledge
their guilt herein; and many are ready to deceive themselves because of some
common effects of illumination, conviction or comfort, that the Gospel has had
upon them; go away with false hopes that all shall be well.

THE great ENQUIRY therefore that I would propose to you to put to your own
Souls, is, Whether you have been brought thankfully to receive the blessings
offered, and heartily to submit to the terms propounded in the Gospel? For
surely they who don't accept the Salvation tendered do neglect it. How
honorably soever Men speak of the Gospel and privileges of it, yet if their
hearts are not bowed to consent to the offers it makes, and submit to the
duties it requires, they do neglect it. A few Particulars may be insisted on
for your help in this trial.

1. IT you have received and accepted the Grace offered in the Gospel, you do
indeed value the privileges of it. Both Christ himself and the Benefits of
Christ are precious to Believers. The privileges of Salvation are various, and
some of them some carnal Persons may seem to esteem. But to value them all, or
indeed rightly to value any, is one distinguishing character of true Believers.
Peace with God is one of the privileges of the Gospel. Carnal Men would be
glad that God would not hurt them, but as for any real esteem of his Favor, or
rejoicing in his Friendship, prizing his Presence or Fellowship with him, this
they are strangers to: but a gracious Soul values this, and accordingly prefers
the favor of God above the increases of Corn and Wine, Psalm. 4.5, 6, 7. Yea
accounts his loving kindness to be better than Life, Psalm. 63.2. The friendship
of God is more to them then the smiles of all the World. The sense they have of
the excellency of it is the great inducement to a holy walking before God, and
watchfulness against any thing that may make a breach between God and them, and
provoke him to hide his Face from them. Again, Liberty of Access to God, as to
a Father in Christ, that they may come and pour out their hearts unto him in
all their straits and necessities, this is a privilege which gracious Souls
have an high esteem of, and do thankfully improve. Hence their approaches to
God are not the effects of slavish fear, but of love, they come not into God's
presence as forced and constrained, but as delighting in it, that they may
express a sense of his Grace toward them, and may obtain further
manifestations and experiences of it. Again, Another Privilege that Believers
have by Christ and which they are wont highly to value is, Deliverance from the
reigning power and dominion of sin. Romans 6.14. This is a principal part of that
Liberty which they enjoy by Christ at present, that by his Spirit he enables
them to mortify the deeds of the body, Romans 8.13. They are made partakers of a
new nature by the Spirit of Christ effectually working in them, which inclines
them not only to avoid and resist, but to hate sin, and to love and prize
holiness. And as they are improving the consideration of the Death of Christ
and his design in Redemption as arguments to engage their hearts against it; so
they have recourse to the Spirit of Christ for direction and help in the course
of their duty, and for assistance in their conflicts and temptations: and it is
their comfort that the Salvation which is begun in them in this respect shall
in due time be perfected; glad would they be of the perfection of holiness, and
abolition of sin: and even now while they groan being burdened, with the
remains of this body of sin, they rejoice in Christ as one that has engaged
for them, and will give in due time complete victory. Romans 7.24, 5. Awakened
sinners would be glad to be freed from the punishment of sin, but they that are
truly gracious would be delivered from the being of Sin.

2. IF you have accepted the Salvation of the Gospel you will fetch your best
and sweetest comforts from the hopes of it. This character the Apostle gives of
Believers, Romans 5.2. That they rejoce in-hope of the glory of God. It is
lawful, yea a duty to rejoice in God on account of the present effects of his
goodness that we partake of, but the chief joy of a Believer is in God through
Christ, and in the hopes of that perfect and satisfying felicity that shall be
enjoyed with God in a state of Heavenly Glory. The promises hereof are their
Songs in the House of their Pilgrimage; these lighten their burdens, and
relieve them under their wants and trials and distresses here: they reckon with
the Apostle, Romans 8.18. That the sufferings of this present time are not worthy
to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in them. They are often
refreshing themselves with the meditations of the greatness and goodness and
certainty of the (...) ^dmiring the Mercy and Love that has made such glorious
preparations for such mean and vile and unworthy creatures; are waiting and
longing for the Day of Redemption, and groaning under their present distance
from God, and the unsuitableness of their hearts to the glory and blessedness
of the state that is prepared for them. The temper of the heart is as much
discovered by what it rejoices in the hope of, as in the possession of. Carnal
Men show the carnality of their hearts by the carnal expectations that they
feed themselves with, as well as by their complacency in what they enjoy, as,
Luke 12.19.20. Gracious Souls discover the heavenliness of their temper by
their seeking the things that are above, and groaning after the perfecting of
their Redemption. Carnal Men may desire Heaven as their Refuge, when they can
be here no longer, but Godly Men desire it as their Inheritance.

3. IF you have accepted the Salvation of the Gospel, you do then make it your
care to answer the design of it. 'Twill be your serious aim and endeavor to
walk worthy of the Lord unto all well pleasing. It was none of Christ's design
to countenance licenciousness, to purchase an indulgence to Men's lusts. It is
a vile abuse of the Gospel they are guilty of, who take encouragement from it
to continue in sin on this hope, that the Mercy of God and Merit of Christ,
will bear them out. God had quite another design in revealing his Grace to
sinners in the Gospel. We are told what it was, Tit. 2.11, 12. The grace of God
which brings salvation has appeared to all men, teaching us that denying
ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly righteously and godly in
this present world. Whoever are taught it effectually, and brought to
understand the truth as it is in Christ Jesus, do learn this by it; they see a
glory in this method of divine Grace, as it carries the strongest arguments
against sin, and the most forcible inducements to holiness and purity and
righteousness, in the course of their lives; and as they have been made
sensible of their misery by reason of the power as well as guilt of sin; so
they esteem it their privilege that they have the offer and promise of Grace
by Christ to take away the power of sin; and to enable and assist them to walk
in newness of life. Hence the Scripture does so frequently insist upon such
signs of Faith; as being the sure and infallible marks of it. They who are made
partakers of life by Christ do discover it in righteousness, truth, and a care
of universal holiness in the course of their lives. Consider therefore, is this
your spirit? Do you see a beauty in holiness? Do you love the divine Law
because of the purity of it? Do you improve Promises, Ordinances and
Providence to the advancement of holiness in your hearts and lives? Are you
really thankful for any advance and progress in it, and mourning for
deficiencies in it? After Falls into sin are you in haste to repair to Christ
for recovery by giving you repentance and pardoning Mercy? And to renew your
watchfulness against sin, and a more strict dependence upon him, that his power
might rest upon you, and his strength be perfected in your weakness? This is
the Spirit of Believers.

USE III. TO Advise all such as have neglected the Salvation that has been
offered them in the Gospel now to embrace it. Now hearken to the proposals God
is making to you, in order to your present comfort, and future happiness. That
Caution of the Apostle deserves to be often thought upon, Heb. 12.15. Looking
diligently least any man fail of the grace of God. Every Man in particular had
need be concerned that he don't fail of an interest in the Grace of God, or
come short of Salvation. The revelation of the Grace of God to Sinners in the
Gospel is in it self a Mercy; but if the Doctrine of the Gospel be not believed
and understood, nor the Mercies it offers accepted, it will eventually prove an
aggravation of Sin, and a heightening of Judgment.

I shall offer a few Word of Advice.

1. SET your selves to shake off Presumption and Security. From the prevailency
and power of these it is that Salvation is so much neglected. Men presume they
have time enough before them, presume upon the Patience of God, the continuance
of Means, the assistances of the Spirit: all which are utterly uncertain, and
not at their command. Presume upon their good purposes and resolutions; not
understand the deceitfulness and desperate wickedness of their own hearts; and
through these presumptions indulge a spirit of security and sloth: have no heart
to take pains about their eternal welfare, but content themselves either with
lazy wishes or superficial and formal duties. Therefore shake off this sloth
and abandon these presumptions. Conclude upon it, that now is the time of duty;
now is the season of hope: That you know not what a day may bring forth, when
God will put a period to your time or suspend the influences of his Spirit.

2. GET the knowledge of your absolute and present need of the Salvation that
is offered to you. Sense of want quickens endeavor. God has given you many
advantages to know this; by his Word, by the voice of Conscience, by his
Providence, by the Confessions and Experiences of others. You are capable of
understanding and passing a true judgment upon your state and actions, to see
the numerous sins you have been guilty of in the course of your lives, to see
the truth of the threatening and curse of the Law that lies upon you and stands
in force against you, your utter impotency to fulfill the righteousness or bear
the penalty of it, to make any compensation for sin, or to give to God any
ransom for your Souls, to offer any thing to God that may be a price for
Eternal Life. So that unless a Savior interpose for you, there is a necessity
of your perishing, and it is altogether uncertain how soon it may be.

3. LABOR after an understanding of the sufficiency of the Savior, and the
suitableness of the Salvation that the Gospel reveals, and the just and
honorable terms upon which it is offered. Men's taking up wrong apprehensions
of these things, breeds prejudices and discouragement. The principal means God
has appointed to be used to bring you to a knowledge of these things, are
diligent hearing and searching into the Word of God; and earnest applications
to God for his Spirit to instruct you. The Word reveals Christ, propounds the
terms of Salvation, the Spirit opens the understanding to see the truth and
glory of the things revealed. Joh. 5.39. and Joh. 16.14. There you are informed
of the Natures, Person and Offices of Christ: How mighty he is to save even to
the uttermost; of the sins and wants, of those that come to God by him; It
shows us the compleatness of his Satisfaction, the acceptableness of his
Sufferings, the prevailency of his Intercession, the riches of his Grace and
Mercy, his readiness to receive and undertake for believing Sinners, that find
an utter inability to save themselves. He imposes terms that are not only just
but honorable and gracious: he requires no part of the satisfaction due to the
Law from the sinner himself, but an entire dependence upon what he has made by
his Obedience and Sufferings; that you break off your sins by repentance, and
return to your duty to God by an entire Dedication of your selves, Soul, Body,
Time, Interests, to his Glory and Praise; to which he encourages with the most
great and precious Promises of Eternal Life and Happiness, as the reward of it
at last. Surely you should be ashamed of your neglects of so Great Salvation.

I proceed to the Last Proposition. PROPOSITION V. THE Neglect of this Great
Salvation will expose Men to Great and Unavoidable Misery.
THE accepting and entertaining of it will secure the greatest happiness, the
choicest blessings to the Children of Men; but the neglect of it will bring on
the sorest and heaviest Condemnation; this a truth plain from the words of our
Text. The Apostle's question supposes a vehement Negation, There will be no
escaping, the severest Vengeance of GOD, if the Salvation offered in the Gospel
be neglected and refused. A question something like this you have, 1 Pet 4.17.
What shall the end of them be that obey not the Gospel of God. How miserable
and how dreadful it will be he does not determine, but leaves it to their own
thoughts and consciences to judge. And that their condemnation and punishment
will be intolerable, our Savior plainly asserts when he tells us that the
punishment of some of the worst of the Heathen will be more tolerable than
theirs. Mat. 11.22. The plagues and miseries that shall fall upon the most
abominable among the Heathen shall not be comparable to theirs, who shall be
found guilty of despising and sinning against the remedy offered in the Gospel.

I shall speak to two things only for the Explication of this Proposition.

1. HOW does it appear that such will be exposed to Great and Unavoidable
Misery?

2. WHY will this neglect have such a fearful Issue?

THAT their Misery will be exceeding great may appear from the nature, quality
and kind of it in the following Particulars.

1. THEY will have none of their Sins Pardoned, but must expect to answer for
them, and bear the guilt of them all. Whenever the Salvation offered in the
Gospel is received aright, remission of Sins is one happy effect of it.
Remission of Sin does always follow* upon Men's Faith and Repentance, Act. 3.19.
And Chap. 10.43. But on the other Hand, unbelieving and impenitent Sinners,
have the guilt of all their sins lying upon them. There Is no remission of sin
without the Blood of Christ; and without Faith in Christ, there is no interest
in his Blood, and consequently no Pardon. Sinners stand guilty before God of
numerous sins, but how many soever they are, they are all chargeable upon them;
they have forgotten abundance of them, but God han't forgotten one of them:
They are laid up in store with him, and Sealed up among his Treasures, Deuteronomy.
32.34. The Scripture is plain as to this, that none of their sins are pardoned,
nor shall be whilst they abide in their unbelief. Joh. 3.18. He that believes
not is condemned already, because he has not believed on the Name of the only
begotten Son of God. And Joh. 8.24. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall
die in your sins. Now this is a very dreadful misery to have the guilt of all
your sins lying upon you; to be liable to answer at the Bar of God (as shortly
you must) for all the sins that ever you have committed. The Guilt of sin is a
heavy burden. Many have cried out with bitter distress and anguish of spirit,
because of it in this World. The very forethoughts of this that God would bring
them to Judgment, there to answer for the sins they have committed, has made
many to be a terror to themselves, it has been insupportable to them. But when
sin comes indeed to be charged upon sinners it will be unspeakably worse; and
that on these Accounts.

(1.) BECAUSE then Sinners will have a clearer sight of their sins then now
they have. Sinners will then have a fuller discovery of the nature, number and
aggravations of their sins. Here they see but a few of them, they that have the
^ullest conviction of sin don't see all. There are multitudes of vain Thoughts,
idle Words, omissions of Duty, commissions of Evil, that they took no notice
of, or have now slipped their Memories: But then there will be a full discovery
of them all; they will be Judged for all things they have done in the Body.
Ungodly Sinners shall be convinced of all the ungodly deeds, and all the hard
speeches they have done and spoken, Jude 15. God will bring every work into
Judgment, Eccl. 12.14. The Judgment will be particular both as to Persons and
Things. Not one of your sins did escape his knowledge, nor will any of them be
forgotten. Then God will make good that Word, Psalm. 50.21. A dreadful amazing
sight it will be for a Man to have all his sins set in order before him. So
many Enemies, yea so many Devils would not be such a horrid Spectacle!
Conscience will then be filled with light and power, and will freely testify
for God, and against the Sinner; will both remember him of his sins and the
aggravating circumstances of them. Yea it may be Thousands of things that they
never saw or believed to be sins, will then be produced against them.

(2.) THEN Men will have another manner of sight of the Terror and Majesty of
God against whom they have sinned, then now they have. Abundance of Persons now
have slight thoughts of God's Power and Wrath; therefore are bold to sin, and
secure after the commission of sin; they know but little of the power of his
Anger, and the dreadfulness of his Wrath, but fancy God to be like themselves;
but then God will give some discoveries of his Greatness and Majesty, and the
terror of his Wrath: the very sight whereof will be intolerable to sinful
creatures; they will not be able to bear it, but will wish rather to be buried
under Mountains, and dashed in pieces with Rocks, then to behold the Face of
their offended Judge, Rev. 6.17. Then they will see and own the truth of what
is said, Heb. 10.31. That it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God.

(3.) THERE will be no hope left that ever it shall be Pardoned. Here under the
greatest distress of Conscience that sinners have been burdened with, there
has been this to moderate them, that there has at least been a possibility of
Pardon; a Peradventure that God might give Repentance. And many who have been
under deep distress of Spirit, have afterward had experience of his Grace to
their abundant support and comfort. But there is no such expectation for those
that die in their sins, that continue in their unbelief, and neglect of Christ;
their Day of Grace is over; Mercy has done with them: they have no more
Invitations by a Savior; the Patience of God is come to its utmost period with
them, and that Wrath which they were so long preparing is now executed, and
has actually seized them. Now, the hopelessness of their condition renders it
inexpressibly doleful! There Is no hopes of forgiveness! no more Sacrifice for
sin!

2. THEY must look to bear the Wrath and Curse of God which belongs to the
Transgression of the Law. Guilt and Wrath are inseparable Companions. They who
have no interest in the Promises, must expect the execution of the Threatening.
They who are not saved will be damned, Mar. 16.16. Joh. 3.36. They who don't
hear that gracious Sentence from Christ, Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my
Father, etc. must hear that, ver. 41. Depart ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire!
In vain do any dream of a middle state between these. They who neglect the
Salvation which the Gospel tenders will have nothing to secure them from the
dreadful Wrath of God. The Lord Jesus Christ will be no Advocate for them: He
will put in no plea in their (...) your: nor will it be in the power of any
creature either Angels or Men, to do any thing for their relief. What is the
just wages and demerit of sin they must expect to bear. Now the Wrath of God
due to sin is an intolerable burden; no misery is to be compared with this. As
the Love and Favor of God is a privilege that is inconceivably great, so the
Wrath and Anger of God is a misery proportionably dreadful. Who knows the power
of his Anger, Psalm. 90.11. Nah. 1.6. Who can stand before thine indignation?
who can abide in the fierceness of thine anger? Much might be here spoken
concerning the terribleness of God's Anger in the punishments that it shall
inflict upon Sinners, both with respect to the Privative and Positive effects
of it. The guilty sinner is deprived at once of all his Comforts and all his
Hopes. He has neither any natural nor spiritual good; all his enjoyments,
friends, pleasures or hopes, wherewith he diverted himself whilst he lived, are
now at an end; and he will not have so much as a drop of Water to comfort him.

AND the Positive Evils that he shall suffer from the actual impressions of
Divine Wrath, in the pains of sense that shall accompany this loss. The
extensiveness of them as to the whole Man, both Soul and Body, and every part
and faculty of them; and the intenseness and extremity of them, so as to
procure bitter outcries and piercing lamentations: but especially in the
eternal duration of them. The Scripture speaks largely concerning these things,
and Men's thoughts may expatiate upon them: but when they have gone to the
utmost reach of a finite underderstanding in speaking or thinking of them, they
vastly surpass all that can be thought or said! As none can describe the
blessedness of a Soul encircled in the Arms of Divine Love, so none can express
the misery of a Soul separated from God, and adjudg'd to the Society of Devils,
and the inextinguishable flames of Divine Wrath!

3. THEY will not only suffer the Wrath of God, but in a greater and sorer
degree than others that have not been privileged as they have. This is clear
from that forecited Text, Mat. 11.22. Where our Savior plainly asserts it. It
is beyond question that there will be degrees of punishment in Hell, for the
Judge of all the earth will do right. There shall be an impartial trial: Men
shall be judged according as their state shall be found to be, and accordingly
as their sins have been aggravated. We are told this, Luke 12.47, 48. That
servant which knew his Lords will and prepared not himself, neither did
according to his will shall be beaten with many stripes, etc. And the more
knowledge and love any have abused, the more their guilt will be inhanced, and
the more aggravated will their punishment be. They will suffer more from their
own Consciences in the terrible accusations and reproaches that they will bring
against them. The reflections of Conscience upon the light they had, the
warnings that were given them, the offers that were made them; the strivings of
the Spirit that they were sometimes under, will be inexpressibly distressing to
them. They will suffer more than others from the Devils who will be their
Tormentors as well as Fellow Sufferers. They who now tempt them to sin, and to
neglect the means of their Conversion and Salvation, will then upbraid them
with it, and be ready to tell them, that if they had ever been privileged as
they were, they would never have been imposed upon and deluded as they were,
nor neglected the Grace offered them as they did. Yea, CHRIST Himself will then
appear in greater terror toward them than other^, He will make them sensible
by the splendour of his Majesty, what a Glorious Person they slighted and
despised: And as one speaks, He that once came in a flame of Love to save Men,
will then appear in flames of Wrath to take Ven^^^^^^ upon them that have not
obeyed the Gospel of God. The more Mercy Men have had and abused in this World,
the more Wrath they must expect to feel in the World to come. And to add no
more under this Head; It will be a dreadful aggravation of the misery of such
to remember in how fair a way they once were for Salvation, how near to the
Kingdom of Heaven; and for what base and mean things they forfeited it: for
what trifles they cast away their Souls; and then Sinners will confess that the
Scripture does not miscall them, when it terms them Fools. They will fast
enough load themselves with the opprobrious name, that they had a price in
their hands to have got wisdom, but not a heart to improve it, Prove. 17.16.

2. WHENCE is it that the neglect of the Great Salvation of the Gospel shall
have such a fearful Issue, Or, That the Misery of such Sinners will be so
terrible and unavoidable?

Two or Three Things may evidence it.

1. BECAUSE it is an abuse of the greatest Love and Mercy that God ever
manifested to the World. The Scripture speaks of the love of God in the Gift of
Christ as transcendent and superlative, Joh. 3.16. 1 John 4.10. God shows great
Mercy to Man in giving them Food and Clothing, and other necessaries and
comforts of Life. But Infinite love shines forth in the Gift of Christ. God had
nothing greater and better to give to the World, than his Own Son, an Only Son,
most Dear to him, One in whom he took the highest pleasure and satisfaction; A
Son that was the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person.
To give him to endure such Sufferings, to submit to such a state of Humiliation
and Abasement as he was pleased to do. For our sakes to bear the Curse that we
might have the Blessing! to be made Sin that we might partake of his
Righteousness! to Die that we might Live! for us that could never profit him,
nor recompense him! to make a free offer of this Salvation, yea to repeat the
offer, it may be Hundreds of Thousands of Times to Sinners! and yet all this
while to have this Glorious Savior contemned, this Great Salvation trampled
upon, and slighted, as if every triflle, vanity or lust were more desirable,
this must needs provoke the heaviest Wrath. If Men know not the worth and glory
of a Savior, how to set a value upon the wonderful wisdom, grace and love of
God that has appeared in the way of Salvation by him, and the blessed
privileges of it; yet surely God knows the worth of these things, and how to
adjudge a proportionable punishment for it. And what sufferings of Sinners can
bear a proportion to an indignity cast upon so Glorious a Person? God has
sometimes severely animadverted upon those that have despised his Servants: and
much more may it be expected that he will be severe upon those that don't
reverence his Son. However ignorant and careless Sinners make light of this
contempt of the Lord Jesus Christ: the Justice of God in inflicting deserved
Vengeance for it will appear Glorious in the Eyes of Angels and Saints.

2. BECAUSE such are guilty of refusing the only Remedy. This is the last and
only refuge or means of relief that God has provided for Man's restoration to
his Image and Favor since his Apostasy from God. We read, Romans 8.3, 4. For
what the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending
his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the
flesh, that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us. When Adam
the sponsor and surety of the First Covenant, failed of obtaining Life, and Men
through the loss of the Divine Image were so weakened and disabled, that they
could not answer their obligation to it, God was pleased to substitute the Lord
Jesus Christ to procure Pardon and Life by a New Covenant. But in case this way
of Salvation by Jesus Christ be rejected and slighted, God has made no
provision of Another. God has laid out the treasures of his Wisdom and Love in
providing of this way. Grace and Mercy toward Sinners have been glorified in
as high a degree as we can suppose it possible that they should. God has no
other Son to give to die in the Sinners stead, there was a necessity of Death
to satisfy for trangressions against the Law. Without shedding ^f blood, there
was no remission. Rivers of Blood of Beasts, that by Divine Appointment were
shed before the great Sacrifice of Christ was offered, were insufficient to
expiate sin. How then can it be thought that satisfaction should be made by any
mere Creature, when the guilt rises higher by sins both against the Law and
Gospel too? What can ever expiate for contempt cast upon the Blood of the Son
of God? Sinners against the Gospel must be left quite hopeless. God has
provided no remedy, nor is it in their own power to provide any. Therefore
their destruction is certain and unavoidable. Nor will the Rivers of Tears shed
by condemned Sinners in Hell ever be able to quench the flames of it.

3. THE certainty of it is evident because the Justice and Truth of God
requires it. The Blessed God has resolved upon it, that he will glorify his
Son. The Word is gone out of his mouth in righteousness, and shall not be
reversed, that every knee shall bow to him. The whole World shall be the
triumphs of his Grace or Justice. The Scripture contains abundance of terrible
comminations against unbelievers. It tells us, they shall be damned, that they
shall never see Life, that the Wrath of God abides on them, etc. Now these
threatenings proceed from a God of invariable Truth, unspotted Justice, and
Almighty Power, and will surely be accomplished. There is many times a secret
hope nourished in the hearts of Sinners that God will not be so strict and
severe as to execute his threatenings upon them, or if he does, he will not do
it in so terrible a manner, as he has threatened. But these hopes are
presumptuous and ungrounded. God has left no foundation for Sinners to build
them upon. His threatenings are no rash and sudden determinations as Men's often
are; but are a sanction of the Gospel Covenant, which God in his Eternal Wisdom
and Counsel has determined and established, therefore will not recede or go
back from them. God is unalterably just and true in his Threatenings as well as
in his Promises. He is not a man that he should lie, or the son of man that he
should repent, Jam. 1.15. There Is no expectation that God will alter his mind,
or that he can ever want Power to execute his threatenings. Besides the
Sufferings of Christ are a convincing proof of the Truth of them. God spared
him not when sin was imputed to him: there was a necessity that he should drink
the bitter Cup of Divine Wrath, that the Justice and Truth of God might be
glorified. And if Justice would not spare the Son of God neither will it spare
guilty Sinners. If these things were done in the green tree, what shall be done
in the dry?

THESE Things may be sufficient to confirm the Truth before us, That the
destruction of such as neglect the Salvation offered in the Gospel will be
Certain and Unavoidable.

USE I. THIS Truth may evidence the fearful blindness and sottishness that many
Sinners are under, who neglect the Salvation tendered to them by Jesus Christ
in the Gospel. It is evident from hence, because there will be no possibility
of escaping God's sorest Wrath and Vengeance if this Salvation be neglected.
This way of Salvation which the Gospel propounds by Jesus Christ is so suitable
to the state of fallen Man, so accommodated to answer all his necessities; to
relieve him under all his wants and fears; so safe a way, and a way wherein so
much of the Grace, Love and Wisdom of God has appeared, that its own
excellency and beneficialness may justly recommend it to all to whom the offer
of it is made; but when, together with this, there is such an unavoidable
certainty of misery unto all them that neglect it, one might justly expect that
every Man should be most deeply concerned to secure an interest in it, and use
utmost diligence to make it his own. But alas! How much does a contrary spirit
appear! What carelessness, slightness and indifferency do abundance manifest in
this matter? As if it were a thing of little weight or worth, that they might
do well enough in the neglect of. The Apostle assigns the true reason hereof, 2
Cor. 4.3, 4. Were not Men under fearful blindness and strong delusions from the
god of this World, it could not be that they should thus neglect their own
Mercies. This may be further manifested,

1. IN that they act so contrary to what they profess to be their Interest. It
is a thing which Men generally, if not universally, acknowledge to be necessary
to take care of the Salvation of their Souls, and provide for a future
happiness; that if Christ be not their Surety and Savior, they are miserable:
that the life and safety of their Souls depends upon their Faith in Christ, and
Repentance toward God, but yet they act as if they loved Death, and could be
contented to venture Damnation. Though a Savior be offered them, yet they
neglect or defer closing with him. Were they not under a strange infatuation
blinded with the love of Sin, or the love of the World, it could not be that
they should leave their Souls at this hazard, and run such a venture of
perishing for ever: especially when they know their opportunities are
continually passing from them, and they know not how soon God may put a period
to them.

2. IN that this is the only way wherein there is any hopes of obtaining
Salvation. If this way ben't closed with there is no hope of relief by any
other. The Word of God assures us that as there is One God, so there is One
Mediator between God and Men, and there is but One. Foolish Men have multiplied
mediators as well as gods; but God never appointed but One. And it is through him
alone that Salvation is attainable, Act. 4.12. Neither is there Salvation in
any other for there is no other name given among men whereby we must be saved.
God never saved any of the Children of Men upon any other account, and there is
no room to expect he ever will. It must be owned that Heaven is the Lord's, and
he may give it to whom he will; and upon what terms he will. But our Savior
tells us, Joh. 14.6. That he is the way the truth and life, that no man comes
to the father but by him. You must take this way or perish for ever. They who
will not have Heaven upon Christ's terms must go without it. Now when the case
is thus, it must be a most strange infatuation and delusion they are under who
neglect it.

3. IN that God has given as clear and evident proofs of the certainty of this
way of Salvation as can in reason be desired, and of his willingness to bestow
it upon the terms propounded in the Gospel. So that they cannot pretend a want
of sufficient Warrant for encouragement to believe. God in his Word plainly
discovers to Men what their sinful helpless and undone condition is; and how
impossible it is to them to get righteousness and life by the Law. He has also
plainly discovered the sufficiency and acceptableness of the satisfaction that
Christ has made: that he is well pleased in him: that it was a way of his own
contriving; that he sanctified him, and sent him into the World, Joh. 10.36.
That the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin, Joh. 1.7. His Satisfaction was
fully commensurate to the demands of the Law and Justice of God. Believers have
the sure Word and Promise of God to depend upon in this matter, yea he has
confirmed it by his Oath, to this end (as the Apostle assures in, Heb. 6.17,
18.) That the Heirs of Promise might have strong Consolation. God formerly
confirmed his Word by miraculous works, and still confirms it by many
supernatural effects: in awakening, quieting and comforting the Consciences of
Sinners; filling them with Joy unspeakable: and sanctifying their hearts; which
are a kind of Inchoation of Glory. Now after the truth of the Gospel has been
so fully confirmed, and is so generally acknowledged; for Men to be careless
about the Salvation that it offers; does surely flow from the blinding
hardening power of sin, and the delusions imposed upon them by the great
Adversary of their Souls.

USE II. TO Awaken and Reprove such Persons as neglect the Great Salvation. I
intend here all such as are not seriously and deeply concerned to have their
hearts brought to a full compliance with the terms upon which it is offered; to
abandon their sinful ways, to renounce a dependence upon their own
righteousness, and to commit their Souls in a way of believing unto the Lord
Jesus Christ, as the Gospel requires: but spend their days in security, in
carnal and sensual delights, in an eager prosecution of the profits of the
World, or that in the pride of their hearts are seeking to establish a
righteousness as it were by the works of the Law; and spend their days in
sinful dispondency, and vain and fruitless cavils against the duty of believing
in Christ, which the Gospel urges unto. I shall mention a few things here, to
promote the Awakening and Conviction of such Persons.

Consider, 1. HOW great contempt of the Grace and Mercy and Condescension of
God you are guilty of, by neglecting Christ and the Salvation he offers to you.
The offers of Salvation that are made to sinners are fruits of free and
undeserved Grace. God had no need of Man's friendship or service, had just
advantage by the Law against him to have glorified himself in the executions of
his Justice upon him: but notwithstanding was pleased in sovereign Mercy to
provide and reveal a way of Salvation, wherein he would discover his own
Perfections, and provide for the happiness of Man. And as the Apostle here
informs us, has sent His Own Son, to work out this Salvation for us, and to
publish it to us. It is that which began to be spoken to us by the Lord. The
ever blessed Lord Jesus Christ was willing to come himself from the bosom of
his Father to purchase and publish Salvation. Now the greatness of the Person
sent upon this great errand and design carries the greater obligation in it to
all to accept the offer, and heightens the sin in the refusal of it. God was
justly offended with the Jews that they despised his Servants; and expected
that surely they would reverence his Son, when he sent him among them, Mat.
21.57. The fuller and clearer the revelations of divine Grace are to Men, the
greater assurance God gives of his readiness to accept them, and bestow
Salvation in this way, there is the greater contempt in neglect and refusal of
it. The not hearkening to the Law of God delivered by Angels at Mount Sinai,
was a contempt of God's Authority, and received a just recompense of reward; As
the Apostle tells us in the Verse before our Text. But it is a much greater
contempt to disobey the Gospel which was Preached by Christ himself. In the one
God is despised, speaking by his Servants, in the other by his Son. There has
been a great deal of contempt cast upon God by Sinners in all Ages, they
under-value his goodness, slight his threatenings, trample upon his authority,
walk contrary to his commands: which gave occasion to that of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 10.13. Wherefore does the wicked contemn God! It is an unreasonable and
injurious thing that they should do so; but in this case the contempt rises
higher, because not only his Authority is contemned which requires Men to obey
the Gospel, but his Grace and Love in the highest discoveries of them are
slighted and undervalued, as though the rich offers that he makes, were not
worthy of your serious regards, did not deserve your thoughts, or the employing
your time about. Do ye thus requite the Lord? Does the blessed Jesus deserve no
better requital for all the Testimonies he has given of his tender concern for
you?

Consider, 2. THE inexpressible wrong you do to your own Souls. Nature teaches
Men to love themselves, to seek their own good, and especially requires a due
concern for the best part of themselves, their Souls. These being of greater
excellency and worth then their Bodies, deserve the highest regards from them.
But they that neglect a Savior disregard and undervalue their own Souls,
interpretatively they love Death. They bring the most certain and inexpressible
misery upon their own Souls. They cut themselves off from any hope of
acceptance with God, and any title to a blessed Immortality, and bring upon
themselves certain and unavoidable misery: yea at present they do unspeakable
wrong to their own Souls, in depriving them of all true comfort. They can have
no pardon of Sin, no peace with God, no hope in the Promises, no privilege of
access to him. These are all obtained by Christ, and communicated only for his
sake and upon his account to Believers; and they deprive them also of that
which is their Beauty, their Honor, their Life; even that Holiness and
Sanctification which is a main part of the Salvation which Christ invites
Sinners to come to him for. A Soul destitute of holiness is a loathsome vile
thing in the Eyes of God. It Is fit to do him no service, to perform no
acceptable duty, to exert no act of Grace: is enslaved to its own lusts;
hurried by its irregular passions; a ready instrument of Satan to serve his
designs; is often hurried as that miserable Demoniack, Mark 5.5. To cut and
wound and tear himself. Is pulling down many spiritual Judgments upon himself.
If Christ ben't accepted as a Savior to you, you have none of these blessings
from him: the spirit of holiness is his peculiar purchase and gift. He saves
his people from their Sins. He enlightens their minds, renews their wills,
purifies hearts, conveys and cherishes all spiritual life in them. Now can you
be content to be an utter stranger to all true holiness? To live under the
tyranny of Satan, and reign of Sin? To have a Soul utterly unserviceable to God
while you live, and unfit and unworthy of any fellowship with God when you must
die? Now thus it must be if the gracious offers that Christ makes be rejected
and slighted. How unworthy the name of a Man is he that suffers a Soul to be
thus neglected and ruined?

3. YOU oppose, and as much as in you lies, frustrate one main design that God
has been carrying on from the beginning of the World. The work of Redemption
is one of the great and most glorious Works of God which has been upon his
Heart before the foundations of the World; and whereby he designed to raise
Eternal honor and glory to himself, and to bring about the greatest good to
his Elect. Now the means of effecting this, is by bringing Men to, Repentance
and Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ; submitting to the terms of the Gospel. This
is that which God calls Men to, when he brings his Gospel to any place. The
great duty he urges Men unto is not to receive the Grace of God in vain. Now it
is in vain if his end be not attained; if Men neglect the duty enjoined in
order to God's Glory, and their own good. Now when Men act contrary to the end
of God, it may be reasonably concluded that it is very offensive to him; as on
the other hand it is pleasing to him when his end is attained. Hence we read,
that our Savior rejoiced in Spirit, upon the report that the Disciples brought
him of the success of their Ministry, Luke 10.21. Now he enjoyed the end of his
coming. We read, that there is joy in Heaven upon a Sinners Repentance, Luke
15.7, 10. Heaven rings with joy at the report of it; that God is glorified, and
a Soul rescued from destruction; and it is matter of great joy and refreshing
to those whom God sends upon this Errand, to beseech Men to be reconciled to
God. When they see the glory of God advanced in the Salvation of Men, then they
shall be able to give up their account with joy. And at another time you read,
of Christ's being grieved because of the hardness of Men's hearts, Mar. 8.5.
That they did not believe notwithstanding the evident proofs that he gave of
his Divinity. And at another time of his weeping over Jerusalem, because they
understood not the things of their peace in the day of their visitation. Now
will you grieve and displease the ever blessed God in crossing him in an end so
gracious and so glorious? Wherein your own welfare is enwrap'd so much with his
honor? Will you rather choose to gratify your Lusts and please the Devil that
would destroy you, then to pour out your Souls in earnest cries that his Grace
may be effectual in bringing your hearts to comply with the duty that the
Gospel requires of you? That God may be glorified and your Souls saved.

4. BY neglecting the Grace tendered to you in the Gospel you are guilty of much
resistance and opposition to the Spirit of God. The Dispensation of the Gospel
is called by the Apostle, the Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. Probably
upon this account especially, because there is more of the Spirit goes along
with it, then any before it, as he also elsewhere intimates. There are very
few, if any, who live to years of understanding, but they are many times under
the strivings of the Spirit, awakening and convincing of them, causing of them
to see their sin and danger, exciting many terrors in their Consciences, and
putting them in mind of the necessity of Christ, of Faith, and of Repentance.
Some improve and yield to these motions of the Spirit, and they are preparatory
to their Eternal safety. But these that neglect the Salvation offered them,
refuse and resist the Holy Ghost in his motions upon them; bear down the light
they receive, suppress the convictions they have from the Spirit of God, and so
become guilty of sinning against more Grace and Love. Our Apostle intimates in
the verse after our Text, that this was one great aggravation of Men's
neglecting the Great Salvation, that it was a Doctrine which had been attested
to by diverse extraordinary operations of the Holy Ghost. And as these formerly
left Men inexcusable, so will the present sensible operations of the Spirit
upon Men's hearts, leave Men so now. They feel a divine power going along with
the Word, whereby it sensibly touches their Consciences, convinces of sin, and
in God's name condemns for it; urges to Repentance and Faith in Christ, in
order to peace and pardon with God. So that they cannot but confess these
things to be their duty. Now how tremendous a consideration is this, that you
should he guilty of resisting the Holy Ghost, and withstanding the methods of
divine Grace, to recover and save you? To slight the favor of God, to make a
light account of the Blood of Christ? To disregard the Promises, and despise
the Threatenings of the Gospel, which rise higher than any before, and to resist
the spirit of God too in its application of them: how inexcusable will you be?

USE III. OF Warning to all such as have hitherto neglected the Great Salvation
tendered in the Gospel, no longer to persist in your neglect of it. It is too
long you have done so already; there is no just apology or plea that you can
make for it; and you will render your case the worse by persisting in a thing
so sinful and unreasonable. There are none of you but will cry out of, and
condemn the blindness and obstinacy of the Jews that had the first tender of
Gospel Grace, but neglected and refused it: and withstood their own Mercies.
Why then will you imitate their practice, continue careless of your own Souls,
and provoke God to exclude you as he has them? It Is your privilege at present
to enjoy the light of the Gospel, with all clearness and liberty: the best
Mercies are freely tendered to you. God justly expects that his offers be
received thankfully, and a due entertainment given to the Lord Jesus Christ;
that you don't prefer sins and lusts before a Savior: that you be not diverted
by your Worldly interests and designs, from securing Heavenly and Eternal
mercies. It will be a thing of doleful consequence if after such opportunities
and encouragements you fail of Eternal Life. How stinging will be the
reproaches of Conscience for it? To enforce this matter,

Consi. 1. THE greatness of this sin of Unbelief, in rejecting Christ and the
Salvation that he offers. It is not without cause that God has so often fixed
Damnation to it, and so plainly threatened the ruin of those that continue in
it. Too often this sin is looked upon as a small matter, as if it were their
misery rather than their sin that it is not in their power to believe without
the assistance of the Spirit of God. Yea some that startle at other sins, don't
tremble at this; but this is a sin that is very sinful, and many ways
aggravated in the sight of God. This may appear in that this sin flows from the
wickedness of Men's hearts, as all other sins do: it flows from the blindness
of Men's minds, and the many unworthy thoughts of God that they are ready to
entertain. They doubt of his Wisdom, his Holiness and Truth. They are more
ready to lay weight upon the word of a Man, than upon the Word of God. Unbelief
reflects upon the Truth and Faithfulness of God. Hence it is said, 1 John 5.10.
He that believes not God has made him a liar. How fearful a thing is it, to
reproach the God of truth, and One that cannot lie? It disparages and virtually
denies the suffic^ency of Christ, as if He were not a fit object of Trust; not
such a complete Savior as God testifies him to be, One that is able to save to
the uttermost them that come to God by him. It disparages the Wisdom of God, as
if he had busied his thoughts to provide a way of Salvation for Men that they
had no need of. It is a sin that is rooted in the pride, perverseness and
obstinacy of Men^s hearts. Hence Christ says to them, Joh. 5.40. Ye will not
come to me that ye may have life. It Is a sin that is committed against more
Grace, Mercy and Love then many other sins are. Hence it is said to be in a
peculiar manner the damning sin, the sin that binds the guilt of all other sins
upon the Soul, and cuts it off from the last and only remedy. It is a sin of a
very heinous and horrible nature; therefore justly to be dreaded and deprecated.

Consi. 2. WHAT Misery this sin of neglecting the Great Salvation offered by
Christ has brought upon others. If we only look into the state of the Jews,
their example is very instructive and awakening. The Apostle tells us, Romans
11.20. That for unbelief they were broken off. Their sin was exceeding great in
Crucifying the Prince of Life. But it pleased God to make them the offer of the
Salvation that was purchased by that precious Blood afterward, and had they
accepted the offer, it had been effectual to have expiated that crying sin. But
for their Unbelief God rejected them. They were once a People highly favored
by God; there was no People in the World for many Generations so peculiarly
priviledg'd by God as they were, (as were easy to show in many instances) But
now as the Apostle tells us, Wrath is come upon them to the uttermost, 1 These.
2.16. None of their privileges could secure them from an astonishing
desolation. Historians observe this as remarkable in their desolation, that God
pick^d out one of the most merciful Emperors that ever swayed the Roman
Scepter, to be the Instrument of it, that their destruction might appear to be
from the Hand of Heaven, rather than from the cruelty of Man. And very dismal
was their desolatio^ Eleven Hundred Thousand are said to have ^^^ished by the
Sword and Famine, and Ninety Thousand were sold for Slaves. And ^c. Nation has
continued under the dreadful frowns of Heaven, for now almost One Thousand
Seven Hundred Years. And if God spared not the natural branches, as the Apostle
argues, others have no reason to be high-minded but fear. But it is not only
Temporal but Eternal misery too, that this sin has brought upon innumerable
multitudes of miserable Men. Hell is the place and portion of Unbelievers.

Consi. 3. HOW incapable you are to perform any act of duty to God, or to find
acceptance with God in any service you perform, 'till you are interested in
this Salvation by Faith in Christ, and a saving Conversion to God. It is only
in the Name and upon the account of Christ that our Persons and services come
to be of any account with God. Without Christ, God is a consuming Fire, ready
to consume and destroy all the works and workers of iniquity. The Covenant of
Works accepts of no obedience but that of a holy Person, and free from all
imperfection. And you have no claim by the Covenant of Grace, 'till the terms
of it are consented to. If therefore you are not united to Christ by Faith,
have not the spirit of holiness, enlivening of you, you cannot plead acceptance
in anything that you do. God takes no pleasure in them, they will not be
rewarded or crowned by God at last. Yea, if you are destitute of a principle of
Faith and Love to God, they are all done for some corrupt end or other, are not
a service to God, but to some Lust. Hence the very Praying as well as Plowing
of the wicked is sin. This duty now urged upon you is fundamental to all holy
and gracious actions. Were this thing alone duly considered it might be enough
to make you afraid of continuing any longer in the neglect of this Great
Salvation.

4. THINK how uncertain your opportunity of obtaining the Salvation that the
Gospel offers may be. God has been a long time tendering the Blessings of the
Gospel to you; but he has set bounds to his Patience how long it shall be
exercised; not only toward Men in general, but toward particular Persons. And
you know not what bounds God has set to it, when you shall come to the period
of it. Persons of all ranks and ages many times go suddenly down to the Grave.
They who are ready to reckon upon many years, many times find such a summons by
Death as he did, Luke 12.21. This night thy Soul shall be required of thee. It
falls out with many as is threatened, 1 These. 5.3. When they cry peace and
safety sudden destruction as travel upon a woman with child, seizes upon them.
The getting out of a state of Sin into a state of Grace and Salvation is a work
of great difficulty, and ordinarily will require time. Your own corruptions
will rise in opposition against it. Satan will do all he can to divert and
discourage you. Therefore you cannot be too earnest or too speedy about it; if
this be neglected in the day of probation afforded you, rivers of Tears
throughout the ages of Eternity will not do that for you which the Blood of
Christ applied by Faith is able to do, even to atone the Wrath of a
sin-revenging God. Let the consideration of these things prevail with you
without any further delay to break off your sins, however secret, pleasing or
profitable they have been. To cry mightily to God for the convincing, humbling
and converting power of his Spirit, to accompany all Gospel Dispensations and
Ordinances. Yield a present obedience to the motions of the Spirit upon your
hearts, whether by the Word or Providence of God. Listen to no thoughts of
delay, or presumptions of future Time and Grace, and deeply bewail your past
neglects. This will give hope that your Souls shall live and not die.

FOR a CONCLUSION to this Discourse I shall add.

USE IV. OF EXHORTATION, To all that have professedly embraced and accepted the
Great Salvation that has been offered in the Gospel, and are waiting for the
full accomplishment of it; That you would unfeignedly make it your care to
answer the great design of God, and to walk worthy of your Privilege.
Christians need arguments of Terror as well as of Comfort and Hope, to bind
them to their duty. The Ap^stle though he felt the constraining power of the love
of Christ, 2 Cor. 5.14. and was careful of his duty upon that ground, yet in
the same Chapter tells us, that the Terrors of the Lord had an influence upon
him, ver. 11. The certain and inexpressible misery of such as neglect this
Great Salvation should be a powerful inducement to all who profess to hope for
the blessings of it, to walk and live so that they may not seem to come short of
it. We are acquainted what was the great design of the Redeemer, and what is
the duty of the Redeemed, Tit. 2.11. to 14. Your own reason and conscience
cannot choose but acknowledge the suitableness of this. Would the ever Blessed
God be at the expense of such Wisdom, Grace and Love, that he might restore
sinful Man to his Favor and Image, and design him to be a partaker of an
Inheritance in Heaven, and not manage this design in a way suitable to his own
Holiness? Would the Blessed Jesus submit to such Abasement and Suffering, that
he might expiate sin, and afterward allow his People to give any countenance or
indulgence to it in their hearts or lives? Would the Holy Spirit in a powerful
^^nner dispense his Grace to Sinners in their Conversion and Sanctification,
and not expect a due improvement of the principles implanted in them? And that
they show the reallity and efficacy of Grace upon their Souls, in the holiness
of their lives? Both these the Apostle speaks plainly to, 2 Cor. 5.15. If one
died for all then were all dead, that they that live should not henceforth live
to themselves but to him that died for them. And, Gal. 4.25. If you live in the
spirit, see that you walk in the spirit. The Grace wrought in your Hearts by
the Spirit, should appear in your Lives: The Sobriety of your hearts, in eating
and drinking, and in the temperate use of all lawful delights: the
Righteousness of your hearts, in your justice, honesty, faithfulness in all
your dealings in your truth and charity: the Piety of your hearts in a gracious
performance of all acts of Worship: with that reverence, faith, love, as may
testify to your own Souls, and as much as may be to the consciences of others,
that your Religion is not pageantry and hypocrisy, but the genuine effect of
the Grace and Spirit of Christ upon your hearts. In sum, your great duty is to
adorn the Gospel, to live so as to make it evident, that you do indeed believe
the Promises, and love the Precepts of it. Be Exhorted to Two Things.

1. TO a daily exercise of Faith upon the Lord Jesus Christ, for all the parts
of the Great Salvation (revealed and promised to you in the Gospel) as you
stand in need of it. The Covenant of Grace, contains in it the Promises of all
needful good things whether for this Life or for that which is to come. And it
is the great duty of the People of God in a way of believing in Christ (who is
the Mediator and Head of that Covenant) to look to God for the communication of
them as their necessities do require. Col. 1.19. and 1 Cor. 1.30. God will have
all Men honor the Son, as they honor the Father. Now one great means of their
doing it, is by their dependence upon him, by coming to God in his Name and
Worthiness for all the blessings they stand in need of.

LET it be your care then to act Faith upon the Lord Jesus Christ, for your
preservation in a state of justification, and for the comfort of it. Holiness
in the People of God is incomplete. Corruption is still in being, and the flesh
will be lusting against the spirit; sin will break forth into act: and this
will give Satan advantage to bring in accusations against you; stir up fears
and disquiets in your consciences: whether you shall obtain pardon from God.
Now at the same time you fall down before God in penitent confessions of sin,
it is your duty to renew Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ for pardoning Mercy.
You read, Romans 1.17. That the righteousness of God is revealed from faith to
faith. As Faith brings a Sinnner into a justified estate, so by Faith he is
preserved in it. God directs you to take this course, 1 John 2.1. If any man
sin we have an Advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is
the propitiation for our sins. It is the duty of Believers to watch against and
beat down a self-righteous spirit, not to expect their pardon upon account of
their sorrows for present guilt, for past services, or future purposes of
better obedience. But to remember, that as by the Righteousness of Christ, they
are at first brought into a justified estate, so by his Intercession for them,
they are continued in it; and it is their work to honor Christ by renewed acts
of Faith.

AGAIN, Let it be your care to act Faith on the Lord Jesus Christ, for your
preservation and progress in a state of Sanctification. This is another
principal part of our Salvation, and it is derived from Christ who is said to
be made of God, for sanctification: to be our Life, etc. He that is acquainted
with ^he holiness of God, and the sinfulness and wretchedness of his own heart,
his manifold enemies; will see need of a greater power then his own for the
preservation and increase of the life of Grace in his own Soul. Now God has
graciously provided for the help of his People in Christ, for the carrying on
of this work. Ephesians. 5.26. And you must honor Christ by believing the Promises
he has made of it. Such as these, Ezekiel. 36.26, 27. Micah 7.19. Heb. 8.10. By
improving the Means he has appointed for it; the Word, Sacraments and Prayer.
Enforcing the Precepts he has given for it, and the rule of it, the
encouragements he has given to it, and by a daily recourse to, and dependence
on him, in all your conflicts and temptations; and for strength and assistance
in all duties and services, under a sense of your own nothingness. In this way
Christ is wont to promote Holiness, and cherish Grace in the hearts of his
People, to make his power glorious in their weakness, to give them cause to say
with the Apostle, Phil. 4.13.

AGAIN, Exercise Faith in a dependence upon Christ for acceptance of your
persons and services with God. Believers are wont to have mean and low thoughts
of themselves, and of the services they do for God: And it is very fit they
should: Considering how mean and vile they are, and how much sin is interwoven
in their best services. This prevails sometimes to sinking discouragements,
lest God should disacc^p^ them, and all they do. But under the deepest
apprehensions of your own unworthiness it becomes you to entertain honorable
thoughts of the worthiness of Christ: to behold the Humane Nature exalted in
him, to see God well pleased with him. And who tells us, Ephesians. 1.6. We are
accepted in the beloved. To look to the fullness of his Satisfaction, the
prevalency of his Intercession: Who as the great High Priest has entered into
the Heavens for us, Heb. 6.20. Bears the Names of his People upon his Breast,
presents their Persons and Services; atones for their defects; perfumes them
with his Merit. This will keep up your drooping spirits.

AGAIN, Act Faith upon the Lord Jesus Christ with respect to your expectations
of future Glory and Immortality, (in the enjoyment whereof this Great Salvation
will be completed.) It is to be lamented that not only the greatest part of
those that live in the common light of Christianity, are blinded and cannot see
afar off, are governed by sense and appetite, and are craving only pleasure,
profit and honor, think not of the vast Eternity, to which they are hastening;
but even God's own People need to have a more clear and firm persuasion, and
lively sense of things to come; will venture little upon the hopes of them, are
so little affected with them, take so little pains for the clearing up, and
evidencing their title to them, and are much more swaved with the views of
temporal advantages, then with the hopes of Eternal Mercies. This tends greatly
to the dishonor of Christ. But some there are to whom these things are real;
who are looking for the blessed hope, Tit. 2.14. For a City that has
foundations, Heb. 11.10. Are contemplating the Glory of the Heavenly state, the
Rich Inheritance of the Saints. And while viewing the greatness of it, are
ready with trembling hearts to say, Who shall ascend the Hill of the Lord, and
stand in his Holy Place? It may support your hearts in this case, to look by
Faith upon it, as a Purchased Possession, Ephesians. 1.14. Christ Jesus has laid
down the price of Heaven for his People, fulfilled the condition of Eternal
Life in his perfect Obedience to the Law. That he has carried our Nature into
it, and taken possession of it as a forerunner and surety for his People. And
especially may this quiet your hearts in the expectation of it, that Heaven
itself, as great and as rich an Inheritance as it is, is not a greater Gift
then Christ is: And if God had love enough to his People to give his Son, he
don^t want love to give Heaven. You may conclude with the Apostle, Rom, Romans
8.32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how
shall he not with him freely give us all things? I only briefly touch these
things. But it is not in these only, but in all Conditions of Life, in all
Temptations and Trials, it is your duty, and will be your comfort to keep up
the exercise of Faith on the Lord Jesus Christ.

2. BE Exhorted to a Life of Universal Obedience and Holy Walking before God.
The Apostle tells us, Heb. 5.9. He is become the Author of Eternal Salvation to
all them that obey him. Christ came not into the World to countenance
licentiousness in his People; to lessen Gods sovereignty over us, or free us
from our duty to him. He is a King and Lawgiver as well as Savior to his
People. It Is his aim to make them holy as well as happy. Indeed this ought
deservedly to be looked upon as a main part of our happiness, as well as the
way leading to it. And there is no sincere choice of Christ, and subjection to
him, where he is not received as a King as well as Savior. It is an abuse of
the Grace of Christ manifested in the Gospel, when Persons presume upon
inpunity, while they allow themselves in sin. Christ by suffering for sin has
given us the clearest representation of the evil nature of sin, and its extreme
offensiveness to God. By the holiness of his Life he has given us the most
excellent pattern of Obedience: and by the purity of his Laws, has given us
the most perfect rule of Obedience. All which things clearly show, it is what
he expects from all his People. The honor of God, their honorable Relation to
him, their hopes from him, and the experiences of his Grace toward them, there
own comfort in the expectation of the blessings he has promised them, are all
Motives to such a Conversation. The great duty of the Gospel is Love. Now Love
to Christ is especially to be expressed by Obedience; as in that Precept of
Christ, Joh. 14.15. If ye love me keep my Commandments. And that this is the
most clear and genuine fruit of Love, Christ further declares, in ver. 21.23,
4. Gods Love to us is a Love of beneficence, but our love to him is a love of
reverence and obedience, a love to please and honor him. 1 John 5.3. This is
the love of God that we keep his Commandments. And his Commandments are not
grievous. Now if you ask what Obedience is required, this may be best answered
by a reference to some comprehensive Places of Scripture, where you may find it
in God's Name, expressly enjoined. As, 1 Pet. 1.15. But at he which has called
you is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation. Here God himself is
proposed as a Pattern; which shows that the highest measures of holiness,
should be the aims of Christians: they should make it their design to resemble
the God they Worship. This is an honor put upon God, when his People are
witnesses to his holiness; when they testify to the holiness of God, in his
Nature and Laws, by the holiness of their walk. God being perfectly holy both
in respect of the purity of his Essence, and the rectitude of his
Administrations, shows that Christians should be holy in the state and temper
of their Souls, and in the course of their actions; and it is added, in all
manner of Conversation. The whole of his Conversation ought to savor of
holiness: not only his Religious but his Civil Actions ought to be done in the
Lord, and for his Glory. In every condition of Life, holiness should appear.
When surrounded with Blessings his heart should be filled with thankful Praises
to God; and he should be ready to serve him with joyfulness and gladness of
heart in the abundance of all things that he enjoys. Under Afflictions he
should be holy, be bringing forth fruits of repentance, meekness, patience, and
a due resignation to the divine Will And in every Relation, as Husbands and
Wives, Parents, Masters, Children and Servants, the holiness of Christians
should shine forth in a conscientious observation of all such rules as concern
their Relative Duties; toward their Families or Neighbors. Such render their
holiness questionable that don't show it in their Relations. This is the
principal sphere of their activity: therefore here they have most frequent
occasions to express it. And a course of holiness in all Relative duties will
have an extensive influence upon others, who shall be the better for it, and
will hopefully be ready to imitate it, or at least be awed by it. Indeed if
Piety ben't carefully maintained in Families it will languish every where else.

AGAIN, You have another Precept in, Luke 1.74, 75. where our duty is made the
end of our deliverance. Christ came not to exempt us from the service of God,
but that we might serve him the more cheerfully, without servile fear, and with
cheerfulness and joy of heart. And the branches of duty here urged are Holiness
and Righteousness, the former may respect the duties nextly due to God, and
enjoined in the First Table of the Law, a holy fear of, faith in, and love to
God as our highest good, our portion and blessedness; a conscientious regard of
his Worship in all the branches of it, and the manner of attending it: A
reverence of his Name, both in our thoughts and expressions. A due regard to
his Sabbaths, accounting them holy of the Lord, and honorable: devoting our
selves to holy Exercises upon them, and watching against all undue frames of
heart, or unholy carriages, while we are engaged in them. Because we have to do
with a God, who is Glorious in Holiness, and will be Sanctified by all the^
that draw near unto Him. And not only are all our ways before him, but the most
secret motions and workings of our hearts. Righteousness may respect the duties
of the Second Table, whatever we owe unto Men, according to the Relation we
stand in to them, or they to us. We owe respect and honor to Superiors, and
it is matter of justice to yield it to them. We owe respect and love to all
Men, and must be careful not to injure them in their Bodies, by any wrong or
violence offered to them. Yea, may not dare to cherish rash or causeless Anger
against them. Or in their Chastity, by tempting or encouraging them to any
thing that is obscene or filthy: to any intemperance, or immodesty, but rather
doing what in us lies to prevent it, by giving holy patterns to them, and
avoiding all obscenity in words and gestures. All injury to their Estates must
also be avoided; according to that Precept, 1 These. 4.6. There must be no
unfairness in their dealings one with another; no unfaithfulness in their
Promises; all oppressive, covetous, deceitful methods in their transactions
upon any Worldly account with each other, are to be resisted with greatest
care; and that which is altogether just must be followed. Again, no injury must
be done to the Names of others, by a light and hasty receiving or unwarantably
spreading of reports to their defamation; and all care should be used that you
never unjustly reproach them, by inventing or carrying false reports concerning
them: but be charitable toward all Men, and ready to vindicate them wherever
there is need of it, and ground for it: and all discontent and repining against
God, or envy at them, because others are in some respects better then they in
any valuable enjoyments, should carefully be avoided. Christ came not to make
void the Law; but rather to explain and enforce it: that he might render
holiness more conspicuous; and raise his People to greater eminency in it, then
ever before. And it should be the aim and design of all Christians, both for
Christ's sake, their own and others, that their Graces may be resplendent in
the holiness, and universal righteousness of their Conversations: that as the
Apostle directs, they may adorn the Gospel, Tit. 2.10. Walk worthy of their
Relation to God, Col. 1.10. Their present privileges from him, Heb. 12.28. 1
Pet. 2.5. And their future hopes, 1 Cor. 15.58. This will do more to recover
and maintain the honor of Christianity, and of the God and Savior that
Christians profess, then the highest encomiums or praises of them.

FINIS.
ERRATA. The Reader is desired to Correct these Mistakes of the Press, or any
others not here observed.
PAge 2. l. 7. read Gentile. p. 8. l. 2. unable he is to relieve himself, dele.
p. 25. l. 21. for one, r. arm. p. 30. l. 26, for cure and remedy. r. care for a
remedy. p. 39. l 9. at the word hearts, make a period. p. 44. l. 15. for
hereby, r. here. p. 47. l. 5. r. shine. l. 12. r. reality. p. 55. l. 23. for
prepares, r. gives. l. 24. dele for. p. 60. l. 26. for revelation, r.
relaxation. p. 61. l. 8. for dross, r. gross. p. 62. l. 2. r. deservedly. p.
83. l. 13. for own, r. now. p. 86. l. 1. for on, r. only. p. 87. l. 8. r.
glorious. p. 88. l. 15. r. rather than yield. p. 89. l. 22. for it, r. sin. p.
97. l 17. r. remediless. p. 108. l. 11. for and, r. as. p 109. l. 18. for
Light, r. Life. p. 110. l. 19. r choice of Providence. p. 122. l. 20. for is,
r. are. p. 145. l. 14. for understand, r. understanding.

The General CONTENTS.
TEXT. HEB. 2.3. DOC. The Salvation revealed and offered in the Gospel is Great
and Glorious, and the neglect of it will bring upon Men great and unavoidable
misery. p. 5 PROP. I. That Men need Salvation, even such as the Gospel reveals.
p. 6 Cleared by considering, 1. What Man's natural estate at present is, how
depraved and sinful; In several particul. p. 8 to 16 2. What is like to be
consequent upon it, here, and hereafter; Evils, Temporal, Spiritual and
Eternal. p. 16 to 20 3. Man's impotency to relieve himself under his present
misery, or prevent what is future. p. 20
Application. USE 1. To Reprove the security and carelessness of such who live
as if they had no need of Salvation. p. 23. Several Considerations offered to
promote their Awakening. p. 24 to 28 USE 2. To persuade Men to endeavor to get
a right understanding, and through conviction of their need of Salvation. Urged,
Because, 'Till they have such a sense they will not be in earnest concerned to
obtain it. p 29 To further which sense and conviction, several Directions
given. p. 31 to 42
PROP. II. There is a way of Salvation revealed and proposed to Men, in and by
the Gospel. p. 43 Q. How the Gospel reveals a way of Salvation? A. 1. It
reveals the eternal purpose and counsel of God concerning Man's Salvation. p.
44 2. It reveals that God has provided a Savior for perishing Sinners. And
shows us WHO and WHAT He is, God and Man in One Wonderful Person. p. 45 to 49
3. The Gospel makes an offer of Salvation to all that enjoy it. p. 50. 5. It
propounds the Terms upon which it may be had; Faith, Repentance, A life of
sincere Obedience. p. 50 to 54 5. It is the great Instrument and Means God uses
for the Application of Salvation. p. 54, 5, 6, 7.
Application. USE 1. How exceeding thankful ought we to be for the Gospel. p.
58 Our Obligations to thankfulness are very great. 1. In that it is an act of
special Mercy. p. 59 2. Distinguishing Mercy. Not the common lot of Mankind. p.
61 3. A Mercy which we had absolute need of. p. 62 4. Is continued after it has
been much neglected and disregarded. p. 63
USE 2. Let this put you upon Enquiring, what are you the better for it?
Several Enquiries proposed. p. 65 to 72
PROP. III. That the Salvation revealed and offered in the Gospel is very Great
and Glorious. p. 73 1. If we consider how great Difficulties lay in the way of
it. And what a glorious Display of the Divine Attributes there is, in bringing
it to ^ass. p. 74 2. If we consider how Great and GLORIOUS A PERSON was
employed in purchasing Salvation. p. 76 And what he did in order to it. Several
Particulars. p. 78, to 84 3. Argued, From the necessary gracious operations of
the Holy Spirit, in applying it to the Souls of Men. p. 84 4. If we consider
from what Evil and Misery we are saved. From Sin, from Hell, etc. p. 87 to 91
5. If we consider, What Blessings it contains in it, and what Privileges it
intitles Believers unto. p. 91 to 94
Application. USE 1. Inf. How greatly should Men be concerned for the Salvation
of their Souls. Three Considerations. p. 94 to 98 USE 2. How much reason we
have to admire the Riches of Divine Wisdom and Grace herein. This is one
special way of honoring God for it, and will be greatly subservient to our own
Comfort. p. 99 to 103 USE 3. Exhortation, To secure an interest in this Great
Salvation. Enforced by several Arguments. As, Man's absolute necessity; the
compleatness of this Salvation, etc. p. 104 to 113
PROP. IV. How Great and Glorious soever this Salvation is, it is by too many
neglected. p. 114 Here shown, 1. That it is so. 2. Whence it comes to pass. 1.
That many do neglect the Salvation which the Gospel offers. This is the case,
1. Of those that slight and disregard the offers of it. p. 115 2. Of those that
don't make it their great concern to get a right understanding of the way of
Salvation; and to be interested in it. p. 117 3. Of those who thrust it from
them. Two sorts of Persons here comprehended. p. 118, 119.
2. Whence it is that so many neglect Salvation. p. 120 Many blameable Causes,
the more General hinted. 1. A prevailing love to some Lust. p. 121 2. An
inordinate love of Earthly Enjoyments. p. 122 3. Causless prejudices, which Men
take up against the way of Salvation, or the means of it. p. 124 4. From the
influence of bad Examples. p. 125 5. From a legal spirit and temper prevailing
in them. p. 127 6. From the influence of Satan in blinding the minds of Men,
and setting them against their duty. p. 128

USE 1. This shows what cause there is of Humiliation and Mourning, that this
Salvation is so much neglected and undervalued in our Days. p. 129 Upon several
Accounts.
1. Considering the greatness of the Sin. p. 130 2. The sad effects it is
attended with in this World. p. 132 3. The certain danger such are in of
Eternal Judgments. p. 134 4. The great hazard that their Opportunities will
quickly be gone. p. 136
USE 2. Of Examination. Whether you are not guilty of this Sin of neglecting
the Great Salvation. Enq. Whether you have been brought thankfully to receive
the Blessings offered, and submit to the Terms proposed in the Gospel? p. 138
If you have, 1. You do indeed value the Privileges of it. 2. You will fetch
the sweetest comforts from the hopes of it. p. 141 3. You will make it your
care to answer the design of it. p. 142


USE 3. To advise all that have neglected Salvation, now to embrace it. p. 144
1. Shake off presumption and security. p. 145 2. Get the knowledge of your
absolute and present need of Salvation. 3. Labor after an understanding of the
sufficiency of the Savior, and the suitableness of the Salvation which the
Gospel reveals. p. 146
PROP. V. The neglect of this Great Salvation will expose Men to great and
unavoidable misery. p. 148 Two Questions here considered.
1. How does it appear, that such will be exposed to great and unavoidable
misery? 2. Why will this neglect have such a fearful Issue?
For the First it is evident, 1. Because they will have none of their Sins
Pardoned, but must bear the guilt of them all. p. 149 And this will be terrible
and insupportable. (1.) Because Sinners will have a much clearer sight of their
sins than now they have. p. 150 (2.) Because then they will have another manner
of sight of the majesty and terror of God against whom they have sinned. p. 152
(3.) They shall have no hope of ever being Pardoned.
2. They must bear the wrath and curse of God which belongs to the
transgression of the Law. p. 153 3. They will suffer it in a greater and sorer
degree than others who have not been so priviledg'd. From their own
Consciences. From the Devils. And from Christ himself. p. 156
2. Why will this neglect of Salvation issue in such terrible punishments? p.
157 1. Because it is an abuse of the greatest love and mercy that God ever
manifested to the world. 2. Because such are guilty of refusing the only
remedy. p. 159 3. Because the justice and truth of God requires it. p. 160

USE I. Inf. The fearful blindness and sottishness of many sinners who enjoy
the Gospel, but neglect Salvation. Their folly is manifest also. 1. In that
they act contrary to what they profess to be their interest. p. 163 2. In that
this is the only way in which they can hope for Salvation. p. 164 3. God has
given as clear proofs of the certainty of this, and of his readiness to give
it, as can be desired. p. 165
USE 2. To awaken and reprove such as neglect the Great Salvation. p. 166
Consider, 1. How great contempt of the Grace and Mercy of God you are guilty
of. p. 167 2. The inexpressible wrong you do your own Souls. p. 169 3. You
oppose the great design which God has been carrying on from the beginning of
the World. p. 171 4. You resist and oppose the Spirit of GOD. p. 173
USE 3. Of Warning to all who have hitherto neglected Salvation, not to
continue in such neglect any longer. Several Considerations to enforce it. p.
175 to 181 USE 4. A Concluding Exhortation, To all who have professedly
embraced the Great Salvation offered in the Gospel, to live accordingly, to
walk worthy of their Privilege and Profession. p. 181 Particularly, 1. Live in
the daily exercise of Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ for all the parts of this
Salvation, as you stand in need. In several Instances. p. 183 to 189 2. Live a
Life of universal Obedience, walk holily before God continually; so as to Adorn
the Doctrine of God our Savior. p. 181 ad finem.



