THE TRIALS Of Eight Persons Indicted for Piracy etc.

Of whom Two were acquitted, and the rest found Guilty.

At a Justiciary Court of Admiralty Assembled and Held in Boston within His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, on the 18th of
October 1717. and by several Adjournments continued to the 30th. Pursuant to
His Majesty's Commission and Instructions, founded on the Act of Parliament
Made in the 11th. and 12th of KING William IIId. Entitled, An Act for the more
effectual Suppression of Piracy.

With an APPENDIX, Containing the Substance of their Confessions given before
His Excellency the Governor, when they were first brought to Boston, and
committed to Goal.

Boston: Printed by B. Green, for John Edwards, and Sold at his Shop in King's
Street. 1718.

I Do appoint Bartholomew Green to Print the Trials of Simon Van Vorst, John
Brown, Thomas Baker, Hendrick Quintor, Peter Cornelius Hoof, John Shuan, Thomas
South, and Thomas Davis, To be Sold by John Edwards, Bookseller in King Street,
Boston; And that no other Person presume to Print the same.

SAMUEL SHUTE.
Boston, May 22 d. 1718.
Anno Regni Regis GEORGII, Quarto,
At a Justiciary Court of Admiralty held in the Court House in Boston, for and
within His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England on Friday
the Eighteen Day of October, Anno Domini, 1717. by His Majesty's Commissioners
especially Appointed and Cited, as the Law Directs, to Try, Hear and Adjudge
Cases of Piracy, Robbery and Felony Committed on the High Seas, viz.

His Excellency Samuel Shute Esquire Captain General, Governor, and Commander in
Chief of this Province, and Vice Admiral, etc. President. The Honorable
William Dummer Esquire Lieutenant Governor of the Province. The Honorable Andrew
Belcher, John Cushing, Nathaniel Norden, John Wheelwright, Benjamin Lynde,
Thomas Hutchinson, and Thomas Pitch, Esqrs of His Majesty's Council for this
Province. John Meinzies Esquire Judge of the Vice Admiralty. Capt. Thomas Smart
Commander of His Majesty's Ship of War the Squirrel, John Jekyll Esquire Collector
of the Plantation Duties.

HIS Excellency the Governor with the Commissioners abovenamed being
Assembled, Upon the Motion of His Majesty's Advocate, The Statute Made in the
Eleventh and Twelfth Years of King William the Third, with the several
Continuations of it; Her late Majesty Queen Ann's Royal Commission of the 20th
of October, in the Third Year of Her Reign, Pursuant to the abovesaid Act,
under the Broad Seal of England, Constituting the Court, etc. The Proclamation
Declaring His Present Majesty's Pleasure for continuing the Officers of His
Majesty's Plantations till His Majesty's Pleasure should be further Declared,
And also his Excellency's Commission and Instructions from the Crown were
openly Read; and the Court Solemnly and Publicly called and proclaimed, and
then his Excellency the Governor in the first Place took the Oath appointed in
the said Act, And immediately after Administered the same Oath to the several
Commissioners. And then Samuel Tyley Gent Notary Public was Sworn Register of
the Court by the President. The Statute Directing that the Register of this
Court shall be a Public Notary. But the Judge of Admiralty and Advocate G.
insisted, That the Register of the Court of Admiralty was the only Person
lawfully qualified to act as Register on this occasion, he being by virtue of
his Office a Notary Public in matters within Admiralty Jurisdiction. And
immediately after the Court Issued out a Warrant signed by the Register,
Directed to the Sheriffs of the County of Suffolk in the Province aforesaid,
requiring them forthwith to bring into Court the Bodies of Simon Van Vorst,
John Brown, Thomas South, Thomas Baker, Hendrick Quintor, Peter Cornelius Hoof,
and John Shuan, from His Majesty's Goal in Boston, they being Accused of and
Imprisoned for Piracy, Robbery and Felony committed on the high Sea. And
accordingly the Sheriffs brought the Prisoners into Court, and having hold up
their hands at the Bar, the Indictment Exhibited against them by Mr. Smith His
Majesty's Advocate was Read to them by the Register, and is as follows:

Cur. Justic. Admir. Boston. Amer. Hab. Indictment of Simon Van Vorst, John
Brown, Thomas South, Thomas Baker, Hendrick Quintor, Peter Cornelius Hoof, and
John Shuan, for Crimes of Piracy, Robbery and Felony committed on the high Sea.
ALbeit the Crimes of Piracy and Robbery are most Odious and Detestable, being
Repugnant to the Laws of Almighty God, Destructive of Government, and Directly
Tending to Subvert and Extinguish the Natural and Civil Rights of Mankind, and
therefore are strictly Prohibited and Provided against by diverse Express Laws,
Statutes and Ordinances of our Sovereign Lord the King, and more particularly
by an Act of Parliament, Made in the Eleventh and Twelfth Years of the Regin of
King William the Third, Entitled, An Act for the more Effectual Suppression of
Piracy; Whereby it is Enacted and Ordained, That such Persons, as shall be
attainted and found Guilty of Piracy, Robbery and Felony committed in, or upon
the Sea, or in any Haven, River, Creek or Place where the Admiral or Admirals
have Power, Authority or Jurisdiction, by their own Confessions, or their
Refusing to Plead, or upon the Oath of Witnesses by Process founded on the
Authority of His Majesty's Commission or Commissions by the said Act directed
and appointed, shall be Executed and put to Death, and also to suffer Loss of
Lands, Goods and Chattles; as in and by the said Act, which was Revived and
Confirmed in the first Year of our Sovereign Lord the King, and still continues
and remains in full force, will more clearly appear. Nevertheless so it is,
That the said Simon Van Vorst, John Brown, Thomas South, Thomas Baker, Hendrick
Quintor, Peter Cornelius Hoof, and John Shuan, To the high displeasure of
Almighty God, in open Violation of the Rights of Nations and Mankind, and in
Contempt and Defyance of His Majesty's good and wholesome Laws aforesaid,
Wilfully, Wickedly, and Feloniously, all and each of them, being Principal
Actors and Contrivers, Associates, Confederates, and Accomplices, Did,
Perpetrated and Committed on the high Sea sundry Facts of Piracy and Robbery,
Distinctly Specified and Expressed, and Qualified with respect to time and
place, and manner, when, and where, and in which the said Facts were so done,
perpetrated and committed by all and each of them, the said Simon Van Vorst,
John Brown, Thomas South, Thomas Baker, Hendrick Quintor, Peter Cornelius Hoof,
and John Shuan, in the several Articles immediately following, Viz.

I. And first, the said Simon Van Vorst, John Brown, Thomas South, Thomas
Baker, Hendrick Quintor, Peter Cornelius Hoof, and John Shuan, on or about the
Twentieth and Sixth day of April last past without lawful Cause or Warrant, in
Hostile manner with Force and Arms, Piratically and Felonionsly did surprise,
Assault, Invade, and Enter on the High Sea, viz. Between St. Georges Banks and
Nantucket Shoalls, a free Trading Vessel or Pink, called the Mary Anne of
Dublin, bound from this Harbor to His Majesty's Colony of New York, which said
Vessel or Pink was owned by His Majesty's Subjects of Ireland, having on board
her own Cargoe, and Navigated by her own Crew, belonging to His Majesty's
Kingdom aforesaid.

II. Secondly, The said Simon Van Vorst, John Brown, Thomas South, Thomas
Baker, Hendrick Quintor, Peter Cornelius Hoof, and John Shuan, having in manner
aforesaid, entered the said Vessel or Pink, did at the same time and place,
aforesaid, Piratically and Feloniously seize and imprison Andrew Crumpstey
Master thereof, and him the said Crumpstey did force and constrain with five of
his Crew to leave and abandon the said Vessel or Pink, and to go on board a
Ship named the Whido, which Ship was then employed and exercised by the said
Simon Van Vorst, John Brown, Thomas South, Thomas Baker, Hendrick Quintor,
Peter Cornelius Hoof, and John Shuan, and others their Accomplices and
Confederates in continued acts of Piracy and Robbery on this, and other Coasts
of America.

III. Thirdly, The said Simon Van Vorst, John Brown, Thomas South, Thomas
Baker, Hendrick Quintor, Peter Cornelius Hoof, and John Shuan, Did on the day,
and at the place aforesaid, Piratically and Feloniously Imbezil, Spoil and Rob
the Cargoe, of the said Vessel or Pink, consisting chiefly of Wines, and also
the Goods and Wearing Apparel of the said Master and his Crew.

IV. Fourthly, The said Simon Van Vorst, John Brown, Thomas South, Thomas
Baker, Hendrick Quintor, Peter Cornelius Hoof, and John Shuan, having at the
time and place, and in manner aforesaid, over powered and subdued the said
Master and his Crew, and made themselves Masters of the said Vessel or Pink,
did then and there Piratically and Feloniously Steer and Direct their Course
after the abovenamed Piratical Ship, the Whido, intending to join and
accompany the same; and thereby, to enable themselves better to pursue and
accomplish their Execrable designs to oppress the Innocent, and cover the Sea
with Depredations and Robberies.

All which Facts of Piracy, Robbery and Felony having been done, perpetrated
and committed at the time and place, and in manner aforesaid, by the said Simon
Van Vorst, John Brown, Thomas South, Thomas Baker, Hendrick Quintor, Peter
Cornelius Hoof, and John Shuan, all and each of them being principal Actors and
Contrivers, Associates, Accomplices and Confederates in the said Crimes, and
being thereof Convicted and Attainted upon sufficient Proof, made by clear and
plenary Evidence before His Majesty's Commissioners, for Hearing, Trying and
Adjudging cases of Piracy, Robbery and Felony committed on the High Sea, or
within the Admirals Jurisdiction, the said Simon Van Vorst, John Brown, Thomas
South, Thomas Baker, Hendrick Quintor, Peter Cornelius Hoof, and John Shuan,
all and each of them ought to be punished by Sentence of the said Court with
the pains of Death, and loss of Lands, Goods and Chattels, according to the
direction of the Law, and for an Example and Terror to all others.

Ja. Smith, Advs. Fis.

The Indictment being Read, the Kings Advocate Moved the Court, That the
Prisoners at the Bar should immediately plead Guilty or not Guilty, Alleging
that the Statute so directed, and likewise the Civil Law. But Simon Van Vorst
for himself and the rest of the Prisoners at the Bar, prayed the Court, That
they might have the benefit of Council, before they pleaded, that so they might
be well advised what to do. Which request the Court was pleased to Grant. Then
they moved, That Mr. Auchmuty should be of Council for them; to which the Court
Agreed.

Mr. Auchmuty being admitted, offered some Pleas to the Jurisdiction of the
Court: And after a short hearing, the following Questions were propounded by
the Prosecutors for the King, and submitted to the Courts Determination.

Viz.

Q. 1. Whether the Prisoners shall have liberty allowed them to plead against
the Jurisdiction of this Court?

Q. 2. Whether the Prisoners Pleas against the Courts Jurisdiction (if allowed
to be made) shall come on before they plead Guilty or not Guilty? And both the
said Questions were Voted in the Affirmative.

Then it was alleged and pretended in behalf of the Prisoners, That the
Commission of the late Queen Anne was of no force after Her Majesty's Demise:
And so the Court had no Power to act by virtue of the said Commission, It
having dyed with the Queen: And several Authorities in the Law were Cited and
Insisted upon by the Prisoners Council to Maintain his Pleas and Allegations.

To which it was answered, That the Proclamation of His present Majesty King
GEORGE, for Continuing Officers, and the subsequent Commission, and the
Instructions from the Crown lately Transmitted to the Governor, referring to
the Pirates was a sufficient justification of the Authority of the Court to
proceed, act, adjudg and determine in all things according to the Powers and
Authorities of the abovementioned Act, which was still in full force; and that
the cases which had been Cited, were not to the purpose; and thereupon the
following Question was humbly referred to the Courts judgment. Viz.

Quest. Whether this Court has a sufficient proper Jurisdiction and Trial of
the Prisoners at the Bar* To which the Court Declared their Opinion in the
Affirmative, Nemine Contradicente.

And then all the Prisoners held up their hands again at the Bar, and severally
pleaded, Not Guilty, Except John Shuan a Frenchman, who made known to the
Court, That he did not understand English, and therefore was ignorant of what
he was charged with in the Indictment. And thereupon Mr. Peter Lucy of Boston,
Merchant (being a person of good Credit) was Sworn Interpreter between the
Court and the said Shuan; and then by the Courts direction the said Lucy
informed the said John Shuan in his own Language of the several Articles
Alleged against him in the said Indictment, and then he held up his hand at
the Bar and pleaded, Not Guilty.

The Prisoners having severally pleaded to the Indictment, desired Copies
thereof, and a further day to prepare for their Trial.

The Court accordingly Ordered the Register without delay to serve the
Prisoners with Seven several Copies of the Indictment, with the Names of the
Kings Witnesses annexed: And also to issue out Citations to the Witnesses to
appear at the next Adjournment. And then the Prisoners were sent back to Goal,
and the Court was Adjourned to Tuesday the 22d. day of October, Instant, at
Nine of the Clock Ante Meridiem.

At a Justiciary Court of Admiralty held in the Court House in Boston, for and
within His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England by
Adjournment on Tuesday the 22 d. of October, Anno Dom. 1717. by His Majesty's
Commissioners especially Appointed and Cited, as the Law Directs, to Try, Hear
and Adjudge Cases of Piracy, Robbery and Felony Committed on the High Seas, viz.

His Excellency Samuel Shute Esquire Governor, Vice Admiral, etc. President. The
Honorable William Dummer Esquire Lieutenant Governor. The Honorable Elisha
Hutchinson, Penn Townsend, Andrew Belcher, John Cushing, Nathaniel Norden, John
Wheelwright, Benjamin Lynde, Thomas Hutchinson, and Thomas Fitch, Esqrs of His
Majesty's Council for this Province. John Meinzies Esquire Judge of the Vice
Admiralty. Capt. Thomas Smart Commander of His Majesty's Ship of War the
Squirrel, John Jekyll Esquire Collector of the Plantation Duties.

THe Court being Opened and Proclamation made, Silence was Commanded; And then
Elisha Hutchinson and Penn Townsend Esqrs; Two of His Majesty's Council and
Commissioners, being Sworn according to the Statute, took their Places on the
Bench.

Intrant.
Simon Van Vorst, John Brown, Thomas South, Thomas Baker, Hendrick Quintor,
Peter Cornelius Hoof, John Shuan.
All of them Indicted and Accused at the Instance of His Majesty's Advocate for
Crimes of Piracy, Robbery, and Felony in manner as mentioned in the Indictment,
exhibited against them the 18th Current. Mr. Smith Advocate Genesis Prosecutor,
Mr. Dudley Attorney Genesis Procurator in Defense Mr. Auchmuty.

No Objection being made, by or in behalf of the Prisoners why their Trial
should not proceed immediately: the Indictment was again Read.

The Kings Advocate observed to the Prisoners now at the Bar, That if they had
any thing to say or allege against the Indictment, It was then their proper
time to do it. And there-upon their Procurator urged that one Thomas Davis a
Prisoner in Boston Goal might be brought into Court, and allowed to give
Evidence in behalf of the Prisoners; And to that end prayed that their Trial
might be deferred till the said Davis could be had to give Evidence for them.
Which Motion was rejected by the Court, upon several Authorities urged by the
Advocate Genesis showing, That the said Davis could not lawfully be admitted a
Witness for the Prisoners, he being accused of, and though not Indicted, yet in
Custody for the same Crimes which they stand charged with. And so the Court
Resolved to proceed to the Trial of the Prisoners at the Bar without further
delay; And then their Procurator Resigned that Trust. Where-upon the Advocate
Gen, made a Speech to the Court, to the following Effect.

May it please Your Excellency,
THe Prisoners at the Bar stand Arraigned for sundry Acts of Piracy, Robbery
and Felony by them committed at the time and place, and in manner set forth in
the Articles of their Indictment, to which they have severally pleaded Not
Guilty. It is therefore my duty, in order to convict them of the heinous
crimes, they are charged with, to show first, that the facts laid in the
Indictment amount to Piracy, Robbery and Felony; and secondly, that they are
all and each of them guilty of these facts; And if it shall plainly appear to
your Excellency and the Honorable, His Majesty's Commissioners now in Court
Assembled, that both these points are proved by the strongest and most
convincing Evidence, that a case of this Nature can admit of, I doubt not, but
from a deep and awful sense of Your duty to God and the King, and a zealous
just concern for the common rights and interest of Mankind, the safety of His
Majesty's good Subjects in these remote parts, the Preservation and Security of
their Trade, the Reputation of this Colony, and the honor of your Excellency's
wise and happy Administration, You will Unanimously concur in Attainting and
Condemning them to suffer the Punishment, which the Law requires, and their
crimes most justly deserve.

Though the word, Pirate, in its proper and genuine Signification, implies no
more than a Seafaring Person, Vid. ^pelm. Glos.
it having been first invented and used by a People, I mean the Greeks, who in
early and barbarous Ages, long before Solon and Lycurgus had contrived their
Laws, or Athens had become the Seat of Learning, thought it not only lawful but
honorable to practice Piracies and Depredations within their Seas, Thucid.
Lib. 1.
, yet the Laws of all Nations, that have settled into regular Governments,
define and declare a Pirate to be an Enemy of Mankind.

And therefore he can claim the Protection of no Prince, the privilege of no
Country, the benefit of no Law; He is denied common humanity, and the very
rights of Nature, with whom no Faith, Promise nor Oath is to be observed, nor
is he to be otherwise dealt with, than a a wild and savage Beast, which every
Man may lawfully destroy. Quippe adversus Latrones, etc Justin. Lib. 18.
i. e. All persons by the right they have to preserve Mankind in general may
and ought to draw the Sword against Robbers, with whom Men can have no Society
nor Security. Every one, that finds me, shall slay me, is the voice of
Nature, that the sense of guilt must needs force from such impious Wretches,
who have renounced the rights of Nature and Society, and declared themselves to
live in opposition to the rules of Equity and Reason, which is the measure set
to the Actions of Men for their Mutual Support and Preservation. And to finish
the hateful character of this Monster, He is perhaps the only Criminal on
Earth, whose crime cannot be absolutely pardoned, nor his punishment remitted
by any Prince or State whatever. For as a Pirate is equally an Enemy and
dangerous to all Societies, the bonds, which are to secure them from violence
and injury, being by him slighted and broken, every Power has equally a right
to insist upon Reparation and his being Punished. It is true, Princes are not
answerable by the Laws of Nations for Spoils and Robberies committed by their
Subjects on those of other Princes, unless they knew and consented to the same,
but they are expressly obliged by these Laws, and generally by their own
Treaties, to punish or deliver up to be punished such Offenders, and their
neglect or refusal will justify a declaration of War, whereof many instances
are to be met with in History. Grot. De Jur. Bell. Lib. 2. Chap. 1". Chap. 21.


Now as Piracy is in its self a complication of Treason, Oppression, Murder,
Assassination, Robbery and Theft, so it denotes the Crime to be perpetrated on
the High Sea, or some part thereof, whereby it becomes more Atrocious,

First, Because it is done in remote and Solitary Places, where the weak and
Defenseless can expect no Assistance nor Relief; and where these ravenous
Beasts of Prey may ravage undisturbed, hardened in their Wickedness with hopes
of Impunity, and of being Concealed for ever from the Eyes and Hands of
avenging Justice. One of the most aggravating Circumstances, that attend a
Crime, is the facility of it is being committed, that is, where the Malefactor
cannot easily be prevented nor discovered. Thus by the Law of GOD Theft in the
Field was more grievously Punished, than Theft in a House. Exodus 22. 1. 9.
And he that lay in wait for his Neighbor and slew him, was to be forced from
the Sanctuary and put to Death without Pity Deuteronomy. 19.
. By the Roman Law every secret attempt on a man's Life by Assassination, Poison
or other ways is Punished Capitally L. 1.ff. l. Corn. Desicar.
. So is Stealing Clothes in places for Bathing ff. de sur. Bal.
. And both by that and the Divine Law a Night Thief may lawfully be Killed. Ea
sunt animadvertenda peccota Maxim, que difficillime precavcntur. Cic. Pro. Ros.
i. e. Those Crimes ought to be Punished with the utmost Severity, which cannot
without the greatest difficulty be prevented.

Another Aggravation of this Crime is, That the unhappy Persons on whom it is
acted, are the most Innocent in themselves, and the most Useful and Beneficial
to the Public; whose indefatigable Industry conveys amidst innumerable
Dangers, besides that of falling into the hands of Pirates, Blood into the
Veins of the Body Politic, and nourishes every Member. Ships are under the
Public Care, Interest Reip. Us ^^ves exercean^ur, i. e. It is the Interest of
the State, that Shipping be improved. And to this Improvement our Nation owes
its Greatness, Safety and Riches. Masters of Ships are Public Officers, and
therefore every Act of Violence and Spoliation committed on them or their
Ships, may justly be accounted Treason, and so it was before the Statute of the
25th of Edward III.

The Third Circumstance, which blackens exceedingly and augments a Pirates
Guilt, is the Danger, wherewith every State or Government is threatened from the
Combinations, Conspiracies and Confederacies of Profligate and Desperate
Wretches, united by no other tie (for what other can there be among such?) than
a mutual Consent to extinguish first Humanity in themselves, and to Prey
promiscuously on all others. Ni^^^^m (...) grassanti^^es, opus ost Example L.
Aut facta. ff. De Poen.
. Hannibal's Victorious Army was never more terrible to Rome, than that of
Spartacus, who in three set Battles shook the power of that Mighty Empire, flew
their Consuls, and cut down the flower of Italy. Pompey by his Successful
management of the War against the Pirates in his time obtained the Glorious
Surname of Great, a Mark of Honor, to which none of his former Victories and
Triumphs ( though these were more, says the Orator, Quam cateri l^gerunt Cic.
had advanced his Merit, nor any Roman General before him had aspired: And yet
after all, the Pirates were reduced rather by Treaties and Concessions, than
subdued by the power of Pompey's Army. I presume there are few, who do not know
that the Pirates on the coast of Barbary, after many Devastations and Robberies
committed by them at Sea, and on the Christian Shore, at last in Spite of the
most vigorous opposition, the greatest Princes of Europe were able to make,
formed themselves into Governments, and erected Kingdoms, which even to this
time prove the bane and plague of Christendom.

But I need not go far to find out instances of this kind. It was but the other
day we saw and felt with horror the formidable power of such confederated
Villains, who increasing in Strength in proportion to the number of their
Crimes, and by every repeated act of cruelty being enabled to commit a greater,
dared at last not only to infest our Coasts, seize our Ships, and put a full
stop to our Commerce, but to enter our Harbors, and if Providence had not
raised the Winds and Waves for our deliverance, who can say, but these vile
Remains of that abominable Crew, reserved in a wonderful manner for Public
Justice, that others may be amended and detered by their example, might have
been now giving Laws to those, from whom they expect to receive their doom.

Having offered to your Excellency this short and imperfect view of the Nature
and Effects of Piracy in General, I beg leave in the next Place to observe
briefly from the Principles of the Civil Law, which is appointed to rule and
direct the proceedings of this Honorable Court, what Acts do necessarily infer
the guilt and penalty of that Crime.

The first Act consists in the mind, animus depradandi, and if it rests there
only, it cannot fall under the censure of any humane Judicature L Cogitationis
ff. De Poen.
; for as no Person can receive prejudice by Acts merely internal, it cannot
reasonably be supposed to be the interest or concern of any to have one
punished for them. But when these inward motions come to discover themselves by
undoubted tokens, and break out in some open Act, though that proceeds no
farther, than an endeavor or bare attempt, yet the Guilt and Punishment are
the same, as if the intended mischief had been fully executed. Consilia Hominum
non eventa (...) legibus vindicanture Cic. de Offic. l. 3.
. i. e. The vengeance of the Laws (...) levelled at the designs and intentions
of Men, and not the events of things. To the same purpose is the Emperor
Hadrians Rescript, L. Divus ff. ad l. Cor. o^ Sicar.
In Malesicijs voluntas Spectatur non exitus. i. e. The weight and importance
of every Offense must be measured by the Malefactors Will and not (...) success
of the Action. Jur. S^t. 11.
Et paritur (...) paccandi sola voluntas. For the Law considers every crime as
actually accomplished, with respect to the Guilt, though the Fact be not
committed. Se^^. Doc^.
Omnia scelera etiam ante effectum operis, quantum culpa satis est perfecta
sunt.

The Man, for instance, who goes armed on purpose to assassinate or rob L. 1.
ff. ^^. l. Cor. de ^ic.
, mixes poison to give to another Ibid.
, sollicites the chastity of a Married Woman ff. ad l. Inl de Adult.
, attempts to Steal ff. de surt.
, to corrupt another's Servant L. siquit. C. de furt.
, to betray his Country C. ad l. Jul. Maj.
is in the eye of the Law no less an Assassin or Robber, a Poisoner, an
Adulterer, a Thief, a Corruptor, a Traitor, than if he had succeeded in the
Attempt, and effectually completed his design. And consequently the attacking,
invading or entering a free Ship, Animo depredandi, the attempting to Rob or
Steal the goods on board, the offering violence to the Master or his Crew or
putting them under restraint, are so many direct acts of Piracy though there be no
capture nor taking, nor any damage done, and the Aggressour, if he is overcome
and taken on the High Sea, may be lawfully hanged up at the Yard-Arm, it being
permitted to every Man to use in such cases his natural Liberty, where no
Judicature can be applied to for redress.

It is otherwise at Common Law, and I wish the nature of the Prisoners Guilt
were such, as to leave the least room for considering the difference of the
Laws in this point. How many Innocent lives had been saved, how many Families
preserved from extreme Misery and Ruin? Heaven has suffered them to prevail in
their Attempts, and to pursue their execrable designs to the last degree of
Wickedness. Their own Confessions, emitted before your Excellency, open a
dreadful scene of Depredations, Robberies and barbarous Cruelties, exercised by
them before they came on this Coast, where, to fill up the measure of their
Guilt, they committed the Crimes, for which they are now Indicted, Namely, That
on the 26th of April last they surprised and with Force and Arms entered a
Vessel belonging to His Majesty's Subjects in Ireland, and having subdued the
Master and his Crew and made themselves Masters of the Vessel and Cargo, they
forced the Master with five of his hands (there being in all eight on Board) to
abandon his Vessel and to go on board the Piratical Ship Whido, where soon
after they perished in the Shipwreck. And in this respect, though the Prisoners
are not charged with Murder in the Articles of their Indictment, yet I may
justly affirm on the best Authorities in Law, that they are truly Murderers.
Nibil interest, Occidat quis, an cansane Mortis prabeat L. 15. ff. ad l. Cor.
de Sicar.
. They Robbed the Cargo and Goods on board, and Navigated the Vessel in company
with their Accomplices, who were then possessed of several Ships and Vessels
under the Command of their Capital Ship the Whido, in order to carry
Destruction to the utmost parts of our Territories. The bare naming of these
Facts is enough to prove the first point, viz. That the Facts laid in the
Indictment amount to Piracy, etc. That the Prisoners are all and each of them
Guilty of these Facts will evidently appear to your Excellency from the
Testimonies of three Persons, who belonged to the Vessel, and were detained on
Board after the Master and five more were turned away. And albeit the law
presumes every Act of Piracy to be habitual, yet that in Fact they have long
ago given themselves up to such a Flagitious course of Life, several worthy and
credible Persons will testify and declare. The Witnesses are here in Court, and
I humbly move that they may be examined and interrogated on the several
Articles of the Indictment

Then the Witnesses for the King were called into Court, and the Prisoners were
asked if they had any just Challenge or Objection to make against them; but
none being offered, the Witnesses were severally Sworn in order following, Viz.

T Homas Fitz Gyrald late Mate of the Pink Mary Anne of Dublin in Ireland,
Testifyeth and says, That on or about the Twenty-fourth day of April last
past, the said Pink lest Nantasket in New England, bound for New York, under
Command of Capt. Andrew Crumpstey; and on Friday the 26th day of the said
Month, between the Hours of Four and Six of the Clock in the Morning, they
discovered two Sail a-Stern, viz. a large Ship and a Snow, between Nantucket
Shoals and St. Georges Banks, which came up with the Pink in the Morning, with
the Kings Ensign and Pendant flying; the large Ship was found to be the Whido,
whereof Samuel Bellamy a Pirate was Commander, Who ordered the Pink to strike
her Colors, and then hoisted out their Boat, and sent the Seven Prisoners, now
at the Bar, on board the said Pink, all Armed with Muskets, Pistols and
Cutlashes, except Thomas South and John Shuan. And further the Deponent,
Declares and says, That the said Thomas South, soon after he came on board,
Declared to him the Deponent his Intention to make his escape from the Whido,
as soon as he could, but Shuan was very forward (...) active on board the Pink,
although he had no Weapon with him.

That Thomas Baker went to the said Capt. Crumpstey with his Sword drawn, and
ordered him to go on board the said Ship with all his Papers, and five of his
hands, who were forced to obey, and accordingly Rowed on board the said Ship
Whido in the Boat, while the Seven Pirates now at the Bar tarryed on board the
Pink with the Deponent, and Alexander Mackconachy and James Dunavan. And in a
little time after several more Men came from the Ship on board the Pink for
some Wine, but finding it difficult to be come at, returned to their own Ship,
with a small quantity of Wine and some Clothes which belonged to the Ships
Company. And soon after the Boat was again hoisted into the Ship, from whence
he hailed the Pink and gave orders to the Prisoners now at the Bar (who had
forcibly taken Command of her) to Steer North-West and by North; Who answered,
They would, and accordingly followed that Course, till about Four of the Clock
in the afternoon, when the Ship and the Snow, which last was also taken and
made a Prize of by Capt. Bellamy, and the Pink lay too, it being very thick,
foggy Weather. And presently after the Snow came under the Ships Stern, and
told Capt. Bellamy, They had made discovery of Land. Wherefore he ordered the
Pink to Steer away North, which the Prisoners did; And when Night came on the
Ship put out a Light a-Stern, as well as the Snow and the Pink: And also a
Sloop from Virginia surprised and taken by Capt. Bellamy the same day; and then
all of them made Sail again.

The Deponent further says, That Capt. Bellamy Commanded the said Simon Van
Vorst and Company on board the Pink to make more haste: Whereupon John Brown
Swore, That he would carry Sail till she carried her Masts away. That when the
Deponent and Mackconachy were Prisoners, Simon Van Vorst told Mackconachy, That
if he would not find Liquor he would break his N^^k. Thomas Baker said they had
got a Commission from King George, and Simon Van Vorst answered, We will
stretch it to the Worlds end. The Prisoners at the Bar Drank plentifully of the
Wine on board the Pink that day they took her; went to the Helm by turns and
had the government of the Pink; and some of them ordered the Deponent to help
to reef the Topsail, and do other services; She proved Leaky, so all hands were
forced to Pump hard, and therefore they Damned the Vessel and wished they had
never seen her.

The Prisoners Van Vorst, Baker and Brown with the Deponent, were divided into
two Watches, and about Ten a Clock at Night the Weather grew so thick, it
Lightened and Rained hard, and was so very dark that the Pinks Company could not
see the Shore till they were among the Breakers: When the Deponent was at Helm,
and had lost sight of the Pirate Ship, Snow and Sloop, and discerning that they
were among the Breakers; they were about to trim the Head sail, but before they
could do it the Pink run ashore, opposite to Slutts-bush, so called, to the
Southward of Cape Cod, between Ten and Eleven a Clock at Night, about which
time the Prisoners at the Bar or some of them (being fearful as the Deponent
supposed lest they should be Apprehended on Shore) Cried out saying, For God's
sake let us go down into the Hold and Die together. And the whole pinks
Company tarried on Board her all that Night: And in their Distress the
Prisoners asked the Deponent to Read to them the Common Prayer Book, which he
did about an Hour; And at break of Day they found the shoar-side of the Pink
dry, so all of them jumpt out upon an Island, where they tarryed till about Ten
a Clock, and eat Sweetmeats and other things taken out of a Chest, which
Quintor and Shuan broke open, and drank of the Wines which came out of the
Pink: About which time two Men, viz. John Cole and William Smith came over to
the Island in a Cannoe, and carried the Pinks Company to the Main Land; and
then Mackconachy discovered the Pirates, so that they were Apprehended by
Warrant from Mr. Justice Doan at Eastham, from whence they were brought to
Boston Goal. The Deponent further says, That while they were on the Island,
Brown and others would have him call himself Captain of the Pink, and give out
that the Pirates on Board were his Men: and after the Prisoners had got on the
Main Land they talked in diverse Languages, and were in a great hurry to go to
Rhode Island the better to make their Escape, as the Deponent imagines.

J Ames Dunavan Mariner, late belonging to the Pink Mary Anne, and
Brother-in-Law to Captain Crumpstey late Master thereof says, That the said
Pink belonged to Ireland, was Owned by the Subjects of the King of
Great Britain, and was Taken on the 26 th Day of April last past, under English
Colors by Samuel Bellamy Commander of the Pirate Ship Whido, That Simon Van
Vorst and the rest of the Prisoners at the Bar came on Board the Pink Armed,
and had their Pistols Charged with Powder and Ball, except Thomas South and
John Shuan, and Ordered the Captain, with Five Hands more to go on Board the
Ship with his Papers: And that the Prisoners at the Bar steered the Pink after
Bellamy's Ship, as he gave Orders. That they drank plentifully of the Wines on
Board; That Thomas South's Behavior in the Pink was civil and peaceable. The
Deponent further says, That he heard John Baker threaten to shoot Mackconachy,
Cook of the Pink, through the head, because he steered to the windward of his
Course; and said moreover, That he would make no more to shoot him, than he
would a Dog; and that he should never go on shore to tell his Story. That one
of the Prisoners asked the Deponent what he thought they were? To which Baker,
who stood by, said, That the King had given them a Commission to make their
Fortune, and they were sworn to do it. After the Pink was cast on shore, they
said, They were in as bad a condition then as before.

A Lexander Mackconachy, late Cook of the Pink Mary Anne of Dublin, says, That
on the 26th day of April last past, in the course of their Voyage from
Nantasket to New York, they were taken by a Pirate Ship called the Whido,
Commanded by Capt. Samuel Bellamy, That all the Prisoners at the Bar came on
Board the said Pink armed, except Thomas South and John Shuan, and made
themselves Masters of the Pink; and that Simon Van Vorst ordered the Captain to
go on board the Ship Whido, with his Papers and five of his hands. The Deponent
further says, That the Pink was cast away opposite to an Island, called
Slutts-bush; and after the Prisoners were carried to the Main Land they looked
very sorrowful, and made all imaginable speed in order to escape from the hands
of Justice. That Thomas South behaved himself Civily. That Thomas Baker cut
down the Foremast and Mizen-mast of the pink when she run on shore.

J Ohn Brett Mariner, Testifyeth and says, That in the Month of June 1716. he
was taken by two Pirate Sloops, one Commanded by Capt. Samuel Bellamy, and the
other by Capt. Labous; They Damned the Deponent, and bid him bring his Liquor
on board; they carried him to the Island of Pynes, and he was detained a
Prisoner by them there Eighteen days; During which time John Brown was as
active on board the Pirate Sloop as the rest of the Company: He told a Prisoner
then on board, that he would hide him in the Hold, and hinder him from
complaining against him, or telling his Story.

T Homas Checkley Mariner says, That he knows John Shuan the Prisoner at the
Bar, That he belonged to the Tanner Frigot one John Stouer Master, and sometime
in March last the said Ship or Frigot was taken in the prosecution of her
Voyage from pettyguavus to Old France, by Capt. Samuel Bellamy and Monsieur
Lebous, they pretended to be Robbin Hoods Men. That Shuan declared himself to
be now a Pirate, and went up and unrigged the Main topmast by order of the
Pirates, who at that time forced no Body to go with them; and said they would
take no Body against their Wills.

M Oses Norman says, That he knows Thomas Brown, and saw him in company with
the Pirates belonging to Capt. Bellamy, and Monsieur Labous when the Deponent
was taken with Capt. Brett in the Month of June, 1716. That he was carried to
the Isle of Pynes, and kept Prisoner Seventeen or Eighteen days, during all
which time the said Thomas Brown was very active on board of Capt. Labous.

J Ohn Cole says, That on the Twenty-seventh day of April last he saw the
Prisoners now at the Bar, in Eastham soon after they were cast on shore, That
they tarryed a short time at his house, and looked very much dejected and cast
down; they enquired the way to Rhode Island, and made great haste from his
house, though he asked them to tarry and refresh themselves.

J Ohn Done Esquire says, That hearing there were some pirates journeying toward
Rhode Island, he pursued them with a Deputy Sheriff and other Assistants, and
seized the Prisoners now at the Bar at Eastham Tavern about the 27th of April
last; When they confessed that they belonged to Capt. Bellamy Commander of the
Ship Whido, and had taken the Pink Mary Anne in which they run on shore.

After the aforementioned Witnesses were examined, the Court in favor of the
Prisoners by giving them time to make their Defense, Adjourned till three a
Clock Post Meridiem.

The Court met about that time, and the Prisoners were sent for and brought
again to the Bar. When the President observed to them, That this Court had
given them time, till now, to make their own Defense; Then demanded what they
had to say for themselves.

Simon Van Vorst alleged, That he was forced by Capt. Bellamy's Company to do
what he did, and would have made known his intentions to make his escape from
the Pirates unto the Mate of the said Pink, but that he understood by the Mates
discourse that he inclined to be a Pirate himself; and therefore he did not
discover his Mind to the Mate.

Thomas Brown pretended himself also to be a forced Man, but produced no
Evidence to make it appear to the Court.

Thomas South alleged, That he belonged to a Bristol Ship, whereof one James
Williams was Master; That he was taken by Capt. Bellamy, and forced to carry
with him, otherwise was threatened to be put upon a desolate Island, where there
was nothing to support him.

Thomas Baker says, That he and Simon Van Vorst were both taken out of one
Vessel; That he attempted to make his escape at Spanish Town, and the Governor
of that Place seemed to favor his design, till Capt. Bellamy and his Company
sent the Governor word that they would burn and destroy the Town, if that the
said Baker, and those that concealed themselves with him were not delivered up.
And afterward he would have made his escape at Crab Island, but was hindered by
four of Capt. Bellamy's Company.

Hendrick Quintor says, That he was taken by Capt. Bellamy and Monsieur
Labous, and they had agreed to let him go to the Coast of Crocus in the French
Vessel which they took him in, but the Commander thereof soon after dyed, and
so Capt. Bellamy would not permit him to proceed the said Voyage, and he was
unavoidably forced to continue among the Pirates.

Peter Cornelius Hoof declares and says, That he was taken by Capt. Bellamy in
a Vessel whereof John Cornelius was Master, That the said Bellamy's Company
Swore they would kill him unless he would join with them in their Unlawful
Designs.

John Shuan by his Interpreter says, That he was sick at the time when Capt.
Bellamy took him, and went on board the Pirate Vessel at the Instance of Capt.
Bellamy's Doctor, who advised him to stay with him till his Cure. And that when
he went on board the Pink Mary Anne he did not carry any Arms with him; and
that he hoped by going on board the Pink he should the sooner make his escape
from the Pirates, for that he had a better way of getting his living than by
Pirating.

THE Evidences for the King being fully heard, and also the Pleas and
Allegations made by the Prisoners at the Bar; His Majesty's Attorney General in
a very handsome and learned Speech summed up the Evidence, and made his Remarks
upon the whole; and after him the Advocate General having resumed the Articles
of Indictment, the Depositions of Witnesses, and the Prisoners defenses,
observed to the Court, That their pretense of being forced out of the
respective Ships and Vessels, they belonged to, by Bellamy and Labous, if it
was true, can never excuse their Guilt, Since no case of Necessity can justify
a direct violation of the Divine and Moral Law, and give one the liberty of
Sinning, whatever exceptions may be allowed from Laws purely Possitive, and
humane establishments: But on the contrary, that they acted freely and by their
own choice, is most plain and obvious, for when they had the fairest
opportunity, that could have happened, to make their escape, if they had
intended it, by means of the Weather, Wind and nearness of the Shore, they were
obstinately resolved rather to hazard the Vessel and their Lives, than lose
company with the Whido. That Shuan and Souths going on board the Pink unarmed,
is not material, nor does that circumstance extenuate the Crime in the least;
if the rest had gone without Arms, as they might with security enough,
considering their Number, and the weak condition of those, they had to deal
with, and that the Pink then lay under Bellamy's command, Can any Person
imagine they would have been less criminal? Suppose one or two Ruffians having
no Arms meet a Man in the Highway, and instead of threatenings and force, give
him good Words, and at the same time put their hands in his Pockets and rob him
of his Money, Are they not to be accounted Robbers because they did not draw a
Sword or Pistol? The guilt is incurred by possessing the Innocent Persons mind
with such just apprehensions and dread of extreme danger, as to determine him
to avoid a greater evil by exposing himself to a less one, that is to save his
Life by delivering up his goods. That it appears evidently by the Deposition of
Checkley, that Shuan at the time they both belonged to one Vessel voluntarily
joined the Pirates, and the three first Witnesses declare, That he acted his
part on board the Pink with as much forwardness as the rest. That as to Souths
inoffensive behavior on board, and his inclination to make his escape, it
shows the presure of his guilt, but does not take off the weight in the eye of
the Law. He was a part of the Crew, marked in the Watch Roll, entitled to a
share of the booty, and employed in such interprizes, as none but experienced
and accomplished Villains could have been trusted with, and though at last
perhaps he might not seem so active as the rest, yet his very presence on board
the Pink involved him in the same crime, and Facinus, quos inquinat, AEquat.
Besides, it being proved by the Oaths of some of the Witnesses, That Bellamy
and Labous did not press any body (nor indeed is it credible they would) and
there being no reason to doubt of his listing himself amongst those, with whom
we found him, his Repentance may save his Soul, but cannot except him from the
punishment due to his crime: It being a Maxim both in Law and Morality, That an
involuntary act taking its rise from an act that is voluntary, is likewise
accounted voluntary. And as it has ever been the glory of our August Monarchs
to suppress Piracies by force and wholesome Laws, whilst other Nations have to
their perpetual disgrace called Pirates to their assistance, and admitted them
to a share of the Plunder. As the English Trade is in the utmost danger at
present in America from the prodigious Number of Ships exercised in Piracies,
and as Providence has wonderfully preserved us by destroying their Capital
Ship with her Numerous Crew, and has no less wonderfully delivered into the
hands of Public Justice, the Prisoners at the Bar, to teach others by their
Exemplary Punishment to abhor the barbarous and inhumane practices, which have
been fully proved against them, and whereof they stand convicted. He humbly
moved His Excellency and the Honorable the Commissioners to proceed to pass
Sentence of Death upon all and each of them, they being all equally Guilty; and
concluded with saying, That to show the least Pity in matters of this Kind,
where the Proofs are so full and Pregnant, and not the least presumption in
favor of the Prisoners, would be the greatest cruelty. Unnum Pietatis genus,
in hac re esse crudelem.

The Court was Cleared, and the Evidences and Pleadings there upon against the
Prisoners, with their Defenses, having been duly considered, and the Question
put with respect to each of the Prisoners severally, Guilty or not Guilty. The
Court Voted Simon Van Vorst, John Brown, Thomas Baker, Hendrick Quintor, Peter
Cornelius Hoof, and John Shuan, Guilty of Piracy, Robbery, and Felony,
according to the Indictment. But forasmuch as Thomas South at the time when the
Pink Mary Anne was taken, went on board her without Arms in a Peaceable manner;
and manifested and declared unto Fitz Gyrald the Mate of the Pink when she was
in sight of the Ship Whido, and there was no sufficient grounds to hope for his
escape, That he was taken from on board of a Jamaica Vessel and compelled
utterly against his Will to join with the Pirates; And that he was fully
resolved to leave them the first opportunity that should afterward present,
and his Behavior and Carriage toward the Mate being always Civil and Kind;
The Court were (...) opinion, and accordingly Voted, That Thomas South is Not
Guilty.

Then the Prisoners were brought again to the Bar, and severally asked, (except
Thomas South) Whether they had any thing further to say why Sentence of Death
should not be Pronounced against them according to Law. And nothing being
offered, more than what was said upon their Trial, by any of them, except John
Brown; who pleaded the benefit of Clergy, which was denied him, being contrary
to Law; The President Pronounced the Decree of the Court against the said Simon
Van Vorst, John Brown, Thomas Baker, Hendrick Quintor, Peter Cornelius Hoof,
and John Shuan in the words following. Viz.

THis Court having duly considered the Indictment and the Proofs of the several
Articles contained therein, together with your Defenses, Have found you Simon
Van Vorst, John Brown, Thomas Baker, Hendrick Quintor, Peter Cornelius Hoof,
and John Shuan, Guilty, of the Crimes of Piracy, Robbery and Felony, as is set
forth in the Indictment, And do therefore Adjudge and Decree, That you Simon
Van Vorst, John Brown, Thomas Baker, Hendrick Quintor, Peter Cornelius Hoof,
and John Shuan, shall go hence to the Place from whence you came, and from
thence you shall be carried to the Place of Execution, and there you and each
of you, shall be hanged up by the Neck until you and each of you are Dead; And
the Lord have Mercy on your Souls.

And the Court do also ordain, That all your Lands, Tenements, Goods and
Chattles be forfeited to the King, and brought into His Majesty's use.

President. Thomas South, The Court have found you not Guilty: Whereupon he put
himself upon his Knees and Thanked the Court, etc. And after he was duly
Admonished and had Promised Amendment of Life, etc. he was Dismissed, and taken
out of the Bar.

Then Charge was given to the Sheriffs to take special Care of the Condemned
Prisoners, and the Court was Adjourned till Monday the 28th of October Current
at Nine a Clock in the Forenoon.

The Sentence was accordingly executed by Mr. Vincent Marshal of the Court of
Admiralty, the Sheriffs assisting, on the 15th day of November following at
Charlestown Ferry within flux and reflux of the Sea.

At a Justiciary Court of Admiralty held in the Court House in Boston, for and
within His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England by
Adjournment on Monday the 28 th. of October, 1717. by His Majesty's
Commissioners especially Appointed and Cited, as the Law Directs, to Try, Hear
and Adjudge Cases of Piracy, Robbery and Felony* Committed on the High Seas,
viz.

His Excellency Samuel Shute Esquire Governor, Vice Admiral, etc. President. The
Honorable William Dummer Esquire Lieutenant Governor. The Honorable Elisha
Hutchinson, Penn Townsend, John Cushing, Thomas Hutchinson, and Thomas Fitch,
Esqrs of His Majesty's Council for this Province. John Meinzies Esquire Judge of
the Vice Admiralty. Capt. Thomas Smart Commander of His Majesty's Ship of War
the Squirrel, John Jekyll Esquire Collector of the Plantation Duties.

THE Court being Opened by Proclamation issued out a Warrant Directed to the
Sheriffs of Suffolk, Requiring them forthwith to bring into Court the Body of
Thomas Davis from His Majesty's Goal in Boston, where he was Committed, being
accused of Piracy, Robbery and Felony on the High Seas; and accordingly the
Sheriffs brought the said Thomas Davis to the Bar of this Court: When Silence
was Commanded, and after he was Arraigned, and the Indictment filed against him
by His Majesty's Advocate, for the Crimes aforesaid was Read, and is as
follows. Viz.

The Preamble the same as in the Indictment before.

I. ANd first, The said Thomas Davis, sometime about the latter end of
February, or beginning of March last past, did in Confederacy, Combination, and
Conspiracy with diverse other Profligate and Felonious Persons, without any
lawful Cause or Warrant, in hostile manner, with force and Arms, Piratically,
and Feloniously, chase, assault, invade and enter, on the High Sea, Viz. in the
Windward Passage, about three Leagues off the Island commonly called
Long Island in the West Indies, a Free Trading Ship called the Whido, bound
from His Majesty's Colony of Jamaica, to the Port of London, which Ship then
was Owned and Navigated by His Majesty's Subjects, of Great Britain, having her
own Cargoe on board, and displaying English Colors.

II. And secondly, The said Thomas Davis, having at the time and place, and in
manner aforesaid entered on board the said Ship, did then and there in
Confederacy, Combination, and Conspiracy, with diverse other Profligate and
Felonious Persons, Piratically and Feloniously overpower, subdue and imprison,
Lawrence Prince Master of the said Ship, and his Crew, and him the said
Lawrence Prince, with his said Crew, did force and constrain, to leave and
abandon the said Ship, and her Cargoe, consisting chiefly of Sugar, Indigo,
Jesuits Bark, Silver and Gold.

III. Thirdly, The said Thomas Davis, at the time and place aforesaid, in
Confederacy, Combination, and Conspiracy, with diverse other profligate and
Felonious Persons, Piratically and Feloniously seized and possessed himself of
the said Ship and Cargoe; and the said Ship did use, navigate, exercise and
employ in Confederacy with others aforesaid, in Perpetrating and Committing
Piracies, Robberies and Depredations.

IV. Fourthly, The said Thomas Davis sometime about the latter end of March or
beginning of April last past, then being on board the said Piratical Ship
aforesaid, Did on the High Sea, viz. off or near the Capes of Virginia, in
Confederacy, Combination and Conspiracy with other Profligate and Felonious
Persons, Piratically and Feloniously surprise, assault and take a Free trading
Vessel bound from His Majesty's Colony of Barbados, to some part of Great
Britain, which Vessel then belonged to and was Navigated by His Majesty's
Subjects of that part of Great Britain called Scotland, having on board her own
Cargoe.

V. Fifthly, The said Thomas Davis at the time and place aforesaid, Did in
Confederacy, Combination and Conspiracy with diverse other Profligate and
Felonious Persons, Piratically and Feloniously, seize and imprison the Master
and Crew belonging to the said Vessel, and Robbed the Cargoe thereof, and the
said Vessel then and there, and in manner aforesaid, did sink and destroy.

All which Facts of Piracy, Robbery and Felony having been done, perpetrated
and committed at the several times and places, and in manner in the preceding
Articles specified and set forth by the said Thomas Davis; And he being thereof
duly Convicted and Attainted upon such Accumulative probation offered to be
made before His Majesty's Commissioners, in hearing, trying and adjudging cases
of Piracy, Robbery and Felony committed on the High Sea, or within the Admirals
Jurisdiction, as the discovery of crimes so heinous and atrocious, practiced in
remote parts, and so Industriously and Obstinately endeavored to be concealed,
admits and requires, he the said Thomas Davis ought to be punished by Sentence
of the said Court with the pains of Death, and loss of Lands, Goods and
Chattles according to the direction of the Law, to the Example and Terror of
others to do, or commit the like crimes in times coming.

Ja. Smith, Adv1. Fis.

The Indictment being Read, It was moved to the Court by the Kings Advocate,
That the Prisoner should immediately plead Guilty or not Guitly. But the
Prisoner humbly moved the Court that he might have Council assigned him, which
was allowed. And Mr. Volentine was admitted his Attorney; then the Prisoner
held up his hand at the Bar, and pleaded Not Guilty. After which the Court
ordered the Register to serve the Prisoner with a Copy of the Indictment, with
the Names of the Witnesses annexed; and then Adjourned to Wednesday the 30th of
October Current at Nine a Clock in the forenoon.

At a Justiciary Court of Admiralty held in the Court House at Boston for and
within His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, by
Adjournment on Wednesday the 30th day of October, Anno Dom 1717. by His
Majesty's Commissioners specially appointed and Cited as the Law directs to
try, hear and adjudge cases of Piracy, Robbery and Felony Committed on the High
Seas, viz.

His Excellency Samuel Shute, Esquire Governor, Vice Admiral, etc. President. The
Hon. William Dummer Esquire Lieut. Governor. The Hon. Elisha Hutchinson, Penn
Townsend, John Cushing, Nathaniel Pain, John Otis, John Wheelwright, Thomas
Fitch, Edmund Quincey, Esqrs of His Majesty's Council for this Province. John
Meinzies Esquire Judge of the Vice Admiralty, Capt. Thomas Smart Commander of His
Majesty's Ship of War the Squirrel, John Jekyll Esquire Collector of the Plantation
Duties.

Intra. Thomas Davis. Mr. Smith Advocate G. Prosecutor. Mr. Dudley Attorney G.

Curia Legitime Affirmata, Mr. Valentine, Procurator in Defense.
The Prisoner by order of Court being brought to the Bar, The Kings Advocate
moved, That if the Prisoner's Council had any just Objections against the
Indictment, that it would be proper to make them before the Witnesses on His
Majesty's behalf were examined; but no Objections being offered, he spoke in
the manner following.

May it please Your Excellency,
THe Prisoner at the Bar is arraigned before You, for Crimes of Piracy, Robbery
and Felony by him committed on the High Sea, in Confederacy, combination and
conspiracy with others like himself. i. e. Profligate and Felonious Persons;
And has pleaded Not Guilty.

Though the Nature of the Proof, that is now offered to be made, is cumulative,
yet your Excellency will easily observe, That the Facts to be proved are not so
joined and connected, as to make up and Accumulate the Crime, for take them
singly and apart, every one is a direct and complete act of Piracy, but are
laid down as so many aggravated Circumstances, whereby the Crime becomes more
heinous, and the Prisoners guilt proportionably more black and odious.

To attack a Free trading Ship is unquestionably an act of Piracy, and the
subsequent Facts, viz. Entering on board, seizing and imprisoning the Master
and his Crew, carrying away one Ship and her Cargoe, and robbing the Cargoe of
another, and sinking the Vessel, are so many distinct Superv^ening Crimes,
which differ only according to the several degrees of the wrongs and
oppressions, which necessarily flow from thence. The Evidence, which I shall
lay before Your Excellency is of three kinds. 1st By the Prisoners Confession.
2 By Witnesses. 3. By Presumptions called in the Civil Law Argumenta et
Indicia. But in regard the practice of Civilians in cases Criminal may be
mistaken, or perhaps not well understood in these parts, I beg leave briefly to
mention some particulars concerning the Nature of this Evidence, in order to
obviate and remove some doubts and objections, which probably may be raised
against it.

I. Confession is the strongest and surest proof in Law; according to the
Maxim, In confiteniem null^ sunt Judicis partis, and the reason is because
Confessus pro Judicato habetur. ff. de Conf.
It is true, an extrajudicial Confession is not of that validity and force, but
is admitted only under certain Restrictions and limitations, whereof I shall
name only three, as being agreed to by all Civilians. 1st. If it is emitted
before a Judge competent. Farin. Qu. ^^. de Reo. Con.
2d. If it is supported by presumptions. 3d. If it is brought to prove the
circumstances of a Crime.

II As to Witnesses, I shall only observe, that two Witnesses concurring in
their depositions to one and the same Fact, are not required in proving a crime
by the Civil Law. If 1st. They are not contrary, but assist one another; As if
one should Swear, that he saw a Thief go in without a Horse, and another saw
him take the Horse, and no more; This would be sufficient to convict the Thief.
And 2dly. When the Witnesses depone upon different acts in a crime, Farin. In
Oppos. Cont. Exam. Test.
that is reiterable, as in Adultery, Piracy, and Robbery, and in such cases
they are Contestes sufficient for inflicting the pains of Death.

III. The last part of our Evidence is by Presumptions, and that crimes may be
proved by Presumptions, is most clear from the Rescript of Valerius, L. ^. ^.
^. ff. de Test.
Que Argumenta, etc. i. e. What Arguments are sufficient to prove any thing,
cannot certainly be determined, I can only therefore enjoin you in short, that
in your inquiry and decision, you are not to be tied to any one sort of Proof,
but you must judge according to your own Conscience, what you believe to be
true, or what you think not sufficiently proved.

And in Atrocious crimes, which by the Civilians are called excepted cases,
amongst which Piracy is deservedly reckoned one, where wickedness industriously
endeavors to hide it self, Gi^^. Concl. 831
It is a constant rule, Probatio per Indicia, etc. i. e. That probation by
conjectures and presumptions in things hard to be proved, and secretly
committed, is held to be good and evident proof. And to the same purpose, Secus
tamen se res habet, etc. i. e. But the matter is otherwise, if many
presumptions concur and lead the Defendant, Carp. Qu. 213.
of which any one may be proved, and by a single Witness; for one presumption
strengthens another, and many of them joined together make proof.

It is not necessary that one crime be made evident by one manner of proof
only, for several sorts of proof may be so joined, that those which taken alone
could not affect the Criminal, Matthaeus de Criminibus. Page 675.
yet being put together fall upon his head like a Storm of Hail and overwhelm
him.

I shall conclude with that most Excellent constitution of the Emperor
Theodosius. Sciant cuncti accusatores, etc. i. e. Let all Prosecutors take
notice. L. Ult. C. de prob.
that when they bring a Criminal matter into Public Judgment, it ought to be
supported by proper Witnesses, or plain Proofs, or undoubted presumptions, as
clear as the Sun.

This is the Rule, which I propose to follow in the course of this Trial, and
as I would with great Submission recommend to Your Excellency and the
Honorable Bench the wise direction given, L 5 ff. Depaenis.
Sed nec de Suspicionibus, etc. That no man ought to be condemned on bare
Suspicions, for it is better that a guilty man pass Unpunished, than that an
Innocent man should be Condemned: So on the other hand, I humbly move, the
Nature of the Crime, the Prisoner is charged with and the manner of proof
adduced to convict him, may be duly considered, and if his guilt shall plainly
appear by his own confession, the evidence of Witnesses, and violent necessary
presumptions, that he may by Sentence of this Honorable Court suffer the
Punishment, which the Law inflicts.

Then the Kings Evidences were called into Court, and no objections against
them being made by the Prisoner.

O Wen Morris Mariner was first Examined upon Oath, Who Solemnly Testified and
Declared, That he knew the Prisoner at the Bar, That he belonged to the Ship
St. Michael whereof James Williams was Master; And in the Month of Sept. 1716.
they left Bristol bound to Jamaica, and in December. following the said Ship was
taken by two Pirate Sloops, one commanded by Capt. Sam Bellamy, and the other
by Loves Lebous, about Twenty Leagues off Sabria, That they gave the said
Williams his Ship and detained the Prisoner because he was a Carpenter and a
Single Man, together with Three others of the Ships company. And further the
Deponent says, That the Prisoner was very unwilling to go with Bellamy, and
prevailed with him by reason of his Entreaties to promise that he should be
discharged in the next Vessel that was taken: And afterward the Deponent was
again taken in the Ship Whido, commanded by Capt. Prince by the said Capt.
Bellamy, who was then commander of the Ship Sultania, taken from Capt.
Richards, as the Deponent understood, and then he saw the Prisoner aboard the
said Ship; at which time the Prisoner reminded the said Bellamy of his promise:
when he asked him, If he was willing to go, He answered, Yes: and then the said
Capt. Bellamy replied, If the company would consent he should go: And thereupon
he asked his company, If they were willing to let Davis the Carpenter go? Who
expressed themselves in a Violent manner, saying, No, Damn him, they would
first shoot him or whip him to Death at the Mast.

Thomas South Mariner, lately taken by Capt. Samuel Bellamy in the Pirate Ship
Whido cast away upon this Coast, and discharged upon his Trial, was admitted an
Evidence, and being accordingly Sworn, says, That the said Bellamy while he
was in command of the said Ship Whido, took a Scotch Vessel off the Capes of
Virginia last Spring, Cut down her Masts and sunk her: That he heard the said
Thomas Davis went on board her; but did not see him. That this Deponent thought
it not prudent to be too farmiliar with the Prisoner, because it might tend to
create a jealousy in the pirates; that the Deponent and the Prisoner (whom they
suspected, because he was a forced Man) would run away together. The Deponent
says further, That Capt James Williams commander of the Ship St. Michael
(whose Carpenter the Prisoner was) Entreated the said Capt Bellamy when he took
him to let the Prisoner go. But the Ships company would by no means consent
thereto by reason he was a Carpenter; and Swore that they would shoot him
before they would let him go from them.

Capt. John Brett Mariner Sworn, says, That he was taken by Capt. Samuel
Bellamy, before the Ship Sultana was taken from Capt. Richards, and then it was
the Custom among the Pirates to force no Persons, but those that remained with
them were Volunteers.

Capt. Thomas Fox Sworn, says, That he was taken by the Pirates in July last,
and robbed, and they Questioned him, Whether any thing was done to the Pirates
in Boston Goal: The Deponent answered, He knew nothing about them. And in
particular a Dutchman belonging to the Pirates, asked him about his confort a
Dutch man in Boston Prison; and said, That if the Prisoners suffered they would
Kill every body they took belonging to New England.

Seth Smith Prison-keeper in Boston Sworn, says, That when the Prisoner at the
Bar was first brought to Goal, his illness hindered their talking together; but
sometime after as they were discoursing, the Deponent observed to the Prisoner,
That if he would be ingenuous and make a confession, he might save his Life,
and be a good Evidence against the other Pirates in Prison. To which the
Prisoner made answer, That he was abused by several of the Pirates that were
Drowned, and was glad he had got from them, but knew nothing against the rest
of the Pirates in Prison.

Then the Kings Council moved the Court that Capt. Thomas Glyn, a Prisoner for
Debt upon Execution, might be brought into Court to give Evidence on His
Majesty's behalf in this Trial: Whereupon the Court directed the Sheriffs, who
have the keeping of His Majesty's Goal, to bring the said Glyn into Court.

Capt. Isaac Morris Sworn, says, That on the 14th of Sept. 1716. he was taken
by the Pirates, but knows nothing of Capt. Bellamy or his Accomplices.

Capt. Thomas Glyn being brought into Court by the Sheriffs, and Interrogated
upon Oath, says, That he never knew the Prisoner till he was committed to Goal
for Piracy, that he frequently afterward conversed with him, but knew nothing
against him.

After which the Prisoner was desired by the President to speak for himself,
Who said, That he was Carpenter of the Ship St Michael whereof James Williams
was Capt. and Sailed out of Bristol in Great Britain in the Month of Sept.
1716. bound for Jamaica; and in December. following the Ship was taken about
Twenty Leagues off Sabria by two Pirate Sloops commanded by Capt Samuel
Bellamy, and Monsieur Lebous, who carried the Ships company to the Island of
Blanco where they were detained till the Ninth day of January last, when he and
fourteen other Prisoners were put on board the Sultan Galley, then under the
said Bellamy's command who had taken her from Capt. John Richards: And
afterward took another Ship called the Whido, in which Ship to his great grief
and sorrow, he was forced to come upon this Coast, where she was castaway: And
he with one John Julian only escaped Drowning He further says, That he was no
way active among the Pirates, only as he was compelled by them.

Then Mr. John Valentine the Procurator in Defense of the Prisoner observed to
the Court, That if he believed the Prisoner to be guilty of the crimes, for
which he was Indicted, he should not appear on his behalf: That he hoped this
Honorable Court upon consideration that there was little or nothing said, much
less proved against the Prisoner, they would acquit him as being Innocent, for
that in all Capital crimes there must be downright Proofs and plentiful
Evidence to take away a Man's Life, and then he made the following remarks on
the Evidences. Viz.

That Owen Morris Testified, That the Prisoner at the Bar was forced and
constrained against his Will to continue with the said Capt. Bellamy and his
company. And it appears by the Oath of Thomas South as well as by Morris, That
the Prisoner desired Capt. Bellamy to release him upon his Caption of another
Vessel according to his Promise, but his company would not consent thereto; And
although South says, that he believes the Prisoner was on board the Scotch Vessel
when her Masts were cut down, yet the Prisoner utterly denies it, and Souths
belief was grounded upon hearsay.

Capt. Bretts Evidence serves only to inform the Court that the Pirates did not
Press Men before the Prisoner was taken, but it is well proved, That when they
took the Prisoner they compelled him to be among them, to his great sorrow and
grief.

The Evidence of Thomas Glyn avails nothing, and if the Prisoner had been never
so Guilty, his confession made in Prison, shall not be taken as Evidence
against him on the Trial. And whereas the prisoner stands charged in the
Indictment with Accumulative crimes; the Procurator in Defense was pleased to
say, That in the Trial of my Lord Strafford his Attainder was reversed because
he was Indicted upon Accumulative Crimes, which is contrary to Act of
Parliament.

Then Oliver Noyes Esquire was Sworn, and Declared, That he heard Capt. Richards
say, That when he was taken by Capt. Bellamy, the Prisoner at the Bar was very
desirous to be released and cried, giving out that he was undone by being
detained among them. And one of the Pirates hearing him lament his sad
condition, said, Damn him, He was a Presbyterian Dog, and should fight for King
James, etc.

Peter Osgood Mariner Sworn, says, That he well knew the Prisoner, That he was
a Sober, Honest Man, of good Conversation etc.

John French Sworn, says, That he has known the Prisoner above a Year and an
half being frequently with him at Bristol, and in Antegoa, that he had a good
Character, and was reputed an Honest Man, etc.

Capt. John Corney Sworn, says, That he knew the Prisoner at Antegoa, when he
was Carpenter to Capt. Moor, and never heard any harm of him.

Capt. Samuel Shrimpton lately Arrived here from Jamaica, Sworn, says, That he
heard one of Davis's company say, That Davis the Prisoner was a forced Man, and
he would Swear it.

Mr. Valentine moved, That an Affidavit under the firm Seal of a Notary Public
in Great Britain, and in favor of the Prisoner should be read in open Court,
but his Motion was rejected, being contrary to Act of Parliament, which directs
that all Evidences respecting Pirates shall be given into Court Viva Voce.

The President asked the Prisoner, What he had to say for himself: The Prisoner
answered, He was not on board of the Scotch Ship that was sunk as was reported;
and that he humbly conceived the Evidence produced in order to his condemnation
sufficiently proved his Innocence: That his Attorney had fully spoke his Mind
and Sentiments, and therefore he should not trouble this Honorable Court any
longer in his Defense, or to that purpose.

THE Evidence on both sides being closed, the Advocate General reduced the
whole under the following Heads. That the Indictment consisted chiefly of two
parts. The first charges the Prisoner with Piracy committed by him sometime in
February or March last, in the Windward passage on an English Ship named the
Whido; the second with another Piracy about a Month after on a Scotch Vessel
off the Capes of Virginia.

As to the first, Morris Depones, that when he was taken with Capt. Prince in
the Whido he saw the Prisoner on Board the Piratical Ship Sultana, and heard
Bellamy ask him, if he was willing to go, which necessarily proves that the
Prisoner at that time was under no confiement, but one of the Crew, otherwise
no such question could have been put to him. This he himself acknowledges and
in his Confession v. Append.
further declares, that though at first the old Pirates were a little shy of the
new ones, and it seems not without good reason, they being only 80 in number to
130, yet in a short time the New Men being sworn to be faithful, and not to
cheat the Company to the Value of a Piece of Eight, they all consulted and
acted together with great unanimity, and no distinction was made between Old
and New. Capt. Brett, who was likewise taken by Bellamy expressly says, that it
was not the Pirates custom to Force any Person, and that such as were amongst
them were Volunteers. And whatever Sentiments the Prisoner might entertain of
his Companions, it is plain from Capt. Fawke's Evidence that they had a very
tender concern for him. Had he been really affected with so much grief and
sorrow as he pretends, it was not impossible for him to have made his Escape at
some of the Places where he touched before he came on this Coast, viz. Blanco,
the Spanish Main, Testages and Long Island; but it is not so much as suggested,
that ever he attempted it, nor is it to be presumed as matters stood; the spoil
was not yet divided, and it is obvious he expected to receive his share V. Ap.
.

To the second, South declares, that Bellamy took the Vessel cut down her Masts
and afterward sunk her, that the Deponent being Sick at that time was told by
Bellamy's Crew, and does believe, that the Prisoner went on Board the Vessel:
And further says, that the Pirates could not be prevailed with to discharge
the Prisoner because he was a Carpenter. The truth is, Bellamy sent the
Prisoner and another Carpenter on Board, who by his Order cut away the Masts
and bored a hole in the bottom of the Vessel, and so destroyed her. This was a
piece of work properly belonging to Carpenters, and it was for performing such
Services the Prisoner made himself so acceptable and necessary to his
Accomplices. To take off the weight of this Evidence it is said, that it is
only Hear say, but the Court will consider that the Deponents belief, as it is
grounded on the constant Reports of 120 Persons, to whom the Fact must needs
have been notoriously known, is no less certain, than if he had seen the Fact
committed. But admiting the Prisoner not to be directly concerned in sinking
the Vessel, yet it is clear beyond contradiction, that he was on board the
Whido, and one of the Crew, that surprised and took her, and consequently
Guilty of Piracy; the other Facts laid in the Indictment being only
circumstances, which help to give light to the discovery of his Crimes.

For the manner of proof required in capital Crimes, especially such as are
Atrocious, as in the present case, He referred the Court (in answer to what was
alleged on that point in behalf of the Prisoner) to the Authorities produced
already, adding, that if the Crimes did appear by the Qualifications and
Circumstances as they were libelled, to be made out by undoubted presumptions,
although every circumstance be not proved by two direct Witnesses, the same ought
to be held for Clear and Plain Evidence. And as to the Exception touching
Accumulative Crimes, no reply seemed needful, it being founded on a palpable
Mistake, as if Accumulative probation and Accumulative Crimes were the same.

He observed in the last place, that the only plausible Argument offered in
defense of the Prisoner was his being taken and detained by Force, which he
could not possibly withstand, and since Necessity has no Law, and every Man is
carried on with an irresistible Ardour to any means of preserving himself, some
perhaps might believe him innocent, as not being answerable for the Crimes,
which for his own safety he was obliged to commit; therefore to prevent any
mistake that might happen concerning this important Point, he Prayed His
Excellency and the Honorable Bench to consider,

That Force can never justify nor excuse an Action, that is contrary to the
Divine and Moral Law, for as it cannot be committed without expressing
indirectly at least some contempt for the supreme Legislator, it would be the
highth of impiety to think that these Laws can admit any exception of Cases of
Necessity. A Man [says the very Heathen Cic. ad Attic. Lib. 13.
] must take care in every Moment of his Life not to recede a hairs breadth from
the dictates of a good Conscience on any account whatever. Seneca's assertion,
that extreme Necessity, which he calls the great protection of Humane weakness,
cancels and breaks through every Law Lib. 4 Controv. 17.
. is restricted only to Civil Constitutions and Establishments Gro^ de
Jur-^bel. lib. 2. c. 2. 6.
, and even with respect to these it is a certain and infallible rule, that
although the doing an Action, which is prohibited* may be a sure way to escape an
imminent danger, yet if the evil thereby occasioned be greater or even equal to
what is avoided, the Law allows no exception of necessity. If a Man, for
instance, is in danger of being killed or robbed, he may lawfully in his own
defense kill the aggressor, Quia versatur in re ilicita; but if to ward off the
danger he should kill or rob a third person, whom he knows to be innocent, he
is without doubt punishable as a Murderer or Robber. The Roman Law exempts
Children and Servants acting in Obedience to their Father's and Master's
command from Punishment, it being presumed they are obliged to submit L. Velle
ff. Reg. Jur.
, but in their perpetrating atrocious crimes, that presumption ceases and the
Law considers them as free Agents L. ad ea ff. end. Tit.
. And indeed if the doctrine of Hobbes and (...) had prevailled, i. e. that
extreme necessity may dispense with and supersede all Obligations Moral and
Civil, there would have been no Martyrs in the Church, no examples of Loyalty
in the State (...) or honor left amongst Men. In vain did Joseph prefer a
Dungeon to the embraces of his Mistress, the Fathers of this People a far
distant Wilderness to the charms of their Native Land, and the Noble Papinian
death to the greatest Dignity and splendour

To conclude, The Crimes charged upon the Prisoner being direct Violations of
the Laws of Nature as well as His Majesty's, and the proofs adduced being
sufficient to convict him, He ought to suffer the pains of death, etc.

Where-upon the Court was cleared, and after a short debate, were of Opinion
that there was good proof of the Prisoners being forced on board the Pirate
Ship Whido (in which he was cast on shore) which excused his being with the
Pirates; and that there was no Evidence to prove that he was Accessory with
them, but on the contrary that he was forced to stay with them against his
Will. And this Question being put, Whether Thomas Davis is Guilty of Piracy,
Robbery and Felony according to the Indictment, or not? The Court Voted, That
the said Thomas Davis is Not Guilty. And in less than half an Hour the Prisoner
was brought again to the Bar, And the President declared, That the Court found
him Not Guilty of the crimes for which he was Indicted; So he put himself on
his Knees, Thanked the Court, etc. and was dismissed with a suitable
Admonition. And then the Court Adjourned to Monday the Thirtieth day of
December next at Nine a Clock Ante Meridiem.

APPENDIX.
The Substance of the Examinations of John Brown, etc. Taken by Order of His
Excellency the GOVERNOR, on Monday the 6th of May, 1717.

J Ohn Brown being interrogated says, That he was born in the Island of
Jamaica, is 25 Years old, and Unmarried. About a Year ago he belonged to a Ship
Commanded by Capt. Kingston, which in her Voyage with Logwood to Holland was
taken to the Leeward of the Havana by two Piratical Sloops, one Commanded by
Hornygold and the other by a Frenchman called Labous, each having 70 Men on
Board. The Pirates kept the Ship about 8 or 10 Days and then having taken out
of her what they thought proper delivered her back to some of the Men, who
belonged to her Labous kept the Examinate on board his Sloop about 4 Months,
the English Sloop under Hornygolds command keeping company with them all that
time. Off Cape Corante they took two Spanish Briganteens without any resistance
laden with Cocoa from Maraca. The Spaniards not coming up to the Pirates demand
about the ransom were put ashore and their Briganteens burned. They Sailed
next to the Isle of Pines, where meeting with 3 or 4 English Sloops empty, they
made use of them in cleaning their own, and gave them back. From thence they
Sailed to Hispaniola in the latter end of May, where they tarryed about 3
Months. The Examinate then left Labous and went on board the Sloop Commanded
formerly by Hornygold, at that time by one Bellamy, who upon a difference
arising amongst the English Pirates because Hornygold refused to take and
plunder English Vessels, was chosen by a great Majority their Captain and
Hornygold departed with 26 hands in a prize Sloop, Bellamy having then on Board
about ^^ Men, most of them English Bellamy and Labous sailed to the Virgin
Islands, and took several small Fishing Boats and off St Croix a French Ship
laden with Flower and Fish from Canada, and having taken out some of the Flower
gave back the Ship. Plying to the Windward the Morning they made Saba they
spied 2 Ships, which they chased and came up with, one was Commanded by Capt.
Richards, the other by Capt. Tosor both bound to the Bay. Having plundered the
Ships and taken out some Young Men they dismissed the rest and likewise T^sor's
Ship, and made a Man of War of Richard's, which they put under the Command of
Bellamy, and appointed Paul Williams Captain of their Sloop. Next Day they took
a Bristol Ship, Commanded by James Williams from Ireland laden with Provisions,
and having taken out what Provisions they wanted and 2 or 3 of the Crew, let
her go. They parted with their French consort at the Island of Blanco and stood
away with their Ship and Sloop to the Windward passage, where in the latter end
of February last they met with Capt. Lawrence Prince in a Ship of 300 Ton
called the Whido with 18 Guns mounted, and 50 Men bound from Jamaica to London
laden with Sugar, Indigo, Jesuits Bark and some Silver and Gold, and having
given chase 3 Days took him without any other resistance than his firing two
chase Guns at their Sloop, and came to an Anchor at Long Island. Bellamy's crew
and Williams's consisted then of 120 Men. They gave the Ship taken from Capt.
Richards to Capt. Prince, and loaded her with as much of the best and finest
goods as She could carry, and gave Capt. Prince above Twenty Pounds in Silver
and Gold to bear his charges. They took 8 or 10 Men belonging to Capt. Prince,
the Boatswain and two more were forced, the rest being Volunteers. Off
Pettiguavis they took an English Ship hired by the French laden with Sugar and
Indigo, and having taken out what they had occasion for, and some of the Map,
dismissed her. Then they stood away for the Capes of Virginia, being 130 Men in
company, and having lost sight of their Sloop the Day before they made the
Land, they cruised ten Days according to agreement between Bellamy and
Williams, in which time they seized 3 Ships and one Snow, two of them from
Scotland, one from Bristol, and the fourth a Scotch Ship from Barbados with a
little Rum and Sugar on Board, so leaky that the Men refused to proceed
farther. The Pirates sunk her. Having lost the Sloop they kept the Snow, which
was taken from one Montgomery, being about 100 Ton and manned her with 18
hands, which with her own Crew made up the number of 28 Men; the other 2 Ships
were discharged being first plundered. They made the best of their way for Cape
Cod intending to clean their Ship at Green Island (having one. (...) and an
Indian born at Cape Cod for Pilots) and on Friday the 26th of April last to the
Eastward of Cape Cod took a Pink laden with Wine from Madera, last from Boston,
bound to New York. They sent seven Men on Board called out on the Watch Bill,
of whom the Examinate was one. He further says, that there were about 50 Men
forced, over whom the Pirates kept a watchful eye, and no Man was suffered to
write a word, but what was Nailed up to the Mast. The names of the forced Men
were put in the watch Bill and fared as others, they might have had what Money
they wanted from the Quarter Master, who kept a Book for that purpose, but this
Examinate took only Clothes. It was the common report in their Ship, that they
had about 20000 Pounds in Gold and Silver. That Peter Ho^ff was once whipped for
attempting to Runaway, and that he and every one of the other Prisoners were
forced to Join the Pirates

T Homas Baker being Examined says, That he was Born in Flushing, Aged 29
Years, by Trade a Tailor, and sometimes went to Sea, and sometimes followed his
Trade ashore* That he was taken with 9 more in a little Boat coming from Cape
Francois, by Bellamy and Labous, but they were sent away being Married Men.
This Examinate was never sworn as the rest were. Being on Board of Lebous he
asked leave to go on Board of Bellamy, that he might have an opportunity of
getting away, and accordingly he went, but found that Bellamy would not
discharge him, on the contrary threatened to set him ashore on a Moroon Island
if he would not be easy. When they took Richards, Tosor and Williams they
spread a large black Flag, with a Death's Head and Bones across, and gave
chase to Captain Prince under the same Colors. They had on Board 20000 or
30000 Pounds, and the Quarter Master declared to the Company, that if any Man
wanted Money he might have it. The Examinate came on Board the Pink which was
taken off Cape Cod, Armed. The reason why he and the other Prisoners did not
discover themselves to the Government when they first came ashore was because
they expected to get to Boston and there Ship themselves as Sailors. In all
other particulars he agrees with what is above.

THomas Davis Examined says, He was born in Carmarthenshire in Wales, Aged Two
and twenty Years, is by Trade a Ship wright, and has used the Sea these five
Years. He Sailed from Bristol with Capt. Williams, and was taken on the 19th of
December last, by (...) 9 leagues to the Leeward of Blanco, and in January he
joined Bellamy's company. When the company was called together to Consuls, and
each Man to give his Vote, they would not allow the forced Men to have a Vote.
There were One hundred and thirty forced Men in all, and Eighty of the Old
company; and this Examinate being a forced Man had no opportunity to discover
his Mind. From Blance they Sailed to the Spanish Main and watered there, and
from thence to a Moroon Island called Testegos, where they fitted up a Ship and
Sloop of their own. All the New Men were Sworn to be true and not to cheat the
company to the value of a piece of Eight. That when they chased the Whido they
thought they had lost her, but came up with her the third day. Capt. Prince was
treated civily. What Money they got in the Whido was not shared. Seven or eight
of the Whido's Crew joined them. That their design in coming on this Coast was
to get Provisions: That three of the Vessels, they look off the Capes of
Virginia, belonged to Scotland, and the fourth to Bredhampston, and when a
Prize was taken the Watchbill was called over, and Men put on board as they
stood named in the Bill, and no more imposed on the forced Men than the
Volunteers, they being all alike. The same day the Whido was lost, they took a
Sloop coming from Virginia. The Ship being at an Anchor, they cut their Cables
and ran a shore, in a quarter of an hour after the Ship struck, the Mainmast
was carried by the board, and in the Morning She was beat to pieces. About
Sixteen Prisoners drowned, Crumpstey Master of the Pink being one, and One
hundred and forty-four in all. The riches on board were laid together in one
heap.

PEter Hooff declares, That he was born in Sweden, is about 34 Years old, and
left his Country 18 Years ago. He Sailed for the most part with the Dutch on
the Coast of Portobello, and has been with the Pirates fourteen Months* When he
was taken by Bellamy in a Persaga, he belonged to a Ship whereof one Cornelison
was Master: Three Weeks after he was taken they went to Portobello in a French
Sloop with 60 Men on board; then stood for the Havana, and from thence to Cuba,
where they* met with a Pink, an Englishman Master, and took out some Powder
and Shot, and some Men. A difference arising amongst them about taking
Prisoners; Some being for one Nation and some for another; and having at that
time Two Sloops and about 100 Men, Hornygold parted from them in One of the
Sloops, and Bellamy and Labous kept company together. They turned to the
Windward from the Isle of Pines to look out for a Ship of Force. The Money
taken in the Whido, which was reported to Amount to 20000 or 30000 Pounds, was
counted over in the Cabin, and put up in bags, Fifty Pounds to every Man's
share, there being 180 Men on Board. No Married Men were forced. Their Money
was kept in Chests between Decks without any guard, but none was to take any
without the Quarter Masters leave.

JOhn Shuan declares, That he was born in Na^ts, 24 Years old, a Mariner. That
(...) Two Months and an half ago he was taken by Bellamy in an English Ship
coming from Jamaica, commanded by an Englishman, and a Frenchman, bound from
Pettiguavis to Rochel, with Sugar. This Examinate knows nothing of the Scotch
Vessel's being sunk. When Crumpstey's Pink was taken on this Coast, He desired
Bellamy to give him leave to go on board her, but could not obtain it, by
reason he had not taken up Arms, yet afterward Bellamy let him go. He further
declares, That he never was upon the List as the rest were: That in the Ship he
belonged to the Pirates found 5000 Liyres, and on board of Bellamy's there was
a great quantity of Silver and Gold.

Simon Van Vorst declares, That he was born in the City of New York, aged 24
Years. That he went from New York to St. Thomas's, and from thence to Cape
Francois, where he staid three Months, and came from thence in October last in
a Boat with Captain Simsons Men, who were Prisoners there, and standing over to
Cape Nicholas they spied two Sail, which came pretty near them, and firing a
Gun brought them on board, three were dismissed, being Married. The Examinate
desired Labous to let him go on board of Bellamy, and accordingly he went,
Bellamy told him he must be easy until they could find Volunteers, or he would
put him a shore on some Moroon Island. Next day they took a Sloop coming from
Cape Francois, and soon after a French Ship, out of which they took Claret and
Provisions. They cleaned at St. Croix, where 3 of their Men Ran away, and one
of them being brought back was severely whipped. Plying to Windward for what
they could get they took Richards, Tosor and a Bristol Ship laden with Beef. He
further declares, That he saw many of Williams's, Tosor's and Richards's Men
Cry and express their Grief upon their being compelled to go with Bellamy.
After the Whido was taken they gave Richards's Ship to Capt. Prince and put as
great a quantity of Goods on Board, as he desired. They took 10 or 12 of
Prince's Men of whom the Boatswain and 2 or 3 more were forced. The Examinate
went on Board Crumpsty's Pink Armed with a Gun and Pistol, and he and the other
6, who were with him were all equal as to the commanding part, being in course
according to the list or Watch Bill.

HEndrick Quintor declares, He was born in Amsterdam, Aged 25 Years, a Mariner.
That he was taken in a Spanish Briganteen by Labous Commander of the Sloop
Postition, and Bellamy Commander of the Sloop Mary Anne and being bound to
(...), the Pirates told him he should go to the Coast of Crocus, but afterward
they compelled him to stay, and during the time he was with them they took 3
French Ships and then cleaned at the Main Land of Hispaniola. After that they
took 3 English Ships, viz. Richards's, Tosor's and Williams's, and went to the
Main to Water, from thence to Testegos, the Wind blowing very hard they went to
St Croix, where a French Pirate was blown up. That this Examinate and the other
six, who were sent on Board the Pink were Forced Men.

THomas South says, He was born in Boston in Lincolnshire, about 30 Years of
Age, a Mariner. That he came from Cork in Ireland in a Ship Commanded by Capt.
Williams bound to Jamaica, and was taken by the Pirate Bellamy about four
Months ago. The Pirates forced such as were Unmarried, being four in number two
of them were drowned in the Whido, a Dutchman and a Welshman. This Examinate
further says, That the Pirates brought Arms to him, but he told them, He would
not use any, for which he was much threatened; they staid sometime at Spanish
To^^; when Captain Richards's Ship was taken this Examinate did not take up
Arms, he only stood by the Rigging. That they came on this Coast to meet their
consort Paul Williams, whom they expected to find at Block Island* That he was
One of Seven, who were sent on board the Pink, He told the Mate that he was a
forced Man, and if he could get a-shoar he would run away. And further
declares, That he has heard the other Prisoners say, They were compelled to
join the Pirates.

FINIS.
The Reader is desired to Correct with his Pen the following Errors.

PAge 1. line 3. read Eighteenth. p. 2. l. 15. r. Reign. p. 8. l. 10. r. (...).
p. 11. l. 11. say Brown r. Baker. p. 12. l. 19. for Thomas r. John. p. 17. l.
22. r. aggravating. p. 29. l. 51. r. Firm and Seal. p. 21. l. 16. r.
confinement nor restraint. p. 22. l. 32. r. had ever prevailed. For Indictment
r. Indictment throughout.


