Twelve Single SERMONS On Various Subjects, Tending to Promote Godliness, AND
Quicken Persons to walk in the WAY OF SALVATION. Preached,

By Benjamin Wadsworth, A.M. Pastor of a Church of Christ in Boston, N.E.

1 Cor. 9.22. -- That I might by all Means Save some.

2 Pet. 1.10, 12. -- Give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. --
Wherefore I will not be negligent, to put you always in remembrance of these
things.

1 Timothy 4.8. -- Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the Promise of
the Life that now is, and of that which is to come.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for N. Buttolph, B. Eliot, S. Gerrish, and D.
Henchman, Sold at their Shops. 1717.

PREFACE.
I Have cause to belie^^, (...) I have heard from several, that the Preaching
of the following Sermons has not been altogether in vain, but rather profitable
to some. And I hope (by God's blessing) the Reading of 'em may be useful to
those, who will take the pains to do it. Our Time of Life is so short and
uncertain, our Hearts so trifling and deceitful, our Snares and Temptations so
many and dangerous; that we had need diligently to Improve all proper Means, to
help us forward in the way of Salvation. I hope the following Sermons may be
useful to this end, to those who will diligently Read them. I shall not here
give any particular account, of these several Sermons or Subjects; the Texts
and Titles are here subjoyned. It was with a desire and design, to promote the
Glory of God and good of Souls; that I have transcribed them for the Press, and
that they may be successful in attaining what is thus aimed at, is and shall be
the Prayer of the unworthy Author,

B. Wads.

The CONTENTS.
SERMON, I. THE Brazen Serpent, a Type of Christ. From Numb. 21.8. And the Lord
said unto Moses, make thee a fiery Serpent and set it upon a Pole: and it shall
come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when he looks upon it shall
live. SERMON, II. The dangerous Sin of Murmuring, described and condemned. 1
Cor. 10.10. Neither Murmur ye, as some of them also Murmured; and were
destroyed of the destoyer. SERMON, III. The fear of God, fortifying against Sin
and ill Examples. Neh. 5.15. -- But so did not I, because of the fear of God.
SERMON, IV. The Day of Life to be improved, before the Night of Death comes.
Joh. 9.4. I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is Day; the Night
comes when no man can work. SERMON, V. Wholesome Counsels and Warnings,
occasioned by the Sin of Young Men. 1 Samuel 2.17. Wherefore the Sin of the Young
Men, was very great before the Lord. SERMON. VI. GOD, the Free and Sovereign
Author of all benefits. Ezekiel. 36.32. Not for your sakes do I this, says the
Lord God, be it known unto you. SERMON, VII. Utmost diligence needful, to
obtain Salvation. Phil. 2.12. -- Work out your Salvation with fear and
trembling. SERMON, VIII. The use Christians should make, of remembering their
past Sins. Deuteronomy. 9.7. Remember and forget not, how thou provokedst the Lord thy
God to wrath in the wilderness. SERMON, IX. GOD's Bow bent and Sword drawn,
against the wicked. Psalm. 7.12. If he turn not, he will whet his Sword: he has
bent his Bow and made it ready. SERMON,X. Christ coming in Glory, to reward
every One according to his works. Mat. 16.27. For the Son of Man shall come in
the glory of His Father, with His Angels; and then he shall reward every Man
according to his works. SERMON, XI. Disobedience to the Gospel, is a despising
of GOD. 1 These. 4.8. He therefore that despises, despises not Man but God.
SERMON, XII. Trusting in GOD, yields perfect Peace. Isai. 26.3. Thou will keep
him in perfect Peace, whose Mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in
thee.
Sermon, I. The Brazen Serpent, A Type of CHRIST.
Numbers XXI. 8. And the Lord said unto Moses, Make thee a fiery Serpent and set
it upon a Pole: and it shall come to pass, that every one that is bitten, when
be looks upon it shall live.


WE find in the 4th v. of our Context, that Israel Journeyed from Mount Hor, by
the way of the Red Sea, to compass the Land of Edom; and the Soul of the People
was much discouraged because of the way. They were fatigued and tired with this
tedious Journey, and we find, v. 5. They spoke against God, and against Moses.
Often before this, when they met with difficulties, they murmured against God,
and against his faithful Servants, Moses and Aaron; and this vile practice they
renew and repeat upon this new difficulty they met with. And for this their
Sin, God plagues them. v. 6. And the Lord sent fiery Serpents among the People;
and they bit the People, and much People of Israel dyed. It Is likely these
Serpents were called fiery, either because their color somewhat resembled that
of fire; or rather, because those bitten with them were tormented with a
Scortching burning heat in their Bodies, being greatly Inflamed, scortch'd with
thirst which nothing could quench. These Sinners were served in their kind,
were filled with their own ways; their Tongues had been Influenced by the old
Serpent the Devil, they were set on fire of Hell in speaking against God and
Moses, and now fiery Serpents are sent to punish them. Under this Plague, the
People confess their Sin, desire Moses to Pray to God for them, which he did,
v. 7. We don't find, that God presently destroyed or removed these Serpents;
but our Text tells us, God ordered a remedy for those bitten and wounded with
the Serpents. He orders Moses to make a brazen Serpent, and set it on a Pole,
that the bitten Israelites looking to it might be healed and live. Now this
brazen Serpent, which was thus set up on a Pole to heal the wounded Israelites;
was a Type of Jesus Christ, who was lifted up and dyed on the Cross, to save
Sinners. Our Savior Himself so expounds and applies it. Joh. 3.14, 15. And as
Moses lifted up the Serpent in the Wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be
lifted up. That whosoever believes in him, should not perish but have
everlasting Life. As every Israelite stung with the fiery Serpents, lived, if he
did but look on the brazen Serpent; so, every Sinner that believes in Jesus
Christ, shall live for ever. The Hebrew word, NES, which in our Text is rendered
a Pole; is translated an Engsign, and plainly refers to Christ. Isai. 11.10.
And in that day, there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an
Ensign of the People; to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be
glorious. The Lord Jesus Christ is that Ensign of the People, to which many of
the Gentiles seek and are Saved.

From the words we may observe this

DOCTRINE. As those Israelites bitten with the fiery Serpents, who looked to the
brazen Serpent, were saved Alive; so, those Sinners who believe in Christ shall
be saved for ever.
This Doctrine is to be handled, by showing in sundry particulars some Parallel
or Similitude, between the Malady and Remedy of those Israelites mentioned in
our Text; and the Malady which Persons have by Sin, and their Remedy through
Christ.

1. Those bitten by the fiery Serpents, were grievously wounded. Doubtless those
bitings, occasioned extreme pain and anguish: many died of their wounds, and we
don't find that any recovered of them (and it is likely none did) but those who
looked to the brazen Serpent. So, all Men are grievously wounded by Sin, they
are stung by the old Serpent, the Devil. The Devil made use of a Serpent, to
draw our first Parents into Sin. Genesis 3.1. The Serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtlety, 2 Cor. 11.3. This Dragon, this old Serpent was the Devil and Satan,
which deceives the whole World, Rev. 12 9. The old Serpent the Devil, drew our
First Parents into Sin, and so all their Posterity with them. For by one man
sin entered into the World, and death by sin; and so death has passed upon all
men for that all have sinned -- by one man's disobedience many were made
sinners, Romans 5.12, 19 All have Sinned and come short of the Glory of God. All
mere Men since the fall of Adam, are shapen in Iniquity and conceived in Sin;
and so they are Children of wrath by nature. Indeed they are all Sinners, and
Sin is a grievous terrible wound. Sin is a Mortal wound, the wages of it is
Death, Rom 6.23 Every Sin in its own nature tends to eternal Death and Misery;
it deserves such Death. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
written in the book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3.10 Yea, Sin is a wound very
grievous, distressing, tormenting to the awakened Consciences of those, who are
not at present sensible of their Interest in the healing blood of Christ.
Distress of Soul for Sin, is sometimes compared to broken bones, Psalm. 51.8. To
a being weary and heavy laden, Mat. 11.28. To an Insupportable Burden, Psalm.
38.4. Mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as an heavy Burden, they are
too heavy for me. Sense of Sin, made David's bones wax old, he roared all the
day long -- his moisture was turned into the drought of Summer, Psalm. 32 3, 4.
Our Tongues cannot express the Grief and Horror, the Anguish, Pain, amazing
Trouble and Disquietment, which Persons often feel in their own Souls by reason
of their Sins. All the Wounds which a Man's Body can receive, are not so
hurtful to him, as the Wounds which Sin gives to his Soul. Sin is such a mortal
Stab, such a poisonous Wound, as will certainly Kill and Damn a Person for
ever, unless the healing Blood of Christ be applied to it. Surely, Sin is a
most grievous Wound. If any ask, Why don't Men complain more of this wound? If
all are thus wounded, why don't they express their trouble, danger, concern
more frequently than they do? I answer, they are not duly sensible of their
wounds. Many that are Mortally wounded by Sin, are yet stupid; they are in a
sort of Spiritual Lethargy. Persons are never reckon^d more dangerous in bodily
distempers, than when they are most stupid, senseless, and make no complaint at
all: those are most dangerous that are in such a condition. So, those that are
least sensible of their danger by Sin, least concerned about it; are indeed in
most danger by it. Their Souls seem stupid and benumbed, they seem hastening to
hell, without thinking or considering where they are going. They are not
sensible of their wounds, that is the reason they don't complain. They Are so
much taken up about their bodies, that they utterly neglect their Souls. Sin is
a wound, and a dreadful dangerous one too; this is the first thing.

2. These bitten Israelites could not be healed or cured, by any art or skill
of their own. Writers say, that when persons were bitten by these poisonous
Serpents, Physicians were wont to give them over as uncurable, irrecoverable:
No art or skill of men could save them. If they applied never so many Medicines
of their own contriving, yet they could not be cured thereby. So, Men cannot by
any skill, art or power of their own, save themselves from that eternal death
which their Sins have justly deserved. Fallen men, Sinners, are without
strength, Romans 5.6. Their destruction is of themselves, they are the guilty
Authors of it; but they have no strength to deliver themselves from the power,
guilt or punishment of Sin.

1. Not from the power of Sin. Men are naturally, Dead in trespasses and in
sins, Ephesians. 2.1. And they cannot create new Life in their own Souls: no man can
come to the Son, except the Father draws him. True believers are born, not of
blood, nor of the will of the fresh, nor of the will of man, but of God, Joh.
1.13. It Is God of his own will that does beget them; that creates them in
Christ Jesus, according to the exceeding greatness of his power, the working of
his Mighty Power, Ephesians. 1.19, Faith is Gods Gift, Ephesians. 208. So is Repentance
too, Acts 5.31. Alas, without Christ Sinners can do nothing: it is God that
works in them to will and to do of his own good pleasure. So that Men cannot
save or deliver themselves from the filth, the power, the prevailing efficacy
of Sin.

2. Nor from the guilt or punishment of Sin. They cannot by all their doings or
sufferings, satisfy Gods justice, and purchase their own deliverance. When
they have done their best, they are unprofitable Servants. If they should offer
thousands of Rams, or ten thousands of Rivers of oil; give their firstborn for
their transgression, and the fruit of their bodies for the sin of their Souls,
yet it would not be a sufficient Sacrifice. They are not redeemed with
corruptable things, such as silver and gold, 1 Pet. 1.18. They can by no means
redeem their Brother (nor themselves neither) nor give to God a ransom for
him, Psalm. 49.7. The redemption of the Soul, is too precious to be wrought by
them. They cannot buy off eternal plagues and punishments. There is Salvation in
none but Christ; Neither is there any other name given under heaven among men,
whereby they can be saved, Act. 4.12. As these bitten Israelites, could not
heal nor cure themselves; so neither can Sinners deliver themselves from the
power, guilt or punishment of Sin, by any art, skill or power of their own. If
they have no help but of their own procuring, they must necessarily perish for
ever.

3. It was God that appointed this brazen Serpent, for the healing of the
people. 'Twas not any device or contrivance of their own, 'twas not man's
Wisdom that proposed this method. So, 'twas God that appointed Jesus Christ to
be the Savior of Sinners. The Way of saving Sinners through Christ, was not the
result of the Wisdom or Contrivance neither of Men nor Angels; 'twas originally
and wholly from God. God did elect and choose Christ, to the Office and Work of
a Redeemer. Hence Christ is called, God's Servant, and His Elect, Isai. 42.1.
It Is said of Christ, He was faithful to Him that appointed Him, Heb. 3.2. God
chose, called, appointed Him to His Mediatorial Work and Service. Though Man's
Misery is of his own procuring, yet his Salvation is of God's contriving and
procuring.

4. 'Twas of God's mere undeserved Mercy and Grace, that He provided a Remedy
for the bitten Israelites. They had provoked God, spoken against Him, and
against His faithful Servant Moses; God was justly angry with them. He had sent
Serpents to bite and wound them, many dyed of their Wounds; and if all had dyed
that were bitten, 'twas no more than what they had justly deserved. Now for
such unworthy, provoking Sinners as these, God provided a Remedy; surely 'twas
nothing but mere, sovereign, undeserved Mercy and Grace that could move him
thus to do. So, 'twas mere, sovereign, undeserved Mercy and Grace and nothing
else, that moved God to provide a Savior for poor, miserable, self-undoing
Sinners. God did not give his Son to save Sinners on the account of any Merit,
Worthiness, or good Deserving in them, for they were unworthy of any Favor.
They justly deserved Eternal Wrath and Vengeance: God might have glorified His
Justice in their everlasting Ruin and Destruction. God's Happiness does not
depend on the Sinners Salvation. God stood in no need of their Happiness; He
had no necessity of their Recovery. If He had pleased to have sinless Men to
serve and praise Him; He might have created a new, holy Stock, and have given
them Grace to be eternally Obedient to Him, if He had seen meet so to do. Or if
He had desired to glorify His Grace in the Redemption of Sinners, He might have
done it (if he had seen meet) in the Salvation of fallen Angels, who were
originally of a Rank and Order superior to Man. Indeed sinful Men did no way
deserve God's Favor, nor had He any need of their Salvation; 'twas therefore
of His most free and sovereign Grace, that He gave His Son to be their
Redeemer. So we read, Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world, as to give his only
begotten Son; that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but should
have everlasting Life. Romans 5.8. God commends his love to us, in that while
we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us. Thus we see, that Gods sending His Son
to save Sinners, is ascribed to His Love: It Is mentioned (and that very justly)
as an admirable Effect of His amazing, unparallel Love. 'Twas (as the Apostle
tells us, Ephesians. 2.4.) His great Love wherewith he loved us. 'Twas great Love, if
we consider the Author of it, the infinitely Great GOD; Great, as to the long
standing of it, from Everlasting to Everlasting. Great, as to the Objects of
it, who were vile Sinners, greatly Unworthy of it. 'Twas great Love, else He
would never have given His only begotten Son, to dye for the saving of those
whom He thus Loved. 'Twas Great as to the Fruits of it, delivering from great
and everlasting Misery, and bringing poor unworthy Sinners to great and
everlasting Glory. Indeed 'twas great Love, free, sovereign, undeserved Grace
and Mercy, that moved God to provide such a Savior as He has done for poor
Sinners. Therefore Believers should learn,

1. Not to ascribe any of the praise of their Salvation to any thing of their
own. Oh Man, have thou a saving Change wrought in thy Soul? Art thou become a
New Creature? Art thou indeed Entitled to Eternal Life and Glory? Is it thus
with thee, while others are hastening on in their Ways of Sin to Eternal
Misery? Whence came this difference between thee and them? Is it to be ascribed
to any Worthiness or Merit of thine own; or to any Power which thou had to
save thy self, more than what others have? No indeed, nothing of the praise of
thy Salvation is to be ascribed to thy self. If thou should be dealt with
according to thy Deservings, Hell would be thy Portion for ever. If no Power
but thine own were employed for thy Deliverance, thou would never be
delivered at all.

2. To ascribe the praise of their Deliverance and Salvation wholly to God. O
Sinner, 'twas the free, sovereign Grace of God, that provided a Savior for
such as thou art, even for vile Sinners. 'Twas sovereign Mercy that ordered thy
being born under the Gospel, or at least thy being brought under the Gospel:
'Twas free Grace that set home Divine Truths on thy Soul, and made thee a New
Creature. 'Twas free Gra^^, that in the Blood of Christ blotted out thy Sins,
and that gave thee a new and firm Title to Eternal Blessedness. The whole of
thy Deliverance and Salvation, is to be ascribed to free, sovereign Grace: It Is
the fruit and effect of sovereign divine Mercy. Therefore the whole praise is
due to God, to Christ. In this manner we should say, as Psalm. 115.1. Not unto
us, O Lord, not unto us; but to thy name give Glory, for thy mercy and thy
truths sake. I Am sure, the bitten Israelites were indebted to free, sovereign,
divine Favor, for providing a Remedy for them. So, Sinners are inconceivably
indebted to sovereign, divine Grace, for providing a Savior, an holy, powerful
Redeemer for them.

5. If the bitten Israelites had done nothing but pore and ponder on their
Wounds, this would not, could not have cured them. Though they were sensible of
their Wounds, did see them, feel them, complain of them, smart under their
Pain, grieve and mourn for them; yet if they did no more, this could not cure
them. They must not only consider their own Wounds, but also look on the Brazen
Serpent, else they were not healed. So, if Sinners only keep looking and poring
on their own Sins, this can never save them. Indeed a sight and sense of Sin is
proper for them, but this is not sufficient. Men should so consider their
sickness and wounds, as to see their need of a Physician, a Surgeon; so, Men
should so consider their Sin and Misery, as to see their need of a Savior, and
trust in Him for Salvation. But if they only keep poring on their Sins, this
will not save them. They may possibly see themselves very vile and sinful, be very
much distressed and perplexed for their Sins, have some Legal Convictions and
Humiliations for them, and yet perish for ever. Ahab humbled himself, and put
on Sackcloth; yet there is no Evidence of his true Repentance. Judas Repeated,
brought back the Price of his Treason; said, he had sinned in betraying
innocent Blood, Mat. 27.3, 4. He had great Convictions and Horrors for Sin, yet
he was the Son of Perdition, and perished for ever, because he did not heartily
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ. Be instructed then, it is not a mere sight and
sense of Sin, horror and distress of Conscience for it, that can bring Persons
to Heaven. Persons may have great Awakenings and Horrors for Sin in this World,
and yet be Damned Eternally in the next. It Is not enough that Persons be
frighted with their Sins, but they must abhor and forsake them, and trust in
Christ alone for the Pardon of them, if ever they would be saved. Men must not
only see their Malady, but also apply the Remedy, if they would obtain the
Relief they need.

6. This piece of Brass, though made in the Figure of a Serpent, yet had not
the Poison of a Serpent in it; but was for the healing of those that were
poisoned. So, the Lord Jesus Christ, though made in the likeness of sinful Flesh,
Romans 8 3. Yet he knew no Sin (that is, he had none) a Cor. 5.21. He did no Sin,
neither was guile found in his mouth, 1 Pet. 2.22. He had no Sin, but came to
save those that had ruined themselves by Sin.

7. 'Twas the Duty of the bitten Israelites to look to the brazen Serpent for
Cure, though to an Eye of Sense, there was little if any likelihood of Cure by
it. The brazen Serpent had no innate Virtue to communicate from it self to
those that were bitten, for the healing of them. There was no natural Efficacy
in that piece of Brass, to heal wounded Spectators, as there is in the Sun to
warm the Earth it shines on. Nay, Writers say, that when Persons were bitten
with those poisonous Serpents, 'twas very hurtful for them to look upon bright
shining Brass. Carnal Reason in a bitten Israelite might say, What should I
look upon that piece of Brass in the Figure of a Serpent for, what good can it
do me? And yet 'twas the Duty of such bitten Persons to look on it for healing.
The healing did proceed from Gods Appointment and Institution; and from His own
efficacious Power exerted in that His own Way. So, the Way of Salvation through
Christ, is very unlikely, if nothing but Man's carnal Reason makes the Judgment
of it. Carnal Men were apt to think concerning Christ, that He had no form,
comeliness or beauty for which He should be desired, Isal* 53.2. The Preaching
of Salvation through a Crucified Christ, was to the Jews a stumbling block, and
to the Greeks foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23. Thus carnal Reason often rejects and
disapproves the Means appointed by God, even by infinite Wisdom and Goodness.
Yet it is the Duty of all that live under the Gospel, to believe in Christ for
Salvation. 1 John 3.23. This is his commandment, that we (...) believe in the
name of his Son Jesus Christ. This is the Way of Gods choosing and appointing,
therefore all should walk in it, though never so contrary to carnal Reason.
They also should expect the Blessing from God in His own Way, and not from any
Worthiness in themselves or Actions. When a bitten Israelite looked on the
brazen Serpent, it was not any Virtue or Merit in his Act of looking, that
obtained the Cure; but the whole Benefit did proceed from Gods Institution and
Blessing. So, when we trust in Christ for Salvation, it is not our Act of
trusting that really merits or deserves the Benefit; but this trusting is
appointed by God, as the Way in which we are to expect His Favor. We should
expect Gods Blessing in His own Way, and not give heed to any contrary
Arguings. This might teach us, diligently to attend on all Ordinances of Gods
appointment. Let us not say, What good shall I get by these and those
Ordinances; what spiritual good can I get by Baptism and the Lords Supper? How
can these convey any Benefit to my Soul? No, this is carnal Arguing and
Reasoning; for these are Means of Gods appointing, therefore we ought heartily
and obediently to attend on them, depending on God alone for the Blessings
represented and exhibited thereby. If the bitten Israelites had insisted on
this, We wont look on the brazen Serpent, it can do us no good; then they might
all have dyed of their Wounds. So, if we will do nothing for the good of our
own Souls, but just what carnal Reason suggests, we must then perish for ever.
Gods Blessing is to be sought and expected in His own Way.

8. The brazen Serpent was set on High, set on a Pole, that all bitten
Israelites might see it for their own good. Indeed the Lord Jesus Christ was
lifted up on the Cross, He was hanged on a Tree, He suffered that accursed
Death to redeem and save Sinners, Gal. 3.13. And Ministers of the Gospel, in
their Preaching, should lift up, or hold and show forth Christ Jesus to
Sinners, that they may see Him by Faith, and live. The brazen Serpent was set
on an high Pole, that bitten Israelites might see it from all Quarters of the
Camp; so, Christ should be Preached and offered to all Sinners, wherever the
Gospel comes. Ministers should spread the Name, and Fame, and Glory of Jesus
Christ, as much as possibly they can, inviting all Sinners to look to Him and
be saved. Mark 16.15, 16. Go, preach the Gospel to every creature; he that
believes and is baptized shall be saved, he that believes not shall be damned.

9. If the bitten Israelites were never so near the brazen Serpent, yet they
had no Benefit thereby, if they did not Look upon it. What if a bitten
Israelite lay almost under the very Pole where the Serpent was? What if his
bitten Parents, Children, or other Friends were healed by looking to it? What
of all this, yet if he did not personally look upon it, then he died of his
wounds. So, though a person lives under the Gospel, and hears a Multitude of
excellent Sermons, though he is much urged and solicited to believe in Jesus
Christ; yet if he does not believe in him, he shall not be saved by him. It may
be his Father and Mother, and many of his near Relatives and Friends believed
in Christ for the saving of their Souls; yet he will be never the better for
this, if he himself does not believe in Christ he must be damned for ever. If a
stung Israelite heard never so much about the brazen Serpent, or spoke never so
much about it; yet if he personally did not look on it, he was not benefitted
by it. So, though a person hears never so much about Christ, speaks or preaches
never so much about him; yet if he personally does not believe in him, he must
perish for ever. If he has ten thousand offers of Christ, yet if he does not
accept of him by heart-purifying Faith, he must be Eternally Damned. He that
believes not on the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath God abides on him,
Joh. 3.36.

10. All bitten Israelites, were equally welcome to look on the brazen Serpent;
and all were healed that did so. Looking on the brazen Serpent, was not a
Privilege limited only to the Rich or Great, or only to those of such or such
Orders and Degrees; No, All might look on it. Whoever was bitten, whether Male
or Female, Young or Old, High or Low, Rich or Poor, Bond or Free; whether he
had been bitten a longer or shorter Time, whether he had received one Wound or
many, whether his Anguish and Pain had been great or small, yet he might look
on the brazen Serpent. None were forbidden to look, all bitten Persons were
equally welcome; and all that looked on it lived. So, All Sinners under the
Gospel, are equally welcome to come to Christ; all that will come shall be
welcome. He has said, Joh. 6.37. Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise
cast out. All that hear of Jesus Christ, whether they are Younger or Old, Rich
or Poor, or however circumstanced in the World; yet they are invited to come to
Christ. Isai. 45.22. Look unto me and be ye saved, all ye ends of the earth.
Their own Sins, their own Unworthiness shall never Ruin them, if they will but
heartily submit to Jesus Christ. Whosoever believes in him shall not perish,
but shall have everlasting life, Joh. 3.16. If a poor Israelite that had been
stung for some considerable time, that was much swelled, greatly tormented,
just ready to die, did but look on the brazen Serpent, he as surely lived as he
that had looked on it as soon as he was bitten. So, if the greatest, vilest
Sinner in the World should come to Jesus Christ, he would be as welcome as any;
and he should never be rejected for his Unworthiness, but should be saved for
ever. Oh consider the gracious Invitations of the Scripture. Come unto me, all
ye that labor and are heavey laden, and I will give you rest, Mat. 11.28. He
that is a thirst, let him come; and whosoever will, let him take of the water
of life freely, Rev. 22.17. These things should abundantly Encourage Poor
Sinners, to trust in Christ for Salvation.

11. After many had been cured by Looking on the brazen Serpent, yet this way
of healing was not at all abated, but as efficacions as ever. Indeed the
healing power came from God, and this was not at all abated by healing of
Multitudes. The last bitten Israelite that looked on the brazen Serpent, was as
truly and really benefitted thereby, as the first that looked on it. So, the
Lord Jesus is now as able to save Sinners, as ever he was. Though he has healed
and saved Multitudes already, all the believers of the Old Testament, and all
those of the New Testament heitherto; yet his sufficiency to save is in no
measure abated. No, He Is able to save to the uttermost them that come unto God
by him, Heb. 7.25. He Is fit to be trusted in, for he has Everlasting Strength,
Isai. 26.4. He is an inexhaustible fountain of Good and Grace, able for ever to
supply all that come to him for help and relief. This should greatly encourage
all of us, to trust in Christ continually, for all that Pardon of Sin, for all
those supplies of Grace which we need. Psalm. 55.22. Cast thy burden on the
Lord, he shall sustain thee. Casting all your cares upon him, for he cares for
you. Psalm. 27.14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
thine heart: wait I say on the LORD.

SERMON, II. The Dangerous SIN OF Murmuring, Described and Condemned.
1 Cor. X. 10. Neither Murmur ye, as some of them also Murmured; and were
destroyed of the Destroyer.


THose who call themselves Christians, and profess Obedience to the Gospel,
should heartily endeavor to live answerably to such their Profession. They
should live holily on Earth, that they may live happily in Heaven for ever. The
Apostle Paul did exhort the Christian Corinthians thus to live. He said to
them, 1 Cor. 9.24. So run, that ye may obtain. He would have them be so hearty,
sincere, constant in their Christian Course, as that they might obtain the
Prize, the Crown of Eternal Glory. Therefore he would not have them content
themselves merely with their outward Profession, their external Religious
Privileges and Performances. To this end, in the former part of this Chapter
containing our Text, he tells them, that the Israelites of old, were Gods
peculiar professing People, that they had many distinguishing Religious
Privileges, and yet many of them perished for their Wickedness. Though they
did all eat the same spiritual Meat, and did all drink the same spiritual Drink
(for they drank of that Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ) yet
with many of them God was not well pleased; for they were overthrown in the
Wilderness, v. 3, 4, 5. Having thus said, he adds, v. 6. N^w these things were
our Ex^^^^^^s, to the intent we should not lust after (...) things, as they
also lusted. Would you know, why the Sins and Punishments of many are recorded
in Scripture? Why, it is for this end, that the fear of like Punishments, might
keep us from the like Sins. We should hear and fear, and not do so Wickedly as
others have done. We should not imitate their Sins, lest we partake of their
Plagues. The Apostle having plainly intimated in general, that the Sins and
Punishments of Israel, were recorded for the cautioning and warning of those
who should hear of them; he then particularly cautions the Corinthians against
Idolatry, v. 7. against Fornication, v. 8. against tempting of Christ, v. 9.
and against Murmuring, as in our Text, v. 10. Neither murmur ye, as some of
them also murmured; and were destroyed of the Destroyer. As if he had said,
Many of the Israelites Murmured against God in the Wilderness, and were
destroyed for doing so; let this caution you against the Sin of Murmuring. From
the Words we may observe this

DOCTRINE. Christians should carefully avoid the great and dangerous Sin of
Murmuring.
Under this Doctrine we may consider, (1.) The Nature of this Sins. (2.) The
Greatness of it. (3.) The Danger of it.

1. The Nature of this Sin. Some describe Murmuring to be, a speaking against
Persons or Things, out of Dislike, Impatience, or Discontent. To be sure, when
Persons Murmur at what they meet with, it plainly implies their Dislike of it,
their being Uneasy and Discontent with it, their Blaming and Complaining of it,
and finding Fault with it: It plainly implies their Condemning of it, as not
being as it ought to be. This in general is the Nature of Murmuring. Hence
Murmurers and Complainers are put together, as being much the same, Jude. v.
16. This Murmuring, Discontent or Complaining, often operates or exerts it self,

1. When Persons cannot get those Things they ^e^^e. Thus, when the Israelites
wanted Bread (their Stores being spent which they brought out of Egypt) they
murmured against Moses and Aaron in the wilderness, and said, would to God we
had died by the hand of the Lord in the Land of Egypt, when we sat by the
fleshpots, and when we did eat Bread to the full: for he have brought us forth
into this wilderness, to (...) this wh^le Assembly with hunger, Exodus 16.2, 3.
So they Murmured when they wanted ^a^e^, and said to Moses, Exodus 17.3.
Wherefore is this, that thou have brought us out of Egypt* (...) kill us and
our Children, and our Cattle with thirst? They greatly Murmured, they bitterly
Complained, as though they were ill dealt with; because they had not such Food
and Drink, such outward Supports and Supplies as they desired. When Ahab could
not get his Neighbors Vineyard as he desired, he showed a base, murmuring,
discontented Spirit; he was full of ill Humur, Pouty and Sullen, turned away
his face, and would not eat Bread, 1 King. 21.4. Many Persons, when they cannot
get those things they desire, will Fret, Vex, be Uneasy and Discontent: This is
Murmuring, it is a faulting of Divine Providence, which Governs all Things.

2. When Persons meet with those things, which are more directly and
possitively Troublesome and Afflictive to them. Persons often Murmur, not only
when they want such things as they desire, but also when they meet with Losses,
Disappointments; even when Troubles and Afflictions come upon them. When those
who joined in the Sin of Korah, were cut off by a sudden, terrible Destruction;
the Congregation Murmured against Moses and Aaron for it, and said, Ye have
killed the People of the Lord, Numb. 16.41. They complained of the Loss of so
many Men, as being an Affliction which ought not to have been brought upon
them. It Is said, Rev. 16.9. And Men were scortched which great heat, and
blasphemed the name of God, which has power over these Plagues. The Affliction
they met with, made them quarrel with their Maker, blaspheme his Name, and
condemn the Dispensations of his Providence; like those, Isai. 8.21. And they
shall pass through it, hardly bestead, and hungry, and it shall come to pass,
that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and shall curse
their King and their God, and shall look upward. Men too often Fret, Vex,
Murmur, Curse, when they meet with sore Trials and Afflictions. Prove. 19.3. The
foolishness of Man perverteth his way, and his heart fretteth against the Lord.
When God afflicts Men for the Folly and Wickedness of their Ways, their Hearts
often fret against him for it.

3. When Persons see others Enjoy more than they think they should. Persons are
too apt to Envy those whom they see in prosperous Circumstances; especially
when they judge them unworthy of such Prosperity. When those who labored but
one Hour in the Vineyard, received as much as those who labored all Day; those
who had labored all the Day Murmured at it, though they themselves received
all they had agreed for, Mat. 20.11. The holy Psalmist was envious at the
foolish, when he saw the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 73.3. Envy always
implies Murmuring in it; it is an implicit charging of God with an undue,
unbecoming Distribution of his Favors. Indeed Gods Providence governs the
World; His throne is prepared in the Heavens, his kingdom rules over all,
Psalm. 103.19. He does according to his pleasure in Heaven, Earth, Sea, and all
deep places, Psalm. 135.6. Let Instruments be who or what they will, yet all
Benefits and Troubles are distributed, ordered forth, by Divine Providence. God
forms the Light, creates Darkness, makes Peace, creates Evil; it is the Lord
does all these things, Isai. 45.7. Men therefore should look above and beyond
Instruments, in all the Mercies and Afflictions they meet with, and consider
the Hand of God in every one of them. If therefore they Murmur when they want
what they desire; or when they meet with Losses in their Estate in their
Children or other dear Relatives, indeed when they meet with any Afflictions;
or when they see others in Prosperity whom they think unworthy of it; I say, if
they Murmur at these things, it is plainly a faulting and condemning of what God
does. We therefore now proceed to consider,

2. The Greatness of this Sin. Murmuring is a very vile Impiety, a very great
Sin. Disobedience (as such) to the Divine Law, is a practical contempt of Gods
Authority; a saying, Who is the Lord that I should obey him? Murmuring is an
implicit faulting of Gods Government; a condemning the Steps and Methods he
takes in ordering of his Creatures. Indeed there may be such a thing, as
faulting (and that justly) the Instruments of our Trouble, where yet there is
no Murmuring against God; but a Patient bearing of his Hand in the Trial. But
on the other hand, when Persons are Fretful, Impatient, Discontent under
Afflictions, whether they have much regard to Instruments or not; this is
Murmuring, and a great Crime it is: For it highly and basely reflects on God,
who orders and governs all things in his Providence as he pleases: It Is an
implicit judging, faulting, condemning what God does. This highly Reflects,

1. Upon Gods Sovereignty. As for Gods own Being, it is Necessary and Eternal.
As for the Being of Creatures, it depends entirely on Gods Sovereign Pleasure.
For his pleasure, all things are and were created, Rev. 4.11. God has made the
Heaven, Earth, Sea, and all things therein; and he preserves them all, Neh.
9.6. It Is of Gods mere Sovereign Pleasure, that he has made Creatures, and that
he continues them in Being. Therefore he must needs have the most absolute
Lordship and Dominion over them, that possibly can be. He is the Supreme Lord
and owner of them, and may therefore order and dispose of them as he sees meet.
The Earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof; the World and they that dwell
therein, Psalm. 24.1. Therefore he may do according to his will in the Armies of
Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth; none may stay his hand, or say
to him, what do thou? Dan. 4.35. Persons commonly reckon, that Men may
dispose of their own things as they will; as the Lord of the Vineyard said,
Mat. 20.15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is thine
eye evil, because I am good? Surely then, the Great GOD may do what he will
with his own: He Is the sovereign Potter, we are the Clay; he may make one
Vessel to Honor and another to Dishonor as he will. Now, when Persons Murmur
and Repine at that Condition, at those Circumstances which Providence orders to
them; therein they do as it were arraign and condemn Gods Sovereignty; they
implicitly say, God has no right thus to order things as he does, at his own
Pleasure. Surely, it is great and daring Wickedness, thus to impeach and condemn
Gods Sovereignty, his sovereign Government of the World. When Peter said to our
Lord, What shall this Man do? Jesus said unto him, If I will that he tarry till
I come, what is that to thee? Joh. 21.21, 22. So, O Man, though thou art in
great Adversity, while God bestows great Prosperity on others; yet, what is
that to thee? May he not dispose his own Favors as he will? What is that to
thee, if others have Health while thou have Sickness; if others are loaded with
Honor, while thou art loaded with Contempt; if others are Rich while thou art
Poor; if others have their Houses and Estates continued, while thine are taken
away; if others have their Wives, Children, or other dear Relatives continued,
while thine are taken away? Surely, God may do what he will with his own When
thou do fret and vex at thy Condition, thou do Murmur against God; thou
do practically condemn his Sovereignty, and show thy self displeased that he
has the actual Government of the World in his own Hand. Thy Murmuring is as it
were a practical Essay to rob God of his Crown, thrust him from his Throne, and
wrest his Scepter out of his Hand. Such proud, daring Arrogance as this, must
needs be a great and heinous Offense. Murmuring does Reflect,

2. On Gods Infinite Wisdom. God is the Father of Lights, his Understanding is
infinite, he is Wisdom it self. He acts with infinite Wisdom, in all his Works
of Creation and Providence too: Psalm. 104.14. O Lord, how manifold are thy
works, in Wisdom have thou made them all. The Lord of Hosts is wonderful in
Counsel, and excellent in Working, Isal. 28.29. He works all things according
to the Counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. God in all he does, always aims at
the highest and best End, even his own Glory; he has made all things for
himself, and he orders all things after the best manner that can be, to obtain
this best End; and therefore he orders all things in infinite Wisdom. But when
Men Murmur, Repine, Fret, and are Discontent at the Dispensations of
Providence; therein they reflect on Gods Wisdom. They practically say, God does
not know how to govern the World well and wisely, he does not take right and
proper Steps in his Rule and Conduct; for if he orders things well and wisely,
then why do they yet complain? Now it must needs be a very great Crime, thus to
reflect on the unsearchible Wisdom of the great God. Shall such Bats, such
ignorant, short-sighted blind Creatures as we are, arraign and condemn the wise
Conduct of Divine Providence? Yet thus wickedly we do, when we Murmur at
Afflictions. Job 40.3. Shall he that contendeth with the Almighty, instruct
him! He that reproves God, let him answer it. It Is wicked Arrogance, for any
to pretend to instruct the Almighty, or reprove him for any part of his
Conduct. He that Murmurs, practically says, that God does not govern wisely;
and this Reflection must needs be a great offense. Murmuring Reflects,

3. On Gods Justice and Righteousness. Indeed* God is a God of Truth and
without iniquity, just and right is he, Deuteronomy. 32 4. Shall not God the Judge of
all the Earth, do right? Yes surely, he cannot do a wrong, or an unrighteous
thing. He is Righteous in all his ways, and Holy in all his works, Psalm.
145.17. Men often do unjust things; yea, Good Men, through Ignorance, or
present Prevalency of Corruption, sometimes do unjust things, and so may justly
deserve Blame. But God is unchangibly Wise, Just, Holy, Righteous; and so
cannot do an unjust thing. As it is impossible for God to lie, so it is
impossible for God to be unjust, or to act unjustly; for there is no
variableness with him, nor any shadow of turning, Jam. 1.17. Yet when Men
Murmur at their Condition, they practically charge God with treating them
hardly, with dealing unjustly with them. If they meet with no unjust Treatment,
then they have no reason to find fault; therefore their finding fault plainly
implies, that they think themselves unfairly dealt with, and that they don't
deserve the trials they meet with, or that others ought not to be so high, and
they so low in the World: Ezekiel. 18.25. Yet ye say, the way of the Lord is not
equal. They wickedly charged God with Innequality and Injustice in the Methods
of his Providence. This was the Spirit and Temper of those, Mal. 3.13, 14. Your
words have been stout against me, says the Lord, yet ye say, what have we
spoken so much against thee? Ye have said, it is vain to serve God; and what
profit is it, that we have kept his Ordinance, and that we have walked
mournfully before the Lord? They seem evidently to complain, that God did not
deal with them so well as he should; that he did not bestow on them the
Benefits and Blessings which they deserved. The same ill Spirit appeared in
those, Isai. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not?
Wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou take no knowledge? By these
Queries, full of Discontent and fretful Complaints, they practically said, Gods
Ways were not equal, he did not deal justly with them, they deserved better at
his Hands. This is the Heaven-provoking Language, of a Murmuring, Discontented
Spirit. Murmuring is a great Crime, it is a charging of God with Injustice.
Murmuring highly Reflects,

4. On the Goodness of God. Murmuring implies a contempt of, and unthankfulness
for the Goodness of God. God is good, and his tender Mercies are over all his
works, Psalm. 145.9. There Is no Person in the World, but what receives more or
less of the Tokens of Gods Goodness. All Men are Sinners, and the Wages of Sin
is Death. Therefere all that persons have on this side Death, on this side the
unquenchible Flames of Hell, is owing to mere Divine Mercy and Kindness; it is
better than they deserve: For they are less than the least of Gods Mercies, as
Jacob confessed of himself, Genesis 32.10. Under their heaviest Losses, Trials,
Disappointments, Afflictions, they should yet say, God punishes us less than
our Inquities deserve; it is of the Lords Mercy we are not consumed: Wherefore
should a living Man complain, a Man for the punishment of his Sins? Under our
sorest Afflictions, we yet have many Mercies, though we deserve none; therefore
we have always cause to be Thankful, but never any cause to Complain. But when
we Murmur and Repine, it shows a contempt of Gods Goodness to us; as though it
did not deserve our Notice of it, or Thankfulness for it. This despising of
Gods Goodness, must needs be highly provoking to him. Oh Man, do thou Murmur
at thy Afflictions? Thou do Reproach God in doing it. God deals far better
with thee than thou deservest, thou have no reason to Repine, but much reason
to be Thankful. Have thou lost part of thy Estate? It Is a Mercy thou have not
lost it all. If thou have lost all thy Estate, yet it is a Mercy thou have thy
Liberty, and art not a miserable Captive among cruel Enemies. It may be thou
have Health and Ease in thy Body; that is a great Mercy. Or if thou have
Sickness and Pain, yet it is a great Mercy that thy Sight and thy Hearing are
continued to thee. It Is a Mercy that the use of thy Reason is continued to
thee. In a Word, Sure I am, it is a great Mercy that thou art out of Hell, that
thou art under the Gospel, that thou have the Bible for thy Guide and Comfort;
and so have an Opportunity to lay up Treasures in Heaven, to secure an unfading
Inheritance, an eternal weight of Glory. It Is wicked Ingratitude, a vile
contempt of Gods Goodness, for one so circumstanced as thou art; to Murmur and
Repine at Troubles and Afflictions. Thus we see, that Murmuring is a very great
Sin; it highly reflects on the Sovereignty, Wisdom, Righteousness and Goodness
of the Great GOD; and this must needs be a great Offense, an high Affront
indeed to the Great GOD.

Let us now consider,

3. The danger of this Sin. The Sin of Murmuring, greatly provokes God, and
exposes persons to His terrible displeasure. This is evident from, (1.) The
threatenings he has denounced against it. (2.) The Judgments he has Inflicted
for it.

1. From the threatenings he has denounced against it. When Israel said, The
way of the Lord is not equal; God threatened, That he would Judge every one of
them according to their ways, Ezekiel. 18.29, 30. God threnten'd to Judge and
punish them severely, when they so wickedly Murmured at his Providence. So,
Isai. 45.9. Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker: Let the Potsheards strive
with the Potsheards of the earth: shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it,
what make thou? God threateneth those, woe to those, who strive with their
Maker, who fault and condemn his proceedings, and yet all Murmurers do so. Yea,
woe to them indeed who strive with their Maker, He Will certainly overcome. Shall
we strive with our Maker, contend with him? Shall we run upon the thick Bosses
of his Buckler? What can we expect but ruin, when we thus provoke Him who is
infinitely more than a Match for all Creatures? 1 Cor. 10.22. Do we provoke the
Lord to Jealous^e, are we stronger than he? We act most foolishly and madly
against our own Interest, when we provoke the strong, the Almighty God, by our
Murmuring at what he does.

2. From the Judgments God has Inflicted for it. Our Text tells us, that some
of the Israelites Murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. God destroyed
many of them in the Wilderness, for their Murmuring at his dispensations. Numb.
11.1. And when the People complained, it displeased the Lord; and the Lord
heard it, and his anger was kindled; and the fire of the Lord burnt among them,
and consumed them that were in the uttermost parts of the camp. The People they
Murmured and Complained; and God heard it, He took exact Notice of all their
repining, discontented, complaining Words; and was so provoked thereby, that he
consumed many of them with fire. Discontent burnt in their hearts, brake forth
in their Words or Actions or more probably in both; and kindled the fire of
Gods wrath which consumed them. Soon after this, they Murmured for want of
Flesh to eat, though they had Manna enough every Day; they were not content with
God's Allowance which he gave them. Well, God gave them Quails to eat, He sent
them Flesh with a vengeance, He gate them Flesh and a Curse with it. For while
the Flesh was between their Teeth, ere it was chewed; the wrath of the Lord was
^indled against the People, and the Lord smote the People with a very great
Plague, Numb. 11.33. God Plagued 'em and killed 'em for their Murmuring. He
gave them their desire, and sent leanness into their Soul. At another time,
when the Spies gave an ill report of the Land of Canaan, the People Murmured
and said, Would God we had died in Egypt, or would God we had died in this
Wilderness, Numb. 14.2. God was so provoked with this wicked wish, that he
said, v. 28, 29. As you have spoken in mine ears, so will I do to you. Your
Carcasses shall fall in this Wilderness, and all that were numbered of you,
according to your whole number from twenty Years old and upward, which have
Murmured against me. There were about Six hundred thousand men of Israel, that
came out of Egypt above twenty Years old, (Exodus 12.37. Numb. 1.3.) yet none
of them but Caleb and Joshua, ever got to Canaan, the rest died in the
Wilderness: and 'twas their wicked Murmuring and Unbelief* (...) procured the
Death of them. They were so discontent, that they wickedly wished they had been
dead, God (in a sort) says Amen to it; He threatens that they should die in the
Wilderness and he fulfilled his threatening. Rachel in a Murmuring fit once
said, Give me Children or else I die, Genesis 30.1. God gave her Children and they
killed her: She di'd in Travail with her Second Son, Genesis 35.19. Surely these
things show, that Murmuring is a Sin very highly provoking to God. And by the
way, surely these things should Caution us against wicked wishes, vile
abominable Imprecations. Some are very apt to wish such and such evil things to
themselves, to their Wives, their Husbands, their Children or other Relatives;
it may be they may wickedly and rashly wish that they may be Hanged, or that
they may never see one another again, or the like. It Is very Sinful to do thus,
avoid such wicked wishes, lest God fulfill them in his wrath. Israel wished they
had di'd in the Wilderness, God said Amen to it, He was so provoked that He
caused them to die there. Let none be discontent and fretful, because they
cannot have these and those things they desire; let them not say, that they can
never be easy or content without them, lest God send the things thus desired
and a Plague and Curse with them. Rachel cannot be content without Children,
well then, She shall have Children and be killed in bearing them. Israel cannot
be content without Flesh; well then, they shall have Flesh and a consuming
Plague with it. These things should be Cautions and Warnings to others. What
has been said, may suffice for clearing of the Doctrine.

We proceed to the USE, from what we have heard we may Infer,

1. That we should be deeply humble, for all that Murmuring and Discontent
which we have been chargeable with. Murmuring too often breaks out in Words and
Actions; and yet more frequently rages in the Secret of the Soul. Though it is
a very common Sin, yet it is a very great one. How often have we been Impatient,
Fretful, Discontent at the Dispensations of Divine Providence? This was a
charging of God foolishly, a striving with our Maker; we should be deeply
humbled for it, and say as he, Psalm. 73.22. So foolish was I, and ignorant, I
was as a Beast before thee. Job 42.6. Wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in
dust and Ashes.

2. We should watch and strive against the Sin of Murmuring. This is the
Exhortation in our Text, Neither Murmur ye. To quicken and fortify us against
this Sin, let us mind the following Directions.

1. Let us consider, that God sends all our Afflictions. Let Means,
Instruments, Second Causes be what they will; yet we have to do with God, in
all our Comforts and Afflictions too. Shall there be Evil in a City, and the
Lord has not done it? Amos 3.6. There Is no Evil of Affliction, but what is of
Gods ordering. Therefore, though we may be displeased with the Sin of
Instruments that afflict us; and may grieve for the Afflictions themselves too;
yet we should not Murmur at them for the sending of them is a Divine Work.
Psalm. 46.10. Be still, and know that I am God. Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, I opened
not my mouth, because thou did it.

2. Let us impress on our Minds, a firm Belief of Gods Righteousness, even in
the darkest Dispensations. The Prophet did so; Jer. 12.1. Righteous art thou, O
Lord; yet let me talk with thee of thy Judgments. Psalm. 97.2. Clouds and
darkness are round about him; Righteousness and Judgment are the habitation of
his Throne. If we cant see through these and those dark Dispensations; yet let
us firmly believe, that God does all things well and wisely, that there is no
Unrighteousness with him. Patients often take Physic, though they don't know
all the Particulars of the Composition, the Potion, nor the particular Nature
of them; yet they trust the Physicians Skill, and think that he knows and does
well. Much more should we think, that God always does what is best, though we
cannot at present see through the meaning of his particular Dispensations. Our
Lord said to Peter, Joh. 13.7. What I do, thou know not now, but thou shall
know hereafter.

3. Let us deeply affect our selves with a Sense of our own Sinfulness and
Unworthiness. This Consideration prevented Murmuring in the afflicted Prophet:
Micah 7.9. I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him. As if he had said, I have deserved worse than all this, I have no
reason to complain. So, Dan. 9.14. -- The Lord our God is righteous in all his
works which he does, for we obeyed not his Voice.

4. Let us get our Affections more weaned from Earthly Things. Col. 3.2. Set
your Affections on things above, not on things on the earth. If we looked on
our selves as Pilgrims and Strangers on Earth, who abide here as it were but
for a Night; and rightly considered the Uncertainty, Emptiness, Insufficiency
of Earthly Enjoyments; this would tend very much to prevent Envying and
Murmuring.

5. Let us be very sollicitous for our Spiritual Eternal Welfare. Are we
Discontent at Afflictions? Let us thus Argue; We are Gods Children, or we are
not. If we are not his Children, why are we thus concerned about outward,
momentany Troubles? Instead of being so concerned at these Troubles, we should
be chiefly concerned to make our Peace with God, that we may be Safe for ever.
Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. Give diligence
to make your Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. On the other hand, if we
are Gods Children, then all things shall work together for our good, (Romans
8.28.) whether we can at present see how it shall be or not. God has Power and
Faithfulness sufficient to fulful his Promise. He can do exceeding abundantly,
above all that we ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. And we should not Murmur at what is
profitable to us.

6. Let us be much in Prayer. In every thing, by Prayer and Supplication with
Thanksgiving, we should make known our requests to God, Phil. 4.6. We should
Pray, that God would strengthen us against all our Temptations and Corruption;
that he would keep us from Sinning, and so particularly from Murmuring and
Discontent. Psalm. 19.4. Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my
heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my Strength and my Redeemer. Psalm.
119.133. Order my steps in thy Word; and let not any Iniquity have dominion
over me.

Sermon, III. The Fear of GOD, Fortifying Against Sin, and ill Examples.
NEH. V. 15. -- But so did not I, because of the Fear of GOD.


THese are the words of Nehemiah, a godly Governor among the Jews. This Book
of Nehemiah, refers to the affairs of the Jews after their Babylonish Captivity
was ended. After their return from Babylon, they were few, poor, and met with
various Trials. It Is said, Chap. 1. v. 3. They were in great Affliction and
Reproach: the Wall also of Jerusalem was broken down, and the Gates thereof
burnt with fire. When Nehemiah a godly Jew, heard of this distressed state of
his returned Country men (though he himself was not then among them, but in
Persia, Chap. 1. v. 1.) he was greatly concerned for them. He himself was
Cup Bearer to the King of Persia (Chap. 1. v. 11.) in which considerable Post,
he might doubtless have lived in great Personal ease, quiet and prosperity, if
he had looked no further than a present serving of himself. But being a very
godly Man, and of a Public Spirit, he was sollicitous for the welfare of his
Country Men and Brethren the Jews, God's professing People; and he prayed to
God for them. Chap. 1. He also besought the King of Persia (under whose
extensive Imperial Government, the returned Jews then were) that he might be
permitted and empowered to go to Judea, and promote the welfare of his Country
Men, Chap. 2. He obtained his request, was by the King of Persia made Governor
over the returned Jews, and sent to promote their welfare. Being thus
Empowered, he laid out himself and employed his Authority, to promote the
welfare of his People, in their poor and low circumstances. He took care to get
the Walls of Jerusalem rebuilt, Chap. 3. and 4. And in this 5th. Chapter
containing our Text, we find, that he took care to Redress Grievances and
Abuses among the Jews themselves. Some of the Poorer Sort had Mortgaged their
Houses, Lands, Vineyards, and made their Children Bond-Servants also, for the
buying of Food and paying the Kings Tribute. The Richer Sort who exacted these
things were Rigorous, Cruel, Unkind and Uncharitable to their Poorer Brethren.
When these things were complained of, Nehemiah the Governor Rebuked those, who
were thus Injurious to their Poor Neighbors and set himself to Redress the
Wrongs done; as appears in this Chapter, from v. 1. to the 13. Hereupon,
Nehemiah (to enforce the Exhortation he had given to others) mentions his own
kind Example and Carriage, v. 14, 15. Though some who had been Governors over
the returned Jews before him, had been very chargible to the Poor People, yea,
had suffered their very Servants to Rule them; yet he did not follow this
Example set before him. So did not I (says he, in our Text) because of the fear
of God. He does not deny in general, those who are Civil Rulers, Ministers of
God for good to a People; I say, he does not deny in general, that such ought
to have a suitable Support and Reward from the People, for whose Welfare they
are concerned; but some of his Predecessors in Government, had gone farther
than they ought in exacting from the People in their poor and low
Circumstances; yea, they had suffered their very Servants to Rule over and
abuse them; but Nehemiah dare not Sin after this Rate, dare not tred in these
Steps, nor walk in this beaten Road, dare not follow these ill Examples set
before him, because he feared God, and therefore made Conscience of his Ways.
Though he had the Power of a Governor, yet he dare not abuse that Power, as
some of his Predecessors had done.

Note by the way, Those that have Power and Authority over Men, yet ought to
Fear God as well as others.

All Men are not Equals, nor do they stand upon a Level as to Power and
Authority. Order ought to be upheld in Societies, which cannot be, without some
being Superiors and others Inferiors in them. It Is agreeable to the Revealed
Will of God, and Required by him, that in Families, which are the smallest
Societies; in Churches or Ecclesiastical Societies; in Civil Societies, Common
Wealths or Kingdoms, some should be Rulers and others Ruled. Yet even those who
have never so much Power and Authority among Men, I say, even such Superiors
among Men, are as much Inferiors to God, and ought as really and truly to Fear
Him, as any of the meanest and lowest of the Children of Men. If they are
Governors, Kings, Emperors, have the greatest Power that is lawful among
Mortals; yet they are bound and obliged as really and as much to Fear God and
Obey Him, as any others are. God is as truly their Makers, Preserver,
Benefactor, Lawgiver and Judge, as he is of any others. But the Observation
chiefly intended from the Words is this, viz.

DOCTRINE. The Fear of GOD should keep us from Sinning, and particularly from
following ill Examples.
Here are Two Propositions. (1.) The Fear of God should keep us from Sinning.
(2.) It should particularly keep us from following i^l Examples.

PROP. I. The Fear of God should keep us from Sinning. Sin is a breach of Gods
Law. 1 John 3.4. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the Law; for sin
is a transgression of the Law. Sin is a very great evil, Inasmuch as it is an
affront to the Infinitely Great GOD. And as it is a great Evil, so it deserves
great Misery. The wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. Those who are the Servants
of Sin, are like to be the Subjects of Death, even of Eternal Death and Misery.
This Eternal Misery, will be Inflicted by Divine Justice, on those who go on
obstinately in ways of wickedness. Therefore the true Fear of God, and of His
holy displeasure, is the best Remedy or Preservative against Sin. Every
Regenerate Person, every true Convert, has in him the root and principle of
every true saving Grace. As he has true Faith and Trust in Gods Mercy through
Christ; so he has true Love to God, and true filial Fear of Him. True Fear God,
is a saving Grace. Christians are bidden, to pass the time of their Sojourning
^^ere (...), 1 Pet. 1.17. They should cleanse themselves from all filthiness of
Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. The more
Men fear God, the more careful they will be to avoid Sin, and to practice
holiness. Job 28.28. The fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from
evil is understanding. A Person's truly fearing of God, Implies in it, his real
belief that God is such an One as He has declared Himself to be, and his being
suitably Affected therewith; and so it tends directly to keep him from Sinning.
A realizing belief of his Knowledge, Holiness, Power and Faithfulness, does so.

1. A realizing belief of His Knowledge. Gods Law should be our rule in all
things; we should conform our Thoughts, Words, and Deeds unto it continually.
And God most critically observes whether we do so or not. Though many of our
Actions may be hid from Men, yet none of them can be hid from God. He says,
Jer. 23.23, 24. Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see
him, says the Lord? Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord? God is
present every where, sees all things, strictly observes whether we regard his
Authority and obey His Precepts, yea or no. God's Eyes are on all our ways:
there is not a word in our Tongue, but lo, He knows it altogether: Yea He knows
the things that come into our Minds, even every one of them. His eyes are in
every place beholding the evil and the good, Prove. 15.3. There is no Creature
that is not manifest in his sight; all things are open and naked to the eyes of
him with whom we have to do. Heb. 4.13. Though many Sins are secret as to Men,
yet none are so as to God; His Knowledge is Infinite. A realizing belief of
this extensive universal Knowledge of God; would tend very much to keep us from
Sinning. Persons are often restrained from Sin, by the Presence of serious,
grave, godly Men, their Fellow. Creatures; and how much more would it restrain
them from Sin, if they seriously believed and considered, that the All-seeing
Eye of their infinitely Holy and Glorious Judge, is continually upon them?

2. A realizing Belief of his Holiness. As God necessarily sees and knows all
the Sins any are guilty of, so, he as necessarily hates and abhors them. Sin is
the most hateful thing to God that can be, yea, the only thing that provokes
him; it is the abominable thing that his Soul hates. He has no pleasure in
wickedness, evil shall not dwell with him; he hates all workers of iniquity,
Psalm. 5.4, 5. He is of purer eyes than to behold evil, he cannot look on
iniquity, Hab. 1.13. No vile Object in the World, is so loathsome and
abominable to Men as all Sin is to God. It Is nothing but Sin, that hinders the
Communication of Blessings and Favors from God to Men. Your iniquities have
separated between you and your God. Isai. 59.2. Your sins have witholden good
things from you, Jer. 5.25. God has manifested his matchless, glorious Holiness
and Purity, and so his Hatred of Sin, in casting the fallen Angels into Chains
of Darkness, in threatening Death as the Wages of Sin; in drowning the old
World with a Flood for their Wickedness; in bringing numberless terrible
Judgments on particular Persons, Families, Nations, Kingdoms, Countries for
their Sins; and in bringing terrible Sufferings on our blessed Lord Jesus, who
became Surety for his chosen People, and undertook to satisfy for their Sins.
Though God through Christ can be Reconciled to Returning Sinners, yet he cannot
be Reconciled to Sin it self. Now a Realizing Belief of God's infinite
Holiness, his unnutterable Hatred and Loathing of Sin, tends to keep Men from
Sinning. While the true Fear of God actually and vigorously operates in the
Soul, a Person would not dare knowingly to Sin against him, to do any thing
which he knows to be so unutterably Hateful to him.

3. A Realizing Belief of his Power. Gods Power is as great to punish Sin, as
his Holiness to hate it. Sometimes Just and Righteous Judges cannot come at vile
Criminals, to punish them as they deserve. But Gods Eye beholds all
Transgressors,, he needs no Witnesses to inform him; his Hand also is long
enough to reach them all, and strong enough to inflict the most terrible
Judgments on them. He is the Lord Almighty; the Lord God Omnipotent Reigns;
nothing is too hard for him, all things are possible with him. Obstinate
Sinners cannot possibly escape his terrible Revenges. Who ever hardened himself
against God and prospered? Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy, are we stronger
than he? 1 Cor. 10.22. Though Sinners exalt themselves as the Eagle, and set
their Nest among the Stars; yet God will bring them down, Obad. v. 4. He can
inflict intolerable Plagues and Punishments on Sinners, on their Bodies, on
their Souls, in Time, and throughout Eternity. Who knows the Power of his
Anger? Oh, it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God!
Surely, a Realizing Belief of the Almighty Power of that God, who sees all the
Sins of Men, who infinitely hates them, must needs have a proper Tendency to
keep Men from Sinning. Who but Madmen, would heedlesly and knowingly anger and
provoke One, whom they know has present, constant, sufficient Power to deprive
them of all their Comforts, to Ruin and Destroy them, to make them unutterably
Miserable?

4. A Realizing Belief of Gods Faithfulness. God has denounced terrible
Threatenings against Sin and Sinners. The Soul that sins shall die. The Wages of
Sin is Death. Every Sin is a Capital Crime, by the Righteous Law of God. Those
who are obstinate Servants of Sin in this World, shall be the Subjects of
Eternal Misery in the next. He that believes not, shall be damned, Mark.
16.16. The God that has denounced these terrible Threatenings, is unchangibly
True and Faithful to his Word. He is not a man that he should lie, nor the son
of man that he should repent. Has he said, and shall he not do it? Or has he
spoken, and shall he not make it good? Numb. 23.19. It is impossible for God to
lie, Heb. 6.18. God is unchangibly True, and will fulfill his Threatenings in the
Everlasting Destruction of Sinners, if Repentance prevent not. He is as true
also to his Promises, and will Pardon all true Penitents, will save all that
heartily hate Sin, strive and watch against it. Endeavoring to be Holy in all
manner of Conversation. None have a right, true Fear of God, but those who
believe these things concerning him; even his infinite Knowledge, Holiness,
Power and Faithfulness; and those who do really believe these things, duly
consider them, and suitably apply them to their own Hearts, they cannot but
Fear God, fear to sin against and offend him. They cannot but esteem his Favor
better than Life; and so they cannot but Fear the Lord and his goodness, Hos.
3.5. They cannot but fear the offending of that God, on whose Favor the whole
of their Welfare and Happiness depends. And on the other hand, they cannot but
Fear his Wrath more than Death. The Fear of God should, and as far as it is in
lively Exercise it will, keep them from sinning. If the Saints do fall into
known Sin at any time, it is because the Fear of God was not at that time in due
Exercise in their Souls. Sinful Fear of Men, more than the true Fear of God,
prevailed in Peter, when he denied Christ with Cursing and Swearing. But so far
as the true Fear of God prevails in any, 'twill Restrain them from sinning; it
will not suffer them to indulge Sins of Omission or Commission. It is not Fear of
Shame or Punishment from Men, that is the chief Restraint on them; for then
they would sin in Secret, or when they had a Prospect of escaping Punishment
from Men; but so far as the true Fear of God prevails in them, they are as
careful to avoid secret Sins as open ones, (for they know, Gods Eye is always
upon them) they are afraid of Sins which would not expose them to humane
Censures, as well as of those that would; for they know that God will be
provoked with Sin, whether Men are or not. True Fear of God will make them
argue in their own Consciences, as Joseph once did to his wicked, tempting
Mistress: Genesis 39.9. How shall I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?
True, holy Fear, puts Men upon Obeying God. Heb. 11.7. By Faith, Noah being
warned of God of things not seen as yet, moved with Fear, prepared an Ark to
the saving of his house. God told him, a Flood would come and destroy the
wicked World, bad him prepare an Ark for safety when the Flood should come;
Noah believed the threatened Judgment would come, was afraid of it, and so
obeyed God in providing an Ark for safety, as he had been directed. True Fear
of God in Exercise, will make Men choose Suffering rather than Sinning. Daniel
Feared God, and rather than displease God by omitting Prayer, he chose to be
cast into the Den of Lions. The three Children Feared God, and they chose to be
bound and cast alive into a fiery Furnace, rather than displease God by
worshipping an Idol, Dan. chapter 3. It Is the Character of the true Fearers of God,
that they love not their Lives to the Death, Rev. 12.11. They have not so great
a Fear of Men, who can do no more than kill the Body; as they have of God, who
can destroy both Soul and Body in hell, Mat. 10.28. The Fear of God should, and
so far as it operates and prevails it will, Restrain Persons from sinning; so
far as holy Fear prevails in them, they will act most for Gods Glory and their
own Good. And, as the Fear of God should keep us from sinning in general, so,

PROP. II. The Fear of God should particularly keep us from following ill
Examples. When godly Nehemiah had mentioned ill Practices in others, he adds,
But so did not I, because of the Fear of God. As if he had said,

Though they have sinned thus and so, yet I dare not do like them; their
Example cannot excuse, and therefore shall not obtain, my Imitation. I know
that God is my Maker, Lawgiver and Judge, that I am accountable to him for all
my Ways, that his Eye is always upon me; therefore I dare not offend nor sin
against him, though never so much prompted by ill Examples.

Indeed the Fear of God should, and where it is duly exercised it will,
strengthen the Soul against the Snares and Temptations by which it is
endangered; particularly against ill Examples, which are very dangerous Snares
indeed. God says, Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. If
this or that Sin becomes very common, customary, fashionable, if the Multitude
do it; yet God forbids our imitating them therein. Ephesians. 5.11. Have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. Do
others tempt us to Sin, by their vile Examples or Persuasions? We should be so
far from complying, that we should rather reprove them. If the Multitude go
wrong, we should not go wrong for Company sake. Are we willing to be Damned, to
go to Hell for Company sake? If not, let us not Sin for Company sake. Rev.
18.4. -- Be not partakers of her sins, that ye partake not of her plagues.
Indeed there is no Preservative against the poisonous Influence of ill
Examples, like this of the true and lively Fear of God. The Gospel teaches us
to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts; and to live soberly, righteously, godly
in this present world, Tit. 2.12. The Fear of God should quicken us to avoid
the Examples that are contrary hereunto. As,

1. Examples of Ungodliness. Are others ungodly in their Practice, do they omit
any Duties of Religion? We should reply, So dare not I, because of the Fear of
God. For Instance, Do others take Gods Name in vain? Do they Curse and Swear
Profanely? We should say, So dare not I, because of the Fear of God, who has
said, He will not hold them guiltless, that take his Name in vain. Do others
Profane Gods holy Sabbath? So dare not I, because of the Fear of God, who has
terribly threatened those that do so, Jer. 17.27. Do others neglect reading and
studying the holy Scriptures? So dare not I, because of the Fear of God, who
has said, Joh. 5.39. -- Search the Scriptures. Josh. 1.8. This Book of the Law
shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate in it day and night.
Do others live in the neglect of secret Prayer? So dare not I, because God bids
me Pray in Secret, Mat. 6.6. Do others neglect Family Prayer? So dare not I,
because Gods fury will he poured out on the Families that call not on his Name,
Jer. 10.25. Therefore I will Resolve like Joshua, Josh. 24.15. As for me and my
house, we will serve the Lord. Do others neglect Gods Public Worship, seldom
if ever meeting at his House? So dare not I, because he has said, Heb. 10.25.
Not forsaking the Assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is.
Do others neglect Baptism or the Lords Supper? So dare not I, because Christ
requires, that his Disciples should be Baptized, and should observe all things
whatsoever he has commanded, Mat. 28.19, 20. And has particularly said
concerning the Lords Supper, Luke 22.19. This do in remembrance of me. Yea, he
has required us to do whatsoever he commands, and that as a Proof and Testimony
that we Love him and are his Friends, Joh. 14.15. and 15.14. The Fear of God
should quicken us to avoid,

2. Examples contrary to Sobriety. Under this head of Sobriety, may be
comprehended the Duties of Chastity and Temperance. The fear of God, should
fortify against Examples contrary hereto. Are others Unchaste, Unclean, Filthy,
Lascivious in their Words or Actions? We should heartily say, so dare not I,
because of the Fear of God who says, Thou shall not commit Adultery: Flee
Fornication: Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge: Fornicators and
Adulterers shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God. Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your Mouth. Again, are others Drunkards? Do Men or
Women make themselves brutish, or worse than brutish by Intemperance? so dare
not I, because of the Fear of God who has said Take heed lest your hearts are
at any time overcharged with surfeiting or drunkenness, Luke 21.34. He also
has said, Woe to Drunkards, Drunkards shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God. Nay,
though others do not Reel and Stagger with Drunkenness, yet, do they drink to
Excess, drink more than does them good, Pint after Pint, Quart after Quart,
Bottle after Bottle: Or do they drink so as to doze and hurt themselves, though
they don't Stagger and Vomit? so dare not I, because of the Fear of God who has
said, Isai. 5.22. Woe to them that are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength
to mingle strong drink, Amos 6.1, 6. Woe -- to them that drink wine in Bowls,
Hab. 2.15. Woe unto him that gives his Neighbor d^ink, that pu^test thy Bottle
to him, that make him drunken also. Oh how many Woes has God denounced
against Drunkards, strong-headed excessive Drinkers, against vain Tippling
Companions? Nay further, Do others take methods that plainly tend to
Intemperance, though possibly as yet they have not Staggered nor Wallowed in
their Vomit? Have they a vicious practice of drinking Drams often? Or do they
when their Day-work is over, make a trade of Meeting at Taverns, there Idly
spending their Time and Money though they have no real business there? Or do they
on every Payment of Money, hasten to a Tavern to Solemnize that affair by
needless Drinking? Are these the practices of some? We should with our Hearts
and Consciences say, so dare not I, because of the Fear of God who has said, Be
harmless, blameless, unrebukable. Whatsoever things are Just, Honest, Pure, of
good report, if there be any virtue or praise, think on these things, Phil.
4.8. Abstain from the Appearance of evil, hate the Garments spotted with the
flesh. Walk circumspectly, not as fools but as wise; redeeming the time, Ephesians.
5.15, 16. Let any of your Consciences Judge, whether these ill practices I have
mentioned, are consistent with walking circumspectly, and with such a redeeming
of the time, as will be comfortable to reflect on in a dying Hour and Judgment
Day. The examples of others, should not lead us to any thing wounding to our
own Consciences.

The Fear of God should quicken us to avoid,

3. Examples of Unrighteousness. We should be Just and Righteous in our whole
behavior toward Men; not wronging them in their Persons, Names or Estates. Do
others Rob or Steal? We should heartily say, so dare not I, because of the Fear
of God who be* said, Thou shall nor Steal. Thieves shall not Inherit the
Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Do others Lie Cheat, Defraud, Extort, Oppress,
needlessly lie long in Debt to the great Injury of their Creditors? Are others
so False to their Words, Promises, Engagements, that there is no regard to be
had to what they say? Do others act thus? We should heartily say, so dare not
I, because of the Fear of God who has said, Lie not one to another, Speak every
man the truth with his Neighbor. That no man go beyond or defraud his Brother
in any matter; because the Lord is the Avenger of all such. 1 These. 4.6. Owe no
man any thing, but to love one another, Romans 13.8. We should have our
Conversation in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, 2 Cor. 1.12. For Men to make
plain Promises and Engagements, when they have no rational prospect, or it may
be no true design, to fulfill them; let your Consciences Judge, whether this is
to act in Simplicity and godly Sincerity. No, it is fallacious dealing, it is too
much an Imitating the Devil that grand deceiver, it is vile deceit; the Fear of
God should restrain us from it. Would we be willing, to be thus gulled and
deceived by false Promises our selves? If not, surely we should not serve
others so. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even
so to them, Mat, 7.12. Again, do some neglect Family Government and
Instruction, bringing up their Young Ones Ignorantly, Idly, Disorderly;
Suffering them to be rude, vicious, to be from home at unseasonable times of
Night, to keep bad company, and the like? We should heartily say, so dare not
I, because of the Fear of God who has said, Bring up Children in the nurture
and admonition of the Lord; train up a Child in the way he should go. So, as to
Children and Servants, is the Fear of God in your hearts? It should be there,
and should restrain you from following ill Examples. Possibly you know such and
such Children and Servants, that are very unruly, disorderly, untractable; it
may be they are saucy, disobedient, unfaithful to Parents and Masters, they take
a lawless Liberty in many things; and will you plead their Example that you may
do so too? God forbid. Instead of pleading or Imitating their ill Examples, you
should rather say as in our Text, So did not I, (yea, so dare not I) because of
the Fear of God. The like might be said, in numberless other cases.

USE.
From what has been said, we may Infer,

1. Those who Indulge themselves in known ways of wickedness, have no true Fear
of God in their Hearts. Psalm. 36.1. The transgression of the wicked says
within mine heart, that there is no fear of God before his eyes. And indeed
many such there are. Such are Liars, Drunkards, Fornicators, Thieves, Profaners
of Gods holy Name and Day, Oppressors, Extortioners, Revilers, etc. Those who
live in a Course and Trade of known, allowed Wickedness, are open Enemies to
Heaven, whatever Professions or Pretenses they make to the contrary. The Tree
is known by its Fruit. Though they profess to know God, yet in works they deny
him; being abominable, disobedient, and to every good work reprobate, Tit.
1.16. Indeed they practically bid Defiance to the God that made them, they
trample on his Authority; they brave and challenge the Almighty (running on the
thick Bosses of his Buckler) as though his Wrath would not or could not hurt
them. Such a Practice comprehends in it, presumptuous, daring Wickedness,
unnutterable Folly, and tends to Everlasting Destruction.

2. Ill Examples cannot excuse us if we imitate them. Our being tempted to Sin,
will not Indemnify us if we comply. Not the Practice of Men, but the Law of God,
should be our Rule. The customs of the People are vain, Jer. 10.3. If we
imitate the Sins of others, we may expect to share in their Plagues.

3. We should greatly cherish the Fear of Gad in our own Hearts. We should
therefore, at no time dare to affront our Consciences, in doing what they
plainly declare to be sinful; or omitting what they testify agreeably to Gods
Word, to be Duty. We should also be much in Prayer, that God would help us
sincerely and constantly to Fear him; Psalm. 86.11. Teach me thy way, O Lord, I
will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy name. Psalm. 119.133. Order
my steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me. We should
also Meditate much on Gods Word, store it up in our Minds and Memories as much
as we can; Psalm. 119.11. Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not
sin against thee.

Sermon, IV. THE Day of LIFE Improved, before the Night of Death comes.
JOHN IX. 4. I must work the Works of him that sent me, while it is Day: The
Night comes when no Man can work.


THese Words were spoken by our Holy Redeemer, when he was about to work a
Miracle. The Context tells us, that our Savior saw a Man Blind from his Birth;
and that he miraculously gave Sight to him. When our Savior saw this Blind
Man, his Disciples asked him, v 2. Who sinned, this Man or his Parents, that he
is born blind? They reckoned, that some extraordinary Sin had procured this
extraordinary Affliction of Blindness. v. 3. Jesus answered, neither has this
Man sinned, nor his Parents; but that the works of God should be made manifest
in him. The meaning is, 'twas no remarkable, extraordinary Sin, either in this
Man or his Parents that procured this remarkable extraordinary Affliction, of
his being born Blind. God sees so much Sin in any, in all, in the best, that he
can without any Injustice or Unrighteousness bring great and remarkable
Afflictions on them; Witness, Job. All mere Men are Sinners, and the Wages of
Sin is Death, even Eternal Death; and all that Men have on this side such
Misery, is better than they deserve. It is of the Lords Mercy that we are not
consumed. -- Wherefore does a living Man complain, a Man for the punishment of
his Sins? Lam. 3.22, 39. Our Lord having answered Negatively, that it was no
particular, remarkable Sin, that procured this remarkable Affliction of this
Person's being born Blind; he then answers Affirmatively, giving the special
Reason of it, viz. That the works of God should be made manifest in him. The
meaning seems to be plainly this, The special Reason of Gods ordering this
Person to be born Blind was, that Jesus Christ the Son of God, might have this
special Opportunity and Occasion, to manifest his own divine, miraculous Power,
in giving Sight unto him; and by this Miracle (together with many others)
confirm his own divine Mission and Doctrine. And therefore he adds in our Text,
I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is Day.

As if he had said,

God, my Eternal Father (whose only begotten Eternal Son I am) has sent me into
the World to Redeem Sinners, to teach them the Way of Life and Salvation; and
has commissioned me to work Miracles, to confirm this Mission, and the truly
Divine Doctrine which I Preach: This is the Work God has sent me about, and
this Work I must follow, while the Day of Life lasts. Therefore I Will give
Sight to this blind Man, that by this Miracle (as well as many others) ye may
know that God has sent me, that the Doctrine I Preach is true, that I am the
true and only Savior of Sinners, long ago foretold by the Prophets.

Though our Savior was to Die for the Redemption of Sinners, and rise from the
Dead, and so manifest himself to be the Son of God with Power; yet before this
Night of Death came, he would take all proper Opportunities to do the Work God
had sent him about, to Preach Divine Truths, and confirm them by Miracles. And
in the close of the Verse, gives a general Reason which extends to all Men,
viz. The Night comes when no Man can work. The Day, while the Sun gives Light,
is the most convenient time for Men to Work in: The dark Night renders it
impossible for them to follow at least some sorts of Work. In allusion to what
is thus universally known to, and regarded by Men, our Savior compares the
time of Man's Life in this World, to the Day and Death to the Night; and plainly
intimates, that Men should diligently mind and perform the Work God requires of
them, while the Day of Life lasts, before the Night of Death puts a stop to
their Work. From the Words therefore we may observe this

DOCTRINE. Men should diligently do the Work of God, while the Day of Life
lasts; because the Night of Death comes, wherein no Man can work.
Here are Three Propositions, viz.

I. The Night of Death is coming on all Men.

II. When this Night comes, no Man can work.

III. Therefore Men should diligently do the Work of God, while the Day of life
lasts.

PROP. I. The Night of Death is coming on all Men.
Death seems undeniably to be meant, by the Night spoken of in our Text. When
Night comes, that is the proper Time for Sleeping; and so Death it self is
sometimes compared to Sleep. Psalm. 13.3. Consider and hear me, O Lord my God;
lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of Death. Psalm. 76.5. The
stout-hearted are spoiled, -- they have slept their sleep. That is, they are
Dead. And as Death is compared to Sleep; so in our Text it is compared to Night,
the proper Time for Sleep. Death may be compared to Night, inasmuch as then Men
commonly cease from Working: Psalm. 104.23. Man goes forth to his Work and to
his Labor, until the Evening. When Night comes, Men commonly leave Working,
especially without Doors: Some Works cannot be done in the Night. So, when Death
comes, Men can work no more (as the next Proposition will show) and on this
account it may be compared to the Night.

Now this Night, to wit, of Death, is coming on all Men The Day of Life lasts
but a while with them, the Night of Death is approaching to all Men. It Is
appointed for Men once to die, Heb. 9.27. This is the Statute Law of Heaven, no
Man can avoid or evade the Force of it. No Man has power over the spirit, to
retain the spirit; neither has he power in the day of Death, and there is no
Discharge in that war, Eccl. 8.8. Though the Earth abides for ever, yet the
Inhabitants of it do not; for one Generation goes and another comes. Men are
Born to Die: Sin has made Men Mortal, the Body is Dead because of Sin. By one
Man sin entered into the world, and Death by sin; and so Death has passed upon
all Men, for that all have sinned, Romans 5.12. All are Sinners, and therefore
all must Die; the Godly and Ungodly must Die. Psalm. 49.10. He sees that the
wise Men die, likewise the Fool, and the brutish Person perish. Indeed, the
Saints found Alive when Christ comes to Judgment, shall not Die; but shall
suddenly be Changed, and be like the glorious, raised Saints, 1 Cor. 15.51, 52.
But excepting those then remaining alive, all must have their Bodies and Souls
parted from one another. Men and Women, Young and Old, High and Low, Rich and
Poor, Learned and Unlearned, Godly and Ungodly; all must Die: They must Sleep
the Sleep of Death: The Night of Death will soon overtake them. And how soon it
will overtake any particular Persons, they don't know: Though Death certainly
will come, yet it is uncertain how soon. Isaac once said, Genesis 27.2. I know not
the day of my Death. Every one that can speak, may truly say the same of
himself. Prove. 27.1 Boast not thy self of to morrow, thou know not what a
day may bring forth. So, Jam. 4.14. Ye know not what shall be on the morrow:
For what is your life? It is even a vapor, that appears for a little while,
and then vanishes away. The Day of Life is like a Vapor, a Smoke or Fog; no
one knows how soon it may disappear and be gone. It is evident therefore, that
the Night of Death is coming on all Men, though none of them know how near it
may be to them.

PROP. II. When this Night comes, no Man can work.
As we have hinted once and again, when Night comes Men commonly cease from
Work; some Works especially must then be left. So, when Men Die, then their
working Time is ended for ever. When Men Die, they don't cease to be, their
Souls, subsist in a separate State. When the Wicked Die, their Souls go to Hell
Torments, till the Resurrection of their Bodies; at which time, their Bodies
and Souls together shall be cast into Hell for ever. When the Godly Die, their
Souls go into Abraham's Bosom, that is, into Heaven; and there follow that
blessed and happy Work, which God appoints them: In (...) Work they shall be
employed till the Resurrection of their Bodies; and then their Reunited Bodies
and Souls, shall be eternally and inconceivably Happy and Blessed. But
notwithstanding all this, yet when the Night of Death comes, no Man can work.
That is, he can no more, no longer do any of those Works which are proper and
peculiar to this World, to this present state of Life upon Earth. When a Man
Dies he ceases from all the external Works, Affairs, Concerns of this Life.
He Is never more concerned abo^^ Plowing, Sowing, Reaping, Merchandising, or any
other such outward Affairs. Psalm. 146.4. His breath goes forth, he ^^^urneth
to his earth; on that very day (...) perish. When his Breath goes forth, then
all his Thoughts, Plots, Schemes, Contrivances about worldly Matters, they
pe^^sh, they cease for ever; he is no more concerned about these Matters. Eccl.
9.10. There is ^o work, nor device, (...) ^^^nowledge, nor wisdom in the grace
whither thee (...). Nay, when the Night of Death comes, then Men can do no
^^^re for the Everlast^n^ Welfare of their Souls. In the place where the tree
falls, there it shall be, Eccl. 11.3. So, according as Men Die in the state
of saving Faith, or damning Unbelief; so it is like to be with them for ever.
It is appointed for Men once to die, and after Death the Judgment, Heb. 9.27.
When Men Die, their Souls go to their particular Judgment, and are doomed to a
state of Misery or Glory, according to what their Works and Behavior in this
World were. When Pious Lazarus Died, his Soul went to Abraham's Bosom, to a
state of Happiness: When the wicked Rich Man Died, his Soul was sent to
Hell Torments, and the great Gulf was then fixed; he was staked down (as it
were) in Misery, he could not possibly escape or get out of it, Luke 16.22,
etc. He was beyond the Possibility of Mercy, all his Cries, Prayers, Tears
could not obtain the least Relief for him. He begged for one small Drop of Water
(as much as would hang on the tip of a Finger) to cool his tormented Tongue;
but could not obtain it. 'Twas but a small thing he ask^d for; he did not ask
to be Released from those scorching Flames, nor ask that some living Spring or
running River of Water might be afforded for his Relief: No, he asked only for
one Drop, a small Pittance indeed, and yet could not get it. Oh, there is not
one Drop of Mercy for those that Die Christless and Graceless, though they
plead and beg never so much for it. If Death finds a Man Christless, the Day,
the Season for working out his Salvation, is ended for ever. Time was, that if
he had heartily Repented of Sin, Believed in Christ, and given up himself to
him; it would have been for his advantage, he should have been accepted,
pardoned, saved for ever. But the Graceless Sinner, will not do any such works
as these after Death; no Invitations of Grace or offers of Pardon, will then be
made to him. No, now is the accepted time, now (...) the day of salvation: to
day while it is called to day, if ye will hearken to his voice, harden not your
hearts. When a graceless Sinner dies, the things of his peace are hidden from
his eyes for ever. After death, Men can do nothing to prepare for Eternity:
nothing toward the obtaining of peace with God, and endless happiness in his
favor. If Men obtain peace with God in their Life time, then death cannot take
it away. Death cannot separate them from the love of God. But if peace with God
be not obtained before death, it can never be had at all. Blessed are the dead
that die in the Lord, Rev. 14.13. It is as true, Cursed are the dead that die
out of the Lord, alienated from him by reigning wickedness. It Is evident
therefore, that when the Night of death comes, no Man can work.

PROP. III. Therefore Men should diligently do the work of God, while the day
of Life lasts.
Here are Two Things.

(1.) There is a work which God sets Men about, or requires of them.

(2.) The thoughts of Death and what follows it, should make them diligent in
this work.

1. There is a Work which God sets Men about, or requires of them. God has made
all things for himself, he requires a revenue of Glory from all His Creatures,
according to the various natures he has endowed them with. All thy works shall
praise thee, O Lord; and thy Saints shall bless thee, Psalm. 145.10. All Men
should Obey God, that in general is the work he requires of them. I Am now
speaking more especially of those, who Enjoy God's revealed Will, His Written
Word: they have greater advantages to know God's Will, and greater Motives to
do it, than mere Heathens have. God has showed them what is good, and what he
requires of them; To do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with their God,
Mic. 6.8. In general, it is their duty to believe all that God declares, and to
do all that He commands. Thus He said to Israel: Jer. 11.4. -- Obey my voice
and do them, according to all that I cammand you. Would we know what is the
work God requires of us? It Is this in general, That we should obey His Voice, do
all that He bids us; yield sincere, universal, unwearied Obedience to His holy
Precepts: this is the work He calls us to, and sets us about. And there is One
particular Momentous Command of God, which we should Obey, else we cannot obey
any other so as to find acceptance with Him; and that is, to Believe in Jesus
Christ, to accept of and submit to Him on Gospel Terms as Prince and Savior. 1 John 3.23. This is his commandment, that we should believe in the Name of his
Son Jesus Christ. When the Jews asked our Savior, What shall we do that we may
work the works of God? He replied, This is the work of God, that ye believe in
him whom he has sent, Joh 6.28, 29. This indeed is the work, the great work,
the most absolutely necessary work that God calls all under the Gospel unto,
and requires of them. Oh Man, Woman, whoever thou art, there is a work, an
Important work which the Great GOD calls thee to, and sets thee about, even
thee, thee in particular whoever thou art; and this work is, that thou should
heartily Repent of all thy Sins, and heartily Submit to the Lord Jesus as the
only Prophet, Priest and King of thy Soul. This is the great call of God in the
Gospel to thee, if thou do not heartily. Obey this call, this Command of God;
then thou can not possibly do any one particular work, that he will accept
and be pleased with. Heb. 11.6. Without faith, it is Impossible to please God,
Romans 8.8. They that are in the flesh, (that is, Unregenerate) cannot please
God. And as God requires all under the Gospel, to believe in Christ, accept of
Him as Prince and Savior; so their doing this Implies in it, their taking Him
for their Lord and Lawgiver, and so their yielding unfeigned Obedience to his
Precepts. The Gospel teaches them, to deny ungodliness and worldly lust; and to
live Soberly, Righteuosly, Godlily in this present World, Tit. 2.12. To cleanse
thems^l^es from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the
fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. God requires them also, to do the duties of those
several Capacities, Stations, Relations which His Providence has set them in. 1
Cor. 7.24. Let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with God. We
should heartily do all that God sets us about, relying on His Grace through the
Mediation of Christ for acceptance. This in general, is the work God sets us
about, and requires of all under the Gospel.

2. The thoughts of Death and what follows, should make them diligent in this
work. All of us should be greatly moved and quickened, speedily and heartily to
Repent of all our Sins, to Believe in the Lord Jesus, submitting to Him on
Gospel Terms. The calls and offers of the Gospel will soon be ended with us;
therefore we should forthwith hate and forsake all our Sins, and give up our
selves to the unfeigned, constant practice of Godliness. We cannot possibly be
too speedy, hearty, diligent, resolute, constant in this work, this necessary
work. This indeed is the One Thing needful, the great Important business we
should be chiefly concerned about. We should show unutterable Folly, and be
unspeakably Miserable, if we neglect this work till the Night of Death
overtakes us. What shall it profit a man, if he gain the whole World, and lose
his own Soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? Mat. 16.26.
Many are greedy after much of the World, as though they could never have enough
of it; but if a person might be supposed to gain the whole World, and yet lose
his Soul by neglecting the work of God, he would then be a most miserable
loser. Those who entertained themselves with worldly pleasures and profits,
though they had never so great a measure of them; yet by neglecting to get into
the Ark, they perished when the Flood drowned the old World. So, if Men get
never so much of this World's good, yet if they neglect the work of God,
neglect getting an Interest in Christ, till the Night of Death comes, then
they will perish for ever. How often are Servants beaten, and that very justly,
for Playing, for Idling away their Daytime, not doing what their Masters bid
them; and when Night comes on, their Stint, their Work is not done? God sets us
a Ta^k to do, and a most reasonable profitable Task it is; but if we stand all
the day Idle neglecting our business till the Night of Death comes, we shall
then be beaten, and that most Justly and terribly with many Stripes. Our tender
hearted Redeemer, once wept over Jerusalem for neglecting the things of their
Peace in the proper Season of them, saying, Luke 19.41, 42. If thou had
known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy
peace! but now they are had from there eyes. The day of Gods Patience is yet
extended to us, He waits to be Gracious; but i^ in this our day we neglect the
things of our Peace, we are then undone for ever: it would have been good for us
that we had never been born. It Is said of Jerusalem, Lam. 1.9. -- -- She
remembers not her latter end, therefore she came down wonderfully: She had no
comforter. Surely, those will come down wonderfully, down indeed, down to hell
it self; and will have no comforter, who don't remember their latter end so as
to prepare for it. Well then, let us work the work of God, while it is Day;
because the Night comes wherein no Man can work.

Here therefore a few things may be mentioned, by way both of Motive and
Direction, viz. Seriously consider,

1. Death most certainly will come, and it is uncertain how soon. This is so
plain a Truth, that doubtless none will dare to deny it; yet it is not so duly
and seriously thought on as it should be. Oh let us daily think of Death, let
it be often in our Thoughts: our thinking daily and frequently on it, need not
take up our Time so as to hinder us from any proper business. Death will most
certainly come. It may be we sometimes fear these and those Outward troubles,
think they will come, yet it is not certain that they will come, possibly they may
not. But as for Death, it certainly will come, whether we expect and fear it or
no, yet it will come, there is no escaping it. Yea, it is coming nearer and
nearer to us, every Day, Hour and Moment. The longer it is since Sun rise, the
nearer it is to Sunset. Every time the Clock-strikes, it shows that so much of
the Day is gone already; and therefore there is the less remaining before Night
comes. Every step we take, and every breath we draw, brings us so much nearer
to the end of our Time, of our Life. But as it is certain Death will come, and
that it is every Moment approaching nearer to us; yet it is uncertain how near it
may be. Many are apt to put far away the evil Day, when they think of Death,
they still think of it as at some Years distance: But alas, Such Thoughts are
groundless. As it is commonly said, Old Man must die; so it is as true, Young Man
may die. The Young and Stout and Strong, are often suddenly cut down by the
Stroke of Death. Art thou Young and Strong? Possibly Death may not come to thee
for these several Years; yet on the other hand, thou do not know that thou
have a Day longer to live. The Rich Sensualist in the Gospel, reckoned upon
living many Years, to eat drink and be merry; but God said to him, Thou fool,
this night shall thy soul be required of thee, Luke 12.19, 20. He was a Fool,
for flattering himself with thoughts of long Life, when he knew not how near
Death was to him. It Is probable, there are many such Fools in the World. Oh,
What Sciences do they form in their own Minds? They reckon upon long Life, they
plot and contrive to buy and sell and get Gain; to get such and such desirable
Enjoyments, to obtain much worldly Grandeur and Pleasure; but Death comes and
nips them in the Bud, cuts them off before ever they possessed what they thus
vainly promised to themselves. Therefore let us meditate much on the certainty
of Death, and the uncertainty when 'twill come: This tends to quicken us to the
Work of the Day in the Day. If a Person would seriously think thus,

I don't know but this Day may be my last Day, I don't know that I shall have
any more Time to prepare for an endless Eternity in; I don't know but God may
require my Soul of me, and doom me to an Eternal State before I Am a Day older.

I say, if he would frequently thus think with himself, doubtless he would not
omit Duty and commit Sin, so readily as he often does. To think when we go to
Bed, I don't know that I shall live till Morning; and when we rise in the
Morning, I don't know that I shall live till Evening: Surely thus to think,
tends to make Persons serious, and to make them mind their Duty. Deuteronomy. 32.29. O
that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their
latter end. It Is a great Point of Wisdom, and tends to make Persons yet more
Wise, seriously to consider their latter End; seriously to consider Death, and
what is like to follow after it. Psalm. 90.12. So teach us to number our days,
that we may apply our hearts to Wisdom. If we would but seriously consider,
that much of our precious Time is gone already, and we know not how little
remains; this surely would make us do better than we often do. Again, let us
consider,

2. The Eye of God our Judge is continually upon us. Servants will often work
diligently while their Master's Eye is on them, though they are too often Idle
when he is absent, Well, the Great GOD our Maker is our Judge; he will call us to
an Account for all our Thoughts, Words and Deeds in this World. Eccl. 12.14.
God will bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be
good or evil. Now this God who will Judge all Men according to their Works, has
his Eye continually upon all Men: He critically observes all their Thoughts,
Words and Actions. The Eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil
and the good, Prove. 15.3. There is no Good nor Evil done by Men, but what God
takes exact Notice of. His Eyes are upon the Ways of all the Children of Men;
there is not a Word in their Tongue, but he knows it, altogether; yea, he knows
the things that come into their Minds, even every one of them. He searches the
Hearts, tries the Reins of the Children of Men, even every one of them; to give
to every one according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings,
Jer. 17.10. How often does the Presence of a Parent or Master, or some grave
Superior, Restrain Persons from ill Practices, and Incite them to a proper
Behavior? Surely then, if we frequently and seriously considered, that the Eye
of God, our Holy and Glorious Judge is always upon us, and that we know not how
soon Death and Judgment will come; this would tend to quicken us to our Work,
while the Day of Life lasts.

3. Let us not allow our selves in any thing now, which we cannot reflect on
with Comfort in a dying Hour. Men should do nothing in the Day, but what in
their serious Evening Thoughts, they may Reflect on without any Sting, or
Regret of Conscience. So, Men should allow themselves in nothing while here in
this Day of Life, which they cannot reflect and think on with Comfort, when
Death looks them in the Face, and God calls them into Judgment. If thou wast
now dangerously Sick, did apprehend Death very near thee, and thy soul
speedily to be doomed to an Eternal State; if it were thus, could thou
reflect with Comfort upon thine Impenitence, thy neglecting of Christ, thy
shameful neglect of reading and studying Gods Word, thy neglect of Ordinances,
Baptism or the Lord's Supper, thy neglect of Secret Prayer, or Family Prayer?
Could thou reflect with Comfort on thy Intemperance, thy needlessly spending
thy Time and Money at Taverns, on thy unclean Practices, on thy Injustice and
Unrighteousness in thy Dealings, thy whiffling, shuffling, cheating Tricks, on
thy Promise-beaking, on thy careless, slothful neglecting the Duties of thy
Particular Calling, or the Duties of those Particular Relations, whether of
Husband, Wife, Parent, Child, Master or Servant, which thou do sustain: I
say, if thou did apprehend the Night of Death and the Dooming Judgment very
near, could thou seriously Reflect with Comfort on such things as these? No
surely, thou could not. Well them, think seriously of the Matter; and ^ allow
thy self in nothing now, which thou can not think of with Comfort when Death
comes. Frequently consider with thy self, What Thoughts shall I have of these
and those Ways and Practices of mine, when Death looks me in the Face; can I
then reflect on them with Peace and Comfort? And if they will not afford thee
Peace at last, then don't allow them now. Consider on the other hand, if thou
do now diligently and heartily strive to please God in all thy Ways; this
will yield thee Comfort in After-Reflections. This is our rejoicing, even the
testimony of our Conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with
fleshly wisdom but by the Grace of God, we have had our conversation in the
world, 2 Cor. 1.12. It Is peaceable, comfortable, joyful to look back on a life
carefully spent in the Service of God. When the Apostle could say, I have
fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the Faith; when he
could thus reflect on what was past, he could then look forward with holy
Courage and Comfort, and say, henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.

4. Let us get our Hearts more and more weaned, from Worldly Profits and
Pleasures. We are too apt to look on this World as our home, as our resting
place, and to reckon on a long abode here, and so to crave greedily after
Worldly Enjoyments; and these things hinder us from working the works of God.
Let as therefore consider, the Night of Death is coming on apace; we must soon
part from this World, the Places that now know us will know us no more: we must
soon leave our Houses, our Gardens, Orchards, our whole Estates; our dearest
Relatives and we must soon part. We brought nothing into this World, and it is
certain we can carry nothing out, 1 Timothy 6.7. Let these Considerations wean us
from this World. Why should we set our Eyes or Hearts, on things that are not?
Col. 3.2. Set your affections on things above, not on things on the earth. The
more our Hearts are weaned from Worldly Profits and Pleasures; the more likely
we shall be to work the works of God while it is Day.

5. Let us neglect nothing now, which we should be loath should he left undone
when Death comes. We know not how soon Death may arrest us; well, is there
this, that, or the other thing which we would not have undone, unaccomplished
when Death comes? If so, then let us do those things speedily. As to Outward
concerns, I would give this one Hint; those who have any Estate to dispose of
by Will, should always keep a Will by them: Death will come never the sooner
for this. And when they have a Will by them, if Death should Suddenly snatch
them away; yet such their Will might prevent many Sinful Jangles and Quarrels
among their Surviving Relatives. But further, would thou have Death come,
before thou have Assurance of thine Interest in Christ? If not, then speedily
and diligently seek after Assurance. 2 Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure. If Death should come speedily, would it not grieve
thee that thou have not honored God more with thy Substance, thy Estate; that
thou have not done more for the Spiritual good of thy Relatives, thy Wife,
Children, Servants, Neighbors? Well then, speedily and carefully do all those
things, which thou would be unwilling should be found undone, unperformed,
when Death comes; that when it does come, thou may have nothing particularly
to lie on thy Conscience (no unrepented Sin, no neglected Duty) to be a grief
and trouble to thee; but may quietly say with him. Luke 2.29. Lord, now
^ettest thou thy Servant depart in Peace.

Sermon, V. Wholesome COUNSELS and WARNINGS, Occasioned By the SIN of YOUNG MEN.
I SAM II. 17. Wherefore the Sin of the Young Men, was very great before the
Lord.


ALL mere Men since the Fall of Adam, are Sinners by Nature, shapen in Iniquity
and conceived in Sin. Yea all mere Men while living in this World, are more or
less Sinners by Practice too: For there is not a just Man upon Earth, that does
good and sins not, Eccl. 7.20. Yet there are some Persons, more eminently,
abundantly, remarkably Wicked than others: they allow themselves in very
heinous, crying, scandalous Abominations, working wickedness with greediness.
Such vile Transgressors, were these Young Men spoken of in our Text. These
Young Men were not professed Infidels and Heathen; no, they were Israelites,
Children of God's Covenant, enjoyed His Revealed Will, His Holy Oracles; they
were some of His Professing People, they had received Circumcision the Soul of
God's Holy Covenant. Nay more than this, they were Children of a godly Father,
of Eli. They were Eli's Sons. ver. 12. Eli was a Priest of God, the High Priest
at this time: he also was Judge of Israel. chap. 4. ver. 18. By the account we
have of Eli in Scripture, he seems to have been a very godly Man, though
criminally Indulgent to his Sons, very faulty in not duly witnessing against
their vile Abominations; for which neglect of his* God threatened such Judgments
to him, and his Family, as should make both the Ears of them that heard them to
tangle, 1 Samuel 3.11. Eli being a godly Man, a Minister, a Priest, it is very
probable he gave his Sons a pious Education, godly Instructions and
Exhortations. We find that he once reproved them, though not with that sharpness
and severity which their Crimes deserved, 2 Samuel 23, 24. Therefore though he did
not restrain and punish them as he should have done; yet it seems more than
probable, that he gave them very godly Counsels, Instructions, Admonitions. But
notwithstanding these Sons of Eli had so good a Father, were Children of the
Covenant, were Circumcised, were doubtless piously instructed; yea, though they
were Mininers, Priests by Birth and Office; yet they were notoriously and
abominably wicked. It Is here said, ver. 12. They were Sons of Belial
(signifying, the most scandalous Sinners, such us would not bear the Yoke of
Government and good Order) that they knew not the Lord. That is, they wickedly
and scandalously disobeyed Him, lived as though they knew nothing of His
Commands; or were not obliged to regard them. These Young Priests not only took
their own share of the Sacrifices, but they would have it unseasonably too;
even before Gods part was Offered and Burnt to Him, ver. 16. Yea, they also
forcibly took from the Offerers, part of what belonged to them, ver. 13, 14.
Yea they were so abominably wicked, that they lay with the women that assembled
at the door of the Tabernacle, ver. 22. Horribly daring and Impudent they were,
in their Fornications and Adulteries, those cursed Practices. So scandalously
wicked they were, as that it is said in this Verse containing our Text, Men
abhorred the Offering of the Lord. Men abhorred to bring Sacrifices, which must
pass through the hands of such wicked abominable Ministers, Priests, as these
were. Our Text therefore says of these Young Men, their Sin was very great
before the Lord. Their Sin was before the Lord, it was under His Eye and in His
Sight, as indeed the Sins of all Men are. For the Eyes of the Lord are in every
place, beholding the evil and the good, Prove. 15.3. Many Thiefts, Fornications,
Adulteries, Murders, and other abominable Crimes, are committed Secretly as to
Men; the Crimes are a long time, if not always concealed from the Public
notice of Men; but no Sins are Secret as to God. He knows what is done at
Midnight in the darkest corner, as well as what is done at Noon Day on the
House top. But this phrase, before the Lord, does here more probably signify,
that these Young Men Sinned thus abominably at the Tabernacle, the House of
God, the place of His special Presence and holy Worship; at the Tabernacle,
where the Ark that Symbol of God's special presence was. And so it is justly
mentioned as a great aggravation of their impudent wickedness. That they should
be thus wicked at the very Door of Gods House, where People came to Worship the
Holy and Heart-searching God; this was high and impudent wickedness indeed:
It Is not easy for Words to paint out such Crimes in their just Colors. It is
Criminal at any time, to harbor and nourish wicked thoughts in our hearts; but
it is an high aggravation of the Crime, to nourish such thoughts in the House
of God, in the time and place of His Holy Worship: and more abominable still,
at such a time and place, openly to perpetrate what such indulged Lusts do move
for.

But the Observation designed from the Words, is this, viz.

DOCTRINE. Sometimes, those who have had a Pious Education, and special Means
used to make them Religious; do yet prove grossly and scandalously Wicked even
in their Youth.
Our Text and Context, yield a plain proof of this sorrowful Truth. These Men
were Young Man, though what their particular Age at this time was we don't exactly
know. It Is certain, they had means to know God's revealed Will (it was part
indeed of their Office work to teach it to others, Mal. 2.7.) They were brought
up under the Means of Grace: they had had good Methods used to make them
Religious; yet they proved otherwise, they were scandalously Wicked. Alas, it
is too often thus* Indeed the way of our Duty is prescribed, Prove. 22.6. Train
up a Child in the way he should go; and when he is old he will not depart from
it. Christian Parents should bring up their Children in the mixture and
admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. They should do their utmost to Train them up
in right ways: this is their Duty, and the best Method they can take, to make
their Children take right Courses when grown up, if they live to it. Yet such
pious Endeavors, don't always prove successful. Sometimes the Children of
Eminently Pious Parents, Children that have had eminent means used, and great
pains taken with them, to make them truly and practically Religious; do yet
prove scandalously and abominably wicked. Pious Abraham, did command his
Children and Household after him, to keep the way of the lord, Genesis 18.19. Yet
his Son Ishmael, was a Mocker of his Brother Isaac. It is probable, that he
wickedly mocked and scoffed at him for pretending to be Heir of God's Promise;
for the Apostle calls this Mocking, Persecution. Compare, Genesis 21.9. with Gal.
4.29. Isaac was a very godly Man, and doubtless gave pious Instructions to his
Children, yet his Son Esau proved a Profane Person, and despised his
Birthright, Heb. 12.16. No doubt but Pious Jacob, gave goldly Education and
Instruction to his Children; yet abominable Crimes were committed by several of
them. Simeon and Levi, barbarously Murdered the Shechemites; hypocritically
prostituted Circumcision (the Seal of God's Covenant) as a means to fulfill
their revenge, Genesis chap. 34. Another of Jacobs Sons, Reuben his Firstborn,
was guilty of Incestuous wickedness, of Uncleanness with his Fathers Wife, Genesis
35.22. Samuel was an holy Prophet, a religious and righteous Judge in Israel,
and doubtless gave the best Counsels and Instructions to his Children (as well
as set an eminent Example before them) yet his Sons were very wicked. They
walked not in his ways, but turned aside after Lucre, and took Bribes, and
perverted Judgment, 1 Samuel 8.3. The Daughters of Pious Lot, were so wicked as
to make their Father Drunk, that when he was thus besotted he might be Unclean
with them, and he was so. Genesis 19.30, -- 38. Godly David, had a Son Amnon who
committed an Incestuous Rape, he forced his own Sister; for which wicked Fact,
Absalom (another Son of David) Murdered him, 2 Samuel 13, 14, 28, 29. Afterward,
this Absalom rebelled against his Royal Father and would have destroyed him;
but he himself died in the Rebellion. These sorrowful Instances now related,
prove the Truth of our Doctrine: yea it is too often proved, by woeful sorrowful
Experience from time to time. How often do the Children of professed
Christians, who have been Baptized, brought up under the Means of Grace, had
good Family-Instruction, had good Examples set before them; I say, how often do
such, fall into vile, scandalous Abominations? How often are such Persons
guilty, possibly of Fornication, Stealing, Profaning God's Holy Name or Day,
Drunkenness and other heinous Abominations? It is sorrowful and lamentable to
consider, that Family Instructions, good Examples, precious Sermons have
wrought no more good in them; but that notwithstanding the precious Means they
have enjoyed, yet they often become scandalously Wicked even while they are
Young. Well, when such sinful, sorrowful things happen, What is the Improvement
to be made thereof.

QUESTION. What are the Counsels, Instrustions, Cautions, Warnings proper to be
given o^ such Occasions?
ANSWER.

I shall Endeavor to mention a few.

These things show us,

1. That it is not in the power of mere Instruments or Means though never so
good, to work restraining, (much less, saving) Grace in the Hearts of any. It Is
justly to be accounted a great favor, to enjoy the Means of Grace; there is no
Salvation without the Means. Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of
God, Romans 10.17. Yet the best Means that can be used for the good of Souls,
will prove ineffectual; unless God adds his efficacious Blessing. If Young
Persons have never so good Instructions given them, never so good Examples set
before them in the Family, or by the Neighbors; if they are never so well
advantaged as to Public Ordinances, yet nothing but Divine Almighty Grace can
restrain them from Sinning, or make them truly Holy. It was God that kept back
Abimelech from sinning, Genesis 20.6. Whoever plants or waters, yet none but God
can give the Increase, 1 Cor. 3.6, 7 If Ministerial weapons (or Endeavors) are
used never so faithfully; yet it is only through God (by His efficacious blessing
on them) that they are Instrumental to pull down the strong holds of Sin and
Satan, to cast down Imaginations -- and to bring into Captivity every thought
to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor* 10.4, 5. It is said of Lydia, That the Lord
opened her heart, that she hearkened to the things that were spoken by Paul,
Act. 16.4. Though Paul was such an Eminent Apostle, such an Eminent Ambassador of
Christ ( laboring more abundantly than others, Cor. 15.10.) yet he might have
Preached long enough and Lydia got no good by it, if God (who has all hearts in
his hand, and can turn them as the Rivers of water) had not opened her heart to
receive the Truths Preached. Let us learn then, to prize and value Means and
diligently to attend on them ('it is our duty so to do) but let us not trust in
them, but trust in God alone for a blessing, Parents, besides diligently giving
the best Instructions to their Children; should earnestly and constantly Pray,
that God would give restraining, yea Saving Grace unto them. So, Ministers
should not only declare Gods Mind as plainly as ever they can to their People;
but they also should earnestly Pray to God for all that Success they desire.
The best Means will do no good without Gods blessing.

2. We should grieve and mourn for the scandalous Transgressions of others. We
should grieve and mourn firstly and chiefly for our own Sins: Be ashamed and
confounded for our own ways, Ezekiel. 36.32. Though our hearty Sorrow for Sin
should thus begin at home, yet it should not be confined there; but look abroad
also. We should sigh and cry for all the Abominations committed by those
amongst whom we dwell, Ezekiel. 9.4. David was grie^ed for the Transgressions of
others, Psalm. 119.158. Lot's Righteous Soul was vexed with the filthy
Conversation of the wicked, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8. We should grieve for the heinous,
scandalous Sins of others,

1. Because God is very greatly Dishonored thereby. Romans 2.23. Thou that
make thy boast of the Law; through breaking the Law dishonourest thou God?
When Men break Gods Law by Profane Swearing, vile Cursing, Sabbath-breaking,
Drunkeness, Fornication, Lying, Cheating, Stealing, Defrauding, etc. They
grievously Dishonor God thereby. They practically scorn and contemn God,
despise him, as though he was not worthy to be Regarded or Obeyed by them.
David's scandalous Sin, was a despising of Gods Command, 2 Samuel 12.9. And what
are our Hearts made of, if they will not grieve and mourn, when the infinitely
Glorious GOD is thus despised, contemned dishonored by bold Transgressors? We
should grieve,

2. Because such Scandals tend to Defile and Corrupt others. A little Leaven
leavens the whole Lump. The springing up of a Root of bitterness (an evil
example) tends to defile many, Heb. 12.15. One sinner destroys much good, Eccl.
9.18. Sometimes one Drunkard, one foul Mouth'd-Person, one profane Swearer or
Sabbath breaker, does a world of Mischief in a Place or Neighborhood by his
cursed Example: Many are in danger of being defiled and ruined thereby. We Are
distressed when a Fire breaks out though in but One House, lest it should spread
and consume many; and when a Mortal contagious Sickness is brought though by but
One Person into a Town, lest it should Infect and destroy many So, we should
grieve and mourn for Scandalous Practices in a Place, left the Sin should
spread, and ruin many Souls. We should grieve,

3. Because Sinners wound their our Souls by their Transgressions. We should
love our Neighbors as our own Souls, and should grieve for what really hurts
them, especially for what hurts their Souls. And Sin is the greatest hurt any
can do to their own Souls; the wages of it is death, Romans 6.23. When Paul saw
the Prison-keeper going to kill himself with his own Sword, he cried out, do
thy self no harm, Act. 16.28. Would it not grieve us, to see distracted persons
cutting, wounding, gashing, burning their own bodies? Why Men are doing worse
than this to themselves, to their precious Souls, when they are boldly and
presumptuously Sinning against God. They are heaping up loads of guilt,
treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, provoking and challenging divine
Almighty vengeance, and hastening apace to the Unquenchible flames of Hell (if
speedy Repentance prevent not) and should not our very Souls grieve for such
things as these? Yes truly. Sin in others, should move our pity to their
Persons, our grief and mourning for, and hatred of their offenses. And as we
should grieve for the Sins of Others, so,

3. We should Endeavor, and pray for, the Repentance of those who grievously
transgress. Christ came not to call the Righteous, but Sinners to Repentance.
Sovereign Grace has sometimes triumphed in Saving of great Sinners, in giving
Repentance and Pardon to Fornicators, Adulterers, Thieves, Drunkards, and other
Scandalous t^^^sgressors, 1 Cor. 6.9, -- 11. And free Grace, can yet do as
great wonders as ever. Therefore Endeavors are to be used even with great
Sinners, If paradventure God will give them repentance, 2 Timothy 2.15. Therefore
we should warn the unruly (1 These. 5.14.) Endeavor to restore such as we
fallen, Gal. 6.1. So, Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine
heart, thou shall in my wise rebuke thy Neighbor; and shall not suffer sin
upon him. None knows, how far God may bless Endeavors for Saving good to great
Transgressors. Onesimus (the Servant of Philemon) played the Thief, Stole from
his Master, ran away, was apprehended and put in Prison; and in Prison was
Converted by Gods blessing on the Endeavors of the Apostle Paul, who was a
Prisoner in the same Place. See the Epistle to Philemon. Surely then, as we
have opportunity and ability, we should reprove offenders, warm them, counsel
them, Endeavor to make them sensible of their Sin and Danger, and so bring
them to Repentance. So we should Pray to God for them, that He would indeed
take away their heart of Stone and give them an heart of Flesh; that He would
make them true Penitents. For in every thing, by Prayer and Supplication we
should make known our requests to God, Phil. 4.6. Possibly some, when they hear
of the great Crimes of others, will readily run out against them, show their
ill will against them, but never Pray to God for them; but such, don't do as
they ought.

4. We should be thankful for restraining Grace to us and ours, and be more
Watchful and Prayerful for the future. Have others fallen into great and crying
Abominations, thereby deserving shame, blame and punishment among Men; and
laying themselves open to the sore displeasure of God? And have not we and ours
been as bad as they? What Is the ground of this difference? If we had had the
like Opportunities and Temptations with others, and been left to our selves, we
should have shown our selves as bad as any of them all. For the Hearts of all
the fallen Children of Men are naturally alike Sinful, deceitful above all
things and desperately wicked. Jer. 17.9. Out of the heart proceed evil
Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, etc. Such Hearts ours are by Nature. And it is
the undeserved Grace of God, that keeps us and ours from Sinning, so far as we
are Restrained. The vile scandalous Crimes of others, do as it were show what
is Originally in our Hearts; therefore we should be Thankful, if we and ours
have not broken forth into the like Scandals as they are guilty of. Who makes
thee to differ? When you that are Parents and Masters, justly condemn the vile
Crimes that any Young Persons are guilty of; consider, it is owing to the mere
undeserved Grace of God, that you, your Children and Servants, have not fallen
into the like or worse Transgressions. If you and yours with others, should be
in a Boat when it oversets (or in some other great danger) and while they
perish, you and yours escape; would you not be Thankful for such singular
Preservation? Surely you should. So when you and yours are kept from those
Scandalous Crimes, which many others fall into; you should be Thankful for such
distinguishing restraining Grace vouchsafed to you. Again, the Falls of others
should quicken us to more Watchfullness and Prayerfulness, lest we fall as they
have done. When the Apostle had mentioned sundry gross Sins in others, the Use
or Application he makes is, Let him that thinking he stands, take heed lest
he fall, 1 Cor. 10.12. Truly, such things should make us take heed, watch and
be careful that we don't offend like them. With reference to the Sins of (and
consequent Judgments on) others, the Apostle says, Romans 11.20. Be not
high-minded, but fear. Oh, be not high-minded, don't boast nor triumph over
those that fall, done trust in thine own strength; but Fear, Watch, Pray, lest
thou fall as they have done. Consider thy self, lest thou also be tempted, Gal.
6.1. Watch and Pray, that ye enter not into Temptation, Mat. 26.41.

5. Let none trust in themselves, merely on the account of their freedom from
Outward Scandals. Possibly some, when they hear of the Scandalous Falls of
others, are apt to despise those that fall, and to be mightily conceited of
themselves, and to trust in their own Duties and Righteousness, because they
are not chargeable with like Scandals as others are. Thus 'twas with the
self-conceited, self-justifying Pharisee, who said, Luke 18.11, 12. -- God I
thank thee, that I am not as other Men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers,
or even as this Publican. I fa^t twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I
possess. So, possibly some will think, I am no Drunkard, Thief, Fornicator,
Profane Swearer as such and such are; I Am an orderly blameless Person, I keep
Sabbaths, hear Sermons, attend Sacraments, Pray in my Family, etc. therefore
surely God is pleased with me, and will save such a godly righteous Person as I
am. I say, we should take heed of such self-conceitedness as this is.
Restraining Grace is a great favor, and should be Thankfully acknowledged as
such (as was before hinted) yet it does not entitle us to Heaven. Some who
outwardly appear righteous to Men, are inwardly full of iniquity and
hypocrisy, Mat. 23.28. Doubtless, Formality, Hypocrisy, Self-flattery will
ruin Multitudes. Those who go about to establish their own righteousness, will
not submit to the righteousness of God, Romans 10.3. It Is not mere freedom from
Outward Scandals, that can carry us to Heaven: we must be self-empty, broken
hearted for Sin, trust only in Christ's Righteousness for Justification, and
diligently strive after purity of Heart, as well as Outward blamelessness, if
ever we would be Saved.

6. We should bear due witness, against the grievous Transgressions of others.
Though we should pity their Persons, desire and pray for their Repentance; yet we
should hate, loath, abhor their Sins, ( abhor that which is Evil, Romans 11.9.)
and bear due Testimony against them. Nay though our dearest Relatives should fall
into Scandals, yet we should bear due Testimony against their Sins. Christians
should love Christ (His Honor and Glory) above Father, Mother, Wife, Children,
Sisters, Brethren, yea and above their own Life too, Luke 14.26. Mat. 10.37.
God required His People of Old, to bear due Testimony against the Sins of their
Dearest Relatives, that others might hear and fear and do no more such
wickedness, Deuteronomy. 13.6, -- 11. Eli was terribly threatened, for not duly
witnessing against and punishing, the great Scandals of his Sons spoken of in
our Text.

7. The great Transgressions of others, should not make us reflect on any good
way they have been brought up in, or on any good Profession they have made, or
on any good thing formerly done by them. Possibly some that were brought up in
Praying Families, that were well Catechized, had a Religious Education,
belonged to Private-Meetings designed for the Furtherance of Piety, were wont
to Pray in Secret, etc. I say, Possibly some such have fallen into grievous
Scandals, and shall we for the sake of their Sins, condemn the Manner in which
they were Educated, or the Method they once took to promote Religion, or the
good things once practiced by them? No, God forbid. If some Church Members fall
into foul Scandals, shall we therefore say, that all Church Members are alike;
or condemn the good Profession which some Scandalous Persons once made? No,
this would be vile and abominable indeed. The Devil, would fain bring the
Truths and Ways of God into dislike and contempt; for the sake of ill things
done by some, who once professed those Truths and Ways. But if we rail against,
decry or condemn any good Ways and Practices, because of the ill carriage of
some who once professed and favored them; herein we greatly gratify the
Devil, and do more hurt to the Interest of Religion than we are aware of: As it
would be unreasonable and unjust, to condemn the Christian Religion in General,
because of the hellish Scandals of some professed Christians; so it is
proportionably vile, to condemn any Divine Truth or good Practice, merely
because some who once favored the same, are turned Scandalous Criminals.

8. From the Scandalous Falls of Young Persons, Householders should take
occasion to warn their Young Ones, to avoid such Evils. Prove. 9.6. Forsake the
follish and live. Well, say to your Young Ones,

Consider how foolish, how vain, vile, wicked such and such have been; what
shame and disgrace among Men, what hurt and damage they have brought to
themselves: how woefully they have dishonored God, and exposed themselves to
His displeasure, Consider these things, and be Warned hereby not to tread in
their steps. Your Hearts are as bad by Nature as theirs, you are in danger by
Snares and Temptations; therefore Watch, Pray, give utmost diligence lest you
fall as others have done.

When Solomon advises Young Men, to avoid the Whorish Woman, this is one
Argument he uses, Prove. 7.26. She has cast down many wounded: yea many strong
Men have been slain by her. As if he had said, Oh consider how others have been
Tempted, Ensnared, Ruined; therefore take Warning, beware lest you fall into
the like Snares and Mischiefs with them; let their Fails, be loud Watch Words,
and Awakening Warnings unto you.

9. When Young Persons fall into grievous Scandals, other Young Persons should
take peculiar Warning thereby, and beware lest they fall like them. Have Young
Men or Young Women, fallen into these or those Scandals? Then you that are
Young, and possibly have much the like Temptations, Snares, Dangers with them;
Oh do you take Warning, do you take heed lest you also be prevailed upon by
your Spiritual Enemies. And that you may not fall into gross Scandals, as many
others have done; take these few Directions, viz.

1. Heartily comply with the Terms of the Covenant of Grace. The most of our
Young Men and Women, are the Children of Professing Parents, visibly the
Children of the Covenant, and Baptism the Seal of the Covenant has been set
upon them; now you Young Ones, who have thus been Consecrated to God, your
Hearts should be right with Him and steadfast in His Covenant. Gods Holy
Covenant does oblige you, heartily to Repent of your Sins, heartily to submit
to Christ in all His Offices as Prophet, Priest and King. You cannot really
please God, without thus heartily submitting to Christ. They that are in the
Flesh (that is, Unregenerate) cannot please God, Romans 8.8. Without Faith it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. If you heartily receive Christ and submit
to Him on Gospel Terms, this is the best way to keep you from Sinning. It Is
said to the Saints, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you. Thus to
submit to Christ, is the only way to keep you from perishing. He that believes
not shall be Damned, Mark 16.16. But if you are formal and hypocritical,
customary and superficial in your Profession and Practices of a Religious
nature; if you don't heartily submit to Christ, then be assured, that you
despise God, you contemn Christ, you trample on His Authority, abuse His
Patience, despise the Offers of His Mercy and Grace, disregard His terrible
Threatenings; this is great Wickedness, and there is great danger lest God be
hereby provoked to say of you, let him that is filthy be filthy still: and to
say of you as of those, Psalm. 81.11, 12. My People would not hearken to my
voice, and Israel would none of me: so I gave them up to their own hearts
Lusts, and they walked in their own Counsels. But on the other hand, if you
heartily turn to God, comply with the Terms of His Holy Covenant, submit to
Christ as Prince and Savior; this will be the best way to keep you from
Sinning, 'twill be greatly to your advantage. Whosoever has, to him shall be
given, and he shall have more abundance, Mat. 13.12. God is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. He says, Prove. 8.17. I love them that love
me, and they that seek me Early shall find me.

2. Maintain a constant Course, of diligently Reading and Studying the Holy
Scriptures. Psalm. 119.9. Wherewith shall a Young Man cleanse his way? By taking
heed thereto according to thy Word. Gods Word tells Young and Old how they
should live, how they should behave themselves; and gives them the best
Directions for, the best Motives and Arguments to, holiness and righteousness
that can be. Surely then, Young Men and Woman, (yea indeed all Christians)
should maintain a constant course of Reading and Studying Gods Word. Psalm.
119.11. Thy word have I hid in mine heart; that I might not Sin against thee.

3. Humbly submit to Family Government. The Great God, strictly commands
Children to obey their Parents, Servants to Obey their Masters; therefore you
Young Ones, if you disobey your Fathers, Mothers, Masters, Mistresses, in so
doing you disobey God, despise God, you greatly provoke Him indeed. Many Young
Men and Women, Children and Servants are Proud, Haughty, Stubborn; they will not
submit to the Yoke of Family Government; they will be in these and those
Fashions though costly, and much above their Rank and Ability; they contend for
this and that liberty, liberty to be Unseasonably from home, to be out late on
Nights, to go and come almost when they will, to have frequent needless
Diversions; thus they will proudly and stubbornly contend for their own way, though
possibly Parents and Masters are never so much against it. Alas, such Persons
a^e in a dangerous Course, they are fighting against God; it is well if their
Pride and Disobedience be not the Forerunner of some grievous Fall. Be not
deceived, God is not mocked, Gal. 6.7. You Young Ones, if you cast off the Yoke
of Family Government, you then cast off Gods Yoke; and you're in great danger
lest God give you up to the Will of your Spiritual Enemies. It Is said of Eli's
Sons that are spoken of in our Text, 1 Samuel 2.25. -- They hearkened not to the
voice of their Father, because the Lord would slay them. Oh don't disobey your
Parents, lest God be provoked to slay you. Prove. 30.17. The Eye that mocketh at
his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall
pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it. That is, such Disobedient ones
are like to come to an untimely judicial Death; it often proves so. Oh tremble
at that Word, Prove. 29.1. He that being often reproved, hardens his neck;
shall suddenly be destroyed and that without remedy.

4. Be diligent in lawful Business. Every Christan that indulges Idleness, is
in the Way of Temptations; and Young Persons (who are commonly most active) are
especially so. Idleness is Wickedness: The slothful Servant is called the
wicked Servant, Mat. 25.26. Idleness is the Devils School. If thou art not
doing some Work for God, well employed in some good thing; the Devil will be
ready to employ thee, to offer some cursed Business or other to thee. If you
would not fall into vile Scandals, then be diligent in some lawful Business.
Romans 12.11 Not slothful in business, fervent in spirit, serving the Lord.

5. Religiously observe Gods Holy Sabbath. The Lords Day, is by the Lords
Command to be kept Holy, employed in Holy Exercises and Duties. The Scripture
requires this, and terribly threatens the profaning of the Sabbath, Neh. 13.17,
18. Jer. 17.27. Take heed therefore, you young Men and Women, that you don't
entertain slighty Thoughts of the Sabbath, but count it an Holy and Honorable
Day, spend it as such in Gods Service, Isai. 58.13. Diligently attend public
and private Duties of Religion on the Lords Day; let a Savor of Spiritual
Divine Things abide on your Souls. And surely, if you would avoid your
diverting Visits on the Lords Day Evenings, and spend those Evenings at home in
minding Spiritual Matters; I say, if you young Men and Women would do thus, it
would keep you out of the Way of many Temptations, and might be unspeakably
profitable to you. But if you once indulge a Regardlessness of Gods Holy Day,
he is highly provoked thereat; and there is great Danger lest you should be left
to some great Wickedness.

6. Avoid evil Company. Prove. 13.20. A companion of fools shall he destroyed.
Alas, How many Persons, especially young Men and Women, that once appeared
Virtuous, Sober, Blameless, have by falling into bad Company been carried away
to Folly, and drawn into gross Abominations? Ill Company has Ruined Multitudes.
Therefore, If sinners entice thee, consent thou not, Prove. 1.10. When vain
Companions come, and would call you from your proper Work and Business, or
would entice you abroad at unseasonable Times, or if they solicit you to do
any ill Thing; look on such Persons not as your Friends but Enemies. They are
indeed the Emissaries of Hell, the Tools and Messengers of the Devil; they are
doing Satan's Work, even tempting and striving to Ruin Souls. Carefully shun
such Companions: Foresake the foolish and live, Prove. 4.14, 15. Enter not into
the path of the wicked; and go not in the way of evil men. Avoid it, pass not
by it, turn from it and pass away. In these two Verses, there are six
Prohibitions, requiring us to shun ill Examples and Companions. Psalm. 1.1.
Blessed is the man that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands
in the way of sinners, nor s^tteth in the seat of the scornful.

7. Don't undulge small Sins, but maintain a constant Tenderness of Conscience.
Though no Sin is really small in the Sight of God yet some Sins are greater
than others. Well, Don't indulge thy self in those Sins, which possibly some
may count small Matters, scarce worth the minding. One Sin leads to another,
and smaller Offenses to greater Transgressions. Don't tell a Lie, lest thou
become a common Liar* and it may be a false Swearer too. Don't so much as steal
Fruit out of an Orchard o^ Garden, lest thou come to steal Things of greater
Value. Don't steal from thy Parents or M^st^r, lest thou come to steal from
others, and become a common Thief. Don't use wanton, lascivious Carriage, lest
^^ou fall into Fornication and Adultery. Don't take God's Name in vain, lest
thou become an habitual Blasphemer. Don't drink more than thou need, lest
thou become a common Drunkard. Oh, take heed, and watch against the Beginnings
of Evil. If thou indulgest those Sins which thou reckonest small, there is
Danger of thy falling into, and being hardened in great and scandalous
Transgressions. Therefore allow of no Sin, though counted never so small; but
maintain a great Tenderness of Conscience as Job did: Job. 27.6. My heart shall
not reproach me so long as I live.

8. Maintain a constant Course secret Prayer. Consider the Deceitfulness of
thine own wicked Heart, the Temptations of the Devil, who watches to destroy
thee, the Falls of others once as likely to stand as thou art, the many Snares
thou art endangered by. Consider these Things, and let them move thee daily and
diligently to Pray to God in Secret, that he would keep thee from sinning
against him, and would help thee to serve him sincerely, diligently and
constantly. Mat 6.6. Enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy door,
pray to thy Father which sees in secret, and thy Father which sees in secret,
shall reward the openly.

Sermon, VI. GOD, THE Free and Sovereign AUTHOR OF ALL BENEFITS.
EZEKIEL. XXXVI ^. Not for your sakes do (...) the Lord God, be it know^ (...). --


THis Text i^ (...) or a gracious Declaration, which God by his Prophets
Ezekiel made to his People under their Babylonish Captivity. Gods professing
People had defiled their own Land by their Sins, therefore he cast them out and
scattered them among their Enemies, v. 17. -- 19. When the Land of Israel was
thus emptied of Gods People, the neighboring Heathen, and particularly the
Edomites, mocked and derided the desolate Case of the Jews; and made a Prey of
their Land, and appointed it for a Possession to themselves, v. 4, 5. But in
the preceding Part of this Chapter, God promises, that he would again bring
back his People into their own Land, they should possess it, and be blessed in
it: Yea, he promised them Spiritual Blessings also, that he would cleanse them
from their Filthiness and Idols, give them a new heart and spirit, and cause
them to walk in his ways, v. 25. -- 27. Having resolved and promised to bestow
such rich Blessings and Benefits on them, he would have them received as
Streams from his own most free, sovereign Bounty; and would not have his sinful
unworthy People think, that they themselves were any ways deserving of these
Benefits. Therefore he says to them in our Text, Not for your sakes do I this,
he it known unto you. As if he had said,

Consider, that these Benefits, which according to my gracious Promises I Will
bestow on you, flow from my mere, free, sovereign, undeserved Bounty and
Kindness; from mine own Heart, mine own good Will and Pleasure: I Will give them
freely, not for the sake of any Worthiness in you, for you have none; you are
unworthy of the least Drop of Favor from me. Instead of thinking your selves
Worthy and Deserving of these Favors, you should be ashamed and confounded for
your own ways, and loath your selves in your own sight for your Iniquities and
Abominations, v. 31, 32.

From the Words therefore we may observe this

DOCTRINE. It is of the free, sovereign Bounty and Goodness of God, that he
bestows on the Children of Men all the Benefits they at any time receive.
There are two Propositions in this Doctrine.

I. God bestows on the Children of Men, all the Benefits they at any time
receive.

II. It is of his own free, sovereign Bounty and Goodness that he bestows them.

PROP. I. God bestows on the Children of Men, all the Benefits they at any time
receive.
God is the supreme efficient Cause and Author of all Benefits. This must needs
be owned by all, who believe that God made the World, and that he governs it by
his Providence. God is the Father of Lights, and there is no Beam of Light or
Comfort, but what darts forth from this inexhaustible Fountain of all Goodness.
He is the Giver of every good Gift, Jam. 1.17. There are many Receivers of
Benefits, but there is but one original Giver of them, and that is God. He
gives to all Life and Breath and all things: We live, move, and have our Being
in him. He opens his hand, and satisfies the desire of every living thing. The
Lord is good to all, and his tender Mercies are over all his works, Psalm.
145.9, 16. All the Good and Benefit which Creatures receive, whether Angels,
Men, or inferior Beings; they all receive it from God. It must needs be so; for
his supreme sovereign Providence governs all things, and that continually; his
Dominion is an everlasting Dominion. His throne is prepared in the Heavens, his
kingdom rules over all, Psalm. 103.19. He does according to his will in the
Armies of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth; even in Heaven,
Earth, Sea, and in all deep Places, Dan. 4.35. Psalm. 135.6. Though Benefits may
come more immediately and directly in this or that Channel, yet they all
originally flow from the same Fountain, even from God, who is Goodness it self.
And as it is God who bestows on the Children of Man, all the Benefits they at
any time receive; So we are told in

PROP. II. It is of his own free, sovereign Bounty and Goodness that he bestows
them.
He bestows on Men all the Benefits they have, and he bestows them freely; it is
not for your sakes, as our Text declares. And this is true, not only of the
Benefits bestowed on the Jews, who had so highly provoked God by their heinous
Transgressions; but it is true likewise of all or any of the Children of Men, at
one time or other, in this World or in the next. It Is of Gods own Heart that he
bestows them, the sole Motive is primarily and originally from himself; it is
not from any Worth, Merit, or good Deserving in them. Indeed God may be said to
be under Bonds and Engagements to bestow Benefits, and very great ones too, on
some sorts of Persons, even the Bonds of his own Word, Promise, Oath; but 'twas
of his own most free, sovereign Bounty and Goodness, that he laid himself under
such Bonds. So that all the Benefits Men ever receive, flow originally from the
free Bounty and Goodness of God. This Truth may in some Measure be cleared and
demonstrated, by considering these following Particulars, viz.

1. 'Twas of Gods Sovereign Goodness, that He purposed to make Men, to bestow
Benefits on them, and that He did give being to them. It is the Lord that has
made us, and not we our selves. He has of one Blood made all Nations of Men to
dwell on the face of the Earth, Act. 17.26. Though Divine Wisdom directed in, and
Divine Power effected, the Creation of the World; yet Divine Goodness was the
first mover in the matter. God did not make the World from any necessity of
Nature, nor from any need He had of Creatures (for He Is Infinitely,
Unchangeably Self-sufficient and All-sufficient) but from a voluntary purpose
to exert and display His Glorious Perfections, and communicate of His Goodness.
For his Pleasure all things are and were created, Rev. 4.11. Therefore Thanks
are rendered to God, for His Mercy, (His Goodness) in the Work of Creation, in
making the Heavens, Earth, etc, Psalm. 136.1.5, -- 9. Now God being an
Infinitely wise Agent, had laid the Plan or Scheme of His Work, before he set
upon doing it: all his Works ad extra, in Creating and Governing the World, are
but the Execution of His Antecedent Eternal Purposes. For, known unto him are
all his Works from the Foundation of the World, Act. 15.18. He works all things
according to the Counsel of his own will, Ephesians. 1.11. He Is of one Mind and none
can turn him: his Counsel shall stand, and he will do all his pleasure.
Inasmuch therefore as all his Works referring to his Creatures, are but the
Executions of his Antecedent Eternal Purposes, it thence follows, that his
making of Men, and his bestowing Benefits on them; are but the product or
execution of his Eternal Counsels. And since before Men had a being, God
purposed to give them being and to bestow benefits on them; it must needs be,
that those purposes did flow from his most Free Sovereign bounty. Those
purposes of Goodness, could not possibly have any other Spring or Fountain. For
Men not being yet made, could not possibly act, and so, could not possibly
deserve either good or evil. Gods purposes, did preceed Men's beings and
actions, as the Apostle tells us in the particular Instance of Jacob and Esau.
The Children being not yet born, neither having done any good or evil, that the
purpose of God according to Election might stand, etc. Romans 9.11. All those
benefits Men ever receive, are the fruit and product of those Eternal Purposes
which God purposed in Himself, before Men ever had any being; therefore they
must necessarily flow Originally from the Sovereign Bounty and Goodness of God.
It Is of Sovereign Divine Bounty and Goodness,

2. That God has given His Son Christ Jesus, to Die for the Salvation of Sinful
Men. All Men by Sinning against God, by breaking his holy Law; became justly
obnoxious to Everlasting Vengence, Wrath and Misery. God might (if he had seen
meet) have greatly Glorified his Vindictive Justice to all Eternity, in making
all sinful Men (as well as all sinful Angels) inconcievably and everlastingly
miserable. But instead of this, he gave his Only Begotten Eternal Son, to Die a
shameful and an accursed Death in the room and stead of sinful Men, to purchase
Pardon, Grace and Eternal Blessedness for them. And it could not possibly be
any thing else, but most Free, Sovereign Bounty and Goodness in God, that put
him upon such a Method as this. That he should in such an expensive way as this
(even at the expense of the Blood of his Only Begotten Eternal Son) bring those
who deserved endless Plagues and Torments in Hell, to enjoy endless
inconceiveable Glories in Heaven, could not possibly proceed from any thing but
most Free Sovereign Grace and Goodness. God so loved the world, as to give his
only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him should not perish, but have
everlasting Life, Joh. 3.16. God commends his love to us, in that while we
were yet sinners Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. He is rich in mercy, for his
great love wherewith he loved us -- by Grace are ye saved, Ephesians. 2.4, 8. It Is of
God's Sovereign Goodness,

3. That He has put such a connection as He has, between Men's Duties, and the
benefits which will thence accrue to them. Inasmuch as God is the Sovereign
Maker of all Men, does hold their Souls in Life, and preserve their Spirits and
all their powers of Operation; inasmuch as they thus entirely depend on the
Sovereign pleasure of God, it necessarily follows, that it is their
indispensable duty to employ themselves and all their Powers for God,
conformably to the discoveries of his preceptive Will unto them. They Are
indispensably obliged to this, from the Relation there is between them and
their Creator, and from the dependence they have on him for their Being and
Operation; whether he had promised any Reward to their Obedience or not. 'Twas
therefore an effect of Sovereign Bounty, rather than of proper and strict
Justice, that God promised an endless happy Life to innocent Man (as is plainly
implied in the first Threatening, Genesis 2.17.) if he had continued perfectly
obedient. For if innocent Man had long continued perfectly Obedient to his
Masters Will; this would have been no more than what he was indispensably
obliged to, from his relation to God as his bountiful Creator and Preserver:
nor could God have thence been obliged to continue him longer in being, or
bestow further Benefits on him, unless by his own free sovereign promise he had
so obliged Himself. Surely then, since Man is fallen, it must needs be of Gods
Free, Sovereign Grace and Bounty, that in and through the Mediation of Jesus
Christ, he puts a connection between Man's Duty and the Benefits which will
thence accrue to Him. If we judge rightly, we must needs own, it is Sovereign
Goodness in God that he will stoop to treat with Rebels, through a Mediator of
his own appointing; and that when he might glorify himself in their deserved
Destruction, he promises to receive them to favor and make 'em Eternally
happy, if they will return and submit to the most reasonable and gracious Terms
which he offers to them. Yet he does so. For through Christ he is reconciling the
World to himself. He does not bid any to seek him in vain; but declares,
there is Forgiveness with him that he may be feared, Psalm. 130.4. He Is a
rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6. Whatsoever good thing any
Man does, the same shall be receive of the Lord whether he be bond or free,
Ephesians. 6.8. It Is of God's Sovereign Bounty and Goodness,

4. That he bestows many Outward Benefits, on those who continue obstinately
wicked and disobedient to him. God left not himself without Witness to the
Heathen World, but gave them Rain from Heaven and Fruitful Seasons, filling
their hearts with food and gladness, Act. 14.17. The Wicked are often fat and
flourishing, swiming in streams of Pleasure, they are not in trouble like other
Men, neither plagued like other Men; their eyes stand out with fatness, they
have more than heart can wish: the ungodly often prosper in the World, and
increase in riches, Psalm. 73.5, -- 13. How many Heathen Monarchs are there,
clothed with Royal Robes, crowned with Diadems, possessed of vast Power and
Wealth, enjoying all the fullness that outward things can give them; who yet are
unmindful of, and rebellious against, God their Sovereign Maker and Benefactor?
God often extends riches of his Goodness and forbearance to some, who do
nothing else but treasure up wrath against the day of wrath (by their
abominable and continued Wickedness,) Romans 2.4, 5. Many who deserve to burn in
Hell forever for their Wickedness, and will get thither at last; yet often
enjoy numberless and great Outward benefits here in this World; and that for
many Years together. Surely, every one who believes the Bible, must think; that
this flows from the mere, sovereign, undeserved bounty and kindness of God. For
though through their own folly and sin, such Prosperity often leads to, and fattens
'em for, Destruction; yet this does not hinder, but that the bestowment of such
Prosperity in it self considered, is a fruit of Sovereign Divine Goodness. The
Light of the Sun is a great Blessing (Mat. 5.45.) though many abuse it to the
practicing of Wickedness, Mic. 2.1. It Is of God's Sovereign Bounty and Goodness,

5. That He often makes use of Means and Instruments, to convey Benefits to
Men. Some are apt to take so much Notice of Means and Instruments, which more
immediately and directly hand forth benefits to them; as too much to neglect
the Original Fountain of them. But God is no less the Giver and Author of all
Benefits, because he uses Means and Instruments in conveying of any of them.
God fed Jacob all his Life long, though his Labor and Money supplied him one
while, and his Son Joseph furnished his Table afterward. God was as really the
Feeder of Elijah, when the Ravens brought him Flesh and Bread; as he was of
Israel in the Wilderness when he daily supplied them with Manna. All Second
Causes, are under the Influence and Government of the First Cause. God hears
the Heavens, they hear the Earth, that so Corn, Wine, Oil may be produced for
God's People, Hos 2.22, 23. All Moral Agents whether good or bad, are under the
Government of the First Supreme Cause, even God: he can make them Instrumental
(if he will) of conveying benefits. God made his People to be pitied, even of
their wicked Enemies who carried them Captive, Psalm. 106.46. The barbarous
People of Malta, showed no small kindness to Ship-wreck'd Paul and his Company,
Act. 28.1, 2. Sometimes Men of great Abilities, of Public Spirits, inPublick
Stations and Capacities, are instrumental of abundance of Good to the People
among whom they are, in encouraging Virtue, and endeavoring to promote their
Wel^are; but it is the God of the Spirits of all Flesh, that does raise up,
qualify, assist and succeed such Instruments. Sometimes abundance of good comes
to particular Persons, yea to an whole People, in answer to the Prayers of some
godly ones. The Prayers of the Righteous avail much. But it is of Sovereign
Grace that God helps such to Pray, that by his Promises he has encouraged such
to Pray, and that he gives an Answer to their Prayers. So that all Benefits are
as really, truly and originally from God; as if no Means or Instruments were
made use of to convey them. Means could never be Instrumental of any good to
us, if God did not make them so. Whoever Plants or Waters, none but God can
give the Increase. Would not Men be more thankful to God for every Meals Meat
(as well as for other benefits) if they saw Gods Hand as visibly reaching it to
them; as Belshazzar saw the Hand when it wrote on the Wall? And yet every
Benefit really comes from God, whatever are the Means or Instruments of
conveying it; nay it is of his mere undeserved bounty, that he does Honor any
Means with the Service or Instrumentality of conveying any of his Benefits. So
it is of Gods Sovereign bounty.

6. That he enables Men to comply with those Terms, on which he is pleased to
bestow further Benefits. As it is of his Sovereign bounty (as we showed before)
to make the connection he has between Men's Duties and Benefits; so it is, that
he inclines and enables Men to perform Duty. It Is the God of the Spirits of all
Flesh, the Fountain of all Good, that often bestows on Unregenerate Men, those
common gifts and restraints of Grace; which frequently prove conducive to many
outward temporary Benefits, both to themselves and others. But further, it is
most free and sovereign, as well as most powerful Grace, that enables any
heartily to receive Christ as offered in the Gospel, and to walk in him till
they come to Glory. It Is God's Prerogative to take away the Heart of Stone and
give an Heart of Flesh: to create a new Heart and a right Spirit in any. Of his
own will be begets them by his Word of Truth, Jam. 1.18. He calls them
according to his purpose, (Romans 8.28.) for no Man can come to Christ, except
the Father draws him, Job. 6.44. It is not of him that wills nor of him that
runs, but of God that shows Mercy. As the Wind blows where it will,
without Man's appointing or power to obstruct it; so is every one that is born
of the Spirit. And as it is of Gods Sovereign Grace, that he first works a
saving change in the Soul; so it is, that he carries on the work when thus
begun. He works both to will and ^o do of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.13.
It Is he that helps, strengthens, upholds by the right Hand of his
Righteousness. If any Man draw back, God's Soul will have no pleasure in him;
yet those who hold out to the end, are kept by the power of God through Faith
unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. So that it is indeed most free, sovereign Grace,
that enables Persons to do those things, that have a firm connection with
Eternal Happiness. This Grace is most free, and undeserved by thosethat receive
it: for though it is purchased, dearly bought and paid for by Jesus Christ for
them; yet 'twas of free Grace that God appointed this Method for purchasing it,
and that thereupon he does bestow it. It Is of sovereign Grace and Goodness,

7. That God makes the Afflictions of the Saints, Instrumental of great
advantage to them. God has promised, That all things shall work together for
their good, Romans 8.28. That their Chastisements shall be for their profit, to
make them partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12.10. Indeed their Sins deserve and
procure their Afflictions, yea they deserve inconcievably greater evils than
ever they meet with. Now when God is whipping them for their offenses, that he
should resolve and effect their great benefit and advantage thereby; must needs
be a fruit of most sovereign Goodness. He turns their Maladies into Remedies,
their heavy Burdens into healing Medicines: when if he dealt with them
according as they deserve, he might justly make them Eternally and
Inconcievably miserable. Sovereign Goodness, must needs be the Spring and
Fountain of such a Method as this* God's Sovereign bounty and goodness appears,

8. In the greatness and duration of the Benefits, promised to those that
sincerely seek and serve him. As it is of Grace, that God has put any connection
between Men's Duties, and their obtaining further and future benefits; so it is
yet an higher evidence of such Grace, that the benefits promised are so great
and durable. Those who heartily submit to God in Christ Jesus, and obey his
holy Gospel; shall certainly obtain endless inconceivable Glory and Happiness.
This is called the Recompense of Reward, Heb. 11.26. But alas, there is no
proportion between the short imperfect Duties of the Saints on Earth, and their
endless Glories in Heaven. Therefore though their future happiness is called a
Reward, yet it is a Reward of Grace; and is indeed a Free-Gift. Romans 6.23. The
gift of God is Eternal Life. Luke 12.32. It is your Fathers good pleasure to
give you the Kingdom. Now that so great and durable benefits, should be annexed
to the sincere duties of the Saints in this World, notwithstanding all their
imperfections; can flow from nothing else, than the sovereign amazing Goodness
of that God who delights in Mercy. Thus these Heads that have been mentioned,
though few and brief compared to what might have been said; may help to set forth
this great Truth to us, viz. That it is of Gods free sovereign Bounty and
Goodness, that he bestows on the Children of Men, all the benefits or good
things they at any time receive.

The USE of these things may be in the following Inferences, viz.

1. We ought to contemplate on and admire at, the free sovereign bounty of God.
There cannot be a more noble Subject of our most frequent and serious
Contemplation. When here and there a few among Mortals, exceed their Neighbors
in Ability, Virtue, Goodness, Usefulness; they are often much spoken of and
commended by those, whose good Opinion is of any worth; I say, it is often though
not always thus. But all the communicative Goodness in any Creatures, is not so
much compared to the Goodness manifested by God; as the glittering of a
glowworm, compared to the diffusive extensive Light of the Sun. Surely our
Souls should stand, look, gaze and wonder at the free extensive, though
Incomprehensible Goodness of the Eternal Jehovah. Who can tell the Number, or
the ten thousandth part, of those Benefits which he freely bestows? Surely, no
Man's Arithmetic can reach to this. His wonderful works of Goodness cannot be
reckoned up in order, they are more than can be numbered. Psalm. 40.5. But though we
cannot measure the height or depth, length or breadth of those streams issuing
from Sovereign Divine Goodness, and to the most unworthy too; yet we should
greatly contemplate on them, and admire the Immense Fountain and Original from
whence they flow. This work, the bright Spirits above employ themselves in; the
more we abound in it the more we shall be like them, and the fitter for their
Company.

2. We should never murmur, though possibly we may want some Comforts which we
are desirous of. God is the Author, yea, the free, sovereign Giver of all
Benefits; And do we indeed deserve any good thing at his hand? No truly, we are
so far from that, that by our Sins we justly deserve his insupportable Wrath
forever. When Afflictions are most and heaviest upon us, even then it is much
better with us than we deserve. When God takes away our Health, our Ease, our
dearest Friends and Relatives, or any other Comforts; he does but recall what
he freely lent us during his Pleasure, so he can do us no wrong herein; and
therefore we never have any cause to repine or murmur. Nay, we are so far from
having any real cause of Murmuring, that when we meet with the most grievous
Emptyings and Losses, there are yet freely continued to us, so many and great
Benefits, as loudly call for our Praising and Adoring the sovereign Author of
them. It is of the Lords Mercy we are not consumed. Therefore,

3. We should be constantly Thankful to God, for the diffusive Streams of his
free Bounty to us. We cannot reckon up the Number or describe the Greatness of
these Benefits, God freely bestows on each of us every Day. Every Breath we
draw, is a renewed Instance of his amazing Power, Patience, and undeserved
Goodness. If it be not our own Fault, we may daily trust in God for, and
delight our selves with the Thoughts of, those matchless, endless Joys, which
his faithful Promise secures to those that rightly seek after them. Then sure I
am, we should be daily and heartily Thankful to that God, who thus freely
showers down his Benefits on the Unworthy. In every thing give thanks, for this
is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you, 1 These. 5.18. Giving thanks
always for all things unto God and the Father, in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Ephesians. 5.20. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless
his holy name: Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits,
Psalm. 103.1, 2. What can be more Vile, Criminal, abominably Sordid, than for
such as we are, to be unthankful to that God, who freely and constantly bestows
great and numberless Benefits on us!

4. We should never envy to others the good Things they enjoy. Whence come
those good Thing? Why from God the Fountain of all good, and he may surely do
what he will with his own. He is the sovereign Potter, Creatures are the Clay;
he may fashion this or that Lump into what Figure he pleases, and can be
accountable to none for doing so. If others have more Health, Ease, Honor,
Power, Wealth, greater inward Gifts and Abilities or Endowments, more desirable
Friends and Relatives, greater Measures of Sanctifying Grace and Divine
Consolations than we have; yet we should by no means Grudge or Envy them. Our
Eye should not be evil because God is good. The lowest Shrub should not envy
the tallest Cedar; nor the smallest Stars those of the first Magnitude, for all
the Stars have that Measure of Light, and keep the Orb and Sphere their wise,
bountiful Maker assigned them. Men in the lowest Form should not envy those,
whom their sovereign Maker and Benefactor makes Superior to them, in one regard
or other. Those who receive fewest Talents, have unspeakable cause of
Gratitude, but none of Envy.

5. Those who excel others, should never be Proud of it. Who makes thee to
differ? If we have more Health, Wealth, Honor, Power than others; yet here is
no just Foundation for Self-conceit. Sovereign Divine Bounty makes the
Difference. God might have made us the lowest and meanest, and those who now
are so, he might have advanced much higher than we are; and yet done us not the
least Wrong therein. If we have greater Natural Abilities than others, God
freely gave them, without any Means of our using. In this Case, there is no
Reason for the Inferior to be despised, nor the Superior to be Self-conceited.
If we have greater Acquired Endowments of Mind than others, yet God freely gave
Opportunity for Endeavors to get them, and he also gave Success to such
Endeavors; so that still here is no cause for Pride, though much for
Thankfulness. Nay, If we are sincerely Pious and Godly, and have done much
greater Service, and many more good Deeds than others; yet here is nothing to be
Proud of. God freely gave the Opportunities for doing good, Qualifications for
it, Inclinations to it, Assistances in it, and all the Success that did attend
our Endeavors. Indeed in a strict Sense, the more Holy any are, the more they
do for God; so much the more they are Indebted to him. Though by his free and
gracious Promises, he has obliged himself to Reward their sincere Performances,
yet it is of his sovereign Goodness that he has given these Encouragements, that
he has given them Hearts to take and improve the Encouragements, and to abound
in doing what he requires. As we love God, because he first loved us; so if we
do more for God than others, it is because he first did more for us, working in
us to will and to do of his own good pleasure: For without him we could do
nothing. If we have sincerely Served God in any Matter, we may justly say as
David in that Case of contributing toward building the Temple: 1 Chronicles. 29.14.
Who am I, and what is my People, that we should be able to offer so willingly
after this sort? For all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given
thee. That God should by his gracious Promises give Encouragement to Duty, give
Opportunity, Inclination, Assistance to do Duty, and after all give a gracious
Reward too (as he will in the other World) here is Grace upon Grace indeed:
Grace from the Foundation to the Top-stone. And since it is such sovereign
Grace, surely those favored with it, have no cause for Pride, Boasting or
Self-conceit; though unspeakable cause for the most lively Gratitude.

6. Though we are never so unworthy in our selves, yet we should trust in God
for the best of Blessings and Benefits. It is of Gods own Heart, of his free,
sovereign Bounty, that he bestows on Men all the Benefits they ever receive;
and since he gives so freely, our Unworthiness should not discourage us from
seeking to him, and trusting in him for the best of Blessings which we need.
Indeed God does, and ever will* maintain his own sovereign Lordship and
Dominion over his Creatures, and will give forth his own Favors in his own
Way; therefore we may not expect Pardon of Sin, Peace with God, a Title to
future Happiness, unless we heartily Repent of Sin, hate and turn from it, and
receive Christ as Prince and Savior. It Is grand Presumption for any to expect
Peace with God, and Happiness in his Favor, and yet continue loving and
practicing known Wickedness, known Rebellion against him. Yet on the other
hand, notwithstanding our many and great Transgressions, by which we are most
unworthy, undeserving of Gods Favor; yet if we heartily Repent of our Sins,
and rely on Gods Favor as offered through Christ in the Promises, we shall
then be freely Welcome to it. If we thus do, our unworthiness of Divine Favor,
shall be no Bar to our obtaining it. For Gods Offers of saving Mercy, are most
free, gracious, sovereign; and his Promises which contain them are infallibly
true. Therefore, together with utmost loathing of our Sins, we should all of us
be encouraged speedily, fully, firmly to trust in the Sovereign Grace of God
through Jesus Christ, for all that Pardon, Grace and Salvation which we need. God
is such a Sovereign Fountain of Good, and so delights in Mercy; that we cannot
possibly please him more, than by thus trusting in him for promised benefits,
Psalm. 147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, in those that
hope in his mercy, Abraham was strong in Faith giving glory to God, Romans 4.20.
His Strong Faith, hope and trust in the Divine promises, did please and glorify
God.

7. We should freely and readily do as much Good as ever we can. The more we do
so, so much the more like we are to God. Christians are bidden to be Followers
(it signifies, Imitators) of God as dear Children, Ephesians. 5.1. Surely then, they
should endeavor to be as diffusive and extensive as ever they can in doing of
Good. Our blessed Lord Jesus said, Luke 6.36. Be ye therefore merciful as your
Father also is merciful. Our Lord Jesus went about doing good, Act. 10.38. And
we should walk as he also walked, 1 John 2.6. We should be as ready to forgive
those that have wronged us, as we are desirous that God should forgive us.
Forgiving one another, even as God for Christ sake has forgiven you, Ephesians.
4.32. Yea, as we have opportunity we should do good to all men, especially to
those of the household of Faith, Gal. 6.10.

8. Those must needs be happy, who have God for their God and Portion. This is
the case, of all sincere Believers in Christ Jesus. They have the Unchangeable,
Inexhaustable Fountain of all Good for their Portion; there is in God,
infinitely more than enough to supply all their wants, and that to all
Eternity. Nor is this Good God more able than he is willing, to bestow
matchless endless Felicity, on all his sincere Saints. Therefore we may well
conclude with that, Psalm. 146.5. Happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his
help; and whose hope is in the Lord his God.

Sermon, VII. UTMOST DILIGENCE Needful, to obtain SALVATION.
PHIL. II. 12. -- Work out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling.


WHen the First Man Adam rebelled against God; all his Posterity were involved
in that Rebellion. He being their common Father, Head and Representative; they
all sinned in him and fell with him in that first Transgression. And by being
involved in Sin, they became liable to misery too. By one man sin entered into
the World, and death by sin; and so death has passed upon all men, for that
all have sinned, Romans 5.12. In Adam all Die, 1 Cor. 15.22. All men deserve
Eternal Misery, Eternal Damnation for their sinning against God. For the Wages
of sin is Death, Romans 6.23. Though all Men deserve Damnation, yet God has
designed Salvation to some; and has sent his only Begotten Son to save them, 1 Timothy 1.15. This as a faithful saying worthy of all acceptance, that Christ
came into the World to save Sinners. Christ came into the World on purpose to
save Sinners, and none else can do it. For there is Salvation in none other,
neither is there any other name given under Heaven among men whereby we can be
saved, Act. 4.12. But who are those whom Christ will save? Why all that believe
in him. Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish but have Everlasting Life,
Joh. 3.16. He Will save those that Obey him. Heb. 5.9. He became the Author of
Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him. Those who heartily repent of their
Sins, and trust in Christ's Righteousness for Justification, and yield unfeigned
Obedience to his Precepts, shall be saved by him. The Lord Jesus will save them
from the Wrath and Curse of God, from Hell, from Eternal Misery; and will make
them Eternally Blessed and Glorious in the Heavens. All that call themselves
Christians, do at least pro^ess and pretend to hope for such Salvation as this.
Jesus, signifies a Savior, why do they call themselves the Disciples and
Subjects of Jesus Christ; why do they call him Prince and Savior, unless they
expect Salvation by him? Well, since they pretend to expect such Salvation,
they should carefully walk in the way that leads to it; And this is the meaning
of our Text, Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling; the Explication
whereof may be considered under this,

DOCTRINE. It is the Duty of Christians to work out their Salvation with fear
and trembling.
Here we may Inquire,

I. What Is meant by Christians working out their Salvation?

II. What Is meant by working out their Salvation with fear and trembling?

III. Why should they so work out their Salvation?

QUESTION I. What Is meant by Christians working out their Salvation?
The first Answer to this Question, is Negative; it does not mean that they
should or can, purchase, merit or deserve any part of their Salvation. Sinners
have merited Damnation, by breaking Gods Law; but they cannot merit Salvation,
by any or by all their doings and sufferings. Indeed Jesus Christ has merited
Salvation, for all those who shall obtain it; yet those who receive it, do not
deserve it. It Is Gods free Gift to them, Luk, 12.32. It is your Fathers good
pleasure to give you the Kingdom. The Gift of God is Eternal Life, Romans 6.23.
This Salvation is purchased for, but not by, those who obtain it. As it comes
from God, from Christ to them, it is a Gift, it is the fruit of mere, free,
sovereign Love, Grace and nothing else. There are some Qualifications necessary
to be found in Persons, in order to their complete Salvation; as Faith,
Repentance, Holiness, without these no Man shall see the Lord. Yet these
Inherent qualifications, do not merit or deserve Happiness; they are rather
parts of the Sinners Salvation, and preparatory to the perfection of it. And
even these qualifications, are also the Gifts of God. So is Repentance (Act.
5.31.) and Faith, (Ephesians. 2.8.) it is of Christ's fullness, that Persons receive
Grace for Grace. He is the Spring and Fountain of their Grace and Holiness: he
works in them both to will and to do of his own good Pleasure. So that the
Sinner's perfect complete Salvation, is Gods Gift; all those qualifications in
the Soul which are necessary hereunto, are also Gods Gifts: therefore the
Sinner cannot purchase, merit or deserve Salvation. This is the Negative Answer.

The Second Answer is Affirmative, A Christians working out his own Salvation,
signifies, his walking in those ways, doing those things which lead infallibly
to Eternal Salvation. When a Person lives in the Exercise of Repentance, of
Faith in Christ, and yields sincere Obedience to the Gospel; he may then be
said to work out his own Salvation, because he takes the only course, walks in
the only way that leads to Salvation. For those who obey not the Gospel, shall
not be Saved, but be punished with Everlasting Destruction, 2 These. 1.9. It Is
not enough for Men to say, Lord, Lord; but they must do the will of God, else
they shall not enter into the Kingdom, Mat. 7.22. In short and in general, a
Person may be said to work out his own Salvation, when he lives as the Gospel
directs, when he does what Gods Word requires of him. But then, this Obedience
must have these qualifications, it must be Sincere, Universal, Constant.

1. It must be Sincere. There Is no Salvation without Faith in Christ. He that
believes not shall be damned, Mark. 16.16. Now true Faith, it purifies the
Heart (Acts 15.9.) and works by Love, Gal. 5.6. It shows it self in Works of
Obedience. By Faith Abraham -- obeyed, Heb. 11.8. Faith without works is dead,
Jam. 2.26. Yea, true Faith puts the Person upon yielding sincere Obedience to
God: He not only does the Things which God commands, but he does them because
God commands them, out of Love to God, with a desire to Please and Glorify him.
The Hypocrite does many Things for the Matter of them, which God commands; yet
his doing them can scarce be called Obedience, because he is not heartily moved
thereto by Gods Authority, and with a design to please him; but rather with a
design that he himself may be applauded by Men. Thus all things which the
Pharisees did, they did to be seen of Men, Mat. 23.5. But the true Saint acting
as such, is moved from a Principle of Obedience to God, aiming at his Glory. He
desires to glorify God with Body and Spirit; whether he eats, drinks, or
whatever he does, 1 Cor. 6.20. and 10.31. He desires that Christ may be
magnified in his Body, whether it be by Life or Death, Phil. 1.20. Perfect,
sinless Obedience, the Saints cannot arrive to in this World; but sincere
Obedience they may and do arrive at.

2. It must be Universal. Hypocrites will pick and choose among Gods Precepts;
they will do the external, material Part of what is required by some of them, but
they wholly disregard others. But the true Believer in a becoming Temper, has
Conscientious Regard to all Gods Commandments. David had respect to them all,
and said to God, I esteem all by Precepts concerning all things to be right;
and I hate every false way, Psalm. 119.6.128. Our Lord Jesus describes his
Disciples, his Friends that are Journeying in their Way to Salvation: Joh.
15.14. Then are ye my Friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Christ's Yoke
is easy, his Burden Light, his Commands not grievous but precious to the Heirs
of Salvation.

3. It must it Constant. If our Righteousness be as the morning Cloud and early
Dew, which soon passes away; as the Seed sown in stony Ground, which soon
withers and comes to nothing, we shall never obtain Salvation. None but the
Persevering Saint shall get to Heaven. If any Man draw back, Gods Soul will
have no Pleasure in him. We must not be weary in well doing, if we would Reap
the Harvest of Eternal Jo^* It Is by patient continuance in well doing, that we
should seek for Glory, Honor and Immortality, and so obtain Eternal Life, Romans
2.7. When Christians yield such Obedience as this to the Gospel of Christ, they
may be said to work out their Salvation; for they walk in that Path, that Way
of Faith and Obedience which leads to Everlasting Blessedness. We may in the
next place enquire,

QUESTION II. What Is meant by working out their Salvation with Fear and
Trembling?
Here also, the first Answer must be Negative. It does not mean that they
should nourish in themselves a Principle of slavish Fear. It does not mean that
they should give way to overwhelming Melancholy, to sinking Doubts, Fears,
Dispondencies; that they should be filled with amaving Horrors, Terrors and
Anguish; that they should spend their whole Time in Weeping, in Sighs and Tears
and Groans, refusing Comfort to their Souls. I say, it does not mean that they
should thus live. For the ways of Wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and all her
paths peace, Prove. 3.17. And Christians are Required to lead Lives of Gladness,
Joyfulness and Thanksgiving. They should rejoice in the Lord, rejoice in hope
of the Glory of God, Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always; and again I say
rejoice. Christians should lead gladsome, thankful, cheerful Lives.

The second Answer is Affirmative. Their working out their Salvation with Fear
and Trembling, signifies, that they should use utmost Care, Caution, Diligence,
Circumspection in this grand Affair. They should maintain in their Hearts, a
constant, holy Jealousy and Godly Fear, lest they should miss of that endless
Salvation they hope for, or carry it amiss while they pretend to seek after it.
The Precept is much of the same Import with those, Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice with trembling. 2 Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your
calling and election sure. Heb. 12.15. Looking diligently, lest any Man fail of
the Grace of God.

When the Apostle says, Work out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling, it is
as if he had said,

Take heed to your selves: Don't think you are past all danger, don't be secure,
idle, slothful, careless. See to it, that your Hearts are right with God,
steadfast in his Covenant; and that your Conversation be answerable. You have
many Enemies that would obstruct your Salvation, and hinder you from walking in
the way that leads to it; therefore have your Eyes open, be on your Watch and
Guard, that you may see your dangers and escape them, and see your Enemies and
conquer them. Walk circumspectly, not as Fools but as Wise redeeming the time.
Be jealous of your selves, be cautious and watchful, lest you indulge any Sin,
lest you provoke God. Use utmost constant Care, Prayer, Diligence to walk very
humbly, closely, exastly with God; that so you may obtain that complete
Salvation, that is promised to his faithful Servants.

This seems to be the plain import of that Fear and Trembling, with which
Christians should work out their Salvation. They cannot be too Careful,
Cautious, Prayerful, Watchful, Diligent that they may get safe to Heaven at
last. Therefore we proceed to,

QUESTION III. Why should they so work out their Salvation?
Why should they use so much Caution, Care, Watchfulness, Prayerfulness,
Diligence in this Affair? What are the Reasons or Considerations, which should
move them to do thus? For Answer, they are such Considerations as these, viz.

1. Many have seemed very likely to obtain Salvation, and yet have missed of it
at last. Alas, how many such? Many are but almost, not altogether, persuaded to
be Christians, such will surely perish if they continue so. Many make an open
full Profession of the true Religion, and yet perish at last. When God brought
Israel out of Egypt, and proposed his Law and Covenant to them; what said they
to it? Why they readily promised Obedience, saying, All that the Lard has
said, will we do, and be obedient. All the People answered with one voice and
said, all the words which the Lord has said will we do, Exodus, 24.3, 7. We
cannot desire Men to say more than this. Who could bid fairer for the Earthly
Canaan, or the Heavenly one either, by their Profession, than these did? Yet
after this fair show, Multitudes of them perished by their Wickedness, their
Unbelief and Disobedience. They could not enter in because of unbelief, Heb.
3.19. The Stony ground hearers, they embraced the Gospel, yea they did it with
Joy too; they made a fair show of Religion, yet they had no Root in themselves;
the hot Sun of Persecution, withered and destroyed the fair shows they had
made, Mat. 13. chap. Judas was one of our Lords Twelve Disciples, and for ought
we know, was in general blameless in his outward behavior, 'till he discovered
himself to be the Son of Perdition by betraying the Lord of Glory. Some have
Preached and Prophesied in Christ's Name, and in his Name have cast out Devils,
and done many wonderful works; and yet were Hypocritical in all, and shall at
last be numbered among the workers of Iniquity, Mat. 7.22, 23. And does not
constant Experience show, that many (who to Man's Judgment) made a good
beginning, were Sober, Virtuous, Pious; have afterward fallen into scandalous
courses of wickedness, and lived and dyed in them? Many (to the eye of Men)
have bid fair for Heaven, and yet turned into Hell at last. Therefore O
Christian, Fear and Tremble, use utmost care and diligence lest thou prove such
an one. The Apostle Paul was careful and watchful, lest after he had Preached
to others; he himself should prove a Castaway, 1 Cor. 9.27. Surely there
should be as great care in us. How woeful, doleful, dreadful would it be; if
after we have made fair shows of Religion, and fed our selves with hopes of
Heaven a great while, we should be tumbled down into the Torments of Hell?
Doubtless there are many now in Hell, who for a while made as fair a show for
Heaven as to outward appearance, as any of us do. This should make us look
about our selves.

2. Many of Gods sincere Children, have through Unwatchfulness fallen into great
Sins. When they have been off their Watch and Guard, their Spiritual Enemies
(Temptations and Corruptions) have given them very sore Falls. Lot's Righteous
Soul was vexed with the filthy Conversation of the Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
Yet soon after, he himself was guilty of great Filthiness, of repeated
Drunkedness, and repeated Incest, even Incest with his own Daughters, Genesis
19.30. Aaron was a Godly Man, between Eighty and Ninety Years old, and yet
joined in making a Golden Calf to be worshipped by the Israelites. Oh vile
Iniquity! After this, Holy Moses, the Meekest Man in the World, spoke
unadvisedly with his Lips, provoked God, and excluded himself from entering
into the earthly Canaan. David, that Man after Gods own Heart, after he had
received many wonderful Deliverances, and great Advancement, became guilty of
Adultery and Murder. Solomon, after the Lord had appeared to him twice, became
guilty of vile Idolatry. The Apostle Peter, he denied Christ with Cursing and
Swearing. What shall we say to such things as these? Surely we should look on
them as awful, solemn Warnings to us: They are written for our Admonition, that
he who thinks he stands, may take heed lest he fall, 1 Cor. 10.11, 12. Have
such eminent Saints, after long standing in Grace, after many particular
Victories over their Spiritual Enemies, and after having done eminent Services
for God; yet fallen into such Sins as the Scripture assures us they have? Then
what will become of us? Are we sure, that we shall never fall as they have
done? No, we are not sure of any such thing. If we do know that we are sincere
Believers, then we may know that we shall not finally fall away; but shall be
kept by the power of God through Faith unto Salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. But we don't
certainly know, that we shall be kept from sore falls, even into scandalous
Sins. Therefore the falls of the Godly, should greatly quicken us to be very
careful, watchful, diligent in walking in the way that leads to Salvation. The
falls, wounds, groans of others; should be as a continual Alarm in our Ears,
putting us continually on our watch and guard.

3. God uses his sovereign pleasure, in giving forth grace to the Children of
Men. We cant obtain Salvation, unless we are sincerely and practically Godly;
and we cannot be so, without the help of Divine Grace. Without Christ we can do
nothing, Joh. 15.5. We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as
of our selves; but our sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3.5. Now God acts as a
Sovereign Lord, in giving forth his Grace: God is not our Debtor. If we wont
hear him to day, he is not obliged to call on us to morrow. If we wont comply
with his holy motions now, he is not obliged to continue them to us. This
consideration should quick^n us, to be careful and diligent in obeying God,
lest we provoke him to withdraw his Influences. Yea in our Text, the Apostle
seems to have reference to this Argument. For when he had said, Work out your
Salvation with Fear and Trembling, his very next words (which have an
Argumentative reference to them) are, for it is God that works in you both to
will and to do, of his own good pleasure. As if he had said,

You cannot work out your Salvation without the help of Gods Spirit, he affords
his help according to his own sovereign pleasure: he may work when he will, and
cease working when he will. If you carefully and diligently receive and comply
with his gracious Influences; you may expect they shall he continued: to him
that has shall be given. But if you are careless, slothful, negligent; then
remember God works at pleasure, you don't know how soon or how far he may
withdraw. Therefore let holy fear, quicken you to utmost diligence.

God once said, Genesis 6.3. My spirit shall not always strive with Man. O
Christian, fear and tremble, l^st thou should provoke God to withdraw the
Influences and Motions of his good Spirit. If hitherto thou have been a
Christian, only in Name and Profession; then speedily comply with Gods call,
heartily embrace Christ on Gospel Terms, lest by thy slothful wickedness, God
be provoked utterly to withdraw his gracious Influences, and so thou perish for
ever. On the other hand, if thou have true Regenerating Grace in thee, and so
shall never finally fall away and perish; yet be careful and diligent to obey
God, and comply with his holy Motions, lest he leave thee to fall very foully,
to the darkening of thine Evidence for Heaven, and the wounding of thine own
Conscience. David's great Sins, darkened his Evidence for Heaven, sorely wounded
his Conscience; his inward troubles were as grievous as broken bones, Psalm.
51.8. Peter's gross Sins, caused bitter weeping. Well then, be careful and
diligent in working out your own Salvation, because God acts as a Sovereign
Lord in giving forth his gracious Influences.

4. Sloth and Negligence in Christians above their Salvation, is a very great
Sin; and often occasions very great Evils. It Is it self a very great Sin, for
it is plain Disobedience to Gods Command. He bids them keep their Hearts with
all diligence; seek first the Kingdom of Heaven; strive to enter in at the
strait Gate; and to look diligently, lest they fail of the Grace of God. So
that Sloth in this Matter is plain Disobedience to God; and it is also a
practical Despising and Contemning of his offered Mercy* and as it is a great
Sin, so it often procures great Evils. When Christians are slothful and
negligent in the Concerns of their Souls, they often become guilty of great
remarkable Failings, visible and offensive to others; yea, they sometimes fall
into gross Scandals. And this surely does very much hurt; it brings great
Dishonor to the Name of God, of Jesus Christ. David's Adultery and Murder, gave
the Enemy great occasion to Blaspheme, 2 Samuel 12.14. O Man, if thou art a true
Saint, and in a right Temper; then surely nothing will be so dear to thee, as
the Glory and Honor of God, of Jesus Christ our Lord. Christ has loved thee,
given himself a Sacrifice for thee; he has died that thou may live: he has
been loaded with Shame and Scorn from Men, that thou may be crowned with
Glory: And can thou Dishonor this glorious and gracious Redeemer? Can thou
wound his Name and Interest? How can thou bear the Thoughts of this? Well, if
thou would not displease and dishonor thy tender hearted, heavenly Father,
thy precious and dear Redeemer; then be not slothful, but most careful and
diligent in working out thine own Salvation. Again, if thou should be
careless, and fall into great Sins, this would greatly grieve the Holy Spirit
of God; the contrary whereto is expressly commanded; Ephesians. 4.30. Grieve not the
holy Spirit, whereby you are sealed to the Day of Redemption. O Believer in
Christ, would thou not grieve that Holy Spirit, which enlightened thy dark
Mind, softened thy hard Heart, made thee a new Creature and a Child of God?
Would thou not grieve that Holy Spirit, who alone can assist, refresh and
comfort thee, and lead the safe to Glory? Then work out thy Salvation with Fear
and Trembling, with utmost Care and Diligence. Again, if thou should be
careless, slothful, and fall into great Sins; this might greatly hurt others:
They may be scandalized, offended, prejudiced against the Ways of God for thy
sake. It may be thy ill Example may be an occasion of their hardening in Sin
and perishing for ever. Some think, Da^id's Scandals occasioned the Ruin of
Multitudes. And how can thou bear the Thoughts of this, that thy Sin, thy ill
Example should hurt the Souls of others? Art thou not bidden to make thy light
shine before others, that they seeing thy good works, may glorify thy Father
which is in Heaven, Mat. 5.16. If thou would not hurt but benefit, others by
thy Example; then work out thy Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Again, if
thou should be slothful and fall into gross Offenses, this might greatly
wound thine own Soul and Conscience (as was hinted but now of David and Peter)
therefore if thou would avoid unutterable wounds, stings, lashes of
Conscience; and would enjoy true inward peace and serenity of Soul; then work
out thy Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Endeavor to be inoffensive in word
and deed; give no occasion of stumbling and finding fault, no not so much as to
thine own Conscience. Make a business of Religion; exercise thy self to have
always a Conscience void of offense, both toward God and Men.

5. A Christians working out his own Salvation, is a matter of great weight and
Importance; therefore he should be most careful and diligent in it. It Is
exceeding ridiculous for Persons to be serious in nice, needless, triffling
matters; and yet triffling in what is weighty and important. Yet too many, yea
the most of Men are so. What will become of the Impenitent Sinner? Why he must
lie under the guilt of Sin, under the Wrath and Curse of God forever. He must
burn in Hell for ever; be stung, lashed, tormented with his own Conscience
forever; dwell with exasperated enraged Devils for ever; be inconceivably
miserable in Body and Soul to all Eternity. And is it not a matter of great
weight and importance, to escape such misery as this? Should not utmost care,
prayer, diligence be employed in the matter? How much care, pains, cost will
Men sometimes be at, to escape some small temporary evils? Surely then, they
should spare no care, pains, watchfulness and diligence that they may flee from
the Wrath to come, and escape that Divine Vengeance which is insupportable.
Ordinarily, Men wont grudge any pains, nor stick at difficulties, to preserve
their Houses when on Fire; their Estates, and much more their Lives when in
danger. And should they not be ten Thousand times more sollicitous for their
Souls, that they may escape Everlasting Inconceivable miseries? Yes indeed they
should. For what shall it profit a Man if he gain the whole World, and lose his
own Soul? or what shall a Man give in exchange for his Soul? Mat. 16.26. On the
other hand, what is the portion of those that rightly work out their own
Salvation? Why they shall have a far more exceeding, and an Eternal weight of
glory; a never fading Crown; they shall dwell with God and Christ forever;
shall have fullness of Joys, and rivers of Pleasure for evermore. They shall
possess greater Good than Eye has seen, Ear heard, or the Heart of Man is
capable to conceive of. And surely, it is a matter of greatest weight and
importance, For Men to strive after this: Surely they should use utmost Care
and Diligence to obtain this Happiness. How much care, cost and pains will Men
sometimes be at, to build one House, or one single Ship? How will they break
their rest, jade and tire their Bodies and Minds, hazard Health and Life too;
to increase their Outward Estate, their Earthly Treasures? And should they not
be abundantly more concerned for Heavenly than Earthly Treasures? Indeed they
should. Scarce any that calls himself a Christian, will deny it in words; though
Thousands do in their actions. Doubtless there are many who call themselves
Christians, that never in their Lives took half so much pains to get to Heaven;
as they have to get Twenty Shillings, yea to get a less value. But such are
Fools and Madmen (let their pretense to wisdom be what it will) all will count
them so very quickly. Let a real Christian seriously consider, of how great
weight and importance it is to work out his own Salvation; and then let him be
slothful and careless if he can. Sure I am, the greatest car and diligence
should be used, to avoid the greatest evil and obtain the greatest good;
therefore it should be employed in working out our own Salvation.

6. A Christian has many Enemies to hinder the working out his Salvation,
therefore he should be the more careful and diligent an doing it. When a thing
is found to be absolutely necessary (as the working out our Salvation, is
already proved to be) then the difficulties that lie in the way, should not
discourage but animate us, and make us the more resolute and diligent. Well,
there are many difficulties which lie in the way, and tend to hinder a
Christian from working out his own Salvation. In this grand work, Persons meet
with difficulties from the World, the Devil, and their own Lusts.

1. From the World. The World is a bewitching thing to Men, ever since they
first forsook God the Fountain of Living Waters. If any Man love the World, the
love of the Father is not in him. Friendship with the World, is enmity with
God. Men must by Faith overcome the World, or else they can never get to
Heaven. They should keep themselves unspotted from the World, if they would be
pure and undefiled in Religion, Jam. 1.27. Alas, Men Souls are much endangered
by the World, by it is Prosperity and Adversity.

1. By its Prosperity. When Rich and Prosperous, they are in danger of
forgetting God, of being proud, highminded, and of trusting in uncertain
^iches. When the Fields of the Fool brought forth plentifully, he then thought
of Eating, Drinking, and Luxurious licencicus meriment for many Years to come,
Luke 12.19.

2. By i^ (...) ^^ty. When Persons are very Poor, ^ow apt are they very often
to Steal, Rob, Lie, Cheat, Defraud; at least to Fret, Murmur, Repine and to be
discontent? And these things are very obstructive to their Spiritual and
Eternal Good. This present World in an evil World, (Gal. 1.4.) and may well be
reckoned among the Spiritual Enemies of a Christian, among the difficulties
which tend to obstruct his Salvation. There Is no Experienced Christian, but
meets with so much difficulty from the World in his Spiritual concerns; as call
for his very great care and diligence to oppose it.

2. From the Devil. The Devil is a Lye^ and Murderer from the beginning; a
grand Enemy of Souls: He Is the old Serpent, who stung and poisoned all Mankind
in the Fountainhead, the first Adam. He is full of Subtlety, Spite and Malice;
and employs all his Skill and Industry, to hinder Men from being Holy and
Happy. He has many Wiles, Methods, Stratagems to Ruin them. The Consideration
of such an Enemy, should make the Christian exceeding careful, watchful,
diligent in working out his own Salvation. The inspired Apostle Peter thought
so, when he said, 1 Pet. 5.8. Be sober, be vigilant, because your adversary the
Devil walks about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour. So the
Apostle Paul, having mentioned the Devils, the fallen Angels, those
Principalities, Powers, spiritual Wickednesses as Enemies to the Christian, he
bids him Arm; Put on the whole Armor of God, mentions the Shield, Helmet,
Sword, etc. All must be put on, all diligently and carefully employed, to
withstand so dangerous an Enemy as the Devil is, Ephesians. 6. latter end. Those who
are slothful and careless, as though they had no envious Devils plotting
against them; are most under their Power and most hurt by them. Those receive
most Mischief from him, who are least Jealous of him, least watchful against
him.

3. From their own Lusts. Their Lusts do war in their Members, Jam. 4.1. They
war against their Souls. They are deceitful Lusts; that is, they would turn
them out of the Way, out of the true Way of Faith and Holiness, which leads to
Glory. The best of Christians have indwelling Lusts, which often put them upon
the Evil they would not, and hinder them from doing the Good which they would:
When they would do Good, Evil is present with them. Holy Paul met with a great
Conflict with his own Lusts; and said, Romans 7.23, 24. I find a Law in my
Members, warning against the Law of my Mind, and bringing me into Captivity to
the Law of Sin which is in my Members. O wretched Man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this Death? Surely, the consideration of these
constant, dangerous Enemies, should make the Christian use utmost Care and
Diligence, in working out his own Salvation.

USE.
We may hence see,

1. Many call themselves Christians, who don't work out their Salvation with
Fear and Trembling. Many professed Christians, seem to have little or no
Concern or Care to get to Heaven. They pretend to hope for it, but will take no
Pains for it: They pretend to hope for Heaven, but walk in the broad Way to
Hell. If they have the Form, yet they deny the Power of Godliness. Though they
profess to know God, yet in works they deny him; being abominable, disobedient,
and to every good work reprobate, Tit. 1.16. But woeful and dreadful will their
Condition be, if they don't speedily amend, by unfeigned Faith, Repentance, and
practical Godliness.

2. We should all be quickened to work out our Salvation with Fear and
Trembling. Our Time is short, our Work great; therefore greatest Speed, Care,
Diligence is very needful to be used. Motives have been mentioned already: By
way of Direstion I would say,

1. Let us be much in Self-Examination about what is past, and Serious
Consideration about what is to come. Let us Examine what is past, and be deeply
humbled for our Sloth and Negligence. Let us likewise seriously consider what is
to come, even Death, Judgment, Eternity, and what is like to become of us.
Serious Meditation on these things may prove very profitable to us.

2. Let us be much in Prayer to God, for his Grace to help us. Psalm. 25.4, 5.
Show we thy ways, O Lord, teach me thy paths. Lead me in thy truth, and teach
me. Psalm. 119.133. Order my steps in thy Word, and let not any Iniquity have
Dominion over me.

Sermon, VIII. The USE CHRISTIANS Should make, of Remembering their past SINS.
DEUTERONOMY. IX. 7. Remember and forget not, how thou provokedst the Lord thy God to
Wrath in the Wilderness.


THese Words were spoken by Moses to the Children of Israel, a little before
they were to pass Jordan, and possess Canaan, ^.1. And as he tells them, they
were going to possess that good Land; so he cautions them against thinking that
it was for any Righteousness of theirs, that God gave this good Land to them,
v. 4. God dispossessed and destroyed the Canaanites, for their own Wickedness;
and did not dispossess them, and make way for Isreal's coming in their room, for
the sake of any Righteousness in the Israelites. v. 6. Understand therefore,
that the Lord thy God gives thee not this good Land to possess it, for thy
Righteousness, for thou art a stiff-necked People. And to prevent Proud,
Self-conceited Thoughts in them, that they might not imagine that God gave them
Canaan for the sake of any Goodness or Righteousness of theirs, he says to them
in this 7th. V. Remember and forget not, how thou provokedst the Lord thy God
to wrath in the wilderness; from the day that thou did depart out of the Land
of Egypt, until ye came unto this place, ye have been rebellious against the
Lord. They were Gods professing, Covenant People, that were thus commanded to
remember their past Sins: And if this was the Duty of Gods People in Days of
old, the same is the Duty of Gods People now.

From the Words we therefore may raise this Doctrinal Observation, viz.

DOCTRINE. It is the Duty of Christians, to remember and not forget their past
Sins.
Moses requires Israel to remember their Sins, and not forget them. It was a
Matter of so great Weight, that he possitively injoyns it, and plainly forbids
the Neglect of it: Remember it, muse and meditate on it, and often revolve it
in your Thoughts, that you have Sinned against God, provoked him; and take heed
that you don't forget this, don't let it slip out of your Minds or Memories. He
bids them remember their Sins in the Wilderness: They had been in the
Wilderness about Forty Years; and very quickly after they came into it, they
were guilty of grievous Transgressions (as well as of others afterward.) Well,
though they were so long ago committed, for so long time past, yet they ought
to be Remembered and kept in Mind by them. Christians should do what they can,
to remember all the Sins of their whole Lives past, and to forget none of them.
David says, Psalm. 51.3. My sin is ever before me. Neither should Christians
remember their actual Sins only, or the more gross and heinous of them; but the
thoughts of their Personal Transgressions, should make them also remember their
Original Sin. David's thinking on the Murder and Adultery he had been guilty of,
brought him to consider, that he was shapen in iniquity and conceived in sin,
Psalm. 51.5. But more particularly, Christians should remember,

1. Against whom their Sins are committed, and that is the Great GOD, Though some
Sins are committed more immediately and directly against Men, yet they are all
ultimately against God, inasmuch as they are a breach of his Law. 1 John 3.4.
Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the law; for sin is a
transgression of the law. We never sin against our Neighbor, but we break Gods
Law in doing it; for the general nature of Sin is, that it is our Nonconformity
to the Divine Precept. Hence God says, Prove. 8.36. He that sins against me,
wrongeth his own Soul. Every Sin wrongs the Soul, nothing wrongs the Soul but
what is against God, therefore every Sin is against God. Every Sin (though more
immediately against our Neighbor) is a Violation of Gods Law. Hence David when
guilty of Murder and Adultery, yet said to God, Psalm. 51.4. Against thee, thee
only have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight. Christians therefore
should remember, that all (...) Sins are against God, the Great God, the ever
blessed God their Maker, Preserver, and only Benefactor; every Sin is a
practical contempt of Gods supreme, indisputable Authority. The very nature,
venom and malignity of Sin is this, that it is against the ever Blessed and
Glorious God. The evil of Sin must needs be great, because it is against so
Great and Glorious an Object. Christians should endeavor so to remember their
Sins, as to have a deep self-abasing sense of them; therefore they should
remember, not only in general that they are all against the ever Blessed and
Glorious God, but they should also remember,

2. The great Aggravations of their Sins.

And here,

1. They should remember, that their Sins ha^ been committed against their God,
their Covenant God. So says Moses to the Israelites in our Text, remember and
forget not; how thou provokedst the Lord thy God; even that God who has taken
you for his Inheritance, for his peculiar Treasure and People; that God who has
made many great, large and precious Promises to you. And as God has taken you
for his peculiar People and Treasure, so you have taken him for your God, for
your King, Lord and Lawgiver: you have vowed Obedience to him, promised to keep
his Statutes and Commandments, Exodus 24.3.7. David said to God, Psalm. 119.106.
I have sworn and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments.
Such an Engagement (for the substance of it at least) is supposed to be made by
all, who take God for their Covenant God: there is a Covenant Transaction
between God and them, and this consideration aggravates their Sins against him.
Their sinning against God who is in Covenant with them, is not only a breaking
of his Commands; but also of their own Vows and Promises. When Christians are
guilty of gross Crimes, they are guilty of gross Lying or rather Perjury,
because they act contrary to those Vows and Engagements, whereby they have
bound themselves to obey God. This is a great aggravation of Sin, and should be
remembered by Christians as such. Eccl. 5.4. When thou vowest a vow unto God,
defer not to pay it; for he has no pleasure in fools; pay that which thou have
vowed.

Again,

2. Christians should remember that their Sins have been committed against much
knowledge, and that is a great aggravation of them. He that knows his Masters
Will and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes; when he that falls
short through Ignorance, shall escape with few, Luke 12.47, 48. Though all
Christians are not equal in knowledge, some know more than others, some are
Babes and some grown Men; and though such as know most, yet know but in part, (1
Cor. 13.9) are short sighted in the things of God; hence David said, Who can
understand his Errors; Cleanse thou me from secret faults, Psalm. 19.12. The
wisest and most knowing Christians, are guilty of sins of Ignorance every day;
I say, though things are thus, yet, as God showed his word to Jacob, his statutes
and judgments to Israel, and dealt not so with every Nation, Psalm. 147.19, 20.
So he gives to all Christians generally, especially where the Reformation most
prevails; greater means of light and knowledge than he does to other Nations.
As for those who are well acquainted with the Bible, to be sure their knowledge
in the main substantial parts of Christianity, in the main of their duty,
toward God and Christ, and toward one another, must needs be so great, that
their Sins, gross Sins especially, cannot but be much aggravated by being
against knowledge. Nay possibly Christians sometimes sin, not only in general
against knowledge, but also against the particular strivings of their own
Consciences, and the Motions of Gods Spirit in them: This is still a greater
aggravation of sin, and yet how often have we been thus guilty? If we search
diligently into our past Lives, it may be we may all find that we have been
frequently thus guilty. Did we never find strivings between Lust and Grace in
our own Souls, and at last yield to our Lusts, to the grieving the Holy Spirit
of God? We should surely remember such grievous aggravations of sin as these
are.

3. Its a great aggravation of Sin, when committed against God after the
bestowment of many, great and singular Mercies. This Aggravation seems to be
implied in our Text, thou provokedst the Lord thy God to wrath in the
Wilderness. As if he had said to them,

God brought thee out of cruel Egyptian Slavery and Bondage, with an high and
mighty hand; he destroyed thine enemies in the red Sea, through which thou did
safely pass; he brought thee into the Wilderness, there took care of thee, gave
thee Water out of the Rock, fed thee daily with Manna, Bread from Heaven; he
did many, great and wonderful things for thee. He manifested much sparing
Goodness and Patience toward thee, he restrained and bridled in his Anger,
when it was just ready to destroy thee; thus he dealt with thee in the
Wilderness, yet then and there thou provokedst him to wrath, notwithstanding
all the singular discoveries of his Goodness to thee.

Thus when Nathan comes to set forth the Aggravation of David's Sin, his
Adultery and Murder, he says, Thus says the Lord God of Israel, I anointed
thee King over Israel, and delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, etc.
Wherefore have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his
sight? 2 Samuel 12.7, 9. The Mercies as well as Commands of God, should bind us
to his Service. Its a great Aggravation of Sin, that it is committed against a
God that has bestowed many and great Mercys on us. And in this Regard, none of
us can Sin but with great Aggravation. The wages of Sin is Death, Romans 6.23.
And we are all Sinners, so by Nature, were shapen in Iniquity and conceived in
Sin; and therefore deserved Hell even before we were born. Therefore we are
less than the least of Gods Mercies, Genesis 32.10. It is of the Lords Mercy we
are not consumed, Lam. 3.22. Yet God has spared us hitherto; he has kept us out
of Hell, which is better than we deserve. But besides the continuation of our
Lives, keeping us out of Hell, yea leaving us room to hope for Heaven; I say,
besides all these things, possibly all of us at one time or other have had very
special and singular Deliverances, from hazardous Sickness, or from some
eminent Dangers: It may be some peculiar Mercies at one time or other, have
been bestowed upon us, either in our own Persons, or in our dear Relatives. Now
all such singular Favors, are singular Ties, Bonds and Obligations to serve
God; and so they heighten the Aggravation of Sins committed against that God,
who has bestowed such singular Favors. But those of us who are Christians
indeed, the Workmanship of God, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works; the
Spiritual Mercies bestowed on us, are unspeakably great. God has given us a new
Nature, united us to his Son, justified our Persons, in part sanctified our
Souls, made us Heirs of Eternal Glory, if we are indeed true Believers, the
Spiritual Benefits bestowed on us are so many, so great, bought with such an
invaluable Price, bestowed in such a wonderful Manner, as that Eternity will not
be too long a Space, wherein to admire and adore Divine Grace for them. Surely
then, if willingly and knowingly we commit any one Sin against God, after the
Bestowment of such invaluable Mercies, 'twill be an aggravated Crime indeed. As
Nehemiah said, Neh. 6.11. Should such a Man as I flee? No sure, 'twould be a
great Shame. So all true Christians might say, Shall such as we are Sin against
God? What, such as we are, who have received numberless and matchless Benefits
from God; shall such as we Sin against him? No sure, for this would be
unspeakably Disobedient, Ungrateful, inexpressibly Sordid and Abominable.

Thus in General, Christians should remember their Sins as against God; as
greatly Aggravated in being against their Covenant God, against much Light, and
after the Bestowment of many Mercies. And besides this in General,

They should endeavor Particularly to remember the more Particular
Out-breakings of Sin, which they have been chargeable with. In this Chapter,
Moses puts the Israelites In mind of their more particular Transgressions, at
Horeb, at Tabera, at Massah and Kibroth-hattaavah, v. 8, 22. Moses particularly
remembers, his own speaking unadvisedly with his Lips. David remembers his
Adultery and Murder; his Sin was ever before him. Paul remembers what a bitter,
cruel Persecutor he had been, and often mentions it with Self-condemning for
it. If we have not been guilty of the most daring gross and open
Transgressions, of scandalous Incest like Lot, or Drunkenness like Noah, or
Adultery and Murder like David; yet possibly at one time or other we have been
shamefully Disobedient to our Parents or other Superiors, or have spoken
Falsely, have broken some just and lawful Promise, spoken very Passionately
(without Grounds) to, or of others; or have manifested some base Revenge; or
been grossly Dull and Stupid in the Frame of our Hearts toward God. Without
Doubt, all of us upon strict Search, may find many remarkable particular Sins,
which our Consciences cannot but severely condemn and check us for. It may be
some of us that now are new Creatures, did a long time vigorously and
perversely oppose the free Offers of Christ, and Motions of the Spirit of God
in our Souls, before we heartily submitted to Christ as Prophet, Priest and
King. Oh how Vile was such our withstanding the Calls of the Gospel, the
Motions of the good Spirit of God! Surely, such our Sins should be particularly
remembered by us. God is graciously pleased to forget the Sins of his Children,
true Believers; that is, as to the Guilt of them, he Pardons them. True
Believers shall as certainly escape Eternal Condemnation and Misery, as if God
had really forgotten they were Sinners (though this he can never do) or as if
they had never Sinned. But though God does in this Sense forget our Sins, yet we
in a true and proper Sense, should not forget but remember them. Nay, we should
in general, remember the Infirmities, Imperfections, Short-comings attending
our best Duties, those performed with the greatest Sincerity and Fervency. When
we have done our best we are but unprofitable servants, Luke 17.10. There is
not a just Man upon Earth, that does good and sins not, Eccl. 7.20. When
just Men do Good, perform Duty sincerely; yet there is Sin mixed with, and
cleaving to their Performances; none of them are exactly Perfect. This also
Christians should keep in Remembrance.

Now therefore we may Enquire,

QUESTION. What Is the Use Christians should make, of the Remembrance of their
past Sins? Or, What are the Duties it should stir them up unto?
For Answer,

There are many Duties it should stir them up unto; some may be now
particularly mentioned. The Remembrance of their past Sins,

1. Should make them very Humble and self-abased. Ezekiel. 36.31, 32. Then shall
ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall
loath your selves in your own sight, for your Iniquities and for your
Abominations. -- Be ashamed and confounded for your own ways, O House of
Israel. Great shame, confusion of face, self-judging, self-condemning,
self-loathing, self-abasing and abhorring, very well becames us, upon the
Remembrance of our Sins. Might we not well say?

Ah vile Worm; Ah ungrateful Wretch that I am; that I should forget my Maker,
provoke my Preserver, rudely affront my only and glorious Benefactor, basely
neglect my Redeemer; that I should so wickedly Disobey my God, who has laid me
under numberless and strong Obligations, to consecrate my self wholly, only and
continually unto him.

Alas, it is utterly impossible fully to express or describe, that
self-emptying, self-loathing frame of Soul for Sin, that always becomes a true
Christian. There Is no Grace more Ornamental to a Saint, than Humility; and
nothing tends more directly to bring this into Exercise, than the remembrace of
our Sins. Can we have high thoughts of our selves? Nay, how can we have any
other, but low, mean, self-abasing thoughts; when we consider how disingenious,
base, ungrateful, and disobedient we have been to our most merciful and
gracious God? May we not well say with him, Psalm. 73.22. So foolish was I, and
ignorant; I was as a beast before thee. Prove. 30.2. Surely, I am more brutish
than any man, I have not the understanding of a man. Isai. 6.5. -- Woe is me,
for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips. A due remembrance, a deep
sense of Sin, would make us more humble; indeed more low, mean and base in our
own minds and thoughts, than could possibly be expressed by our words. The
Remembrance of past Sins,

2. Should make Christians very thankful for all their Mercies, as free Gifts
of God. Moses in our Text and Context puts Israel in mind of their Sins, that
they might not think God bestowed Canaan on them for the sake of their own
Righteousness, as though they had deserved it. Have we Life, Liberty, Health.
Strength, Food, Raiment, Friends, Relations, Reputation, any Outward Comfort or
true Inward Peace? Have we all or any of these things? Why these are all the
free Gifts of God, we never deserved the least part of any one of them. We were
no sooner Children, than we were Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. We have deserved
Death, Hell, Damnation thousands of times over by our Sins. It Is of the Lords
Mercy we are not consumed for our Iniquities: whatsoever we have on this side
Eternal Burnings, unquenchible Flames, is mere undeserved Mercy, its the free
Gift of God. And we should really think and esteem it so, if we had but a due
remembrance of our Sins. Since therefore we have by our Sins times without
number deserved Eternal Misery, and are yet surrounded with innumerable
Mercies, all of which are the free underserved Favors of God; O how thankful
should we be? Surely it becomes us to say, What shall we render to the Lord for
all his Benefits, for all his underserved Benefits toward us? There are two
sorts of things which we cannot number they are so many, and those are, our
Sins against God, and his Benefits bestowed on us; this is wonderful indeed.
Surely we should be deeply humble for the former; and as thankful for the
latter. None are more thankful for their Mercies, than those who are most
deeply humble and penitent at the remembrance of their Sins. Remembrance of
past Sins,

3. Should make Christians thankful to God for Restraining Grace. Have we been
guilty so much as any one single time, of disobeying our Parents or other
lawful Superiors, of profaning Gods Holy Name, of groundless Quarrelling, of
Intemperance, Uncleanness, Lying, Passionate speaking and reviling? Do we
remember that so much as at any one single time, we have been guilty of any one
of these, or any such like Crimes? Then how comes it about, that we have not
constantly lived in them? We have a root of bitterness, a sinful corrupt Nature
still dwelling in us, our particular acts of Sin did flow from this corrupt
Nature. Out of the Heart proceed evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, etc. Well,
how comes it to pass, that this bitter corrupt Fountain did not always even
continually, send forth such cursed Streams? How comes it about, that we have
not in the whole course of our Lives, lived in the most flagitious Crimes, and
most scandalous Immoralities; for our corrupt Nature has in it, the root and
seed of all manner of Abominations? Why it is the Grace of God that has kept us
from Sinning, and nothing else has restrained us when we had an opportunity of
Sinning. I don't mean, true sanctifying saving Grace: many are restrained from
these and those out-breakings of Sin, which have no saving Grace in them. Well,
so far as we have been restrained from Sinning, it is God that has restrained
us. He that kept back Abimelech from defiling of Abraham's Wife; and David from
shedding the Blood of Nabal; has kept us back from all those Sins we have not
committed, though we had an opportunity of committing them. When we remember how
shamefully our Corruption has broken forth, we should be thankful for that
Grace, which has restrained it from breaking forth much more than it has. The
Pharisee said, Luke 18.11. God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are,
Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, etc. Though we should not (like this Pharisee)
proudly trust in our selves as righteous, if we have been outwardly more
blameless than others; yet if we can as to matter of fact truly say with him.
We have not been so wicked as others, then we should be humbly thankful for it.
As we should with brokenness of Heart and deepest self-abasement of Soul,
remember and repent of our past Sins; so with true thankfulness of Heart, we
should acknowledge the restraints of Divine Grace, that have kept us from the
more abundant out-breakings of our Corruption. It Is matter of great
thankfulness to God, that we are not all of us Murderers, Adulterers,
Blasphemers; that we are not the most abominable Villains that ever lived on
Gods Earth, for we should have been internally and externally as vile and
wicked, as ever we had any possible opportunity of being, if Grace had not
prevented and restrained us. I have often thought, it is a great favor, an
instance of the merciful Divine Protection, when Persons can in the Morning go
out about their Affairs, and come safe home at Night, without broken Bones or
any distressing Accidents. But I have often thought also, that it is still a
much greater Mercy, when they can thus go out in the Morning and come home at
Night; without having committed Adultery, Murder, Theft, or some daring and
heinous Crime or other, since they have continually a corrupt Nature (the seed
and root of all manner of wickedness) in them. When we remember, and most
heartily abhor and mourn for our past Sins; let us also be thankful to God,
that he has restrained and kept us back from Sin so much as he has done. The
Remembrance of past Sins,

4. Should keep Christians from murmuring at their Afflictions. It Is a thing
too frequent, even in Gods own Children, to fret, murmur, repine at afflictive
Dispensations of Providence. Jacob once complained of his Afflictions; saying,
All these things are against me, Genesis 42.36. The Church complained and and
said, Lam. 1.12. -- Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow.
Afflictions brought both Job and Jeremiah to curse the Day of their Birth. How
commonly will Christians tell of their Sickness, Poverty, Losses, Crosses,
Disappointments, bitterly complaining of their Trials, showing great Discontent
and Disquietness of Mind thereat? This is a great Fault; it is a greater Sin
than many are aware of, for Persons to fault and quarrel with the spotless
Dispensations of Sovereign Divine Providence. Well, one thing that occasions
this Discontent and Murmuring is, the forgetting our own Sins. If we duly
remembered our past Sins, our multiplied, aggravated Crimes; our repeated
Transgressions; were we heartily affected with a Sense of our daily,
unavoidable Infirmities, were we duly sensible, that the least of all these
deserves Eternal Misery; I say, did we duly remember, consider, and affect our
Hearts with these things, we should not then be so ready to Murmur and repine
at Afflictions as we often are. All the Troubles, Sorrows, Difficulties we meet
with either in Body or Soul, while here in this World; they are but mere
Flea-bites, Shadows, Nothing, if compared to what our Sins deserve. Where Sins
lie heavy upon the Mind, Affliction lies the lighter. Shall a living Man
complain, a Man for the Punishment of his Sins? Lam. 3.39. No sure, if a Man
rightly considers what his Sins are, he will see no Cause to ^omplain of any
Punishment he meets with while he is Living. If Sin be suitably remembered,
'twill rather make a Christian say, as Mic. 7.9. I will bear the Indignation of
the Lord, because I have sinned against him. q. d. I know I have sinned against
God, my Sins deserve more Misery than I bear; therefore what I do bear, I Will
bear it Patiently, without Murmuring or Repining. If Sin be suitably remembered,
'twill make an afflicted Christian Dumb with Silence, so as not to open his
Mouth in way of complaining against God, Psalm. 39.9. A suitable Remembrance of
Sin, will make a Christian in the midst of his Sorrows and Troubles, thankful
that his Troubles are not more and greater, rather than fretful that they are
so many and great. Remembrance of past Sins,

5. Should make Christians highly prize, and daily apply themselves to, the
Blood of Christ for Pardon. It Is sure, the least Sin deserves Eternal Misery;
our innumerably many, and very great Sins, do as certainly deserve greater
Measures and Degrees of Misery. There is deserved by some, a greater Damnation,
Mat. 23.14. Well, Who can save us from this Misery? Who can cancel these Bonds?
What can wash away the Guilt of our Sins, and free us from Eternal Death? Why
Jesus Christ and he alone, can save us from deserved Miseries. Nothing but his
Blood can quench the Wrath of God that is kindled against us. If a Man should
give his first Born for his Transgression, the Fruit of his Body for the Sin of
his Soul; if he should give thousands of Rams, or ten thousands of Rivers of
Oil; if he should give corruptible Things, such as Silver and Gold, all these
would avail nothing to the satisfying for his Sins, and purchasing the Pardon
of them, Mat. 6.7. 1 Pet. 1.18. No, nothing short of the precious Blood of
Christ can do the Business. He has purchased the Church with his own Blood,
Acts 20.28. It Is only through that Blood* that we have Redemption, even the
Forgivene^s of Sins, Ephesians. 1.7. His Blood washes away Sin, it cleanses from
all Sin, Rev. 1.^. 1 John 1.7. If the Blood of Christ be applied by Faith, it
will cleanse from all Sins, though they have been of a deep Dye, as Scar^es or
Crimson, Isai. 1.18. On the other hand, without the Application of that Blood,
the least Sin cannot be forgiven; for there is Salvation in none other, Act.
4.12. Well then, since this Blood of Christ is the only Remedy, the only Salve
that can cure those mortal Stabs and Wounds which our Sins have given to our
Souls, Times without Number; Oh, How highly should we prize this precious
Blood, when we remember our many and great Sins, and that nothing but this
Blood can save us from the Miseries deserved by them? Surely, we should highly
prize, and diligently apply our selves to, this precious Blood of Christ. And
since we Sin every day, yea there is Sin mixed with and cleaving to our best
Duties; we should as constantly apply our selves by Faith and Prayer, to this
Blood for Pardon. Considering our past Sins and daily unavoidable Infirmities;
the exercise of Humiliation and Repentance should be our daily work, so also
should the exercise of Faith in the Blood of Jesus Christ. We are stung anew by
Sin every day, therefore (if we have any true care for our Souls) we should
every day by Faith look to Christ for healing. Remembrance of past Sins,

6. Should make Christians ready to forgive one another, and meek and humble in
reproving one another. When we consider our own many and great Sins, and yet
hope in God through Christ for the Pardon of them; this should prompt us to
forgive those who have wronged us. Our Lord says, Mat. 18.34, 35. His Lord was
wroth and delivered him to the Tormentors, till he should pay all that was due
unto him. So likewise shall my heavenly Father also do unto you, if ye from
your Hearts forgive not every one his Brother their Trespasses. Ephesians. 4.31, 32.
Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and evil Speaking be put
away from you, with all Malice: And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted,
forgiving one another; even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. If we
Pray as our Lord directs, Forgive us as we forgive others; and yet we do not
really forgive them, but harbor Revengeful Thoughts against them; what is this
but a Mocking of God, and Praying (in effect) that he would retain our Guilt on
us and Damn us.

The Remembrance of our Sins should likewise make us meek and humble in
reproving of others. Gal. 6.1, 2. Brethren, if a Man be overtaken in a Fault,
ye which are spiritual, restore such an one in the Spirit of Meekness,
considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted. Bear ye one another Burdens,
and so fulfill the Law of Christ* If we would fulfill the Law of Christ, we
should bear one another Burdens; and in a spirit of meekness endeavor to
reduce those that are out of the way. Phil. 2.3. Let nothing be done through
strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind let each esteem other better
than themselves. A due Remembrance of our Sins, will make us low and mean in
our own eyes; and the more we are so, the more ready we shall be to esteem
others, to be meek and humble in our carriage to them. The Remembrance of past
Sins,

7. Should make Christians more watchful and fruitful for time to come. When we
consider, how Satan's Temptations and our own deceitful Hearts, have led us away
from God and drawn us into Sin; this should make us cautious and watchful, lest
we should again be so Ensnared. We commonly say, The Burnt Child dreads the
Fire. Our past falls and wounds, should make us the more careful of our steps
for time to come. If from the Falls of others, the Apostle directs us to make
this Application. 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him that thinks he stands, take heed
lest he fall; Much more should our own past Falls, make us more careful and
watchful for the future. So, the remembrance of our past Sins, should make us
more fruitful in Holiness for time to come. When we consider, how little we
have done for God in time past, nay how much we have done against him; it
should make us double our diligence, and redeem our time for the future. When
we consider, how much of our day of Life has been spent in the service of Sin;
it should make us more diligently employ the remainder of it, in the Service of
Christ. Once more, the Remembrance of past Sins,

8. Should move Christians to trust in Christ for Spiritual Strength for the
time to come. Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchmen wake in vain that
keep it. Our own power and prudence in watching, will not do, unless we have
strength from Jesus Christ. We must therefore Pray as well as Watch. When we
remember our past Sins and Falls, we should Pray, that God, that Christ would
strengthen us against Sin for the future. Without him we can do nothing, Joh.
15.5. But he can work in us to will and to do, of his own good pleasure; can
strengthen us to do all things, Phil. 2.13. and 4.13. Well then, let us always
despair in our selves; endeavoring in the exercise of Faith and Prayer, to be
strong in the Lord and in the power of his might. Let us make those Prayers,
with which I shall now finish, Psalm. 25.4, 5. Show me thy ways, teach me thy
paths: lead me in thy truth and teach me, Psalm. 86.11. Teach me thy way, O
Lord, I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to fear thy name. Psalm. 119.133.
Order my steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.
Psalm. 141.4. Incline not mine heart to any evil thing, to practice wicked works
with men that work iniquity. Psalm. 19.13, 14. Keep back thy servant also from
presumptuous Sins, let them not have dominion over me. -- Let the words of my
mouth, and the meditations of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my
Strength and my Redeemer.

Sermon, IX. GOD'S BOW Bent, and SWORD Drawn against the Wicked.
PSALM. VII. 12. If he turn not, he will whet his Sword: He has bent his Bow
and made it ready.


THe Title of this Psalm shows, that holy David was the inspired Author of it;
it refers to a Time when he was in great Danger from wicked Enemies, v. 1. O
Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust, save me from all them that persecute
me, and deliver me. This Verse intimates both the Danger he was in, and the
Method he took for Relief. As to the latter, namely, his trusting in God, he
was encouraged to it from the Consideration of Gods being the Supreme Governor
of all Things, the Righteous Judge of all Men. He Will surely take his Time to
appear eminently for the Righteous, and against the Wicked. v. 10. My defense
is of God, who saves the upright in Heart. v. 11. God judges the Righteous
(that is, will appear to vindicate, help and relieve them) and God is angry
with the wicked every day. Then follows our Text, If he turn not he will whet
his Sword. That is, if the Wicked does not turn from his wicked Ways, but goes
on in his Sin (which is further described v. 14.) then God will whet his Sword,
he has bent his Bow and made it ready. These Expressions concerning God,
represent him as an Enemy, armed, prepared with a Bow bent and Sword sharpened,
to execute Vengeance on the Wicked, v. 13. He has prepared for him the
Instruments of Death. God had deadly Vengeance, mortal Vengeance in Store, for
those who will not turn from, and forsake their wicked Ways. Yea, there is mortal
Vengeance in Store for every such one, not any one of them shall escape in a
Crowd: If he turn not (he, be he who he will that obstinately goes on in Sin)
deadly Vengeance shall overtake him. It shall certainly be so, for God himself
will whet his Sword, bend his Bow, etc. God himself will execute Vengeance on
the Wicked: Though he often employs Instruments in this Work, yet he never puts
it entirely out of his own Hand into others. He Will do it himself, and see it
thoroughly done. He assumes to himself this work, of executing Vengeance on the
Wicked. Deuteronomy. 33.35, 41. To me belongs Vengeance and Recompense. -- If I whet
my glittering Sword, and mine hand take hold on Judgment; I will render
Vengeance to mine Enemies, and I will reward them that hate me. Those who walk
in ways of known Sin and Disobedience to God, are Enemies to God, Haters of
him, and he himself (if they turn not) will render Vengeance to them. So that
their ways of Sin, are to their own Hurt, Wrong and Damage: (For God says,
Prove. 8.36. He that sins against me, wrongeth his own soul; all they that
hate me love death.) God will bring deadly Vengeance, on them, if they turn not.

From the Words therefore we may raise this

DOCTRINE. Great is the Danger of those, who go on in sinful Ways.
Their Danger must needs be great, because our Text tells us, If they turn not,
God will whet his sword; that is, he will certainly punish them according to
their ways, their deservings. He will thus punish them, partly in this World,
but more fully and eternally in the next. As for ways of Sin, (if we would know
what they are) they are ways of Disobedience to God. 1 John 3.4. Whosoever
commits sin transgresses also the Law; for sin is a transgression of the
Law. Ways of Disobedience to God, of trangressing his Precepts, of breaking his
Commandments, are ways of Sin; and those who allow themselves in so doing, must
needs be in great Danger.

That great is the Danger of those who walk on in ways of Sin, will appear if
we consider these following Particulars, viz.

1. God perfestly and exactly knows all their Wickedness. Persons may possibly
keep many of their Crimes secret from Men; they often strive to do so. Job
24.15. The Eye also of the Adulterer waits for the Twilight, saying, no Eye
shall see me; and disguiseth his Face. But no Crime can possibly be kept secret
from God; he perfectly and truly knows all the Thoughts, Words, Ways of all
the Children of Men: He knows all the secret Springs and Motives of their
Actions, whatever their Pretenses are. The Eyes of the Lord are in every place,
beholding the evil and the good. Prove. 15.3. There is no creature that is not
manifest in his sight; all things are open and naked to the eyes of him with
whom we have to do, Heb. 14.23. God perfectly knows all the Sins of every
Person, the Time when, the Place where they were committed; and all
Aggravations and Circumstances attending them. Can any hide himself in secret
places, that I shall not see him? says the Lord. Do not I fill Heaven and
Earth? says the Lord, Jer. 23.24.

2. God exactly remembers all their Sins. Sometimes the ill Actions of Persons
are much talked of when newly committed, but in a while there is a great silence
about them, they are much forgotten. Nay, Persons frequently forget many of
their own Words and Actions, bad as well as good. But God perfectly and exactly
remembers all the Sins of all Persons. Indeed when he Pardons the Sins of true
Penitents, he is said not to remember them any more, Jer. 31.34. This
signifies, that he will never inflict the punishment deserved by their Sins. But
Gods Knowledge being Infinite and Perfect, in strict and proper speaking, he
cannot really forget or let slip out of his Memory or Knowledge, any thing that
ever he has known. Therefore as he perfectly knows all the Sins of the wicked;
so he perfectly and exactly remembers them all, and that continually. Job said
to God, Job 14.16, 17. For now thou numbrest my steps, do thou not watch over
my Sin? My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sowest up mine
iniquity. God says concerning the wickedness of his People, Deuteronomy. 32.34. Is not
this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my treasures? Men often
store and treasure up things in Bags, and Seal them; that they may keep them
safely and have them forth coming upon occasion: in allusion hereto, God is
said to Seal up the Sins of the wicked. It notes his full, exact knowledge and
remembrance of them. Oh Sinner, God remembers all thy past transgressions,
every one of them, with all their aggravations; all the vanities and follies of
thy Childhood, Youth and Riper Age. It may be many Years ago, thou have been
guilty of Drunken Bouts, Unclean Practices, of vile Cursing and Swearing, of
Profaning the Sabbath, of Cheating Tricks, of mad abominable Frolicks, etc.
Well, God exactly remembers all these, whether thou do or no: they are as
fresh and plain in God's View and Memory, as if committed but this very Moment;
and if thou have not heartily repented, then the guilt of these and all other
thy transgressions, remains in full force upon thee. Hence Sinners are said, to
treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of Gods
righteous judgment, Romans 2.5. As they add Sin to Sin, so they treasure up yet
greater and greater measures of Wrath and Vengeance; which shall surely be
poured out upon them, if Repentance prevent not. Time, may possibly wear out
thy remembrance of thy Sins, but it can never wear out God's remembrance of
them.

3. God hates all Sin. He is of purer eyes than to behold evil: he cannot look
upon iniquity, Hab. 1.13. This alludes to the practice of Men, when they shut
their Eyes or turn away their Faces, as not being able to bear or endure the
sight of these or those Objects, which are loathsome, hateful and abominable to
them. Men cannot endure to see these or those things, which they hate and loath.
So, God is said to be of such holy and pure Eyes, that he cannot bear the sight
of Sin. The Expression notes, his unutterable hatred, loathing and abhorrence
of it. He declares, that it is the abominable thing which he hates, Jer. 44.4.
No Objects we can think of, can be so hateful and loathsome to us, as all Sin
is to God. Nothing can be so displeasing and provoking to us, as all Sin is to
God. It is because God's Holiness hates Sin; that his Power has made an Hell to
punish it. Indeed Sin is the only thing that is loathsome, hateful and provoking
to God; and all Sin is inconceivably abominable to him.

4. God has threatened to punish Sin, and he is faithful it his Word. While Man
was Innocent, God threatened Death in case of Disobedience, Genesis 2.17. And the
Scripture plainly declares, the Soul that sins shall Die, Ezekiel. 18.4. The wages
of Sin is Death, Romans 6.23. Every Sin is Treason and Rebellion against God, and
deserves Death; even Eternal Death and Misery. And if Sin be not so Repented
of, as to be Pardoned through the Blood of Christ, Eternal Death and Misery shall
certainly be inflicted for it: for God is faithful to his Word. He cannot lie,
Tit. 1.2. God is not a man that he should repent. Has be said, and shall he
not do it? or has he spoken, and shall he not make it good? Numb. 23.19. It is
impossible for God to lie, Heb. 6.18. God is Unchangibly true and faithful, and
therefore his threatenings (if Repentance prevent not) as well as his Promises,
shall certainly be accomplished. This God of Unchangible Truth has said, Woe to
the wicked, it shall go ill with him, Isai. 3.11. Those who obey not the
Gospel, shall be punished with everlasting destruction, 2 These. 1.8, 9.

5. God has power sufficient to punish Sin, to fulfill all his Threatenings
against it. Among Men, Judges sometimes want Power to inflict deserved
Punishments on Offenders; God can never want Power so to do, for he is the Lord
God Omnipotent. Criminals sometimes make their Escape out of the hands of
Justice, Abscond, Break Drison, etc. But none can make their Escape from God.
If they make their Nest among the Stars, he can bring them down. God has
already shown, great Justice and Power in punishing of Sin. The strong, the
mighty Angels that Rebelled; he has laid in Chains, reserving them to that
terrible Judgment which they tremble at the thoughts of. God Drowned the Old
World for their Ungodliness: destroyed Sodom and Gomorah, with Fire and
Brimstone from Heaven for their Wickedness. All the Miseries, Plagues,
Punishments, Deaths that were ever inflicted on the Children of Men; were the
fruits of Sin. That God who has done these things, is the same God still, he is
Unchangible: he can punish Sin more terribly than we can conceive of. Do we
provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10.22. O Sinner,
will thou provoke the Lord by walking in any way of known Sin? Thou Fool, thou
Mad Man, God can tear thee in pieces so that none can deliver thee. God governs
the World, he does what he will in the Armies of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the Earth. Thy time, thy breath, all thy ways and concerns are
in his Hand; he can do what he will with thee. God can if he pleases, soon
strip thee of all thy outward Comforts and Enjoyments, of thy Estate, Credit,
Friends: he can take away thy Health, fill thee with Sickness and Pain. He can
awaken thy stupid Soul, set thy Sins in order before thee, and make thy
Conscience a gnawing tormenting Worm within thee; he can make thee a terror to
thy self, and to all round about thee: he can destroy both thy Soul and Body in
Hell, Mat. 10.28. Thou art absolutely and entirely in the hand of that God,
whom thou provokest with thy wickedness; he can end thy Life and send thee to
Hell in a Moment, if he pleases. Nothing can be so presumptuously mad and
foolish, so eminently hazardous and dangerous; as for Persons to Sin against
and provoke, this Holy Almighty Jehovah.

6. God will show no Mercy to those, who are finally obstinate in Sin. God now
calls them to turn and live, he waits to be Gracious; but if they will not
hearken, will not turn, then (as our Text and the following Verse intimate) God
has nothing but a sharpened Sword, a bent Bow, Arrows and Instruments of Death
prepared for them. Those who being often reproved, harden their necks, shall
suddenly be destroyed; and that without remedy, Prove. 19.1. Those who finally
and obstinately refuse to turn to God, shall have Divine wrath and fury poured
out upon them, but they shall have no Mercy. He that made them will not have
mercy on them: and he that formed them will show them no favor, Isai. 27.11.
There Is a time coming, when all their Prayers, Cries, Tears will prevail
nothing with God. He often called on them and they would not hear, they
obstinately refused till the day of his Patience was over; therefore when they
cry under the heavy pressures of his Wrath, he will not hear them. If they cry,
Lord, Lord, Open to us, hell say, I know you not, Mat. 25.11, 12. Nay, he will
laugh at their calamities, and mock when their fear comes as desolation, and
their destruction as a whirlwind, when destress and anguish come upon them,
Prove. 1.26, 27. To have the Great God pouring out his insupportable Vengeance
on them, and instead of hearing their Cries and Petitions for Mercy; to mock
and laugh at their inconceivable anguish and distress, this is terrible indeed.
Yet this will be the Portion of obstinate Offenders. God said of his obstinate
People of Old, Ezekiel. 8.18. Therefore will I also deal in fury: mine eye shall
not spare, neither will I have pity; and though they cry in mine ears with a loud
voice, yet will I not hear. In the day of God's Patience there is ground to Pray
with hope of success (God regards the Prayer of the destitute, and will not
despise their Prayer) but when God's abused Patience is ended, all the Prayers
of Sinners will be disregarded. The wicked rich Man in Hell, tormented in those
scorching Flames, begged for as much Water to cool his Tongue, as could hang on
the tip of a Man's Finger; what a small pittance was this? He did not ask to be
taken out of Hell, not ask to have those Flames quenched; not ask to have a
running River, a living Fountain always by him to cool and refresh him; no, he
asked but a small matter, a drop of Water, and that when he was in utmost
necessity too, and yet 'twas denied him, Luke 16 Chap. Oh believe it, God has
not one drop of Mercy for the finally obstinate and rebellious Sinner. In this
World, Gods Mercy (as it were) goes a begging to them, it is brought to their
very Doors and offered to them; Christ stands at the Door and knocks for
entrance. They actually enjoy many outward Mercies, and Spiritual Eternal
Mercies are offered to them and urged on them; but when God's Patience is
ended, let them Cry and Pray as long as they will, not the least drop of Mercy
shall be obtained for them. And as they shall not have the least drop of Mercy,
so they shall have Wrath and Misery without mixture; Pain without mitigation or
intermission. They shall be cast into outer darkness, where there is weeping,
wailing and gnashing of teeth: they shall be cut asunder; shall be plagued with
the Worm that never dies, the Fire that never can be quenched, and that among
Damned Devils forever. Truly, no Tongue can declare, no Heart conceive the
greatness of this Misery. Oh, it is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of
the living God, Heb. 10.31. Who knows the Power of his Anger! None can
deliver out of his Hands; he will punish his obstinate Enemies with Everlasting
Destruction.

These Things thus briefly touched, if duly considered, will fully prove the
Truth of our Doctrine, viz. That Great is the Danger of those that go on in
sinful Ways. If they had a right Sense of their Danger, it would fill them with
Fear and Trembling. Oh how Ignorant, Stupid, presumptuously Daring and
Foolhardy are they, in thus running on the thick Bosses of Gods Buckler, and
(as it were) challenging of his Almighty Vengeance against them! When Balaam's
Ass saw an Angel with a drawn Sword, that dumb Beast was so concerned for its
own Welfare, as to get out of the way of Danger, Numb. 22.23. But Multitudes of
Sinners seem more Senseless, Stupid, Careless than that dumb Beast was. Our
Text Represents Almighty God as having a Sword drawn (whetting it for
Execution) and a Bow bent, and Instruments of Death made ready to punish the
Wicked; and yet they go on Thoughtless and Fearless to meet Divine Vengeance.
Many Beasts are more concerned for their own Safety, than Multitudes of Sinners
are for their Precious, Immortal Souls. The Ox and Ass, the Crane and Swallow,
may condemn a Fearless, Thoughtless Multitude of Sinners. Nay, the very Devils
believe Gods coming Wrath and Judgment, and tremble at the Belief of it; but
many sinful Men will not fear and tremble, at the Threatenings and Wrath of God
that are out against them. What, are they more Stupid than Beasts, more
Careless, Fearless, or Unconcerned than Devils? But Stupid and Fearless as they
are, if they go on in Sin till Divine Patience is ended, and Divine Vengeance
comes to deal with them; then the stoutest and boldest of them all, will be
filled with inconceivable Anguish, Horror and Confusion. Rev. 6.15, -- 17. The
Kings of the Earth, and the great Men, and the rich Men, and the chief
Captains, and the mighty Men, and every Bondsman, and every Freeman, hid
themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of the Mountains; and said to the
Mountains and Rocks, fall on us, and hide us from the Face of him that sits
on the Throne, and from the Wrath of the Lamb; for the great Day of his Wrath
is ^ome, and who shall be able to stand? This shows, that Sinners who were
Great and Rich, Stout and Strong, and had made others Tremble, even Kings, yea
chief Captains and mighty Men, puissant Warriors; possibly such as had
approached many a fenced City, s^al'd the Walls, and slain the Inhabitants, had
stormed and carried many a Fortress, strong Citadel and Castle; that had with
intrepid Boldness and Courage, fac^d the thundering Cannon, and encoun^red
eminent Dangers; yet even such, when they see the Almighty God clothed with
Wrath and Vengeance to punish the Wicked; then their Courage f^^^s them,
Paleness covers them, their Blood chills, they are filled with distressing fear,
horror, despair; they would be glad to have the heaviest Rocks and Mountains
fall on them and crush them to pieces, if that might hide them from the much
heavier Wrath of that God, who has drawn his Sword and comes with Instruments
of Death to execute Vengeance on them. But alas, no Rocks nor Mountains can
hide them from the Wrath of a revenging God; there is no possibility of their
escape. Then great must be the danger of those, who go on in ways of Sin.
Surely, none but Fools, none but Mad Men will make a mock of Sin; a mock of
that which is inconceivably hurtful and dangerous.

But we may now proceed to some Use or Application. From what we have heard, we
may Infer,

1. That wonderful is the Love of God in giving Christ to save Sinners. Since
Sin is so abominable and provoking to God, and justly deserves terrible Eternal
Vengeance; it must needs be amazing Love in God, that he should give his Son to
save Sin^^^s. God commends his love to us, in that wh^^^ we were yet Sinners
Christ died for us, Romans 5.8. So 'twas amazing Love in our Blessed Lord Jesus
Christ, that he should so Love Sinners as to give himself for them, an offering
and a sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2. He loved us, and
washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, Romans 1.5. Amazing and Unparallel is
the Divine Love and Grace, in this Method of saving vile Sinners who justly
deserved Everlasting Vengeance.

2. Wonderful is the Patience of God to Poor Sinners. Inasmuch as Sin is
unutterably hateful, abominable, provoking to God, and all Sinners are entirely
in his Hand that he could crush them in a moment if he would; I say, inasmuch
as it is thus, its indeed admirable and wonderful that God should spare
Sinners, and bear with them as he often does. God could glorify himself in
their speedy utter destruction if he would, it is as easy with him to turn them
into Hell if he pleased, as for us to crush a Moth under our Fingers; and yet
he often spares them long. It may be some Prayerless Persons, some Profaners of
Gods Name and Sabbath; some Drunkards, Fornicators, Adulterers, Thieves, Liars,
Murderers, etc. and it may be others free from such gross visible Scandals, who
yet live Impenitent and Unbelieving, are yet suffered to live till they are
Twenty, Thirty, Fifty, Sixty Years Old or more: though they are all this while
sinning against God, provoking him every day, yet he spares them and calls upon
them to turn and live. This is amazing Divine Patience and Forbearance, It is
riches of Goodness, Forbearance and Longsuffering, Romans 2.4.

3. We should heartily and speedily repent, and turn from our Sins. If we turn
not, our Text intimates, that God's sharpened Sword and Instruments of Death,
will Execute Vengeance on us. But yet such are the wonders of Gods Love, Mercy
and Grace; that if we heartily Repent of Sin, and Believe in Christ Jesus, we
shall then be Pardoned and Saved. There is forgiveness with thee, that thou
may be feared, Psalm. 130.4. He that covers his Sin, shall not prosper, but
whosoever confesses and forsakes, shall have mercy, Prove. 28.13. Let us therefore
heartily repent and turn from all our Sins, and trust in Christ, submitting to
him as the only Prophet, Priest and King of our Souls. Ezekiel. 18.30. -- Repent
and turn your selves from all your Transgressions; so iniquity shall not be
your ruin. 1 John 3.23. This is his commandment, that we should believe in the
Name of his Son Jesus Christ. Isai. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him, and to our God for he will abundantly pardon. Yea we
should be speedy as well as hearty, in turning from Sin and believing in
Christ; for we know not how near we are to Death and Judgment. We may not boast
of to morrow, we know not what a day may bring forth, Prove. 27.1. If we are
never so careless and thoughless, yet we don't know but that Death may remove us
into Eternity, before to morrow morning. Heb. 4.7. -- To day, after so long a
time, as it is sa^d, to day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts.
It Is therefore proper and needful that we take the advice, Eccl. 9.10.
Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might: for there is no work
nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave whether thou go.

4. We should carefully watch against Sin, and the occasions of it. Since Sin
is so provoking to God and dangerous to our selves, we should be most watchful
and prayerful against it. Mat. 26.41. Watch and pray that ye enter not into
Temptation. Yea we should carefully watch against the Occasions of Sinning, to
avoid them as much as may be. Those things which tend to draw us into Sin and
hurt our Souls, and have no tendency to benefit our Souls; should be carefully
avoided. Needless going to Taverns and spending time there, brings no glory to
God nor good to Souls, but the contrary. Health-Drinking, what glory did it
ever bring to God or good to Souls? it has often been an occasion of much Sin,
and therefore of much Dishonor to God and hurt to Souls. A needless
frequenting of ill Company, leads to abundance of Sin, Mischief and Misery: A
Companion of Fools shall he destroyed. Surely, the thoughts of Gods Sharpened
Sword and Bent Bow, of that Vengeance he is preparing for Sinners; should make
us very watchful, careful, prayerful to avoid Sin, yea (and so far as we can)
the occasions of Sinning, those things which lead and tend to the hurting of
our Souls. Persons are apt to cherish in their own minds, many Pleas,
Arguments, Pretenses for these and those sinful (at least doubtful) Practices;
but whole Armies of such vain pretenses, would vanish at the sight of Gods
drawn Sword and bent Bow: if they did but see the Vengeance deserved by Sin, it
would greatly deter them from it.

5. We should grieve for the Sins of others. Their Sins dishonor God and hurt
themselves; we should grieve for them on both Accounts. I beheld Transgressors
and was grieved, because they kept not thy Word, Psalm. 119.158. If we should
see Madmen cutting, wounding, gashing themselves; would not this grieve us to
the Heart? But Alas, Persons are more Injurious to themselves, while walking in
Ways of known Wickedness, for thereby they deserve Eternal Punishments in Hell.
Surely then, we should grieve for the Sins of others, sigh and cry for all the
Abominations committed by those among whom we live, Ezekiel. 9.4.

6. We should do what we can to prevent Sin in others. Private Christians, by
their good Examples, wholesome Counsels and Admonitions, fervent Prayers (as
well as by the well Governing their own Families) should do what they can to
prevent Sin in others. Ministers of the Gospel, should faithfully teach and
exhort Persons to Repent of Sin, and Believe in Christ: They should lift up
their Voice like a Trumpet, faithfully warn them to turn from their evil ways;
whether they will hear or whether they will forbear. They should teach them to
deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and
godlily in this World. If Ministers are unfaithful Watchmen, they will bring on
themselves the Guilt of the Blood of Souls. So, such as have Civil Authority,
should do their utmost to prevent Sin in those under their Government. Good
Laws should be seasonably made, and as faithfully executed. Civil Rulers should
be a Terror to evil Doers, and a Praise to them that do well. They should do
what they can, that the People under them may live in all Godliness and Honesty
(which is their Duty) and may enjoy Peace and Quietness as a Fruit thereof, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Those in Civil Authority should do what they can, to prevent all
that is contrary to the Godliness, Honesty, Peace and Quiet of the Subject. If
Taverns are needlessly multiplied and frequented; if Illuminations and Bonfires
occasion growing Disorders, Rude Persons making themselves Judges who shall be
spared or hurt in their Properties, whose Fences shall be burnt, and whose
Habitations broken or shattered; I say, these or any other things that tend to
hurt the Morals of a People, and are contrary to Peace and Quietness, Godliness
and Honesty, are worthy to be considered, that so all proper Methods may be
taken to prevent Wickedness, which is provoking to God and hurtful to Men. A
serious, realizing Sense of the Vengeance of God against Sin, would make all
Sincere Christians more careful to avoid Sin them^^lves, and to endeavor the
Preventing of it in others also. A thousand Pleas, Arguments, Excuses to
indulge sinful Practices, or plain leading Occasions of Sin; would vanish and
disappear, before a realizing Sense of Gods Vengeance against Sin. Would Men
dare to do this or that (...) thing, if they saw God standing with his
Instruments of Death prepared to render Vengeance to them?

7. We should count those our worst Enemies who prompt us to Sin, and those our
best Friends who endeavor to prevent our sinning. Those who by Frowns or
Flatteries strive to draw us into Sin; do endeavor to make a Breach between
our God and our Souls to our utter Undoing. We should avoid such as Enemies
indeed. But faithful Reprovers are faithful Friends, and should be so esteemed:
Psalm. 141.5. Let the Righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness; and let him
reprove me, it shall be an excellent Oil, which shall not break my Head. And as
we should desire for our selves, so we should show to others, such Friendship.
Therefore we should have no Fellowship with the unfruitful works of Darkness,
but rather reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11. We should consider one another, to provoke
unto Love and good Works, Heb. 10.24.

Sermon, X. CHRIST Coming in GLORY, TO Reward every one according to HIS WORKS.
MAT. XVI. 27. For the Son of Man shall come in the Glory of his Father, with
his Angels; and then he shall Reward every Man according to his Works.


THough in this World, the Godly often meet with great Adversity, and the
Ungodly with great Prosperity; yet hereafter it will evidently appear, that the
former, viz. the Godly, took a wise and safe Course; and the latter, viz. the
Ungodly, took a very foolish and dangerous one. For however it fares with
Persons in this present Life, yet in the Judgment Day, every one shall be dealt
with according to his Works: This our Text plainly intimates to us. In the
three Verses immediately preceding our Text, we are Instructed, that those who
would approve themselves the sincere Disciples of Christ, must cleave close to
him, whatever Difficulties they meet with in the Way; yea, though it be the
losing of Life for his sake; and if they do so, they shall find their Lives,
that is, they shall be happy for ever. But on the other hand, if any from Fear
of worldly Troubles, or from Love to worldly Prosperity, should neglect to be
the sincere Disciples and Followers of Christ, they, though they should be
supposed to gain the whole World, would yet be miserable Losers at the last,
for they would lose their own Souls; that is, be M^serable for ever.

Now the Truth of these things, is further declared and summed up in our Text,
which tells us, there shall be a Day of Judgment, in which every Man shall be
dealt with according to his Works. And it is the Lord Jesus Christ, who is here
called the Son of Man, that shall come in the Glory of his Father, accompanied
with his Angels, to Judge the World, and to render to every one according to
his Deeds.

There are two Doctrines that may be spoken briefly to from the Words, viz.

I. The Son of Man, the Lord Jesus Christ, shall come in the Glory of his
Father, with his Angels to Judge the World.

II. He will then Reward every Man according to his Works.

DOCTRINE, I. The Son of Man, the Lord Jesus Christ, shall come in the Glory of
his Father, with His Angels, to Judge the World.
For the clearing of this Truth, we may consider the following Heads, viz.

1. The Lord Jesus Christ is both God and Man in One Person. He is the Only
begotten Son of God, Joh. 3.16. His Eternal Son, of the same Essence and
Substance with God the Father and God the Holy Ghost; for these Three are One,
1 John 5.7. They are but One Divine Being, Substance or Essence. Christ
therefore is a Divine Person, really and truly God by Nature, from Everlasting
to Everlasting. He is God over all, blessed forever, Romans 9.5. Christ also has
an Humane Nature, united to His Divine Nature; so that he has T^^ distinct
Natures (Divine and Humane) in One Divine Person. This Humane. Nature, the Son
of God did in time (not from Eternity) take into Personal Union with himself.
The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among us, Joh. 1.14. Jesus Christ our Lord,
which was made of the seed of David according to the Flesh, Romans 1.3. God sent
forth his Son, made of a Woman, made under the Law, Gal. 4.4. So that Christ is
both God and Man, he has a Divine Nature which he had from all Eternity; and an
Humane Nature which he took to himself in time; now it is with respect to his
Humane Nature, that in our Text (as well as in many other places) he is called
the Son of Man.

2. This Lord Jesus Christ shall Judge the World. All the World of Mankind, all
Humane Persons that ever were in the World, or ever shall be in it, shall be
called into Judgment, and Doomed to a state of endless Misery or Glory,
according to what their behavior was while they lived here upon Earth. And the
Person that shall be the Supreme, Universal Judge of all, that shall hear all
Causes, and determine whether they are good or bad, and pronounce Sentence on
each Person accordingly; I say, the Person that shall thus Judge the World, is
the Lord Jesus Christ. God -- has appointed a day, in which he will Judge the
World in righteousness, by the Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the Dead, Act 17.30, 31.
It was Christ whom God raised from the Dead; and the Apostles were commanded to
testify, That it is he which was Ordained of God, to be the Judge of quick and
dead, Act. 10.39, -- 42. The Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and
the dead, at his appearing and his kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. By the Quick, we are to
understand those that shall be found Living on Earth, when Christ comes to
Judgment ( we shall not all Sleep, 1 Cor. 15.51. We which are alive and remain,
1 These. 4.17.) and by the Dead, such as shall be raised from the Dead at
Christ's Coming; all shall be Judged by Christ. Romans 2.16. God shall judge the
secrets of Men by Jesus Christ. It Is evident therefore, that the Lord Jesus
Christ who is both God and Man, shall Judge the World.

3. When Christ comes to do this, it will be in the Glory of his Father with
his Angels. Come, from whence will Christ come to Judge the World? Ans. He will
come from Heaven to do it. About Forty Days after our Savior was raised from
the Dead, in a Cloud he was taken up, and he ascended into Heaven, Act. 1.3, 9,
10. Christ is now in Heaven at Gods Right Hand, Romans 8.34. And the Heavens must
receive (retain) him till the times of the restitution of all things, Act.
3.21. Therefore when Christ sets himself to Judge the World, he will come, and
'twill be from Heaven (where he now is) that he will come. 2 These. 1.7. The
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven. This is called his Appearing, 2 Timothy
4.1. His appearing the second time without sin unto Salvation, Heb. 9.28. He
has already appeared once in this World, in a mean humbled state, in the form
of a Servant, to Die a Sacrifice for the Sins of his People to procure the
Pardon of them; but his Second appearing when he comes to Judge the World, and
complete and perfect the Salvation of his People, will be very bright and
splendid, full of Majesty and Glory. For he shall come,

1. In the Glory of his Father. Though Christ will descend from Heaven in his
Humane Nature, when he comes to Judgment; yet he will come incircled with Divine
Glory. It will then be incontestibly evident to all Angels and all Men, that
Christ's Person is Divine, and that he is clothed with the Majesty and Glory
proper and peculiar to such an One. Christ as a Divine Person, had Divine Glory
before Creatures ever had a being. Our Savior a little before his Death, made
that Prayer to God, Joh. 17.5. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine
own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the World was. Whether
the Glory in which Christ will come to Judge the World, is in our Text called
the Glory of the Father, because the Father by an Eternal and Ineffable
Generation communicates the Divine Nature and Glory to the Son; or whether,
because Christ as Mediator is commissioned by the Father to Judge the World; I
say, whether it be in the one or other, of these respects, we need not dispute,
though I see no cause to reject either of them. The Father judges no man, but
has committed all Judgment to the Son, Joh. 5.22. God has exalted the
Mediator, given him Dignity and Glory in appointing him to Judge the World,
Phil. 1.9, -- 11. The Glory in which Christ comes to Judge the World, is in our
Text called the Glory of his Father. It Is called Christ's own Glory. Mat.
25.31. When the son of Man shall come in his Glory. So we read, Luke 9.26: He
shall come in his own Glory, and in his Fathers and of his holy Angels. He
shall come in a Glory becoming his own Divine Person, and becoming the Son of
his Eternal Glorious Father. This Glory in which Christ shall appear at last,
will be more Bright, Splendid, Majestic and Magnificent than ever was seen
before. Christ's Glory shall be revealed, 1 Pet. 4.13. It Is called great Glory,
Mat. 24.30. The glorious appearing of the Great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ, Tit. 2.13. Indeed Christ will then come with a shout, with the voice of
the Archangel, and the Trump of God, 1 These. 4.16. He shall come in Flaming
Fire, 2 These. 1.8. He shall come,

2. With his Angels. Christ as God, is the Creator of all things. All things
were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was made, Joh.
1.3. Christ also as Mediator, has all things put under his Feet; he is Head
over all things, Ephesians. 1.22. So that Christ both as Creator, and as an exalted
Mediator, is Lord of Angels; they are His Angels: They are the Good and not the
Fallen Angels, that are especially intended in our Text. All the good Angels
shall be of Christ's Retinue, and help to set forth the Splendour of his
Appearance, when he descends from Heaven to Judge the World. He shall be
Revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, 2 These. 1.7. All the holy Angels
shall come with him, Mat. 25.31. All the Angels, the whole Number of the
Heavenly Host, those bright Attendants in the Supreme Court, shall accompany
the Glorious JESUS at the Last Day. The Angels on particular Occasions, have
sometimes appeared so Bright, Dazzling and Glorious, as to affright mortal
Spectators. The Roman Soldiers that were set to keep and watch the Sepulcher
of our Savior, were greatly Amazed and Terrified at the Sight of an Angel. His
countenance was like Lightening, and his raiment white as Snow. And for fear of
him, the Keepers did shake, and became as dead Men, Mat. 28.3, 4. And if the
Angels appeared thus Glorious on particular Occasions, doubtless when they
shall all accompany our Lord (and theirs) on the Judgment Day, they will appear
clothed with their brightest Robes of Light and Splendour, and therein help to
set forth the unparallel Glory of that most August and Grand Solemnity. The
holy and mighty Angels, who shall then attend our Glorious Judge, shall gather
together his Elect from the four Winds, from one end of Heaven to another, Mat.
24.31. And they shall gather the Tares, the Wicked, all things that offend, and
them which do Iniquity, and shall cast them into a Furnace of Fire, there shall
be wailing and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 13.40, -- 42. Thus I have proved, that
the Son of Man, the Lord Jesus Christ, shall come in the Glory of his Father,
with his Angers, to Judge the World.

DOCTRINE, II. He will then Reward every Man according to his Works.
Our Text expressly declares this to us; and for the illustrating and further
clearing of it, we may consider the following Particulars, viz.

1. All the Dead shall be raised. When Persons die, their Rational Souls
parting from their Bodies (which Separation is Death) their Bodies then are
usually buried in the Earth, where they Rot and return to Dust. Genesis 3.19. Dust
thou art, and unto dust shall thou return. When a Person dies, then shall the
dust return to the Earth as it was, and the spirit return unto God who gave it,
Eccl. 12.7. But though the dead Bodies of Men shall Rot, return to their Dust;
or though being drowned in the Sea, shall be eaten by Fishes; yet all these
dead Bodies, both of the Godly and Ungodly, shall be raised again, they shall
live again, shall be reunited to those Souls which formerly dwelt in them, and
shall abide united to them for ever. This Doctrine of the Resurrection of the
Dead, is known only by Divine Revelation; therefore our Savior refers us to
the Scriptures as the only proper Proof of it: For he said to the Sadduces, who
denied the Resurrection, Mat. 22.29. Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor
the Power of God. God who is infinitely Wise, Powerful and Faithful, has
declared in the Scriptures, that the Dead shall be raised; therefore we have
the highest Ground and Reason firmly to believe that it shall be so. Though if
Men would give way to their short-sighted, carnal Reason, they might make
Objections against the Resurrection, or fruitless Queries about the Way, Manner
and Circumstances of it; yet 'twould be foolish so to do. Acts 26.8. Why should
it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the dead? It Is
incredible indeed that Men (by any mere Power of their own) should raise the
Dead; but not incredible that GOD should do so. 1 Cor. 15.35, 36. But some Man
will say, how are the dead raised up, and with what Body do they come? Thou
fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it die. According to
Scripture Language, that Man is a Fool who denies the Resurrection, or makes
any doubting, needless Queries about the Way, Manner, Circumstances of it. What
God has plainly declared, we should firmly believe. Now he has plainly
declared, Joh. 5.28, 29. The hour is coming, in the which all that are in their
Graves shall hear his voice; and shall come forth, they that have done good to
the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done evil to the Resurrection of
Damnation. Acts 24.15. -- There shall be a Resurrection of the dead, both of
the Just and unjust. Rev. 20.13. And the Sea gave up the dead which were in it;
and Death and Hell delivered up the dead which were in them: And they were
judged every one according to their Works. Thus it is evident! that all the Dead
shall be raised.

2. All Persons shall be Cited and Convened, before the Throne or Judgment Seat
of Christ. When Christ comes from Heaven at the Last Day, to be sure he will
descend into this World as low as the Air, for there the Saints shall meet him.
We -- shall be caught up together with them in the Clouds, to meet the Lord in
the Air, 1 These. 4.17. And when the Lord Jesus thus comes to Judgment, he will
sit on a Glorious Throne, Tribunal, or Judgment Seat; and all Persons that ever
lived in the World, shall be gathered together before him. Mat. 25.31. -- 33.
He shall sit upon the Throne of his Glory, and before him shall be gathered all
Nations; and he shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides
his sheep from the goats; and he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the
goats on the left. 2 Cor. 5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, (that is, while
he lived here in this World) according to what he has done whether it be good
or bad. Rev. 20.12. I saw the dead, small and great stand before God, and the
Books were opened, and another Book was opened which is the Book of Life: and
the dead were Judged out of those things which were written in the Books,
according to their works. And not only the Dead, that is, such as shall then be
raised from the Dead; but those also found Living when Christ comes, shall be
Judged. For (as was hinted before) he shall Judge the Quick and the Dead, at
his Appearing and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4.1. Every one of us must give an account
of himself to God, Romans 14.12. All that ever lived in the World, must make
their Personal Appearance before Christ's Judgment Seat; and must give an
account of themselves, of their own Carriage and Behavior: none shall be
allowed to appear by Proxy, or to have an Attorney to appear in his room and
answer in his stead; but every one must appear Personally.

3. The Lord Jesus will then render the Godly, Inconceivably and Eternally
happy and blessed. There are but two sorts of Persons in this World, the Godly
and the Wicked; and there will be but these two sorts in the Judgment Day. The
Godly are called Sheep, and shall be at Christ's Right Hand, and he will say to
them, as Mat. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you, from the Foundation of the World. Christ will then own them, call them
Blessed, and make them Blessed, in possessing them of an Eternal Glorious
Kingdom. Godly Persons, Sincere Believers, are in general described from their
doing Good, and shall at last come out of their Graves to the Resurrection of
Life, Joh. 5.28, 29. And in the Judgment Day, they shall receive a Reward of
Grace for all the good they ever did. Indeed the endless future Glory and
Happiness they shall have, is no part of it really meritted, purchased,
deserved by themselves; but it is the Gift of God, Romans 6.23. It is your
Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom, Luke 12.32. It Is a free Gift of
God as it comes to them; yet it is called a Reward too, inasmuch as God has
freely promised it to those who seek and serve him; having put a firm connection
between their present Duty and their future Welfare. It is the Recompense of
Reward; God is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him, Heb. 11.6, 25. The
Lord Jesus will graciously Reward all the sincere Duties of the Saints
performed in this World. He Will say, Well done thou good and faithful Servant;
thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee Ruler over many
things: enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord, Mat. 25.21. He Will then mention,
commend, and graciously reward, their Alms-Deeds, their Charity and Kindness.
He Will say, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, -- for I was an hungered and ye
gave me Meat: I was thirsty and ye gave me Drink: I was a stranger and ye took
me in; naked and ye Clothed me, etc. Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the
least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me, Mat. 25.34, -- 40. Their
giving a Cup of Cold Water (which is but a small and cheap token of kindness)
to a Disciple, shall not lose its Reward, Mat. 10.42. Their sincere Prayers
also shall be Rewarded. Mat. 6.6. Enter into thy Closet, and when thou have
shut thy door, Pray to thy Father which sees in secret; and thy Father which
sees in secret, shall reward thee openly. So their Faith which they now
exercise in this World, shall be found to Praise, Honor and Glory at the
appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.7. Indeed, none of their work and Labor in
the Lord (and for the Lord) shall be in vaiu, 1 Cor. 15.58. For God is not
unrighteous to forget their work and labor of love, which they have showed
toward his Name, Heb. 6.10. Yea, whatsoever good thing any man does, the same
shall he receive of the Lord whether he be bond or free, Ephesians. 6.8. All the good
Actions of the Saints whether open or secret, shall then be graciously
Rewarded. For God will bring every work into Judgment with every secret thing,
whether it be good or whether it be evil, Eccles. 12.14. All who in this World,
sincerely Repent of Sin, Believe in Christ and Obey him; shall by him in the
Judgment Day be openly Owned, Commended, and graciously Rewarded. And this, so
far as it concerns the Godly, is what our Text calls, a Rewarding every man
according to his Works. When Christ comes to Judge the World (the Apostle tells
us) he will render to every man according to his Deeds; to them who by patient
continuance in well doing, do seek for Glory, Honor and Immortality, Eternal
Life. -- Glory, Honor and Peace to every Man that works good, to the Jew
first, and also to the Gentile. Romans 2.6, 7, 10. And this good, great and
gracious Reward which shall be bestowed on the Godly; will be an Eternal one,
an Happiness that shall never cease nor have an end. It is Everlasting Life,
Mat. 25.46. A Crown of Glory that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5.4. And as a good
and gracious Reward, shall in the Judgment Day be given to those, who in this
World were Doers of Good: So,

4. The Lord Jesus will then render the Ungodly, Inconceivably and Eternally
Miserable. Isai. 3.11. Woe unto the Wicked, it shall be ill with him; for the
Reward of his hands shall be given him. The Sins of Omission which the Ungodly
were chargeable with, shall be mentioned and punished in the Judgment Day. Mat.
25.41, 42. Depart from me ye Cursed, into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels; for I was an hungered, and ye gave me no Meat, I was
thirsty and ye gave me no Drink. Many are apt to make light of Sins of
Omission. How common is it for many to omit and neglect Secret Prayer, Family
Prayer, Reading Gods Word, hearing it Preached, attending on Gods Public
Worship, etc. Well, though the Ungodly make never so light of their Neglects of
Duty, their Sins of Omission; yet these their vile Omissions, shall be openly
published and punished in the Judgment Day. And so shall their Sins of
Commission too; for God will bring every work into Judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil, Eccl. 12.14. All the ill
Actions of the Wicked, whether open or secret, shall then be published and
punished. God will then bring to light the hidden things of Darkness, and make
manifest the counsels of the Heart, 1 Cor. 4.5. He Will Judge the Secrets of Men
by Jesus Christ, Romans 2.16. Many Abominations are committed in Secret, secret
Thiefts, secret Fornications and Adulteries, secret Drunkeness and
Intemperance, secret Minders, etc. Well, but these hidden things of Darkness,
these cursed, secret Crimes shall then be openly published before the World,
and punished also. In this World, the Wicked often make light of wicked Words?
How do many of them abound in Lies, Reproaches, filthy obscene Speeches,
profane Cursing, Swearing, etc. But shall these wicked Words go unpunished? No
truly. Of every idle word that Men speak, they shall give an account in the day
of Judgment; and by their Words the Wicked shall then be Condemned, Mat. 12.36,
37. Indeed all the sinful Thoughts, Words, Actions of the Ungodly and
Impenitent, shall be published and punished in the Last Day; for that Day will
be the Revelation of Gods righteous Judgment, Romans 2.5. As very terrible
punishments shall then be inflicted on the Wicked, even those Treasures of
Wrath they have been purchasing; so their Sins which have deserved those
Punishments, shall be mentioned and published; and by publishing of their Sins,
there will be revealed and manifested the Righteousness of God, in inflicting
their Punishments on them. He will then render to every Man according to his
deeds; -- to them that are contentious, and obey not the Truth, but obey
Unrighteousness, Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish, on every soul
of man that does evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile, Romans 2.6, 8,
9. Thus Christ will deal in the Judgment Day with those that obey
Unrighteousness, that live Unrighteously; yea, thus he will deal with every Soul
of them particularly, not so much as any one of them shall escape. Gods Hand
will find out all his Enemies. Enoch Prophesied of the Judgment Day, saying,
Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute Judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly among them, of all their ungodly
deeds, which they have ungodlily committed; and of all their hard speeches
which ungodly sinners have spoken against him, Jud. v. 14, 15. Not only some,
but all the hard Speeches, and all the Ungodly Deeds of the Wicked, shall be
brought into Judgment, openly published before the whole World of Angels and
Men, justly condemned and punished. The Ungodly shall then be Sentenced, to
Everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: they shall go away into
Everlasting Punishment, Mat. 25.41, 46. They shall be with the Worm that never
dies, be cut asunder, be cast into outer darkness; have weeping, wailing and
gnashing of teeth: they shall be punished with Everlasting Destruction from the
presence of the Lord and the glory of his power, 2 These. 1.9. This will be the
Portion of the Wicked, this is what the Ungodly are hastening unto. But, do
Sinners consider this? Can they dwell with devouring Fire, with the never dying
Worm, with Everlasting Burnings? When they neglect God, and Christ and their
Souls, and live Wickedly, they are but treasuring up Wrath against the day of
Wrath; they are increasing their Guilt and Misery. But alas, stupid Sinners
walking in the broad way; are little or nothing concerned about their end, and
the Eternity they are going to. And as all Ungodly shall be rewarded according
to their Works, and made Inconceivably and Eternally miserable; so, the more
wicked any have been on Earth, the more miserable they shall be in Hell, in the
Lake that burns with fire and brimstone. It shall be more tolerable for Tire
and Sydon in the Day of Judgment, than for those obstinately Impenitent under
the Preaching and Miracles of Jesus Christ our Lord, Mat. 11.22, 23. Some shall
receive a greater Damnation, Mat 23.14. All the Impenitent shall have great
Damnation, but some shall receive greater Damnation and Punishment than others.
Though all the Saints shall be Inconceivably happy and glorious; yet doubtless
there will be degrees of glory; One Star differing from another Star in glory,
so also is the Resurrection of the dead, 1 Cor. 15.41, 42. He that delivered
Ten Pounds to his Ten Servants, granted greater Preferment to him that gained
Ten Pounds by his One, than to him that gained but Five Pounds by his one, Luke
19.13. -- 19. So, though all the wicked shall be eternally and inconceivably
miserable; yet he that rewards every one according to his works, will make
those most miserable who have been most wicked.

We may now proceed to some brief USE or Application.

From what we have heard, we may Infer,

1. Miserable will be the Condition of the wicked, notwithstanding all their
Prosperity in this present World. Sometimes those who live and die ungodly and
impenitent, yet in this World are outwardly very Prosperous, they Increase in
Riches, their eyes stand out with fatness, they have more than heart can wish:
they are sometimes clothed in Purple and fare Sumptuously every day. Indeed the
wicked are sometimes so incircled with Outward Prosperity and Glory, that the
Godly themselves are apt to envy them; but there is no ground to envy them, for
they are in a woeful condition. They Are under the guilt of Sin, the wrath and
curse of God: they are but treasuring up of wrath against the day of wrath, and
the Revelation of Gods righteous Judgment, Romans 2.5. Now they serve Sin and
Satan, neglect God, Indulge themselves often in those cursed Crimes, which they
would by no means have known so much as to a few of their next Neighbors; but
very quickly even in the Judgment day, all their Sins open and secret, of
Omission and Commission, shall be published and laid open before the World: and
for such their Sins, the wicked shall then be sentenced to Eternal Punishments
in Hell. So that their condition will be Inconceivable miserable
notwithstanding all the present Prosperity they can possibly Enjoy.

2. Happy will be the State of the Godly, notwithstanding all their adversity
in this present World. In this World, the Godly shall have Tribulation, Joh.
16.33. And they often meet with great Tribulation, so that if in this world
only they had hope, they would be of all Men most miserable. Well, but
notwithstanding all their trouble and adversity in this World, yet they will be
Inconceivably happy and glorious for ever. For very quickly, they shall have a
glorious Resurrection, their vile bodies shall be fashioned like to the
glorious body of Christ, Phil. 3.21. All their exercise of Grace, their Sincere
Duties in this World whether open or secret; shall in the Judgment day be
openly mentioned, commended, and graciously rewarded by Christ their gracious
and glorious Redeemer, their Lord and Master, and their Judge. It will then
plainly appear, that however they were despised and contemned in the World, yet
they served the most kind and gracious Lord; and that none of their labor for
Him was in vain. Then also shall all their Sufferings for Righteousness sake,
be acknowledged and graciously rewarded. Our Lord said to His Disciples: Matt.
5.11, 12. Blessed are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and
shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your Reward in Heaven. Romans 8.18. For I reckon,
that the sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared to the
glory that shall be revealed in us.

3. We should firmly believe the Resurrection of the dead, the coming of Christ
in Glory to Judge the World, and to reward every Man according to His Works.
These things, the Infallible Word of God plainly declares to us, and they are
the strongest Arguments and Motives to true Piety; therefore we should most
firmly believe them, and continually realize the truth of them to our own Souls.

4. We should live under the governing Influence of this belief. When Christ
comes in glory (...) judge the World, this bright Appearance of His, will work
Inconceivable shame, horror, terror, confusion to those who neglect and disobey
him (whom he will then try, condemn and punish before the World) and it will work
Inconceivable Joy, Gladness, Triumph in those, who in this World sincerely
believed in and obeyed Him. Surely, we should live agreably to the firm
unwavering belief of these things; therefore we should not Indulge or allow our
selves in any thing now, which we should be ashamed to have openly published
before the World in the last day: we should do nothing now, which we shall be
ashamed to own and stand by in the Judgment day. Let us live, as realizing the
coming Judgment. If Sinners saw Christ descending from Heaven in Glory, heard
the last Trumpet Sounding, saw the Graves opening and the Dead rising to be
Judged; if Sinners realiz'd these things, would they dare to act as now they
do? Would they neglect God, and Christ, and their own Souls? Would they neglect
Prayer and other Duties? Would they cheat and lie, profanely Curse, Swear and
Blaspheme? Would they haunt Taverns, frequent Evil Company, spend their Time in
Idleness, in Wicked Gaming, Drunkeness, Uncleaness and other Cursed Practices?
Would Sinners do such things as these, if they realiz'd the coming Judgment?
Doubtless they would not. And yet the coming of Christ, the raising the Dead*
the rewarding of every Man according to his works; we should account as real
and certain, as if we now saw them with our eyes: for these things shall
Infallibly come to pass. Let us believe it, and live accordingly; and therefore
never Indulge any Sin of Omission or Commission; but heartily repent of all our
Sins, believe in Christ, submit to and obey Him, glorify Him with our Bodies
and our Spirits, in all things approve our Hearts and Consciences to Him. Let
us live, as if the last Sentence were Sounding in our ears, to the Godly, Come
ye Blessed; to the Wicked, Depart ye Cursed into everlasting fire. I shall
finish with, 2 Pet. 3.10, 11. The day of the Lord will come as a theif in the
Night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the
Elements shall melt with fervent heat; the Earth also and the works that are
therein shall be burnt up. Seeing then that all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy Conversation and
Godliness.

Sermon, XI. Disobedience TO THE GOSPEL, Is a Despising of GOD.
I. THESE. IV. 8. He therefore that despises, despises not Man, but GOD.


MEN don't care to be despised themselves, even then when they deserve
contempt; yet they often despise the ever blessed God, who is most worthy of
the highest honor, esteem and love. Men cannot bear such vile treatment from
one another, as they too frequently offer to the most High God. That Men do
sometimes despise God, is plainly supposed in our Text, as well as asserted in
other Places of Scripture. In the 1. v. of this Chapter the Inspired Apostle
exhorts the Christian Thessalonians, to abound in such a walk, or holy
practice, as he had taught them in Preaching the Gospel; even such a walk as
would please God. After this general Exhortation, he more particularly cautions
and warns them against Uncleanness; and then adds in our Text, He that
despises, despises not Man, but God. It is as if he had said to this purpose.

I and others who have faithfully Preached the Gospel to you, are but
Ministers, Messengers of God, Ambassadors of Christ; it is Gods truth, His mind
and will ( not cuningly devised fables, 2 Pet. 1.16. nor commandments of Men,
Mat. 15.9.) that we declared to you; therefore those who don't live agreably to
this Gospel Preached to them, they despise not Men, but God.

Not Man but God, the meaning is, he despises not only Man who declares this
Divine Message, but also God who sends the Message; or the aggravation of this
despising is, that it is not so much against the Messenger (a frail mortal Man)
as against God that sends both Message and Messenger. So, when Israel Murmured
against Moses and Aaron, Moses said to them, What are we? Your Murmurings are
not against us, but against the Lord, Exodus 16.2, 8. So Peter said to Ananias,
Act. 5.4. -- Thou have not lied unto men, but unto God. The great aggravation
of the Sin was, that it, was chiefly, principally, ultimately against God as
the object of it. So, the Apostle having exhorted the Thessalonians, to live
agreably to the Gospel faithfully Preached to them (which Gospel, was not the
word of Men but of God, 1 These. 2.13.) on supposition any of them lived
contrary to it, says of such an one, He is a Despiser; and not a despiser of
Man only, but which is more vile and abominable, a despiser of God also.

From the words we may observe this

DOCTRINE. Those under the faithful Preaching of the Gospel, who live contrary
thereto, are Despisers of God.
Here are Three Propositions, viz. (1.) Ministers should faithfully Preach the
Gospel. (2.) Some under such faithful Preaching, live contrary to it. (3.) Such
are Despisers of God.

PROP. I. Ministers should faithfully Preach the Gospel.
Such a faithful Preaching of the Gospel, is necessarily supposed as the
Foundation of what is said in our Text, about Despising of God. For the
clearing of this Proposition, we may consider,

1. All mere Men, at coming from fallen Adam, are Sinful and Guilty. The first
Adam was a public Person, representing his Posterity. In his falling from God,
Humane Nature became Sinful and Guilty. All his Posterity are Sharers in the
Guilt of his first Sin, and have a sinful Nature derived to them. By one Man
Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; so Death has passed upon all Men,
for that all have sinned. -- By one Man's Disobedience, many were made Sinners.
Romans 5.12, 19. As coming from fallen Adam, we are Children of Wrath by Nature;
were shapen in Iniquity and conceived in Sin; have Hearts deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked. Every Mouth must be stopped, and all the World
are guilty before God, ( Romans 3.19.) and the Wages of Sin is Death; it deserves
Eternal Damnation in Hell.

2. God of his infinite Love, gave his only begotten Son Christ Jesus, to save
Men from this sinful, miserable Condition. 1 John 4.9. In this was manifested
the Love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into
the World, that we might live though him. Christ purchased his Church with his
own Blood, gave himself a Ransom for them, bought them with a Price, bare their
Sins in his own Body on the Tree, was made a Curse, to redeem Sinners from the
Curse of the Law, Gal. 3.13. He was manifested to destroy the Works of the
Devil, to bless Men in turning them from their Iniquities, saving them from
Sin, making them Holy, saving them from Wrath to come, and bringing them to
endless Glory. He suffered, the Just for the Unjust, that he might bring us to
God, 1 Pet. 3.18.

3. Persons must turn from Sin to God in Christ, if ever they would obtain
Salvation. Christ did not come to save Men in their Sins, but from their Sins,
and from the Misery deserved by them. Therefore Sinners must Repent or Perish,
(Luke 13.5.) Believe in Christ, or be Damned, (Mark 16.16.) become sincerely
Holy, else they cannot see God, and be Happy, Heb. 12.14. The Scope and Design
of the Gospel is, To turn Men from Darkness to Light, from the Power of Satan
to God; therefore they must have their Sins, with Abhorrence turn from them,
trust in Christ's Merits for Pardon; Love, Obey and Serve God Sincerely, if
ever they would be Saved. Christ is the Author of Eternal Salvation, to them
that obey him, Heb. 5.9. But those who will not that he should reign over them,
are his Enemies, and shall be slain before him, Luke 19.27.

4. Ministers should faithfully Preach these Things to Men. The Command to them
is, 1 Timothy 4.2. Preach the Word, (that is, the Word of God, his Mind and Will
made known in the Scripture,) be instant, in season, out of season; rebuke,
reprove, exhort, with all Long-suffering and Doctrine. They must teach Men, to
observe all things whatsoever Christ has commanded, Mat. 28.20. They should
plainly Preach, Declare, Publish Scripture Doctrines, Precepts, Promises,
Threatenings. They should testify to Men, Repentance toward God, Faith toward
our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20.2^. Should plainly tell them of their Sin and
Danger, warn them to forsake their Evil Ways, to believe in Christ, to live
Holily, that they may die Safely. They should urge Men to deny Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, to live soberly, godlily and righteously, in this present World;
for so the Grace of God, which brings Salvation, teaches and requires Men to
live, Tit. 2.11, 12. Thus Ministers should faithfully Preach the Gospel.

PROP. II. Some under such faithful Preaching, live contrary to it.
Indeed many under the faithful Preaching of the holy Prophets, Apostles, and
of our holy Redeemer too; lived contrary to the holy Doctrines, Precepts,
Exhortations that were given to them Indeed in every Age, too many who hear the
Gospel, yet live contrary to it. Here therefore we may enquire,

QUEST. When way Persons be said to live contrary to the faithful Preaching of
the Gospel?
ANSW. I might say in general, When they live in the Service of the Devil, of
their own Lusts and Corruptions, then they live contrary to the Gospel; for
that requires them to cleanse themselves from all Filthiness of flesh and
spirit, perfecting Holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. It Is true, a
perfect Freedom from Sin, exact, complete Holiness, are not attainable in this
Life. There is not a just Man upon Earth, that does good and sins not, Eccl.
7.20. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves; and the truth is not in
us. 1 John 1.8. But though Persons cannot get quite free from Sin in this World,
yet they must hate and war against their Lusts and Corruptions, strive to
subdue and mortify them; they must not live serving and obeying of them, for
this is quite contrary to the Gospel. Therefore under this Proposition, I Will
briefly mention a few general Heads, and say, Persons live contrary to the
Gospel,

1. When they live in gross, vicious, scandalous Practices. Many under the
Gospel live in a Course of Drunkeness, that worse than beastly Practice. They
are every now and then Drunk, if not reeling, staggering, and wallowing in
their own Filthiness, yet they drink to Invi^ible Excess. This is quite
contrary to Gods Word, which requires Persons to live soberly, denounces Woes
against Drunkards, and plainly says, they shall not inherit the Kingdom of God
Again, some live in filthy, unclean Practices, Fornications and Adulteries; and
what can be more contrary to Gods Word than this is? For Gods Word says, Thou
shall not commit Adultery, Flee Fornication, Whore* mongers and Adulterers God
will judge, Fornicators and Adulterers shall not inherit the Kingdom of God,
etc. Again, some are very Unjust and Unrighteous in their Carriage toward Men;
some will Rob and Steal; others who will not go so far as that, yet will Cheat,
Defraud, Oppress, Extort in their Dealings. This is quite contrary to Gods
Word; for that says, Thou shall not steal. That no Man go beyond or defraud his
Brother in any matter, because the Lord is the Avenger of all such, 1 These.
4.6. As ye would that Men should do to you, do ye also to them likewise, Luke
6.31. Thieves and Extortioners, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

2. When they disregard and slight the Day, Worship and Ordinances of God. Gods
Word requires, that we should Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it Holy.
Therefore when Persons profane the Lords Day, his holy Sabbath, by Idleness,
Sleeping, Gaming, or minding worldly Affairs, as if it were a common Day; they
then act quite contrary to Gods Word; for this Day should be spent in serious
Exercises of Religion, both Public and Private. Again, God bids us Pray
always, Pray without ceasing; Praying always, with all Prayer and Supplication
in the Spirit, Ephesians. 6.18. Publick-Prayer, Family Prayer Morning and Evening,
Secret or Closet-Prayer; all these should be diligently attended by every
Christian, in the proper, recurring Times and Seasons thereof. Therefore
Prayerless Persons, those who never, or but seldom call on God, they live
directly contrary to his holy Word. Prayerless Persons will be condemned from
that, Phil. 4.6. In every thing by Prayer and Supplication with Thanksgiving,
let your Requests be made known to God. Those who neglect Secret-Prayer, will
be condemned from Mat. 6.6. Enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy
Door, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which sees in
secret, shall reward thee openly. So, those who will suffer a little
uncomfortable Weather, or small trivial Inconveniences, it may be often nothing
but Sloth, to keep them from attending on the Preaching of Gods Word; they act
contrary to Gods Word which says, Faith comes by hearing, Hear and your souls
shall live, Desire the sincere Milk of the word that ye may grow thereby; not
forsaking the assembling of your selves together, Heb. 10.25. Therefore when
Persons without any sufficient Bar in the way, neglect to hear the Gospel
Preached on Lecture Days, especially on Lords Days; therein they cast contempt
on God, despise his Ordinances, as though it were not worth their while to hear
what the great God has to say to them. Possibly if they knew of a Market,
Auction or Vendu^ ^^ey would go and look for a good bargain; but when the
Gospel is Preached, which offers Christ that Pearl of great Price, and Invites
them to buy tried Gold that they may be Spiritually Rich, white Raiment, Wine
and Milk without Money and without Price, (Isai. 55.1.) I say, when these
things are offered in the Gospel, they contemptuously neglect to hear them. So,
those who disregard the Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper, take no care
to receive them, nor to obtain the Spiritual benefits represented by them; they
act quite contrary to Gods Word, Mat. 28.19, 20.

3. When they have little or no regard to the Government of their Tongues. The
well governing of the Tongue, is an Important Article in the Christians
conduct, and tends greatly to adorn his Profession. But if a Man seem to be
Religious, and yet bridleth not his Tongue but deceives his own heart, his
Religion is vain, Jam. 1.26. How many are there who fall under this
condemnation, whose unbridled Tongues prove their Religion to be vain? (1) Many
Indulge a profane Tongue, they rend the Holy and Dreadful Name of the eternal
God, by their horrible Oaths, Curses, Blaspemies. Such profane wretches look
like the first born of the Devil, act as if they had hell in their Hearts
foaming out of their Mouths; and seem to dare and challenge the third
Commandment, which says, Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in
vain; for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that takes his Name in vain.
(2) Some Indulge an angry Tongue, if they are but a little crossed or thwarted,
oh how Hot, Fiery, Passionate are they? They Are for sending out a flood of rage,
as though they would drive all before them, as though they were of that wicked
temper, Psalm. 12.4. With our Tongues will we prevail, our Lips are our own, who
is Lord over us? These act quite contrary to Gods word which says, Psalm. 34.13.
Keep thy Tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. (3) Some Indulge a
Meddling Tongue, they will be Meddling and Prating about almost every Person and
every Matter, though they are not concerned therewith. They are much for ordering
and directing in, censuring and condemning of, Matters that don't belong to
them. They speak evil of things they know not, are buisy bodies in other Men's
matters. These act contrary to that word: 1 These. 4.11. Study to be quiet, and
to do your own business. (4) Some Indulge a Light, Frothy, Lascivious Tongue;
they will vomit out nast and rotteness in their obscene words. The opening of
their Mouths, is like the opening of a Sepulcher that lets out stink and
noisomness; or like the Lancing of a putrifi'd Ulcer that lets out Filth and
Corruption. This is as contrary as can be, to Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt
communication proceed out of your Mouth, but that which is good to the use of
edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers. As for Filthiness, Foolish
Talking and Jesting which are not convenient; let them not be once named among
you, for this becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5.3, 4. (5) Some Indulge a backbiting,
reviling, sland^ing Tongue: Their Tongues are as Swords, as Sharp Rasors
working deceitfully, they cut the throat of their Neighbors Reputation, they
cut and hack his good Name all to pieces. This is quite contrary to Gods word
which says, Jam. 4.11. Speak not evil one of another, Brethren. Tit. 3.2.
Speak evil of no man. Revilers shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor.
6.9, 10. (6) Some Indulge a false lying Tongue in matters of dealing. Possibly
he that Sells, will affirm his Wares or Goods to be Sound and Good, when he
knows the contrary: Possibly the Buyer will say, it is Naught, it is Naught,
till he gets it below the worth, and then brags of his good bargain. Many are
so false in dealing, that there is scarce any believing what they say. It may be
they will make Possitive Promises, when they have neither Ability nor Design to
fulfill them. They wont bear to have another give 'em the lie, they take it as
a great Affront; but they give themselves the lie, prove themselves Liars very
frequently, by being false to their possitive Promises and Engagements. This is
very contrary to that Simplicity and Godly Sincerity, which well becomes us, 2
Cor. 1.12. It Is contrary to Ephesians. 4.25. Wherefore putting away lying, Speak
every man truth with his Neighbor.

Sure I am, those who have little or no regard to the Government of their
Tongues, have little or no regard to the Word and Authority of God. They are
not of David's Spirit who said, Psalm. 39.1. I will take heed to my ways, that I
sin not with my Tongue. We Are told, Jam. 3.2, -- If any man offend not in word,
the same is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole body. But those
who have unbridled Tongue, they break God's bands and cast his cords from them,
(Psalm. 2.3.) disregarding and slighting those awful words of our glorious
Judge: Mat. 12.36, 37. Every Idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the day of Judgment. For by thy words thou shall be
Justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned.

Again, Persons live contrary to the Gospel,

4. When they are under the Governing Influence of an Envious, Spiteful,
Revengeful Spirit. As our first and great duty is, to Love God with all our
hearts; so our next is, to Love our Neighbors as our selves. The Scripture
does abundantly Inculcate, press, urge this duty of Brotherly Love; he that
hates his Brother is a Murderer. 1 John 4.7, 8. Beloved, let us love one
another, for love is of God: and every one that loves is born of God, and
knows God. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is love. Our Savior
said, Joh. 13.35. By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye
have love one to another. We should love our Neighbors, heartily desire and
endeavor their Welfare, rejoice in their Welfare, grieve for their Adversity.
If therefore we care not how it goes with them, or envy and grieve at the Good
they do or enjoy, or rejoice in their Adversity, or in their Sin because it
tends to hurt and blast them; I say, if such a Spirit as this prevails in us,
it is quite contrary to the Gospel, which says, Romans 12.15. Rejoice with them
that rejoice, and weep with them that weep. So, if we are of a spiteful,
revengeful Spirit, and will by no Means forgive Injuries; this is as contrary
as can be to what Gods Word says, Romans 12.17, 19. Recompense to no Man Evil for
Evil. -- Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves. Mat. 6.14, 15. If ye forgive
Men their Trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you. But if ye
forgive not Men their Trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your
Trespasses. So, Ephesians. 4.31, 32. Let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger, and
Clamor, and evil Speaking, be put away from you, with all Malice; and be ye
kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven you. Therefore, as for spiteful malicious Persons,
they are rather the Children of the Devil, that Liar and Murderer from the
beginning (who seeks whom he may devour) than the Children of God, who is Love,
and delights in Mercy. Persons live contrary to the Gospel,

5. When they are under the governing Influence of a worldly Spirit. Jam. 4.4.
The Friendship of the World is Enmity with God. To be carnally minded is Death.
All that is in the World, the L^st of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eyes, and the
Pride of Life; is not of the Father, but is of the World, 1 John 2 26. Earthly
Riches, Honors, Pleasures, are sometimes called the carnal Man's Trinity. Some
are Lovers of pleasures more than Lovers of God; have an higher Value for
sensual Gratifications, than for any Converse or Communion with God. So, some
love the praise of Men more than the praise of God, Joh. 12.43. If they can but
be applauded and honored by mortal Men, they care not what the Eternal God
thinks of them. Others, they make Gold their god. Psalm. 49.6. They trust in
their Wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their Riches. Their
chief Study and Labor is, to get and enjoy Riches, though they lose their
Souls thereby. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. They that will be Rich (that are set and
resolved upon it, right or wrong) fall into temptation and a snare, and into
many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown Men in destruction and perdition.
For the love of Money is the root of all evil, which while some have coveted
after, they have erred from the Faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows. Nothing can be more contrary to the Gospel, than for Persons to
indulge such a carnal, worldly Spirit; for the Scope of the Gospel is, to bring
Sinners to God, to subdue their Estrangedness and Alienation from him,
reconcile them to him through Christ, conform them to his holy Image; and to
make them esteem his Favor as Life, his loving Kindness as better than Life;
to thirst after God, as the Heart after the Water Brooks; to esteem nothing in
Heaven or Earth, comparable to the Communications of his Grace and Favor. But
alas, of many it may be said, Their god is their belly, they glory in their
shame, they mind earthly things; and such are Enemies to the Cross of Christ,
(Phil. 3.18.) Enemies to what Christ who was Crucified, requires of them. Though
they profess to know God, yet in works they deny him; being abominable,
disobedient, and to every good work raprobate, Tit. 1.16. Once more, Persons
may be said to live contrary to the Gospel,

6. When they are destitute of unfeigned Repentance of Sin, and Faith in Christ
Jesus. Too many under the Gospel, content themselves with a Name to live,
though they are spiritually dead; with a Form of Godliness, though they deny
the Power of it. They content themselves with outward Shows, Professions,
Performances of Religion; though their Hearts were never truly humbled and broken
for Sin, never emptyed of themselves, never brought off from their own
Righteousness; though they never as self-condemned Sinners, heartily embraced
Christ as Prince and Savior, as the only Prophet, Priest and King of their
Souls, All such Persons disobey the Gospel. Though Persons are never so
Orthodox in their Faith and Profession; never so strict and constant in the
Externals of Religion; never so blameless and commendable in their outward
Behavior; yet, if they have not been born of the Spirit, nor had the washing
of Regeneration, nor been created in Christ Jesus unto good Works; if they have
not reciev'd Christ by such a Faith as purifies the Heart, and works by Love;
they never heartily obeyed the Gospel of God. For the Scope of the Gospel is
not to make Men Hypocrites, to reform their outward Behavior, and suffer Sin
to reign in their Souls: No indeed, but that with the Heart they should believe
unto Righteousness, and with the Mouth make confession to Salvation, Romans
10.10. God searches the Heart, sees the whole Frame, Temper, Disposition,
Behavior of it; and requires that it should grieve for Sin, turn from it with
utmost Abhorrence of it, trust in Christ alone for Justification, yield
unfeigned Submission to his Authority, and Obedience to his Precepts. Jam. 4.8.
Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you; cleanse your hands ye sinners,
and purify your hearts ye double-minded. None but the pure in Heart, shall see
God, Mat. 5.8. Indeed God tries the Heart; he cannot be deceived, and will not be
mocked; if the Heart be not sound in his Statutes, right with him, and steadfast
in his Covenant; then he is not pleased with such a Person, nor does he accept
of any of his Services. Romans 8.8. They that are in the Flesh (that is,
Unregenerate) cannot please God. Heb. 11.6. Without Faith it is impossible to
please God. Hypocrites may flatter themselves, and provoke God, but please him
they cannot; for he requires that they should worship him in Spirit and in
Truth, and glorify him with their Spirits as well as with their Bodies, 1 Cor.
6.20. The end of the Commandment is Charity, out of a pure Heart, and a good
Conscience, and of Faith unfeigned, 1 Timothy 1.5. Therefore, if Persons draw near
to God with their Mouths, and honor him with their Lips; and yet remove their
Hearts far from him, then they worship him in vain, (as to any saving Benefit
to themselves) Isai. 29.13. with Mat. 15.8, 9.

Having showed in these few general Hints, that some who live under the
faithful Preaching of the Gospel, yet live contrary to it, we may proceed to

PROP. III. Such are Despisers of God.
Those who Disobey God, are said to Despise him. David's killing Uriah the
Hittite, is called a Despising the Commandment of the Lord, 2 Samuel 12.9. God
said to his People, Lev. 26.15. If ye shall despise my Statutes, or if your
Soul abhor my Judgments, so that ye will not do all my Commandments, but that
ye break my Covenant. Those therefore who disobey the Gospel faithfully
Preached to them, they despise God.

1. Because it is the Gospel of GOD which they disobey. The Holy Bible, the
Scriptures, they are God's Word and not Man's. Holy Men of God, spoke as they
were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.22. Holy Men were infallibly moved by
Gods Spirit, to declare Gods Mind to those to whom he sent them. So, those who
wrote the Scriptures, were infallibly assisted by Gods Spirit in doing of it. 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God.

2. Ministers are but God's Servants, in faithfully Preaching the Gospel. They
are but Stewards of the Mysteries of God. The Gospel of Reconciliation is
committed to them, they are Ambassadors of Christ, (2 Cor. 5.20.) speak in his
Name and by his Authority, when they faithfully Preach the Gospel. They are but
Gods Servants in faithfully publishing his Will; therefore (as he bids them)
they must lift up their Voice as a Trumpet; tell Men of their Sin and Danger,
and warn them to turn and live. They must declare God's Mind, whether Men will
hear, or whether they will forbear, Ezekiel. 2.7. Woe be to them if they do not
Preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16. If they don't faithfully warn Men (as God bids
them) to turn from their evil Ways, they will bring the Guilt of the Blood of
Souls on themselves. Therefore, when they faithfully Preach the Gospel, if Men
disobey it, they disobey GOD, disobey the Message he sends to them; and therein
throw Scorn and Contempt upon God, despise him, as though he were not worthy to
be minded, regarded, or obeyed by them.

USE. We may now proceed to the Use or Application. From what we have heard we
may Infer,

1. That Ministers should Preach nothing but what is agreeable to Gods Word.
They are Ambassadors, and should stick close to their Instructions. Their
Commission runs, 2 T^m. 4.2. Preach the Word. It Is God's Word they must Preach
and Publish. Paul could say, 1 Cor. 11.23. I have received of the Lord, that
which also I delivered unto you. Ministers should not Preach their own Whims,
Fancies and Inventions; nor say, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord has not
spoken it. They should not get into the Pulpit to tell their own Stories, but
to deliver God's Message agreeably to his Word. They should Preach no Doctrines
as Divine, but what are agreeable to the Scriptures; forbid nothing as Sin, but
what Gods Word declares to be so; require nothing as Duty, but what they have
Scripture Warrant for: They should lay no Burdens on Men's Consciences, but
what Gods Word lays there.

2. We should all be deeply humbled, that we have despised God so much as we
have done. If those Civil Rulers, whose proper Work it is to issue out
Proclamations, enact and publish just Laws; Subjects should endeavor to
understand the same, that they may conform thereto. How much more then, should
we Read and Hear the Word of the Great GOD, the Eternal KING Study and Pray
too, that we may understand and obey it? So far as we have neglected to Read
and Hear Gods Word, to understand and obey it; so far we have despised God. And
where is the Person, that is not at least in some grievous Measure guilty? We
have not used such care and diligence as we should have done, to hear,
understand, and obey the word of the living God, time one Lawgiver who can save
or destroy; this we should be deeply humbled for.

3. It Is unreasonable and groundless, to be offended with Ministers for the
sake of Gospel truths; or with Gospel truths for the sake of Ministers. Many
are apt to be offended with Ministers for their Preaching, though it is plainly
agreeable to the word of God. They can quietly hear a Minister Preach against
Sin in general; can hear him condemn Pride, Unrighteousness, Evil Speaking and
the like, in general terms; but when their Sins are pretty plainly and
particularly described and condemned in the word Preached, then they are angry
with the Preacher. They Are ready to say, the Minister Intended them in
particular, when possibly he never knew, that they personally were ever guilty
of this or that crime in particular, which he condemned in his Preaching, Very
often when Persons are touched to the quick, their Sins laid open and
condemned, their guilty Consciences smitten by the faithful Preaching of the
word; then they are disgusted at the Preacher; apt to hate and revile him, and
to say as Ahab of that faithful Prophet Micajah, 1 King. 22.8. I hate him, for
he does not Prophecy good of me, but evil. They hate him that rebukes in the
Gate, Amos 5.10. The wicked often hate, faithful Reprovers who are their best
Friends; though such Friends offer them Pearls (faithful Reproofs, are so)
they will turn again and rent them. Such treatment of Ministers for their dealing
faithfully, is unreasonable and abominable. What, would you have Ministers
Prophecy smooth things; and cry Peace, Peace when there is no Peace? Would you
not have them faithfully declare God's Mind; if you would, why are you angry
when they do it? If a Servant brings to you a Letter from his Master, that
contains grievous things in it; you have no reason to be offended with such a
Servant, he did but his duty to deliver the Letter as his Master bad him. So
when Ministers faithfully Preach Gods word, though it pierces Conscience never
so deeply, stings and wounds never so sharply; yet you should not be angry with
them for it, they do but their duty in faithfully declaring Gods Mind and Will:
Instead of being blamed they deserve to be commended. If Men cannot bear sound
Doctrine, it is because they have itching Ears and distempered Hearts. Faithful
searching Sermons, displease none but those who Indulge such Lusts and
Corruptions as should be slain by the Sword of the Spirit. The end of
Preaching, is not to tickle an itching ear, and gratify a corrupt fancy; but
to Instruct the Mind, reach the Conscience, move the Will and Affections to
every thing that is Holy, Just and Good; and to move them against the contrary.
It Is therefore unreasonable to be displeased with Ministers, when they
faithfully aim at these things in Preaching.

And as it is unreasonable to be offended with Ministers for faithfully
Preaching the Gospel; so it is unreasonable to be offended with the Gospel for
the sake of Ministers. Too many are apt to act, as though they were Qualifi^d and
Authorized to censure Ministers; sometimes they will condemn the Voice as being
too low, or it may be too high; sometimes the Style as not being Polite,
Correct and Curious enough for their nice squeamish humors; sometimes the
Method as not being Logical enough for their Phylosophical genius; and by thus
faulting one thing or other which they are pleased to dislike in the Preacher,
they let slip and disregard the weighty and divine truths delivered by him. The
Apostle in his Preaching, Endeavored to commend himself to every Man's
Conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4.2. And did not speak in the words
which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost teaches, 1 Cor. 2.13.
Yet some of his pround, self-conceited Auditors made bold to censure him,
saying, 2 Cor. 10.10. His bodily presence is weak, and his Speech contemptible.
If this great Apostle was thus censured and despised, no wonder if ordinary
Ministers are though they do never so well. Well, but whatever opinion you have
of Ministers, yet don't think meanly of what they Preach agreably to Scripture.
Don't despise heavenly Treasures, because they are conveyed in earthen Vessels.
When great and weighty Truths and Duties are Preached, if Men disregard them
because of some dislike they have to the Preacher; this shows great and
prevailing Corruption in their Minds. If Men were well an hungry, they would be
glad of wholesome food, though not dish'd and garnished after the newest nicest
mode. New born Babes, should desire the sincere Milk of the word that they may
grow thereby. If Persons did hunger and thirst after Righteousness, they would
prize and value Divine Truths though in never so plain a dress.

Don't take upon trust all that Ministers Preach, don't believe it as a Divine
Truth merely because they deliver it, but try it by the word of God: 1 These.
5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. When the Apostle had been
Preaching to the Bereans, he commends them, That they received the word with
all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily whether those things
were so, Act. 17.10, 11. They readily and gladly heard the word Preached, and
as diligently searched the Scriptures, to see whether what was Preached agre'd
thereto. This was noble indeed. If Ministers Preach contrary to the Scriptures,
you have a divine Warrant to reject it. Isai. 8.20. To the Law and to the
Testimony, if they speak not according to this word; it is because there is no
light in them. But if Ministers Preach agreeably to the Scriptures, then reject
it at your Peril. Act. 5.39. If it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it; lest
happily ye be found to fight against God. He that despises, despises not Man
but God; he that disobeyeth, disobeyeth not Ministers but God that sends them.
When Ministers Preach agreably to the Scriptures, they may truly say, Thus
says the Lord; and those who reject it, do reject the Lords Message to them.
When Ministers call on you to Repent of Sin, heartily to Believe in Christ
Jesus, or to do this or that Duty required by Scripture; then remember, the
Great GOD by His Messengers calls on you to do these things, and to neglect
them (how mean soever the Messengers in themselves are) is rebellion against
Heaven, against your Lawgiver and your Judge. Let us therefore hear and obey
Gods Voice, in the Mouths of His faithful Messengers. Let us not think it
enough, to commend good Ministers, or good Sermons, this alone wont please God
nor save your Souls; but let us Live Gods Word, obey His Voice, do as He bids
us. This is the way to have a blessing. Jam. 1.21, 22, 25. Wherefore lay a part
all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness; and receive with meekness the
ingrafted word, which is able to save your Souls. But be ye doers of the word,
and not hearers only, deceiving your own selves. -- But whosoever looks into the
perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, he being not a forgetful
hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed.

Sermon, XII. Trusting in GOD, Yields Perfect PEACE.
ISAIAH XXVI. 3. Thou will keep him in perfect Peace, whose mind is stayed on
thee, because he trusts in thee.


WE live in a changible, uncertain World; if we rightly consider the Nature and
Course of the Affairs of it, we cannot have our Minds steady and easy, unless we
have something better to trust in, than any outward Enjoyments whatsoever. But
our Text now read, shows us, how Persons may come to have great Peace and Quiet
in their own Souls, even in this changible World, and in the next World too. To
have the Mind fixed staying on God, trusting in him, relying on him, according
to the Discoveries he has made of himself in his gracious Promises: This, even
this is the Way to have Ease and Rest, Peace and Quiet in the Soul, in this
World and in the next also.

Thou will keep him in perfect Peace, etc. Thou, that is God. God is the Keeper
of those that trust in him. Happy they that have such a Keeper, the best Keeper
that can be; a Keeper that never slumbers nor sleeps, Psalm. 121.4. Yea, he will
keep them in perfect Peace; the Hebrew is, Peace, Peace. The Repetition of the
Word may intimate, the Firmness, Greatness, Certainty of the Peace of those who
have God for their Keeper: Peace, Peace, they have Peace with God, often Peace
and Quiet in their own Consciences; Peace in this World and in the next. And
who are they that are thus favored? Why, such as have their Minds stayed on
God. There Is Variety among Interpreters, about the Meaning and Application of
these Words. Some are for reading thus, With a firm Purpose (or established
Decree or Resolve) thou will keep him in perfect Peace, because he trusts in
thee. Some thus, Thou will keep the Mind (or Thought) of him that trusts in
thee, in perfect Peace.

But without further insisting on these Things, the Words may afford us this
following Observation, viz.

DOCTRINE. God will keep those in perfect Peace, whose Hearts are stayed on
him, and do trust in him.
Here we may Enquire,

I. What Is employed in Persons having their Hearts stayed on God, trusting in
him?

II. What Is meant by God's keeping of such in perfect Peace?

QUESTION I. What Is employed in Person having their Hearts stayed on God,
trusting in him?
For Answer, this must needs imply,

1. That they are acquainted with the Revelations of Gods Will, with his
gracious Promises. All Men are Sinners, as such they deserve no Peace with God;
but Wrath and Vengeance from him. But God is in Christ reconciling the World
unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. God can be just, and the Justifyer of him that
believes in Jesus, Romans 3.26. Therefore Persons must be more or less
acquainted with the Revelations of His Will, with his gracious Promises through
Christ, else they have no Bottom, no Foundation for hoping and trusting in God
for Peace, for Pardon, for Eternal Blessedness. The Scheme and Method of
Sinners Reconciliation with God, was laid in Gods own eternal purpose (Ephesians.
3.11.) and this Purpose of his cannot be known to Men, any further than he
reveals and discovers it. Therefore the Mercy of God through Christ, revealed
in the Promises, is the Foundation of Faith, the Ground and Encouragement
Persons have to hope and trust in him. Romans 10.14, 17. -- How shall they
believe in him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a
Preacher? -- So then, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word of God.

2. That they actually trust in God, upon the Encouragement of his Promises.
Though such as cover their Sins, shall not prosper; yet those who confess and
forsake them, shall have Mercy. There Is an Abundance of Pardoning Mercy with
God, for penitent, returning Sinners, Isai. 55.7. Therefore Persons cannot be
said, rightly to stay on God, or lean on the Lord (as the Phrase is, Mic.
3.11.) unless they heartily Repent of their Sins, grieve and mourn for them,
hate and turn from them; and heartily trust in God's Mercy through Christ, as
Revealed in the Promises. And when they do thus trust in his Mercy, cast all
their Cares and Burdens upon him; rely and depend on him for Pardon, for Grace,
for the good Things laid up in the Promises: I say, when they do thus, they may
be said to have their Minds and Hearts stayed on God, trusting in him. And
where there is such a trusting in God as this, it purifies the Heart, works by
Love, (Act. 15.9. Gal. 5.6.) and brings forth Fruits of sincere, holy Obedience
to God; for Faith without Works is dead, Jam. 2.26. By Faith Abraham -- obeyed,
Heb. 11.8.

3. Their Steadiness and Continuance in so doing. Their trusting in God, and so
their other Duties the Fruits thereof, should not be like the morning Cloud,
and the early Dew, which soon pass away. They should trust in the Lord for
ever; their Hearts should be fixed in doing it, Isai. 26.4. Psalm. 112.7. When
the Jews asked our Savior, What shall we do that we may work the Works of God?
He replied, This is the Work of God, that ye believe in him whom he has sent,
Joh. 6.28, 29. The Work of Faith, is the Work of God, that which he requires of
us, and we should be doing of it as long as we live. 1 Cor. 15.58. Be steadfast,
unmovable, always abounding in the Work of the Lord. We should constantly and
firmly trust in God through Jesus Christ, for all the Blessings, Temporal,
Spiritual, Eternal, which his Promises give us Encouragement to hope for. And
this Faith should quicken us to obey God, to walk in his Ways, to submit and
resign our selves and all our Concerns, to his holy, wise and gracious Dispose.
When we thus do, we may be said to have our Minds and Hearts stayed on God,
trusting in him.

QUESTION II. What Is meant by Gods keeping of such in perfect Peace?
ANSWER.

It may imply,

1. That God is at Peace with them. As for the unregenerate, impenitent
Sinners, they are in a State of Enmity to God, and are under his terrible Wrath
and Curse. He that believes not, is condemned already, -- the Wrath of God
abides on him, Joh. 3.18, 36. The Wages of Sin is Death: The Law of God
condemns impenitent Sinners. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one, that continues
not in all things written in the Book of the Law to do them. But when a Person
heartily Repents of his Sins, and trusts in the Mercy of God through Christ
for Pardon; then the Great GOD, his Maker, Lawgiver and Judge, is Reconciled to
him, and at Peace with him. Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. -- -- There is therefore no condemnation to them
that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 5.1. and 8.1. If any one's Sins have been never
so many or great, yet if he heartily Repents and turns from them, and believes
in the Lord Jesus Christ; then God Pardons all his Iniquities, and is at Peace
with his Soul. 1 John 1.7. The Blood of Jesus cleanses from all Sin, Acts
10.43. -- Whosoever believes in him, shall receive the Remission of Sins.

2. God will always be at Peace with such. He will keep them in Peace, or keep
Peace with them for ever. Being once Reconciled to them through Christ, he will
never cast them out of Favor: Whom he loves, he loves to the end. It Is true,
sincere Saints are liable to grievous Falls; some of them are sometimes
actually chargeable with very gross Transgressions, as Noah, Lot, and some
others have been; and such Transgressions are very provoking to God. Such
Offenses may possibly provoke God to bring heavy Troubles and Afflictions on
them. Because David by his heinous Crimes, had given great Occasion to the
Enemy to blaspheme; therefore God took away his Child by Death, 2 Samuel 12.4.
But though God may be thus highly provoked with the Offenses of his adopted
Children; yet he will so Renew them by the Exercise of Repentance, as that they
shall not be utterly Rejected by him, nor Conquered by their Spiritual Enemies.
He will restore their Souls, and lead them in paths of Righteousness for his
Name sake, Psalm. 23.3. The Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, the
Lord knows them that are his. God has both threatened and promised concerning
the Spiritual Seed of David, of Christ, Psalm. 89.30, -- 33. If his Children
forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments; if they break my Statutes, and
keep not my Commandments, then will I visit their Transgression with the Rod,
and their Iniquity with Stripes. Nevertheless, my loving kindness I will not
utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. When God has once
accepted a penitent, believing Sinner, and pardoned him for Christ's sake;
though after this he may possibly chastise him very sorely for great Offenses,
yet he will never utterly cast him off, nor suffer him finally to perish; but by
his Grace he will Humble him, Restore him, and Save him for ever. He will bring
him to Heaven, though it be by Weeping Cross; he will save him, though it be as
by Fire. For whom he justified, them he also glorified, Romans 8.30.

3. God will give them all that outward temporary Prosperity, which he sees
best for them. The Hebrew Word Shalom, which we render Peace, is of a large,
extensive Signification, sometimes comprehending all manner of outward Welfare
and Prosperity in it. Thus God said to the Jewish Captives at Babylon; Jer.
29.7. Seek the peace of the City whether I have caused you to be carried away
Captives, and pray unto the Lord for it; for in the peace thereof ye shall have
peace. So, Psalm. 122.6. Seek the peace of Jerusalem; they shall prosper that
love thee. Well, God will give to such as have their Minds stayed on him, all
that outward Prosperity which he sees best for them. Godliness has the promise
of the Life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. It Is true,
God will not give to the Saints an uninterrupted Course of present, outward
Prosperity; they have no Ground to expect that he will, but abundant Ground to
expect the contrary: Yet he will give them all that outward Prosperity, which in
infinite Wisdom and Love he sees best for them, or which he sees will be most
for his Glory, and their Spiritual, Eternal Good. It cannot be, but that God
should deal thus with them. He that has so loved them, as to give his only
begotten, Eternal Son to die for their Salvation, cannot but bestow on them
what he sees best for them. Romans 8.32. He that spared not his own Son* but
delivered him up for us all; how shall (...) not with him also freely give us
all things ^ And the Apostle plainly says there, v. 28. All things shall work
together for good, to them that love God, and are called according to his
purpose. Those whom God has effectually called home to Christ, and enabled to
stay their Minds on him, and trust in him; as for such, he will make all things
work together for their greatest Good, and everlasting Welfare. Therefore he
must needs bestow on them, all that outward Good, and Prosperity, he sees will
be most for their true and greatest Welfare.

4. God often gives them great inward Peace and Joy in their own Souls. Peace
with God is one thing, Peace and Quiet in the Conscience is another. A Person
may possibly be a true, penitent Believer, and be Pardoned, Reconciled to God,
and at Peace with him; and yet not know, or be fully assured in his own Mind,
that he is in so safe a State. Even Zion her self is sometimes ready to say,
The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me, Isai. 49.14. Those
that fear the Lord, and obey the voice of his Servants, yet sometimes walk in
the Dark, and have no Light, Isai. 50.10. That sincere Saints are sometimes
under Clouds, Doubts, Fears, Jealousys about their own Spiritual Safety, is a
thing too plain to be disputed or denied. Notwithstanding all this, yet a
steady Course of having the Mind stayed on God, and trusting in him, tends
directly to the inward Peace, Joy and Satisfaction of the Soul. The ways of
wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, Prove. 3.17. Great
peace have they that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them, Psalm.
119.165. So the Apostle says, Romans 15.13. Now the God of hope, fill you with
all joy and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope through the power of
the Holy Ghost. Believing in Christ, lays a Foundation for fullness of Joy and
Peace: And though some who have true Faith, are not at present filled with such
Joy and Peace; yet this proceeds from the Weakness of their Faith. For if they
did suitably and firmly Realize the Truths of God, and steadfastly trust in him
through Christ, for the Accomplishment of his gracious and faithful Promises;
then on good Grounds they might infer, that God is at Peace with them, and so
they might well rejoice in him as their Portion, and exceeding great Reward.
Therefore, as they are bid to trust in the Lord for ever; (Isai. 26.4.) so they
are bid to rejoice in the Lord always, Phil. 3.1. So, Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the
Lord always; and again I say rejoice.

A Realizing the Revealed Truths of God, and a firm trusting in him through
Christ for promised Blessings; gives good Ground for inward Peace, and true
Spiritual Joy and Comfort, even in the midst of outward Dangers, Troubles and
Afflictions.

This may appear if we consider the following Particulars, viz.

1. Men are made for Eternity. Indeed their Time and Life in this World, are
very short and uncertain; but there is an endless State of Misery or Glory,
after this present Life is ended. The Scripture plainly assures us of the
Immortality of the Soul, and of an endless, future Eternity. And though when
the Body and Soul part at Death, the Body Consumes, Rots, returns to Dust, as
it was originally; yet there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, both of the
Just and Unjust, Acts 24.15. And as all the Dead shall be Raised, so all
particular person shall be Judged to a State of endless Glory or Misery,
according to what their Carriage and Behavior was here in this Word. 2 Cor
5.10. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in the Body; according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. God will ^ender to every Man according to his Deeds, Romans 2.6.
And when all persons both Good and Bad, shall be thus Judged, then the Wicked
shall go away into everlasting punishment, and the Righteous into Life eternal,
Mat. 25.46. So that every particular, individual person, that ever has lived,
or ever shall live in the World, shall be Eternally and Inconceivably Happy or
Miserable in the future State and World.

2. That Is really best for Persons, which most promotes their Spiritual and
Everlasting Welfare. If Men had no other State and Being but in this present
Life and World, like the Beasts that perish; then present, outward Ease and
Prosperity, might be reckoned their Chief Good and Happiness; and the contrary
hereto their Greatest Misery. But since they are made for an Eternal State,
that must needs be most for their Good, which mostly promotes their Eternal
Good and Welfare, how cross soever it may seem to their present Ease or
Inclination. When persons are Sick or Wounded, that Physic, those Applications
which cause more present Uneasiness, are yet reckoned good and advantageous, if
they are useful to procure Health and Soundness of Body. Though in it self
considered, it is irksome and troublesome, to have deep Incisions made in the
Flesh, or to have a Leg or Arm cut off from the Body; yet these Methods are
reckoned good, when they are needful to preserve Life. So, though Sickness,
Pain, Poverty, Contempt, Persecution, and the like, in themselves considered,
are very undesirable, uneasy, uncomfortable and distressing; yet if they become
instrumental to promote our Spiritual and Eternal Welfare; so far they are to
be looked on as Good and Beneficial. The Apostle speaks plainly to the same
purpose, Heb. 12.11. Now no chastening for the present seems joyous but
grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruits of
Righteousness, to them that are exercised thereby.

3. God has promised, that all the Afflictions of the Saints shall he for their
Good and Benefit. He has plainly declared, Romans 8.28. All things shall work
together for good, to them that love God. But how can this be? What Good can
they have by Pain, Poverty, Contempt, and other heavy Afflictions? How can such
things as these be said to be for their Good? Why, these things may be said to
be for their Good, so far as they are instrumental to make them more fit and
meet for Heaven. We Read of a Meetness (or Fitness;) for the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light, Col. 1.12. And what is it makes Persons fit or meet for
Heaven, for the Enjoyment of God and Christ in the future State? Why the more
Holy they are, so much the more fit for the Heavenly State. Without Holiness no
Man shall see the Lord: But the pure in Heart shall see God, Heb. 12.14. Mat.
5.8. Those that have clean Hands and a pure Heart, are most fit to stand in
God's holy Place, Psalm. 24.3, 4. Well, the Afflictions of the Saints shall be
made instrumental to promote their Holiness. When the Apostle gives the Reason
why God afflicts the Saints, he says, it is for our profit, that we might be
partakers of his Holiness, Heb. 12.10. The Fruit is, to purge away Iniquity,
and take away Sin, Isai. 27.9. We are always profited by our Afflictions, of
what Nature or Degree soever they are; if thereby we are made more Holy,
Humble, Prayerful, Patient, Thankful, more purged from Sin, and weaned from the
World. If our Pride, Envy, Covetuousness, Revenge, or any other Lust
whatsoever, is more subdued and mortifyed by this or the other Affliction; then
we are profited and benefited by it. Sometimes Afflictions are sent to humble
and chasten for past Sins, sometimes to prevent those Sins there is great
Danger of. Thus, the Apostle Paul had a Thorn in the Flesh, a Messenger of
Satan sent to buffet him, lest he should be exalted above Measure, a Cor. 12.7.
It was to prevent that Pride and Self-conceit which God saw he was in Danger
of. Possibly the Saints meet with Losses and Disappointments in Business. they
can but just rub along in the Word; or they lose Children or other dear
Relatives; and possibly God may order these things, to prevent the Sins he sees
them in Danger of; such as Pride, Worldly-Mindedness, Inordinate Love to
Creatures. Yea, at the same time he may design both to abase and humble them
for past Sins, and also to prevent those further Miscarriages they are in
Danger of. He chastens them, that they may not be condemned with the World, 1
Cor. 11.32. God declares his End in afflicting them, it is to make them more
Holy; and therefore, though he may do it in just Anger against their Sins, yet
it is in tender Love to their Souls. Their light Afflictions which are but for a
moment, shall work for them a far more exceeding and an eternal weight of
Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. The holy Psalmist found, that his Afflictions had been for
his Spiritual Good and Advantage; Psalm. 119.67, 71, 75. Before I was afflicted
I went astray, but now have I kept thy Word. -- It is good for me that I was
afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes. -- I know, O Lord, that all thy
Judgments are right; and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me.

4. God will certainly fulfill all his Promises. God is infinitely Wise and
Knowing, infinitely Strong and Mighty, infinitely True and Faithful; and
therefore all his Promises shall most certainly be accomplished. He cannot lie,
Tit. 1.2. It is impossible for God to lie, Heb. 6.18. God knows how to fulfill
his Promises, for his Understanding is infinite. He Is able to fulfill them all,
for he is the Lord God Omnipotent, (Rev. 19.6.) and can do exceeding abundantly,
above all that we ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. Many things may possibly disable Men
from fulfilling their Promises, but nothing can hinder GOD from fulfilling his.
God has Power sufficient to break through, break over, and utterly to remove
all Difficulties that lie in his way. That which is impossible with Men, is yet
possible and easy with God. He can baring Good out of Evil, Light out of
Darkness, and call things that are not as though they were. Gods Providence
actually governs the World; he does according to his Will in the Armies of
Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the Earth. As he is the Giver of every
good Gift, bestows all the Benefits any receive; so he also dispenses all the
Troubles and Afflictions which any meet with. The Saints meet with no Trials
but what is of Gods sending; it is the Chastisement of the Lord, Heb. 12.5. The
Lord creates Darkness and Evil, Isai. 45.7. And he never brings Trials on the
Saints, but he sees the same are proper for them. 1 Pet. 1.6. If need be ye are
in Heaviness, through manifold Temptations. God never sends Afflictions on the
Saints, but when he sees them some way or other needful to promote their
Spiritual and Eternal Good. So that God orders all their Afflictions as to the
Kind or Sort, as to the Measure, Degree, Duration, and all the Circumstances of
them; and has promised, that all things shall work together for their Good; and
is true and faithful to his Promises.

Now, these things laid together and duly considered, plainly show, that when
the Saints realize the Truths of God, and firmly trust in him through Christ
for promised Blessings; this gives them good Ground for inward Peace, Joy,
Serenity of Mind, even in the midst of alt the Uncertainties, Dangers,
Troubles, Afflictions they are liable to in this present evil World.

For they may know, that things don't come to pass by Chance or Accident as to
God, but are all ordered by his wise, sovereign, unerring Providence; even by
the Hand of that God, who has promised, that all things shall work together for
their Good. They may know, that their Life, their Time, all their Affairs and
Circumstances, are entirely at the Dispose of that faithful, omnipotent God,
who has promised, that he will never leave them nor forsake them, that he will
give them Grace and Glory, and no good thing will he withold from them.

Therefore in their firm Relying on God for the Accomplishment of his Promises,
they may glory in Tribulation, rejoice in hope of the Glory of God. They may
boldly say, The Lord is mine Helper, I will not fear what Man shall do unto me,
Heb. 13.5, 6. If all outward Means of Help and Relief fail them, they may yet
rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of their Salvation, Heb. 3.17, 18. He
shall not be afraid of evil Tidings, his Heart is fixed trusting in the Lord,
Psalm. 112.7. In the midst of outward, threatening Dangers and Confusions, they
may yet have inward Peace, Calm and Serenity of Soul. Psalm. 46.1, 2. God is our
refuge and strength, a very present help in time of Trouble. Therefore will we
not fear, though the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea.

Those who rightly trust in the Almighty God, as their Help, Strength and
Refuge, have enough to support them, though the Mountains should be carried
into the midst of the Sea. Though Heaven and Earth should seem ready to crack
and break, as if all things were approaching to a sudden Disolution; yet there
is no Occasion for them to be frighted or terrifyed; for the Alsufficient,
Unchangible GOD, who orders all Changes that happen, is the unchangible Portion
of their Souls for ever. He Will guide them by Counsel, till he brings them to
Glory, Psalm. 73.24. In the due Exercise of Faith, the Saints may triumph and
say, Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? -- Nay,
in all these things, we are more than Conquerors through Christ that has loved
us. For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the Love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.35, -- 39.

USE. We may now proceed to some Application; Inferring from what has been said,

1. That God has made plentiful Provision for the Comfort of his Saints, even
while they abide in this present evil World. It Is true, this is not their Home
nor Resting Place, they are Strangers, Sojourners, Pilgrims upon Earth; yet God
has made such Discoveries of his Mind to them, as gives them abundant Ground
even for present Comfort. If they meet with great and sudden Afflictions, they
need not be surpised nor frighted; for God has forewarned them, that such is
the State and Course of this present Life, and that in the World they shall
have Tribulation. He has told them also, that they should commit the keeping of
their Souls to him; cast all their Cares and Burdens upon him, for he will care
for them and sustain them; and will make all things work for their Good, and
guide them by Counsel, till he brings them to Glory. These and such like
gracious Promises, give them abundant Ground for present Peace, Joy, Comfort in
their own Souls, whatever outward Troubles they meet with. Therefore when they
are bid to rejoice in the Lord always, it is no Mockery, no Jest, nor hard
Saying; its no more than what the faithful, gracious Promises of God, give them
sufficient Ground for. 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen ye love; in whom, though
now you see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of
Glory.

2. Unbelief is the greatest Plague and Mischief the Saints have in the World.
There may be Truth of Faith, where there is Weakness of Faith. Our Savior once
said to the great Apostle Peter, Mat. 14.31. O thou of little Faith, wherefore
did thou doubt? The best Believers in the World, have some Unbelief in them;
and it prevails more at some times than at others. And this Unbelief is their
greatest Plague and Mischief. The lively Exercise of Faith, does as it were
feelingly unite the Soul to God in Christ, as the Alsufficient Fountain of
Light, Life, Love, Grace, and all Good; and how profitable and comfortable must
this needs be? The lively Exercise of Faith may show the Saint, that all things
are his, whether Life, Death, things present, or things to come; and he is
Christ's, and Christ is God's, 1 Cor. 3.21, 23. But Unbelief, so far as that
prevails, it separates the Soul from God the Fountain of all Good. Heb 3.12.
Take heed lest there be in any of you an evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing
from the living God. An unbelieving Heart, is an evil Heart. Why so? Why,
because it departs from the living God: That must needs be very Evil, which
departs from the Fountain of all Good and Grace. Therefore the Saints should
take heed at such an Heart, to avoid it: Be not faithless but believing.

3. We should all of us believe and trust in God, in Jesus Christ. It Is our
Duty, our Interest to do so. 1 John 3.23. This is his Commandment, that we
should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ. Sinners, the Unregenerate,
should forthwith Repent of all their Sins, and trust in Jesus Christ for
Salvation; they Provoke God and Ruin their own Souls, if they neglect it. Oh
Dreadful Evils! 1 John 5.10. He that believes not God, has made him a Liar,
because he believes not the Record that God gave of his Son. Mark 16.16. He
that believes not shall be damned. On the other hand, Sinners cannot possibly
please God, or profit themselves, in any thing, like penitently trusting in his
Mercy in Christ for Salvation. Psalm. 147.11. The Lord takes pleasure in them
that fear him, in them that hope in his Mercy. Joh. 3.16. Whosoever believes
in him, shall not perish, but shall have Everlasting Life. The Saints also
should be in the constant Exercise of lively Faith; firmly Realizing Gods
Revealed Truths, and firmly Trusting in him for promised Blessings. Isai. 26.4.
Trust in the Lord for ever; for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.
Such Faith Glorifies God. Abraham was strong in Faith, giving glory to God, Rom
4.20. It is profitable to us. Jer. 17.7. Blessed is the Man that trusts in
the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. There is joy and peace in believing, Romans
15.13. We should therefore check and rebuke our doubting, unbelieving Hearts;
and should stir up our selves to take hold on God. Psalm. 42.11. Why art thou
cast down, O my soul? And why art thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God.
Psalm. 27.14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
thine Heart; wait I say on the Lord. Lam. 3.25, 26. The Lord is good to them
that wait for him, to the soul that seeks him. It is good that a Man should
both hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord.

FINIS.

