The Duty of GOSPEL MINISTERS TO preserve a PEOPLE from Corruption. Set forth,
in A SERMON Preached at Brookfield, October 16. 1717. Being the Day wherein the
CHURCH was Gathered, And Mr. Thomas Cheney, was Ordained PASTOR.

By Solomon Stoddard, A.M. and Pastor of Northhampton.

BOSTON: in N. E. Printed for Samuel Phillips, on the South side of the
Townhouse, in King Street. 1713.

The Duty of GOSPEL MINISTERS to preserve a People from Corruption.
MATTHEW. V. 13. Ye are the Salt of the Earth.


CHRIST JESUS having been Baptized and after that tempted of Satan for Forty
days, does in a more eminent manner enter into the execution of his Prophetical
Office, and Preaches his Sermon in the Mount contained in this and the two
following Chapters. He begins his Sermon by teaching them, who are blessed Men;
and their in this and the next verse he teaches his Disciples what is their
Office, and the work which they are to do as his Ministers. First he tells
them, they are the Salt of the Earth: First it may be enquired, who he speaks
to? Some think that it is spoke of professed Christians; but that does not seem
proper. Forthen when Countries come to be Christianinized, there would be no
difference between the Salt and them that are Salted. Christ knew that whole
Nations would entertain the Christian Religion; and who then would they be Salt
unto? But I judge that he intends the Apostles, and it may be the seventy
Disciples, if they were at that time present; though they were not yet called to
their Office, yet Christ designed them to it. We find a distinction, ver. 1.
between his Auditors and his Disciples, Seeing the Multitudes, he went up into
a mountain, and when he was set his Disciples came unto him. Again we may
enquire, Why does Christ compare them to Salt? Ans. Salt has many useful
qualities, it has Medicinal virtues in it, applied outwardly or inwardly; but
it has two properties especially, one is, that it savours Meats, gives a
grateful relish to them, makes them more acceptable to the stomach, takes away
their crudeness and is an help to digestion. Job. 6.6. Can that which is
unsavory be taken without salt. The other is, that it preserves things from
corruption and putrefaction. Flesh and some other Meats are liable in a little
time to corrupt and spoil: but Salt has virtue to preserve them; and in this
respect the Apostles are compared to Salt. He does not speak of what they were
de facto, but of what they were de jure, what they were by their Office to be.
Again it may be enquired, Who would have the benefit? Ans. The Earth, or the
Land where they dwell; by Earth you are to understand the Inhabitants of the
Earth. This is amplifyed by their incurableness if they loose their savor. Not
but that a Minister may be recovered, if he loose his savor; but if the
Ministry should loose their savor, there is none to recover them, 2. by their
unprofitableness if they grow corrupt and unsavory. They are unserviceable and
deserve to be rejected. It is good for nothing but to be cast out and trodden
under foot of men.

DOCTRINE.
THE Ministers of the Gospel are by their Office to preserve the People from
Corruption. IT is a great misery to a People to be corrupted, to be like
putrifyed and rotten Meat, they will be an affliction and enemies one to
another, and exposed unto the Judgments of God. But the Ministers of the Gospel
are means to preserve them from corruption. Magistrates in their place have
their influence on them to preserve them from corruption: but especially
Ministers are useful that way. In such Nations where there is no Gospel
Ministry, People are very corrupt: if by the light of Nature and severity of
Rulers, they be preserved from grosser iniquities, yet they are always very
corrupt. But the Faithful Services of Gospel Ministers is a special help to
preserve from corruptions. A Gospel Ministry is looked upon by some Persons as
an heavy charge, they groan under the burden of it; but Men have little reason
to think much of the charge considering the benefit that they are to a People,
as they are means to prevent the growing of corruption. Ministers had need be
careful that they do fulfill their Ministry, for their work is not only of
great concernment to themselves, but also to Multitudes of others, by keeping
the Country from corruption.

Consider 1. THAT People are very prone to grow corrupt. As the Bodies of Men
if they be not duly looked after, will grow corrupt, so will the Souls of Men.
A professing People are in great danger, many of them are in their natural
condition, and godly Men that are among them, are but in part sanctified; and
there are a great many young ones growing up among them, that are born in sin,
and abundance of temptations; and there is a great deal of danger that in a
little time they will be corrupted. As Buildings are subject to decay, and
Fields to be tainted, so People are to be corrupted. Isai. 1.21. How is the
faithful city become an harlot.

1. IN respect of the Principles of Religion. The Church of God is called the
pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. And if they don't hold fast the form
of wholesome words, they will quickly run to ruin. The practice of Religion does
depend upon the principles; if they loose the knowledge of the truth, they cannot
make due improvement of it. Blindness is a corruption and it leads to corrupt
practices. And that they are in danger of,

(1.) By Ignorance. A knowing People may in time become an ignorant People. The
People of Greece were some of the learnedest People of the World, in former
Generations. Corinth and Athens were called the two eyes of the World, but
since that they are become very ignorant. Darkness many times succeeds where
there was a great deal of light. If the present Generation be knowing Men, in a
few years many of them may die, and the young Generation, if they have not
suitable means of instruction will be very ignorant; though they grow to years
of understanding, may be ignorant of the principles of Religion. Parents may
bequeath their Estates to them, but they cannot bequeath their Knowledge to them.
If their Teachers be blind and ignorant, as the complaint is, Isai. 56.10. no
wonder if the People be ignorant. The People of Israel grew in continuance of
time a very ignorant People. Hos. 4.1. There is no knowledge of God in the land.
If a People be a knowing People, yet by the change of a Generation, they may be
children in understanding.

(2.) BY Errors. Men have a great deal of carnal reason, and so are in danger
to grow erroneous. There be a great many temptations from without to errors,
there be many false Doctrines published in the World. Men have mightily
corrupted the Doctrine of the Christian Religion: there have been heretical
teachers that have broached dangerous errors. 2 Pet. 4.1. There shall be false
teachers among you, who shall privily bring in damnable heresies. And Satan is
busy to blind the minds of Men. 2 Cor. 4.4. The God of this world has blinded
their minds. And there be many temptations in Men's own hearts to seduce them:
carnal men don't love Evangelical truths; and the pride of their hearts exposes
them; they are unwilling to acknowledge such truths as they cannot comprehend.
The lusts of Men's hearts do incline them to receive heretical Doctrines. 2 Timothy
3.6. They lead captive silly women laden with sins, led away with diverse lusts.
Many errors have mightily prevailed in the World. The smoke that has come out
of the bottomless pit has darkened the air, Rev. 9.2. Arianism did so for a
while, and Pelagianism, and Popery, and Arminianism: many Countries are
corrupted.

2. IN respect of Practice. Fallen Men are great enemies to the power of
Godliness, and in great danger to carry themselves corruptly: it is difficult
to make a professing People grow better, but they easily grow worse. It is
natural to those that have chronical diseases to grow worse and worse. People
that are in a declining way, are in great danger to decline more and more. Jer.
16.12. Ye have done worse than your fathers. Land that begins to be tainted is
liable to be tainted more and more.

(1.) BY Formality. Where the Worship of God is set up, Men don't readily loose
the form, but it is a frequent thing to loose the power of Godliness. It is an
easy thing to carry on Praying, to attend Public Worship, and to attend duties
of Religion on the Sabbath: this may be done, though their hearts are violently
set upon the World, and they be under great prevailings of evil affections: but
it is very cross to nature to mortify corruptions, and to exercise themselves
in self-denial; give their hearts to God, and to be rejoicing in the
righteousness of Christ. Many times People that retain the name of living loose
the life of Religion, Rev. 3.1. People are wont to grow lukewarm, Rev. 3.15.
The spirit of Religion does decay by degrees.

(2.) BY Vice. Evil practices frequently gain ground among them: the lusts of
Men's hearts hurry them into bold transgressions. There be bad examples and
small means of restraint, and so evil practices get head. Many times People
grow knavish and injurious one to another; they have their ways of deceit and
oppression that mightily prevail Jer. 6.6. She is wholly oppression in the
midst of her. Sometimes they fall into ways of Drunkenness, and lie at the
Tavern, and are pouring in strong Drink, they cannot work without it, nor play
without it, nor make bargains without it. Hos. 3.1. They love Bottles of
Windfall into ways of wantonness and rudeness. Sin abounds in all professing
Countries.

Consider, 2. HOW Ministers are to preserve a People from Corruption.

1. THEY are to do it by their Preaching. Ministers are God's Messengers or
Ambassadors, sent to publish the Gospel. Mar. 16.15. Preach the Gospel to every
creature, i. e. every humane creature. This is the principal part of their
work. 1 Cor. 1.17. Christ sent me not to baptize but to preach the Gospel
Therefore they are called Preachers. 1 Timothy 2.7. I am ordained a Preacher.
Other services are to be done occasionally, but this is the constant service
that they must addict themselves unto. 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the word, be instant
in season, out of season. And it is upon that account especially, that double
honor is due unto them. 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well be counted
worthy of double honor, especially they that labor in the word and doctrine.
The Word of God duly Preached is the special means to advance the work of
sanctification. Joh. 17.17. Sanctify them by thy truth, thy word is that truth.

(1.) BY instructing them in the Principles of Religion, and the Rules of God's
Word. The light of nature teaches Men some things concerning God and His
Attributes, and it teaches them the difference concerning many things that are
morally good and evil; but this light shines but dimly, and the characters that
are written in the heart are much blurred and obliterated, and they have need
to have those things clearly inculcated. But the way of Salvation by Christ is
a thing of pure revelation. Natural reason is utterly silent about it. The
Gospel is called the Wisdom of God in a mystery, and bidden wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.7.
And the work of the Minister is to feed Men with the sincere milk of the word.
Joh. 21.15, 16. to Feed the Sheep, and Feed the Lambs. And it is not enough
that Men are able to say their Catechize by rote, but the Minister must labor
in it, that they may have a confirmed knowledge of the truth: that they may
have a clear, distinct and explicit understanding of the Doctrines of Religion:
they must take pains to make them understand. Heb. 5.12. Ye need that one teach
you again the first principles of the oracles of God.

(2.) BY solemn Warnings. That was Paul's practice. Act. 20.31. I ceased not to
warn every one of you night and day with tears. That is the duty of the
Watchman, Ezekiel. 33.8. There is great danger many times of public calamities,
because of the abounding of Sin among them; and he must warn them and reprove
them. Isai. 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, show
my people their transgression, and the house of Israel their sins. Godly Men
are in danger to provoke God and bring sorrow upon themselves; and the Minister
must warn them. Many lie in a natural condition, and in danger of damnation;
they had need be warned. Mar. 16.16. Some are of an unruly and ungoverned
conversation, if they continue so, their end will be destruction; these must be
warned. 1 These. 5.14. Many Men that are in a dangerous way, are severe and
bold, and the Minister must set the terrors of God before them; putting them in
mind of the jealousy of God, and the terribleness of his indignation. There be
many Scriptures wherein God speaks terribly to ungodly Men, and Ministers
should make these Scriptures ring in their ears, and be with utmost solemnity
telling them of their danger. Phil. 3.18, 19. Many walk of whom I have told you
often, and now tell you weeping, that they are enemies of the cross of Christ,
whose end is destruction.

(3.) BY suitable Encouragement. Awakened Sinners are in danger, though seldom
of despairing, yet of being discouraged; and that will be a great wrong to
them, and Ministers must be careful to encourage them. God puts such words into
their mouths. Isai. 55.6, 7, 8. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that are weary
and heavy laden. Some are in danger to be discouraged from doing their duty,
from fear of want, from fear of the anger of Man, for fear of reproach; but
there are many promises in the Word of God to strengthen Men's hearts in such
cases. Gal. 6.9. Let us not be weary in well-doing, for in due season we shall
reap if we faint not. Some are ready to sink in their Spirits, because of their
afflictions, their sins, their temptations, and their dangers: it is very fit
such should be encouraged. 1 These. 5.14. Comfort the feeble-minded, support the
weak.

2. MINISTERS should preserve a People from Corruption by good Government. God
has given power of ruling to Ministers. Heb. 13.13. Obey them that rule you and
submit to them. He has given a power of binding and losing. Mat. 16.19. What
thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven. And he appoints that they
rule well, 1 Timothy 5.17. Ministers have a corrcive power to execute censures on
them that are obstinate. Ministers must have a tender and compassionate spirit,
but when Men are sturdy and rebellious, severity is compassion; executing
Ecclesiastical censures is a terror to evil doers: this is a proper means that
their spirits may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5. Though
private revenge is utterly forbidden, yet they are to revenge disobdience: 2
Cor. 10.6. Having in a readiness to revenge all disobedience. This is the way
to purge out the old leaven, to bring Men to repentance, and to put a stop to
prowing iniquities, that the Land be not defiled.

3. BY being good Examples. Ministers must be Examples to the People in all
virtuous carriages. When Ministers teach Men their duty, they must be obedient,
whether the Minister practices so or no. Mat. 23.3. Whatsoever they bid you
observe, that observe and do: but do not ye after their works, for they say and
do not. But Ministers had need give good Examples. 1 Timothy 4.12. Be thou an
example of the believers in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in
faith, in purity. If they give a good Example, their words will sink more into
the hearts of Men. But if they addict themselves to any vice, Men will despise
them, and their counsels and warnings, they will judge they don't believe
themselves what they say, they will nauseate their Preaching. It would be very
unpleasant to hear a Pharisee make a grave haurange against hypocrisy, and to
hear a Judas declame against stealing. If Ministers be not of good
conversation, People will count their Preaching to be art and dissimulation: it
will render them contemptible in the eyes of the People. Mal. 2.8, 9. Men could
hardly be patient to hear a Drunkard speak in the commendation of temperance,
and a wanton Man enlarge in the commendation of chastity.

USE I.
A Faithful Ministry in a Land is a great Blessing. If God gives a People a
good crop, if he give peace and health, they count they have received great
Blessings: and yet they take but little notice of the mercy of God in giving a
faithful Ministry unto them; but God reckons this a great mercy. Jer. 3.15. I
will give them Pastors after mine own heart, that shall feed them with
knowledge and understanding. Amos 2.11. I raised up of your sons for Prophets.
They are great blessings on this account, that they are the Salt of the Land.
If Men's Provisions should putrify for want of Salt it would be a great
calamity: but if the People of the Land should grow corrupt for want of a
Faithful Ministry, that would be a far greater calamity. When they are Faithful
they are a means to prevent corruption. Mal. 2.6. He walked with me in peace
and equity, and did turn many away from iniquity: that is great service.

1. FOR if they should be corrupt they would be a great affliction one to
another. When a People carry orderly and holily they will be a great comfort
one to another: they will make their conversation and society pleasant and
profitable, and they will dwell together in unity: Religion teaches Men to love
one another; but when they are corrupt they will be as thorns in one another
sides, Mic. 7.4. The best of them is as a brier, the most upright is sharper
then a thorn-hedge. They will be reproaching and backbiting one another,
blasting the names of one another: Children will carry badly to Parents, and
Parents to their Children; they will be injurious to one another Estates,
cheating, oppressing, stealing; they will be quarrelling and fighting; they
will be debauching one another; they will corrupt Men's Daughters, and Wives
too; they will be plagues one to another.

2. THEN their Prosperity will do them hurt. If God bestows plenty and success
on them, they will be taken with it, and it may be keep days of Thanksgiving:
but they had better be without their Prosperity. Their blessings will become
curses, their meat will be their poison, their prosperity will make them more
secure and hard hearted: they will flatter themselves and take the more liberty
to be wicked, they will put false constructions on the Providence of God, and
take occasion to flatter themselves, and take the more liberty to carry loosly,
they will take a liberty to be drunken, and live an effeminite life. But
Jesurun waxed fat and kicked, thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou
art covered with fatness: therefore he forsook God that made him, and lightly
esteemed the rock of his salvation, Deuteronomy. 32.15. So they will grow more
covetous, their prosperity will be like oil to feed the flame, it had been
better for them to have been kept poor and low. Prove. 1.32. The prosperity of
fools shall destroy them.

3. THEY will have a great deal of Judgment. If they prosper a while it wont
continue, but the wrath of God will break out like fire. God will pursue them
with the tokens of his anger. When Israel corrupted themselves in the
Wilderness, the Plague came amongst them and many fell; sometime fiery serpents
bit them: when they corrupted themselves in the land of Canaan, God sent the
Mesopotamians, Moabites, Midians, Ammorites and Philistines upon them: and
brought them into great distress, Jud. 5.8. God is a jealous God and will not
let their sins go unrevenged. God has his days of Judgment, wherein they shall
be called to an account: and then they will cry to God and he will not hear:
iniquity is a root that bears gall and wormwood, and their sins will cost
them dear. Job. 21.17. God distributeth sorrows in his anger.

4. MULTITUDES of them will perish. When Religion flourishes among a People,
they don't all go to Heaven when they die: many have but a name that they live;
there is chaff as well as wheat; there be foolish Virgins among the Wise. But
when it is a corrupt time few are converted, the means of Grace are much
blasted; Men are minding their carnal enjoyments more than Heaven: they have
great temptations, and the temptations have great power, and few of them will
find their way to Heaven; there will be but a small number of godly Men, they
will fail much as in Saul's time. Psalm. 12.1. Help Lord for the godly man
cease, for the faithful fail from among the children of men. They will depend
much upon their privileges and outward services; and generally as they dye they
will go to hell: hell will be stocked with them: an evil generation, is a
generation of God's wrath. So when Christ was here, Mat. 8.12. The children of
the kingdom shall cast out into outer darkness, there shall be wailing and
gnashing of teeth.

USE. II.
PEOPLE had need be careful that they don't provoke God to give them such a
Ministry as will be like unsavory Salt. Sometimes God does leave a People to
such a Ministry. Isai. 56.10. His watchmen are blind, they are all ignorant,
they are all dumb dogs, that cannot bark; sleeping; lying down, loving to
slumber. Jer. 2.8. The Priests said not where is the Lord, and they that handle
the law knew me not, and the Pastors have transgressed against me. Zech. 11.15,
16. The Lord said to me, take unto thee the instruments of a foolish shepherd,
for I will raise a shepherd in the land, that shall not visit that which is cut
off, etc. When God does so it is in a way of punishment. It is a sign that such
a People have greatly offended God, this is one way whereby God pours out his
displeasure upon a provoking People, and when he does so, they are like to grow
more and more corrupt. The Scribes and Pharisees were such Ministers, they were
blind guides, and the guide and the people both fell into the ditch; therefore
you should avoid such sins as may bring this judgment. There is often a
suitableness between the sin and the punishment. You may do it;

1. BY barrenness under a Faithful Ministry. It is sometimes so that Faithful
Ministers have very little success, they take a great deal of pains, and there
is very little effect of it: Men dote upon the World, despise the Gospel, don't
regard rules, make their hearts like an adamant, make a derision of the awful
threatenings of the Word of God. God in this case sometimes takes away their
opportunities. When the People of Judah brought forth only wild grapes, God
threatens this judgment, Isai 5.6. I will lay it waste, and it shall not be
pruned (...), but there shall come up briars and thorns, and I will command the
clouds that they rain no rain upon it. When Men don't profit by means, it is
just with God to take away suitable means. God in anger gives them up to strong
delusions, sends them such teachers as shall mis-lead them, and be a snare to
them, and so they grow into corrupt principles, they did not like sound
doctrine, and they are fitted with such teachers as shall nourish a spirit of
security in them. 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. Because they received not the love of
the truth, God shall send them strong delusion, that they should believe a lie,
etc.

2. BY abusing a Faithful Ministry. Sometimes People cannot endure sound
doctrine, and mis-use God's Prophets. 2. Chron. 36.16. They mocked the
messengers of God, and despised his word, and mis-used his Prophets. They give
them a great deal of trouble and molestation, they oppose them, contradict
them, and are weakening their hands in their work. Sometimes they talk against
them, Ezekiel. 33.30. Sometimes they persecute them. This is a great provocation
to God, and he many times punishes them, by leaving them to a corrupt and
carnal Ministry, that will do them little good, and (...) to such as will do
them a great deal of hurt. Thus God dealt with the People of Israel, they
abused the Prophets that God had sent unto them; and God took vengeance on them
by leaving them to false Prophets that deluded them, and were occasion of their
ruin. Lam. 2.14. Thy Prophets have seen vain and foolish things for thee.

3. BY counting their Ministry a burden. Sometimes a sordid spirit prevails
among a People, and they count their Ministers Bills of charge. They can lavish
away a great deal in a Year, for the gratification of their pride and
voluptuousness, and spend freely upon many frivolous occasions, but the support
of the Worship of God is counted a great burden: God may justly remove faithful
teachers in a way of anger for this, and leave them to such teachers as shall
not profit them. God is angry when they think much to maintain his Worship, God
gives them wherewith to do it, and he does so, that they may do it, and they
provoke him, when they think that ill spent that is laid out that way. If
Ministers sow unto them spiritual things, it is not a great thing if they reap
their carnal things. 1 Cor. 9.11.

USE. III.
LET this be the care of Ministers. Ministers must do their Office in being the
Salt of the Land. We find great complaint of the Jewish Ministers before the
Babylonish Captivity, in Isaiah, Jeremiah and Ezekiel. And after the Captivity
in Ezra, Nehemiah, and Malachi. Ministers must not only be careful that they
don't corrupt the Land by evil manners and false Doctrine; but also that they
don't by their negligence suffer the People to corrupt themselves. It is a
great fault in Ministers when they don't diligently study the mind of God, but
spend their time in visits and wordly business. 1 Timothy 4.15. Meditate upon
these things, give thy self wholly to them. And it is very blameable in them,
when they Preach things that they have not duly studied. And it is a great sin
in them, when they are afraid to deal faithfully, and to bear a testimony
against the sins of the Land. If the Land be corrupted by their default, they
will bring down the Anger of God upon themselves: if they countenance the sins
of the Land, if they do not their duty for the preventing the sins of the Land,
they will make themselves partakers of other Men's sins; and it will be a
dreadful thing for God to charge the sins of the Land on them. As, Mal. 2.8. Ye
have caused many to stumble at the law. But if they be serviceable according to
their place, to keep the Land from being corrupted, God will reward them for
it: He will be ready to acknowledge their service. As, Mal. 2.6. The law of
truth was in his mouth, iniquity was not found in his lips, he walked with me
in peace and equity; and it will be a great honor and comfort to them, that
they have been instruments of the holiness of the Land: when the Sons of Levi
are purified, the offerings of Judah will be acceptable to God. As, Mal. 3.3, 4.

THERE are four things that Ministers should labor in to prevent the
Corruption of the Land.

1. THAT there be a good number of the People savingly Converted. Ministers
should labor to convert as many as possible, not only out of a respect to the
Salvation of their Souls, but to prevent the Corruption of the Land. If Men are
converted they will lead holy lives. 1 John 3.9. He that is born of God sins
not. Men that are converted are not so apt to drink in false Doctrine as other
Men; and they will have a great influence upon the conversation of others; but
an unconverted generation will be a corrupt generation. Judge. 2.10, 11.
Converted Men will teach their Children the ways of God, and discountenance
sinful practices: Converted Men will be good Examples: yea, they will savor of
divine things, and thereby stir up that light that is in the consciences of
others. If Men that are converted have power, they will improve it for God.

2. THAT godly Men be kept in a flourishing condition. Converted Men may be in
a withering condition, and be carried away with a worldly spirit; but Ministers
should be careful to keep them in a thriving way, that their Souls may be in a
prosperous condition, that they may be in an healthy estate, and enjoy much of
the presence of God. If godly Men be under decays, as sometimes they are, Rev.
2.4. Losing their first love, that will be a damage to the religion of a
country. When they flourish they will walk more exactly according to the rules
of the Gospel, they will be more zealous for God, they will more strongly
resist temptation, they will be more savoury, and their discourses will be more
edifying. Psalm. 45.1. Their hearts will endita good matter, and their tongues
will be as the pen of a ready writer. They will be more exemplary, and others,
will be loath to grieve them.

3. THAT the Consciences of natural Men be kept tender. Ministers must labor
to possess Men with a deep sense of the jealousy of God, and of the terrible
Judgments that God executes for sin; they should be often setting matter of
terror before Men, remembering them of Eternal punishments, of the awful ways
wherein God takes vengeance on impenitent Sinners, that they may be afraid of
Sin. 2 Cor. 5.11. Knowing the terrors of the Lord we persuade men. If their
consciences be awakened, they will restrain them from sinful practices, and
bridle in their corruptions. Mat. 19.20. All these things have I done from my
youth. Their fear will dispose them to lead a religious life, and make them
forbear ways of iniquity: Though destitute of Grace, yet they will carry
themselves commendably.

4. THAT they be well principled against the errors and vices of the age.
Ignorance exposes a People to corrupt carriages: if Men's principles be
erroneous they will carry badly, whether they be godly or ungodly. 2 Timothy 2.16.
If Men mistake the rule, conscience will allow them to break it; yea, will
force them to break it: But if Conscience be duly informed, many natural men
will not dare to go against their light. Therefore Ministers should be careful
to principle the People aright, about the nature of true Conversion, about true
signs of Grace, and about moral duties. Many Men are carried away with the
corrupt practices of the Land, into ways of pride, injustice, and
licenciousness, because they think they are lawful. If they were well taught
they would reform. The Word of God would be like fire in them; they would not
dare to do such things as now they do. When any ill practice prevails, the
Minister should do as John did, Mat. 14.4. John said to him it is not lawful
for then to have her.

FINIS.

