Fervent ZEAL Against Flagrant Wickedness. A Lecture-Sermon, Preached at
Boston, N. E. On November. 27. 1718.

By Benjamin Wadsworth, A. M. Pastor of a Church in Boston, N. E.

Joh. ii. 17. -- The zeal of thine house has eaten me up.

Numb. xxv. 11, 13. Phineas -- has tuned my wrath away from the Children of
Israel, while he was zealous for my sake among them -- He was zealous for his
God.

2 Cor. vii. 11. For behold, this self-same thing that ye sorrowed after a
godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your
selves; yea, what Indignation; yea, what fear; yea, what vehement desire; yea,
what zeal; yea, what revenge? In all things ye have approved your selves clean
in this matter.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for B. Eliot, at his Shop. 1718.

Fervent ZEAL Against Flagrant Wickedness.
ACTS XVII. 16. Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his Spirit was
stirred in him, when he saw the City wholly given to Idolatry.


WE find, v. 13. that when Paul had Preached at Berea, there came wicked Jews
from Thessalonica, and so stirred up the People, that 'twas dangerous for him to
stay any longer there. Where upon, leaving Silas and Timotheus behind him, Paul
himself came to Athens, v. 14, 15. And our Text tells us, that while Paul
waited at Athens for the two Persons thus left behind; His spirit was stirred
in him, when he saw the City wholly given to Idolatry. The City was wholly
given to Idolatry, to the Worshipping of Idols; this was a gross, abominable
Crime, highly provoking to GOD, and hurtful to their own Souls. And when the
holy Apostle saw, observed, considered, this plain, this great and highhanded
wickedness; then his Spirit, his Heart was stirred in him. Was stirred, the
Original Word signifies, to be moved or provoked. It Is rendered, To provoke,
(Heb. 10.24.) Easily provoked, (1 Cor. 13.5.) Sharp Contention, Acts 15.39.
When our Text tells us, Paul's Spirit was stirred, it must needs signify, that
he had a quick, lively, keen resentment of the great wickedness he observed: he
was grieved for it, moved and provoked against it. He was put into an holy
flame, a Paroxism of fervent zeal against the flagrant wickedness he beheld. It
was the commendation of the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, That he could not
bear that which was evil, Rev. 2.2. So, this holy Apostle of Christ, this
Newborn, Heaven born Soul, could not behold the gross crimes of others;
without being fired with an holy dislike of, Zeal and Indignation against, the
same. And so it should be with other Christians also.

From the words therefore we may observe th^s

DOCTRINE.
We should have a quick, lively sense and dislike of, Zeal and Indignation
against, the plain, known Sins of others. For the preventing of Mistakes, it
may be premised.

1. Our first and chief resentment should be against our own Sins. How odd and
strange would it look, to pluck at a Mote in our Brother's eye, and suffer a
Beam in our own? Mat. 7.3. -- 5. We shall never duly abhor Sin in others, if
we don't heartily hate and loath it in our selves. Deepest Self abasement and
holy shame, well becomes us for our own Sins. The best of Saints have expressed
great Self abasement for Sin. Abraham called himself, Dust and Ashes, Genesis
18.27. Job said (Chap. 42.6.) I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.
The Psalmist said, Psalm. 73.22. So foolish was I, and ignorant; I was as a
beast before thee. Agur said, Prove. 30.2. Surely I am more brutish than any
man. The holy Prophet said, Isai. 6.5. I am a man of unclean lips. The Apostle
Paul, who was so zealously moved against the gross crimes of others, had very
Self-abasing thoughts for his own Sins; calling himself the chief of Sinners (1 Timothy 1.15) Less than the least of all saints, (Ephesians. 3.8.) And says, He was not
meet to be called an Apostle, because he had persecuted the Church of God, 1
Cor. 15.9. The strongest, sharpest resentments, should be against our own Sins.
An universal abhorrence of Sin in our selves, fits us the better to appear
against Sin in others.

2. We should manifest Charity and Forbearance, toward Weak, Infirm
Christians. If we have good ground to believe, that they are Orthodox as to the
Main Fundamental Articles of Faith; that they mean well and honestly,
conscienciously Endeavoring to avoid known Sin, and to practice the duties of
Christianity according to their best light; I say, as for such, we should love
them, bear with them, Receive them though not to donbtful disputations, Romans
14.1. We then that are strong, ought to bear the Infirmities of the weak, and
not to please our selves, Romans 15.1. This holy Apostle Paul, who was so zealous
against plain, known, flagrant wickedness in others; was yet very tender and
condescending to Weak, Infirm Christians. To the weak, became I as weak, that I
might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all means
save some, 1 Cor. 9.22. Bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the law
of Christ, Gal. 6.2.

Having premised these things, we may prosecute the Doctrine, by Endeavoring
an Answer to these Inquiries, [1.] How should our fervent dislike of, and
Zealous Indignation against, the plain known Sins of others; exert and manifest
themselves? [2.] Why should we thus manifest our dislike of, and zealous
Indignation against, the plain, notorious Sins of others?

Quest. 1. How should our fervent dislike of, and zealous Indignation against,
the plain, known Sins of others; exert and manifest themselves?

Here I might say, Negatively, 1. We should not move out of our own Line or
Sphere, to testify against the Sins of Others. Every private Person must not
make himself Judge of, or Executioner against, the Notorious Offender; though he
should deeply abhor his crimes. We must keep within the bounds of our Station,
the Place and Capacity God has set us in, even in showing our dislike of the
Sins of Others. The private Person, must not pretend to exert the Authority of
an Officer. Let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with God, 1. Cor.
7.24. 2. We should never commit one Sin, to show our dislike of another. We
should never tell a Lie, nor bear false Witness; to get any crime, though never
so gross, punished. We should not do evil, that good may come of it, Romans 3.8.
3. We should not act from wrong Principles. We should not testify against the
Sins of others, from any private Malice, personal grudge or revenge against
their Persons ( Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, Romans 12.19) nor from a
Principle of Vainglory or Self-applause, that we may be esteemed and praised
by Men, as being Zealots. Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, Phil.
2.3. Having given these Negative hints:


We may answer Affirmatively, and say 1. We should show our grief and sorrow
for the Sins of Others. David, Beheld transgressors and was grieved, because
they kept not Gods word, Psalm. 119.158. Lot's righteous; soul was grieved and
vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked, 2. Pet. 2.7, 8. Our eye
should affect our heart, if we see or hear of, the gross crimes of others; we
should grieve and mourn for them. Yea, and we should Manifest or make Known,
our grief for the Sins of others; we should Sigh and Cry for the abominations
committed, Ezekiel. 9.4. The Apostle said, I now tell you ^^eping, that such and
such are enemies of the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18, 19, The consideration of
their Sins, moved his holy heart, and drew Tears from his eyes. Moses and the
Congregation were weeping at the door of the Tabernacle, for the Wickedness of
those who had joined themselves to Baal-peor, Numb. 25.6. 2. We should live
contrary to the Sins of Others. In this way, we should Indeed condemn all
manner of wickedness in Others; saying as he, Neh. 5.15. So did not 1, because
of the fear of God. If we practice wickedness our selves, and condemn the same
in others; may they not justly retort and say, Physician heal thy self? The
Apostle says, Romans 2.1. Therefore thou art Inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou
art that Judge; for wherein thou Judge another, thou condemnest thy self;
for thou that Judge, do the same thing. If one Drunkard reprove another,
one Thief reprove another; one profane Swearer reprove another; it is not likely
that much good will come of such reproofs. Let us therefore be harmless,
blameless, unrebukable; deny all Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and live
Soberly, Righteously, Godlily. Let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of
Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. Let us live as
Daniel, whose very enemies could find no ocoasion against him, but concerning
the law of his God, (Dan. 6.5.) Nothing against him, but what was really and
truly matter of commendation. By such an holy and virtuous conversation, let us
continually show our dislike of, and bear our testimony against, all manner of
wickedness in others. 3. We should in our words as there is occasion, plainly
condemn the plain known Sins of others. Whoever the Persons are that be guilty,
we should not Scruple plainly to condemn the abominable crimes committed by
them; such as Sabhath-breaking, Profane Swearing and Cursing, a Contemptuous
neglect of Gods Public Worship, Notorious Disobedience to Parents, Murders,
Malicious Quarrellings, Fornications, Adulteries, Filthy Unclean Practices,
Drunkenness, Rioting, Chamboring, Wantonness, (Rom 13.13.) Night-Revels, Mad
Frolicks, St^^ling, Cheating, Defrauding, Oppressing, Promise breaking, Lying,
Slandring, Backbiting, Perjuries, Briberies, and the like. As there is
occasion, we should not Scruple in our Words freely to censure and condemn,
such works of darkness, such works of the Devil as these are. How freely and
fully does the Apostle express himself, against plain gross abominations? Now
the works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance.
Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, Envying, of the which I tell
you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such
things, shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5.19. -- 21. The Apostle
does not Scruple plainly to condemn these wicked works, declaring that those
who live in them, shall miss of Heaven and be turned into Hell So, we should
freely condemn known abominations, though not from an Insulting contempt of the
Persons guilty; but from an hearty abhorrence of their Crimes. 4 We should
reprove the Vicious and Criminal, and Endeavor to Reform them. Faithful
reproof when there is occasion, is one of the truest proofs of brotherly love
and friendship. Thou shall not hate thy Brother in thine heart, thou shall in
any wise rebuke thy neighbor; and shall not suffer sin upon him, Lev. 19.17.
Warn them that are unruly, 1 These. 5.14. We should with a Spirit of Meekness,
Endeavor by reproofs to heal and reform Offenders, Gal. 6.1. And as there is
occasion, reproofs should be Sharp and Pungent: reprove them sharply, Tit.
1.13. Wine as well as Oil must be poured into Wounds, (Luke 10.34.) for the
Searching and Cleansing, in order to the Curing of them. Eli was criminally
soft and easy, in reproving his Vicious Scandalous Sons, when more sharp
Methods were needful. Indeed he said to them, Why do ye such things? I hear of
your evil dealings by all this people: Nay my Sons, it is no good report that I
hear, ye make the Lords people to transgress, 1 Samuel 2.23, 24. Possibly some
wont reprove so much as this, for Notorious Scandalous wickedness; yet this was
far too short, he should have done much more; and for not doing it, God brought
those Judgments on him and his Family, which made both the Ears of them that
heard them to tingle, 1 Samuel 3.11. 5. We should discountenance the wicked and
ungodly. A shy or displeased Look, may sometimes manifest a dislike of the
wickedness of others. Prove. 25.23. The north wind drives away rain; so does an
angry countenance a backbiting tongue. We should not so much as by a pleasant
look, Cherish or Encourage others in wickedness; but rather by an angry
countenance testify against their S^^^. As for those who are known to be
Vicious and Scandalous, we should not need Josly Prefer or Employ them. How can
those who are true Christians, who have the true fear of God in their hearts,
endeavor to advance or prefer to any Place of Trust or Honor, those who are
Notoriously wicked, Intemperate, Unclean, given to Profane Swearing, Lying,
Stealing, Cheating, or any Immoral Practices? It Is part of the Character of a
true Practical Saint, to Contemn a vile person, as well as Honor them that
fear the Lord, Psalm. 15.4. Holy David very fully and plainly said, I hate the
work of them that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me. A froward heart shall
depart from me; I will not know a wicked person. Whosoever privily slandreth his
neighbor, him Will I cut off. Him that bath an high look, and a proud heart,
will I not suffer. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they
may dwell with me: he that walks in a perfect way, he shall serve me, Psalm.
101.3, -- 6. This plainly shows, that he was not for prefering and honoring
the Vicious, but for discountenancing of them; and for prefering and employing
the Virtuous and Faithful. And thus it should be with us, according to the
various Stations and Capacities God has set us in. Much might be done to bear
down wickedness, by thus discountenancing of it. Why should we Employ and
Prefer in Business, the Drankard, the Profane Swearer, the Thief, Cheater,
Liar, Promise breaker, if we can get others to do the Service? If we let the
wicked know, that we reject their Service because of their wickedness; this
would show a dislike of their Sin. and might be one Means to work at least some
Reformation in them. If Vicious Seamen, Tradesmen, and others were thus
evidently discountenanced for their known wickedness; possibly their own
consequent Straits and Necessuies, might force them to some amendment.

6. We should plainly give in Testimony against the Sins of others, as there is
occasion for it. There are cases, wherein Persons not only may but should bear
witness against wickedness, for the Punishing of it and preventing Impending
Evils, Deuteronomy. 17.7. How common is it when Persons are Vicious and Scandalous, to
tell of their faults behind their backs, to spread their ill same; but if any
strict Search is made to have their faults punished, then those who can
testify to convict them, will shrink, bite in their words it may be; and say,
They don't care to have strife with their neighbors, nor witness against them,
nor get the all will of them; Alas, how often is it thus? So that from a base
sinful Cowardice, wickedness often prevails Unpunished, God is dishonored,
Religion suffers, the Devil is gratified, the guilty unspeakably Injured, and
the Public greatly endangered by being exposed to Gods Judgments. Because some
wont be so bold against the Devil's Kingdom and Interest, as to bear witness
against known wickedness when they might and ought to do it; therefore they are
deeply chargeable with the evils now mentioned, God's being dishonored,
Religion suffering, etc Such backwardness to bear witness against Sin, is a
shrirking from God; cause, let that take care of it self for all them; nay,
it is in some fort a siding, with the Devil. For Christ says, Mat. 12.30. He
that is not with me is against me: and he that gathers not with me,
seattereth abroad. We should love Christ, His Cause, Honor, Interest above all
our nearest Neighbors, Friends, Relatives, Acquaintaince whatsoever. The case
may be such, as to render it our duty to witness and act against the Sins of a
Brother, Son, Daughter, Wife, or Friend that is as one's own Soul; and that
even to the taking away of Life too, Deuteronomy. 13.6 -- 10. The cause of Christ and
Piety, should be dearer to us than the love or friendship of any Person or
Persons whatsoever. In this sense our Savior said, Luk, 14.26. If any man come
to me, and hate not his Father, and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren
and Sisters; yea and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple. We should not
Scruple therefore, when we can, and are called to it, to bear plain Testimony
against gross wickedness, that it may be punished. Nay it may be our duty in
many cases, where we can prove the gross crimes of Drunkenness, Profane
Swearing, Sabbath breaking, and the like; and Persons wont be mended by more
private and gentle Methods; to go on purpose to Inform against them, that they
may be punished. Thus to do, it but a siding with Christ and His Interest,
against the Devil and his Interest. 7. We should avoid as much as may be, the
needless Society or Company of Scandalous Sinners. Sometimes indeed it may be
needful to be with them, to reprove them. Sometimes possibly we may have
necessary business with them, or unavoidably fall into their Company; so that
we must even Go out of the world (as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 5.10.) if we
would Entirely and Continually avoid their Company. But my meaning is, we
should not Needlessly accompany with Scandalous Sinners; eve should not choose
their Company, nor freely associate with them; not allow them to be our usual
Companions, but should shun their Company for their wickedness. What, are they
given to Chambering and Wantonness, Rioting and Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
Profaness, and the like? Then let us not put so much honor and respect upon
'em, as to let 'em frequent our Company. Ephesians. 5.11. Have no fellowship with the
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. Prove. 22.24, 25. Make no
friendship with an angry man; and with a furious man thou shall not go; lest
thou learn his ways, and get a snare to thy soul. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 5.9.
I wrote unto you in an Epistle, not to company with Fornicators. 2 These. 3.14.
If any man obey not our word by this Epistle' note that man, and have no
company with him that he may be ashamed. Those who grossly disobey Gods written
Word, should be avoided; we should let them know that we dislike their Company
for their wickedness; that so they may be ashamed and reform. David said, I
have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go with dissemblers. I have
hated the Congregation of evil doers, and will not sit with the wicked, Psalm.
26.4, 5. Depart from me ye evil doers, for I will keep the Commandments of my
God. Psalm. 119.115. It Is truly a bad mark on any Person, when he loves and
frequents loose, vain, idle, wicked Company. How easy is it to guess, what
Persons are by observing the company they keep? As, He that walks with the
wise, shall be wise; so, a companion of fools shall be destroyed, Prove. 13.20.
It Is part of the blessed Man's Character, Psalm. 1.1. That he walks not in the
counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the
seat of the scornful. We should be companions of them that fear God, and keep
his precepts, (Psalm. 119.63.) but not of those who Scandalously break them. As
we our selves should avoid the company of such, so we should warn others to do
so too. My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not -- walk not thou in
the way with them, refrain thy foot from their path, Prove. 1.10, 15. Forsake
the foolish, and live, Prove. 9.6. and Prove. 4.14, 15. Enter not into the path
of the wicked, and go not in the way of evil men; avoid it, pass not by it,
turn from it, and pass away. In these two Verses, the same thing for substance
is Inculcated Six times over; even that we should avoid ill Company. Then
surely the keeping such Company, must needs be vile and abominable, it tends to
Encourage wickedness, rather than to prevent or suppress it. 8. Those who have
Authority for it, should duly punish gross Offenders. Every One according to
the Office, Station, Capacity he is in; should Employ his Influence and
Authority, to prevent and suppress wickedness as much as possible.


Heads of Families should discharge a good Conscience in this matter; by duly
punishing of Sin in their Children and Servants. He that spares his rod,
hates his son; but he that loves him, chasteneth him betimes, Prove. 13.24.
Withhold not correction from the child; for if thou beatest him with the rod,
he shall not die. Thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul
from hell, Prove. 23.13, 14. A servant will not be corrected by words; for tho
he understand he will not answer, Prove. 29.19. Church censures also should be
dispensed to those who deserve them, and need them for their healing; for the
destruction of their flesh, that their spirit may be saved in the day of the
Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.5. Ministers also in their Preaching, should plainly lay
open and condemn the wickedness of Men. Cry aloud and spare not, lift up thy
voice like a trumpet, and show my people their, transgression, and the house of
Jacob their sins, Isai. 58.1. They should plainly Preach against all
Unrighteousness and Ungodliness of Men; laying open and condemning their
particular Lusts of Drunkenness, Profaneness, Covetousness, etc. Faithfully
denouncing the threatenings and terrors of God against them. This they should
do with great plainness, boldness and fervent zeal; as well as Preach the most
Precious, Inviting, Melting Promises, to those that will Penitently Trust in
Christ. Thus Ministers should do, though probably when they touch Men to the
quick, gall their guilty Consciences, lay open and condemn their beloved Lusts
and darkling Sins; the Mouths of the wicked will be open against them, laying
some causeless charge or other against them. I suppose it is seldom if ever
known, but that if Ministers are faithful in their Office, testifying against
Sin; they meet with lashes and reproaches from some vile Tongues or other. Thus
it was with the holy Prophets of old, All manner of evil was spoken against
them falsely, for Christ's sake, Mat. 5.11, 12. For Christ's sake, for plainly
Preaching His Truths, Inclcating His Precepts; and testifying against and
condemning, those Vicious Practices which were contrary to His Laws, and
provoking in His sight. However, Ministers ought to be faithful to God, and to
Souls, in plainly Preaching against all manner of known wickedness.

So, Civil Rulers who bear the Sword of Justice, should not let it rust in
their hands; but Employ it against the wicked. They should cut off the horns of
the wicked, (Psalm. 75.10.) break their jaws, and pluck the spoil out of their
teeth, Job 29.17. They should be a terror to evil works, make the wicked
afraid; they should not kold the sword in vain, but as Revengers appointed by
God, they should execute wrath on him that does evil, Romans 13.3, 4. As the
Power of Civil Rulers (whether for Making or Executing Laws) is betrusted with
them by God, so it should be Employed for God. It should be faithfully and
impartially exerted, to Encourage all manner of Virtue and Goodness; and to
Discourage all manner of Vice and Wickedness, in all Persons High and Low Rich
and Poor.

These are some of the ways and methods, wherein those who truly fear God:
should manifest their resentment and dislike of, and servent zealous
Indignation against, the plain Notorious Sins of others.

But possibly 'twill be objected,

1. Men wont bear such plain dealing. Men wont bear to be thus plainly told of,
reproved and testified against, for their Sins: they wont bear that Persons
should be forewarned their Company, because of their wickedness; they will be
displeased and angry to be thus dealt with.

I reply, We bad better suffer Men's displeasure for doing of Duty, than Gods
displeasure for neglecting it. If we show our dislike of Men's Sins, according
as God directs and requires, we shall but displease Men in it; but if we
neglect to do what God requires of us, we shall then displease and provoke the
Great GOD Himself, even the Infinitely Holy and Jealous GOD. And whom shall we
please, GOD or Men? Whose favor is most to be valued and desit'd; that of GOD
or of Men? Cannot every Christian answer this case? The Apostle Peter said, Acts
5.29. We ought to obey God rather than men. The Apostle Paul said, Romans 15.2.
Let every one please his neighbor for his good, to edification. We should no
further please 'em, than will be for their good and edification; therefore not
please them, by Encouraging or Indulging them in known wickedness, for this is
unspeakably to their hurt and damage. Gal. 1.10. If I yet pleased men (that is,
in opposition to God and His Interest) I should not be the servant of Christ. I
These. 2.4. Even so speak we, not as pleasing men, but God which tries our
hearts. Our great Study and Care should be, to please God, to approve our
Hearts and Consciences to Him; though Men should be never so much displeased and
provoked with our doing so. We should show a servent Zeal, an holy boldness for
God, for His Truths, Ways, Cause and Interest; though Men fret, fume and rage
never so much against us. When the wicked Jews did Contradict and Blaspheme,
this did but raise the holy courage of Paul and Barnabas; it is said, They waxed
bold, Acts 13 45, 46.

Possibly 'twill be objected,

2. This is the way to make Parties and Divisions among Men. To be thus plain
in testifying against the Sins, and avoiding the Company of the Vicious and
Scandalous; what is this but to promote Parties and Divisions?

I reply, This tends indeed to promote Christ's Party and Interest, and to
suppress the Devils; and we cannot do too much in these things. There are but
Two great Parties in the World, that of Christ, and that of the Devil. Christ
came to destroy the works of the Devil. Every particular Person, is a Child of
God, or a Child of the Devil, 1 John 3.8, 10. And shall we not plainly show by
our profession and practice, whose Party we are of, whose side we belong to? As
ever we would be of Christ's Party, appear among His Sheep, at His right hand
in the Great Day; let us now be, and act, as becomes His faithful followers. We
should not be ashamed of, but should own, Christ before Men; we should openly
profess His Name and Truths, and walk in His Ways; should detest and obhor
those works of the Devil which He came to dostroy: We should plainly show our
obhorrence of damnable Errors and Heresies, and Scandalous Immoralities; though
Satan's Party, the Enemies of Truth and Holiness are never so much displeased
and provoked at it. Let the World plainly know, that we are of Christ's Party,
willing to endure hardness, as His good Soldiers, to fight the good fight of
faith under Him the Captain of our Salvation; that we are friends and favorers
of all Virtue and Holiness, and enemies of all Heresy and Wickedness. What
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? And what communion has
light with darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? -- Come out from
among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing, and I will receive you, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 17. We should separate as much
as possibly from all known wickedness, from all appearance of Evil, from the
Garments spotted with the flesh; and from all needless familiar Society with
the Vicious and Scandalous; as ever we expect that God should recieve, bless
and save us. Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord, Hob. 12.14. Let us not
fear therefore, to show our fervent Zeal against known Scandalous wickedness.
The beholding of gross abominable wickedness, kindled a fire of holy Zeal in
Phineas; he showed his Zeal against Sin, not fearing any Party that might be
raised against him, Numb. 25.6-11. When Moses beheld the Golden Calf, that
Instrument of Cursed Idolatry (like Paul in our Text, his Spirit was stirred in
him) his anger waxed hot, he said, Who is on the Lords side? Exodus 32.19, 26.
He showed his holy anger against the Peoples great wickedness, stirred up many
to execute Vengeance for it; not fearing what Parties should be raised against
him for doing so. Prove. 29.25. The fear of man brings a snare; but whosoever
puts his trust in the Lord, shall be safe. If we are on the Lord's side (and
woe be to us if we are not) let it appear by our Professing His Truths, walking
in His Ways, obeying His Commands, testifying against the things that
evidently provoke Him; let us do thus, how much soever any may be provoked with
us therefore. Gal. 4.18. It is good to be zealously affected always, in a good
thing. We need not fear Parties or Divisions, if our zeal be according to
knowledge, and only for good and against wicked things; and if we walk in
Simplicity and godly Sincerity. Romans 8.31. If God be for us, who can be against
us? 1 Pet. 3. 13, 17. Who is be that will barm you, if ye be followers of that
which is good? -- For it is better, if the will of God be so, that ye suffer
for well doing, than for evil doing. It is better, safer, more honorable to be
on Gods side (and so have Him on ours) though all Men were against us; than to
have all Creatures on our side, and to have GOD against us.

But we may now proceed to the next Inquiry, viz.

Quest. 2. Why should we thus manifest our dislike of, and zealous Indignation
against, the plain, notorious Sins of others?

Answ. 1. Because they provoke God and gratify the Devil. They provoke God,
they are a practical trampling on His Authority, a despising of His Laws and
Government, an affront to His Infinite Majesty. Sin is the abominable thing
that God hates, it provokes him to wrath, Jer. 44.4, 8. Indeed we should be
highly displeased with those things, which are thus highly provoking to the
Infinitely Holy and Glorious GOD. And those things which are thus offensive and
provoking to GOD, are pleasing and gratifying to the Devil. He that commits
sin, is of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. The Devil is an enemy of all righteousness,
he works in the Children of disobedience (prompting them to their disobedience)
all Sin is pleasing to him: and the more vile and wicked Men are, so much the
more the Devil is pleased and gratified. Well, we should abhor and renounce the
Devil and all his works (^e should abhor that which is evil, Romans 12.9.) and
show our utmost abhorrence of, and displeasure against, those things which
promote his hellish Interest.

2. Because they Injure the Souls of those that are guilty of them. God says,
Prove. 8.36. He that sins against me, wrongeth his own soul, When persons are
Prosane, Unclean, Intemperate, false in their Words, Unrighteous in their
Practices; What are they doing? Why they are wronging their own Souls, cutting,
wounding, damming their Precious Immortal Souls; that is, they are Increasing
their loads of guilt, Incensing Divine Vengeance against them, heaping up wrath
against the day of wrath, and so preparing for greater Plagues and Miseries in
the Eternal World, in the Endless Torments of Hell, if speedy Repentance
prevent not. Surely, we should be grieved for such things as these, show our
utmost dislike of them. For we should Love our Neighbors as our selves; and how
can we do this, without showing out utmost dislike of what is most evidently and
extremely Injurious to them? Would it not grieve our very hearts, to see a
Distracted Person cutting, wounding, grievously hurting himself? Ought we not
to do what we could, to prevent his thus Injuring of himself? Then how much
more should we be grieved, for what is unspeakably Injurious to the Precious
Immortal Souls of Men; and how greatly should we be concerned to prevent their
ruin? Where Is our Love to our endangered Neighbor, if we don't do what we can
to turn him from the error of his ways, and so to prevent the Eternal ruin of
his Precious Immortal Soul?

3. Because they tend to pull down Public Judgments. Prove. 14.34.
Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a reproach to any people. Romans
1.18. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven, against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men. The more Sin abounds in any Place, or among any People,
so much the more God is provoked, and so much the more likely it is, that His
Judgments will soon be poured down upon them. Jer. 5.25. -- Your Iniquities
have withholden good things from you. Isai. 42.24. Who gave Jacob for a Spoil,
and Israel to the Robbers? Did not the Lord, he against whom we have sinned?
For they would not walk in his way;, neither were they obedient unto his law.
Those therefore who Love their Country, and desire the welfare of it; should
do all they lawfully may, to discountenance and suppress wickedness; that so
the Judgments of God may be prevented, and His needful Mercies be bestowed and
continued.

But we may now proceed to some brief APPLICATION, and from what we have heard,
we may Infer,

1. We should be deeply humbled, that we have not had more becoming Resentments
and Abhorrence of Sin, in our Selves and Others. How much of Sin has there been
in us, and how little grief and shame for it, how little anger and opposition
against it? How apt have we been, to cherish God's Enemies (our cursed Lusts)
in our own bosoms? We should be ashamed, abased, deeply humbled, that we have
had no more quick, lively resentments and abhorrence of Sin in our Selves. And
as for Others, have we not often seen and heard of, much wickedness in them;
and yet been little or nothing moved and grieved at it? How vile was this!
What, to see God dishonored, our Neighbor Injured, the Public endangered,
the Devil gratified; and not to show our greatest grief, dislike and
abhorrence! This is vile indeed, and calls for deep humiliation in us.

2. Great blame is justly due to sundry Sorts of Persons. If we should manifest
our great dislike and abherrence of the gross Sins of Others, then great blame
belongs, (1.) To those who allow themselves in gross Scandalous Evils. Their
works show them to be rebels against God, to be Enemies of the cross of Christ;
because they live in those vile Practices, which Christ died to Save Men from.
If we should abhor vile Practices in Others, then surely we should avoid them
our Selves, else we shall be utterly Inexcusable. Great blame belongs,

(2.) To those who prompt and move Others to do wickedly. Satan is emphatically
called, The Tempter (Mat 4.3.) and those. Men and Women are his Agents and
under Officers, as it were, who tempt and solicit Persons to do wickedly Some.
Persons will tempt and move Others, to leave their work, their proper business;
to go a Tippling, Idling, Gaming, Frolicking, etc. Such Tempters are the
Missionaries of Hell; they are promoting Satan's Interest, and the ruin of
Precious Souls. We justly condemn those, who Ald and Supply Public Enemies,
Pirates, Robbers, and such as promote the Public damage. Surely then, we
should be offended with those who tempt others to Vicious Practices; for they
promote Treason and Rebellion against GOD: they promote the Devil's Interest,
and the mine of Souls. Great shame and blame, belong to such Tempters to
wickedness. If we should abominate Sin in Others, then those must needs be
abominable who tempt Others to do wickedly. Great blame belongs,

(3.) To those who connive at, and delight in the Sins of Others. Possibly some
vill willingly wink and connive at, those Sins of Others, whether Children,
Servants, or Neighbors; which they should servently abhor and testify
against. It may be they will say little or nothing against them; take little or
no pains to have the guilty resonned. Such connivance is abominable, hereby
Persons become sharers and partners as it were, in Treason and Rebellion
against GOD They connive at what is provoking to GOD, and should be abhorred and
testified against by them. Civil Rulers should punish evil doers, (Romans
13.3.4.) and put them to shame, (Judge. 18.7.) but if they connive at their
grofs Crimes, and suffer em to go Unpunished; they so far become Partners in
the guilt of them Ministers should Preach against Men's Notorious wickedness,
and warn them to Repent and Reform; but if they are Dumb Dogs (Isai. 56.10.)
and Dawb with untempered mortar, (Ezekiel. 13.10, 11.) and don't warn the wicked
from their ways; then they become guilty of the blood of Souls, Ezekiel. 33.8.
It Is Indeed very dangerous to connive at the Notorious Sins of Others. nay some
not only Connive at the Sins of Others, when they should zealously appear
against them; but also take Pleasure and Delight in their accursed Crimes. They
take Pleasure in wickedness, are delighted in those things whereby GOD is
dishonored, the Devil gratifyed, the Precious Souls of Men unspeakably
Injured, and the Public greatly endangered. This is an aggravated evil. How
greatly are some pleased with the Profaneness, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, and
various Sorts of Wickedness practiced by Others? It Is mentioned as a high
aggravation of wickedness in the Heathen; that they not only did those things
which were worthy of death, but also had Pleasure in those that did them, Rum.
1.32. The last Inference is,




3. We should do what we can, to promote Holiness, in our Selves and Others. We
should be a Peculiar People, zealous of good works (Tit. 2.14) Cleansing our
selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear
of God, (2 Cor. 7.1.) being holy in all manner of Conversation, 1 Pet. 1.15
It Is an Infinitely Great, Holy, All seeing, Jealous GOD, that is offended with
Sin: He cannot be deceived, and He will not be mocked. Sin tends directly to our
Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal damage. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death.
Romans 2.8, 9. Unto them that are conrentious, and do not obey the truth, but
obey unrightcousness; Indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish on every
soul of man that does evil. But Practical Godliness, is unspeakably profitable
in this World and in the next. 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable unto all
things; having promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.
Heb. 11 6 God is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. We should
therefore do om utmost to Promote Holiness in our Selves and Others. Mat. 5.8.
The pure in heart shall see God. Heb. 12.14. Without holiness no man shall see
the Lord. Isat. 3.10, 11. Say ye unto the righteous, that it shall be well with
him; for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. Woe unto the wicked, it shall
go ill with him; for the reward of his hands shall be given him. Let us
therefore be holy our Selves, and prompt Others by our examples to be so too.
Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven. Phil. 2.15. That ye may be
blameless and harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Nation, among whom ye shine as lighes in the world. I
shall conclude with that awful Text, which refers to the Great and last DAY OF
JUDGMENT. Mat. 25.46. And these (that is, the wicked) shall go away into
Everlasting Punishment; but the Righteous into Life Eternal.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
LAtely Published a SERMON, Entitled, Constant Preparedness for DEATH a
Constant Duty. Occasioned, by the Sudden Drowning of Six Persons near the
Lighthouse, in Bosion Harbor, 1718.

By the Author of this Sermon.

Sold by Benjamin Eliot at his Shop in King Street, a little below the
Townhouse Boston, New England. 1719.


