THE Character AND Blessedness OF THE UPRIGHT. A SERMON Occasioned by the Death
of the Honorable Wait Winthrop Esquire Who Expired, Nov. 7. 1717. Aetatis 76.

By Joseph Sewall, A.M. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston.

Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect man and behold the upright: for the end of that
man it peace. BOSTON: Printed by T. Crump, 1717.

THE Character and Blessedness of the UPRIGHT.
ISAIAH LVII. 2. He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, each
one walking in his uprightness.


IN the beginning of this Chapter the Prophet Isaiah gives an account of the
degeneracy and stupidity of the Times wherein he lived. The righteous
perishes, and no man lays it to heart -- They did not duly consider the
operation of God's Hand in taking away the Righteous by Death, nor were they
suitably affected with it. They did nor discern the signs of the Times, nor
would they observe the warning which God gave them of approaching Calamities,
in the removal of such as were Upright before God in their Generation: None
considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come.

In the Second Verse wherein is our Text, the Prophet comforts the People of
God from the consideration of the Peaceful End of the Upright, and of the Rest
which they enjoy after Death. He shall enter into peace: or, he shall go in
peace; or as some read the Words, Peace shall come; to wit, to him. They go in
peace when they leave this troublesome World; and their departed Spirits are
refreshed and comforted in the Paradise of God.

They shall rest in their beds. As their Souls are taken to a place of perfect
Peace; so their Bodies are laid in the Grave where they shall rest 'till the
^ction, when the shadows of Death shall be turned into the light of the
Morning. Here Is a sudden change of the number, which is not unusual in the
Prophets. Each one walking in his uprightness; or, that walks uprightly, or
in straightness, making straight paths in the way of God's Commandments,
without declining to the right hand, or to the left. Before Him: So Arias
Montanus, and others read the Word: i. e. before God; as in His sight, and
seeing Him who is Invisible.

In the Words we may observe, 1. The Character and Description of the Children
of God: They walk in Uprightness. While they live they walk with God in
Sincerity, ordering their steps according to the rules laid down in His Word.
2. We have the Privilege and Blessedness of such asserted and described: He
shall enter into peace: They shall rest in their beds.

In the Words there is contained this Doctrine,

DOCTRINE.
The People of God, who walk in their Uprightness while they Live, shall enter
into Peace, and rest in their Graves, as in Beds, when they Die. PROP. I. It is
the Character of the Children of God that they walk in their Uprightness.

PROP. II. It is their Happiness, that they shall enter into Peace, and rest in
their Graves, as in Beds, when they Die.

PROP. I. It is the Character of the Children of God that they walk in their
Uprightness. Every true Believer, who is a Child of God by Faith in Jesus
Christ, is a perfect and upright Man. Under this Proposition, I shall endeavor
to show what is implied in walking in Uprightness, and so explain and
illustrate this Character.

Here we may observe, that this Word as used in the Scriptures, is of much the
same import with Perfection. Sincerity, Integrity. As it is here used, it cannot
intend Sinless Perfection, We read, Eccl. 7.29. God has made man upright; but
they have sought out many inventions. The Word for Man is Adam. God made our
first Parents right in sinless Perfection: But Adam sinned, and we in him. And
since the Fall all are conceived in sin, and go astray from the Womb. And there
is no Man but has the remains of this Original Corruption abiding in him. The
Law which is the rule of Right between God and Man, and an Eternal rule of
Righteousness demands perfect Obedience, and threatens the Curse upon the least
defect. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which
are written in the Book of the Law to do them. And therefore the Psalmist
deprecates God's being strict to mark iniquity, Psalm. 143.2. The holiest Men
that ever lived had Sin remaining in them. Noah was a just Man, and perfoot in
his Generations, Genesis 6.9. And yet he was overtaken with the Sin of
Drunkenness. Job was perfect and upright: And yet he makes that confession, Job
9.20. If I justify my self, mine own mouth shall condemn me: if I say I am
perfect, it shall also prove me perverse. How passionately does the Apostle
Paul cry out, O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? There was never any Man since the Fall, excepting the Man CHRIST
JESUS, (who is GOD as well as Man) persectly free from Sin. Indeed God is said
to see no iniquity in Jacob, or perverseness in Israel. The perfect
Righteousness of Christ covers all the Sins of His People; God beholds no
iniquity in them so as to impute it. However, all want of conformity to, or
transgression of the Law of God, is Sin, under the Covenant of Grace, as well
as under the Covenant of Works: But here is the difference; the Sins of
Believers do not expose them to the condemnation of the Law, and to the Sword
of Vindictive Justice; because their Surety has born their iniquities, and
made Reconciliation for them. The Children of God know but in part, and are
sanctified but in part. Eccl. 7.20. There is not a just man upon earth that
does good and sins not. While they live in this World they sin daily, and
therefore they live a life of Repentance and Godly Sorrow, and must daily go to
that Fountain which is set open to the house of David, -- for sin and for
uncleanness. The best Men upon Earth come short in every duty: None are able
perfectly to keep the Commandments of God. Their houses of Clay must be pulled
down, before the leprosy of Sin will be wholly taken away; and their Souls must
be separated from their Bodies by Death, before they can attain the spotless
purity of the spirits of just Men made perfect. The brightest Lights that ever
shone in the Church Militant have had their spots.

But to speak Positively.

1. Walking in uprightness presupposes this, that the Dominion of sin is
destroyed in God's People, and the image of God, in all the Graces of the
Spirit, is created in them. Every Child of God is renewed in the whole Man,
after His Image. All the Divine Laws must be written on our hearts by the
Finger of God, and we must be set right with God, or our ways cannot be upright
before Him. Every Man is by nature under the dominion of lust, and the way of
sin is the way of his own heart. And therefore unless God create in us a clean
heart, and renew within us a right spirit; it is as much impossible for us to
walk in uprightness, as it is for the Dead to arise and walk. The motion of
natural Bodies is according to their principle, and the laws impressed upon
them. And thus the motions of the Soul in moral actions are according to the
biass that is upon it. While our inclinations are corrupt, our ways will be
unclean. While we are governed by the law in our members, we cannot walk in
uprightness. This does therefore necessarily suppose that the People of God are
renewed in the spirit of their minds; being delivered from the dominion of sin.
Their Understandings are savingly enlightened to see the path of Life; their
Wills renewed, so that they choose the ways of God's Testimonies: their
Affections sanctified, and by them their Souls are forwarded in the way of
God's Commandments. Thus every Power is rescued from the bondage of Corruption;
and Grace takes possession of every faculty. The image of God is engraven on
the hearts of His Children in every line of it. There is an integrity and
perfection of parts in the new Man: For of Christ's fullness they receive and
Grace for Grace; though it be imperfect as to degrees. And though every lust
remains in some degree, yet there is no lust but what is cast down from it is
usurped Throne. Every Child of God is born of the Spirit, and is denominated
from his better part, a perfect and upright Man. All old things are passed
away, and all things are become new.

2. Walking in uprightness intends that we make the Word of God our Rule in our
way, and have a respect to all His Commandments. The Upright endeavor that
their obedience may be extended in some good measure, in proportion to the
breadth of God's Law; and none of God's Commands are grievous to them. They
delight in the whole Law, and are obedient to every Precept in it; they make
Conscience not only of obeying those Commands which immediately respect God,
but also of those which respect their Neighbor. They neither separate the
Tables of the Law, nor dash them in pieces one against another. They do not
pick and choose, and say, These Commands we will do, those we will leave undone;
but earnestly desire that their hearts may be directed to keep all God's
Commandments. They allow not themselves in the omission of any known duty.
Secret as well as open duties bear the stamp of the Divine Authority, and
therefore are impartially regarded by them. The Children of God take His Word
for a light to their feet, and a lamp to their path. In the Law of God our duty
is marked out to us, and the way to Blessedness laid out before us; and
therefore the Upright do take care to walk in the Law of the Lord, and dare not
allow themselves in passing over these lines and bounds which their Lawgiver
has set and described therein. They make it their business to order their
Conversation according to this Law of Liberty. They take the Word of God for
their directory, and worship Him according to His own Institutions and
Appointments. They labor to understand the Orders and Ordinances of God's
House as revealed in His Word, and keep close to them. In a Word, the Grace of
God which has appeared to them in the Gospel, teaches them to live soberly
righteously and godly in this present evil World.

3. Walking in uprightness intends that we hate every false way. The upright do
not allow themselves to walk in any forbidden path, or to turn aside to the
crooked ways of sin. There is no way of wickedness, though it seem to be never so
pleasant and gainful; but what they heartily desire to forsake. They lay aside
the sin that does most easily beset them, and through the Spirit they mortify the
deeds of the Flesh, even those beloved lusts, which their Constitution,
Employment, or Coversation might most incline them to. Psalm. 18.23. I was also
upright before him: and I kept my self from mine iniquity. They are cleans'd
from secret faults, and kept back from presumptuous sins, so that they have not
dominion over them.

4. Walking in uprightness intends that Believers do walk as being sensible
that God's Eye is upon them, and as seeing Him who is Invisible. We have
already observed that some translate the Word, before Him. They order their
Life and Conversation under a realizing view of the Presence of God. They
believe that truth, Prove. 15.3. The Eyes of the Lord are in every place
beholding the evil and the good. And they act as of sincerity in the sight of
God. The Hypocrite is ready to say in his heart, Does God know, can he judge
through the dark cloud. But the Upright Man makes that confession of his Faith,
Psalm. 139.3. Thou compassest my path, and my lying down, and art acquainted
with all my ways. And this belief of the Omniscience and Omnipresence of GOD
governs him in his walk, and makes him take care to approve himself to God, by
having his Conversation in simplicity and godly sincerity. The Children of God
do live in Obedience to that command, Genesis 17.1. I am the Almighty God, walk
before me, and he thou perject. They live and act under this apprehension, that
they are continually in the presence of that God who is their Judge and
Rewarder: And therefore they desire truth in the inward parts, and see to it
that the inward temper and frame of their minds be agreeable to their outward
profession. By Faith they see Him who is Invisible to sense. They are sensible
that He sees all their tho'ts afar off, and therefore walk circumspectly. They
behold God in His Providential Dispensations, wherein He passes before them;
and they labor to keep their eyes fixed upon Him in all their ways, and to act
as in His sight. This is to walk in Uprightness; and such may appeal to God and
say with Hezekiah, Lord thou know that I have walked with an upright heart.

5. Walking in uprightness implies that we have upright Aims and Intentions in
our Lives and Actions. Believers do make the Glory of God their chief and
ultimate end. As far as we are sincere and upright we have a single eye and
pure aims; and labor to move in a direct and straight line toward that
glorious End, the advancement of God's Honor. In this respect, Their eyes look
right on, and their eyelids look straight before them, as Prove. 4.25. The
Upright seek to promote God's Glory in all their ways: Whether they eat or
drink, or whatever they do, they do all to the Glory of God. And endeavor to
subordinate their inferior interests to this grand Design.

6. It intends that they act thus in the whole course of their Lives. A Man's
way is that which he accustoms himself to. Agreably, to walk in uprightness, is
to be upright at all times, and under all circumstances. Integrity and
uprightness do preserve God's People in all company, in all conditions of life,
and in every affair they engage in. This is the way and manner of their life.
They are upright in a constant and continued course of actions. In the frame
and tenor of their lives they are upright, exercising themselves in this, to
keep a Conscience void of offense both toward God and toward Men. Indeed the
Upright Man may fall once and again. They do sometimes go out of the way of
God's Commandments; but then they do not walk in the counsel of the ungodly,
nor stand in the way of sinners. Though they fall seven times, yet they rise
again by Repentance, and return unto the Lord. The Upright are steady and
constant in walking in the path of God's Commandments; they persevere in their
duty till they finish their course, and obtain the end of their Faith. Psalm.
119.33. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it unto the
end. Thus we have briefly considered a few particulars, to illustrate the
Character which is here given of the Righteous, when it is said, That each one
of them walks in his uprightness.

PROP. II. It is their Happiness that they shall enter into Peace, and rest in
their Graves, as in Beds. We proceed now to consider the Privilege and
Blessedness of the Upright.

In this World God's Providence toward the Righteous and Wicked is very
promiscuous, so that no man knows love or hatred by all that is before them.
Eccl. 9.2. All things come alike to all. There is one event to the righteous
and to the wicked -- Job 9.22. He destroys the perfect and the wicked. The
Upright must die as well as the Sinner, and to an eye of sense, the Righteous
perishes; But then, Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his
Saints. When they go the way of all the Earth, they go in Peace. Every Upright
Man is a Son of Peace. The Lord Jesus Christ has purchased Peace for His
People, and that in the most comprehensive sense of the word, and He will
bestow it upon them. Psalm. 84.11. For the Lord God is a sun and shield: the
Lord will give grace and glory: no good thing will he withold from them that
walk uprightly. When our SAVIOR was about to leave this World He bequeathed
Peace to His Disciples as a rich Legacy. Joh. 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my
peace I give unto you, -- The Lord Jesus Christ is our Peacemaker. Col. 1.20.
-- Having made peace through the blood of his Cross -- The chastisements of our
Peace were upon Him. He who is the Fathers only begotten Son, in whom He is
ever well pleased; was bruised and wounded for the transgressions of His
People, that God might with Honor to all His Attributes, receive them into
favor, and embrace them in the Arms of His Everlasting Love. God hid His Face
from Him for a time, when He uttered that strong and vehement Cry, My God! My
God! Why have thou forsaken me? Now, this was that His People might enjoy the
manifestations of His Love, and walk up and down in the light of His
Countenance.

And as our Lord Died to purchase this great and comprehensive Good for His
People; so He ever Lives to communicate it to them. Now He is in Heaven, He
does not leave them Comfortless; but comes unto them in the holy Influences and
Consolations of His Spirit, who is the Comforter. All Divine Peace is laid up
in Him, He is the proton decticon, the first Recipient; God has anointed Him
with the Oil of gladness above his fellows, and from Him who is the Head this
flows down to the Members of His Mystical Body, as the Oil that anointed the
Head of Aaron ran down to the skirts of his Garments. In His light they see
light. Being justified by Faith they have Peace with God. Being delivered from
the guilt and bondage of Sin, they have peace of Conscience and joy in the Holy
Ghost; And through Christ become Heirs to the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.
Thus I have endeavored to show the ground and foundation of that Peace which
the Righteous do and shall enjoy. I proceed to speak more directly to the
Proposition before us, in a few Particulars.

1. Sometimes God gives unto the Upright abundance of peace, and more than
ordinary tranquillity of mind toward the end of their lives; so that they
finish their course with Joy. God reserves the best Wine 'till last, and gives
the Upright strong and refreshing Cordials when they lie upon a Deathbed, and
stand in most need of them. Thus it is sometimes, and it may be many times,
when through their weaknesses, others cannot observe, and intermeddle with their
Joy. As they draw nigh to the borders of the Heavenly Canaan, God sometimes
takes them up into the Mount, and gives them such tavishing views of that
better Country, as make them even desire to pass over Jordan, that they may
possess it. Phil. 1.23. Having a desire to depart -- It may be they have walked
in darkness; but at evening there is light. They are sometimes enabled to say
with the Psalmist, Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will
fear no evil: for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me,
Psalm. 23, 4. Thus God lets His Servants depart in Peace, and they finish their
course with joy.

To be sure, The Upright Die in a state of favor and friendship with God through
Jesus Christ. Suppose God should hide His Face in the hour of Death; yet still
He is their God; they die in the Lord, and therefore there Death is safe.
There Is not one drop of vindictive Wrath in this bitter cup. Their Savior has
tasted death for them, and through death has destroyed him, which had the power
of death, that is the Devil; and therefore Death cannot do them any real harm.
They go in Peace when they leave the World, whatever doubts and fears may cloud
their minds in the hour of Death; and even these shall all vanish away as the
morning Cloud, when their Souls are separated from their Bodies. Which leads me
to the Second thing.

2. After Death the departed Spirits of the Upright do enter into Peace, and
enjoy undisturbed Rest in the Paradise of God. The troubles of good Men and
their lives end together. Death is a Messenger of Peace unto them, and brings
them the joyful news, that there Warfare is accomplished. When an Upright Man
Dies, God dismisseth Him to Rest, and speaks to him in the voice of His
Providence, as to Daniel, Dan. 12.13. -- Go thou thy way till the end be: for
thou shall rest --. The faithful Servants of God who have born the heat and
burden of the day, and have been worn out almost with hard labors and bitter
sufferings, find ease and refreshment at Death. Not as if the Souls of
Believers were then laid asleep in a stato of inactivity; or did wholly cease
from business; No! No! They live and act, in a separate state. They go to God,
and join an innumerable company of Angels, and the general Assembly and Church
of the first born, in praising and glorifying God in his Temple above. As the
Four Animals, of whom it is said, They rest not day and night, saying, Holy,
Holy Holy, Lord God Almighty --: But then they enter into Peace, inasmuch as
they are delivered from all those hardships and difficulties which attend the
service of God in this Life; in that they are delivered from all the calamities
of this present evil World, and received to a place of inconceivable Delight
and Refreshment; to the Heavenly Jerusalem where the Prince of Peace reigns,
and they enjoy Visions of Peace. The Souls of Men don't perish with their
Bodies; Death cannot kill the Soul. The Man dies, the vital Union between the
Soul and Body being dissolved; and then the Body is sown in Corruption. But the
Soul is an indivisible, immaterial, immortal Substance. Indeed the Souls of Men
depend on God for their continuance; in Him they live and move and have their
Being. God alone has Immortality independently. But then they have no
principles of Corruption in themselves; no created power can destroy them. Mat.
10.28. And fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the
Soul. This Truth, that the Souls of Believers do live, act and enjoy, in a
separate state; is written as with a Sunbeam in the Holy Scriptures. 2 Cor.
5.8. We are confident, I say, and willing rather to be absent from the body,
and present with the Lord. Luke 23.43. And Jesus said unto him, Verily, I say
unto thee, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Heb. 12.22, 23. But ye are
come unto Mount Sion, -- and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of
just Men, made perfect. Phil. 1.23. -- Having a desire to depart, and to be
with Christ; which is far better. There is a double comparative in the
Original, word for word, by much more better. These and many other Texts of
Scripture do plainly declare that the Spirits of the Saints do exist in a
separate state.

Under this Second Particular, I shall mention a few things briefly.

(1.) When the Upright die they enter into Peace, all their painful Labors
being at an end. At Death they accomplish as an hireling their day, and go to
reap the precious fruits, and receive the gracious rewards of their Labors.
They are then released from the burden of their Secular Employments: There is
much toil and fatigue in our particular Callings. God said unto Adam after his
fall, Genesis 3.19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat Bread, -- But now at
Death Believers are called off to higher Employments, wherein they exercise
themselves, being altogether free from care, and pain, and weariness. Again,
The People of God meet with many difficulties, and great opposition in working
out their Salvation. Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto
life, -- Mat. 7.14. It is a perplexed, afflicted, persecuted Way. We must
Agonize, as the word used, Luke 13.24. signifies. We must wrestle, sight,
endure hardness --. But at Death the Saints rest from these toilsom Labors.
Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, -- that they may rest
from their labors; and their works do follow them.

(2.) At Death the Upright enter into Peace, being perfectly delivered from the
body of death. In this life they have the remains of sin in them, as we have
heard. They see a law in their members, warring against the law of their mind
--; They sigh and groan to be wholly delivered from the bondage of Corruption.
The Sins of Believers do many times disturb their peace. Sometimes they provoke
God by their iniquities to bide His Face from them, and to write bitter things
against them. Psalm. 38.3. There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine
anger: neither is there any rest in my bones, because of my sin. ver. 8. I have
roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart. But after Death they will no
more complain that their Sins interpose as a thick cloud, and hide the light of
God's Countenance from them. No more shall they be bowed down heavily under the
weight of their Sins; but their Spirits being made perfect in Holiness, they
shall be presented faultless before the presence of God's glory with exceeding
joy. While they are in this World, there are two contrary Principles in them,
striving for the mastery. Gal. 5.17. For the flesh lusts against the spirit,
and the spirit against the flesh --. It is impossible therefore that they
should enjoy perfect peace, while their Souls are the seat of war. But at Death
the Graces of the Spirit obtain a complete victory over Sin, being perfected in
Glory. Now they complain that when they would do good, evil is present; but in
Heaven they will serve God continually without the least molestation from this
enemy. And as Conquerors they shall sit down with Christ on His Throne, as he
Overcame and sat down with His Father on His Throne.

(3.) At Death the Upright enter into Peace, being delivered from Satan, and
wicked Men. The Devil is the Tempter and Accuser of the Brethren. He hates the
Children of God, envies them their Happiness, and does his utmost to hinder and
disturb them in their way to it. Indeed this roaring Lion who goes about
seeking whom he may devour, shall never be able to destroy so much as one of
these little Ones, who put their trust in Christ. However while they are upon
Earth, he bussets them with his temptations, shoots his fiery darts at them,
and when permitted, raises Storms of Persecution against them. But now at
Death God sends His Holy Angels to convoy the departed Spirits of Believers
through the darkness of this World; and these Spiritual wickednesses in high
places, shall not be able to annoy them in their passage. To be sure, this foul
Serpent cannot enter the Heavenly Paradise, to tempt God's People. Their
Adversary the Devil shall never be able to shoot an arrow into the Jerusalem
which is above. At Death, the God of Peace does in an eminent manner bruise
Satan under their feet. Again, The Upright are at Death delivered from wicked
and ungodly Men. These are the rod of God's Anger whereby He oftentimes
chaftiseth His own Children. They many times have reason to complain something
as the Psalmist did, Psalm. 120.5, -- 7. Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, that
I dwell in the tents of Kedar. My soul has long dwelt with him that hates
peace. There is enmity between the seed of the Woman and the seed of the
Serpent. Wicked Men who are set on Fire of Hell, do persecute God's People;
tear and devour the Lambs of Christ's Flock. But their power extends no further
then this life. At Death the wicked cease from troubling; And the Upright shall
have dominion over them in the Morning.

(4.) After Death the Upright enter into Peace, being joined with the Spirits
of just Men made perfect in the Business and Enjoyments of Heaven. When they
Die they are carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom, where they are Comforted.
They sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in their Father's Kingdom. When
they remove from this World, where they are Strangers and Pilgrims, they go to
dwell in that City of the Living God, where they enjoy a peaceable Habitation,
sure Dwellings, and quiet Resting Places; in that City which has no need of
the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it; for the Glory of God does
enlighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof. There they are before the
Throne, and serve him in His Temple: And He that sits on the Throne dwells
among them. The Lamb who is in the midst of the Thorn seeds them, and leads
them unto living Waters; and God wipes away all tears from their Eyes. Thus
they wait in a certain hope, and joyful Expectation for the redemption of their
Bodies.

3. The Bodies of the Upright de Rest in their Graves, as in Beds, when they
die. Sleep is the image of Death; and Death is in Scripture frequently
compard'd to Sleep. Deuteronomy. 31.16. And the Lord said unto Moses, Behold, thou
shall sleep with thy Fathers -- Joh. 11.11. Our friend Lazarus sleeps -- ver.
13. -- Jesus spoke of his death --. When the Children of God leave this World,
they enter into their Chambers. Their Souls return to the Lord, and enjoy Peace
in the presence of God, as we have already heard; And their Bodies do rest in
the Grave, which is the House appointed for all living. Job 17.13. If I wait,
the grave is mine house; I have made my bed in the darkness. ver. 16. -- When
our rest together is in the dust. While they are in this World, they sometimes
complain with Job, 7.4. When I lie down, I say, when shall I arise? -- and I am
full of tossings to and fro to the dawning of the day. But after Death, their
Bodies are at rest, free from pain and all uneasiness. At Death the bodily
Organs cease to discharge their respective offices. The Eyes see not, the Ears
hear not, the Hands handle not, the Feet move not. There is no work in the
Grave. At Death the Night comes wherein no Man can work, and the People of God
go to rest; they are put to Bed in the silent Grave, free from the noise and
hurry of this present Life: There they lie still and are quiet; they sleep and
are at rest. And in the Morning of the Resurrection they shall awake, and arise
with fresh vigor. We lie down in our beds at Night, that our exhausted spirits
may be recruited, and that we may with renewed strength engage in the business
of the Day. Agreably, When the Bodies of God's Children are laid in their
Graves, it is in order to their arising recruited and refreshed at the last
Day. The bars of the Pit shall not be about them forever. No, No. At the time
appointed in God's Unchangible Decree, He will call, and they shall answer, He
will have a desire to the work of his Hands. Then the Upright who sleep in the
dust of the Earth shall awake to Everlasting Life. The Dead in Christ shall
rise. The dead Bodies of the Saints shall arise and shine, with the Glory of
the Lord arisen upon them, strengthened to the Work and Enjoyments of the
Heavenly World. Then their glorious change shall come. For their vile bodies
shall be changed, and fashioned like to Christ's Glorious Body. And then shall
they behold God's Face in righteousness: they shall be satisfied, when they
awake, with His likeness. Their Bodies will then be redeemed from the power of
the Grave. Their Corruptible shall put on Incorruption, their Mortal
Immortality, and Death shall be swallowed up in Victory.

4. After the Resurrection the Upright, their whole Man, Soul and Body, being
glorified, shall enter into perfect Peace, and enjoy Everlasting Rest in the
Heavenly World. At Death their departed Spirits enter into the joy of their
Lord. At the Day of Judgment, their Souls and Bodies being reunited; they shall
be openly acknowledged and acquitted; And when the Business of the Great Day is
finished, they shall ascend with their Glorious Redeemer, and ever be with the
Lord. Then God will open the Gates of the Heavenly Jerusalem, and the Righteous
shall have an abundant and triumphant Entrance into that high and holy Place,
where they shall be kept in perfect Peace for ever and ever. There is a Rest
which remains for the People of God in Heaven, an Eternal and uninterrupted
Sabbatism. There are Mansions of Glory prepared for them, and when they are
six'd and settled in them, they will dwell at ease, and move no more. There
God's Countenance will be hold the Upright with the greatest complacency, and
they shall rejoice in the Lord with an exceeding great Joy. There they shall
have the full Enjoyment of the God of Peace, and in His Presence obtain Fullness
of Joy, and Pleasures for ever more. God the Father will embrace them in the
Arms of His Everlasting Love; God the Son will dwell with them, and they shall
behold His Glory; God the Holy Spirit, the Spirit of Glory, shall rest upon
them, and fill them with Grace and Comfort. The Kingdom of God in this World is
Righteousness and Peace; what then shall the Kingdom of Glory be? Then they
will Rest indeed; for all their wants shall be fully supplied, their desires
perfectly satisfied, and their Blessedness consummated. In Heaven they will
have the clearest Knowledge of God, of His Glorious Perfections, and Counsels
and Works; particularly, they will have a most ravishing view of the most
wonderful and mysterious Work of Redemption in its perfection and
Accomplishment. Then they will reach the Center of their wishes, hopes, and
desires, and therefore they will Rest. There will be nothing to hinder them
from the perfect exercise of their Graces. They will act and enjoy in the most
perfect manner, all their Powers being exerted in the Service of God, and being
completely satisfied in Him. I might go on, and say, They will then be made
Equal to the Angels in Heaven, and meet Companions for those Glorified Spirits.
They will then enjoy the Communion of Saints in its full beauty and perfection.
At present there remain much sin and imperfection in the best, which is apt to
weaken the Union, and disturb the Peace of the most holy Societies upon Earth.
But in Heaven all the hindrances of Peace will be done away, and the Children
of God will be of one Heart, and one Soul. There will be no difference in
opinion, no distance in affection, their knowledge and love being perfected.
There are no misunderstandings, no ill humors, no envy, no uncharitable
jealousies among the Saints in Light. The Millions of Celestial Inhabitants
compose but one Society, Love mixing in one Mass of Light and Glory, all their
Understandings and Wills. In a Word, Their Rest will be Glorious and
Everlasting. The Church Catholic shall then be presented a Glorious Church,
and her Glory shall never fade away. Certainly then the Upright shall enter
into Peace, and enjoy it in the most comprehensive sense.

APPLICATION.
USE. I. Shall the Upright enter into Peace -- Learn, that the Upright are
Blessed. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord;
Psalm. 119.1. Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in
heart. And in a little time they shall reap the full Harvest. When they shall
eat of the peaceable fruits of righteousness, and be satisfied. Let their
troubles be never so many in this Life, yet it shall be well with them in the
Conclusion: Isai. 3.10. Say ye to the righteous that it shall be well with him:
for they shall eat the fruit of their doings. They have their fruit unto
holiness, and therefore their End shall be Eternal Life. Their Condition must
needs be good and happy, which ends so well. The Upright are the blessed of the
Lord, and therefore they are blessed indeed.

USE II. Shall the Upright enter into Peace, -- Then the Wicked can have no
true peace, either in the hour of Death, or after their Dissolution. Contraries
have contrary Consequences. If the Righteous has hope in his Death; then the
hope of the Hypocrite shall perish. Isai. 48.22. There is no peace, says the
Lord, unto the wicked. When they cry Peace! Peace! sudden destruction shall
come upon them. If their Consciences awake in this Life, they must needs be
like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest. But suppose they should doze on in
their Carnal Security; and there should be no bands in their Death, yet after
Death they will awake, and lift up their eyes in Torment. Then distress and
anguish shall seize upon them, and they will be utterly consumed with terrors.
They must make their bed in Hell, where the Worm never dies, and the Fire is
not quenched. They must lie down in sorrow, and awake to shame and everlasting
contempt, at the Great Day, when they will call to the Rocks and Mountains to
hide them from the Wrath of God and the Lamb, but in vain: For in that terrible
Day of the Lord they shall be forced to appear before the Judgment Seat of
Jesus Christ, and be doomed to suffer the pains of Eternal Death. O that secure
Sinners might be awakened, and be persuaded by the terrors of the Lord to be
reconciled unto Him, and to make their Peace with Him. Consider this, ye that
forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

3. Infer. That Believers should never be weary of well-doing; nor yet faint
under their Sufferings. Shall they enter into Peace, and Rest when they Die?
Surely, they are then strongly obliged to work the Works of Him that sent them,
while they live. O it becomes them to be not slothful in business; fervent in
spirit serving the Lord! Seeing that when they die, they shall rest from their
Labors, and their Works shall follow them. O Believer! there is a Glorious and
Eternal Rest remains for thee in Heaven; and will thou not be diligent in thy
Lord's Business while upon Earth? Certainly it is thy Duty and Interest so to
be. Yea furthermore, if God in His Providence should call you to suffer
Affliction, it becomes you to bear His Hand with a quiet Submission, neither
repining nor fainting when rebuked of Him; For these Troubles which are for the
present not joyous but grievous, shall yield the peaceable fruits of
righteousness. By your present Sorrows God is doing you good for your latter
End, and preparing you for perfect Peace in Heaven. Lift up your heads then,
Behold! the time of Refreshment draws nigh. In a little time you will have your
Quietus. In a little time you shall ascend to the Heavenly Zion with Songs, and
Everlasting Joy upon your heads; you shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow
and sighing shall flee away.

Here I might say that this Consideration affords a refreshing Cordial to such
as are Mourning, being bereaved of Pious Relatives. They Sleep in Jesus, and
are entered into Peace. O let not this Consolation of God be small with you!
While you sow in Tears, they reap in Joy. Let this then mitigate your Sorrow,
assuage your Grief. Weep not for them, but for your selves: Your Loss is their
Gain.

4. It is therefore our duty to mark the Perfect Man, and behold the Upright.
Psalm. 37.37. Mark the perfect Man, and behold the Upright: for the end of that
Man is peace. We should observe Upright Men in their holy Walk with God, that
we may follow their Faith, considering the end of their Conversation.

A Person of this Character, the Honorable Major General WINTHROP, was carried
to his Sepulcher the last Week. He was descended of Honorable Ancestors, who
were famous in their Generation, and their Names are deservedly precious in
New England.

His Excellent Grandfather The Honorable JOHN WINTHROP Esquire
was One of those Worthies who left a pleasant Land, and fair Possessions, that
they might follow their Lord Jesus Christ into this part of the New World, when
it was an howling Wilderness; and enjoy Communion with Him in the purity of His
Ordinances. He was a principal Founder of this Town, and of this Province,
where he was for many Years Elected Governor, and Died while invested with
that Authority.

His Honorable Father The Honorable JOHN WINTHROP Esquire
was for several Years an Assistant of this Colony, and afterward the
Governor of Connecticut, for whom He procured the Charter under which They now
enjoy their Precious and Valuable Privileges.

Sed Genus, and Proavos, and quae non fecimus ipsi:
Vix ea nostra voco --.
This Honorable Person was Himself a Friend and Father to his Country, and had
the Religion and Liberties of New England much at heart, being a Lover of Truth
and Justice.

He was a skilful Physician, and generously gave, not only his Advice, but also
his Medicines for the healing of the Sick, which by the Blessing of God, were
made successful for the Recovery of many. He was well skilled in Philosophy:
But above all, we have good reason to believe that he had learnt CHRIST, and
that he now Sleeps in JESUS.

It is an honor to Boston, that it was the Place of his Nativity.

By this repeated and awful Bereavement there is a great Gap made in our Hedge.
May the Repairer of our Breaches raise up and qualify such from time to time as
shall make up our Hedge, and stand in the Gap.

I cannot here forbear to mention that Aged Handmaid Mrs. Hannah Meylen. Our
Grief has since been renewed by the Death of her Son in Law, Mr. William
Tilley, a Person truly Valuable for his Piety and Usefulness.
of the Lord, who departed this Life the last Week. She was a genuine Daughter
of Sarah, and has left us an excellent Example of pure and undefiled Religion.

5. Let us all be Exhorted to Walk in Uprightness before the Lord: Let us
diligently improve His Providence and Ordinances; particularly the Lord's
Supper, to prepare us for this Rest, and to give us the Assurance of it. The
Providence of God has been very observable in the many great Breaches which He
has made upon this Church of late, especially since our last Communion. And
His Voice to us now is, Be ye ready also. O let it not be said that God
stretched out His Hand, and we did not regard it. But let us now be awakened to
search and try our ways, and to return unto the Lord. In a particular manner,
Let us draw nigh to this Holy Ordinance of the Supper, with reverence and godly
fear; And labor so to show forth our Lord's Death, that we may be prepared for
our own. This Ordinance is of excellent use for this end. O that we may be
enabled to improve it in a right manner! Here we have Jesus Chrift evidently
set forth Crucified, before our Eyes; and may by Faith behold our Victorious
Redeemer, through Death, destroying him that had the power of Death. Come then,
and see the Salvation of God; that you may be able to say with Simeon, Now
let thou thy Servant depart in peace; For mine Eyes have seen Thy
Salvation. Come, Behold your Savior Who Lives, and was Dean, and behold He is
Alive forever more, and has the Keys of Hell and of Death. Come to this Table,
and by Faith eat that Bread which came down from Heaven, that you may live for
ever. Come, and take this Cup which exhibits a Sovereign Antidote against the
Sting of Death, and a rich Cordial to cheer and refresh your Spirits in the
Approaches of that King of Terrors. For the true and faithful Witness
testifyeth; Joh. 6.54. Whose eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has
Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last Day. Here are the Bread and
Waters of Life. And the Master of the Feast bids us Welcome, and says, Eat O
Friends! yea drink abundantly, O Beloved! God does here prepare a Table before
His People, and their Cup runs over, and they may sing, The Lord is my
Shepherd, I shall not want -- yea, though I walk through the Valley of the shadow
of Death, I will fear no evil: for Thou art with me -- But then we must look to
it, that we come in Uprightness, and keep the Feast, not with old leaven --;
but with the unleavened bread of Sincerity and Truth. Then by this Supper we
shall be prepared to sit down at the Marriage-Supper of the Lamb, and to drink
New Wine with our Glorified Redeemer in His Father's Kingdom.

FINIS.

