PSALTERIUM Americanum.

The BOOK of PSALMS, In a Translation Exactly conformed unto the ORIGINAL; BUT
ALL IN Blank Verse, Fitted unto the TUNES commonly used in our CHURCHES. Which
Pure Offering is accompanied with ILLUSTRATIONS, digging for Hidden Treasures
in it; And RULES to Employ it upon the Glorious and Various Intentions of it.
Whereto are added, Some other Portions of the SACRED SCRIPTURE, to Enrich the
CANTIONAL.

BOSTON: in N. E. Printed by S. KNEELAND, for B. ELIOT, S. GERRISH, D.
HENCHMAN, and J. EDWARDS, and Sold at their Shops. 1718.

THE INTRODUCTION: To be Attentively perused, that so the whole BOOK may have
the Good and Great ENDS of it, the more effectually Accomplished.
. 1.THERE have appeared in the World some Humane Composures, which have been so
favored, and perhaps flattered by Mankind, as to have it asserted concerning
them, That no Man's Reproach could lessen, and no Man's Applause could heighten,
the Reputation which belonged unto them. The Assertion may be made without
Controversy concerning the Divinely Inspired Book of PSALMS; than which the
Church of GOD is enriched with nothing more Glorious, among all its
Incomparable Writings.

THE Commendations which the Ancients gave of this Unparalled Book, are as
high, as the Tongue of Men can carry them; And the Commendations would not be
too high, if the Tongue of Angels, who possessed the Writers of this Book, were
employed for the giving of them. Let Chrysostom and Basil alone be called in,
to declare unto us the sense of all the rest! Chrysostom, who calls this
wonderful Book, The Christian Panoply; And Basil, who Styles it, The Common
Treasure of all Good Precepts, and, A Complete Body of Divinity.

THE PSALMS are in the Hebrew, divided into Five Books, like those of Moses;
and so they may be called, A Second Pentateuch. Yea, They are a surprising
Epitome of all the Bible; For which cause, if we call the Psalter, A Little
Bible, we shall do no other than what Luther did before us. And such are the
Excellent Virtues, in the Leaves of this Tree of Life which our God has granted
for the Healing of the Nations, that, as Proclus of Constantinople expresses
the matter, To cure Heaviness, to lay aside trouble some Thoughts and Passions,
to ease us of our Cares, and recreate those who are oppressed with any, sorts
of Pains, as well as to move Compunction for Sin, and to stimulate unto Piety,
no Book in the World, is to be compared with it, for such important purposes.

MELANCTHON says very truly, concerning the Book of PSALMS, That it is the most
elegant work extant in the World. It has indeed performed what Plato wished
for, but what he thought mere Man could never come to: Plato, who saw there was
no way of Instruction so efficacious, as that by Odes and Songs; but after all
concludes, This must be the work of GOD, or of a Man that shall be full of GOD.

THERE have been profane, foolish, empty Pretenders to Literature, who have had
no great Relish for the PSALMS of David. But with Men who have had a just
sense, a true gust of Things, no Writings in the World have been so Relished,
as these matchless Gifts of Heaven unto the Children of Men. So Mattheus Vegius
coming to himself, made a Declaration, which none who are not besides
themselves will wonder at. Nunc pro Virgilio, quem alterum in Terris Deum esse
arbitrabar, Nunc Davidem fideliorem vatem, colam, suscipiam, amplectarque; et
ejus mibi carmina, quae tanquam anilia deliramenta sordebant, nunc mira
aspergunt animum su^vit^^^.

. 2. THEODORET informs us, The People in his time, were so well acquainted with
our PSALMS, that both in City and Country it was the usual Employment of all
Christians, To Sing them: And even they who had little Acquantance, with any
other Book of the Sacred Scriptures, yet so had the PSALMS by heart, as to
recreate themselves with Singing them in the Streets, and in the Fields, as
well as in their Houses. And Verily, These mavelous Poems, have not by their
Age lost any thing of their Spirit, or their Goodness. The Christians in our
days, may as well feed and live upon them, and Eat the Bread of Angels.

THE Truth is, It was no ill Advice of Jerome unto his Friend, That he would
make the Psalter his Vade mecum, his constant Companion and Counselor on all
occasions. Christian, Thou will find it so marvellously to answer all the
occasions of Christianity, that thou will commend the prudence of the Ancient
Constantinopolitan, who being driven out of the City, took no part of his
Treasures but This, which unto him was, Pro et prae Divitjis, preferrible to
all perishable Riches.

BEHOLD, A Prayer Book which never had a Parallel. And though the very Words of
this Book, may often supply us with the best Forms in the World for our
Prayers, when we may have need of such; (which made Luther say, He that Prays a
PSALM, shall be made thoroughly warm:) yet the principal use hereof would be,
from hence to learn, for what Things, and with what Frames, we are to make our
Prayers, and with a Fuel from hence, to keep that Holy Fire in its operation,
The Spirit of Grace and of Supplications.

WHEN the Pardon of Sin is to be implored, the PSALMS will furnish us, with the
most Pathetical Expressions imaginable for that Grand Concern.

WHEN the Graces of the New Creature, and the Dispositions of Piety are to be
asked for, the PSALMS will not only furnish us with Petitions for these Best of
Blessings, but insensibly draw us in to the Possession and Exercise of them.

WHATEVER Maladies we find our Minds distempered withal, we may repair to the
PSALMS as to a Dispensatory filled with the noblest Remedies.

Do our Invisi^le Enemies infest us with grievous Temptations? The Weapons and
the Outcries we find in the PSALMS, against the vexatious Adversaries, may be
as efficaciously as elegantly turned upon them. David's Harp wisely introduced,
will cause our Enemies to turn back, the Evil-Spirits to retire before it.

WHEN we have our heavy Afflictions of many sorts lying upon us, what can we do
better, than repair to the Songs, which GOD our Maker has given for the Night,
in the PSALMS which we now have in our hands? We shall not perish in our
Afflictions, if we take the Delights here provided for us.

FINALLY, If we would be well instructed in the Mysteries of the Great
Salvation, or be well acquainted with the Prophecies of what is to be done in
the Latter Days: Let the PSALMS be well studied. The truest and the highest
Wisdom is here to be met withal.

AND if in the Prosecution of these Designs, we add the method of Singing,
which is the way to be filled with the Spirit, from whence the PSALMS are
dictated, Behold, the Spiritual Songs now put into a Cond^tion for it, that we
may in our Heart make Melody unto the Lord.

IT is a Thing to be observed, That all Nations make Singing, to be one part of
the Worship which they pay unto their GOD. Thus All People walk even every one
in the Name of his God; and thus we CHRISTIANS will walk in the Name of CHRIST
who is the Lord our GOD, and who had directed us thus to do for ever and ever.

. 3. OUR Poetry has attempted many Versions of the PSALMS, in such Numbers and
Measures, as might render them capable of being Sung, in those grave Tunes,
which have been prepared and received for our Christian Psalmody. But of all
the more than twice Seven Versions which I have seen, it must be affirmed, That
they leave out a vast heap of those rich things, which the Holy SPIRIT of GOD
speaks in the Original Hebrew; and that they put in as large an Heap of poor
Things, which are entirely their own. All this has been merely for the sake of
preserving the Clink of the Rhyme: Which after all, is of small consequence
unto a Generous Poem; and of none at all unto the Melody of Singing; But of how
little then, in Singing unto the LORD! Some famous pieces of Poetry, which this
Refining Age has been treated withal, have been offered us in Blank Verse. And
in Blank Verse we now have the Glorious Book of PSALMS presented unto us: The
PSALMS fitted unto the Tunes commonly used in the Assembles of our Zion: But so
fitted, that the Christian Singer has hi^^ Devotions now supplied, with ALL
that the Holy SPIRIT of GOD has dictated, in this Illustrious and Calestial
Bestowment upon His Church in the World: and there is NOTHING BESIDES the pure
Dictates of that Holy SPIRIT imposed on him. Now, True PIETY, Thou shall be
Judge, whether such a Divine matter for thy Songs thus disencumbred from every
thing that may give them any Humane Debasements, be not really to be preferred
before any Compositions thou have ever yet been entertained withal. Doubtless,
the more that any are desirous to offer unto the Glorious GOD what is purely
His Own, and the more concerned that any are to have their Worship entirely
Regulated and Animated, by the SPIRIT of GOD, the more agreeable to them, will
be such an Instrument of Devotion, as is here prepared. Though the Hymns have not
the Triflle of Rhyme, as a Lace to set them off, yet they are all Glorio^^
within, which is the thing that Manly Christianity has its eye most upon; and
in the Spiritual Songs thus enjoyed and improved, thou may most hope to have
the Holy SPIRIT of GOD, who indicted them speaking unto thee, even such Things
as cannot be uttered.

BUT that our Cantional may be furnished with a superabundance, and the
Faithful be plentifully feasted with Angels Food, Behold, an Addition of
Passages Collected in Meter, (but still as exactly translated) from some other
parts of the Sacred Scriptures, to answer the various occasions of Christianity.

. 4. FOR the New Translation of the PSALMS, which is here endeavored, an
Appeal may be with much Assurance made, unto all that are Masters of the Hebrew
Tongue, whether it be not much more agreeable to the Original, than the Old
one, or than any that has yet been offered unto the World. Perhaps there is
more Liberty taken here in Translating the First Verse of the Psalter, than
almost any Verse in the whole Book beside. It keeps close to the Original; and
even when a word of supply is introduced, it is usually a needless Complement
unto the care of exactness, to distinguish it at all, as we have done, with an
Italica-Character; for it is really in the Intention and Emphasis of the
Original. Yea, the just Laws of Translation had not been at all violated, if a
much greater Liberty had been taken, for the beating out of the Golden and
Massy Hebrew into a more Extended English, For, it may be observed, if you
Translate a French Book, suppose, into English, you turn it into English
Phrase, and make not a French English of it; For, If fait froid, for instance,
you do not say, It makes Cold, but, It is Cold, We have tied our selves to
Hebraism^, more scrupulously, than there is real occasion for.

BUT Particularly; The Reader will allow, JEHOVAH, to be Translated, The
ETERNAL GOD. It is the truest English of that Incommunicable Name: A Name, though
not Unutterable, (according to the Jewish Superstition,) yet what should not be
too commonly uttered. And the French Translation will here speak a Good Word
for ours. And where is the wrong done, if Elohim should be Translated, GOD the
Judge? or, Adonai, be Translated, The GOD on whom I lean, or, The GOD from whom
is my support? It is in the Hebrew Term. What if, Col Haijom, should be
Translated, All Day, and Every Day? What if Gnani, should be so Translated, as
to carry both Suff^ring and Meekness in it? What if G^alam should be
Translated, Who can tell the Term? It Is no more than what is in the Hebrew.
When Two English Words are employed for One Hebrew Word, we have signified it
sometimes with an * Asterisk. But, Reader, Know, that the He^rew signified
Both: and since it is not easy to determine, which to take, exclusive of the
other, it will not be disagreeable unto the Glorious Inditer, that Both be
considered.

BRIEFLY, Upon any Difference in this, from the former and common Translation,
if the more Learned Reader will please to Examine the Original, there will be
no Fear of its being Justified. But then, this Translation may deserve some
Thanks from the Religious part of Mankind, for having tendered a plain, clear,
fair sense of many Passages, which have hitherto been so Translated, that
People could scarce tell how well to understand them: In which regard, this
very Translation alone, without any of the Notes that wait upon it, may be
esteemed a Commentary.

. 5. MOST certainly, our Translation of the PSALMS, without the Fetters of
Rhyme upon it, can be justly esteemed no prejudice to the Character of Poetry
in the performance. For indeed, however it is now appropriated, according to
the true sense of the Term, to Rhythme it self a Similis Desinentia, or, a
likeness of sound in the last Syllables of the Verse, is not essential. Old
Bid will give you such a Definition of Rhythme, and bring other Authorities
besides Austins for it, that Scaliger thereupon holds, all Verses wherein
Regard is had unto the Number of Syllables, to have a claim unto it. Be that as
the Critics on the Term shall please, our Translation is all in Meter; and
really more tied unto Measure, than the Original appears to have been, by all
the Examinations that have as yet been employed upon it. For, however it might
be with the Song of Moses in Deuteronomy, and with the Book of Job, and of the
Proverbs; My incomparable Master Alsted allows me to say, That in the PSALMS,
Nullum canticum sit metricis legibus astrictum, sed mera soluta sit cratio,
charactere Poetico animuta.

INDEED, that Question, To what Rules the Poesy of the Davidic PSALMS is to be
adjusted? has been as vexed a Problem to our Modern Critics, as most that they
have meddled with. It were endless to reckon up the several Methods wherein
Learned Men have attempted an Account of the Hebrew Poesy. Pfeiffer in his
Dubia Vexota, has given us a Collection; Among which, that which Gomarus, has
lit upon, looks as probable as any: And yet, the Rules invented by that Author,
are so very lax, that you may according thereunto imagine, a Verso, in every
Line of almost any Author in the World. I am therefore strongly of the Opinion,
That the Poesy of the Ancient Hebrews, knew no Measure, but that of the
unknown Music, wherein it was to be accommodated. Our PSALMS in the Hebrew, are
not so much Metrical as Musical; And hence, the very Inscriptions of them
sometimes intimate, that there was a sort of Melody, unto which they were
adapted. It is true, the Oriental Nations at this day, have their Metred
Poetry; But it is of a late Original. However, it is very certain, that all the
skill in the World, will hardly find the Rules of that Metred Poetry observed
with any exactness in the Songs of the Sacred Scriptures. There is little value
to be set on the Authority, of either Philo, or Josephus, and and after them,
of Jerome, who quotes Origin and Eusebius for it, when they go to resolve the
Hebrew P^esie, into I know not what, Lyricks and Hexameters. And therefore it
may be hoped, that our Version may be released from the Chime of a, Similis
Desinentia, without being censured for Unpoetical. The Sublime Thought, and the
Divine Flame, alone is enough, to challenge the Character of Poetry for these
Holy Composures. And if any Beauties be wanting, it is owing to the lowness of
the Language, whereinto a strict and close Translation, is what we are here
tied unto.

6. IT is a true Observation, which is made by Folengius, in his Commentaries
on the PSALMS; Totius Voluminis PSALMORUM Argumentum CHRISTVS: A Glorious
CHRIST is the principal Thing appearing in them. It is very certain, That in
the PSALMS, the Person, the Natures, the Virtues, the Humiliation, the
Exaltation, the Extensive Kingdom, and the admirable Glories of the MESSIAH,
are every where scattered and glittering, after such a manner, as calls for our
Wonderment. The Gospel according to DAVID, compared with, The Gospel according
to MATTHEW, affords a wonderful Entertainment. If a Jew would but believe the
Songs of Zion, which once were sung in his own Land, he would soon turn a
Christian, and would his Nation do so, it would not be long, that they should
be put upon Singing them in a Strange Land. Christian, Dig in these Mines, and
thou will soon be sensible of what thy SAVIOR has told thee, Search the
Scriptures, for they testify of me. Yea, Good Old Hilary has a Note, That the
Book of PSALMS is a Bundle of Keys, which will open the Locks of all the other
Scriptures. The Word, Mictam, is found in the Titles of several PSALMS; and
Monsieur Goussets Discourse upon it, has very much to demand a Reception for
it. The Word signifies, A Thing that is covered with Gold. But another Word of
the same Letters, does also signify, A Sanctified Thing. Our Great SAVIOR, and
His Works, are variously Exhibited, in the Types, and so in the Songs, of the
Old Testament. The sense which concerns the Types, is a piece of Canvas, on
which the Holy Spirit has inlaid the Mystical sense, which concerns our
SAVIOR, as a Golden Embroidery. If David be the Canvas, in any of the Mictams,
the Holy Spirit has inwrought a Golden Idea of our SAVIOR into it, and
curiously Embroidered it, with some of His Incomparable Glories. Verily, There
are more Mictam's in our Psalter, than those which have this Term in the Titles
of them. They are not the only ones, that have His Unutterable Glories
Exquisitely Embroidered in them. The German Divine, who wrote a Treatise, to
prove, That there is not a Chapter in the Bible, wherein there is not a mention
or a notice of our SAVIOR, might find the Psalter to be the easiest part of
the Bible for him to work upon. And now, when we discover our SAVIOR in the
PSALMS, we then have indeed the Quickening Spirit of them. In that Light of
GOD, we see the Light wherein the true sense of the PSALMS is made manifest
unto us. We see every thing in a new Light. And how sweet the Light? What a
pleasant thing, to behold the Sun of Righteousness darting His Benign Beams
upon us, through the clear and pure Glasses, wherewith His Holy SPIRIT here has
furnished us!

BUT, O Eagle-Eye'd Believer, when thou art Singing the Graces, the Actions,
the Sufferings, and the Grandeurs of the REDEEMER, and perhaps coming into
Thoughts and Frames, that have some little Resemblance to those, which the
Prophetic Spirit here assigns to thy REDEEMER, in the Time of His Working out
thy Salvation for thee, what an Angelical Dignity art thou advanced unto! What
a Token for Good have thou, that thy REDEEMER will one day bring thee to a
Confort with Him, in the Songs and Joys of the Heavenly World!

THE Word, SELAH, Ever now and then occurs in the PSALMS. And now allow me to
propose, every SELAH, as an Invitation for thee to make a pause, upon the
Magnificence of thy SAVIOR. I will not here make a long Recital, of the
various, and very many Interpretations, which the Critics have left that Word
in the dark withal. It shall be enough to say, That in the large, Thesaurus
Philologico-Theologicus lately Published, there is a Dissertation upon that
Word, which would persuade us, That SELAH is a proper Name of the Blessed GOD
our SAVIOR, and that it signifies, The Magnificent One, or, One that is
exalted on high. The Word must not be too much separated from the rest of the
Discourse, but it is to be looked upon as a part of it. It belongs to the
Period, and is to be rendered, sometimes in the Nominative, sometimes in the
Genitive Case, and sometimes in other Cases; but most commonly in the Vocative,
Christian, In the PSALMS every where think on thy SAVIOR. And if a SELAN stop
thee, think, before thou go on, O my SAVIOR, How Magnificent art thou! --
Indeed, such is the Fellowship ever between our SAVIOR and His People, that
the condition of the One in the PSALMS will not forbid, but invite us to
confider the condition of the Other. And therefore, what is now propounded,
about a Contemplation of our SAVIOR, to be a principal stroke of our Devotions
in Singing of the PSALMS, will not supersede the Entertainments which are to be
joined with it.

7. THERE is a way of Reading the Scripture, which is now particularly and
pathetically to be demanded for the Reading of the Psalter. And that is, The
Parismain^ way; Or, To Read with an Holy cate, to observe and educe, the
Doctrines of Godliness, which this Rich Storehouse of Truth will yield unto
them that are seeking after it. Reader, Make a Pause upon every Verse, and see
what Lessons of Piety are to be learnt from every Clause. Turn the Lessons into
Prayers; and send the Prayers up unto the Heavens: As Arrows from the hand of a
mighty Man, send them with lively Ejuculations up unto the Heavens. The Singer
gives himself Time, to do the part of such a Reader; And, Oh, what a Melody
does he make unto the Lord! They who have tried this way of Reading, with a
Note and a Wish devoutly formed upon every Verse, have seen cause to Bless a
Glorious GOD, for instructing them in this Method of Communion with Him, and
Rejoice in this way of conversing with His Testimonies, more than if all Riches
had been bestowed upon them. Soul bound for Heaven, Thy Psalter taken into thy
hand on such an Intention, and with such a Management, would be the most
serviceable, and the most comfortable, Instrument of Devotion, that any thing
upon the face of the Earth could afford unto thee.

WHEN Zerdusht (or Zoroaster) more than Two and Twenty Hundred Years ago,
composed that famous Book, which is to this Day the Bible of the Magians under
the Mohammedan oppressions in the Orient, and which has a great part of the
Davidic Psalms inserted in it, he put upon it the Title of Zendavesta, or, The
Fire-kindler, as pretending to kindle the Fire of Love to God and Religion, in
the Hearts of the Readers. But with how much more Justice and Glory, may the
BOOK, thou now have in thy Hands, claim such a Title! Nothing upon Earth will
more bring down the inextinguishable Fire of GOD from Heaven into thy Soul,
than this BOOK employed as it ought to be; and as now, if it be not thy own
Fault, it is like to be.

To assist the Reader in coming at the vast Profit and Pleasure, which is to be
found in this rare part of the Christian Asceticks, every PSALM is here
Satellited with Illustrations, which are not fetched from the Vulgar
Annotations, (whereof still, Reader, continue thy esteem and thy improvement:)
But are the more Fine, Deep, and Uncommon Thoughts, which in a course of long
Reading and Thinking, have been brought in the way of the Collector. They are
Golden Keys, to the Immense Treafures of Truth, which have not been commonly
used: But which will enable the considerate Reader, not only to see set in a
Bright Light, the Passages to which they are annexed, but having them in his
mind, he will be able to Read very many other Passages, of the Holy Book, with
a greater satisfaction of mind, than ever he had before.

THERE had been a vast Addition to this Collection of Illustrations, if the
dread of imposing a Great Book upon the Reader, had not so stinted and stopped
the Growth of the Volumn.

THERE had been also prepared and prefixed unto every PSALM, a Short Account of
the Scope which it is aimed at; and such an Argument as Dr. Roberts in his Key
of the Bible, has given us. But upon a further consideration, this has been
lasd aside; For it was considered, That there are so various and so glorious
Things contained in every PSALM, as render it impossible to give any thing like
a Full Account of what is intended in it, without requiring much more of Room
for it, than the PSALM it self does occupy. Nor has any Essay that was ever yet
made this way, done a Justice (it may have done a Damage) to a BOOK in every
Paragraph whereof, there are all manner of pleasant Fruits, new and old, laid
up for the Beloved. Certainly, To cramp and stint the Thoughts of him that
Reads, with confining him to some Few Things as the Intention of a PSALM, when
an Attentive Reader will find that the Argument which the Short-sighted
Analysis has offered contains not a Temb part of the Illustrious Things, in
which the Holy SPIRIT has designed our instruction there: it appears in effect
such a wrong to the Divine Composure, as our PSALTERIUM did not care to be
guilty of. Why should a Bill of Fare be brought in, which does not mention one
Temb part of the Delicacies, which an ordinary Attention will find on a Table
that always yields, A Feast of Fat Things full of Marrow, of Wines on the Lees
well refined: A Table more glorious by far then that of Ptolomies in the Temple?

. 8. AND yet I show unto you a more Excellent way. Go on, O People of GOD, in
His Way, and in the Path of the Just which is now becoming plain before you;
And proceed unto the Reading of the Psalter, and of the Bible, in that which we
will call, The Affectuous way, according to a PROPOSAL which is now to be
seriously thought upon.

WE are to consider, That the Holy Men of GOD, who wrote the SCRIPTURE, were
moved by His Holy Spirit, in and for the Writing of it; and the Spirit of
Holiness at the Time of the Inspiration made suitable Impressions on the
Affections of His Faithful Servants, The Good Men had their Hearts Holily,
Graciously, Divinely, and suitably Affected with the Matter, which the Spirit
of GOD employed their Pens to leave upon, their Parchments. It might not merely
be said of them, as it was of a Baloom, That the Lord put a Word into his
MOUTH. No, A David who has an Heart after the Heart of GOD, most certainly had
his HEART also Holily affected, with the Word of GOD, that came unto him. In
the Written Passages here under our Contemplation, there will be found Evident
Indications of such AFFECTIONS working in the minds of the Inspired Writers;
as, A Flaming LOVE toward GOD; and then toward Men, for the sake of GOD:
LOVE, the Root of all Spiritual Affections.

A Lively FAITH, relying on the Existence and Perfections, and Promises, or
Threatenings of GOD; and on the Mediation of our SAVIOR.

A Longing DESIRE, after such Blessings as are in the view of a Soul that would
Live unto GOD; Joined with an HOPE of obtaining them.

A Fervent ZEAL for GOD, and for the cause of His Kingdom, and the Enjoyments
of His House among the Children of Men.

A Mighty HATRED of Sin; accompanied with, a^ Abh^rrence of, and yet a
Compassion for, those who abandon themselves unto it.

A bitter SORROW for Sin, and for the Mischiefs and Miseries, which are brought
by it, upon them that are guilty of it.

A Noble COURAGE, Resolving upon an Adherence unto GOD in the ways of
Godliness, notwithstanding all Discouragements.

A Total DESPAIR to find that Help in Creatures, which is no where to be found
but in their Great Creator.

A distressing FEAR of the Judgments, whereto all Wickedness does expose those
who are drawn into it.

A Triumphant JOY in GOD, and in His CHRIST, and in the Favors, which He
bestows upon His People.

A Rapturous ADMIRATION of Him, who is the Glorious Maker and Ruler of the
World, and of His Glories; with a Magnifying of His Work which Men behold.

ALL True PIETY is begun by the Enkindling of these Affections in the Soul. It
proceeds, it prospers, it improves, as these Affections gain strength and
vigor there. O Lord, Ey these things Men live, and in all these things is the
Life of my Spirit: so will thou recover me, and make me to live!

Now, Christian, Discover which of these Affections may be most obvious and
evident, in the Sentence, which may be now under thy consideration: And make a
Pause! -- But Restless until thou find the same Affections beginning to stir in
thy own Soul, and marvellously to Harmonize and Symphonize, with what the Holy
SPIRIT of GOD raised in His Amanuensis, at the moment of His Writing it. Be not
at Rest until thou feel thy Heart Strings quaver, at the Touch upon the Heart
of the Sacred Writer, as being brought into an Unison with it, and the Two
Souls go up in a Flame together.

THE Hints which our Excellent Matthew Henry gives in his Exposition on the
PSALMS, at the close of every Paragraph, what Affections the Verses of that
Paragraph are to be Sung withal, are a noble Commentary; And every Holy Heart
who by reason of use may have senses in Exercise to discern such things, may
add unto it, EASILY do I concur with my Excellent Franckius, in allowing, That
an Unregenerat^ Mind is poorly qualified for such an Exerc^se as this. But then
I will say, That I Soul pressing after a true Regeneration, cannot readily take
a more likely way to arrive unto a Blessed Experience of it, that by waiting
upon the Holy SPIRIT of GOD, with proper Trials, whether He will not quicken
such Affections in it, as are to be found no where, but in a Soul Regenerated,
and Animated and Actuated from Above. Try, O Soul wishing for Quickenings from
Heaven, Try, whether upon observing the Heavenly Affections, which are very
observable in the Writers of the Word by which we are Born again, and upon
Attempting with an Eye on Help from Sovereign Grace, to express the like
Affections, in the Salley of Devotion toward the Glorious GOD, thou do not
find some Vital Operations in thee, that shall be the Inchoations of a Life
that shall never be extinguished. Most certainly; If thou do become Affected,
as those Favorites of Heaven, whom GOD chose for the Vehicles, and Enkindlers,
and Preservers of PIETY in His Church through all succeeding Ages, it will be an
Infallible Mark of GOD upon thee, assuring thee of an Everlasting Mansion with
them in His Holy City. Nor is it possible to propound an Exercise, that will
more Prepare and Ripen Men to be Partakers in the Inheritance of those
Distinguished and Exemplary Saints; or Assure them, that they shall be
Associated with these Angelical Men in the Future Blessedness.

BUT, O you who are indeed Born again, Be prevailed withal, to make this
Exercise of PIETY more usual with you. When you would bring your selves into
the Best Frames that can be wished for, take a short Paragraph of the Word by
which Men live, and with humble Addresses to Heaven pertinent unto the
occasion, Consider, What Affections of Piety are plainly discernable in the
Word now before you: And then, with a Soul Turning to the Lord, assay to utter
the Language of the like Affections. Perhaps the CXIX Psalm, is as likely a
Portion for this Purpose as any under Heaven, that the Experiment may be made
upon. Friend, Ere thou art aware, thou will be caught up into Paradise, in such
and Exercise. Thou will mount up as with the Wings of Eagles.

It Is true, They that can Examine the Original Tongues, have peculiar
Advantoges for their Discoveries, when this Design is to be prosecuted. But yet
out Translation affords enough, to furnish the Illiterate Christian, for This
and every Good Work And if I constantly affirm this, That all the Gommentators
in the World, are poor Things to interpret the Bible, in comparison of a^
Illiterate Christian, thus coming with (...) sanctified Soul, to make his
practical Commentary; I could quote a very Great Person who will not leave me
alone, but will affirm, That a Commentary made without an Experimental
Acquaintance, with such Tempers and Motions, as were in the Minds of the Holy
Writers, -- Commentarius sine hac Adminiculo, (pio sacrorum motuum scrut into)
conscriptus, est vere Commentarius, et Nom^ne et Omine talis. i. e. Commentis
cerebri refertus. Among all the Hermeneutic Instruments for the the opening of
the Scripture we may say of this, There is none like in And certainly, a
Preacher of the Gospel, cannot more effectually do the part of a Workman that
needs not be ashamed, than by first of all making sure, that he have those
Affections in his own Soul, which are in the Text that he is going to Preach
upon. Very Notable is the Direction given by Spener; Premissis pjis procibus,
Affectum Scriptorum sacrorum devota attentione observent, cumqus affectum
assumere studeant. And very undoubted the Assertion made by Luther; Scio
suturum, siquis exercitatus in hac re suerit, plura per se inventurum, quam
omnes omnium Commentarii eribuere possiut.

Now, Christian, Go thy way; Repair to thy Psalter. Go this way to work upon
it, and say, That thou have in thy Hands, the most Glorious Book of Devotions,
that ever was in the World!

AND here, Let one Admonition be given once for all, which the Devout Singer
will often have occasion to think upon; and which comes in as a Retainer to
that Exercise of Godliness which is now in prosecution. Christian, When thou
art in the PSALMS that have Imprecations upon Adversaries in them, Let thy
Arrows be shot at thy Interior Advesaries. Thy Indwelling Sin, is an
Antichrist in thy Soul; and of all Adversaries the most worthy to have all the
curses in this Book, fulminated at it. That Old Man within thee, is too like
the Violent Man, the Malicious and Injurious one, which is in the PSALMS
complained of. Thy Lusts are the Enemies that Roar and Blaspheme, and Pursue,
and indeed the worst of Enemies. And Satan too, with whom these are
confederate; he is, the wicked one; the Den'd Lion, that lurks to catch the
poor. His Evil Angels are the wicked ones, who wait with hopes to ruin thee,
under their molestations, thy Soul is with Lions, and among a fiery Crew.

SING with such Thoughts, and so carry on the Wars of the Lord. Thy Successes
will be, Wonderful! Wonderful!

. 9. THERE is a wonderful Thing to be observed concerning our PSALMS, which has
hitherto been too much overlooked by all the Uninspired Interpreters; But it is
a Thing which our SAVIOR, and His Apostles who have quoted the PSALMS near
Fifty Times, have led us into the Apprehension of. This is, That they are full
of Prophecies, and our Psalter is indeed the most Prophetical Book in the World.

IT is more particularly, but not without holy Astonishments -- to be observed,
That the Design of the PROPHETIC SPIRIT, in the PSALMS, all along has been to
describe the Sufferings of the Jewish Nation, as well as of the Christian
Surregate, under the Tyranny of Antichrist; and foretell the Characters and
Confusions of that Wicked One, and of his Followers; and predict the Recovery
of the Jewish Nation from their long Dispersion, and a long Felicity for them,
and the Converted Gentiles associated with them, under the succeeding Reign of
the MESSIAH; and that Happy state of the New Earth, in which, under the
Influences of the New Heavens, there shall dwell Righteousness; and the
Tabernacle of GOD shall be with Men, and He shall dwell with them, and they
shall be His People, and GOD Himself shall be with them, and be their GOD.

IT may be, The Word which we render, To the Chief Musician, but which may be
rendered, (and was of Old so,) For the End, may be to intimate that the PSALMS
are calculated eminently with an Eye to the Things which are to be done, at
that which the Bible calls, The Time of the End. Indeed Jerome long ago found
Antichrist in the PSALMS; And Austin affirmed, That the PSALMS ought all to be
understood, of CHRIST and His Church, and many of them refer to After Ages. But
we now improve in our Discoveries.

ACCORDINGLY, Upon the PSALMS, as we go along, the Devout Reader will find this
Key of David here communicated unto him. And when he becomes a Devout Singer
too, then like the Beloved Disciple, he shall be carried away in the Spirit
into the wilderness, and be shown the Judgment of the Great Whore thee sits
upon many Waters. He shall also in these Visions of GOD, see the Holy City, New
Jerusalem, coming down from GOD out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for
her Husband. Very depraved must be that Soul, that has not a relish for such
Contemplations, more than for any Earthly Entertainments; and that will not
most heartily say, They Are more desirable than Gold, yea, than much solid Gold;
than Honey also sweeter much, or dropping Honeycomb.

YEA, and who can tell, but the PSALMS put into the hands of the Jews, with so
Entertaining a Commentary thereupon, may be a powerful and persuasive Engine in
the Arm^^ of the LORD, for the Enlightening and Overcoming of them, to Look on
Him whom they have Pierced! Were One to single out (...) present for a JEW, it
should be a Psalter with such a Commentary! Which no doubt he will consider the
more Attentively because he will find his own Rabbi's continually brought in as
Vouchers for it. However It is an agreeable circumstance, to encourage our
Hopes, that the Redemption of Israe^ and the Time to favor Zion, the set time,
is coming on, in that the condition of the Jewish Nation as represented in the
PSALMS, is now like to be more confidered by the Holy Singers of them, than in
the former Ages. When the Holy Singers then begin to Sing and to Praise, who
knows, what Ambushments our GOD may set against the Powers of ANTICHRIST, and
of MAHOMET; causing them to destroy one another, and making way for, The
Glorious Things which are spoken of thee, O Thou City of GOD!

10. IT has been among the Glories of our PSALMS, that wherever the Kingdom of
GOD has been upon making any New and Great Appearance, the Singing of THEM, has
been very notably Subservient and Instrumental unto it. More particularly, It
is well-known, That when the Reformation in France began, the PSALMS were
turned into French Meter, and agreeable Tunes were set unto them. The Singing
of THESE charmed the Souls of Court and City, Town and Country. They were Sung
in the Louvre itself, as well as in the Protestant Churches: Ladies, Nobles,
Princes, the King himself Sang them. All Ranks of Men practiced it; A Gentleman
of the Reformed Religion would not Eat a Meal without it. This One Thing
mightily contributed unto the Downfall of Popery; which the Popish Chergy
railing at, they never gave over until the profane and obscene Odes of the
Pagan Poets, had among many People of Quality thrust out the PSALMS of David.
And Juel writing from England unto Peter Martyr beyond Sea, 1560, reported,
That a Change now appeared visibly among the People, but nothing promoted it
more, than the Inviting of People unto the Singing of PSALMS. This was begun at
one Church in London, and quickly spread itself unto the Neighboring Places;
and sometimes at Paul's Cross, there would be no less than Sir Thousand People
Singing together. Truly, a growing Regard unto the Book of PSALMS, allowing us
to say, The Time of Singing is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in
the Land, will be among the hopeful Signs of the Times, and give as cause to
hope, that it will not be long before it be said, The Winter is past, and the Rain
is over and gone.

DOUBTLESS, The Day approaches wherein the Kingdom of GOD will appear in
brighter displays of it, than the World has ever yet been Enlightened withal.
There are certain MAXIMS of PIETY, wherein all Good Men are United, whatever
Different Persuasions they may have in other matters: MAXIMS wherein all that
are cordially United, are Good Men, and the Children of GOD. Good Men will come
to an Explicit Union upon these MAXIMS, and know no other Terms of Communion,
than those Terms of Salvation, and the Privileges, the Emoluments, and the
Expressions of Brotherly Charity, which of Right belong to all Good Men, as
well in the Church as in the State, will be granted unto all that embrace these
Glorious MAXIMS. GOD will bring His People, to Receive one another upon these
Generous MAXIMS, and keep lesser Points in a due Subordination to them, and
manage their Controversies on these lesser Points, with another Spirit, than
what has been too frequent among the Disputers of this World; And all Invasions
upon the Throne of the Great GOD in the Conscience of Men, will be abominated.
There shall be a Reign of Righteousness, and an admirable Peace and Joy will
arise from the operations of the Holy Spirit accompanying of it; and Joels
Prophecy will be accomplished. There will be Men Qualified like, and Influenced
by, the ANGELS of GOD; and those Boanerges, and Sons of Commotion, shall Fly
through the midst of Heaven, having the Everlasting Gospel of these Uniting
MAXIMS, to Preach unto the Inhabitants of the Earth: And our Glorious LORD will
shake all Nations, until this Gospel be complied withal. That Cry, Babylon is
fallen, will ensue upon it; and wondrous Changes upon the World, will turn an
horrid and howling Wilderness into a Paradise, and GOD will give wondrous
Tokens of His Gracious Presence among the Children of Men.

BUT certainly, The Everlasting Gospel has a very Illustrious Exhibition in the
Book of PSALMS; which now demands a Passage among the Inhabitants of the Earth,
under some singular Advantages.

AND perhaps there are many Thousands, to whom such a Version as we have now
before us, will be much more acceptable, than any Version, which only for the
sake of a little Jingle at the end of the Line, has left out much of that which
the Holy SPIRIT has provided for us, and put in much more that is none of His
Provision. A Pure Offering is here prepared for them!

AND if it were needful to quote any Authors for such a Remark, we could easily
bring more than one, whose Words may now be the Apples of the present
Entertainment. The Divine, Book of PSALMS, is an Excellent Collection of Devout
Hymns and Forms, which being Inspired from Heaven in their Original, are sure
to be Acceptable there in their Use. And from this Rich Treasury we may be
furnished at all times, with proper Forms for our Devotions, suitable to the
present state of the Church, and Every Ones particular Case in all Emergencies:
We have here a plentiful Provision for the Matter of our Duty, and the Manner
of performing it.

An Admonition Concerning the TUNES.
OUR VERSION is fitted unto all the Common TUNES, the Notes whereof are Eight
and Six.

BUT some of them are accommodated for a well-known Longer Meter, by putting in
Two Syllables of the Black Letter, which are, without any Damage to the Truth
of the Translation, found enclosed between Two such Crotchets as these, [] And
which being left out, the Meter, with the Sense yet remaining entire, is again
restored unto the usual, Eight and Six.

AND some of them are so contrived, that by leaving out what is in the Black
Letter, between the Two Crotchets, [] which may be done without any manner of
Damage, they are accommodated unto a well-known Shorter Meter.

THE Director of the Psalmody, need only to say, Sing with the Black Letter,
or, Sing without the Black Letter, and the Tune will be sufficiently directed.

IN the Addition to the CANTIONAL, the Singer will find, That besides what is
done for the Tune, which uses to go by the Name of, The CXLVIII Psalm-Tune, or,
the Hallelujatic Tune; by Taking or Dropping the Two Syllables of Black Lettet,
between the Crotchets, [] a Variety of Other T^^^^s is provided for.

THE SONGS of Zion,
THE FIRST BOOK OF PSALMS.
PSALM I.
1. O What the Blessings of the Man who is not walking in the counsel of the
Men that are set for impiety! The Man who stands not in the way of sinful
wanderers: The Man who sits not in the seat, of scornful cavillers!

2. But his delight is in the Law of the ETERNAL God; and in his Law he
meditates both in the day and night.

3 Sure he shall be like to a tree planted by streams of water; which in its
season yields its fruit: its leaf too shall not fade: and whatsoever it does
bear shall prosper very well.

4 The Ungodly are not so; but like Chaff which the wind does chase.

5 Therefore shall not ungodly ones stand in the Judgment Day; neither shall
Sinners stand in the Assembly of the just.

6 For the ETERNAL God regards the way of righteous Men; But the way of ungodly
ones shall perish utterly.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the I. PSALM.
1 BEhold the Psalter beginning like the Sermon of our SAVIOR, with a
Discourse on the Supreme and Final Happiness of Man. Basit considers the First
Psalm, as the Foundation o^ all the Psalter. The Terms used for the Wicked
here, are such as the Holy Oracles put on the Members of Antichrist. A thing
here to be deeply thought upon. See Isai. XI. 4. and 2 Pet. III. 3, 4.

3 Behold, the New Law of God in His Gospel standing like the Tree of Life, and
imparting its nature to its Disciples! Here pause upon the allusion to the
Blessing of Joseph. Genesis XLIX. 22. -- Shall prosper! Christian, Is Devoti^n an
hindrance to Business? The same Idea that is here employed, is it not more
fully pursued, in the Happiness of the Faithful under the Reign of our SAVIOR,
after the Fall of Antichrist? Isai. LX. and LXI.

4 Compare the Fate of the Adherents to Antichrist. Dan. II. 35. -- Like dust
scattered by the wind. Behold! What comes of their Essays to Root themselves.

5 Ponder the Allusion to the Fate of Corah.

6 The Vulgar Latin explains it; The life of the Wicked. On, The Ungodly,
mentioned four Times in the First Psalm, R. Aba gives a notable touch; Et
similiter sunt quatuor Monarchiae. Behold the Four Monarchies!

PSALM II.
1 THE Nations, why do they concur with such tumultuous rage! And why the
People meditate a thing that is but vain?

2 Kings of the Earth do set themselves, and Rulers do consult, against the
ETERNAL, and against [CHRIST] His Anointed One.

3 What they say, is, Let us throw off at once their curbing bands; And let us
cast away from us the yokes they bind us to.

4 He who sits in the Heavens above shall there but laugh at them. The ETERNAL
God shall them expose unto contemptuous scorn.

5 At that time He shall speak with strokes in anger unto them; and fill them
with perplexity in His incensed wrath.

6 What He will say, is, I have set Him I anoint my King on Zion which is unto
me an hill of holiness!

7 I [ who am He] proclaim the act; The ETERNAL ^a^d to me, Thou art my Son;
this very day have I bego^^en thee.

8 Ask me, and Nations will I give for thy Inheritance; And the remo^e ends of
the Earth for thy Possession.

9 Thou with a rod of Iron shall, a Shepherd, govern them; Like to a Potters
vessel thou shall break them all to shreds.

10 And now be wise, ye Kings; be taught, ye Judges of the Earth.

11 Serve ye the Lord with fear; and yet with trembling still rejoice.

12 Kiss ye the Son, lest He be wroth, and you fail in vour way: For His hot
wrath will quickly flame. Blessed all tha^ trust in Him.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the II. PSALM.
THE Jewish Writers themselves, in the form^^ A ^es, generally understood the
Second Psalm of the M^ssiah. Behold, Israelites themselves refu^^^ the Kingdom
of CHRIST, become as bad as Heath^^

4 God has the wicked in Derision, when He expos^ th^n to Derision.

12. So then, the Messiah must be more than a Man For, Cursed is be M^n who
trusts in Man! JEW Think of this, and leave thy Judaism.

PSALM III. A Psalm of David, when he fled from Abs^dom his S^^
1 ETERNAL GOD, how they are increased who greatly trouble me? How many are the
Men that stand in triumph over me?

2 Many there be who ever are saying unto my Soul, There Is no Salvation to be
had for him in God at all. Selah.

3 But now about me you are a shield, O thou ETERNAL God, Thou art my Glory,
and thou art th'uplifter of my head.

4 Unto the ETERNAL God, I cried, with my extended voice, And He gave answer
unto me out of His holy hill. Selah.

5 I laid me down, and took my sleep; and then I did awake: Because that the
ETERNAL God sustained me all along.

6 Though there should be ten thousands of those people who do set themselves
against me round about; I will not be afraid.

7 ETERNAL, rise; save me, my God; For thou have smitten all my Foes on the
cheek-bone; Thou have broken the wicked's teeth.

8 Salvation is what does belong to the ETERNAL God; On those that are thy
People is thy benediction still.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the III. PSALM.
1 SInger, Now meditate on the Suferings of thy SAVIOR. The Fifth Verse
evidently mentions His Death and Resurrection. Compare the Third Psalm with the
Sixteenth.

2 They thought the Crimes of David past Expiation This is the Jewish gloss
upon it. But Old Arnobius invites us to consider this Passage, as fulfilled in
the flouts of the Jews at our dying Savior. And all the rest as fulfilled in
Him.

7 Is here no Allusion to Sampson's Victory? Wa^ it not literally fulfilled in
the Deaths of Absalom and of Ahitophel!

8 What? A Blessing wished for such an ungrateful People! Christian, imitate
this Goodness! Compare Gal. VI. 16.

PSALM IV. To the chief Musician. On Neginoth. A Psalm David.
1 O Thou God of my righteousness, hear me when I do call: Thou have enlarged
me when I was in trouble some Restraint. O be thou gracious unt^ me, and O hear
thou my prayer.

2 Ye Sons of Men, how long shall my Glory be turned to shame? How long will
you love vanity; and how long seek a lie?

3 But know, the ETERNAL sets apart the pious for Himself. The ETERNAL God will
hear when I do call to Him for help.

4 Be you much moved; but do you not then any more offend. Commune with your
own heart upon your bed, and so be still.

5 Offer the Sacrifices which belong to righteousness: And therewith place your
confidence on the ETERNAL God.

6 Many there be that say, O who will show us what is good! O thou ETERNAL God,
do thou signally over us, like as a banner, lift the light of thy bright
countenance.

7 Thou have bestowed, in doing thus, a joy upon my heart, more than the time
wherein their Corn and their Wine did increase.

8 I will both lay me down in peace, and I will take my sleep; For, O ETERNAL,
Thou alone do make me dwell secure.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the IV. PSALM.
THE Term which we render, To the chief Musician, may be rendered also, To, or,
For the End. An Intimation, that these things are eminently calculated for that
Period, which is called, The Time of the End.

2 Sons of Men; especially means the Rulers of the People. [See Psalm. LVIII.
1.] The Son of Man, (when the word Adam is used,) means the Greatest of Men.
[See Isai. LI. 12.] The Hebrews call the chief of any Kind, by the Name of the
whole Kind. Man is called Creature. Son of Man is the Chief among the Sons of
Men. Ezekiel and Daniel were acknowledged very Great Men, by this Appellation.

4 It may be read, Are ye Angry? (That I have the Kingdom?) yet do not Sin;
have a care what you do. Munst^r notes here, An Admonition to tremble at Enmity
and Rebellion against the CHRIST of God and suppress the first rising of all
thoughts that have such a tendency.

6 Is not here the Language of Good Men, longing for the appearing of the
Mess^ah? -- He is, The Go^d One. His Name is, The Face of GOD.

PSALM V. To the Chief Musician. Upon Nebiloth. A Psath of David.
1 O Thou ETERNAL God, do thou give eat unto my words. Let the consideration
weigh what I do meditate.

2 O hearken thou unto the voice of m^ lamenting cry; Thou art my King; the art
my God; and I will pray to thee.

3 O thou ETERNAL, thou shall in the morning hear my voice. I in the morni^^
will prepare for thee, and will look u^

4 For thou art not a God that has pleasure in wickedness: nor shall a
dw^^^ling be with thee for any evil thing.

5 None of them that are scornful fools shall stand before thine eyes; The
worke^ of iniquity, thou hate all of them.

6 Thou shall bring a perd' ^^^n on the^ who do speak a lie; The ^^ERNAL Go^^
will much abhor the man of blood an^ guile.

7 But I in thy large mercy will enter into thy house: Toward thy holy Tem^ple
I will worship in thy fear.

8 O thou ETERNAL do thou lead me in thy righteousness; For my observers sake,
make ^lai^ the way before my face.

9 Truth's in the mouth of none of them; within they have g^ievous frauds; their
throat's an open Sepulcher: they flatter with their to g^e.

10 O God, condemn them; let them fall from counsels of their own: expel them
in their many crimes; for they have provoked thee.

11 But let all them that hope in thee, joy; ever si^g for joy. Since thou
hid'st them; let them that love thy Name, rejoice in thee.

12 For, O ETERNAL, thou do use to bless the righteous one: with crowning
favor as a shield thou will encompass him.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the V. PSALM.
THere are even Jews themselves, who re^er the whole Ps^^m, to the Time of the
Messiah. It must be the Second coming of the Lord, when there ^^ll b^^ Temple,
wherein will be no Sacrifices but (...) of Pra^ses. The Followers of An
^ichrist, are here described; with the joy of the Church in their D^^^^uction,
Compare, Rev. XI. 17, 18.

3 Man, would thou have an e^rly and speedy help from GOD? ^^ce what is to
be ^nde^voured.

5 Who ^he that speaks a Lie? Old Arnobius in^^prets it ^^^cially of them, who
deny the Son of God.

7 W^^^^ be driven out of the House of God, than (...) of ou^^^wn!

9 It seems the Slanders of the Wicked against Good Men, are but preparatives
to their Death, if they can accomplish it; the opening of a Sepulcher for them!

12 This Righteous One, -- The Arabian Interpreter does well to understand it
of the Messiah.

PSALM VI. To the Chief Musician, On Neginoth. Upon Sheminith. A Psalm of David.
1 O Thou ETERNAL God, in thine anger rebuke me not. And in thy fiercely
burning wrath, O do not chasten me.

2 Pity me, O ETERNAL God; for I am languishing. O Lord, restore me; for my
bones are greatly terrified.

3 Yea, more than this; my very Soul is greatly terrified. But, O thou, the
ETERNAL God, how long shall it be so?

4 Return, O thou ETERNAL God; deliver thou my Soul. O grant Salvation unto me,
for thy kind mercies sake.

5 For no commemoration can be made of thee in death: And who is there to
celebrate, thy praises in the Grave?

6 I Am with my groaning spent; all night I make my b^d to swim. With my
continual sweeping I water my lodging place.

7 My eye is merely worn away thro^^ forrow of my mind; It is becoming old
because of all my enemies.

8 All workers of iniquity, Depart away from me! Because that the ETERNAL One
has heard my weeping voice.

9 Now the ETERNAL God, He has my supplication heard: The Eternal will receive
my prayer, kindly approving it.

10 My Enemies be all ashamed and greatly terrified; Let them return, and
suddenly let them be put to shame.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the VI. PSALM.
CHristian Singer, Among other things make the cond^tion of the Jewish Church
in her Dispersion, a Subject of thy Meditation. Heal me, is answered, Isc,
LVII. 18. The sudden stroke of the Idolatrous Oppressors, praedicted, 1 These.
5.3. is here spoken of.

5 O our dear SAVIOR; Had thou been left in thy Grave, thy People must all
have perished; God would have had no Praises from them! Some of the Ancients
thus apply these Passages.

6 -- Most penitently done! David, Was not thy Bed the place of thy Crime? --
Theodoret has a glance of this importance.

PSALM VII. Shaggajon of David; which he Sang unto the LORD, concerning the
words of Cush the Benjamite.
O Thou ETERNAL God, my God; in Thee I put my trust. From all my persecutors
save me, and, Oh! Rescue me,

2 Least he to pieces tear my Soul, like as a Lion tears; To pieces rending it,
while there is no deliverer.

3 O Thou ETERNAL God, my God; if I have done this thing wherewith I Am charged;
if in my hands there be iniquity:

4 If I have rendered ill to him that was at peace with me; (yea, I have rescued
him that was my causeless enemy!)

5 The Enemy then pursue my Soul, and overtake it too! yea, tread my life to
the Earth, and lay my honor in the dust. Selah.

6 LORD, in thine anger rise; lift up, for the rage of my foes: Wake for me;
There Is a Judgment which thou give Commandment for.

7 So shall the Congregation of the People compass thee: For their sakes
therefore, O do thou return unto the height.

8 The People shall the ETERNAL Judge: Me, O ETERNAL, Judge; as is my
righteousness, and as my innocence in me.

9 The wickedness of wicked ones, Oh let it have an end. But fix the just; for
the just God does try the hearts and reins.

10 The Shield for my defense, it is still to be sound with God; who is a
Savior unto those that are upright in heart.

11 God is a Judge on His behalf that is a righteous Man; And God is grievously
provoked no less than every day.

12 Except he shall be turned about, He Will sharply whet His Sword, He has
already hent His Bow, and has prepared it

13 He also has prepared for him the instruments of Death. His arrows He has
wrought against the persecuting ones.

14 Behold, he is in travail to bring forth iniquity; He has conceived
mischief, and he shall bring forth a lie.

15 He has with digging made a pit, and he has hollowed it: but he has
fallen into the ditch which was his workmanship.

16 Upon his own head shall return the mischief done by him; upon his own crown
from on high his violence shall come down.

17 According to His righteousness I Will Praise the ETERNAL God; and sing the
Name of Him that is the ETERNAL, the most High.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the VII. PSALM.
WAS not Shimei, who was related unto the Family of Kish, concerned here?
Behold, some enterrainment for the reviled Servants of God!

5. -- q. d. I am willing to be as much Reproached when I am dead, as I have
been Honored in my Life.

6 -- This Judgment, is by Munster understood of the Jus Regni, which by the
Prophecy of Jacob, was to be transferred unto the Tribe of the Psalmist; Then
the Gathering of the People would be to him.

12. Behold an Allusion to the Judgment upon Antichrist, as described in Deuteronomy.
XXXII. 41, 42. Rev. XIX. 11, 12, 16. It calls for the deepest Meditation. The
Chief Characters of the Government, are assigned in the salm now before us.

PSALM VIII. To the Chief Musician; upon Gittith. A Psalm of David.
1 O Thou ETERNAL God, our Lord! Thy Name, how great is it in all the Earth
That thou have set thy Praise above the Heavens!

2 Out of the mouths of Infant Babes, and them that suck the Breast, a firm
foundation thou have laid for an admired strength. By reason of thine Enemies;
that thou may make to cease the Adversary so, and him, that does revenge
himself.

3 When I do look upon the Heavens, the work the singers made; When I look on
the Moon and Stars, the which thou have disposed,

4 I say, What is forgetful Man that thou remembrest him? And what the Son of
Earthly Man, that thou do visit him?

5 For thou a little made him be lower Than Angels are; Then thou have
crowned him with a bright Glory and Majesty.

6 Over the works of thy hands thou have given him to rule: under his feet thou
have put them into subjection all.

7 The Sheep and Beeves, even all of them, and the Beasts of the Fields.

8 Of Heavens the Fowls, of Seas the Fish what passes the Seas paths.

9 O Thou ETERNAL God, thou art our Lord on whom we lean; how admirably
glorious is thy Name in all the Earth!

ILLUSTRATIONS on the VIII. PSALM.
WAS not the Psalm composed on the Victory over Goliath of Gath? A lively Emblem
of the Conquest which our SAVIOR has had over the Devil! Christian Singer,
Behold, and Adore the Second Adam.

1 Above the Heavens! -- Done in the Ascension of our SAVIOR.

2. Founded. In Matthew. XXI. 16. it is, Perfected. Chrysostom has a Note upon
it. Where GOD has laid a Foundation for any thing, it shall come to Perfection.

3 Why is the Sun omitted? Perhaps the Psalm was composed in the Night. Or
shall we rather say, The MAN here Crowned is the SUN! Aben-Ezra says, one
cannot behold the Sun, as one may the Moon and the Stars.

4 Man, ENOSH. Eusebius notes, The Term signisies, Forgetful or Forgotten Man.
That GOD should Remember such a thing!

8 Are there any things passing through the paths of the Sea^ besides the Fish?
Yes, Kimchi, and Aben-Ezra, Two Jewish Rabbi's, and our Chrysostom, apply it
unto Vessels and Sailors. Oh! That such would submit unto the Dominion of our
SAVIOR!

PSALM. IX. To the Chief Mnsician, upon Muth-labben. A Psalm of David.
1 O Thou ETERNAL God, I will praise thee with all my heart, I Will give a full
relation of all of thy wondrous works.

2 I will be glad within, and will rejoice without in thee; I will sing praise
unto thy Name, O thou that art most high.

3 When that my Adversaries be returned back again, they shall with stumbling
fall, and shall perish before thy face.

4 Because that thou have done the right, and what was judged for me; Thou
sattest down upon the Throne, O Judge of righteousness.

5 Thou have rebuked the heathen; Thou destroy'st the wicked one: their name
thou have quite blotted out to all Eternity.

6 O Enemy, Destructions are come to perpetual end: and Cities which thou have
destroyed their Name is lost with them.

7 But now JEHOVAH shall endure to all Eternity: For Judgment to proceed from
thence, He has prepared His Throne.

8 He, even His own self will judge the World in righteousness: He Will judge the
People with such things as are forever right

9 And the ETERNAL God will be a refuge for the poor; a refuge in the proper
times, when trouble comes on him.

10 And they that know thy Name will place their confidence in thee: For thou
^orsak'st not them that seek Thee, O ETERNAL God.

11 To the ETERNAL God, who dwells in Zion, sing with praise: Among the People
tell abroad the things which He has wrought.

12 When He inquireth after Blood, He will remember them: He Is not unmindful of
the cry made by the humbled poor.

13 Have Mercy, O ETERNAL God on me: behold my grief from them that hare me;
raising me up from the gates of death.

14 For this, that I may utter all thy praises in the gates of Sions daughter;
I Will rejoice in thy salvation still.

15 The Nations are sunk down into the pit themselves have made; their own
foot's taken in the net which they themselves have hid.

16 Known is the ETERNAL God by this, the Judgment He has done! The wicked is
ins^ared in the work of his own hands, Higgajon. Selah.

17 The wicked shall be turned back, even down into the pit: And all the
Nations shall be so that do forget a God.

18 For that the needy one shall not for ever be forgot: And the hope of the
humbled poor shall not for ever fail.

19 Rise, O ETERNAL God; let not a wretched man prevail: The Nations shall have
Judgment done on, them before thy face.

20 O thou ETERNAL God, strike thou a terror into them: And let the Nations
understand they are but sorry men. Selah.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the IX. PSALM.
THE Ancients make this a Funeral Song upon the Ruin of Antichrist. Vicars in
his Decapla quotes an Ancient MSS which gives this Title to the Psaim;
Ostendit, quod Christus adventu suo oppress^^ns est Antichristum. The Syr^ac
Tit^c is, Of the Kingdom of Christ. Compare Isai. XI. 4.

17 They that forgot what God has done unto others, are very particular^y
intended here.

PSALM X.
1 WHY, O ETERNAL God do thou stard so far off from us? Why do thou hide
thy self in times when we are in distress?

2 In the pride of the wicked one the humbled poor's on fire: May they be taken
in the plots the which they have devised.

3 The wicked one does glory much upon his hearts desire; and he does bless the
covetous the ETERNAL does abhor.

4 Through the pride of his angry look the wicked will not enquire; All of his
thoughts do run on this, That there is not a God.

5 His ways do always grieve; In's view thy judgments are above: For all His
enemies, he thinks, to blow them all away.

6 'T^s what he says within his heart, I never shall be moved, from age to age
I never shall be in adversity.

7 His mouth's of execration full, and of deceits and frauds; under his tongue
there lies concealed mischief and vanity.

8 He sits in lurking-holes of towns; he in by-places kills the innocent; his
eyes are set sliely against the poor.

9 Like a den'd lion clos^ he lurks; he lurks to catch the poor: he seizes on
the poor when he draws him into his net.

10 He Is broke to pieces; he is brought down; and by his potent ones there falls
the congregation of the miserable ones.

11 This he has said within his heart, God has forgotten all; He has quite
turned away his face; He does not ever see.

12 Arise, O thou ETERNAL God; O God, lift up thy hand: O be not thou forgetful
of the poor afflicted ones.

13 For what cause does the wicked one cast such contempt on God! It Is what he
says within his heart, Thou Wilt bring to no account.

14 Thou see; thou look on Sin and spite to take it into thy hand; The poor
leaves all to thee; thou do relieve the Fatherless.

17 To shivers break the arm of him that is an impious man: And looking then
for wickedness, thou wilt find no wicked one.

16 Now the ETERNAL One is King; ever and ever so. The Nations of the heathen
are perished out of His land.

17 O thou ETERNAL, Thou have heard the humbled ones desire; Thou do prepare
the heart of such; thou giv'st a listening ear.

18 For judging of the fatherless, and small oppressed ones; He Will then go on
no more to break frail man from off the Earth

ILLUSTRATIONS on the X. PSALM.
THE Syriac Title is, Concerning the Devil tempting Adam. This might lead one
to some ne^ and curious Ideas in reading of the Psalm. The Jewi^^ Note of R.
Obadiah, is a very Christian one. It Is (...) Psalm concerning the Captivity of
Israel under the Fourth Beast, or Monarchy. The Midrash Tilli^^ takes, the
Tim^s of Trouble to be the Time, the Times, and the half Time, foretold by
Daniel. Yea, on that, He lutks like a Lion, it is a Passage of Austin;
Pers^cutio per An^ichristum ventura est violenta et fraudulenta.

1 Compare Deuteronomy. IV. 7. What Nation has G^^ so n^gh unto them?

5 quoth. All his Business is to molest his Neighbors

7 He Will call for one Curse after another on himself, to confirm the Promises he
never intends to keep.

PSALM. XI. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
1 IN the ETERNAL God I have reposed my confidence: How say ye to my Soul, flee
thou a Bird unto thy mount?

2 For lo, the wicked bend their bow, fix their shaft on the string, to shoot
in darkness at the Men that are upright in heart.

3 When that the firm foundations are, all utterly destroyed: It may be ask't,
The Righteous One what is it he has to do?

4 Why? the ETERNAL One is in His holy Temple still; And the ETERNAL One has in
the Heavens above His Throne. His eyes exactly do behold all that is done
below: His eyelids do discover well the Sons of Earthly Man.

5 The ETERNAL God makes trial of him that is a righteous Man: But his Soul
hates a wicked man, and him that loves to force.

6 Upon the wicked He shall rain, snares fre and sulphur down; a Spirit also
full of storm's the portion of their cup.

7 For the ETERNAL God who is just loves the things that are just; His
favorable aspects are upon the righteous Man.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XI. PSALM.
1 BEhold, the Church flying from Antichrist. Compare Rev. XIII. 2. It Is
remarkable, the destruction of Antichrist, by Fire and Brimst^ne, is her^
foretold. Compare, Is^. XXXIV. 9. and Rev. XVI. and XXI. Old Commentators
expound the Psalm from Isa. XI. 4.

3 Patrick so paraphrases; If Men have no regard unto Laws, and public
Decrees, which are the Fo^^dation of Humane Society, what security can an hon^^
Man have? or, what should he do, but get away from those who are so arbitrary
and perfidious? Mun^^ by Foundations understands the Oaths and the Ter^^ of
Peace, which Saul had so often violated. -- W^ see what is done by Antichrist.
Now see what the Righteous God will do!

4 While God seems to wink, and close his Eyes, if He took no notice of Men; He
is now trying them. It Is old Mr. Dickson's Note.

6 -- The Fate of Sodom is alluded to. Snare^^ One of the Ancients has an awful
Gloss. Laquei s^^ vetera peccata (et cupidines) iterum predomina^^ O ^lave to
ungoverned Passions, consider, whether the also have not, A Spirit full of
Storms!

PSALM XII. To the Chief Musician, Upon Sheminith. A Psalm of David.
1 HElp, O ETERNAL God, because t^^ pious Man does cease: the faith^^^ are
diminished from among the Sons (...) Men.

2 Each one unto his neighbor does speak lying vanity; with a most flatteri^^
lip they speak, and with a double heart

3 The ETERNAL God will cut off a^^ lips full of flatteries; the tongue that
set^ self to speak things of a mighty sound.

4 They say; We with this tongue of ours will carry still the day; Our lips we
have them for our own; who is a Lord to us?

5 For the spoil of the humbled ones, for the cry of the poor, Now, says the
ETERNAL God, I Will rise, I Will save whom he ensnares.

6 The words of the ETERNAL God are words exceeding pure; Silver tried in an
earthen forge, purified seven times.

7 Thou, O ETERNAL God, wilt have them in thy custody: From this vile
Generation, thou will him forever keep.

8 When they whom once the sons of ^^en did basely vilify shall be exalted,
wicked men walk sad on every side.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XII. PSALM.
IT IS Remarkable, Daniel describes the Antichristian Party, with expressions
taken from this Psalm. An Arabian Copy, from Sheminith, [or, The Eighth] in the
Title has this hint, De fine mundi, qui continget in Die O^tavo. Et prophetia
de adventu Christi. So the Syriac, De adventu Christi. Quaere, How far the
Seven times in the Sixth Verse, may refer to the Seventh Age, or Sabbatism

6 -- The Promises of God, not like yours, O False Men; Deceitful.

8 The Patrician Paraphrase is; This will make the Wicked not know which way to
turn themse^ves, but be ready to burst with vexation, when they see those Men,
whom they vilified, not only preserved, ^ut exalted by thy favor to di^nity.

PSALM XIII. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
1 O Thou ETERNAL God, How long will thou forget me? Ever! How long will thou
with anger hide thy face away from me?

2 How long consult I in my Soul? Griefs daily in my heart. And how long shall
my Enemies be exalted over me?

3 O thou ETERNAL God, my God, look, listen unto me; enlighten thou mine eyes,
lest I do fall asleep in death.

4 Lest that my adversary say, against him I Have prevailed! Lest that my
troublers do reicyce when I am staggering.

5 But I have placed my trust upon thy kind benignity: my heart in thy
salvation shall triumphing still rejoice.

6 Now also with my voice I Will sing to the ETERNAL God; since in a recompencing
way thou have dealt well with me.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XIII. PSALM.
R. Solomon thinks, that the How long, repeated Four times, may refer to the
Oppression of Is^ael under the Four Beasts in Daniel; the Four Mo^archies. The
Midr^sh Tillin takes notice of this Mystery; and adds. That herein was the just
Vengeance of God upon Israel, for putting him to complain Four times of them in
the Wilderness, How long! [S.e ^^od. XVI. and Numb. XIV.]

4 My Adversary! The Chaldee Paraprast understands it of our Evil Imagination;
that is our Original Sin. Christian, Improve the Hint. Have (...) found thee, O
mine Enemy?

PSALM XIV. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
1 THE Fool has said within his heart That there is not a God. Thus they
corrupt; they do the thing that is abominable. There is not one among them all
who does the thing that is good.

2 From Heaven the ETERNAL God looks on the sons of Men: He looks to see if
that there be one who does mind at all to understand, or, one who is, a seeker
after God.

3 They Are every one declined; they are together putrified; There is not one
doer of good, no, not so much as one.

4 All that work evil, know they not? They eat my people up, as they eat Bread,
they do not call on the ETERNAL One.

5 Even then and there with terror they were greatly terrified; for God is in
the race of him that is the righteous one.

6 The counsel of the humbled one, you would put that to shame; Because he does
for refuge fly to the ETERNAL God.

7 From Zion who gives Israel's health? When the ETERNAL turns His captived
people, Jacob will joy, Israel will be glad

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XIV. PSALM.
WHO are intended by the Wicked, who are here described? -- All the fallen and
sinful Children of Men have a share in the description. Sank Court may have a
peculiar share. But some Jewish Expositors, have a notable hint, That the Holy
Spirit intends yet more particularly, the Romish Babylon; by which the Israel
of God, was to be oppressed, until the Secord Coming of the Messiah, when the
Salvation of Israel is to come out of Zion, and the Lord will bring back the
Captivity of His People. How elegan^^ then, how appositely, how convictively,
and with how much cogency, does the Apostle choose the Passages of this very
Psalm, in writing unto the Romans, to co^vince them of their being such sinful
Creatures as at here described?

1 -- Yea, and as Arnobius notes, when they saw the humble state wherein our
Lord appeared, they said, H^^ is no God.

3 Austin reads it, There is none who does Good; (...) Except ONE. This ONE is
our Blessed JESUS!

6 The counsel of the Poor! This, Because the Lord is his Refuge; He looks to
be Justified only by Faith in the Lord, not by any works of his own. If I don't
misremember, it is Autstins curious gloss upon it.

PSALM XV. A Psalm of David.
1 WHO is it, O ETERNAL God shall sojourn in thy tent? His dwelling who shall
have in the mount of thy holtness?

2 He that walks with integrity and that works righteousness: and he that
speaks the very truth, even what is in his heart.

3 He with his tongue backbiteth not, nor does his Neighbor harm: And takes
not up a culumny against one near to him.

4 A despicable person is despised in his eyes; but he puts honor on the Men
that fear the ETERNAL God. He changes not when he has sworn, though it may do
him hurt.

5 His Coin he does not put unto a biting Usury. Nor does he take a bribe to
hurt one that is innocent. He that is a doer of these things shall never be
thrown down.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XV. PSALM.
SOme think, the Psalm was composed by David, either when he had brought the
Ark to Zion, or when he was himself restored thither, after the Rebellion of
Absalom. Then was very seasonable an Admonition to live better, and as under
the Government of God. So Theed ret.

1 Christian, Thou love, I know, to see thy SAVIOR! All the World agrees,
the Citizen of Zion to be every Godly Man. But, Old Arnobius, invites us, to
consider, whether our Blessed JESUS may not be described in the Psalm; and that
with Ten Characters answering to the Ten Commandments. I Will touch on an Article
or two. He has honored them that fear the Lord. How? By giving them a power to
become the Sons of God. He has Sworn and not Changed. How? In the Premises of
the Gospel. He has not put out This Money to Usury. That is in the Spiritual
Gifts bestowed on His Disciples, whereof He said, Freely ye have received,
freely give. He took not a reward against the Innocent; No, He freely gave
Himself a Ransom for the Guilty.

3 Takes not up! The Original goes further, He cannot hear it.

4 The Munsterian Reading is. In his own eyes, he is a^vile person and
contemned. To his hurt. -- Or (...) may be read, unto an ill Man. The
wickedness of others, will not release us from our Obligations to them

5 In the Holy Land where Mortgages were f^^ special Reasons made unlawful,
Usury was for the cause also forbidden. But among the Gentiles, there is no
disallowance of Mortgages; And so, Usury, regulated with Charity, is among us
to be allowed of.

PSALM XVI. Mictam of David.
1 O God, preserve thou me, because place my trust in thee.

2 My Soul, Thou to the ETERNAL God have said, Thou art my God. My goodne^^
reaches not to thee.

3 It Is to the Saints on Earth; and to those glorious ones in whom is all of m^
delight.

4 Their sorrows shall be multiplied, w^^ hasten to another; their
blood-drink-offrining I Will not pour, nor name them with my lips

5 The ETERNAL God's the portion which is my inheritance. And He Is the cup the
falls to me; Thou do maintain my lot^

6 The lines that fall to me are in places of sweet delights; yea, the
Inheritance for me it is how excellent!

7 I Will bless the ETERNAL God; It Is He who has advised me: yea, in the very
nights, my reins have well instructed me.

8 I have set the ETERNAL God before me ever more; Because He is at my right
hand I shall not be removed.

9 Therefore my heart is joyful, and my glory does rejoice; yea, more than so,
my very flesh shall dwell in confidence.

10 For thou will not forsake my Soul, when it is in the pit; nor wilt permit
thy gracious One to see corruption there.

11 Thou Wilt make me know the path of lives, joys enough are before thy face; at
thy Right hand there are pleasures for evermore.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XVI. PSALM.
BEhold, the Prayer of the Messiah in His Humiliation! Peter proves it can
belong to no other. Acts 11.25. In that state, GOD is at His Right Hand. But
after His Exaltation He sits at the Right Hand of GOD.

2 Some take it so. My Welfare (and what leads to it) is not concealed with
thee. No; -- (as anon) Thou have shown me the path of Life. Or, may not the
Messiah say, My Goodness is not known only to GOD; But the Saints on Earth are
also acquainted with it. The J^wish Expositors carry it so, My Goodness is not
without Thee. Thou art the Author of all the Go^ enjoy or perform.

3 If we say to the Lord, Thou art my Lord, (...) shall also say to the Saints,
These are the Excellent It is D. Kimchi's Gloss.

4 Old Arnobius understands, the Names, not of (...) Idols, but of the
Idolat^rs. I will deny them, -- s^^ our SAVIOR. The same Hebrew Word that fi^^
fies Idols, also signifies Sorrows. Christian, Let G^^ alone Reign in thy Soul,
or thou shall find them (...) Fond People causing Images to be made of their
d^^ Relatives, and with passionate Sorrows, first hone u^^ and then adoring of
them; This gave rise to the W^^^ shipping of Images.

7 q. d. In the darkest Night of Affliction, whe^^ cannot see my way, God
secretly inspires my mind w^^ wise tho^'s, and shows me what He would have
(...) to do.

9 Heart, Glory, Flesh. Some of the Anei^^ thought, 1 These. V. 23. Spirit,
Soul, and Body all^^ unto it.

10 Gracious One. The Hebrews tell us Chafi^^ One, Qui andit maledicentem et
non respondet. O who when he is reviled, revileth not again. Comp^^ 1. Pet. II.
21.

PSALM XVII. A Prayer of David.
1 HEar, O ETERNAL God, the right attend unto my cry; Give ear u^^ my prayer,
which is not in deceitful lip

2 Let there come from before thy fa^^ the sentence passed on me: Let thine
(...) favorably look upon things that be ri^^

3 Thou^h'st proved my heart; thou'st visited by night; me have thou tried:
Thou shall find nothing; I have thought, My mouth shall not transgress.

4 For what concerns the works of Men, by the word of thy lips, I have observed
well the paths of him who does destroy.

5 My goings, O do thou uphold in thy well-tending paths: When thou have done
that thing for me my footsteps have not slipped.

6 Upon thee I have called, because thou hear me, O God: O do thou bow thine
ear to me, O hearken to my speech.

7 Thy wondrous favors show, O thou who do deliver them that hope for it,
from those who do rise against thy righthand.

8 O do thou keep me even as the apple of thine Eye; under the shadow of thy
wings O do thou cover me.

9 From the face of the impious ones, such as have laid me waste; The enemies
who for my Soul about encompass me.

10 In their own stupifying grease they have enclosed themselves: They with
their mouth have loudly spoke in their exalted pride.

11 When we were going in our way they have encompassed us: They set their eyes
that they may spread their Nets upon the Earth.

12 He Is like unto a Lion which is greedy of a prey; and like to a young Lion
which does lie in lurking holes.

13 O thou ETERNAL God, arise, desh^^ him, cast him down; my Soul save from the
wicked one, used by thee as thy Swore^^

14 By thy hand, O ETERNAL God, save me from mortal Men; From mor^al Men of
this World, who in this life have their part: And of thy hidden treasu^^ thou
givist them a belly-full: Their Sons are filled, and they unto their Chi^^dren
leave the rest.

15 My portion's this; I shall behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be
sat^^ fy'd when that thy Image shall awake.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XVII. PSALM.
IT has the same Subject as the X Psalm; It Is a Pray^^ directed against the
same wicked men. Comp^^^ the 14th verse -- with the fate of Antichrist. Mat.
XXIV. 17.

4 q. d. I know what Men are apt to do in suc^ Circumstances. But the respect I
bear to thy Commandments, has preserved me from those Mu^^errous Practices,
which the Violent Man would have attempted. [See 1 Samuel XXVI. 8.] The Patrician
Paraphrase,

8 It Is onr SAVIORS Allusion, Mat, XXIII. 37.

13 Some read it, by thy Sword. Others, By the Sword, suppose the Ark to be
meant, which was as the Sword of God for the Defense of Israel, and the Osten^
of their Enemies. The Psalmist prays, they say, ^o^ the Deliverance of that, as
for his own Soul.

14 Metals and Jowels are, as the Jewish Expositor Notes, the bidden Treasure;
hidden in the Earth.

15 Is not Almsgiving a considerable Article of Righteousness? It Is all over
the Bible called so, and for weighty and obvious Reasons. It Is opposite here,
to the spirit and conduct of the Mon of this World, who what they don't spend
on their own Bellies, are studious to leave all the rest unto their Children.
The Ancient Hebrews have a report concerning David, That he gave Alms to the
Poor every day; using these Words, I will behold the Face of God in
righteousness. But the Messiah is the Face of God -- may we get into His
Rightcousness! Hebr. When it shall awake.] The Resurrection of the Messiah (and
so His Death is foretold.

PSALM XVIII. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David the Servant of the LORD,
who spoke unto the LORD, the words of this Song, in the day that the LORD
delivered him from the ^and of all his Enemies, and from the ^and of Saul.
1 OThou ETERNAL God, I will love Thee, my Fortitude.

2 The Eternal God my stone-defence; my Tower too is He; And He is my deliverer;
He is my mighty God; He is my Rock; in Him I Will hope; He is to me a Shield; And
He is that strong horn wherein all my salvation lies: He is that high Munition
where my whole protection lies.

3 I Will call on the ETERNAL God, who is worthy to be praised; So I shall rescued
be from those that are my Enemies.

4 The very grievous cords of Death encompassed me about; and torrents of
impiety gave terrors unto me.

5 The very grievous cords Hell about surrounded me; snares of a deadly
tendency stopped me on every side.

6 In my sad anguish I did call on the ETERNAL God; and with my voice I made a
cry to Him that is my God. He from the Temple where He dwells did hearken to my
voice; and my cry came before His Face; it came into His Ears.

7 Then the Earth shook, and trembled fore; and of the mountains then were the
foundations moved and shocked; because He was displeased.

8 Out of His nostrils went a smoke, and fire out of His mouth, this did
devour; coals were by Him kindled into a flame.

9 The Heavens also He bowed down; and He made His descent; A cloudy darkness
then there was under His feet displayed.

10 Upon a Cherub then He rode, and flew with wondrous wings; yea, He flew
swiftly on the wings of the Spirituous Wind.

11 Darkness He made His secret place; surrounding darkness was His Tent;
darkness of waters with clouds which do cloth the skies.

12 Through the illustrious brightness which there was before Him then, His thick
clouds passed away; there were Hailstones and Coals of fire.

13 And the ETERNAL God did in the Heavens thunder forth; And the most High
uttered His voice, Hailstones and Coals of fire.

14 Yea, He did send His Arrows forth; and so He scattered them. His Lightnings
too He darted forth, and did discomfit them.

15 The channels of the waters then were evidently seen; and the foundations of
the World plainly discovered. Because of thy threatening rebuke O thou ETERNAL
God; Because thy wrathful Nostrils did cause a fierce wind to blow.

16 He from above did then send down; He did lay hold on me; He from the mighty
waters then did safely draw me out.

17 From my strong adversary He did so deliver me; and from my haters; for they
were too powerful for me.

18 They did prevent me in the day of my calamity; But the ETERNAL God was He
whom I did stay upon.

19 And He did bring me forth into a place of large extent; He did deliver me
because He took delight in me.

20 The ETERNAL God rewarded me, after my right'ousness; after the cleanness of
my hands He recompensed me.

21 Fot I did well observe the ways of the ETERNAL God; and I did not dea
wickedly with Him that was my God.

22 For all His Judgments these were what I had before me still; His
Institutions also I did not remove from me.

23 I was one of integrity in all my (...) with Him; And carefully I kept my
sell from mine iniquity.

24 The ETERNAL now rewarded me after my right'ousness; after the cleanness of
my hands, which was before (...) Eyes.

25 Thou will with him that is merciful show thy self merciful; with him that an
upright one Thou Wilt show thy se^ upright.

26 With one that is well purified thou show thy self as pure; But with one the
is obstinate, thou wilt be inflexible.

27 Because to humbled people thou will a Salvation grant: But those who ha^
exalted eyes are whom thou will abase.

28 Because my candle thou will make with glory to shine forth; The ETERNAL
God, my God gives light, in darkness (...) me.

29 Because by Thee I have broke through ^troop of armed ones; and by my God I
swiftly have leaped over an high wall.

30 For God, perfect's His way; the Word of the ETERNAL God is a tried Word, He
is a Shield to all that hope in Him.

31 For who can be esteemed a GOD, but the ETERNAL One? And who but He that is
our GOD, can be a Rock to us?

32 This GOD girds me with fortitude, and perfect makes my way.

33 He makes my feet like those of Deer, and makes me stand in heights.

34 He does instruct my hands unto the management of War, so that a Bow of
hardened steel is broken by my arms.

35 And thou of thy salvation have bestowed on me the shield; and thy right
hand has held me, and thy meekness greatned me.

36 Thou have vouchsafed enlargement to my goings under me, so that my
footsteps in thy ways weakly have not declined.

37 I have pursued my enemies, and overtaken them; neither did I return again
until they were consumed.

38 I Have wounded them, so that they were not able to arise; they prostrate fell
under my feet, which trod upon their necks.

39 For thou with mighty fortitude have girded me for War; such as rose up
against me thou have bowed down under me.

40 And thou have given me the necks of these my enemies; Those also who have
hated me, I have destroyed them.

42 Then I did beat them very small, as dust before the wind; I brought them
low, like to the dirt which lies about the streets.

43 Thou'st saved me from the peoples strifes, placed me the nations head; the
people whom I have not known shall be my servants now.

44 At hearing the report of me they have obeyed me; the children of the
stranger have dissembled unto me.

45 The children of the stranger have quite withered away; and they have with
much trembling come out of their hidden caves.

46 The ETERNAL is the living One; and blessed be my Rock; And now exalted let
the God of my salvation be.

47 It is the mighty God who grants revenges unto me; And it is He who does
subdue the people under me.

48 He saves me from mine enemies; from my invaders thou do also lift me,
thou do pluck me from the violent Man.

49 Therefore I will give thanks unto Thee, O ETERNAL God, among the Nations,
and I will sing praises to thy Name.

50 Great makes He the salvation of His King; and kindness shows unto His
CHRIST; to David and his seed for evermore.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XVIII. PSALM.
IT IS the Song of the Mossiah on His Victory over Antichrist.

1 Arnobius has a Gloss of Practical Piety. When it is come to this, that all
our L^ves are swallowed up in this, I will Love Thee, O Lord; Then we are truly
delivered from the hand of all our Enemies, that is to say, Our Vices; and from
the hand of Saul, that is to say, The Prince of this World.

2 The Resort of David had been to Cave^ and Lurking Places, and Fortresses,
and Strong Holds, and Rocks, and impregnable Forts, and high Mountain. But now
unto none of these does he ascribe any thing. It Is all ascribed unto GOD.

15 When accomplished? If David made the state of the Church of Israel his own
(as every Ruler should!) -- That Church had these things done for it in its
Deliverance out of Egypt, and in some following Dispensations. But remember,
here is a Prophecy as well as a Hisiory!

16 Consider now, Moses as a Type of our SAVIOR.

23 q. d. 'How unjustly soever my Fnemies dealt 'with me, I would not imitate
them; Though I could 'not hinder their's, I kept my self from mine Iniquity. It Is
the Patrician Paraphrase.

29 Arnobius applies it unto the Souls going out of the Body in Death.
Christian, pause upon (...).

34 Austins Gloss upon it is; Intentio bon^rum Operum in illo fuit
indesatigabilis.

40 An Allusion to Josh. X. 16.

43 Hopes for Americans! Our Savior as Man seen and known, Asians, Africans,
Europe^ns.

44 Aben-Ezra takes it so; They shall be so Liars, in the Promises they made
unto themselve obtaining Victories.

PSALM XIX. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
1 THE Heavens, they declare abroad Majesty of God; and the expa^ing Firmament
shows forth His Han work.

2 Day unto day most copiously utters us a speech; Night unto night insinuat^
the things that we should know.

3 There is not any speech on Earth, (...) words used any where, where the loud
vo^ uttered by them may not be plainly heard.

4 Their line is gone through all the Farth and to the very end of the whole
habital World, the words which they do spea^ In them He sets the Sun a Tent:

5 And he goes Bridogroom like from Bride chamber, glad as one strong for run a
^ace.

6 He goes out from one end of Heaven and rolls to t^other ends; and there is
any thing that is hid from the heat there^

7 Perfect is the ETERNAL's La^ Converting of the Soul; The ETERNAL's
testimony's sure, making the simple wise.

8 Right the ETERNAL's statutes are rejoicing of the heart; Pure the ETERNAL's
Precept is enlightening of the eyes.

9 The Fear of the ETERNAL's clean, lasting perpetually; The ETERNAL's
Judgments are the truth, all alike justified.

10 Defirable much more than Gold, yea, than much solid Gold; Than honey also
sweeter much, or dropping honeycomb.

11 Thy Servant he moreover is admonished from them; in the exact keeping of
them there is a great Reward.

His errors, who can understand? cleanse me from secret sins.

13 Restrain thy Servant also from what are presumptuous crimes: Let them not
over me prevail; then shall I be complete: yea, I from much transgression shall
therein be purified.

14 The words proceeding from my mouth in Worshipping of Thee, yea, and the
thought which in my heart Thou see I meditate; Let these to good acceptance
be before thy Glorious Face, O Thou ETERNAL God, my Rock, and my Deliverer.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XIX. PSALM.
COnsider Romans X. 18. and you will see what the Ps^lm is to be reserr'd unto.

1 All Nations have made their Deductions from the Works of God, and
particu^^ly from what they s^^ i^ the H^^vens, That there is a GOD. The
Quotations would fill many Volumns.

5 How did the Ancients apply it? Anstin shall and were for them. Conjugatum
carni ^uma^^^ Verbum, processit de utero Virgin^li but methinks I see the Grand
Revolution which concludes our Bible coming on I see the Marriage o^ the Lamb,
and our Bright SAVIOR proceeding to that W^dding, for which He^^ to return
unto u^. Then w^ll there be an Accomplishment of what the Psalm goes on to
celebrate. The Word of GOD will then have its transcendent efficacy. The
Glorious Virtues and Effects of the Divine Wort, on those who are ma^e New
Creatures by it, will t^^^ appear, with a most ^fronishing Lu^^re, to ^ll the
World

7 The Psalmist passes from the Sun to the Law! (...) Kimch: makes a no^^ble
Comparison between them, with as notable a Dissimil^tude, wherein the Law h^^
the advantage. R. Saadiah, supposes that Word (...) Transition, says, to be
understood here. The S^^ says, The Law of the Lord is perfect. But, O^^ Let
the Resemblance of our SAVIOR to the SU^ be prosecuted here. The Sibylline
Oracle was, G^ shall send a King from the Sun, who shall make peace over the
Earth. Fagans therefore looked for a Sa^^ our, to come from the Sun. But our
Apostle Jam^^ tells us, That our Good is to be expected in a SAVIOR, who is
the ^un of Righteousnes^.

14 In the Midr^sh T^llin, there is this Gloss up^ it; may they be written for
Posterity. ^^^s well f^^ us that they have been so.

PSALM XX. To the Chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
MAY the ETERNAL in a Day of Trouble answer thee; The Name of Jacobs God, may
that then set thee up on high.

2 May He afford thy help to thee, from the most holy place; and with supports
from Zion sent may He now strengthen thee.

3 May He remember kindly all the oblations thou do make: May He declare that
He accepts of thy burnt Sacrifice. Selah.

4 May He give Blessings unto thee according to thy heart: And may He now
accomplish for thee all that thou would have.

5 In thy Salvation we'll rejoice and in the Name of our God Banners we'll
raise, All thy desires may the ETERNAL grant.

6 Now know I the ETERNAL God saves His Anointed One; He Will hear him from His
holy Heaven; His Right hand saves with powers.

7 In Chariots some confide, and some in Horses; But for us, The Name of
JEHOVAH OUR GOD, we will remember that.

8 These are compelled for to stoup, and they are fallen down: But we are
raised up again, and we do stand upright.

9 O Thou ETERNAL One, Do thou grant thy Salvation now. Let the King hear us in
the day when ever we shall call.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XX. PSALM.
1 A Rnobius here sees the Acclamations of the Ch^^^ to our SAVIOR, going to
dye on the Cr^^^ Yea, Aben Ezra testisies, That the Jews themsel^^ apply the
Psalm to the Messiah.

Why, The God of Jacob? Jacob was the Patriarch remarkable for this, That God
had heard him in (...) day of Trouble. The Midrash Tillin, here quo^^ those
Words of Jacob; Genesis XXXV. 3. The God (...) answered me in the Day of my
Distress.

PSALM XXI. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
1 IN thy strength, OETERNAL God, King does much rejoice; and He thy Salvation
does triumph how gloriou^^

2 Thou have afforded unto him w^^ was his heart's desire; and thou have
witheld from him the utterance of lips. Selah.

3 For with the Blessings of the Goo^ Thou have prevented him: Thou have posed
on his head a crown of solid Go^

4 He asked life of thee; thou did stow it upon him; A length of days ^ended
to Ages that never end.

5 His Glory how magnisicent in Salvation^^tis^ Honor and Majesty what th^^
ha^t upon him put.

6 Because to be Blessings thou have set him for evermore; Thou have made him
for to rejoice with joy before thy face.

7 For that the King does place his hope in the ETERNAL One; and in the grace
of the most High he never shall be moved.

8 Thy hand shall apprehend all those that are thine enemies; thy right hand
such shall apprehend as haters are of thee.

9 Thoult make them as a fiery oven in the times of thy wrath: The ETERNAL in
His great wrath will swallow them wholly up. And the fire that shall flame from
thence shall quite devour them all.

10 Their fruit from Earth thou wilt waste, and from the sons of Men their seed.

11 Because against thee they have still intended what is ill: They have
contrived a device; but more than they could do.

12 Thou shall set them all but as one in turning of the back; Arrows thou
shall sit on the strings against the face of them.

13 O thou ETERNAL One, Do thou exalt thy self on high in thine own strength;
so we will sing and praise thy mighty power.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXI. PSALM.
CHristian, Behold the Messiah; His Kingdom, and the ludgments of GOD upon His
Fremies. Compar^ ^^an. VII. and XI.

3 Munster says, it alludes to the crown taken (...) the Ammonites. 2 Samuel XII.
30.

8 It is an ancient Observation, and indeed a Curf^^^^ That when the Right Hand
of God is mentioned, (...) usually with an eye to what He will do in the F^^^
State, in and her World, in the Eternity that (...) take place when this
present time comes to an (...) Save by thy Right Hand, is a Prayer for E^^^^
Salvation. Pleasures at the Right Hand of G^^ are those of Eternal Happiness.
Wisdom with L^^^ of Days in the Right Hand, has Eternal Hi^^^ Thus here. It Is
Gregory's Nore. Hosts Dei^^^. The Enemies of God may enjoy the Good things of
Left Hand, in this (...). Fur in that which is come, they shall (...) and
extinguished.

PSALM XXII. To the Chief Musician. Upon Ajeleth-Shah^^ A Psalm ^f David.
1 MY God, my God, O for what cau^^ have thou forsaken me^ Why (...) thou so
far from my help? from the wor^^ of my cry^^.

2 By day I cry'l to thee, my God; still thou hear not, Yea, in the ni^^^
cry again, and do not hold my peace.

3 But thou art holy; still thou do Israel's praises dwell.

4 Our Fathers hoped in thee; they ho^^ and thou did rescue them.

5 They unto Thee did make their (...) and were delivered, in Thee they did
(...) their (...) were not put to shame.

6 But I am treated as a Worm, and not a Man of worth; I Am the reproach of Men,
and I am still the peoples scorn.

7 All that do cast their eyes on me do but laugh me to scorn; they shoot out
with a scoffing lip; they shake the head with scoffs.

8 He leaned on the ETERNAL One for to deliver Him; Let Him now rescue Him,
because He does delight in Him.

9 Because that thou art He who did extract me from the Womb; Thou did cause
me to hope, while I hung on my Mother's Breasts.

10 Yea, even from the very Womb, I upon Thee was cast; Ever since my Mother
went with me, Thou art my mighty God.

11 O do not thou withdraw unto a distance far from me; for there is distressing
trouble near; for there is none to help.

12 Many Bulls compass me, the strong of Bashan me surround.

13 They gaped on me; a Lion so rav'ning and roaring would.

14 Like water am I poured, and all my Bones are out of joint; my Hearts like
wax; in the midst of my bowels it is dissolved.

15 My strength is like a potsherd dried, and my tongue joins my jaws: and thou
have brought me down into the dust where lie the dead.

16 For dogs have compassed me: a rout of wicked me beset; My hands they and my
feet have dug, even as a lion would.

17 My bones I may tell all of them; they look and stare on me.

18 My Clothes they part among them selves, and on my Robe throw lots.

19 But, O ETERNAL One, Be not thou far estranged from me. O thou that art my
strength make haste with succor unto me.

20 Save my Soul from the Sword; from the Dogs paw my Only one.

21 From lions mouth save me, and hear me from the Wild-Goats horns.

22 I will declare thy Name to those that are my Brethren; I will thee in the
midst of the Congregation praise.

23 Who fear the ETERNAL God, praist Him; all you of Jacob's seed, glorify Him;
and fear Him all you seed of Israel.

24 For He has not despised, nor loathed, the abasement of the poor; nor has
He hid His face from him, but heard his cry to Him,

25 In the Great Congregation now from Thee shall be my praise; Before such as
do fear Him now I will perform my Vows.

26 The poor shall eat, and have enough; They Will praise the ETERNAL God, who
seel for Him; your heart shall live to all Eternity.

27 All the Worlds bounds remembering shall turn to the ETERNAL God; and of the
Nations all the Tribes, how down before His face.

28 For unto the ETERNAL God the Kingdom does belong; and He shall be the
Governor among the Nations all.

29 All the fat ones of Earth have eat, and they have bowed down; all who go
down unto the dust have bowed before His face; even every one of them that
cannot make his own Soul to live.

30 A seed shall serve Him, to the Lord a Generation deemed.

31 They shall come, and they shall declare His right'ousness unto a People
that shall be begot, that it is what He has done.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXII. PSALM.
A Ijeleth Hashachar, some read, The Morning Star. Compare Rev. XXII. 28.

3 Is not the Messiah worthy of our Praises? Besure, In Him GOD Inhabits as His
Holy of Holies.

6 Heb. The Red Worm. Compare Isa. 1.18. the same Word is used for our Crimsons
Sins. Think with surprise! Nazianzen observes, Our Savior is compared unto the
weakest things; A Worm, a Lamb: The Devil is compared unto the strongest -- A
Lion, an Armed One. Yet our Savior is too hard for the Devil.

26 Arnobius has a fine Thought, Edent corpus ejus pauperes spiritu, ut
satientur.

29 -- Munster does well to refer it unto the Dead.

PSALM XXIII. A Psalm of David.
1 MY Shepherd is the ETERNAL God I shall not be in [any] want:

2 In pastures of a tender grass he [ever] makes me to lie down: To waters of
tranquillities He gently carries me, [along,]

3 My feeble and my wandering Soul He [kindly] does fetch back again; In the
plain paths of righteousness He does lead [and guide] me along, because of the
regard He has [ever] unto His Glorious Name.

5 Yea, when I shall walk in the Vale of the dark [dismal] shade of Death,
(...) of no evil be afraid, because thou [ever] art with me. Thy rod and thy
staff, the^^ are what yield [constant] comfort unto me.

5 A Table thou do furnish out richly [for me] before my face. It Is in view
of mine Enemies; [And then] my head thou do anoint with fatning and perfuming
Oil: my cup it [ever] overflows.

6 Most certainly the thing that is Good, with [most kind] Benignity, This
(...) the days that I do live shall [still an^] ever follow me; Yea, I shall
dwell, * an^ Sabbatize, even to [unknown] leng^^ of days, Lodged in the House
which d^^ belong to [Him who's] the ETERNAL God.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXIII. PSALM.
BEhold, the Confidence of the Church under the Couduct of the Messiah: He
says, Joh. X. 11. I am the Good Shepherd. The Prophets have taught us how to
apply the Psalm. See Isa. XI. 10. Jer. XXIII. 3. Ezck. XXXIV. 11, 23. And so
have the Apostles, 1 Pet. II. 25. and V. 4 Heb. XIII. 20.

1 -- And, Christians, Why should not you find in your Secular Employments, the
Occasions of Divine, Devout, Heavenly Reflections! David, a Shepherd, is led by
Shepherdy, to think on the Heavenly Shepherd.

7 Drusius will have David now to think of Samuel's Anointing of him.

6 Good, and Benignity are Names of the Messiah. Christian, Thou know why He
should be called so. In the Luminous Cloud, which like a Pillar did follow the
Church in the Wilderness, there was a mavelous Presence of the Messiah. May
not this be here pointed at! The Shelter which this Pillar gave, was that of an
House. With some eye to that Moses might say, Psalm. XC. 1. Thou have been our
dwelling place.

PSALM XXIV. A Psalm of David.
1 TO the ETERNAL God, the Earth and what fills it belongs; the habitable
World, and all that do inhabit it.

2 For the foundations of it He has laid upon the Seas; and He has firmly
fixed it against the rolling floods.

3 Who shall ascend into the Mount of the ETERNAL God? And who is it shall
stand in the place of His Holiness?

4 One that is clean in hands, but then One that is pure in heart; who don't
receive his Soul in vain, nor swear deceitfully:

5 This Man the Blessing shall receive from the ETERNAL God; and Righteousness
shall from the God of his Salvation have.

6 This is the Generation of them that seek Him aright; even of them that see
thy face: Jacob is such as these. Selah.

7 Lift up your heads, O Gates, and be lift up, O lasting Doors; and so the
King of Glory will now make His entry there.

8 Who is the King of Glory? It Is JEHOVAH strong and great: It Is the ETERNAL
God who is in War a mighty one.

9 Lift up your Heads, O Gates, and be lift up, O lasting Doors; and so the
King of Glory now will make His entry there.

10 Who is the King of Glory? It Is JEHOVAH Tzebaoth: It Is the ETERNAL Lord of
Hosts, the King of Glory's HE.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXIV. PSALM.
SUppose the People now attending the Removal (...) the Ark unto Zion, with
extraordinary Solemni^^ They are Exhorted now to practice the most Substa^tial
together with their Ceremonial Pi^ty. The Ascent of our Savior, was
represented in that Solemnity; and may here be Prophesied.

The Hebrews did use to Sing the Psalm on the First Day of the Week. And the
LXX add a Title of that Importance. Doubtless (as Dr. Patrick expresses it).
because their Wise Men saw here a Prophecy of CHRIST, whose first step unto the
Throne of His Glory, was on the First Day of the Week.

^ut it is urged by Dr. Allix, that the Return of our Savior may be as much
considered here; and His coming in His Kingdom.

The Psalm contains the Characters of those who shall be admitted into it. That
expression, In War and Mighty One; supposes His Enemies to be vanquished.
Compare, Rev. XIX. 6.

4 Surely, He that employs a Soul only in the mean and vile purposes of
impiety, Receives a Soul in vain. And, O you, who do nothing for the Souls
committed unto your Charge; is not this your Character too!

7, 9 Twice opened! First for thy SAVIOR, and then for thee, O Believer, who
art a Follower of Him.

10 In War a Mighty One; Omitted in the Repetition: Ab^^ Ezra say, Because in
the Days of the Messiah, Men are to beat their Swords into Plowshares.

PSALM XXV. Of David.
1 O Thou ETERNAL God, To Thee I do lift up my Soul.

2 My God, I put my trust in thee; let me not be ashamed. Let not my
Adversaries have a triumph over me.

3 Yea, all of them that wait on thee, let them not be ashamed. Let be ashame^
those who do transgress without a cause.

4 O Thou ETERNAL God, show me thy ways, teach me thy paths.

5 Make thou me in thy truth to walk; And teach me; for thou art the God of my
Salvation; I wait on thee all the day.

6 Remember, O ETERNAL God, what thy kind bowels are; and what thy bounties
are; for they have ever been of old.

7 Sins of my youth remember not, not my vile trespasses: But, Oh! according to
thy Grace do thou remember me. O thou ETERNAL God, Do this, even for thy
Goodness sake.

8 The ETERNAL's Good and Right therefore Sinners He Will teach the way.

9 The humbled meek ones He will help with judgment for to walk; and He the
humbled meek ones will instruct what is His way.

10 All the paths of the ETERNAL are Mercy and Truth to those who keep His
Covenant, and mind His Testimonies there.

11 For the sake of thy Glorious Name, O Thou ETERNAL God; Pardon (...) mine
iniquity; because that it is great.

12 Who is the Man that has the fear (...) the ETERNAL God? He Will thoroughly
instru^^ him in the way that he should choose.

13 His Soul shall spend the Night in rest, with what is good Above; and then
his Seed shall take as heirs the Earth he leaves to them.

14 The secret of the ETERNAL is with them that have His fear, and it is His
Covenant that He will make them for to know.

15 Mine eyes continually are to the ETERNAL God; Because it is He that shall
bring forth my feet out of the snare.

16 O turn thou unto me, and have thou mercy upon me; for I am in a lonely
case, and an afflicted one.

17 The anguishes of my Heart have greatly enlarged themselves; O do thou bring
me out of all my sore vexatious grief's

18 On my affliction, O look down, and on my laboring pain; and let thy
pardoning mercy reach to all my trespasses.

19 Look down upon my Enemies for they are multiplied; and it is with hatred
full of rage that they have hated me.

20 Into thy keeping take my Soul, and Oh! Deliver me; Let me not be ashamed,
for I have put my trust in thee.

21 Let an entire Integrity and exact Rectitude, be my preserver; for that I am
waiting still on thee.

22 O GOD who art the Judge of all, Do thou redemption give unto thine Israel
from all the Troubles now on him.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXV. PSALM.
IT IS the first of the Alphabetical Psalms. Acrosticks were of much esteem in
Antiquity. But sometimes the strength of the Inspiration might interrupt the
method. Or, a Letter may be dropped for causes now unknown to us. There were
Examples of it (as Mr. J^ukins. observes) among the Greek Poets.

8 Is it not an Allusion to the care used of Old, about the ways to the Cities
of Refuge? My Jewish Expositors tell me so.

15 -- When the Off spring of a Godly Man, are entering upon the Earthly
Inheritance, which, at his Death, he leaves unto them, Then the Soul of this
Man, is lodged with the Good One (Christ,) or in the Good Place (Heaven,) or in
Goodness itself; in Happiness. The Immortality of the Soul is here asserted.
This Hint I had from Dr. Alting the Younger. But, Arnobius finds another and a
better Earth for the Seed of the Messiah.

PSALM XXVI. Of David.
1 ETERNAL, Judge me, for I Have walked in my integrity; and on the ETERNAL God
I Have hoped; I shall not stagger now.

2 O thou ETERNAL God, Do thou thoroughly examine me; and make a trial of me;
try my reins, and try my heart.

3 Because thy loving kindness is always before mine eyes; and I have carried
on my walk in thy directing truth.

4 I have not chose my seat with Men of vain temerity; nor have I entered
councils with Men that put on a mask.

5 The Assembly of malignant Men is that which I do hate; and I will never sit
with such as are ungodly ones.

6 My hands I will be sure to wash in a clean innocence; Thine Altar so I Will
walk about, O thou ETERNAL God,

7 That I may make for to be heard with a thanksgiving voice, and that I may
declare abroad all of thy wondrous works.

8 O thou ETERNAL, I have loved the dwelling of thy House; and the place where
thy Glory has its Habitation chose.

9 O gather not my Soul with such as wander on in Sin; Nor take away my life
with such, as are the Men of Blood.

10 With such Men as have in their hands mischievous wickedness; and their
right hands replenished with a corrupting gift.

11 But as for me, my walk shall be in mine integrity; O do thou now redeem me,
and be merciful to me.

12 My foot has still persisted in a constant rectitude; I in the
Congregations will bless the ETERNAL God.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXVI. PSALM.
3 PSalmist, How durst thou have said, Judge me O Lord; if thou had not also
said, Thy loving kindness is always before mine eyes? This Note is a very
Ancient one.

4 The Dissemblers here, Aben Ezra says, ar^ Young People who mind none but the
Delights of the World. The Hebrew Word would favor such a Thought. O Young
People, consider it.

6 What? Was David a Priest? Our SAVIOR (...) Consider Him speaking here. Yea,
David might we^ say. I have not satisfied my self with the ceremony of washing
my Hands, before I went unto the offering of a Sacrifice, but I endeavored
sincerely to keep free from all moral and sinful impurities.

9. q. d. -- Let me not perish as if I were a Murderer.

PSALM XXVII. Of David.
1 HE who to me a Glorious Light, an^ my Salvation gives, is the ETERNAL God;
and now who is it I shall fear. The strength from whence my Life's maintained,
is the ETERNAL God; And no^^ what one is there by whom I need be te^^tify'd?

2 When evil ones, my troublers, who (...) were enemies to me drew near on me,
t^^ waste my flesh, they stumbled and fell dow^^

3 Against me let an host encamp, (...) my heart shall have no fear; against me
let a War arise, in this I am secure.

4 There is one thing I have desired of the ETERNAL God; This is the thing that
I will seek, that I may ever have my dwelling, * and my Sabbath too assigned
me, in the House of the ETERNAL all the days my life shall be prolonged: That
so I may enjoy the view of the sweet Beauty in the ETERNAL God, and to enquire,
in His high Temple still.

5 For in the time of trouble He shall hide me in His Tent; In's Tabernacle's
covered part; There shall He cover me. He shall exalt me where I shall be set
upon a Rock.

6 And now my head's lift up above all my surrounding foes. So Sacrifices with
a shout I Will offer in His Tent; I Will sing, yea, I will praises sing to the
ETERNAL God.

7 Hear, O ETERNAL God, my voice with which I cry to thee: Have mercy also upon
me, and hearken unto me.

8 Seek ye my face; On hearing this, my heart did speak to thee; Thy face, O
thou ETERNAL God, Thy face now, I will seek.

9 Hide not away from me thy face, nor suffer to decline, in * or to anger him
that is a servant unto Thee. Thou have afforded help to me; O do not leave me
now; not yet forsake me, O thou God whence my Salvation comes.

10 My Father and my Mother, when they have forsaken me, Then O ETERNAL God,
thou do take me into thy care.

11 O thou ETERNAL God; do thou teach me what is thy way; And lead me in the
path of Right, for my observers sake.

12 Give me not up unto the will of my foes; for there rise false witnesses
against me, and one who breaths violence.

13 Nevertheless, I do believe for the enjoyment of the Good of the ETERNAL in
the land of living ones.

14 Look for the ETERNAL God, and so I strengthen thy self in Him; He shall
confirm thy heart; Again look for the ETERNAL God.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXVII. PSALM.
4 ENquire, After what? The Spanish has a Good Hint upon it. Enquire in my
Doubts; For direction in the Doubtful Attairs of my Kingdom.

5 The Secret of the Tabernacle was the Holy of Holles. No Man might come
there. Christian, is (...) the Voice of thy SAVIOR to be considered her^

8 Our Psalmist had been doubtless much a Stu^^^^ in the Book of Deuteronomy.
Now, See Deuteronomy. IV (...) If thou seek the Lord thy God, thou shall find Hi^ if
thou seek Him with all thy heart.

9 Yea, and remember, O Christian, If thou art (...) lest unto an Angry
Impatience under thy T^yals, (...) will ben Sign, that GOD has not put thee
away.

10 Is it not an Allusion to the Journey of Israel through the Wilderness? When
the Three first Squadrons were passed on, the Fourth were to gather up, the
Sick, and the Weak, and the Lame, that had been left behind.

13 This present World, alas, it is rather the Land of the Dying, than the Land
of the Living. Believer, Look forwards, look upwards! The Ancients, both Jews
and Christians, expounded, The Land of the Living, to mean, The World to come.
Think on the New Earth, in the Kingdom of our SAVIOR. Think on Mat. V. 3.

14 Arnobius notes, That this Verse is the Antiphona of the Holy Spirit, unto
the Saint expressing these Expectations.

PSALM XXVIII. Of David.
1 TO Thee, O thou ETERNAL God, I will send forth a cry; O be not silent, Thou
my Rock, in a withdraw from me. Lest that if thou do hold thy peace,
witholding Help from me, I should be like to them who do go down into the pit.

2 Hear what my Supplications speak, when I do cry to thee; when I lift up my
hands toward thy holy Oracle.

3 Drag me not with ill M^n, not with workers of vanity; who speak peace to
their Neighbors, but mischief is in their hearts.

3 Give them according to their deeds, and as they have ill designed: Give them
what their own hands have wrought; render them their desert.

4 Because they don't regard the deeds of the ETERNAL God, nor the work of His
Hands; He Will them destroy, and not build up.

6 Blessed be the ETERNAL God, for this, because that He has kindly hearkened
to the voice my supplications had.

7 It Is the ETERNAL One, who is my strength, and is my shield. On Him my heart
has placed its hope, and I am helped so. And for this very cause my heart does
mightily rejoice; Now with my Song His Praises I will gladly celebrate.

8 Yea, the ETERNAL God to them is their true fortitude; and of Salvation He Is
the strength of His Anointed one.

9 O save thy People, and O bless thou thine Inheritance; Be thou a Shepherd
unto them, and lift them up for ever.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXVIII. PSALM.
R. Solomon says, When in the Title of a Psalm, we read only, Of David, it
intimates, The Holy Spirit came suddenly on David, without the use of the usual
means to obtain His Influences. But when we read, A Psalm of David, it
intimates, that he then had used means to obtain the Illapses of the Holy
Spirit. Behold, here a Trayer for the Faithful, that they may not be joined in
Destruction with the Followers of Antichrist; and they hope for Salvation by
the Messiah, after that He has destroyed that wicked Society.

2 Our Supplications have a further V^ice in them, than what just utters the
matter of them. Christian, Thy Prayers, Do they speak thy Love to the Glorious
GOD, thy Exaltation of His Will above thy own, thy Faith in thy SAVIOR, thy
esteem for Spiritual Blessings above Temporal, and thy Benignity toward thy
Neighbor, wishing as well to him as to thy self? When there is a Voice in thy
Supplications, importing such things as these, GOD will hear it, and have a
great respect unto them.

5 Arnobius applies it unto the unbelieving Jews, who did not regard the
miraculous Works of our SAVIOR, when He even raised the Dead, and said,
Believe my Works.

PSALM XXIX. A Psalm of David.
1 A Scribe to the ETERNAL God, O Sons of mighty ones, Ascribe to the ETERNAL
God Glory and Fortitude.

2 Ascribe to the ETERNAL God the Honor of His Name; Bow to the ETERNAL God in
the Glory of holiness.

3 The Voice of the ETERNAL God is on the Waters heard: The Glorious God
Thunders on great Waters; JEHOVAH's there.

4 The Voice of the ETERNAL is uttered. with mighty power; the Voice of the
ETERNAL is urter'd with majesty.

4 The Voice of the ETERNAL does break Cedars all to shivers; yea, the ETERNAL.
One does break Cedars of Lebanon.

6 He makes them also for to leap as a young Calf would do; even Lebanon and
Sirion like a son of Wild-Goats leap.

7 The Voice of the ETERNAL God having divided them, He does strike down with
flaming darts of a devouring fire.

2 The Voice of the ETERNAL God does shake the Wilderness; The ETERNAL makes
the Wilderness of Kadesh for to shake.

9 The Voice of the ETERNAL God does make the Hinds bring forth; And in His
Temple all of His do speak His Glory there.

10 The ETERNAL God presides upon the Flood, still ruling it; yea, the ETERNAL
God sits King Enthroned for evermore.

11 His People, the ETERNAL God will fortify with strength; His People the
ETERNAL God will bless with prosperous peace.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXIX. PSALM.
WAS not the Psalm composed by David, after some extraordinary Lightning and
Thunder and Rain; which had perhaps assisted the Discomfiture of His Enemies?
One looks on it as an Exhortation to the Princes of the Earth, to submit unto
the re-estabed Kingdom of the Messiah. And the Voice here may be the Report of
the wonders done in that Matter. Compare, Jer. XXV. 31. A Noise from the ends
of the Earth.

1 Compare, Job XXXVIII. 7. Munster notes well, There is nothing so high and so
great, but what is obliged unto the Praises of God.

3 P^meranus whom Lather cried up as the best and the first Interpreter of the
Psalter, and whose Commentaries, as Frankins notes, Referti sunt Meditationibus
de CHRISTI Magnitudine et Majestate; would have what we read here about, The
Voice of the Lord; compared with what the Apostle to the Hebrews writes about,
The quick and powerful Word of GOD, and what John writes about, The Word of God
by which all things were created.

9 But, Oh! why not the whole World a Temple of GOD! R. Moseh has this Gloss.
The Levites Praise GOD, for His preserving of them from hurt by Thunder.

10 Aben-Ezra notes upon it; The Waters shall not overwhelm the Kingdom of God.
Another considers this Intimation; The Thunder does not more easily tear the
Trees and the Rocks, than God can break in pieces the proudest of Princes.

PSALM XXX. A Psalm. A Song at the Dedication of the House of David.
1 THEE, O ETERNAL, I Will extol; for thou'st exalted me; and have not made my
enemies to triumph over me,

2 O thou ETERNAL God, thou art my God; I unto thee have made my cry inmy
Distress; and thou have healed me.

3 Thou, O ETERNAL God, have brought my Soul up from the pit; thou have made me
to live, that I descend not to the Grave

4 Sing unto the ETERNAL God, O ye His Gracious Ones; and praise at the
remembrance of His Glorious Holiness.

5 For but a moment's in His wrath; There in His favor life: weeping may with
the Evening lodge; but in the Morning joy.

6 But as for me, this did I say in my felicity; I shall not be removed from
thence to all Eternity.

7 Thou, O ETERNAL, to my mount giv'st by thy favor strength; Thou for a while
did hide thy face; my Trouble then was great.

8 O thou ETERNAL God, to Thee then did I make my cry: And unto the ETERNAL God
I then did supplicate.

9 What profit's in my Blood, when I go down into the pit? The Dust, shall that
acknowledge thee? Shall it declare thy Truth?

10 Hear, O ETERNAL God, and have thou mercy upon me; O thou ETERNAL God, Be
thou an helper unto me.

11 My mourning thou have turned into tripudiating joy; Thou have put off my
sackcloth, and with gladness girded me.

12 Glory shall therefore sing to thee, and shall not hold its peace; O Thou
ETERNAL God, my God; Thee I Will forever praise.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXX. PSALM.
THE House of David is by the Midrasis Tillin, understood of, the Temple,
called His, because he purposed the Building of it. But, as one Remarks;
Behold, the Joy the Jews will have when the Tabernacle of David which is
fallen, shall, according to Amos. XI. 11. be re-established. Compare the
Conclusion of the Psalm, with Isai. LX. 1.

5 -- Drusius adds this Gloss, Diu durat; -- It is a lasting favor, it will
never dye. As, a Tree that never dies is called, a Tree of Life. David the Jew,
has the like Paraphrase; durat tempore multo, et vita longa.

9 Dr. Fuller notes on it; While a Man is alive, not only the Soul of the Man,
but his Dust also praises GOD; His Body has a share in the Worship of God; Our
Moiety of Dust has a Counterpart in our Praising of God. After our Death,
whatever our Soul may do, our Dust has no part in the Service of God, until the
Resurrection from the Dead.

PSALM XXXI. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
1 O Thou ETERNAL God, I have placed my hope in thee: Let me not be ashamed, O
save me in thy righteousness.

2 Kindly to me bow down thine ear; rescue me speedily; A strong Rock be to me;
to save me, a defended house.

3 For thou art He that is my Rock, and thou art my defense: and therefore for
thy Name sake me lead thou, and be my guide.

4 O do thou bring me up out of the Net which they have laid in secret for me;
for that thou art He that is my strength.

5 My Spirit I resigning do commit into thy hands; Thou have redeemed me, O
thou ETERNAL God of Truth.

6 I hate those who observe what are but lying vanities; But as for me, I place
my hope on the ETERNAL God.

7 I in thy mercy will be glad, and very much rejoice; for thou have looked
upon my grief, Thou know my Soul in straits.

8 Nor have thou shut me up into the Adversaries hand; But thou have made my
feet to stand in a most spacious place.

9 Pity me, O ETERNAL God, because I am in grief; my Eye, my Soul, do waste in
wrath, my very belly too.

10 For that my life is spent with grief, and all my years in sighs; thorough
my Sin my strength does fail, and my bones are consumed.

11 From all my foes I had reproach, and from my neighbors much; a fear to
them that knew me too, who fled, seeing me abroad.

12 I am forgotten like a Man that is dead, and out of mind; I am become just
like unto a Vessel that is broke.

13 For I from many heard ill fame; fear was on every side; while they against
me did consult; they thought to seize my Soul.

14 But as for me, I did rely on Thee, ETERNAL God; This did I say, Thou art my
God to whom I do adhere.

15 My Times are all at thy dispose; O do thou rescue me from the hand of mine
enemies, and from my following foes.

16 Upon thy Servant do thou cause thy countenance to shine; in thy free mercy
do thou grant Salvation unto me.

17 ETERNAL, Let me not be shamed; for I have called on thee; Let wicked ones
be shamed; Let them be cut off in the Grave.

18 Let those lips be made silent, which are given to falsity; which speak hard
things against the just, with pride and with contempt.

19 How great's thy Good, which thou for them that fear thee have laid up!
Thouh'st wrought for them that hope in thee, before the sons of Men.

20 In the secret of thy face thou hid'st them from the threats of Man; Thou
do in a Pavilion hide them from the strife of tongues.

21 Blessed be the ETERNAL God, for He has wondrously within a City of defense
shown mercy unto me.

22 But I said in my haste, I Am from before thine eyes cut off; yet the voice
of my Prayers thou heard'st, when I did cry to thee.

23 All ye His gracious ones, Do ye love the ETERNAL God; The ETERNAL keeps the
faithful, and pays the proud doer home.

24 Be of good courage, and He shall corroborate your heart; All ye that with
an hope do wait for the ETERNAL God.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXXI. PSALM.
THE Haste of David, flying unto the Wilderness of Maou; [1 Samuel XXIII. 26.]
seems to be mentioned in the Twenty second Verse of the Psalm; I said in my
haste. But, Christian, Be sure to be hold thy Suffering SAVIOR here! He died
with the Fifth Verse of the Psalm in His Mouth.

2 David was now in a Rock; [1 Samuel XXIII. 25.] But, Lord, Thou art the only
Rock!

4 The Net. The Treachery of the Ziphites, [1 Samuel XXIII. 10, 20.]

8 God would not suffer him to be shut up in Keilah; but by Oracles admonished
him how to escape. See 1 Samuel XXIII. 7, 9.

19 The Hebrew Word may be rendered Ex diametr^. Dr. Gell renders it, Maugre
all the Oppositions of the Sons of Men.

20 To be sheltered from the mischiefs which contentious Men may seek by their
false Tongues to bring upon us; It Is a Blessedness.

21 See, 1 Samuel XXIII. 7.13.

PSALM XXXII. Of David. Maschil.
1 O What the Blessings of the Man to whom Transgression is forgiven; of the
Man to whom Error is covered.

2 O what the Blessings of the Man to whom the ETERNAL God imputes not
iniquity: and guile's not in his spirit!

3 For while that I did hold my peace my bones were waxing old; and so it was
when I did make a roaring all the day.

4 Because that day and night thy hand lay heavy upon me; my moisture was quite
turned into the Summers parching heat. Selah.

5 I of my sinful error made acknowledgment to thee; and my impure iniquity I
did not go to hide. I said, To the ETERNAL God, I will confess my crimes; then
of my Sin thou did remit the great iniquity.

6 For this each gracious one shall pray to Thee in finding time; Surely in
floods of waters great, they shall not reach to him.

7 Thou art my hiding place to me; thou keep me from grief; and with songs
of deliverance thou do encompass me.

8 I Will make thee wise, and teach thee in the way which thou should go; I will
give counsil unto thee; I Will on thee have my eye.

9 Be n't as the Horse, or as the Mule, which do not understand; whose mouth
with bit and bridle is held least they injure thee.

10 There shall be many sorrows to him that is a wicked Man; But who hopes in
the ETERNAL God, him mercy shall surround.

11 Be glad in the ETERNAL God, and, O ye just, rejoice; and shout with a
triumphing joy, all ye upright in heart.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXXII. PSALM.
MAschil. Twelve more Psalms are thus Entitled. Some take it for an Epithit of
the Master of Music, who instructed the Sons of Korah skilfully. One says, The
Felicity of the Penitent and Converted Jews, and of the Nations joined with
them in the Kingdom of GOD, is here pointed at. The Syriac Title seems to give
a Key to an hidden sense of several Passages in the Psalm; De Adami Peccato, et
Christi Redemption.

1 Covered. The Law in the Ark, was covered by the Mercy-Seat; So our Sin
against the Law, is covered by the Messiah, our Great Prepitiatery.

2 No guile. D. Kimchi describes him well; He that has a purpose, never to
return unto the Sin that he repents of.

3, 4 Austin will have the Fever here complained of, to be that of raging
Concupiscence. A terrible Observation! That Sin keeps a strong and a strange
hold on the minds of Men, till it be by a Penitent Confession repented of.

6 Compare Isai. LV. 6.

PSALM XXXIII.
1 BEcause of the ETERNAL God Rejoice, Ye righteous ones; Unto the Men that are
upright Praise is desirable.

2 With harp praise the ETERNAL God, Sing with a Psaltery; Sing to Him with an
Instrument that has ten strings in it.

3 Sing to Him a new Song; Do well in singing with a noise.

4 For the Word of The ETERNAL's right; and His whole work in truth.

5 Both Righteousness and Judgment are the things which He does love; The
Goodness of the ETERNAL God, the Earth is full of it.

6 The Heavens were made by the Word of the ETERNAL God; and all the host of
them made by the spirit of His mouth.

7 The flowing waters of the Sea He gathers as an heap; as in so many
Storehouses He lays up the deeps.

8 Let all the Earth express the fear of the ETERNAL God, let all Inhabitants
of the World stand in awe of Him.

9 For He no sooner spoke the Word, but, lo, the thing is done: He did but give
out His command, and then the thing stood forth.

10 The ETERNAL God defeats the plot laid by the Nations here; Devices of the
People He makes be of none effect.

11 The Counsel of the ETERNAL God, that does for ever stand; so do the
Thoughts of His Heart to all Generations stand.

12 O blessed Nation that; whose God is the ETERNAL One! The People He has
chosen for His own Inheritance.

14 From Heaven the ETERNAL God continually looks down; He takes a thorough
^ognisance of all the Sons of Men.

14 From the bright Habitation where He has His resting place He takes a view
of all that do inhabit on the Earth.

15 He has bestowed a fashion on the Heart of them together; Animadvert He
does upon all the works done by them.

16 No King's delivered by the multitude of an host; no Potent one is rescued
by the greatness of his power.

17 An Horse for safety trusted in is a deceitful thing; for by the greatness
of his strength he shall deliver none.

18 The Eye of the ETERNAL God, behold, it is on them that fear Him; it is on
them that hope in His Benignity.

19 It Is for to grant a rescue to the Soul of them from Death; and that He may
keep them alive when Famine shall prevail.

20 Our Soul has still with waiting hoped for the ETERNAL God; It Is He Himself
who is our help, and He that is our Shield.

21 For that it is in Him our heart shall cheerfully rejoice; Because that in
His Holy Name we place our confidence.

22 Thy mercy, O ETERNAL God, Let that upon us be, according as we do rely upon
thy self alone.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXXIII. PSALM.
BEhold, An Hymn of the Israelitish Nation, after it is re-established in the
favor of GOD. And a Song upon the Ruin of the Nations that continue in enmity
to Him.

1 Desirable. Kimchi carries it so. The Upright will desire nothing so much as
this, that GOD may be Praised.

4 Word -- and Work. Both have the same Voice, come on the same Errand, show
the same right way to us.

PSALM XXXIV. Of David; When he changed his Behavior before Abimelek; who
drove him away and he departed.
1 BLessing I Will at all times ascribe to the ETERNAL God; In my mouth shall the
Praise of Him continually be heard.

2 In the ETERNAL God my Soul shall make her sacred boast; They whom affliction
has brought down, shall hear, and shall be glad.

3 O join with me to magnify now the ETERNAL God; And let us all together join
for to exalt His Name.

4 I did seek the ETERNAL God, and He gave ear to me; yea, He did me deliver
then from out of all my fears.

5 Others too now shall look to Him, and be enlightened thence; nor shall their
countenances be covered with any shame.

6 This poor Man made his cry, and him the ETERNAL God did hear; yea, He
delivered him from all of his perplexities

7 The Angel of the ETERNAL God encampeth round about such as do fear Him, and
He does extricate them from straits.

8 O taste, and take a view, how good is the ETERNAL God! What are the
Blessings of the Man, who puts his trust in Him!

9 O fear ye the ETERNAL God, all ye His holy ones; for unto them that have his
fear there is no penury.

10 Young Lions are red uc'd to want; and hunger comes on them; but they that
fear the ETERNAL God shall not want any good.

11 Come, O ye Children, unto me, give an attentive ear; I will instruct you in
the Fear of the ETERNAL God.

12 What Man is he who does desire to set repeted life! who has a love to
days, that he may have the sight of good!

13 Keep thou thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.

14 Depart from evil, and do good; Seek peace, and follow it.

15 The Eyes of the ETERNAL God are ^n the righteous ones; and to the cry
that is nade by them His Ears are still inclined.

16 Against ill doers is the face of the ETERNAL God; for to extirpate from the
Earth the memory of them.

17 Men cry, and the ETERNAL God does hearken to their cry; and out of all
their troubles He gives them deliverance.

18 Nigh unto brokenhearted ones is the TERNAL God; and the contrite in spirit
^le will give Salvation to.

19 Many are the calamities upon the ^ighteous one; but him does the ETERNAL
God deliver out of all.

20 He keeps all his bones; of them there shall not one be broke.

21 Woe slays the wicked; and be shamed shall they that hate the just.

22 The ETERNAL God redeems the Soul of Servants unto Him; and none of them who
trust in Him shall a confusion see.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXXIV. PSALM.
BEhold, The Praises which the Messiah gives unto His Father, for carrying Him
through His wonderful sufferings!

5 They; All Good Men that hear the Story, GOD will revive and quicken them,
from this Experience.

7 Encampeth. Here seems to be an eye upon Mahanaim [Gen. XXXII. 1, 2.] And is
not this the special instance of Goodness, which the next Verse refers to? Upon
the mention of these words, Origin has a Note, That when the Faithful Servants
of GOD are assembled in His Churches, their Guardian-Angels are there present
with them, so as to make a Double Church, one of Men, another of Angels.
Compare, Psalm. CXXXVIII. 1. O Holy Singer: Think of this, and be animated.

19, 20 Now, I hope, it is plain that the Humiliation and Exaltation of our
SAVIOR, is here celebrated.

PSALM XXXV. Of David.
1 STrive, O ETERNAL God, with them who are at strife with me: Opposing them
contend with such as would devour me quite.

2 O do thou take hold of the Shield, and of the Buckler too; and rising, O do
thou stand up now for to succor me.

3 Draw out the spear also, and stop my persecutors course: O do thou say unto
my Soul, I thy Salvation am.

4 May they be shamed, and may they blush, who do pursue my Soul; may they be
turned back, and shamed, who do devise my hurt.

5 May they become like to the chaff driven before the wind; The Angel of the
ETERNAL God, may he drive them about.

6 May their way have much darkness in it, and much of slipperiness; and the
Angel of the ETERNAL God still persecuting them.

7 For the pit of their net for me, they have hid without a cause; without a
cause they for my Soul have dug an horrid pit.

8 May unknown ruin come on him, and may his net which he has hid, surprise
himself; may he with tumult fall into' it.

9 But let my Soul have glorious joy in the ETERNAL God; O let my Soul greatly
rejoice in His Salvation still.

10 Yea, of my Body all the Bones let them also declare, O thou ETERNAL God,
who is to be compared to thee? Thou do redeem the Poor from him that is too
strong for him; Redeem the poor and needy one from him that spoileth him.

11 Against me there have risen up injurious witnesses; interrogating me of
things which I know nothing of.

12 Evil for good was that which they did recompense to me; to the depriving of
my Soul of what might comfort me.

13 But I when they were sick, did make Sackcloath my covering; I broke my Soul
with fasting, and my Prayer turned on my breast.

14 I walked as though he would been a Friend and Brother unto me; as mourning for a
Mother I did bow down heavily.

15 But in my halting toward a fall they did exult for joy; such as were
abject wretches did gather themselves together; gather themselves against me,
when I did not know of it; they tore me all to pieces there, and did not hold
their peace.

16 They were with mocking hypocrites who made a feast of scoffs; They did
against me fiercely gnash with their devouring teeth.

17 O Lord, how long will thou look on? deliver thou my Soulfrom their dead
strokes, my only One Oh! from the Lions save.

18 In the great Congregation then I will give thanks to thee; among much and
great People I will render praise to thee.

19 My wrongful enemies, may they not triumph over me; nor who hate me without
a cause wink with a scornful eye.

20 Because they speak not peaceably, but words they do devise full of deceit
against such as are quiet in the Land.

21 Yea, even with an open mouth they have upon me run; and they have cried,
Ah^, Aha, Our eyes have seen the thing.

22 O Thou ETERNAL God, Thou have took cognizance of this; O (...) not now a
silent One; Lord, Be not far from me.

23 Stir up thy self, and O awake unto my judgment now; O Thou my God, and Thou
my Lord, awake unto my cause.

24 According to thy Righteousness judge me, ETERNAL God; Judge me, my God, and
let them not have triumphs ever me.

25 In their hearts let them not say, Ah, Our Soul would have it so! O let them
not have room to say, We have devoured him.

26 Let them be shamed, and blush together, who of my hurt are glad; may they
be clothed with shame, and blush, who look so big on me.

27 Let them shout with triumphant joy, and be exceeding glad, whose favorable
sentiments believe my righteousness. Yea, may they say continually, Let the
ETERNAL God be magnified, who takes delight in His true Servants peace.

28 And now my tongue shall dwell upon thy glorious Righteousness; My Tongue
shall celebrate thy praise all day * and every day.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXXV. PSALM.
BEhold, A Psalm of Wishes, to see the Kingdom of Antichrist, whereof we have
here a description, destroyed! But, O Christian Singer, Take here, once for
all, a Noble Instruction of A^nobius. Cave ne^ad homines adversantes ^ibi pules
ista competere. Don't think to Pray at this rate against thy personal Enemies;
But employ those Prayers, contra Spiritus hugus aerie, qui quotidie noc^^,
against thy Spiritual Enemies. against which thou art engaged in a continual
Warfare.

2 Good Men assaulted or endangered by Enemies at first will desire no more
than to be defended from them. They are not for offending of them. Anon, if
there be no other way, they are content that the Holy One take the Spear also.

4 Compare, Job. XVIII. 6. The LXX here uses the same Word that is there.

8 R. Obadiah thinks, here is an Allusion to 2 Samuel XVIII. 13. -- Bring Ropes
to the City.

13 q. d. I wished my self no better than I desired God to do for them. The
Patrician Paraphrase. The Gloss of the Ancients upon it was; Non alium orabam,
quam illum qui mihi personaliter junctus est, dicit CHRISTUS; Secundum quod
homo, secundum quod orat. Sed oration convertitur in sinum; idest, ad Verbum in
quo erat Pater.

15 q. d. The Scum of the People who were so vile, that I did not so much as
know there were such Wretches in the World. The LXX reads it, The Scourges,
Ainsworth supposes it refers to the Scourge of the Tongue. [Job VI. 21.]
Hammond supposes it means People worthy of the Scourge.

16 Hebr. Mockers for a Cake. Sycophants who flatter at the Table for a belly
full of Meat. Compare 2 Samuel XI. 8. -- there followed a mess of Meat from the
King, R. Obadiah thinks that these Mockers employed their Squibs particularly
on that unhappy Mess of Meat,

21 q. d. -- We have now found him out.

PSALM XXXVI. To the Chief Musician. Of David, the Servant of the ETERNAL God.
1 THE Wicked Man's Transgression does, speak this within my heart; That there is
not any fear of God at all before his eyes.

2 For in his own deceived eyes he flattereth himself, till his iniquity be
found to be an hateful thing.

3 Iniquity and base deceit are the words of his mouth; he has left off to
understand; to do the thing that is good.

4 Iniquity he does devise while he lies on his bed; he sets upon a way not
good; evil he don't abhor.

5 Thy Mercy, OETERNAL God, is in the Heavens seen; Thy faithfulness is what
does reach unto the Heavenly clouds.

6 Like mounts of God's thy Righteousness; thy Judgments a great deep; ETERNAL
God, Thou do preserve Man, and inseriour Beast.

7 O God, How wondrous excellent thy loving kindness is! Now in the shadow of
thy wings the Sons of Men will trust.

8 They from the fatness of thy House shall be replenished; and of the stream
of thy Delights thou shall make them to drink.

9 Because there is the Fountain of all of our Lives with thee; Enlightened by
thy glorious Light we shall see Light with joy.

10 Extend thy loving kindness to them that acknowledge thee; extend also thy
Righteousness to the upright in heart.

11 O never let the foot of pride make an approach to me: Nor let the hand of
wicked ones cause me for to remove.

12 The workers of iniquity, they are now fallen there; they are cast down, and
they shall not be able to arise.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXXVI. PSALM.
1 SAul doubtless was intended; yet he names him not, because he would preserve
all the Reverence that might be, for him.

7 The Shadow of the Wings of the Lord, No doubt refers to Angelical
Influences, and Protections. But Arnobius devoutly refers it unto the extended
Arms of our SAVIOR on the Cross.

8 The Fatness of the House of GOD, more immediately refers to the Sacrifices
of Thanksgiving.

12 There! -- in the very Act of their wickedness.

PSALM XXXVII. Of David.
1 FRet not thy self because of them that are malignant Men; Be'n't moved with
envy at the Men that work iniquity.

2 For that like as the Grass they shall be speedily mown down; and like unto
the verdant Herb, wither they shall away.

3 Hope thou in the ETERNAL God, and still be doing Good; Inhabit then the
promised Land, and make the Truth thy food.

4 And do thou place thy whole delight in the ETERNAL God; so He will then
vouchsafe to thee the wishes of thine heart.

5 Devolve the Cares of all thy way on the ETERNAL God; and place thy
confidence in Him, so He Will accomplish it.

6 He shall therewith like as the Light bring forth thy Righteousness; and with
meridian luster shall Judgments be wrought for thee.

7 On the ETERNAL God be thou a silent waiter still; and with unceasing
patience wait expecting Him to work. Fret not thy self because of him who
prospers in his way; or because of the Man who brings wicked designs to pass.

8 Desist from anger, and dismiss fierce indignation: Do not wax hot; but still
be sure to do no evil thing.

9 For evildoers, they shall be cut off; but they that wait on the ETERNAL
God, they shall as heirs enjoy the Earth.

10 For yet a little while, and then the wicked shall not be; yea, thou shall
closely view his place, and he shall not be there.

11 But humbled ones shall have the Earth for their Inheritance; and in the
abundance of their peace they shall delight themselves.

12 The wicked does devise a plot against the righteous man; and he does gnash
upon him with his ill-designing teeth.

13 The Lord relied-on shall him in a derision have; because he does foresee
his day of Woe is coming on.

14 The wicked have drawn out their Sword and they have bent their Bow, to make
the poor and needy fall; to slay right walking ones.

15 Their Sword shall with a mortal thrust pass into their own heart; their
Bows also which they have bent, they shall be broken quite.

16 Though it be but a little that a righteous Man enjoys, it is better than the
heaped Wealth of many wicked ones.

17 Because the arms of wicked ones shall be entirely broke; But the ETERNAL
God confirms with strength the righteous Men.

18 The ETERNAL God takes notice of the days of upright ones; and their
Inheritance shall last to perpetuity.

19 They shall not be put to any shame in any evil time; and when the days of
famine come they shall be satisfied.

20 But fade shall ill Men, and the foes of the ETERNAL God shall be consumed
like fat of Lambs; they shall consume in smoke.

21 The wicked does receive a Loan, and does not pay again; But he that is a
righteous Man shows mercy and does give.

22 For they who are His blessed ones as heirs shall have the Earth; but they
that are cursed from Him shall be cut off from thence.

23 The steps of Man are ordered by the ETERNAL God; when the way which he
takes is what he does take pleasure in.

24 Although he fall yet he shall not be utterly cast down, because that the
ETERNAL One upholds him with His Hand.

24 I have been Young, and now am Old, yet have I never seen the Just forsaken,
nor his Seed, when asking for their Bread.

26 He does show mercy every day, and's on the lending hand; and his Posterity
shall be remarked for blessedness.

27 Depart from evil and do good; so shall thou dwell for ever.

28 Because that the ETERNAL One does love the thing that is right: He will not
forsake His gracious ones, they are preserved for ever; But the Offspring of
wicked ones is utterly our off.

29 The righteous, they shall have the Land as their Inheritance; and they
therein forever shall their habitation have.

30 The mouth of a just Man shall speak that which has wisdom in it: his tongue
shall also utter what shall be the thing that is right.

31 The Law of God is in his heart; none of his steps shall slip.

32 The wicked Man does watch the Just, and seeks to ruin him.

33 The Eternal God will not leave him in the hand of such an one; nor will he
him condemn for such, when that he shall be judged.

34 Wait thou on the ETERNAL God, and keep thou in His way: and thou shall find
He then will set thee in an high estate, That so thou may enjoy the Land as
an Inheritance; whence when the wicked art cut off thou shall behold the thing.

35 I have beheld the wicked one grown mighty in his power; and like unto a
green Bay Tree, spreading himself abroad.

36 Yet he did quickly pass away, and lo, he was not there! yea, I did look for
him, and he was not for to be found.

37 Do thou observe the perfect Man, and the upright behold, because that such
2 Man shall have peace in the latter end.

38 But the transgressors of the Law shall be destroyed together; the latter
end of wicked Men shall be, to be cut off.

39 But the Salvation of the Just is from the ETERNAL God; In the time of
distress He is the fortitude of such.

40 And the ETERNAL God does help them, and does rescue them; rescues them from
ill Men, and saves them; for they trust in Him

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXXVII. PSALM.
NEcessary Instructions for the Faithful under the Power of Antichrist, who
holds Prosperity to be a Mark of the true Church. Behold, the Ruin of
Antichrist; both Head and Body; and the bright Prosperity of the Faithful,
after the wicked one shall be desiroyed. Our SAVIOR applies the Psalm to an
happy condition of the Church upon Earth; Matthew. V. 5. Compare, Isai. XI. 4.

The Son of Syrack gives us the Sum of the Psalm in, Eccl. I. 23. A Patient
Man, will bear for a long time, and afterward Joy shall spring up unto him.

1 Quite contrary the wretched Ethics taught by that grand Apostle of Satan,
Aristotle; who commends for a Virtue, an Indignation at the Prosperity of
unworthy Men.

3 David Kimchi so glosses it; Pasce alios, ubicunque habitas, insiructione in
vijs Domini.

6 Kimchi's Gloss is, Men shall plainly see and own, that thou art a Righteous
Man.

14 It Is an Observation of R. Solomon's; Pauper et egenus, in Psa^mis, semper de
Israele dicuntur. The poor and needy always mean Israel.

16 A famous Jew reads it so; A few Righteous Men are of more account than many
Wicked ones.

24 David once begged his own Bread. The begging of Bread here notes, all
asking for it, either of God or Man. We are compelled unto the Version that is
now given us.

35 We see Wicked Men pretending to Laurels. But what comes of them?

PSALM XXXVIII. A Psalm of David; To bring to Remembrance.
1 O Thou ETERNAL God; in thy hot wrath rebuke me not; And in thy Anger flaming
out, O do not chasten me.

2 Because thine Arrows upon me are shot down from above; and thy hand from
above does come down to afflict me sore.

3 In my flesh there is nothing sound; thine Anger is the cause; nor in my
bones is any rest; because that I have sinned.

4 Because that mine iniquities over mine head are gone; they as an heavy
burden are too heavy found for me.

5 My wounds do stink and are corrupt; my folly is the cause.

6 Troubled I am, and much depressed; go mourning every day.

7 For my loins are inflamed, and in my flesh there is nothing sound.

8 I Am weak and broken much; I r^^^ through anguish of my heart.

9 O Lord, Before thee there is laid the whole of my desire; and none of all my
groaning is at all concealed from thee.

10 My heart perplexed turns every way; my strength, it fails me: And as for
the light of mine eyes, even those are not with me.

11 My lovers and my friends do stand where they may n't see my stroke; and
they that are my Neighbors do stand at a distance off

12 And they that seek my life lay snares; they too that seek my hurt, do speak
mischievous things; and plot all the day long deceits.

13 But I am as a Man that is deaf; I hear not what they say; And I am like a
Man that is dumb, who opens not his mouth.

14 And thus I was like to a Man who does not hear at all; nor is there in his
mouth what he may answer for himself.

15 For, O ETERNAL God, thou art He for whom I do wait; O Lord, Thou art my
God, thou will give answer unto me.

16 For this is what I said, lest they should triumph over me, while my foot
slips, against me they do magnify themselves.

17 For I Am prepared to halt, and ever before me is my grief.

18 For I Will declare my crime, I will be sorry for my sin.

19 But my foes, who are living ones, are mighty, strong withal; and they who
hate me wrongfully are greatly multiplied.

20 They too that render ill for good, are enemies to me; yea, it is for this
very cause; I follow what is good.

21 ETERNAL God, Forsake me not; My God, Be'nt far from me: make haste to help
me, Lord, who art, my sole Salvation ^l^

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXXVIII. PSALM.
DOes not the Psalm express the condition of the Synagogue, as now groaning
under the Persecution of An^ichrist? No doubt of it. Compare the 16th Verse,
with Deuteronomy. XXII. 26, 27. and the 17th Verse, with Zeph. III. 19.

2 R. Obadiah reports a Tradition, That the Psalmist labored under a Leprosy
Six Months together, and that all this time, The Divine Presence was witheld
from him.

12 Munstors gloss upon Snares, is, Verba ad desperationom inducentia: Words of
Despair.

PSALM XXXIX. To the Chief Musician: To Jeduthun. A Psalm of David.
1 I Said, I will regard my ways lest I sin with my tongue; I Will keep a bridle
on my mouth, while I Have the vile in view.

2 With silence I remained as dumb, wholly held my peace, not mentioning of any
good; my grief was then renewed.

3 My heart within me did grow hot; while my thoughts were engaged; the Fire
did then begin to burn; then spoke I with my tongue.

4 O Thou ETERNAL One, Do thou make known to me my end; and what is the measure
of my days; to know how frail am.

5 Lo, Thou an hands breadth make my days, and my age in thy sight, as
nothing; sure each man at best is wholly vanity.

6 Sure, in a shadow Man does walk; sure, they are disturbed in vain; he heaps
up treasures, and knows not who shall make use of them.

7 And now, O Lord, What wait I for? My hope is placid on thee.

8 Deliver me from all my sins; the Fools scorn make me not.

9 I Am dumb, I open not my mouth; for it is what thou have done.

10 Remove thy stroke away from me; by thy hand's blow I waste.

11 When with rebukes thou do correct Man for iniquity, thou make to waste
even as moth, that which is his desire. Most certainly then every Man is very
vanity. Selah.

12 Hear my Prayer, O ETERNAL God, and hearken to my cry. Upon my tears, O be
not deaf, because I am with thee a stranger, and a sojourner, as all my Fathers
were.

13 O spare me graciously, that so I may recover strength, before that I shall
go from ^ence, and be no more at all.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XXXIX. PSALM.
BEhold again the Condition of the Synagogue under the Oppressions of
Anticbrist.

6 A Man promises himself mighty matters; But he has no more than the Image and
Shadone of them in his Erain; For on the sudden he himself vanithes and is
gone. So one Paraphrases. The Comparison of Man to a Shadow, may be copiously
prosecuted, with much Service to Piety.

12 A sad Hint! It seems, GOD and he were both Strangers here. But have an Eye
to the Messiah here. He was a Stranger in this World.

PSALM XL. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
1 WIth earnest waiting I did wait on the ETERNAL God; and He inclined unto me,
He also heard my cry.

2 And fetch^d me from the roaring pit; out of the miry clay; and on a Rock He
set my feet; He did direct my steps.

3 And put a new Song in my mouth, of Praise unto our God; Many shall see, and
fear, and trust in the ETERNAL God.

4 O blessed is the Man that makes the ETERNAL God his trust; and don't regard
the proud, nor the decliners to a lie.

5 ETERNAL God, my God, Thoust wrought Thy many wondrous works; And thy
thoughts toward us, to thee none can in order tell: Would I declare and
mention them they are more than can be told.

6 A Sacrifice and Offering thou did not at all desire. Thou for thy Service
bor'st the Ears thou'st given unto me: Burnt-Offring and Sin-Offring is what
thou have not required.

7 Then, said I, Lo, I come; to do that which thou have required: Thou have a
rolled Book wherein it is written thus of me.

8 That I may do thy Will, My God, this is what I would have; In the midst of
my Bowels too thy Law is treasured up.

9 In the great Congregation I have Preached thy Righteousness: Lo, I have not
refrained my lips, ETERNAL God, thou know.

10 Thy Righteousness I have not hid in the midst of my heart; I have thy
faithfulness and thy Salvation shown abroad. Thy loving kindness I have not in
any part concealed, nor from the Great Assembly kept thy never-failing Truth.

11 Withold not, O ETERNAL God, thy kindnesses from me; Thy Mercy, and thy
Truth let them keep me continually.

12 For evils have encompassed me till none can number them: And my iniquities
withal have taken hold on me. Nor can I take a view, they are so multiplied
above the hairs which grow upon my head; and my Heart fails me.

13 Be pleased, O ETERNAL God, for to deliver me; and unto my relief make
haste, O Thou ETERNAL God.

14 Let those be shamed, and blush together that seek my Soul, to slay't; Let
those be driven back and shamed, who do desire my hurt.

14 As the just recompense of what is really their shame; they shall be
desolate, who say, to me, Aha, Aha!

16 Those who are thy true seekers, let all such rejoice in thee yea, let them
all triumph in this with overflowing joy. Those who in thy Salvation take a
true delight, let them forever say, The ETERNAL God, Let Him be magnified.

17 But I Am a needy one, and poor: the Lord yet thinks on me: Thou my Help, and
my Savior art; My God, O tarry not.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XL. PSALM.
CHristian, Behold the Praises of thy SAVIOR to His ETERNAL Father, for His
Presence with Him, in His Humiliation. Paul has taught us how to apply the
Psalm.

2 The Sepulcher of our SAVIOR was hewed out of a Rock. Behold Him setting His
Fert on the Rock, and in His Resurrection triumphing over the Grave.

5 Munster so reads it, Nemo est qui ea ordinat ad te. The Benefits of Heaven,
are not ordered by Men as they should, and subordinated unto the Glory and
Service of GOD.

6 Mine Ear have thou bored, is, q. d. Thou have made me thy Servant. The
Service which the Son of GOD was to do for His Eternal Father, could not be
done without a Body. The Clause is with much wisdom rendered in the
New Testament, A Body have thou prepared for me. The Servant was to have part
of his Body, his Ear fastened with Iron to a Post. So was the Body of our
SAVIOR, to the Cross. Yea, the Hebrew Word signifies, Apparare, as well as,
Perforare. And Ozen, may signify a Body as well as an Ear. Moreover, the Greek
Word (...), which we render, a Body, is continually used by the Jewish Writers,
to signify, A Servant. So in the Books of the Apocrypha and Josephus.

There is a wrong done to the Holy Spirit of GOD, by those Critics, who will
tell you, That the Apostle followed the LXX, in his reading here, A Body have
thou prepared for me.

In Jerome's Days, there was not this reading in the LXX. The Primitive
Christians altered the LXX in several Places, which the New Testament cites out
of the Old, and put in the Words of the New Testament, which were not there
before.

7 Some read it, In the Head, [or Beginnin] of thy Book; And think the Prophecy
in the III. of Genesis referred unto. Grotius observes, That the Hebrews wrote
their Contracts and Agronnents, and Indentures in Rolls. The Volumn here
implies a Cont^act.

16 -- Not expect^^^ ^^^vation from any other hand. But, Christian, The Love of
(...) SAVIOR is also supposed her.

PSALM XLI. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
1 BLessed the Man, who prudently considers the Poor; The ETERNAL God will
rescue him when it is an evil day.

2 The ETERNAL God will have him in His gracious custody; and He will make him
for to live, when Death does threaten him. He shall be blessed upon Earth; nor
will thou give him up unto the spiteful will of those that are his enemies.

3 The ETERNAL God will on the Bed of weakness strengthen him: Thou, when that
he is languishing, wilt turn his Bed for him.

4 I said, O Thou ETERNAL God, Be merciful to me; Heal thou my Soul, because I
have wandered from Thee by Sin.

5 My Adversaries, they do speak evil concerning me; When shall he die? They
say, and when shall his name be destroyed?

6 And if he comes to visit me, he speaks but vanity; his heart rakes mischief
to it self; going abroad he tells.

7 Against me they that hate me do whisper together all; against me they devise
what may be mischeivous to me.

8 They say, Some thing of Belial sure is lying upon him; and now that he is
lying ill he shall rise up no more.

9 Yea, and my own familiar friend in whom I trusted much; he who did eat my
bread, has lift the heel to strike at me.

10 But thou, O thou ETERNAL God, be merciful to me; and O restore thou me,
that I may make returns to them.

11 By this thing I am sensible, that thou do favor me; because my enemy has
not a triumph over me.

12 And as for me, me thou upholdst in my integrity; and thou sett'st me before
thy face to perpetuity.

13 Blessed be the ETERNAL One, the God of Israel: from Age even unto Age,
Amen, And yet again, Amen.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XLI. PSALM.
MAY we not see the Condition of the Sanagogue, forsaken of all Humane help;
yet hoping for a Restoration? It Is in view of this that GOD is blessed ty the
Name of, The GOD of Israel; An Appellation that relates to the Re-calling of
all the Tribes. The double Amen, leads us to a Second Restoration.

1 Pagnin, and others read it, Blessed is he that understands the Poor. Aquinas
notes on it, A Merciful Man will endeavor to inform himself of the wants of
the Poor, and relieve them, even before they do themselves reveal them. As Leo
speaks, Ut hoc ipso magis gaudeant, quum et paupertati little consultum fuerit,
et pudori.

3 He^r. Turn his Bed. Munster bespeaks that sense for it: The Lord will change
his Bed; and give him Health instead of Sickness.

9 Hearken to Old Arnobius. Here suppose our Interior assaulted by the Flesh,
and the Powers of Dar^ness. Our Name which they would have to perish, is that
of, Christian. Christian, Thy Flesh is thy Familiar Friend, and it plays the
Judas with thee, When thou art Ris^n from the deadly Circumstances, which thy
Spiritual Enemies bring upon thee, Requite them, Destroy them.

Ditto. Lift up the Heel. The Jewish Gloss is agreeable; Ac si eram semita pede
suo trita. As if I were the dirt of the Street, for him to tread upon.

Ditto. Of Old, No Covenant of Friendship counted more inviolable, than what
was begun at the Table, or confirmed there. Jowish and Pagan Writers, have
Curiosities of this Importance. Communicants at the Table of the Lord, Consider
of this.

THE SECOND BOOK OF PSALMS.
PSALM XLII. To the Chief Musician. Maschil; for the Sons of Korah.
1 AS the Heart makes a panting cry for cooling streams of waters; So my Soul
makes a panting cry to Thee, O mighty God.

2 My Soul does flame with thirst for God, even for the living God; when shall
I come, and when appear before the face of God?

3 My Tear has been my constant meat, both in the day and night, while they
continually say to me, Where is thy God?

4 These things when I remember, I pour out my Soul in me. For I had gone in
company once with the multitude; I went with them to the House of God with
voice of joy and praise; even with a multitude of them that kept a Festival.

5 Why do thou throw thy self into dejections, O my Soul? And why art thou
disquieted in me with such a noise? Hope thou with waiting upon God; For I
shall praise Him yet; Salvations are dispensed from the kind Aspects of His
Face.

5 My God, my Soul's cast down in me; Hence I Will remember thee from Jordan's
Land and Hermon's Hills, from the Hill Mizar there.

7 Deep calls unto deep, at the noise of thy water spouts; Thy swelling
Billows and thy Waves have all gone over me.

8 Now the ETERNAL God will with effectual power command His mercy which He
promised when that the Day arrives, And when the Night comes on there is with
me a Song of His; A Supplication to Him who is of my Life the GOD.

9 I will say unto God my Rock, Why have thou me forgot? Why go I mourning for
the sore oppression of the foe?

10 With cutting to my very bones my foes reproach me hard; While every day
they unto me do say, Where is thy God?

11 Why do thou throw thy self into dejections, O my Soul? And why art thou
disquieted in me with such a noise? Hope thou with waiting upon God; for I
shall praise Him yet; Salvations He does work before my face; He is my God.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XLII. PSALM.
BEhold, The sorrows of the Synagogue in her dispersion, described by the
Spirit of Prophecy^

1 Some have applied this unto Baptism, after which, even the Infant-Soul does
pant, as having been invenomed by the Old Serpent. Many of the Fathers had this
Notion. And Aquinas quotes it out of Jerome, That these Verses were Sung at the
Solemn Times, when Baptism was administered.

2 -- Who would have expected it from a Jew? And yet Aben-E^ra says, The coming
of the Messiah is here longed for.

3 q. d. I have been so taken up with Weeping, that I have had no time or heart
for Eating.

4 'Twas very notably so, when the Psalmist brought the Ark to its dwelling
place. Compare, I Chron. XV. 25, 28.

6 All Jordan, from the Spring to the Mouth of it, is here measured out. -- He
was banished unto the utmost Countr^es, both North and South, washed by the
River Jordan.

7 The Waters of Jordan put him in mind of his Miseries; -- All rolling over
him one after another.

10 Because the Jews had no Images of GOD, but worshipped an Invisible GOD, the
Pagans derided them. Lucan speaks of their Deus Incerius. And Ph^^a^ch owns, he
did not know who he was. Quotations might be Numberless.

PSALM XLIII.
1 JUdge me, O God, and plead against a Nation merciless, my cause. O save me
from the Man that is crasty and unjust.

2 For of my strength thou art the God, why do thou cast me off? Why go I
mourning for the sore oppression of the foe?

3 Thy light O send forth, and thy truth; let them lead me; let them bring me
unto thy holy hill, and to thy Mansions there.

4 Then to God's Altar I will go; To God, Joy of my Joy: and on the Harp I will
confess to thee, O God, my God.

5 Why do thou throw thy self in dejections, O my Soul? And why art^^ou
disquieted in me with such a noise? Hope thou with waiting upon God, for I
shall praise Him yet: Salvations He does work before my face; He is my God.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XLIII. PSALM.
IT IS a servent Praver of Dispersed Israel, for a Restoration. Compare, Zeph,
III. 16, 17.

3 It Is Remarkable. The Midrash Till in finds the Messiah here. And so does
Rabbi Sol^^^^.

PSALM XLIV. To the Chief Musician. For the Sons of Korah. Maschil.
1 WE have heard with our Ears, O God; us have our Fathers told what work thou
wroughtest in their days; even in the former days.

2 Thou did expel the Nations with thy hand; but plantedst them: Thou did
afflict the People there, and thou did send them out.

3 For it was not by their own Sword they did possess the Land; nor was it any
arm of theirs which did deliver them. But it was thy Right hand, it was thy Arm
which did the thing; 'Twas the Light of thy face; Because that thou did
favout them.

4 Thou even thou thy self shall be ever my King, O God: Salvations by
commandment for Jacob, O procure.

5 Through thee as with an horn we will push down our Enemies; Them who do rise
against us, we will tread down in thy Name.

6 For in my Bow I will not place at all my confidence; nor shall it be a Sword
of mine that shall deliver me.

7 But thou art He who still do fa^c ^s from our Enemies; it is thou who do
put unto shame them that have hated us.

8 We glory in the Glorious God, all day, ^ and every day; And to thy Name we
will confess unto Eternity. Selah.

9 But thou have in thy wrath cast off and have put us to shame; and with our
Armed Forces now, thou art not going forth.

10 Thou make us for to return back from the Enemy; and they that hate us, of
our Weal^b make for themselves a spoil.

11 As if we had been Sheep for food, so have thou giv^n us up; And thou among
the Nations have scattered us all abroad.

12 Thou of thy People have made sale, and not increased thy Wealth; nor have
thou multiplied thy Gain by a price paid for them.

13 Unto our Neighhours thou do make us to be a reproach; a scorn and a
derision to them that encompass us.

14 A mere byword of us thou do; among the Nations make, Among the People we
are those at whom they shake the head.

15 Before me every day is my confusion to be seen; and the shame for to show
my face has wholly covered me.

16 From the Voice which reproaches m^ and ulters Blasphemies, from the face of
the enemy, and the ^^ongeful one.

17 All this is come on us, yet we have not forgotten thee; nor have we dealt
perfidiously against thy Covenant.

18 Our heart is not departed in Apostasy from thee; not has our going yet been
such as to decline thy way.

19 Though in the place of Dragons thou have sorely broken us, and thou have
overwhelmed us in the gloomy shade of Death.

20 If we have ever forgot the Name of Him that is our God; or if unto a
strange God we have stretched out our hands;

21 Of such a thing would not our God full inquisition make? For the most
inward secrets of the heart He fully knows.

22 Yea, for thy cause we are put to death, all the day long it is so: We are
accounted like the Sheep designed for to be slain.

23 Awake, O Lord, our strong support, O why art thou asleep? Awake thou so as
to arise; cast us not off for ever.

24 O wherefore do thou hide thy face? Wherefore do thou forget the
affliction which does humble us, and our oppression sore?

25 Because our Soul is bowed down unto the very dust; so prostrate that our
belly does lie cleaving to the Earth.

26 Arise, O thou that ever art the help that we propose, and, O do thou
deliver us, even for thy mercy's sake.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XLIV. PSALM.
BEhold a Prayer for the Synagogue in her Dispersion. Old Theoderet puts upon
it this Title, D^feroci Animo Antiochi. But remember that Antiochus was a Type
of Antichrist. Others, who think such Inspirations then ceased, apprehend the
Psalm calculated for the days of Hezekiah; and the Distress which the Assyrian
brought upon Judea, in the time of that pious Reformer.

4 Accomplish Deliverances, by Commands and Orders given to Angels. It Is an
Hint of Grotius.

5 Compare, Deuteronomy. XXXIII. 17.

12 God often Sold His People into the Hands of their Enemies, before the
Conversion of the Gentiles. But it was not an Absolute Sale; It was only a
Mortgage for Years; Redeemable after the Enemy had received his pay. God passed
not away His Propriety in them; He entered a Proviso of Recovery in the Command
of Preserving the Evidences. [Jer. XXXII. 7] The Selling all this while was for
naught. God hereby did not increase His Wealth, nor add unto the heap of the
Riches of that Grace, He had made over by Covenant unto Abraham and his
Offspring. If God had utterly Sold away His People before He had set up His
Kingdom among the Gentiles, He had Sold them for Naught; He had lost His
Visible Kingdom in the World. But now when He Sold His People in the last Roman
Captivity, it is not for Naught; it has introduced another and a larger People;
The Riches of the World, as the Apostle expresses it.

14 A Fulfillment of Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 37.

19 Munsters Gloss is, Agimur in Exilium, A Banishment into a Wilderness.

PSALM XLV. To the Chief Musician: Upon ^b^sha^mim; For the Sons of Korab.
Masehil. A ^ong of Loves.
1 MY Heart it boils good matter out; I speak unto the King what I have
wrought; my Tongue is like a ready writers pen.

2 Fairer thou art than Sons of Men; Upon thy lips there is a Grace diffused;
God therefore has blessed thee for evermore.

3 Gird thou thy Sword upon thy thigh, O thou most mighty One; Do it with thy
Magnificence, and with thy Majesty.

4 And in thy Majesty do thou proceed most prosp'rously; yea, ride thou forth
upon the Word of Everlasting Truth: It is a Word of Meekness, and a Word of
Righteousness; So thy Right Hand shall show to thee Things very wonderful.

5 Sharp are thine Arrows: (under thee the People shall fall down:) Sharp in
the Hearts of them that have been enemies to the King.

6 For ever and for ever is, thy Throne, O God, the Judge: The Scepter of thy
Kingdom is a Scepter swayed with right.

7 Thou love Righ teousness; and thou hate all wickedness; God therefore,
He who is thy God, has now anointed thee; Has made thee His Messiah with a
sweet refreshing Oil, which does distinguish thee from them who do partake with
thee.

8 With Benjamin and Aloes, and Cassia, all thy robes, fetched from the ivory
Palalaces; from thence did make thee glad.

9 Ladies of Honor unto thee are Daughters of Great Kings; At thy Right Hand
in Ophirs Gold arrayed thy Consort stands.

10 Hearken, O daughter, and behold; and bow thine ear to this; Now thine own
People O forget, yea, and thy Fathers house.

11 So in thy Beauty shall the King have an intense delight; Because He is thy
Lord, therefore pay homage unto Him.

12 Daughter of Tyrus, even thou; the wealthy People shall solicit for thy
favor with a Present made to thee.

13 The Daughter of the King, she is all glorious within; Her covering is of
spangled Robes which are inlaid with Gold.

14 In Robes of Needle Work she shall be brought unto the King; Virgins that
follow and attend, these shall be brought to thee.

15 They shall brought be with wondrous joys, and exultations there; their
entrance they shall make into the Palace of the King.

16 In the room of thy Fathers now thy Children shall succeed; these thou shall
bencesorth constitute Princes in all the Earth.

17 In every Generation I will make thy Name to be remembered; so the People
shall ^aise thee for evermore.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XLV. PSALM.
BEhold the Marriage of the Jewish Church unto the Messiah, when she shall be
recalled and restored unto the favor of GOD. Compare the III. Chapter of
Joremiah. R. David Kimchi, has wondrous Confessions, That the Loves in the
Psalm, are the Loves of GOD unto His CHRIST; That the Kings Daughters are the
Nations of the Farth, Subject unto the Messiah; and the Queen among them is
Israel. Others of the Rabbi's; but above all, the Chaldee Paraphrase; are full
in their Applications of the Psalm to the M^ssiah. Yea, according to the
Chaldee, in the Psalm now before us, the Messiah is GOD; and in the LIII. of
Isaiah, the Messiah is Man. Wonderful! O Christian, How does thy Religion
triumph over its Adversaries!

The Psalm is called, A Song of Desires. R. David says, The whole World will
rejoice at the coming of the Messiah, because all the Nations have desired it.
Compare, Hag. II. 7. Consider, Romans VIII. 19. The same Word used by the LXX, in
Genesis XLIX. 10. Is not the Name of Jedidiah here alluded to?

1 A Writer of Short Hand. An basty Writer, as R. Obadiah Gaon expresses it,
Qui principia Vocum solummodo transcribit. q. d. I Will only bestow a touch or
Two in a contracted manner, on the Beginning of the matter.

4 The Prospering of the Kingdom is to be by the planting of all Virtue among
the Subjects of it. Our SAVIOR goes forth as a Conqueror, not in taking of
Spoils, or making of Slaves; but in Settling of the True Faith among them, and
making of them to be Meck, Modest, Humble, Righteous, and Charitable. For this
purpose He did Miraculous things, Luke IV. 36. and V. 26. And then, as Munster
adds (...) Insedit Apoll (...) veluti Equo.

8 The Super-eminent Gifts of our SAVIOR cause an inexpressible Gladness,
among His People and Subjects. Compare the Joy expressed, when Solomon was
Anointed, and preferred before his Brethron, 1 Kin. I. 39, 40.

If Solomon's Wedding Garments were perfumed, much more shall there be a sweet
Odor in the Knowledge of CHRIST, when He comes to Fspouse His People. See, 2
Cor. II. 14, 15, 16. But, Behold what was literally done to the Garments of our
SAVIOR! Consider, Job. XIX. 30. Mark XVI. 1. Luke XXIV. 1. Our SAVIOR was
made Glad, in His not seeing of Corruption.

9 R. Obadiah Gaon, wittily Fxpounds the Kings Daughters to be, Op^niones
sapientum Nationum Exterarum. The Opinions of the Wiser Gentiles, are but so
many Confessions of the true Religion; so many Attendants on the Church of GOD.
Lactantius affirms of these, That if any one would make a fair Collection of
them, Is profecto non dissentiret a nobis.

16 Arnobius here finds the Apostles coming in the room o^ the Patriarchs. By
their means, the Church brings forth Children unto CHRIST, whom He makes Kings
and Priests unto GOD, and they shall Reign upon the ^arth.

PSALM XLVI. To the Chief Musician. For the Sons of Korah. Upon Alamoth.
1 GOD is a Refuge unto us, and fortifying strength; and help in troubles which
we have in great abundance found.

2 Therefore we will not be afraid, although the Earthdo shake; and though the
mountains be removed to the midst of the Seas.

3 Thereof the waters, let them roat; and let them be disturbed; and let the
mountains tremble for the raging swell thereof. Selah.

4 A River's here; the streams whereof rejoice the City of God; the Holy place
where the Most High has Habitations chose.

5 God is within the midst of her; she sha'n't feel any shake; God shall send
help to her, when that the Morning does approach.

6 The Nations raged, the Kingdoms were in great Commotions roil'd; He did give
forth His thundering Voice; the Earth was all dissolved.

7 The ETERNAL God of Armies grants His presence unto us; The God of Jacob is
for us a lofty Citadel. Selah.

8 O come, Confider well the Works of the ETERNAL God; who has made
desolations be upon the watted Earth.

9 Unto the Borders of the Farth He makes Wars to cease; He breaks the bow and
cutts the spear, Chariots He burns in fire.

10 Be still and know that I am GOD, among the Nations I will be exalted; and
will be exalted in the Earth.

11 The ETERNAL God of Armies grants His Presence unto us; the God of Jacob is
for us a lofty Citadel. Selah.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XLVI. PSALM.
BEhold the Happiness of restored Israel! Compare the Ninth Verse, with Isa.
II. 4.

4 Take the Patrician Paraphrase. Our Hearts shall be quiet and still; like the
River that runs through our City, from whence the Inhabitants draw by Trenches,
delightful Streams to Water their Gardens. -- The small Forces that guard this
place, which make no more noise than those Waters, [ Isai. VIII. 6, 7.] shall
by the help of God, who in a special manner dwells here; be too hard for the
greatest Armies; which in their Number, and their Boasts, imitate the Waves of
the raging Sea.

But after all; The intention of the Holy Spirit here will not be understood,
if the Holy Spirit Himself be not understood. HE is the River; His Effusions
will be wonderful!

6 The horrible Tempest by which the Assyrian Camp fell under such Desolations,
was a notable Fulfillment of this Passage.

But, if I don't misremember, some of the Ancients have l^d me here to consider
what I read. Matthew. XXVII. 50, 51. Behold, God utters His Voice and the Earth
melts.

10 Old Raymund in his Pugio fidei, firds a Direction for a Sabbath here. It
may be rendered Sabbatize. Yea, the Great Sabbatism now arrives.

PSALM XLVII. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm for the Sons of Korah.
1 O All ye People, every one, Clap ye your hands for joy; with a loud voice of
triumph make a joyful shout to God.

2 For the ETERNAL God most High, is greatly to be feared; He as a King
magnificent reigns over all the Earth,

3 He shall even with His Word subdue the People under us; and He shall bring
the Nations to lie prostrate at our feet.

4 He shall make choice for us, what shall be our Inheritance; Even the
Excellency of Jacob, whom He has loved. Selah.

5 God is gone up unto His Place with a triumphant shout; The ETERNAL God is
thither with the Trumpet sounding gone.

6 Sing Praises to the Glorious God; sing Praises yet again; sing Praises unto
Him our King; sing Praises unto Him,

7 Because the Glorious God is now the King in all the Earth; O sing ye Praises
unto Him, each understanding one.

8 The Glorious God does as a King over the Nations Reign: The Glorious God
sits King upon His Throne of Holiness.

9 The Princes of the People do in a Convention meet; They do become the People
of the God of Abraham. Because that they who are Shields for to defend the
Earth, belong to God, He therefore is exalted very high.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XLVII. PSALM.
BEhold the Triumph of the Messiah when He has established His Kingdom among
the Nations!

9 W^y, The People of the God of Abraham? There (...) a noble Emphasis in it.
Abrabam was to be the F^^her of many Nations. The God of Abraham is the God of
the Gentiles, as well as of the Jews. The C^nverted Gentiles are now to Glorify
God. The Relig^^n of Abraham (not what the Sects of the Orient call s^^ but
what is really such) will now be the Religion of the Nations.

PSALM XLVIII. A Song. A Psalm for the Sons of Korah.
1 GReat art Thou, O ETERNAL God, and greatly to be praised in the City of our
God, in the Mount of His Holiness.

2 Mount Zion, a most lovely Seat, the Joy of all the Earth; On the North sides
whereof there does the Great Kings City lie.

3 God in her Palaces is known for an high Citadel.

4 For lo, the Kings assembled there; they passed by together.

5 They saw; then wondered; they were scared; a terror seized on them.

6 Fear seized upon them there; a Pain of Women in their Pangs.

7 The Ships of Tarshish thou do break with a fierce Eastern Wind.

8 According to what we have heard so is what we have seen; In the City of the
ETERNAL God to whom all Hosts belong; In the City of our God; God will ever
establish it. Selah.

9 With quiet meditation we have had our tho'ts, O God, in the midst of thy
Temple, on thy kind benignity.

10 According to thy Name, O God, so is thy Praise unto the Earth's last
Borders; thy Right hand is full of Right'ousness.

11 Because of thy right Judgments now Mount Zion shall rejoice; the Daughters
too of Judah shall triumph with glorious Joy.

12 All about Zion walk ye round, and round encompass her; Account the number
of her Towers, to see what state they are in.

13 Apply your mind unto the Wall that has defended her; Observe her Palaces,
that ye may tell the Age to come.

14 For this God is our God; He Is so to all Eternity; and He will be a guide
for us to Death, and* over it.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XIVIII. PSALM.
WHY may not the Psalm refer to the History in, 2 Chronicles. XX. The Coming of the
Kings against Jehosaphat, with an intention to fall upon Jerusalem? The more
Prophetic Seers, here behold the Ruin of the Turks, when they come to assault
the Israelites, after they return into their Country; And suppose it explained
in the XXXVIII, and XXXIX of Ezekiel.

2 Pliny describing some of the most eminent Cities in the World, yet prefers
Jerusalem; calling it, Longo clarissimans Urb^um Orientis.

7 Such was their Consternation, that it surpised them, not only as Anguish
does a Woman in Travail; but also as Mariners, when a Fleet of Ships richly
laden from Tarshish, is broken in pieces. Whether Jehoshaphat improved his
Deliverance with due Thankfulness or no, yet quickly after this, he had a Fleet
exactly in this Condition. [2 Chronicles. XX. 37.]

10 Particularly that Name, The Lord of Hosts.

12 See, if there be so much as one wanting.

PSALM XLIX. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm for the Sons of Korah.
1 BEstow an hearing upon this, ye People every one; Hearken all you
Inhabitants upon a transient World.

2 Yea, bear, ye Sons of meaner Men, and Sons of higher too; Let the Rich Man
attend to this, together with the Poor.

3 My mouth shall speak of things that have a wisdom manifold; and my hearts
meditation shall yield many prudent things.

4 I will incline mine ear unto a most instructive speech; I will upon the harp
explain my speech that seems obscure.

5 In days of evil why should I be anxiously afraid; the days, when of my heels
the Sin does compass me about.

6 There are those who do place their hope upon their strengthening Wealth; and
in the multitude of their Riches do boast themselves.

7 There is no Man of them that can by any means redeem his Brother, nor give
unto God a price to ransom him.

8 For the Redemption of their Soul is of a weighty price; and it remains
unfinished to perpetuity.

9 For this, that he should always live to perpetuity; that he should never see
the pit wherein corruption lies.

10 For he may see that wise Men dye; so does the foolish Man and brutish
perish; and their Wealth they leave to other Men.

11 What is within them is this Thought, Their houses ever will endure; their
Tabernacles will endure from age to age. Their own Names for that cause they do
impose upon their Lands.

12 But notwithstanding all of this, look back on what is past. Man in bright
excellency placed continued not a Night; under dominion he did fall even like
the perishing beasts.

13 Egregious folly unto them this way of theirs does prove; yet their
Posterity walk on in that which they have said. Selah.

14 They are like Sheep laid in the Grave; upon them Death shall feed; and over
them the upright ones shall a dominion have, when the bright morning shall
arrive; then shall their Rock descend, Death to destroy; He then shall from His
Habitation come.

15 But from the power of the pit God shall redeem my Soul; This He will do,
because He will, receive me to Himself. Selah.

16 When that a Man grows Wealthy, then be not concerned at it; when that the
glory of his house is greatly multiplied.

17 For at his Death he shall not take any of it with him; nor shall the glory
which he had descend then after him.

18 Though in his Life he did proclaim his Soul a blessed one; and other Men will
praise thee when thou do befriend thy self.

19 O dying Man, Thou shall unto the Generation go of them that were thy
Ancestors; Light they shall never see.

20 Man who in honor is advanced, and does not understand, under dominion such
an one falls like the perishing beasts.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XLIX. PSALM.
BEhold the folly of them who think, that a Resurrection from the Dead, was not
promised or expected under the Old Testament The First Resurrection is here
plainly pointed (...).

5 The Talmud, by the Iniquity of the heel, understands the Iniquity, which Man
in this World makes light of, and even tramples under foot. Some of the
Ancients carried it so, Homines iniqui c^roumdant calcaneum meum. But consider
the Messiah speaking here; and the Ancient prediction of His Heel bruised for
the Iniquity of His People. Aben-Ezna takes the Iniquities of the Heels, to be
the Iniquities of illgotten Riches; whereof, Peccatum sequitur^quasi in calce,
et non videtur. Arnobius has a good Admonition; Hoe solum tremendum est
omnibus, ne in sine suo Iniquitate sua capiantur. Patrick's Paraphrase is, The
Iniquity of those that endeavor to supplant me.

8 The Redemption.] The Chaldee understands it, for the Vengeance pursued upon
the Soul; when the Ransom is paid for it, that now cease forever.

11 Inward thot's, are those that arise merely from the Inward Principles,
Dispositions and Inclinations of Men, and that are not suggested and excited
from Outward Objects.

Ditto. Compare Genesis IV. 17. The Jewish Rablins interpret it, with the mention
of Alexandria, of Antioch, and of Tiberias.

12 Some read it, Adam continued not a Night in Excellency. What became of him?
Alting observes, That the Word Mashal, signifies not only Similitude, but also
Dominion. And if it be not so taken here, the Particle, Caph, before Beasts,
will be superfluous. -- Whose Dominion? But that of Satan, the horrible Tempter.

14 The Hebrew Word Phadah, to Redeem, is of the same Importance with the
Arabic, Feda, To devote ones self to Death. A Glorious Truth! Our Lord Redeems
us, by devoting Himself to Death for us.

PSALM L. A Psalm of Asaph.
1 THE God of God's, the ETERNAL God, has spoke, and called the Earth, even
from the rising of the Sun, unto its going down.

2 From Zion wholly beautiful God sends a luster forth.

3 Our God shall come and He shall not keep silence any more. Before His Face a
wasting Fire shall dreadfully devour, and round about him it shall be very
tempestuous.

4 He shall give out His call unto the Heavens from above; and He shall call
unto the Earth, to judge His People there.

4 Assemble ye His gracious ones together unto me, those that have made a
Covenant with me by Sacrifice.

6 The Heavens also shall declare abroad His Right'ousness; Because the
Glorious God Himself in Person shall be Judge. Selah.

7 Hear, O my People, and I Will speak, Give ear, O Israel; and unto thee I Will
testify; I Am GOD, I am thy GOD.

8 Upon thy Sacrifices I give no Reproofs to thee, for thy Burnt-Off^rings have
been still before me evermore.

9 Knore that a Bullock I will not out of thy house accept: He-goars for
Off^^ings I will not eart of thy Fold; ^ecei^^.

10 For every Beast throughout the Wood I as my own do claim; the Cattle which
are on the Hills by thousands in a drove.

11 The Fowls that on the Mountains fly, I know them every one; and the wild
Beasts that range the fields I ever have at hand.

12 If I were hungry I would not declare it unto thee; For that the World is
mine, and so is all that fills it.

13 Do thou imagine I shall feed upon the flesh of Bulls; or that I shall, to
quench my thirst drink up the blood of Goats.

14 Confessing, offer unto God a Sacrifice of Praise; and pay unto the most
High One the Vows which thou have made.

15 And call upon me in the day when trouble comes on thee; I will deliver thee
and thou shall glorify me then.

16 But to the Wicked God has said, What claim'st thou to declare my Statutes,
or my Covenant take thou into thy mouth?

17 For as for thee, thou do but hate to be instructed well; and thou do
cast with all contempt my words behind thy back.

18 When thou have seen a Thief thou have gladly concurred with him; and with
Adulterers thou have chosen to have thy part.

19 Thou to thy mouth have given a loose for evil purposes; and thy Tongue
artfully contrives to carry on deceit.

20 Thou on thy seat do speak against thy Brother wrongfully (...) thou do
give out a stand^rous lye^^ against thy Mothers Son.

21 These things thou did, and I was dumb; thou thought^st me like thy self;
I will reprove thee, and will rank these thing, before thine Eyes.

22 Consider now this, you that are, forgetful of a God; Lest I tear you to
pe^ces and there is none to rescue you.

23 He glorify's me, who does bring an Offering of Praise: And unto him who
takes the way I Will God's Salvation show.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the L. PSALM.
BEhold, the Return of the Jews, with a Correction of their mistake, in placing
Religion only in Sacrifices. Behold, then a Condemnation passed on the
followers of Antichrist.

1 The Name of GOD occurring three times may seem a sweet Indigitation of the
Trinity. In the Midrash Tillin there is what looks very like a Confession of it:

2 According to the Chaldee it is not Zion, but GOD the Messiah, who is here
called The perfection of Beauty.

13 Justin Martyr and Origin, and many mo^e, assure us, The Heathens were of
Opinion, that their Gods were nourished, and therefore also delighted, with the
sumes and steams of the Sacrifices offered unto them.

23 May not here be some Eye to the Messiah? Praise is a Name of the Messiah,
He is the Praise of Israel. God inhabits Him. He is the great One of Judah, who
is to be Praised. The Original here is. He that Sacrifices Praise. Our Messiah
Glorified God infinitely, when He presented himself a Sacrifice unto God. We
never glorify GOD so much as when we fly to and lean on that Sacrifice.

I find one who so reads it, One Sacrificing Praise shall glorify me.

PSALM LI. To the Chief Musician; a Psalm of David, when Nathan the Prophet
came unto him, after he had gone in to Bathsheba.
HAve Mercy upon me, O God, [even] according to thy Grace: As thy Compassions
are most large, [do thou] blot out my Trespasses.

2 O multiply my Washing from [all of] my Vile Iniquity; And O make me entirely
clean from [all of] my defiling Sin.

3 Since I do of my Trespass make a Free [and full] ackowledgment; and I
continually have my [horrid] Sin before my Eyes.

4 To thee, To thee alone I Have finn'd, and done ill in thy View [alone;] That
when thou speakst thou may be just, and [may'st be] pure when thou do
judge.

5 Behold, 'twas in Iniquity that I [at first] received my Shape; and 'twas in
Sin my Mother did [at first] conceive me as her Child.

6 Behold, Thou do desire the Truth [to be] in the most inward parts; and
thou will make me understand Wisdom in what is concealed [within.]

7 O purge me with the Sprinkler well, and so I shall be [throughly] clean; O
Wash thou me, and then shall I be whiter than the [whitest] Snow.

8 Make me to hear that which will be Gladness and [Glorious] Joy to me: The
Bones which thou have broken quite, O let them yet [again] rejoice.

9 From the beholding of my Sins [kindly] hide thou away thy face; and all of
my Iniquities [wholly] do thou obliterate.

10 O God, Create in me an heart that shall be [judged] thoroughly clean; and in
the midst of me do thou renew a Spirit right [and firm.]

11 From standing still before thy face O cast me not [in Wrath] away: Thine
holy Spirit now from me away [therefore] O take thou not.

12 Restore thou unto me the Joy of thy [desir'd] Salvation now; and let a
Spirit free * and high gloriously [lead and] strengthen me.

13 Unto Transgressors I will give Instructions in thy [Righteous] Ways; and
they who have been sinners shall be [real] Converts unto thee.

14 O God, O my Salvations God; Deliver me from [crying] Bloods: My Tongue then
of thy Righteousness shall openly proclaim [and sing.]

15 Lord, who art my Support, Do thou Open these [closed] Lips of mine: and
then my mouth with freedom shall declare thy [glorious] praise abroad.

16 For thou desir'st not Sacrifice, else had I [freely] given it; Thou do
not take delight at all in a [common] Burnt-Offering.

17 The Sacrifices owned by God are in a broken Spirit [ found; ] An heart
that is broken and contrite, O [Gracious] God, Thou Wilt not despise.

18 In thy good pleasure, O do thou do good to [threatned] Zion too; and O do
thou build up the Walls of both [thy own] Jerusalems.

19 Then thou with pleasure wilt receive the [grateful] sacrifices which are to
be reckoned requisite unto true [and full] Rightconsdess. Burnt-offerings thou will then receive, and [even] whole Burnt-offrings too; Then they shall offer
Bullocks on the [Sacred] Altar claimed by thee.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LI. PSALM.
BEhold the Jews consessing their Murder of the Messiah: [Compare Isa. 1 15
16.] And entreating for a return of the Gifts, whereof they have been long
deprived; and engaging to publish the Mercy of God among the Nations.

The Eighteenth Verse points to a time wherein Jerusalem lies desolate.

3 What if, Sin, should here mean also Sin offering?

4 To thee alone] It means, as Munster glosses, In occulto foci. None but God
saw the Sin. David might now call to mind the Words of the Proplet. 2 Samuel 11
17. Thou did it secretly.

Be just.] Munster would have these clauses refer, not unto the next foregoing,
but unto that, cleanse me from my Sin. The plea, is, That so there may be found
a Truth in the promises of Mercy and Pardon to the repenting sinner.

6 Sin aggravated from a Principle of better motions in us.

But can we see nothing of the Messiah here -- That He should be thus in
David's Loins after he had been thus polluted!

7 Impure as a Leper! -- Far more unclean by touching Bathshebah, than one
could be in touching a Dead Body.

I choose to say, The Sprinkler; Because I suspect Hyssop was not the plant used
on the Occasion referred to, but Rosemary.

11 Has not the Psalmist the Condition of his Predecessor, Saul, in his Fie?

16 For some Atrocious Crimes [like Davids] there was no Sacrifice directed or
allowed in the Law of Moses. But now see Acts XIII. 39. All that believe are
justified from all things.

17 The Sacrifices were first out in pieces (not mangled but Jointed.) That was
their Breaking. They were then burnt to Ashes. That was their Contrition.

Repentance has in it something Analogous.

But let us away, to our glorious Messiah as often as we can! The special
Character which the Oracles of God put on the Messiah coming to be a Sacrifice
for sin, is that of The Bruised One. Yea, the very first time that ever the
Messiah was mentioned in the World, His being Bruised was the main thing spoken
of. Besure the Messiah was one of a Broken Spirit, a Broken and a Contrite
Heart. Never such heart breaking things undergone by any one! At last his very
Spirit was broken from his Body; the Vital Union was broken. Behold the
Sacrifice which the Psalmist has his Eye and his Hope upon.

18 Both Jerusalems] The Name Jerusalem, is of the Dual Number; not without a
Mystery!

The Psalm expires not, before it is evident, that the Spirit of Prophecy,
which he had prayed for, was returned unto him. It ends with a Prophecy.

PSALM LII. To the chief Musician. Maschil. Of David. When Do^g the Edomite
came and told Soul, and said unto him, David is come to the House of Ahimelech.
1 IN Mischief, O thou mighty Man, why do thou boast thy self? The Mercy of a
Mighty God endures continually.

2 Thy Tongue devises things of a Pernicious Tendency; It is like a Sharp
Razour; it still works deceitfully.

3 Thou love evil more than good; more to speak false than right. Selah.

4 Thou love all devouring Words, O thou deceitful Tongue.

5 And God upon thee shall inflict endless Destruction too; He shall take thee
away, and pull thee from thy dewlling place. Yea, He shall extirpate thee from
the Land of Living Ones. Selah.

6 The Just shall also see and fear, and they shall laughed at him.

7 Behold the Man who made not God his strength, but trusted in his mighty
Riches, and grew strong in's Wealthy wickedness.

8 But I am in the House of God like a green Olive Tree; I have had in the
Grace of God my everlasting Hope.

9 Forever I Will praise thee, because this is what thou have done; And I Will wait
on thy Name, because it is good before the Saints.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LII. PSALM.
Cannot we see here a Censure on the manners of Antichrist, and his Party; and a
Praediction of his Destruction; and the Joy of the faithful upon it?

But Arnobius teaches us, to apply the Psalm ^^ainst the Dovil. Ipsi Diabolo
tot^ ver^a h^jus Psal^^ s^ous in Otatiou^ cant abis.

1 It seems the sorry wretch bragged of what he had done. These Words may be an
Irony; q. d. A goodly feat indeed for a Man to boast of

2 A Reviling Tongue, is like a Razour for this; 'twill cut every little hair,
The smalleft pretense of Offenses cannot escape it. But a Razour don't wound
the Person. Hence it is compared [Psalm LVII. 4.] to a Sword. It cuts deep into
the Credits of Men, and into their Spirits also. But a Sword will do mischief
only near at hand. Hence it is compered [Psalm LXIV 3.] to an Arrow. It hits at a
Distance; does mischief a great way off.

5 From the threatening to pull him from his dwelling place, the Jews have a
Tradition of Doegs being smitten with a Leprosy. It Is the Phrase used in that
Case. Lev. XIV.

Doeg is paid in the same Coin, that the Priests of the Lord had received from
him.

8 R. Obadiah Gaon has this fine gloss upon it, In oleum Splendoris, ad
illuminandos alios in lege.

The ancient People of God, had their proseucha's, or praying places. [Luk. VI.
12.] Courts open above like the Forums of the Romans. And they usually had
Groves about them, Yea, Trees within them. Dr. Prideaux thinks the passage of
an Olive Tree in the House of God, may allude unto what was in these
Proseucha's.

PSALM LIII. To the Chief Musician; upon Mahalath, Maschil, of David.
1 THe Fool has said within his heart, That there is not a God. Thus they
corrupt; they do the thing that is abominable. There is not one among them all
who does the thing that is Good.

2 From heaven God who is the Judge looks on the Sons of Men; He looks to see
if that there be one who does mind at all to understand, or, One who is a
seeker after God.

3 They Are every one declined; they are together putrified; there is not one
doer of good, no, not so much as one.

4 They that work evil, know they not? They eat my People up as they eat Bread;
they do not call on God who is the Judge.

5 There they shall be in grievous fear, though there is no cause to fear: For God
scatters the Bones of him that lays a Seige to thee. Thou shall effectually
put them to contemptuous shame; because that God has with contempt utterly
cast them off.

6 From Zion who gives Isreal's health? When the ETERNAL turns his Captive
People, Jacob will Joy, Israel will be glad.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LIII. PSALM.
IT is guessed by Patrick, that the Rebellion of Absalom, caused the complaint
in the 14. Psalm. And the New Revolt of the Israelites under Sheba, caused this
New Edition of it. After Sheba was beheaded, it is likely, his Body was
exposed, and his Bones were scattered, and all his adherents became
contemptible.

But what shall we do with the Word Captivity, in the last verse of the Psalm?
Was the Psalm reviewed by Asaph the Seer in the Days of Hezokiah, when many of
the People were carried into Captivity?

A Prophecy of Antichrist here, clears all.

PSALM LIVE. To the chief Musician; on Neginoth; Masichil. Of David. When the
Ziphims came, and said to Saul, Does not David hide himself with us?
1 BY thy Name save thou me, O God and judge me by thy strength.

2 Hear thou my Prayer, O God; Give ear to the Words of my Mouth.

3 For Strangers have against me risen, and formidable ones pursued my soul,
they have not set God in their view at all. Selah.

4 Behold, the God who is Judge is He who does afford me help; it is the
Supporting Lord's with those who do uphold my Soul.

5 He shall retaliate evil to my Prying Enemies; Exterminate them utterly as
thy Truth calls for it.

6 With Freedom I will Sacrifice to thee, ETERNAL God; with Praises I Will adore
thy Name, because that it is good.

7 For out of all adversity He has delivered me; mine Eye has also seen what
comes upon mine Enemies.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LIVE. PSALM.
BEhold, a Prayer of the Faithful, under the Persecution of Antichrist!

David was brought into such a straight that if Saul had not been strangely
diverted, he could not have escaped. In this distress he made the Prayer in the
first three verses of the Psalm. Surprised at the Tidings of the Diversion
given to Saul, he breaks out into an Admiration of the Divine Goodness unto
him. When the Danger was quite over, he adds the two last Verses, from his
mountain beholding the retreat of Saul, and of his Forces.

PSALM LV. To the Chief Musician. On Neginoth. Maschil; of David.
1 GIve thou a gracious Ear, O God, unto my righteous prayer; and from my
Supplication now O do not hide thy self.

2 O give attention unto me, and hear me graciously; I in my sad complaint do
mourn, and make a Troublous noise.

3 From the Foes voice, from the face of Grief by the wicked one; For falsehood
they do cast on me, and hate me furiously.

4 Within the midst of me my heart trembles in travailing pain; and there are
fallen upon me, the terribles of Death.

5 Terror with Trepidation has now much surprised me, and horrid Consternation
has quite overwhelmed me,

6 Then said I, O! who is it will give Wings of a Dove to me? with them I Would
swiftly fly away, where I might find a Rest.

7 Behold, I would then make my flight to a vast Distance off; my Lodging I
would make in a far distant Wilderness. Selah.

8 I would make all the haste I could in making my escape, from the impetuous
Wind which does rise with a mighty storm.

9 Lord, Send Destruction upon them; and Oh, divide their Tongues: for in the
City I have seen fierce Violence and Strife.

10 Both Day and Night they compass it, upon the Walls thereof; and troublesome
Iniquity is in the midst thereof.

11 Grievous Corruptions full of fraud are in the midst thereof, and from the
Streets thereof Deceit and guile do not Depart.

12 For it was not an Enemy that has reproached me; For if it had been such an
One, I could have suffered it. Nor was it one who hated me that has insulted
me; had it been such an One, I might have hid my self from him.

13 But it was thou, O man, whom I Esteemed like my self; 'twas my Informer,
and one who was my familiar Friend.

14 We sweetly did Communicate secrets to one another; We walked into the House
of God in Company together.

15 Let Death arrest them, let them go down to the Pit alive; for mischiefs
are where they do meet, even in the midst of them.

16 But as for me, This I will do, I upon God will call; and the ETERNAL God
will give Deliverance to me.

17 Evening and Morning, and at Noon, I meditate for Prayer; so I will make a
fervent Cry, and he will hear my Voice.

18 He has delivered my Soul in peace from those who made against me an
hostile approach; for many were with me.

19 God shall hear, and shall vex them; He, even who sits Judge of Old. Selah.
There are no changes found with them; and so they fear not God.

20 He shall put forth his hand against the Men at Peace with him; his Covenant
therein he has profaned by breaking it.

21 Smooth were his Mouth's fine buttered Words; but war was in his heart; much
foster were his words than oil; and yet drawn Swords they were.

22 Cast thy Load on the ETERNAL God, and he shall strengthen thee; The
Righteous one He will not leave ever to be disturbed.

23 But thou, O God the Judge, wilt cause them to go down into the dark pit of
the grave in which there is corruption found; These bloody and deceitful men
sha'n't live out half their days; But as for me, This I will do, I Will put my
trust in thee.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LV. PSALM.
HEar the Groans of the Church, under the Cruel ties of Antichrist and his
party.

In the fifteenth Verse, is a Prophecy fulfilled in Rev. XIX, and XX.

3 q. d. They say I am unjust, Compare 2 Samuel 15 34.

12 Instructed from old Arnobius, a Child of God may thus apply these Passages.
Lord, If Satan my Enemy should by himself speak unto me, I should be armed and
hid against one, who I know has such a^ hatred for me. But he employs my
Flesh, my Familiar, my Acquaintance, the very Body which has eaten with me, at
thy holy Table. The Devils do that way fall upon me. Oh! Therefore let death
fall upon them. Nay, because they are by nature Immortal, do thou send them
down Quick into Hell. For there is nothing but Wickedness, where ever they
dwell, and in the midst of all their Suggestions.

It is a Nice thought of Gregory in his Pastorali^ Cura. The Living are they
that know what they do, and have some sense of it: The Dead are sensible of
nothing. They that sin against their knowledge, are such as may be said, to go
down alive into Hell. Other sinners go Dead thither.

^. cout^nue what they were, without the f^^^ of G^^ Theod^^^ so. Because they
sear not God, (...) changes, Their m^^eri^^ continue on them: The^ adversity is
no^ changed into prosperity.

23 It Is a Predictior of the ^ate of Young Abs^ lom, am his Accomplices. Perhaps
the Psalmist (...) a^ ^ye on (...) fifth Commandment.

PSALM LVI To the Chief Musician; upon Jonath Plomrec^^^^^^ Mic^an of David.
When the Philistin^^ ^ook (...) in Gat^.
1 PIty thou me, O God, for man H^^ seeks for to devour; continually opposing
me he still oppresses me.

2 My Enemies are all the Day me see^ing to devour: many are they who do
co^vene against me from on high.

3 At whatsoever time I am afiald, Pl trust in thee

4 What I will praise in God, it is H^ Word, I Will trust in God, I will not be
fraid of what frail Flesh can do to me.

5 My Words they daily wrest; th^^ Thoughts against me tend to ill.

6 Together they convene themselves, they do conceal themselves; my steps t^^^
curiously observe when they walt for (...) Soul.

7 Because of their Imquity shall th^^ make an Escap^? O God, do thou the (...)
pie cast (...) in indignation do^^

8 Of all my wandering to and fro, thou keep an Account; Into thy Bottle put
my Tear; Is it not in thy Book?

9 In the Day when I make my Cry then shall my enemies be turned back; this I
do know, because God is for me.

10 In God I Will praise the Word, in the ETERNAL praise the Word.

11 I hope in God; I will not fear what man may do to me.

12 O God upon me are thy Vows; to thee I Will praise^ pay.

13 Because thou have delivered my Soul from threatened Death; O will thou not
deliver now my feet from falling too? That I may walk before God in the Light
of living ones.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LVI. PSALM.
BEhold still the Dispositions and Supplications of the Church under the
Tyranny of Antichrist.

One thinks, That the Psalmists not making any Remonstrances to Achish for the
Ill Usages he had met withal, might be the Reason why he is here compared unto
Jonath Elem, or the Silent Dove.

1 Saul, forgetting his own Mortality, was insatiably set for the Destruction
of our Psalmist.

8 Many Elegancies are in this Verse, besides the Hebrew Paranomasies, which
cannot be Englished.

But among the reft, Observe the Hebrew has, Tear, in the Singular Number. A
sweet Intimation, that the Faithful have not so much as one single T^ar. that
shall be lost. Of Old, they had Viols, which they called Lacrymatorics, wherein
they pres^^ved the Tears dropped at Funerals.

10 For his Word: -- ( Munster glesses well) with which he comforted me, and
caused me to hope in Him.

PSALM LVII. To the Chief Musician. Altaschith. Mictam of David, when be fled
from Saul in the Cave.
1 BE merciful to me, O God; Be merciful to me: Because my Soul in Thee alone
does place its confidence. Yea, I will make my refuge in the shadow of thy
wings until that the calamities shall be well overpast.

2 Unto the most high God I will cry with a fervent voice; to God who does
perform for me what He has promised.

3 From Heaven he sends and rescues me; my enemy blasphemes. Selah. God will
send forth His mercy, and He will send forth His Truth.

4 My Soul's with Lions; I do lie among a fiery crew; Men's sons whose teeth are
spears and darts, and a sharp sword their tongue.

5 Above the Heavens, O God the Judge, Be thou lift up on high; and over all
the Farth let be thy Glory spread abroad.

6 They for my steps prepared a net; he bowed down my Soul; before me they have
dug a pit, wherein they are fallen themselves, Selah.

7 My heart is well prepared, O God, My heart is well-prepar'd; and being so
prepared, I Will sing, and I will make a Psalm.

8 My Glory, O awake thy self; awake, O Psaltery; aw^ke, O Harp too; I my self
will in the morning wake.

9 Ill thee among the People praise, O Lord, my great support; I will sing unto
thee among the Nations of the Earth.

10 For thy great mercy does extend unto the very Heav^ns; and to the tender
Clouds there does extend thy faithfulness.

11 Above the Heav^ns, O God the Judge, be thou lift up on high; and over all
the Earth let be thy Glory spread abroad.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LVII. PSALM.
A Ltaschith was the Word of David unto them that would have killed Saul in the
Cave. We have ^re the Praver of the Church under the Antichristian ^^^secution;
And the Ruin of Antichrist foretold, as (...) fore^unner unto the Establishment
of our Savior's Kingdom, over all the Earth. Agreeably to this Thought the
Midri^is Tillin applies the Calamities here spoken (...), into the Condition,
wherein the Church must lie, ^l the time of the Four Monarchies.

1 Why ^^vice, Be mer^iful? The Midrash Tillin as a Glots to this Purpore? B^
Merciful to me in ce^ing me from Sin: But if I do fall into Sin: Be Merciful to
me, in giving me Repentance.

D^^^, The Sh^^ow of the Wings of GOD; -- no doubt, refers to the Angelical
Protection; a Safety and Comfort through the Ministry of the Good Angels. Are not
these cali'd His Feathers? [ Psalm. XCI.4, 11.] Here is doubtless, an Allusion
to Exodus XXV. 20. The Cherubim did stretch forth their Wings.

2 -- Or, Perfec'cs, i. e. The Work he has begun. Compare Psalm. CXXXVIII. 8.
and Phil. 1.6.

7 Once Res^lving, is not enough to settle and confirm such an Heart as ours.
But one of the Ancients has another devout hint upon it. Our Psalmist was
willing to undergo a very different Condition. If GOD would have him, High or
Low, Rich or Poor, a Shepherd or a Monarch; his Heart was prepared! prepared!
Paratum eor meum ad prospora, Paratum ad adversa; Paratum ad Humilia, Paratum
ad Sublimia; Paratum ad universa qua preciperis. Bern.

PSALM LVIII. To the Chief Musician. Altaschith. Mictam of David.
1 DO ye indeed speak Righetousness, O you confederate ones? Do ye judge none
b^^ righteous things, O Sons of earthly Man!

2 Yea, in the heart contriving it you work iniquities; you in the Earth will
still weigh out the violence of your hands.

3 The wicked are estranged from God, even from the very womb; they go astray
as soon as born, the speakers of a lie

4 Their poison's like the poison which a serpent has in it; like that of the
deaf adder which does obturate her ear.

5 She will not hearken to the voice of any Charming ones; No, though the Charmer
should be one never so skilled in Charms.

6 O God, What teeth are in their mouth, do thou quite break them out; The
great teeth of the dragons break, O Thou ETERNAL God.

7 Like water let them melt away, divide among themselves; Let him direct his
arrows, let them yet be as cut off.

8 Even like to a dissolving shall let each one pass away, as a Females
untimely birth; they have not seen the Sun.

9 Before your Pots can feel the thorns, as raw flesh snatched away, so let
wrath carry him away, even as a whirlwind would.

10 When that the righteous one shall see this vengeance, he will rejoice; in the
blood of the wicked one then shall he wash his feet.

11 Then shall a Man say, Truly, for the Just there is a reward; most certainly
there is a God who judges in the Earth.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LVIII. PSALM.
SEE the Barbarity and Corruption of the Antichristian Party; and the
Destruction that shall come upon them. Dr. Patrick looks on the Psahn as a
Reproot of those evil Counselors, who had condemned David against their
Consciences, merely to please the King, and give him a pretense to destroy him.

5, 6. The Incantation of Serpents, is a thing so famous in Antiquity, that
whole Pages might be filled with Testimonies, besides those whereof Bochart has
given so copious a Collection.

9 Some think the Boiling of Asparagus, to be here alluded to; The Wicked shall
be consumed in as little a time; Citius quam Asparagi ccquaniur. One of the
lewish Expositors carries it so; Antequam creseant spins parva ac tener a in
Rhamnum. That is, Before the Children of those wretches come to be of Age. The
Psalm Entitled Altaschith, or Destroy not, some say was penned on the Occasion
of David's being happily kept from the Destroying of Nabal. The Man's Tonguo had
reviled him, and his Ear was deaf to the charms of his Messengers. He
Trophecies, that God would suddenly take him away, as with a Storm, ere the
Pots that were set on the Fire for his Feasrs could feel any warmth from the
Thorns put under them, to boil them. This Clause, Both living, and in his
Wrath, Dr. Light foot carries thus; According as he was lively, or ^ovial, so
should the Wrath be proportioned unto him. Hebr. As he lively, so the Wrath;
The Word Chai, is the very Epither, which David gave him; Say (Lechai) to him
that is lively, and has his Spirits raised with Prosperity. May we not find,
in Mic. III. 2, 3. A Key to this Place?

PSALM LIX. To the Chief Musician. Al-taschith. Mictam, of David: When Saul
sent and they watched the House to kill him.
1 FRom them that are my enemies, My God, Deliver me; from such as rise against
me, grant me a defense on high.

2 From them that work iniquity do thou deliver me; and from the men of bloods
to me a preservation grant.

3 Because, behold, they lie in wait for to surprise my Soul; The mighty ones
against me to do a Congregation form. It Is not for a transgression which by me
was ever done; it is not for any sin of mine, Thou know, ETERNAL God.

4 They run and they prepare themselves; without my fault at all; Do thou awake
to succor me, and, Oh! behold my case.

5 Thou therefore, O-ETERNAL God, who art the God of Hosts, O thou the God of
Israel, do thou appear awake; to give a visit unto all the Nations of the
World; But be not merciful to them who wickedly transgress. Selah.

6 At Evening they return; they make a noise like to a dog; and about all the
City they do take their compass round.

7 Behold, they do out of their mouth belch forth most grievous things; sharp
swords are in their lips; for who ( say they) is there to hear?

8 But, O ETERNAL God, Thou shall but merely laugh at them; all of the Nations
thou shall in a mere derision have.

9 His strength is that for which I will keep waiting upon thee, because that
God is evermore my high-place of defense.

10 The God of all my mercy shall prevent me still with it; God shall make me
to see what does befall my enemies.

11 Slay them not, lest my People do for get; but by thy power O scarter them,
and bring them down, O Lord, who art out Shield.

12 For their mouth's sin, for their lips word, and for their pride let them be
taken, and for cursing, and for lying which they speak.

13 Waste them in wrath, waste them, that they may not be, and let them know,
that God does rule in Jacob, to the ends of all the Earth.

14 At Evening so let them return; let them bark like a Dog; and if they are
not satisfied, then let them murmur on.

16 But as for me, I Will make my Song of thy victorious power; and of thy mercy
I will in the morning sing aloud. Because that thou have been for me my
high-place of defense; and refuge in the day when there was trouble upon me.

17 O Thou that art my strength, I will utter my Songs to thee; Because God is
my high defense; God of my mercy still.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LIX. PSALM
WE have here a Prayer against the Enemies of the Church. The Term of, The God
of Israel, invites us to think of the Jewish Nation groaning under the
Oppressions of Antichristian the City in the Sixth Verse (...) not Kome to be
understood? Compare, Numb. XXIV. 19. Good Old Arnobius has directed the
Application of the Psalm to the Morals of Christianity. When the House of thy
Body is beseiged and beset by the Prince of this World, with Temptations, that
thou may be taken and stain by the Sword of any Sin, it is now a time from the
bottom of thy Soul to make these outories.

5 In R. David Kimchi, there is an admirable intimation, That the Psalmist here
beholding the wickedness of Men, despairs of seeing a Good World, until the Day
of Judgment. The Day of Judgment, or the time of the Messiah's Kingdom, is here
Prayed for. At the Time when God shall thus visit all the Nations, He will
eminently exhibit Himself as the God of Israel.

6 Compare, 1 Samuel XIX. 10, 11. Take for once a Mystical Interpretation, and
from the Hint learn to make more such on proper Occasions. Men are guilty of
great Crimes, in their Younger Years. They reform those Crimes and live many
Years unblemished. But if the work of Repentance in them, have not been a
sincere and thorough work, they Return in the Evening to their old Crimes. God
leaves them to some strange Infatuation; and in their Old Age, or in the
Evening of their Lives, they fall into their Old Crimes again, with such
Circumstances as exceedingly expose them.

11 Austin has a Notable stroke upon it, Orat ut gens Judaeorum maneret. -- It
is not so much a David, as a Persecuted JESUS, whose Condition is expressed
throughout the Psalm. The Jewish Nation deserved utter destruction and
extinction for the wrongs which they did unto the Persecuted JESUS. But he
Prays, That the Nation may not be utterly Extinct, for their wickedness; but
wander about in a distressed and abject state, not altogether forgotten in the
World. The Syriac Title of the Psalm is, A Prophecy of the Conversion of the
Gentiles, and the Rejection of the Jews.

13 A fine thought Arnobius has upon it; Ibi dominatur Dominus, ubi Fines
faciunt Terrer and Voluptates.

14 The Return in the Evening, is by R. Obadiah Gaon, applied unto the Prophecy
of Gog and Magog.

PSALM LX. To the Chief Musician. Upon Shushan Eduth. Mictam. Of David; To
teach. When he strove with Aramnaharaim and with Aram-Zobah; When Joab returned
and smote of Edom in the Valley of Salt, Twelve Thousand.
1 O God, Thou have rejected us; Thou have dispersed us; Thou have been angry;
O do thou return to us again.

2 To tremble thou have made the Earth; Thou have divided it; The breaches of
it, O do thou heal them, because it shakes.

3 Thy People thou did cause to see a very grievous thing; Thou have made us
to drink the Wine, which does astonish us.

4 A Banner thou have given now to them that have thy fear, that it may be
displayed on high in the good cause of truth. Selah.

5 That thy beloved ones may have an hep'd deliverance; do thou now save by thy
right hand; and do thou answer me.

6 God has spoke in His holiness; I will triumph with joy; Shechem I will
divide and will measure out Succoth's Vale.

7 Gilead is what I claim for mine; Menasseh too is mine. Ephraim is of my
strength the head; Judah's my Lawgiver.

8 Moab's a Pot wherein I Will wash: On Edom I will cast my shoe; Philistia, If
thou can, triumph thou over me.

9 Who will conduct me unto the well-fortifyed Town? Into the heart of Edom,
who is it will lead me on?

10 Is it not thou, O God, who us did cast off heretofore? Even Thou, O God,
who did not go out with our Armed hosts?

11 O give us succor from distress; for vain's the help of Man.

12 Through God we shall do valiantly: and He Will tread down our foes.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LX. PSALM.
REad 2 Samuel VIII. And you understand the Psalm. The Sufferings of the Jewish
Nation in their present Exile, are also to be considered. R. Solomon has a
notable Gloss on the first Verse; He foresaw in the Spirit, Quod Romani erant
dominaturi.

2 There had been dreadful Divisions and Commotions among the People, [See, 2 Samuel II. 9, 10, 17. and III. 1.

3 A Fulfillment of Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 28, 34. They were like unto Men bereft of the
use of Reason, by some intoxicating Potion; who thereupon madly destroy one
another.

4 David became their King; to whom they were all to repair, like Soldiers to
their displayed Ensign, Because of Truth.] Munsters Gloss is; Ut promissionibus
tuis satisfaceres. But this is not all.

6 Take a Paraphrase. God [According to His Promise, 2 Samuel III. 18.] has put
me in possession of all the Country about Samaria, which I will distribute
under such Officers as I shall set over them. Gilead also and Menasseh. [who
were lately under another King, 2 Samuel 2.9.] have submitted themselves unto me.
And so has the Tribe of Ephraim; which is a main support of my Authority. These
and all the reft of the Tribes of Israel, are now invited unto the Royal Tribe
of Judah; which [according to Genesis XLIX. 10.] supplies me with Able Men, to
order the Affairs of my Kingdom; which now shall extend itself beyond the
Bounds of this Country. For I will tread Moab under my Feet, and reduce them to
the vilest Servitude. I will trample also on the Edomites, and make them my
Slaves. The Philistines also whom I have begun to smite, shall add unto my
triumphs.

7 My head; i. e. My chief Strength in time of Wa^: Judah my Lawgiver. It
refers to the Prophecy, Genesis XLIX. 10.

8. To pour Water out of a Vessel, for the wasning of another hands, is the
same as to be a Servant. [See, 2 Kin. III. 2.] Some of the Ancients applied it
unto the Tribute of Lambs, which Moab was to pay unto the King of Judah. [2
Kin. III. 4.] These were washed and boiled in Pots. q. d. Moab shall keep my
Pot boiling. Cast my shoe.] Does not the Spanish Version well express the
matter! Tomare Possession, or, I will take Possession of Edom. [Compare, Ruth
IV. 7. and Deuteronomy. XXV. 7, 9.] Plucking off the Shoe, was a Ceremony used of Old,
in Contracts and making over Estates.

11 The Trouble of the Syrians invading. See, 2 Samuel VIII. 5.

PSALM LXI. To the Chief Musician. Upon Neginoth. A Psalm of David,
1 O God, hear thou my mighty cry; attend unto my prayer.

2 From the end of the Earth I will send up my cry to thee; When that my heart
is overwhelmed, this will be still my course; O lead thou me unto the Rock that
is more high than I.

3 For thou have been my sheltring place, which I have hoped in; A Tower of
strength to hide from the face of the enemy.

4 I in thy Tabernacle will for ever make abode; I Will seek my refuge under the
safe covert of thy wings. Selah.

5 Because that thou, O God, the Judge, have hearkened to my Vows; Thou'st given
me the Heritage of them that fear thy Name.

6 Days thou shall add unto the days of Him that is the King; His years shall
be prolonged as an Age upon an Age.

7 Before the face of God He shall abide for evermore; Mercy and Truth do thou
prepare; these will continue him.

8 And then for evermore I will sing praise unto thy Name; that I may be
performing still my Vows from day to day.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXI. PSALM.
BEhold the Jewish Nation here despersed unto the Ends of the Earth: But
comforted with an hope of Restoration; and of happiness under the Protection of
the Messiah, for many Generations.

PSALM LXII. To the Chief Musician; To Jeduthun. A Psalm of David.
1 ASsuredly my Soul does wait in silence upon God; From Him it is that all of
my Salvation does proceed.

2 Surely He is my Rock, and He is my Salvation still; He is my high place of
defense; I shall not be greatly moved.

3 Against a Man how long will ye plot mischief's? you shall all be slain; like
to a bowing wall you will be, a tottering fence.

4 They only plot to cast him down from his high dignity;: They love a lie;
bless with their mouth; but inwardly they curse. Selah.

5 My Soul, See that in silence thou wait upon God alone; because it is from
Him that I my expectation have.

6 Surely, He is my Rock, and He is my Salvation still; He is my high place of
defense; I shall not be moved at all.

7 In God is my Salvation still, and there is my Glory too; The Rock in which
I Am fortified; my refuge is in God.

8 O People, At all times repose your confidence in Him, Pour out you heart
before His face; God is our safe retreat. Selah.

9 Sure lower Men are vanity, and higher Men a lie: Let them ascend the Scales,
they are less than vanity together.

10 O do not in oppression trust and robbery: Be not vain; If riches should be
multiplied, set not your heart thereon.

11 The mighty God has spoken once; These two things I have heard; One is,
That there is a mighty power which does belong to God.

12 The other, That Mercy belongs to thee, ETERNAL God; For thou will render
every Man according to his work.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXII. PSALM
THus the Church, under the Oppression of Antichrist, comforts herself, with
hopes in the Prophecies of what shall be done unto the Wicked.

6 How Piety improves in the exercise of i^ Four Verses ago, it was, I shall not
be greatly moved. Now it is come to this, I shall not be moved at all.

11 The Syriac Interpreter countenances our Version. Once God spoke on Mount
Sinai; And these Two things were heard, when the Sanctions of the Second
Commandment were uttered. I have somewhere met with such a devour Gloss as
this. When the Lord spoke once, this Pious Man heard him twice; Namely, by an
after Meditation on what had been spoken.

PSALM LXIII. A Psalm of David, when be was at the Wilderness of Judah.
1 O God, Thou art my God, I will seek after thee betimes; My Soul is in a
thirst for thee: Thee does my flesh desire. They do it in a Land that is a very
wilderness: And in a place of weariness, which has no water in it.

2 It is that I may have a view of what thy Power is, and what thy Glory; As I
have seen in the holy place.

3 Because thy loving kindness is better than Lives themselves; My lips shall
therefore be employed in setting forth thy Praise.

4 So in my Lives I will proclaim Thee the most blessed One: I will still
elevate my hands in thy m^^i blesed Name.

5 So as with marrow and with fat my Soul shall be fussic'd; And with my joyful
lips my mouth shall celebrate thy Praise.

6 It while I Am lying on my Beds I do remember thee, if in the watches of the
Night I meditate in thee.

7 Because that thou have been to me an help once and again, and in the shadow
of thy wings I do triumph with joy.

8 Still closely following after thee my Soul does cleave to thee: Thy
right hand does sustain me so that I am kept from falls.

9 But they who seek my Soul to bring destruction upon it: These shall go
surely down into the low parts of the Earth.

10 By the hands of the Sword they shall make him to flow away; they shall
become a portion to the Jackals of the Night.

11 But the King shall rejoice in God; each one that swears by him shall Glory:
but the mouth be stopped of them that speak a lie.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXIII. PSALM.
THink on the Case of the Church under Antichrist. Yea, think on the case of
the Synagogue too. Compare Versed. with Hos. II. 15. and Ezekiel, XX. 35. Dr.
Patrick thinks, the Wilderness here was that which David went through, when he
^^ed from Absalom. [2 Samuel XVII. 29.] Inasmuch as he calls himself a King;
which he would not have done, during the Reign of Saul.

1 Does not he long for the Coming of God, in our Flesh? It is the Son of God
in His Incarnation, wherein peculiarly we enjoy the Great GOD for our God. But
Methinks, I perceive the Cry of the Saints in Hades, wishing for the
Resurrection of the Dead. The Souls do thirst for the Coming of the Lord; Their
Flesh does also long for it; in a Land which wants the them of Heaven, whereby
the Dead shall be Revived. Singer, 06 Having this Key in thy Hands, now go into
the Psalm with most attentive Meditation. Dry and thirsty Land.] Compare 2 Samuel
XVII. 29.

3 It pleases one very much, to find the Chaldes intimating, That the Loving
kindness here celebrated, is the Blessedness which God will vouchsafe unto the
Just in the World to come. This is better than any Life in this World.

6 Old Arnobius has a singular Gloss upon it: Ostendit per^ejus Auxilium
potuisse se Castimoni^m ^btinuisse.

10 The Jackals, are a Mungril Creature, deriving their Cruelty from the
Wolves, their Sires; and their Craftiness from the Foxes their Dams. These are
so ravenous that they will not only feed on Carrion above Ground, but also dig
holes in the Farth, and setch forth the Dead Bodies of Men, if not very deeply
interrel. whereas, proper Foxes, they say, will not fee on my Carcass, but what
they kill themselves.

PSALM LXIV. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
1 O God, Hear Thou the Voice that is in my Praying unto Thee; O do thou keep my
Life from the fear of the Enemy.

2 O hide me from the secret plot of the malignant ones; from the contemptuous
rage of them that work iniquity.

3 The Men who like a cutting Sword do whet their spiteful tongue: they have bent
to shoot their arrows out, a word of bitterness.

4 This they do to shoot secretly against the perfect one; they suddenly do
shoot at him, and they are not afraid.

5 An evil matter for themselves they give a strength unto; they talk about
their hiding snares: Who shall see them? They say

6 They search iniquities; they make an exact scrutiny. The inward thought of
every one, and the heart is a deep.

7 But God shall shoot down upon them an Arrow suddenly: There shall be
suddenly dispensed strokes that shall be their wounds.

8 And so they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves: All they
who do behold them shall betake themselves to flight.

9 So all Men are afraid, and shall declare the work of God; For they shall
wisely apprehend the work that he has done.

10 The just one shall be very glad in the ETERNAL God; and all that are
upright in heart shall gloriously rejoice.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXIV. PSALM.
Cannot we see here the Condition of the Israelitish Nation dispersed under the
Tyranny of Antichrist? And the great Conversion of the Nations, which will be
after they are Converted and Restored.

PSALM LXV. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm; A Song of David.
1 O God, In Zion there does wait Praise silently for Thee; And unto Thee the
Vow thereof shall surely be performed.

2 O Thou that art the hearer of Prayer that appeals to thee, since thou art
such One, all flesh will still repair to thee.

3 Works of iniquities against me have prevailed sore; But as for our
transgressions thou, do purge them quite away.

4 O blessed is the Man of whom thou make a gracious choice, and whom thou
shall make to approach near to thy Majesty. (...) does dwell in thy courts;

We shall be satisfied with the Good of thy House, and with thy Temple's holy
place.

5 By awful things in righteousness an answer unto us thou will dispense, the
God from whom still our Salvation comes. You Are He that art an hope unto all
the ends of the Earth; And so Thou art of them that are far off upon the Sea.

6 The mountains he establishes by His own mighty power: He has a Girdle of a
Great and wondrous fortitude.

7 He does allay the raging noise of the disturbed Seas; the noise raised by
their waves: and the tumultuous People too.

8 They who dwell in the utmost parts do also fear thy signs; outgoings of the
Morning and the Evening thou make glad.

9 The Earth with Rain thou visitest, after that thou have made it to desire
the Rain, Thou do enrich it mightily. The River of God with waters is richly
replenished; Thou do prepare them Corn; it is so that thou preparest it.

9 Water its ridges plenteously; On't's furrows O descend; With showr's thou
make it soft; Thou do bless what does spring from it.

10 Thou with thy Goodness do adorn the Year as with a crown; and the paths
that are trod by thee, do drop a fatness down.

11 They drop upon the Pastures of the thirsty wilderness: and so the little
Hills are girt on every side with joy.

12 The Pastures they are clothed with Flocks; the Valleys too with Corn are
covered over: they do shout, and sing they do for joy.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXV. PSALM.
BEhold the Miracles to be wrought, when Israel shall be returned from Exile.
The Showers here Celebrated are those of the Holy Spirit falling on the Church
of GOD. Dr. Patrick thinks, the Showers that came after the Three Years Famine,
which succeeded the Rebellion of Absalom, are here spoken of.

1 The Praises of God are so inexpressible, that they are best expressed by
Silent Admiration. Yea, and God is never more effectually, never more
acceptably Praised, then by the Silence of His People; their Silent Patience,
and Forbearing of all Murmuring in their Adversity.

2 Munster here glosses well, Agit Psalmus de Regno Christi.

3 When Unrighteous Men so prevail against us, as to put unrighteous things
upon us, it will be a blessed Consequence and Improvement of it, if we come
thereby the more to reform our own Transgressions.

4 The Priests and Levites partaking of the Thanksgiving Sacrifices, are but
the Figure of what is principally intended here.

5 Munster carries it so; When the Righteousness of GOD, was by our SAVIOR
brought unto the Children of Men, the Miracles which accompanied the
Dispensation were very wonderful. But there are Mavelous things which yet
remain to be done.

8 Dr. Patricks Paraphrase is, The most barbarous People, who live in the most
remote Parts of the Earth, behold with wonder the Heavenly Bodies, which God
has appointed for Signs and Tokens. [Gen. I. 4.] In the Title Page of a Book
about, The Gospel of the RAINBOW, I have seen the Text so translated, They who
dwell in the uttermost Parts, have a Reverence for thy Tokens; Thou visitest
the Earth and waterest it. Alsted would have the Outgoings of the Morning,
refer to Man, and the Cattle, which then go out to work and feed; and the
Outgoings of the Evening refer to Wild Beasts, which then go out for their Prey.

8 Arnobius here considers the God of Salvation, as Exhibited at the first
Preaching of the Gospel. Then the Apostles appeared as Mountains, from whence
there was Proclaimed the Gospel to every Creature. Then they who dwelt in the
uttermost Parts, were struck with Reverence, at the Miracles wrought by our
Lord. Both Morning and Evening; both Eastern and Western World, felt the joyful
effect of these things, in Churches gathered every where. The Lord then visited
the Earth, and Watered it with the Heavenly Influences of His Holy Spirit. From
Jordan, the River of GOD, there particularly issued that which enriched it. GOD
then prepared for His People the Food which endures to Everlasting Life.

13 Great Fruitfulness will occasion Great Joyfulness. One who shall be so
happy as to bring forth much Fruit, for GOD and His People, and be very
serviceable, will have cause to sing for Joy.

PSALM LXVI. To the Chief Musician. A Song; A Psalm.
1 O All the Earth, Make you to God shouts of a Jubilee.

2 Sing forth the Glory of His Name; put Glory on His Praise.

3 Say unto God, Things done by Thee, How terrible they are! For thy great
power, thy enemies shall seem to stoop to thee.

4 All who do dwell upon the Earth shall bow themselves to thee: And they shall
sing to thee; they shall sing to thy Glorious Name. Selah.

5 O come and take a view of the works that are done by God; How terrible in
what He does upon the sons of Men!

6 Into dry Land that might be trod once did He turn the Sea: Thorough the
flood they passed on foot; there we rejoiced in Him.

7 He by His power for ever rules; His Eyes the Nations see: O now let the
rebellious ones no more exalt themselves. Selah.

8 A Benediction to our God, ye Peoples, offer up; and the voice of His Praise
do you make to be heard aloud.

9 It Is He who by restoring it does place our Soul in Life; and He does not
permit our foot to stumble into falls.

10 Because that thou, O God, have made a thorough proof of us; Of us thou h'st
such a Trial made as Silver should be tried.

11 Thou have brought us into the Net that was prepared for us; Affliction
which does straiten us thou on our Loins have put.

12 Thou have made Man ride over our head; we went through fire and water; But
thou have brought us forth into a fructifying place.

13 I will with due Burnt-Offerings now enter into thy House; and I will render
unto thee the Vows that I have made.

14 The things which formerly my lips did openly pronounce; and what my mouth
has spoken when I was in my distress.

15 Burnt-Offerings of well-marrow'd things I Will offer up to thee; Rams with
their Incense: Bullocks I with Goats will offer up. Selah.

16 O come, attend; All you that have in you the fear of God; and I Will give a
Relation of what He does for my Soul.

17 A cry importunate I did make with my mouth to Him; And for that very cause
He was extolled with my tongue.

18 If in my heart I paid regard unto iniquity, surely the Lord would not have
heard my Supplication then.

12 But verily, now God has heard what I addres^'d to Him; He has attended to
the voice which my petition had.

20 Blessed be God, who has not tur^^d my Prayer away from Him. Because His
mercy He has not turned away from me.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXVI. PSALM.
CErtainly, we have here, the Praises which the Church of Israel will give unto
God, after He has Pardoned her Sins, and Restored Blessings to her, which will
cause all other Nations also to magnify Him.

12 Munsters Gloss is: Men used them as if they had been Beasts.

15 Arnobius is very nice in his Allegories here. The Offering of Rams, he
finds in Zeal for defending the Truth; Of Bcoves in Preaching the Gospel; Of
Goats, -- cum Imperium Libidinis subjugo, vel jugulo.

18 It is the Messiah who has the first and chief claim to this Passage. J.
Capellus observes, The Pharisees laid an Imputation of Wicked Intentions, on
the Miracles of our SAVIOR. The Answer of our SAVIOR is, GOD would never have
so owned Him if He had been one of such wicked Intentions.

PSALM LXVII. To the Chief Musician. On Neginoth. A Psalm; A Song.
1 LEt God be merciful to us; and bless us graciously; among us let Him cause
to shine His glorious countenance. Selah.

2 That they may have the knowledge of thy way throughout the Earth: That they
among all Nations may thy Great Salvation know.

3 O Glorious God, The People they shall celebrate thy praise; yea, all the
People, every one, shall celebrate thy praise,

4 The Nations let be glad, and sing for joy; For thou shall judge the Peoples
justly, and shall lead the Nations on the Earth, Selah.

5 O Glorious God, The People, they shall celebrate thy Praise; yea, all the
People every one shall celebrate thy Praise.

6 The Earth shall yield her fruit, and us God, our own God, shall bless.

7 God shall bless us, and all ends of the Earth shall Him revere. Selah.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXVII. PSALM.
A Prayer for the Second Coming of the Messiah! We read, when the Ark was
brought into the Tabernacle prepared for it, 2 Samuel VI. 18. David blessed the
People, in the Name of the Lord. It is Dr. Patricks Conjecture, That he then
pronounced the Psalm now before us; wherein he imitates the Form of Blessing
which the Priests were to use on Solemn Occasions, [ Numb. VI. 23, 24, 25.] He
Prays that God would make them the Subjects and Samples of such Blessings, as
might invite all Nations, to whom the fame thereof should come, to submit unto
His Government.

2 Thy Way. Austin's Gloss is, Thy CHRIST.

6 Theodoret thinks the Increase, to be the Messiah. But is not the Messiah's
Restoring of the Earth unto a Paradisaick State, here Insinuated? The Jews as
is evident from R. David on Hos. XIV. and R. Solomon on Psalm LXXII, were of
this Opinion.

7 It was long ago thought by the Learned Orientals, That the Mystery of the
Trinity was indicated in this Repetition.

PSALM LXVIII. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm. A Song of David.
1 MAY God arise; His Enemies, may they be scattered; and such as are haters of
Him fly from before His face.

2 Drive them as smoke is driven away; as wax melts in the fire; The wicked
ones shall be destroyed before the face of God.

3 But righteous ones, they shall be glad; they shall rejoice before the face
of God; yea, they shall leap through their exceeding joy.

4 To God sing; to His Name sing Praise: He through the deserts rides: Extol
Him by the Name of JAH; and in His face rejoice.

5 A Father of the Fatherless; A Judge for Widows too: So God is in the
dwelling place of His pure holiness.

6 God sets the Only's in an house; brings out the bound in chains: But the
rebellious ones dwell in a place most destitute.

7 O God, When that thou did go forth in thy own Peoples view, when thou
did take thy wondrous march thorough the wilderness. Selah.

8 The Earth shook; yea, the Heaven's dropped, before the face of God; even Sinai
at the face of God, the God of Israel.

9 O God, Thou on thy heritage did pour a plenteous Rain; even when that it
was languishing, so thou confirmedst it.

10 Thy living Congregation has a dwelling place in it; O God, Thou of thy
Goodness do provide for him that is poor.

11 The Lord from whom we have support; He does give forth the word; and of the
Souls that publish it great is the company.

12 The Kings that had their Armies, fled; and yet again, they fled: and she
who did reside at home, did then divide the spoil.

13 Though ye have lien among the pots wings of a dove you have that is with
Silver covered, and her feathers with bright Gold.

14 When the Almighty one therein did scatter mighty Kings, then very White
like to the Snow in Salmon it became.

15 Like to the Mount of Bashar is the Mountain of our God; A Mountain it is of
Wondrous heighths; the Mount of Bashan's so.

16 Why, O high Mountains, do ye leap? This Hill God does desire, to dwell
there; Yea, the ETERNAL God will dwell forever there.

17 God's Chariots Twenty Thousand are; Repeated Thousands, they! Among them is
the Glorious Lord: Sinai's in's Holy Place.

18 Thou have on high made thy Ascent: and then Captivity thou have led
Captive; and thou have received Gifts for Men. Yea, Gifts for such Men as have
been very intractable; That so the God whose Name is JAH, may have a dwelling
place.

19 O blessed is the Lord who does lay daily Loads on us; O blessed be the God
from whom does our Salvation come.

20 This God. He is to us the God from whom Salvations come. And to the ETERNAL
God, the Lord Issues of Death belong.

21 But God shall wound the Head of them that are His Enemies; The hairy Scalp
of him that walks on in his trespasses.

22 The Lord has said, From Bashan I will make for to return; from the Depths
of the Sea I Will make my People to return.

23 May Thou dip deep thy foot in Blood; may thou dip deep the Tongue of
thy Dogs in that of thy Foes; yea, every One of them.

24 Thy Goings they have seen, O God; the Goings of my God; the God who is my
King, and is lodged in Holiness.

25 The Singers went before, then came players on Instruments; These were among
the Damsels which managed the Timbrels there.

26 O speak well of the Glorious God, in Congregations speak; Even of the Lord,
you that are from the Spring of Israel.

27 The Little Benjamin does now make his appearance there; and an Inspired
Ruler who does now proceed from him. The Eminent Ones of Judah were the Stones
of their Support; The Eminent Ones of Zebulon; the Eminent of Naphthali.

28 Thy God is He, who does Command confirmed Strength for thee; Strengthen, O
God, the very thing which Thou have wrought for us.

29 For the sake of thy Temple which is at Jerusalem, they that are crowned
Kings shall bring their Presents unto thee.

30 Do thou bestow Rebukes upon the Wild beast of the Reeds; Rebuke the
Multitude of Bulls, joined with the Peoples Calves. With Pieces of Silver each
one of them submits himself; He has dispersed the People which do take delight
in War.

31 Out of the Land of Egypt then there shall great Princes come; soon
Ethiopia shall then stretch out her hands to God.

32 Now, O ye Kingdoms of the Earth, sing to the Glorious God; O sing ye
Praises forth unto him that becomes your Lord. Selah.

33 To Him that rides upon the Heavens of Heavens which were of old; Attend; He
does give out His Voice; It is a mighty Voice.

34 Great strength ascribe ye unto God; Now over Israel does his Magnificence
appear; and His Strength's in the Skies.

35 Thou from thy Holy Places art, O God, how terrible! He that is so is He
that is the God of Israel. It Is He who to His People will give a confirmed
Strength; Yea, forces most invincible. O blessed be my God!

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXVIII. PSALM.
LO, The Conression of the Synagogue, That the JESUS who was lifted up to
Heaven, at His first Coming is her SAVIOR; even the same who conducted her
through the Wilderness; and will at last restore her to her Land, and will
destroy her Oppressors, and pour out His Holy npirit upon her. She fore-sees
the Ruin of Antichrist, and her own return upon it, and the homage that all
Nations shall then pay to the Messiah her King and her God.

1 Behold the Resurrection of our JESUS from the Grave! -- In the Days of
Athanasius, the Devils in the Energumens discovered usually a strange Horror
when this Verse was recited.

4 R. David Kimchi has a Good Gloss. He Governs them as a Man does the Horse he
rides on.

5 Though the Lord be so much above the highest Heavens, yet the poorest and
meanest persons upon Earth need have no doubt of His Patronage: They may repair
to His Fatherly Care and appeal to His Righteous Judgment.

9 Liberal Showers sell on the Dry and Desert places through which the chosen
People of God were traveling. Add the Manna rained from Heaven.

But above all think on the Gifts of the Prophetic Spirit. Munster accordingly
makes the People to be meant by the Land.

11 If we consider here, what was done for the People of God in the First Ages
-- We know they were so Victorious over their Opposers, that they returned with
Songs of Triumph, and were met with Women ready to accompany them in the
Praises of GOD. [Exod. XV. 23,] Kings and Generals fled. [Exod. XVII. Number.
XXI.] Yea, they fled and left their Spoll. [Num. XXXI. 8, 11. Judges. VIII. 21,
26. This welcome they gave to their Victorious Country Men. Tho you endured
great Hardship in Egypt, where you loo^t more like Skullions then Soldiers,
you shall hereafter appear most splendid, and the Wings of your Armies shall
shine like those of a Dove. Their Word was fulfilled at the Entrance into
Canaan; when by scattering of Kings God appeared most illustrious at Salmon,
and gave them the Possession of the Country on that side of Jordan, as on the
other side he subdued the King and Country of Bashan, the Hill whereof (which
had so many fertile Risings) became the Hill of GOD. But the lofty Mountains
must not grow proud of this. For not they but Zion had God chosen for His
Habitation. The Heathen also must not brag of their many Chariots; for in Zion
there are Ten Thousand times more, even innumerable Hosts of Angels attending
on the Divine Majesty, who is with them there, as He was upon Mount Sinai: So
much was declared by God who highly Exalted Himself, in the Astonishing
Victories, which through their Manistry He gave them over their Enemies; whom
they carried Captive and their Spoils with them, to be Distributed among His
People. All this is an Emblem of what is done by the Messiah. This is the Sum
of the Patrician Paraphrase.

13 Potts. -- The IXX render it Lotts. Hemingius thinks it an Allusion to the
Decimation of Rebellious Legions, or of Captivated Enemies, for Destructions,
'Twas called Sortiri ad Panam, 'twas done by Lot; and is often mentioned by
many of the Ancients. q. d. You have lain in as continual Danger of Death, as
poor Soldiers expecting the Lot of Decimation, for their Lives. But your
Savior obtains an happy Lot for you; you fly away like Doves.

18 In the Gifts of our Ascended Lord for His Church, He does but Spargers
Missilia, and scatter Medals ^^^e Princes at their Coronation, or in their
Triumphal Entries. The well-qualifyed Ministers and Publishers of the Gospel,
are the Medals which our Triumphing Savior does cast about, that His Church
may seize upon them. Yea, But the Medals have on them the Image of the Princes
who disperse them. O Preachers of the Gospel, How much ought you to be affected
with this Consideration? There is nothing of so much Consequence unto you, as
to have the Image of your SAVIOR very Conspicuous on you.

20 The Original may be rendered, The Goings forth of Death: All the several
Ways of Dying, which are found by the Children of Men are appointed and ordered
by God. The LXX render it, The Passages of Death. All the several and secret
Avenues whereby Death invades Mankind, God is the Uncontrollable Disposer of
them. After all, in the Goings from Death here mentioned, why should not the
Resurrection from the Dead be referred unto?

24 There seems to have been a fierce Captain who had Shaggy Hair, which gave
him something of a terrible Aspect, here particularly referred unto. Why not
Hadadezer? [2 Samuel VIII. 3.] Notandum. Pharaoh signifies, A long haired Man.

27 Jerome and Theodoret shall now help us, and let Lyra give some very
melodious Notes unto us. Let the Amiable Alting and the Admirable Witsius more
distinctly modulate them. The Glorious Ascension of our SAVIOR unto Heaven is
here described unto us. The Praises to be offered on that Occasion are
intimated; and those Tribes of Israel are mentioned, from whence the Persons
were to arise, that were to be considerable in Praising of the Lord. The first
mentioned is Little Benjamin. As Benjamin was the Youngest Son of Jacob, so our
Apostle Paul of this Tribe, was the last that was called unto the Apostleship.
[See 1 Cor. XV. 8, 9, 10.] And if Littleness may lead us to a Thought of
Humility, it was what rendered our Paul Illusirious. [Eph. 3.8.] The Word
Rodem, which we render A Ruler, is found no where else. It may mean an Extatic
one. [Corn pare now Acts IX. 3.12. Acts XXIII. 17.2 Cor. XII. 1.] Theodotion
renders it, A Teacher. [Compare now, 1 Cor. XV. 15. 2 Cor. XI. 5, 23.] Then
appear the Princes of Judab, and their Council. The Word Rigmotham, is also
found no where else. It Is by some rendered, An heap of Stones. A Stone is a
Phrase for an Upholder and Preserver. [Gen. XLIX. 14.] An heap of Stones,
intends a Number of Colleques in the same Work. The Tribe of Judah afforded a
Number of Apostles. Four or Five without mentioning of Judas of Kerioth. The
Princes of Zebulon were Peter and Andrew and Philip and Bartholomew, (probably,
the same with Nathanael.) the Princes of Napthali were Matthew and perhaps
Th^mas. A stin's Note is, ex his Tribubus Apos^o^ie^ant. The Patrician
Paraphrase amounts to thus much. What a Solemn Entrance, God by His Ar^, made
into the Sanctuary! [2 Samuel VI. 13, 15, 16.] Part of the Levites went Singing
before, the rest with Musical Infiruments followed after. [1 Chronicles. XV. 16,
28.] To complete the Melody, Damsels with Timbrels came between them both. As
they went they Sang, and the Song is recited here. -- The Tribes were
universally assembled on this occasion. There were not only the Little Tribe of
Benjamin, from whence came the first King of Israel; and Princes of the Tribe
of Judah, the great Support of the Kingdom. There were also, the Princes of the
emoter Tribes; Of Zebulen and of Napthali.

30 Some of the Ancients would have this Wild Beast be, the Fourth Beast in the
Seventh of Daniel. And R. Solomon says, Fera calami est EsaX. The same with
Psalm. LXXX. 14. Deep thought is required here.

20 Does not the Roman Orater a little expound the Heb en Prophet, where he
relates. Aurum Judcorum Nomine, quotannis ex Italia, et omnibus vestris
Provincijs, Hierosolymam exportari soleret? -- But it waits a further
Accomplishment.

32 There is doubtless an Ethiopia of Africa, as well as of Arabia, considered
in the Scriptures. Ezekiel mentions Ethiopians and Egyptians as near
Neighbors. Munster has a good Gloss here; Non caret Locus iste Mysterijs Regni
Christi.

PSALM LXIX. To the Chief Musician. Upon Shoshannim. Of David.
1 DEliver me, O Glorious God, Because the waters do threatening my ruin,
penetrate into my very Soul.

2 In the mire of the Deep I sink; there is no standing there; Into deep waters
I am come; and the Flood covers me.

3 I Am weary with my crying there; my very throat is dried; mine eyes do fail,
while that I do keep waiting for my God.

4 They that bear hatred unto me, though still without a cause, these Men are
multiplied above the hairs upon my head. My causless enemies who would destroy
me, are grown strong; Then I made restitution of what I took not away.

5 O God, Thou know very well what is my foolishness; and my offenses have
not been at all concealed from thee.

6 ETERNAL Lord of Hosts, Let not be shamed who hope on thee through me; not let
thy seekers blush for me, O Isreal's God.

7 Because that I have undergone reproach on thy account, and a confusion full
of shame has covered my face.

8 I am unto my Brethren but as a stranger held, and to my Mothers Children I
am held an alien.

9 Because the hot Zeal of thy house has even devoured me; Contempts from those
who thee contemn, have also fallen on me.

10 In fasts when I wept with my Soul, that turned to my reproach.

11 When I wore Sackcloth, then I was a byword unto them.

12 They who sat in the Gate pursued me with their obloquies; and I was made
the Songs of those who take the Drunkards cup.

13 But as for me, I turn my Prayer to Thee, ETERNAL God, in such a time, as I
might hope to find acceptance in. In the great multitude of thy Mercy, hear me,
O God; and for the Faithfulness which is in thy Salvation sound.

14 Deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink there; From them that hate
me let me be saved, and from deep waters.

15 Let not the flood of waters come over me, nor the deep swallow me up, nor
let the pit upon me shut her mouth.

16 ETERNAL God, Hear me, for good is thy Benignity; Oh, in the multitude of
thy compassions turn to me.

17 And from thy Servant, O do not Thou hide thy face away; for that sore
trouble on me lies; O haste, O hear thou me.

18 O draw near to my Soul; for it do the Redeemer's part; Because I have such
enemies, redeem me from them all.

19 Thou have known my reproach, and what a shame they cast on me; And my
dishonor; in thy view are all my enemies.

20 Reproach has broke my heart, and I have grieved; When I looked for
condolence, there was none, and for comforters, none I found.

21 Nay, they for my refreshment gave unto me bitter Gall; and in my thirst
they gave to me sour Vinegar to drink.

22 Their Table now let that become before them but a sHare; and what should be
intended for Peace-Off'rings, but a trap.

23 Let darkness come upon their eyes, so that they shall not see; and make
their loins to tremble still for fear continually.

24 Upon them direfully do thou thine indignation pour; and let the burning of
thy wrath take a fast hold of them.

25 Their stately Palace let it be entirely desolate; within their Tabernacles
let be no inhabitant.

26 Since Him whom thou have smitten, they jo on to persecute; and they talk to
the grief of those who are thy wounded ones.

27 Add more iniquity upon their past iniquity; And let them not admission have
into thy righteousness.

28 Let them be blotted out of the Book of the living ones; and let them not in
Writing be enrolled with the Just.

29 But I Am a poor afflicted one, and I am sorrowful; O God, Let thy Salvation
now exalt me gloriously.

30 The Praises of the Name of God I Will utter with a Song; and I Will with a
confession Him thankfully magnify.

31 This also will more grateful be to the ETERNAL God, than Beef or Calf on
which the horns as well as hoofs appear.

32 The humbled meek ones shall behold; they shall be very glad; O you that
seek the Glorious God, even so your heart shall live.

33 Because the ETERNAL God attends unto the indigent; and such as He does hold
in bonds, these He does not despise.

34 Now let the Heavens, and the Earth unite in praising Him; the Seas, and
every thing that does move to and fro in them.

35 For Zion God will save, and He will Judah's Cities build; that Men may
dwell therein and have it their Inheritance.

36 The Offspring of His Servants too, these shall inherit it; and they who
bear love to His Name, these shall inhabit it.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXIX. PSALM.
WE have here a Prayer of the Messiah in His Humiliation. It foretells the
Desolation of the Jewish Nation: But a Glorious Establishment.

4 Theodoret well considers our SAVIOR, as paying a Debt, which was none of
his own Contracting.

5 Munster notes; That some take it so; Thou know I have not been so
foolish, as my Persecutors assert I have. -- But there is no need of taking it
so.

11 Was it not then become a Proverb, for the utmost Hatred or Contempt of any
Man; I value him no more than I do David?

12 The Language both of Graver Senators, and of Idle Companions.

27 q. d. Suffer them to go on in completing their Iniquity.

28 q. d. Let them enjoy none of the Blessings Written in the Promises for the
Righteous. To be Remembered in the Genealogical Tables, was matter of no little
Consequence. An Inheritance in the holy Land, was implied in it. The first, if
not chief use of Letters, was to keep these Genealogical Tables, in every
Family. When a Family was increased, these Tables were Transcribed for the use
of New Descendants. In the Transcription, they Blotted out whatsoever occured
unnecessary, to carry down the History of the Succession. The Issueless were
so. Of Judab's Five Sons, the Two Eldest were useless in the Heraldry, and were
blotted out. Unto these Tables refer, Exodus XXXII. 32. And Psalm. CIX. 13. Here
is a Key to Dent. XXV. 6. The Book of Genealogies is here called, The Book of
the Living, because the Names of Men lived here, and the Men lived in their
Posterity. And it is called, A being Written with the Righteous, because
Fruitfulness, was among the Jews reckoned the Reward of Righteousness. The
failing of their Genealogical Tables, among the Jews, is here foretold. How
Remarkably it is Accomplished!

31 The Jews refer it, unto the First Sacrifice offered by Adam, after his
Fall. Conceive the Messiah, who is the Second Adam, speaking here, and it is
worth Considering.

PSALM LXX. To the Chief Musician. Of David. To bring to Remembrance.
1 O God, For to deliver me! O Thou ETERNAL God, O do thou now make haste for
the relief of my distress.

2 Let them be shamed and blush, who do seek to destroy my Soul; Let them be
turned back, and perplexed who do desire my hurt.

3 Let them be forced to turn about for a just recompense of the shame that
belongs to them, who say, Aha, Aha.

4 Let all be glad and joy in thee, who seek thee, and those who love thy
Salvation, ever say, Let God be magnified.

7 But I Am a poor and needy one; Make haste to me, O God; O Thou ETERNAL, Thou
my help and Savior, tarry not.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXX. PSALM.
IT IS the Prayer of the Messiah in His wonderful Sufferings. In the last Verse
He takes the very Name which is in Zech. IX. 9. assigned unto Him. He foretells
the Miseries, which the Jews would procure to themselves by the I ^juries they
offered unto Him.

PSALM LXXI.
1 IN Thee, O Thou ETERNAL God, I do repose my trust; O let me not be put to
shame unto Eternity.

2 Save thou me in thy righteousness, and cause me to escape; Incline thou unto
me thine ear; And, O deliver me.

3 Be Thou the Rock where I may dwell, and constantly resort; my safety thou
have ordered; for Thou art my rock and strength.

4 My God, Deliver me from the hand of the wicked one; out of the hand of the
unjust, and of the cruel one.

5 Because, O Lord, the ETERNAL God, with hope I wait on thee: You Are He on
whom I place my trust even from my early youth.

6 On Thee I lean even from the womb: Thou have extracted me out of my Mothers
Bowels; Praise shall ever be to thee.

7 I unto many am become a wondrous prodigy: But thou have ever been to me a
refuge very strong.

8 O let my mouth be filled with Expressions of thy Praise; It shall be with
thy Glory filled all day * and every day.

9 O cast me not off in the time of my advanced Age: Forsake me not when that
my strength is under a decay.

10 For they that are my enemies do spend their talk on me, and they consult
together who watch for to seize my Soul.

11 They say, God has forsaken him; Now persecute the Man; And seize upon him:
for there is none to deliver him.

12 O God, Be'nt far from me: my God make haste unto my help.

13 The adversaries of my Soul, may they confounded be. Yea, may they be
consumed all, they who do seek my hurt: may they be covered with reproach, and
with disgraceful shame.

14 But as for me, I will maintain my hope continually; and I shall make
additions still to all thy glorious praise.

15 My mouth shall make relation of thy spotless right'ousness: of thy
Salvation all the day; for I no numbers know.

16 I Will walk in the strength of the Lord, of the ETERNAL God; I Will celebrate
thy righteousness, yea, even thine alone.

17 O God, Thou from my early youth have well instructed me: and hitherto I
have declared the wonders thou have wrought.

18 Yea, even to the time when I must see advanced age, and have gray hairs
upon me, then, O God, forsake me not till to this Generation I declare thy
power abroad, and unto every one that is to come, thy fortitude.

19 Thy righteousness therewith, O God, unto the very height! Thou who do
things so very great: O God, Who Is like to thee?

20 Thou art He who has shown to me Afflictions great and sore: Thou Wilt quicken
me again, and raise me from the depths of Farth.

21 Thou have given an increase unto my bright magnificence; and consolations
given me, returning unto me.

22 With Psaltry helped, now Thee I Will praise for thy truth, O my God: To thee
I will sing with the harp, O Isreal's Holy One.

23 My lips they shall triumph with joy, when I do sing to thee; and so my Soul
shalldo, which thou have thoroughly redeemed.

24 My tongue too tells thy righteousness all day * and every day; for they are
confounded and disgraced, who do pursue my hurt.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXI. PSALM.
SEE the Church (and the Spirit of Prophecy representing the Condition of the
Synagogue also) groaning under the Tyranny of Antichrist; and hoping for a
Restoration after so many Calamities.

3 Munster, Gloss is, Tu mandabis Angelis tuis de me.

5 A Remarkable Iustance that I Sam. XVII. 33, 47.

16 O ye Servants o^ GOD, In your Ministry handling that Subject, see whether
He do not remarkably Strengthen you.

PSALM LXXII. Of Solomon.
1 GIve Thou unto the King, O God, Thy Judgments of all sorts; and unto the Son
of the King give thou thy Righteousness.

2 He to thy People shall dispense Judgments in Righteousness; and with right
Judgment he shall treat Thy poor afflicted ones.

3 The mountains to thy People shall bring forth a prosperous peace; and so the
little hills shall do, because of righteousness.

4 The poor afflicted ones among the People He shall judge: He Will the Sons of
the needy save; and break the injurious one.

5 Even so long as does the Sun their fear of thee shall last: and while the
Moon shall have a face; from Age to Age 'twill be.

6 He shall come down like to the Rain upon the Grass that is mown: There shall
be a descent like to Showers watering of the Earth.

7 Whoever is the righteous one shall flourish in His days; and there shall be
great store of Peace, while there shall be no Moon.

8 And He shall His Dominion spread abroad from Sea to Sea; yea, from the River
it shall spread to the ends of the Earth.

9 They who dwell in the wilderness before Him shall bow down: and they that
are his enemies shall lick the very dust.

10 The Kings of Tarsis and the Isles, shall bring their presents then; Then
Sheba's Kings and Seba's too, shall offer Gifts to Him.

11 Yea, Kings of every Kingdom shall before Him bow themselves; all Nations
shall therewith become liege Servants unto Him.

13 For he shall save the needy one, upon his piteous cry, and save the poor
afflicted one, yea, him whom none will help.

13 He shall a kind compassion show to him that is destitute; and to the needy;
yea, He Will save the Souls of needy ones.

14 From fraud, and from iniquity, He shall redeem their Souls; their Blood
shall also be esteemed precious before His eyes.

15 This Poor shall live so, and the King shall give him Sheba's Gold; And
He Will still intercede for him; He Will bless him every day.

16 Of Corn an handful there shall be then seen upon the Earth; Upon the very
top of the high mountains, sown and seen. The fruit thereof shall make its wave
even like tol, ebanon; The Citizens shall flourish then like the Grass of the
Earth.

18 His Name, that shall endure unto all perpetuity: in the face of the Sur He
shall, have the Name of, The Son. And it shall usual be for Men, to bless
themselves in Him: All Nations of the World, they shall call Him, The blessed
One.

18 O blessed be the Glorious God, who is the ETERNAL One; Blessed be the God
of Israel who (...) alone does wondrous things.

19 Yea, ever blessed His Glorious Name: And now let all the Earth be with His
wondrous Glory filled: Amen, O say, Amen.

20 With such inspired desires as these, the Supplications of David, who was
Jesse's Son, have come unto their end.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXII. PSALM.
It Is a Traver for the Coming and Kin^^om of the Messiah. The Jews unanimously
apply it unto Him 1 A praefarory Wish for the Prosperity of the Psalmist
himself, and of His Son Solomon, to whom the Psalm is dedicated. -- The Subject
of the following Psalm is another, a Greater than he.

16 An handful of Corn sown even on the Top (...) Barren Mountains, will spring
up with ^ar^, win^^ will be so thick and full, that when they are sua^en with
the Wind, they shall make a Noise like the C^dars of Lebanon. The City shall be
as truitful as the Country, and as well stored with Good things, as the Earth
is with Grass in the Spring. This is the Patrician Paraphrase.

17 The Hebrews call the Messiah by the Name of Jinn^n, which signifies A Son
Here Before the Sun, Jinn^n is Hi^ Name. The Midrash Till^^ rea^^ it Ante Solemn
filiabit Nomen ejus. And adds this Gloss upon it; -- Quia ipse filiaturus est
Dormientes in Pulvere.

This is Wondrous from the Pen of a Jew!

I have somewhere seen this Gloss and thought upon it. His Name shall be as a
Son, to continue his Father's Name forever. Thus the Ministers of the Word,
ought to raise up the Name of CHRIST upon His Inheritance, His Church. They
ought not to raise up their own Names.

This Passage, Nomen ejus filiabatur, is fulfilled unto our Savior, in that
His Name is continued by the Succession of Many Sons, before the Sun. Compare
Heb. II. 13.

THE THIRD BOOK OF PSALMS.
PSALM LXXIII. A Psalm of Asaph.
1 BUt yet, This I will say, That God is good to Israel; that is to say to them
that are of a Well cleansed Heart.

2 But as for me, my feet almost declined from what is right; scarce any thing
appeared, but that my Steps had run abroad.

3 Because I had some Envy at the madly boasting Fools; When I saw the
Prosperity of the Ungodly Ones.

4 For in their Death there are no Bands; till then their strength is firm.

5 They are not in Man's Labor, nor are plagued like other Men.

6 Therefore their Pride does like a Chain encompass them about; Iniquity does
cover them, esteemed an Ornament.

7 Their Eyes stand out with fatness; they have more than Heart can wish.

8 They waste; and speaking ill, oppress; they talk, how loftily!

9 They resolutely set their Mouth for to blaspheme the Heavens; and their
Tongue with their Calumnies does walk about the Earth.

10 Therefore His People do at length make their Return to this; When Waters of
a Plenteous Cup are poured out to them.

11 And this is now the thing they say; How is it that God knows? or is there
any knowledge in Him who is God on High?

12 Behold, these are the ungodly Ones who prosper in the World; of Riches
they have a mighty Store obtained for themselves.

13 Surely, it is in vain that I have purified my Heart; In vain that I have
washed my hands in purest Innocence.

14 Whereas I have been still chastised all day * and every day; and every
Morning I have had Rebuke bestowed on me.

15 If now I should resolve with me. I Will speak at such a rate; Thy Children's
Generation, Lo, will say, I Have done amiss.

16 I did propose unto my self that I would know this thing; but it appeared
before my Eyes a labor troublesome.

17 'Twas thus, until that I into God's Holy Places went; But then I clearly
understood the latter End of them.

18 Surely in Slippery Places * and in dark Thou set them; Thou do cause
that they shall into frightfull Destructions fall.

19 To Ruin, Oh! How are they brought! How very suddenly! They perish; They are
quite consumed from things most terrible.

20 It Is sound but as a Dream when they awake out of their Sleep; Lord, at
their, rising thou will on their Image cast Contempt.

21 Truly on this Account my Heart within me waxed hot, and in my reins I
underwent the Piercings of a Dart.

22 And as for me, I was become a, very foolish one; nor had I any knowledge;
But was with Thee like the Beasts.

23 Yet as for me, I now will be with thee continually; To keep me from false
Steps thou have kept hold on my right hand.

24 Thou by thy Counsel ever wilt give conduct unto me; and me Thou in bright
glory then wilt afterward receive.

25 Whom in the Heavens have I to implore or to enjoy? And there is none upon
the Earth whom I desire but Thee.

26 When my flesh and my heart do now with a consumption fail; God is the
strength of my heart, and my portion evermore.

27 For, lo, they that go far from Thee, shall perish utterly; each one who
does a whoring go from thee thou do destroy.

28 But as for me, it is good that I get * and keep near to God; I in the Lord
ETERNAL hope to tell of all thy works.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXIII. PSALM.
BEhold, the reflection of the Faithful on the Prosperity enjoyed by the
Followers and Abettors of Antichrist: And their comfort in the Expectation of
his Destruction. Dr. Patrick thinks, Asaph the Seer, might be one who lived in
the days of Hezekiah: [2 Chronicles. XXIX. 30.] probably the Father of that Eminent
Person, who was then the Recorder. The miserable Havoc made by the Assyrians,
notwithstanding Hezekiah's Reformation, might afford sufficient Occasion for
the Psalm. Or, the common Occurrences, which produce the XXXVII. Psalm would
yield abundant occasion for the LXXIII.

4 So great is their Power, they are not in danger of being bound over, by any
humane Justice for their Crimes. Nor are they afflicted with sore diseases:
After a long Life they dye easily. Munster's Gloss is, They have no Anxiety
about their Widows and Orphans; They leave enough to them.

7 They are short-sighted People.

14 q. d. I was dealt withal as a Malafactor. Such were punished in the Morning.

17 Did not he hear the XCII. Psalm Sung in the Sanctuary?

20 The Prophets of God, inspired from the Sanctuary, or the Holy Place of the
Heavenly World, have told us, that Men shall be Raised from the Dead, and shall
see a Day of Judgment, which will bring all to rights, and unsold the Mysteries
which now puzle us in the Conduct of Providence. This Resurrection of the Dead,
with the following Day of Judgment, is here intimated. Yea, the Chaldee
Paraphrase on the Text is; In Die Judicij magni, cum fne^int suscitati de
Sepulchris suis. At that Day, First, the Prosperity of the Wicked, shall appear
to have been a Dream, It shall be found so at their Awaking. The Awaking of the
Dead is the Scriptural Term for the Resurrection. Should the following Word,
Baguir, be rendered, in the City, as it is by many and Ancient Interpreters, it
would suit admirably. The Transactions of the Last Judgment will be very much
carried on in the Heavenly City. But render it if you please, Insuscitando; the
plain English is, At thy Raising them, or, At their Rising. Well, what shall be
then? Thou will on their Image cast contempt. A notable Key to this you have
in, Dan. XII. 2. -- Let the Word Image signify either their Prosperity; [See
Psai. XXXIX. 7.] or their Corruption. [See Genesis V. 3.] or their Spirit, or
their Body; or their pompous Fashion of living in this World; [See 1 Cor. VII.
31.] still it will be true. By Image, I would understand, whatever they value
themselves upon. Let it be remembered, The Word here also carries Punishment, in
the Signification of it.

21 Arnobius finds chaste living here.

22 A Beast regards nothing but what is present.

25 Says the Pious Harle; It seems, Heaven is the Place of having, Earth but of
desiring. Old Raymund in his Pugio Fidei, gives this Gloss; Who will give me to
be in Heaven with Thee? On Earth I desire not to be. Arnobius makes it the
Language of our Savior, having finished all His Work on Earth, and going to
Heaven, where he had before conversed continually.

28 The Works of Providence in preserving the Righteous and destroying the
Wicked.

PSALM LXXIV. A Psalm of Asaph.
1 O God, why have thou cast us off to perpetuity? Against the Sheep which thou
do feed, why does thy Anger smoke?

2 Remember thine Assembly, thou have purchased of Old; the Tribe thou have
redeemed for thy own Inheritance. This mount of Zion in the which, Thou'st had
thy dewlling place.

3 Lift up thy feet, with haste to tread where Enemies have made the
desolations that appear to be perpetual; and smite each enemy that has done ill
to thy holy Place.

4 In the midst of thy Synagogue the enemies do roar as if possessed of Prey,
they have set up their signs for signs.

5 Notice is taken of the Man who carries up on high Axes among the thickest
boughs of the Trees in the wood.

6 So now with an united force at once they batter down with the Ax and with
Hammers, all the carved works thereof.

7 Thy Sanctuary they have cast into the wasting Fire, they have defiled the
dwelling place of thy Name down to Earth.

8 They said within their hearts, Let us destroy them altogether; They Have burnt
up all the Synagogues of God throughout the Land.

9 Our Signs we see not; There is not a Prophet any more; with us there is not
any one that knows how long 'twill be.

10 The adversary, Thee, O God, How long shall he reproach? The Enemy, shall he
blaspheme thy Name for evermore?

11 Thy hand even thy right hand, wherefore do thou withdraw from us? From
the midst of thy bosom take thou it, them to consume.

12 For Thou, O God the Judge, do reign my King from ancient time; Salvations
He does bring about in the midst of the Earth.

13 Thou by thy mighty strength did make the Sea divide asunder, the heads of
Dragons thou did break under the Waters there.

14 Thou didsi with wounding bruise the head of the Leviathan; with him thou
fedst the People which dwelt in the wilderness.

15 By cleaving thou did cause to flow the fountain and the flood; Thou did
dry up the Rivers which ran with a mighty force.

16 Even the Day itself is thine, thine also is the Night; Thou have prepared
the Light and the Sun which dispenses it.

17 You Are He, who has appointed all the Borders of the Earth; The Summer and
the Winter, thou art He that formed them.

18 Remember this, the Enemy has reproached the ETERNAL God; The People vain
through folly, cast contempt upon thy Name.

19 Thy Turtle-dove's Soul, O give not up to the multitude; The Congregation of
thy Poor forget them not fore'er.

20 O do thou have respect unto the Ancient Covenant; for the Earth's dark
places are filled with dwellings of cruelty.

21 O let not the oppressed one return from Thee ashamed: But let the meek
afflicted one and the Poor praise thy Name.

22 Do thou arise, O God; appear thou to defend thy cause; Remember thy
reproach from the vain Fool heard every day.

23 Forget not thou the voice of them that are thine Enemies: The noise of them
who do rise up against thee daily grows.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXIV. PSALM.
THE Spirit of Prophecy here livelily represents the state of the Jewish
Nation, in their Dispersion under the Romans. Dr. Patrick thinks, the Asaph by
whom the Psalm was written, lived in the time of the Captivity, and perhaps
near the Conclusion of it, when there was no Prophet left, who could inform
them, How Long! Was it not Asaph, the Keeper of the Kings Forest, in the days
of Nehemiah?

3 q. a. Make haste and come and visit the Ruins that have lasted a long while,
and without thy powerful help will never be repaired.

12 A Geographical Curiosity! The Land of Judea was in the middle of the then
inhabited Earth. And this was the Stage whereon the Price of our Eternal
Salvation was effected. Compare, Ezekiel. V. 5. Not only Casaubon finds that Land
in the midst of the Seven Climates, then known, but Villalpandus with his
Compasses finds it in the very Center of the World. Kimchi has much this way:
Especially on Ezekiel. XXXVIII. 12. where it is called, The Navel of the Earth.
Eucherius goes on to Remark, our SAVIOR undergoing what He did for us in this
Land. [He adds also In utero Virginali.] Austin has this Gloss upon it; This
was done, when the Word was made Flesh and inhabited a Body of Earth. One Mr.
Smith observes, How God accommodated the Earth, by having His Church and Word,
in the midst of it.

14 An Allusion to Pharoah's Death. The breaking the Head of the Dragons in the
Waters, the Ancients with Arnobius had this Gloss upon it; Confregisti Capita
Daemonum in Baptismate, It Is done in Baptism.

PSALM LXXV. To the Chief Musician. Altas^bith. A Psalm of Asaph. A Song.
1 WE do give thanks to Thee, O God; we do give thanks to Thee; For that thy
Name is near to us thy wondrous works declare.

2 When I shall at the appointed time receive into my hands the Congregation, I
will Judge Things that are wholly right.

3 The Earth and all of them that are Inhabitants on it, are clean dissolved;
its I that do uphold it is Pillars now. Selah.

4 I to the foolish Madmen said, deal not so foolishly; and to the wicked ones
I said, Lift you not up the horn.

5 Lift you not up the horn on high against the Highest One; Utter not speeches
with a neck that wont receive the yoke.

6 Because what you look for does come not from the rising Sun, nor from the
setting, nor from the mountainous wilderness.

7 But God Hims^^^. He is the Judge acting with Equity: One Ma^^^^^, does pu^
down, and He does set another o^.

8 For the ETERNAL God has in (...) hand^ a measuring cup; and the Wine (...)
^^rtain'd therein is in its (...). Its ful^ of mixture; And He (...) the dregs
thereof all their (...) shall such, shall (...)

9 But as for me, I will declare this thing Forevermore: Unto the God of Jacob
I will sing His Glorious Praise..

10 And all the horns of wicked ones, I Will utterly cut off; But the horns of
the Righteous one shall be lift up on high.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXV. PSALM.
BEhold the Expectation which the Church has, for the future Kingdom of the
Messiah. In the Fifth Verse, we have the Fate of the Little Horn, Dan. VII. 11.
In the Eighth, we have the Cup so remarkable in the Prophecies, Isai. LI. 21,
22. Rev. XVII. 19.

1 The Kingdom of David was now near; which was a Figure of the Messiab's. The
Miracles done for and by him, and the Revolutions on the Nation in his favor
were wondrous Works of GOD.

2 Dr. Patrick will have our Asaph here, to be him in, 2 Chronicles. XXIX. 30. --
and thinks the strange Destruction of Senacherib's Army, referred unto. Here
Hezekiah then resolves, as soon as they could have their Assemblies again, he
would perfect the Reformation he had begun before.

7 Some have had their witty Descants on the North, not being mentioned here.
But is not the Word, which has been rendered, The South, rather to be read, The
Wilderness? Which lay to the North as well as the South. Some have thus
Descanted on it. The Orientals were generally given to Afarology. They took
Promotion to come from the Stars; especially, The Sun. The Psalmist says, No;
Promotion comes not from the Planett Rising and Setting, or exalted in the
Mid-heaven. From the North none expected it. Yea, and elsewhere we read, On the
North was Mount Sion, the City of the Great King. Here was the special Presence
of the Great King from whom all Promotion.

8 The Punishments inflicted by GOD, are often like an intoxicating Wine, full
of stupifying Ingredients, which loosens the very Joints, and takes away all
strength to resist.

10 The Midrash Tillin has a notable Gloss; That by the Horns of the Wicked are
meant, The Ten Horns of the Fourth Monarchy in the Visions of Daniel.

PSALM LXXVI. To the Chief Musician. On Neginoth. A Psalm of Asaph. A Song.
1 IN Judah God is known; His Name is great in Israel.

2 In Salem too's His tent; and in Zion His dwelling Place.

3 There did He break in pieces all the Arrows of the Bow; There did He break
the Shield and Sword, and what belonged War. Selah.

4 Illustrious Thou do appear, wondrously powerful, upon the Mountains where
wild Beasts, and Robbers seek their Prey.

5 Stout-hearted ones are spoiled they have slept the sleep designed for them;
and none of all the mighty Men found the use of their hands.

6 O God of Jacob, 'Twas at thy effectual rebuke that both the Chariot and the
Horse were laid so dead asleep.

7 Thou, even Thou, art one that is exceeding terrible; and who shall stand
before thy face when once thou art provoked

8 Thou did cause Judgment for to be heard from the Heavens above; the Earth
was struck with trembling fear, and then saw quiet rest.

9 When God the Judge for to dispense His Judgments did arise; for to fave all
the meek who were afflicted on the Earth. Selah.

10 Surely the wrath of Man shall but confess thy praise to thee; and the
remainder of the wrath is what thou shall restrain.

11 Vow and pay to the ETERNAL One, even Him who is your God; you that surround
Him, bring a gift to Him who is to be feared.

12 He shall cut off the spirits of Princes in Vintage time; He shall be
terrible unto the Kings that rule the Earth.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXVI PSALM.
COmpare the Fifth Verse of the Psalm with the XXXVIII, and XXXIX Chapters of
Ezekiel, and you would here think on the Messiah's Triumph over Gog and Magog.
The Vintage in the last Verse leads one to Isai. LXIII. and Rev. XIX. Whether
the former Psalm had a reference to Sonacherib's overthrow or no, it is more
probable that this may have so. The^dor^^ assures us, That in some Copies of
the Greek Version, he found this Title, An Ode against the Assyrians.

4 The Assyrians had been on the Mountains about J^rusalem, committing
depredations. But God appeared most Excellent, Glorious, Illustrious, in what
He did on those Mountains.

5 Besure the Assyrians lay down to Sleep and never Waked. [2 Kin. XIX. 35.]

12 Hezekiah went into the Temple, and Prayed unto GOD who dwelt between the
Cherubim. There GOD gave the Sentence and Order for this wonderful thing to be
done. [See Verse 3.] To cut off the Leaders of Senacherib's Army. [2 Chronicles.
XXXII. 21.] He took away their Lives at once, as a Gardener does the Franches
of a Vine, or the Bunches of the Grape. In the Fate of Senacherib, there was
done a thing terrible to the Kings of the Earth.

PSALM LXXVII. To the Chief Musician to Jeduthun. A Psalm of Asaph.
1 MY Voice was unto God, and I did make an earnest cry; My voice was unto God,
and He did hearken unto me.

2 In the day of my trouble I did seek the Lord; my wound, spread in the Night,
and rested not; my Soul refused relief.

3 I did remember God, and then was greatly discomposed: I did complain; my
spirit then was overwhelmed with grief.

4 The watchings thou did apprehend which did attend my eyes; I was seized
with astonishment so that I could not sleep.

5 I have considered the days which were in Ancient time; I have considered the
Years of Ages yet unknown.

6 My Song I thought on; in the Night I commun'd with my heart; and then my
spirit made a search, to find the matter out.

7 The Lord, on whom I lean, will He call off forevermore? And will he not go
o^^ to show His favor any more?

8 His mercy, does it wholly fail to perpetuity? What? For whole Generations
does His Word to nothing come?

9 What? Has the mighty God forgot for to be merciful? Has He His tender bowels
in great anger quite shut up? Selah.

10 Then, upon this, I said, This is but my infirmity; The years of Change are
all in the Right hand of the most High.

11 I will remember the Works of the EVER-BEING One; surely I Will in remembrance
have thy wonder done of old.

12 Yea, I will meditate upon all of thy Glorious work; and will * with Prayers
and wonders speak of things which thou have done.

13 O God, Thy way proceeds, and is bebeld in holiness; Who is the mighty God,
so great as is our God the Judge?

14 Thou art the mighty God; who does the thing that is wonderful; among the
People openly Thou have declared thy strength.

15 Thou have redeemed thy People with thy own extended Arm; Thou have redeemed
the Children of Jacob and Joseph so.

16 The waters thee beheld, O God, the waters thee beheld; they were afraid;
the deeps themselves in a commotion were.

17 Thick clouds did of their waters make an inundation then; The sky gave out
a thundering sound; thy darts too went abroad.

18 The loud voice of thy Thunder was in the Revolution heard; The Lighthings
struck light on the World; the Earth was moved and shook.

19 The way which thou did take was in the Sea, thy paths were in the mighty
swelling waters; and thy footsteps are unknown.

20 Then by the hand of Moses, and of Aaron joined with him; thy People thou
did lead along even like unto a Flock.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXVII. PSALM.
SEE we not here the Jewish Nation in a Meditation on their Desolate Condition,
as rejected of God? And yet comforting themselves with reflecting on His
Ancient Miracles and Promises.

3 To Remember how kind our GOD has been to us formerly; this only gives us the
Greater Trouble, when we Compare it with our present Miseries.

10 q. d. I said, this is the thing that sorely afflicts me; -- To see the
change in the proceedings of the Most High toward me. To this purpose, Dr.
Patricks Paraphrase.

13 Munsters reading is, In Sancto. The whole Way of Ged has a most unspotted
Sanctity ever Shining in it.

18 How far did the Thunder, which accompaniment the promulgation of the Law on
Mount Sinai, cause the Earth to tremble? See Josh. II. 10, 11. As soon (...) we
heard our Hearts did molt.

PSALM LXXVIII. Maschil. Of Asaph.
1 O Ye my People, Hearken well to my distilling law: Incline your ear
attentively to the words of my mouth.

2 My mouth I Will open in a dark * Sententious Parable; I Will utter secret
mysteries in what fell out of old.

3 They are the things which we have heard, and things which we have known; and
they are what our Fathers have related unto us.

4 These we will not conceal from them that are Children to those; They to the
Generation so to come shall still relate: Even the Praises which belong to the
ETERNAL God; and His strength and His wondrous works; the Things which He has
wrought.

5 A testimony He did in Jacob establish so; and He made an appointment of a
law in Israel: The things the which He did command unto our Ancestors, that
they unto their Children should communicate the same.

6 That so the Generation still to come might know the things; the Children to
be born might rise and to their Children tell.

7 That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works which God
has done, but that they might keep His Commandments.

8 And not be as their Fathers were, a Generation bent upon Apostasy from God,
and a rebellous Race: A Generation which did not direct their heart aright; nor
was their spirit faithfully adhering still to God.

9 Well-armed were the Children which issued from Ephraim; with Bow they shot;
and yet in day of Battle turned back.

10 For they were such as had not kept the Covenant of God: they also had
refused to walk according to His law.

11 Yea, and they had forgotten quite the Works which He had wrought; and the
Things very Mavelous which He had shown to them.

12 Things very Mavelous He did before their Ancestors; He in the Land of
Egypt, in the field of Zoan wrought.

13 He did divide the Sea, and gave to them a passage through; The Waters He did
make to stand collected as an Heap.

14 He with a Cloud did give to them His Conduct in the Day; and with the
Brightness of a Fire over them all the Night.

15 He in the Wilderness did cleave the solid Rock asunder; and He did make
them for to Drink as out of mighty Deeps.

16 Yea, He did bring forth flowing Streams out of the solid Stone; and like to
Rivers He did cause the Waters to run down.

17 But they in Sinning against Him did add yet more and more; Thereby
provoking the most High while in the Wilderness.

18 And in their Heart Tempting of Him they tried the mighty God; They did it
by Desiring food to suit their Appetite.

19 Yea, They blasphemed the Glorious God; and this is what they said; Can God
prepare a Table here in such a Wilderness.

20 Behold, He smote the Rock and then the Waters gushed out; The Torrents then
did running there an Inundation make. But what? can He also bestow upon His
People Bread? What? will He make provision of fiesh for His People too?

21 Therefore the ETERNAL heard, and was Angry: so kindled was a Fire on Jacob,
and Wrath went up against Israel.

22 Because that they had not reli'd with faith upon their God; not had they
then their Confidence in His Salvation placed.

23 Although He from above had given Command unto the Clouds, and opened wide the
Gates of Heaven, as of a Granary.

24 And He from thence had rained down Manna on them to Eat; yea, and the Corn
of Heaven too He had bestowed on them.

25 A Man was then allowed to Eat the Bread of mighty ones; He did of that send
unto them a Diet to their full.

26 He in the Heavens then did cause an Eastern wind to blow; and by His mighty
power He did bring in a Southern wind.

27 He did rain down upon them Flesh in plenty like the dust; and like the Sand
that bounds the Seas a Fowl that had a wing.

28 And in the midst of their Camps He caused it to fall; yea, and in the
whole circuit of their Habitations there.

29 So they did eat thereof, and they were well replenished; and He did bring
to them the thing that was their own desire.

30 They were not yet estranged from what was their own desire: their Meat they
had so much desired as yet was in their mouth;

31 When the great Wrath of God did like a Fire ascend on them; and slew their
fat ones, and smote down the chief of Israel.

32 But notwithstanding all of this, they still went on to Sin; and they did
not give credit to His very wondrous works.

33 Therefore He made their days to waste away in vanity; yea, and their years
in trouble which quickly dispatched them.

34 When He struck them with Death, on this then they did seek to Him: Then
they returned, and early they enquired after God.

35 Then they called to remembrance that God was their sheltring Rock; and the
High God claimed still to give Redemption unto them.

36 Nevertheless with a false mouth, they did but flatter Him; and with their
tongues that spoke so fair they did but lie to Him.

37 For still their heart with right intents was not resolved for Him; nor in
His Covenant did they use good fidelity.

38 But being merciful, He did forgive iniquity; And He then did not upon them
deserved destruction bring: No, He did multiply the Acts in which He turned
away His anger, and therewith He did not stir up all His wrath.

39 For He remembered this of them; that they were feeble Flesh, a Spirit that
passes away, and comes not again.

40 How often in the Desert they provoked Him bitterly! Have often in the
Wilderness they irritated Him!

41 Yea, they returned back unto their way or tempting God; Limits they also
did preservable bed to Frank Holy One.

42 They did not well remember what His Hand had wrought for them; the Day when
He delivered them out of Adversity.

43 How He in Egypt wrought and set His most amazing Signs; and in the Field or
Zoan there, His Works most wonderful,

44 There He had with a strange turn changed their Rivers into blood, and
changed their Floods at such a rate, they could not drink thereof.

45 He sent the Dog-fly upon them, which preyed upon them sore; He sent the
Frogs too which did bring, destruction upon them.

46 Unto the Caterpillar He did give up their increase; and to the Locust He
gave up what they had labored for.

47 He killed their Vines with Hail, and their Sycomore Trees with Frost.

48 And left their Cattle to the Hail, their Flocks to Lightning too.

49 He cast on them His burning Wrath, Anger, and great Disdain, with Trouble;
Evil Angels were commissioned for the work.

50 He for His Anger weighed a path; He spared not their Soul from Death, but
He gave up their life unto the Pestilence.

51 All the Firstborn of Egypt then He smote; The First Fruits of their
Forces, in the Tents that were inhabited by Cham.

52 But He made His own People to go forth like unto Sheep; and He did in the
Wilderness guide them like as a Flock.

53 He did guide them in safety, so that they were not afraid; But the Sea
overwhelmed them that were their Enemies.

54 He brought them to the border of His Sanctuary here; the mountain which His
own right Hand had made a purchase of.

55 And He before their faces did cast out the Nations there; yea, He did cause
them for to fall in the divided Lotts, when there was to be cast a Line for
their inheritance; and in their Tents He made to dwell the Tribes of Israel.

56 Yet they did by temptations try and bitterly provoke the most High God, and
they kept not the things He testified.

57 But they returned to their wont and dealt perfidiously, like to their
Ancestors; they warped like a deceitful bow.

58 For that with their high places they provoked Him to wrath; and with their
graven Images moved Him to jealousy.

59 This Thing when God the Judge did hear. He then was moved to wrath; yea, He
with great abhorrence cast contempt on Israel.

60 So He the Tabernacle of Shiloh did then forsake; The Tent which He had
placed for to cohabit there with Man.

61 And He delivered his strength into Captivity; yea, and His glory into the
hand of the Enemy.

62 He also His own People did shut up unto the Sword; and He was very angry
with His own Inheritance.

63 Their choice Young Men the Fire of wrath did greatly waste away; and so
their Virgins could not be praised to the Married State.

64 They that were Priests to Him did fall by the devouring Sword: but yet
their Widows did not then their lamentations make.

65 Then did the Lord awake, as one that had been fast asleep; He was like to a
mighty Man shouting upon his wine.

66 And He upon the hinder parts did smite his Enemies; He brought upon them a
disgrace that is perpetual.

67 The Tabernacle also of Joseph He did refuse; and He placed not His choice
upon the Tribe of Ephraim.

68 No, but the Tribe of Judah He did please to make His choice; He chose the
Mount of Zion which He set His love upon.

69 And He His Sanctuary did, build like high Palaces; Like to the Earth for
which He does a long Foundation lay.

70 David he also chose to be a Servant unto Him; and fetched him from the
Enclosures where the Sheep were folded in.

71 From following of the Ews with young He brought him for to feed Jacob that
was His People, and Israel His Heritage.

72 So he led them according to his hearts integrity; and led them in the
manifold skilfulness of his hands.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXVIII. PSALM.
THE Psalm foretells the Refection of the Ten Tribes for Crimes committed since
their Separation; with a Promise of preserving Judab, and the House of David,
from which the Messiah was to be Born, who is to re-establish Zion, and bring
the People into Subjection to Himself.

9 Some think, this refers to the overthrow which the Israelites received, when
the Philistines took from them the Ark of GOD. As the Ark so the Fight was then
in the Territory of the Ephramites. ^ur here are, Dark sayings of Old. The
Jewish Traditions, and Commentaries on, 1 Chronicles. VII. 21. tell us; the
Philistines had made some Inroads and Assaults on the Skirts of Goshon, while
the Israelites resided there. The Israelites and particularly the Active
Ephramites formed an Expedition against the Canaanites, presuming to attack
them in their own Country. But they came off unhappy Losers; The Rabb^^s tell
us, they lost no less than Eight Thousand Men. This they got by Anticipating
and Pracipitating what GOD had to do for them. Yea, after the Death of the
Twelve Patriarchs, they fell into all manner of Abominations. They committed
innumerable Idolatries. They did forget and forego Circumcision, the Covenant
of GOD: This was the Reproach of Egypt. [Josh. V. 9.]

12 Zoan, a very Ancient City, [ Numb. XIII. 22.] called by the Greeks Tanis,
near the Second Mouth of the Nile.

25 A Food prep^^e! by Angels! The Gloss of Saidas is, Ministered by Angels.

30 q. d. They were not hindered from Fating as much as they pleased.

32 q. d. They were not moved by any of His wonderful Works, to Believe, That
He was able to bring them into the Land of Promise.

49 The Apostle, Romans II. 8, 9. uses these very Words, when he mentions the
Judgments of GOD on Wicked Men. An Intimation that GOD will put those
Miserables into the Hands of Evil Angels.

60 Some choose to read it, The Tent which He had fixed in Adam. There was a
Town called Adam. [Jesh. III. 16. The waters rose up in an Heap, afaroff, in
Adam.] Adam was the Center where the Waters were parted; and where was the
Station of the Ark, now ready to enter Jordan.

PSALM LXXIX. A Psalm of Asaph.
1 O God the Heathen are come in to thine Inheritance; Thy holy Temple they have
defiled; Jerus'lem laid in heaps,

2 Dead Bodies of thy Servants they made meat for Fowls of Heaven; and the
flesh of thy gracious ones for the Beasts of the Earth.

3 Their Blood they have like water shed around the Circuits of Jerusalem, and
there was none found that would bury them.

4 We are made a reproach unto those in our Neighborhood; a scorn and a
derision to them that encompass us.

5 How long, O Thou ETERNAL God? Will thou forever be angry with us? Thy
jealously shall it still burn like fire?

6 Thy burning wrath, O do thou pour upon the Nations down; which do not render
unto thee any acknowledgments: And on the Kingdoms which have not called upon
thy Name.

7 For Jacob they have devoured, and have laid waste his dwelling place.

8 Mind not against us former sins; make haste; Thy bowels, Oh! let them
prevent us; for that we are brought exceeding low.

9 O God whence our Salvation comes; Afford thy help to us; Because there is
concerned therein the Glory of thy Name. And, Oh! do thou bestow on us a full
deliverance; cleanse thou us also from our sins, for the sake of thy Name.

10 Why say the Nations, Where Is their God? Let our eyes see made known to
Nations the revenge of blood they have of thy Servants shed.

11 The sighing of the Prisoner, let it come before thy face; To show the
greatness of thy Arm, Reserve the sons of Death.

12 But to our Neighbors pay into their bosom sevenfold the vile reproach,
with which they have reproached thee, O Lord.

13 So we thy People, and the Sheep Thou feedest, Thee shall praise for time
unknown; from Age to Age; we shall declare thy Praise,

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXIX. PSALM.
BEhold Jerusalem destroyed by the Romans, and the Jewish Nation exposed unto
Derision in their long Dispersion. Behold a fervent Prayer, that GOD would
recompense upon the Idolatrous Nations their Cruelty toward the Jews; with a
Promise to Celebrate the Praises of GOD, after their Deliverance, and the
Destruction of Antichrist.

PSALM LXXX. To the Chief Musician. Upon Shushannim. Eduth. A Psalm of Asaph.
1 HEar, O Thou Isreal's Sheperd, who leadst Joseph as a Flock; Thou who do
make thy Seat to be the Cherubim, Shine forth.

2 Before the face of Ephraim, also of Benjamin, and of Menasseh, show thy
strength, and come with help to us.

3 O God, Cause thou us to return, and cause thy Countenance to shine forth
upon us; so we shall our Salvation see.

4 O Thou ETERNAL One, who art the God of Hosts? How long against thy Peoples
Prayer will thou smoke with incensed wrath?

5 Thou feedest them but with a Bread that is mixed still with tears; and thou
do give them tears to drink, even with a treble cup.

6 Thou make us a strife unto them in our Neighborhood; and they that are
our Enemies do laugh among themselves.

7 Turn us again, O God of Hosts, and cause thy Countenance to shine forth upon
us; so we shall our Salvation see.

Thou from its place in Egypt have caused to be brought a Vine; The Nations
thou rejected have; and thou have planted it.

9 Thou did evacuate all clear before the face of it; and thou did make it
take deep root, until it filled the Land.

10 The Mountains were well covered with the spreading shade of it; and the
Branches thereof did hide Cedars of God themselves.

11 She did send forth her Branches wide, as far as to the Sea; and the slips
cut from it she sent as far as to the River,

12 But, Oh! why have thou broken down her hedges all of them? so that all they
who do pass by the way, do pluck at her.

13 The Boar that comes out of the wood has laid it very waste; and the wild
Beast that ranges in the field, devoureth it.

14 Return, O God of Armies, we do humbly ask for it; look down from Heaven,
and behold and visit thou this Vine.

15 Even the Plant which thy Right Hand has planted in the Earth; and look
upon the Branch which thou have strengthened for thy self.

16 It is consumed with the Fire; it is utterly cut down; they perish from the
stern rebuke of thy proveked face.

17 Let thy Hand be upon the Man who is at thy Right Hand; Upon the Son of Man
whom thou have strengthened for thy self.

18 So we shall never any more Apostatize from thee; O do thou quicken us, and
we shall call upon thy Name.

19 Make us return, ETERNAL God of Hosts; Thy Countenance, cause to shine forth
on us; so we shall our Salvation see.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXX. PSALM.
DE. Patrick thinks the Psalm was ^enn^ in the Time of Hezekiah; who wrote a
Circular Letter unto the Tribes, especially Ephraim ^^d M^nasseh, who were
escaped out of the Hand of the Assyrian; that they would come to the House of
GOD at Jerusal^m. After this the Land was invade^ an^ sorely dis^^r^ssed by
Senacherib; which was dou^tless a grievous Discouragement unto them, who had
^o^ned in the Reformation. This might move Asaph, most earnestly to beseech of
GOD, that He would stir up Himself, before Ephraim and M^nass^h, as well as Bon
amin, (in which Tribe stood part of Jerusalem and the Temple^) and let them see
by a Remarkable Deliverance, that their Zeal was acceptable to Him. These Three
Tribes, may be also linked, because they were the Tribes, which together
followed the Ark, and brought up the Rear in the Camp of Israel. The Greek
expressly calls this, A Psalm concerning the Ass^rian. It is remarkable Hezekiah
distressed by the Ass^rian, appl^es himself to GOD in the very Language (...) the
Psalm now before us. 2 Rin. XIX. 15, 16. Isa XXXVII. 16, 17. But in the midst
of all, Behold t^^ Jewish Nation under the oppression of the Roman Enpire
(called the Wild-Boar, because it was one of t^^ Standards of that Impire)
waiting for Deliverance by the Hand of the Messiah.

1 Joseph personally considered, was one like an Innocent Lamb fallen among a
Company of Wolves. [ Genesis XXXVII. 18.]

5 Hebr. In a Tieble Measure. The Talmud E^pounds it, that the Captivity under
Edom, that i^ Rome, will be a Cup Three times as large as that in Egypt, and
that in Babylon, Three Times 400 Years, and Three Time 70 Years, at least 1410
Years. D^ Kimchi observes, That the Captivity in Babylon was a Third part so
long as the Capt^vity in Egypt.

6 q. d. Our Neighbors are ever picking of Quarrel^ with us, or striving among
themselves who shall make the greatest Booty of us.

Channa, which we render, The Branch, is an^ Egyptian Word; very agreeably used
when a Vine brought out of Egypt, had been spoken of. Beehart expounds it of
the Hedera Chenositis.

17 Even the Targum of Jonathan the Jew, will confess that the King MESSIAH is
here spoken of. Behold the Two Natures of the Messiah. He is the Man of GOD's
Right Hand in regard of His Divinity; He is the Son of Adam in regard of His
Humanity. In the Desolation of the Vine here, doubtless the Spirit of Prophecy
ultimately refers to the Destruction of the Jews, by the Roman Power. R.
Solomon says well, Innuit Captivitatem Rome. The Boar out of the Wood, he
calls, Esau, that is the Roman; and says, It Is the Fourth Beast in the Visions
of Daniel. It is Remarkable, The Destruction of the Jews, begun with the
setting up a Boar on the Gates of the Temple. GOD then said unto them, Now the
Boar out of the Wood is coming upon you!

PSALM LXXXI. To the Chief Musician. Upon Gittith. Of Asaph.
1 O Sing aloud unto the God in whom we have our strength; O make a joyful
noise unto the God of Jacob now.

2 Take up a Psalm into your Mouth; And bring the Timbrel out; Bring out the
pleasant Harp, with it joining the Psaltery.

3 Sound with the Trumpet at the Time when the New Moon appears; at the
appointed time; on the Day of our Festival.

4 For this to Israel is ordained a Law of Jacobs God.

5 This for a Testimony He to Joseph did assign: He did it when thorough the
Land of Egypt He went forth; A Land where I did hear a Tongue I did not
understand.

6 It Was this, His Shoulder I removed from the load laid on it; his hands did
from the Basket then make an entire escape.

7 When thou wast in thy Trouble, thou did make a Cry to me; and I thereon
did work for thee a great Deliverance. In The secret Place of Thunder I gave
Answer unto thee; I proved thee at the Waters of Contentious Meribah. Selah.

8 Hear, O my People, now, and I will testify to thee; O Israel, If that thou will now hearken unto me.

9 There shall not any strange God be acknowledged in thee; Nor unto any
foreign God shall thou bow down thy self.

10 I am JEHOVAH, Thy God who fetched thee up from the Land of Egypt; Open thou
thy Mouth, and I Will replenish it.

11 But, Oh! my People, they would not hearken unto my Voice; and Israel had no
desire to take Delight in me.

12 So I did give him up unto the Lust of their own heart; they in their own
Inventions then went always walking on.

13 My People, Oh! that they had been Obedient unto me; Oh! that in my directed
Ways Israel had walked on!

14 Their Adversaries then I should have quickly vanquished; and on their
Enemies I should have quickly turned my hand.

15 They that hate the ETERNAL God should soon have fawned, on Him; But then
their time would have endured to Perpetuity.

16 He should have also fed him with the fatness of the Wheat; and from the
Rock with Honey I should have replenished thee.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXXI. PSALM.
THE First Day of the Seventh Month was above others, A Day of blowing
Trumpets. [Num. XXIX. 1.] And it being the first New Moon in the Year, the
Trumpets were blown longer this Day than any other. Maimonides thinks it was to
awaken their Preparation for the Solemn Day of Expiation, which was Ten Days
after. It was the Day when Moses ^^^te^ being twice forty Days in the Mount)
began to, ^^e order for building the Tabernacle.

The Psalm was compo^ed for this Occasion. GOD Himself is introduced in it as
instructing them in the End of the Solemnity. And He shows the Jews (and us,)
that their Disobedience to Him is the Cause of all the Miseries which be^al
them.

5 Was it the Egyptian Language. Or, shall we rather take Patricks Paraphrase?
We heard unto our Astonishment, (for we never before were acquainted with it)
the Voice of God.

6 They were delivered from the dirty and sordid Employments, wherein the
Egyptians had employed them.

7 The Arabian Interpreter, has a Notable Passage here; Secret Prayers are like
sounding Thunder in the Ears of GOD. But the Thing most evidently referred unto
is this; the People cried unto GOD in their Distress at the Red Sea, and God
confounded the Egyptians with Lightning and Thunder out of the Cloudy Pillar.
[See Fxod. XIV. 10, 13. Psalm LXXVIII. 18.]

PSALM LXXXII. A Psalm of Asaph.
1 IN the Assembly of our God there stands God the Judge; He in the midst
of the God's does the part of a Judge.

2 He says, How long in Judgment will you do iniquity? and so accept the
persons of such as are wicked ones?

3 In Judgment see that you defend the Poor and Fatherless; do Justice to the
Afflicted one, and the impoverished.

4 Accomplish a deliverance for the Poor and Needy one; Out of the hands of
wicked ones set them at liberty.

5 They neither know nor understand: in darkness they walk on; all the
foundations of the Earth are sh^^^^^ ou^ of course.

6 I Have said, You Are God's; and all of you are Sons of the Most High.

7 But ye shall dye like Men, and as one of the Princes fall.

8 Arise, O God, and execute thou Judgment in the Earth; for thou shall have
all Nations to be thine Inheritance.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXXII. PSALM.
IT appears by the last Verse of the Psalm, that it relates to the Time of the
Divine Vengeance on the Antichristian Powers. It contains an Exhortation unto
those Powers to follow Righteousness; and fo^etells their total Destruction,
when the Messiah shall come to establish His Empire. Dr. Patrick refers the
Psalm to the days of Hezekiah; and makes it an Admonition unto the Judges then,
to be more careful of their Duty, and Remember GOD who Judges them.

6 Reizius thinks, The Judges of Israel, on the account of the peculiar
Theocercy, wherein they had their Station, had a claim to the Name of Elohim,
above others in the World; but that our Lord JESUS CHRIST has now supersceded
the Title for them.

Nevertheless there is an Holy Use, that may still be made of the Title. And as
the Lord Bacon observes, All the Precepts concerning Magistrates, are
effectually comprehended in those two Remembrances; Remember that you are Gods,
and, Remember that you are Men. The One Bridles their Will, the other their
Power.

7 Like Men! -- and not like Beasts; For After Death the Judgment. One Observes
further, That Beasts live out their Time determined by Nature, unless Violence
or Casualty come in between, But Man di^th in every Age; ostner in Infancy then
in any other Age

PSALM LXXXIII. A Song, A Psalm of Asaph.
1 AN intermitting silence let not be with Thee, O God; as one deaf hold thou
not thy peace; and be not still, O God.

2 For that, behold thy Enemies make a tumultuous noise; and they that are thy
haters do proudly lift up the head.

3 Against thy People they have had cunning contrivances; and have their
consultations held against thy hidden ones.

4 They Have said, Come let us destroy them quite to be no Nation now; That so the
Name of Israel may be mentioned no more.

5 For they their consultations have closely together held with one consent;
against thee they do form a mutual league.

6 It Is what the Tents of Edom do, and of the Ishmaelites; Moab associates with
them; so do the Hagarens.

7 Gebal and Ammon do come in conjoined with Amalek; Philistia comes in with
the Inhabitants of Tire.

8 Yea, the Assyrian so remote, is also joined with them; They to the Sons of
Lot became a very strengthening Arm.

9 O do to them as once thou did unto the Midianites; as Sisera, as Jabin
once, by Kishon's Torrent were.

10 They at the Place called Endor did destruction undergo: They were scorned
and unburied left as dung upon the Earth.

11 Make them, yea, make their Nobles like to Oreb and to Zeeb; yea, ^^ke to
Zebah, and like to Zalmunna, all their Kings.

12 They said, We will Houses of God f^^ our possession take.

12 My God, Make them like to a wheel, as chaff before the wind.

14 As the fire burns the wood and as the flame sets hills on fire;

15 So with thy Tempest follow them, and fright them with thy storm.

16 Make thou their faces to be full of ignominious shame; That they may seek
thy Name, O Thou that art the ETERNAL God.

17 Let them be put to shame, and be forever terrified; with shame, yea, let
them hang the head; and let them perish quite.

18 Let Men know, that Thou only have JEHOVAH for thy Name; Thou art the most
High One, who do rule over all the Earth.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXXIII. PSALM.
WAS the Psalm composed on the Combination made against the Church in the days
of Jehoshaphat? And was the Writer of it, either Jabaziel one of Asaph's
Posterity inspired on this Occasion? Or some other in those days whose proper
Name was Asaph? Or, does the Psalm take in all the Attempts made after that,
until that made by the Assyrian, who came to do what the rest had not been able
to do? Then Dr. Patrick thinks the Asaph who lived in the days of Hezekiah, may
pass for the Author. But after all, Dr. Allix here sees a Prayer against the
Followers of Antichrist, and of Mahomet, who have sought the Ruin of the Jewish
Nation, and the Conquest of their Country. Compare the last Verse with Zech.
XIV. 9. which is to be accomplished, after the Destruction of the Idumaans, and
the Ishmaelites; which are the Two Parties aforesaid.

3 The Hidden Things, may be not only the People, whom GOD had hitherto
protected as His Jewels; but also the Temple and the Secret-Place of it, which
He had chosen for His Dewlling Place.

PSALM LXXXIV. To the Chief Musician. Upon Gittith. A Psalm for the Sons of
Korah.
1 HOw lovely are thy Tents, O Thou ETERNAL Lord of Hosts?

2 My Soul, it longs, yea, and it faints for to approach the Courts where the
ETERNAL God is pleased to manifest Himself; My heart, yea, and my flesh cry out
to enjoy the Living God.

3 Even the Sparrow does find out an House where she may lodge; The Turtle too
does find a Nest where she may lay her Young. But then my choice and cry is
this; Thine Altars! There I Would be! O Thou ETERNAL Lord of Hosts; my King, and
Oh! my God!

4 Blessed are they who in thy House enjoy a dwelling place; they will
perpetually be engag d in praising thee. Selah.

5 O the vast Blessings of the Man who has his strength in thee! The beaten
ways that lead thereto are in the heart of such.

6 Passing a Valley full of tears they meet a Fountain there; yea, and the Rain
replenishes the Cisterns ready there.

7 They go from one Company to another Company; Anon in Zion each appears
before the Glorious God.

8 O Thou ETERNAL One, who art the God of Armies, Hear my Prayer, and Thou that
art the God of Jacob, O give ear. Selah.

9 O God, Behold our Shield; the Face of thy Anointed see.

10 For better than a thousand is one Day within thy Courts; I on the Threshold
choose to keep in the House of my God; rather than have my dwelling in the tents
of wickedness.

11 For the ETERNAL God, God is a Sun and Shield to us; and the ETERNAL God
will give both Grace and Glory too: Yea, He Will deny no good to those that walk
in perfect ways.

12 JEHOVAH Tzebaoth, The Man is blessed who hopes in thee.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXXIV. PSALM.
OUR Allix here sees a strong desire for the Jewish Nation to see themselves
reestablished after their long Dispersion, and Assemble together for the
Worship of GOD. The Messiah is here mentioned, as He by whom that Work is to be
accomplished. Patrick thinks, The Psalm was Composed by a Pious Levite in the
Country, when Senacherib's Army had blocked up the way to Jerusalem, and
hindered them from waiting on the Service of GOD at the Temple; where he judged
the lowest Ministry, even that of a Porter, to be far more honorable, than the
highest Perferment among the Pagans.

1 The Assemblies of Zion are, The Hosts of the Lord. -- O Minister of the
Gospel, Comfort thy self in this; Thou shall have such Assemblies to Preach
unto, as the Lord of Hosts will order for thee.

3 Was the Tabernacle any Nestin-Place for Birds? I rather suppose a rapturous
Ap^sicp^sis here. The Sparrow has found an House; and the Turtle a Nest for
her self; -- But as for me, the House, the Nest, the Delightful Place which I
choose for my self; my cry is, Thine Altars, O Lord of Hosts! With an abrupt
outcry, he signifies, that He longed as much for the Altars of GOD, as a
Sparrow for her House, a Turtle for her Nest.

But R. Solomon supposing the Psalm to be Written in the Time of the Chaldean
Captivity, the Temple then in Ruins, might have the Fowls lodging there. What
we render, A Swallow, does as Bochart proves, property intend the Ring-Dove, or
the Turtle.

5 q. d. Happy the Man who relying on the Divine Protection, [ Exodus XXXIV,
24.] goes up Three Times a Year, to the Solemnities at Jerusalem. Or, when he
is debarred of that Liberty, as I now am, is one of those devout Persons, whose
Hearts are more in the Highways that lead thither, than at their own home; who
traveling through the troublesome Valley of Bacah, where there is no water,
pass it as cheerfully, as if it abounded with Springs; depending on God the
Fountain of all they want, for Showers to refresh them in their Journey. The
Patrician Paraphrase.

6 It may also be rendered, The Teacher is filled with Blessings.

10 In the Heavenly World, there is a Temple, where the Worship of God is after
a most Glorious manner carried on; Of which first Moses, and afterward David,
had a mavelous Exhibition; And it was further Exhibited unto John, in his
wonderful Visions. The Third Heaven is the Holy of Holies in that Holy Temple
of the Heavens, where the Majesty of God, is peculiarly Exhibited in a Light
that is inaccessible. Doubtless many Passages in the Psalms have an Eye
ultimately unto that Glorious Temple in the Heavens, where GOD is Glorified by
those whom He receives in the Everlasting Habitations. The Mansions of the
Paradise, where the Departed Spirits of the Faithful are lodged until the
Resurrection, are the Courts of the Temple. Believer, Think on those Mansions,
and be caught up to Paradise, when thou singest about, The Courts of the Lord.
Old Arnobius, the Younger, will stand by me in offering this Contemplation.

PSALM LXXXV. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm for the Sons of Korah.
1 O Thou ETERNAL God, Thou have been gracious to thy Land; the Captived ones
of Jacob thou have brought them back again.

Thou the iniquity of thy own People have forgiven; all the Sin found in them
thou have entirely covered. Selah.

3 All thy wrath thou have utterly taken away from them; Thou have recalled thy
anger from the heat it rose unto.

4 Return thou us, O God in whom we our Salvation have; and toward us thine
anger now, O do thou cause to cease.

5 Will thou be angry still with us to perpetuity? Will thou make thy incensed
wrath extend from Age to Age?

6 What? Will thou not return again? Yea, Thou will quicken us; and they that
are thy People shall shine with bright joy in thee.

7 O Thou ETERNAL God, Show thou thy mercy unto us; and thy Salvation as a Gift
upon us, O bestow.

8 Now will I listen well to what God the ETERNAL One will please to speak,
because He will speak a most happy peace: Peace to His People, and to them that
are His gracious ones; and they shall not return unto foolishness any more.

9 Surely, to them that fear Him His Salvation's very near: that Glory may
within our Land its habitation have.

10 Mercy and Truth will meet together; Justice and Peace will kiss;

11 Truth will spring from the Earth, and from the Heavens will Justice look.

12 Yea, the ETERNAL One will give the thing that is truly Good; and then our
Land shall liberally bring forth her joyful fruit.

13 Each one before his face shall make still righteousness to walk; and he
shall regulate his steps for such a beaten way.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXXV. PSALM.
THE Prophetic Spirit here Prays for the Israelites under the marks of the
Divine Anger in their Dispersion, and comforts them with a Meditation on the
Promises which GOD has made by all the Prophets, to be one Day Reconciled unto
them, and bring them again unto their own Land, and bless them under the Reign
of the Messiah, abundantly and wonderfully.

8 Idolatry is emphatically Folly. It is Remarkable, The Jews have not relapsed
into that Folly, since their Captivity in Babylon.

9 The Coming of the Messiah is thus looked for. Yea, the Words in the Original
are, His JESUS is nigh them that fear Him. Glory.] Munster's Gloss is
Excellent, Praesentia Divinae Majestatis incarnatae.

11 Some of the Jewish Rabbi's (as R. Hadarson, and R. Joden,) have here made a
mavelous Remark. It is not said here, Truth shall be engendered, but, It shall
spring Forth. To signify that the Messiah whose Name is, The Truth, shall not
be begotten as other Men are. And accordingly R. Haccadosch proves out of the
Scriptures, That the Mother of the Messiah must be a Virgin. He also proves,
That as the Name of Him who first brought the Jews into the Land of Promise,
was JESUS, the same should be the Name of the Messiah, who comes to repeat such
a Deliverance for them.

13 Patrick's Paraphrase runs thus, He shall govern us with great Justice and
Mercy, having His faithful Promise always before His Eyes. From that Rule He
shall never swerve, but steadfastly proceed by it, as the constant method He
will hold in His Divine Administrations.

Munster's Gloss is notable; Justus quisque studebit ambulare ante Deum, et
ponere gressus suos in Via Mandatorum Dei.

PSALM LXXXVI. A Prayer of David.
1 O Thou ETERNAL God, Bow down thine Ear, and hear thou me; Because I am an
humbled one, and I am indigent.

2 Preserve my Soul, since that I am one that is merciful; Save, thou my God,
thy Servant who does place His hope in thee.

3 O Lord in whom is my support, Be merciful to me; Because that I do cry to
thee all day * and every day.

4 Rejoice the Soul of him that is a Servant unto thee; Because that unto thee,
O Lord, I do lift up my Soul.

5 For Thou, O Lord art Good, and art most ready to forgive, and great in mercy
unto all that make their cry to thee.

6 O Thou ETERNAL God, To my Petition O give ear; and to the Voice of my
requests for favor, O attend.

7 In the day when that I into a tribulation fall, then will I make my cry to
thee; for thou will answer me.

8 Among the God's, O Lord, there is none to be compared to thee; nor are there
any works that may be lik'ned unto thine.

9 The Nations all which thou have made shall come, and they shall bow their
kne^ before thy face, O Lord, and glorify thy Name.

10 Because that in thy Greatness thou art very glorious; and do things that
are wonderful; yea, Thou art God alone.

11 ETERNAL God, Teach me thy way; I in thy truth will walk; Unite my heart for
Thee, and to the fearing of thy Name.

12 I will praise thee, O Lord my God, even with all my heart; and I will
glorify thy Name to perpetuity.

13 Because thy mercy unto me is gloriously great; and from the pit below thou
have delivered my Soul.

14 O God, Against me rise the proud, and an assembly of strong ones have
sought my Soul, and not set thee before themselves.

15 But Thou, Lord, art a God full of Mercy, and Gracious art; Long suffering
and plentiful in Mercy and in Truth.

16 O look on me, and pity me; Afford thy strength unto thy Servant; and the
Son of thine Handmaid deliver thou.

17 Show me a sign for good, which my haters may see, and be ashamed; since
Thou, ETERNAL God, do help and comfort me.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXXVI. PSALM.
THE Prophetic Spirit here makes a Prayer for the Jewish Nation, oppressed by
the King of Pride, who is described in the XI Chapter of Daniel. It Is engaged,
that when the Mercies asked and hoped for, are granted, what is done shall be
celebrated before all the Nations. The Signs which are to usher in their
Deliverance, are in the last Verse Petitioned for.

16 R. David Kimchi thinks, the Handmaid here more peculiarly referred unto,
may be Ruth the Moabitess. -- Behold then, in this Language of the Messiah, 2
powerful Memorial, for the Vocation of the Gentiles. But attend unto a wondrous
matter. The Messiah, as here, so elsewhere, and ever, is introduced as speaking
of His Mother alone; without the least intimation of His Father. An occult
intimation, That He was to have a proper Mother, but no proper Father in this
World, and by Consequence He was to be the Son of a Pure Virgin. Compare, Psalm.
XXII. 9, 10. and XXXV. 14. and LXIX. 8. and LXXI. 6. and CXVI. 16. and CXXXI.
2. and CXXXIX. 13. and Isai. XLIX. 1.

PSALM LXXXVII. A Psalm. A Song for the Sons of Korah.
1 HE in the holy Mountains has His firm foundation laid.

2 The ETERNAL God loves Zions Gates more than all Jacob's Tents.

3 City of God, Of thee there are spoken most glorious things. Selah.

4 Of Rahab, and of Babylon I will make mention now among them that acknowledge
me; Behold Philistia, and Tire, with Ethiopia; There such an one was Born.

5 Of Zion then it shall be said, This and that worthy Man was born in her; and
the most High Himself shall stablish her.

6 When the ETERNAL God shall write the Peoples in His Roll, This is the thing
He shall declare, There such an one was born. Selah.

7 There as the Singers are, so are Players on instruments; And as for me the
springs of all my Good are found in thee.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXXVII. PSALM.
BEhold, How the Israelites are one Day to be acknowledged among the Nations,
and separated from among them; Though there shall be then many Proselytes.
Compare Isa. XIX. 18.

4 Rahab (which in the Egyptian Tongue signifies a Pear) is, as Bochart Shows,
the Name of that famous three Square part of Egypt, formed by the several
Mouths of Nilus, which is called the Delta of Egypt. And so all Egypt came to
have the Name.

It is a Gloss of Munsters here; Agnoscam inter Populum meum, et hos qui
extremifuere bestes populi mei.

5 Now and then, some one Single Man of Eminency born in other Countries: But
in Zion, there is Man and Man, many very eminent Men.

Again, Proselytes from all these Countries came to worship at Jerusalem. And
though they were born in other Countries, yet the Lord writes them down as if
Born in Zion.

7 The Spanish Translation reads it (as D. Kimchi does) My Eyes are upon Thee;
meaning the Eyes of a Watchful Providence.

But R. Solomon keeping to the Term of Springs, understands the Fathers of whom
the Messiah was to come. Compare Psalm. LXVIII. 26.

Take Munsters Gloss; Quicquid unquam inveniri potest Laudis et Preconij, erit
in Zion, ad Extollendam Dei Bonitatem, qui filium suum pro totius Mundi
Salutetrad dit; meraeque Scaturigines Sanctarum Meditationum, Cogitationum, et
Locutionum divinarum erunt in eis.

PSALM LXXXVIII. A Song. A Psalm for the Sons of Korah. To the Chief Musician.
Upon Mahalath Leannoth. Maschil. Of Heman the Ezrahite.
1 O Thou ETERNAL One, the God whence my Salvation comes. By Day, by Night,
before thee I make my Complaining Cry.

2 Before thy Face, O let my Prayer a free Admission have; Unto the Cry I make
with Grief do Thou incline thine Ear.

3 For that my Soul with Trouble is fully replenished; for that my Life is very
near come down unto the Pit.

4 I reckoned am with them who do descend into the Grave; I am become like to a
Man that has no strength in him.

5 Among the Dead I am exposed Free to all sorts of wrongs; I am like to the
Slain who do Sleep in the Sepulcher. Such as thou do not any more show a
Remembrance of; Even such as Violently are cut off by thy Hands blow.

6 Thou have for my place ordered me the Pit that is below; In Darkness Thou
have placed me, in the devouring Deeps.

7 Thy Wrath is lying upon me like to a mighty Weight; and with all thy
Tempestuous Waves Thou have afflicted me. Selah.

8 Those that were known to me thou have put far from me; and made me loathsome
unto them; I am shut up, and cannot come forth.

9 Mine Eye does through Affliction waste; O Thou ETERNAL God, I call upon thee
every Day; I stretch my Hands to Thee.

10 For such as do lie dead will Thou work a thing Wonderful? Shall the
deceased ones arise and celebrate thy Praise.? Selah.

11 Shall thy Benignity be in the Sepulcher declared; or shall there in
destruction be declared thy Faithfulness?

12 In darkness shall thy Work that is most wonderful be known? Thy
Righteousness also in the Land of Forgetfulness?

13 But O ETERNAL God, I have made unto Thee my Cry; and in the Morning shall
my Prayer anticipate Thee still.

14 O Thou ETERNAL God, Wherefore do Thou cast off my Soul? Wherefore do
Thou so hide away from me thy Countenance?

15 I am a poor afflicted One; and ready for to dye from early Youth; Thy
Terrors I have born till I Am amazed.

16 Thy Burning Indignations have been passing over me; Thy Terrors full of
Troubles have utterly cut me off.

17 Like Water they have surrounded me all day * and every day; they all together
in an heap have round encompassed me.

18 Thou Lover and Companion have removed far from me; and into hideous
Darkness those that once were known to me.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXXVIII. PSALM.
CHristian, Behold thy Crucified SAVIOR going down into the Prison of the
Grave!

Dr. Patrick thinks it probable, that when Jeconiab or Zedekiah, was carried
Captive into Babylon, with many other principal People, this our Heman was
among them; and probably was cast into a Dark Prison there, and miserably
treated.

3 It notably expresses a Prognostic and an Harbinger of Death, commonly
observed in the Experience of Godly Men. A little before their Death, when
their Life draws nigh to the Grave, usually their Soul is more full of
Troubles, then ever in their Life before, by reason of Troublesome Things
befalling them, in their Persons and Families.

5 Christian Singer, Behold thy SAVIOR here, First, Free among the Dead.
Understand it not of that Libertas M^rtuorum, which was the Consolation of the
Pagans about the actually and perfectly Dead. But understand it as the
Extremity and Epitome of the Miseries undergone by our SAVIOR. Vitringa
observes, The Torm notes, A Separation from all Mankind, which most eminently
befell our Lord, when He was hanged on the Cross between Heaven and Earth, and
all Commerce with Man was denied unto Him, and He was treated as the Execration
of the whole World, and exposed as Free, so that it was free for every (...) to
do what they would unto Him, and speak what th^^ would about Him. It implies a
State, In quo qu^^^ sum miser, ab aliis de relinquitur, spernitur, vif^^^tur.
A Leper was indeed such a Freeman. Hi^^ House was called, 2 Kin. XV. 5. An
House of Liberty Our Lord on the Cross compares Himself, Isai. LIII. (...) to A
stricken Man; that is, with a Leprosy. Ever^ one abandoned such a Man. Cocceius
tells us, Th^^^ Word used here, is what is used, Pro Publication Personae, for
the Exposing of a Person to all manner (...) Injury, Violence, and Contumely.
On the Cross (...) Savior was as the Apostle says, Act. II. 23. Ex^^^^ Exposed
unto all the Wrongs imaginable. Our Lor^^ thus Exposed here, counts Himself,
Among the Dead. He was now next unto the State of Death. But more than so; The
Cross was esteemed the Grave of the Crucified. The Romans left them there, to
be corrupted or devoured. Our Lord was now, Like the Slain lying in the Grave.
The Word, Slain, signifies Pierced; The Hebrews have not a more significant
Word for, The Crucified.

PSALM LXXXIX. Maschil. Of Ethan the Ezrahito.
1 THe Mercies of the ETERNAL God I will forever Sing; Thy Faithfulness I Will
with my mouth make known from Age to Age.

2 For I have said, Benignity shall be built up forever; The Heavens! thou
establish shall thy faithfulness in them.

3 I Have made a Covenant with Him that is my chosen one; To David (the Beloved
one). my Servant, I have sworn.

4 Thy Seed, I will establish it to perpetuity; and I will make to last and
grow thy Throne from Age to Age. Selah.

5 ETERNAL God, The Heavens shall confess thy wondrous one; yea, and thy
faithfulness in the Assembly of the Saints.

6 For who in Heaven may be compared to the ETERNAL God? Among the Sons of
mighty ones; who is like the ETERNAL God?

7 God in the great Assembly of the Saints is to be feared; and to be
reverenced above all that encompass Him.

8 O Thou ETERNAL God of Hosts, Strong JAH, Who Is like to thee? Thy
Faithfulness does also round about encompass thee.

9 Over the raging of the Sea thou thy Dominion have; when that the waves
thereof arise then thou asswagest them.

10 Egyptian Rahab thou have broke, it is as a wounded one; with the Arm of thy
strength thou have scattered thine Enemies.

11 The Heavens, they belong to thee, the Earth is also thine; the World and
all that fills it, thou have disposed them.

12 Both the North and the South also, Thou have created them; Tabor and
Hermon, West and East, shall in thy Name rejoice.

13 Thou have an Arm to which there does a mighty strength belong; Mightily
strengthened be thy hand, exalted thy Right Hand.

14 Justice and Judgment are the firm Foundation of thy Throne; Mercy and Truth
shall go before thy face, as Officers.

15 O blessed are the People, who do know the joyful sound; They, O ETERNAL,
walk in the light of thy Countenance.

16 They in thy Name shall still rejoice all day * and every day; and in thy
righteousness they shall an Exaltation have.

17 Because thou art the Glory of the strength which they enjoy; and in thy
favor shall our horn be lifted up on high.

18 Because that the ETERNAL One is our protecting Shield: and He that is the
Holy One of Israel is our King.

19 Then did thou speak in vision to thy gracious One, and say; I Have laid the
Help that is hoped for, upon a Mighty One: I have exalted One who is out of the
People chose.

20 My Servant David I have found; (even the Beloved one;) I have anointed Him
with the Oil of my Holiness;

21 With whom my hand shall be confirmed and my Arm strengthen Him.

22 The Enemy shall not impose exactions upon Him; and the son of iniquity
shall lay no yokes on Him.

23 Yea, I Will beat down before His face those who do trouble Him; and them that
are haters of Him I Will smite with wasting plagues.

24 But still my Faithfulness, and my Mercy shall be with Him; and in my Name
His horn shall be exalted very high.

25 I on the Sea will cause His hand Dominion to exert; and on the Rivers His
right hand to do what He shall please.

26 He shall invoke me at this rate, Thou art my Father; Thou! Thou art my God;
and Thou the Rock of my Salvation art.

27 Yea, to be my firstborn is what I shall allow to Him; to be the Highest
one, above the Monarchs of the Earth.

28 My Mercy I will keep for Him to perpetuity; and fast my Covenant shall
stand confirmed unto Him.

29 His Offspring I will cause to be to perpetuity; yea, His Throne shall
continue like unto the days of Heaven.

30 If that His Children by their Sin do violate my Law, and if they in my
Judgments don't maintain their constant walk;

31 If they profanely do despise the things which I appoint; and if they do not
carefully keep my Commandments;

32 Their proud transgressions then besure I Will visit with a rod; and their
perverse iniquity with scourges that shall wound.

33 Nevertheless, my Mercy I will not make void to Him; nor will I falsify
against the Faith I Have given Him.

34 I will not by the breach of it pollute my Covenant; and what is gone out of
my lips, I will not alter it.

35 Once have I by my Holiness taken my solemn Oath; To David I will never lie
(To the Beloved one.)

36 His Offspring shall continue still I to perpetuity; and his Throne shall
before me be I even like unto the Sun.

37 It shall be stablish'd like the Moon to perpetuity; and there is the
faithful Witness, there is the Rainbow, in the sky. Selah.

38 But now thou have rejected and expressed much disdain: And against thy
Anointed One thou have been very wroth.

39 The Covenant of him that was thy Servant have thou nulled; his Crown thou
have profaned by casting it to the ground.

40 Thou have quite broken down all of the things that hedged him; Thou have
brought unto ruin his Holds that were sortify'd.

41 All who do pass along the road do tear and trample him; he is become a vile
reproach unto his neighborhood.

42 Thou have exalted the right hand of them who trouble him; thou have made
them for to rejoice who are his enemies.

43 The whetted edge of his Sword thou have given a turn unto; and in the
Battle thou have not enabled him to stand.

44 His pure and glorious luster, thou have caused that to cease; and
overturning of his Throne: cast it unto the ground.

45 The days of his protected youth thou have diminished; with ignominious
shame thou have quite overwhelmed him. Selah.

46 ETERNAL God, How long will thou conceal thy self? forever? Shall thy
incensed wrath burn like to a devouring Fire?

47 Remember thou, that as for me, how little is my time! Wherefore have thou
created all the sons of Men in vain?

48 What Man shall live, so that he shall never see Death at all? From the hand
of the pit shall he deliver his own Soul? Selah.

49 Thy Ancient loving kindnesses, O Lord, where are they now? Even what thou
in thy truth have swornto David, (the Beloved?)

50 Lord, The reproach of them that are thy People bear in mind; of all the
mighty People I do bear upon my heart.

51 Because that, O ETERNAL God, thy Enemies have reproached for they have
reproached the footsteps of CHRIST, thy Anointed One.

52 May the ETERNAL God be owned as the most blessed One, to an unknown
Eternity; Amen, we say, Amen!

ILLUSTRATIONS on the LXXXIX. PSALM.
BEhold the Prophetic Spirit, propounding the Grounds of Hope, which the Jewish
Nation have u^ their Dispersion; even the sure Promises made unto David,
concerning the Glorious Kingdom of the Messiah, The Throne of David for many
Ages overthrown shall be exalted at the Second Coming of the Messiah, as James
in the Fifteenth Chapter of the Acts, proves from the Prophecies of Amos. And
this is here asked for.

4 The Promise is too Glorious to have a Completion in Solomon, and the other
Kings of Judah. In the Psalm there is a discernible distinction, between, The
Seed of David, and The Sons of David. The Seed is the Messiah. The Sons are the
other Descendents.

5 By the Heavens are meant the Angels, [Compare Job XV. 15. with IV. 18. See
also, Psalm. L. 4, 6.] The Wonder here is that most Wonderful One, the Messiah.
[ Isai. IX. 6.]

7 It Is very surprising that several of the Jewish Rabbi's countenance this
Reading of the Verse; God is Bruised in (or, A Bruised God is in) the Great
Mystery of the Holy Ones. [Compare, Isai. LIII. 4. and 1 Timothy III. 16. and
Wonder!]

12 Tabor and Hermon, is, q. d. West and East.

15 The Joyful Sound of the Trumpet, which called the People unto the Service
of God. [ Numb. X. 10.]

19 It may nextly refer to the Revelation which GOD gave in a Vision unto the
Holy Samuel; [I Sam. XVI.] concerning the Deliverer, which He would raise up
for His People. That Chapter well considered, will give a notable Key to this
whole Context.

25 On the one hand, he was to conquer the Philistines. and those who lived on
the Coast of the Sea, and on the other hand, the Syrians as far as Tygris and
Euphrates.

37 Is not the Faithful Witness in Heaven, the RAINBOW? -- This leads to some
curious tho'ts on the Scriptures, wherein we find the Rainbow mentioned, with
Relation to the Kingdom of our Savior.

51 It was objected unto the Jews, Messiam su^m esse tardigradum: That the
Messiah took but slow Steps in His Coming. But the Word which we render
Footsteps, most properly signifies, the Heel of a Man's Foot, and it is
translated from thence to signify the End of a thing. The Enemy now boasted
that they saw the Kingdom of David on its last Legs; They reproachfully
insulted it, as come to an End. The Truth is, it never was restored unto that
Family until the Coming of our JESUS, the Great Son of David. And unto the
Messiah sundry Passages in the Psalm, are applied by the Jews: in both the
Bereschith; and in other Books: and Aben-Ezra, and R. Solomon consent unto it.

THE FOURTH BOOK OF PSALMS.
PSALM XC. A Prayer of Moses, the Man of God.
1 LORD, Thou have evermore ^o us an Habitation been, from one Age to another
Age, sweetly protecting us.

2 Before the Mountains were brought forth or thou had formed the Earth, and
World, even from Age to Age, Thou art the Mighty God.

3 Thou to destruction do reduce poor miserable Man; and then thou say, O
Children of Adam, Return again.

4 Because a thousand of years, they do appear unto thine eyes but as a
yesterday when past; and but a watch by Night.

5 Thou sweep'st them off as with a Flood; they are like unto a sleep; they are
in the morning like the grass; it is, Oh! how transient

6 It Is in the morning flourishing; but still, how changeable! For in the
Evening it is cut down and then it is withered quite.

7 Because we are utterly consumed by thy most burning wrath; and by thy heated
anger we have fears how troublesome!

8 Thou have set our iniquities before thee in thy view; what we have hidden is
in the light of thy Countenance.

9 Because that in thy wrath all of our days are passed away; we do consume our
years like to a story, told and passed.

10 The days of all our years, in them there are but Seventy years; or if they
are in doubled strength then they are Fourscore years. But yet their power
which is our pride, it is labor and it is pain; because that it is soon cut off,
and so we fly away.

11 Who so considers as to know what power thine anger has? yea, even according
to thy fear, so is thy flaming wrath.

12 For the right numbering of our days To do thou give the skill; and unto
wisdom we shall then apply this heart of ours.

13 Return, O Thou ETERNAL God; How long yet shall it be? And O be thou
appeased for them who are servants unto thee.

14 O satisfy us early with thy kind benignity; so we shall all our days
rejoice and be exceeding glad.

15 According to the days wherein thou have afflicted us, the years wherein we
have seen ill, now do thou make us glad.

16 To them that are thy Servants now O let thy work be seen; thy glory also
unto those that are their Children here.

17 And let the lovely brightness of the Lord who is our God, with a
conspicuous luster be seen shining upon us; And the work of our hands, do thou
establish upon us; yea, the work of our hands do thou firmly establish it.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XC. PSALM.
R. David Kimchi takes the Psalm to be made by the Prophetic Spirit, with an
Eve to the last and long Dispersion, under which the Jewish Nation is now
Languishing. But will the Holy One give that People, as long Time under His
Blessing, as they have had under His Anger? One of the Ancients has a Pious
Fancy here. The Name of Moses is, One drawn from under the Waters. And so, says
he, This is a Psalm especially cut out for all Baptized Persons.

1 Munster thinks, here might be an Eye to the Tabernacle in the Wilderness.
GOD Himself was this, and more than this, and before this was Built, unto His
People.

4 When I read Arnobius here observing, That a Watch is the Fourth part of a
Night, it presently led me to think, how Four Thousand Years passed, and then
arose the Sun of Righteousness unto the World; by whom is to be accomplished
that Resurrection of the Dead which is here waited and groaned for: When He who
turned Man to Destruction, shall say, Return ye Children of Men.

8 Chemnitius, by, our Secret, here, would have Original Sin to be understood;
whereof though the Fruits are evident and notorious, the Root is yet Secret.

9 The Ancients read it, Like a Spider. And such was their Gloss upon, Ut
Aranearum Tela, sic bumana Vita convellitur.

10 Dr. Goodwin observes here, an Allusion to the Condition of a Bird, which
has been hatching its full time. When the time for it arrives, the Shell
breaks, and it flies away. Death is the breaking of the Shell.

11 Unto the common Annotations I will add that of P. Amana; Siquis te timeat,
ira tua ab illo descedit. The Fear of GOD, will deliver us from His Wrath.

12 R. Solomon is mighty nice here; observing that the Letters of the Hebrew
Word, Chen, SO, considered as Numerals, make the Number of Seventy.

16 A CHRIST is here asked for!

17 Dr. Patrick thinks, The Beauty of the Lord, here may mean, the Lovely and
Pleasant Land of Promise. [Compare, Genesis XLIX. 15. Deuteronomy. VIII. 7, 8.]

PSALM XCI.
1 HE who dwells in the secret place of Him who is the most High, under the
shadow he shall lodge of the Almighty One.

2 I Will say to the ETERNAL God, You Are my security, and you are my tower, my
God in whom I place my confidence.

3 Surely He shall deliver thee out of the Fowler's snare; He shall deliver
thee from the malignant pestilence.

4 He with His wings shall cover thee; and thou shall be secure under His
wings; His truth shall be a buckler and a shield.

5 Of what is the terror of the night thou shall not be afraid; nor of the arrow
which by day does make a sinister flight.

6 Not of the pestilence which does in darkness take its walk, nor of such a
destruction as does at the noonday waste.

7 A thousand at thy side shall fall and close at thy right hand shall fall ten
thousand; unto thee it sha'n't come nigh at all.

8 Thou only shall considerately behold it with thine eyes; and thou shall see
the recompense dispensed to wicked men.

9 Because Thou, O ETERNAL God art my security. So have thou gone to the most
High as to thy dwelling place.

10 There shall not any evil thing happen to thee at all: nor shall there any
plague near to thy habitation come.

11 For He shall to His Angels give a charge concerning thee; that they in all
thy ways may have thee in their custody.

12 They like to tender nurses shall in both hands carry thee; lest that thou
should dash thy foot against some hurtful stone.

13 Thou shall victorious tread on the black serpent and the asp; the dragon
and great dragon thou shall trample underfoot.

14 Because he has so loved me, therefore I Will rescue him; because that he
has known my Name, I will set him on high.

15 On me he will call; and Him I Will hear; when he is in trouble, then I Will be
with him; I Will rescue him, and I will honor him.

16 I Will fully satisfy him with extended length of days; when upon my Salvation
shall cause him for to look.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XCI. PSALM.
SAtan himself owned the Psalm to refer to the Messiah. From the Eleventh Verse
in the Psalm the Jews fetch their Maxim, That the Messiah shall be greater than
any of the M^nistring Angels. Our Savior gave to His Apostles the Powers here
mentioned, over Serpents. The last Verse refers plainly to the Resurrection.
Dr. Patrick thinks the Psalm to have been Penned at the time of the Great
Pestilence toward the End of David's Reign. But then by Gad rather than David.

6 Dr. Patrick understands, Malignant Fevers which rage in the hottest Season
of the Year.

7 Jewish Critics observe, That Side or Hand mentioned without any Addition,
still means, The Left.

12 An Allusion to the Care which a Nurse has of a Child. O Gracious and
Wondrous!

13 Bochart will maintain our Translation; which admits none but Serpents into
the whole Speech of the Psalmist.

14 These are the Words of the Glorious GOD unto His Angels, when He gives them
their Commission to look after His Faithful Servants.

PSALM XCII. A Psalm. A Song for the Sabbath Day.
1 IT IS a good thing to celebrate with Praise the ETERNAL God; and to Sing
Praise unto thy Name, O Thou that art most high.

2 In every Morning to declare Thy kind Benignity, and in the darkness of the
Nights declare thy faithfulness.

3 Upon an Instrument that has Ten strings to furnish it; and on the Psaltery;
and with a Song upon the Harp.

4 For, O ETERNAL God, Thou in Thy Work, have made me glad; In the works of thy
Hands I do make my triumphant songs.

5 O Thou ETERNAL God, Thy works, how very great are they! Thy exquisite
Contrivances, how very deep are they!

6 A Man grown stupid like a Brute, is one who does not know; and he that is a
fool does not well understand this Thing.

7 When like the Herb, the Wicked flower, and all the Workers of what is evil,
flourish; it is that they may be destroyed forever.

8 But Thou who art the ETERNAL God, [JEHOVAH is Thy Name?] shall be exalted
very High to all Eternity.

9 For, lo Thy Foes, ETERNAL God, For, lo, Thy hateful Foes shall perish, and
all Workers of Evil shall be destroyed.

10 But thou will like unto the Reems exalt my horn on high; and I shall be
anointed with a very grateful oil.

11 My Eyes shall also look with thought upon my enemies; my ears shall hear of
wicked men that rise to do me hurt.

12 The righteous one shall flourish as the Palm Tree use to do; he shall grow
like the Cedar-Tree that is in Lebanon.

13 They who are planted in the House of the ETERNAL God; these shall still
flourish in the Courts of Him that is our God.

14 They even in old age shall still be yiedling of their Fruit; they shall
continue in good case, and keep their verdure still.

15 All this to show the equity of the ETERNAL God; He is my rock and there is
no iniquity in Him.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XCII. PSALM.
THe Old Rabbis have a Notable Passage; That the Psalm relates to the World to
come, and the Age wherein the People of God shall enjoy an entire Sabbath,
which will be, the days of the Messiah.

The Truth is, we have here, as Dr. Allix observes, a prophecy of the Happiness
to be enjoyed by the Jewish Nation in the Great Sabbath, whereof the Apostle
speaks to the Hebrews. GOD promises here, to give them the Messiah for their
King, after the Destruction of the Antichristian Powers. Compare the fourteenth
verse, with Isa. LXV. 20. Probably David might write the Psalm, after the Lord
had given him such Rest round about from all his Enemies, that he concluded he
should be able to subdue those who should hereafter venture to oppose him.

10 Onicorns are a Fabulous Animal; we'll keep the Hebrew Name o Reems, until
we are better agreed about the true English of it; which Bochart will have to
be the Arabian Wild-goats.

12 Hugo Victorinus has this Gloss; -- He performs in the End more than he
promised in the Beginning. As the Palm has a small Root, but the Top is very
great and large.

PSALM XCIII.
1 THe ETERNAL God is now the King; High Glory He puts on; The ETERNAL God does
now put on a mighty fortitude. He girds Himself, ready to act; The habitable
World is likewise so established, that it shall be moved no more.

2 Thy Throne, it is established from -- who can tell the term? Thou art still
what thou art from an unknown Eternity.

3 The floods lift up, ETERNAL God, the floods lift up their voice; the floods
have lifted up on high their hideous dashing noise.

4 The ETERNAL God, who is on high, is mightier than the noise of many waters,
mightier than mighty waves of the Sea.

5 Thy testimonies unto us are very faithful ones; Holiness does adorn thy
house, ETERNAL God forever.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XCIII. PSALM.
ONe observes, the Psalm is an Hymn, wherein the Reign of the Messiah, as being
the true JEHOVAH, is described; After the destruction of the Beast which sits
upon the great Waters. In the last Verse. The Restoration of the Jewish Nation
is mentioned, as an Act established by many Witnesses.

Was not the Psalm composed, when some of those Enemies, began to take heart
again, and threaten a Disturbance to the Tranquillity of David's Kingdom, to
which he was confident, in the foregoing Psalm, they could never give an
overthrow? Dr. Patrick who makes this conjecture, yet adds, That the Psalm
ought in a more sublime sense to be applied unto the stability of our Savior's
Kingdom. The Jews themselves do acknowledge this matter, to be prophesied in
this, and all the Psalms that follow, unto the Hundredth.

5 Kimchi carries this to the Days of the Messiah, when (as he renders it) The
Holiness of God's House will be desirable. He expounds it from, Isa. II. 2.
That all People will then desire to go into the House of God; yea, all in the
House will desire to be Holy; yea, all will desire to be Holy like that House.

But then the Testimonies of GOD will be found certain. All that GOD has
praedicted and promised concerning His House, will be accomplished.

PSALM XCIV.
1 O Thou ETERNAL God, The God to whom revenge belongs; Shine forth
conspicuously, O God to whom revenge belongs.

2 O thou Judge of the Earth, Do thou exalt thy self on high: a retribution
render thou unto the haughty ones.

3 O Thou ETERNAL God, How long shall very impious ones; How long shall very
impious ones make their triumphant boast?

4 How long shall they still belching out, talk what is very hard? How long
shall all they boast themselves that work iniquity?

5 Thy People, O ETERNAL God, they break to pieces quite; and they unto thine
heritage humbling affliction cause.

6 The Widow and the Stranger, these with slaughter they destroy; and them that
are the Fatherless they murder barbarously,

7 And this is that which they have said, JAH will not see at all; nor will the
God of Jacob take a cognizance of it.

8 O ye most brutish ones among the People, understand; But O ye foolish ones,
when comes the time that you will be wise?

9 He who with skill did plant the Ear, think you, that He Will not hear? It it
is He that formed the Eye, think you, that He Will not see?

10 He that instructs the Nations, What? shall He not argue right? It Is He who
does communicate all knowledge unto Man.

11 But the ETERNAL God does know the thot's of earthly Man; He knows, that
they are nothing but mere foolish vanity.

12 O blessed the Man, whom thou, O JAH, with chast'ning do instruct; and
do out of thy law bestow a teaching upon him!

13 That thou from days of evil may afford a rest to him; whilst that a pit
is dug for him that is the wicked Man.

14 For the ETERNAL God will not cast His own People off; neither will He
forsake what is His own inheritance.

15 But judgment shall anon return even to righteousness; and all that are
upright in he ^t shall follow after it.

16 Who will rise up for me against them who do evil things? Who will stand up
for me against workers of vanity?

17 Unless that the ETERNAL God bad given help to me, my Soul had quickly dwelt
in the sad silence of the Grave.

18 When I did say within my self, My foot is on the slip, thy mercy, O ETERNAL
God, was what sustained me.

19 When I Have a multitude of tho'ts, mixed in the midst of me, then do thy
comforts make my Soul glad with repeted joys.

20 Shall the Throne of things tyrannous have fellowship with thee? That which
enacts into a Law what is a mischeivous wrong?

21 They raise their troops against the Soul of every righteous one; and they
condemn to death the blood of him that is innocent.

22 But the ETERNAL God becomes the tower for my defense; and He that is my God
becomes the Rock in which I trust.

23 And He Will to them repay their wrong, yea, He will cut them off in their
crime; the ETERNAL God, our God will cut them off.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XCIV. PSALM.
IT IS a Prayer both for the Christian Church and the Synagogue; equally
oppressed by the Antichristian Party; whose Thr^ne, whose Titles, whose
Judgments, mentioned in the Prophecies, are found most expressly in the Psalm
now before us.

9 The Eye of Animals, especially of Man, is a piece of such astonishing
Workmanship, that it is impossible for any but a most bruitify'd wretch, to
behold it without an Acknowledgment of a Glorious and Infinite GOD. Sturmius's
Exercitation, De Visus Organo, makes this just Remark; Nobis fuit persuaj
ssimum, Atheismunt quem vocant, speculativum, baber^ locum ant invenire non
posse, in co bomine qui oculi fabricam atten^o animo inspexerit. The Philosophy
of the Ear, would make the same Remark.

10 He that has taught all Nations His Will (or the Difference between the Good
and Evil) shall not He correct them, when they transgress it? Kimchi thinks it
refers to, Ultiones Dei insigmores, the more signal Judgments of GOD sometimes
executed among the Nations; as the Fate of Sedom, and the like.

19 The Quadrate form of the Hebrew Word used here for, make glad, leads to
this Translation.

PSALM XCV.
1 O Come, and let us sing with joy to the ETERNAL God; O jubilate unto the
Rock whence our Salvation comes.

2 Quickly let us before His face, with due confession come; and make with
Psalms to Him the praise of a glad Jubilee.

3 For the ETERNAL God, He is a God who is very great; and He is a great
Sovereign, placed above all the God's.

4 He it is in whose hand are the deep recesses of the Earth; the weary tops of
mountains too do all belong to Him.

5 He it is to whom the Sea belongs; for He created it; His hands were also
those that formed the Earth now dried from it.

6 O come, let us prostrate our selves, and let us humbly bow; before the
ETERNAL God who is our Maker, let us kneel.

7 For He Is our God, and we of His Pasture the People are, and the Sheep of His
hands; if ye will hear His voice to day.

8 O harden not your hearts, as they in the Contention did; as in the desert on
the day of the Temptation there.

9 The day, wherein your Fathers did tempt me so sinfully: A trial they did
make of me, and they beheld my work.

10 I Forty years was grieved with this race of Men, and said; The People, they
wander in heart, and have not known my ways.

11 For this cause I have made an Oath in my incensed wrath, That they by no
means ever shall enter into my Rest.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XCV. PSALM.
OUR Apostle, Heb. IV. 1. shows us that the Psalm is an Exhortation unto the
lsraelites, to prepare for the receiving of the Messiah, who is to bring their
Nation into the happiness of the great Sabbatism.

4 Are not the Deep Mines of Silver and Gold in the Bowels of the Earth,
particularly referred unto? One of the Ancients adds a good Note, Quae in mann
Dei sunt, sine Deo nequeunt obtineri.

9 They doubted, and they demanded new Proofs, though they had already seen
such wonderful Works of GOD.

PSALM XCVI.
1 O Sing to the ETERNAL God a Song that shall be new; O sing to the ETERNAL
God, All that are on the Earth.

2 O sing to the ETERNAL God: to His Name bow the knee; Evangelize from day to
day of His Salvation still.

3 Of His bright Glory an account unto the Nations give; among all People give
account of His most wondrous works.

4 For the ETERNAL God is great, and greatly to be praised; He above all the
Gods is to be had in reverence.

5 For Idols vain are all the gods the People do adore; But the ETERNAL God is
He who did create the Heavens.

6 Before His face is to be seen Honor and Majesty; and in His sanctuary are
strength and a diadem.

7 O Families of Peoples, Bring to the ETERNAL God; Bring ye to the ETERNAL God
glory and fortitude.

8 Bring ye to the ETERNAL God the glory of His Name; present ye an oblation,
and so come into His Courts.

9 Worship the ETERNAL God in the beauty of holiness; tremble before His face,
O all ye dwellers on the Earth.

10 Proclaim this very thing abroadamong the Nations all; That the ETERNAL One
does sit a King upon His Throne. The World shall be now stablished; it shall
not be removed; He Will judge the People with the things that are forever right.

11 O let the Heavens now rejoice, and let the Earth be glad; Let the Sea lift
it is roaring voice, and what it is filled withal.

12 Let the Field have triumphant joy, and all that is therein; Then the Trees
of the wood shall allmake a loud shout for joy.

13 Let them do this before the face of the ETERNAL God; Because He comes;
because He comes that He may judge the Earth. The habitable World He will now
judge in righteousness; and He will judge the Poople in His steady
faithfulness.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XCVI. PSALM.
BEhold, the Praises of GOD, that are to be Sung by the Jewish Nation, at the
Second, Coming of the Messiah. They invite all Nations that survive the
Judgments on the Antichristian Powers, to acknowlede Him for their GOD, and
reject the Idolatries they have hitherto practiced.

1 Several of the Jews themselves, own that this belongs to the Times of the
Messiah. We ought certainly to have Him in our Minds, when we Sing a New Song,
for the New Grace in Him granted to us.

12 Why? The Earth is to be restored unto a Paradisaic State, at the Coming of
the Lord.

By the Heavens here called upon, to rejoice, may we not understand the Angels?
By the Earth, all Mankind which are dispersed on the Earth.

By the Sea, the Mariners and Passengers in Ships, and the Inhabitants of the
Islands.

By the Fields, the Husbandmen and Shepherds, who dwell in the Fields.

By the Trees of the Wood, the Woodmen and Foresters, who are with joy to see
the happy Day approaching when all the Idols that are Worshipped there, shall
be thrown down, together with their Groves.

PSALM XCVII.
1 NOW the ETERNAL God does reign, O let the Earth rejoice; and let the many
Isles thereof shine with a cheerful joy.

2 A cloud and a dense darkness does encompass Him about; Justice and Judgment
are the firm foundation of His Throne.

3 Fire goes before His face and burns all round His Enemies;

4 His lightnings fill the World with light; the Earth sees it and shakes.

5 Like melting wax the mountains are dissolved before the face of the ETERNAL
God; before the Lord of all the Earth.

6 O let the Heavens now declare abroad His righteousness; and of His radiant
glory let all People have a view.

7 Confusion be to all those who serve graven Images; who do in Idols boast
themselves. Worship Him all ye God's!

8 Zion heard and was bright with joy: and Judah's daughters were for the sake
of thy Judgments glad, O thou ETERNAL God.

9 For, O ETERNAL God, Thou art High above all the Earth; Thou art exalted very
high; High above all the Gods.

10 O ye who love the ETERNAL God, Hate ill; He keeps the Souls of all His
gracious ones; He saves them from the wickeds hand.

11 There Is for the righteous one a light sown as an hidden seed; and for them
who are upright in heart there is a joy reserved.

12 You that are righteous ones, Rejoice in the ETERNAL God; and when you do
commemorate His Holy One, give thanks.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XCVII. PSALM.
THE Psalm is of the same Design with the foregoing. It insults the New
Idolaters, the Antichristian ones, with the Coming of the Messiah who is to
condemn them. It represents the Joy which His Coming, will give unto the People
of GOD, and unto the Jewish Nation in particular. Was not the Psalm written, on
some Conquests made by David, after the Ark was brought to Zion: when the
foregoing Hymn was made, in hope of the great things to ensue? In subduing
these, GOD might fight for His People, with some such Tempest as that, 2 Samuel
V. 20, 21, 24.

1 Mr. M^strezat observes, That since the Isles are the Gentiles; the Reign
here must be a Reign of Grace, and favorable to them. In such Expressions as
imply a Reign of Grace, the Lord who Reigns must be the Messiah. Our Apostle
Paul might well apply the Psalm to Him!

5 Masius notes, that Adonai, is a Name on Illustrious Accounts peculiar to the
Son of GOD.

6 -- A dreadful Tempest, managed by Angelical Ministers, declares the just
severity of GOD against His Enemies.

11 Some Jewish Rabbi's, by this Light understand the Messiah. As they do, Dan.
II. 22. Psalm. XXXVI. 10. -- But, O Christian, all the Felicity thou hopest for,
must lie for a while concealed, as under the Clods, with a Sentence of Death
upon it.

PSALM XCVIII. A Psalm.
1 TO the ETERNAL God, O sing a new Song; for He has done wonders; His right
hand has Him helped, and His holy Arm.

2 The ETERNAL God has caused His Salvation to be known; In the eyes of the
Nations He has shown His righteousness.

3 He minds His mercy and His truth to the house of Israel; All the ends of the
Earth, they have our God's Salvation seen.

4 O Jubilate now all the Earth to the ETERNAL God; O raise your voice, and
sing aloud, and celebrate with Psalms.

5 O sing to the ETERNAL God, with a well-tuned harp; Do it with a ten-stringed
harp, and the voice of the Psalm.

6 With trumpets which assemble troops, and with the sound of horn, O Jubilate
before the King who is the ETERNAL God.

7 Let the Sea make its thundering noise, and that which fills it; so let the
habitable World and its inhabitants.

8 Let the floods clap their hands for joy with acclamations loud; Together
with them also let the mountains make their shouts.

9 Let them do this before the face of the ETERNAL God; because that He is
coming forth that He may judge the Earth. The habitable World He will now judge
in righteousness; and He will judge the People with things most exactly right.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XCVIII. PSALM.
A New Song; To be Sung at the Second Coming of the Messiah. Compare the First
Verse of the Psalm with Isai. XII. 5. -- which by the way, invincibly shows,
That the Messiah is GOD. It foretells the Recalling of the Jews,; and Exhorts
all Nations to acknowledge the Messiah as GOD. The Judgments on the
Antichristian Powers, must be before the Happiness of the Jews, and the
Conversion of the other Nations.

PSALM XCIX.
1 THE ETERNAL God now reigns as King; O let the People quake; He sits between
the Cherubim; O let the Earth be moved;

2 In Zion the ETERNAL God is greatly magnified; and above all the Peoples He
is now advanced on high.

3 O let them celebrate thy Name with due co^^essions now; It Is great, and it
is terrible; and holy too it is.

4 The King's strength also judgment loves; right things thou do prepare; In
Jacob thou do execute judgment and righteousness.

5 Exalt ye the ETERNAL God, even Him who is our God; and at His footstool
worship ye; He is the holy One.

6 Moses and Aaron eminent among His Ministers; and Samuel eminent among them
that call on His Name. These did their invocation make on the ETERNAL God; and
He then granted unto them a gracious audience.

7 He in the pillar of the cloud gave Oracles to them; they kept His
testimonies, and the Law He gave to them.

8 Thou heard'st them, O ETERNAL God, our God; Thou wast a God that spared
them; and thou did revenge the things designed at them.

9 Exalt the ETERNAL God, our God; and at His holy hill Worship; for the
ETERNAL God, Our God's the Holy One.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the XCIX. PSALM.
THE Psalm is Calculated for the Coming and Kingdom of the Messiah; when His
Throne shall be in Zion; and the Jews have new Tokens of His Presence among
them.

1 The Patrician Paraphrase is; Though the whole Earth should be in an uproar, we
are safe and secure; for the Lord is attended with Innumerable Heavenly
Ministers, who are a Guard unto His Faithful Wo^shippers.

5 The Ark was peculiarly ^he Footstool of the Lord. But the Ark was also a
Type of our Savior Ambrose and Austin found this Fo^tstool in the Fle^^ of our
Savior.

6 Drusius notes, That the Particle, Among, ofter intimates one very Eminent
and Exernious among those that are spoken of.

8 Patricks Paraphrase is this; When they Pray^^ unto Thee, Thou did fulfill
their Petitions, passing by for them sakes, the Sins of those who contemned the
Authority, and were contriving how to depose them [ Numb. XII. 2, 9, 10. XVI.
3, 31, 32. 1 Samuel VIII. 7, 8, 9.]

PSALM C.
1 NOw unto the ETERNAL God make you the joyful shouts which are heard in a
Jubilee, all ye who dwell on Earth.

2 Yield service with a shining joy to the ETERNAL God; with joyful
acclamations come ye in before His face.

3 Know, That the ETERNAL God, He Is God; He made us, and we are His; we are His
People, and we are the Sheep which He does feed.

4 With due confessions enter ye His gates, His courts with Praise; make due
confessions unto Him; speak ye well of His Name.

5 For the ETERNAL God is good; His mercy is for ever; And unto Generations
does His faithfulness endure.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the C. PSALM.
HAve we not here, an Exhortation o^ the returned Jews unto all People, that
they should acknowleage their SAVIOR, as their GOD and Creator, cons^^er^ng
how faithful He has been in His Promises, and what great Wonders He has
performed, for the sake of His People? The Jews have a Report that the Psalm
was appointed peculiarly to be Sung, when their Sacrifices of Thanksgiving
[Lov. VII. 12, 13.] were to be offered. The Levites called, The Companies of
them who gave Thanks unto GOD. [Neh. XII. 31, 38.] were the Singers of it.

3 The Word implies, Advancing, Preferring, Raising them, as a People, to be
such a People as they were; a great and a mighty Nation.

PSALM CI. A Psalm of David.
1 OF Mercy and of Judgment both I will now make my Song; Unto Thee, O ETERNAL
God, I will now sing a Psalm.

2 I Will in a perfect way be wise; When will thou come to me? In the midst of my
house I will walk with a perfect heart.

3 I will not set before mine eyes a thing of Belial; I hate the work of
wanderers: it shall not cleave to me.

4 An heart that is perversely bent, it shall depart from me; and I will take
no notice of one that is a wicked man.

5 I^ll cut off him that slandereth his neighbor secretly; One high in looks
and proud in heart, I will not bear with him.

6 I Will eye the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me; He that
walks in a perfect way, He Will be my Officer.

7 In the midst of my house none shall dwell, who does work deceit: before my
eyes established none shall be who tells lies.

8 I as the mornings do recur, with close confinement will destroy all of the
wicked ones that are upon the Earth. And this, that from the City of Him who is
the ETERNAL God, I may extirminate all them who work iniquity.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CI. PSALM.
DAvid on the Death of Saul, was immediately promoted unto the Kingdom. However
he had not yet the entire Kingdom. In the mean time he resolved with himself
how well he would govern when GOD should make him King over all Israel as well
as Judah.

But indeed, We have here the Character of those who are to be admitted among
the Subjects of the Messiah in His glorious Kingdom; and the manner wherein He
will curt off them who pretending to acknowledge His Laws, have overthrown all
Righteousness in the World.

1 In these Two Things, Mercy and Judgment, does consist really, Totae Vitae
Integritas: especially the Integrity of an Officer.

Austin makes a Remark on the Order of the Words; first, Mercy, then Judgment.
Now and Here, the former; Anon the Latter. Par Tempor a distinguinuis haec duo.

2 Arnobiu, has a fire Thought here. A Saint will be an Almagiver. He will
understand when a CHRIST comes to him, in the Person of a distressed Brother.

8 Early.] Munsters gloss is, Before others are corrupted with them.

Athanasins has a Note of Piety here, which though it be not the Sense of the
Place, is worth our thinking on.

As the Morning is the Beginning of the Day, so, the Beginning of our Sin is in
the fraudulent ^uggestion of our Enemy the Devil. To Destroy the Wicked in the
Morning is to Observe and Defeat the Devil, in the Beginning of his
Temptations. The Soul of Man is the City of the Lord. We should betimes destroy
the Designs of the wicked, therein, by an Early Mortification bestowed upon
them.

PSALM CII. A Prayer of the Afflicted when that be is over whelmed, and pours
out his sad Complaint before the ETERNAL God.
1 O Thou ETERNAL God, Do Thou my Supplication hear; and my loud Cry made in
Distress, let it arrive to Thee,

2 In the Day of my Trouble, Oh! Hide not thy Face from me; Bow thine Ear to
me, in the Day I call, soon answer me.

3 For as the Smoke does pass away so are my Days consumed; and as the Wood
laid on the Hearth my Bones are burned up.

4 My Heart is smitten like the Grass, and it is withered up; Insomuch that I
do forget to eat my daily Bread.

5 By reason of the Voice that is by my sad Groaning made; my bones do
evidently cleave unto my wasted skin.

6 I am made like the Pelican that is in the Wilderness; I am like to the
Bitten^ which affects Solitudes.

7 I pass the weary Nights without enjoying any Sleep; and like the Sparrow am
on the top of the House alone.

8 My Enemies do cast on me Reproaches every Day; they that are mad against me
do form cursing Oaths from me.

9 For truly, as, * and in my Bread Ashes is what I eat; and my Drink I have
mingled with the Tears that I have shed.

10 From the view of thy Anger it is, and of thy boiling Wrath; Because that
thou have lift me up, and cast me down again.

11 My days are like a shadow which is now on the Decline; and like unto a
parched Herb, even so I withered am.

12 But, O ETERNAL God, Thou do endure forevermore; and thy Remembrance from
one Age unto another Age.

13 Thou will arise, and now thou will to Zion mercy show, because the time to
favor her, yea, the set Time is come.

14 Inasmuch as thy Servants do take wondrous pleasure in the Stones thereof,
and they are kind unto the dust thereof.

15 So the Name of the ETERNAL God the Nations now will fear; and thy
conspicuous glory all the Kings upon the Earth.

16 When the ETERNAL God shall build the Zion that is fallen, He shall most
visibly appear, in His bright Glory [ there.

17 He will have a respect to the Prayer of the humble shrub; and on their
Supplications He will not cast a contempt.

18 This shall be written for the Age hereafter to come on; A People yet for to
be formed shall also Praise the Lord.

19 For He has looked down from the height of His Holiness; From Heaven the
ETERNAL God, exactly views the Earth.

20 It is that He may hear the groan of him that lies in bonds; that He may set
at liberty such as are sons of death.

21 In Zion to declare the Name of the ETERNAL God; and to declare His glorious
Praise in both Jerusalems.

22 When that united Peoples shall their Congregations form; and Kingdoms do
agree to serve Him who is the ETERNAL God.

23 But in the midst of the way unto these Glorious Things, He sorely has
afflicted me; He has cut off my days.

24 I said, my God, Take me not up in the midst of my days; Thy Years a
Generation to, yea, Generations last.

25 In the beginning thou have laid Foundations for the Earth; the Heavens also
of thy hands are the rare Workmanship.

26 They I perish, but thou shall endure; yea, like a garment they shall all
wax old; Thou Wilt change them as a robe, and they will be changed.

27 But as for Thee, Thou ever do continue what thou art; and thy years, they
are such as will not ever be consumed.

28 The Children of thy Servants shall have a fixed dwelling place; and their
Offspring before thy face shall be established.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CII. PSALM.
WAS not the Writer of the Psalm, Daniel the Prophet, who in the approaches of
a Great Revolution, and the Deliverance of the Church from the Babylonish
Captivity, spent Three Sevens of Days, in Secret Prayer, with Fasting before
the Lord? But, methinks, the Prophetic Spirit here expresses Prayers and Groans
for the Jewish Nation, in their Dispersion, and in the approach of their
Deliverance.

3 The Patrician Paraphrase is well; 'My Days are 'spent as dismally, as it I
lived and breathed in Smoke.

7 Bochart will maintain my Version for the Names of the Birds.

8 It may be read, Sworn upon me. Munster's Gloss is; When they bestowed a
Curse on any one, they wished him, As miserable as a Jew.

10 Lifted up in Glorious Hopes. [Fzra. I. 5. II. 68. III. 10.] And then cast
down; all dashed again. [Ezra. IV. 4, 24.]

14 Arnobius takes the Stones of Zion, to be the Books of the Scripture, and
the Dust, the Dead Saints who have suffered greatly for the Cause of GOD.
Besure, the scattered Stones of Zion liberally taken, were more dear to the
Pious Worshippers, than the goodliest Palaces in Babylon.

23 Some think, it refers to the Afflictions the Jews met withal, in the midst
of their Building.

PSALM CIII. Of David.
1 O My awakened Soul, Do thou Bless [always] the ETERNAL God; and all my
inward powers the Name of His pure [spotless] holiness.

2 O my awakened Soul, Do thou Bless [always] the ETERNAL God; and O forget not
any one of all His [precious] benefits.

3 It Is He who gives a pardon to all thy [most vile] iniquities; It Is He who
gives an healing to all thy [most sad] infirmities.

4 It Is He who does redeem thy Life from the [dark Grave's] corrupting pit;
It Is He who thee with Mercy does and with [tender] compassions crown.

5 It Is He who with the thing that is good does satisfy thy [craving] mouth; thy
Youth it is renewed; Then like the [soaring] Eagle shall thou be.

6 The ETERNAL God is ever One who does most righteous things [to all;] and
Judgments He does execute for all [that are] oppressed ones.

7 A revelation of His ways He did to [Holy] Moses make; and He revealed His
works unto the [happy] sons of Israel.

8 The ETERNAL God is merciful; and [He is] full of clemency; to anger slow,
but plenteous [He is] in all be^ignity.

9 He will not dispense rebukes in wrath to [lasting] perpetuity; He will not have
it in reserve unto [Endless] Eternity.

10 His dealings have not been with us according to our [horrid] Sins; nor has
He recompensed us according to our [heinous] crimes.

11 Because that as the Heavens are in height [rais'd up] above the Earth, so
upon them that fear Him does His [matchless] mercy ever come.

12 Even as far as is the East [remov'd] in distance from the West, our
trespasses He makes to be distant so [very] far from us.

13 At the rate that a Father to Children is [very] pitiful, the ETERNAL God,
for them who do fear Him has [yearning] pity too.

14 For He is well acquainted with the [feeble] frame wherein we are made, He
very well remembers this, that we are very [sorry] dust.

15 For soon-forgotten Man, his days are like unto the [fading] grass; As the
flower that is in the field, so it is He flourishes [a while.]

16 For the wind passes over it, and ^^^sently [at once] it is gone; and in the
place where once it stood, it will be [seen and] known no more.

17 But the m^st kind benignity of [Him who's] the ETERNAL God, is from unknown
Eternity [lasting] even to Eternity; Upon such as do exercise a [real] constant
fear of Him; and unto Childrens Children is His [faithful] constant
right'ousness.

18 It Is meant, to such as faithfully do keep His [Holy] Covenant, and to those
who His Precepts mind, that they may do the things [requir'd.]

19 His Throne has the ETERNAL God [fir'd and] prepared in the Heavens; His
Kingdom also over all extends its [Righteous] Government.

20 O ye His A^gels, vast in strength, Bless ye [and Draise] the ETERNAL God;
who do His word, that so the voice of His word may be [duly] heard.

21 O Bless ye the ETERNAL God, All ye His Marsha^d [Numerous] Hosts; ye
Min^sters who execute His Will [when 'tis] made known to you.

22 Bless ye the ETERNAL God, O all His works [that are] in places all of His
Dominion; O my Soul, Bless thou [and praise] the ETERNAL God.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CIII. PSALM.
BEhold now, the Jewish Nation returned, and received into the Favor of GOD,
and Exhorting, all Creatures to celebrate the Miracles of His Power and of His
Goodness.

2 In the Midrash Tillin, there is an out-of-the-way Observation, That the
Psalmist calls on himself to Bless the Lord, no less than Five Times over:
which answers not only to the Five Books of the Law: but also to the Five Ages
through which Man is to pass. First, Fl^^ Condition in His Mothers Womb.
Secondly, His Condition at his Mothers Breast. Thirdly, His Condition while
passing through the Changes of this World. Fourthly, His Condition in the
presence of GOD after Death, Fifthly, His Condition after the Resurrection in
the World to come.

5 The Blessings of the Resurrection from the Dead, are here celebrated. That
Clause, He redeems thy Life from destruction, evidently points unto it. Now
it is one of the Promises, concerning the Blessings of the Resurrection, Isa.
XL. 31. They shall mount up with wings as Eagles, which the Jews admirably
apply to the Bodies raised from the Dead. In this Passage which has hitherto
been read, Thy Youth is renewed like the Eagles; there are Two Clauses couched
according to the short Hebrew way of expressing things; First; Thou shall renew
thy Youth; which Bochart proves to be the true Reading; A thing to be done in
the best sense imaginable, at the Resurrection. And then, Thou shall be like
the Eagles. The mavelous Flight and Strength of the Resurrection-Bodies, is
excellently set forth by that Comparison. The Vulgar Tradition of the Eagle
renewing his Youth is not countenanced here.

14 By, our Frame here, the Jewish Rabbi's understand the Iatzar Harang, the
Figmentum malum, the Evil Frame, which we call Original Sin; whereof we read,
Genesis VIII. 21. The imagination of the Heart of Man is evil from his Youth. The
same which they call, The Poison of the Old Serpent. And The Enemy, whereof we
so often read in the Sacred Oracles. And, The Heart of Stone.

17 Let not the Gloss be so received, as to prejudice the Regards due to the
Rightiousness of GOD, illustriously displayed in showing Favor to us for the
Righteousness of our SAVIOR. But yet, it may be allowed and observed, That
Righteousness is a Term sometimes used for Benignity. Thus, A Rain of
Righteousness, is a Bountiful Rain. And our Drusius would have, The Sun of
Righteousness to be a Sun that bountifully and liberally imparts Light and Heat
unto the World.

PSALM CIV.
1 MY Soul, Bless thou the ETERNAL God; ETERNAL God, my God, You Are very
great, You Are clothed with Honor and Majesty.

2 As with a Garment on Him He covers Himself with Light; He does extend the
Heavens like a curtain round about.

3 He on the Waters lays the beams of's chambers; He does make the Clouds His
chariot; He does walk on the wings of the wind.

4 He does make Spirits for to be Angels sent forth by Him, and He a flaming
fire does make to be His Ministers.

5 Upon the Bases for it He has founded well the Earth; so that it shall not be
removed; no, not from Age to Age.

6 As with a Garment thou did hide it with the vast abyss; At first above the
mountains did the waters take their place.

7 But then they fled away at thy most forcible rebuke; at the voice of thy
thus der they made haste to get away.

8 The mountains, they make their ascent; the valleys, they descend: All still
unto the proper place, Thou'st founded this for them.

9 Thou have determined a Bound the which they shall not pass; that so they
may not return again to overwhelm the Earth.

10 Into the valleys He sends forth Waters that flow from springs; which do
among the mountains take their never-ceasing walk

11 They do bestow their drink on all the beasts that range the field; There
the will asses, though so wild and stupid, quench their thirst

12 By these the fowls of Heaven havetheir habitation made; among the branches
here they do give a melodious voice.

13 He from His chambers does distill waters upon the hills; from the fruit of
thy works the Earth is fully satisfied.

14 He for the Beasts makes grass to grow; and for the use of Man He grants
herb, that so He may fetch food out of the Earth.

15 Even wine that chears the heart of Man, that so his face may shine with
oil; and bread which does give strength unto the heart of Man.

16 The trees of the ETERNAL God, these do abound with sap; the cedars of the
Lebanon which He has planted there.

17 That so the little Birds may there build and enjoy their nests; The Stork
particularly has the fir-trees for her house.

18 The mountains of a stately height for the Wild-Goats are these;the rocks,
these are a refuge wherethe Rock-rats lodge themselves.

19 He formed the Moon that so it might determine stated times; The Sun is well
acquainted with the time of g^ing down.

20 The darkness thou did constitute, and then the Night arrives; all the
wild-creatures of the wood do creep abroad in it.

21 That so they may come at their prey then the young Lions roar; that so they
may by seeking find their sustenance from God.

22 The Sun does rise; on this they dogather themselves together; and then they
to their dens repair there to lay down themselves.

23 Man being so secure from these, goes forth unto his work; and to his usual
husbandry, until the Evening come.

24 Thy works, O Thou ETERNAL God, how are they multiplied? In wisdom have thou
made them all; The Earth's with thy riches filled.

25 This great and spreading Sea is s^;the swimming things are there; And
there is no number; living things both small and great are there.

26 There it is the Ships do steer their course. There Is that Levia than: him
thou have formed that so he may enjoy his sport therein.

25 All of these things on thee alonehave, their dependence still, that so thou
in due season may afford their food to them.

28 It Is what thou do afford to them, that they do gather up; Thy hand thou
open'st, so they are then satisfied with good.

29 Thou hid'st thy face, they are troubled then;Their spirit thou withdraw'st;
they die, and so they do return to their Original dust.

30 Thou will send forth thy spirit; they created are anew; and thou to the
face of the Earth, wilt a renewal give.

31 The Glory of the ETERNAL God, it shall endure forever; The joy of the
ETERNAL God will be in all his works.

32 He does look down upon the Earth; it falls a trembling then: He to the
mountains gives a touch, and presently they smoke,

33 I Will sing to the ETERNAL God as long as I do live; while I have any being I
will sing unto my God.

34 My meditation upon Him, it shall be very sweet; In the ETERNAL God I will
with a bright joy be glad.

35 From Earth let Sinners be consumed and the impious be no more; My Soul,
Bless thou the ETERNAL God. Sing HALLELU-JAH now.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CIV. PSALM.
THE Works of Creation and Providence are here celebrated; and the Destruction
of the Wicked, who have corrupted the use of these Works, is denounced. This,
as Dr. Alli^ observes, chiefly relates to the Kingdom of the Messich; who is to
execute the Curse expressed in the last. Verse of the Psalm.

Dr. Patrick thinks, That when David was treated by Nathan, as he was, about
Euilding the Temple, he not long after fell into a Contemplation of the Divine
Majesty, who having built this great World for His Temple, needed none of his
Erecting. The Psalm here begins in Terms like those, 2 Samuel VII. 22.

2 A Curtain.] Some render the Word, A Skin, and have this Note upon it, The
Heavens are an Open Bock; (such of Old were made of Skins:) to teach us the
Knowledge of GOD.

4 GOD often sends His Angels, into the Winds, and into the Lightnings and
Thunders to execute His Royal Pleasure.

15 The Fating of Oil, and the Ointing with it, we all know, produces this
effect. But besides this, hear David Kianchi. Indicat noctis Lampades, qua
illuminant facies bominum.

22 Behold a rare stroke in the Midrash Tillin; a rare stroke from the Infidel
Jews: The Sun is the MESSIAH. Yea, they proceed further, to find Hell, the Dens
of the Wild-Beasts.

24 Is every one of the Fixed Stars, whereof the Telescope has brought great
Numbers into view, a Sun attended with a Chorus of Satellits? Come from our Sun
and pass by the Planets in our System, and pass by the Mete^rs of our
Atmospsiaere; In our Globe the Fossils are without Number. Of the Beasts
including Serpe^ts, we know 150 sorts; Of Birds 500; O^ Fishes 500; the
Shellfish Six times as many; Of Insects little short of 20000, according to
Rays Computation, Bauhinus finds of Plants, about 6000: But R^y concludes there
are more than Triple the Number. But then what prodigious Numbers of
Individuals in the several species! An amazing instance in the Acci, malcules
discovered by Lewenhoeck, which discoveries are confirmed by others. No less
than 45000 living Creatures in a quantity of Water no bigger than a grain of
Millet. He affirins 8280000 of these living Creatures to be seen in a drop of
Water, yea, Millions of Millions of Millions. Oh! Manifold Works! Oh! the
Power, Oh! the Wisdom, Oh! the Majesty of our Glorious GOD!

31 This follows on the Lords Feeding every Creature; and on His other Works of
Goodness and Bounty. An Intimation, that He doesall this Good unto His
Creatures with Delight; He rejoices in it. It as it weae does Him Good to see
His Creatures happy.

35 The Jews have a Remark, That Hallelujahs are not used until, the Sinners be
consumed out of the Earth, and the Wicked be no more. Compare the Repetition of
Hallelujah in the Apocalypse. with this Observation. Hallelujah is a Note
Calculated for the Time of the Great Revolution, when the Kingdom of the
Messiah shall arrive. Under the Kingdom of Antichrist, there has been a
mock-usage of Alleluia's: But it is ridiculous to read the foolish and
monsirous Etymologies of that Word, assigned by the most celebrated Writers
among the Romanists. Is not here, a Notable Key, for the opening of the
Hallelujatic Psalms?

PSALM CV.
1 COnfess to the ETERNAL God, Call ye upon His Name; among the People O make
known His admirable Works.

2 To Him with voices sing; to Him sing too with Instruments; talk ye of all
the wondrous Works which have been done by Him.

3 Value your selves upon the Name of His most Holy One; O let the heart of
them rejoice who seek the ETERNAL God.

4 O seek ye the ETERNAL God, seek ye His powerful strength; Seek to behold His
glorious Face, Do this continually.

5 The admirable things which He has done, Remember ye; the Prodigies which He
has wrought and Judgments of His mouth

6 O you that are the Offspring of His Servant Abraham; O you that are the
Children of Jacob, His chosen Ones.

7 It Is He who is the ETERNAL God that is become our God; His Judgments now are
seen and known quite over all the Earth.

8 He has been very mindful of His Covenant forever; the Word He for the Age
marked by a Thousand, did appoint.

9 It Is that which He to Abraham did make as His Covenant; it is what He unto
Isaac did swear with a solemn Oath.

10 And this is what He did confirm to Jacob for a Law; to Israel as a Covenant
for perpetuity.

11 This is what He declared; To thee the Land of Canaan I will give, that it
may be the ^ot of your Inheritance.

12 When as they in their Number were but a few mortal Men; Yea, but a very few
indeed, and Sojourners in it.

13 Then from one Nation they unto another Nation ^lk'd; and from one Kingdom
they unto another People went.

14 He did not suffer any man to do them any wrong; and He did upon their
Account give His reproofs to Kings.

15 He said, Do not you dare to touch these mine anointed Ones; and unto the^
my Prophets do not any iujury.

16 Then after this, He called for a Famine on the Land; the whole supporti^^
Staff of Bread he broke and made to fail.

17 But he before their Faces then di^send a Man of Note; Joseph who was the^
bartered for a Servant, was the Man.

18 His foot they did first humble with the Affliction of a Chain; The Iron,
that did Penetrate unto his very soul.

19 It Was thus until the Time Came for the coming of His Word; the Word of the
ETERNAL God then fully cleared him.

20 On this the King did send and set him at his liberty; The Ruler of the
People did to freedom him restore.

21 He constituted him to be the Ruler of his house; yea, and the Governor of
all that was possessed by him.

22 That He might lay restraints upon his Princes as he pleased, and that He
might make them be wise that were his Senators.

23 Then Israel into Egypt did on this oc^sion come, and Jacob in the Land of
Ham became a sojourner.

24 His People He did very much then cause to fructify; and made them to
improve in strength above their Enemies.

25 That they should hate His People, He did turn about their heart; and that
against His Servants they should plot deceitful things.

26 He sent a Moses, who became His humble Minister; He sent an Aaron whom He
had now made His chosen one.

27 These did among them set the words of His prodigious signs; and wondrous
prodigies which were done in the Land of Ham.

28 He did send darkness upon them, and it grew very dark; 'Twas at this time
that they did not rebel against His word.

29 He turned their waters into Blood, and He destroyed their Fish.

30 Their Land bro't forth great store of Frogs, even where their Kings did
lodge.

31 He did give forth the Word and then the grievous Dog-fly came; He did give
forth the We^d and Lice did swarm in all their coasts

32 For rains He gave them hail, and fire with flames shot through their Land.

33 He smote their Vines too and th^^ Figs; and broke their bounding Trees.

34 He gave out His Command for it a^^ then the Locust came; the Caterpillar
a^^ came, and it was numberless.

35 They did entirely eat up all the (...) bage of the Land; and they did eat
up (...) the fruit which grew upon their soil.

36 He also did in all their Land smi^^ every Firstborn thing; He did smite
the si^^^ fruits which were produced in their strength

37 And He brought forth those Israeli^^^ with Silver and with Gold; yea, there
(...) not in all their Tribes One feeble Per^^^ found.

38 When they took their departure, th^^^ Egypt was very glad; Because a
griev^^ fear of these was fallen upon them.

39 He did expand a cloud to be a cove^ing over them; and with it was a Fire
for to illuminate the Night.

40 On their Petition then He did brit^ them great store of Quails; and with
th^^ bread of Heaven He supplied them to the full

41 He opened a Rock, and thence (...) waters gushed out; away they through dry
places did, a River, take their course.

42 For He did mind His holy word; H^^^ Servant Abraham.

43 And brought his People forth with joy^^ with songs his chosen ones.

44 Then 'twas He of the Nations did bestow the Lands on them: The labor of
the People then they their possession made.

45 All this that so they might observe His Institutions there, and that they
might obey His Laws. Sing Hallelujah now.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CV. PSALM.
A Meditation prepared by the Prophetic Spirit, for the Jewish Nation; to raise
their Expectation of such things to be done for them, as were done for their
Deliverance out of Egypt. Compare, Mic. VII. 15.

4 The Strength of GOD, and the Face of GOD, are Names of the Messiab.

6 Some Jewish Commentaries invite us to Read, not, Ye Seed of Abraham, etc.
But, The Seed. -- [i. e. The Messiah,] of whom it follows, He is the Lord our
GOD. So Malac. II. 15. Hebr. The Seed, who is GOD. The Old Rabbi's understood
the Messiah there.

8 Arnobius finds the Thousand Generations, in so many distinct Nations and
Languages anon found among the Sons of Noah. But, the Grand Article in the
Covenant of GOD, is, The Lord JEHOV AH will be a God unto His People. [Jer.
XXXII. 38.] Herein it is implied, That the Lord JEHOVAH will in His Messiah give
Himself to be sensibly enjoyed by His People. [ Lev. XXVI. 12.] Hence the
Covenant will not be fulfilled, in the full sense of it, until the Messiah come
to Sit on the Throne of His Glory among His People. [Psal. LXXXIX. 34.] Nor
indeed, until the Resurrection from the Dead. [Math. XXII. 31, 32.] Consider
also, Heb. XI. 16. with Rev XXI. 13. Lastly, There is a Generation or Period of
Time, wherein this Covenant of GOD will be remembered, and performed. And here,
we have a special Character or that Period. The World where we sojourn will not
endure a Thousand Generations. But if you take a Generation in the
Signification of the Law, for Seven Years, then a Thousand Gen^^^^tions are
Seven Thousand Years. Indeed, Such a ^^^^ration for our World, may be Typi^ed
in the S^^^^ Days of the Creation. But here the Word is not (...) the Plural
Number. It notes one special Generat^^^ or, if you will, Revolution. For the
Character of (...) Thousand here put upon it, one renders it, The P^^^ Age,
(which Bildad sends Job unto,) namely, that the Patriarchs, to whom the Lord
gave the Covenant. Yea, Kimchi renders it, Ad Ducem in Generation and expounds
it of Abraham. However let us k^^^ our Translation of, a Thousand. It may very
well (...) rendered, The Millennial Age: Or, The Period th^^ shall have the
Sabba^ical Character of a Thousand Years upon it. The Words of Moses, Psalm XC.
(...) Thou turnest Man to destruction, and say, Re^^^ -- are a Prophecy of
the Resurrection. It follows Thousand Years in thy Sight -- Ponder it.

14 What Kings? See Genesis XII. 16. and Genesis XX.

19 What was, Tried, in our former Version, man be read, Purged, or Cleared.
GOD would never h^^ inspired with His Word, a Man really guilty, of (...)
Crimes, as Joseph was accused of.

22 R. Solomon Expounds it of the Love, where^w^^^ he bound the Hearts of the
Princes to him; and k^^^ them, like the Soul of Jonathan to David.

28 The Plague o^ Darkness is mentioned First (th^^ it were the Ninth) because
it was the worst. It (...) upon every Individual; And was accompanied with
Apparitions of Devils and Specter. Dr. Lightfoot supposes, That the Israelites
took this time, to perform that part of their Obedience to the Word of Go^^
which they had hitherto rebelled against, [ Josh. ^. 9. Their Circauncision;
without which they could not ha^^ kept the Passover. A Remarkable Thing; That
Go^ should by this Darkness on the Enemy, protect h^^ Obedient People!

PSALM CVI.
1 SIng Hallelujah! O Confess to the ETERNAL God; Because that He is good;
because His mercy is forever.

2 Who shall declare the mighty Acts of the ETERNAL God? Who shall cause to be
heard all that He Is to be praised for.

3 Blessed are they who do observe the thing that is right-and-good; Blessed is
^e who executes at all times righteousness.

4 ETERNAL God, Remember me with such a favor as thou show'st thy People; and
with thy Salvation visit me.

5 That the good of thy chosen I may see; To shine with the joy of thy Nation;
To triumph with thine Inheritance.

6 We, as our Ancestors have done before us, have transgressed; We have done
much iniquity; we have dealt wickedly.

7 Our Ancestors in Egypt did not wise attention give to understand the
wondrous things which were done by thee there. They minded not the multitude of
thy benignities; but they rebelled near the Sea, even at the Reedy-Sea.

8 Nevertheless for the sake of His Name He saved them; That so He might make
to be known His mighty Power abroad.

9 So He rebuked the Reedy-Sea, and it was dried up; and then He lead them
through the deeps as through a wilderness.

10 Thus He did save them from the hand of them that hated them; And He
redeemed them from the hand of a fierce enemy.

11 Their troublous adversaries then the waters overwhelmed; There was not any
left of them; no, not so much as one.

12 Then they believed on His words; they did sing forth His praise.

13 They made haste; they forgot His works; they stayed not for His help.

14 They lusted with strong appetite when in the wilderness; and they did tempt
the mighty God when in the Solitude.

15 And the thing which they did request He granted unto them; Nevertheless
(...) leanness He did send into their Soul.

16 Yea, and against Moses himself, they envied in the Camp; Against Aaron, the
holy One of the ETERNAL God.

17 The Earth did then open itself, and swallow Dathan up; It overwhelmed the
Company which with Abiram were.

18 And there enkindled was among their Company a Fire; The flame thereof did
utterly consume the wicked ones.

19 Near unto Horeb they did make an idolized Calf; and to a molten Image they
did then bow down themselves.

20 Thus that which was their glory they did shamefully transform into the
likeness of a Beef that feeds upon the grass.

21 They did forget the mighty God who had their Savior been; who had in Egypt
done the things that were exceeding great.

22 Works that were very wouderful within the Land of Ham; Things that were
very terrible near to the Reedy-Sea.

23 He then said, He Would destroy them; but His chosen Moses stood (...) the
breach before Him to divert His wrath from slaying them.

24 Yea, they did cast contempt upon a Land to be desired; and they did not
rely upon what He had promised.

25 But in their Tabernacles they kept ever murmuring; They hearkened not unto
the Voice of the ETERNAL God.

26 He therefore lifting up His handagainst them took His Oath, that He would
make them fall, while theywere in the wilderness.

27 That He among the Nations would their Offspring make to fall; and that He
would now scatter themabroad into the lands

28 They to Baal-peor also did in his yoke join themselves; The sacrifices of
the Dead they then did feed upon.

29 Thus they with their inventions did great provocation give; and so the
Plague broke in upon them irresistibly.

30 Then Phinehas did stand up with Prayer and did proceed to do, the execution
of a Judge; and so the Plague was stayed.

31 And this to him was reckoned as an act of righteousness, from one Age to
another Age, to perpetuity.

32 And at the Waters of their strife they raised a boiling wrath; so that with
Moses there it went but ill on their account.

33 Because that they his spirit threwinto great bitterness, and then he
brought forth with his lips what should not have been there.

34 Those cursed Peoples they did not wholly exterminate, concerning whom the
ETERNAL God had so commanded them.

35 But they did mix themselves among the heathen Nations there, and they did
learn to do their works; even their Idolatries

36 And they did serve their Idols which became a snare to them.

37 Yea, they to Devils sacrificed their Daughters with their Sons.

38 So they poured out the Blood of such as were poor Innocents; It was the
Blood of their own Sons and of their Daughters too. These unto Canaan's Idols
they did make their sacrifice; and with such bloody doings was the very Land
defiled.

39 Thus with their detestable works they did pollute themselves; and so they
did a^^ whoring with their own Inventions go.

40 Now the wrath of the ETERNAL God against His People rose; and He did now
abominate His own Inheritance.

41 And He delivered them into the hand of Gentiles then; and they that hated
them did bear dominion over them.

42 And they that were their Enemies sorely oppressed them, yea, and they were
under their hand into subjection brought.

43 He many times delivered them; But with their counsel they provoked still,
and were brought low for their iniquity.

44 Nevertheless He did behold, when upon them there was Affliction, when
therein He heard them making of their cry.

45 And He for them His Covenant did to remembrance call; after His mercies
multitude it then repented Him.

46 He also to compassions did kindly deliver them before the face of all of
those that captivated them.

47 O Thou ETERNAL God, our God, To us O do thou grant Salvation, and, Oh! from
among the Nations gather us: That so we may confess to the Name of thy Holy
One, and that we may triumphantly sing forth thy Glorious Praise.

48 Blessed be the ETERNAL God, the God of Israel evermore; And let all People
say, Amen. Sing Hallelujah now!

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CVI. PSALM.
THE Prophotic Spirit prepares an humble Confession to be made by the Jews,
concerning the Sins of their Fathers, and an humble Petition for Deliverance
from their Dispersion.

Some imagine the Psalm to be composed in the Ti^^^ of the Babylonlan
Captivity; because of Gather (...) from among the Heathen. Dr. Patrick rather
suppost this Petition to refer unto those, who in the Days (...) Saul, or
before, were taken Prisoners by the Philisti^^ and other Nations.

15 Munster says, It Is a Phrase for Death.

17 Why no mention made of Korah? The Psalm was to be Sung by the Sons of
Korah. And R. Solo^mon observes, Honor at Filios Cora, et not memi^^^ Patris
eorum.

30 To Stand in Prayer, was a Posture so usual amo^^ the Jews, that it became a
Phrase for Prayer. The Jews here consider Phinehas as Praying before his Action.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF PSALMS.
PSALM CVII.
1 O Make you a Confession now to the ETERNAL God; because that He is Good;
because His mercy is forever.

2 So let them say, who have been redeemed by the ETERNAL God; those whom He has
redeemed from the hand of the enemy.

3 And those whom He has gathered from the Lands, even from the East, and from
the West, and from the North, as likewise from the Sea.

4 They wandered in the Wilderness in solitary ways; they did not find a City
which might be inhabited,

5 They were with hunger famished and they were parched with thirst; their Soul
within them overwhel'md, was ready for to faint.

6 Then in their trouble they do cry to the ETERNAL God; He then did them
deliver from their grievous anguishes.

7 And He in a right way did give a conduct unto them; that they might to a
City go for habitation there.

8 Let Men to the ETERNAL God confess His mercy now; and the most wondrous
things which He does for the Sons of Men.

9 For He does satisfy the Soul wandering with appetites; and He does fill the
famished Soul with what is very good.

10 There are those who imprisoned sit in darkness and the shades of Death; in
great Affliction bound and Iron chaining them.

11 It is because they have rebelled against the words of God; and they have
despised the Counsel of Him who is the most High.

12 Therefore He with hard labor did bring down the heart of them; they fell
down under it and there was none to succor them.

13 Then in their trouble they did cry to the ETERNAL God; He then did them
deliver from their grievous anguishes.

14 He brought them out of darkness, and our of the shades of death; and He did
br^^^ asunder all a the Chains that fettered the^^.

15 LetMen to the ETERNAL God con^^^ His mercy now; and the most wondro^^
things which He does for the Sons of M^^^^.

16 Because that He has broke the Ga^^^ the which were made of brafs and the
str^^^^ Iron Bars, He has cut these to pieces qui^^.

17 Fools for the way the which they d^ i^^ their transgression take, and for
th^^ wrong iniquities do with affliction meet.

18 All manner of repast their Soul d^^^ then abominate; and they make their
(...) pr^^c^es to the very Gates or Death.

19 Then in their trouble they did cry the ETERNAL God; He then did them d^^
liver from their grievous anguishes.

20 He will send forth his word, and will give healing unto them; and He w^ll
the^^ deliver them out of their Sepulchers.

21 Let Men to the ETERNAL God co^^^ sess His mercy now; and the most w^^^
drous things which He does for the So^^ of Men.

22 And let them sacrifice of praise (...) sacrifices now; let them also
declare H^^^^ Works with a triumphant song.

23 They who embarked in Vesse^s do down unto the Sea; they that on many (...)
^^rs have a business to pursue.

24 These have a view of the Works done by the ETERNAL God; and of the wondrous
things that are occurring in the deep.

25 And when He gives the word, He makes the stormy Wind to rise; therewith He
makes the rolling waves swell to a mighty height.

26 They mount up to the Heavens; they go down unto the Deeps; their Soul does
in this evil time a Dissolution feel.

27 They Are tossed, and they do stagger like unto a drunken man; and now all of
their Wisdom is entirely swallowed up.

28 Then in their trouble they do cry to the ETERNAL God; He then does bring
them forth out of their grievous anguishes.

29 Into a Silence He does make the roaring Tempest stop; and the unquiet waves
to lay aside their boisterous noise.

30 Then are they very glad, because they are so quieted; and He does bring
them well unto the Port of their desire.

31 Let Men to the ETERNAL God confess His Mercy now; and the most wondrous
things which He does for the sons of Men.

32 Yea, and Let them exalt Him where the People use to meet, and let them
greatly praise Him where the Elders use to sit.

33 Rivers He does reduce into a parched Wilderness; and places wherein Waters
flowed into a thirsty Land.

34 A fruitful Land He does reduce to salt sterility; by reason of the
wickedness (...) them who dwell therein.

35 The wilderness He does reduce into a Pond of Waters, and the forsaken Land
into places where waters flow.

36 And there He makes the starving One^ to find a dwelling place; Yea, they a
City do prepare for habitation there.

37 And so they cultivate the Fields; they do plant Vineyards too: and there
they do obtain the fruit of usual increase.

38 He does also bestow on them His blessing and they are much multiplied;
their cattle too, He don't diminish them.

39 Again they are diminished, and they are brought very low; through Tyranny,
Affliction and a mind oppressed with grief.

40 He upon Princes does pour out Contemptuous disgrace; and He does make them
wander in a Desert where is no Road.

41 But yet He does raise up the Poor from out of Penury; and He produces
Families that shall be like a Flock.

42 The upright ones shall take a view, and shall be very glad; but all
Iniquity shall now forever stop its Mouth.

43 Who is there now that will be wise, and will observe these things? These
shall the mercies understand of the ETERNAL God.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CVII. PSALM.
IT IS an Hymn for the Jewish Nation, gathered from its Dispersion, and
confessing the Miracles which the Messiah performs for their Deliverance.

We have it several times over, Then in their trouble they do cry unto the
ETERNAL God; But we do not find it said so much as once, upon their
Deliverances, then they praised the Lord for His Goodness. No, that matter
always comes in with a Let Men confess. Alas, It Is to be Desired that they
would; hardly to be supposed, that they will.

16 Old Ayn^bius has an Holy and a solemn Tho'^; Gates of Bress and Bars of
Iron are Habits of Sin.

20 The Jewish Writers quoted by Galatinus, have many astonishing Passages on
this Verse. They find the Messiah to be, The Word, here sent by God. They find,
Healing Miracles wrought by Him. They find that a singular share of his Favors
would be granted unto Persons, whose Business lies upon the Waters, and even
unto dull Fishermen.

23 Arnobius would fain have those that go to Sea in Ships, to mean, those who
lead an holy Conversation in the World, and by their Instruction and Example
bring many People to Piety. Oh! That they who go to Sea in Ships, would more
answer this Character!

34 Terry in his Travails observes, (as others have also done) Can^an was a
Fruitful Land, and like the Garden of God, and able to feed a Prodigious
Multitude of People. Whereas the Blessing of God is now so withdrawn from it,
that it will not nourish and sustain an Hundredth Part of such a Number, as
once lived upon it.

43 Whosoever will be truly wise, ought to ponder such Passages of the Divine
Providence, that they may make others who are less considerate, understand, how
gracious the Lord is to them, who study to please Him, and obtain His Favor.
This is the Patrician Paraphrase.

PSALM CVIII. A Song. A Psalm of David.
1 O God, With preparation now my heart is well confirmd; I^ll sing with voice,
and sing with strings; yea, so my Glory shall.

2 O well-tuned Psaltery, Do thou awake unto the work; Awake, O Harp; IN the
early morn I will my self awake.

3 Among the Peoples I will praise Thee O ETERNAL God; and I will unto thee
aloud among the Nations sing.

4 For from above the Heavens is thy mercy magnified; and to the terder Clouds
there does extend thy faithfulness.

5 Above the Heavens, O God the Judge, be thou lift up on high, and over all
the Earth let be thy Glory spread abroad.

6 That thy beloved ones may have a full deliverance, Do thou now save by thy
right hand, and do thou answer me.

7 God has spoke in His holiness, I will triumph with joy; Shechem I will
divide, I will measure out Succoths Vale.

8 Gilead is what I claim for mine; M^nasseh too is mine; Ephraim is of my
strength the head; Judah's my Lawgiver.

9 Moab's a Pot wherein I Will wash; On Edom I will cast my Shoe, and I will
triumph now over Philistia.

10 Who will conduct me unto the well-fortified Town? Into the heart of Edom,
who is it will lead me on?

11 Is it not Thou, O God, who did cast us off heretofore? Even Thou, O God,
who did not go out with our Armed Hosts.

12 O give us succor from Distress; for vain's the help of Man.

13 Through God we shall do valiantly; And He Will tread down our foes.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CVIII. PSALM.
THe Prophetic Spirit here teaches the Jewish Nation to figh after the ^lorious
Reign of the Messiah; when they shall repossess their Country and see the
Destruction of their Enemies; especially of Edom, on the Roman Empire.

3 Some note an Emphasis in the Ori^nal, I will wake the Morning. The Morning
has not found me Sleeping, but I have rather wakened That.

9 Aben-Ezra's Gloss is, I will Water my Earth, I will do my People no Hurt,
but Good, by the Hands of Moah.

But rather, like R. Solomon, Compare 2. King. III. ii.

PSALM CIX. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
1 THou who art of my praise the God, O hold not thou thy Peace.

For the mouth of the wicked One, even the mouth of Deceit; these have wide
open set themselves unto my prejudice; they have in talking with me used a
Tongue of falsity.

3 They have encompassed me about, (...) words of hatted full; they have an
^^^^sition made to me without a cause.

4 They are my Adversaries for the (...) I Have born to them but while they (...)
do still apply my self to Prayer.

5 And they have recompensed me ^^^lieu of good;and hatred they have recomp^^^^
to me fot all my Love.

6 To be a Ruler over him appoint a^^^ked one; and let as an accuser at (...)
right hand Satan stand.

7 When that he shall be judged, le^^^ go forth a wicked one; and let his (...)
Prayer become but as a New Offense.

8 Let his days be but few; so let (...) there take his charge.

9 His Children, let be Orphans, and (...) Wife a Widow made.

10 Yea, let his Children always ro^^^ Vagabonds about; and from their
deso^^^ons let them seek about for food.

11 Let the extortioner with Snares upon all he has; let strangers also (...)
upon what he has Labored for.

12 Let there be none that shall exc^^^ compassion unto him; and to befriend^
Orphans let there not be any one.

13 Let his end* and Posterity be (...) cutting off; in the next generation
let^^^ name be blotted out.

14 Let the Sin of his Father be with the ETERNAL God remembered; and his
Mothers Sin never be blotted out.

15 Let them continually be before the ETERNAL God; that He may cut off from
the Earth the memory of them.

16 Because he did not mind to show mercy; but did pursue the poor and needy
man, and the heart-broken one to slay.

17 In that he cursing did affect, so let it come to him; as he for blessing
had no mind, so be it far from him.

18 Yea, let him be with cursing clothed like his next garment; yea let it
like water reach his bowels, and like to oil his bones.

19 To him let it be like unto the Garment covering him; and be the Girdle
wherewith he is girt continually.

20 This of my foes is the reward from the ETERNAL God; and of them who speak
evil to the damage of my Soul.

21 But Thou ETERNAL God, the Lord, Do for me for the sake of thy Name; since
thy mercy's good, do Thou deliver me.

22 Because I Am a meek humbled one, and I am indigent; my heart also within me
does suffer most grievous Wounds.

23 Like to a shadow, when it does decline, I Am driven away; I am tossed to and
fro as if I were a Grasshopper.

24 My knees are grown very infirm; (...) fasting is the cause; and my flesh
does consume away, of fatness destitute.

25 I also am become to them an obje^^ of contempt; they took a view of me;
(...) which they did but shake their head.

26 O Thou ETERNAL God, my God, (...) Send succor unto me: according to (...)
mercy, Oh! do Thou deliver me.

27 And make them sensible that this (...) what Thy hand has done; and that it
is wh^^ Thou have wrought, O Thou Eternal GOD

28 They still will curse; but Thou (...) bless; when that they shall arise, O
(...) them be ashamed; But let they Serv^^ then rejoice.

29 O let my Enemies be clothed w^^^ shame, and let them hide themselves a^^^
a Mantle, with their own confusion cl^^^.

30 O Thou ETERNAL God, I will (...) fess thee with my mouth; yea, I will
pra^^^ Him in the midst of a great Multitude.

31 Because, He stands at the Right ha^^^ of the distressed One, to rescue him
fr^^^ those that would condemn his Soul to dea^^

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CIX. PSALM
BEhold the Messiah here Cursing of the Synagog^^ whose Bloody designs Judas
executed; the sear^^ effects whereof the Jews are now feeling in their disper
(...)

Tho the Ev^ngelical Spirit allows us not the (...)

these Dirae against our Persecutors, yet the Primitive Churches fetched thence
their Expressions, at the Deposition o unworthy Bishops; and with an Eye to
Judas it was called Psalmus Iscarioticus.

1 Arnobius reads it so: Deus, Laud^m meam no tacueris. He desires that GOD
would not jet His Praise be unmentioned; Because His Adversaries loaded Him
with their Vituperations. Dr. Patrick thus comprehensively Paraphrases it. As
thou have given me hitherto continual cause to praise Thee, so I hope, Thou will still vindicate my Honor.

11 The Ancients here understood the Romans, with their Demands of Tributes.

18 That Illustrious Dutchman Dr Neuwentyt, (whose Contemplations are
translated by the valuable Dr Chamberlayn,) does on the occasion of this Text
admire the precise knowledge of Nature which the Holy Spirit, who indicted our
Scripture, has discovered in a vast variety of Instances. Here he says, Any one
who reads this Text, and has ever seen the Caries Ossium, or Corruption of the
Bones produced by Liquid or Olouginous matters, must needs confess, that the
Wrath and Curse of GOD, cannot be described by more lively Comparisons.

31 There was an Officer in the Hebrew Courts, whom they called, Baal-Rib, or,
The Pleader. He stood on the Right Hand of the Party cited unto the Court,
whether he pleaded for him or against him.

What is here said is, q. d. The Lord shall plead his cause: Compare Zech. III.
1. We have some Allusion to this Baal-R^b or Pleader, when it is said, 1. John
II. 1 We have an Advocate with the Father.

PSALM CX. A Psalm of David.
1 SO spoke the ETERNAL to my Lord, Sit Thou [enthxon'd] at my Right Hand,
until I make thy Enemies a [conquerd] footstool for thy feet.

2 The ETERNAL out of Zion shall send the Rod of thy [mighty] strength; In the
midst o^ thy Enernies maintain [Thou thy] Dominion.

3 In the Day of Thy Marshalling Thy Forces for [to do] Thy Work, Thy People,
they shall then appear with [none but] free will offerings: They shall appear
in Beauties of [the most] adorning Holiness; more than the mornings Womb Thou
have the fresh Dew of thy [early] Youth.

4 The ETERNAL God has sworn, and He will not repent [at all] of it; Thou ever
art a Priest of the set [a^d sort] of Melchisedek

O Glorious God, The Lord who is seated [above] at thy right hand; He in the
day of His great wrath will give wounds unto [mighty] Kings.

6 Among the Nations He will judge; Dead bodies He will [raise and] fill. He
will with bruises wound the Head that is over [great and] many lands.

7 He shall drink of the Torrent, which c^^urs [unto] Him in the way; He for
that reason shall list up. thereon His [con^u'ring] head on high.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CX. PSALM.
THe J^^lm is an Illustrious Prophecy, about the Ascent O^ the Messiah into the
Heavens, the extant of His Empire, the Glory of His Priesthood, His recalling
of the Jews, and His destroying of Antichrist, when He comes to Judge the Earth

A Ce^^^^man made an attempt for an Historical Sense of the Psa^m. Whereupon a
Synod of the French Churches, at Breda, in the Year 1713. severely condemned
the Exposit^on as very Impious, and passed a sev^^e Sentence on, Un^^h^rdiese
si^^eriminelle. And a Synod of the Dut^h Churches con^urr'd unto the censure.
The Learned Mons. Martin also, wrote a whole Book to confute, that evil Essay.

The Jewish concessions for our Christian Application of the Ps^lm, are
Numerous and Mavelous. The Midrash Tillin particularly, quotes the, Sit thou
at my Right hand, as belonging to the Messiah. And R. Obadiah says, The Psamist
composed this Psalm of the Messiah. And from the first Verse, he places the
Messiah, above the Angels of God.

1 Sitting, when spoken of a King intends Reigning. Here is an Association in
Government. The Scepter comes between them. Vitring^ writes finely on it.

3 An Obscure Pass^^e. The Jews read it, Thy Nativity from the Womb, is as the
Dew of the Morning. The J^rusalem Talmud says, the Explication of it is is to
be fetched from, Mic. V. 7 R. Solomon Jarchi's Gloss is, Quasi Rosa Domino, qui
minquam per Hominem dimi^^itur.

Or, If the Nativity of the Messiah do not appear so plainly intimated here,
why may not his Resurrection which indeed was also His Nativity? The Dew of our
Lord is that quickening Power of his, by which he raises the Dead. [I sai.
XXVI. 19.] When it is said. The D^w of thy Youth is thine, it may be, q. d. It
i. thine own lover that Raises thee from the dead. This was from the Womb of
the Morning. The Resurrection of our Lord, was in the Morning on all Account^^^

But we'll refer to the Common Annotations. (...) take pious Mr Henry's,
'Abundance of Young O^^ 'verts, like drops of Dew in a Summer's Morning Or
thus, From their very Childhood, thou hast^^^ Dew of thy Peoples Youth: their
Hearts and Ass^^^ ons when they are Young.

The Dew of thy Youth is a Numerous, Illustrious hopeful show of Young People
flocking to Christ, which are to the World as Dew to the Ground, to me^^^
fruitful.

Again, on, the Day of Power, and, the Will^^ People: A particular day, in the
time of the Mess^^^ is called the Day of Power. And this Day of Pe^^^ must, it
seems be celebrated as a S^bbath. Upon in^^^ People shall be Populus
devotion^^^, a People wi^^ devoted unto the Lord. The Place of the Devo^^^^ is
to be, In the f^^^^ties of Holiness; which is (...) Name of the ^enctuery. This
Day of Devotion, (...) be the Resurrection Day; and consequently the (...) day
of the Week. Why it should be called the day (...) Power, See, Romans I. 4. --
Thou have the Dow (...) thy Youth, is by the LXX rendered, I have begotten thee.
Take Dr Patrick's Paraphrase, In the Day when thy Forces [2 Timothy II. 3]
completely Armed with a Divine Power [Acts. IV. 33.] (...) march forth to
subdue the World unto thy Obedien^^ they that are sit for thy Kingdom, [Luk.
9.62.] shall cheerfully Submit themselves, and present th^^ with Freewill
Offerings, in token of their absolute subjection to thee: [Act. II. 45. IV.
34.] And great shall be the Number of chosen Men, who gl^^ to see the Night of
Ignorance gone, shall at the first appearance, by the Celestial Blessing fall
unto the^^ as thick as the Morning Dew.

Beauties of Holiness.] It Is very sure the Beu^^^^ of the Holy JESUS, invite and
allure His People to become a Willing People; willing to be His People. But may
not the Beauties of Holiness here, be the Beautiful Garments which adorn the
Willing People? It may be an Allusion to Exodus XXVIII. 2 Holy Garments for
Aaron for Glory, and for Beauty. When a People become an Holy People, they are
advanced unto the Dignity of an Holy Priesthood. Consider. 1. Pet. II. 9. Rev.
V. 8.

It had just been said, a People of Free Will Offerings. How agreeably are the
Priestly Garments of Holiness assigned unto them?

6 In the Original it is, He shall fill the [De Bodies: Is it not a Prophecy of,
The Resurrection of the Dead, which arrives when our Lord comes to Judge among
the Nations? The Resurrection is accomplished by His filling the Bodies of His
People. This is good Philosophy. We have the Resurrection so described; Ephesians. I.
23. II. 1. He fills all in all; and you, who are dead in trespasses and Sins.

Wounding the Head over many Countries, evidently refers to the Protevangelium;
The bruising the Head of the Sorpent. When Antichrist is destroyed, the Head
over many Countries is wounded. Yea, the Ancient Promise of Bruising the Head of
the Serpent, will then have an Eminent Accomplishment.

Thus Gesner, In primis David respicit ad Promissione^ primis Parentibus, in
Paradiso factam.

7 See John. XVIII. 1. with Phil. II. 9.

PSALM CXI.
1 PRaise ye the Lord! With all my heart I Will Praise the ETERNAL God, where the
upright meet privately, and where more publicly.

2 The works of the ETERNAL God are gloriously great; they are sought out by
all of them who take delight therein.

3 A Glory and a Majesty appear upon His work; and unto perpetuity His
Righteousness endures.

4 He has made a memorial of His most wondrous works; most gracious is the
ETERNAL God, and most compassionate.

5 He unto them that fear Him has granted a prey of food; He ever will be
mindful of the Covenant He has made.

6 Unto His People He has shown the great power of His works; in giving them
the heritage of what the Nations had.

7 Both verity and judgment too are the works of His hands; and faithful all
the precepts are; with which He visits us.

8 To perpetuity they do forever stand confirmed; they are done in faithfulness,
and in exactest rectitude.

9 He for His People did send forth Redemption; He commands His Covenant
forever; His Name Holy and Reverend is.

10 The first thing, * and the principal, which does belong unto a real Wisdom,
is, The Fear of the ETERNAL God. Good Understanding is for all who do such
things as these; and as for Him, His Praise endures to perpetuity.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXI. PSALM.
DAvid here gives a Compendium of the CV. and CVI. Psalms. The Psalm does
consist of as many short Metres as there are Letters in the Hebrew Alphabet. And
with the Regard of an Acrostic in the Order of them. However that the Number of
the Verses might not exceed that of the Ten Commandments, the Two last Verses
have Three Metres apiece, and very short ones. Dr. Allix here sees the
Gratitude of the Jews, beholding themselves re-established in their Country, by
a vast Number of Miracles, and the Destruction of the Turks, who have possessed
it.

4 GOD instituted Solemn Times, for the Commemoration of His wonderful Works.

5 This was done partly in the Spoil of the Egyptians, partly in the Manna of
the Wilderness.

7 It may be read, His Visits are Faithful. Be sure, the Visits made from the
Invisible World, unto the Patriarchs, with Predictions of the Messiah and our
Salvation by Him, are not such as have deceived us.

10 Behold, A sweet Encouragement unto the Praise of GOD. If the Praise of GOD,
(or the Work of Religion) be our main Business, or chief Delight; if we love to
be at this Work; the Work will endure forever. We shall, ^^ver be taken off.
Our Employment with Satisfaction in that Work, will be upon us a Token for
Good, that we shall be employed in that Work in another World, and World
without end. Yea, and in this World if our Hearts be in this Work, we shall
never want Occasions. The Work will endure forever, by a continual renewal of
Occasions for it.

PSALM CXII.
1 SIng Hallelujah! Blessed the Man who fears the ETERNAL God; who greatly does
delight himselfin His Commandments.

2 His Offspring shall upon the Earthgro^^ very powerful; The Race of upright
ones shall be a truly blessed Race.

3 There shall be wealth and riches in his habitation found; his righteousness
do^^ also last to perpetuity.

4 In darkness there does light arise unto the upright ones; Gracious he is,
and Men ciful, and Righteous too is he.

5 A good Man is compassionate: and he does lend his help; with good discretion
yet he does still govern his affairs.

6 Sure he shall not from his good state fo^ever be removed; In everlasting
memory shall the righteous one be kept.

7 Of hearing any evil thing he shall not be afraid; his heart's confirmed,
relying still on the ETERNAL God.

8 His heart is well-established; he shall not be afraid; until he does behold
what shall befall his enemies.

9 He scatters: he gives to the Poor; his righteousness endures to perpetuity;
his horn in glory will be raised.

10 The wicked one shall see it, and rage; he with his teeth shall gnash, and
melt away so perish will the wicked Man's desire.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXII. PSALM.
THE Faithful here acknowledge, that Charity toward the Menders of their
SAVIOR, shall have a great Reward; and that those who have used Cruelty, shall
be punished for it, and rejected from His Kingdom. The last Verse evidently
refer to the Kingdom of the Messiah.

1 The Jewish Rabbi's and the Midrash Tillin, remark, that it is Obedience
rather than the Recompense of Obedience, that is the delight of the God^y Man.
They bring the Alacrity of Abraham in his Obedience for an Example. The Truth
is, The Picture of a^^^ght^^ms Man here seems drawn, with an eye very
particularly on the Circumstances of our Father Abraham.

4 And is not here an eye, to the Story of Abraham? Genesis XVI. 17. It was dark,
and behold, a Burning Lamp. The comfortable support and Rescue which God gives
to His People in their Dark^st Hours of A^^iction, seems to be promised, in
Allusion to that Appearance.

But, Quaere, Is not the SFED that is to he mighty upon the Earth to be
interpreted of the MESSIAH, who was the SEED promised unto Abraham? And was not
the Light that which arose, when the World was in the most fearful Darkness?
Christian, A new Field of precious Thot's is opened for thee.

Dr. Patricks Paraphrase is also Excellent. I^ any A^^iction comes, it will be
so far from making him unhappy, that besides the Divine Comforts imparted unto
him for his support, it will make the virtue of Upright Men the more
Illustrious; while one exercises Meekness and Sweetness to those that provoke
him; another forgives Offenses, and p^ties the Instru^^^its of his Trouble; and
a Third exercises the greater (...) or Mercy, and will not be tempted to do any
(...) or eru^^ Thing, for his own Deliverance.

7 Hebr. Evil Hearing. The Jewish and some (...) Into preters, carry it so; He
is not sollicitous (...) the false Rop^rts that may be raised upon him. (...)
We formerly ^^^dred it, He shall se^ his desire upon his Enemies. But, his
desire, is not in the Orignal. Dr. Patricks Paraphrase is, He expects the Time,
when he shall be able securely to look upon (...) his Enemies.

9 Why is Charity called Rightcousness? Gre^^^ M. in his Pastoralis Cura, says
well, Quia (...) communi Domino tribuitur, JUSTUM prefecto^^ (...) accipiant,
eo communiter utantur.

Horn Exalted. Accept a singular Though It upon it, without excluding the common
Interpret^tion. The Praises of God were of Old sounded in Comets. There were
Exalted Horns or Exalted Notes, which (...) would have their Praises to be
raised with. We (...) 1 Chronicles. XXV. 5. Of, Words to lift up the Horn. (...) may
in our Day, thus accommodate the Observation The Praises of GOD are to Sound
hig^ in our ^^ons. When we Praise GOD for being excellent^^ G^o^ to ^ur selves,
we do well. But we are to raise (...) Pr^ises unto an higher Pitch than so;
They are to (...) patiate upon all those Things wherein our GOD h^^ exhibited
Himself as excellently Great, throughout the World. Such abstracted Praises are
agreeable to the inclinations of every Godly Man; He argues at that (...) GREAT
is the Lord, and, THEREFORE Great^^ to be Praised.

10 q. d. Their Envy shall first bring an Ague, (...) then a Consumption upon
them.

PSALM CXIII.
1 SIng Hallelujah! O Praise ye, who ser^^th' ETERNAL God; O do ye Praise the
Name of Him who is the ETERNAL God.

2 The Name of the ETERNAL God, (...) let it blessed be; Blessed from the
preson time, and so unto Eternity.

3 Even from the rising of the Sun unto its going down, the Name of the ETERNAL
God is greatly to be praised.

4 Above all of the Nations High is the ETERNAL God; above the Heavens now
there is His Glory to be seen.

5 Who Is like the ETERNAL God, our God, whose dwelling is on high?

6 He stoops that He may view what is in Heaven, and on Earth.

7 He does raise up the poor one from his lying in the dust; He from the sordi^
D^nghill does lift up the needy one.

8 That he a seat with Princes may assign to such an one; among the Princes
which His own distinguished People have.

9 The Barren he sets in an house; Of Children she becomes the Fruitful Mother
full of Joy. Sing Hallelujah now.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXIII. P^ALM.
SOme here behold the Praises of the restored Jews, for their Deliverance. The
five last verses magnificently des^ribe, the Second Coming of the Messiah; at
which they shall be restored unto a Glorious Condition The irophet Isa^ah. Chapter
LIVE. 1, 2. alludes to the lastverse of the Psaim.

Our Doctor Goodwin mentioning the application that some have made of a certain
Text, unto our SAVIOR, adds, I would there were a Thousand more of them, For
the more such Lines of Prophecy about our JESUS, meet in one center, the more
ascertained we are, that He is that MES^IAH who was then to come; and the
Scriptures are discovered thereby, to be the more mysterious, and Himself the
more Illustri^^^ And now, why may not our SAVIOR be ultimate^^ intended in the
Psalm that is now before us. Christia^^ Carry His Glory in thy mind, when thou
read the beginn^^ of the ^sa^m. When thou read of the Po^^ raised ou^ of
the Dust, and the Needy lifted out (...) the Dunghill; thin^ on the profound
and wond^^^ Humil^at on of thy SAVIOR, and His following E^altation. When thou
re^dest of Him set with Princ^^ consider Him S^tting on His Throne, surrounded
with His Holy Angols. Lastly, When thou read of (...) Barren Woman becoming
a Fruitful Mother; Wh^ should not the stupendous Work of God that was d^^^ for
the Virgin M^ry be thought upon? As well as (...) Application, which the
Chaldee Paraphrase, makes (...) it unto the Church of Israel?

This, with the Five Psalms that follow, was by (...) Jews c^ll'd, The Great
Hallei. They recited it (...) their New Moons and other Festival^, and at the^^
Table in the Paschal Night, after they had eaten th^^ Lamb.

7 R. Amama here finds, The Resurrection of the Dead.

8 The Princes, are by R. Obadiah Gaon, rendred^ The Libera Ones.

It is observed, both in the Italian and Spanish Version, That the Psalm is an
Abbreviation o^ the ^ong o^ Hannah. Pareceseruna abbrevi^^on, ^y^ the Spanis^.

PSALM CXIV.
1 IN the withdraw of Israel from the Egyptian Land; the Family of Jacob from a
People barbarous.

2 Then Judah came for to be His dissi^^ guish'd Holy One; yea, Israel did then
become Dominions for Him.

3 The Sea beheld this thing, and fled; Jordan was turned back.

4 The Mountains then did leap like Rams; the little Hills like Lambs.

5 What was done unto thee, O Sea, in that thou did fly back; O Jordan, what
to thee was done, that thou wast turned back?

6 O Mountains, what was done to you, that ye did leap like Rams; and what to
you, O little hills, that ye did leap like Lambs?

Before the face of Him who does sustain thee, shake, O Earth; before the face
of Him that is the God of Jacob, shake.

7 It Is He who the firm Rock does to a Pool of Waters turn; it is He who the dry
Flint does to a Spring of Waters turn.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXIV. PSALM.
BY the Meditation on the Miracles, in the coming out of Egypt, wherein the
Order of Nature was changed, the Prophetic Spirit here lifts up the minds of
His People, to what the Messiah will do for them, when He appears for the
Deliverance which is to be (...) looked for. Compare, Mich. VII.

2 The Cloud of Glory then had no peculiar Place to be a Sanctuary for it, but
stood over the whole Camp of Israel.

That the Convulsion of Nature here may be brought in with a due surprise, the
Name of God is not mentioned until afterward.

PSALM CXV.
1 NOt unto us, ETERNAL God, N^^ unto us; But tothy Name give Glory, on thy
Grace and on thy constant Truth.

2 Why should the Nations utter this Where Is now this God of theirs?

3 Sure our God's in the Heavens; He ha^ done whatsoever He pleased.

4 Their Idols Silver are and Gold, wh^^ hands of Men have wrought.

5 Mouth's have they but they do not speak, they have Eyes, but do not see.

6 Ears have they, but they do not hears they have Nostrils, but cannot smell.

7 Hands have they, but they handle (...) they have Feet, but do not walk. Not
can they utter through their Throat.

8 The Makers of such things are li^^ them; so is every one that puts his trust
in them.

9 O Israel, Do thou place thy trust o^ the ETERNAL God; It Is He who does
afford them help; and He Is a Shield to them,

10 O House of Aaron, Place thy trust on the ETERNAL God; It Is He who does
afford them help;and He Is a Shield to them

11 Ye who do fear JEHOVAH, trust in the ETERNAL God; It Is He who does afford
them help: and He Is a Shield to them.

12 The ETERNAL has remembered us; He Will bless; He Will bless the House of Israel;
He will bless the House of Aaron signally,

13 He will bless them who have the fear of the ETERNAL God; He Will bless the
little Ones of these together with the great.

14 The ETERNAL God shall add to you; to you, and to your Sons.

15 You're blessed of the ETERNAL God who made the Heavens and Earth.

16 The Heavens, the Heavens, these do belong to the ETERNAL God; But to the
Sons of Men He has distributed the Earth.

17 Such as are Dead, these will not Praise the Ever-Living Lord; Nor all who
do desrend into the silence of the Grave.

18 But as for us, we still will bless the Ever-Living Lord from this time and
for evermore. Sing Hallelujah now.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXV. PSALM.
THE Prophetic Spirit prepares a Prayer, for Israel dispersed among the
Antichristian Idolaters, That they may be restored unto their own Land. With a
Curse on the Idolaters, the misery of the Israelites is complained of, as
hindering them from Glorifying of GOD, as they should, if they were gathered
into one Body.

Dr. Patrick thinks, that when a Prophet had encounged the hope of Jehosaphat,
for Deliverance from the vast Forces come against him, and he had by the
Levites given Thanks for this Hope, H^, or that Prophet might compose this
Hymn, to quicken their Faith in God. Yea, this might be the Hymn, which by
common consent, the Singers were to use, when they went against those ^^mic^.

1 q.d. Give us Victory, not that we may grow famous and get Glory by it; but
that thy Divine Majesty may be honored.

5 The Idol Bual-peor; (or, Priapus) was particularly called, Ch^^^^ so which
is as much as to say, The Blind God.

16 Calvin observes, the meaning of this to be That the Infinite GOD, is
forever satisfied in and from Himself; He needs no Earthly thing to augment
^^is Happiness. The Earth with all the Enjoyments of it, He allows to the Poor
Children of Men. All He expects from the Earth is a Thankful Acknowledgment
from the relieved and obliged Children of Men. Ho^ Propheta Consilium est, quod
miror tum secture a plerisyuc inter pretibus negligi.

17 q. d. Therefore He will not suffer us to be rooted out, as our Enemies
design; for then the Earth would have none in it, to sing His Praises; which
the Dead who dwell in the silent Grave cannot celebrate. This is the Patrician
Faraphrase.

PSALM CXVI.
1 I AM full of Love: It is because [of this] that the ETERNAL Godhath hearkened
now unto my voice; [and hath] my supplications heard.

2 Because that He has unto me [kindl^] inclined His gracious Ear; therefore
upon Him I will call while I have any days [of Life.]

3 The cords of Death surrounded me, and me the [dreadful] pains of Hellfound
our; a sad anxiety I found, and sighing [^heady] grief.

4 But I did call upon the Name of the ETERNAL God, [for this;] I pray Thee, O
ETERNAL God, Del^^et thou my [sinkins]

5 Most full of tender clemency [foreber] is the ETERNAL God; Righteous He is
too; and out Godis most compassionate [withal.]

6 The simple ones the ETERNAL God takes into [his kind] custody; I was brought
miserably low, and then [it was] He helped me.

7 O thou my Soul, Do thou return where it is [alone] thou find rest; Because
that the ETERNAL God has well [enough] ^ewarded thee.

8 Because thou have from threatening Death [cafely] delivered my Soul; my Eye
from tear; my Foot from fall by a thrust given [unto] me.

9 I Will walk before the ETERNAL God [^ube] in the Land of living ones.

10 I did believe, therefore I spoke: I was afficted [very] sore.

11 In the great perturbation when [my ^oze] affiction frightened me; I said,
That every Man of Earth [fails and] is but a lying thing.

12 But now, O what Returns shall I [bring and] make to the ETERNAL God? Upon
me are His Benefits, [yea, and] above me His Rewards.

13 Of manifold Calvations I will take [and drink] the Thankful Cup; and I will
call upon the Name of the ETERNAL God [with it.]

14 I Will to perfection bring my Vows [duly] to the ETERNAL God; I Will do (...)
Now in presence of all that His [hol^] People are.

15 In the Eyes of the ETERNAL God how very precious is [esteem'd] the Dea^
which there shall be for those who are (...) [truly] gracious ones'

16 ETERNAL God, Thy Servant sure am, Thy Servant I [will be!] I of the
Handmaid am the Son; Thou have diffolv^ my [deadly] bonds.

17 The Sacrifice of Thankfulness (...) [freely] Sacrifice to Thee; And I will
(...) upon the Name of the ETERNAL Go^ [with it.]

18 I Will to perfection bring my Vows [dul^] to the ETERNAL God; I Will do it Now
presence of all that His [doly] People a^^

19 In the Courts of the Glorious House of the ETERNAL God [I'll do't]: In m^d
of thee, Jerufalem. Sing Hallelujah no^ [to God.]

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXVI. PSALM.
AN Hymn of Grat^tude unto GOD from the (...) ^eemed of Ifr^el. They publish
the Greatness ^^eir Delivera^^^e with a R^meml^rance of the dre^^^ (...) Thi^^s
which they had surfered, and the Double (...) o^ce had of ever bein ^delivered.

They who look on the Great GOD as here propo^^^ (...) Soul ^o upon a ^lorious
Tr^^^^ Domine, Irrequistum cor nostrum, donec raquiescat in Te. -- but, O Christian, Will thou nor consider the Psa^^ss here, as a Type of our SAVIOR? Truly
we have here the Language of our JESUS R^son from the Dead. Behold Him now
Returning to the Heavenly World, and Ascending to the Joy set before Him.

I know not whether the Distinction of the Verses in the Old Testament, at
least in the Book o^ Psalms, might not be so ordered by the Providence of GOD,
as to carry sometimes a Mystery in it. In reading the Psalms I have often though it
on it. The Church of GOD may be a so heard speaking here. The Church of GOD
w^ll one Day Return unto Rest, and see a Sabbatic State in the Rest which
remains for the People of GOD. This occurs in the Sevemb Verse of the Psalm;
and is reserved or the leventh Age of the World.

13 They had in Israel of Old, A Cup of Deliverance, with which when blessed
and set apart, they did commemorate the Blessings they had received.

15 The common Glosses are well known. But I renew my Instances, That this as
well as many other unsuspected Psalms, may be considered as a representation of
our SAVIOR. The Agonies and Sufferings of our SAVIOR are displayed in the
Beginning of the Psalm; the Consequences thereof in the Conclusion. What we use
to render, I said in my haste, is without any just pretenses expounded, of
David's hasty ^eproaches upon the Truth of Samuels Prophecies. No; It may be
read, i said in my Fear: [my Anguish, may Distress,] All Mon are Liars: There
is no dependence on any Man or Help. Compare, Psalm CXLVI. 3. -- written
perhaps, about the same time with the Psalm now before us. But the the Original
here, directs in to Read, The Death which there is FOR those, when are His
Gracious Ones. It Is the Death of our SAVIOR, the Price of Redemption for His
Chosen. The Almighty GOD sets a great Price upon it. [Eph. V. 2.] Though the
Death of our SAVIOR, be for Sinners. yet none partake in the saving Benefits
of it, but such as are made willing to be Gracious Ones.

16 Arnobius gives us a Mystical Gloss of the Ancients. Ancilla Dci est in
disciplina Sancta. The Bonds here, some apply to the Bonds which hold the
unborn Infant in the Womb. There is much Harmony between the XXII and the CXVI
Psalms. In that Psalm our Savior's being taken out of the Womb, is a
considerable Article. And in this we have the Loosing of the Bonds, which
enwrapped Him there.

PSALM CXVII.
1 O Praise ye the ETERNAL God, Do it ye Nations all; His Praises, O ye People
all, now celebrate with Songs.

2 For upon us His Mercy is confirmed; and the Truth of the ETERNAL is forever.
Sing Hallelujah now.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXVII. PSALM.
BEhold in a few words Predicted here, the Conversion of all Nations, when God
shall have accomplished His Promise of Recalling the Israelitish Nation.
Consider, Deuteronomy. XXXII. 43.

PSALM CXVIII.
1 O make you a confession now to the ETERNAL God; because that He is God;
because His mercy is forever.

2 O now let Israel say this thing, That Is mercy is forever.

3 Let Aaron's Family now say, That Is mercy is forever.

4 Now let the Proselytes that have in them the holy fear of the ETERNAL God,
still say, That Is mercy is forever.

5 In Trouble I did call upon the Everlasting JAH; the Everlasting JAH did with
enlargement answer me.

6 With me is the ETERNAL God appearing on my side; I will not be afraid of
what a man may do to me.

7 For me the ETERNAL God among my helpers does appear; what therefore is to
come upon my haters I shall see.

8 It Is better to seek refuge in Him who is the ETERNAL God, than it is to place
a confidence upon poor earthly man.

9 It Is better to seek refuge in Him who is the ETERNAL God, than it is to place
a confidence upon Superior Men.

10 The Nations all of them did round about encompass me; (...) in the Name of
the ETERNAL God I Will surely cut them off.

12 They compassed me about; yea, they did compass me ab^ut; in the Name of the
ETERNAL God I Will surely cut them off.

12 They compassed me about like Bees; They Are quench^d like fire of Thorns; in
the Name of the ETERNAL God I Will surely cut them off.

13 Thou have thrust, and have thrust against that thou may make me fall; but
then did the ETERNAL God send succor unto me.

14 The Everlasting JAH is He who does afford me strength; and He Is my Song; He
also is Salvation unto me.

15 The voice of Joy and Sasety's in the tents of righteous ones; the right
hand of the ETERNAL God works with a mighty force.

16. The right hand of the ETERNAL God is listed up on high; the right hand of
the ETERNAL God works with a mighty force,

17 I shall not dye, but live, and tell Works of the living JAH.

18 The living JAH chastis'd me much, but gave me not to death.

19 O set ye open unto me the Gates of Righteousness; I will go into them; I Will
praise the Everlasting JAH.

20 The answer is, This is the Gate of the ETERNAL God, it is by this Gate the
righteous ones shall make their entrance here.

21 To thee I will confess, since thou have heark'ned unto me; and what shall
be Salvation, This Thou have been unto me.

22 The Stone which they who did profess to build, did cast away, is now become
the Head Stone which the Corner's founded on.

23 This is a thing which is performed by the ETERNAL God; it is what in our
eyes appears most wondtous to behold.

24 This is the very day the which the ETERNAL God has made; in it we'll show
how glad we are, and we will shine with joy.

25 Save now, O Thou ETERNAL God, I earnestly entreat; I do entreat, ETERNAL
God, Send now Prosperity,

26 He Is blessed who comes in the Name of the ETERNAL God; We Have blessed you
out of the House of the ETERNAL God.

27 The ETERNAL God's the mighty One a^dble has shone on us; bind ye the
Sacri^oe with cords, even to the Altar's horns.

28 Thou art my God; and I will make Confessions unto thee; Thou art my God, I
will for this exalt thee very high.

29 O make you a Confession now to the ETERNAL God; Because that He is Good;
because His mercy is forever.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXVIII. PSALM.
THe Psalm seems to have been pronounced at first, in some solemn Assembly of
all the People assembled for the Praises of God. And Interpreters have thought,
they all had a part in the Psalm. The greatest part was uttered by David; --
Then coming in Procession to the Gates of the Talernacle he calls (V. 19.) upon
the Porters, to open them unto him, that he might praise GOD in the San^iu^ry,
He does is accordingly, first, in the very entrance; (V. 20.) and then in the
Courts of the House of God. (V. 21.) After all which the People shout, and
magnify the Di^^ne Goodness, in making him who had met with such Indignities in
the late Reign, their King (V. 22.) And then the Priests come forth, and bless
both the King, and the People, in the Name of the Lord; (V. 20) and exhort them
to be thankful. (V. 2^.) David then seems to take the Words out of their Mouth,
and to ^^hre that be will be never unmindful of the Benefi^^^ God; and to
desire, that all the People also would Remember them.

Yea, But have we not here, (what our Allix discovers) an Hymn of redeemed
Israel; in whose ^^^^^tion all that fear God are comprehended! They ce^brate
the Glorious things done by the Messiah for them when He comes again; and they
acknowtedge the Since their Fathers in rejecting Him.

22 I could Subpans a Number of Jewish Rabbi^^ who confess, the Messiah to be
the Stone here spoken of. It is confessed in the Midrash Schir Haschir in. Yea,
that the Messiah shall be refused, as it is here foretold, is after a strange
manner foretold in Beresch^^ R^^^a. Quando veniet Messiah, non cito dicent
C^^tic^^^, donec fuerit vilifica^us ipse Messiah: Ac d^^^cadat coram eo Regnum
nequam Romanum; siondicium est, Dan: II. 42.

A Wonderful Passage!

The Targum on this Text reads, The Builders ^^dected the Child. And on the
next verse: Bind this Child to the Sacrifice of Solemnity with Chains, unto we
shall have Sacrificed Him, and poured out (...) Blood upon the Horns of the
Altar.

From the Pens of Jews, these Lines are truly Mavelous.

In the Talmuds also, we find the Messiah to be, The Stone cut out of the
Mountain.

PSALM CXIX.
1 O the vast blessings of the Men, who have [and hold] Integrity in their way;
walking in the Law of [Him who's] the ETERNAL God'

2 O the vast blessings of the Men who keep [with heed] the things which He
does testify! With all their heart they [ever] do seek after Him.

3 Yea, they work no iniquity; they in His [Holy] ways do walk.

4 Thou thy Commandments haft prescribed greatly to be [by all] observed.

5 O that my ways directed were thy Statutes to observe [with care.]

6 Then shall I not be shamed, when I [truly] regard all Thy Commands.

7 With a just Rectitude of Heart I [freely] shall confess thy Praise, when I
have learned the Judgments which Thy Righteousness has given [to us.]

8 What things Thou haft appointed, those I will observe with [constant] care:
O do not Thou forsake me to a great [and (...)] extremity.

II Beth.

9 A Young Man, by what Method shall he purify his [sinfui] path? He Will do it,
if he do take heed according to thy [Holy] Word.

10 With all the powers of my heart I have sought after thee, [D Lord.] To
wander, Oh! Don't suffer me from thy [most right] Commandments.

11 In my heart I have hid thy Word, that thee I may not [by Sin] offend.

12 Blessed art thou, O ETERNAL God; Thy Statutes [therefore] teach thou me.

13 I all the Judgments of thy mouth have with my lips declared [abroad.]

14 I in thy Testimonies way, [as mu^^] as in all wealth, rejoice.

15 I Will on thy Precepts meditate; and (...) regard [with care] thy Paths.

16 I in thy Statutes will delight; (...) not forget thy [Holy] Word.

III. Gimel.

17 Unto thy Servant O do Thou m^^ [kind and] bountiful returns; O let me live
that so I may observe with care [(...) do] thy Word.

18 Open my Eyes, that I may see (...) [hidden] Wonders of thy Law.

19 On Earth I am a stranger; don't (...) me thy precepts [therefore] hide.

20 At all times for thy Judgments do^^^ my Soul break with [intense] desire.

21 The cursed proud ones Thou rebuk'^^ who from [ways of] thy Precepts err.

22 Rolling it off from me, O take away reproach, and [shameful] Scorn; bec^^^
Thy Testimonies I have kept [with ca^^] inviolate.

23 Princes themselves in Council fart; (...) against me then they [falsely]
spoke; Thy Servant on Thy Statutes did the meat while [ever] meditate.

24 Thy Testimonies truly are my ravishing [and chief] delight; they are the
Counselors which I do still [chuse (...)] consult withal.

25 To dust my Soul cleaves; quicken me according to thy [gracious] Word.

26 I showed my ways, and me thou heardst; thy [Holy] Statutes teach thou me.

27 Make me to understand the way thy Precepts have [to me] prescribed; so I
will meditate upon the [Glorious] wonders thou haft wrought.

28 With grief my Soul melts; strengthen me according to thy Word [to me.]

29 The way of lying take from me; and [kindly] grant to me thy Law.

30 The way which truth directs unto is that [of which] I make my choice; thy
Judgments are what I have still proposed to [mind and] keep unto.

31 Unto Thy Testimonies I adhere, ETERNAL God [forever;] O let me not be put
unto [shame and] confusion, doing so.

32 I with a quickened pace will run the [Holy] way of thy Commands, when Thou
upon my straightened Heart Enlargement haft [from Heav'n] bestowed.

V. He.

33 Teach me, O Thou ETERNAL God, the way [the which] Thou do appoint; and
I Will keep it inviolate [always] unto the very end.

34 O give me Understanding, so I will then keep thy Law, [unbroke;] yea, I
will it observe with Care, and that with all my Heart [and might.]

35 Lead me in thy commanded Path; for [greatly] I therein delight.

36 Bow my Heart to thine Oracles, and not to [fordid] Avarice.

37 From view of vain things turn my eyes; in thy way [lead and] quicken me.

38 Good to thy Servant make thy Word, who is wholly [purpos'd] for thy fear.

39 My feared Reproach, O turn away; for good [and right] thy Judgments are.

40 Lo, I Have longed for thy Precepts; in Thy Justice [do Thou] Quicken me.

VI. Vau.

41 O Let Thy Mercies come again to me [D Thou] ETERNAL God; Let thy Salvation
come to me according to [whats in] thy Word.

42 So I a Word shall answer to him that [falsely] reproaches me; because that
I upon thy Word do [ever] place my Confidence.

43 And from my Mouth, O take Thou not wholly [away] the Word of truth: Because
that of thy Judgments I an [hopeful] expectation have.

44 Thus I will always keep thy Law [I'll do't] long, yea, Eternally.

45 And I will walk at large, because have sought [after] Thy Commands.

46 Yea, before Kings themselves I will speak of thy [faithful] Oracles; nor
will I ever be ashamed of what I do therein [for them.]

47 And I in Thy Commandments will take [all of] my sweet Delight; for they
are what I still have set my [kind and] chief Affection on.

48 My hands I will lift up unto Thy Precepts which I Have [dearly] loved; and
what are Thy appointments I will [daily] meditate thereon.

VII. Zain.

49 Unto thy Servant, O be thou still [always] mindful of the Word, on which
thou have caused me to place my [constant] expectation still.

50 This is my comfort in my grief; that thy Word [ever] quickens me.

51 The proud have much derided me; [But yet] I ve not gone from thy Law.

52 ETERNAL God, Thy Judgments I remembered have, which are [the same] of old,
and thereupon I have encouraged my self [in them.]

53 Horror with a tempestuous force has [often] taken hold on me, on the
account of wicked ones who do forsake thy [Holy] Law.

54 In the house of my Pilgrimage thy Statutes are my [cheerful] Songs.

55 O Thou ETERNAL God, I have been [ever] mindful of thy Name; yea, in the
Night I have been so; and I have [therefore] kept thy Law.

56 This has befallen me, because thy Precepts I have kept [with care.]

VIII. Cheth.

57 My Portion, O ETERNAL God, Thou art, so I have said [of Thee.] And this it
is, that so I would observe [with care] all of thy words.

58 Thy favorable Face I have besought with all my Heart [and Soul;] O be thou
merciful to me according to thy [faithful] Word.

59 I viewed my ways, and turned my feet [thereon] unto thine Oracles.

60 I made haste, and did not delay for to keep [all of] thy commands.

61 The bands of wicked ones robbed me; [but yet] thy Law I Have not forgot.

62 To praise thee I at midnight rise; for thy just Judgments it is [I do't].

63 To all of them that have thy fear I a companion arn [and friend:] I am so
unto all who do [mind and] keep thy Commandments.

64 ETERNAL God, The Earth is full of thy [most kind] benignity; O do thou well
instruct me in the things [the which] thou do appoint.

65 O Thou ETERNAL God, Thou half one [the best] Good, to One that is a
faithful Servant unto thee; [even] according to thy Word.

66 Good sense and knowledge teach me; for thy Precepts [firmly] I believe.

67 Before I was abas'd, I strayed; But now I [better] keep thy Word.

68 Thou art Good, and thou do Good; Thy Statutes [therefore] teach thou me.

69 The proud forged lies of me; I keep thy Statutes [very] heartily.

70 Their heart's as fat as senseless grease [whereas] I in thy Law delight.

71 It Is good for me I Have been chastis'd; Thy Statutes so to learn [from
thence.]

72 The Law dispensed from thy mouth [by far] is better unto me than would be
many Thousands of Gold, and of [choicess] Silver Coin.

X. Jod.

73 Thy hands have made me what I am; and [it is] they have fashioned me; O
Give me Understanding that I may learn [to do] thy Commands.

74 They who have thy true fear in them [with it] shall take a view of me; and
they shall then rejoice, because I Have hoped in thy [faithful] Word.

75 ETERNAL God, I know full well that [very] just thy Judgments are; and with
unfailing faithfulness thou have [always] afflicted me.

76 I pray thee, let thy mercy be still for [this End] to comfort me; according
to thy Word which Thou have to thy [faithful] Servant given.

77 The tenderest compassions let, O let them come to [succour] me; so shall I
live to Thee; because thy Law yields me [the best] delights.

78 Let proud ones be ashamed; for they wronged [and hurt] me without a cause;
But I Will keep meditating still on thy [most just] Commandments.

79 Let those that have thy fear in them with [Love and] kindness turn to me;
and this let all that understand thy Testimonies [always] do.

80 Let my heart have integrity in [all of] what thou do appoint; Let it be
thus. that so I may not [come to] be at all ashamed.

XI. Caph.

81 My Soul for thy Salvation faints; for thy word do [wait and] hope.

82 My eyes fail for thy Word, and say, When will thou [help and] quicken me?

83 Because I am become like to a Bottle [which is] dried in smoke, I Am not
forgetful of the things [all of] the which thou have ordained.

84 How many are the days which thou lest to thy [^ying] Serva^t grant? When on
my persecutors will thou [a just] Judgment execute?

85 The proud have dug pitts for me; which answer not [well to] thy Law.

86 Each one of thy Commandments are very [Truth and] Faithfulness. They
persecute me wrongfully; O send thou help [from Heav'n] to me.

87 On Earth they near consumed me; yet I left not [nor broke] thy Commands.

88 According to thy mercy now O do thou [save and] quicken me. So I the
Testimony of thy mouth shall keep with [cautious] care.

XII. Lamed.

89 ETERNAL God, Thy Word remains forever [set'ed] in the Heavens.

Thy Truth's from Age to Age; Thou found'st the Farth and it abides, [forever.]

91 They by thy orders stand this day, For all [of th^m] thy Servants are.

92 Had not thy Law been my delights, then in my [Woful] grief's I'h'd sunk.

93 I Will never forget thy Precepts, for with them [it is] thou quick'nest me

94 I am thine own; O save thou me; for I Have sought [and kept] thy Commands.

95 With hopes the wicked ones do wait, that they may [wholly] ruin me; I on
thy Testimonies do consideration [therefore] use.

96 I have beheld a Period set to all Perfection here [on Carth.] In thy
Commandment there is a very broad [and vast] extent.

XIII. Mem.

97 How vehemently do I love the Law distilled by thee [on us!] It is my
meditation still, all [of the] day * and every day.

98 Thou have made me more wise than those that are my [Wicked] enemies;
Thorough thy Precepts it is; for they forever are [and stay] with me.

99 I have more understanding than all my instructers have [with them;] For I
thy Testimonies do my [constant] meditation make.

100 I know more than the Ancients do; For I keep thy Commands [with care.]

101 From all ill paths I Have kept my feet; that I may keep [close to] thy Word.

102 I have not from thy Judgments gone; For [better] thouh'st instructed me.

103 How sweet thy words unto my tastel [They're sweet] past honey to my mouth.

104 To understanding I arrive through thy [most wise] Commandments; I therefore
do hate every way of false [and base] iniquity.

XIV. Nun.

105 Thy Word's a Lamp unto my feet; and [a clear] Light unto my path.

106 I Have sworn, and will periorm't; I will thy righteous Judgments [ever] keep.

107 O Thou ETERNAL God, I am afflicted [and broke] very much; But O do thou
enliven me according to thy [faithful] Word.

108 The Free-will-offerings of my mouth I pray thee [kindly] to accept; and, O
ETERNAL God, Teach me the Judgments thou have given [to us.]

109 My Soul's in my hand ever; yet thy Law I don't forget [for all.]

110 The wicked lay snares for me; yet thy Precepts I Have not [Wandring] lost.

111 Thy Testimonies I have took [to be] for my Inheritance; Forever so;
Because they are the [joy and] gladness of my heart.

112 I have inclined my heart to do the things [the which] thou do appoint;
Yea, to do them forevermore, in Hope of a [most sure] reward.

113 I wavering thot's abominate; But I do [dearly] love thy Law.

114 Thou art my shelter and my shield, I do [place my] hope in thy Word.

115 Depart from me, O all of you, [each one] that evil doers are; for I Will
keep the Commandments of Him who is my [chosen] God.

116 Upnold thou me according to thy Word, and I shall [surely] I Have; and make
me not ashamed of what my [raised] expectation is.

117 Sustain thou me, and then shall I in perfect safety [always] be: and I Will
unto thy Statutes have [a just] respect continually.

118 All who do from thy Statutes err, such have thou [justly] trodden down:
For the deceit they trusted in [anon] is found a falsity.

119 The dross thou make to cease, ev'nall the wicked of the Earth [are
such:] Thy Testimonies therefore I [as pure] place my affection on.

120 Thorough a fear of thee my flesh is with a [fearful] trembling se^z'd; and
of thy awful Judgments I am [always] very much afraid.

XVI. Chajin.

121 Judgment I Have done, and Justice: To my [cruel] vexers leave me not.

122 For good thy Servants surety be; Let not the proud me [wrong and] vex.

123 My eyes for thy Salvation fail, and looking for thy [Kighteous] Word.

124 Deal with thy Servant in thy Grace, and me thy Statutes [therefore] teach.

125 I am thy Servant, make me wise; to know thy [faithful] Oracles.

126 Time for the ETERNAL it is to work: they have made void [and Hull] thy Law.

127 I therefore my affection place on thy [despis'd] Commandments, more than
I do on any Gold, yea, than [upon] the finest Gold.

128 I therefore judge all thy Commands, of all things to be [very] right; I do
hate every way that is found by them for to be false [and wrong]

XVII. Pe.

129 Wondrous thy Testimonies are; My Soul them [therefore] ever keeps.

130 The opening of thy Words gives light; It makes the simple [truly] wise.

131 I did for this open my mouth, and [I did] aspirations use; Because I
longed earnestly for [to gain] thy Commandments.

132 O look upon me, and to me O be thou [very] merciful; according to thy
usual course to them who [truly] love thy Name.

133 The Steps I take, O give to them [a full] direction in thy Word; and grant
to no Iniquity [to have] Dominion over me.

134 From man's unjust oppression set [and keep] me at full liberty; so then I
unobstructed shall keep thy [most just] Commandments.

135 Upon Thy Servant, O make Thou Thy [pleased] Countenance to shine; and do
thou well instruct me in the Things [the which] Thou do appoint.

136 Rivers of Waters do run down still flowing from my [weeping] Eyes; For
this Cause, in that they have not observed well thy [Holy] Law.

XVIII. Tsade.

137 Just Thou art, OETERNAL God, and right thy Judgments [always] are.

138 The Justice of thy Oracles, and Truth thou [very] much requir'st.

139 My Zeal has cut me off; Because my Foes forget [whats in] thy Words.

140 Thy Word is very pure; therefore thy Servant [dearly] loves it.

141 I Am small and I Am despised yet I, [for all] forget not thy Commands.

142 Thy Justice ever Justice is; and thy Law is the [very] Truth.

143 Trouble and anguish finding me have taken [a strong] hold on me; But still
thy Precepts under all afford me my [most sweet] Delight.

144 Thy Oracles are Righteousness to [endless] perpetuity; Give understanding
unto me; Then shall I surely live [to Thee.]

XIX Koph.

145 With all the Powers of my Heart I made a [loud and] piercing cry: Hear me,
O Thou ETERNAL God; Thy Statutes I will keep [with care.]

146 I made a piercing Cry to thee; [unto] me thy Salvation grant that so thy
Testimonies I may thereupon [with care] observe.

147 The Dawning of the Morning, I prevented it betimes [for this;] that I
might make my Cry to Thee; Thy Word [is what] I Have hoped for.

148 My Eyes with waking do prevent the Watches of the Night [for this;] that I
upon thy word may have my [early] Meditation placed.

149 ETERNAL God, According to thy Mercy hear my [Earnest] Voice; O quicken me
according as Thy [Wont and] Judgment is for it.

150 Who follow mischief, they draw nigh; They from thy Law at [very] far.

151 ETERNAL God, You Are near and all of thy Commands are [wholly] Truth.

152 About thy Testimonies I have known this [certain] thing of old; that their
foundation Thou have laid for [lasting] perpetuity.

Resh. XX.

153 My Trouble view, and save me; for I don't forget Thy Law [therein.]

154 Plead Thou my Cause and rescue me; Quicken me for [to do] thy Word.

155 Salvation is far distant from [all of] such as are wicked ones: for they
seek not to know and do the things [the which] thou do appoint.

156 Many Thy tender Mercies are, [and great] O Thou ETERNAL God: According to
thy Judgments now, O do Thou [therefore] quicken me.

157 Many my Persecutors are, many [and great] my Enemies; yet from thy
Testimonies I do not [for that] at all decline.

158 When I transgressors have beheld, I have been grieved [very] much; The
reason of it was; because they have not [duly] kept thy Word.

159 Behold, O Thou ETERNAL God; thy Precepts how I love [and prize!] according
to thy Mercy now O do Thou [kindly] quicken me.

160 Thy Words beginning* and main point is [ever] most undoubted truth; and
all thy righteous Judgments are [still such] to perpetuity.

XXI. Schin.

161 Great Men, but without any Cause, have [siercely] persecuted me; But of
thy Word my Heart has still maintained a [silial] Reverence.

162 I at thy word rejoice as one that sinds [therein] a mighty Spoil.

163 Lying I hate and do abhor; [But then] thy Law I dearly love.

164 Thee for thy righteous Judgments I praise seven times [at least] a day.

165 Great peace have they that love thy Law;and nothing them [hurts or]
offe^ds.

166 I Have had ^y Expectation of Salvation sent from Thee [atone,] O Thou
ETERNAL God; and I have [therefore] done what thou Command'st.

167 Thy testimonies has my Soul [ever] most diligently kept; and the Love
which I bear to themis very [strong and] vehement.

168 Strictly I have thy Precepts and thy [faithful] ^estimonies kept; because
that all my Ways do lie [J know] forever in thy view.

169 Before Thee O ETERNAL God, Now let my cry come [very] near; give
Understanding unto me according to [what's in] thy word.

170 O Let my Supplication now draw near before thy [Glorious] face; Grant thou
me a Deliverance according to thy [faithful] Word.

171 My Lips shall utter praise when thou have [unto] me thy Statutes taught.

172 My Tongue shall speak thy Word; for all of thy Commands are [very] just.

173 Let thy hand help me; for I have chose [to keep] thy Commandments.

174 ETERNAL, Thy Salvation I wish, and thy Law's [to me] my Joys.

175 My Soul, O let it live to Thee, and it shall [gladly] praise thee then;
But for this blessed purpose let thy Judgments be my Aid [and Guide.]

176 Like to a Sheep that has been lost, I have been wandering so [about:] O
seek thy Servant out; for I forget not [to do] thy Commands.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXIX. PSALM.
IT was required of the Jewish King, Peut. XXVII. 18. To write him a Copy of
the Law in a Book. Is it not probable our David might be now at that Work?
While his Hand was transcribing of the Divine Oracles, (...) Heart mic^^ be
thus affected with them: And so might note the Devout Motions and Salleys of
his ^oly Heart, as he went along; which Independent (...) is, he might
afterward cast into the Alphabetical Order wherein we now enjoy them.

Theo^oret observes, David had great Varieties in (...) Condition. All these
are here collected into one Psalm; no connected with the Prayers he had made
unto God (...) the several Occasions. A Psalm sufficient (he says) (...)
afford all manner of Medicines for the Cure of the ^^rious Dis^ases of Mankind.

The Prophetic Spirit here also teaches the dispersed ^^^s, how to adhere unto
God, and confess their past ^nors, and c^rry it well under the Persecutions
they ^^^^r from Antichrist, and his Abettors. Oh! were ^oy sousible!

It is ^^dent from sundry passages in the Pook of Psalm, that the Gody Jews,
had a Prospect beyond the Outside and Letter of the Law; and that they
^pprehended a more Spiritual and Mystical and ^vancelical meaning in it, than
what the bare Letter men^tioned. There was a Kabala among the true Israeltes,
which instr^cted them in the Glorious Truths or the Gospel, which lay under the
Shadows of the Law. Thus [I sal. XXV. 14.] The Secret (or, Mystery) of ^^bovah
was with them that feared Him.

Here we read of, Wondrous Things in the Law, and Commandment exceeding broad,
and many ^assages which refer to Mystery. The Mystery is in one Word, the
CHRISTIAN REHGION.

1 Arn hims will so Gloss it; CHRIST is the way. 1: The Psalmist employs
himself in Blessing of God, which (...) thing very pleasing to Him. Aben-(...)
^^server, That He desires no Reward of His Re^^^^ Endeavo^^, but this; To be
taught the States of God 17 R. ^^olomon reads it so: In a way of Recompen^^
(...) thy Servant the thing ^y which I m^^ live. Now the Messi^h is the Thing
by which we live Compare, Lam. IV. 20.

The Coming of the Messiah is promised in those Terms, Isai. XXXV. 4. God the
Recompense (or, God with a Recompense) will come and save you. The same Word
that is used here. The Messiah is very fity called, The God ^f Recompense,
because He is to be the Judge of the World. Yea, He is called, The God who is
the Recompense; Because in the Enjoyment of Him, there is made up the want of
every thing else, and amends are made for all Sorrows. The Recompensing JEHOV
AH; Chr^stian, It Is the Name of thy SAVIOR. And I have now given th^e a Key, to
many of the Holy Oracles. Compare, Genesis XV. 1. The promise of the Messiah is, I
am thy exceeding great Reward.

The Granting and Coming of the Messiah is here prayed for.

22 It is a Reproach unto a Man, and makes him worthy of Contempt, when he
neglects the Divine Institutions. When the Israel^tes of Old, kept the
Testimonies of GOD, in observing the Circumcision, which was to Testify their
Faith in the M^ssiah, it was then said, Josh. V. 9. This day I have rou^daway
the reproach of Egypt from off you. That very Word is used here. Enquire into
the Intention.

25 Did the Psalmist humbly Lie prostrate in the Dust, when he thus expressed
himself? -- A Godly Man will thus complain under and against his Earthly
Dispositions.

Munster's Gloss is, proximus morti, I am just going into the Grave.

26 Take an hint of Old Arnobius, Artem Exaudiendi Didicisti, Christian. Do
thou Declare the ways of God, O Christian, in making them thy own, and see if
He do not hear thy Prayers.

31 Arnobius notes, That Confusion will naturally ^ise, when a Petition is not
heard, by one of whose ^avour to us we presumed upon.

45 To walk at Liberty is not to walk as a Liberti^^; But to be free from the
Encumbrances, which may hinder our Walk with GOD.

49 What Word? That in Genesis III. 15. So Arnobi^^. The Evil Spirits enjoying
their Temples and their Opitols, were some of the Proud, who had this Word in
Derision.

59 Upon serious Deliberation, What Course of Lise to take. So Patrick
paraphrases.

69 May not the Lie referred to, be that 1. Sam. XXIV. 9.

91 These things continue; But Man for whom God made them does not continue.
Why? They all are Servants of God. But Man declines the Service of God. Homo
non persever at quia non, sicut omnia, servit tibi.

This is a Gloss of Antiquity.

96 The most porfect and Glorious things in this World come to an ^^nd. But,
the Law of God extends, in futurum seculum. So Munster Glosses it. Arnobius
considers the Commandment as exceeding broad; Quia omnia Terra spatia occupat.
There will a time come, when all People, in the Breadth of the whole Earth,
shall yield Obedience unto it. GOD hasten it

98 Some think, the more particular Commandments by the Observation whereof the
Wife Man defeated and outwitted his Enemies, were those which restrained him
from attempting his own Revenges upon them. See, 1 Samuel XXIV. 17. and XXVI. 21.

99 In the P^rke Avoth, we have a Notable Reading of the Passage. I learn
Wisdom from all my Teachers. The Text will bear it And, Christian, it will be
thy Wisdom to do it.

103 Why Sweet unto his Mouth, and not rather unto his Ear, and his Heart?
Mollerus gives a good Account of it. He speaks as a Tea^her of others; and
there should be nothing so sweet unto a Heather, as to have the Words of GOD
passing through his Mouth, unto them that are about him.

122 It Is, as I remember, Austins Note; That this is almost the only Verse of
the Psalm, where the Law of God, in one or other of the various terms for it,
is not mentioned. And now, Ubi Lex deficit ibi Christus. Now it is time for
CHRIST our Surety to appear.

126 It is Maimonides who so reads it; It is Time to Work for the Lord.

130 R. Solomon is a little curious here; The Word of GOD, at the very Entrance
of it, in the History of the Creation, begins with Lighi.

The Patrician Paraphrase is a Good one; When 2 Man does but begin to be
acquainted with thy Word, he finds his Mind marvellously enlightened with such
clear and useful knowledge, as directs the most simple People, how to live
happily.

134 The sense is obvious. But I will and, that of R. Amama who reads it, The
Oppression of Adam, That is, The Evil Figment, or Original Sin, derived from
Adam.

136 -- Yea, What if the Psalmist also laments the Sins of his own Eyes,
because they kept not the Law of GOD. The Word for, Law, signifies, both to
Teach and to Rain. When God gives His Law to Men, there are Showers of Grace
from Heaven upon them. When Men don't keep the Law, it calls for Showers of
Grief with all observers on Farth.

PSALM CXX. A Song of Degrees.
1 I In my Tribulation did make a distressing cry to the ETERNAL God, and He
did hearken unto me.

2 Grant O ETERNAL God, unto my Soul deliverance from a lip that will speak a
lie, from a deceitful tongue.

3 What shall He give thee, and what pay to thee, Deceitful tongue.

4 Sharp Arrows of a mighty one, with Coals of Junipers.

5 Woe is me, that in Mesheck I am still a sojourner; in Kedars Tabernacles I
have all my residence.

6 Long has my Soul its dwelling had with him that hates peace.

7 I am for peace; but when I speak, still they are bent for war,

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXX. PSALM.
MAny Conjectures have been about the meaning of this Title, A Song of Degrees,
here put upon fifteen of the Psalms. Kimchi says, They were Sung in the Ascent
of the Jews from the Babylonian Capti^ity. [We have the same Word, Ezra VII.
9.] R. Saadias will have the Psalms to be Sung in an higher Note, or an higher
Place than ordinary. Aben-Ezra thinks. The Term only distinguishes the Tune, to
which the Psalms were fisted. R. Obadiah thinks, The Psalms to be Composed for
every Degree of Persons. Many think the Psalms to be called thus, because they
are Excellent in the Superlative Degree. There are those who fancy them
Calculated for the Time, when the Sun went back by the Degrees on the Dial, to
foretell the Fifteen Years of Hezekiah's Life. A Worthy Scotchman, Mr.
Hutcheson, thinks the Psalms were Sung by the Priesis and Levites, about the
Altar, while the Burnt Offerings and Sacrifices, were As^^^^ in Smoke from
thence. Good Old Arnobius will (...) at least an a^reeable Similitude upon it.
Veluti^^ ali^^ qui^in foveam cec^dit, ponatur scala. By th^^ Pravers and
Frames, we are to be fetched up (...) Depths of Calamities. Some, who seem to
come (...) the matter than the rest, will have the Psalms (...) Sung, either on
the Stairs of the Temple; or (...) Stains belonging to the Tower of David.
[Neh^^ 15. XII. 37.] But in the Nouvelles de la Repub^^^ des Lettres, I find a
Gentleman offering a Conje^^ more ingenious than any yet mentioned. These (...)
Psal^^s were et apart by the Directors of the (...) sia^^cal Polity of Israel,
to be Sung on the Top (...) Stairs, during the Night Watch of the Guard a^^^
the Temple. What more agreeable Song could th^^ be, to entertain and ^nimate
their Piety? The (...) ^ites are so descrio^d. Mal. 11.12. Him that wa^^^ and
him that answers. It is ^^tably Explained in (...) last of there ^if^een
Psalms. It is a Dialogue, (...) the first that spea^s, (...) he tha^ makes,
namely (...) Levite who stood C^ntiael without the Court of (...) at the Place
most proper for him to look out, ex^^^ his Companions to Sanctify the Hours of
the Night, praisin of GOD, unto the Service of whom they were vote^. The other
that Answers, blesses him (...) Waketh, by way or an Holy Acknowledgment for
sub an holy Exhortation; The Lord Bless thee out (...) Zion. What could that
Sentinel do better, than (...) Sing an Holy Song A certain Proof that this
Wat^hman in the House of GOD, was neither out of (...) Post, nor tallen a
Sleep. And certainly 'twas pre^^ that some Watchman of the Guard, should
answ^^^ that waked them. A good Exhortation ought (...) to be lest unanswered;
and it was for the (...) these Levites to give a proof of their being on (...)
tune to time, the Levits was on the Centry, Sung one of other of those Fifteen
Psalms: and at the end of every Psalm, he added the two first-Verses of the
CXXXIV. Psalm, which occa^oned the Answer and Blessing in the last Verse of the
Psalm.

The Jews costantly refer all these Fifteen Psalms to their People, in the
Dispersion wherein they are now languishing.

In the Fifth Verse of the Psalm now before us, we sind the Idumaeans and
Arabians; that is to say, the Romans and the Mahometans.

4 A Long Fire as well as a Strong one, is here pointed at. Juniper abounds
with a piercing Oil, which yields a very sharp Fire; and Pliny says, Coals of
Juniper, being raked up, will keep a glowing Fire for a whole Year together.

5 The Hebrew Particle Gnim, is to be translated, Like, as well as, In, or
With. As I remember Glassius thus reads the Text now be ore us. But some think
that the Calumnies of Doeg did force David, actually to take a flight into
these Countries. Or, Mesheck, as Bochart thinks, may signify, not a Place but
the Length of Time, which he stayed in his Exile. All the Ancient Interpreters
exeept one, understand it so. Patricks Paraphrase is; 'I groan, not only in a
tedious Banishment from my own Country, but I am forced to seek for shelter
among the Barbarous Arabs.

PSALM CXXI. A Song for Degrees.
1 I Lift my Eyes up to the Hills: From whence should come my help?

2 My help's from the ETERNAL God, who made the Heavens and Earth,

3 He will not let thy foot be moved; thy Keeper slumbers not.

4 Lo, He that keeps Israel; He slumbers not, nor sl^eps.

5 The ETERNAL God is He who is the watchful Keeper still; The ETERNAL God
becomes thy shade; at thy right hand He stands.

6 The Sun shall not smite thee by Day nor shall the Moon by Night.

7 The ETERNAL keeps thee from all ill. He shall preserve thy Soul.

8 The ETERNAL keeps thy going out; and keeps thy coming in; He does it from
this time and will do it forevermore.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXI. PSALM.
THe Title here a l^ttle differs from the other Fo^^teen. Cajetan observing it,
has a stroke of Christian Modesty, which we may often find occasion to use,
when Difficultles in the ^acred Scriptures occur unto us; Reservo Spiritur
Sancto. Restored Isra^ will thus comfort herself. Compare, Isai. LX. 19. and
Rev. XXII. 5.

5 An Allusion to the Pillar of Cloud and Firs, which accommodated Israel,
traveling through the Wilderness.

6 Sunt Solis et Lunae Tela, Pestis. The Psalm^^ after the Faith of the Second
Verse comes to supp^^ ^he Angels uttering to him in the Holy Place, (...)
Comolations. See, 2 Samuel XVII. 1, 6, 22.

PSALM CXXII. A Song of Degrees. Of David.
1 I Took delight in hearing them who said thus unto me, We will go up unto the
house of the ETERNAL God.

2 Our Feer were standing once withinthy Gates, Jerusalem.

3 Jerusalem's as a City built compacted well together.

4 Thither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of JAH, to the Oracle of Israel, for to
Praise the Name of the ETERNAL God.

5 For there are placed the Thrones on which Judgment is given forth; The
Thrones which do unto the House of David appertain.

6 For the Peace of Jerusalem O make a strong request: They who have a true
love to thee shall see Prosperity.

7 Let there be Peace within the Wall which you are surrounded with; Let there
be seen Prosperity within thy Palaces.

8 For the sake of my Brethren, and of my Associates; this is what I will utter
now, Let Peace be found in thee.

9 For the sake of the House which to the ETERNAL God belongs, Even the God who
is our God; I will pursue thy Good.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXII. PSALM.
I Find, the Ancients Expounding the Psalm, concerning the State of Things in
the New Jerusalem, after the First Resurrection.

And so Dr. Allix observes, The Psalm is the Gladness of Restored Israel, It
supposes the Twelve Tribes gathered, Jerusalem rebuilt, the Twelve Seats of the
Apostles laid, and the Reign of the Messiah established.

Some see this occasion for the Psalm. David having settled the Ark at
Jerusalem, and being at this Time on some Cocasion in the Country, heard the
good People there speak one to another, as some of them did unto him, of going
to Worship God, at some of the Three Solemn Festivals: This devotion of theirs,
as it rejoiced his heart, so probably it moved him to compose the Psalm, for
their use at such Times as these.

The Talmuds tell us, they did use to sing the Firs Verse of the Psalm, as they
went out of the Country toward Jerusalem, carrying their First Fruits unto the
House of the Lord, as the Law, [Deut. XXVI. 2.] directed them. And when they
entered within the Gates of the City, they Sang the Second Verse. There they
were met by some of the Citizens who Sang the rest of the Psalm together with
them, as they went toward the Temple. Of this Custom Seldom gives us a fuller
Account.

PSALM CXXIII. A Song of Degrees.
1 TO Thee I lift my Eyes, O Thou who dwell in the Heavens.

2 Lo, as the Eyes of Servants are to the hand of their Lords; as the Eyes of
the Handmaid are unto her Ladies hand; even so our eyes are kept intent on the
ETERNAL God. He is our God and unto Him w^ do direct our look; until that He
upon us shall compassion please to have,

3 Pity us, O ETERNAL God; have pity upon us: for with contempt that is cast on
us We Are filled exceedingly.

4 Our S^ul is filled exceedingly with the contemptuous scorn of such as live
a^ease; with the disdain of haughty ones.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXIII. PSALM.
THE Prophetic Spirit here prepares a priver, for the Jews, under the
oppression of Antichrist, Dr. Patrick thinks it a snott Prayer mane by a pious
person, when the King of Assyria, sent Ra^sh kali, and his other Captains, to
the besie^ing of Jerusalem; when they cast the utmost contempt on the People of
God. [2. King. XVIII, XIX.] It might be composed by Isaiah, when Hezekiah
desired him to lift up a Pray^ for the Remnant that was left. Perhaps both
Hezekich and he, lift up their Eyes to Heaven, and used these Words.

PSALM CXXIV. A Song of Degrees
1 BUT that the ETERNAL was with us, Now this may Israel say.

2 But that the ETERNAL was with us, when Men against us rose.

3 Then had they swallowed us alive, when their wrath raged at us.

4 Then had the waters covered us, the stream gone over our Soul.

5 Then the proud swelling waters had surely gone over our Soul.

6 Blessed be the ETERNAL, who gives not us to their Teeth a prey.

7 Our Soul's escaped as a bird out of the Fowlers snare; the snare is broken;
and we are escaped out of it.

8 Our help is in the Name of Him who is the ETERNAL God; He is the Powerful
Maker of the Heavens and the Earth.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXIV. PSALM.
THe Miraculous conservation of Israel among the Idolaters and Barbarians, who
have often sought their entire Destruction, is here celebrated.

8 The Jews apprehend, not only the Cause, but also the very Time of their
great Redemption to be here mysteriously intimated. The Lord permitted Six Days
to roll away, while He made Heaven and Earth. Even ^o, they say, the Lord will
not appear for their Help, till toward the End of the Sixth Millennium; For, A
Thousand Years is with the Lord ^s one day. Then their Soul will escape as a
Bird out of the Snare of the Fowler.

PSALM CXXV. A Song of Degrees.
1 THey who trust in the ETERNAL God, these as Mount Zion are; which is not to
be moved, but stands to perpetuity.

2 Mountains surround Jerusalem; so the ETERNAL God surrounds His People from
this time. (...) and ^v^n for evermore.

3 For the Rod of Iniquity shall not rest on the Lot of just ones: lest the
just put forth their hands to Wickedness

4 O Thou ETERNAL God, Do Thou please to do good unto such as are good, and to
such as are in their hearts upright:

5 But such as turn to crooked ways, the ETERNAL God will these with evil Doers
make to go. Peace upon Israel now!

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXV. PSALM.
DR. Patrick looks on the Psalm, as an Exhortation unto the People, to trust in
God, when Sennacherib threatened the Destruction of Jerusalem. These may be some
of the Comfortable Words. which Hezekiah then spoke unto them. [2. Chron.
XXXII. 6.7.8.] When God chastised them with that Rod of His Anger. [See, Isai,
X. 5.]

Dr. Allix looks further, and sees here; a Proplecy of Israel's Preservation,
and the Destruction of the Antichristian Powers, which oppress them, and
persecute the Church; and at last Isreal's Happiness, when this Rod or Scepter
of Wic^edness, ^^dest^oyed.

2 The Original is, And the Lord is round about His People. But the Particle
Van often Signifies Much more.

3 An Allusion to the Method used for the dividing of Lands among the Jews. A
Rod or Staff was used in Sortition; particularly, in assigning any I and by
Lot. The meaning is; The Portion of the Wicked, shall not be the Portion of the
Righteous; they shall not in their future Condition be confounded with one
another

PSALM. CXXVI. A Song of Degrees.
1 WHen the ETERNAL God returned what was returned of the Captived Zion, we
were like to people in a Dream.

2 Then was our Mouth replenished with Notes of cheerful mirth; so was our
Tongue with Shouts; they then among the People said; The ETERNAL God has done
for them things that are very great,

3 The ETERNAL God, has done for us great things; whereof we are Glad.

4 O Thou ETERNAL God, Return what must return of us; It will exhilirate us
like Streams running in the South.

5 They who do Sow in Tears, shall reap with an exulting Joy.

6 Each one of those in going forth does mostly weeping go: He carries forth
the Precious Seed, a little, to be sown; he surely does return with Joy; he
does bring back his Sheaves.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXVI. PSALM.
BEhold the Surprise of the Israelites Returned and Restored by the Messiah,

1 Some take it so, We were in such a Frame, and it was at such a Time, that we
took all the Prophecies about our Deliverance, to have been so many Dreams.

4 A Thing as welcome as the Enjoyment of Streams in a thirsty Land. So
Munster: Non mimis erit illud, quam si in Deserto squalido et exusto, Rivos
facias urrere aquarum. The South of the Holy Land is every parched Land; a dry
and a faint Wilderness.

6 Kimchi says, The Husbandman is here supposed, in a dry Soil, falling into
Tears, through Fears that the Droughts will procure the loss of all the Seed. But
God looks on his Tears, and with seasonable Showers, procures the Joy of
Harvest.

And now the Spanish Gloss will more particularly and Emphatically tell you,
who the Weeping Husbandman are. Los Trabans pios Ministros del Evangelio, no
ser an sin Fruto. The Laboring and pious Ministers of the Gospel shall not be
without Fruit.

This is Dr. Patricks Paraphrase. Just as we behold the poor Husbandman, going
to and fro with a little Seed, which in a scarce year, he throws with a heavy
heart into the Ground, returning again and again from the Field, with Songs of
Joy in his Mouth, when the Harvest comes to Reward his past Labors with a
Plentiful Crop of Corn.

PSALM CXXVII. A Song of Degrees of Solomon.
UNless that the ETERNAL God shall please to build the House; they that the
Builders of it are do labor but in vain. Unless that the ETERNAL God shall
please to keep the Town, in vain does any keeper else maintain a careful Watch.

2 In vain is all you do, O you, who do make haste to rise; who don't sit down
till it be late; who eat the Bread of Griefs. So, * and in a convenient way, He
does a sweet repose unto His Jedidiah give, * to His Beloved one.

3 Lo, Children are the Heritage of the ETERNAL God; the Fruit of the Womb is
bestowed by Him as a Reward.

4 As Arrows in the Hand of one that is a mighty Man, so are the Sons of Youth,
to him who sees them in their Youth.

5 O Blessed is the Man, who has his Quiver full of them Such will not be shamed,
when they speak with their Enemies in the Gate.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXVII PSALM.
WAS not Solomon the Writer of the Psalm? None of his more than Three Thousand
Songs transmitted unto Posterity; but only This and the Next and the CXXXII.
Psalm, and the Canticles

The Psalm is a Commentary upon a Maxim of Piety often repeated in his Book of
Proverbs; That it is in vain to attempt any thing, if the Lord will not prosper
it. See Prove. III. 6. XVI. 3, 9. XX. 24. XXI. 30, 31.

But R. David Kimchi has observed, that the Psalm refers to ^^ter Times, than
those wherein Solomon erected the Temple, and enlarged the City. He finds here
the happiness of the restored sews, under a greater than Solomon.

2 Solomon had it said of him, 2 Samuel XII. 24. The Lord loved him. Now, to see
how every clause here belonged unto this Jedidiah, consult, 1. Chron, XXII. 9,
10. I will give him rest from all his Enemies; I will give Peace and Quietness
to Israel in his Days; He shall build an House for my Name. Accordingly there
are three ben fits applied unto Solomon, His Building of the Temple; his
keeping of the City; and his enjoying of Rest with his People. But a direction
is here given, both Whence and When, these Benefits were to be expected. q. d.
You must expect these Benefits from the Lord who will not give them unto you,
until Solomon His Beloved one come into the Succession.

Arnchius carries these things, to the Coming of our SAVIOR, and the
Inheritance which his People shall receive at the Resurrection, after they have
slept in their Graves.

5 The Gate in which they are not afraid of speaking with their Enemies, is,
Cumegrediuntur Corpore in quo Diabolum superarunt. Compare, Mat. VII. 14.

PSALM CXXVIII. A Song of Degrees.
1 O The vast Blessings of the Man, yea, and of every Man, who does feat the
ETERNAL God, who in His ways does walk!

2 For what the Labor of thy Hands has gotten, thou shall eat; Blessings of
all sorts shall be thine, and good shall be to thee.

3 In the sides of thy House thy Wife proves as a Fruitful Vine; thy Children
round thy Table prove as Plants of Olive Trees.

4 O give a due attention to this grateful Spectacle; for so the Man shall
blessed be who fears the ETERNAL God.

5 The ETERNAL God from Zion shall a Blessing give to thee; all the days of thy
Life, so thou shall see Jerusalem's good.

6 Yea, Thou shall see the Children which are of thy Children born; Thou shall
see Peace on Israel; Peace be on Israel.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXVIII. PSALM.
BEhold the Happiness of the Jewish Nation, when anon restored unto the Favor
of GOD. Compare Isai. LXV. and Ezekiel. XXXVII.

1 Arnobius observes, That Walking in the Ways of God, is added unto, His Fear,
to distinguish it from the Fear which the Devils have, who Believe and Tremble

6 Luther has a Note; That GOD bestows Public Peace upon a People, out of
respect unto well ordered Families; partly that they may sustain themselves
with Daily Bread: But chiefly, That they may bestow a good Education upon their
Posterity.

PSALM CXXIX. A Song of Degrees.
1 MUch from my Youth they have troubled me, This now may Israel say.

2 Much from my youth they have troubled me, but over me not prevailed.

3 The Plowers plowed upon my Back; they made their Furrows long.

4 The ETERNAL God who is Just, has cut the Cords of Wicked ones.

5 They who hate Zion, let them all be shamed, and turned back.

6 As grass on Houses let them be, which withers e're it is grown.

7 He that is a mower don't so much as all his hand therewith; much less does he
that binds sheaves therewith his bosom ^^ll.

8 Nor shall Men passing say, On you the ETERNAL's Blessing be; We bless you in
the Name of Him who is the ETERNAL God.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXIX. PSALM.
SEE the Restored Jews, describing the Great Mischiefs they suffered under
Antichrist; and the wondrous Ruin of their Oppressors, abandoned unto the Curse
of GOD.

6, 7. We don't use, either Sheaves or Handfulls in that kind of Husbandry. But
the Ancient Writers, De Re Rustica, have such Expressions. Columella has, Fanum
Vincire, the Binding up of Hay. Varro asafirms, De his manipules fieri. In
their mowing, it seems, they did not cut all down clear at once; but used (...)
After-section, which they called Sizilitium. They did, as Pliny Notes, Falcibus
consec^^^i qa^ Foeniseca praterierunt.

But Maundril in his Travels, tells us, They pluck up their Corn by Handful^,
at the Ro^t; that they may loose none of their Straw; -- No Hay being made
there; The Mower is no other than he that would in this way Fill his hand.

6 Arnobius has a Nice Fa^^y on the House Top here; Quia maxima pars
Hareticorum ad personas alt as ^^dit.

PSALM. CXXX. A Song ^f Degrees.
1 OUt of the Depths I cried [aloud] the ETERNAL God.

2 Lord, Hear my Voice, to the Voice (...) my Pra^ers be bowed thine Ear.

3 If Thou [O Thou] ETERNAL JAH. souldst mark Iniquities, O Lord, who is there
that could stand, when in the Judgment tried?

4 But [surely] there is found with the^^ a Pardon for our Sins; that so Thou
maybe worshipped with a Religious Fear.

5 For [Him who's] the ETERNAL Go^ I wait; my Soul does wait; and on His Word I
do rely with an expecting hope.

6 My Soul waits [and looks] for the Lord, more than the Watchers do for
Morning; more than they that are Watchers for morning, do.

7 In the ETERNAL God [O now] let Israel confide; for there is mercy to be
found with the ETERNAL God. Yea, and with Him there [surely] is Redemption
plenteous.

8 And He will Israel redeem from alls ^niquities.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXX. PSALM.
HA^ not the Prophetic Spirit here provided a Prayer for Pardon, unto abdicated
Israel? And Protestation of their Expectation, to be redeemed by the Messiah,
who is the True GOD?

Patrick thinks the Psalm to be composed by David, under the Sauline
Persecution; [When reduced unto ^at condition, Psalm XVIII. 4. and LXIX. 2, 14,
16.] He Beseeches the Holy One, to Pardon his own Sins, and the Sins of the
People, which made them deserve the ill Government of Saul, which now brought
so ^^ch Corruption, and Confusion upon them.

4 Diverse of the Jewish Rabbi's observe an Emphasis on the Particle Thee. God
has made His Angels His ^^nisters to dispense his Favors: But the Remission of
Sins He reserves to Himself alone.

6 The Messiah is undoubtedly, The Lord, here ^^ited for. In the Morning the
Priests that waited, (...) their daily Sacrifices. Behold a plain and full
Inti^ation, That the Faithful People of God, when they brought their Sacrifices
unto Him, had their Faith waiting for the Messiah, who is to bring in a
Plenteous Redemption with Him. And in the Reduplication of this Passage, is
there not a Prophecy, that there were to be Two Comings of the Messiah?

PSALM. CXXXI. A Song of Degrees. Of David.
1 O Thou ETERNAL God, My Heart, it is not haughty grown; nor are these Eyes of
mine with proud elation lifted up. Nor have I exercised my self in matters very
great; nor in such matters as would be too wondrous high for me.

2 What? Have NOT I set and silenced my Soul just as a Child from'ts Mother
weaned? My Soul in me is as a weaned Child.

3 Let Israel now with hope confide in the ETERNAL God; Yea let him do it from
this time to all Eternity.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXXI. PSALM.
INto this Humility and Mortification ought the Jewish Nation to reduce
themselves, that so the promised Redemption may arrive unto them.

3 It Is impossible to mention a more Hopeful Preparation for all the Blessings
of Goodness, than a Resignation to the Will of a Sovereign God. Christian,
Become as a weaned Child, willing to be any thing that a Sovereign God will
have thee to be. FROM HENCEFORTH may thou Hope, that He will deal mercifully
and wonderfully with thee.

PSALM. CXXXII. A Song of Degrees.
1 O Thou ETERNAL God, Have Thou in thy remembrance still David and all the
Affliction which he has encountered with.

2 How he did take a solemn Oath, to the ETERNAL God; he then did make a solemn
Vow to Jacob's mighty one.

3 If I do go into the Tent wherein have my House; if I go up unto the Bed that
has my Coverlets.

4 If I do give unto my Eyes the Sleep ^ich they require, or but unto my
Eyelids once a little slumbring time:

5 Until I do find out a place for the ^TERNAL God; Mansions to be inhabited by
Jacob's Mighty One. --

6 -- Behold of it, even of Thy Ark we heard at Ephratah; we found it in the
fields that were then overgrown with wood.

7 We will into the Mansions go inhabited by Thee; and at thy footstool there
we will with bowing down adore.

8 ETERNAL God, Arise to go unto thy place of Rest; Arise, Thou and the Ark
from whence Thy Power does appear.

9 O let thy Priests array themselves with robes of Righteousness; and those
who are thy gracious Ones, O let them shout for joy.

10 Because of David who has been a Servant unto thee, O turn thou not away the
Face of thine Anointed One.

11 The Truth has the ETERNAL God unto His David sworn; He Will not turn from't
I Will on thy Throne one from thy bowels set.

12 If that thy Children shall keep well my Covenant with them, and keep the
Testimony which I shall instruct them in; Then also their Posterity that shall
come after them, even to perpetuity shall sit upon thy Throne.

13 Because that the ETERNAL God of Zion has made choice; He has desired it
to have His Habitation there.

14 This is the Place where I will rest to Perpetuity; Here I will have my
dwelling place; for I Have desired it.

15 I surely * and abundantly will her Provision bless; with bread I Will fully
satisfy the Poor which be in her.

16 Her Priests I with Salvation will adorn as with a Robe; Her gracious ones,
they also shall Sing, yea, and shout for joy.

17 There I will for my David make an Horn to Issue forth; I have a Lamp
ordained there for mine anointed one.

18 His Adversaries I will cloth with a Contemptuous shame; but upon him still
flourishing shall be his Diadem.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXXII. PSALM.
THE Hope of the Jewish Nation, is here provided by the Prophetic Spirit. But
what they most build upon is, the promise of the Messiah, who, when He comes
again is to bring about their glorious Happiness, and bring destruction on
their Pnemies.

Was not Solomon the Writer of the Psalm? He concludes his Prayer at the
Consecration of the Temple with part of (...).

It may refer to the pious humility of David, who chose to endure many
Afflictions, rather than by un^^^^ul means ^o advance himself. See the first
Verse o^ the [^^^^oin] ^alm.

Mighty One, is as much as to say Lord. So, ^aris et Terrae Tempestatumque
potentes.

6. A Discourse written in Barhary, 1610. Entitled, The Messith already come,
has this Gloss upon the (...) David after much restless study, to find out the
Mystery of the Place, where the Messiah should be born; -- At length the
Mystery being revealed unto him, he does as it were point unto the very Place,
in the words following; Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah; which is the same with
Bethlehem.

It was in the Territory of Bethlehem Ephratah, [Gen. XXXV. 16, 19.] In the
Fields that the Angel ^ood, and directed David to build an Altar to the Lord.
[1. Chron. XXI. 18. XXII. 1]

16 Such as have nothing but Salvation, and what ^ds to it, conspicuous upon
them; look on them and on shall see in them a most conspicuous care to obtain
Salvation; A Care worthy of your Imitation. Come to them and you shall be
excited unto the Care of Salvation, and be directed, how to obtain it. Munster
(...) a Gloss of this Tendency.

17 An Horn signifies Might, Strength, Joy, Safety, and Prosperity; anon,
Glory. And so, a Royal Power. From Keren, and Cornu, may come, Corona. flence
in the Prophetic. Schemes of Daniel, and of John, Horns do signify Kings. [Dan.
VII. 24. VIII. 7.] The Pagans learnt the Speech; Pauper Cornua sumit. Jupiter
was called Corniger. Alexander was Bicornis on Medals. In the Alcoran, his Name
is, Dulcarnain.

PSALM CXXXIII. A Song of Degrees.
1 BEhold how good a thing it is, and how delectable, when Brethren down
together sit united in their Love!

2 It Is like the precious Ointment which poured upon the Head, made its Descent
upon the Beard of Aaron here and there. Yea, and it did go farther down to the
edge of his Robe that closed about his Neck, and reached the Names of all the
Tribes.

3 It Is like the Dew which is upon Mount Hermon often seen; and that which on
the Mountains of Zion does make descent. Because that it is in that Place that
the ETERNAL God commands His Blessing, even Life to all Eternity.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXXIII. PSALM.
BEhold an Hymn to be Sung, when the Tribes of Israel shall be gathered and
restored.

When the Tribes of Israel had no Strife, but who should be most forward in
returning to their. Allegiance; and the Children of Judah were inclined as one
Man, to bring back David unto his Kingdom, after the Rebellion of Absalom; then
might he fall into this Rapturous Admiration of their Unity. This is Dr.
Patrick's Though It.

But the Psalm was aptly to be applied unto the Babylonian Captivity; when as
Theodoret Notes, the Tribes which had been divided by the Imprudence of
Rehoboam; were again united.

The Primitive Christians used the Psalm to express their Joy, for the blessed
Union of the Jews and Gentiles, which had been as distant from one another as,
Hermon from Zion.

2 Aaron, on the Collar of his Garment, bore the Names of all the Tribes of
Israel; they were all perfumed.

3 Modern Travelers tell us, they found themselves ^^et with the Dew of
Hormon, falling in the Night, (...) it had ra^^'d upon them.

PSALM CXXXIV. A Song of Degrees.
1 O Give Attention! Speak ye well of the ETERNAL God, all you that are the
Servants, who wait on the ETERNAL God; ye who by Night stand in the house of
the ETERNAL God.

2 Lift up your hands with Holiness, and bless the ETERNAL God.

3 From Zion may the ETERNAL God Kis Blessing g^ve to thee; The God who is. the
Maker of the Heavens and the Earth.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXXIV. PSALM.
B^hold the Devotions of the Israelitish Nation, at the return of the Messiah;
and their Prayers or the continuation of their Happiness. Look back to the
Illustrations on the CXX. Psalm.

PSALM CXXXV.
1 S^ng HALLELUJAH. Praise the Name of the ETERNAL God; Praise, O you that the
Servants are of the ETERNAL God

2 You that your Station have in the House of the ETERNAL God; standing in the
Courts of the House of Him who is our God.

3 Praise JAH; Because that truly Good is the ETERNAL God; Sing Praises to His
Name; because it is a pleasant thing.

4 Because that JAH has made a choice of Jacob for himself; of Israel for a
Treasu^^ to Himself peculiar.

5 For as to me, this I do know, That the ETERNAL God is a Great One, and that
our Lord is above all the God's!

6 Whatever He would please to do the ETERNAL God has done, in the Heavens,
and on Earth, in Seas, and in all Abysses.

7 From the ends of the Earth He makes the Clouds arise; He makes Lightnings
with rain; He brings the Wind out of His Treasuries

8 Of Egypt He smote the Firstborn, from Man, even to the Beast.

9 In midst of thee, O Egypt, He did Signs and Wonders send; This He did upon
Pharaoh and on all that served Him.

10 Great Nations He laid strokes upon and He slew mighty Kings.

11 Sihon King of the Amorites, He slew, and Og the King of Bashan, all the
Kingdoms too which were in Canaan found.

12 And He disposed of their Land as an Inheritance; as an Inheritance unto His
People Israel.

13 Thy Name is, O ETERNAL God, to Perpetuity; Thy Memory, O ETERNAL God, it is
from Age to Age.

14 For the ETERNAL God will to His People be the Judge; and upon them that
serve Him He will now refresh Himself,

15 The Idols which the Nations do render their Homage to, are nothing but
Silver and Gold; what hands of Men have wrought.

16 Mouths have they, but they do not speak; they have Eyes but do not see,

17 Ears have they, but they do not hear; no breath is in their Mouths.

18 They that the Makers are of such ridiculous things are these, are like
them; so is every one that puts his trust in them.

19 Bless the ETERNAL God, O you the House of Israel; Bless the ETERNAL God, O
you that are of Aaron's House.

20 Bless the ETERNAL God, O you that are of Levi's House; Ye who do fear the
ETERNAL God, Bless you the ETERNAL God.

21 O Blessed out of Zion be now the ETERNAL God, who dwells in Jerusalem.
Sing Hallelujah now!

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXXV. PSALM.
It Is an Hymis of Praise, to be Sung by restored Isiael; Rehearsing the Ancient
Miracles done for their Fathers, and insulting the false Gods of Antichrist.
The Ideas of the Psalm are followed in the XL Chapter of Isaiah.

1 The Apollo of the Ancients was our Joshua, Joshua's Conquest of Og, and the
Anakims in Canaan, was Apollo's Defeat of Typhon, or Python, and the other
Giants. Cadmus the Gibeonite with other Phanicians, carrying a Colony into
C^aecia, celebrated the Victories of Josi^^a in such Hymns as they had learned
from their New Masters in the Land of Ca^^a^. Might not such strains as are in
the Psalm now before us, be among those Hymns? And the E^elu Jou Jou used in
them, be no other than our Hallelujah?

18 There is this admirable Force in the mention of the respects paid by the
Hearthen to their Idols. The Honor the Heathen give to their lifeless Images,
ought mightily to excite us all, with a greater Devotion to Praise our God, who
is the Maker of all things.

PSALM CXXXVI.
1 [O Now] a just Confession make to the ETERNAL God; Because that He is good;
Because His mercy is forever.

2 [O now] a just Confession make unto the God of Gods; Because His mercy does
endure to perpetuty.

3 [O now] a just Confession make unto the Lord of Lords; Because His mercy
does endure to perpetuity.

4 To Him who [eber] only does things great and wonderful; Because His mercy
does endure to perpetuity.

5 To Him who made the Heavens [above] wifely disposing them; Because His mercy
does endure to perpetuity.

6 To Him who stretched the Earth [abroad] upon the Waters laid; Because His
mercy does endure to perpetuity.

7 To Him who made [and set] the Lights which are so very great; Because His
mercy does endure to perpetuity.

8 The Sun [it is] that for the Day does ^dominion bear; Because His mercy does
endure to perpetuity.

9 The Moon and Stars that have [in course] Dominion for the Night; Because His
mercy does endure to perpetuity.

10 To Him that Egypt smote [and slew] in the Firstborn of them; Because His
mercy does endure to perpetuity.

11 And He [thereon] did Israel bring forth from the midst of them; Because His
mercy does endure to perpetuity.

12 With a strong [mighty] Hand, and with a most extended Arm; Because His
mercy does endure to perpetuity.

13 To Him who did in [several] parts divide the Reedy-Sea; Because His mercy
does endure to perpetuity.

14 And He made Israel [safely] pass thorough the midst of it; Because His
mercy does endure to perpetuity.

15 But shook off Pharaoh, and [all of] his Host, in the Reedy-Sea; Because His
mercy does endure to perpetuity.

16 To Him who led His [chosen] folk thorough the Wilderness; Because His mercy
does endure to perpetuity.

17 To Him who laid His [killing] strokes on great and potent Kings; Because
His mercy does endure to perpetuity.

18 And He slew Kings that were [esteem'd] exceeding powerful; Because His
mercy does endure to perpetuity.

19 Sihon was one of these [great Kings] King of the Amorites; Because His
mercy does endure to perpetuity.

20 And Og mother was [of them] who was of Bashan King; Because His mercy does
endure to perpetuity.

21 And He did give their Land [away] for an Inheritance; Because His mercy
does endure to perpetuity,

22 It Is an Inheritance [design'd] for Israel serving Him; Because His mercy
does endure to perpetuity.

23 Who in our low [oppress'd] Estate has mindful been of us; Because His
mercy does endure to perpetuity.

24 And from [all of] our Enemies He ^^th redeemed us; Because His mercy does
endure to perpetuity.

25 Who [kindly] to all Flesh affords and for their fustenance; Because His
mercy does endure to perpetuity.

26 [O now] a just Confession make unto the God of Heaven; Because His mercy
does endure to perpetuity.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXXVI. PSALM.
AN Hymn to be Sung by Israel, after their Deliverance from all their Enemies.
In the Third Verse, The Lord of Lords is Praised; The Title of the Messiah at
His next Coming. Twenty Six Times, occurs, His Mercy does endure to Perpetuity.
The Psalm does Commence with the Creation, and Conclude with the Entrance into
Cana^n; between which there had run Twenty Six Generations. The Numeral Letters
of the Name, JEHOVAH, amount unto just that Number. Consider still the Clause
to which that Consolation is annexed. It is, q. d. The Mercy of GOD, will still
do for His People, such things as the Clause makes mention of; or things of the
like importance with them. Further Elegencies may be observed in the Analogies.

10 The Psalmist having distinctly mentioned the Works produced in the Four
First Days of the Creation, immediately passes to the Plagues upon Egypt. The
Works produced in the Two next Days of the Creation, were employed in those
Plaaues.

20 Why only Sihon and Og mentioned? R. David Kimchi gives this Reason; Because
their Lands were not in the Covenant, which GOD made with Abraham.

23 The Mercy of God, which has remembered thee in thy Low Estate; Christian,
Let it Endure to P^rpetuity, in thy Thankful Remembrance of it, and of the
Obligations it has laid upon thee, to Live unto GOD. Behold, a Noble sense, in
which it should be said, His Mercy does endure to P^rpetuity.

PSALM CXXXVII.
1 WE by the Rivers which do run through Babylon, sat there; yea, we poured out
our Tears when we remembered Zion there.

2 Upon the Willows in the midst thereof we hung our Harps.

3 For they that Captived us did there demand of us to Sing words of a Song,
and they who laid us in our ruinous heaps, demanded mirth, Sing us, said they,
a Song of Zion, Sing!

4 Our Answer was, How can we do to Sing a Song that is for the ETERNAL God, in
the Land of a stranger here?

5 O dear Jerusalem, If I of thee forgetful grow! As soon shall my Right Hand
forget what it is used unto!

6 My Tongue shall to my Palate cleave when thee I do not mind! If I don't set
Jerus'lem at the top of all my Joy.

7 Remember, O ETERNAL God, the Sons of Edom, who said in Jerus'lems day, Raze,
Raze, to its foundation bare.

8 Daughter of Babylon, who art to be made desolate, Happy, who shall repay to
thee the pay thou'st paid to us!

9 O the great blessedness of him who shall lay hold upon, and who against the
solid Rock shall dash thy little ones!

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXXVII. PSALM.
WE have here the sorrowful State of the Jews, under the first Babylonian
Captivity; and then under the Roman Domimon, which the Prophet calls, Daughter
of Babylon, because the Romans have done to them as the Babylonians did.
Several Prophets have agreed with our Psalmist, in calling the Romans by the
Name of Edom. In the Jewish Treatise Git^^, R. Jebudah finds the Destruction of
both Temples, ^der the Two Terms of Babylon and Edom. Ar^obius pathetically
makes the Babylonians here, a Picture of the Devils insulting over fallen Man.

1 When they were transported into Babylon, they ^ad the sides of Euphrates and
several of its Rivers, assigned for their Habitation. [ Ezekiel. 1.1.] Chrysostom
says, They did not at first sufer the Captives to dwell in any of their Towns,
but made them dwell along the sides of the Rivers, where they built little
Cottages for themselves; and perhaps they were put upon Draining those moist
places to make them wholesome.

3 The Babylonians here demand, Sing us, the Words of a Song. It seems, they
had no regard unto the ^atter. The Tune, The Sound, the Words, was all they
cared for. A Mark of Babylonians! Among such they regard nothing but Words and
Forms; All they mind, is a Lip-labor, an External. Service in Religion.

PSALM CXXXVIII. Of David.
1 I Will a just Confession make of thee with all my heart; Before God, * and
His Angels, I will Praises Sing to thee.

2 Toward thy holy Temple I will bowing down adore; and I will celebrate thy
Name for thy benignity, and for thy faithfulness; for that thou above every
thing have magnified thy Name; Thou have so magnified thy Word.

3 In the day I invoked thee, and thou did answer me; Thou in my Soul with
manly strength me then did fortify.

4 To Thee, O Thou ETERNAL God, all the Kings of the Earth shall their
Confessions make, when of thy mouth they he^^ the words.

5 Yea, they will with voice sing in the ways of the ETERNAL God; Because that
great the Glory is of the ETERNAL God.

6 For the ETERNAL God is high; but looks upon the low; whereas what would be
high, He does far off take notice of.

7 Although my walk be lying in the midst of much distress, yet thou with sweet
revivals wilt enable me to live: Thou Wilt use thy hand against the rage of my
fierce enemies; and thy Right hand shall unto me give a deliverance.

8 The ETERNAL God will perfect what He has to do for me: Thy mercy, O ETERNAL
God is to Eternity. O do not thou forsake, * O don't utterly cast away, those
Men and things that are the Works that thy own Hands have wrought.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXXVIII. PSALM.
AN Illustrious Prophecy concerning the calling of the Israelitish Nation, to
the knowledge of the Messiah; and the Great Conversion of the Heathen Kingdoms
to His Religion, after the Messiah has destroyed the Enemies of the Kingdom.

5 The Wonderful Ways wherein the Lord brings about His Glorious Purposes will
be the Subject of their Songs. The Ways of God in bringing of David unto his
Kingdom; were those the things which the Kings in the Neighborhood celebrated?

6 The tho'ts of the Proud are hid in their Hearts afar (...), out of fight;
They have more Wit than to utter me Proud thot's, which lie covered and
swelling in their minds. But the Lord knows what they are afar (...). The Proud
may be here compared unto a L^per; one who has little cause to be Proud. God
knows a Proud Man to be no better than a filthy Leper, upon ^^om it was
enjoined, that He should stand afar off; ^e might not be approached unto; nor
will the Spirit of GOD approach near unto such a Man. Compare L^v. XIII. 45, 46.

The Patrician Paraphrase, is; He will not stoop (...) the loftiest Princes (as
they may see in Soul) whom He despises, when they are forgetful of Him, and
ungrateful to Him.

7 Arnobius here sees our SAVIOR extending His Hands upon the Cross.

PSALM CXXXIX. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
1 ETERNAL God, Thou'st searched me, and have known what I am.

2 Thou know full well my sitting down, and know my rising up. Thou at
the greatest distance do well understand my though it.

3 My path thou see round, and my bed; and find'st out all my ways.

4 Yea, and each word I speak, while it is not yet in my tongue; Behold, O Thou
ETERNAL God, Thou know all of it.

5 Me thou have formed, * and beset, both as to what is behind, and as to what is
before; and thou have laid thy hand on me

6 Such knowledge as this is, it is too wonderful for me; Sublime it is, and it
is more than I can reach unto!

7 Where shall I from thy Spirit go? And where fly from thy Face?

8 If I should say, I will ascend to Heaven, Thou art there: Or, If I make my
Bed in Hell; lo, Thou art also there.

9 I Will take the Mornings Wings, I Will dwell at the Seas utmost bounds.

10 Even unto that very place thy hand shall carry me; Thy Right hand also,
that shall make a seizure on me there.

11 If I should say, Assuredly Darkness should cover me; The very Night itself
would be about me as the Light.

12 Yea, Darkness nothing hides from thee; but Night does shine like Day; The
Darkness and the Light, they are both but the very same.

13 For my most hidden Reins thou have in thy possession held; Thou in my
Mothers Womb, as with a Tent have covered me.

14 I Will praise thee for with wonders I have separated been; Thy Works are
wondrous, and my Soul knows this abundantly.

15 My strength was not hid from thee; when I was in secret made, in the
Earth's lowest parts I was most curiously wrought.

16 Thy Eyes did see my unformed mass; and in thy Book were all writ down 5 the
days when they were formed and none of them were lost.

17 And now, how valuable are thy Thot's to me, O God! Into how great a
reckoning are they to be multiplied!

18 If I should go to number them more man the Sand they grow. When I awake out
of my sleep, then I am still with thee.

19 O God, Thou will most certainly destroy the wicked one; And now you that
are bloody Men, Do you depart from me.

20 These are they who against thee speak abominable stuff; They who are
enemies to thee are such as sweat in vain.

21 Do not I hate those who do hate Thee, O ETERNAL God? Those who do up
against thee rife, be'nt I offended at?

22 I hate them with perfection in my hatred unto them; They as my Adversaties
are ever esteemed with me.

23 Make thou a thorough search of me, O God, and know my heart; A thorough
trial make of me, and know my very thot's.

And see if I have any way that should be mourned for; but lead me in the way
that lasts to perpetuity.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXXXIX. PSALM.
THe Prophetic Spirit here teaches the Jewish Nation [Oh! would they learn!]
how little able they are to hide themselves from the Judgments of GOD; And now
they are to acknowledge GOD as their Maker and their Savior; and Pray to Him
for the Destruction of Antichrist and his Abettors.

9 It Is astonishing to see what Passages there are in Plato. [De Leg. l. 10.]
agreeable to these of the Psalmist. O Christian, the Light of Nature will teach
thee such things as these.

14 Galen's Book, De Usu Partium, were a notable Commentary and Illustration on
the Text now before us. And when he, who was a Pagan, cries out, Considera hic
marabilem Creatoris Sapientiam, shall not we reflect, What Praises do I, that
am a Christian, one to the Glorious GOD, upon the view of every thing that
belongs to me!

The Modern Improvements in Anatomy add infinitely to the Occasions. ^^ellini
would begrutch his Time and Cost and Pains, (...) searching out the Astonishing
Workmanship, in the several Parts of an Humane Body, if it were only to
discover a Work of mere Chance, or of one who were not infinitely Wise and Good
and Glorious. No, he does (as every just Contemplator must) find himself
compelled into the Admiration of a Glorious GOD, and thrown into those
Transports and Raptures and Flames, which extort these Exclamations from him,
Magnus Dominus! Magnus Fabricator Hominum Deus! Magnus atque admirabilis.
Conditor rerum Deus, Quam magnus es! O Thou Maker of Man, How Great and
Glorious are Thou!

16 Is not the Mystical Body of our SAVIOR principally intended? The Substance
of the Church, whereof it was to be formed, was under the Eye of GOD, as
proposed in the Decree of Election; yet was, as such Imperfect. It was not
formed or shaped into the Members of the Mystical Body; but they were all
written in the Book of Life. And in, pursuance of the Purpose of GOD, there
they are by the Holy Spirit, in the whole course, and continuance of Time, in
their several Generations, fashioned into the shape designed for them. Thus our
Dr. Owen Glosseth it.

17 The Vulgar Latin, and the LXX read it, How Precious cre thy Friends to me!
The Hebrew may indeed be very well translated so. And the Translation agrees
very well, with what is just before said, about the Members of our SAVIOR, all
which are the Friends of GOD. It suits also very well, with what follows about
the Enemies of GOD; whom the Psal^^st professes an Hatred of.

22 A Perfect Hatred. What is that? Gregory M. in his Pastoralis Cura, has a
singular Gloss upon it; It is to Love the Creature and Hate the Sinner: To Love
what he is, and Hate what he does. -- Quod facti sunt diligore, et quod Faciunt
increpare. He adds an Observation, Propheta tantus boo velut in Hostiam Deo
obtulit, quod contra se pro Domino Pravorum in micitias Excitavit.

24 Kimchi's Exposition is very odd; That the Way Everlasting is a Periphrasis
of Death. [See 1 Kin. II. 1, and Josh. XXIII. 14.] As if David had said: Lord,
If upon search, thou find, that I walk in any way of Wickedness, I may
venture to say, Let me Dye; Lead me to the Grave. -- I cannot recommend the
Glois; yet was willing to mention it.

PSALM. CXL. To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
1 REscue me, OETERNAL God, from the malicious Man; preserve me from the Man,
who is used to do injurious things.

2 They Are those who in their heart within contrive mischievous things; they do
together come for war all day * and everyday.

3 They give an edge unto their Tongue; It Is as the Serpents is; the Poison of
the Adder lies under their Lips concealed. Selah.

4 From the hands of the wicked one keep me, ETERNAL God; save me from the
injurious man: they thought to trip me up

5 The Proud ones have set secretly a Snare and Cords for me; they have spread
(...) Net by the way side; Gins they have set for me. Selah.

6 I unto the ETERNAL God have said, Thou art my God; O Thou ETERNAL God, The
voice of my Petitions hear.

7 ETERNAL God, the Lord, the Strength of my Salvation, Thou! Thou have in day
of Battle given a covering to my Head.

8 Grant not, O Thou ETERNAL God, the wicked ones desires; O let not his design
obtain; they will exalt themselves. Selah.

9 As for the *Venomous Head of those who compass me about, the mischief of
their own Lips, let it overwhelm themselves.

10 Let burning Coals upon him fall; let them be cast into the Fire, into the
deepest pits (...) let them not rise again.

11 Let not an Evil speaker be established in the Earth: let evil the injurious
man to Precipices drive.

12 I know that the ETERNAL God will judge the poor * and meek; on the behalf
of needy Ones He Will Judgment execute.

13 Surely the Righteous Ones will make Confession to thy Name; and the upright
before Thy Faceshall have their Sitting down.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXL. PSALM.
THE Prophetic Spirit here prepares a Prayer for them that are suffering under
Antichrist.

Yea, it looks as if here were some Eye, to what the Ancient Propheeles have
also spoken concerning the Destruction of Gog.

And indeed when these Two Enemies are gone, the Righteous will dwell with the
greatest Praises in the Presence of God.

1 The M^dr^sh Tislin has a strange Passage here. The Malicious Man, and the
Man bent on violent things, is the Fourth Beast in the Seventh of Daniel.

10 An Allusion to the Fate of Sodom. It Is the Fate of Rome. Remember still
David was a Type of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Antichrist with his adherents, the
Ant type of David's Enemies. Read such Psalms as this, O Christian, with a
great Attention; and compare them with the Passages in the New Testament, which
describe Antichrist unto us, and thou will ^ee, Wendrous Things in the Law.

13 Pebel a Charming H^rmony, between the Exercises o^ Flety, and the
Recompenses of it. The Final and Endless and Complete Blessedness of Upright
Men, will be to, dwell in the Presence of God. Even In that Presence in which
there is fullness of Joy; and so to be sorever with the Lord. Now what an
agreement is ther^ between the Uprightness and the Blessedness? Uprightness
lies in this thing; To be always in the Presen^e of God; always to Act as in
the Presence of God; A Behavior governed by a Sense of being under the Eve of
God. An Upright Man, Oh! how suitably is he Rewarded, when he is brought at
length to dwell in the Presence of God.

PSALM CXLI. A Psalm Of David.
1 ETERNAL God, I cry to thee: O hasten Thou to me! when I do cry to thee, do
thou give Ear unto my Voice.

2 Let my Prayer be directed still as Incense in thy View; As the Meat-Off'ring
of the Eve the lifting of my hands.

3 O Thou ETERNAL God, Set Thou a Watch before my Mouth; at the gate of my Lips
do Thou maintain a constant guard.

4 O do not Thou incline my Heart unto an Evil thing; to practice wicked Works
with Men that work Iniquity. And in their Delicacies let me not Communicate.

5 (The Just shall kindly smite me, and shall give reproofs to me); But the
rich Oil of such an One shall not mollify my Head: For still my Prayer it is
against the Wicked th^^gs they do.

6 By the sides of the Rock it was their Judges were let down; they then did
hearken to my words, for they were pleasant ones.

7 As when one plougheth up the Earth and it asunder tears; our hones are
scattered so about at the Mouth of the Grave.

8 But, O ETERNAL God, the Lord, My Eyes are unto thee; on thee I my reliance
place; O do not strip my Soul.

9 Keep me from the Hands of the snare which they have laid for me; and from
the intangling gins of those that work iniquity.

10 O let the wicked fall into the Nets they have spread themselves: I will keep
close with thee and mine until that I escape.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXLI. PSALM.
A Frayer provided by the Prophetic Spirit, for the People of God, scattered by
the Power of Antichrist.

2 Munster observes, David was now an Exile, and could not attend the Daily
Sacrifions.

5 Far from Excluding the more obvious and common Sense of the Words, and from
neglecting to learn the Duty of a Reproved Christian in them, I would ask,
Whether we may not have a CHRIST, in a Transcondent Sense here Offering
Himself, as well as in many other Passages of the Sacred Oracles, which we do
not at the first view, see Testifying of Him? Does not our SAVIOR here desire,
That His Intercession may come in the Room of Incense, and Mincha under the
Law? Don't we see Him here standing as a Surety for Sinners, with these
Concessions. Let the Righteous GOD smite me with an Hammer, in His Nailing me
to the Cross: It will be a Mercy to His chosen, for whom, I am now to be
Smitten. Let Him reprove me, still I have the Oil of the Head upon me; I am the
Messiah, His Anointed, His Christ and His Priest. Whatever is now done to me,
it shall not break my Head; It was the Ancient Promise, That not my Head, but
the Serpents only, shoul be broken. And nothing shall hinder my Intercession
from its being still continued. -- After that, Their Judges shall be overthrown
by an Hand of Stone, (as the Syriac renders it). The Monarchia, o^ the World
shall be broken in Preces by a Ston cut out which is not in Hands. And this
Dispensation shall be attended with, yea, effected by, my Words being made
sweet unto them.

To return unto the Type. The Rich Oil of such an One shall not mollify my Head,
may be, q. d. I Will never visit him. In a Visit this was the usual Complement.
So, what we read, of the Just shall kindly smite me, is but a Rapturous
Parenthesis. A Modern Traveller, who has presented us with an Ingenious
Callection of Orientalisins, for the Illustration of the Sacred Scriptures, has
bespoke a Reception for this Illustration.

6 We have a Key to this Passage, in 1. Sam. XXIV. 2. When the Judges of
Israel, (Saul and his Officers,) were let down (to pursue and surprise David)
by the Sides of the Rock (the Rocks of th Wild-Goats leading into the Cave;)
Then they heard the Words of David's Apology for himself, which were so
pleasing to Saul, that he went home, and gave over disturbing of David any
more. Dr. Roberts gives us this Illustration in his Key of the Bible.

7 Robusti Davidis erant a Davide dispersi. This is Aben-Fzra's Gloss.

Dr. Patrick's Paraphrase is this, They still persecute me, and the small Body
of Men that follow me; whom they have reduced unto such Extremities, that like
the Earth, when it is ploughed up, we break in Pieces and are ready to
disperse, and flee for our Lives, with little hope of Safety.

10 q. d. I Will keep with my Friends, not scatter and wander from them. The
Safety and Wisdom of good Men, lies much in their keeping Together; not going
^funder.

PSALM CXLII. Maschil; Of David. A Prayer when he was in the Cava.
1 WIth my Voice I did make a Cry to the ETERNAL God; with my voice to the
ETERNAL God I made my humble Prayer.

2 Before His Face I poured out what I had thought upon; Before His Face I
uttered what was troublesome to me.

3 Within me when my Spiritfaild, then Thou did know my Path; In the way
where I should have walked they laid a Snare for me.

4 Look on the Right hand, and behold; there is none does know me there; Refuge
does perish from me, and there is none to seek my Soul.

5 O Thou ETERNAL God, To Thee I made my cry, I said, Thou art my Hope, my
Portion in the Land of Living Ones.

6 Attend unto my cry, because I am brought very low; Save me from my pursuers,
for they are more strong than I.

7 From out of Prison bring my Soul; That I may praise thy Name; the just shall
be a Crown to me, when thou rewardest me.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXI II. PSALM.
A Prayer made ready for the Captives under the Tyranny of Antichrist.

7 Remember, O Christian, thou art here concerned with the Messiah. Now,
Aben-Ezra renders this Passage thus; Justi coronabunt sese mecum. q. d. They
shall Glory in me, as having a Crown of Glory on their Head. Thus the Spanish
Translation; Commigo se toronoran los Justos.

PSALM. CXLIII. A Psalm Of David.
1 ETERNAL God, hear Thou my Prayer, hearken to my Requests: Answer me in Thy
faithfulness, and in thy righteousness.

2 And with thy Servant, O do not thou into Judgment come; For in thy sight no
man alive shall justify himself.

3 For the En'my has pursued my Soul; my Life struck to the ground; made me in
darkness dwell as those that have been dead an Age.

4 My spirit therefore is in me faint * and quite overwhelmed; My Hearts within
the midst of me frighted * and desolate.

5 I do remember Ancient Days; I meditate upon all of thy Works; I think upon
the Work thy Hands have wrought.

6 I unto thee with Anxious Prayers extend these Hands of mine; my Soul is as a
thirsty Land still thirsting after thee. Selah.

7 Hear me with speed, ETERNAL God; My Spirit fails; Thy Face hide not from me,
lest I be like them who descend the Pit.

8 O that thy mercy Thou would make me in the Morning hear; Because that I do
ever place my Confidence on thee. Cause me to understand the way wherein I
ought to walk; Because that I with Prayer and Hope lift up my Soul to Thee.

9 O Thou ETERNAL God, Do Thou grant me Deliverance, from them that are my
Enemies: I hide my self with Thee.

10 O teach me for to do thy Will, Because Thou art my God; let thy good Spirit
lead me to a Land of Rectitude.

11 For thy Names sake, ETERNAL God, Thou will enliven me; Thou for thy
righteousness my Soul wilt out of trouble bring.

12 And Thou will in thy mercy slay my Enemies; and all the Troublers of my
Soul destroy; for I thy Servant am.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXLIII. PSALM.
THE Prophetic Spirit here makes a Prayer for the Church, and for the Jewish
Nation, lying in the State of Death, which is now described in the Prophecies
of Ezekiel; and particularly Prays for the Out pouring of the Spirit, in such
Gifts as are to be expected at the Second Coming of the Messiah.

But, O Christian, Think on thy Dying and Risen SAVIOR

10 Dr. Patrick finds the Psalmist longing to get into an honest Country. But,
O Christian, It Is an Heavenly World that is the true Land of Rectitude.

PSALM CXLIV. Of David.
1 BLessed be the ETERNAL God; He is a Rock for me; He does instruct my hands
for War, my fingers for a Fight.

2 He is my Mercy, and my Tower, my Refuge set on high; and He it is who does
bestow deliverances on me. He is my Shield, and upon Him I do repose my trust;
It Is He who to subjection brings my People under me.

3 ETERNAL God, Oh! What is Man that Thou take cognizance of him? The Son of
Man, that Thou esteem him any thing?

4 Man is no other than a piece of flying vanity; his days are like a shadow
which does quickly pass away.

5 ETERNAL God, O bow thou down Thy Heavens and descend; The Mountains touch
with Thunderbolts, and they shall yield a smoke.

6 The Lightning do thou lighten forth; and do thou scatter them; Thy Arrows, O
do thou shoot forth, and do thou run them down.

7 O from on high send out thy hands; save me, and rescue me from mighty
waters; from the hand of a base strangers brood.

8 The mouth of these does use to speak nothing but falsity; and their right
hand a right hand is in which is found a lie.

9 O God, I Will Sing thee a New-Song upon a Psaltery; upon a Ten-string'd
instrument I Will sing a Verse to thee.

10 He it is who on advanced Kings Salvation does bestow; He saves His Servant
David from the most destructive Sword.

11 Save me, and rid me from the hand of the base strangers brood; whose mouth
speaks false, and their right-hand's the right hand of a lie.

12 Let so our Sons be like to Plants well ^^med in their Youth; Our Daughters
like to corner Stores polished in Temple-form.

13 Our Garners full, affording store of every sort of food; Our Flocks yield
thousands; Myriads so increasing in our streets.

14 Our Beeves both fat * and strong, to work; safe * when they are with Young;
(...) breaking in, nor going out; nor clamor in the streets.

15 Happy those People are esteemed who are in such a case; Happy the People
are, whose God is the ETERNAL One.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXLIV. PSALM.
THe Jewish Rabbi's, particularly Saadias and Kimchi, own the Psalm to relate
unto the Messiah. The Temporal Prosperity here arrives after the Destruction
brought on the ^nemies of the Jewish Nation.

1 Though I do with Hilary, dislike the LXX foisting that Clause, A Psalm against
Goli^^, into the Title of the Psalm. (...) suspect, the Psalmist now on the
Throne, may have some Remembrances of, and References to, his old Victory over
Goliath; in this Verse particularly. Arnobius thinks, here is an Allusion to
Moses lifting up his Hands for the Conquest of A^^lok; and adds, Docuit manus
nostras, in pralio, non Armis sed p^ecibus pugnaturas. The holy Martyr Barlam,
thrusting his hands into the burning Flames, Sang this Verse of the Psalm.

4 That ever such things as are here celebrated; should be done for a, Man who
is no other than a piece of flying vanity?

5 The proudest Oppressors will vanish away like Smoke, when GOD appears to
rescue His People.

9 Arnobius will tell you, A New Song, is, A New Life; And Kings are Victoros
Vitiorum.

11 A Right Hand of a Lie, Take R. Obadiah Gaons Gloss upon it; Scribere falsa.
It writes falsehoods.

What is it they speak? Some take it, for the Opinion, That Happiness lies in
Temporal Blessings here. Corrected at last so, Happy that People whose God is
the Lord. An Happiness not enjoyed until the Resurrection-World.

12 Kimchi observes, That the Method and Order of the Blessings here, is taken
from, Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 4.

14 Dr. Patrick's Paraphrase, is not all that I have to justify my Translation.

PSALM CXLV. David's Praise.
1 O Thou that art my God, the King, I Will thee extol [and set] on high; and I
will speak well of thy Name to [endless] Ages still to come.

2 All day, * and every day, I will keep [ever] speaking well of thee; And I
will celebrate thy Name to [ endless] Ages still to come.

3 Most Great is the ETERNAL God; and greatly to be praised [is He.] And of His
Greatness there cannot be [ever] any Searching out.

4 One Generation shall relate thy Works unto the next [that comes:] and the
most powerful things thou do, they shall declare [them all] abroad.

5 The Beauty, Oh! The Glory of His [more than] Royal Majesty; and the most
wondrous things thou do; of these [it is] I will discourse.

6 The Might of thy tremendous Acts, others shall [also] speak about; and of
thy Greatness I my self will declarations make [with them.]

7 The memory of the Greatness of thy Goodness [amply] they will pour out; and of
thy Right'ousness they shall sing with a [loud and] mighty noise.

8 Gracious is the ETERNAL God, and He Is [truly] compassionate; to anger He is
very flow; but in His mercy [wondrous] great.

9 Even to all the ETERNAL God is ever [Oh! how] sweetly good; yea, and His
tender mercies are toward all [the Works] that He has wrought.

10 All thy Works, O ETERNAL God, shall [ever] celebrate thy Praise; and all
that are thy gracious ones, they [ever] shall speak well of thee.

11 The Glory of thy Kingdom is what they shall speak [so much] about; and thyn
illustrious power is what they shall make [so much] mention of.

12 For to make known His mighty Acts [this way] unto the Sons of Men; and the
most splendid Glory of the Kingdom which He [justly] claims.

13 Thy Kingdom is a Kingdom which and [unknown] Ages does extend; and thy
Dominion does anto all [future] Generations last.

14 The ETERNAL God does all sustain when [He sees] they are falling down; and
all of His He raises up when [He sees] they are bowed down.

15 The eyes of all do wait on thee with [Hope and] Expectation still; and thou
in the due season do give them their [wanted] sustenance.

16 Thou open'st* and thou do extend thy [kind and] all-relieving Hand, and
thou do satisfy the wish [fully] of every living thing.

17 Righteous is the ETERNAL God [even] in all the ways He takes; and He is
also merciful in all the Works He [ever] does.

18 The ETERNAL God is near unto all [of those] who do call on Him; near unto
all who call on Him with truth* and [with due] constancy.

19 He Will the desire fulfill of them that have the [Godly] fear of Him; He Will also
hearken to their cry, and He Will [save and] deliver them.

20 In safety the ETERNAL God keeps all that have His Love [in them:] But all
them that are impious ones He Will utterly destroy [forever.]

21 My mouth shall utter forth the Praise of [him who's] the ETERNAL God; and
all flesh bless His Holy Name ever [let it] and evermore.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXLV. PSALM.
THe Psalm was always esteemed so excellent that the Title of the whole Book of
Psalms was taken from it. It is wholly spent in Praising of GOD, with such
admirable Devotion, that (as has been by Schindler long since observed) the
Ancient Hebrews did use to say, He could not fail to be a Child of the World to
come, who would recite this Psalm Three times every Day. And, as Dr. Patrick
observes, This might be the Reason, why it was composed Alphabetically; even
that so every Body might the more easily learn and remember so useful a Psalm.

Dr. Allix will have it, An Hymn of the Synagogue, Restored unto the Favor of
GOD. The Destruction of the Wicked, and the Conversion of the Nations, under
the Glorious Reign of the Messiah, is here particularly celebrated.

13 How did the Letter Nun come to be lost at this Verse of the Acrostic? If it
were lost when the Psalm came to the Hands of the Collector of this Book, ^he
would not supply it with one of his own. The Modern Greek, (I say Modern, for
the Ancient and Theodotion and Aquila have it not;) and so the Arabic and
Syriac, and vulgar Latin supply it so, -- The Lord is Faithful in all His
Words, and Holy in all His Works. But this differs little from the Seventeenth
Verse. And why might not the Psalmist be carried, [as in the XXV. Psalm,] through
the strength of the Inspiration upon him, out of the method he at first
proposed? Or, O Masorites, Do you give us a reason for this Omission.

16 The Affectionate Gloss of Old Christianity was; Quanda aperuisti manus tuas
in Cruce. On the Cross!

PSALM CXLVI.
1 LEt HALLELUJAH now be Sung. And now, O thou my Soul, Do thou awake and utter
Praise to the ETERNAL God.

2 I in my life,* and while I live, will Praise the ETERNAL God; while I have
any being I will sing unto my God.

3 Place not your confidence in Men of Princely power and grace; Nor in an
eminent Son of Man who cannot a Savior be.

4 His spirit* with his breath goes forth; He to his Earth returns; and in that
very day his Thot's all come unto an end.

5 O happy Man that has the God of Jacob for his help; whose hope is in the
ETERNAL God become a God to him.

6 It Is He who made the Heavens and Earth, the Sea, and all in them; It Is He
who does maintain the Truth to petpetuity.

7 He Judges for oppressed ones; He gives the hungry food. It Is the ETERNAL God
who sets the bound at liberty.

8 The ETERNAL God opens the blind; the ETERNAL God does raise the bowed down;
the ETERNAL God does love the right'ous ones.

9 The ETERNAL God does Strangers keep, He gives support unto Orphan and Widow:
and subverts the way of wicked Men.

10 Forever shall JEHOVAH reign; thy God, O Zion, He shall reign to Generations
all. Sing Hallelujah now.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXLVI. PSALM.
HAve we not here an Hymn of the Restored Jewish Nation, under the Reign of the
Messiah?

3 The Persian Emperors, put a stop unto the Building of the Temple; To
prevent a distrust of God on this difficult occasion, One of those Two Prophets
Haggai or Zechariah, might compose the Psalm that is now before us; exhorting
them notwithstanding the ill prospect of their Affairs, to put their Trust in
GOD. Well; Cambyses dies; and then in spite of all opposers, the City, Temple,
and Worship of God, were gloriously carried on.

4 Gods on Earth, and vet but Gods of Earth. It Is not said, They return to
their Cities, to their Castles, to their Kingdoms; These now become another;
But their Earth. A Little Earth is now all they have. It may be the Earth is
all they set their hearts upon.

8 Above a Thousand Years after, these Works were notably exemplified; And on
Sabbaths too; A Mystery pointing at the Kingdom of our SAVIOR, in the Sabbath
of the World, foretold at the close of the Psalm. There were Seven Sabbaths
which our Lord signalized, in the Time of His Ministry with working Miracles
thereupon. The Fifth of them was, when He raised up one that had been bowed
down. [Luk. XIII.] The Sixth of them was, when He opened the Eyes of one that
had been born Blind [Joh. IX.] Grotius truly oblerves, Mire haec congruunt in
Christi Tempora. But, O Christian, there is more to come. On that, He sets the
Bound at Liberty, the Midrash Tillin has that wonderful Gloss; In the future
Age, God permits the use of all sorts of Foods. Yea, He releases those that are
Bound in Death and the Grave. O Jews, Consider of it.

PSALM CXLVII.
1 SIng HALLELUJAH. For it is good to Sing unto our God; Because it is a
pleasant thing: Praise is a comely thing.

2 It Is the ETERNAL God who does build both Jerusalems; and the Outcasts of
Israel He will surely gather in.

3 He heals the brokenhearted ones; and He binds up their wounds.

4 He tells the number of the Stars; He calls them all by name.

5 Great is the Lord on whom we lean; and very much His power; There is no
number of the things His wisdom knows and does.

6 The ETERNAL God, He raises up the meek-afflicted ones; He brings down the
wicked ones unto the very dust.

7 Answers to the ETERNAL God with a Confession give; Sing with a Verse unto
our God upon the Ten-string'd Harp.

8 With Clouds the Heavens He does cloth; Rain for the Earth prepares; He
makes the lofty Mountains to produce the tender herb.

9 He does bestow upon the Beast for each their proper food: Upon the Ravens
Young Ones, when they makes their piteous cry.

10 In the strength of the Horse he does not any pleasure take; nor is He
pleased in the Legs of Man; He needs them not.

11 The ETERNAL God takes pleasure in such as maintain His fear: in them who on
His mercy do maintain a lively hope.

12 O both Jerusalems, Do ye Praise the ETERNAL God; O Zion, Do thou offer up
thy Praises to thy God.

13 Because He gives strength unto the bars that keep thy gates; on thy Sons
in the midst of thee His blessing He bestows.

14 He makes thy borders to enjoy peace and prosperity; richly He does supply
thee with the finest of the wheat.

15 He to the Earth sends His command; His Word does swiftly run.

16 The Snow He gives like wool; the Frost He does like ashes cast.

17 The Ice* and Hail like morsels, Hethrows down to nourish it;Before the Face
of His sharp Cold, who is there that can stand?

18 He does again send forth His Word, and so He melts them; His Spirit He
does make to blow, whereon the Waters flow.

19 He of His Words to Jacob does a revelation make: His Statutes and His
Judgments He reveals to Israel.

20 In such a manner He has not with any Nation dealt; For they right things
don't understand. Sing HALLELUJAH now.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXLVII. PSALM.
JErusalem is here supposed as re-established, and the Marks of the Divine
Presence and Blesting in the midst of it, fixed; and the Jewish Nation
gathered. It is an Hymn of Thanksgiving for this Revolution. The Condition of
the Christians turned Heathens at this time, under the Wrath of the Messiah, is
bewailed.

4 Kimchi says, The Stars are the Just mentioned, Dan. XII. 3. who shall be
then employed in Turning many to Righteousness. Arnobius has a Gloss a little
akin to it. Numerare Multitudinem stellarum eum credamus, in Sanctis. Dr.
Patrick's Paraphrase is; Whom He knows how to gather out of all their
Dispersions, and to find every one of them, wherever they are, though as numerous
as the Stars of Heaven. [ Genesis XV. 5.] which He as distinctly and exactly
understands (how confused soever they seem to us to be scattered in the Sky,)
as we do those things which we call by their proper Names. Munstors Gloss is
the same, Eadem facilitate qua stellas in Caelo dispersas m^merat.

8 The Clouds and Rains are mentioned because of the Plenty now granted them. [
Hag. II. 19.]

10 Dr. Patrick's Paraphrase is; Let us not be afraid, though we are of little
Force, [ Neh. IV. 3, 4. VII. 4.] and have no Armies of Horse and Foot to defend
us. For the Lord who Fights for us [ Nab. IV. ^0.] has no need of these; and
will not take part with our Enemies, because they are Superior to us, in the
strength of their Horses, and the nimbleness of their Soldicrs.

12 The Reduplication of the invitation to the Praises of God, is not without a
Mystery, and a Prophecy for Two Returns from Captivity. Moreover that Name, Thy
GOD, more peculiarly carries the Messiah, in the Signification of it. It is in
Him, that God becomes OUR GOD. In the Second Return, the Messiah will be more
eminently acknowledged and glorified.

15 The Intention of introducing the Circumstances of the Winter here, is well
touched in the Patrician Paraphrase. GOD shows us, by the Fruitful Seasons He
sends, after all things seem to be killed by the hard Winter, that He does not
intend by our Affliction to destroy us; and that He can easily bring all our
Brethren hither, who remain s^ill in Captivity. For when He would have any
Alter^tion made in the Earth, it is done as speedily as we can speak.

16 Our Husbandmen burn heaps of Rubbish on their New-ploug'd Ground. Probably
the Israelitish Husbandmen did so too. They scattered Ashes on their Fields; or
perhaps cast Ashes on their Dunghills, where being diluted by the Rains, the
Salt very deeply impregnared them, and the diffusion of such a Salt was a
notable way to produce a Fruitful Soil. Virgil speaks diverse times of this
Practice in his Georgicks.

The Greeks of Old called Snow, by the term of Wet-Wooll. The Latin, Floccus,
is both a Lock of Wool, and a Flake of Snow. There is a Saline Spirit in this
Woollen Mantle; and it has a Fructifying Virtue. A Winter of seasonable Snows,
is usually followed with a Fruitful Summer. Floods of Snow-Water enrich the
Earth exceedingly.

19 The Word of God, gives us, yet more full Instructions, than what we have in
the Meteors of the Winter, to depend upon GOD.

PSALM CXLVIII.
1 LEt HALLELUJAH now be Sung! Now from the Heavens above Praise the ETERNAL
God; praise Him in the high places there.

2 All you His Angels, O Praise Him; Praise Him, O all His Hosts.

3 Praise ye Him, O thou Sun, and Moon; Praise Him all Stars of light.

4 Praise Him, ye that the Heavens are of Heavens, Seats of Bliss: and Praise
Him, you the Waters which above the Heavens are.

5 Let them give Praises to the Name of the ETERNAL God; For He gave His
Commandment, and they created are.

6 He also has established them forever, Evermore; He has made a Decree, and
it shall never be transgressed.

7 Now from the Earth below, give Praise to the ETERNAL God; Do it, ye Dragons*
and ye Whales, and do it all ye Deeps.

8 Do it both O thou Fire and Hail; O Snow and Vapor too; Do it O thou
Tempestuous Wind, which does sulfil His Word.

9 Do it, O you High Mountains, and all of you lesser Hills; Do it, O you
Fruit-bearing Trees, and all you Cedars join.

10 Do it, O all you Animals, and all you Cattle kind; Do it, O every creeping
Thing, and every flying Fowl.

11 Do it, O all Kings of the Earth, and all ye People too; Do it, O Princes,
and all you the Judges of the Earth.

12 Do it, O you that Young Men are, yea, and Young Women too; Do it, O you
that Old Men are, with Babes in Infancy.

13 Let these with Praises due to Him so celebrate the Name of the ETERNAL; for
His Name alone is Excellent. His Glory is above the Earth, yea, and above the
Heavens.

14 And He, of His own People does exalt the Horn on high; the Praises of His
gracious ones, the Sons of Israel; a People that are near to Him. Sing
HALLELUJAH now.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXLVIII. PSALM.
THe People of the Messiah are here supposed, to be gathered unto Him, and all
Creatures are exhorted now to praise Him.

12 Kimchi says, Old Men are joined with Children in the Invitations to Praise
the Iord; because the Old Men are to teach the Children who know not how to do
it of themselves. Yea, Old Men often sancy to have Children under their
tuition; perhaps most of them Grand Children. Young Men and Young Women are
added in the Verse. Thus the Thre^ Ages are called upon. The Apostle John, may
allude hereto, when he sales. I write unto you, Fathers, Young Men. and
Children. And when the Seryants of God be^an their Speeches, Men, Brethren, and
Fathers'; By Brethren, with a humble Figure they may mean Children.

PSALM CXLIX.
1 SIng HALLEUJAH. A New Song Sing to the ETERNAL God; His Praise is in the
Church of those that are His gracious Ones.

2 In Him who is his maker now let Israel rejoice; Them that are Sons of Zion
let be joyful in their King.

3 With a Tripudiating Joy O let them Praise His Name; let them sing Praises
unto Him with Timbrel and with Harp.

4 For the ETERNAL God does in His People take Delight; He Will beautify the low
* and meek with His Salvation still.

5 In Glory let the Gracious Ones * most gloriously rejoice; on their Beds,
where they rest or feast, O let them sing aloud.

6 High Praises of the mighty God let warble through their Throat; and in their
hand let there be held a double-Edged Sword.

7 Due Vengeance for to Execute upon the Nations so.

8 To bind their Kings in Chains, and their Nobles in Iron Bonds.

9 Upon them for to Execute the Judgment written down. This honor all His
gracious Ones enjoy. Praise ye the Lord.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CXLIX. PSALM.
THe Psaim is fitted unto the Time, when the Messiah reigns over the restored
Jewish Nation; and and their Joy on the Occasion mentioned it the XXXVIII of
Ezekiel, and the XIV of Zechariah.

3 Tripudiating Joy. Or, the Dance. They Praise the Lord in the Dance, who use
much Activity, in the Praising of God; They who are ever in Motions which have
a Tendency to utter or produce the Praises of God; They who also associate with
others in Vigorous Essays to do those things wherein God may be glorified.
Behold the Dance of the Evangelical Dispensation. The Choreutic Agitations of
the Body, are too mean things to be chiefly intended here.

4 When God shall bestow Salvation on His People, He will also beautify them.
How? Sanctify them. The Beauties of Holiness will be seen upon them.

Think on this, O Pretenders to a Justified State, and behold all Antinomian
Presumptions fulminated. But one Singular Beauty on the saved People of God,
and indeed one that prepares them for Salvation, is Meekness and Patience.
Prosecute this with a Thousand Holy Meditations.

6 It has been the Custom of all Nations, to prepare and excite themselves for
a Fight, by some Instrumen of Music. Clemens of Alexandria enumerates the
Variety. But it was proper unto the Israelites, to go forth against their
Enemies, with Psalms of Praise to the God, who had given great Victories unto
their Ancestors.

8 An Allusion to Judges 1.7. The State of things in the Days of the New
Jerusalem is referred to. Now, turn to Isaiah. LX. 11, 12. and you have a Key
to this Passage. Yea, in the Present time, the People of God, by their Prayers,
obtain the Restraints of His Providence, to be laid upon such Persons, a^are
here spoken of.

9 The Judgment written of. ^ee Deuteronomy. VII. 20. and XXXII. 41, 42, 43.

PSALM. C L.
1 PRaise ye the Lord. In's holiness Praise ye the mighty God; Praise ye Him in
the Firmament where His strong Power is seen.

2 O Praise Him for the mighty things which have been done by Him; Praise Him;
as there are many things wherein His greatness shines.

3 Praise Him with sound of Trumpet; with Psaltry and Harp Him praise.

4 Praise Him with Timbrel and with a tripudiating Pipe. Praise Him with
stringed Instruments and with the Organ too.

5 Praise Him upon the Cymbals which are very audible, Praise Him on Cymbals
heard on high * as for a Jubilee.

6 Praise JAH, O every thing that breaths. Sing HALLELUJAH now.

ILLUSTRATIONS on the CL. PSALM.
THe Psalm relates to the Reign of the Messiah, when every thing that has
Breath will Praise the Lord. Maimonides gives us a Jewish Tradition, That when
the People brought up their First Fruits, to present them unto the Lord,
according to the XXVI. of Deuteronomy, as soon as they came to the Mountain of
the Temple, every one took his Basker into his hand, and Sang this whole Psalm;
till they came to the Courts of the House of the Lord: And then the Levites met
them, Singing, the XXX Psalm.

1 Of Old they read it, Laudate Deum in Sanctis ejus. And their Gloss was; It Is
done, Quando little imitamur Exempla, sequimur Monit^, Regulam obtine^us.
Aben-Ezra observes, we have no way left now, to know, what these Musicial
Instruments were; There being many found in the Country of the Ishmaelites, (or
Mahometans) which are not among the Men of Edom, (or Christians.)

It may not be amiss here to mention, what Monsieur Jurieu has observed.

There are Three Sorts of Instruments frequently mentioned in the Psalms; The
Cymbals, the Psalierys, and the Harps.

The Cymbals were large and broad pieces of Brass bent, and giving a strong
sound; which were beaten very near in such a manner, as we now beat our Drums;
and are known by the Name of Tymbals in our Days. Our Apostle Paul in a famous
Text alludes unto them.

The Psalterys were Violins, on which they played. with a Bow, Ten Strings
belonged unto it; and the several Notes were managed with the Bow and the
touch, as it is done on the Violins in our days.

The Harps, had Twelve Notes, and every Note had its own String, which was
managed with the Fingers, and could not be altered by the different way of
touching.

The Levites were the only Persons that were to play on these Instruments.
Indeed we read of David, and all the House of Israel, playing on Instruments,
at the Transportation of the Ark. But Monsieur Jurieu thinks, this might be one
of the Irregularities which occasioned the Death Unzah. At least it may be
supposed, that this was not allowed of, Except in the Country and in private
Houses. But in the Temple, no body durst play on Instruments, unless he were a
Levite, or the Son of a Levite. We say, the Son of a Levite, because the
Rabbi's tell us, that such of the Levites as were Singers, did use to bring
their Sons along with them, into the Court of the Priest, tho they were not
come to their Full Age required unto the performance of any Service there on
their own bohalf. There is another Tradition of the Rabbi's, That is was
allowable to make choice of Singers from among the People of Israel, provided
they were by Marriage near akin to the Sacerdotal Race.

But, O Sincere Christians, Lifted up to Heaven! You all are Priests of God:
And of the Tribe, who may and shall Sing His Praises. His Graces in your Souls,
will be the Glorious Instruments wherewith you shall perform the Noble Exercise.

6 The Bereschith Rabba carries it, as if every Breath of a good Man should
Praise the Lord; There should be a Praise of God in every Breath of such a Man.
In the strict Sense of it, this is not attainable by any Man Breathing in this
Evil World. However to be Breathing after as much of this Attainment as can be
come at, becomes a Christian.

The End of the PSALMS.
APPENDIX.
I The Firstborn of Poetry: Foretelling the Fall of ANTICHRIST.
Exodus XV.
1 I Will Sing to the ETERNAL God who triumphs gloriously: The Horse with him
that rides him, He has thrown into the Sea.

2 Now the ETERNAL God becomes my Strength, and so my Song; and He it is who
has been for Salvation unto me. He is my God, and I Will prepare for Him a
Dewlling Place; He of my Father is the God, and I Will set Him on high.

3 He who is the ETERNAL God does yet become a Man a Man of War; it is He of
whom JEHOVAH is the Name.

6 Thy Right hand O ETERNAL God, is glorified with power; Thy Right hand O
ETERNAL God has broke the Enemy.

7 Those who against thee rise, Thou will in thy great Excellence pull down;
Thou^'t send thy wrath; it shall like stubble them consume.

11 Among the God's, who is like to Thee, O Thou ETERNAL God! Who Is like to
Thee; In holiness so very Glorious who! Thou in thy Glorious Praises art how
very terrible! Thou art the doer of the thing that is most wonderful.

13 The People which thou have redeemed in thy benignity thou have led forth;
Thou in thy strength do a good conduct give, unto the Habitation of thy
Glorious Holiness.

18 He, who is the ETERNAL God shall reign for^ evermore,

II. The Mosaic Prophecy.
Deuteronomy. XXXII.
3 SInce I will own aloud the Name of the ETERNAL God; A mighty Greatness, O do
ye Ascribe unto our God.

4 The Rock; His Work is perfect; For Judgment's in all His ways; A God of
truth; He does no wrong: most just and right is He.

29 Oh! That they were once truly wise, That this they under hood! That they
would think and know what shall come in their latter end.

36 For the ETERNAL God will for His People be a Judge; And for His Servants He
will do as one who does repent! It shall be done, when that He does behold
their power is gone, And there is none shut up in Tow'res, no, not the least
reserve.

43 Sing O ye Nations, of what He will for His People do; Because of His own
Servants He will now revenge the blood: And Vengeance He will render to those
who have troubled them. So He Will show mercy to His Land, unto His People there.

III. The Song of the MESSIAH. [Or when the Name of the MESSIAH is first
mentioned.]
I Sam. II.
1 IN the ETERNAL God my heart has an exulting joy: In the ETERNAL God my Horn
is listed up on high. Over my Adversaries now I have an opened mouth; It is
because I do rejoice in thy Salvation, Lord.

2 There is not any Holy like to the ETERNAL God. And there is not a Rock to be
compared unto our God.

6 It Is the ETERNAL God who kills; and He who makes to live. It Is He brings
down unto the Pit and He who brings up.

7 The ETERNAL God, He makes Poor He also makes Rich; It Is He who makes down
to fall; and He who lifts up.

9 He of His gracious Ones will keep the feet; but wicked ones in darkness
shall be silent; for by strength no Man prevails.

10 The ETERNAL God, They who contend with Him shall be destroyed; He in the
Heaven's upon them shall thunder down from thence. The ETERNAL God shall be the
Judge to the Fnds of the Earth; His King He Will strengthen, and on high lift His
MESSIAH's Horn.

IV. Divine Attraction Asked for.
Cant. I.
4 O Draw thou me; we shall thereon be running after thee; Into His Chambers
now the King has introduced me. In thee we'll be exceeding glad, and have
triumphant Joy; Thy Love we will mind more than Wine; Upright ones love thee
still.

7 O Thou beloved of my Soul, Declare thou unto me, Declare where thou do
feed thy Flock, and make them rest at noon. For why should I be like unto One
who does turn aside, * a veiled one, among the Flocks of thy Companions!

V. The Tree of Life.
Cant. II.
3 REsembling of the Orange-tree among the other Trees of the Wood, my Beloved
is among the other Sons. Under His blessed Shadow, I sat down with great
Delight, and to my palate was His Fruit most wonderfully sweet.

4 He introduced me into His House of Banqueting, And of His banner over me,
the Motto, it was, LOVE.

VI. Flaming Love.
Cant. VIII.
6 O Set me as a Seal upon thine Heart; O set me as a Seal upon thine Arm: For
Love it is as strong as Death. Oh! Jealousy, it is severe as is the very Crave;
Its Arrows are Arrows of Fire, Flames of the Fire of God.

7 Love, many Waters cannot quench, nor drown it can the Floods; should one
give all He Is worth for Love, it would be but despised.

VII. Repeated Songs of Salvation.
Isaiah XII.
The Former.
1 I WILL Praise Thee, O ETERNAL God; Though thou waft wroth with me, Thy wrath is
now all turned away, and thou will comfort me.

2 LO, God's my SAVIOR, I will trust and will not be afraid: For He whose
Glorious Name is JAH even the ETERNAL God; It Is Him I have ^o strengthen me, and
He shall be my Song: He also it is that unto me a Savior is become.

3 And now with a most solid Joy, Waters you shall draw forth from the still
flowing Fountains, which the Savior has prepared.

The Latter.
4 O Praise ye the ETERNAL God, Call ye upon His Name; Among the People O
declare the things performed by Him. Keep in remembrance, that His Name is now
on high extolled.

5 O utter now your Songs to Him who is the ETERNAL God. For He has done what
does proclain His high magnificence: This is a thing that is made known abroad
in all the Earth.

6 O Thou, who do in Zion dwell, Cry out and shout aloud For Great is
Israel's Holy One who is in the midst of thee.

VIII. The Song of the Strong City.
Isai. XXVI.
1 THere is for us a City now of a sufficient strength; The SAVIOR will afford
to it Walls and a Bulwark too.

Set open ye the Gates of it; and let then enter in the Righteous N^tion, which
^oes keep the Truth; i^ --

3 Established is the Decree that thou will keep it still in Peace, yea, in a
glorious Peace, because it hopes in thee.

4 In the ETERNAL God, O put your trust for evermore; Because a Rock of Ages is
in JAH the ETERNAL God.

9 Oh! with my very Soul I have desired thee in the Night; yea, with my Spirit
in me I will early seek for thee. For when thy Judgments are abroad dispensed
in the Earth, They who are dwellers in the World shall then learn
Righteousness.

12 O Thou ETERNAL God, Thou will accomplish Peace for us, Because that in and
for us thou all of our works have wrought.

13 ETERNAL God, our God, Without Thee, Lords have ruled us; We with regard to
thee alone will celebrate thy Name.

20 Thy Dead shall live again, they shall as my Dead Body rise: Awake, and
with, a triumph sing, ye who dwell in the dust. For thy dew shall be like the
dew which does revive the Plants; and so the Earth, it shall send sorth such as
ly dead in it.

21 In the mean time, Go then thy way thou, O my People, go Enter into thy
Chambers, and about thee shut thy door. There hide thy self; it will but as a
little moment be, until the indigration shall be wholly past and gone.

IX. The Lord's Prayer.
OUr Father who art in the Heavens; [Olet] thy Name be sanctified; Thy Kingdom,
Oh! may it arrive; Thy Will, may that be [fully] done. Done here upon the Farth
below, as it is done in Heaven [Above:] This Day bestow thou upon us what is
[to be] our Daily Bread. And us our Debts forgive, as we our Debtors [freely]
do forgive; And to Temptation lead us not, but us from [the worst] evil save.
Because the Kingdom, it is thine, The Power too, it is thine [alone;] And thine
the Glory still will be Forevermore. Amen. [Amen.]

X. Tidings from Heaven.
Luk, II, 10, 11, 14.
THe Angel said to them, Fear not, For, Lo, I bring [ from Head'n] to you Good
tidings of exceeding Joy; [and such] 'twill to all People be. For now a SAVIOR
unto you this Day a [Bighty] Savior's Born; It Is in your DAVID's City so; He
is the CHRIST, the [Glorious] Lord.]

And with the Angel suddenly there was a [wondrous] Multitude of the Celestial
Army, which then Praised God, and [thus they] said; O! In the Highest let there
be Now Glory [given] unto God; And now on Earth let there be Peace; In Men
Benignity [be seen.]

XI. The Lord our Healer.
Mal. IV. 2.
TO you that fear my Name there shall the [Slendid] Sun of Righteousness arise
with bealing virtue in the rays [that be] shot forth from Him

Matthew, XI. 4, 5.
THose things which ye do hear and see: The Blind receive their [wish'd for]
sight; And they that were the Lame do walk; The Lepers are made clean [and
whole.] And they that were the Deaf do hear; The Dead are [also] raised up; And
they that are poor Creatures, such [Ev'n such] as these are Gospelliz'd.

XII. The Beatitudes.
Matthew. V. 3. -- 13.
I. BLessed the Poor in Spirit are, for theirs the Kingdom of the Heavens.

II. Blessed are very Mournful ones, for that they shall be Comforted.

III. Blessed the Meekly Patient are, for they inherit shall the Earth.

IV. Blessed, who Hunger and who Thirst for Justice; for they shall be filled.

V. Blessed shall be the Merciful, for Mercy's what they shall obtain.

VI. Blessed shall be the Pure in Heart, for they shall have the sight of God.

VII. Blessed the Peacemakers: for they shall be pronounced the Sons of God.

VIII. Blessed the pursued for Righteonsness; for theirs, the Kingdom of the
Heavens.

XIII. The Song of Simeon.
Luke II. 24, -- 32.
O Lord, Thou in a blessed Peace thy Servant do dismiss, Now after all that I
have seen according to thy Word. For of thy Great Salvation now my Eyes have
had the sight: which thou before the Face of all People prepared have: A Light
by which the Gentales are to be enlightened all: And the bright Glory shining
to thy People Israel.

XIV. A Golden Chain.
2 Pet. I. 5, 6, 7.
GIving all Diligence, O add, Courage unto your Faith; and unto Courage
Knowledge add; to Knowledge, Temperance: And unto Temperance let there be added
Godliness. And unto Godliness do you Brotherly kindness add: But to Brotherly
kindness let be added Charity.

XV. Patience.
Jam. I. 4, 5.
LEt Patience have the perfect work which does belong to it; so you will be
perfect and entire de^c^ent in no point. But if that any of you are sensible
that he wants the Wisdom, which is now proposed, let him ask it of God; Who
has a liberal hand unto all Men does freely give, and don't upbraid their
foolisimass: so 'twill be given him.

XVI. A Song in the Night.
Heb. XII.
5 MY [Chastned] Son, Despise thou not the Chastning of the Lord; nor do thou
faint when that thou do receive Rebukes from Him.

6 For whom the Lord does [truly] love He chastneth such a one: and scourges
every one whom He receives as a Son.

7 If Chastning ye [do well] endure God deals with you as Sons; for what Son
ever is there, whom the Father Chastens not?

10 He Chastens us ['tis true] but it is for our benefit; it is that Partakers
so we might be of His Holiness,

11 Now for the present, there [he sure] no Chastning is that seems to be a
cause of any joy, no, but a cause of grief. Yet asterwards it. [surely] yields
the fruit of Righteousness to them that are well-tri'd thereby; which will be
full of Peace.

XVII. The Faithful Saying.
1 Timothy I. 15.
THis is a Saying, which deserves [Over] to be relied upon, and it is worthy of
a full Reception every where [of all.] This, That CHRIST who is JESUS, has Now
come into the [Ruin'd] World for this, that unto Sinners, He might be a
[Mighty] SAVIOR.

The Matchless Gift.
John III. 16.
SUch, Even such, a Love has God had for a [Lost and] Dying World, that He His
Only One has given, Even His Begotten Son [for it,] This has He done, that
whosoev'r Believes aright in Him [alone,] should never perish, but should have
an Everlasting Life [by Him.]

XVIII. The Blessing.
Act. III. 26.
GOD Raising His Son Josus, has sent Him to Bless you all, in turning every
one of you from his Iniquities.

Act. V. 31.
Him God with His Right hand sets up, a Prince and Savior to give His Israel
to repent, and to forgive their Sins.

XIX. The Holy Baptism.
Matthew. XXVIII. 19, 20.
ALL Nations make Disciples, them Baptizing in the Name of GOD the Father and
the Son and of the Holy Spirit. Instructing them, that thereupon they carefully
observe all things whatever they may be I have commanded you.

XX. The Holy Supper.
1 Cor. XI. 23 -- 26.
KNow, The Lord Jesus in the Night in which He was betrayed, took Bread and
having given Thanks, He brake it and He said: Take, Eat; This is my Body which
is Broken thus for you: This do, that so of me you may keep the Remembrance up.
He also in like manner took the Cup, when He had Supped; said, This is the
New Testament, confirmed in my Blood. This is what I would have you do, as
often as you Drink of this, that so of me you may keep the Remembrance up. As
often now as ye Eat this Bread, and as ye Drink this Cup, you the Death of the
Lord show forth until that He do come.

XXI. Our Atonement.
Roman, Chap. V.
6 WHen we were [ whosty] destitute of strength, This [ proper] time, CHRIST
died for the profane.

7 It Is [Very] true, One for a Just Man would [Scarce and] with no small
difficulty dye. Yet peradventure somr would [Even] dare for a [Bels^^] Good Man
to suffer Death.

8 But God commends [in this] His Love to us that CHRIST for us [altho'] yet
Sinners died.

9 Much more then we [may well] infer from hence, since by His Blood we are
[freely] justified, we shall through Him be [surely] saved from the wrath to
which we [Justly] are exposed.

10 For if by His Sons Death [for it] we were while yet Foes [fully] reconciled
to God, much more be sure now [so well] reconciled, we shall be saved by His
[Glozious] Life.

11 And yet this not all [of it] but we do herewithal rejoice in God [our God,]
Through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom [it is] [a full] Atonement we have now
received.

XXII. Spiritual Blessings.
Ephesians. I.
3 O Blested be the Glorious God and Father of our Lord, Even of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has now blessed us; with all the Blessings which are of a
Spiritual import in Heavenly places; in and with, a CHRIST to be enjoyed,

4 According as in Him He has made a free choice of us before that the
Foundation of the World was ever laid. Choosing us upon this intent that we
before Him should be holy and be blameless, through the influence of love.

XXIII. Great Things done for us in CHRIST.
Ephesians. II.
4 A God, who in the Riches of His Mercy does abound, because of the great love
wherewith He still has loved us.

6 Even when we were dead in Sins, He has enlivened us, together with CHRIST
doing it; Saved you are by Grace!

6 Us also has He raised up together, and He has in Heavenly Places made us
fir in Jesus Christ together

XXIV. The Scale of Heaven.
Romans VIII.
30 WHom He did first predestinate, them he did also call; and them whom he has
called, He has also Justified, and whom He Justified, He those has also
glorified.

31 Unto such things as these then what is there that we shall say? If God be
once engaged for us against us who can be?

32 He who his own Son spared not, when Justice made Demands, but did deliver
him to Death in the room of us all, How shall not He also freely give all things
to us with Him?

XXV. Conjugal Goodness.
Ephesians. V.
21 WIves, Unto your own Husbands yield, even as to the Lord.

23 The Husband is head to the Wife, as CHRIST Head to the Church.

24 For this Cause, as the Church is in subjection unto CHRIST, Wives unto
their own Husbands should in every thing be so.

25 Husbands O do you love your Wives with all due tenderness, as CHRIST has
also loved the Church, and gave himself for it.

28 As Men love their own Bodies, so they ought to Love their Wives; He who
does duly love his Wife, does therein love himself.

33 Let each and every one of you love his Wife as himself: and let the Wife
see that she pay her Husband much Regard.

XXVI. The Song of the Twenty-Four Elders.
Rev. IV.
WOrthy Thou art, O Lord; for to receive from all Glory and Honor too and
power; for that thou did all things create; and for thy will they are and
were created all.

XXVII. Praises for the Men of Judah.
Jude. 24, 25.
NOW unto Him who has the power to preserve you free from Sinful falls, and to
set you before the face of His bright Glory, free from fault, with a Triumphant
Joy; To Him who is only wise God, Even our Savior, Glory and Grandeur be, Power
and Dominion; Now at this time let it be so and so unto all Ages be.

XXVIII. The New Song.
Rev. V. 9, 10.
O Lamb of God, Thou art worthy to take the Book, and open all the Seals which
cover what is in it; For thou wast Slain, and have redeemed us unto God by thine
own Blood. So from each Kindred, and Language and People and Nation thou
bring us; and thou have made us to be both Kings and Priests unto our God,
and we shall Reign over the Earth.

[With the voice of the many Angels.]

Rev. V. 12.
Oh! worthy is the Lamb, the Lamb, that has been Slain, all Power and Riches
and Wisdom and Fortitude and Honor too with Glory and with Blessing still for
to receive.

XXIX. The Doxology.
Rev. 1.5, 6.
NOW to that Glorious One who has wondrously loved [sinful] us, and who has
made us to be Kings as well as ^^^ests to God [on High;] Even unto the God,
whom His Father; [let there] unto Him be Glory and ^^^^nion forever more. Amen:
[amen^]

XXX. The Name of God.
Prove. XVIII. 10.
JEHOVAH's [Great and] Glorious Name, it is a Tower of Strength: The Righteous
runs [with speed] into it; and there on high Sits safe.

Exodus XXXIV. 6, 7.
So He proclaimed it [of Did] JEHOVAH is His Name; JEHOVAH who is [the Strong]
God forever merciful and [berv] Gracious too is He; to anger very Slow; yea, He
does [very] much abound in Grace and Truth to us. He does [how Great] reserves
of Grace for many Thousands keep! Iniquity He [freely] does dispense a pardon
to. Yea, to Transgression too [tis done] and to all sorts of Sin; and if He do
[in part] cut off He will not quite cut off.

XXXI. Right Sabbatizing.
THE FIRST PART. Isai. LVI. 1, 2, 6, 7.
THus the ETERNAL God has said, Blessings attend the [Pious] Man who does
this, and the Son of Man who lays [and keeps] fast hold on it; The Man who from
polluting it does keep the [Holy] Sabbath well; and he who from the doing of
all Evil keeps his hand [with care.]

Yea, The Sons of the Stranger, who to [and on] the ETERNAL God do join
themselves, that they may be true [Priests and] Servants unto tree: And that in
Love unto the Name of [Him who's] the ETERNAL GOD, they may become the
Servants, who [truly] devote themselves to Him; all of these will my Sabbath
keep from all pollutions [clean and] elear, and they upon my Covenant will take
[therein] perpetual hold.

Now such as these I will into my Holy Mountain [surely] bring; and in my House
of Prayer I will make them to shine with [Glorious] Joy. Their Offerings which
ascend in Flames, and [all the] Sacrifices which they Offer on my Altar, shall
a good [and kind] Acceptance find. For that my House, to which they do for such
Devotions [use to] go, it shall be called, an House of Prayer, free for all
People [coming] there.

THE SECOND PART. Isai. LVIII. 13, 14.
IF thou from the profaning of the Sabbath turn [away] thy Foot: not doing of
thy pleasure on what is [ordain'd] my Holy day; But if the Sabbath thou esteem
[and keep] as a Delight unto the Blessed JEHOVAH's Holy one, even [Him who's]
the Victorious One; And if thereon thou honor Him, not doing as you are used
[to do,] nor pleasing thy own humor now, nor Speaking a wrong word [thereon.]

Then thou shall satisfy thy self [Ever] in the ETERNAL God; And I will make
thee Ride upon High [and Rich] places of the Earth. I will thee with the
portion of Jacob thy Father [always] feed; For so now speaks the very mouth of
the [True and] ETERNAL God.

XXXII. Early Piety.
Eccle. XI. 9, 10. XII. 1, 14.
Rejoice, O Young Man, in thy Youth, and be of a good Heart in the Days of thy
Youth, to this thou art enough inclined! And walk thou in the ways preser'd by
such an Heart as thine; Do what shall seem desirable unto thy Youthful Eyes.
But know thou that for all of these indulged Enormatimes, God the judge will
bring thee anonto render an Account

Oh, then remove thou from thine heart, what causes Grief and Wrath; and from
thy Flesh, Oh, do thou cause each Vicious lust to pass, For Infancy, and then
the Youth which is the Morning time, is Vanity: Is spent in Sin, it is all
spant in vain.

Remember thy Creator now (the Father, Sen, and Spirit;) Now in the Days of thy
Youth, * which are of thy choice the Days. Do it, before the Evil Days do come,
and years draw nigh in which thou shall have cause to say, I Have no Delight in
them.

For GOD the Judge will every Work into a Judgment bring; with every Secret;
be it a good or be it an evil thing.

XXXIII. Almsgiving.
Luke XII. 33, 34.
SEll your Possessions, rather than leave such a thing undone: And freely
giving what you have, Merciful Alms dispense. By doing so provide yourlelves of
Bags that will not decay; a Treasure in the Heavens, which is certain not to fail:
Where it is no Thief can make approach, nor can a Moth corrupt. For where your
Treasure is laid up, your Heart will still be there.

Heb. XIII. 16.
Be sure that you by no means be forgetful of this thing; To be Beneficent, and
be Communicative still: For with such Sacrifices as are in such things as
these, the GOD, who does behold them all, is highly gratified.

Act. X. 4.
The Supplications thou haft made unto the Glorious GOD, and there withal thy
Gracious Alms that have attended them; These Offerings have made their Ascent;
for a Memorial, in the sight of the Blessed GOD, who still remembers them.

Eccl. XI. 1.
Cast thou thy Corn-for-seed upon the face of moistened Ground: For after many
days thou shall find the return of it.

XXXIV. The Ten Commandments.
I BEfore my face, thou shall not have Other, and After Gods, for thine

II. Thou shall not any Image make to thee, nor bow thy self thereto.

III. Thou shall not take in vain the Name of the ETERNAL One, Thy GOD.

IV. Remember thou the Sabbath Day, that thou may it as Holy keep.

V. Thy Father and thy Mother pay, Honor, that so they may prolong thy Days
upon the promised Earth.

VI. Kill not in any Murderous way.

VII. Commit thou no Adultery.

VIII. Thou shall not any Stealth Commit.

IX. Upon thy Neighbor bear thou not a Testimony that is false.

X. Thou shall not Covet any thing which to thy Neighbor does belong.

1 John V. 3.
This is the Love of GOD; and His Commandments never grievous are.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 34. Line 4. Read. of Hell. p. 49. l. 8, r. 29. l. 21. r. Rev. II. p. 61.
l. 10. for 3. r. 5. p. 64. l. 27. r. re-established. p. 87. l. 7. r. 25. p. 92.
l. 5. r. XXXII. p. 101. l. 16. r. 6. p. 107. l. 23. r. be brought. p. 135. l.
21. f. shall. r. has. p. 171. l. 11. r. Colleagues. p. 173. l. 25. r. depths
of Waters. p. 184. l. 11. r. Filiabitur. p. 190. l. 28. r. Heads. p. 191. l.
10. r. the p. 196. l. 8. r. Judgment. p. 198. l. ult, add, Selah. p. 208. l. 3.
f. LED. r. FED. p. 241. l. 24. Blot out, OF. p. 244. l. 2. add it. p. 262. l.
6. r. Eximious. p. 170. l. 14. r. OVERCOME. p. 276. l. 3. r. 27. p. 306. l. 23.
r. Covenant p. 332. l. 9. r. Thy.

Parallels are wanting, p. 123. l. 5. p. 136. l. 21. p. 247. l. 17. p. 176. l.
10. etc l. 22. p. 286. l. 4. p. 334. l. 24. p. 339. l. 21.


