October. 1660.

Etatis suae 61.

J. F Sculp



LO here! the Dictates of a dying: Man!
Mark well his Note; who like the expiring Swan,
Wisely presaging her approaching Doom,
Sings in soft Charms her Epicaedium.
Such, such are his; who was a shining Lamp,
Which though extinguished by a fatal Damp;
Yet his last Breathing shall like Incense hurled
On sacred Altars, so Perfume the World,
That the next will admire, and out of doubt,
Revere that Torch-Light, which this Age, put out.
A Dying Fathers LAST Legacy TO AN Only Child: OR, Mr. Hugh Peter's ADVICE TO
HIS DAUGHTER.

Written by his own Hand, during his late Imprisonment in the Tower of London;
And given her a little before his Death.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green for Benjamin Eliot, at his Shop (...) the North
Side of King Street. 1717.

To the Impartial READER
BE not Discouraged from Reading this small Treatise, because of the unhappy
End of a wear if (...) Pilgrimage, which the (...) met with in this World;
(...) get a Fall in a Journey, or meet with a (...) Shower of Rain so it be in
the (...) Day when we are near our Inn, (...) meet with accommodation and
refr^^^ (...) we are the less troubled; Yet such (...) Care (who for many Years
was very (...) mental in the Church of God, and a (...) of bringing many Souls
to Christ (...) the good of others, came into (...) when it was in a flame of
(...) has signed him also, that he ^ight (...) everlasting flames) in this
Disc^^^ (...) wails the vanity of his own Spirit (...) will not Excuse him: he
find (...) busy in Aliena Republica, and we will not justify him; But if that
precious Gold should be cast away because there is some Dross, or the Children
of God cast out of the Family for every fault though heinous, we should condemn
the Generation of the Just: You will find in this Legacy, to his only Child,
that he had a Root of Grace, and that the Fountain was clear from which ran so
savoury a Stream; and that at the last when he had no hope to save a frail
Body, yet he minded his own and others Souls; And that he was a Master Workman
in then Mystery, wherein he had Labored successfully so many Years; And we
hope, that notwithstanding the prejudicasie of some against him, and the words
of others, and his (...) shame faced Catastrophy, we may ^^^ably judge, that
God has wiped away all Tears from his Eyes, that he is entered into Rest, his
Works following him; and that he is made perfect by his great Sufferings; And
wish the same to you, except these Bonds.

G. F. N. B.

Mr. HUGH PETER'S LAST LEGACY, To His DAUGHTER.
For Elizabeth Peter's.
My Dear Child,
I Have thought to leave you the Extract of all my Experienceth so far as may
concern your (...) and because there are so many Books Printed, looking (...)
Cases, which I have often ^^^mended to you; my Labor (...) the less, though
your Pains the greater, in searching and studying them, which next to the
Scriptures, I conjure you to acquaint your self withal; for never Age was so
pregnant that way since our Savior came in the Flesh, which Light I wish may
grow to greater Glory. But to thy self:

1. Above all things know, That nothing can do you any good without Union with
Christ the Head; which can never be, till your Understanding be enlightened
with the want of Christ, and His Worth, and then that your Will be so subdued
to that Light, that it draw forth choice, and consent of, and to that only
good, with an Empire or Resolution to close with Him against Sin, World, Hell,
Death, etc. And know this, That the necessity of a Christ (which the
Understanding discovers) will set the Will on work to all Duty, and (the worth
in Christ it makes manifest) will make the Will delight: unless these two
Faculties be thus wrought upon by the Word and Spirit, you will be at a
constant less, and all the Miscarriages in Religion have the Ignorance of this
for the Foundation. Read Shepherds Convert, Daniel Rogers Practical Catechism,
and Hooker, to this end, with such other helps as you may get: And herein I am
the more earnest with you, because in this my Condition, I find that Union with
Christ, and the Satisfaction Christ has made to His Fathers Justice, by his
Active and Passive Obedience, are the only Two Pillars that must Support a Soul
leaving a mortal Body: For, as I profess my self Orthodox in all Points of
Religion, according to the Assemblies Confession, Explained by Others at the
Savoy also so I have desired in nothing to be more Clear, than in the Two
Doctrines aforesaid: I have wished you to be perfect in Romans 8. and mind
verse ^^ and verse 28. well, with what follow^ to the end of that Chapter: this
(...) been my Experience, That the Pa^^^ing of these Truths have be (...)
greatest Advantage, and of most benefit to Others: though in this I have enough
to bewail also.

2. To this purpose, Hear the best Men, Keep the best Company, Read the best
Books, especially make the Grounds of Religion your own: Balls and the
Assemblies Catechism, with the like you have from me Commended to you: And
though there are near an Hundred several Catechisms in the Nation; yet (if
sound) they must speak one thing, viz. Man lost in Himself, Redeemed only by
Christ, and holy Walking, or Thankfulness; you have my experience so often
repeated to you, That an unbroken Heart, and an uncatechised Head, will keep
distance enough betwixt God and a poor sinful Creature: Oh! that Parents and
Ministers would think of it, what a heap of Mischiefs this Neglect has
produced.

The Waldenses and Germans had never been so famous for Suffering, had they
been uncatechized: This is a large Field, in which I could Walk long, Preach
long, yea, lose my self in this sweet Wilderness: For this is life eternal to
know thee and Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.23. But take this for a Caution, That many
may be well Taught also, who never took forth Christ's first Three Lessons,
never Denying themselves, nor Taking up the Cross, nor Following Him, Matthew.
16.24. We know no more than we Practice, yet we shall never Practice without
Knowledge; How many Scriptures give Evidence to this? which I forbear to quote;
only remember how Solomon extols Wisdom and Knowledge.

I take my share in Mourning, that I see in the Afternoon of this Age, the
Shadow longer than the Substance, Profession than Practice; though the Trade
may not be Condemned, when it falls into ill hands that manage it.

He that sets up Religion, to get any thing by it, more than the Glory of God,
and the saving his own Soul, will make a bad Bargain of it in the close. My
dear only Child, be rooted in the Truth, and thou shall be Fruitful, and
Thriving.

3. Be constant in Reading the Scriptures, and that with a fervent Meditation,
I mean, as to Pray in Praying, Fast in Fasting, so to Read in Reading: Many
doubtless take up a cursory trade, to read out the Cries of a defiled or rackt
Conscience: I say Read with delight, not as under a load, or as a Labourer, who
waits for the shadow of the Evening, which you shall never do, unless your
Heart be connatural with the Word; and therefore Remember as Justification
takes away Guilt, and Punishment; Sanctification takes away the Power and
Filth; Glorification takes away the Presence of Sin: So Effectual Calling takes
away that Jarre that is betwixt the Soul and the (...) of God, by reason of
Sin; the ^^^ed of God read but their Fathers ^^^essed Will in reading His Word,
His ^^^stament, His Lagacies, His Precepts, His Threatenings against Sin, etc.
all which His Child delights to hear and ^^^d. This one Book, well read, will
answer my Question, or Case, and you will find Solomon's Proverbs the best
Politics, and Christ Crucified the best Divinity. But in reading the
Scriptures let me reach out this Experience; When you have Prayed over your
^^^^^se that way, then in every Chap^^^ first mind the Method, then note ^^^
hard things you understand not, and get helps to clear them to you. And Lastly,
Gather out the chief Doctrines, or Lessons, then in reading one Chapter, you
may understand many: And if you read the Bible with the Annotations of some
Divines, or the Dutch translated, it will not be amiss. I have formerly
commended to you a Little English Library, in this kind, which I now fear, your
so much altered Condition will not give you time to be versed in: However,
Remember David, Psalm. 119. how every Verse almost shows Love to the Word. And
truly you may be assured, you shall upon mine and your own Experience find,
that you shall have no more Christ, nay God, Spirit, Faith, Peace, Comfort,
than you have Scripture: Nor will you have any Christ, a Savior, that is not a
Scripture Christ. Oh that the word may dwell plentifully in you, my poor Child.

4. Pray Continually, is the Apostles Counsel to the Thessalonians: And for
this you may have far better helps, then from my unworthy unable self. There
are many helps to Devotion, Mr. Baxter, B^^rows, Gurnal, Bridge, etc. Yet you
shall have what I promised, even my Experience: I hope you know that Prayer is
the breathing forth of holy Desires, or, lifting up the Soul unto God, or
asking the Things we need from God, in and by Christ, according to His Holy
Will, not without Confessions, and Thanksgiving. This Work must have Time,
Seriousness, Composure: And this take undoubtedly, That Prayers can never fly
high, where the Person is not accepted; can have no strength without Faith:
About this Duty, I must let you know, There are Three Miscarriages usually.

First, Before the Duty, Unpreparedness, Unsuitableness, Reaking hot out of the
World, Self, Sin, into that Service; as if Men could leap into Gods Bosom, out
of the Devils Lap: Before Prayer you need to study God, your self, and the Way
to Him, John 6. You need to take a time when He is most like to hear, even when
He is inditing for you, and puts Words into your mouth, Hos. 14.

The Second Failer in Prayer is, When you do not Watch to Prayer. O the Hurreys
of our Hearts: the Thorowfare that carries crooked Thoughts through us, the
Vanity, Folly, Obliquities of our Spirit: as the Heart must be whipped to the
Duty, so it must be bound fast to it. How few Pray! How many say Words? Oh, how
many say their Prayers backwards, call Him Father, who is not their Father,
would not have His Name Hallowed, nor His Kingdom Come? etc.

3. And Lastly, After this Duty there is either an aptness to be Proud: And add
another Note, as if the Lord was in our Debt: or upon miscarriage in point of
Enlargement, we grow weary and peevish, and call for our Prayers again, if we
succeed not, as Lovers for the Portion, not the Person, call for their
Love Tokens back: Look on Th. Goodwin, on Isa. 55.6, 7, 1. Be plain and honest
with God, show your Sores, and His Love to you: You cannot be so bad as He is
good. With the Old Martyr, I cry, Pray, Pray, Pray, (My dearest Child) Regard
no Injury in thy heart.

5. Keep a constant Watch, upon your whole Man, for which much has been
Written,, as Mr. R^yners Rule for the New Creature. Mr. Brinsleys Watch; and
many others, from the Thoughts, and Affections, to all Cases almost.

But since I promised the Addition of my Experience to your Self, I have held
that very true, noted by David: yea, by some Heathens, That our Life is Seventy
Years: half of which time spends it self in Eating, Drinking, and Sleeping: the
Remainder is Thirty Five: and of that you may allow the first Fifteen, even for
Childhood till when ordinarily little is minded that is solid: then Twenty
only are left of the Number, and of them even half spent in by-business: and
then tell me how little do we live? How needful is it then that you be upon
your Watch continually, when so many Silver Brooks run by many Doors unregarded.

It is hard to Watch, most are very Drowsy: The Disciples themselves could not
Watch One Hour.

My Advice is, That mainly you Watch your self in what you are, And where you
are: These Two go far in your Watch; to see your self in a good Estate; And to
be where you should be in your Duty and Employment, argues a curious Eye, and a
careful Head: But to be very accurate in your Watch, and to keep off from
troublesome Annears, keep a Book by you (I mean it literally) in which, every
Night before you sleep, you set down on the one side, the Lords gracious
Providence and Dealings with you; and your Dealings with Him on the other side:
This Watch well kept, sits for Prayer, Fastings, Sabbath, Sacraments, and
Death; upon which Judgment follows.

I pray Watch so, That Thoughts, Affections, Head, Heart, Hand, Foot, and all
have a share in, and benefit by the Work.

The Flesh and the World, in all the Pleasures and Profits of them, send up
fumes to the Head, occasioning sleep: Therefore the Lord is forced to keep us
waking by Affliction, as the Thorn to the Singing Bird. David sought God early:
The Three Women early looking after Christ. Remember thy Creator betimes. And
this Watching, is the Circumspect Walking, Ephesians. 5.16. Look round about you
continually, as if you Walked with God as Enoch, before God as Abraham: or,
after God, as David: he walked in Gods Ways. If you do not Watch, you will be
Tempted, I say, Tempted. The Lord Watch over thee, that thou may Watch (my
dearest Child.)

6. For thy growth in Grace, I am the more zealous, because (2 Pet. 3.8.) the
Apostle propounded it as a Cure against all the Errors of the wicked. For this
also there are diverse helps, as M. Symmons his Cure to Distressed Consciences,
(a Choice Piece) and many others. But this you must know, that all labor tends
not to growth; no more than Ants grow in bulk, though very much in labor;
Every great Hearer is not a great Grower: Nay, a tree may grow in parts, though
not in all. Grow soundly in the Root Jesus Christ, and the Freeness of his
Grace, and then you will not grow as Weeds do, but as good Grain. To which
purpose I advise you, to observe what you gain against Corruption, and so much
you may hope, you may thrive in Grace; as the House of David, and the House of
Saul. Do not therefore keep the Devils Counsel; but let some able Friend Watch
you, to whom communicate your Decays or Growth. When a Ship is observed by a
Landmark, her way is easily observed. Therefore mind much this one thing, in
all make much of a Rule, and keep to it; as few under the warm Gospel but know
whether they be Hypocrites or otherwise. Even so you shall feel your Growth. An
old stock will not serve turn (which has been the delusion of many) when every
day needs new Incomes of the Spirit, and so advancement to Heaven.

Long to grow, strive to grow; bewail decays: grow in both the Tables Duties.

The Apostle tells us of growth from Virtue; yea, at last to Patience by
Affliction, if we hear the Rod, etc.

Christ's method is, He has all Grace. He gives out what He pleases; He
maintains what He gives* He perfects what He maintains; He Crowns what He
perfects: And thus Christ loves you, more than ever you could hate Him, without
whose watering by His Blood you can never grow. The best Evidence of Growth, is
to grow more Humble, more Holy, attend that well: and see how it is from Meal
to Meal, from one Sabbath to another, one Sermon to another: are you fed or
surfeited? A very very little Grace (if true) is saving: a little Growth (if
right) is comforting: Believe and Live, Believe and Grow; all decays come
through want of Faith: to fetch Blood from the Life Vein, the Lord Christ. The
South and North blow upon thee for Growth (my Child.)

7. In all things as you will have use: so you need to study Conscience well,
for it Eats, Drinks, Walks, Sleeps, Buys, Sells, accompanies you to every Duty,
Service, Work, Doing, or Suffering; for which you have Ames his Cases, and some
others.

It is a judging your self according to the judgment of God.

I Write none of these Heads to you, as intending any common place, which this
and others would make; but only to leave with you a few practical thoughts upon
each.

Our Savior made the Jews to buy a Knife to cut their own Throats, when he
told them the Parable of the Servants, and Son, sent and killed: and so the
Spirit by the Jews, Isai. 5. when he made them impannel a Jury among
themselves, and by Conscience their Judge: So Nathan by David, it is a Witness
with a Witness, and Judge Paramount: therefore I wish you to observe it
narrowly, if you suffer it to be defiled with the least Sin, whilst it has
Life you may hear of it; and therefore Samuel and Paul in all, kept all clear
there; the least filth must be washed out by the Blood of Christ: David paid
dear for it; Cains Building, and Saul's Harping, will do but little to cure it;
it may be quiet and good, unquiet and good, and so on the other hand; but this
I have noted, that false Lights or dim ones, have helped much to the violation
of it: present things and the outsides of things, have also broke in upon it:
and in Sinning, whether the wound be in the Head or Conscience first, is a
question, but not hardly resolved.

Your wisdom will be to live upon a directing Word: and then Conscience will
make a soft Bed for you in your greatest sorrow: A wounded Conscience who can
bear? Go to our first Parent, and he will tell you so, who might have gathered
fruit to eat, rather than leaves to cover himself.

Do not grieve Conscience twice, it must be your best Friend, yea, when
Friends, and World, and all leave you to solitariness.

If it whimper a little, do not make it roar out: and yet do not stiffle it,
but attend it, and carry it up to Mount Cavalry for peace.

Remember, a good Conscience and Sin cannot live together: Let but this Bird
sing sweetly within, and let Heaven and Earth come together, thou shall be
safe, (my poor Child.)

8. Next I am to remember you, that you have much work to do in a little time:
which calls you up to Labor, as the Day the Lark, and the Lark the Husbandman;
Eccl. 12. the whole Chapter: I hope you have it.

About Redemption of time, you have many Treatises. The greatest of your work
in your short time, is to get Christ, and live upon Him, and to Him; And this
is the life of Faith, which you can never live, unless Faith have to live upon
it self, which will digest nothing but Word, and Promises: Therefore now you
are Young, lay in a good Stock for Faith to live on; but you must do it
seasonably; you are Young I say, and may have a little time before you, which
certainly has Eternity hanging upon it; called a Race, a Day, or Hour: the Old
World had their Day, Jerusalem a Day, the Gospel is called the Day of Grace:
Therefore lay in seasonably; and not only so, but abundantly, for your Market
may be at the highest; Foolish Virgins had Oil in their Lamps, none in their
Vessels: Store is no Sore; for you know not what Promises you may need, for
Want, for Reproach, for Sickness and Death.

The Kingdom of Heaven must suffer Violence: Violent Faith, Love, Prayer, must
storm it.

The time will come when wishes will not help; your own Works and Righteousness
will fail.

Lastly, Lay up your stock for Faith conveniently, that you may reach a Word
when you need it most. Ah that you would be wise! Ask your heart at Night, what
you have done that Day in this Point, because every Night may be your last.

Therefore secure your Principles, walk up to the Compass of every Duty, clear
your Evidences, keep close Communion with God, Look out to growing Evils, and
fit for them; And these are the work of your Generation. I say, it is your
work, you may easier make bars to the Sea, and order the Influences of Heaven,
then call back yesterday.

Therefore Work and Pray, Repent, Believe, get Assurances of Heaven to Day, I
say, to Day, and be happy for ever, (Dear Child.)

9. I must also invite you to Content in a Low Condition, for which you have
great furtherance, as Mr. Burrows for Contentment (whose Writings are all
savory) But for my own thoughts they are these, That though many write and
speak of the Contempt of the World, some cloister up themselves from it; yet
very few are Masters of this Art, which the Apostle himself had been long
learning.

Constitution, Age, Experience, Parts, Afflictions, Fullness, Honor, Glory,
will all say, We have it not; Crowns have it not; and Beggars want it: I was
about to say, it is only in Heaven. This Herbs grows in very few Gardens. But
Oh that you might be truly Content!

You will find a But upon all your Comforts; and therefore you cannot be
contented: You may find a fullness in Christ, Col. 1.19. And therefore you
should be Contented. Mind the Disease, and the Cure in this Case.

First, All your under-moon Refreshings, or Comforts, are too short, and too
narrow Beds for Content to lie in.

And, Secondly, They are but partial in their help, and cannot answer all Cases.

Thirdly, They are short lived. Riches have Eagles wings, and Beauty but skin
deep; Honor in another keeping: Friends and all, are but waking Dreams.

Content must have something to answer all the defects of the Creature; and it
only dwells where all Questions are fully answered, springing from thence.

A Naked Soul meeting with a Naked Christ, can only be quieted in Spirituals,
and the same Christ improved also for Temporals: Sin is pardoned, Iniquities
and Corruptions done away; the Favor of God gained* the Spirit bearing Witness
to Adoption, answers all; for to this you must roll at length. Though I know
(as others) so we our selves, add to our Discontents, and often quarrel for a
Feather in our Cap.

Paul says nothing befalls us, but what is common to man, and upon that would
stay us: but when Eternity will pay for all: And Christ has satisfied for all
Sin, and cut the score, and will make all work to the Great End: The Saints
make their Challenge against all, Romans 8. and last.

The good Lord grant you may groundedly say, Thy Will be done in Earth as it is
in Heaven; and that is Content, My Child.

10. I commend unto you Meekness of Spirit, Zep. 2.3. Be loving to all, envy
none, though they thrive by evil, and are evil, Psalm. 37.1. You know what a
Promise the Meek have, Matthew. 5.5. As inordinate Passion bears the name of all
Sin in Scripture, so Meekness carries many good things with it, as Love, Pity,
Patience, etc. Nor do I oppose Meekness to Zeal, but would have you to allow
both their perfect work. Meekness will make smooth all your ways, disappoint
Enemies of the advantage they may take against you; And your Love will not only
cover many Sins, but help many out of them: Indeed these will be a strong guard
unto you, and Grief will hardly get footing long, where Meekness and her
Concomitants dwell.

When you lose a poor Father, or a rich Friend, you will be able to say you
knew them Mortal, and will be quiet, though not senseless. It will fit you for
Meditation, a duty even out of Doors, and very hardly practiced: I know the sad
Experience of Passion, how it bars the door against Prayer and other Duties:
Oh! how can we lift up wrathful hands to Heaven? They say, Anger is the boiling
of the Blood about the Heart; I am sure it cools the Heart in Spirituals: God
too ^^^ils to Himself, when He discovered His Name to Moses, a Pitiful,
Pardoning, Long-Suffering God. Oh that you might be God-like, Christ-like,
Moses-like. Michael contesting with the Dragon, maintained his Meekness; and
Paul says, it is the Woman's Ornament.

To get this Meekness, Gentleness, Long-suffering, Patience and Love; I only
advise, to get all when they may be had; as James for Wisdom, Jam. 1.5. Study
Examples, for with the froward you shall learn frowardness; Prize it as a
Jewel. And because all the good or evil we have, we act through our Complexions
and Skins, (and great are the advantages sometimes that way) know there are
tears of constitution, as well as of contrition, and joys also; so Meekness
and other Graces will be hardly discern^d by some from Naturals and Morals. The
Lord make you Meek from the true Root, (my dear Child.)

11. Beware of a trifling loose Heart, which has been the guise, and the bane
of many in these last days of Liberty, and the decay of that old solemn,
serious spirit, and sober, that was among and upon the Ancient Professors of
Religion, was very visible, and broke out to the common vanity of the World, in
Diet, Clothes, Recreations, condemned and threatened, Isai. 3. But so loose in
holy things, that who almost did not make Religion an indifferent thing, and
all duties concerning it accordingly, (though the like Reformation was never
known in any Age.) But new Temptations drew forth old Corruptions, made good by
the changes the Israelites were under, and their trifling with God under all
His bounty to them, till they scorn Manna and Ease, and would have Garlic and
Oppression. It much appeared in this, that it grew common to dispute
Principles, even the highest, and most consented to; as also in slighting
Promises, Vows, Engagements, Oaths, Inconstancy in Duty, undervaluing
Authority; shaken Men were with every Wind, like to every Company; Ministers
many Words, and Frothy, Shells, and Outsides, most Men playing fast and loose
with God. Do but mind in your Reading, what a sober, plain, unaffected, holy
strayn is in Dod, Sibs, Preston, Hooker, Burrows, and many other Good Men, to
what you find in some others, though it may be Good Men too.

Ah (my Child,) a Frothy Wit, and a Vicious Life carry directly to Atheism,
which is the Master Mischief of this Age, yea in Professing England.

This trifling, springs either from a Heart and Head never kindly wrought upon,
or never well way'd: where Sin has been, or is an easy burden, there Men
trifle with their Spirits; and where Men are not guided by a Rule, they will
prove the Children of Changes; it grows as other evils, gradually, and soon
Conspicuous in some Constitutions, like David's Waters, from the Ancle, soon
over the Head. I must tell you, Thoughts are not free, nor Words wind, they
will judge us one Day, and from thence this Trifling comes. The best cure I
know by experience, I say by woeful experience, of this evil, will be to look
within the Vail, to the Mercy-Seat, made of pure Gold, for free Grace to help
against so great a mischief; and then to be much in Prayer, Communion of
Saints, Fasting, and holy Duties, to lay some more weight upon this spirit, and
often to mingle the sense of Sin, to take away this Froth and Lightness. Every
Morning down to Golgotha, and from thence go up to Mount Cavalry. Believe me,
If Sin made our Savior cry, My God, My God, etc. What is the weight of Sin?
Look to a Day of Reckoning. Christ's Spirit was ever Serious, never known to
Laugh. Be Sober and Watch; (dear Child.)

12. In like manner against that spreading evil of being a Busie-Body, and
Pragmatical, which is the Plague of Mankind, 1 These. 4.11. The words are very
full and plain, Study to be quiet, Do your own Business, Work with your own
Hands. The last two will cure the former danger. Read and know, That whilst
you look too much into others Gardens, you will neglect your own. Be not like
the Squiril, leaping from Tree to Tree, and Bough to Bough. Be much at Home,
and you will find work enough; as long as you keep Christ and Sin before you,
you will have work enough for your Thoughts; and if your Fancy be not well fed,
your Thoughts (like Milstones) will grind themselves. Spirits raised, and not
employed, will torment the Witch that raised them. And if you set not your self
on work, the Devil will. Mark but the several Trees of Fruit or others, they
grow in their own Roots and change not. Be content to be a shrub, Cedars will
shake, and never desire to be near Greatness. Honor often dies grinning and
ghastly. Our Business must be our own, as well as our Crosses. To meddle with
other Men's work, will be thankless, as to take other Men's Physic, will be
useless, if not dangerous. An Hours Idleness is a Sin, as well as an Hours
Drunkenness. Few Men's Feet stand before Princes, because few Men's Hands are
diligent.

The Maid was possessed, because the Devil found her in his own House, viz. a
Playhouse.

The Busy Body is but a Peddler to carry up and down, and vend the Devils
Wares. How few lose any thing by quietness, and doing their own work? Their
sweet sleep commends it.

David got his great wound upon this neglect, and Peter his, by warming his
Hands, when he should have been breaking his heart in secret.

Oh keep home, keep home; I speak experience to you, who never found good hour
but in mine own work: Nor does this cut off works of Love, or Charity, which
must be attended in their Seasons, and by their Rules. The cure of this evil
lies much in Studying Duty, the end of your Creation, and being the practice of
Saints; that though you work here, ease is in Heaven; all your labor is little
enough for your own Business; be always ready to say, I am where the Lord would
have me to be.

How bitter is the remembrance of good Hours ill spent? How cutting of time
lost? Death knows no distance; whether King or Bishop, or Pawn, all at the end
of the Game put into one Bagg, the Grave. Be doing your own Work, whatever your
condition be; Tell me what our blessed Lord did, but the work he was sent
about! Be like Him in this, as in all things else, and that Spirit of the Lord
Jesus be with thee, (My dear Heart.)

13. Through your whole course let Truth have its way, and do not make Lies
your Refuge, they will mock you in the end.

Mr. Reynor and others have written largely about the Words and the Tongue, but
none to James the Apostle You see I do not load you in any thing with Heathens,
Fathers, Poets, and their Apothegms, which are many in these Cases: which I
purposely avoid as tickling the ear, when often they reach not the heart: A
Scholar, yea a Schoolboy may gather them, but the Truth of God, set on by His
Spirit, must make you consistent.

All the World is hung with Lies, and all of man Proclaims so much; Clothes,
Meats, Trades, Salutations, yea ones Profession of Religion: All men are Liars,
and all things on this side Christ a Lie; The Prince of the Air makes it his
work, who was the Father of Lies. Christ calls for Yea, and Nay only.

I wish in Christianity we could find this Christianity: Heathens and Turks
shame us: it is the blot of the Nation, as if we were Liars in the Womb: the
Sin even lives and dies with us: you may not tell a Lie for God.

The Prophet Zechary puts Peace and Truth together, as if they could not be
asunder, Zech. 8.15, 16, 19.

The Root is the Heart, from whose abundance the Tongue speaks. Oh the
falseness and deceit of this little thing! Not a Breakfast for a Kite! Away
with that distinction of Jocous, or Friendly Lies. Psalm. 101. David will have
no Liar with him. Truth takes in all good Religion, God owns none where it is
not. Hypocrisy is a Lie. Friend, Name, Credit, Estate, Beauty, Honor, etc. are
full of Lies. John 6. Christ the Truth, as well as Life and Way. Though every
untruth be not a Lie, where it is not spoken with a purpose to deceive, (so men
distinguish;) your care must be to trade with your heart: Na^^anaels heart was
honest, and so without guile; good seed fell into an honest heart. Truth is
naked, beware of base Coverings.

Let your conversation be without Guile, without a Lie, the Lord is the
Heart-searcher.

Sow up your Mouth, but let it be with Honesty, not Policy. As you never hurt
your self by speaking little, so will you never gain any thing by telling a
Lie. Let others call this Sin a Virtue, but do you call it by its own Name, and
hate it as Poison.

Let Truth be thy Portion, it will preserve you; and ever say, I can do nothing
against the Truth; (dear Child.)

14. And what I said last, urges me to commend Wisdom to you, which is a very
comprehensive Word, and is justified of her Children: But I mean not the Wisdom
of this World, whether natural or artificial: I intend Scripture Wisdom, which
is from Above. And this is a Light that God sets up in the Soul, to direct us,
and affect us, in our whole course, Job 28. last. The Fear of the Lord, that is
Wisdom; and to depart from evil, that is Understanding: If you be wise, be wise
for your self: To have all Books in ones Head and want this Catechism in the
Heart, will never amount to it. Many great Clerks, not wise; many a Statist
falls short. But this will make you hear, Prove. 1.5. It will make you to lay a
sure Foundation, Matthew. 7. the Wise Builder. This will make you provide for
Changes, Luke 16.8. This will make you lay in abundantly, Matthew. 25. The
Virgins were Wise. This will make you bear Sorrow, Eccles. 7.4. And truly this
is Wisdom, and the Helps hereunto are, to become a Fool, 1 Cor. 3.18. To number
your days, that so you may apply your heart to Wisdom, Psalm 90.12. To beg it
of God, Jam. 1.5. But above all, to make Christ your Wisdom, 1 Cor. 1. last. Oh
that you were thus Wise! Much of Wit must be pared off before it will be
useful. I have seen the ways of it, though never could pretend much to it: But
this I know, that being unsanctifyed, it is a Sword in a Mad-Mans hand, spends
it self in vanity, foolish jesting, abuse of those who are weaker than our
selves; yea often to play with the blessed Word of God. But this Wisdom will
guide, preserve, honor you: How does Solomon admire it in the Proverbs! bids
you seek it, love it, follow after it, and this is Christ Himself. You shall
never have comfort in suffering for Folly, therefore see the Plague, and hide,
which has invited some so to do often. Experience (which is the observation of
many Events) will help you much in this study: be much in the Word, which will
make you wise unto Salvation: Let your Companions be the Children of Wisdom:
Judge of all things by this Wisdom, which will make you look upon them by
Eternity. To the Only Wise God I commend you, dear Child.

15. There are two very great turns in Man's Life; the one is a lawful Calling:
the other is Marriage: and miscarriages in either are almost irrecoverable. For
the former, I must say the less, because of your Sex, though your present
condition may lead you to the Service of others: and then know, Fidelity and
Diligence are your Duties: your time and parts will then be another, not your
own: Eye-service will not be acceptable to God or Man, much less comfortable to
your self. Many have written upon this Subject, as Dr. Gouge, and others.

For Marriage, though your present Estate (according to the World) renders you
many ways hopeless: yet your times are in Gods hands, and da^ly Experience
(with my own, will let you know, that as it is the joining together of one Man
and one Woman lawfully, in an indissolvable bond, either for an help,
procreation of Children (which were before the Fall) or a remedy against Sin
since that; so it has many Concernments in it, where Goodness and Suitableness
are the primary ingredients; And as the Husbands duty is, Love, Teaching,
Providing, Honoring, etc. So the Wives must be Subjection, suitable to that
Love in all the parts of it: And these duties need mutual supports. And this
Conjugateness (like a yoke) must still be fin^d with more Love to make the
draught easy. Against this Love, the Devil and Temptations will be striving.
People so engaged, need a Standard, (even the Word) to be set up, to guide all
by: They need to observe each others spirits; They need to Pray out, not
Quarrel out their first brablings; They need at first to dwell much in their
own duties, before they step into each others: When Repentance comes too late,
the best is to be made of the present condition. Read Prove. 31. Oh the
bitterness of unequal Matches! Oh their ruin and misery! I ever left you free,
and do; only Marry in, and for the Lord; The sensual part of that condition,
can never answer the encumbrances may attend it. Let Christ be your Husband,
and He will provide you one to His own liking: do nothing herein without
Prayer, Scripture and Counsel. The Lord love you, My dear Child.

16. For the World (I mean the People in it) and that part of it the Lord has
set you in; I have very much to say, because my days in it are not a few (as we
account) Believe our Savior and the Word ( Joh. 16. last.) and you will find
that in the World you shall have Tribulation; and your passage out of it must
be through many Tribulations, and Persecutions too, if you will live* godly.
The World loves her own: You must look upon it as your Enemy, and use it so;
take what you may lawfully from it, and embrace not this present World; It will
kiss you, and kill you; like a Sea of Glass, it soon cracks, though it
glisters, and when you have Iron Shoos that tread upon it; how soon may you
drop in? The World will give you no more credit than you have of the World to
maintain it: and therefore whilst you are in the World, though you may know
many, yet be acquainted with few, and even trust none. Be sure you get nothing
unlawfully, it has Fire in it to destroy: Sweat is our portion here below, and
whatsoever is gained by your own labor will be sweetest, dearest, and of
longest continuance with you; And do not borrow. You may wonder why the World
is generally imbittered to Gods Children, and why the way to Canaan was paved
with so many difficulties. Oh know it is to keep us humble, to draw forth the
exercise of His Attributes, viz. Power, Wisdom, Mercy; and the exercise of our
Gifts and Graces, Prayer, Faith, Patience, etc. He will have the use of what He
has given; yea, hereby Heaven is made dear and sweet to us; the Storm commends
the Haven; Prison, Liberty, Sickness, Health; and Sin and Sorrow, Heaven; where
the double vail of Corruption and Affliction shall be taken off, and we shall
be with the Lord for ever.

Many dying Men speak much about the Vanity of the World: But truly, as I would
not die in a pet, so I would not quarrel with, or leave the World, because I
could be no greater in it, but because I could not do, nor be better in it, and
that God is pleased I should leave it for a better: I wish I had never been
vain in a vain World, but I appeal to, and plead with, Christ for my Peace. So
use the World, as if you used it not: for the World has a principle of decay
in all the glory of it: Dote not on it, my poor Child.

17. And whilst I am in the World, and advising about it, there is a great
Rarity in the World, if you could reach it, and that is a Friend; which is a
Commodity so very scarce, that it will be your wisdom so to look upon a Friend
(...) day, is likely to be an Enemy to morrow. How many sad Experiences can I
witness to of this kind, yea (...) times and changes? Fai^ Dove coats ^^ve most
Pigeons; Lo^^ B^a^es know (...) Friends Job and all the (...), David sadly,
(...) had (...) to ^and by him: You see most Men now are neither upon their own
security ^r perferments; one cries, My Friend (...) me: another, My Friend
^^hou me and some cry, All Flesh ^s (...) and much I could say, but that (...)
causes are to be attended above ^nstrumental. They say, T^^ may (...) ^aniel of
one he (...). So ^and it (...) ^ot a Friend; and if you have ^any, you have
hardly a^. The Friend (...) commend, is a Soul Friend, which ^ou will never
find among Children. Fools or Profane. An Experienced Christians Friend I
intend, (...) must ^ave three (...) ^he must have the art and skill or Friend,
few know its* must have the bowels and (...) of a Friend, which most want; and
lastly, must have Faithfulness, the great ingredient: if such an one you can
find, you shall enjoy their Experiences freely, you shall constantly be carried
to God in their Prayers, you shall have sympathy and help in your troubles: The
Spirit of Christ is a healing saving Spirit, and such is theirs: To such open
your heart clearly, who will never upbraid you for Confessions; and know when
Foundations shake, you will need a Master Builder or Workman, such is a good
Friend and wise. To get such an one, must be your care; and to keep, must be
your diligence: Walk not unworthy of the mercy if you gain it. Kinsman will not
make it, no nor a Brother, though born for Adversity. Your hopes may be those,
if the Lord promise; When your ways please Him, your Enemies shall be at peace
with you. He can raise a Friend, and Himself be your best Friend: To whom I
commend you, dear Child.

18. And because Sin will be creeping into all your conditions, ways and works,
something I must advise you about it from Experience, though many Books are
written about it: as Mr. Goodwyns Sinfulness of Sin, etc. Yet two things take
from me: Be mavelous careful it break not in: Secondly, as diligent to drive
it out speedily. And for the former, Gonge and Gurnal I commend, about the
putting on the whole Armor, Ephesians. 6. Sin is a breach of the Law, and the
strength of Sin is the Law from that breach, the Soul being as well left to Sin
the Keeper, as to Satan the Jailer, by the Fall, and nothing but the
Satisfaction of Christ, put in to Divine Justice, can remit the Authority of
it; yea, though the power and filth in part be taken away by Sanctification,
yet it will break in again, as an inmate, and will at least get some out-room,
as Pride in Clothes, Cozenage in Dealings, Lust in the Eye, Passion, etc. and
bad work it makes, wherever it is; Oh keep it at staves length: Peter, David,
Heman and others ever crack under it: As you cannot build your Reformation upon
unrepented Sin; so you should not make daily work for Repentance, by admitting
Sin, which must be reformed. Therefore to prevent this mischief, you must
exercise hatred against it, as against an Enemy that cut the throat, or would,
of your best Friends, and yours also, and pursue it with a deadly feud; hate it
in all the stock and lineage of it, my Child.

A little Sin is Sin, down with it, keep your guard, and hate it in all the
forage that may maintain such an Enemy: I mean, in the occasions leading to
it: in which I might be large. On with all your Armor speedily: and when you
find it has bespotted you, do as a good houswife with her Linen, get a
Washing-day, I mean a Fasting-day, out with it by hand, laver, bucking; if it
be a stain that gets through and through, it will out the next Spring for
bleaking, I mean, a Sin premeditated as David's: a few common tears will not
help there, but extraordinary, and the Blood of Christ above all. Ask the
Damned what they ail? Sin, Sin, they cry. Ask the distressed Conscience? Sin
too. Ask the Afflicted? Sin. For the Bulrush will not grow without mire. That
which crosses the Law of God, make thy greatest cross; that which divides you
from the best Good, call your worst Evil. It made Christ to bleed, to groan, to
die. The Lord sprinkle thy Conscience with the Blood of the Everlasting
Covenant, that you may not Sin to Death, My dear Child.

19. And next (because bordering upon what went before) I would add a case,
which so often, even choice Christians are encumbered with, and that is, Their
questioning all their works after many years Experience and Profession; and
their Objections, many against themselves; as from Sins before Conversion, in
Conversion, after it; repeated Sins, against Judgment, Mercy, Light, Means;
yea, even cutting Purses under the Gallows; against all Examples, and what not?
Nay, it cannot stand with Gods honor to save, etc. though Isai. 55.8. answers
all.

This therefore I would have you know, that though it be not safe to dig at
Foundations often, lest we shake the Building; so our great care is to have
sound Foundations to build upon, which in the general is Christ, and other none
can lay. Make quick work, and see you be in Christ, and offer your Evidences to
a discerning Friend, or more; and know, that God has limited his tenders of
Grace to a day of this Life, of the Gospel, and of Conscience awakened;
therefore look out whilst it is To day.

Put by Spiritual sloth, Cares of this World, bosom Corruptions, or whatever
may hinder; God is not bound to your limitings: Were it not from His Mercy, and
to leave every Soul inexcusable, why should the Lord give any time of Grace?
Remember, this day ends suddenly; How unworthy to put the Lord off till to
morrow, and how retaliated? See Prove. 1.29, etc.

Your delays rob your Soul long of Comfort, and you keep your self the longer
out of Christ's Service. The nature of Sin is poison, do not stay till to
morrow for an Antidote What got Lots Wife by lingering in Sodom? The Lord must
pull us out. Nor can you plead any thing for hereafter which you may not now.
Oh to work, to work; and if you find it will not amount to Grace, then cry
mightily; Ply the Lord with all the Promises of His Free Grace, Isai. 55.1.
Matthew. 11. last. Revel. 22.17. Isai. 53. the whole Chapter: Jer. 3.1. and many
more.

Tell the Lord, none so vile as you, none so good as Himself: Tell Him, His
Nature is Mercy, He may be a gainer by His Grace: However, hang upon Him living
and dying in the use of all mean^^, Hos. 14.3, 4, 5.

But if you have your share in Christ, though hardly discerned; make much of
it, you need walk very humbly, very h^^^ly: do not question continually, as
some do, Psalm. 18.1. Love the Lord who has been your strength, and will answer
all thy hard questions, dear Child.

20. I add hereunto your Case, under cross Providence: yea, such as where
Promises seem to speak one thing, and Providence another; Under which the best
Saints have had great and strange sinkings of spirit; For which you have Sibbs,
Burrows, and others to help.

My poor thoughts also are these for Case and Cure; When Job faints, Job 4.5.
When David chides his soul, Psalm. 42. When Heman is even distracted, Psalm.
88.15. Jacob will not be comforted, Genesis 37.35. and so diverse. This great
Dissertion springs from either the overweening some Comforts we enjoy, our
overvaluing them breeds much trouble in the loss of them: So David with his
Absalom; or from the surprisal being sudden and unexpected; a prison at first
uncouth, in time easy and sweet; where a mortified heart grows suited to it:
(to this I could speak much) or else it may spring from some secret weight God
may put into this Change of Providence, which we are not aware of; and so the
scale grows heavy with some Lead hanging at the bottom unseen: a small thing
troubles more than a greater: the former we apply to our own strength in it,
but for the other to Gods. Or lastly, it may spring from the Dispensation it
self; As when the Cross is heavy, or multiplied, or of long continuance, or
touches some noble part; as wounds that touch the Liver, Heart, Brain, etc.
Nay, I must tell you, when we make our Case worse than God does, as by our
refusing the Lords Comforts, which Jacob did, Genesis 37. or where we let loose
the Reins of Passion, as David, On my son, my son! etc. Or when we drown all
our present Enjoyments in that one cross Providence, which is too near the
spirit of Haman, who cross by Moraecat, slights all his Favors at Court, and
dies upon the other.

Your Cure in all this will be, To be willing to want, what God is not willing
to give, and to know He is wife, to give what He will, how He will, and when He
will: for the godly* Heart for Temporals cries, Lord, what thou will: and in
Spirituals, When thou will: and in both, How thou will: (...) part must be no
chusers, and any thing is good from the Hand of such a Father.

Your Interest in Christ, supplies all, and sweetens all: but with the Doves
Innocence, use the Serpents Wisdom; live in daily waiting and expectation of
Changes, even in your best and holiest condition here: Deaths-heads, and
Hour-glasses will be but ordinary significant Ceremonies: it is within you that
cruciats, or comforts: He that made the World, can change it when He will: Your
Comfort will will be, that in the greatest Storm, your Heavenly Father is at
the Helm; though Sin and Satan bussle: that Hand keep you, My dear Child.

21. And if you ask me (after all) what you shall do with your fears to which
your Sex and Condition prompt you? You shall have what I know, though the Lord
Jesus answers all to His little Flock when He says, Fear not; yea, more
particularly, Fear not them that can only kill the Body, and destroy that. You
must know that your question will mainly lie about base and unwarrantable
fears, which have these roots: Either (when our of this fear) you are loath to
part with that the Lord would have you let go, or would part with that the Lord
would have you keep; as when you wrangle about some Corruption, especially
which is dear unto you, and has some great disadvantage attending your
throwing it away. These kinds of fear are accompanied with these mischiefs. As
you will be unwilling to know your duty, so you will be unwilling to practice
it when you know it; yea, not only so, but (through fear) be as unable, as
unwilling: like that trembling King at the handwriting he saw. The
inconveniences are very many, and the Sins not few that follow it. The cure in
general, even for Peter, who (by it) denied his Master, is this, That whoever
fears to sin, never sins by fear: and more particularly, The absence of some
good you desire, or the coming on of some evil, draws out this fear: Therefore
make much of this Rule; Be ever possessed of some good, that may answer the
taking away of what you may lose, which is the presence and favor of God in
Christ: In the night the waking Child in the Cradle is quiet at the Nurses
coming to it, because there is more of comfort in the Nurse, than fear in the
dark.

And then be persuaded to set a right value upon all earthly, perishing, dying
things; do not call a Pebble a Pearl. But above all, keep your fear in his
proper channel: Oh fear God, fear God. It is not only the beginning of wisdom,
but the perfection of your joys, which kept Joseph, and others of the Saints
from Sin.

My earnest desire for you is, That the Lord would give you an even and equal
spirit, and the root of it, Integrity: That (as the Righteous) you may be bold
as a Lion, and yet rejoice with trembling. In this good fear I leave you, My
dear Child.

22. And if the Evil you fear, and a day of Affliction come upon you; then my
counsel is, (bear with the feebleness of it in all) take that Rule, Eccles.
7.14. In that evil day, or day of your distresses, you must Consider: which is
(as the Word bears) by solemn and diligent though fullness to take things
asunder, especially sorrows and sins: For the little Needle will draw a long
tail of Thread after it: little Sins may be followed with great Sorrows, to set
you at your work.

First, You must see the evil of Adversity in the nature of it, such a plague,
and such a visitation: and in the causes of it: As in the principal, none of
that evil in the city, but from the Lord.

In the Meritorious Cause, there look at Sin, and search closely, and men the
Final Cause, God will ^^ther ^e glorified by your Humiliation or Ruin; He will
either bend you or break you; and the He does when Nations. Churches, and every
Individual.

But for the Instrumental Cause, travel not much there. Though Pharaoh were the
occasion of the Planges, not the Egyptians Sins, the Cause.

Secondly, in such an evil time you must l^^e by Faith (to Habbakkuk) and will
unto God: for this must be your (...) no condition superseds (...) (...) be
performed: And in these you may not dally, it is your life.

Thirdly, To get out of such a day and case, you may not act unlawfully; nor
did Paul in going out in a Basket.

Take these Rules,

First, See what the Word says, if you can find a parallel case and help.

Secondly, If that be dark, see what Providence suggests; but that you must
neither Slight nor Cross, nor out run.

Lastly, If here you want Light, then live and die upon the counsel of
Impartial friends, that you may trust Gods way in doubtful and hard cases.

And be assured that in distress (I know not) if Enemies bring your Release, it
will be too late; and i^ some Friends bring it, it may be too soon; but if God
do bring it, it will be seasonable.

I will hear what the Lord will say, cries the Prophet: So do you, (M^^^deas
Heart.)

23. Though in part I have hinted something about Errors, yet in this age and
juncture, I need let you know what I know, since the importunity of Error has
brought forth so many Obliquities, and occasioned so much scandal to Religion
the World through.

And because many have touched hereupon (as you see in their Writings,) and
many more Polemicks and Disputes are Printed than profitable, every Party
striving their own advancement; this I have said, this I must say, That whosoever
departs from those Fundamentals professed, and died upon by the Saints and
Martyrs since the reformation and departure from Popery, need to have his
Opinion written in Stars: for If an Angel bring another Gospel, he or it may
not be received, that shall contradict what we have received already from the
Lord Jesus. It is a continuing word. Oh that it might abide in us, and with us.

Two things in such a danger I commend unto you:

First, Observe, or ask your self or others what frame of spirit or heart you
are in, when you receive this novelty; and if I mistake not, When the heart is
Proud, Lazy, or Frothy, neglects communion with God, duty, and exactness, then
a cover-cup for such corruption is sought after; then Preachers understand
nothing; then men can live without God, Ordinances, etc.

You must know that this work is gradual: The Ship sails through the Channel,
where she may have Land on both sides, before she come to the Main, and loses
sight of all Land.

But this you will certainly find, That if these People would speak out, they
have changed their Opinions about God, before they change about His Ways. I
could be very large in this, accounting it my very great Mercy, that temptation
never led me from that Honest, Old, Godly, Puritan Profession of the
everlasting truths of the Gospel.

Secondly, Enquire whether they have been carried more to God and Holiness
since their change. For that which comes from God, will carry us to God: but if
only to Pride, Censuring, Libertism, etc. you know what to make of it.

Beware of Leaven of the Pharisees, (Christ says) for Leaven will sour the
Dough: will swell it, will harden it, and these you meet with in men's spirits
leavened with Error. Where men once leave the Rule, there will be no end of
their running, till they come to Atheism.

Therefore stand in awe of God, and fear Him always; Hold to the Word as to
Life; Question not Truths: Look to your Company: Value the meanest Ordinance:
You will need all. Be very low and humble before the Lord, and Grow in Grace, 2
Pet. 3.18. (My dear Child.)

24. And because the first Child that appears in view of this Jesabel, the
Mother of Mischief (Error) so called by John, Rev. 2.20. is about the Sabbath:
either wholly slighting it, or counting it Jewish: or our day not the right
day, not the Seventh: yea that every day is a Sabbath, with the like: I mean
besides all such as profanely look upon it as a day of Sport, Pleasure, and
Vanity: I think it my duty to Charge you, (as ever you mean or hope to enjoy
that everlasting Rest hereafter) that you would value the Sabbath. Read Dod and
others about it.

I do not remember that I have ever met with a truly Godly gracious Soul, that
lived above or beyond this.

The First Commandment sets up the true God, The Second His Worship according
to His own Will, The Third His Reverence and Honor, and the Fourth Time, the
Seventh part of Time for Him, is holy Time, Works of Necessity and Charity not
crossing that Holiness.

I say the Seventh part of Time, because it is Night in one place, when Day in
another; which Time begins at the Evening, as Time is distinguished into days,
Genesis 1: And though the Questions about the Sabbath and Baptism breed much
dispute in the World, yet we must Study to know Gods Will in both.

I must say more to you: Where the Sabbath is at an under-value in any Country,
say it be France, Holland, Germany, etc. there you shall find Religion low, and
at best wasting it self into Disputes. But know that England (which is most
famous for Religion) got it from the Sabbaths, upon which Day the Lord is
pleased (as Princes by their Almoners) to give out His Gifts and Graces to the
sons of Men.

I was a witness that Middleburgh in Zealand grew famous for Religion, by
Teeling their Preacher fetching the keeping of the Sabbath from England.

Certainly the Fourth Commandment is the Key to all the rest; for how shall the
rest be practiced if not taught? and how taught, if not time allowed? and what
time more likely to carry a Blessing, than Gods Appointment?

It were as good to take down Ministry, and all Ordinances, as to take down the
Sabbath.

The wonders of God have born witness (as Burton and others write) against the
Breakers of it.

Wherefore look well about you, Isai. 58.13. Love the Lord in His Sabbaths, as
you would have rest hereafter. Look to this Rest here, and remember the
Sabbath; that is, Prepare for it all the Week long, especially the Evening
before.

The Jews had two Preparations to the Sabbath, at Three, and Six.

Do you keep on, and gather home all Affections to wait upon the Work, and let
the day be dear to you. The God of Sabbath be yours, (dear Child.)

25. The Premises considered, I should a little open what I mean by Free Grace,
to which I send you so often for succor in Cases; and truly it has been much
spoken of, and as much abused, as if men from thence might take leave for any
evil; and on the other hand also, filth cast upon men that have labored to
hold it forth; for which Dr. Crisp suffered also, and some of that mind, who
meant faithfully to the Church of Christ, and have written much for the
abasement of the Creature, and lifting up Grace.

I wish we may judge right judgment of all men, and things.

But a little Practically to cast in something to profit you:

The Grace so spoken of, should mainly be minded as the Root and Fruits of the
New Covenant, Jer. 31. and that in Hos. 2.19, 20, etc. Which you will find lie
upon two Parties, Christ, and the poor Believer; and Christ to be considered in
a double Act of his:

First, In his loving, or rather manifesting his love, in time to the soul, And,

Secondly, In passing over that Right he has in himself to the believing soul.

Answerable whereunto, the soul first from Christ's love is warmed to love
again; and from his bounty in his second Act, turns over all the soul has to
the Lord Jesus Christ; whether Name, Estate, Wit, Parts, yea all its Interests.

Now Christ thus loving the soul, and giving himself upon no Meritorious or
procuring Cause on the souls side, is called Free Grace indeed; when the Father
shall freely give his Son, and the Son freely his Heart-blood, and the Spirit
freely all its operations, and make a free Covenant of grace and mercy to
pardon all sin, to receive a sinner into his bosom, without money or price; nay
not to offer any thing of his own, either Duty, or Righteousness, Isa. 55.1.
this call Free Grace: though when Christ comes to manifest this, he (by the
Law) gets Parley with the sinner he means to save, by some uncouth ways, and
often very cross to flesh and blood, which makes the work hard to judge of at
first: yet be assured that the whole work will be Free, in the whole Frame of
it.

But because this point is of such singular concernment, and that I have
formerly delighted to speak to others touching the same, and would have the
comfort of it my self, I shall let you know what I know about the order of the
working hereof, that you mistake not.

26. And in the letting you in this Light, to give you the sum of true
practical Divinity: and therefore observe with diligence, That when a discovery
is made of this Love to the Sins, the Lord Jesus makes a double approach to
the Soul; the first is by the Law, where he takes three steps: And first, by
the Law he stops the Sinner in his course, and makes him to see Sin in the very
nature of it, not in the Hell only, and consequence; but in that it separates
the Soul from the greatest good, Romans 7.7. And, Secondly, makes the soul bear
the burden, and weight of it, which makes David himself cry out often, and so
others: It pincheth hard where sin has got time and strength, etc. Thirdly, it
lets the soul to know, that he is not able to satisfy Divine justice, and so
the Law may be called a Schoolmaster to Christ though the Text leads to the
Ceremonial; the Ceremonies being the Gospel of the Jews. These three steps of
Love Christ takes in the Law by his first approach.

Secondly, In his Gospel-approach he takes these steps:

First, He holds forth himself to the sinner, a Mediator of the New Covenant,
and a free pardon of sin, this keeps the soul from despair.

Secondly, He lets you know that he is as able, and as willing as ever to do
it, Colos. 1.19. etc. This keeps the soul in heart and hope.

Thirdly, By that which they call the Reflex Act, he brings home a particular
Promise of Grace to the soul, as Revel. 3.17. and the Spirit of Christ thus
argues:

He that is athirst must freely come.

But (says the Spirit) Thou art thirsty,

Therefore come freely.

Thus I use to say:

A pitiful, nasty, ragged, fatherless, friendless Child, is lying dying in a
ditch: A noble bountiful hand means to save him, and adopt him; first sends a
servant to awaken him, and bring him to his Court-gate; then bids another let
him in, a third to wash him, and put him on clean clothes; another to read him
the Order of his House; another to set him at Table with his Children; another
to show him his present, and future estate.

Thus the Spirit of Humiliation first wakens a miserable lost sinner, and that
by the Law, and can only bring him to the Gate: Then Vocation opens the Door:
Then Justification puts on Christ's Righteousness: Sanctification teaches him
how to walk, taking away the Power of sin: Adoption makes him a Brother, and
gives him his Privileges: And Glory begun here in part, by sanctifying, shows
him his estate. And all this has its rise from Free Grace, Ezekiel 16. For God
found us in our blood.

The Lord open your eyes, and make this a time of Love to you, dear Child.

27. But whilst I speak to you of Free Grace, I must let you know that in the
next Place I must commend unto you, accurate walking, as the fruit thereof: and
for your better understanding, I commend unto you diverse of the aforesaid
Books: so my own thoughts are, that it consists in all manner of Christian
Circumspection, Ephesians. 5.15. to look within you, without you, about you,
beneath you, to all and every duty: and the rather, because Gods eye is ever,
and every where upon you: Oh that you could so walk, so think: and not only so,
but you have bad Men observing, who, by your negligence, may either infest your
Liberties, or infect you with their Evils, or at best be harder drawn-on to the
ways of God by your careless example: Add hereunto, that you have the eyes of
good Men upon you; and if they be Young Christians, you may make the Ways of
God like Giants and Brazen Walls unto them, carry much difficulty and
discouragement with them; or, if ancient Christians, you may send them with
grief to their Graves by your Miscarriages; and not only so, but the very way
of Religion is like a Narrow Bridge, you need step advisedly that you may keep
upon it, or, if fall, you may recover with much trouble: there is a great cause
you should be wise, for Free grace will never teach sin, nor folly; which that
you may have help in, consider what is said from the abovesaid Arguments, and
weigh them well; and not only so, but study the Lives of all the Saints in
Scripture, and do but see what trophies of their failings sin has hung up, and
Satan: David's sins of Adultery and Murder, Peter's Denial of his Master,
Hezekiahs Pride and Vanity in showing his Treasury, Jonahs Impatience and
Folly, with the like: And see Paul's and Samuels Integrity, Phineas his Zeal,
Nathaniels Truth, etc. On the other hand, Oh walk in this Gallery among these
Pictures; and for your security, rest not without assurance of Gods Love, which
will make you wary; Who would endanger it; much less forfeit it; The empty
Purse fears not the Thief, but the full, looks to every Danger, every
Temptation: And really nothing is a greater safeguard, than the freeness of
this Love communicated to the Soul; stay you no where on this side of it, it
will keep you steady in a trembling world. Thus may you walk, and from this
blessed Principle, dear Child.

28. And that all this may be carried on, and is properly the life of Faith;
remember, That the hardest thing in the world is, To believe in Jesus Christ to
these and all other good ends: Faith is a short word and easily spoken; but Oh
how hard is it in the Nature of it! when if ever the Lord works it in us, he
finds nothing, not a spark of it, till he comes; nay he finds us opposite to
the work of it; nay, he finds us unwilling to be made willing to close with the
offer of Christ, though made so freely; Hypocrisy and all evil has its
fountain here, we believe not: all the other graces sink when this fails; all
must have its cure: we bind the lame arm: we anoint it, we warm it, and yet
nothing helps, because it is out of joint. Oh we believe not! Anger rages,
Lust provokes, Covetousness cozens, etc. and all is, We believe not: Nature
cannot reach this, Art cannot compass it: to look near 1700 years back upon the
Son of Mary (who was the Son of God) lived not forty years, preached but three
years and half, reproached home to his grave: and to believe in him for a
Savior: I say, this must be the work of another world, and the outstretched
Arm of God. See Ephesians. 1.18, 19, 20, etc. To believe that another will pay all
my debts, and become poor to make me rich, to die to make me live: Oh Miracle
of Mercy!

My Child, to believe things incredible, to hope things delayed, and to love
God when he seems angry, are Luthers wonders, and mine, and thine. It is
unbelief is that death in the pot, that lifts up sense, that brings an ill
report of God, that over hastens our mercies, and sets God a time for our
deliverances. Faith is the gift of God, and the greatest, which overcomes
difficulties, sets Mercy to work against Justice, fetches the work done either
by, without, or against Means, throws Mountains into the Sea. A little little
grain like Mustard Seed will do wonders; enliven a dead heart, save even a
damned soul; for such we are: This will not be had without the Word and Spirit,
Romans 10.17. and the glory of it. See Heb. 11. for this, hear, beg, pray, weep,
fast, seek, labor, strive, use violence, read, ask, wish, sigh; and if you do
believe, the Lord help your Unbelief, dear Child.

29. In the next, (which looks like the last) indeed, I must give you my
thoughts about Death: which certainly must be your portion (though Young) and I
must tell you, it is a great word to say, I dare Die: many Books and Funeral
Sermons you may read about it. I say, Life is sweet, and Death terrible: many
in several distempers may call for it, neither minding what it is, nor whether
it leads: Job describes it in his Agony: and Heathens could say, The first good
was, not to be born, and the next, to die quickly: Paul (above any) desires it^
upon right grounds: Yea, the last words in the C^^ticles, and the last in the
Bible are, for the Lord Jesus to come quickly: yea, to come to Judgment: as if
it were the breathings of the Spirits of the Just in the last times: of which
Spirit if you be, these will be your Reasons, as theirs.

First, That you may see Him of whom you have heard so much, who has done and
suffered so much for you. Secondly, That you may have full draughts of what you
now taste only: Thirdly, That your Beloved may come to you, or you to Him: for
whose sake, and love, you may undergo here many frowns, brow-beatings, if not
worse: thus the absent Spouse waits for her Beloved. Fourthly, When the
Sanctuary is trodden upon, Isai. 64.1. Fifthly, That the double Vail of
Corruption and Affliction may be taken off from you: Thus to wish for Death is
to wish for Life.

These things I pray study: and to help you further, remember Balaam would fain
die the Death of the Righteous, which you can never do, unless you live the
Life of the Godly: to which I have written so much before: Only let me add,
That you must live in daily Expectation of this great Change; for though there
be but one way into the World, there are many out. I know nothing to sweeten it
but the Death of Christ, who sucked out the poison of it, and saves to the
uttermost. Romans and Fools can die bravely, write their own Elegies. I am sure
a well-led Life is the best Monument. If one at your door should cry every
Morning, You must Die, it would not reach far: but Christ died for you, My
Child.

30. They say, and truly, Where Death leaves you, there Judgment finds you:
Nothing flies so swiftly than as the Soul out of the body: and you know
Eternity hangs upon a Moment: and such is our Life: and especially such is the
last groan and pang; and thither it leads. It is a vast Ocean, has neither
bound nor bottom: where you are to come before an Impartial Judge, with a naked
and open breast: it is unavoidable, and the miscarriage there intolerable.
Many Books are written by many about these last things, and Apothegmes not a
few: the World and the Flesh will not appear for you: the former can lend you
but a few Ceremonies and Complements: the other dare go no further than the
Judges door: but a good Conscience, sprinkled by the Bood of Christ, will enter
with boldness, and plead, and hear the voice of, Come ye blessed. Your wisdom
will be, to carry your Pardon in your bosom: there Wit, and Learning, Parts,
and Wealth will get no hearing: there the Eloquent Orator is dumb: no Coin is
current, but the Blood of a loving Savior; No man can appear there by any
other Proxy: there Greatness must give way to Goodness; there Hypocrisy is
unmasked, Truth naked; there your fellow Saints shall sit Judges, though
despised amongst men; there the Son of Man shall appear, because despised as
the Son of Man; there Preaching, Miracles, Casting out Devils will not profit,
but a Name written in the Book of the Lamb. Oh that you would consider betimes
what a nothing a thousand Years are to Eternity, yea, where you shall be an
hundred Years hence: if the Grave make no distance betwixt the Scepter and the
Mattock; what will Eternity do when that shall make no difference? Wherefore I
pray measure all your works by Eternity, eat, drink, sleep, work by Eternity;
the cry of a damned Soul is, I never minded Eternity: how many are every day
carrying Faggots to burn them to Eternity? Call that good that holds for ever:
Let but the Judge be your Husband, and fear nothing. The ever-living God love
you, and keep you to all Eternity, My Child.

31. And because I have brought you so far as the Great Day, give me leave to
awaken you with the condition of the Place, Heaven, and to let you know it in
the particulars, which are the presence of all good, and the absence of all
evil; the former commends it self unto you in these:

First, in the universality of it: whereas all things here below are but
partial; so in the suitableness of it, they are there spiritual, and suitable
to the Spirit.

Secondly, for their Continuance: the good things are not like Cherries drawn
by the lips, or Comforts tasted, and gone; but they stay and are good for ever.

Thirdly, Evil knows no Place, there Sin cannot dwell with that Holiness,
Sorrow cannot mingle it self with that Joy: no more fading Riches, dying
Friends, changing Honors, perishing Beauty; no more aching heads, nor
languishing diseases; no more hearing the chain of the Prisoner, nor anger of
the Oppressor; no cry of what do you lack? every Bottle is full, and every Bed
easy, being of never-blasting Roses and Sweets: where every Room is paved with
Love: where Wisdom, Power, Mercy, and Grace have combined, to make all glorious
and pleasant. Then never be troubled about a dunghil-world: when the Apostle to
the Thessalonians, says all in a few words, We shall be with the Lord for
ever; and that includes all, answers all hard Questions, all hard Labors under
the Sun. Remember the Swaggerer that met the poor Man ever mourning over his
Sins, (quoth he) What, still mourning? etc. But what if there be no Heaven? Ah
Sir, quoth the other, what if there be a Hell? The Doctrine of Hell was never
enough Preached (some thinks) and there, on the contrary, is the presence of
all evil, and the absence of all good; you may study it by the former, where
the Tormented never die, and the Tormentor is never weary; where thought and
fear, despair, punishment, extremity meet altogether in Eternity. The Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ preserve you to His Heavenly Kingdom, My poor Child.

Union with Christ,
and Knowledge sound,
The Scriptures read,
in Prayer be found;
A constant Watch,
and growth in Grace,
Good Conscience, Time short,
Work apace:
Contentment in
Condition Low,
No Trifling Spirit
to you grow,
Nor Busy, nor
Pragmatical,
Truth still appearing
in your All,
Wisdom directing
soon and late,
In Calling, and
in Marriage-state;
The World described
in its bad ways,
A Friend indeed
beyond all praise;
And Sin the Mother
of all Grief,
Grace often questioned
for relief,
With Providence
running cross,
Fears sinful, causing Doubts
and Loss;
Days of Adversity
and Evil,
Errors that spring from Self
and Devil:
Sabbath for Rest
and Worshipping,
And Free Grace pitying,
pardoning:
With accurate,
and holy walking,
Hard to believe,
though easy talking:
Death ghastly looking,
and Sins daughter,
With Judgment
that will follow after:
Heaven in its great
Magnificence,
Hells punishment
in Loss and Sense
Are the great things
charged on thee here,
To read, and mind,
and mind (my Dear.)
From him, who grieves
he has no more,
But Words to leave.
Christ be thy Store:
33. And because I know not how the door of opportunity may stand open or shut,
(the Day drawing near of Trial) I shall give you an account of my Self and
dealings, that (if possible) you may wipe off some Dirt, or be the more content
to carry it; in which I shall mainly apply my self to these late troubles.

I was the Son of considerable Parents, from Foy in Cornwall; my Father a
Merchant, his Ancestors driven thither from Antwerp for Religion, I mean the
Reformed; my Mother of the same Town, of a very ancient Family, the Name
Treffey of Place, or the Place in that Town, of which I would not boast.

These lived in very great abundance, their Losses at Sea grew very great; in
the midst of which Losses, my elder Brother being at Oxford, I was sent to
Cambridge, and that Estate I had by an Uncle, I left with my Mother, and lived
at the University; and a little from thence, about eight Years, took my Degree
of Master of Arts, where I spent some Years vainly enough, being but Fourteen
Years Old when thither I came, my Tutor died, and I was exposed to my shifts.

Coming from thence, at London God struck me with the sense of my sinful
estate, by a Sermon I heard under Paul's, which was about Forty Years since;
which Text was, The burden of Dun^ah, or Idumea, and stuck fast. This made me
to go into Essex: And after being quieted by another Sermon in that Country,
and the Love and Labors of Mr. Thomas Hocker: I there Preached, there Married
with a good Gentlewoman, till I went to London to ripen my Studies, not
intending to Preach at all; where I attended Dr. Gouge, Sibs, and Davenports
Ministry, with others; and I hope, with some profit. But in short time was
forced to Preach by importunity of Friends, having had a License from Dr.
Mountain Bishop of London before, and to Sepulchers I was brought by a very
strange Providence; for Preaching before at another Place; and a Young Man
receiving some good, would not be satisfied, but I must Preach at Sepulchers
once Monthly for the good of his Friends; in which he got his end (if I might
not show vanity) and he allowed Thirty Pounds per Annum to that Lecture, but
his Person unknown to me: he was a Chandler, and died a good Man, and Member of
Parliament. At this Lecture the Resort grew so great that it contracted envy
and anger. Though I believe above an hundred every Week were persuaded from Sin
to Christ.

I wish I may not be judged for saying ^^e There was six or se^^^ thousand
Hearers, and the Circum^^^nces fit for such good Work: But I am tender; there I
had some Trouble, who could not conform to all; and went to Holland, where I
was five or six Years, not without the Presence of God in my Work; but many of
my Acquaintance going for New England, had engaged me to come to them when they
sent, which accordingly I did: And truly, my reason for my self and others to
go, was merely not to offend Authority in that difference of Judgment; and had
not the Book for Encouragement of Sports on the Sabbath come forth, many had
staid. That good Man, my dear firm Friend, Mr. White of Dorchester, and Bishop
Lake, occasioned, yea founded, that Work, and much in reference to the Indians,
of which we did not fail to attempt, with good Success to many of their Souls
(through Gods Blessing.) See Bishop Lake's Sermon, 1 King. 8.37. who professed to
Mr. White of Dorchester, he would go himself with us, but for his Age, for
which he had the late Kings gracious Patent, License and Encouragement. There I
continued Seven Years, till sent hither by the Plantation to mediate for ease
in Customs and Excise; the Country being poor, and a tender Plant, of their own
setting and manuring. But coming hither, found the Nation embroiled in those
Civil Discontents, Jars and Wars, and here was forced to stay, though I had
nothing to support me but the Parliaments Promises; And not being able in a
short time to compass my Errand, studied with a constant purpose of Returning,
and went with the first to Ireland, most of your London, Godly Ministers being
engaged in Person, Purse, and Preaching in this Trouble: I thought Ireland the
clearest Work, and had the Pay of a Preacher then and after-ward, as I could
get it. I was not here at Edgehill, nor the Bishop of Canterburies troubles or
death. Upon my Return, was staid again from going home, by the Earl of Warwick
my Patron; then by the Earl of Essex, afterward by the Parliament, who at last
gave me an Estate, now taken away. I had access to the King about my
New England business: he used me Civilly; I, in requital, offered my poor
thoughts three times for his safety; I never had hand in contriving or acting
his Death, as I am scandalized, but the contrary (to my mean power:) I was
never in any Councils or Cabal at any time, I hated it, and had no stowage for
Counsel, thinking all Government should lie open to all; nor had Penny from any
General, but lived in debt, as now I am; nor had means for my Expenses, what I
had, others shared in. I canfess I did what I did strenuously, though with a
weak Head, being over-laid with my own and others Troubles; never was angry
with any of the Kings party, not any of them for being so; thought the
Parliament Authority lawful, and never studied it much; have not had my hand in
any Man's Blood, but saved many in Life and Estate. The Parliament in 1644,
gave me the Bishops Books, valued at 140 l. which I intended for New England,
being a part of his private Library, which (with all mine own) I have often
offered for 150 l. the mistake about them was, and is great, for they never
were so considerable: And these my gettings, who never aimed to be rich, nor
ever had means to reach it. The Changes grew (as you see) a Commonwealth I
found, but thus altered; I staid so long at White Hall, contented with any good
Government that would keep things together; till the breach of that they call
Richards Parliament, and then I removed, and never returned more, but fell sick
long, and in trouble ever since; never was summoned but once by the Council,
which was in April, about Books; of which (lying sick) I craved of the
President of the Council to excuse me, who sent unto me he had, and I gave him
an account of the Books: But hearing that my Estate was gone, and I indebted,
was private, and did purpose so to live, and so to die, having a Resolution
(which I kept) never to meddle with State-matters, but either here or in
New England, to spend my old Age, in looking into my Grave and Eternity; and
never had to do with any Transactions with Soldiers or others; nor never would,
had I a longer Life, my Head and Heart be tired, as well as my Body crazed: I
thought the Act of Indemnity would have included me, but the hard Character
upon me excluded me, which I was so sensible of, that Nature (in its own
preservation) carried me to privacy; but free from that report of the manner
which is suggested, of which you may be assured: By my Zeal (it seems) I have
exposed my self to all manner of reproach: but wish you to know, that (besides
your Mother) I have had no fellowship (that way) with any Woman since first I
knew her, having a godly Wife before also, I bless God.

But because what is before written, may seem my white side only, I shall deal
in all plainness with you, That though for Religion I am and have been really
sound and Orthodox to my best apprehension, according to the blessed Word of
God, and the generality of the Protestant Confessions; yea, though I traveled
through Protestant Churches for Order, to espy the best, and have joined with
the Churches of Christ, and took in with that I call a Tender Presbytery, for
such was ours in New England, and yet so, as I never Unchurcht any Parish where
a godly Minister was, and godly People joined together, though not all so; and
do know God may have a People under all Forms, and would withdraw to the
furthest Judges, rather than give offense to what I cannot close with: yet so
unworthy have my thoughts been of my self to be a meet Preacher of the Gospel,
that more than twice I had given it over, had not Friends prevailed; yea, my
profession of the Gospel has been with much folly, weakness, and vanity: I
crave pardon of any that have taken offense, though in a Christian way I have
not had the reproofs of Three either for Preaching or Conversation. I am
heartily sorry I was Popular, and known better to others than my self; It has
much lain to my heart above any thing almost, That I left that People I was
engaged to in New England, it cuts deeply, I look upon it as a Root-evil: and
though I was never Parson nor Vicar, never took Ecclesiastical promotion, never
Preached upon any agreement for Money in my life, though not without offers,
and great ones; yet I had a Flock, I say, I had a Flock, to whom I was
Ordained, who were worthy of my Life and Labors; but I could never think my
self fit to be their Pastor, so unaccomplisht for such a work, for which, Who
is sufficient (cries the Apostle?) This is my sore trouble; and a private life
would have become me best, and my poor gift have had its vent also: But here I
was overpowered to stay. For Errors in Judgment I have pitied, never closed
with any that I know; when I was a Tryer of others, I went to hear and gain
Experience rather than to judge; When I was called about mending Laws, I rather
was there to Pray, than mend Laws; When to judge in Wills, I only went
sometimes to learn, and help the Poor, than to judge: but in all these I
confess I might well have been spared.

Nor do I take pleasure in remembering any my least activity in State-matters,
though this I can say, I no where minded who Ruled fewer or more, so the good
ends of Government be given out, in which Men may live in Godliness and
Honesty. I have often said, That is a good Government, where Men may be as good
as they can, not so bad as they would; where good Men and Things are uppermost;
and have thought if good Magistrates cannot bring all to their Judgments, the
Dissenters may have liberty, being kept out of Office, and want some other
Public Characters. That which a Friend of mine, and my self writ by Letters
about Magistrates, was very little, and the Records of the Tower were only
named, as giving way to all other Records, to cut off dissentions, or marks of
Tyranny, which no good Prince will exercise; I am sorry if any offended, it was
Zeal for Quietness. I honor Laws, and good Lawyers heartily, and know their
use; only ease, expedition, and cheapness, what good Man does not call for?
Sedition is the heating Men's minds against the present Authority, in that I
never was, yet sorry, Authority should have any hard thoughts of me, or know so
inconsiderable a creature as my self: I never could be fit for a Court, many
ways not fit, and am therefore grieved, that I was either constrained, or
content to live, where I could do so little good; for I would die without a
secret in my bosom, unless Cases of Conscience in the way of Preaching, which
are secret indeed; and for reading them to the World I had appointed a Portion,
if it had been continued to me.

Upon all this you may ask what design I drove, being looked upon that way?
Truly these three.

First, That Goodness that which is really so, and such Religion, might be
highly advanced.

Secondly, That good Learning might have all Countenance.

Thirdly, That there may not be a Beggar in Israel in England.

And for all these I have projected or labored, and I have no other. And these
I pray his present Majesty may look to, and that God would bless him every way.

If in the prosecution of these I have used any of my wonted rudeness, or
unguided zeal, I am heartily as sorry. So begging pardon from God and Man,
Constitution or Custom, I conclude in these particulars, though the aim be good.

I conclude the former thus; I think, That as bad men care not who rule, or
what is uppermost, so they may have their Lusts; so good Men, if they may enjoy
God and His Truth, with good Conscience. For my whole course you know and feel
where my wound has been these Twenty Years, which has occasioned not only my
Head and Heart breaking, but traveling from mine own Nest into business.

Bless God, if ever you meet with suitableness in Marriage. For my Spirit it
wanted weight, through many tossings, my head that composure others have,
credulous, and too careless, but never mischievous nor malicious: I thought my
work was to serve others, and so mine own Garden not so well cultivated; only
this I say, I aimed at a good mark, and trust the Lord in Jesus Christ has
accepted it. My Faith in the Everlasting Covenant was and is, though feeble,
yet Faith. I could thus continue, ripping my whole heart to you, who have very
often had great success, even to the last hour of my last Preaching, and am
Preaching the life of Faith to my self, to which call in all Prayers to the
Father in Jesus Christ his dearest Son, to whom let us look, as the Author and
Finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despised the Shame, and now sits at the right hand of Majesty, making
Intercession for Transgressors, Heb 12.12. To whom be Glory and Praise, and
Thanks for ever. For he is worthy, who has washed us from our sins by his own
Blood, and made us Kings and Priests unto God the Father; To him be Glory and
Dominion for ever.

For that part of my Lord Cravens Estate which I have, took no small place in
my trouble. You may know that I was not in the City when that Act was made, nor
urged my Lord Gray to buy; nor ever advised the said Lord (as I had time) but
to good and just things and company, against that Spirit of Levelling then
stirring: and do heartily wish, that taken offense might die; for it was not
intended by me, who could and can be as well contented without Land, as with
it; never being ambitious to be great or rich since I knew better things.

34. And now I must return to your self again, and to give you my thoughts
about your own Condition, I do first commend you to the Lord, and then to the
care of a Faithful Friend, whom I shall name unto you, if a Friend may be found
in this Juncture, that dare own your Name (though there be more of your Name)
and if such a Friend advise it, that you serve in some Godly Family, to which
you seem to incline, and must (it seems;) but truly if not a good Family, what
will your Condition be? Dwell where God dwells, and be in such Company, as you
must be with in Heaven, and then you do but change your place, not your
company; though it be unexpected and uncouth, yet remember the best of men have
been servants; Moses kept his Fathers sheep; so Jacob, and the Patriarchs;
David to Saul, and many more; I have before given thee Rules for it: And be
sure to be steady to Family and Private-Duties, your Life will be dead without
them; call your Condition Gods Ordinance, and he can bless it to you. But if
you would go home to New England (which you have much reason to do) go with
good Company, and trust God there: The Church are a tender Company; a little
will carry us through the World, yea very little: O Godliness with Content!
Your Faithfulness to me and your Mother will find Acceptance in Heaven, I
trust. My dear Child, tell me, How could thou be without Gods Rod? Remember
he has a Staff also. For your Mother (considering her Distemper) I have and
shall say more unto you. To his Grace, who is able to do above all we can ask
or think, I commend you both.

And if I go shortly where Time shall be no more, where Cock nor Clock
distinguish Hours; sink not, but lay thy head in his Bosom who can keep thee:
for He sits upon the Waves. Farewell.

35. And since we must part, must part: take my Wishes, Sighs and Groans to
follow thee, and pity the feebleness of what I have sent, being writ under
much, yea very much discomposure of Spirit.

My WISHES.
I Wish your Lamp and Vessel
full of Oil,
Like the Wise Virgins,
(which all Fools neglect)
And the Rich Pearl,
for which the Merchants toil,
Yea, how to purchase
are so circumspect:
I wish you that White Stone,
with the New Name,
Which none can Read
but who possess the same.
I wish you neither Poverty,
nor Riches,
But Godliness,
so gainful, with content;
No painted Pomp,
nor Glory that bewitches;
A blameless Life
is the best Monument:
And such a Soul
that soars above the Sky,
Well pleased to live,
but better pleased to die.
I wish you such a Heart
as Mary had,
Minding the Main,
opened as Lydia's was:
A Hand like Dorcas,
who the Naked clad;
Feet like Joanna's,
posting to Christ apace,
And above all,
to live your self to see
Married to Him,
who must your Savior be:
For ENGLAND, etc.
I Wish that Prince and Rulers,
all that guide,
May be good, and do good;
which is God-like:
And that their care appear,
so to provide,
That those of Strength
do not the Weaker strike;
The End of Rules from
Christian Policy,
To live in Godliness,
and Honesty.
I wish Religion
truly pure may grow,
Above Profaneness,
and Idolatry,
Which strive to nip it,
and to keep it low
Throughout the World,
from the Seeds Enmity:
I wish this present Government
surmount
All went before,
and that in Gods Account.
I wish Religion, Learning,
and the Poor
May find sound Patrons,
and that Holy Life
Make the distinction still,
and that no Door
Be stopped, where Christ
would enter to his Wife;
And that the Saints would learn
to suffer, where
Nothing can help,
more than a Groan, or Tear.
Amen, Amen.
Whosoever would live long and Blessedly, let him observe these Following
Rules, by which he shall attain to that which he desires.
Let thy Thoughts Be Divine, Awful, Godly. Talk Little, Honest, True. Words
Profitable, Holy, Charitable. Manners Grave, Courteous, Cheerful. Diet
Temperate, Convenient, Frugal. Apparel Sober, Neat, Comely. Will Constant,
Obedient, Ready. Sleep Moderate, Quiet, Seasonable. Prayers Short, Devout,
Often, Fervent. Recreation Lawful, Brief, Seldom. Memory Of Death, Punishment,
Glory.

FINIS.

