GOD brings to the Desired Haven.

A THANKSGIVING-SERMON DELIVERED At the Lecture in BOSTON N.E. On Thursday
September 5. 1717.

Upon Occasion of the Author's safe Arrival through many great Hazards and
Deliverances, Especially on the Seas, in above Eight Years Absence from his
Dear and Native COUNTRY.

By THOMAS PRINCE, M. A.

With a Prefatory Epistle to the READER, By INCREASE MATHER, D. D.

Psalm. 22. 22. -- 25. I will declare Thy Name unto my Brethren: In the midst of
the Congregation will I Praise Thee. Ye that Fear the Lord Praise Him: all ye
the seed of Jacob glorify Him, and Fear Him all ye the seed of Israel. For He
has not despised or abhorred the Affliction of the Afflicted, neither has He
hid His Face from Him: But when He cried unto Him He heard. My Praise shall be
of Thee in the Great Congregation: I will pay my Vows before Them that Fear Him.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Thomas Fleet, and Sold at his Shop in Newbury
Street at the South End. 1717.

Price 8 d. Single, and 6 s. per Doz.

To the READER.
T HE Worthy Author of the Excellent Sermon which is Emitted herewith, has had
his Birth and Education in New England. It is no dishonor to the Country that
there have been such Natives in it. He had a strong inclination on his Spirit
to travel into Foreign Lands: Accordingly he Sailed over the Atlantic for
Barbados, where he was in danger of being cast away in an Hurricane. And from
thence for England, and some time after that for Holland. After a short stay
there, he set Sail for England again, when he was in great danger of Suffering
Shipwreck, but God Saved him by a great deliverance. When in England he was
employed in Preaching the Gospel to several Nonconformist Congregations there.
A while in the City of Norwich, and half a Year in Great Yarmouth, but a longer
time at Combs in Suffolk, where a Congregational Church having had above Four
Years Experience of the Gifts and Grace of God bestowed on him, did Unanimously
desire him to take the Oversight of them as their Pastor. It was said to Jacob,
Thou sore longest after thy Fathers house; so it was with Mr. Prince. And his
Relations here (his Godly Aged Father being yet alive) were as desirous of his
return. Many times there is a Mavelous Attractiveness in a Native Land, which
makes it to be desired, more than others that are far more desirable. Nescio
qua dulcedine, Natale solum.

He therefore agreed with a Pious Young Gentleman Mr. David Jeffries.
who had been Educated in the same College with him in our Cambridge, to return
with him in the same Vessel for New England. But taking a Journey into the
Country, bodily infirmities with a Concurrence of several other Providence
retarded his coming to London in order to his Transportation for Boston, and on
September 14. 1716. a fatal Storm destroyed the Ship in which he was to have
been a Passenger, had not an overruling Providence prevented, in which
Shipwreck his dear Associate and all the other Passengers, above Twenty, Lost
their Lives. Had he been among them as he Purposed and Endeavored, his Life
had been lost with them, and then his Country had never been Edified by this or
any other of his Labors.

It was well done of him, upon his safe Arrival here, to give God the glory of
this Remarkable Salvation, etc to do it in the hearing of a Multitudinous
Auditory, many belonging to the Adjacent Towns being present at the Lecture
when this Sermon was Preached. And some having importunately desired a Copy of
his Discourse, I am glad that he has complied with their desires, and by the
Press (Litera Scripta Mane^) has Erected a Standing Monument of the signal
favor of God toward him. Doubtless, part of the work of Saints in Heaven,
will be to recount the Providence of God with Everlasting Hallelujahs, for his
wonders toward them.

There are several things which give cause to hope that the Lord Jesus Christ
will make use of this His Servant to do some special Service for His Name. One,
is, his having been like Obadiah, one that feared the Lord from his Youth. When
he was a Young Student at the College, he was a Praying Student. Would to God
all the Scholars were so. The Lord is wont sooner or later signally to own such
Young Scholars. Also, Eminent deliverances of Providence, are ofttimes a sign
that the Subjects of them, shall either do or suffer in the cause of Christ and
Truth that which will be Eminent. Moreover, Providence having ordered his
traveling into other Lands, and this in his Youth for the space of Eight
Years, must needs have proved advantageous to him. A wise observer of (...) and
Things (Multorum hominum mores Vi^it (...) Urbes) will be the more accomplished
thereby.

This Sermon needs no Commendation. It is Judicious and Solid, and proper to
the Subject in hand, as well as to the Occasion of its being Preached. I cannot
but rejoice to see that the Author Preaches CHRIST, ascribing to Him the glory
of His Works of Providence as well as of Redemption. Many late Preachers have
little or nothing of Christ in any of their Sermons (shall I call them) or
Harangues. If old Austin were alive they would be distasteful to him, Quia
nomen Christi non est ibi.

This World is a Sea of troubles. It is strange that they who are tossed with
Tempests, and know that they are bound for a blessed Port, do not think the
time long until they are there. Heaven is an Haven infinitely better and more
desirable than any upon Earth. The good Lord prepare me for, and hasten my
arrival at that Haven.

Boston, Sept. 20. 1717. INCREASE MATHER.

ERRATA.
Page Lin. For Read. 12 23 22 27 16 9 seem seems 20 6 33 38 23 10 Heavens
Heaven 22 either whether 2^ 11, 12. 11 -- 13 26 16 mighty great 32 31 36 28 12
33 34

A THANKSGIVING-SERMON
Delivered at the Lecture in Boston, etc.
WHEN the Psalmist had passed through Fire and Water and was brought out by God
into an happy Place, He first declares to His Great Preserver, I will go into
thy House with Burnt-Offerings I will pay Thee my Vows which my Lips have
uttered and my Mouth has spoken when I was in Trouble --: And then He turns
about and calls out aloud to the People, Come and hear all Ye that fear God and
I will declare what He has done for my Soul. Psalm. 66. 12 -- 16.

IN another Place He tells us, that Those who go down to the Sea in Ships see
the Works of the Lord and His Wonders in the Deep: and from thence exhorts us
all to Praise and give Him Glory for them. How can we Praise the Lord for those
His wondrous Works, unless we either behold them or hear of them? It is Our
Business and Duty therefore who have seen them to declare and publish them* and
Yours to hear and join in admiring them and in offering Him His Dues and
Tributes of Praise and Glory.

LET us then attend with serious Care and Diligence to what may be now
delivered from PSALM 107. 30. SO He brings Them to their desired Haven.



THE Words are a dependant and imperfect Part of a Sentence, and therefore lead
us to the Consideration of the preceding Context. The Psalm is a Collection of
most pathetick Arguments and Exhortations to diverse sorts of People, to Praise
the Lord for His Goodness and for His wonderful Works to the Children of Men.
v. 1, 8, 15, 21, 31.
.

THE Foremost Rank of the Psalmist his Auditory are Those preserved and
directed in their Traveling on the Land. The Second are the redeemed out of
Prison or Captivity. The Third are those recovered out of dangerous Fits of
Sickness. The Fourth are the arrived safe from Voyages on the Seas.

IN this Article of the Psalm He

1. OBSERVES the Works and Wonders of the Lord which their Eyes behold, v. 23,
24. They that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do Business in Great Waters,
These see the Works of the Lord and His Wonders in the Deep.

2. THE Distresses Fears and Dangers they are often in, v. 25 -- 27. For He
commands and raises the stormy Wind which lifts up the waves thereof: They
mount up to the Heaven, They go down again to the Depths, their Soul is melted
because of Trouble, They reel to and fro and stagger like a Drunken man, and
are at their Wits end.

3. THEN He takes notice of their earnest Application to God in these their
Difficulties, v. 28 -- Then They cry unto the Lord in their Trouble*

4. GOD's Gracious Answer in saving and bringing Them safe to Land. v. -- 28 --
30. And He brings Them out of their Distresses: He makes the storm a Calm,
so that the Waves thereof are still: Then are They glad, because They be quiet:
so He brings Them unto their desired Haven.

5. THEN He presses Them and Others to offer public Praise to God, their
merciful and great Deliverer. v. 31. Oh that men would Praise the Lord for His
Goodness, and for His wonderful Works to the Children of men: Let them exalt
Him also in the Congregation of His People, and Praise Him in the Assembly of
the Elders.

FROM Hence we may draw the following Observations.

1. THAT the Works and Wonders of the Lord appear in the Great Deeps.

2. THAT the Sea is a Place of common Fear, Distress and Danger.

3. THAT in such a Circumstance it is proper and natural for Men to cry to the
Lord.

4. THAT He is usually gracious to Them, hears their Prayers and saves and
brings Them to their desired Haven.

5. THAT it becomes Them and Others therefore to admire and offer public
Praise to God for His wonderful Works and Goodness.

THESE several Observations are highly worthy to be considered by us: But
because they entirely take in the Importance of the Context, and we shall have
enough to observe from the words at first read over to you, I shall chiefly
confine my self to them alone: Especially since they contain the most
desirable and happy Consummation of God's Merciful and providential Dealings
with those who travel on the tempestuous Ocean. -- So He brings Them to their
Desired Haven.

AND in the first place I shall offer a brief and clear Explanation of them by
their Dependence on the preceding Passages.

SO -- i. e. After their Crying to the Lord in their Trouble, and His making
the Storm a Calm and the rolling Waves a quiet Water. He -- i. e. God the Lord
to whom They cried and in whom They hoped. Brings Them -- viz. By the natural
Agency of prosperous Winds and gentle Seas. To their desired Haven -- Rendered
the more desirable in their Stormy Hours, upon which They can now look back
with a grateful Pleasure, and enjoy the cheerful Fruits of Gods delivering and
conducting Mercy.

FROM the Words thus explained, without any great Alteration of them, We may
raise this plain and easy Observation.

DOCT. THAT it is God the Lord who brings those that pass through the dangerous
Seas to their desired Haven.

FOR the Illustration of this our Doctrine, it will be needful for us to
consider these Particulars.

1. WHAT is the Importance of that Expression, Their desired Haven.

2. TO show, They are safely bro't unto it by God the Lord.

3. HOW, or in what way God brings Them to it.

I. LET us consider the Importance of this Expression, Their desired Haven.

AN Haven is a Place at Land where we are secure either at Anchor or on Shore
from the fatal Injuries of tempestuous Winds and raging Billows. And it may for
several Reasons be desired by those that Sail on the troublous Ocean.

1) BECAUSE of their occasional Views, Designs and Business.

2) BECAUSE it may be at the Land of their Abode or intended Settlement.

3) BECAUSE it may be the Place of their Education or Nativity.

4) BECAUSE at least it is a Station of greater Convenience and Security than
the Seas.

1. OUR Haven may be desirable to us, Because of our occasional Views, Designs
and Business.

IT is the Place intended when we first begin our uncertain Voyage, and
therefore we must needs have particular Affairs and Views of great Importance
to attract us thither.

SOME are in the Pursuit of Gain and Wealth or Riches: Others of Curiosity,
Pleasure, or Improvement: Others are moved with Views of exalted Figure,
Dominion, Power and Grandeur, of a splendid Train and Show, Obsequious Worship
and Obedience, and pompous Honors. Others run the Danger out of more noble and
generous Ends: Some to gain a virtuous Fame and Reputation: Others to make
advantageous Discoveries to the World: Others for their Country's righteous
Cause, for the Welfare and Protection of Societies, or gloriously to rescue the
Inslaved or Oppressed. Finally, Some are inspiried with a pure and heavenly
Zeal to spread the Gospel, Grace and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to
bring ignorant, unhappy, perishing Nations to the saving Knowledge of Him.

SO quickening and Divine a Principle we find in the Great Apostle in Romans 1.
8. -- 13. First I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that Your Faith
is spoken of throughout the whole World. For God is my witness whom I serve
with my Spirit in the Gospel of His Son, that without ceasing I make mention of
You always in my Prayers, making request, if by any means now at lenght I might
have a Prosperous Journey by the will of God to come unto You. For I long to
see You, that I might impart unto You some spiritual Gift, to the End You may
be established: That is, that I may be comforted together with You by the
mutual Faith both of You and me. And I would not have You ignorant Brethren
that oftentimes I purposed to come unto You, but was hindered hitherto, that I
might have some Fruit among You also even as among other Gentiles.

THESE and many other things excite and animate us to take the greatest Pains,
to endure the most irksome Toils and to risk the greatest* Hazards on the
watery Element: And must therefore render the Place or Haven very desirable
where we hope to obtain or enjoy them. But

2. OUR Haven may be yet more desired, if it be at the Land of our Abode or
designed Settlement.

A CONVENIENT, easy, secure and agreeable Abode and Settlement is the natural
Inclination and more ultimate View of all Mankind. This makes them to prefer
one Place or Country to another, determins them to the choice of One to live
in, and is the general impulsive cause of all their Removes or Change of
Dwellings.

SOME remove from one Part of the Earth to another to get a larger Estate, or
make a farther Improvement of that They have: Or to live in greater Ease and
Pleasure, or rise to higher Respect and Dignities, or to do more extensive Good
in the World.

SOME remove for the Benefit of more plentiful Soils, wholsomer Airs, healthier
Climes, or pleasanter Prospects and Scituations: Some for lonesome Solitudes,
Others for cheerful Converse, and Others for a Neighborhood of People more
agreeable to their religious or political Tempers and Principles: Some to enjoy
the Properties, Rights and Liberties of Humane nature in an equaller Degree and
in a greater Security: Finally, Some to live unmolested in a quiet and
peaceable Exercise of Conscience, a purer Observance of Divine Institution, and
a fuller Inioyment of religious Society, the proper Means of Grace and other
invaluable Privileges of the Gospel of Christ.

WHEREVER These happy Things abound, They must needs render a Land exceeding
dear and precious to every pious or generous Soul, and raise in it an earnest
Longing to see and enjoy it: And which will rather increase as we approach the
nearer to the desired Haven.

ESPECIALLY will our Esteem and Wishes arise, if we remove from a Place of
prevailing Wickedness, Discord, Enmity, Rage, Reproach and Danger of numerous,
restless, implacable Enemies.

THE passionate Resentment and Desire of such a Soul as this is very movingly
described by David in Psalm. 55. 2 -- 8. I mourn in my complaint and make a
noise: because of the Voice of the Enemy, because of the Oppression of the
wicked: For They cast Iniquity on me, and in wrath They hate me. My Heart is
sore pained within me, and the Terrors of Death are fallen upon me: Fearfulness
and Trembling are come upon me, and horror has overwhelmed me. And I said,
Oh, that I had Wings like a Dove! For then would I flee away and be at rest:
Lo, then would I wander far off, and remain in the wilderness, Selah: I would
hasten my Escape from the windy Storm and Tempest.

3. OUR Heaven will be yet more earnestly longed for, if it be the Place of our
Education or Nativity.

IT seems to be a careful Instinct of Divine Providence, that our being born
and educated in any Country does indear it to us, and generally make us to
prefer it above all others in the World, though They ever so much exceed it: That
so Humane Society may be thereby preserved and improved, and every one may have
a strong Propension to promote the Welfare and Prosperity of the Land of His
Birth and Breeding. This is observed among all and even the most Savage and
Barbarous Nations: And therefore Those are justly looked upon as inhumane and
unnatural Wretches, who turn Enemies to the Interest of their Native Country;
though They have met with the unkindest Treatment, or most undeserved
Provocations.

THE Ancient Heathen Greeks and Romans* have given us many noble Instances of
Those who, by the strength of their indelible Love to their Country and a
generous Spirit, in Defiance of all the malign and ungrateful Injuries done
Them, have persevered in their ardent Prosecution of its Welfare and Glory.

OUR Native Shoars must then be very desirable to us, and our Arrival at them
most earnestly longed for, after a long and tedious absence; wherein our tender
Affection has more sensibly wrought, and we have learned to prefer them, as the
Captive Natives of Jerusalem did in a strange Land and by the Rivers of
Babylon, above our chiefest Joy. Psalm. 137. 1 -- 6.

AND as in the Country that gave us our Birth we are generally trained up in
Arts and Sciences, or Religion and Virtue; so we There contract a most
desirable and familiar Acquaintance, which by the charming Simplicity of Youth
and a long tried Experience enters deep into the growing Affection, and becomes
inseparable and natural to us. And from thence we must needs ordinarily feel
the most powerful, united Attraction of Kindred, Alliance and Friendship.

THERE are our old, intimate, approved and bosom Friends; with whom we used to
take sweet Council together, and walk to the House of God in Company: There are
the delightful Desires of our Eyes, as the Holy Scriptures call them, Ezekiel. 24.
16, 18.
and the blooming Offspring of our Bodies: There are our pleasant Wives and
Children, our Fathers and our Mothers, our Brethren and our Sisters! -- The
dearest and most irresistible Incentives and Allurements of Humane Nature.

WE find how powerfully Some of them wrought in the Patriarch Jacob, even while
He was in the full Possession of Others, and in opposition to a long Residence
and Prosperity in a Foreign Land. When He had lived above two Sevens of Years
with his Father-in-Law Laban, and had gotten Him Wives and Children; He tells
Him, Send me away, that I may go unto my Own Place and to my Country. Genesis 30.
25. And a considerable Time after, when He was rather encouraged to stay by a
great Increase of Riches; we find Him forcibly breaking away from Laban, and
Laban well observing in the following Chapter at the 30th Verse: -- And now --
Thou would needs be gone, because Thou sore longest after thy Father's House
--.

THE Delightful Views of These, and the lively Hopes of the Enjoyment of them,
must therefore make our Haven exceedingly desired by us; and like the Descent
of Bodies to their Centers, increase our impatient Longings, the nearer we draw
unto them.

4. THOUGH we should have none of these Attractives; yet our Haven must needs be
very desirable to us, as it is a Place of abundantly greater Convenience and
Security than the Seas.

WHEN we are in the Pursuit of our lengthening Voyage, at a greater Distance
from the Land, and confined within the narrow Bounds of a Ship; what a
Multitude of convenient and desirable Things are we destitute of, either for
Pleasure, Health or Ease? And how many times are we exposed to perish, as many
others have done, for want of the necessary Supports of Life? The Want of them
makes us often to remember them, and excites our earnest, vain Desires to the
Shoars that produce or afford them.

AND as on the Seas we are also destitute of the precious Ordinances of Jesus
Christ; How earnestly will a gracious Soul desire and pant after them! How
beautiful and desirable is the Place where His lovely Temples stand and
appear! The Language of such a pious Soul is expressed with the most
affectionate and tender strains, in Psalm. 84, and 42. How amiable are Thy
Tabernacles O Lord of Hosts! My soul longs, yea, even faints for the Courts
of the Lord: My Heart and my Flesh cries out for the Living God. Yea the
Sparrow has found an House, and the Swallow a Nest for her self; even Thine
Altars, O Lord of Hosts, my King and my God. Blessed are They that dwell in
Thine House: They will be still Praising Thee, Selah. O Lord God of Hosts hear
my Prayer, give ear O God of Jacob, Selah. For a Day in Thy Courts is better
than a Thousand: I had rather be a Doorkeeper in the House of my God than to
dwell in the Tents of Wickedness. Psalm. 84. 1 -- 4, 8, 10.
As the Heart pants after the Waterbrooks; so pants my soul after Thee O
God! My Soul thirsts for God, for the Living God: when shall I come and
appear before Him! Psalm. 42. 1, 2.
.

FURTHERMORE, the fluctuating and tempestuous Ocean is a stage of continually
greater Hazard than the Land. Nothing is more uncertain than the Motion of the
Winds and Waters. A furious Storm or a sudden Gust or Tempest may rise out of a
perfect Calm and Sunshine, when the Heavens above and the Surface of the Seas
below appear to smile and flatter us into a sound Security. They may soon
overset or founder us in the hoary Deeps, or drive and rack us on the fatal
Rocks and Shelves of the very Shoars we long to get to.

NUMBERLESS and dismal Accidents are we perpetually liable to that we cannot
possibly provide against or foresee. But to make use of those beautiful
Allusions in Job 22. 20, 21. -- When Terrors take hold on us as waters and a
Tempest is ready to steal us away in the Night, the Wind threatens to carry us
away and the Storm to hurl us one of our Place; Oh then, How desirable is a
safe and peaceable Harbor! How exquisite is our Taste (...) happy Calm and
Security of the Shore! How ardent are our perplexed Wishes, that we were off
from the violent and outrageous Element! How zealously would we fly with our
quickest Desires as the Affrighted Birds to their Refuge the Mountains for
Defense and Shelter.

HOW desirable then must an Harbor be to those who Sail on the dangerous and
turbulent Ocean! How transporting will be the sudden Cry and Sight of Land! And
how will the swelling Joy increase and flow; as we behold it hastening and
arising to bid us Welcome, and the fair Haven opening to receive us into its
desired Arms!

THUS have we briefly considered the Importance of that Expression, Their
desired Haven. We come now to consider, How it is that we arrive at such a
Point of Joy and Happiness. The Psalmist here ascribes it unto God the Lord:
and our Business therefore is in the

II. PLACE, TO prove that it is by God the Lord that we are brought unto it.

THIS will appear plainly upon our considering, that His Providence is ever
universally extended to all His creatures; upholding the entire Frame of Nature
according to His Wise Appointment, and overruling every Thing according to His
Sovereign Will. If this be true, as the Holy Scriptures and the freest Reason
do assure us; we never then arrive at Land, but it is by Virtue of His
Presence, Power and Active Providence.

THERE is no Necessity that He should therein act in contrariety to the common
Laws of Nature, which He has fixed in the World, and by which He chooses to
preserve and govern it. If He makes use of Winds and Seas and other Secondary
Causes, to bring us alive and well ashore; Yet as He is still the great active
and Supreme Efficient, our safe Arrival must unquestionably be ascribed to Him.
To speak or imagine otherwise, would be impiously to deny Him His great Glory
and Prerogative, To be the continual Almighty Ruler and Supporter of the World.

IN particular, the Seas and Elements, the Works of His Creation, are the
perpetual Objects of His Sovereign, Wise and overruling Power, Care and
Presence. I need describe it in no other Language than we find in the Sacred
Books of Job and the Psalms: where the several Branches of this Assertion are
thus expressed in the loftiest, but the plainest Terms.

1. THAT They were all created by Him. Psalm. 146. 5, 6. Happy is He that has
the God of Jacob for His Help, whose Hope is in the Lord his God: who made
Heaven and Earth, the Sea and all that in them is.

2. THAT They therefore are His Right and Property. Psalm. ^5. 3 -- 5. For the
Lord is a great God and a great King above all Gods. In His Hand are the deep
Places of the Earth: The Hight Margin.
of the Hills is His also. The Sea is His, and He made it: and His Hands formed
the dry Land.

3. THAT He actually Surveys them all. Job 28. 24 -- 26. For He looks to the
Ends of the Earth, and sees under the whole Heavens: to make the Weight for
the Winds, and He weighs the Water by Measure: When He made a Decree for the
Rain, and (...) may for the Lightening of the Thunder: etc.

4. THAT He is really present with them. Psalm. 139. 7 -- 10. Whither shall I go
from Thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from Thy Presence? If I ascend up into
Heaven, Thou art there. If I make my bed in Hell, behold Thou art there: If I
take the Wings of the Morning, and dwell in the uttermost Parts of the Sea;
even there shall Thy Hand lead me, and Thy Right Hand shall hold me.

5. THAT He likewise rules them according to His Soverain Pleasure. Psalm. 135.
5. -- 7. For I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is above all
Gods. Whatsoever the Lord pleased That He did, in Heaven and in Earth, in the
Seas and in all deep Places. He causes the Vapors to ascend from the Earth:
He makes the Lightenings for the Rain: He brings the Wind out of His
Treasuries.

THESE are the positive and clear Assertions of Holy Scripture: and they are
all confirmed by the certain, constant and surprising Observations of the
visible State and Fabric of the World. Whoever will take the pains to study
the Nature and Motions of the Heavenly Bodies, will in a little time enter into
an amazing Scene of Providence. He will be quickly and unavoidably convinced,
that without a perpetual and conpulsive Force, the Sun and Moon and Earth and
Planets would immediately leave their several Orbs and Stations, and the Earth
and Seas would soon dissolve and fly to pieces.

IT is then an Omnipresent, Almighty, Soverain Cause that continually preserves
and governs the Seas and Elements and all within them, in that general Course
and Order which He has been pleased to contrive and settle. And as our Arrival
at our Desired Haven is by the visible Agency of these Instrumental Causes, in
the Hands of their Supreme and Active Ruler-God; we must of Necessity own that
He brings us to it.

ONLY we might here observe, That the Government of the World in the same
inflexible, fatal Manner, without a Liberty to vary, seems inconsistent with
the Nature, Honor and Perfections of the Divine Being and therefore we must
needs allow that He reserves a Soverain Liberty to act whenever He pleases in
Opposition to the common Biass of Second Causes, either immediately by Himself
alone, or Ministerially by the Agence of Humane or Angelick Powers. And (...)
He must have so just a Liberty; so it seems undeniable in a Multitude of
Instances, that He continually makes use of it: Particularly in raising,
allaying and altering the Course of Winds and Storms, and directing the
Thoughts and Views and Resolutions of the Mariners.

THERE seems to be no Necessity of His acting immediately by Himself alone*
unless in the Supernatural Works of redeeming Sinners, of preserving,
overruling, annihilating or altering the internal nature of Things, or the
universal Frame and Constitution of the World. In other Cases, There are
innumerable, powerful, quick and active Attendants ready to perform His Will.
This is so agreeable to Humane Reason, That it has been the Sentiment of almost
every Nation in the World* For the wiser Heathens have naturally and almost
universally fallen into this same Conception; That in Subordination to the
Supreme Deity, there are a Multitude of powerful Spirits, which they wrongly
called by the Name of Gods.

ACCORDINGLY, The Holy Scriptures appear evidently to confirm and illustrate
this common Voice and Light of Nature. For They expressly tell us

THAT The Lord who makes the Clouds His Chariots, who walks upon the Wings of
the Wind; does also make His Angels Spirits, His Ministers aflaming Fire. Psalm.
104. 3, 4.

THAT The Chariots of God are Twenty Thousand, even many Margin.
Thousands of Angels, and the Lord is among them as in Sinai, in the Holy
Place. Psalm. 68. 17.

THAT His Angels are Mighty Heb.
in Strength, and do His commands, hearkening unto the Voice of His word. Psalm.
103. 20.

THAT When He made dark Waters and thick Clouds of the Skies His Pavillion
round about Him, and thundered in the Heavens, and shot out Lightenings, and
did fly upon the Wings of the Wind; He rode upon a Cherub: and then He sent
from above, and took His Servant David* and drew Him out of great Margin.
Waters and delivered Him. Psalm. 18. 10. etc.

FINALLY, That the Angel of the Lord imcampeth round about them that fear Him,
and delivers them. Psalm. 34. 7.

FURTHERMORE, We may take Notice from the Words in Connection with those which
go before them, That by the Lord may be here eminently Meant the Second Person
of the Sacred Trinity. This is frequently the Signification of the Word in the
Book of Psalms, as I might clearly* show: And in the New Testament, our Blessed
Savior is almost ever destinguished by this Soverain Title.

IN Psalm. 110. 1. He is styled Lord, and we are there informed, that the Lord,
the Father had appointed Him To sit at His own Right Hand, until His Enemies
should be made His Footstool. And in Ephesians. 1. 17 -- 22. We are assured, that God
the Father has raised Him from the Dead, and set Him at His own Right Hand in
the Heavenly Places: far above all Principallity and Power and Might and
Dominion, and every Name that is named not only in this World but also in that
which is to come: and has put all Things under His Feet.

NOT but that the Second Person of the Holy Trinity had the same equal Glory
and Dominion from Everlasting, as might easily be proved: But this is meant of
the Raising of His Humane Nature, after its Assumption to His Divine Person and
its Suffering, Resurrection, and Ascension, to the same visible undestinguish'd
Dignity and Dominion.

SO that we now have the unspeakable Consolation to remember in our Dangers and
Distresses on the Land or Water; That our Lord Jesus Christ, the same Merciful,
compassionate and condescending Person, to whom the Winds and Seas and Angelick
Powers were obedient when He was here on Earth, is the Perpetual, Soverain,
Surveyor and Over-ruler of Them.

IT is then to God the Lord Jesus in particular as well as to the Father and
omnipresent, all-active Spirit, that we are to ascribe our joyful safe Arrival
to our desired Haven. Let us now then proceed to consider,

III. HOW or in what Way God brings us to it.

WE have observed that He takes what Course He pleases, and makes use of Means
according to His Wise and Soverain Pleasure. These are of vast and
inconceivable Variety: And some of them have a greater or a less, i. e. a
nearer or more remote Dependence on God Himself, the prime and supreme Mover
and Director of them. There are Multitudes of Instrumental Causes, which we
cannot number or destinguish, that are necessary to bring us safe to Land. But
in general, we may take notice of these Three several Means of God's effecting
it.

1.) BY saving us from many fatal Injuries on the way.

2.) BY moving and ordering of the Vapors, Seas and Winds.

3.) BY influencing of our Thoughts and Views in the Direction of our Voyage.

1. HE preserves Us from many fatal Mischiefs on the Way: and so brings us to
the Port desired.

BY bringing those who Sail upon the Seas to their desired Haven, the
Scriptures must needs intend the bringing them alive to Land. For else it would
be vain to excite them to Praise the Lord for their Glad Arrival, as the
Psalmist does in the two following Verses. For the Dead Praise not the Lord,
neither any that go down into Silence. Psalm. 115. 17. For the Grave cannot
Praise Thee: Death cannot celebrate Thee: They that go down into the Pit cannot
hope for thy Truth. The Living, the Living, He shall Praise Thee, as I do this
Day. Isai. 33. 18, 19.

IN order therefore to the bringing them alive to Shore, it is necessary that
God should save them from many fatal Injuries and Disasters They are subject to
on the boisterous and tumultuous Seas.

WE are exposed on Sea as well as Land to many Mortal Diseases of the Body: and
somewhat more exposed; for want of skilful Physicians, wholsomer Food and
proper Remedies: Besides innumerable sudden and untho't-of Evils we are every
Hour in Jeopardy of. But God is the Great Preserver of Men, as the patient and
experienced Job acknowledged. Chap. 7. 20. If God did not preserve us; the
Vessel wherein we Sail might break or sink or burn, or carry us to deadly
Thirst or Famine, Drowning, Slaughter, or the miserable House of Bondage.

HE likewise holds our Soul in Life, and suffers not our Feet to be moved
Psalm. 66. 9.
from the Face of the World, though we roll and toss on the slippery and
perpetually moving Element. Or else the Ship that bro't us from a Foreign Land
to Sea, would come without us to the desired Shore: and only serve to tell,
unwillingly, the doleful and surprising News to our eager long expecting
Friends, that we were never to see them again; that we had taken up a lasting
Habitation in the Prison of the deep Abyss, or had changed our first designed
Voyage to an eternal Travel on the fluctuating and unsettled Waves.

2. GOD brings us to our desired Haven by Moving and Ordering of the Vapors,
Seas and Winds.

IF we look immediately on the Seas, They are a restless, unruly and
irresistible Element. All Humane Power must submit unto them and cannot prevent
the Rising of a single Wave. But though They seemingly toss us at their Pleasure;
Yet They only perform the Commission of God their Lord and Soverain. They are
among the Number of His lowly Creatures: and therefore justly the Subjects of
His universal and uncontrollable Government. For the Lord sits upon the
Flood: Yea the Lord sits King for ever. Psalm. 29. 10. He alone spreads out
the Heavens, and treads upon the Waves of the Sea. Job 9. 8.

IT is in them we smoothly glide, and through them it is that we forcibly Plough
to get to our desired Haven. They may deceive or stop us in our eager, fair
Career by their cross and violent Currents, or by raising up Themselves and
setting their awful Billows in Battle array against us. Then it is They show
the Greatness of their Might, and rise into a solemn, noisy Rage; to make us
sensible of our own defenseless Impotence, and the necessity of a Superior
Power to countermand them. And the more we resist them, the more we feel the
redoubled Shocks of their incensed Power and Fury.

BUT in such a Time of Distress as this, we may with a triumphing Passion
repair to God the Lord and say -- The Floods have lifted up O Lord! The Floods
have lifted up their Voice! The Floods lift up their Waves! The Lord on high is
mightier than the Noise of many Waters: Yea than the mighty Waves of the Sea.
Psalm. 93. 3, 4. And when their Tumult and Roaring ceases, we must then with
joyful Gratitude and Wonder acknowledge unto God -- Thou rulest the Raging of
the Sea! When the Waves thereof arise, Thou stillest them! Psalm. 89. 9.

BY their fluid Surface and gently rolling Waves He thus sustains the Ship that
holds us, and brings us happily at last to the solid Shoars that bound their
Empire.

BUT as the Seas-are moved and raised by the more active Winds, and obediently
continue, change or cease according to them; we must look up to these as the
chiefer Instruments, whereby God brings us to our desired Haven. These have the
greater Share and Influence to prevent or bring us safe to Land: and therefore
need to be at God's Soverain Motion and Direction.

NOTHING appears to move more irregularly and at random than the Winds: And
the true Reason of their Rise and Fall and Change, or blowing from the several
Quarters of the Heavens, is for the most part beyond our Humane Reach and
Guess. But surely They cannot be the only lawless Subjects of their
omnipresent, allwise, allmighty Creator and Preserver. His overruling Power
and Dominion had need extend to them, as well as His other Elementary
Creatures; Inasmuch as They are the continual Means of great Effects and
Alterations in the World.

THEY are therefore mentioned by the Holy Scriptures in company with the rest,
as the Subjects of His Soverain Will and Rule.

SNOW, Frost, Ice and Cold, warm Weather, Winds and Floods are represented to
be at God's Command. Psalm. 147. 15 -- 18. Fire and Hail, Snow and Vapor; and
Stormy Wind are said to fulfill His Word. Psalm. 148. 8. He commanded the
Clouds from above, and opened the Doors of Heaven: He caused the East Wind to
blow in the Heavens, and by His Power He bro't in the South Wind. Psalm. 78. 23,
26.

AND with respect to the Winds and Clouds, which have a mutual Influence on one
another; we have the Prophet Nahum and Elihu speaking in such magnificent Terms
as these, The Lord has His way in the Whirlwind and in the Storm, and the
Clouds are the Dust of His Feet. Nahum 1. 3.
Also by Watering He wearieth the thick Cloud: He scatters the Cloud of His
Brightness, Heb.
and it is turned round about by His council: That They may do whatsoever He
commands them upon the Face of the World. -- He causes it to come either for
Correction or for Mercy. Job 37. 11, 12.

IF the Clouds and Winds are moved and turned about by His Soverain Power and
Council; we must own, that it is God who stills and moderates as well as raises
the Stormy Tempest, and sends the fresher Gale or gentler Breez that safely
brings us to the unruffled Shore.

3. GOD brings us to our desired Haven, By influencing of our Tho'ts and Views
in the Direction of our Voyage.

WE allways travel in different Paths on the wide and trackless Ocean. Our
Tho'ts and Judgments vary every Voyage: And so we change our Course, though the
Wind be still the same as well as the Port designed. The Views and Resolutious
of the Mariners often turn on the most indifferent Incidents: That they seem to
be more of humorsome Fancy than of solid Judgment, though the precious Lives of
many besides their own depend upon them. By this means we may be directed to
Steer into dreadfully racking Storms: or insensibly led out of our way to avoid
them. And thus it frequently comes to pass, That We have escaped an unforeseen
and hidden and near Destruction; when Others who set Sail with us have
unhappily mistook their way, and have fallen into it.

AND even before we begin our uncertain Voyage; By what innumerable and various
Views do we either prolong or hasten it. By this means God often brings us safe
to Land: Or we might come out to Sea too soon and meet with a dismal fatal
Storm, or come on the dangerous Coast too late to save our Lives.

AND with respect to the transient Passengers and Common Seamen, that
indifferently Sail in one Ship or another; What a peculiar, remarkable
Providence does often overruled and direct us in Our final choice. Multitudes
of Things intervene to divert our Minds from going in the Ship we first
determined upon; that would have only served to carry us, with the rest of our
Dear Companions, to the watery Grave.

IT may be we were vexatiously crossed and disappointed in our Designs, Affairs
and earnest Desires; and wickedly murmured at the Providence of God, while He
was kindly, patiently, wonderfully working for our great Deliverance. An
infinite Number and Variety of Projects, Views, Inclinations, Passions,
Thoughts or Fancies may be suggested to us and raised in us by God's Direction;
that happily saved us from the dreadful Gulf we were blindly and eagerly
running into. When we are safely passed the Danger; we plainly see and view the
wondrous Work, and with surprise and humble Joy acknowledge, Unless the Lord
had been my Help; my Soul had quickly Margin.
dwelt in silence. Psalm. 94. 17.

THUS have we proved and illustrated our general Observation: We come now to
make a practical Improvement of it. And in the

1. PLACE, Let us from Hence observe and adore the soverain Will and
Distinction of Divine Providence; in bringing Some to their desired Haven,
while He suffers Others and even the best of Men to be overwhelmed in the
Depths of the Sea.

THEY are untimely swallowed up alive in the watery Gulf, and are never to see
the Light of the Living, their desired Native Shoars, or their darling Friends
again!

HOW ought this to inspire those that are wonderfully preserved and bro't to
Land with the lowliest Gratitude to God their Savior, a long lasting and
affectionate Concern for the Loss of others, especially their most desirable
Friends, and the tenderest prayerful and officious Sympathy with the Souls of
their nearer sorrowful Relatives?

BUT how dark and mysterious are the Ways of God! Some are snatched away in the
Flower of Age, that would have been more and more Delights, and beautiful
Ornaments and useful Friends to the Welfare and Interest of their bereaved and
Native Country; while Others are the unworthy Care of Providence, who have
fewer Indowments, a slenderer Power and a fainter Prospect of yielding Glory to
their Great Deliverer, and of being extensively useful to the World.

WE may very well adore in the beautiful Allusions of the Psalmist -- Thy
Judgments are a great Deep O Lord! Psalm. 31. 6.
Thy Way is in the Sea, and Thy Path is in the mighty Waters, and Thy Footsteps
are not known. Psalm. 77. 19.

HOWEVER, Our natural inordinate Concern and Amazement ought to lower and
alleviate with this silencing Consideration -- That the Soverain Lord of Heaven
and Earth is not in the present Scene of Time obliged to give an Account of His
Actions to the Children of Men. But when we shall come into the other World, or
arise from the Dead and see our Friends again; the deep and puzzling Scenes of
Providence will be entirely shifted, and in the Consummation we shall all
together behold, with Surprise and ravishing Wonder, the perfect, admirable
Beauty, Wisdom and Contrivance of them.

IN the mean while we may rest assured with the solacing Faith and
Consideration -- That our God The Lord universally reigns: and therefore, Let
the Earth rejoice, and the Multitudes of Isles be glad thereof. For though Clouds
and Darkness are round about him; yet Righteousness and Judgment are the
Habitation of His Throne, and the firm, immovable Basis of His soverain and
eternal Empire. Psalm. 97. 1, 2.

2. WE then that are living ashore ought to rejoice and praise the Lord for the
safe Arrival of Others out of the dangerous Seas.

IF They are our Friends and Relatives or any way dear unto us, though we have
never known Them; it will be natural for us to meet and gratulate them with Joy
and Pleasure. For Delight and Gladness do for ever arise out of Respect and
Love, and will readily show themselves at the safe Arrival of their long
desired Object: Especially when it comes through many Fears and Hazards, and
after a Burial of our Hopes of ever enjoying it.

BUT our Joys should refine and rise from the Taste of these lower Streams of
refreshing Pleasure, to the purer and more ravishing Spring from whence They
flow. They should ascend on aspiring Flames of Praise and Clouds of grateful
Incense to the delightful View and Enjoyment of that bounteous Heaven that
showers them down.

AND when any Others that come up from the Seas and declare the Wonders of the
Lord which they beheld in the Deep; we ought to unite in hearty Wonder, Thanks
and Praise, and in a joyful Exaltation of the Name of God. For God does all His
wondrous Works that He might receive the Glory: And therefore we withhold it
from Him, if we don't observe them and delight in the Hearing and Repetition of
them, and join with others in offering the Tributes of Praise and Adoration
that are due unto Him.

WHEN therefore the Psalmist had experienced the Goodness of God and professed
-- I will bless the Lord at all Times, His Praise shall be continually in my
Mouth: my Soul shall make Her Boast in the Lord; He tells us -- The Humble
shall hear thereof and be glad, and then he calls out earnestly to them -- O
magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt His Name together! Psalm. 33. 1 -- 3.

3. THEN it becomes us to seek the Lord and put our Hope in Him for Those who
are still abroad, that in due time He will bring Them also to their desired
Haven.

WE have observed and proved that God the Lord has the Dominion of the Winds
and Seas, and is every where present with them to direct and order, to raise
restrain and overruled them. It becomes us then to look and seek unto Him, and
hope that He will protect and lead and preserve our Friends at Sea through all
their preplexing Hazards, and return them safe with Joy unto us. It may be that
-- By terrible things in Righteousness thou will answer us O God of our
Salvation; Who art the Confidence of the Ends of the Earth and of them that are
afar off upon the Sea: Who by His Strength sets fast the Mountains, being
girded with Power; Who stilleth the Noise of the Seas, the Noise of their
Waves, and the Tumult of the (distressed) People. Psalm. 65. 5, -- 7.

FOR our great Encouragement we are informed that our Lord Jesus Christ is ever
divinely and really present with Them; To see their Distresses, Fears and
Dangers, and hear their anxious Cries, and in their last Extremities to rebuke
the Winds and Seas and save Them. And He has often shown His Power and Mercy in
Answering our earnest Prayers. Appearing for them in their dark and stormy
Hours, and returning Them safe at length to Land.

WE have therefore sufficient Reason to commit our Friends at Sea with Hope and
Resignation into the Hands of God the Lord: And to submit, however, to his
soverain Will concerning them. He can easily save them if He pleases: And if He
does not -- It is not for want of Power, But because it does not consist with
his wise and just and good Designs and soverain Will: And Who will say unto
Him, what do Thou? Job 9. 12.
For the great Heathen Emperor was at length obliged and inspired to acknowledge
that He does according to His Will in the Army of Heaven, and among the
Inhabitants of the Earth: And none can stay His Hand, or say unto Him -- What
do Thou? Dan. 4. 35.

4. HOW then ought we that are safe arrived* To be thankful unto God that
brings us, to love and praise and honor Him and give Him Glory, to devote
ourselves unto Him and serve Him, and carefully pay the Solemn Vows we are
under.

I begin with Gratitude; Because it is a just affecting Sense of our
Obligations, and a cordial Disposition to acknowledge them. It Inclines us
first to love, esteem and prize the Person that has done us a Kindness, and
then to bless him in our Hearts and Mouths, to praise and honor Him, and do
for his Interest what we can: It is of an active Nature, and has a strong
Propension to exert itself in Returns of Respect and Service.

NOTHING can be more due than all this is to God: And we that are bro't by Him
to our desired Haven, must be the most unjust and base and stupid Creatures in
the World, if we are not greatly thankful to Him.

OH! then, Let us labor after such an habitual, lively Frame of Spirit:
Without which we can never be cordially disposed to make a just Acknowledgement
of His Goodness, or offer Him Honor, Praise and Glory, or yield a dutiful
Obedience to Him. And in order to kindle or awaken such a lively Principle in
us; Oh! Let us attentively observe the continual Train of His Mercies to us:
Let us carefully lay them up in our faithful Memories, or record them in our
religious Diarys: Let us often retire, and call them over in a serious manner:
Let us enumerate them, and reflect on our great Necessity and Unworthiness of
them. And lastly, let us raise up our Thoughts, and contemplate on that
wondrous and Divine Benignity, which is the perpetual Source and overflowing
Fountain of them.

WHILE we are intently meditating on such affecting Things as these, and humbly
praying to God to give us a powerful Sense of them; we shall doubtless find an
active Flame of grateful Love to God a kindling in our Souls, our Minds will
rise into passionate Admirations of Him, and our Hearts and Tongues will find a
strong and ardent Inclination in them to yield Him the most public, extensive
and perpetual Glory.

AND if we have been in dreadful Dangers on the stormy Main, or God has saved
us from near impending Ruin; Oh! How affectionately should we pore on our great
Deliverance, till we find an active, pure and steady Blaze of Zeal arising and
burning in Us, and breaking out with the grateful Transport and Resolutions of
the Psalmist -- I will praise thee O Lord my God with all my Heart, and I will
glorify thy Name for evermore; For great is Thy Mercy toward me, and thou have
delivered my Soul from the lowest Hell. Psalm. 86. 12, 13.

IN fine, There is a vast Variety of lively Graces to be exercised, of holy
Resolutions to be formed, and of pious Actions to be done by those that are
saved by God through the many Perils of the Seas, and arrived safe at Land. And
as in a Circumstance of Danger we are ready to make our solemn Vows and
Protestations to Him, If He would then deliver us; Oh! Let us not now wickedly
provoke Him by forgetting or neglecting of them: Let us be as zealous to
perform them, as when we earnestly made them and resolved on them.

AND, to Conclude, Let us never cease to meditate on our former Dangers and
Deliverances, and on the Lord that has led us safely through them, and
wonderfully shown His Dominion, Power, Wisdom, tender Care and Mercy; till we
can express the lively Sense and Frame of our Hearts and Souls in the Language
of the 116 th Psalm, with the chief of which I close.

I love the Lord; Because he has heard my Voice and my Supplications. Because
He has inclined His Ear unto me; Therefore will I call upon him as long as I
live. The Sorrows of Death encompassed me, and the Pains of Hell gat hold upon
me: I found Trouble and Sorrow. Then called I on the Name of the Lord -- O Lord
I beseech thee deliver my Soul! Gracious is the Lord and righteous, Yea our God
is merciful. The Lord preserves the simple: I was bro't low, and he helped me.
Return unto thy Rest O my Soul; For the Lord has dealt bountifully with Thee.
For Thou have delivered my Soul from Death, mine Eyes from Tears, and my Feet
from Falling. I will walk before the Lord in the Land of the Living. --

WHAT shall I render to the Lord for all His Benefits toward Me? I will take
the Cup of Salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. I will pay my Vows
unto the Lord, now in the Presence of all His People. -- O Lord, truly I am thy
Servant, I am thy Servant, and the Son of thine Handmaid: Thou have loosed my
Bonds. I will offer to Thee the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and will call upon
the Name of the Lord. I will pay my Vows to the Lord, now in the Presence of
all His People: In the Courts of the Lord's House, in the midst of Thee, O
Jerusalem! Praise Ye the LORD.

FINIS.

