Three SERMONS LATELY Preached at Boston.

I. Showing the Virtue of CHRIST'S Blood to Cleanse from Sin.

II. That Natural Man are under the Government of Self-Love.

III. That the Gospel is the Means of Conversion.

To which a Fourth is added, To stir up Young Men and Maidens TO Praise the
Name of the LORD.

By Solomon Stoddard A. M. Pastor of Northampton.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green, for Daniel Henchman, Sold at his Shop
over against the Brick Meeting House. 1717.

SERMON, I. Showing the Virtue of CHRIST'S Blood to Cleanse from Sin.
I. Epistle of JOHN, I.7. last part. -- And the Blood of Jesus Christhis Son
cleanses us from all Sin.


IN these Words we have the commendation of the blood of Christ. By the blood
of Christ we are not to understand the natural blood of Christ: if a Man had
kept some Ounces of that when it ran out of his side, it would have done him no
good: but the meaning is, the Sufferings of Christ, especially his bloody
death. The commendation of it is, (1.) That it has an Efficacy to cleanse us
from Sin. Sin is a pollution and stain: it renders Men offensive to God, it
makes them filthy in the Eye of God; it exposes them to Gods wrath: but the
blood of Christ cleanses us: Rev. 1.5. Jesus Christ washes us from our sins
in his own blood. (2.) The greatness of the efficacy: it cleanses away all
sin. Some Sins are of a double die, scarlet Sins; some have committed a
Multitude of Sins, and nothing else can cleanse from any one Sin, but this
cleanses from all. This is amplifyed by the reason, His Son: if he had been a
Man, if he had been only the Son of Mary, his blood would have had no such
virtue: but he being the Son of God, his blood cleanses from all Sin.

DOCTRINE.
There is Mighty Virtue in the blood of Christ to Expiate the guilt of Sin. The
Law of God condemns for Sin. Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death. It brings
Men under obligation to suffer Eternal Punishment. All Men by Sin are exposed
to the wrath of God. This begets a great deal of disquietment in the hearts of
some Men, they would gladly be put into a way to be delivered from the guilt of
Sin; they have tried some methods and they don't effect the thing, Prayers and
Tears will not do; but this Doctrine gives an account what will do: There is
virtue in the blood of Christ to do it. Some things have a tendency to work
this and that Effect, but they are not always powerful; but there is worth
enough in the blood of Christ to take away Sin. Other things are no ransom for
the Soul; but they that have an interest in the blood of Christ are delivered
from the guilt of Sin. It is all one whether Men's Sins be more or sewer,
whither more or less heinous, the blood of Christ will wash them clean. Meats
and drinks have virtue to nourish Men, Clothes have virtue to warm them,
Physic may have virtue to heal them, but the blood of Christ has virtue to
cleanse them from their Sins. If a Man have Money, he may purchase Land or
Cattle or Corn, but he cannot purchase Pardon, but the blood of Christ will
procure the Pardon of Sin. Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have Redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of sins. Rev. 5.9. Thon have Redeemed us to God by thy
blood. Wisdom is a defense and Money is a defense, but the blood of Christ is a
defense against the curse of the Law: Gal. 3.13. He has Redeemed us from the
curse of the Law, being made a curse for us.

For the proof of this we may consider these Arguments.

1. Argu. The Father would not have put Christ on this Service, if his Death
would not have prevailed for the Pardon of Sin. Men were the Instruments of
putting Christ to death, but the thing was according to the counsel of God:
Act. 2.23. He was delivered by the determinate counsel and sore-knowledge of
God. Yea, God appointed him to die for our Redemption: God made him a Priest to
offer up this Sacrifice: Psalm. 110.4. Thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchizedeck. God commanded him to lay down his life: Joh. 10.18. This
Commandment have I received of my Father. God called him to suffer upon our
account: Isai. 53.6. The Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. From
hence may we conclude the virtue of Christ's blood to take away Sin. It was a
great thing for the Son of God to suffer: there never was any other such thing
from the foundation of the World, nor ever will be again. The dignity of his
Person is infinite, and the love of his Father exceeding great; and there is no
fair account, why the Father should be willing, to lay this punishment on him,
if it would not have had a mighty efficacy for the taking away the guilt of
Sin. Would God lay this upon him for nothing, or for a small matter? Certainly
it must be upon some great design: God foresaw the great Good that would come
thereby. And would the Son have been willing to undergo such great Sorrow, if
it would not availed for the Expiation of abundance of Sin? He knew that many
would be redeemed thereby. Math. 20.28. The Son of Man came to give his Life a
ransom for many.

2. Argu. God promised to Jesus Christ, that his Death should be accepted for
the doing away of Sin. Christ did not suffer under an uncertainty, whether his
death would signify any great matter, whether any number of Men would be the
better for it. God gave a great number to him to redeem, and promised that his
Death should be accepted as the price of their Redemption: Isai. 53.10, 11, 12.
-- If he make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, etc. So
Isai. 49.6. I will give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my
salvation to the ends of the earth. A number of all Nations shall be saved by
him: Psalm. 2.7, 8. Psalm. 72.17. Men shall be blessed in him, all Nations shall
call him blessed. And what can be a stronger tie, and greatee security than the
promise of God? Christ on the encouragement of this promise undertook this
Service, and God that made such promises before he died, and expressed such an
estimation of his Sufferings, will not despise them now they are accomplished.

3. Argu. From the Sacrifices that were offered of old. Sacrifices were offered
up from the beginning of the World. Genesis 4.3, 4. And this practice was
continued in the Church for Four Thousand Years: there were daily Sacrifices,
Sacrifices for the Sabbaths, for the beginnings of the Months, and Yearly
Sacrifices: there were burnt-offerings, trespassofferings, sin offerings, peace
offerings, freewill offerings and vows: Multitudes of Creatures were offered up
in Sacrifice to God: twenty and two thousand Oxen, and an hundred and twenty
thousand Sheep at the dedication of the Temple: there was much expense and
labor in Sacrificing; and these were all types and shadows of Christ: Col.
2.17. These Sacrifices could not purge away sin, Heb. 10.4. God did not regard
them but as they were types of Christ. Heb. 10.5. When he comes into the
World, he says, sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have thou
prepared me. The design of these Sacrifices was to represent the Death of Jesus
Christ, to instruct the World about Christ's Death, to be monitors and
remembrancers of the Death of Jesus Christ, that so the People of God might be
continually exercising faith on him. And would God have done this if there had
not been wonderful virtue in this blood? Why should they be taught with such
labor and expense to depend upon his death if there were not such glorious
virtue in it? I may add to this the consideration of other types: the passover
was a type of Christ: 1 Cor. 5.7. So was the brazen Serpent: Joh. 3.14, 15. And
the legal washings: God took abundant occasion to instruct them in the virtue
of Christ's blood.

4. Argu. From the Sacraments of the New Testament. Baptism shows the efficacy
of Christ's death unto Salvation: thereby is held forth our fellowship with
Christ in his Sufferings. Romans 6.3. So many of us as have been baptized into
Jesus Christ, were baptized into his death. Baptism is a Seal of the doctrine
of faith in the Righteousness of Christ. Adult Persons professed their Faith in
Christ before they were baptized, Acts 8.36, 37. Baptism represents the washing
away of the guilt of Sin by the blood of Christ. So we are taught the same by
the Lords Supper. Therein his death is represented as a violent death, and as
on our account: Matt. 26.28. This is my blood which is shed for many for the
remission of sins. 1 Cor. 11.24. This is my body which is broken for you.
Christ has appointed, that in this way his death should be showed forth, till
he comes, 1 Cor. 11.26. And surely it had not been worth the while to have
appointed Signs of this unto the end of the World, if it had not procured
Salvation. The Wine in the Lords Supper is called His blood of the New
Testament, Math. 26.28. because it purchases the blessings of the New
Testament. In these Ordinances God shows that it is much upon his heart to
strengthen our faith in the blood of Christ. Here we see solemn Ordinances
founded on the doctrine of Salvation by the Sufferings of Christ: if this
doctrine were not true there would be no occasion for these Ordinances. God has
not appointed any Ordinance, that should be like the stock, a doctrine of
Vanities, as the phrase is, Jer. 10.8. God needs no such worship as is not
built on a real foundation. If this doctrine were not true, the Sacraments
would be a mere mockery.

5. Argu. God does direct us to trust in the blood of Christ. We have many
invitations in the Scripture to trust in him. Math. 11.28. Come unto me, all ye
that labor and are heavy laden and I will give you rest. And surely God will
not with seeming love draw us into a snare, will not with great appearance of
love persuade us to build upon a sandy foundation Yea also he commands us to
trust in Christ. 1 John 3.23. This is his Commandment that we believe on the
Name of his Son Jesus Christ. And will God require us to put an honor upon
Christ that he is not worthy of? Will he command us to flatter our selves and
trust in that which will not save us? Will God command us to do, that which we
cannot do, except we be out of our wits. If it be not sase to trust in Christ,
we could not do it, unless we were under a delusion: it would be an hard lesson
to be bound to do that, which there was no reason for. Yea, God commands us
upon pain of damnation to trust in Christ: Joh. 3.18. He that believes not is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the Name of the only
begotten Son of God. But if there be no safety in believing on him, there is no
reason that we should be punished for not believing on him. Will God damn Men
for not building their hopes for Heaven upon the Sand? will he cast them into
Hell for not trusting in a broken reed? Further, this command is enforced with
a promise of Salvation. Joh. 3.36. He that believes on the Son has
everlasting life. But God will not reward Men with Eternal life, for trusting
in that which has no saving virtue in it.

Question. How comes there to be such virtue in the blood of Christ?

I shall Answer this in Four Propositions.

I. PROP. CHRIST Suffered the Curse of the Law. That is, the evil that the Law
threatened. God was bound to execute the curse for Sin: Math. 5.18. No jot or
tittle shall pass from the Law, but all must be fulfilled. And accordingly the
wrath of God fell on Christ, Sin was punished in him, he did not bear a part of
the curse, but the curse: Gal. 3.13. He has redeemed us from the curse being
made a curse for us.

1. He Suffered the Curse of the Law in his Body. They that suffer for
themselves must suffer in their bodies: beside what they suffer in their bodies
here, their bodies must suffer in Hell: Math. 10.28. Fear him that can cast
both Body and Soul into Hell. Therefore they must rise from the dead, Joh.
5.29. Dan. 12.2: The Body is a partaker in Sin and therefore it must partake in
Suffering. So Jesus Christ did not only die for us, that would not serve the
turn, but he died an accursed death. That was signified by that Law: Deuteronomy.
21.23. Cursed is he that hangs on a tree. So Christ bore a painful and an
ignominious death. Phil. 2.8. He became obedient to death, the death of the
cross. He endured a great deal of pain. Psalm. 22.16. They pierced my hands and
my feet. And he died as a Malefactor. There was a necessity that he should
endure abundance of pain, because he was to redeem us from the pains of Hell.
He was cruelly Scourged, and horribly Tormented on the Cross, that we might be
delivered from the bodily Torments of Hell.

2. He Suffered the Curse of the Law in his Soul. The Soul of Christ was filled
with sorrow. Math. 26.38. My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. He
had a terrible sense of the wrath of God in his Soul. He did not suffer much of
this in the time of his Public Ministry; but about and in the time of his
death, he was distressed with the sense of Gods wrath. As sometimes Godly Men
do enjoy the sense of Gods favor, so Christ endured the sense of Gods wrath.
God was not angry with Christ for taking his Office upon him, but for our Sins.
And Christ Jesus had a deep sense how God was provoked by the Sins of the
Elect, and that the guilt of all those Sins was translated unto him. Gods wrath
did burn against him, God looked on him as the guilty Person: God looked upon
him as the object of vindictive Justice: and he was pursued by Divine Vengeance
for those Sins: Isai. 53.6. And the Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us
all, etc. 11. v. He shall see of the travel of his Soul. This was the principal
part of the punishment of Sin; this made Christ sweat drops of blood: this was
typifyed by that fire on the Altar that did consume the Sacrifices.

Hereby Christ suffered the substance of that which was due to us. There was no
need that Christ should suffer the same in all respects, that we should have
suffered, if we had born the punishment of our own Sins; but it was needful
that he should suffer the Substance of our punishment, therefore it is said
that he endured the curse: Gal. 3.13. He was made a curse for us. He came to
fulfill the Law, Mat. 5.17. Christ being our surety was bound to pay our debt;
and God did not abate him any thing of the extremity of the curse that was due
to us. He suffered the punishment of our iniquities, and answered the
challenges of Justice. 1 Pet. 2.24. He bore our sins in his own body upon the
tree.

II. PROP. Christ Jesus who Suffered was the Eternal Son of GOD. Christ Jesus
was honorable on the account of the excellencies of his humane Nature, viz.
his Wisdom and his Holiness, but the great dignity of Christ is, that he was
the Son of GOD. This character is given to the Messiah in the Old Testament.
Psalm. 45.6. Thy throne O God is for ever and ever. Isai. 9.6. He is the Mighty
God. And the New Testament does constantly assert it. Math. 3.17. This is my
beloved son. Heb. 1.3. He is the brightness of his glory, and the express image
of his person. And the works of Creation are attributed to him. Indeed he
suffered in his humane Nature only, the divine Nature is not capable of
suffering; the divine Nature cannot suffer pain or grief: at the time when
Christ was upon the Cross in the greatest Extremity, the divine Nature was in
perfect felicity. But yet his Sufferings were the Sufferings of the Son of God.
If one part of a Man suffers, the Man suffers. Indeed the humane Nature is not
properly a part of Christ, yet it is personally united to him; hence the
sufferings of the humane Nature are the sufferings of God. 1 Cor. 2.8. They
crucified the Lord of glory. Acts 3.15. They killed the Prince of Life. He that
was in the form of God suffered the death of the cross, Phil. 2.7, 8.

Hence it follows that his temporary sufferings were Equivalent to our Eternal
sufferings. Christ Jesus was in a state of humiliation, all the while he was on
the Earth, but the extremity of his sufferings were but about a Night and a
Day, yet these did answer sufficiently for our Eternal sufferings. If we had
suffered in our own Persons, we must have suffered for ever. Math. 26.41.
Depart ye cursed into everlasting fire. But his sufferings were but temporary,
yet they are Equivalent to ours, because of the dignity of his Person. We were
finite Persons, and He an infinite. Our sufferings must have been infinite in
duration, and His were infinite in respect of the dignity of his Person. Finite
creatures cannot bear infinite punishment in a finite time: but an infinite
Person may bear infinite punishment in a little time. The sufferings of an
infinite Person, have an infinite value, and sufferings that are of an infinite
value are equal to the sufferings of mere Men for ever. Acts 20.28. God has
purchased the Church with his own blood. Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the
blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to
God, purge your Conscience.

III. PROP. Christ who suffered was perfectly holy. Many other Men are
imperfectly holy, but Christ was perfectly so: He was not guilty of the first
transgression: the second Adam was not represented by the first Adam, and so
not involved in the guilt of his Sin. Other Men come Sinners into the World,
but He was holy from his birth. Luke 1.35. That holy one that shall be born of
thee. Christ was free from all manner of Sin, both Original and Actual: Heb.
7.26. He was holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from Sinners. He had great
temptations from Men to Sin, but they did not prevail. 1 Pet. 2.23. When he was
reviled, he reviled not again. He had temptations from Satan, but he did not
prevail. Joh. 14.32. The prince of this World comes and has nothing in me. He
always did that which pleased God, Joh. 8 29. The most famous Men that ever
were, were Sinners, Noah, Moses, David, Hezekiah and Paul: but CHRIST was
perfectly free from Sin. Men found fault with him, but God found no fault with
him. He was Gods holy One. Acts 2.27. He fulfilled all Righteousness, Math.
3.15.

Hence, His sufferings might be upon our account. The Lambs that were offered
in Sacrifice were to be without spot. If Christ had not been holy, He could not
have been a Sacrifice for us: a sinful Person is liable to suffer upon his own
account, and cannot suffer the wrath of God for others: but Christ being holy,
his Sufferings were available for our Redemption. 1 Pet. 1.9. We were Redeemed
with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb, without spot and without
blemish. It would have been utterly unacceptable to God to offer that which is
polluted: but Christ being perfectly holy, there could be no objection against
his Sacrifice. Being not liable to punishment on his own account, he was
capable to suffer upon our account: He was only guilty by imputation, and
therefore what he suffered, was not on his own Account, but on our account.

IV. PROP. He was appointed to be a Surety for us. If that be tendered to God
that is a responsible consideration, that is not sufficient for us, unless God
do accept thereof. If a Man offers to another a full price of a Field or an
House, that will make no purchase, without the consent of the owner; but in
this case God consented: He appointed Christ to this Service: He made him to be
the Second Adam. Therefore Adam is said to be the figure of him: Romans 5.14.
Christ Jesus in this undertaking was Gods Servant, Isai. 42.1. Behold my
servant, whom I uphold; mine Elect in whom my Soul delights. Christ was no
intruder, He did not thrust himself into this Service. Heb. 5.5. Christ
glorified not himself to be made an High Priest. God made him a Priest to offer
up this Sacrifice. Psalm. 110.4. The Lord has sworn and will not repent, thou
art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedeck. Christ Jesus was chosen
of God. God laid him for a foundation in Zion, Isai. 28.16. God gave him a
command to offer up himself for us, Job. 10.18. He was put into the Office of a
Mediator. There is One Mediator, between God and Man, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. He stood as a Surety to represent us. Heb 2.12. Jesus was made a
Surety of a better Testament.

Hence, those Sufferings that were sufficient for One, were sufficient for
Thousands. Christ being appointed a Public Person, what he did and suffered is
for every one of them whom he represented. The virtue of Christ's Suffering is
not divided among the Elect; but the vortue of his Sufferings does belong to
every one of his. There was no need that he should suffer the more because he
suffered for a great many. Adam being a Public Person, if he had performed
obedience, it would have been reckoned to all his Posterity, it would not have
been divided among them, that if there had been a great many of them, they
would have the smaller portions. Thus Adams sin is the sin of all his
Posterity; that sin that was sufficient to ruin him, would ruin ten Millions,
even all his Posterity, be they more or less. So those sufferings of Christ,
that were sufficient to Redeem One, are a valuable consideration for Millions.
If many have been pardoned on that account, yet the cleansing virtue of Christ's
blood is not diminished. 1 Cor. 15.22. As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall
all be made alive.

I. USE.
Of Reproof to those that despise the blood of Christ. We read of some that
count the blood of the Covenant a common thing, Heb. 10.29. You may well think,
that God takes it heinously, when you despise it as if there were no great
virtue in it. There be some Men that are distressed for want of pardon, Death
is amazing to them; but they dare not trust in the blood of Christ, as if there
were little virtue in it: you heat great commendations of it, but you don't
believe them: you slight it as insufficient for the Expiation of your Sins: You
don't believe that God has any great esteem of it, you think if you should
trust in it, it would be a presumptuous thing, that would be a way to be
cheated of your Soul. Though you pray that you may be sprinkled with Christ's
blood, and profess the saving virtue of it, yet you do despise it.

For, it is not from the low opinion that you have of your self that you are
afraid, but from the low opinion that you have of Christ. You say you are a
poor wretched Sinner, you have a bad heart and are extreme vile, and run out
very much in condemning your self, as if you had a very humble sense of your
own unworthiness, but this is not the thing that hinders your coming to Christ:
Many persons that have lower thoughts of themselves than you have, do yet
venture upon Christ. Notwithstanding your pretended humility, you have too high
thoughts of your selves; but the cause of your fear is, you are not sensible of
the mighty virtue that is in Christ: it is not because you see your self a
great Sinner, but because you don't see Christ to be a great Savior. It is not
because you have so deep a sense of your malady, but because you have so little
sense of the remedy. Men that are wretched Men are invited to Christ. Rev.
3.17, 18. Thou art wretched and poor and miser able and blind and naked: I
counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire that thou may be rich, and
white raiment, that thou may be clothed.

Neither is it from the high opinion that you have of the Justice of God, that
you are afraid to come to Christ. You say there be terrible threatenings in the
Word of God against Sinners; He says the wages of sin is death, and cursed is
every one that continues not in all things that are written in the book of the
law to do them. You say God is just and will be as good as his word, and no jot
nor tittle of the Law shall pass, but all shall be fulfilled. But this is not
the thing that hinders your coming to Christ, but the thing is, you are not
sensible that Christ has fulfilled the Law, that all the challenges of the Law
have been answered by him, that he has fully paid our debts to the Justice of
God. Those that do come to Christ have as firm a persuasion of the Justice of
God as you have, and that shows them the necessity of coming to Christ, and
don't at all discourage them, for they see a sufficiency in Christ to deliver
them from the curse of the Law. Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the
curse being made a curse for us.

Neither is it from the high opinion that you have of the Holiness of God, that
you are afraid to come to Christ. You say God is glorious in Holiness. The
Scraphims cry Loly, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts, Isai 6 3. God is of purer
eyes than to behold iniquity, Hab. 1.13. And you say, God will not endure such
an unholy Creature as you are: how can the holy God take delight in such a
polluted Creature; you are filthy and abominable; but this is not the reason,
why you are afraid to come to Christ, for it is no way inconsistent with the
Holiness of God, to pardon Men's Sins. God may hate Sin yet pardon it. He may
hate Sin, yet pardon Sinners, and take delight in Saving them; the pardoning of
Sin is a promoting of Holiness. Tit. 2.11, 12. The grace of God that brings
salvation teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present world. If you had a due sense of
the virtue of Christ's blood, the holiness of God would be no discouragement
unto you.

II. USE.
This Doctrine condemns those that have a greater value for their own works
than for the blood of Christ. Some Men make their own works the great
foundation of their hope. Luke 18.11, 12. I am not as other Men, Extortioners,
Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican, I fast twice in the week, etc.
Some Men can depend on their own works without Christ, but cannot depend on
Christ without their own works. Their great care is to establish their own
Righteousness, Romans 10.3. Some because of their works, they think God is not
angry with them; though their Consciences be not healed, yet they are eased:
some are striving to get justification by works, and are neglecting the offers
of Mercy through Christ. You are much out of the way, for there is great virtue
in the blood of Christ.

Consider, 1. You have no Divine Warrant for this. It is a bold presumptuous
thing to trust in God without his Word to warrant you. They that go in this way
go upon the encouragement of their own carnal reason: Men have a warrant to
trust in Christ, because God commands them. 1 John 3.23. This is his
commandment that we believe in his Son Jesus Christ. And because God invites
them: Math. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden. But
where do you find any command to trust in your own works, or any invitation to
do so? or any promise on that condition? The Scripture is silent, there is not
a tittle that way: You must go some-where else to find your warrant; the word
of God don't support that hope: it is a daring thing to trust in God without
any encouragement from him. Men have nothing but bold conjectures, and rash
suppositions to bear them out therein: they that do so, venture their Souls
upon a foolish imagination.

2. God declares against it. To trust in God without his word is bad, but to
trust in him against his word is worse. God warns them against it, that it is
presumption with a witness. To depend upon that as a way of Salvation, which
God declares to be a way of Damnation, is extreme impudence: the foundation of
their belief is unbelief. Are we not told that works will not save Men? Romans
3.20. By the deeds of the Law shall no flesh living be just ifyed in his sight.
Are we not told that Righteousness don't come by the Law? Gal. 2.21. Be there
any solemn warnings to discourage Men from trusting in Christ? Men are afraid
though God don't warn them against it, but they will trust in their own
righteousness though warned against it, as if God jested with them, when he
warned them.

3. Your best works have matter of condemnation in them. The best works of Men
are sinful. Isai. 64.6. All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. There is
pride, dullness, selfishness that does attend them; and can you imagine that
those things that do deserve condemnation, do deserve deliverance from
condemnation? Are those works meritorious that are punishable? Do those things
that deserve Hell, deserve Heaven? Perfect Obedience is the price of Heaven,
but with what assurance can Men depend on that Obedience which is imperfect? Do
Men think that they pay for Heaven by such works as purchase Hell? Has God
changed the price of Heaven? Will such actions as were wont to provoke the
Justice of God, now pacify his Justice?

4. Your works don't answer the Law. The Law is a standing rule: As God bound
us by his Law, so he bound himself, he made a Law for himself, and will not
depart from it. Math. 5.18. Not one jot or tittle of the Law shall pass but all
shall be fulfilled. And by this rule, your works will not justify you. The Law
threatens the curse for sin. Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not
in all things that are written in the book of the Law to do them. There is no
such clause in the Law, that you may make satisfaction by works. Works have not
the nature of satisfaction in them; imperfect works signify nothing by the Law,
to earn eternal Life; these Men cannot claim by the Gospel, because they reject
Christ, they cannot claim by the Law, because they don't keep the Law. What
things the Law faith, it faith to them that are under the Law, that every mouth
may be stopped, and all the world become guilty before God, Romans 3.19.

5. Your good works are fewer than your Sins. Suppose your works were better
than they be, and had the nature of satisfaction in them so far as they would
go, yet upon Examination you will find, that your good works are fewer than
your Sins, your good thoughts fewer than your sinful Thoughts, your Sins of
Omission and Commission, do far exceed the number of your good works: you must
say as David, Psalm. 40.12. Mine iniquities are more than the hairs of my head.
And do you imagine that one good work, will satisfy for an hundred bed ones? If
you owe ten thousand Talents to the Justice of God, your Prayers, and good
Works, must be valued at a prodigious rate, to make satisfaction. You are
greatly in debt, have lived a rebellious Life, twenty or thirty Years, and have
committed abundance of Sin every day; and God must set an high price indeed
upon your Services, or they can make no satisfaction.

6. Suppose your good Works should prove Hypocritical, can they justify you? If
they be Hypocritical, you will surely fail of your hope: for Hypocrisy is a
great Sin, very abominable to God: And whatever hopes such Men have, they will
be deceived. Job 8.13. The hypocrites hope shall perish. Job 27.8. Where is the
hope of the hypocrite, though he has gained, when God shall take away his
soul? And have you good security, that you are not an hypocrite? this is
certain, that if you trust in your own works and neglect Christ, you are an
hypocrite: such persons are under the power of Pride, for carnal confidence
reigns in them. Luke 18.14, Such persons are hypocrites, for they don't know
God and Christ: if they knew them, they would receive the Gospel. Psalm. 9.10.
They that know thy Name will put their trust in thee. Such are hypocrites, for
if they depend upon themselves, they don't know the plague of their own hearts.
If they see themselves, they cannot trust in themselves. Romans 7.9. When the
Commandment came, sin revived and I died.

III. USE.
Of Examination, Whether you have an interest in the blood of Chrish. There is
virtue in the blood of Christ to Expiate the guilt of Sin, and if you have a
part in the blood of Christ, you may be sure that your Sins are pardoned. It is
a thing of great consequence to have your Sins pardoned. Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is
he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. Whatever Afflictions
you are under, you may bless your selves, if your Sins are pardoned: But you
are a miserable Man if they be not. Your Sins will sink you into hell. Inquire
therefore whether you have an interest in the blood of Christ: you have had a
great opportunity to get an interest in his blood, you have been instructed in
the need you have of it, and the virtue of it: you have had time enough to
obtain it: Others as Young as you have obtained it. Examine therefore how it is
with you: if you have, you will see a foundation of comfort, if you find that
you have not, that may stir you up to get an interest in it.

Signs, 1. If you be indeed convinced of the cleansing virtue of this blood,
then you have an interest in it. They that are convinced of this, have saving
light let into them; they are translated from darkness unto light, and so are
delivered from the kingdom of darkness. Light to discern the glory of Christ is
the peculiar enjoyment of Godly Men. 2 Cor. 4.6. God has shined in our hearts,
to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ. The Mysteries of the Gospel are hid to other Men, but revealed to the
Saints. Conviction of the saving virtue of the blood of Christ, is not from
common illumination, but from Sanctifying and Saving light: when ever Men are
convinced of the saving virtue of Christ's blood, they will receive him: it is
for want of conviction and understanding, that Men do reject Christ: God gains
the Will by convincing the Mind. Many Men cannot be persuaded to come to Christ,
because they don't see it safe. Light and Life go together. Joh. 6.40. Every
one that sees the Son and believes on him. v. 45. Every one that has heard
and learned of the Father comes unto me.

But here Consider,

1. That it is one thing to be convinced of, another to be affected with this
dectrine. Common illuminations are very affecting: Men may be affected with the
terrors of hell, yet not certainly believe them; as hypocrites are. Isai.
33.14. They say, who can dwell with devouring fire? So, Men may be affected
with the Gospel, yet not be indeed convinced. Math. 13.20. Anon with joy they
received it. Gal. 4.15. Where is the blessedness, ye spoke of? Experience shows
that Men are commonly affected with tidings that they are not certain of. A
probable apprehension of the saving virtue of Christ's blood may work much upon
the affections of Men. Many Men are greatly affected with the Gospel, that
afterward fall from the profession of the truth. Being much affected is no
security from Apostasy, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. But if Men be indeed convinced, they
will never fall away.

2. It is one thing to be convinced, and onether thing to be filenced. Men are
wont to have a great many objections against the sufficiency of Christ's blood
for them; but sometimes they are argued so with, that their Mouths are stopped,
their objections from the number and aggravations of their Sins, their
objections from the anger of God, their not knowing their Election, are
answered, and they cannot gainsay the replys that are made to them: yet they are
not convinced, they may be confounded and put to silence, yet not convinced.
Acts 9.22. Saul confounded the Jews that dwelt at Damascus, proving that this
is very Christ. For Men may be put to silence, yet not see the grounds of
faith, viz. the certainty of the word of God, the riches of his grace, and the
dignity of Christ. Men may be put to silence, yet harbor apprehensions, that
though they cannot answer what is alleged at the present, they may be able when
they have studied more upon it, and that if they are not able to answer what is
said, yet others may be able.

3. It is one thing to be convinced of the virtue of Christ's blood, another
thing to be convinced that this is the doctrine of the Scripture. Many are
convinced that if the Scriptures be true, the ways of Sin are dangerous, yet
they are not convinced that Sin is dangerous; so many are convinced that if the
Scriptures be true, Salvation is by the blood of Christ: they are fully
satisfied that this is the doctrine taught in the Bible; yet they don't believe
the virtue of the blood of Christ: they can plainly understand the sense of the
Scripture, but they are strangers to the Divine Authority of the word of God.
Many of the Jews though they professed to believe Moses, did not believe him.
Job. 5.46. Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me.

4. It is one thing to be convinced of the virtue of Christ's blood, another
thing to be persuaded that there is no other way of Salvation. A Man may be
very clear in that, that the way of the Turks is not the right way; that way
countenances wickedness, and makes no provision to satisfy Justice, and
promises carnal pleasures in the other world: So he may be abundantly
satisfied, that the way of the Papists is false, because of then Idolatry and
Superstition, and because their Religion is against sense and reason, they
don't teach the right way of Justification: So he may be satisfied that the way
of the Quakers is false; they don't own the Divinity of Christ, they give no
rational account of our Justification; yet these men may be in the dark, about
the saving virtue of Christ blood. They prefer our Religion before others, look
upon it is probably true, yet are not certain of it.

2. Sign. If you live upon the Sufferings of Christ, you have an interest in
his blood. Christ tells us that His flesh is meat indeed, Joh. 6.55. If you
believe in the blood of Christ, that is the foundation of your hope. Some
pretend to believe in the blood of Christ, but their comfort does especially
depend upon the Services that they have done. When they think how they have
provoked God to anger, they comfort up themselves with their Prayers and Tears,
they make them their refuge, they are the things that quiet their hearts and
dissipate their fears. But they that have an interest in the blood of Christ,
make that their plea: that is their great refreshing: Phil. 3.3. We rejoice in
Christ Jesus and have no confidence in the flesh. When Conscience accuses, they
set this against those accusations. Romans 8.34. Who is he that condemns, it is
Christ that died. When they think of the Justice and Jealousy of God, they
remember the dignity of Christ's Person. Heb. 1.3. He who is the express image
of the Father, has purged our sins by his blood. They are comforting up
themselves that the Just died for the unjust, 1 Pet. 3.18. They remember that
God has promised that Men shall be blessed in Christ, Psalm. 72.17. When they
consider the provoking nature of Sin, they remember that Christ has offered a
Sacrifice acceptable to God, Ephesians. 5.2. They set under his shadow with great
delight, Cant. 2.3. They are beholding the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sin
of the world. They likewise receive strength from Christ to live holily: the
consideration of the blood of Christ has a Sanctifying efficacy upon them. They
are not bold to Sin because Christ has procured pardon, but they are
strengthened against Temptations thereby. Gal. 2.20. I live by faith in the Son
of God. The Death of Christ is a means to crucify their Sins. 2 Cor. 5.14. The
love of Christ constrains me. The consideration of Christ's death is powerful to
make them live holily.

IV. USE.
Of Exhortation, to depend on the blood of Christ. You want pardon, you are
undone, if you be not pardoned. You dare not depend upon your self, and it is
well that you dare not: But you may safely depend upon the blood of Christ. It
is Men's wisdom to be cautious what they do depend upon; it would be a dreadful
thing to throw away your Souls: There is no danger in depending upon Christ.
God never propounded any other way to Sinners. This is a way agreeable to the
Justice of God, this is a way contrived by the wisdom of God, this is a proper
way to advance the glory of Gods Grace. This is the way that God contrived
before the foundation of the World, 1 Pet. 1.20. You need not be afraid of any
insufficiency in the blood of Christ: Fear to venture you Soul on Christ, is a
reproaching of God and Christ; but it is no presumption to accept Gods offer.
It was a safe thing for the Israelites to sprinkle the Posts of the doors with
the blood of the passover, when the destroying Angel was to go through the Land
of Egypt: It was a safe course for them that were stung with the fiery flying
Serpents, to look to the brazen Serpent: So, it is a safe thing for you to fall
in with the Counsel of God, and trust in the blood of Christ, for that
cleanses from all sins, 1 John 1.7.

I shall now answer some Objections that may rise in your hearts.

1. Obj. It is very uncertain whether I am Elected; and if not, I shall never
be saved. Romans 11.7. The Election have obtained it, and the rest are blinded

Ans. The uncertainty of Election is no discouragement. Multitudes of Persons
have come to Christ and been saved by him, and they were all uncertain of their
Election before they came to Christ: for there is no way to know Election but
by Vocation, 2 Pet. 1.10. And though your Election be uncertain, yet the event of
your faith is not uncertain: You use means for the preservation of your Lives,
though its uncertain whether God have decreed that you shall live any longer.
Besides, there is an absolute connection between Faith and Salvation: if you
believe in Christ that will be a sure sign of Election. 1 These. 1.4, 5. Knowing
brethren your Election of God, for our Gospel came in power, etc. Faith is a
sure fore runner of Salvation. The terms of the Gospel do not run so, If you
believe you shall be saved, provided you be Elected; but he that believes on
the Son has everlasting life, Joh. 3.36.

2. Obj. There are but few that have the benefit of the blood of Christ.
Multitudes in Places of Profession fall short of Eternal life. Math. 20.16.
Many are called and few are chosen.

Ans. The reason why so many fall short of Salvation is because they will not
come to Christ: they refuse and so they perish, and if you refuse, you will
perish. All that believe in Christ are saved. Joh. 1.12. As many as received
him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God. If you believe in him it
will be no strange thing for you to be saved, though thousands fall at your side,
and ten thousand at your right hand: and if there be but few saved, why may not
you as well as others obtain? that was no discouragement to Paul, or Peter, and
should be none to you: you stand as fair as others for Salvation, and will not
be rejected if you come.

3. Obj. I have not the inward Call of the Gospel: all that have that Call are
Justified, Romans 8.30. but I have only the External call, and Multitudes have
that, who perish.

Ans. The External call is our warrant to believe. The Gospel is the word of
God, and offers of God recorded in the Scripture make it our duty to believe,
and are our security in a way of believing. In the External call there is Gods
command and Gods promise, and we must be judged by what is written. Romans 2.16.
God will judge the secrets of men according to my Gospel. The inward call is no
distinct call, but only the opening of the eyes to see the External call to be
true. You may not expect any such revelation as was made to the Prophets. If
you believe the Voice of God in his Word, that is enough.

4. Obj. The blood of Christ cannot move the heart of God to pity me. It seems,
that if I had a broken heart, that would move God to pity me; but how can the
Sufferings of Christ move Gods pity to me?

Ans. You don't need any thing to move God to pity you. The pity of God is only
from his own breast. Hos. 14.4. I will love them freely. All that is wanting
is, to answer the Law for you, to satisfy Justice, and pay the price of your
Redemption, and this the blood of Christ has effectually done. It was only the
Law that lay in the way of your Salvation, and the blood of Christ answers all
the challenges of the Law. 1 Pet. 1.19. We were redeemed with the precious
blood of Jesus Christ. His Sufferings were as much as Justice does demand for
our Redemption.

5. Obj. God seems to be too angry with me to accept of me: He must needs be
angry with me, because I have been provoking of him all my days; and he appears
to be so, in that he don't hear my Prayers.

Ans. God is always angry with Men until he pardons them: till the very moment
wherein they are pardoned, his anger is not abated But he is never so angry
with any Man, but he stands ready to pardon him, if he comes to Ghrist. Acts
10.43. To him give all the Prophets witness, that whosoever believes in him,
shall receive remission of sins. The anger of God is no passion, his anger is
the anger of a Judge, He is angry because Men are guilty of the Law; but when
they come to Christ, they are not guilty by the Law, the Law acquits them, and
so Gods anger ceases. God is never so angry as to be unfaithful; if he be
angry, he will not forget his Word.

6. Obj. I am not godly but under the power of Sin, and so it seems to be a
presumptuous thing for me to thrust my self on Christ: for without holiness no
man shall see God, Heb 12.14.

Ans. God does not expect, that Men should be first holy, and so be encouraged
to come to Christ; they are invited that have no holiness, they that are
wretched and blind and naked, Rev. 3.17, 18. They that are a thirst, being
destitute of Grace are invited, Rev. 21.17. There is no need of antecedent
holiness, before Men come to Christ, though there is always a concomitant
holiness: Men come with a spirit of Love and Repentance. God is said to Justify
the ungodly, Romans 4.5. that is, such as were ungodly, till the very time of
their Justification.

SERMON, II. That Natural Men are under the Government of Self-Love.
II. TIMOTHY, III.2. former part. For Men shall be lovers of their own selves:
--


THESE words with those that follow, are an evidence of what he had predicted
in the first verse, viz. That in the last days perilous times should come. By
the last days we are to understand the last days of the Jewish Church. So James
5.3. Ye have heaped treasure together for the last days. Acts 2.17. It shall
come to pass in the last days, says God, I will pour out of my spirit upon all
flesh. Those last days shall be perilous times, times of great danger; this be
proves from the wickedness that shall abound among the Jews, and he first
mentions that which is the root of all the rest, Men shall be lovers of
themselves: there is a lawful self-love, an holy self-love, and a sinful
self-love. This is that he speaks of, Men shall love themselves, without due
regard either to God or their Neighbor.

Q. Why does he make this a sign of Perilous Times, seeing all carnal Men, in
all Ages, are lovers of themselves? This is no new thing for such Men to love
themselves.

A. Two things may be intended in it.

1. That Men should be generally carnal, and so under the power of self love.
There would be very few godly Men among them, and so undoubtedly it was a
little before the destruction of the Jewish Church.

2. That self-love would mightily prevail over the light of Conscience. There
is a great difference among carnal Men; some are under great restraints, but
others are left of God to the prevailings of their Lusts, and hurried into all
manner of abominations.

DOCTRINE.
Natural Men are under the government of Self-Love. Godly Men are under the
influence of a better and higher principle, they have a spirit of love to God.
Psalm. 18.1. I love thee, O Lord, my strength. But Natural Men are ruled by a
spirit of self-love. The first and great Command is, to love the Lord thy God
with all the heart, Matthew. 22.37, 38. But Natural Men are wholly destitute of
this spirit. There is much of a spirit of self-love in the Saints; but other
Men are under the power of it. Phil. 2.21. All seek their own things, and not
the things of Jesus Christ. Self-love branches out it self into the love of
honor, and profit, and ease, and carnal pleasure, of their wills, and of their
lives; and sometimes the love of one interest is predominant, and sometimes the
love of another, but still they are governed by a spirit of self-love. Their
own hearts tell them, that they should not be governed by it, but it does rule
them.

In speaking to this I shall first premise two Cautions, and then prove the
Doctrine.

Caution, 1. They are sometimes overruled by a spirit of Compassion. Men that
are devoted to themselves, are so overborn sometimes with a Spirit of
Compassion, that they forget their own Interest. Some Men are more
compassionate than others: but there is no Man so void of compassion, but upon
some occasions pity will prevail upon him. The seeing or hearing of the
Miseries of others, will extort acts of compassion, and they will be under a
necessity to deny themselves, and relieve them. Men have not the command of
their own compassions, their compassion does prevail sometimes whether they
will or no, and they are forced to neglect their own interest to relieve others
in their distress: and this compassion is not only to friends, but to
strangers, persons that they have no acquaintance with; yea to Enemies, persons
that they are prone to do a displeasure to them; yea, to bruit Creatures also.

Caution, 2. Sometimes they are overruled by Conscience of Good and Evil. Some
things are so manifestly good, that they cannot but give an approbation to
them, and some are so manifestly evil, that Men must disapprove them. Romans
2.18. Thou approvest the things that are excellent being instructed out of the
Law. Conscience will bear its testimony for some things and against others,
though it thwarts their own interest. Some things appear so right, that they
will plead for them, though it be against their own interest: And some appear
so wrong, that they will plead against them. Sometimes carnal Men will stand up
in a cause from the mere dictates of Conscience, though he does expose himself
to great calamities thereby, it would apparently be his interest to be on the
other side, but Conscience bears down all before it. The Consciences of bears
down all before it. The Consciences of Men are very much corrupted, and
sometimes they will offer violence to them, for a little gain or pleasure, or
to obtain favor with Men: but sometimes it is otherwise, Conscience will
overcome regard to their Reputation, and regard to their worldly profit, and in
obedience to the dictates of Conscience they will forget their interest: they
are set that right should take place, though they suffer for what they do.

Having premised these things, I shall now prove the Doctrine. And it appears
by an induction of particulars.

1. They are governed by self-love in their ill Affection to God. It is said of
carnal Men that they have God: Joh. 15.25. They hated me without a cause. Romans
1.30. They are haters of God. Romans 8.7. The natural mind is Enmity to God. Some
of these Men find affections to God, yet they are enemies to him: They were
alienated and enemies to God by wicked works, Col. 1.21. They are wholly
destitute of love to God: Joh. 5.42. You have not the love of God in you. They
could be glad there were no God. They don't like it that he sees them, that he
is just, that he is able to avenge himself. And the foundation of this enmity
to God is self-love. They are so addicted to their own interest as makes them
to have a bitter spirit toward God.

They hate God because he crosses them in his Laws. They have a desire to serve
their corruptions, but they are restrained by God: they would fain have more
liberty in following their pleasures, than the Laws of God do allow them: so in
pursuing the World, but God will not suffer them They dare not do what they
have a mind to do, least God should be offended. Carnal Men affect a great deal
of liberty, they would walk after the sight of their eyes, Eccl. 11.9. but God
limits them and controuls them, he tells, that they may not do this and this,
and they are forced to deny themselves of many things that they desire, and
they don't know how to bear it. It seems to them that God is an enemy to their
comfort; they think they could live an happy life, if they were not confined
within such narrow bounds, and so they have an ill affection unto God as an
adversary of their felicity.

So they hate God because he afflicts them in his Providence. They have a great
many afflictions that are very cross to them, sometimes they are afflicted with
Sickness and Death in their Families; sometimes their Corn is blasted, the
Worms devour their fruit, Enemies distress them, their designs are broken,
their joy is turned into sorrow, they are involved in difficulties, and they
attribute these things to God. Whatever be the instrument of the affliction,
yet it comes from God; if it seems to be a mere casualty, yet it is ordered by
God. Job 12.9. Who knows not in all these, that the hand of the Lord has
wrought this. They think it is God that bereaves them, and makes them poor, he
could easily have prevented their sorrows, but he has a mind to cross them, so
they look upon him, as an enemy to their comfort; he is ever and anon plaguing
them, and wont suffer them to live quietly, and they are very angry with him.
Jon. 4.1. It displeased Jonah exceedingly and he was very angry. Isai. 8.21.
When they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves and curse their King and
their God.

So they hate God because they are afraid that he will bring miseries upon
them. If they prosper at present, they are afraid that God will go out against
them in ways of displeasure. They know, that they are guilty, and they have a
terror upon their spirits, least wrath will fall upon them. Job 15.21. A
dreadful sound is in his ears. They think they should do well enough if God
would but let them alone; but they are afraid that God will damn them. They
read many threatenings in the Scriptures against Unconverted Men, and they are
doubtful that God has determined to destroy them, and they don't know how to
bear the thoughts of it. The fear of Hell spoils their Mirth, and it is a
terrible provocation to them: they are even ready to blaspheme God Rev. 16.11.
They blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their plagues, and because of
their sores.

2. They are governed by self-love in their ill Affection to Men. Men are
obliged to love their Neighbors as themselves, Matthew. 22.39. But no natural
Men do in any measure live up to this rule; but Men are great enemies one to
another. Tit. 3.3. Hateful and hating one another; they do but a little good
one to another: they do a great deal of hurt one to another, abundance of the
miseries of Men rise from Men; Men do much more hurt one to another, than the
bruit Creatures do to them. They are like pricks in one another eyes, and like
thorns in their sides. And the foundation of this is inordinate self love;
their love to themselves begets enmity to others. 2 Timothy 3.2, 3. Men shall be
lovers of themselves, disobedient to Parents, unthankful, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, despisers of those that are good,
etc.

Sometimes they hate other Men because they hurt them. Self-love makes Men
tender of their interest, and if other Men hurt their Estates, their
Reputation, their Bodies, their Children, their Spirits are imbittered against
them, they stand ready to revenge their wrongs; they cannot bear it, that their
interest is touched; if they have an opportunity they will be even with them,
their hearts are meditating revenge. Simeon and (...) will revenge the wrong
done to their (...). Joab will avenge himself of Abner for the death of Asahel,
2 Samuel 3.27. Yea, if they but suppose they have hurt them, they will be enraged,
1 Samuel 22.19.

Sometimes they are afraid others will hurt them, and that makes them hate
them: others have threatened them, have made attempts that way; sometimes they
have provobed others, and they expect the fruit of their displeasure, and upon
that account they seek their hurt. Hanun had given occasion of anger to Lavid,
and then prepares to make War with him, 2 Samuel 10.6. If they are but jealous,
that another will do them a displeasure, they have an evil eye toward him, 1 Samuel 24.9. Selflove makes them to have an ill affection toward others because
they stand in their way. Men are in the pursuit of some advantage, and some
others stand in their way, they are competitours? with them for the same
Oshice, others are as well accomplished as themselves, and they have an
interest in the heart of those that have power to preferthem, and so themselves
are in danger of disappointment, and they cannot bear them, they will tell of
their infirmities, and seek their ruin. Abner cannot bear Amasa's advancement,
2 Samuel 24.10.

Sometimes they have an ill affection to others because they do outstrip them;
sometimes others carry more worthily and honorably than themselves, and they
cannot bear them. Eccl. 4.4. For every good and every right work, a man is
envied of his Neighbor. Some have more knowledge and greater ability, and they
cannot love them. They would be glad to engross every thing that is commendable.
Men are hated because of their enjoyments and seize. Rachel envied her
Sister, Corah envied Aaron, Saul envied David.

Self-love makes Men have an ill affection to others, because they blame them.
Some Men are much offended, when they are reproved, they are fonder of their
reputation, and take a reproof for an affront: they take it to be a great
abuse, and bear a grudge on that atcount, stand ready to revenge themselves,
and are forward to do a Man a displeasure on that account. So the Pharisees
hated Christ. So Abner hated Ishbosheth, 2 Samuel 3.8. Men love to have others
Prophecy smooth things, Isai. 30.10. Men cannot bear plain dealing, they love to
sleep in a whole skin, they cannot endure plain dealing. Ahab hated Micajah, 1
King. 22.8.

3. Self-love governs in Moral Carriages. Some Natural Men have their
particular Moral vertures: some Men are of Truth, some are very just, some are
temperare, some are dutiful to Superiors: Some are adorned with all moral
virtues, they have a lovely conversation, and are much to be commended on the
account of their Morality. Matthew. 19.20. All those things have I done from my
youth. But they are governed therein by a spirit of self love. Selflove will
make Men carry very badly, and self-love will make Men carry very well. This is
the wound of their Morality, that they don't serve God therein, but they serve
themselves. Hos. 10.1. Ephrains is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit unto
himself; they have a selvish aim in all they do. It is lawful for them to aim
at themselves in a subordinate way, to the glory of God: but they make
themselves their last end.

Sometimes they do it for their Reputation. Vicious carriages are shameful; if
they be known they are a disgrace to them. Gen 38.23 Let her take it to her
self least we be shamed. Such carriages are matter of reproach, thereby they
make themselves of the number of the fools in Israel; they are despised and
render themselves ignominious; their Relations are ashamed of them: it is a
disgrace to be familiar with them. This consideration is the great thing that
influences many Men: they cannot endure to be objects of contempt and scorn;
they think of that Scripture, Prove. 6.33. A wound and dishonor shall he get
and his reproach shall not be wiped away. They hate to be a byword. This makes
them to withstand temptation, they are content to deny themselves of their
pleasures that they might keep a good Name.

Sometimes they carry morally for their profit. Many corrupt carriages are of
impoverishing Nature; so is Idleness. Prove. 6.10, 11. Yet a little sleep, a
little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep, so shall thy poverty
come as one that travelleth, and thy want as an armed man. So is Wontonness,
Prove. 5.10. Least strangers be filled with thy wealth. So is Intemperance,
Prove. 23.21. The Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to poverty. Men that are
given to that, lavish away their Estates. And Men abstain from Vice, because
they cannot endure to be brought to straits and necessities, they are backward
to such ways as will draw them into Expenses; it seems to them a foolish thing
to waste what they have, they should bring themselves to Poverty, they can
hardly afford to spend for necessity, much less for superfluity. They conform
to many Moral Rules from principles of good Husbandry.

Sometimes they carry Morally to please their Friends. Some Persons are so
hardened in sin that they don't much regard their Relations. They are like Eli's
Sons that did not hearken to the Voice of their Father: but there be some that
have a great Veneration for their Parents, they are sensible that their Parents
have a dear affection to them, and they count them wise and good, and cannot
bear to grieve them, and their counsels stick upon their hearts. When they have
Temptations they think if they should comply it would be bitter to their
Parents, and so they reject Temptation; and they dare not be so bad as others.
2 Chronicles. 24.2. Joash did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, all the
days of Jehoiadah the Priest.

Sometimes it is to prevent the Reproach of their Consciences. They have
experience that when they carry orderly, they have not such Reflections as at
other times, their hearts don't twit them, nor revile them. They are more quiet
within and can vindicate themselves, but if at any time they are extravagant,
it perplexes them afterward, and they have a storm within; their Consciences
upbraid them, and imbitter their comforts, their carriages look ugly and base,
Judge. 17.2. And so they resist Temptation.

So they carry Morally to prevent Judgment. The Scripture is full of Instances
of Judgment on particular Persons for sinful carriages, and they dare not fall
in with Temptation least the wrath of God should break out against them, and
least they should perish for ever. Job 31.23. Destruction from God was a
terror unto me.

4. Self love governs them in their Religion. Natural Men do perform many
duties of Religion. Isa. 58.2. Yet they seek me daily and delight to know my
ways, as a Nation that did righteousness and forsook not the Ordinance of their
God, they ask of me the Ordinance of Justice, and take delight in approaching
to God. They Pray, and Preach, they Fast, they attend Sacraments, they may do
all the external duties of Religion, and therein put a great deal of external
honor upon God: but still they have some selvish design in all that they do;
they make the worship of God to be an engine to carry on their selvish designs;
there is no love to God in those Services.

Some of them have wicked ends in their Worship. They have some base designs
when they carry Religiously. Mat. 23.14. They devour widows houses and for a
pretense make long Prayers. They have been Religious that they might avoid duty
to their Parents, Matthew. 15.5, 6. Their design has been to wreak their Malice
upon others. Jezabel would have a Fast proclaimed in order to the death of
Nabai, 1 King. 21.9. And many others have low designs in their Religion: the
Pharisees prayed that they might have glory from men, Matthew. 6.5. The Jews
Fasted for themselves: the highest design of Natural Men is Salvation: They
agree with the Devils in their desire that they may not be cast into the deep;
and with Simon Magus, That misery may not come upon them.

This is very evident in some, because they cast off Religion when it is not
for their Interest. If Men aimed at Gods glory, they would pursue it to the end
of their days: no flatteries would make them cast it off; no danger would make
them relinquish their Religion: but some of them after a while are turn coats,
they see an opportunity to mend their Estates, and shake off Religion. Demas
has forsaken me having loved this present world, 2 Timothy 4.10. Some are
terrified with the fears of Persecution and turn Apostates, Mat. 13.20. And
there be others, that attend some duties of Religion but wont attend all. If
Men did aim at the glory of God, they could not neglect any duty of Religion.
But some persons have a respect to one command but neglect others. They come to
the House of God, but will not Pray in Secret. Some attend Fasts when Authority
commands them, but not else. Some will bring their Children to Baptism, but
neglect the LordsSupper.

Some Men aim at no more Religion than will promote their own Interest; they
love to get so much as will make them acceptable to Men, and don't regard to
get more: and some would fain have so much as will secure their Salvation, that
they may have Eternal Life, Matthew. 19.16. but think it superfluous to afflict
themselves to get any further measures of Religion. And this does evidently
show, that Multitudes of Men, act in Religion only from Self-love, because they
do oppose that part of Religion that must be done for Gods Glory. The very
nature of some actions do imply a regard to Gods glory. So believing in Christ
cannot be done without giving God the Glory of his Grace and Faithfulness: but
they refuse that. Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come to me that ye may have life. So
godly Sorrow does imply in it a sincere regard to Gods glory: but they utterly
neglect that. All Spiritual duties are neglected by them. Those things that may
be done for self ends are attended, but they neglect the rest.

USE, I.
From hence we way learn, That it is a vain thing for Natural Men to pretend
that they do things for Gods honor. Sometimes they make such pretenses. Isai.
66.5. Your brethren that cast you out for my Names sake, said, Let the Lord be
glorified. But if they make themselves believe that their end is Gods glory,
they delude themselves: and if they make others believe that they aim at Gods
glory, they delude them: for they are governed by a spirit of self love, and
are wholly destitute of love to God. Some of them do confess that they have but
a little love to God, but indeed they have not one spark of love to God in
their hearts. Joh. 5.42 You have not the love of God in you. They talk of
aiming at Gods glory, but it is only a pretense.

1. Sometimes they pretend it to excuse themselves. They are accused of that
which is faulty, and when they have nothing to say to prove that the thing is
lawful, they make an excuse of that, that they had a good end in doing it. They
say they did not do the thing out of spirit or ill will, but for Gods glory,
and think no body can contradict them therein; and if they do believe them,
they will not censure them very hardly, for the honor of God is a glorious
end: but the thing is a mere Excuse, they cover their revenge and malice with a
pretense of Gods glory. Joh. 9.24. Give glory to God, we know this man is a
sinner. Abishai would have Shimei punished, because he had Cursed the Lords
anointed, 2 Samuel 21.19. but he would sain have slain Saul, though he also was
the Lords anointed, 1 Samuel 26.8.

2. They pretend it to vindicate themselves. When they are charged with
iniquity, they stand up in the vindication of themselves, that what they do is
a proper means to vindicate the glory of God: regard to Gods honor calls for
it. Hereby they would free themselves from blame, and labor to ride clear of
fault, because the thing is for Gods glory: to stave off censure, by pretending
love to the rule, and to the glory of God. Joh. 19.7. We have a law, and by our
law he ought to die: But these Men love their own honor, much more than the
honor of God.

3 They pretend it to get applause. They are gaping after commendations, and
they are not contented that Men should think only that the thing is right in
its nature, but they would have them think also that they do it for a right
end; that the honor of God is a thing that lies near their hearts. They would
have Men to cry them up for choice and zealous Men. It is matter of Reputation
to advance Gods glory, but the thing they aim at is their own honor. Matthew.
6.5. The spirit of the Pharisees in the main was, that they might have glory
from men. Men's commendations was better than Meat and Drink to them.

USE, II.
See hence, That Natural Men are very much mistaken in the way that they take.
They are designedly pursuing their interest; but indeed they don't take the way
to advance their own interest. The way that godly Men take is for their good;
the way of Holiness is the way of Happiness: but ungodly Men are acting as if
they sought their own destruction, and were carried out with a malicious spirit
against themselves. Prove. 8.36. He that sins against me wrongeth his own
soul, all they that hate me love death. Then surely they are miserably blinded,
and are under a strange delusion; if they were not deceived, they would not act
as they do.

1. In giving way to sinful practices. Evil practices have been witnessed
against in all Ages, yet there be those that will keep up the trade. Some are
addicting themselves to ways of Intemperance, they are thirsting after Strong
Drink, and inflame themselves with it. Some addict themselves to ways of
Uncleanness, and polluting themselves with their Lusts. Some are practicing
Injustice. Some are false in their Speeches: And some are profane in their
Behavior. These Men are undoing themselves: they complain that others are
enemies to them, but indeed they are their own enemies. Job 31.3. Is not
destruction to the wicked, and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity?

(1) Sometimes in this way they lay a foundation of great Sorrow to themselves
and to their Children. God sometimes quickly bears a testimony against the
sinful carriages of Men: Sometimes he does it when they think they are
forgotten, and that there is no danger, then God calls their iniquity to
remembrance, and brings distress upon their Bodies, or a curse upon their
Estates, and multiplies their Sorrows, because they have been guilty of
Rebellion; their Sins are a root of bitterness; iniquity breads calamity. Men
have many awful visitations for their ungodly practices. God makes their lives
uncomfortable. Job 21.17. God distributeth sorrows in his anger. Men commonly
reap according to what they sow. The Providence of God are remembrancers of
their wickedness. There be some poisous that work persently, some after many
Years, as in those cases. 2 King. 5.27. 1 Samuel 2.29.

(2) Sometimes God snatches away their lives upon that account. They are cut
off before their time and wither as the grass: Some die in early days that they
may be taken away from the evil to come; and some die in early days because
they have been rebellious. There be means used for the preservation of their
lives, and they pray that they may live, but God will not be entreated: Death
is the fruit of Adams sin, but a more early death is the fruit of their own
sins. They act against their lives and are accessory to their own death (...)
their iniquities, 1 Samuel 2.34. 1 Chronicles. 10.13, 14.

(3) Sometimes they have great distress of Conscience. Other Men enjoy
tranquillity of Spirit, but Men by addicting themselves to evil courses bring
great inward molestation on themselves; they have ever and anon a dreadful
sound in their ears, Job 15.21. Conscience is presenting their sins before
them; they have a frightful and gashly look. They are in a great doal of
confusion of spirit. Conscience is minding them of the curses that are written
in Gods word. Sometimes there be instances of vengeance and their hearts are
meditating terror; if they have many outward comforts, their wounds smart so
as to make their lives uncomfortable. Some have pangs of terror, as Belshazzar
and Felix: Some in a more abiding way, Genesis 4.15. Mark 6.16. Judds was weary of
his life; the Silver made his heart heavier than his Purse, Math. 27.3, 5.

(4) Sometimes God gives them up to hardness of heart. God takes occasion from
the wickedness of Men, to leave them to an obdurate Spirit. Spiritual Judgments
are the most terrible Judgments, and the less sorrowful their hearts are, the
more sorrowful their condition is; by living in Impenitency, they grieve away
the Spirit of God. Formerly they thought it was but repenting and their danger
would be over; but sometimes God gives them up to a seared Conscience: Romans 11,
8. God has given them the spirit of stumber. Their lives are longthned out,
and they continue under the Means of Grace, but nothing works upon them;
Younger Persons are Converted, and the Spirit of God is stirring in the Place,
but they are like the barren heath. Their Hearts are made far and Ordinances
are blasted to them. Those rebukes and warnings that sink into other Men, take
no impression on them, the arrows of the word fly over their heads, and the
Gospel is a favor of death unto death unto them.

2. They are very much mistaken in preferring the World before Salvation. Many
Men are craving Salvation: they cannot beat the thoughts of Damnation; they are
Praying for Salvation, willing to attend Ordinances, and abstain from vicious
courses; like Balaam, they desire to die the death of the Righteous; yet their
hearts are more upon the World than upon Salvation: the World is a dreadful
snare to them, they see a great necessity of getting the World, and lay more
weight on that than on Eternal life. Mat. 22.5. They made light of it, and went
one to his Farm and another to his Merchandise. These Men are under great
delusion and are enemies to themselves.

1. Such Men take a great deal of care and pains, for that which will do them
but little good. If they had Salvation, that would make them happy. But if you
should add something to your Estates, that will be little advantage to you. You
might eat better Food, and wear better Cloths, and have better Portions for
their Children; but these are trifles to Salvation. Some that have less in the
World live more comfortably than they that have more. Luke 12.15. The life of
man consists not in the abundance of those things which he possesses. But
shortly they must die and then all is lost. Eccl. 9.6. They have no more a
portion in any thing that is done under the Sun. You will be brought into an
equality with beggars. Princes must put off their Robes and beggars their Rags,
when they lie in the Grave. Psalm. 49.17. His glory, does not descend after him.

2. They live but an uncomfortable life. They have a great deal of vexation of
Spirit. Worldly cares are like thorns, they pierce the Soul. You may have great
disappointments and crosses, you will have eager desires, like an hungry Man
that cannot be satisfied. Sometimes you may overcome Conscience, and do things
that are evil, but Conscience will be wounded, and that is hard to bear, Prove.
18.1^ and you will be afraid, you shall have your portion in this life.

(5) Sometimes because of this God blasts their worldly designs. If Men seek
the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness in the first place, they are sometimes
blessed in their Worldly enjoyments on that account, Matthew. 6.33. but if their
hearts be upon the world, they are blasted because of that. God loves to curse
their idols. If they had loved the world less, they might have had more of it.
He is angry for their Covetousness. Isai. 57.17. For the iniquity of his
Covetousness I was wroth and smote him. God is teaching of them by experience
the vanity of the world: This is one reason that Men have so many Judgments on
their Worldly enjoyments, they set their eyes on worldly things, and therefore
God gives wings to them, and they fly away. Hos. 2.7. She shall follow after
her lovers and shall not find them.

(6) Sometimes he puts them off with worldly things. Some Men prefer the World,
and God gives them their hearts desire, and denies better things to them. The
Men take notice of the Providence of God, and say, God prospers them, and deals
graciously with them, and they are blessed above many of their Neighbors; but
they are mistaken, God deals in Judgment with them. He says, let them prosper
in the world, that it may be a snare to them: they don't mind the offers of
Salvation that are made in the Gospel, but are set for the world, let them have
it, and they shall have nothing else; Heaven shall be reserved for other Men.
As in that case, Psalm. 106.17. He gave them their request, but sent leanness
into their souls.

USE, III. Of Examination.
Whether you be in a Natural Condition. If you be under the government of
self-love, you are in your Natural Estate. Some partitular Corruptions, which
are but branches of self-love may be weakened; as Wontonness, Intemperance, etc.
and yet you may be in a Natural Condition: but if self-love be weakened so that
it has not the government over you, then you are not in a Natural Condition.
Grace and nothing but Grace takes away the government of self-love.

1. Quest. Do you perfer the Enjoyment of God before all Enjoyments? Worldly
Enjoyments are of diverse kinds: Houses, Lands, Silver, Gold, Meats and Drinks,
Applause, Power and Dignities; these are the things that the hearts of many are
set for. 2 Timothy 3.4. They are lovers of pleasures more than loveas of God. But
there are some that prefer the Enjoyment of God before all the World: and such
Men do prefer the Enjoyment of God here before all the World. Some are very
desirous to Enjoy God when they die: it is a horror to them to go to Hell: but
they don't regard Gods Presence here: they can live contentedly without
Communion with God here. But godly Men prefer his Presence here. Psalm. 63.1, 2.
My soul thirsts for thee. Such Men as prefer the enjoyment of God, wont
neglect any thing that is needful in order to the enjoyment of God. They wont
think much of their Time, and their Pains; they will put away their Sins; they
will part with any thing rather than loose God: they will part with Estate, and
Ease, and Liberty, and Life, rather than loose God. Acts 21.13. I am ready to
die for the Name of Jesus. Rev. 12.11. They loved not their lives unto the
death.

2. Quest. Do you prefer the Honor of God before any worldly Enjoyment? The
honor of God is of more Moment than your Outward Enjoyments. And it is fit God
should have his honor whatever does become of your Enjoyments; but many will
not stir much out of their way for the honor of God. But those Men that pursue
the honor of God, will not live in any Sin for the sake of any worldly
Enjoyment. All Sin is to Gods dishonor, Romans 2.23. If you esteemed the honor
of God above your Enjoyments, you would not endure to live in any Sin for the
sake of them. A Man that prefers the honor of God, will be contented that God
should vindicate his Name by Judgments. Some Men cannot bear Judgments, the
reason is they don't care what becomes of Gods honor, so they can shourish in
the World. If Men prefer the honor of God, they think it is well that God
brings Judgments: though they suffer by them, yet they are willing it should be
so. They say, there is need of them for the vindication of the Name of God.
Dan. 9.7. O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us confusion of
face. If you prefer the honor of God, you will part with any enjoyment for
Gods honor. Some think much to part with any thing for Gods honor: But
Abraham parted with his Country, with the Goods that he had taken in Battle,
and with his Son for Gods honor.

3. Quest. Do you prefer the honor of God before your Salvation? The honor of
God is of more worth than your Salvation, and you must prefer the honor of God
before it. It is not a duty to be willing to be damned for Gods honor. It is
fit the Will of Man should submit to the pleasure of God, howover he will
dispose of them, Romans 9.21. But he don't require Men to be freely willing to be
damned, or to choose damnation for his honor; for God requires Men to seek
Salvation, Matthew. 6.33. And indeed it is against Religion to be willing to be
damned, for then they will be everlasting enemies to God. Love to Gods glory
will make Men to be unwilling to be the instruments of his dishonor. Yea, it
is impossible that Men should be understandingly willing to be damned; for it
is against Nature: there is no principle in Man to make him willing. Yet those
that love God prefer his glory before their Salvation: they are satisfied in
the Wisdom and Justice of God in damning Men for his honor; they desire
Salvation principally that they may honor God. They do count the honor of God
of greater moment than their Salvation, and take a complacency in that, that
God will not dishonor himself, but will glorify his Name. Jude 25. To the only
wise God our Savior, be glory, and majesty, and dominion, and power, both now
and ever, Amen.

USE, IV.
Of Conviction to Natural Men: God don't take any of your Services kindly at
your hands. God is not beholden to the best Men upon Earth for the Services
they do; but yet he takes the Services of holy Men kindly. 2 Chronicles. 6.8 Thou
did well in that it was in thine heart. 2 Chronicles. 19.3. There are good things
found in thee 2 Chronicles. 34.27. Because thine heart was tender, and thou did
humble thy self before God, I have heard thee. But the Services of Natural Men
are not taken friendly by God: God takes notice of what they do, but he knows
that they are acted by a Spirit of Self-love. He is sensible that there is no
kindness to him in them; they think that he is beholden to them, Luke 18.11,
12. but indeed he despises them.

1. When you reform, he has no occasion to say, that you part with your beloved
Sins for his sake. Some of them do forsake their bad courses, pull out their
right Eyes, and cast them away; they wont do any thing that is unjust; leave
off their Intemperance: shun profane Practices: Men take notice of it and are
glad to see it; but there is no occasion for God to take notice of it as any
love to him. No, God says, the Man is frighted into Reformation: He don't know
how to bear the flames of Hell; he would be as bad as the worst, but that he
dare not. Job 41.25. By reason of breakings they purify themselves.

2. When you confess your Sins, there is no occasion to say that you Mourn for
his sake. Formerly the Man made light of Sin, but it is otherwise now; he
laments his Sins and sometimes sheds Tears, as Saul, 1 Samuel 24.16. But God has
no occasion to say, Behold how he loves me! He could dispense with my dishonor
casily; but he has wounded his Conscience, his wounds smart, he has exposed
himself to misery, his cries are the cries of Nature; he foresees Misery like
to come upon him, and so be howls.

3. When you are zealous, there is no occasion to say, Behold his zeal for the
Lord. The Man is become a zealous Man, he has a Spirit to promote Ordinances;
he will be at any Expenses rather then live without them: And he has a zeal
against the Pride and Drunkenness of the Land; he hopes Men take notice of it,
and call it zeal for the Lord, 2 King. 10.16. But there is no occasion for God
to say so. God takes notice there is another spirit in him, v. 31. He says,
Jebu took no heed to walk in the Law of the Lord God of Israel with all his
heart. God says that there is something of zeal, but he is feeding his Pride or
Covetousness, or covering his other Sins.

4. When you are Charitable, God has no occasion to say, that you deny your
selves for his sake. When some other Men are exercising Charity, God takes it
kindly, and says, they shall not loose their reward, Math. 10.42. But when you
do duties of Charity, God don't say, that you show your love to him; that you
love him more than your worldly enjoyments. He says, You have done it to make
satisfaction for some former Sins, for the erse of your Consciences; or to
comply with the expectations of Men; or that Men may take notice of it, and
appland you for it: that they may have glory from Men, Math. 6 2. There is a
Pharisaical Spirit, and nothing of love in their bounty.

5. When you take pains in Religion, there is no occasion to say, that the Man
wearies himself for Gods sake. Some of these Men take a great deal of pains in
Preaching, and Praying, and Reading; and Men say, they weary themselves for
God: but God says, There is no love to Me in their Services. God slights the
Service and says, the Man takes a great deal of pains that Men may observe him
and commend him: Or, he takes a great deal of pains that he may beguile Men.
Math. 23.14. They devour Widows houses, and for a pretense make long Prayers:
Or, he takes a great deal of pains that he may purchase Heaven. Mat. 19.16.
What good thing must I do, that I may have Eternal Life? He is building up a
righteousness of his own. Romans 10.3. They go about to establish their own
righteousness. He is weaving a garment for himself that he may hide his shame.

USE, V.
Of Conviction, Of the wretchedness of Natural Men. There is a considerable
difference between them, as to their outward Conversation. Some of them are
rude and profane, and do openly trample on the Authority of God. Others walk
orderly: they are Civil and Religious in their behavior: but yet they are all
of them wretched and vile Men, for they are under the government of Self-love;
they exalt themselves above God, and set their interest at the right hand of
Gods glory. When we read the dreadful threatening that God has denounced against
them, we shall not need to wonder: there is no occasion to think that God deals
hardly with them: for they utterly neglect the end that they were made for, and
make it their business to serve themselves; they care not whether his glory
sinks or swims, and are devoted to themselves. Hos. 10.1. Epkraim is an empty
vine, he brings forth fruit to himself.

1. This Spirit is the foundation of all the ill Carriages that are in the
World. There be abundance of abominations committed in the World: The World
lies in wickedness: All Countries are overrun with iniquity: There is
Swearing, and Cursing, and Killing, and Thefts, and Adulteries, and Lying, and
Incest, and Witchcraft. Many severe Laws are made in one Kingdom and another to
prevent these Sins, but they break in like a flood, and spread over the World:
and this is the cause of them, Men love themselves more than God. One loves his
pleasures more than God, another his profit or his honor; one Man's Self-love
works in one channel, another in another; this is the root of all wickedness:
the Spirit of every Natural Man has in it the Seed of all wickedness: In some
it grows up to more maturity than in others; but they are of such a Spirit as
would lead them into every abomination. 2 Timothy 3.2, 3. Men shall be lovers of
themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, etc.

2. They act herein as if they were better than God: As if Gods honor were not
to be regarded, compared with their interest: they magnify themselves
exceedingly, as if every thing were to bow to their interest; they forget that
they were nothing a while a-gone; that they have very little excellency to
commend them: If they had never been made, they would not have been missed;
they cannot create an Heaven and an Earth, as God has done; they cannot give
Rain, or make the Grass to grow; they cannot make themselves or any of their
fellow Greatures happy; they cannot procure one Meals Meat to themselves; they
cannot preserve their Breath in their Nostrils, or keep themselves from rotting
in a Grave. And they strangly forget the excellency of God, who may justly
challenge glory from them: He deserves the honor of his power; By the word of
the Lord were the Heavens made, and all the Hosts of them by the breath of his
Mouth: He deserves the honor of his Wisdom, before whom all things are naked
and manifest: He deserves the honor of his Holiness, who is righteous in all
his works: He deserves the honor of his Mercy: Because of the excellency of
his loving kindness, the Sons of Man put their trust in the shadow of his
wings. It is intolerable Pride and Arrogance for Men to set up themselves above
God. It is an intol table injury to magnify themselves in this manner. The
Angels of Heaven count it their glory and happiness to Glorify God; but Man
that is a Worm, and the Sons of Men that are but Worms, would exalt themselves
have God, as if his Laws and Counsels and Glory must vail to their interest.

SERMON, III. That the Gospel is the Means of Conversion.
I. Corinthians, IV. 15. last part. -- For in Christ Jesus I have begotten you
through the Gospel.


THE Apostle is endeavoring that they may not put an hard construction on his
Discourse: This he does by minding them that they were his Children, and he was
their Father, and so had a Fatherly love to them. He allows that they had
several instructors, but asserts that he was their Father; for he had planted
the Gospel among them. In the words we have,

(1) The work wrought in them: They were begotten. This is that which is called
Regeneration: He does not speak of a Natural but Spiritual begetting; that work
whereby they were made New Creatures. New Men: this is the same that is
intended by Conversion. In Christ they are begotten; they were brought to
receive the Faith of Christ; this begetting did not make them Men, but
Christians.

(2) The living instrument in this work; that was Paul himself. God was the
principal Agent. Regeneration is a divine Work. But Paul was active in order to
it: He used proper means to that end, and God blessed his labors among them.

(3) The doctrinal instrument; The Gospel. The Gospel is the doctrine of
Salvation by Christ, which contains the Revelation of the way of Life, and
encouragements to believe: it contains the doctrine of the Person and Offices
of Christ, his Humiliation and Exaltation, and the Covenant of Grace which God
makes through him.

DOCTRINE.
The Gospel is the Means of Conversion. GOD created the World without any
instrument, but in Conversion he make use of the Gospel as his instrument. The
Gospel is but an instrument, for many that enjoy the Gospel never are
Converted: but the Gospel is the instrument in this work; the Gospel is not a
Physical instrument, but it is a Moral instrument of Conversion. There is no
expectation that Men should be Converted that do not enjoy the Gospel; there
may be Reformation without the Gospel, but not Conversion, for the Gospel is
the instrument of Conversion. The Gospel is not the Means only to bring Nations
to the Profession of the faith, but also to bring Men into a state of Grace.
Conversion prepares Men for pardon of Sin, and heavenly Glory, and the Gospel
is the instrument of this work. The Gospel is very serviceable to Men after
they are Converted: it is very useful for the increase of Grace and
Consolation; but it is also the instrument of Conversion. God don't deal with
Men as stocks and stones by mere force; but he deals with them as with
reasonable Creatures. He convinces them and so prevails on them: and the Gospel
is the instrument whereby he works. Psalm. 110.2. The Lord shall send the rod of
his strength out of Zion. The Gospel is there called the Rod of his strength,
because he Converts Men by it. Jam. 1.18. Of his own will begat he us by the
word of truth. The Gospel is called the word of Truth by way of excellency: And
when God sent Paul to Preach the Gospel, he sent him to Convert Men. Acts
26.18. To turn men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God.

Consider, 1. That other things beside the Gospel are Means to prepare Men for
Conversion.

As,

1. The works of Creation. The works of Creation are a standing Monument of the
power, and wisdom, and goodness of God. Psalm. 19 1. The heavens declare the
Glory of God, and the firmament show his handy work. Romans 1.20. The invisible
things of him are already seen by the things that are made, even his eternal
power and godhead. The consideration of them is many ways useful to promote
Conversion. These works instruct Men that God is worthy to be feared and
glorified. They may see thereby that they owe their Being and their Comforts to
God, and that they are his Servants. These works show that Sin is rebellion
against the Author of their lives; that it is unreasonable to neglect him. Dan.
5.23. The God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, thou
have not glorified. And that God must take Sin very heinously. Isai. 1.2. I
have nourished and brought up Children and they have rebelled against me. These
works are a Conviction that God is able to avenge himself on Man for their
rebellion; that there is no defense against the mighty power of God: that he is
able to perform all his threatenings and his promises. Such considerations work
upon the Consciences of Men, and make them sensible of their sin and danger.

2. The Law or Covenant of Works, is a Means to prepare Men. The Covenant of
Works consists of Precepts and Sanctions, and is very serviceable to promote
Men's Conversion. Gal 3.24. The Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ.
The Precepts of the Law show Men their Sins, by comparing their Actions with
the Commands they are convinced of their iniquity. Romans 3.20. By the Law is the
knowledge of sin. Heb 4.12. The word of God is quick and powerful, sharper than
any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit,
of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the
heart. The Law has also an exasperating power, is an occasion of the workings
of Corruption, as the dam makes the warers swell; and so Men become acquainted
with their own hearts. Romans 7.3 Sin taking occasion by the Commandment wrought
in me all manner of concupiscence. The Law also condemns Men for Sin, shows
them their misery, what destruction they are in danger of, terrifies the
Conscience: the Law says, The wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. The Law
convinces Men that vengeance must be executed for sin. Math. 5.18. No jot or
title shall pass from the law but all must be fullfilled. The Law does also
discover the Righteousness of Man's condemnation: Romans 3.19. What things the law
says, it says to them that are under the law, that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the World become guilty before God.

3. The Works of Providence do also prepare Men for Conversion. Gods works of
Providence are various, and contribute much toward Men's Conversion. Mercies
are a Means to draw Men to seek the favor of God, and Afflictions are Means to
awaken Men's Consciences. Sometimes Men have particular Afflictions, and they
are very serviceable. Job 33.22, 3, 4. His soul draws near to the grave, and
his life to the destroyers; if there be a messenger with him, an interpreter,
one among a thousand, to show to man his uprightness; then he is gracious to
him, and says, deliver him from going down to the pit, I have found a ransom.
So, Job 36.8, 9, 10. If they be bound in fetters, and held in cords of
affliction, then he shows them their work and their transgressions that they
have exceeded; he opens also their ear to discipline, and commands that
they return from iniquity. Thus it was with Manasseh. Sometimes Public
Judgments are very serviceable to them. Hos. 5.15. I will go and return to my
place, till they acknowledge their offense and seek my face: in their
affliction they will seek me early. Some Persons are smitten in Conscience at
such times, and stirred up to be seeking Peace with God. So the great Works of
God in the World are useful to this end. Storms and Thunder and Lightning and
Earthquakes. 1 Samuel 12.18, 19. The Lord sent Thunder and Rain that day, and all
the People greatly feared the Lord and Samuel; and all the People said unto
Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto the Lord thy God, that we die not.

Consider, 2. That if God would open the eyes of Men to see his Glory in the
works of Creation, or in the Law, or in Providence, that would make Men holy.
There is a great deal of convincing light in these things, and they discover
the glory of God. Psalm. 8.1. O Lord Our Lord, how excellent is thy Name in all
the Earth? And if there were but inward discoveries made to the Heathens
thereby, they would love and fear God. There is abundant cause to love God from
the discoveries of his glory in these; the power of God, and wisdom and
goodness of God manifested in the works of Creation, are lovely: and the
holiness wisdom of God appearing in his Law, are lovely: and the glorious
Properties of God appearing in the works of Providence, are lovely; and give
sufficient cause to Men to love and serve God: and upon this account it is that
the Heathens are guilty for their not loving and serving God; this makes them
without Excuse, Romans 1.20. They have Conviction enough set before them to draw
their hearts to God.

This is further evident from these two things.

1. If Men know God they will be holy. Where God is truly known, he will be
loved and served uprightly. Psalm. 36.10. Stretch out thy loving kindness to
them that know thee, and thy righteousness to the upright in heart. Psalm.
91.14. Because he has set his love upon me, therefore will I deliver him; I
will set him on high, because he has known my Name. The Nature of Man is such,
that the Will always follows the last dictates of the Understanding; the Will
it self is a blind facility, and it follows the direction of the Understanding.
When once Men have a Spiritual Sight of the glory of God, they can do no other
but serve him. Light and Life go together. Before Men know God it is impossible
that they should love him, for they are strangers to the reason and foundation
of love: if they have never so many arguments set before them, to persuade yet
they cannot do it, if they strive very much with their own hearts to love God,
from a fear that they shall be damned if they do not, yet they cannot do it.
But when their eyes are opened and they see the glory of God, they would act
against their Nature if they did it not. The excellency of the object is the
foundation of the duty, and when that reason is seen, they are under a
necessity to do it. Because Man is capable to know God, therefore he is capable
to love and serve him: and when he does know God he is under a necessity to
serve him.

2. The Glory of God seen in these works does make Men more holy. When Men are
once Converted, they grow in Grace by these discoveries; they see the glory of
God in the works of Creation, and that has a gracious Effect on them. Rev.
4.11. Thou art worthy O Lord, to receive glory, and honor and power, for thou
have created all things, and for thy pleasure, they are and were created. The
consideration of those mighty works have a great influence into their holy
walk. We find the Saints in Scripture graciously affected many times with the
works of Creation. The Thoughts thereof stirred up a Spirit of Religion in
them. Psalm. 33.6. David magnifies God on that account: By the word of the Lord
were the heavens made, and all the hosts of them with the breath of his mouth.
They often glorify God as the Creator of the ends of the earth, Isai. 40.28. So
Godly Men see the glory of God in his Commandments, and that draws forth the
Exercises of Grace: they often admire (...) ^^^^ection and purity of the Law.
Psalm. 19. ^. The Law of the Lord is perfect converting the soul, the testimony
of the Lord is sure making wise the simple. Gods glory seen in his Law draws
forth Love, and Repentance, and Obedience. So likewise the glory of God
appearing in Mercies and Judgments have a gracious Effect on the hearts of
Saints. Hos. 3.5. They shall fear the Lord and his goodness. Mercies stir up
Thankfulness. Psalm. 103.1, 2. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and all that is within
me, bless his holy name: Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his
benefits. So Afflictions make the heart better, more humble, penitent, and
watchful. Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I
may learn thy statutes. And the great works of God in the World are great helps
to the growth of Grace: Saints are often Meditating on them, and so stirring up
their hearts in holiness. Psalm. 107.8. Oh that men would praise the Lord for
his goodness; and for his wonderful works to the children of men. Psalm. 145.5,
6. I will speak of the glorious honor of thy majesty, and of thy wondrous
works. And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts, and I will
declare thy greatness. The sight of the glory of God will necessarily draw
forth holy Actions: If Men be under never so much indisposition to love and
fear God, these discoveries prevail and work effectually, no opposition or
temptation can stand before them.

3. Consider, How does God (...) Men by the Gospel?

(...). It is by, the Gospel as spiritually under^^^^^. The Gospel works this
change Morally not Physically, the Gospel only works in way of persuasion, as
it discovers to Men that there is abundant reason to turn to God. Men see that
the Gospel is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, as it is called,
1 Timothy 1.15. The Word can have no operation but as it is understood by the
understanding, it works upon the Will; there must be a disciplinary
understanding, but that is not sufficient: Multitudes understand the letter of
the Gospel that are not Converted. Men that have not the spiritual
understanding of it may be affected with it, and be persuaded to an outward
conformity to it, but when they understand it spiritually, then it works
effectually upon them. There is no prevailing with Men to turn to God so long
as they are in the dark about the Truth of the Gospel, about the divine Glory
of Christ, and the freeness of the Grace of God; but when the Gospel is
spiritually understood immediately it works upon the heart. 1 These. 2.13. Ye
received the word not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God,
which works effectually in you that believe. Joh. 6.40. That every one that
sees the Son and believes on him may have everlasting life. v. 45. Every one
that has heard and learned of the Father comes unto me.

2. (...) understand the Glory of God in the Gospel, that makes them actually
turn to God and leave a disposition in the heart that way: Before it was
understood they despised the Gospel. Isai. 53.2. When we shall see him, there
is no beauty in him, that we should desire him. Though they be never so
importunately urged they will not hearken, some objection or other will lie
upon their hearts, if Men think that they cannot withstand the calls, yet they
do: but as soon as they see the glory of Christ, they are encouraged to come to
him: before they understand the Gospel they withstand it, and no arguments will
prevail upon them; they were overcome with a spirit of fear, they were not able
to master a fearful spirit; they heard so much about the sufficiency of Christ
that they wished that they could come, but they were not able to conquer a
spirit of fear, but were restrained by it, as it were bound hand and foot and
could not stir. Joh. 6.44. No man can come unto me, except the Father that sent
me draw him. And they had an enmity in their spirit unto him. Joh. 5.40. Ye
will not come unto me that you may have life. But when they see things as they
are, immediately they come; that delivers them from their enmity to Christ, and
that delivers them from their fear. When they see the glory of God in the face
of Christ, they make no more resistance; when they are turned from darkness to
light, they turn from Satan unto God. And this discovery leaves an abiding
(...) on the heart: as the Man does ejoyce in Christ, so there is an
inclination to rejoice in him for the time to come: the heart is bent that way
and it stands bent that way. Joh. 5.25. The dead shall hear the voice of the
Son of God, and they that hear shall live. 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open face,
behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord, and are changed into the same image
from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord.

4 Consider, Why God does this by the Gospel?

Aos. Here take notice of these four particulars,

1. Faith in Christ is the condition of Pardon and Salvation. Perfect
righteousness was the condition of the Covenant of Works Gal, 3.12. He that
does them shall live in them. Perfect Obedience fell under a double
consideration in the Covenant of Works: it was the matter of Justification, and
so it is still, for we are now Justified by the Righteousness of Christ.
Therefore he is said to bring in ever lasting Righteousness, Dan. 9.24. And by
the Obedience of One shall many be made Righteous, Romans 5.13. And perfect
Obedience was also the condition of Justification. But now under the Gospel
Faith is the condition of Justification. Joh. 5.24. He that hears my words
and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not enter
into condemnation, but is passed from death to life. It is by Faith that we are
accepted: The terms of Justification are, Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou
shall be saved, Act. 15.31. It is Faith that gives a Man an interest in Jesus
Christ. It is most suitable that among the Graces of the Spirit Faith only
should be the condition of Justification. Love to God is as holy an action as
Faith: Yet it is most suitable that Faith should be the condition, because it
does accept of the Grace of God offered in the Gospel, and is an
acknowledgement of the sufficiency of Jesus Christ: and God has made it to be
the condition of our Justification. Act 10.43. To him give all the Prophets
witness that whosoever believes in him, shall receive the remisson of sins.
Hence Faith is called our Evangelical Righteousness: it is called the
Righteousness of Faith, Heb. 11.7. God has made a law concerning our
Justification, which is called the Law of Faith, Romans 3.27. And when we believe
we have fulfilled the condition of the Covenant.

2. Therefore it is meet that Faith should be first wrought. The first good
thing that is wrought in any Man is Faith in Jesus Christ, this being the
condition of Justification, it is no ways fit that Men should have other good
things wrought in them before Faith: for it is not fit that Love and Repentance
should be wrought in him, and yet he remain in an Estate of condemnation. Every
Man is in an Estate of condemnation until he believes in Christ. He that
believes not is condemned already, Joh. 3.18. And it is altogether unsuitable
that a Man should have the Exercise of Love and Repentance given to him, and
yet be suffered to lie in an Estate of condemnation. But if they were wrought
before Faith, then the Man would have a gracious Spirit, and be Sanctified, yet
remain a Child of wrath and be under the curse of God, and in a perishing
condition, then Love and Repentance would be no signs of Justification, and
these Sins which were mortifyed would be imputed, but this would be utterly
unsuitable: but seeing Faith is the condition of Reconciliation, it is meet
that Faith should be the first good thing that is wrought in the Man. And so it
is, God never gives Men Love or Repentance before Faith; whatever appearances
there may be of those things, all is in hypocrisy that goes before Faith; there
is no godly Sorrow, no regard to the glory of God, until Men believe in Christ.

3. This Faith in Christ can be wrought only by the Gospel. Faith in Christ is
an accepting the offer of the Gospel: Faith is an acknowledgment of the Grace
of God held forth in the Gospel, and of the faithfulness of God in
Gospel-promises, and of the Righteousuess of Jesus Christ; Faith is a coming to
Christ as a Mighty Savior, and it is impossible for Men to come to Christ and
know nothing of him. Romans 10.14. How can they believe in him, of whom they have
not heard? Can a Man admire the excellency of Christ, and take encouragement
from him, and venture his Soul on him, and yet know nothing of him? Can a Man
that is an utter stranger to Jesus Christ glory in him, and prefer his
Righteousness before all his own works, and build the hopes of his Soul for
another World upon him, as a sure foundation, before he is made acquainted with
the susliciency of Christ? Let a Man know never so much of the works of
Creation, of the Mighty Power of God in making all things out of nothing: and
of the Wisdom of God in making such variety of Creatures, in diverse Forms, with
great diversity of faculties and virtues; in giving such perfection to the
World, that there is nothing wanting to the integrity of it, this will never
prevail upon him to depend upon an unknown Christ. If a Man be terribly
frighted with his Sins and under the awful apprehensions of the wrath of God,
so that his flesh and his heart trembles, that will not prevail upon him to
come to an unknown Christ. Let Men be never so much affected with Mercies or
Afflictions, yet he will neglect. If he don't know him, there can be no act of
Faith without the knowledge of the object of Faith, there can be no act of
Faith without the knowledge of the encouragements to believe. Faith is a
rational understanding action: In order to the act of faith, there must be a
knowledge of the Gospel, and the actual consideration of it, at the very time.

4. The Gospel is not only proper to work Faith, but also to work every other
Grace. The Gospel does not only work the heart to believe, but it draws the
heart to other gracious Exercises; when Men see the love of God in the Gospel,
that draws forth love. 1 John 4.19. We love him, because he loved us first. The
knowledge of the Gospel makes Men fear God. Psalm. 130.4. There is forgiveness
with thee, that thou may be feared. The Gospel is a proper Means to work a
Spirit of Repentance, and break the heart for Sin. Luke 7.38. She stood at his
feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears. This was the
fruit of her receiving the Gospel, for her sins were forgiven, v. 47. By the
Gospel Men's hearts are brought into a preparedness for all holy carriages; the
Gospel is an effectual Means not only to draw Men to Christ, but to work
universal holiness. Tit. 2.11, 12. The Grace of God that brings salvation,
teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly,
righteously and godly in this present world. This makes Men New Creatures. If
any man be in Jesus Christ, he is a new creature, old things are passed away
(...) all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17.

USE, I.
Hence learn, That where the Gospel is not known there is no Conversion. There
be many People in the World that are ignorant of it. so the Heathens, and the
Turks, and the generality of the Papists, accordingly they are not Converted.
Knowledge is the Key that opens the door of life. Luke 11.52. Ye have taken
away the key of knowledge. There is no Silvation but in the Church of God;
among them that have the Oracles of God. Joh. 4.22. Salvation is of the Jews.
For it is by the Gospel that Men are Converted. Jam. 1.18. He has begotten us
by the word of Truth.

1. Though there be Morality. Some of the Heathens were noted for their
Morality: they were just, chaste and temperate. The light of Nature teaches
Men Morality: the Law written in the heart is the Moral Law. But Morally
differs very much from Conversion. Moral virtues and graces differ in, (...)
Moral virtues are acquired by practice, ^^customing themselves that way, will
beget an habit. But Grace is obtained by infusion. Moral virtues don't render
Men acceptable to God, for thought they look like Graces, yet they are Lusts.
Moral virtues do give an external honor to God, but they don't dispose Men to
aim at the Glory of God. Moral virtues may be lost. A Man that is just and
temperate, and a Man of Truth, may deserve a contrary character before he goes
out of the World. A Man may be an honest Man but not a good Man:
Conscientiousness is not Holiness. Generally by the common workings of Gods
Spirit, Men are Moral Men before they are Converted. Paul was a Moral Man when
he was a Pharisee. Phil. 3.6. Touching the righteousness that is in the law
blameless. Morality is some preparation for Conversion, but it is not
Conversion: Morality intitles no Man to the Kingdom of God.

2. Though there be much Devotion. Some of the Papists are very devout, they
Pray a great many times in a day. So some of the Turks are very devout Men: So
were some of the Heathens. Acts 17.23. I passed by and beheld your devotions.
So many of the Jews that were ignorant of Christ: they did instantly serve God
Day and Night: the Scribes and Pharisees for a pretense made long Prayers, Mat.
23.14. but this may be (...) is no Conversion; great devotion may be great
hypocrisy: many Men that are very devout are very Superstitious, they are
devout in a way of Will worship. The revolters are profound to make slaughter,
Hos. 5.2. They offered a great many Sacrifices to the Calves at Dan and Bethel.
Men's devotion may rise only from terror. Psalm. 78.34. When he slew them then
they sought him, they returned and enquired after God. Many devout Men are
frighted into their Religion: Fear force them to be devout. And many Men are
devout upon carnal designs; they have worldly profit or honor in their Eye;
they make an engine of their Devotion to advance some secular interest. They
seem to put much respect on God, but their devotion is abominable to Him; their
devotion sometimes is a cloak to cover their wickedness, and prevent Men's
suspecting them.

USE, II.
Of Reproof, To those that have lived all their days under the Preaching of the
Gospel, yet are not Converted. Some Men that are not Converted do imagine that
they are Converted, they will not take this reproof to themselves but there be
many Men among us that have lived Thirty Years under the Preaching of the
Gospel; they have had a great deal of Teaching, yet they are conscious to
themselves that they are not yet Converted: their own hearts tell them that
they are in that Estate wherein they were born. Some of them lead a rude life,
and addict themselves to practices that are contrary to the dictates of their
Consciences; and others of them are rejecting Christ, under one pretense or
other, they are turning off the Invitations of the Gospel. If the Gospel be the
Means of Conversion, it might have been expected that you should have been
Converted many Years ago; but this is a matter of lamentation, that you are not
Converted to this day.

1. This is a great provocation. If God had not used Means with you, you would
have had no Sin in comparison. Others that han't lived so long under Means as
you have done, have been Converted. The Means are very proper, and such as have
prevailed with other Men; but you have showed a rebellious Spirit, and have
withstood all the calls of God. God may complain of you and say, as Prove. 1.24.
I have called and they refused, I have stretched out my hand and they have not
regarded. You have been under special advantages to be Converted, you have had
proper Warnings and Encouragements, but yet you stand out. It may be your
Conscience has many times troubled you because of it, but yet you make a shift
to hold on your way; you have designed many times to turn to God, but your
heart has deceived you; you have promised that you would turn to God, but have
dealt falsely with Him. There is no better Means to effect Men's Conversion than
the Gospel, and this you have had plainly and powerfully Preached to you, yet
all has been in vain. It may be you plead in excuse for your selves, that you
have many Temptations, but the great reason of it is the hardness and the
stubborness of your own heart; that is the account that Christ gives of it.
Joh. 6.40. Ye will not come unto me that you may have life.

2. This is a dark sign. It is very much to be feared what will become of you.
We hope concerning young Children that when they grow to Years of
Understanding, they will be wrought upon by the Gospel, but there is less hope
by far of those that have withstood it for many Years: the Gospel is the proper
Means, but God has not blessed it to you; there has been a blast upon the
appointed Means. God has given you his Word, but denied his Spirit. He has made
the Gospel powerful to convert Others. Some that have been your Companions;
some that have been in Relation to you; some Younger than you. It has been a
savor of life to many, but you are suffered to lie in a perishing condition.
God knows what the meaning of it is, that the Gospel is hid from you. He gives
you Corn as well as others, and Health and other outward blessings; but you
have not a blessing upon the Means of Conversion: If this do not determine the
case against, yet it is a threaning Providence. Deuteronomy. 29.4. God has not given
you eyes to see, nor ears to bear unto this day.

USE, III.
Of Examination, Whether you be Converted. It is a pain to a Man to be between
hopes and fears about his Conversion, for his eternal Salvation does depend
upon his Convension. Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of
God, Joh. 3.5. And if a Man begins to rejoice in the apprehension of his
Conversion, he is presently cast down with fears, whether he be not mistaken:
He reads the promises that are made to Converted Men, and they are sweet and
precious to him, he would fain take the comfort of them, but he stands
quivering, but dare not apply them to himself. He thinks of those words, If a
man thinks himself something when he is nothing, he deceives himself. And when
he reads threatenings to Unconverted Men, he has an awful sense of the doleful
condition of such Men, and he pities them with all his heart; he cannot conceive
how they will do to bear those miseries; he thinks their worldly selicities
will be utterly forgotten after a while, and they will mourn at the last: but
then it turns in his thoughts, that may be he is one of them, and he is
frighted least they should be executed upon him; he says, that has been the
portion of many Men, that have promised great things to themselves; many Men's
hopes do utterly fail, when God takes away their Souls, and he says, if that
should be his portion he should be undone. When his Neighbors know nothing of
it, he is in anguish of Spirit, because he is in suspense, whether he shall
hear those words, Come you blessed, or, Go you cursed. Some will be blessed,
and some will be cursed, but he does not know which number he does belong unto.
Therefore examine your selves; this doctrine gives light into it: The Gospel is
the instrument of Conversion, no body else can tell, how they were Converted;
but if it were true Conversion, it was by the Gospel.

1. It may be wrought by Gospel promises. There be many great and precious
promises. Joh 6.37. He that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Math.
11.28. Come unto me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I will give
you rest. Rev. 3.20. If any man open unto me, I will come in and sup with him
and he with me. These promises are a great security to all that come to Christ,
they give an assurance that Men shall be accepted. The faithfulness of God
stands engaged for their Salvation. A Man may Pray, and Read, and Confess Sin,
and Fast, yet have no security for his Salvation; but if he receives Christ,
God has passed his word, and that is the best security in the World for his
Salvation. He has left himself at liberty whether he will give Health, or
Riches, or Honor, but he has promised Eternal Life. And if in these promises,
or any such like. God has made a discovery of his Grace and Faithfulness, and
the sufficiency of Jesus Christ, so that you have been bold to cast your self
on him, then you are Converted. It may be you may have many scruples rising in
your hearts, because you find a great deal of corruption remaining, and the
discoveries are not repeated so often as you hear it is with some others; or
Prayers are not answered; but you are certainly Converted. These discoveries do
beget Faith and Love and Repentance, which will be preserved and renewed in the
heart, and will end in eternal Life.

2. It may be wrought by Gospel Invitations and Commands. There by several
gracious Invitations in the Gospel. Rev. 22.17. The spirit and the bride say
come, and let him that is athirst come: and whoever will, let him take the
waters of life freely. Rev. 3.18. I counsel thee it buy of me gold tried in the
fire that thou may be rich, and white raiment, that thou may be clothed. In
these Invitations God deals truly and uprightly: God does not make vain and
fallacious pretentions of kindness, but tells his very heart to Men; He don't
go about to lead them into a snare, and make appearances as if he were more
kind and gracious than he is. There be also positive commands. 1 John 3.2. This
is his commandment that we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ.
Joh. 6.29. This is the work of God, that ye believe on him, whom he has sent.
God has put forth his divine authority; He don't only allow us but requires us
to believe on Jesus Christ: and he will not command to trust in a broken reed;
he will not enjoin us to trust in a lie. And if you have seen the Grace of God
in these Invitations, so that notwithstanding your great unworthiness, and your
provocations, you have been bold to accept his offers, and if you have seen the
truth of the Gospel in those commands, that it must needs be a safe thing to
trust in Christ, and from the encouragement of Gods Word, venture on Christ,
you are Converted.

3. It may be by Gospel declarations. There be many declarations of the truth
of the Gospel. As, 1 Timothy 10 15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all
acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. 1 Cor.
15.3. Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures. 1 Pet. 2.24.
Himself bore our sins in his own body on the tree. Sometimes God lets light
into the Soul, by one of these, or some other word to like purpose, or by the
general doctrine of the Gospel though you had no particular word. God has
showed you the truth and glory of the Gospel, it is a sure sign that you are
Converted. There be indeed some common illuminations, that do for the present
affect the hearts of Men, that many have had and yet they remain Unconverted;
but when the spirit of God convinces Men of the divine and saving virtue that
is in the blood of Christ, they do immediately turn to God. If the Father that
is in Heaven does reveal Jesus to be the Christ, the Son of the living God: If
the Comforter does convince Men of the Righteousness of Christ; that is a
sufficient evidence of Conversion, and that evidence will not go alone. 1 These.
5.13. Ye heard the word not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the word of
God, which works effectually in you that believe.

USE, IV.
Of Conviction, That there is sufficient ground in the Gospel to make Men turn
to God. This is the Instrument that God works by; and when it is indeed
understood it always prevails. Many Men hear the Gospel, but the light don't
shine into them; the Gospel is hid to them, and they remain in their Natural
condition. But every Man whose eyes are opened to see the Truth and Glory of
the things therein revealed, does turn to God. The Gospel will then have
prevailing Efficacy. Some things the more they are understood, the more they
are despised; but if the Gospel be indeed understood it is evermore succesful;
there is not a Man in the World, that ever failed of being Converted in this
case. And we may conclude from thence, that there is reason for Men to do so;
for ignorance of the Gospel hinders Men's Conversion, but the knowledge of it
does effect it.

And it must needs be so:

1. Considering that there is great good offered. That is offered in the Gospel
that will satisfy the Soul. Men take a great deal of pains for small things;
but the good offered in the Gospel, comprehends all that Men need. The good he
offers there is better than Lordships, and Principalities and Kingdoms; he
offers that which is better than Long-Life, that which Men stand in necessity
of, and indeed all that is necessary. He offers more good than we can
comprehend; Peace with God passes all Understanding. The Apostle says, Because
God could swear by no greater, he swear by himself. So I may say, because he
could offer nothing greater, he has offered himself. 1 Pet. 5.10. He has
called us to his Eternal Glory by Christ Jesus.

2. This good can be attained in no other way. There have been many other ways
thought of: They generally center in Men's own righteousness, but that will not
serve their turn. No Man ever did prosper in that way. The Jews did not attain
to the Law of righteousness, because they sought it, as it were by the works of
the Law, Romans 9.31, 32. That way is inconsistent with Justice, but God will
offer no violence to his law. No jot or tittle of the Law shall pass, but all
shall be fulfilled, Mat. 5.18. God will not vary one hairs breadth from the
Law. He had rather that his own Son should die, than cast the least contempt on
the Law: and if the Law stand in force, the works of the Law cannot justify.
Romans 3.20. By the deeds of the Law shall no flesh living be justified in the
sight of God.

3. There is great security, that the good offered in the Gospel shall be
obtained in that way. We have foundation enough to depend upon. God sent Christ
for this end, Joh. 3.16. He is appointed of God to be the foundation of the
Church, Isai 28.16. and God never had a repenting thought of this contrivance.
Psalm. 110.4. God has sworn and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever
after the order of Melchizedeck. There is a divine virtue in the sufferings of
Christ. God has purchased the Church with his own blood, Act. 20.28. And the
word of God is a full security. God has promised blessedness in this way: He
has promised it upon record under his hand: He has promised it on Oath, and has
appointed Seals to his Covenant; this is not a foundation of uncertain hope,
but of strong consolation, Heb. 6.17, 18. This is enough to give Men boldness
in a dying day. The words of the Lord are pure words as silver tried in a
furnace of earth, purifyed seven times, Psalm. 12.6.

SERMON, IV. To stir up Young Men and Maidens to Praise the Name of the Lord.
PSALM, CXLVIII.12, 13. Young Men and Maidens, let them Praise the Name of the
LORD.


THIS Psalm is an excitation to Praise the Name of the Lord. Where you may
mind. (1.) The reason in general. 1. The excellency of his Name, v. 13. His
Name alone is excellent. 2. His works of Creation and general Providence, v. 5.
He commanded and they were created, v. 6. He has established them for ever and
ever, he has made a decree, which they shall not pass. 3. His special
Providence to his Church, v. 14. He also exalts the horn of his People, the
Praise of his Saints. (2.) Here is a distribution of the Creatures that are
called on. 1. The superior Creatures, v. 2, 3, 4. Praise him all his Angels.
Praise him Sun and Moon, and all the Stars of light. Praise him ye heavens of
heavens, and the waters that be above the heavens. 2. The inferior Creatures:
Such as are in the Earth, and in the Air, and in the Sea. These are distributed
into, 1. Irrational, v. 7, 8, 9, 10. Ye Dragons and all deeps: Fire, Hail, Snow
and Vapor, Stormy Wind fulfilling his word. Mountains and all Hills, fruitful
trees and all cedars, beasts and all cattle, creeping things and flying fowl.
2. Rational: and they are distinguished 1. In respect of order, 1. Kings of the
(...) and all People, Princes and all Judges of the earth: The greatest Men owe
glory to God, and it is not beneath them to Praise him. 2. The common sort of
People: though God don't bestow so much outward Mercy upon them, they owe glory
to him, and he accepts of Praise from them, as well as from the greatest. 2. In
respect of their Sex: Male and Female were created by him, and therefore should
Praise him. 3. In respect of their Age: Old Men and Children. This is an
universal duty: all must Praise the Name of the Lord.

DOCTRINE.
It is very defireable that Young Men and Maidens would Praise the Name of the
Lord. This was David's defire, and this is the defire of every godly Man.
Childood and Youth is vanity: And it is a common thing for Young Men and
Maidens to busy themselves otherwise; but it is much to be desired that they
would Praise the Name of the Lord. It is praiseworthy, and a great
commendation in them, when they Praise the Name of the Lord. It is a Mercy when
God bestows suitable comforts on Young Men and Maidens, Zech. 9.17. How great
is his goodness, and how great is his beauty? Corn shall make the Young men
cheerful, and new wine the maids. But it (...) a greater Mercy when God gives a
spirit of ^^liness unto them. We have several examples of Young Ones in the
Scripture, that have had a spirit to praise the Name of the Lord. Samuel and
David and Solomon, and Josiah and Timothy: And it is much to be desired that
others were of that spirit. Young Ones are called on in Scripture to praise and
glorify God. Eccl. 12.1. Remember thy creator in the days of thy Youth. Psalm.
34.11. Come ye Children, hearken unto me, and I will teach you the fear of the
Lord. Many things are needful to complete the happiness of a People: and this
is very needful among others. Psalm. 144.12. That our Sons may be as plants
grown up in their Youth, that our Daughters may be as torner stones polished
after the similitude of a Palace.

Q. When are they said to praise the Lord?

A. When they carry so as is for his praise.

1. By worshipping him in a suitable manner. The proper business of worship is
glorifying God; when they worship him they honor him as God. Psalm. 29.9. In
his Temple does every one speak of his glory. Divine worship is too great an
honor to be given to any Creature. Rev. 19.10. Worship God. So Men glorify
God, when they Pray to him, and do in religious manner ask blessings of him,
and do ascribe the blessings they enjoy unto him. They therein give a testimony
to the Almighty Power and Goodness of God, and they acknowledge their
dependence on him. Prayer is Praise: the language of Prayer is, Thine is the
Kingdom and the Power and the Glory. Math. 6.13. So a religious Attending on
the Preaching of the Word, is a Praising of God. When they are hearing the Word
with reverence, they therein acknowledge the Authority and Majesty of God, and
his Divine Truth and Faithfulness: We therein acknowledge that his Word is the
rule of Faith and Life. That his Word is able to make us wise unto Salvation;
that it is worthy to be believed and obeyed. Act. 10.33. We are all here
present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God. So a
religious Singing of Psalms, is giving glory to God. Psalm. 147.1. Praise ye the
Lord, for it is good to sing praises to our God. So a religious receiving the
Seals of Gods Covenant, is praising God. There is a thankful Memorial of the
Redemption of Christ. 1 Cor. 11.26. Ye show forth the Lords death. There is a
testimony given to the saving virtue of Christ's blood: The cup of blessing
which we bless is it not the communion of the blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16.

2. By an holy Conversation. An holy walk is a practical acknowledgement of the
gloriousness of God. When persons lead an humble, honest, patient, chaste and
temperate life, they do glorify God. Joh. 15.8. Herein is my Father glorified
in that ye bring forth much fruit. In that way they show forth the Praises of
him that calls them out of darkness into his mavelous light. Math. 5.16. That
men may see your good works and glorify your Father that is in heaven. Sinful
works reproach God, but holy works commond him. When Persons have an holy
Conversation they show a fear of God. Eccl. 12.13. Fear God and keep his
Commandments. An holy life is a testimony to the goodness and righteousness of
the ways of God. Hos. 14.9. The ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall
walk therein. By their Obedience they show that they reverence Gods Authority:
the language thereof is, that God is their Lord and they are his Servants, that
they will not put such an affrent on him as to violate any of his commands;
yea, by their Obedience they show that they lay weight on the promises and
threatenings of the Word; that they count it profitable to be Obedient, and
dangerous to be disobedient; that they depend upon the word of God.

1. Reas. God deserves it from them as well as from Elder People. It is to be
desired on Gods account: It is an honor due to his Name. Young Ones are bound
to God as well as their Parents; they have no liberty to neglect the glory of
God: God may challenge it from them, as well as from their Parents. Lam, 3.27.
It is good for a man to bear the yoke in his youth. God is their Creater as
well as of Elder Persons. Eccl. 12.1. Remember thy Creator in the days of thy
youth. They owe their Being to God, and because they owe their Being, they owe
their Obedience: and they live upon the Mercies of God, as well as Elder
Persons; they dwell on his Earth, breath in his Air, are enlightened by him, and
though they are in their strength, yet they depend upon the care of God, for
their Food and Raiment, Life and Health. God has nourished and brought them up,
Isai. 1.2. They are under covenant Bonds as well as Elder Ones. Deuteronomy. 5.2, 3.
The Lord our God made a covenant with us in Horeb, the Lord made not this
Covenant with our Fathers, but with us, even us, who are all of us here alive
this day. They are under firm obligations to God: They will be
covenantbreakers, if they neglect to glorify God: they are under
covenant-encouragements; God is in a near Relation to them, He is not only
their Fathers God, but their God also. Exodus 15 2. He is my God and I will
prepare him an habitation, my Fathers God and I will exalt him. They are very
injurious if they don't praise Him.

2. Reas. It is a sign of the presence of God with his Ordinances. Christ has
promised his presence with his Ordinances. Math. 28.19, 20. Lo, I am with you
always to the end if the world. This is fulfilled in various degrees; and it is
matter of great lamentation, when there is but a little blessing upon
Ordinances; when the hearts of Men are made fat: as Isai. 6.9, 10. But when
Young Men and Maids do praise the Name of God, it is a sign that the Spirit of
God is present among them. That is a great promise, Isai. 59.21. My spirit that
is upon thee, and my words that I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out
of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy Seed. And when Young Ones are
praising God, it is a manifest token of Gods gracious presence with the means
of Grace. Here is a manifest token of the favor of God to the People: It is a
great blessing. Isai. 44.3. I will pour out my Spirit upon thy Seed and my
blessing upon thy Offspring. This is more a great deal than for God to bless
the labor of their hands. Godly Men are wont to Pray much for a blessing on
Ordinances, they look upon that as a foundation of many other Mercies. And when
Young Ones praise God, they take notice of the goodness of God in hearing their
Prayers; it is a smile upon the People.

3. Reas. It gives great hopes of the continuance of the power of Godliness. If
Young Ones carry religiously that is a foundation of hope for the time to come:
though some of them may die quickly, yet it is probable that many of them will
live to old Age. They that are Young now are like to be the pillars of the
Church, thirty Years hence. Ancient People must die quickly, but if Young Ones
are hearty in Religion; it is hopeful Religion will not die. There is reason to
hope that most of them that are religious when they are Young, will continue to
be so when they are Old. There is reason to hope that they that flourish now in
Gods house, will still bring forth fruit in old age, Psalm. 92.13, 14. That when
the outward man decays, the inner man will be renewed, 2 Cor. 4.16. And
therefore it is a great encouragement to see such embracing Religion. If
Religion be upheld in the next Generation, it must be by those that are Young
now; the burden will lie upon them after a while.

4. Reas. It is an encouragement respecting their Salvation. When Young Ones
carry loosely and corruptly, there is reason to fear their damnation; their
feet go down to death, their steps take hold on hell. Therefore the wise Man
gives that warning: Eccl. 11.9. Rejoice O Young in thy Youth, and let thy heart
cheer thee in the days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart and in
the sight of thine eyes, but know thou, that for all these things God will
being thee into Judgment. But when they have a religious Spirit and
Conversation, they are in the way to Salvation. If God designs to bring Men to
Salvation, he will make them to seek after it: and more generally he makes them
seek it in the days of their Youth; Reforming their Manners, crying to God,
studying the Scriptures, waiting upon God in his Ordinances, are the Means to
prepare Men for Eternal Life: And when the Spirit of Young Ones is much that
way, there is occasion to rejoice in the hopes of their ^ternal Felicity. 2
Epist. Joh. 4. I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy Children walking in truth.

USE, I. Then there is great need that Parents should train up their Children
religiously. Parents are generally careful to bring up their Children to some
Calling, that they may be fitted to do Service to themselves, and others; but
they should be careful to bestow religious Education on them. Prove. 22.6. Train
up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from
it. Ephesians. 6.4. Bring them up in the nurture and admenition of the Lord.
Something is generally done that way, but with too much remissness. Neglects
this way is one of the things, wherein the degeneracy of the Land does appear:
many Parents are not religious themselves, and it is no wonder that they are
negligent in the Education of their Children. But there is great need of it;
Children are corrupt by nature; though they have natural Consciences urging
them to that that is good, yet they have depraved dispositions prompting them
to evil. There is a natural contrariety in them to the ways of God. Romans 8.7.
The natural mind is enmity to God. And there be many temptations to mislead
them: There be a multitude of temptations to draw forth their corruptions; and
there is need of more care than many Parents do take, that they may praise the
Name of the Lord.

1. By Instruction. It is not sufficient that they are brought to Public
Worship, and that they be learned to Read the Word of God, but Parents should
see that they profit by Public Means, and they should be instilling the
Principles of Religion into them. Timothy had a godly Mother, and he was versed
in the holy Scriptures from a Child, 2 Timothy 3.16. And as Parents should
instruct their Children in Principles of Faith, so also they should teach them
rules of Obedience. That was one of the designs of the book of Proverbs. Prove.
1.4. To give subtilty to the simple, to the Young man knowledge and discretion.
The law of nature is much obliterated, and there is great need that the
Precepts thereof should be often inculcated, that convincing light should be
set before them, that they be urged and expostulated with, and that rules be
pressed upon them. Prove. 31.2, 3. What my son, and what the son of my womb, and
what the son of my vows, give not thy strength unto women, etc. Young People
are giddy and heedless, and counsel had need to be often renewed.

2. By Example. Bad examples are very infections: had examples teach iniquity;
irritate corruption, and make men bold to transgress. And if Parents give bad
examples to their Children, it will be no wonder if they tread in their steps.
Men live by examples more than by Precepts. Jeroboams example did mischief to
all the succeeding Kings of Israel. But if Parents give good examples, that is
a ground of hope, that Children will follow them; good examples are lovely and
amiable, and commend themselves to the Consciences of Children, the hearts of
Men give an approbation to them, and are drawn on to a liking of those ways;
they look on the good examples of their Parents as the honor of their Parents
and their honor, and the love they have to their Parents makes their good
carriages more lovely in their eyes.

3. By Restraint. It was Eli' s fault that he did not restrain his Children. 1 Samuel 3.13. His sons made themselves vile and he restrained them not. Parents,
have authority to do it, and if other means will not do they must exert their
authority. It is not enough for Parents, that they do not approve of the
iniquities of their Children, they may not suffer them to carry sinfully. A
toleration of iniquity in Children makes the Parents culpable, and to be
partakers of their sins. Some Children are much more teachable than others, and
there is no need of restraining them, but others are violently set in ways of
sin, and it don't perplex their Consciences to go directly against the commands
of Parents; in such cases Parents must restrain them: this is the way to
prevent the breaking out of iniquity, and to mend their hearts also. Fond
indulging of Children is the way to ruin them: Children left to themselves do
many times bring their Parents to shame.

USE, II. Of Examination. Whether Young Men and Maidens do Praise the Name of
the Lord? It becomes us to take notice of this, that we may see what cause we
have of rejoicing or of sorrow. It is worth the while to observe not only how
Rulers carry, and how the body of the People carry, but likewise to mind what
Spirit does appear in Young ones; they that are Young now are like to have a
great influence upon Public affairs after a while, and the better they carry
themselves, the more hope there is of their being serviceable afterward. Young
ones had need particularly consider, whether they do their duty in Praising the
Name of God, whether they answer the just expectation of God and Man in this
particular: Do you praise the Name of the Lord?

1. Some are disorderly in the Night time. Parents make them work diligently in
the Day time; but in the evening they gather together in companies, and spend
their time in unprofitable talk: They are like the beasts that creep forth in
the Night. Psalm. 104.20. Thou make darknest and it is night, wherein all the
beasts of the forest do creep forth. It is hard to give an account how they
spend their time, but they are disorderly: when the Family attends Religious
duties, they are abroad, and no account can be given of them. Is this to Praise
the Name of the Lord? They should join with the Family in confessing sin,
begging mercy and acknowledging Gods goodness; but they don't regard the
worship of God: Can we think that these Persons are conscientious, in attending
secret duties of worship? Neglects of Family worship are a great contempt of
God: Are these persons concerned for the honor of God or the salvation of
their own Souls? Have they any due regard to the commands of God? does it lie
upon their hearts to give God the Glory of their daily mercies? Do they not
plainly manifest, that they have not the spirit of Religion? they run into
danger. Prove. 27.8. As a bird that wandreth from his nest, so is a man that
wandreth from his place. Is this for the praise of the Name of God, that when
the Family go to bed, the Young Man is running about the Town? he has no
business, it is for the satisfaction of some just; he throws himself into
temptation, and sometimes he gets a wound and a blot.

2. Some of them frequent the Tavern. The Tavern is a place of resort: there is
a great deal of company in the Evening, on wet days, and on public days. There
they are spending their time unprofitably: There is a great deal of vain,
worldly, proud discourse, and corrupt communication: they are swaggering and
vaporing; sometimes they are jeering good Men, and scosting at Religion. Is
this praising the Name of the Lord? Is this an honor to God? They are not
redeeming the time as the rule is, Ephesians. 5.16. They stand about the cup, till
they have enflamed one another. Isai. 5.11. They continue until night, till
wine inflame them. They drink till they are giddy, and sometimes talk wantonly;
sometimes they quarrel and reproach one another; is this to praise the Name of
the Lord? Prove. 23.29, 30. Who has woe, who has sorrow, who has contentions,
who has babbling, who has wounds without cause, who has redness of eyes, they
that tarry long at the wine, they that go to seek mixed wine. At the Tavern they
wast what they have earned, the fruit of their labor is consumed; and they are
under temptation to cheat and extort to get more. Taverns are the nurseries of
profaneness: if the Men talk of Religion, they talk of it in an irreligious way;
their discourses are not savoury: God would not have the less honor if they
were dead and rotten.

3. Some are given to wanton dalliances. Men and Maids will be in company
together, toying and dallying; they are stirring up corruption in one another.
This is not to praise the Name of the Lord. They go to Meeting on the Sabbath
day and at night they are sporting with one another: If they would meditate on
what they have heard, and pray over the word, that would be for their profit,
but they get together, and it is a shame to speak of what they do. Ephesians. 5.12.
It is a shame to speak of those things that are done of them in secret. This is
not to praise the Name of the Lord. They watch for one another company, as the
Eagle does for its prey, and are making provision for the flesh, to fulfill the
lusts thereof. When they have been hearing of a Sermon, they get together and
are gratifying their carnal affection with wanton talk and gestures; they throw
themselves into great temptations, and are in danger to commit Whoredom: there
be many awful instances, of persons that have brought blemishes upon
themselves, and brought themselves to shame thereby.

4. Some neglect the Worship of God. They come universally to hear the word of
God upon the Sabbath, and generally at other times: how they do attend the
secret duties of Religion, God and their own Consciences do know, there is
reason enough to suspect many of them; but there be scarce five or six of them
in a Town, that do attend the Lords Supper. The Lords Supper is a Memorial of
the death of Christ, therein we show forth the Lords death, 1 Cor. 11.26. Do
these Men praise the Name of the Lord, when they turn their backs on this
Ordinance, and refuse to celebrate this Memorial of Christ's Passion, and to
give a testimony to the truth of the Gospel? The Lords Supper is a Seal of the
Covenant of Grace: God therein sets his Seal to the saving virtue of the blood
of Christ: and do they praise the Name of the Lord, when they refuse to receive
the Seal of the Covenant? God in this Ordinance makes an offer of Christ as
slain for our Redemption; and do they praise the Name of the Lord that refuse
to attend it? The coming to this Ordinance is an open acknowledgment of the
truth of the Gospel; what is the neglecting of it then but an open denial of
the truth of the Gospel? Some it may be do neglect it from tenderness of
Conscience, fearing whether they have liberty to come; but many others do
neglect it from a careless and irreligious spirit, they neither come to it, nor
are careful to prepare themselves for it.

USE, III. Of Exhortation, To praise the Name of the Lord. David calls on Young
Men and Maids to do it; and indeed God calls on you to do it. This work is not
left to old People, God expects it from you also: You may not say that elder
People do it now, and you will take your turn when you are older, but heartily
engage in this work: if it has been neglected hitherto, let it be neglected no
longer; don't rob God of his glory. It is a glorious employment to praise God;
the Angels of Heaven do employ themselves that way: this is a debt, you owe to
God: he is worthy to be praised, Psalm. 18.3. His Name alone is excellent.
Praise him in all ways of worship. Praise him in all ways of Obedience.

Motives, 1. All Creatures in the world do it, but Devils and wicked men. There
is great variety of Creatures in Heaven and Earth; and they do with one voice
proclaim the glory of God. If we look up to Heaven, there the Angels are
praising God: Those Morning Stars sing together: the heavenly Hosts do praise
God: the Sun and Moon and Stars of light. Look into the Air, there the Clouds
and Winds and the Meteors praise God. Look unto the Earth and the Sea, and all
Creatures therein do give a testimony for God. Psalm. 145.10. All thy works
shall praise thee. Indeed the Devils do reproach God, those cursed creatures
are enemies to the honor of God; and a number of Men are drawn in to fall in
with the same design. Will you separate your selves from the rest of the
Creatures, to join in with the Devils and a crew of ungodly men? When the
greatest part of the world are agreed to exalt God, will you forsake them and
join with the Devil? It becomes you to say as David, Psalm. 103.21, 22. Bless ye
the Lord all ye his hosts, ye Ministers of his that do his pleasure: Bless the
Lord all his works, in all places of his dominion; bless the Lord O my soul.

2. This will be no burden to you when you come to die. The living know that
they must die. You don't expect to continue here always: You are but Strangers
in the world, and you don't know but you may die quickly; there is nothing in
your Nature, or condition, or in the word of God, that does secure long life
unto you. Man is as grass, and the glory of man as the flower of the field that
fades away, Isai. 40.6. And if you don't praise God, that will make it hard
work to die: if you have not done the work that you were sent into the World for,
that will be heavier than the pains of death: it will sting you to remember
your life past: how will you dare to go before God to Judgment? It is a doleful
condition, when you must die, and yet dare not die. Eccl. 5.17. He has much
sorrow and wrath with his sickness. Conscience will lay that charge upon you,
Dan. 5.23. The God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways,
thou has not glorified. And you will take up that lamentation, Prove. 5.12, 13.
How have I hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof; I have not obeyed
the voice of my teachers, nor inclined mine ears to them that instructed me.
But if you improve your time in serving God, that will be no affliction to you
in the evil day, but a comfort; it will be an ease in death, a relief under
your pains, a cordial against faintings. That was a great comfort to Hezekiah
when he lay at the point of death. Isai. 28.3. He said, Remember now Lord I
beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart,
and have done that which is good in thy sight. If you don't praise the Lord,
you would (in vain) desire that God would forget what you had done; it will be
a terror to you to remember and to think that God does remember what you have
done.

3. If you don't praise the Lord, it will make your life uncomfortable. The ways
of wisdom are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace, Prove. 3.17.
David says, It is pleasant to sing praise to the Lord, Psalm. 147.1. It is
agreeable to the nature of Man to walk in the ways of uprightness. Men are then
in their element, it is the perfection of nature: and it is agreeable to the
Conscience of Man, that approves and applauds an holy life. But unholy living
is uncomfortable living. If Men neglect to serve God, they put themselves upon
the rack: if Men live a life of disobedience, they live a miserable life: they
don't enjoy themselves; corruptions are hard masters. The wicked is like the
troubled Sea that cannot rest, Isai. 57 20. Every corruption is a tyrant: Men's
lusts are scourges to them. Wrath kills the foolish man, and envy slays the
silly one. So, Pride, Covetousness, Unbelief, are troublesome taskmasters. And
a sinful and unsactifyed life is disquieting to the Conscience; such men have
the reproaches of their own hearts: Conscience is chiding, shaming and
upbraiding them. When they hear the rebukes of the word, their own hearts do
echo thereunto; and their own Conscience is making apparitions of danger, and
threatening of them with the vengeance of God Some are more stupid than others,
but upon many occasions Conscience will be terrifying them, they have many
frightful expectations. Job 15 21. A dreadful sound is in his ears. They have
awful preoccupations of hell. They are scared with Death and of Judgment:
Sometimes they think of the blackness of darkness for ever; sometimes of being
among Devils; sometimes of the everlasting flames; they carry their tormentor
about with them: their hearts are many times meditating terror. They are all
their life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2.15.

4. God gave you reasonable Souls for this end that you may praise the Name of
the Lord. God has given rational Souls to you that you might understandingly
praise the Lord. Surely God is angry with Men if they don't use their Souls to
that end that they were made for: He will count them worthy to be destroyed.
And this was the end of your Souls, they are fitted for this end, made capable
to know and praise God. Why do you imagine that God has endued you with
rational Souls? Was it only to keep your body from putrefying? The soul of a
beast would have served that occasion. Some beasts that have only sensitive
souls live longer than Men do. Or was it that they might be caterers for the
body, to contrive how to get Meat and Drink and Raiment for the body, to be
servants to the body, an instrument for the gratification of your sensual
appetite? had God no higher design than to prepare you to enjoy sensual
pleasures, or was it only to make you capable to rebel against him? The bruit
creatures being destitute of rational Souls are not capable to rebel, they
cannot sin or dishonor God, and carry to his reproach: and did God advance you
to an higher pitch of excellency, and give you a Soul of a superior nature,
endued with angelical faculties that you might carry like Devils? Did God make
you better than the beasts of the earth, that you might make your selves worse
than them? surely it was not worth the while for you to be made to dishonor
God. You were made to glorify God, and if this be not done by you, you don't
answer the end of your creation. Other creatures attend what they were made
for, and if you don't attend what you were made for, God may well repent of
making you.

5. You commend those that have praised and glorified God. Men in former
Generations have carried themselves differently; some have praised and
glorified God: So, Moses, Noah, Samuel, Hezekiah, Paul, etc. and you extol
them; you count them wise and worthy Men; they are renowned in all Generations
on that account; you look upon them that have served God as the choicest of
Men; if they were poor and persecuted, yet you count them Men of whom the world
was not worthy, Heb. 11.38. All Generations call them blessed. Others have
neglected to praise and glorify God: as Achan, Gehazi, Doeg, Ahitophel, and
Demas, etc. There have been great numbers of men that have neglected the
service of God, and been devoted to serve their carnal and corrupt affections;
and you despise these men in your hearts, you count them fools and mad men,
some were rich, some of them learned, some lived in honor; but you have a low
opinion of them; you think, it had been better for them, if they had never been
born. You pass that censure on them, Psalm. 49.13 This their way is their folly.
You count them among the fools in Israel; you wonder how they could satisfy
themselves, how they dared, how they were not ashamed to live such a life: they
are despicable persons in your eyes; and just so Men will count of you, when
you are dead: if you glorify God, they will bless you, if you don't, they will
count you a miserable Man. And will you commend such as glorify God, and not
tread in their steps? will you condemn those that have not done it, and yet
imitate them.

6. Great notice is taken in Heaven how you carry. The Angels have great
occasion to be conversant in this lower World; they are often coming and going,
they are descending and ascending, as Jacob saw them in a Dream, Genesis 28.12.
Being minisiring Spirits, sent forth to minister to them that shall be heirs of
salvation, Heb 5.14. And they are giving information how you carry your selves:
and Saints that die and go to Heaven, are able to give an account of the
behavior of others in the Places from whence they come: One would think that
you should be concerned that the Saints in Heaven should not hear an evil
report of you: undoubtedly they are concerned about the carriages of Men upon
Earth. Luke 15.7. Joy shall be in Heaven over one sinner that repents. Saints
that are in Heaven will be inquisitive concerning the state of Religion, and
getting the knowledge how it thrives in such a Country, and such a Town; they
will be asking after their Acquaintance, and after their Sons and their
Daughters; and one would think that many of you should be ashamed to think what
account must be given of you, to your friends, if you have any friends in
Heaven: It may be some would be ashamed that it should be told at the next Town
how they have behaved themselves, much more should they that it should be told
in Heaven. The account that must be given of many Persons is, that they mind
little but the World; they are nothing for Religion; they are swallowed up in
the cares of the World; they have somewhat of a Form of goodliness, but nothing
of the Power; they are panting after the dust of the earth; they don't savor
of a gracious Spirit. They go to Meeting on the Sabbath and at other times, but
the cares of the World do choke the Seed of the Word. And the account that must
be given of others is, that they are Pharisaical, Proud Creatures, mind little
but their Ornaments: Or that they are of rude behavior; when they should be in
bed they are abroad in company with Wenches, or that they lie about the
Taverns; that they are companions of fools. One would think it should go to
your heart, to consider, what discourse there is in Heaven about you; to have
an ill name here is a shame, but it is more shameful to have an ill name in
Heaven: you may well blush to think that it should be told in Heaven, that much
pains has been taken with you, but that hitherto it is all in vain.

7. If you will not Praise the Name of the Lord upon Earth, you shall not do it
in Heaven. Praising God is heavenly work; Saints and Angels will spend an
Eternity in Praising and Magnifying God; they will be making Melody to the
Lord; and you think they will be very happy, according to that, Psalm. 84.4.
Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be still praising thee. But
if you neglect to praise God here, God will not admit you among the holy ones
there, that are praising him. There will be a glorious company in Heaven, and
you would fain be one among the rest; you will beg to be admitted, you have
desires that way now, you have your pangs wherein you long to go to Heaven.
Numb. 23.10. Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like
his. And when you are going out of the World, you will cry earnestly to God to
admit you, and will fill your Mouths with arguments; but you will be rejected
God will have no compassion on you, but will harden his heart against you. He
will remember what a life you led here, how you neglected to glorify him, how
you did not own his Authority, you did not render to him the glory of his
Faithfulness; how you preferred other things before him: And he will stop his
ears against your cries. He wont object against you that you were poor and low
in the World, or the unholiness of your Parentage, but his objection will be,
that you did not honor him. For he says, They that honor me, I will honor, 1 Samuel 2.30. And he will not admit you. Math. 25.11, 12. The foolish Virgins
said, Lord, Lord open to us, but he answered and said, Verily, I say unto you,
I know you not.

8. If you will not praise the Name of the Lord on Earth, you must do it in Hell.
It is commonly said, that wicked men in hell will blaspheme God; and I do not
deny it: that is applied to them, Rev. 16.11. They blasphemed the God of heaven
because of their plagues, and because of their sores: Though that is spoken
directly of Antichristians, when God brings his Judgments upon them. But
ungodly men in Hell shall praise God: God will praise himself by executing
misery on them; he will show forth his own glory when he executes revenge upon
them; as he did when he brought his plagues upon Egypt: He caused his Name to
be declared through the Earth. But besides this he will extort praise from you:
now you are ready to flatter your self as if you were in no danger; then you
shall acknowledge that God is stronger than you; that there is no darkness now
shadow of death, where the workers of iniquity shall hide themselves; then you
shall acknowledge your folly and madness in withstanding the gracious calls of
God. You will be found likewise to own the Justice of God. Now Men have
reasonings in their hearts against it; but then they shall be forced to give a
testimony for it. Romans 3.19. Every mouth shall be stopped and all the world
shall become guilty before God. As Pharaoh acknowledged Gods Righteousness.
Exodus 9.27. The Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. Before they
would not believe the faithfulness of God in his threatenings; now they will say
as, 1 Samuel 7.29. The strength of Israel will not lie nor repent, for he is not
a Man that he should repent.

Obj. 1. It may be objected, That it is not the manner of Young Men and Maids
to serve and glorify God: if they should do it they should be singular: they
must do as others do.

Ans. This is no vindication of you. Irreligion is wickedness though there be
never so many that practice it. The multitude of Sinners is no justisication of
sin: neither is it any security: if hand join in hand the wicked shall not be
unpanished. Multitudes of Young ones are burning in Hell for their iniquities.
If you heard their groans, you would have little heart to follow their example.
Neither are these bad examples an insuperable temptation. Samuel and David,
Solomon and Josiah, did vanquish this temptation, and so may you too.

Obj. 2. Now is our only time to enjoy our pleasures.

Ans. It would be no loss to you, if you never did enjoy the pleasure of Sin.
There be pleasures to be enjoyed in a way of Religion, and they are far better,
less cloying, more substantial, and (...) durable: the pleasures of Sin have
stings in them. Prove. 23.32. At last they bite like a serpent and sting like an
adder. Eccl. 11.9. Know that for all (...) things God will bring thee into
Judgment. You may get such a wound by indulging your selves in the pleasures of
Sin, that may never be cured. And it may be now is your only time, to secure
eternal life: you have no assurance of any time hereafter to do it. The course
of Nature don't secure it unto you. There is no promise from God to secure it
to you: and you are warned to take the present time. Isai. 55.6. Seek the Lord
while he may be found, call you upon him, while he is near.

Obj. 3. It is not to be expected that we should be as good us Elder People: we
are not guilty of any great Extravagances: You would not have us to be as
Religious and as Precise as Elderly Persons.

Ans. If you be not better than some Elderly Professors be, you will never
enter into the Kingdom of God. Men go under an apprehension that a little
Religion will secure Salvation, and so they give way to worldliness and
lukewarmness, and loose walking; and they that will run the ventue of it may:
But assuredly the way to life is narrow: Some that have a Name that they live,
are dead. There may be seriousness and sobriety, and conscientiousness and
affection, and zeal, and yet Persons may be in a perishing condition: it is a
mighty change that prepares Men for Salvation. And I am afraid that the
unsavory carriages of some Elder Professors, make some Young ones to harden
their hearts, and to think that a little Religion will serve the turn; but you
should remember the words of Christ: Math. 5.20. Except your righteousness do
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, you shall in no case
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven

FINIS.

