Two SERMONS Preached at the DEDICATION of the New Meeting House on
Church-Green BOSTON, the 8 th of January 1716, 17.

By the Reverend Dr. COTTON MATHER, And the Reverend Mr. BENJAMIN WADSWORTH.

ZELOTES A ZEAL For the HOUSE of GOD; Blown up, in a SERMON unto an ASSEMBLY of
Christians; in the SOUTH-Part of BOSTON. On 8. d. XI. m. 1716, 17. A Day of
PRAYER kept by them, at their FIRST ENTRANCE into a New EDIFICE Erected by
them, for the Public Worship of GOD our SAVIOR.

By Cotton Mather, D. D. and F. R. S.

Zelo Vindicatur Jerusalem; Zelo Ecclesia Congregatur. Ambro. BOSTON: Printed
by J. Allen, for Nicholas Boon, at the Sign of the BIBLE in Cornhill, 1717.

The Zealous Christian.
Joh. II. 17. The Zeal of thy House has Eaten me up.
WE are at this time concerned with a people professing a Zeal for the House of
God that has Eaten up a Little part of their Estates, which they have devoted
unto the Building of the House, wherein We are now Assembled before Him. Our
concern with them, is not only to assure them, that what the Zeal has Eaten up,
will not be Lost, but also to remind them of other and further Operations,
wherein their Zeal is to be demonstrated: That so their Zeal for the House of
God, may be uniform, and be universal, and be justified. Hearken, my Beloved
Brethren. I do now something more than fetch a Red hot Stone from the Altar,
for this purpose, to keep alive the Flame of your Zeal: I bring the pattern of
our admirable SAVIOR, Even, our God, who is a consuming Fire. When the
Psalmist, who is Renowned in all Ages for the Zeal of the House of God, which
was flaming in him, gave this Account of himself, The Zeal of thy House has
Eaten me up, we may say, I pray thee, of whom spoke the Psalmist this? Of
himself, or of some other Man? The Answer must be, He was a Type of the
Messiah, in what he Spoke. It was foretold of the Messiah, That the Lord should
come into His Temple, and act as a Refiner there. Our SAVIOR coming into the
Temple, and purging the Temple of the Money Changers there, would have drawn
the minds of the People unto the Consideration of that famous Prophecy. Whether
it had this Effect or no, the minds of His Disciples, were drawn to consider
another Prophecy; and what was to be found in the Sixty ninth Psalm concerning
Him. Every Israelite was to pay half a Shekel yearly to the service of the
Temple. When any Man brought a Shekel, to change for Two Half-Shekels, there
was a profit Exacted by the changer: And when the Shekel was brought for Two,
there was a Double profit Exacted for the change. The like unlawful gains were
made by selling of Cattle for the Sacrifices there. Our SAVIOR having His Holy
Soul, inflamed with a just Zeal, against the Dishonesties and Oppressions
committed by these Ecclesiastical Harpies, appears with a Scourge (...) small
Cords in His Hand, threatening of them, and the guilty Thieves fled before Him:
GOD in our SAVIOR Struck them with such a dread, that they could not stand
before Him.

The Zeal which our SAVIOR Exerted on this Occasion, made His Disciples, to
remember the Description which the Holy SPIRIT had above a Thousand years
before given of Him; in this passage, The Zeal of thy House has Eaten me up. I
hope you observe, That they who attentively Read the Word of God, will have the
advantage from it; A Profitable and a Comfortable Remembrance of what they have
Read. Agreeable passages of what they have Read, will be Occasionally Remembered
with them. You also observe; That all the Characters of the promised REDEEMER,
given in the Ancient (...), are answered in our Blessed JESUS. Nothing was
Prophesied concerning the REDEEMER to come, which we don't find answered in our
Lovely JESUS.

But the principal Thing to be now observed is this.

The Zeal of the House of GOD, will mightily possess them, who have an Heart
after the Heart of GOD.

A David, who was a Man after the Heart of GOD, was one that could say, The
Zeal of thy House has Eaten me up. The Antitype of David, and the Man who was
GOD as well as Man, and had an Heart the most after the Heart of GOD, that ever
was in the World, could much more say, The Zeal of thy House has Eaten me up.
Such a Zeal must be in every One, who would have his Heart found after the
Heart of GOD.

We will Enquire, first. What is meant by Zeal in General?

To this the Answer is; That Zeal is an Affection to the Honor and Service of
God in an Intense Degree. Zelus est Intensus Gradus affectionis. Every Good Man
has his Affections, toward God and the Things that please Him. Now, as the
Word ZELE, comes from a Theme, that Signifies, To be Boiling hot; So, When our
well-placed Affections, are Boiling Hot, or, when we are, what we read, Romans
XI. 11. Fervent in Spirit, Serving the Lord, then have we a Zeal of GOD. In
Zeal, there is first, a Love to GOD: and a very Intense Love, But then this
Love must operate in a Sorrow for, and an Anger at what is displeasing to GOD;
An Indignation against Every Thing, that is a Provocation to GOD. Zeal is a
Composition of Love and Grief, and Wrath: an Holy mixture of all these
passions, belongs unto it.

We will Enquire; Secondly, What is meant, by being Eaten up with Zeal?

To this the Answer is; Besure it intends, that the Zeal does mightily possess
them in whom it is. Then does the Zeal of a Man Eat him up, when it makes an
Entire oblation of his All unto GOD. The Fire did Eat up, what was upon the
Altar. An Holy Man, does that thing, Romans XII. 1. Present your selves unto GOD.
He lays his All as on the Altar before the Lord, and Zeal comes like a Fire,
so to consume it all, that GOD only shall have the Regards of all, the Uses of
all. The Honor and Service of GOD, must Engross all our Faculties; must employ
all our Thoughts, all our Time, all our Strength. We are to Love the Lord our
God with all our Heart; And the Interests of GOD must Swallow up all our
Interests. Then the Zeal of GOD has Eaten us up.

Thirdly. Our Main Enquiry is, What is the Zeal of the HOUSE of GOD, which is
mightily to possess us! or, How are we to demonstrate our selves mightily
possessed, with the ZEAL of the HOUSE of GOD? You shall have the Answer to
this, in these Articles.

I. We are to be Zealously Concerned, that we may Enjoy the Church of our
SAVIOR, and have the Enjoyment of all the Ordinances, which are in the Church
administered unto them who wait upon Him. What is the House of GOD? We are told;
1 Timothy III. 15. The House of GOD is the Church of the Living GOD. There must be
awakened in us a Zealous Concern, to have the Church State of the Gospel,
Erected, Preserved, Supported among us. The Zeal of the House of GOD is
defective in us, if we delay to come into the Church State of the Gospel, and
to join unto the Societies that associate for the Worship of GOD our SAVIOR.
That such a Church State may be carried on, we should be willing to lay out
what should be Necessary. It must be nourished with what we have: Else we
cannot say, That the Zeal of it has Eaten us up. A Servant of GOD, was at much
Expense, that so the Worship of GOD, might be maintained. It was He, who said,
The Zeal of thy House has Eaten me up. And for this cause he also said, 1 Chronicles. XXIX. 3. I have set my Affection to the House of my GOD.

In the House of GOD, His Ordinances are dispensed. The Zeal of that House must
make us prize our Opportunities to be partakers of these Ordinances. We must be
Glad, when we have Opportunities to draw near unto GOD in His House; and attend
upon the Exercises wherein GOD is to be there met withal. This was the Zeal of
old so Expressed; Psalm. CXXII. 1. I was glad, when they said unto me, Let us go
into the House of the Lord. We must be Sad, when we are deprived of, debarred
from, Opportunities, to meet with GOD in His House, and there have our
Fellowship with the Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ. So was the Zeal
Expressed of Old; Psalm. CXLII. 4. When I remember these things, I pour out my
Soul in me; for I had gone with the multitude, I went with them to the House of
GOD. Such ought our Zeal to be for the House of GOD, that we should think much
of no pains to come unto it. We should have such a Value for what is to be
done, and heard, and had in the Assemblies of the Faithful, that we should
begrutch no Labor, no Travel, for coming at them. A small matter should not be
made our Excuse for not Coming at them. We should esteem an Hour there, to be
better than a thousand elsewhere. Our Esteem for what is to be found there,
should overcome all the Difficulties of Coming thither. Then does the Zeal of
the House indeed Eat us up, when no Difficulties in the Way can stand before
it. The Zeal of the House of GOD, will Enable a Man to say with him, Psalm.
XXVI. 8. I have Loved the Habitation of thy House. It will make a man Delight
in such Devotions as are performed at the House of GOD. It will give him a
Delight in praying to GOD, in Hearing from GOD, in Praising of GOD, in sitting
at the Holy Table, and in observing all that our Lord has required there. And a
Zeal for the House of GOD, will be accompanied with a Zeal for the Day of GOD:
The Lords* Day, which is a Day Principally set apart for these Devotions. It Is
a welcome Day to a Man, who has the Zeal of the House of GOD Eating him up. The
Sabbath is a Delight unto him. When the Ordinances in the House of our SAVIOR,
are more to us, than our Necessary Food, and our Souls feed upon them, then the
Zeal of His House has Eaten us up.

II. We should be Zealously Concerned, that the Church of our SAVIOR may be
purified from all Corruptions, and nothing that will Corrupt Religion may be
remaining there. When was it, that our Savior said, The Zeal of thy House has
Eaten me up: It was when He was chasing out of the Temple, the Corruptions
which had crept into it. There is now in the Minds of Men, a Natural Tendency
to Error and Folly. The Spirit which works in the Children of Disobedience,
improves the Tendency with a Cursed Efficacy. Hence it comes to pass, that
Things Abominable to the Holy GOD, Speedily and Easily get into His House: The
Church of GOD cannot continue long undefiled; but Roots of Bitterness are
continually springing up in it, whereby many are defiled. Now, we must have in
us a Zealous Concern, to see the Church rescued from the Abominations which the
Man of Sin, or the Sin of Man, has introduced into it. The Zeal of the House of
GOD, is very notably to be employed on that work; Dan. VIII. 14. The Sanctuary
shall be cleansed. Zealous Reformers are they that have the Zeal of the House
of GOD acting of them.

We must have a Zeal for the Reformation of Abuses that are got into the Church
of GOD, and prosecute the Reformation with a Vigor in our Application to it;
with a Venture of our All for the Accomplishment of it. When the Zeal of the
House of GOD, was burning in the Soul of Elijah, he could say, 1 Kings XIX. 10.
I have been very Jealous for the Lord of Hosts; for the Children of Israel have
forsaken thy Covenant, and thrown down thine Altars. The Zeal of the House of
GOD must make us Industrious to restore and preserve Sound Doctrine there. We
must Vindicate the Truth, and Suppress Heresies by using all proper Methods of
Conviction upon them. Our Zeal is thus called for; Jude 3. Earnestly contend
for the Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints. Gospel Truths must be
precious to us. We are to buy the Truth at any rate, but sell it at no rate in
the World. We are to be Valiant for the Truth upon Earth; And strive to an
Agony rather than part with it, and spend All in the Defense of it, and suffer
any Death rather than Deny it. The Liberties of the Church are to be livelily
declared for, livelily adhered to. We are to Stand fast in them. If any make
unjust Invasions on them, we are to withstand the Invaders. The Zeal of the
House of GOD must make us do our part, that the Worship of GOD may be there
managed, only according to the Divine Appointments, and not be polluted with
Humane Inventions. Our Zeal must Signalize our Dislike of that Iniquity; Mat.
XV. 9. In vain do they Worship me, teaching the Commandments of Men. We are to
be for Purity of Worship; and go as far as we can, and undergo any thing rather
than have our Conscience polluted with any False Worship whatsoever. The Zeal
of the Great GOD Himself is peculiarly displayed, in the matters of the Second
Commandment. And our Zeal must make us thoughtful, that the Images may not be
brought unto the House of GOD, which may Violate His Holy Commandment there.
Once more: The Zeal of the House of GOD must make us do our part that no
Ill-manners may be prevailing and Indulged there; and that there may not be
room for that complaint, Among my People there are found Wicked Men. Our Zeal
must be like that in Ephesus; Rev. II. 2. Thou can not bear with them that
are Evil. We must be for keeping up a Godly Discipline; a Discipline that shall
be a Terror to Evil Doers, and a Praise to them who do well; a Discipline, that
shall put away a wicked person from among us. With Zeal we are to rebuke
Offenders; with Zeal to censure miscarriages; and countenance nothing that is
punishable; not suffer it, that the House of GOD be a Den of Thieves. When we
are vehemently carried this way, then the Zeal of the House of GOD has Eaten us
up.

III. We should be Zealously concerned, That we may obtain the Blessings, which
in the House of DOD, we have a Tender of: Have a Strong Appetite, for what is
going in the House. In the House of GOD, and in the Assemblies of Zion, there
is an admirable variety of Blessings, wherewith GOD will be the Rewarder of
them that diligently seek Him there. One who was eminent for his Respects to
the House of GOD, could say; Psalm. V. 5. I will come into thy House in the
multitude of thy Mercy. There is a multitude of Blessings, a great Number of no
small Blessings, for which we are to come into the House of GOD. Here we are
Advised of the Blessings; Here we are Enriched with the Blessings; Here we are
Directed, and here Assisted, for our Arriving to the Blessings. We are to be
Zealously concerned for a share in these Blessings: And our Zeal must be such,
that nothing shall satisfy us without the Blessings. Then, the Zeal of the
House of GOD has Eaten us up! Our Business at the House of GOD, must be for a
sweet Experiment of that Word; Lam. III. 25. The Lord is Good unto them that
wait for Him, unto the Soul that seeks Him. There are the Blessings which the
Covenant of Grace does mainly Consist of, and Insist on; The Blessings of
Transgression forgiven, and Sin covered; The Blessings of a Turn from all
Iniquities; The Blessings, which we are Indeed Blessed of GOD, when we have
them Secured unto us. Our Zeal, and an Insatiable Hunger for the Blessings,
must carry us to the House of GOD; Else the Zeal of the House has not Eaten us
up. In coming to the House of GOD, we are zealously to Propound and Expect, the
Assuring of such Blessings unto us. When our GOD calls us to His House, it is
for this purpose; Isa LV. 3. Come unto me; Hear and your Souls shall Live; and
I will make an Everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure Mercies of the
Beloved One. The Blessings to be acquired in the House of GOD, are those
Blessings; the Merchandise whereof, is better than the Merchandise of Silver,
and the Gain thereof than fine Gold. Most certainly, to Secure all Spiritual
Blessings in Heavenly places, is a thing well worthy of the most ardent Zeal in
the World; Worthy of a Greater than any thing in this World, yea, than to Gain
the whole World. In the House of GOD are those Courts of the Heavenly places,
where we Lay Hold on all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly places, and Lay Hold
on Eternal Life. In Coming to the House of GOD, we must have a Zeal for the
Good Things of the House, and a mighty Concern for that Blessedness: Psalm. LXV.
4. We shall be satisfied with the Goodness of thy House, even of thy Holy
Temple. Come to the House, with such a Zeal as this; I come hither, that I may
know more of Him, whom to know is Life Eternal. Come with such a Zeal as this;
I come hither, that I may be United unto my Savior, and Reconciled unto God.
Come with such a Zeal as this; I come hither, that I may have the Lovely Graces
of the Holy Spirit conferred on me, and Increased in me; and be made meet for
the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. And come with such a Zeal as this; I
come hither, that I may be Instructed in my Duty, and Strengthened against my
Temptations, and Comforted under my Calamities, and filled with the Peace of
GOD. A mighty Concern to make sure of the Salvation, whereof the Wells are
Opened in the House of GOD: This is the Zeal of the House. To come thither with
a Soul Hungring, and Thirsting after the Righteousness, which is Revealed, and
Offered, and Bestowed there; This is to be Eaten up with the Zeal.

IV. A Zeal Enkindled in the House of GOD; Is not this the Zeal of His House?
And when that Zeal puts us upon Sacrificing our All to GOD, may it not be said,
The Zeal has Eaten us up? We read of Notable Things to be done; and it is
said, Isa. IX. 7. The Zeal of the Lord of Hosts will perform this. It may
partly be understood of a Zeal Enkindled by the Lord of Hosts. Thus a Zeal
Enkindled in the House of GOD, and by what passes there, may be called, The
Zeal of the House. But the Zeal of Piety is no where more conspicuous, than in
the Zeal of Sacrificing. With a Zeal of GOD mightily filling of our Souls, and
flaming in them, we are to Surrender and Consecrate Our selves unto the
Glorious GOD; Choose to be Wholly the Lords; Long to be Entirely for the Lord:
Beg of His Holy Spirit, Oh! Do thou take possession of me. Yea, we are to bring
our All under a Dedication unto the Glorious GOD. Make a Sacrifice of All, by
having HOLINESS TO THE LORD, written upon ALL; and by a perpetual projection,
that All may be applied unto the Service of GOD: Have nothing, but what shall
have the Character of a Sacrifice upon it; A Thing set apart for the Use of
GOD. Yet more; We should be willing to Give up all our Good Things whenever GOD
shall call us to it. Look upon all our Good Things with a Sacrificing Eye.
Whatever we have any Relish for, we should come to this Disposition; Lord, If
thou will have this Good Thing to be denied unto me, I am willing to go without
it! Thy Will be done concerning it! Our Will should be Sacrificed unto the
Lord; Be Extinguished and Abolished in the Lords. Yea, We should count a
Sacrificing Heart, which can Resign Every Good Thing; This we should count a
Better Thing, and more Desirable than any Thing that we have Sacrificed. Such a
Sacrificing Zeal, is what the House of GOD calls for; it is what the Children
of GOD sometimes find Enkindled in His House, when they find there, the Things
that make their Hearts to burn within them. And is not the Zeal now such as
even to Eat us up? The Sacrifices of Old, were devoured, by a Fire Enkindled
from Heaven upon them. The Lion of GOD, [The Altar, was called, Ariel, or, The
Lion of GOD!] then did Eat up the Sacrifices. A Zeal Enkindled from Heaven in a
Soul, Baptized with the Holy Spirit and with Fire, the Holy Spirit Shooting a
Fire from above into the Soul, even like what was darted from the Shechinah
upon the ancient Sacrifices: (and like the Flame often visibly seen descending,
and called the MANIFESTATION of the Spirit, on the Baptized in the Primitive
Times,) does offer up it self and its All unto God in a Flame of Love. The Zeal
of the House of GOD has Eaten up such a Soul!

V. We will not allow, that the Zeal of the House of GOD, has any Force upon a
man, Except he be Zealously and Mightily concerned, that He may himself be an
House of GOD. Our Zeal must be concerned for this; Exodus XV. 2. My God, I will
prepare Him an Habitation. But how? Our Zeal must come into this Flame of the
Fire of God; My GOD, I will my self be thy Habitation. A Good Man is himself a
Living Temple of GOD. And it is most certain, One such Living Temple, is of
more Account with the Glorious GOD, than any of Wood and of Stone, and of the
most Exquisite Artifice that is to be seen, in the most Superb and Stately
Cathedrals upon Earth. An humble Spirit, that is become an Habitation of God
through the Spirit, is of more Account with GOD, than a Temple of mere matter
without a Soul; though there should be more than Four Thousand Tun of Gold, and
more than Forty Thousand Tun of Silver, laid out upon it: As according to the
present Reading of the Text, there was upon one of old. A Good Man has GOD so
dwelling in him, that he becomes an House of GOD. But what must be our Zeal for
such a Blessedness? It must be this. We must Exceedingly bewail and bemoan the
condition, which by our Fall from GOD, mankind is fallen into. With Tears in
our Eyes, we must see it the condition of a Temple in Rubbish; An House of GOD
in Ruins. Hereupon, we must heartily desire yea, very zealously, to be Raised
out of this Deplorable Condition. In our JESUS we see the matchless Temple of
GOD become a Sacrifice, as the price of that Favor, that we may be re-edified
a Temple of GOD. We are now to behold the SPIRIT of GOD, profering to Restore
us, and Enter us, and Possess us, as an Holy Temple. We are Joyfully to accept
of the proffer; Joyfully consent to the proffer; and say, Oh! Holy One, Do thou
come into me, and Rectify all that is out of order within me; and fulfill in me
all the Good pleasure of thy Goodness. What remains is, That we be always
Employed in those Things, to which an House of GOD is to be devoted; and that
we abhor and avoid those things by which an House of GOD would be debased. The
Zeal of coming at this Blessedness, Oh! Let it make a wonderful Impression upon
us. It cannot be said, That the Zeal of the House of GOD has eaten us up,
Except the zeal and wish and care to be an House of GOD, be such as to Swallow
up all our Temporal Concernments. Except all our Temporal Concernments give way
to this Grand Work of GOD: this Grand Aim of Christianity.

APPLICATION.
I. And now, how can we go any further without first making the pause of a
Lamentation over it, That the Zeal of the House of GOD, seems to be so mightily
departed from us; to be so mightily declined with us? Alas, Of how many may it
be said; The Zeal of getting this World has Eaten them up! Of how few; The Zeal
of the House of GOD has Eaten them up! When the People of GOD could not see Him
at Work for them, how Pathetically do they Expostulate! Isa. LXIII. 15. Where
is thy Zeal? But, Oh! How may the Expostulation be turned by our GOD upon our
selves, who do so little for Him, and for His House, and mind so little what
becomes of it? Where is your Zeal. A Simon Zelotes, how rare to be found among
the Disciples? How few Phinehas's in Public Stations? How few Elias's to
prepare the way of the Lord? Was not the Complaint calculated for our Times,
and may not the House of our GOD particularly complain? Mat. XXIV. 12. The Love
of many shall wax Cold. The Burning of the World, -- should it now come on;
alas, the Cold Frame of the World, in regard of the House of GOD, and the
Things thereof, it calls for Fire from Heaven! Where is our Zeal, when we are
so Careless and so Lifeless, and so Drowsy, in the Business which we have to do
in the House of GOD? So far from doing with our might, what our Hand finds here
to do? Where is our Zeal, when Church Fellowship is by so very many altogether
neglected; though no cause can be assigned for this Neglect, but only this, that
Men can quietly leave the State of their Souls for Eternity, in horrible
Uncertainties? Where is our Zeal, when, -- But That which is wanting, cannot be
Numbered. It calls for a Lamentation over it.

II. But let not the Lamentation be a fruitless One. It must pass into an
Exhortation. An Exhortation, which I could wish we had that Venerable Ancient
here to manage; who in his Commentary on the Second of John, mentioning the
Zeal of our SAVIOR for the House of GOD, breaks forth into a Flame, Zelemur Et
nos, Fratres Charissimi: O my dear Brethren, shall not we be zealous too: The
Voice of our SAVIOR from Heaven, unto Lukewarm Laodicea, must be the
Exhortation: Rev. III. 19. Be zealous and Repent. Oh! may the Zeal of the House
of GOD be now fired in the House of GOD; A Zeal, that like an Holy Fire, shall
Eat up us, and Eat up all our Powers and Engage all our Endeavors, and all our
Interests.

Briefly,

It Is true, Our Zeal must be a Discrete Zeal; A Zeal with Knowledge. Except
there be Discretion to govern it, our Zeal will be like an Headstrong Horse
wit out a Bridle; will run us into Inconveniences. Church History has told us,
what horrid Consequences once followed, upon the Rash Zeal of one Man pulling
down an Idols Temple in the Kingdom of Persia. But as our Zeal must be
Discrete, so it must be Sincere. Not the Zeal of a Pharisee, which Extends no
further than to the External. Not a Zeal acted by the Vainglory of a Jehu, who
calls, come and see my Zeal? Oh! Beware of putting on Zeal for a Cloak, in
another sense, than that wherein the Sacred Scripture uses that Expression.
Whatever pretenses we make, let us Remember, we have to do, with a GOD that
will not be mocked, in whatever we do. What is the Zeal of the Hypocrite, though
he has gained, when GOD shall take away his Soul? and when Eyes like a Flame
of Fire and more penetrating than the Lightning, shall pierce into it. What I
now bespeak is, The Zeal of the House of GOD, and a mighty Concern for it. And
I solicit for Three ways of Expressing such a Zeal.

First. We are to Express a mighty Zeal, in Going to the House of GOD. Walk to
the House of GOD, as often as you can; yea, though the walk may lie through a
valley of Baca, and has no little Trouble in it. Whatever Discouragements may
lie in the way, let your Zeal overcome the discouragements. Let neither Heat
nor Cold, nor any Conquerable Hardships discourage you. But let the Cry of your
Zeal be that; Psalm XLII. 1. As the Heart makes a panting Cry for cooling Streams
of water; so my Soul makes a panting cry to thee, O mighty God.

Secondly. We are to Express a mighty Zeal in Working at the House of GOD. Be
in Earnest, about all that is to be done there. Our Zeal in the House of GOD,
must so transport us. Psalm LXXXIV. 2. My Heart and my Flesh crueth out for the
Living GOD. Our Heart as well as our Flesh, must be in what we do Pray; (...)
so as to (...) but so as to make melody in your Hearts (...) the Lord. Heart
(...) Shake them (...).

(...) the House of GOD. Yea, Do with all your might for it, as the Zeal of
David once did what he did before the Ark; When the Angel of God possessing him
threw him into the usual Prophetic Agitations. He said, Psalm. CXXII. 9.
Because of the House of the Lord our GOD, I will seek thy Good. Oh! Seek the
Good of the House of the Lord our GOD. Often think, What shall I do for the
House of God? Mercy and Truth will be to them who devise Good, for the House of
GOD.

And now, my Brethren, unto you, who professing a Zeal for the House of GOD,
have here built an HOUSE, wherein you propose to have His Worship carried on;
What can we wish? For we would wish you all the Good of His House, and that is
indeed all the Good that can be wished for! -- But what can we wish, that shall
be a better Symptom, or a better Success of your Zeal, than, That the House you
have built may have that Felicity Illuminating of it; Isa. LX. 7. I will
Glorify the House of my Glory.

Not only, is a Church of Believers Associating for the Worship of our SAVIOR,
to be an House of His Glory; And you especially, that are here laying the
Foundation of a New Church, ought in a singular manner, to be so; to be Persons
of such Glorious Piety, that your Maker and Builder may say, I have laid thy
Foundation with Stones more precious than Agates, and Sapphires: But also, the
Artificial House wherein such a Church does carry on the Worship of our
SAVIOR, may become an House of His Glory too. Oh! may this House, where an
Assembly of Zion is from this time to meet continually, be always an House of
our Savior's Glory.

My Brethren; It will be so! This House will be an House of your Savior's
Glory, if the Exercises performed in this House of your solemn Assemblies, be
filled with Acknowledgements of a Glorious CHRIST, and of His Glory; and if
your SAVIOR may see that Character upon the House; Psalm. XXIX. 9. In His
Temple does every one speak of His Glory.

May the Prayers made in this House, be filled with Confessions of the Glory
belonging to our SAVIOR! Prayers that shall magnify our SAVIOR, as the
Redeemer of his People, and place all their Hopes and Joys upon His Mediation!
Prayers that shall be so many Flights unto our SAVIOR, as the only Refuge of
our Souls!

May the Sermons made in this House, Every where sparkle with Confessions of
our Savior's Glory in them! Sermons that shall have the Mystery of CHRIST
Laboriously Explained in them, and be filled with Lively and Lovely
Representations of our only SAVIOR! Sermons that shall still terminate Every
point in a CHRIST, and lead men unto our SAVIOR upon all Occasions!

When the Songs of Zion are sung in this House of GOD, may our SAVIOR be often
found in our Psalms? The Psalm-Book still be taken as, The Book of the Messiah!
And the Psalms made so many Mictams, wherein something of the Glorious CHRIST
shall be found, as the Golden Embroidery upon the more obvious and Common
Cloth, which lies there before us!

Finally; When you come to have the Seals of the Covenant, administered in this
House of GOD, may our SAVIOR be still Exhibited as the Head of His People in
the Covenant! May all be done, to List Soldiers under the Banner of our
SAVIOR! All be done to Confirm the Servants of our SAVIOR in their Adherence
to Him! All be done Evidently to set forth a Glorious CHRIST, as Crucified
before your Eyes! Behold, How ere I am aware, I have described the Minister
which we wish your Election may fall upon. Can you find a Man, that is like to
bring this Glory upon you! The Dove that lit upon Fabianus when the Church was
choosing a Minister, would not give your choice a more sure Direction. My
Friends upon the Meeting Place, where the Assemblies are thus Entertained in
Mount Zion, there is a Glory, even the Glory of our SAVIOR.

But, Oh! How much will our SAVIOR Glorify such an House of His Glory! Verily,
There will be Glorious Effects of his Grace, on the Souls of the People which
Assemble there; and by such notable Effects of His Grace, this House will be,
how greatly Glorified! It was a Thing once asked for; Psalm LXIII. 2. To see thy
Power and thy Glory, so as I have seen thee in the Sanctuary. The powerful
Grace of GOD our SAVIOR by the Power of His Grace, will do great Things for
the Souls of Men in this House of His Glory; Such Things as to make the Glory
of a Sanctuary rest upon it. The Spirit of GOD is the Spirit of Glory: That
Holy Spirit will be much at work in this House, and thereby, Oh! how it will be
glorified! By His Efficacy accomplishing of it, the Word of GOD will have a
Free course here, and run in upon the Souls of Men, with a Saving, a Renewing,
a Comforting Force upon them. In such a Free course for it, the Word is
Glorified; and so will be the House which has the Dispensations of it. Greater
Kindnesses will here be done for them, than what were done in the Ancient
Miracles of our SAVIOR: The very Dead will come to Live unto GOD: And Oh! how
will He Manifest forth His Glory in them! This House will thereby become a
pleasant Place unto the Children of Zion that Assemble here. They that have met
with their SAVIOR here, will say, It Is Good to be here! Many a Devout Soul,
will bear this Testimony; I have met with much of my glorious Lord in this
House of the Lord, and seen the Glory of my SAVIOR here; Thy goings, O my
King, in the Sanctuary! And therefore this is an House which I cannot but have
an unspeakable value for: Here, Here will I dwell,; for I have desired it.

Such an House, is the One Thing that we now desire for you; and we desire you
to seek after it, that you may dwell in such an House of the Lord all the Days
of your Lives, to behold the Glory of the Lord!

Now, that you may be in a more likely way to see this Felicity it is above all
things to be desired, and you, My Brethren, are to-be earnestly Exhorted, That
Brotherly love may Continue, and that no Sinful Contention may arise among you;
Contention, which will bring on Confusion and every Evil Work. You have
hitherto carried on your undertaking, with an uncommon Quiet, and Silence, and
Satisfaction; Little Noise of Contradicting Axes and Hammers, heard in your
Building; Satan, who is an Adversary to every Good work, doubtless Envies you
this Tranquillity, and would be glad of the Sin and Evil, wherein a Contention
would soon involve you. Be Watchful; For you have an Adversary! Oh! Be not
Ignorant of His Devices; But with a Meek, Patient, Prudent Conduct full of
Self-denial, and the Wisdom which is from above, defeat them gloriously.

Though there be some now Living, who were Born, before this Metropolis of the
English America, had one House Erected in it, yet, what is it now arrived
unto?...

BOSTON, which from a Despair of its ever Coming to any thing, was once called,
LOSTTOWN, is now what you see this Day; and what obliges me to say, This is the
Lords doing, and Mavelous in our Eyes

The CITY of BOSTON, [for its being a (...) Populous Town, and the Head of
adjacent Villages, is enough to challenge the Denomination of a CITY for it;]
has had a Remarkable Smile of GOD our SAVIOR upon it, which you invite us this
Day to take notice of. Though Desolations by Fire, among other Impediments to the
growth of the Place, laid the Two Eldest of our Meeting Houses in ashes, and so
the Oldest we have standing is Two or Three less than Fifty years Old, yet we
may now see no less than TEN Houses, wherein Christians hold their Public and
Weekly Assemblies, for the Worship of GOD our SAVIOR. And some of them very
Capacious Edifices; none of them Contemptible.

Of these Assemblies, (including that at Romny Marsh,) there are no less than
SEVEN, [Oh! May they be so many Golden Candlesticks!] which are Churches of the
UNITED BRETHREN, keeping in the Ways of our New-English Churches. Among these,
there are some Differences in some small Circumstantials and Modalities, which
are not the least Interruption unto the Comforts of mutual Communion. And though
no Parochial Bounds are settled, but the People belonging to each Live
intermixed with one another, this also breeds no manner of Disturbance in the
World.

There are three more; whereof one is of the French Protestants; which if we
should call it, The Eighth, yet it is of the Seven.

The other Two, if they do not Express Communion to such a Degree as the rest;
yet All the TEN carry on so Lovingly, so Peaceably, so Decently, and all the
Offices of Good Neighborhood are, in such a Distinguishing manner cultivated
among them all, as to give unto the Bigots for Uniformity a sensible Rebuke of
their Bigotry, and a notable Instance, how consistent a Variety of Rites in
Religion may be with the Tranquillity of Humane Society; and unto the whole
Christian World, a Demonstration, that PERSECUTION for Conscientious Dissents
in Religion, is a thing whereof all Wise and Just Men will say, Cursed be its
Anger, for it is fierce, and its Wrath, for it is cruel.

The LAST of the TEN Edifices is that Handsome and Costly one, which you, My
Brethren, have now so finished, as to make all Spectators admire it, for
peculiar and surpassing Beauties of it. But, though you deride the Folly, that
has preached up, the Beautifying of such Houses, as intended by, The Beauties
of Holiness; yet you will be apprehensive, that a People meeting in so
Beautified an House, are under all possible obligation to study and preserve
the Beauties of Holiness. And your doing all things with the Holy Spirit of
Love Reigning among you, will be one very shining proof of your doing so.

I have done: Finally, Brethren; Be of One mind; Live in Peace, and the God of
Love and Peace shall be with you.

Quis Comeditur Zelo Domus? Qui Omnia qua ibi videt forte perversa Satagit
emendare; Cupit corrigere; non quiescit: Si emendare non potest, tolerat,
gemit. August. tract. 10. in Joan FINIS.
THE CHURCHES Shall Know that CHRIST Searches the Hearts. Set forth in The
first SERMON that was preached in the New Meeting House in Summer-street,
Boston. On January 8. 1716, 17. being a day of Fasting and Prayer; to obtain
Gods gracious presence with, and Blessing on, the Congregation who designed to
attend Gods public Worship in that Place; and now published at their desire.

By Benjamin Wadsworth, A. M. Pastor of a Church of Christ in Boston, N. E.

Prove. 15. 3. The Eyes of the Lord are in every place, beholding the evil and
the good. Boston: Printed by J. Allen, for N. Boon, and Sold at his Shop in
Cornhill.

THE CHURCHES Shall Know that CHRIST Searches the Hearts.
Rev. 2. 23. All the Churches shall know, that I am he which searches the
reins and hearts: and I will give unto every one of you according to your
works.
THese words, are part of the Message which our Lord Jesus Christ sent to the
Angel of the Church of Thyatira, and to that Church, v. 18. There were some
things among them much commended, others as plainly condemned. The Commendation
is, 19. I know thy works, and charity, service, and faith, and patience, (...)
thy works; and the last to be more than the first. Note, we should grow more
and more such as God commands us to be: our succeeding works should be more and
better than our preceding ones. We should grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18. It Is
not enough to be steadfast and unmovable, but we should be always abounding in
the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. 58. We ought so to walk as to please God, and
abound more and more therein. 1 These. 4. 1. Our last works should be more than
our first. Though there were in this Church at Thyatira, some things very
commendable, yet there were others very blameworthy. v. 20. I have a few things
against thee. Note by the way, If particular persons or Churches have very good
things in them, that is not sufficient ground to cry them up and applaud them,
as though there were no fault to be found with them: there may be very good
things in them, yet possibly some very bad ones too. On the other hand, if
particular persons or Churches have some very bad and abominable things in
them, that is no sufficient ground to cry them down, as though there were
nothing good in them. There were in the Church of Thyatira (as well as in
several others of the Asian Churches) very good things, which our Lord
commends; yet there were a few things which he had against them.

The fault our Lord finds with Thyatira is, v. 20. Thou suffer that woman
Jezebel, which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and to seduce my
Servants to commit Fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to Idols. This
Woman pretended to be a Prophetess, though really she was not. Some think she is
called Jezebel, from her likeness to the Wife of King Ahab in promoting
Idolatry, and other Wickedness. She had a space given her to repent, but she
repented not. v. 21. Her Impudent Wickedness, in seducing the Servants of
Christ to those great Crimes of Fornication and Idolatry; should have been
witnessed against by Church Censures, the neglect of this, and so the suffering
of (and bearing with) her in her wickedness, was their great sin, and very
provoking to Christ. Note,

The Lord Jesus would have good Discipline upheld in his Churches. The Angel of
the Church of Ephesus was commended for this. Rev. 2. 2. Thou can not bear
them which are evil. Those who are known to be Heretical in Opinion, or grossly
scandalous in Practice, ought not to be allowed in the Churches of Christ: if
by proper means they will not be reformed, they should be Excommunicated Wherefore
put away from among your selves that wicked person. 1 Cor. 5. 13. A man that is
an Heretic, after the first and second Admonition, reject. So, those
Scandalous in Practice that will not be reformed, are to be treated as Heathens
and Publicans. Mat. 18. 17. It Is a thing very provoking to our Lord Jesus, that
those known to be grossly scandalous in Opinion or Practice; should be allowed
in Fellowship and Communion in any of his Churches.

Our Lord nextly proceeds to threaten this Jezebel. v. 22. I will cast her into
a Bed, and them that commit Adultery with her into great tribulation, except
they repent of their deeds. v. 23. And I will kill her Children (which may
comprehend her Disciples, Followers, those that were seduced by her) with
death. That is, with the Plague, (as some think) or the Second Death, (as
others) or the phrase may be looked on as an Haebraism, In killing I will kill;
that is, our Lord would certainly and terribly destroy them. Next to this
clause, comes in our Text, All the Churches shall know, that I am he which
searches the reins and hearts: and I will give unto every one of you according
to your works. This plainly implies, that the Churches should serve Christ with
their hearts and reins, that is, sincerely, uprightly. This being supposed,
it is asserted, that Christ knows whether they do so or no, for he searches the
hearts and reins: it is also asserted, that the Churches shall know this, they
shall know that he searches the hearts, for he will give to every one according
to his works. Accordingly, we may take these three heads for the Subject of our
present Discourse, viz. (1.) The Churches should serve the Lord Jesus Christ
with their hearts. (2.) He knows whether they do so or to. (3.) All the
Churches, shall know this, because he will give to every one according to his
works.

I. The Churches should Serve the Lord Jesus Christ with their hearts. The Lord
Jesus Christ is a Divine Person, God as well as Man; therefore the highest
Service and Obedience are due to him. Joh. (...) 23. All men should honor the
Son, even as they honor the Father; they that honors not the Son, honors
not the Father which has sent him. It Is the duty indeed of the very Heathen,
to Serve God according to the best knowledge of his Perfections, and of his
Will, which they can attain to; but inasmuch as our Text speaks of the
Churches, those Societies or Assemblies of men and women who have God's
Revealed Will, profess to believe it, and (...) shall at present confine my
Discourse only to (...).

Our Lord Jesus (...) but One Catholic (...) the Church (...) All that are
(...) had be) Savingly (...) and with him. Our Lord said, Joh. 6 37. All that
the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that comes I will in no wise
cast out.

Our Lord Jesus has but One Catholic Visible Church in the World;
comprehending all those, (with their Children) who profess him to be their
Prince and Savior, their Prophet, Priest and King; and own his Word to be the
Rule of their Faith, Worship and Conversation. But those who make this
Profession, being very numerous, and dwelling in places far distant from one
another, cannot possibly meet in any one place to attend Divine Worship; they
are therefore necessitated to meet in sundry distinct Bodies and Societies, if
they would Worship God as he directs them. And such particular Bodies or
Societies of Christians, thus meeting to Worship God in Christ Jesus, according
to the Rules of his Word, are in the Plural Number called Churches. So we read
of the Churches of Galatia. 1 Cor. 16. 1. The Churches of Judea. Gal. 1. 22.
Now all such particular Churches, should Serve Christ with their hearts,
sincerely and uprightly. Let every one that names the name of Christ, depart
from iniquity, 2 Timothy 2. 19. And now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require
of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love
him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
Deuteronomy. 10. 12. So David said to his Son Solomon. 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. Know thou the
God of thy Fathers, and serve him with a perfect heart, and with a willing
mind. Their Serving of Christ with their hearts, may comprehend,

1. Their sincere repentance of Sin, and faith in Christ Jesus. Sin is the work
of the Devil, Christ came to destroy the works of the Devil, to save his people
from their sins, to make them holy and happy. When the Apostle Preached the
Gospel, he principally Inculcated on his Hearers, the duty of Repentance
toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, Acts 20. 21. Persons must
repent or perish; must grieve and mourn for their sins, hate and forsake them,
or be miserable for ever. They must repent and turn from all their
transgressions, else Iniquity will be their ruin, Ezekiel. 18. 30. Together with
their loathing of sin, they must trust in the meritorious righteousness of
Christ for their Justification before God. 1 John 3. 23. This is his
commandment, that we should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ. And
whosoever believes in him, shall have remission of sins, (Acts 10. 43.) but he
that believes not, shall be damned, Mark 16. 16. The Lord Jesus requires, that
all under the Gospel should heartily repent of their sins, hate and turn from
them; trust in his meritorious righteousness, and powerful Intercession, for
the acceptance of their persons and sincere (though Imperfect) performances with
God.

2. Their ordering their Conversation in general, as the Gospel directs. The
heart is the spring and fountain of men's tho'ts, words and actions. Therefore
as their hearts should hate sin, trust in Christ, love and obey God; so, from
such a prevailing principle within, the whole outward behavior should be
conformed to the Precepts of the Gospel. They should fear God and keep his
Commandments, (Eccl. 12. 13) Glorify him with their bodies and spirits;
whatsoever they do, they should do it to his glory. 1 Cor. 6. 20. and 10. 31.
They should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, live soberly, righteously,
godlily in this present world, (Tit. 2. 12.) cleansing themselves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor.
7. 1.

3. Their attending Divine Worship, and managing the affairs of God's House
according to the Rules of his Word. In matters of Religion, we do but Worship
God in vain, if we take Humane Inventions for our Rule. We must to the Law and
to the Testimony, (Isa. 8. 20.) and try Doctrines and Practices by the Word of
God, if we would hold fast that which is good. 1 These. 5. 21. We should keep
close to the Pattern in the Mount, lest God should say to us of this or that
practice, Who has required this at your hands? Worship should be paid to God,
for the pleasing and honoring of him, and the profiting our own Souls; and the
latter of these depends on the former; in these things, nothing can profit us,
but what is pleasing to God. Therefore we should make his Word our Rule, in all
the Affairs of his House and Worship, and indeed in all other things. Therefore
if we would prove and evidence our love and friendship to Christ, we must do
whatsoever he commands us ( Joh. 14. 15. and 15. 14.) and we need do no more.
Therefore we should carefully Sanctify the Sabbath or Lord's Day; in a
constant course seasonably attend the Preaching of God's Word; and receive the
Sacraments, Baptism and the Lord's Supper, as the Scripture directs. It Is a
very great sin (whatever some think of it) to neglect either Baptism or the
Lord's Supper, as too many of the professed Disciples of Christ do. So, in our
several Stations and Capacities, we should do what we can that the Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline of Christ, may be upheld in their purity in his Churches
according to his Word. Indeed in all things, we should make his Word the Lamp
of our feet, and the light of our paths, Ps. 119. 105.

4. Their carrying it becomingly in the several Relations they sustain. 1 Cor.
7. 24. Let every man wherein he is called, therein abide with God. As in
general, Christians should love their neighbors as themselves, so (which is
truly comprehended in it) they should faithfully perform the duties of those
several Relations and Capacities they sustain, whether as Husbands or Wives,
Parents or Children, Masters or Servants, Ministers or Hearers, Magistrates or
Subjects. For they should behave themselves, as good Stewards of God's manifold
grace, (1 Pet. 4. 10.) and as they have opportunity, do good to all men, Gal.
6. 10. and should do to others, as they would that others (in like cases)
should do to them, Luk.6 31.

5. Their living as becomes Strangers in this World, and Heirs of Heaven. To be
carnally minded is death, but to be spiritually minded is life and peace
Therefore they should set their affections on things above, not on things on
the earth, Col. 3. 2. They should mortify and subdue their carnal earthly
affections; and lay up for themselves not treasures on earth, where moth and
rust corrupt, and thieves break through and steal; but treasures in heaven, which
are not liable to such hazards. Mat. 6. 19. They should pass the time of their
Sojourning here in fear, 1 Pet. 11. 17. Their treasures, hearts and
Conversations should be in heaven. Such a disposition of Soul toward God as
the Psalmist expressed, very well becomes them, Psalm. 73. 25, 26. Whom have I
in heaven but thee,? And there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee:
My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart, and my
portion for ever. Thus, Churches and Christians should serve Christ with their
hearts; what has been briefly hinted, proves it to be their duty to do so; though
it might also be more abundantly evidenced, were it needful, or would time
permit the doing it. We therefore proceed to the next general head, viz.

2. He knows whether they do so or no. Christ Jesus is God as well as man, and
therefore necessarily knows whether persons are hypocrites or sincere, in the
profession they make of Religion. This is necessarily implied or intended in
those words of our Text, I am he that searches the reins and the hearts. In a
literal sense, the reins and hearts are Internal parts of the body, and quite
out of the sight of men; yet God sees them. For there is not any Creature that
is not manifest in his sight, all things are naked and opened to the eyes of
him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4. 13. But the reins and hearts, in our Text
are taken in a metaphorical or figurative sense, to signify the Rational Souls
of men, with their immediate designs, purposes, thoughts, etc. For though these
are secret from the view of other men, yet they lie open to Christ's view. He
searches them, the meaning is, he perfectly sees, knows, and is acquainted with
them. Persons often pretend to have those designs and inclinations, which are
not really in them; and thereby they may deceive men who can judge only by
outward appearance. They may outwardly appear righteous to men, while inwardly
they are full of iniquity and hypocrisy, Mat. 23 28. But the Lord Jesus, whose
eyes are a flame of fire, cannot be thus imposed upon, or deceived. He not only
knows men's words and outward actions, but also as fully knows their hearts, all
their designs, desires and purposes. He knows the things that come into their
minds, even every one of them, Ezekiel. 21. 5. If they act agreeably to his Will,
sincerely desiring and designing to glorify him; he sees and approves their
sincerity, though men possibly may tax them with Formality, Hypocrisy, and by
sinister ends in what they do. So on the other hand, if they make the most
pious shows and pretenses, and shine like Angels, in the opinion of men; yet if
they secretly and chiefly aim at their own applause, outward profit or
advantage in the matter; then the Lord Jesus plainly sees and greatly abhors,
their cursed mockery and hypocrisy. Therefore he could say of the Pharisees,
who made wondrous shows of Piety; all their works they do to be seen of men,
Mat. 23. 5. It was for a pretense that they made long prayers; they made great
shows of piety, that they might the more easily devour Widows houses. Their
pretense to Serve God, was made use of to serve and gratify their own cursed
lusts and corruptions. So that when men may almost esteem such and such (on the
account of their pious pretenses) to be Angels of light; possibly the Lord may
know (because of their secret hypocrisy) that they are more like Devils
Incarnate. It is most certain, that the Lord Jesus perfectly sees and knows the
hearts of all men, and all that is in them. He sees not as man sees; for man
looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart, 1 Samuel
16. 7. Jesus knew all men; and needed not that any should testify of man, for
he knew what was in man, Joh. 2. 24, 25. And as the Lord Jesus knows the hearts
and thoughts of all men; So the last generad head tells us,

3. All the Churches shall know this, because he will give to every one according
to his works.

It Is probable that this latter part of our Text, does more immediately and
directly intend, that the Lord Jesus would bring upon Jezebel and her wicked
followers, such remarkable destructive Judgments for their wicked works; as
should demonstrate to all the Churches that heard of them, that he knew their
hearts. Jezebel pretended to be a Prophetess, extraordinarily Inspired and
taught of God, though indeed she was not. So, calling her self a Prophetess, she
pretended that her Doctrines were Divine; and might very likely insinuate, that
'twas but a part of Christian Liberty to practice such Fornication and
Idolatry, as she incoucouraged. But the Lord Jesus knew all the deceit, pride,
presumption, wickedness of her heart, and of the hearts of her followers; and
would in his spotless all governing Providence make such discoveries thereof,
and bring such Judgments therefore, as should fully convince the Churches (for
their awakening, warning, caution) that he knew the wickedness of their hearts,
and was righteous in the Judgments he inflicted for their Crimes. God sometimes
executes such remarkable vengeance on the wicked, that a man shall say, Verily
he is a God that Judges in the earth. Psa. 58. 10,11. The Lord is known by the
Judgments which he executes, the wicked is snared in the work of his own
hands, Psa. 9.16. Thus God sometimes remarkably and evidently manifests his
Omniscience, Holiness, Righteousness, in the visible Judgments he brings on
particular persons or Societies of men here in this World. And probably this
(as was hinted but now) is what is more immediately, primarily and directly
intended in our Text.

Yet our Text is by no means to be confined, limited or restrained to this
sense. For in this World God does not always make a manifest evident
distinction between the good and bad, by giving to every one according to his
works. We Are plainly told, Eccl. 8. 14. -- There be just men to whom it
happens according to the work of the wicked; and again, there be wicked men,
unto whom it happens according to the work of the righteous. Sometimes the
way of the wicked does prosper, Jer. 12. 1. The wicked devoureth the man that
is more righteous than he, (Hab. 1. 13.) while the godly are plagued all the
day long, and chastened every morning, Psalm. 73. 14. Well, but the Lord Jesus
who knows perfectly well all the thoughts, words and actions, of all men; will
be the Universal Righteous Judge of the whole world; and in the Judgment-day
he will make it manifest and known to all persons, all Churches, yea to all
Nations, (for they shall he cited before him. Mat. 25. 32.) that he searches
the reins and the hearts, and that by his giving to every one according to his
works. At that time Christ will bring to light the hidden things of darkness,
and the counsels of the heart shall be made manifest. 1. Cor. 4. 5. At that
time most fully and remarkable, he will render to every man according to his
deeds. To them who by patient continuance in well doing, do seek for glory,
honor and immortality, eternal life. But unto them that are contentious, and
do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish, on every soul of man that does evil. Romans 2. 6 -- 9.
God says, Jer. 17. 10. I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to
give every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings.
2 Cor. 5. 10. We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every
one may receive the things done in the body; according to that he has done,
whether it be good or bad. Then the secret (as well as open) Sins of the
Wicked, though they had been cloak'd with never so splendid pretenses of Piety,
shall be laid open to the view of all men and Angels; and have just punishment
inflicted for them Then also shall the secret (as well as open) duties of the
Saints, their holy desires, designs, secret prayers, sincerity of heart in
those actions which men were ready to charge with formality and hypocrisy; I
say, these things shall be laid open, made public to the view of all; and
shall be graciously rewarded by Christ the Judge of all. The Last Day, the
Great Day of Judgment, will be the great day of distinction and separation
between the Sheep and the Goats, the Wheat and the Chaff, the Godly and
Ungodly. Then, even at that time most evidently, fully and remarkably, will the
Lord Jesus give to every one according to his works.

We may now proceed to the Use, and may Infer from what has been said.

1. We should never content our selves, merely with Externals in Religion. It Is
true, we should acquaint our selves with the Gospel of Christ, believe it,
profess our belief of it and subjection to it. We should atttend Gods Holy
Worship and Ordinances, and so conform our words and outward actions to the
precepts of the Gospel, as that Men may have nothing remarkable to say against
us, Phil. 2. 15. That ye may be blameless and harmless, the Sons of God without
rebuke. But we should by no means content our selves, merely with what is
outward and visible in Religion. There may be a form of godliness, where
there is nothing of the power of it. To have a name to live, and yet be dead; is
a terrible condition to be in.

2. We should not think our selves sincere, Saints, merely because Men esteem
us so. Men can Judge only by outward appearance, 1 Samuel 16. 7. Even good men
may be mistaken about us, and think much better of us than we really are. Did
not holy Abraham charitably hope, that there might be fifty righteous persons
in Sodom, when God the searcher of Hearts knew there were not ten there? Genesis
18.

3. Our great business should be, to approve our Hearts right and sincere
before God. Without this, all our shows of Religion will avail nothing to our
Salvation. Not one hypocrite shall go to Heaven. Many of the Children of the
Kingdom (those who belong to Christ's visible Church in this world) shall be
cast into outer darkness, Mat. 8. 12. Many Professors, many Church Members will
be damned in Hell for ever; yea and many Preachers as well as Professors of the
Gospel. Many will say to Christ, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name
(that is, preached his Word) and yet he will say to them, I never knew you,
depart from me ye that work Iniquity, Mat. 7. 22, 23. We should therefore see
to it, that we heartily repent of Sin, believe in Christ, love and obey God. We
must have Faith that purifies the Heart and works by love, else we must perish
for ever. No outward shows of Religion, Entitle us to Heaven; none but the pure
in Heart shall see God. If there were a great Assembly of Professors together,
and but one hypocrite among them; he should perish and all the rest be saved.
So, if there were among them but one sincere Saint, he should be saved; and all
the rest should be damned. We should therefore strive (like the Apostle) to
please God who tries our hearts, 1 These. 2. 4.

4. Particular Churches should make Christ's glory their end, and his Word
their rule in all they do. The Lord Jesus knows the heart designs and
Intentions of all, not only considered in their single capacity as individual
persons; but also considered as parts or members of any Society or Community.
Therefore Churches as such, should Endeavor to approve themseves to Christ in
all they do: For he is the Head of the body the Church, the Builder and Owner
of the Church which is his House. And if they would approve themselves to him,
they should aim at his glory and make his word their rule, in all they do.

1. This is their duty. They should observe all things whatsoever Christ has
Commanded, Mat. 28. 20. He is thy Lord, and Worship thou him, Psalm. 45. 11.
Christ has purchased his Church with his own blood, and since he has so bought
them with a price; they should glorify him with their bodies and Spirits which
are his, Act. 20. 28. 1 Cor. 6. 20

2. This is their Honor. When persons make a true and right profession, it is
their honor to act agreeably thereto; for therein they show their Integrity
and Uprightness. Churches (as well as particular Christians) cannot honor
themselves more, than in walking and acting as Christ (whom they profess to be
their Lord and Master) commands them to do. Christ said to the Angel of the
Church of Philadelphia, thou have kept my word; and the Exhortation he then
gave was, hold that fast which thou have that no man take thy crown, Rev. 3. 8,
11. While Ministers and Churches, keep close to the Word of Christ and act
agreeably thereto, it is a crown of honor and glory to them; and their so doing
leads to an eternal crown of glory in the future World.

3. This is their safety and Advantage. All Power in Heaven and Earth is
committed to Christ, he is Head over all things to the Church (Mat. 28. 18. Ephesians.
1.22.) he walks in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks (the Churches) and
holds the stars (his Ministers) in his right hand, Rev. 1. 13, 16. 20. Indeed
he rules and governs (...) according to his Infinite Wise and Sovereign
pleasure. Therefore it must needs be for the safety and welfare of particular
Churches (as well as particular Christians) to obey and honor Christ in all
things. He Is King in Zion, has a rod of Iron to dash his enemies to pieces, as
a Potter's vessel; therefore it is wisdom to serve him with holy fear; lest his
anger being kindled against us, he destroy us for ever, Psalm. 2. It Is
unspeakably dangerous for Persons or Churches, to provoke the Lord Jesus by
acting contrary to his Word; for he can remove the candlestick out of it is
place, fight against them with the rod of his mouth, come on them (suddenly) as
a thief, kill them with death, and spue them out of his mouth (as he threatens
in case of Impenitence and non amendment) Rev. 2. 5, 16, 23. and 3. 3, 16. If
they provoke him to anger, he can tear them to pieces so that none shall
deliver them; he can terribly plague and punish them both in this World and in
the next. On the other hand, if they keep the word of Christ's patience, uphold
and maintain his Doctrine, Worship, Discipline as his word directs; and in all
things approve themselves to him; he can and will do for them, all that
infinite Wisdom (accompanied with Infinite Love) sees best for them. What great
and precious Promises in these Epistles to the Asian Churches, are there made
to those that are faithful in serving of Christ? Promises very great and
precious Indeed. Truly, godliness has the promise of the life that now is, and
of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4. 8. All things shall work together for good
to them that love God, and are called according to his purpose, Romans 8. 28.

And as all particular Churches, should make Gods glory their end and his Word
their rule; so should you who purpose (God willing) to attend and uphold his
Worship and Ordinances in this place. To you therefore that have been at
considerable pains and cost, in building this House for the Worship of God, I
would say a few things.

1. Examine your selves concerning what you have done in this matter. Was it
with a true and hearty aim, at the furtherance of Gods glory and the Interest
of Religion; that you engaged in this affair, and have been at such pains and
expense in it? I would not be mistaken, I do not charge nor challenge any of
you in this matter; however I think it is not improper, for you to examine your
own hearts in this affair. If upon examination you find, that you have
regularly and sincerely approved your hearts to God in this affair; then be
thankful that God has enabled you to expend so much for his service, and that
he has Inclined you thus to honor him with your Substance; and you should
humbly hope and trust, that these your gifts and offerings do and shall find
acceptance with God through Christ. It Is a good and great thing, when in matters
of this nature persons can truly say, as David about his Preparations to build
the Temple, 1 Chronicles. 29. 17. -- As for me, in the uprightness of mine heart I
have willingly offered all these things. And as you should be thankful, so far
as you have approved your selves to God in this affair; so you should be
thankful also for the success you have had. The best means cannot command
success, Eccl. 9. 11. The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor riches to men of understanding, nor
favor to men of skill: but time and chance happens to all men. Men might
labor in the fire, and spend their strength for very vanity, if God did not
smile on and succeed their Endeavors, Psalm. 127. 1. Except the Lord build the
House, they labor in vain that build it. It is therefore owing to kind
Providence, not only that persons have contributed of their estates to build
this House; but also that Materials have been provided, Laborers and
Artificers preserved and assisted, and that the House is thus finished and
perfected. Be thankful to God for this. But if upon examination any of you
find, that you have acted from by, sinister ends, not truly aiming at the
furtherance of Gods glory and the Interest of Religion, or not chiefly aiming
at these things; this calls for your humiliation before God, and flying to the
blood of Jesus for pardon.

2. Approve your selves to God for the future. Be Christians not only in word,
but in deed and in truth, Don't content your selves, with any thing short of
true unfeigned repentance of sin, and faith in Christ Jesus. A New
Meeting-Huuse (if it were as costly and magnificent as Solomon's Temple) New
Seats, New Pews, without a New Heart; can never Entitle you to an habitation or
seat in the New Jerusalem which is above. Sabbaths, Meeting Houses, Ordinances,
Ministers; as to Man's profit, are all of them appointed to this end viz. to
bring Souls nearer to God in Christ, and make them more meet for glory. If you
content your selves with externals in Religion, without having your hearts
sincere and upright with God; then you satisfy your selves merely with means,
neglecting the end, they were appointed for; and thus to do, would be great
folly and wickedness indeed. Live therefore as becomes the Children of God, the
members of Christ, the living Temples of the Holy Spirit; being holy in heart
and life, holy in all manner of conversation.

3. Maintain Religion in your Families. Be religious in your own houses, as
well as in the House of God. Maintain a constant course of secret Prayer, Mat.
6. 6. Enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut the door, pray to thy
Father which is in secret; and thy Father which sees in secret shall reward
thee openly. Maintain a constant course of Family Prayer every morning and
evening. Resolve as Joshua of old, Josh. 24. 15. As for me and my House we will
serve the Lord. Let the word of God be read daily in your Families, Joh. 5. 39.
Search the Scritures, Josh. 1. 8. This Book of the Law shall not depart out of
thy mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and night, that thou may
observe to do according to all that is written therein. Again, set good
examples before, give frequent wholesome Instructions to, maintain good
Government over, your Children and Servants. Bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6. 4. Like Abraham, charge your Children and
Household, that they may keep the way of the Lord, Genesis 18. 19. Do your utmost
that those under your family care, may serve God faithfully while you live, and
also after you are dead; that one Generation may praise Gods works to another,
Psalm. 145. 3.

4. Keep close to Christ's word as your Rule, in all your public and Church
affairs. Do all you can, that his holy Truths, Worship, Discipline may be
upheld among you. The more hearty and diligent you are in this, so much the
more you may expect that Christ will bless you. Do what you can to get a
Learned, able, holy and faithful Minister; even such an one as is described, 1 Timothy 3. 1 -- 7. Tit. 1. 6, -- 9. When God shall set such an one over you,
diligently attend on his Ministrations. Esteem him very highly in love for his
works sake, 1 These. 5. 13. obey him and submit to him, as your spiritual
watchman, Heb. 13. 17. Afford to him an honorable maintenance. Honor the
Lord with thy substance, Pro. 3. 9. So has the Lord ordained, that they who
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel 1 Cor. 9. 14. Let him that is
taught in the word, communicate to him that teaches in all good things, Gal 6.
6. Constanly and earnestly Pray for him, that God would abundantly assist and
succeed him in his work. Christians should make Conscience of thus praying for
their Ministers; the Scrpture frequently Inculcates this duty on them, Ephesians. 6.
18 19. Col. 4. 3. 1 These. 5. 25

5. Live in peace among your selves. If you want direction in any case, be not
backward to advise with Neighboring Ministers in the Town; I believe they all
wish your welfare, that you may have much of the gracious presence and Spirit
of Christ with you, and would heartily and readily give you the best advice
they could. But the best advice from others, would signify but too little if
you should contend among your selves. It Is not easy to describe, the woeful and
grievous fruits of contention: Our Blessed Savior plainly Intimates, that an
House, City or Kingdom, divided against it self, is in danger of desolation,
Mat. 12. 25. Mark 3. 25 If ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be
not consumed one of another, Gal. 5. 15. Where envying and strife is, there is
confusion, and every evil work, Jam. 3. 16. And therefore, let nothing be done
through strife or vain glory, Phil. 2. 3. only by pride comes contention, Prove.
13. 10. Therefore subdue pride and self-will; study self denial, that first
Lesson of Christianity, Mat. 16. 24, Be of one mind, live in peace, and the God
of love and peace shall be with you, 2. Cor 13. 11. In a word, approve your
hearts to Christ in all you do. I cannot give you better Counsel than this,
carry it at all times and in all things toward the Lord Jesus; as considering
and firmly believing, that (as our text declares) he searches the reins and
hearts, and will give to every one according to his work.

FINIS.

