An Addition To the Present Melancholy Circumstances of the PROVINCE
Considered, and^ March 6th. 1718, 9. Exhibiting Considerations about Labor,
Commerce, Money, Notes, or Bills of Credit.
LABOR is needful in order to our comfortable Living in the World. Inasmuch as
we consist of Material Bodies, as well as Rational Immortal Souls. Our
Constitution is such, that Houses to dwell in, Food and Raiment are needful for
our Subsistence; Houses are usually made of Wood, Stone, Brick, Lime, or partly
of them all; Nails, Hinges, Glass for Lights, etc. are also used in making a
comfortable Habitation; Now its obvious to every thinking Person, that much
Work or Labor (as well as Cost) is needful to fit and prepare these Materials,
to collect and get them together (some are often Transported very far*) and
also to join and put them together; Hard Labor is absolutely necessary, in
Building a Convenient Dwelling; and often also in keeping it in good repair,
that through the Idleness of the hands the House may not drop through.

Labor's as needful to procure Food for our Bodies. As to the Grain, our Bread
is made of, whether Wheat, Rye, Indian Corn, etc. how much Labor is there to
Fence and Plow the Ground, Sow or Plant the Seed, tend it, reap or gather it,
Thresh, Grind, Bake it before it becomes Bread? The Flesh we eat, whether Beaf,
Pork, Mutton, etc. how much Labor is there to Raise, Tend, Feed Cattle, Hogs,
Sheep, before their Flesh becomes proper Food for us? As to Fish though we are
at no pains to raise them, yet we are to catch them, with Hooks, Nets, etc, and
often to spirt, (...), dry them before they are fit for our Food, or at least
fit to be kept (...) time without rotting and perishing. So as for Roots,
Turnips, Parsnips, Carrets, etc. And as for Orchard Fruits, Apples, Pears,
Peaches, etc. much Work and Labor must be employed, to produce such Things as
these for the nourishment of our Bodies.

Labor's also as needful to procure Clothes; the greatest part whereof is
commonly made of Sheeps Wool, Cotton Wool, Flax, Hemp, Silk (that is first Spun
fine by the Worms) Skins of Beasts for Shoes, Gloves, etc. As to Sheep there is
Labor to raise, tend, feed them Winter and Summer before their Wool is come to
its full growth, and then, how much Labor in washing, shearing, carding,
combing, spinning, weaving (or knitting) fulling, making before we put it on
our Bodies to wear? As to Flax there is Labor in sowing, pulling, dew-rotting,
or water-rotting, breaking, hatchelling, spining, weaving, etc. before we use
it for Clothing.

These few and brief Hints plainly show, that much Work or Labor is absolutely
necessary to our comfortable Living in the World. The Wise Creator and
Governor of all things has fitted and adapted Man for Work and Business,
besides the rational Endowments of his Immortal Soul, he has Feet for walking
and Hands for working; that when the Sun arises, he may go forth to his work
and labor till the evening: he should work while it is day. As God has fitted
Man for Work, so he has rendered his working absolutely needful for his own
Support and Comfort; and has likewise said, Six Days shall thou labor, and do
all they work: Do your own business, work with your own hands that ye may have
lack of nothing; if any will not work neither should he eat.

These Things being so, I don't see how we can possibly excuse our selves, or
have solid peace in our own Breasts, if we indulge our selves in Idleness. If
some have such Estates, that the Yearly Income's enough to maintain them, yet
since they have the same Powers and Capacities for Business, and are under the
same Supreme Law with others, they seem inexcusable if they wrap up their
Talent in a Napkin, for they should be good Stewards of the Abilities betrusted
with them. The greater Estates they have, the more they are indebted to Divine
Providence, and should make grateful returns by virtuously employing betrusted
Abilities; yet as they have opportunity they may do good to all Men, and become
more able to give to him that needs. But Idleness seems to be a double
aggravated crime in those, whose honest Incomes cannot maintain them. If they
can Work and will not, they may well be counted Public Nusances, for in the
Victuals they eat and Clothes they wear, they really live on the Labor of
others, yet make them no recompense for it: whether this may be styled open
Injustice or secret Theft, I Will leave to the ingenious co decide. God's
Authority and Men's own Necessities, makes Work and Labor absolutely necessary
for them. Therefore Children should be Educated (not only in religious Learning
but also) to good Business, for they should be trained up in the way wherein
they should go. Idleness should be indulged by none, but Diligence in proper
Business, (which by God's Blessing makes rich) should be ezemplifyed in all;
the more there is of such Diligence among a People, so much the more it is
(ordinarily) for their own Support and Comfort. So far as we are thus
Industrious we are obedient to God, profitable to our selves, useful to our
Neighbors, advantageous to Posterity, but Idleness is the reverse of all
these. If Sense and Duty and Interest wont, I believe pressing, pinching
necessity will make some more industrious than they used to be. Yet to prevent
mistakes, I Will say, there is a great variety of Work needful for the good of
Humane Persons and Societies; besides Plowing, Hewing or an immediate laborious
working with the bands. The studying of Languages, Arts, Sciences, Divinity,
Physic, etc. and the employing the skill or knowledge obtained by such Study,
may greatly promote the Glory of God, the Persons own benefit, and the good of
those he is concerned with. This is true as to Ministers, Schoolmasters,
Physicians, etc.

From these Hints about LABOR, we pass to consider something about COMMERCE,
by which I here understand all manner of Exchange in dealing; whether we
Exchange Money for Goods, Victuals, Labor, or Exchange one sort of Goods for
another, or Labor either for Labor or Wages. All such Exchange I here
comprehend under the name of Commerce, and such Commerce is absolutely
necessary for the good of Humane Societies. Though an House, Food, Raiment, are
needful for my comfortable Subsistence, yet I cannot be supposed to be equally
skilled in making, raising, and providing these various and different
necessaries. A Great variety of Arts, Skill, Labor, and a great number of
Persons is ss needful ordinarily, to furnish so much as one Person with what is
proper, for his Habitation, Food and Raiment. Such is the scanty narrowness of
our Capacities, that generally much Use, Habit, Custom is needful to render a
Person truly skilful or accurate at any one sort of Business. Common sayings
declare, that Use makes perfect. Experience is the best Schoolmaster. Studious
Diligence in a Particular Calling, generally makes a Person skilful at it; the
more Skilful, so much the faster and better he can Work. The better he Works,
so much the more profitable to him that buys and pays; and the faster he Works
or the more he does, so much the more profitable it is for himself.

Every Person therefore should endeavor to be Skilful and Accurate at some
suitable and proper Work or Business. that thereby he may be able to manage an
honest Commerce with his Neighbors, and may make a just recompense for the
various benefits he receives from them. For instance, if a Shoemaker with the
Shoes he makes, honestly pay one for the Leather, another for the Thread he
works up, another for the Food his Family eats, another for the Clothes they
wear, etc. herein he manages an honest Commerce and Exchange with those he is
supplied or benefited by. Or if he Sells his Shoes for an honest price in
Money, and with that Money pays particular Persons he deals with, and also
Public dues to Church and State, etc. herein still he manages an honest
Commerce. And I think some Commerce of this general Nature, must be managed by
every one that would live honestly. When do we eat one mouthful of Bread, or
put on any Raiment whether Woolen or Linen, but that several Scores of
different Persons have been employed more remotely or immediately, to raise and
prepare the same for our use? And when the Labor of so many is employed for my
benefit, if my Labor (or the produce of it) be not immediately or remotely an
equivalent benefit to them, I am then unjust and dishonest to them; for why
should I be benefitted by their Labor, without making a just return in being
some way or other as serviceable to them as they are to me? If we (being able)
do'nt do at least as much good to Mankind, as we receive from them: then we are
Debtors to our Neighbors, and unjust in our Conduct to them.

Inasmuch as we should desire to benefit others, as well as be benefitted by
them; therefore we should not Sell our Labor or the produce of it, for more
than it is worth, according to the Rules of Justice and Equity: nor should we
desire to have our Neighbors Labor, or the produce of it, for less than the
just Value of it. Therefore to Sell as high or dear, and Buy as cheap or low,
as possibly we can, is no good Rule for Christians to go by: for we should love
our Neighbors as our selves, and do as we would be done by.

Among the many Products of Humane Labors some are looked on as necessary;
others as being chiefly for convenience, ornament or delight. It Is as plain
that we should prefer Necessaries to what is only for Ornament, or to please
the fancy. Raiment is necessary for us, though this or that particular Mode, Cut,
Fashion or Trimming is not so. Its criminal therefore if through Idleness we
neglect to provide necessaries for our selves, or Families; its criminal also,
if we employ so much of our Labor or the Produce of it, in getting Things for
Ornament or Delight, as to pinch or straighten our selves as to Necessaries; or
render us unable to pay our just Debts. On the other hand, it is more noble to
be employed in serving and supplying the necessities of others, than merely in
pleasing the fancy of any. The Plowman that raises Grain, is more serviceable
to Mankind, than the Painter who draws only to please the Eye. The hungry Man
would count fine Pictures but a mean Entertainment. The King himself is served
by the Field. The Carpenter who builds a good House to defend us from Wind and
Weather, is more serviceable than the curious Carver, who employs his Art to
please the Fancy. This condemns not Painting or Carving, but only shows, that
what is more substantially serviceable to Mankind, is much preferrable to what
is less necessary. Doubtless Nebuchadnezzers Politick's led him to think so,
when to weaken the Jews, he carried from them not only the Princes and Mighty
Men of Valor, but also the Carpenters and Smiths whose Occupation was very
necessary and useful to humane Society.

Indeed when a People grow numerous, and part are sufficient to raise
necessaries for the whole, then it is allowable and laudable, that some should be
employed in Innocent Arts more for Ornament than Necessity: any innocent
business that gets an honest penny, is better than Idleness. If some do nice,
curious works in Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, Linen, Silk etc. and others whose
Estates will bear it pay them for their Labor and buy what they make, this is
much better for the Public, than that any should be idle: This yields the
greatest satisfaction to me, as to many unnecessary Niceties and Curiosities in
building, adorning furnishing of Houses, in making fine costly Gardens, Clothes
etc. that hereby the Poor are employed and maintained, when they could scarce
find work and get a living; if no business was done amongst mankind, but what
is in its own nature necessary to provide Habitations, Food and Raiment: If the
Rich thus pay for such needless Curiosities, chiefly to employ and maintain the
Poor, its noble and generous in them, better than if they had given them the
Cost thereof for nothing: but if chiefly to gratify their own pride, its
criminal in them. Yet observe, if we are rich and able; its better to employ
and maintain the Poor among our-selves, than those in foreign parts.

And we had better give something to those that cant work, and to educate poor
Children etc, than to be lavish in buying of needless curiosityes for
our-selves.

But truly our Country is not yet of that Age, People not so numerous, nor we
in such plentiful circumstances, as to require that many (if any) should be
employed in niceties and curiosities. Though God has given us a good Land, a very
good Country for those that will be industrious, yet it is a Northern Climate,
the winter so long and cold, as to make much diligent Labor necessary to
provide Dwelling, Food and Raiment, though curiosities are neglected. We should
therefore Exercise our-selves, and encourage one another in employments
directly tending to supply our necessities, and promote our comfortable
subsistence.

In Commerce to be managed by a private Family, does not prudence direct us,
that we should sell or part with what we can best spare, and receive by way of
exchange for it, what is most needful for us? If we receive money that answers
all things procurable by commerce; if we cannot get that, we should firstly aim
at what is most serviceable rather than at curiosities. And I presume the same
rules hold good, as to Commerce between one Country and another. I suppose
this Province does not raise nigh so much Provisions as is needful to feed
our-selves, and supply our Shipping, we buy much from other places, while so,
would it not be an hurt to send any Provisions to a Foreign Market? But out of
the produce of our Labor, we may spare great quantities of Fish, Oil,
Whalebone, etc. and for these, what returns should we chiefly desire? Why
things that are most serviceable and necessary for us, and not for needless
Commodities, sundry of which were glanced at in the Letter March 6th.

And I think least of all should we desire so much Rum as is spent here. These
Northern Plantations on the Continent, are great sufferers by the vast
quantities of Rum spent among them. Though in some cases it may be useful
medicinally, yet I have no reason to think that it is proper for any, to make an
usual drink of it if the Excise were so raised, that it could not be retailed
under Ten Shillings a Quart, I believe it would be ten times better for this
Province than it is. If the high price might restrain many of the poor
laborers, from getting Rum and Flip; I believe their needy Families would be
much better provided for than they are. Don't some say, that when Men drink so
much, they drink the blood of their Wives and Children; that is, they waste the
cost which should provide necessaries for their Families.

If the Laborers in my Family spend one fortnight (I Will suppose) in a year, to
get Hoops or Staves for a West India Market; and we spend the returns of it in
Rum, this would be but a miserable Commerce for my Family. We could have done
well enough without the Rum, and if that Fortnights Labor had been spent in
raising Grain, there would have been a better supply of Necessaries; if in
raising Flax or Hemp, we might be employed in the Winter in dressing it;
instead of spending our Time and burning our Skins over our Drams.

I Am humbly of the Opinion, that multiplying of Taverns, Licenses to Retail
Drink, and the Drinking so much Rum, have been unspeakably hurtful to this
Province, and if not speedily retrenched will evidently hurt and impoverish us
much more. If the needless cost in Rum in a few Years past were computed, would
it not amount to as much as the Inhabitants of the Province have taken up upon
their Lands? If that cost in Rum had been spared, might not this Mortgaging
their Lands have been in some measure prevented? If any ingenious Person could
pretty fully inform the Public, how much Rum is Retailed and Spent in this
Province in One Year; it might possibly give to some a new view of things, and
make them more careful to prevent or suppress what threatens us.

The Order that I proposed, requires that I should nextly say something about
MONEY. And by this I principally mean and intend, Gold or Silver that has some
Mark or Stamp on it by Public Authority, showing it to be Legal and Current
Coin, whether it passes by Tale or Weight. Though I conceive what passes by Tale
is supposed to have such a Weight as the Law prescribes for it, as Crowns,
Shillings, etc. As for such Silver and Gold Money, I think it is Universally
esteemed by all Civilized Nations, has been so in all Ages; and is reckoned the
best Medium of Trade or Exchange, by all that are much used in Buying and
Selling.

Money's more durable than Eatables, Drinkables and other Commodities which
Person often Exchange with one another. In Silver and Gold a great Price or
Value may be contained in a small Compass, a small Quantity: a small handful of
Money may buy Cart-Loads of some other things that are yet very useful for us.
Money also is easy of Transportation, a great Value may be easily Transported
by Land or Water. These considerations render Money very Commodious and Useful
in Trade or Commerce. Gold and Silver are reckoned to have an intrinsic Value
in them, and sometimes they are used to make Rings, Jewels, Spoons, Cups, etc.
but Money's chiefly useful to Men, as its the most convenient Medium of
Exchange or Commerce. The Wise Man says, Money answers all things. If a Man has
Money enough, he may buy Food and Raiment, any thing for Necessity or Delight,
that is attainable by Commerce. Generally, Men had rather have ready Money than
any thing else, for what they Sell; and Money will more readily Buy what is
wanted, than any thing else will. This proceeds from the Universal Value and
Esteem, which Men have for Money. It Is true, The love of Money is the root of
all Evil; Coveteousness is Idolatry; if we take such Corruptable Things as
Silver and Gold for our chief treasure; if we make Gold our hope, and fine Gold
our Confidence; I say, to do this, must needs be criminal, provoking to God and
hurtful to our selves; yet the Universal Esteem Men have for Money (if it be
not excessive) seems to be a favor and benefit of God to Mankind; because
thereby it becomes an Universal Medium of Exchange or Commerce. If a Man has
Forty different things to buy, and Money enough; 'twill buy them all as readily
or more readily, than if he had Forty sorts of Commodities to part with for
them. There Is an Esteem of Money which is lawful not vicious; when its valued
as the best Medium of Trade or Exchange. Such an Esteem of it Abraham had, when
he offered Money to buy a Burying Place; and Jacob, when he sent Money to Egypt
to buy Corn in a time of Famine; and David when he offered Money for a Spot of
Ground to build an Altar on. Money being the best, most approved Universal
Medium of Exchange; the more plenty there is of it among a People, the more
easily they may manage all their Affairs of Trade or Commerce. If a Man can
have ready Money for what he does, or Sells, and his Money will Buy what he has
occasion for, this renders the management of his Affairs very easy, to what
otherwise 'twould be. A Bartering Trade is very troublesome, though sometimes
needful for want of Money. It was one of the great Outward Blessings of King
Solomon's Reign, that Money was very plenty among his People.

Inasmuch therefore as the Export of this Conntry, must necessarily exceed what
we spend of Imported Commodities, in order to the making Money pass Current
among us; it must needs be wise in us, to Spend as little as need requires of
Imported Goods, and to Raise, Make, Produce, as much as we can for our own
Supply. The great Wisdom of our British Nation appears in encouraging their own
Produce, their own Manufacture; in encouraging Labor, Industry, Diligence,
Useful Arts and Trades among themselves, that so their own People may live by
their own Labor. And should not we who proceed from them imitate this their
laudible Wisdom and Industry? Methinks the more we do so, the more we deserve
their Praise and Commendation. If it is Wise and advantageous in them to do
thus, must they not commend it as Wise and Advantageous in us, to imitate them
herein?

The Preamble of our Act, 1716. for Emitting on Loan an Hundred Thousand Pound
Bills of Credit, says, All the Silver Money which formerly made Payments in
Trade to be easy, is now sent into Great Britain to make Returns for part of
what is owing there. Since they have all our Money already, they must needs
rejoice to see us more Industrious and Frugal to maintain our selves, that we
may not run farther into their Debt, and have nothing to pay them. Parents are
pleased to see their Children Thrive by their Business; and must it not be
pleasing to our Nation, to see us to imitate the Wise, Industrious Example they
set us, as to Thrive and Prosper also, at least to Support our selves? Would it
not grieve them to see us Proud, Lazy, Extravagant, Spendthrifts, bringing our
selves (for want of Wise Industrious Methods) into perplexing Difficulties? Yet
how faulty are we herein? We have been so deficient in Farming, and managing
our own Manufacture, lived so much above our Abilities, spent so much of
Imported Commodities; that our Money's gone, there is scarce a Penny of it
passing for a Twelvemonth. We need pity, and deserve shame, for these our
Mismanagements; let us be Wise and do better.

Now Consider, NOTES OR BILLS OF CREDIT. Indeed I have not so great a clearness
in my own mind about these things, as possibly some others have: Yet I Will
humbly offer, that I take the Nature of such Bills to be to help our Memories,
showing how much is Due to us; and the securing our Interest, by Intitling us
to so much as the Bill specifies, from those obliged by it to pay us. A Note or
Bill of Credit is not Money, nor supposed (in it self considered) to be
Payment, but rather a Security that Payment shall be made in such a time. A.
obliges himself by a Note under his Hand, to pay Five Pounds to B. in Two
Months time; this Note is neither Money nor Payment, but carries the Nature of
a Bond or Obligation, to make Payment at the Time mentioned. The present want
of Money, seems to be the very reason and Foundation of this Note; for if he
who Binds himself by it, had Five Pounds Money to lay down, what need he Bind
himself to pay it Two Months hence? Every one had rather have present pay, than
be assured by a Note he shall be paid hereafter. If every one could make
present Pay, for Work done or Goods Bought; he would have no occasion to desire
Creditor's Patience, or to give a Note to Pay him after such a Time. So that
generally speaking, Present want of Money, is the Reason or Foundation of Notes
or Bills of Credit.

Of such Bills, some are of a more Private, some of a more Public nature. I
conceive their private ones concern (ordinarily) only those particular Persons
whose names are mentioned therein. If A. obliges himself by a Note to pay Five
pounds to B. in three months from the Date thereof; this Note is of no benefit
but to B. nor can it effect any good for him, till the three months are ended.
If a Note mentions the term of time, when payment is to be made; at the
Expiration of that term, the Obligation should be fulfilled, and payment be
deferred no longer. If no particular term be mentioned, but A, is obliged to
pay Five Pounds to B. upon Demand, it is then supposed, that very quickly, or
whenever B, pleases, he may demand and receive his Five Pounds.

Some such thing as this must necessarily be understood, where there is no
particular term set for payment; else the Note would only be a Declaration,
that A. would always owe for Five Pounds to B. and a thousand of such Notes or
Declarations are not worth a Straw: I would thank no man for his Note or Bond,
obliging himself always to owe me a Thousand Pounds, for if he always owes it,
he never pays it, and so I shall never be the better for it.

This may show too, how weak and groundless a fancy it is, that Paper Money (as
it is called) or Province Bills, or Bank Bills, if such there were, might be
confirmed and established so, as to be of perpetual currency and use like
Silver Money. Those who entertain this Notion, may for all me, please
themselves with Notes and Bonds, whereby Persons engage always to owe
(consequentially never to pay) them so much -- Again, A. may give a Note to B.
to receive Five Pounds of C. or in other words, may draw a Note upon C. to pay
unto B. Five Pounds upon sight of said Note, or in so many Days after. If C.
does protest or refuse this Note, then it is of no present immediate use to any
one. If C. accepts the Note, he is then obliged to act as that directs. In this
case the Note is of no immediate use or benefit to any but to B. again.

If A. gives a Note in General terms to this purpose, viz. I acknowledge my
self Debtor Five Pounds to the Possessor of the Note, and oblige my self to pay
said Sum at the end of Three Months, from the Date hereof. Dated this etc. --
A. --

Such a Note, persons may receive or refuse at pleasure, none can be obliged to
accept it, but the more the Ability and Honesty of A. (who Subscribes the Note)
is known, so much the more likely it is, that the Note will pass with some
persons, if they are satisfied it is not Counterfeit.

These Bills or Notes already mentioned, are of a private Nature; their whole
Credit or Value depends on the Ability, and Obligation of some particular
person considered as in a private capacity.

But then other Notes or Bills of Credit are of a Public Nature; there is, the
Anthority or Government in a Kingdom or Country, ingages to make them good, to
Pay or Discount them. I take our Province Bills (and those of Neighboring
Governments, New Hampshire, Connecticut, etc. to be of this Nature. And though
these Bills are in common Discourse called Paper Money, yet the Law does not
look on them as Money, but calls them Bills of Public Credit. He therefore
that receives one of these Bills, does not receive Money, nor pay properly so
called. He that pays down what he ows, has not occasion to be credited or
trusted; but inasmuch as the Province had not ready Money to serve the Public
occasions, therefore they emitted these Notes or Bills of Credit, as Security
to the Possessor of the Bill for the Sum specified in it. For Instance, the
Twenty Shillings Bill. This Indented Bill of Twenty Shillings due from the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, to the possessor thereof,
shall be in value equal to Money; and shall be accordingly accepted by the
Treasurer, and Receivers subordinate to him in all Public payments, and for
any Stock at any time in the Treasury etc.

He that possesses the Bill, does not possess Twenty Shillings, for that Sum
is due (therefore not paid) to him; nor does he possess Money, for the Bill is
to be in value equal to Money, therefore the Bill is nothing but a Note or
Instrument whereby the Province is obliged to Pay or Discount Twenty Shillings
to the Possessor. I use the word pay or discount, because though the Bill says,
Twenty Shillings are due, from the Province to the Possessor, yet it does not
directly say, that the Province shall pay Twenty Shillings to the Possessor;
but only that this Bill shall be accepted as equal to Money by the Treasurer,
etc. or if there be any Stock in the Treasury the Possessor may bring his Bill,
and have Twenty Shillings worth (as I take the meaning to be) of said Stock.

But I don't see it likely, that there should be any Stock in the Treasury
besides Bills; while the Bills are to be received there at five per Cent
advance; for while so, who would pay his Tax in any thing besides Bills? The
Province owes the Possessor Twenty Shillings, when the Possessor is taxed one
and Twenty Shillings to the Province, and brings this Bill, the Treasurer
receives it, and so the Twenty Shillings due to the Possessor is discounted,
yea, his Twenty Shillings pass for Twenty one Shillings, by the five per Cent.
advance. So that I humbly conceive, the principal way of Sinking the Bills,
will be by calling them in, and discounting with (rather than paying) the
Possessor.

The Fund or Security for Province Bills, is the Duties of Impost and Excise,
and also the Tax to be levied on Polls, and Estates both Real and Personal; as
appears by the Acts for emitting Bills. Anno. Dom. 1702. and 1703. Therefore
the more of these Bills are received into the Treasury, by Impost, Excise, and
Rates, so much the less the Province is in Debt; for this drawing Bills,
discounts with the Possessors of them.

And the shorter the time is for drawing in of Bills the greater will be their
value and esteem in the minds of Persons. Every one desires present pay; if
this cannot be had, yet the sooner the Debt is paid or discounted, so much the
better to the Creditor. Any one had rather have a Note from his Debtor; to pay
him in Three Months, than in three Years. Therefore to defer the paying or
discounting a Bill of Credit is a certain and effectual way to depreciate or
lessen the value of it. In Private Dealings, if a Person finds that he whom he
Trades with, does not keep his word, nor pay at the time he obliged himself by
his Note; he will be the more backward to deal with or trust him for the future:
This is too true and plain to need proof. The nature of the thing is the same,
as to Public Bills. It Is the promise or engagement of the Government, that
gives the whole value and currency to the Bill, and makes so much due from the
Province to the Possessor of it. If therefore the Engagement be not complied
with at the time set, but payment (or calling in or discounting the Bill) be
postponed; does not this lessen the value of the Bill? and some wise and good
Persons even doubt about the fairness of this postponing, however it seems
plain, that it does not commend Public Engagements, to the belief or trust of
Persons.

Does it not give them an handle to argue; that if the fulfilling of one
Public promise be postponed, so it may be with another, and what will public
Faith (or engagement) signify after this rate? Whereas it is the Wisdom,
Honor and Safety of any Government to have their Credit strengthened, and all
their Engagements readily relied on.

If some will say this Postponing is no hurt, for the promise is made to
ourselves, and we may defer the accomplishment at pleasure. Reply. But is not
the matter otherwise? The Engagement in the Bill is made by the Province or
Government, not to it, but to the Possessor of the Bill. And generally
speaking, none but he to whom the Promise is made; can fairly release or defer
the Accomplishment of it. If a Person engages to pay me 20 s. at Two Months
end, when that term is Expired, he cannot fairly defer Payment, without my leave
or Allowance.

However, if Postponing the drawing in of Bills, does sink the Credit or Esteem
of them, and so raise the Price of Commodities Imported and Produced here; this
hurts many. The Merchant and Husbandman seems least hurt, because they can
raise on the Commodities they Sell to each other, and so keep a sort of
Balance. But those suffer greatly, who live on Salaries and on the Interest or
Incomes of their Estates; and so do Tradesmen and Day-Labourers. If I Am a
Labourer and can have Four Shillings for a Days Work, and a few Years ago I
could buy Wheat for Five Shillings a Bushel, but now must give Ten; this shows,
that the Produce of my Labor is not above half the Benefit to me that it was.
This is a very great pressure and burden on poor Laborers, and I cannot but
think it is much owing, to the mean opinion Persons have of Bills of Credit.

I think I have heard, as though in South Carolina, Silver Money has been at
above 30 s. an Ounce, and that a pair of Shoes have cost above Forty Shillings
there in Bills, when possibly 8 or 9 Shillings in Silver would have purchased
them. We should take heed in this Province, that we don't stear the same Course
with them. Therefore it seems much for the advantage of this People (in my
apprehension) to have the Bills of Public Credit called into the Treasury, as
soon as the Establishment they are on will admit of. To increase such Bills, or
continue them out longer than the foot they are on requires, appears to me to be
a method for continuing and increasing our misery. To desire the Emitting more
Bills, or Postponing the Collecting of outstanding ones, is plainly desiring to
be in Debt, when as every wise and honest Man should desire to be out of Debt,
and to owe no Man any thing but love. Parents should lay up for their Children,
but if the present Generation do not draw in the Public Bills as soon as
fairly may be, they may Intail Debts on their Posterity; who must (Buy as it
were, and) Pay for the Inheritances their Fathers left them, if they would be
the full and proper Owners of them. And is it not unkind in Parents, thus to
antecipate, and while Living to spend on that which after they are Dead, their
Children must Labor and Pay for?

But here is a Difficulty to be considered, Paper Money (as it is called) is so
scarce already, that it is something troublesome to deal between Man and Man for
want of more; and the more is called in, the greater will the Difficulty be.

Reply. Though its difficult now and probably will be more so for a while, yet it
may be considered, that the pressing Difficulty should make us do all we can to
get rid of it; which (I suppose) cannot be done, till the Bills are called in
and Burnt. This cannot be done at once but gradually. And the lessening their
Quantity will certainly increase their Value, so that gradually they will be
esteemed as good as Silver Money, though now there is a vast Difference. And I
think the Price of Commodities Imported and Produced here, must necessarily
fall, as the Value and Esteem of Bills do rise. This seems a likely way too, to
make Money gradually pass again among us; For if the Value of Bills does rise
to be Equal with Money in Private Commerce, and Five Shillings in Money will
Buy no more than a Five Shilling Bill, then the Possessor will almost as
readily part with one as the other. But now, though Quantities of Silver (as I Have
heard) are Yearly brought into the Country, yet the difference between that and
Bills being so great as it is, the Silver does not pass between Man and Man in
common dealing, but is bought up by the Merchants to make Returns to Great
Britain.

If you ask, Whether An Act to cause Impost and Excise to be paid in Silver,
would not oblige Merchants to bring it into the Country, and so gradually make
it pass among us?

I Will modestly reply, it belongs not to me to decide this Case; yet Two
Difficulties seem to attend it.

First, Would not this lesson the Value of Bills, if the Public should prefer
Silver to them in such a way?

Secondly, Is not this directly contrary to the Tenor of the Bills themselves?
That says, the Bill shall be in Value equal to Money, and shall be accordingly
accepted by the Treasurer, etc. and in all Public Payments. If to give
Currency to the Bill, the Government have made it Equal to Money in all Public
Payments; nay 5 per Cent. better in such Payments; then how can it be refused
in any Public Payment, and Silver be preferred to it, without directly
contradicting the Public Engagements, which alone has given it all the Value
it has? If therefore we would make no infraction on the Bills, or the
Establishment they are on; I see no way to raise their Value and Esteem among
People, but by lessening their Quantity and calling them in as soon as fairly
may be. And though the doing this may increase our Difficulties in some regards,
yet it may decrease them in others. I think our over Trading, Living above our
Abilities, needlessly spending Imported Commodities, and doing too little to
supply our selves, have evidently, though gradually brought these Difficulties,
we should therefore be patient (not fretful and quarrelsome) under them, and be
thankful to Divine Providence, if we may gradually (though with many an hard rub)
get rid of them, and not Intail them as a mischief and misery on Posterity.

I suppose Money is now as Plenty as ever in the World in General, and daily
increases rather than decreases; its now as much esteemed as ever, as a Medium
of Trade. And if we were Prudent and Industrious and Frugal, I don't see but
that we might have our share in it (in an ordinary course of Providence) as
well as formerly, and as well as other Countries who have no Mines but receive
it only by Commerce. Possibly the Ingenious may have many Schemes and
Projections, to bring and keep Money in the Country, but I can think of none so
honest and likely, as to make our Export exceed our Import, which by Industry
and Frugality (with an ordinary blessing) we might easily do. We cannot be so
Sanguine as to think, that other Countries will give us Money for nothing; if
we have it of them, it must be by way of Exchange for some Produce of our
Country, or the Fruit of our Labor. It therefore we make our Export exceed our
Import, it must needs bring and keep Money here, and I Am humbly of Opinion,
that no other method will be effectual to do it. If a Private Family, besides
what they spend of their own Produce raise Twenty Pounds worth for a Market
Yearly, and Yearly Buy Thirty Pounds, then they are Ten Pounds in Debt and
behind hand. But if of the Twenty they Sell, they lay out but half, then
they are Ten Pounds before hand, they have it ready to serve their occasions.
And if the Province in general would do thus with reference to other Countries,
would it not bring Money here. I think all the Province in their various
Capacities should endeavor this; and none more (with Submission) than you in
Boston.

I humbly conceive, your case as loudly calls for pity and some speedy methods
of redress, as the Case of any Town in the Province, if not more. Your thriving
(humanely speaking) depends on the numerousness of your People; and their being
suitably employed. But don't your numbers of late decrease? has not the low
esteem of Bills so raised the price of necessaries, That Tradesmen and
Laborers can scarce subsist. Is not their being put off with half Money, and
half Goods, a great damage to them? Besides this, if they are Diligent and
receive great wages (as the hirer thinks) yet that wages suffices not to
payment; Rates, to buy Wood, Food, Clothing, etc. Have not these difficulties
caused many of your Laborious People to move out of your Town? and if these
difficulties continue and grow, wont they drive away more? And does not this
thining of your Laborious Inhabitants, tend to hurt and weaken you? If your
Members continue to decrease, some of your wealthy Men may rather be called
owners of Houses and Shops, than Landlords, for they will scarce have Tenants to
hire them, or if they have, the continued high price for necessaries, will
render them unable to pay rent, and possibly make them a Charge to the Town
too. If this be not the present Aspect of the present Posture of Affairs, then
I Am mistaken in my guess.

Therefore I think Wisdom and Interest should move you, to endeavor in your
Station as far as fairly may be, to diminish the quantity and thereby raise the
value, of Bills of Credit, that so a reducing the price of necessaries may
encourage your industrious Inhabitants to abide with you, and draw others such
unto you. And for you to pitch on some proper methods, to promote Industry, and
Manufacture among you, that so your People (by Gods blessing) may live by the
fruit of their Labors, to me seems necessary to prevent your farther
Diminution, and to prevent your Poor being so numerous, that their Neighbors
will scarce be able to Support them, but rather be obliged to Sink with them;
I Have heard that you in Boston are very charitable, ready to give Alms, and I
believe it; Possibly some think, if good Part of what is thus bestowed, were put
into a Stock to employ the Poor, it might be better for your Town. You lay up
Grain in Store to supply your Inhabitants, I suppose it prudent to do so, But
if your Inhabitants by the produce of their Labor, cannot pay for it, it is but
a sorrowful Case still.

You may think on two things. Would not the settling of a Market help you? are
there not many needless Retailers, who buy up Provisions and Sell them with
advance to their poorer Neighbors? Do not the Poor oppress the Poor in this?
Is there no remedy for this? Would not a well regulated Market help you
greatly? The Scripture frequently speaks of Markets as usual in former times;
And I suppose the Ancient and Populous Cities who now use them, would by no
means be without them.

If the Licenses to Sell Drink among you, were greatly diminished, would not
this help you? If I Am not greatly mis-inform'd abundance of Cost and Time is
needlessly spent among you in Drink, and even by the Poor that cannot subsist
without Alms.

Obj. Retailing Drink promote, Trade. Ans. It Is the Redundance and Excess of it
that I Am against. In this the Seller spends his time, without raising one
farthings worth produce for Public Good, and the buyer spends Time and Cost
for what he had better be without. This is double damage to the Public.

If you should now ask, whether a Law to make Bills equal to Money between Man
and Man, and to make them answer Specialties that is Bonds for Silver etc.
would not ease our Difficulties and bring in Silver among us.

Reply. I own my self unable to see through the Propriety of such a Law. For I
conceive it not easy if possible for humane Laws to change Men's minds about
things?

Though the Law allows five per Cent. advance to Bills in Public payments; and
made the tender of them for payment ( Anno Dom. 1712) sufficient to stop
Execution, I say, notwithstanding these Acts in favor of the Bills, yet Men
don't esteem them as Money, but will give (as I am told, Twelve Shillings in
Bills for an Ounce of Silver, which Ounce by our Law is but a small matter
above Seven Shillings; A Law indeed might lay restraints and threaten
Penalties, but it cannot change Men's minds, to make them think a piece of Paper
is a piece of Money, They Will not readily believe such a Transubstantiation, if
Men really think that Silver is more for their profit than Bills, I don't see
how a Law to make them equal in Trade, can universally govern their Practice in
buying and selling which are voluntary actions; For if the Law should threaten
a Fine to him, that would ask Twenty Five Shillings in Bills for Twenty
Shillings in Silver, yet if a man ask me whether I Will sell such a Commodity I
have; I may surely ask him how much he will give and in what. And if he offers me
Twenty Five Shilings in Bills, I may refuse it if I please, who can oblige me
to Sell? When yet if he offered Twenty Shillings in Silver, possibly I might
gladly receive it.

I readily grant, that a Law to make Bills and Money equal in Trade, might
probably make some alteration in practice; but as to the Expedience of such a
Law, I hesitate, and submit it to wiser Judgments.

As to the other part. viz. To make Bills to answer Specialties, I Am at present
not able to see through the fairness and honesty of it.

English Men are justly Fond of Property as well as Liberty. If I have Land or
Goods to sell, I may ask a price I think proper; If none will gave it, I keep
what is my own. If any offer to buy, I may ask how much they will give and in
what? if they offer to pay me in Gold, I may refuse it, if I choose Silver
rather, and if we make a plain honest Bargain, the buyer is obliged to pay me
so much Silver in such a time; surely I may justly claim it, when the Time's
expired, if he neglects to pay and I thereupon sue him, would not any honest
Jurors and Judges find and declare for the Plantiff? In matters of Meum and
Tuum as they are called, I think the common rules of Justice and Equity would
say; that none but he to whom the Obligation is made, can fairly release or
lessen that Obligation; If I Sold Land a Year ago, and the Buyer was obliged to
pay me so much Silver for it, at the Term of Two Years; and a Law comes between
and says, I shall take Bills instead of Silver, am not I a sufferer? I think
Laws are commonly supposed to look forward, and not backward. The Law in Anno
Dom. 1712. which made the offer of Bills for payment sufficient to stop
Execution for Debts, contracted since October. 30. 1705. yet did it on this foot,
as appears from the Preamble, viz. That such Debts were generally understood to
be contracted for Bills. And so that Law, justly made an exception for
Specialties, and express Contracts in Writing. If you say, But to make Bills
answer Specialties, would be an ease to many poor Debtors. Reply. But if it is
unjust and injurious to Creditors (whether poor or rich) who dare plead for it?
God himself has said, he shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, thou shall
not respect the person of the Poor; nor honor the person of the mighty.
Neither shall thou Countenance a poor man in his cause. Justice and Equity
should be preserved between Debtor and Creditor; whether they are rich or poor.

If you say, What then shall those do who are obliged by their own voluntary
Bonds to pay Silver, now there is no Silver passing? Reply, I would advice such
Debtors to beg forbearance in their Creditors, and say to them, (submitting to
Providence,) Have patience with me and I Will pay thee all; and let them honestly
and industriously endeavor to do so. And I would advise Creditors to avoid
extremities, vigor, not needlessly take their Brother by the Throat; nor gladly
catch at an advantage, to squeeze from a Debtor, twice so much in value, merely
because he cannot get Money. Whatever advantage we may happen to have by any
humane Laws, yet considered as Christians we cannot be exempted from that rule,
As ye would that Men should do unto you, do ye also to them likewise; we should
rather suffer some damage ourselves, than bring a very great one on our
Neighbors. I presume that as Bills decrease in quantity they will increase in
value, and gradually before they are all in, be as good as Money. Therefore
Industry, Honesty, Frugality in him that is under Bonds, and Patience and
Forbearance in him that has the Obligation (so far as he well can) seems the
best way to prevent very great wrong, either to Debtor or Creditor. This advice
refers especially to Honest Industrious Debtors, for if a person is in my Debt,
and yet lives idly, extravagantly, is in no likely way to pay what he owes, but
rather to spend and waste the Substance of Creditors, then what reason is there
I should forbear him? Why should I suffer my Substance (gotten by honest
Industry) to be wasted in gratifying his Pride, Idleness or Extravagance, If
through his Extravagance he is not able to pay Fifty per Cent. why should I suffer
him to go on till he cannot pay Twenty Five? I presume many are now convinced,
that the giving too much and too long Credit has been hurtful both to the
Persons trusting and trusted, and 'twill be well if there don't speedily appear
many more proofs of this.

As I would not advise any Creditor rigorously to take the advantage of his
Debtor, so neither would I advise any Friend of mine, if he were rich and able,
to hoard up Bills of Credit merely to make his Neighbors buy them with Silver
at legal weight, to pay their Taxes with. I say I would not advise any Friend
of mine to hoard up Bills for this purpose, lest he should get that Displeasure
from Heaven which will be more bitter to him than all his gain by it, on Earth,
would be sweet.

Since we should love our Neighbor as our selves, how can we receive Bills of
them at the low Value they are now of; and yet lay them by on purpose to make
them Pay us near twice as much for them in a little time? I desire no such
Gain. And if any should hoard up Bills, thinking in a few Years to be paid for
them out of the Treasury in Silver, at Legal Weight, they may possibly find
themselves mistaken. For they are to be received for any Stock in the Treasury,
and if the Government should see meet as Bills grow few and scarce, to take
something else besides Silver for Rates, whether Grain, Flax, Hemp, etc.
possibly when Persons come to have their Bills paid for, they may be obliged to
take such things as shall then be in the Treasury. I humbly conceive therefore,
it is most fair, honest and neighbourly to keep the Bills passing in Commerce,
till they are gradually called in and burnt, and not to hoard them up from any
Private veiws or thirst after Self-Interest.

Thus Sir, out of true Love to my Country, whose Welfare I heartily wish and
aim at, and without being asked by any one, or designing to flatter or disgust
any Person or Persons whatsoever, I have once more opened my Thoughts to you; I
don't offer them with an imposing air, but modestly submit them to Censure. If
upon Scaning what is offered, you see reason to fault any Sentiments therein,
please to Ascribe it to the want of more Skill, and not want of Good Will, to
promote the Public Welfare. If you and I differ in Schemes and Projections,
yet let us be one in Love and Friendship; let us by no means raise or cherish
Parties or Divisions (which directly tend to weaken and ruin a People) but
bearing with different Apprehensions in each other; let us be Friendly,
Neighbourly, Peaceable, Honest, Frugal, Industrious, every one minding Our own
Business, and endeavoring the Welfare of the whole, this will be most
advantageous to the Whole and to all the Parts of it.

From your Friend among the Oaks and Pines, April 14. 1719.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, for B. GRAY, and J. EDWARDS, at their Shops,
on the North and South side of the Townhouse, in King Street. 1719.

BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Benjamin Gray, and John Edwards, Booksellers in
Boston.
MEat out of the Eater. By Michael Wigglesworth.

SEven Sermons. By Robert Russel.

PSalterium-Americanum, The Book of PSALMS in Blank Verse. With Illustrations
upon each Psalm,

CHRIST'S Certain and Sudden Appearance to Judgment. By Thomas Vincent.

THe Duty of Parents to Pray for their Children. By Increase Mather, D. D. To
which is added, The Duty of Children whose Parents have Prayed for them. By
Cotton Mather, D. D.

Where may be had Bishop Beveridges Private Thoughts on Religion. Likewise
Bibles, Testaments, Psalters, Psalm-Books, Primers, Catechisms, etc.


