The Presence of CHRIST WITH THE MINISTERS OF THE GOSPEL, Opened and Applied in
a SERMON Preached at Swampfield, January 1st. 1717/18. Being the Day of the
Gathering of the Church, and the Ordination of the REVEREND JOSEPH WILLARD
their Pastor.

By Solomon Stoddard, A. M. and Pastor of Northampton.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green, 1718.

The Presence of CHRIST WITH THE Ministers of the GOSPEL.
MATTHEW XXVIII. 20. -- And lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the
World, Amen.


CHRIST JESUS in the 18th Verse acquaints the Disciples with His own Authority:
All Power is given unto Me in Heaven and in Earth. And then He Exercises His
Authority in Commissionating them. And first, He tells them to whom they shall
go. viz. To all Nations, as they had Opportunity. They were forbiden formerly
to go to the Gentiles. Mat. 10.5. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into
any City of the Samaritans enter ye not; but now He takes off that prohibition,
though they were first to offer the Gospel to the Jews. Paul and Barnabas told
the Jews, That it was necessary that the Gospel should first be spoken to them,
Act. 13.46. Secondly, Here be the several Offices which they are to Attend. (1)
They were to make Disciples. We render it, Teach the word is (...), Disciple
all Nations. They were to bring them to the acknowledgment of Christ and the
Profession of the Gospel. (2) They were to Baptize them in the Name of the
Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost. This is a Seal of the Covenant
that succeeds in the room of Circumcision, Representing our being wasned from
our Sins in the blood of Christ: This must be applied to all Disciples Adult
and Infants. (3) They must teach them all rules of Obedience. This comprehends
the whole Law of God both Moral and Instituted, what ever was their duty to
practice, that was the duty of the Disciples to Preach. This work that He sets
them about was attended with much difficulty, considering the corruption of
Nature, and the prejudices that both Jews and Gentiles were under; therefore He
incourages them that He will be with them. He would have them take special
notice of it, Lo, I am with you. Mind here, 1st. What He promises, that is, His
Presence. He was about to remove to Heaven, but he tells them, He will be with
them; though He was absent as to His Humane Nature, yet He would be with them,
by His Spirit and His Power. 2ly. The Persons to whom the promise is made, and
they are immediately the Eleven Apostles: But He intends their Successors also.
They could live but a little while; But He promises His Presence to the end of
the World.

DOCTRINE.
CHRIST JESUS will be present with the Ministers of the Gospel to the End of
the World. CHRIST was eminently with the Apostles, so that in a short time,
they set up Churches in many parts of the World, and laid a foundation of the
profession of the Christian Religion, both among civil and barbarous Nations;
and though Ministers in these days must not expect such extraordinary gifts, or
such wonderful success as they had; yet they have the word of Christ for it,
that He will be with them. They may conclude that Satan will be busy to oppose
them: But this is their encouragement that Christ will be present with them.
The work of the Ministry is difficult work. Paul says, Who is sufficient for
these things, 2 Cor. 2.16. But yet there is no reason that they should faint
under their burden, for Christ says He will be with them. The Ministers of the
Gospel are Christ's Ministers, and their Service is Service for Christ,
therefore it is no wonder that He will be present with them. When God sent
Moses to the Children of Israel, He tells them that He will be with him, Exodus
3.12. So when Christ sends his Ministers, He tells them that He will be with
them; and it is a great Comfort to the People, that Christ will be with their
Ministers: and this is not the Privilege of One Generation, or a few
Generations, but of all Generations to the end of the World.

Here it may be inquired, [1.] How do Ministers need the Presence of Christ?
[2] How will Christ be present with them?

1. Quest. How do Ministers need the Presence of Christ?

Answ. 1. To furnish them with Gifts for their Work. There was need of
extraordinary Gifts in the beginning of the Gospel, for the removal of
Prejudices: both Jews and Gentiles by reason of their Education were under
Prejudices, and there was need of Miraculous Gifts to prepare them to consider
impartially the Doctrine taught by the Apostles. And Ministers now need Christ's
presence to furnish them with Gifts: there is need of a great deal of Wisdom to
find out acceptable words Eccl. 12.10. The Preacher sought to find acceptable
words. They need a great deal of Knowledge to accomplish them for their work:
The Minister needs great Knowledge in the Scripture to enable him to answer all
Cases of Conscience that may be put to him; to help Persons that are in the
dark to judge aright of their Condition, to enable them to see their Sincerity
or their Hypocrisy; they need a great deal of Light from Christ, that they may
understand the Truth in things that are controverted, and lead the People in
the right way: there be abundance of Mistakes among Men in Matters of Religion,
some of them very dangerous, all of ill consequence; and Ministers need Light
from God, that they may not be blind guides: they need Divine Teaching, that
they may be able to convince Men that do oppose the Truth; and to establish
them that do receive it He must be able to convince gainsayers, Tit. 1.9. There
is a great deal of darkness among Men about Matters of Faith, about Moral
Rules, and about Divine Institutions; and Ministers need to be taught of God
that they may teach People the good and the right way. It is not enough for a
Minister to be able to make some Edifying Discourses; he should be able to set
those points that are more intricate in a true light, and to speak accurately,
to all those Cases that the Souls of Men need help in.

2. To strengthen them against Temptation. The Calling of a Minister lays him
open to great Temptation, especially through a Spirit of Fear to neglect his
duty; sometimes he is called to Preach such Truths as will be offensive to
some, and stir up their displeasure and opposition; sometimes to give such
Reproofs as will be taken very hardly by some Men, they will stomach it that
they are reflected upon; sometimes he is under a necessity to deal with some
Men, that don't know how to bear it. And there is danger of being out-bid with
a Spirit of Fear; some are his Friends and he is loath to offend them, he has a
dependence upon some, and it is dangerous crossing them: in such cases he needs
a great deal of help from Christ to strengthen his Love and his Faith, that he
may be bold to do his duty. When Jonah was sent to cry against Nineveh because
of their wickedness, his fear mastered him, so that he fled to Tarshish, Jon.
1.2, 3. He was terrifyed to think what usage he should meet with all, and to
avoid the anger of Men exposed himself to the anger of God. Faithfulness may
expose them to great Sorrows, the fear of which sometimes makes to be
unfaithful. Paul begs prayers on that account Ephesians. 6.19, 20. And for me, that I
may open my mouth boldly, to make known the Mystery of the Gospel, for which I
am an Ambassador in bonds, that therein I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak.

3. To protect their Persons. In times of Persecution Ministers are more
exposed than other Men; they are looked on as the head of their Party, and the
principal spite is against them. Jezabel cut off the Prophets of the Lord so
the Papists have a particular Malice against them: and about Fifty Years since,
Two Thousand Ministers were silenced in England, in one day, and many of them
exposed to great straits: and at other times, they are exposed to many wrongs
and injuries, and need help from God for their deliverance. Paul was delivered
through the Presence of God. 2 Timothy 4 17. The Lord stood with me, and
strengthened me, and I was deliverea out of the Mouth of the Lion. Christ
promised Paul to deliver him, Acts 26.17. Delivering thee from the People and
from the Gentiles to whom I send thee And so He did many times. If God had not
delivered him, he had not continued in his work as he did, but would have
fallen a Sacrifice to the rage of his Enemies many Years before he did. Acts
26.22. Having obtained help of God I continue unto this day.

4. To Succeed their Labors. They need to be prospered in their labors, that
there may be a Reformation wrought in the Land; that those corrupt Practices
which bring down the Judgment of God may be put away: And in order to this,
they need the help of God. It is God's work to prepare Men to Reform. 2 Chronicles
29.36. And Hezekiah rejoiced and all the People, that God had prepared the
People, for the thing was done suddenly. There is need of Divine help that the
labors of Ministers may be prosperous for the Comforting of Disconsolate
Saints: Sometimes they are like Rachel, Refusing to be comforted. There is need
of the Presence of Christ with Ministers for the Awakning of Sinners and
bringing them to Christ. Ministers will Preach to no purpose if God do not send
His Spirit. Ministers cannot open blind Eyes, nor raise dead Men to Life. Job.
16.7, 8. If I depart I will send the Comforter unto you, and when he is come,
be will reprove the world of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment. It is God
that adds Efficacy to the Ordinances. 2 Cor. 10.4. The weapons of (...) are
mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds. It is God that casts
out Devils. It is Christ's work to build up His Church. It is a Divine work to
make the Arrows of the word stick in the Hearts of Men. Ministers may waste
their Spirits, tire their Brains, and weary their Bodies to no purpose, if God
don't add the operation of His Spirit. If God do not give His Blessing to their
labors, they may take up that complaint, Isa. 49.4. I have labored in vain,
and spent my strength for naught and in vain. Men can remain sottish and
unbelieving under the best means. It is God that takes away the heart of stone
and gives an heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 11.19. Ministers may take pains and write
their Sermons, but it is God only that writes the Law in the hearts of men.
Jer. 31.33. It is His Voice that raises dead souls, Joh. 5.25. The Word of God
is the Sword of the Spirit.

2. Quest. How will Christ be present with them? How does He engage His
Presence? How far may we depend on those words of Christ, without straining
them? If we consider the Qualities of many Ministers, we cannot conceive any
eminent Presence of Christ with them; many of the Priests of Old were very bad.
Jer. 2.8. The Priests said not, Where is the Lord, and they that handle the Law
know me not: and the Pastors have transgressed against me. So the Scribes and
Pharisees were very corrupt. Mat. 23.3. Do not after their works, for they say
and do nor. And so it is at this day in many Countries, especially with some
Ministers of the Gospel; their Practices are such as make many to stumble at
the Law.

Answ. 1. CHRIST will be so present with the Gospel Ministry, that His visible
Kingdom shall be upheld. If some of them be notoriously defective of their
duty; yet by those that are in the Ministry, His work shall be carried on, and
His Kingdom shall be preserved throughout all Generations. The Gospel shall be
Preached and there shall be those that shall make a Profession of the Truth.
The Kingdom of Christ is sometimes in a more fiourishing condition, and
sometimes it withers: but it shall never be (...). (...) of these Kings, shall
the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, that shall never be destroyed. Mar. 16.18.
Upon this Rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it. God has made a donation of an Eternal Kingdom to Christ. Psalm.
72.17. His Name shall endure for ever, it shall continue as long as the Sun.
How many secure, carnal and corrupt men are in the Ministry, that contribute
very little to the upholding of His Kingdom? yet there shall be such a Presence
of Christ with some that are in the Ministry, that neither Persecutuion nor
Heresy shall prevail to root out the Kingdom of Christ. God will so far prosper
the labors of the Ministry, that the Church shall be Immortal: There shall be
a Succession of those that shall make a Profession of the Gospel: There shall
always be Witnesses for Christ, though for a long while they Prophecy in
Sackcloth. Christ shall divide the spoil with the Mighty.

2. CHRIST will be so present with them, that all the Elect shall be brought
in. There be a Number whose Names are written in the Lambs book of Life: there
be a Number that God has given to Christ, and God will bless the labors of
Ministers unto their Conversion, and their Perseverance in Holiness. Some
Preach Christ out of love, and some for carnal ends. So it was of Old. Phil. 1
15. Some indeed Preach Christ even of envy and strife, and some of good will
But Christ does so far bless the Preaching and Writing of the Ministry, that
all the Elect shall be brought in. In some Ages many are Converted, and in all
Ages such as do belong unto the Election of Grace Joh 6.37. All that the Father
has given me shall come unto me. Romans 11.7. The Election has obtained. Romans
8.30. Whom he did Predeslinate, them he also Called, and whom be Called, them
be also Justified. Whether the Means be greater or less, there shall be such a
Presence of Christ with them, that all whom God has chosen shall be Converted.
If any of them live under corrupt and vicious Ministers, yet they shall not
miscarry; the light that they enjoy shall prevail for their Conversion and
Salvation. Psalm. 132.16. I will cloth her Priests with Salvation. Christ will
not loose any of those that the Father has given him.

3. CHRIST will be present with many of them and make them gracious. For the
advantage of Religion God will prepare many Godly Men to Preach the Gospel: The
Piety of Ministers is greatly for the promoting of Religion: Piety makes them
more findious: Piety furnishes them with such Experience, as greatly helps them
in their work: Piety makes them more faithful to the Souls of Men; and the
sense that People have of their Piety, causes them to lay the more weight on
their words, and causes the word to fall with more authority on them. God fits
Men for the Ministry. So God fitted Paul: He had chosen him to Preach the
Gospel, and Converted him in a wonderful manner. Gal. 1.15, 16. It pleased God
who separated me from my Mothers Womb, and called me by his Grace, to reveal
his Son in me. God promised of old to raise up a faithful Priest, 1 Samuel 2.35.
And sometimes especially there shall be a great Number of faithful Preachers.
Jer. 3.15. I will give them Pastors after mine own heart, that shall feed them
with Knowledge and Understanding. Christ advises us to Pray that it may be so.
Mat. 9.38. Pray ye the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth laborers
into his harvest. And He does at times eminently answer such Prayers. So He did
at the time of the casting off of Popery, which that Scripture has reference
unto, Rev. 14.6. I saw another Angel fly in the midst of Heaven, having the
Everlasting Gospel to preach to them that dwell on the Earth. God raised up
Luther and Melancthon, and Zwinglius, and Calvin, with many others, who did
great Service to the Church of God. God Converts some Men and then makes them
Ministers. So he did Paul: He made him faithful, and so put him into the
Ministry, 1 Timothy 1.12. And He puts some Men into the Ministry and then Converts
them. They are qualifyed with Gifts and Learning before, and after they are
entered into the work, God qualifies them with Grace. Acts 6.7. A great company
of the Priests were obedient unto the Faith.

4. CRHIST will be graciously present with them that are faithful. It is a
great commendation of a Minister to be a faithful Man. Col. 1.7. Epaphras, is
for you a faithful Minister of Christ. Such Men shall have the gracious
Presence of God. He will own them in their work, though it may be in different
degrees. God don't give the same light to one faithful Man that He does to
another. Some godly Men are left to great Mistakes. Godliness is no security
against lesser Errors. Neither does He give the like measure of protection to
one as to another. He appears more eminently for the preservation of one, and
the vindication of one, than of another. He eminently vindicated Moses, as a
reward of his faithfulness. Numb. 12.7. My servant Moses is not so, who is
faithful in all my house. So He does more eminently succeed the labors of one
than of another. Some have more abundant success, while some Men take abundance
of pains, and there appears little profit: Others have great occasion to
rejoice that they have not run in vain. Paul had great success. Romans 15.29. I
am sure, that when I come unto you, I shall come in the fullness of the blessing
of the Gospel of Christ.

USE, I. This is ground of Encouragement to People, in Praying for the Presence
of God with their Ministers. The Minister should Pray for the People, and the
People should Pray for their Ministers, for their own Ministers, and for the
Ministers of the Land; yea, and for the Ministers of the Christian World. Moses
Prays for the Ministers. Deuteronomy. 33.8. And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim, and
thy Urim be with the holy One, etc. Verse 11. Bless, Lord his substance, and
accept the work of his hands. David did so, Psalm. 132.9. Let thy Priests be
clothed with Righteousness. There is ground of encouragement that Christ has
promised His Presence with them. This Promise may make you bold and free in
Praying for them: you may conclude that it is acceptable to God so to do. You
may gather from this Promise that you are welcome to Pray for them, that it is
a thing suitable to the Heart of God, and that there is great hopes that God
will accept of such Prayers. Indeed God don't oblige Himself as to the degree
of this Mercy, but you have no reason to be discouraged, He allows you to put
Him in mind of His Promise, and to beg of Him that He would remember His Word,
and fulfill it graciously. You should look on this Mercy as a Mercy that God
delights to bestow, and so come boldly to the Throne of Grace for it.

There be three faults contrary to this.

1. When People Pray for them for Forms sake. Many People have got a custom
when they make their Prayers, to say something in a cursory way for their
Ministers: but it is not upon their heart that God would be with them. We have
many People that are violently carrying on worldly designs, that are panting
after the dust of the Earth, that make light of the Gospel, and go one to his
Farm and another to his Merchandise: these Men are but formal in their Prayers
for Spiritual Blessings; they spend it may be the greatest part of their time
in Prayer about Spiritual Blessings, but their hearts don't go with their
words. So they Pray for their Ministers, but it is only of course, because it
is their manner: their hearts are not much in it that the labors of their
Ministers be blessed, either to others or to themselves; when the words are out
of their Mouths they have done with it, they think no more on it; they don't
look after their Prayers to see what answer God gives them; if they be not
heard they don't trouble themselves, their hearts are not on the prosperity of
Religion; there is much of Gallio's Spirit in them: They care not for those
matters, Acts 18. 17.

2. When People Pray under the prevailings of discouragement Some Persons Pray
that God would bless the Ministers; Conscience of duty makes them do it, they
cannot satisfy their own hearts to neglect it: but they think it is not worth
the while to insift upon it, for there is very little hope of obtaining any
great matter, for things are growing worse and worse in the Country; we grow
more and more Proud and Worldly, and Intemperate, and there seems to be a blast
upon Ordinances, and People hold fast deceit, and refuse to return to God. We
seem to be like the People of Judah, to whom God sent the Prophets, Rising
early and sending them, but they would not hear; they conclude that the Country
will degenerate more and more; they say Temptations increase and are greatly
multiplied; a spirit of rudeness and profaneness does abound in the Land; and
they are ready to say, God seems to have little regard to Prayers of this
Nature; that God has forgotten us, and that our bones are dried, as they say,
Ezekiel. 37.11. Things look so dark that they are out of hope of obtaining any
great matter; they think the Country will grow a wicked Country; they grow out
of heart, and don't seek earnestly that it may be otherwise.

3. When Men Pray presumptuously for them. Some err on this hand, either from a
misunderstanding of the Promises, as if God were so bound to bless the labors
of His Ministers, that He had not left Himself at liberty, as certainly He
sometimes does in Judgment, as Isai. 6.9, 10. Go tell this People, Hear ye
indeed but understand not, and seeing ye indeed but perceive not; make the
heart of this People fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest
they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their
hearts, and convert and be healed. Some presume from ignorance of the state of
the Country: They think that most of the Professors of the Country are godly
Men; are not sensible that there are many foolish Virgins; many that have a
Name that they live, and are dead; many that have not the Wedding Garment, a
little appearance passes with them for holiness; they are somewhat startled to
consider, that there be so many Judgments in the Land; but it seems to them,
that the Country is full of good People, and that there be a great number of
Converted Men and Women in the Land; and so they presume that Ministers still
will have a great deal of Success, and that Religion will flourish in the Land.
Some presume upon their Prayers, as if they did Merit to be heard; as if their
earnest Prayers must needs engage God, and it would not be fair for God to deny
them; whereas if their Prayers be answered it is from free Grace.

USE, II. Faithful Ministers ought to take Encouragement that they shall have
Christ's Presence. Ministers are in danger to be discouraged; their work is
heavy, and attended with a great deal of difficulty, and their Spirits are
ready to faint, sometimes under a sense of their own weakness, want of
Understanding, and Grace for their work, sometimes upon Experience of
Unsuccessfulness; they have taken a great deal of pains, and little comes on
it; Sins that they reprove are not reformed; Sinners are not Converted; many
remain senseless, and hard-hearted, as if no Means had been used with them: but
their hearts should not sink under their burden. 2 Cor. 4.1. Seeing we have
this Ministry, as we have received Mercy we faint not. Christ Jesus can assist
them in their work, and furnish them to do their work acceptably; and He can
make their work prosperous; He can make their Ministry powerful, though Men be
very blind, and dead, and have strong inclinations to continue in a course of
Sin. And Christ has pomised His Presence. He does not say that He will be as
much with one as with another; or in what degree He will be present; but He
promises His Presence, this should encourage them.

1. This shows that Christ is sensible that they need His Presence. When Christ
says, I will be with you, He speaks it in pity and compassion. He takes notice
that their work is hard, and they are like to meet with many difficulties. He
is sensible that their work will be too hard for them, if He should leave them
alone. He has no Expectation that the work will prosper except He be present
with them. He knows and takes notice of their inabilities; that let them study
never so much, and be exceeding careful in their preparations, and earnest and
hearty in their delivery of their Sermons, let them use the most proper
arguments, and follow them never so fully, and confirm what they say by clear
testimony from the word of God, and pursue the design without weariness; yet
they will not be able to Convince, or to Convert Men; they can neither reform
the Place, nor prevail with Men to comply with the terms of the Gospel, except
He be present with them. He has no dependence upon their abilities, to make the
Gospel Efficacious. He is sensible it would be a fruitless thing to send them;
He may as well send them to remove Mountains, as to persuade them to fall in
with the way of Salvation, Except He be with them. Christ is so well acquainted
with the blindness and hardness of Men's hearts, that it will signify nothing
to send them, unless He be with them; therefore He promises Divine help. Joh.
16.7, 8. The Comforter shall come and convince the World.

2. He would have them encourage themselves in hope of His Presence. The very
design of these words is to Comfort and Encourage their hearts. He speaks these
words to support them, that they may go cheerfully about their work. He would
have them set this Promise against the difficulties of their work. He speaks
these words to answer their Temptations, and the Objections that might arise in
their hearts. If He says, He will be with them, He will not call it Presumption
for them to hope for His Presence, but He will be angry with them if they do
not. Not to be encouraged is to neglect the proper use of these words: These
words, I will be with you, are a good foundation for them to Pray in Faith for
it.

3. Christ is under bonds to grant His Presence to the Ministry. This Promise
is absolute to the Ministry. I cannot say that Christ is absolutely bound to
make every Minister an instrument of the Conversion of Souls. A Minister may
die quickly; or a Minister may prove a very corrupt man; or if God should not
make a Minister an instrument to Convert Souls, yet He may make him very
Successful as to establishing and comforting of Saints; or to reform the Place;
or to clear up some Divine Truths that were not acknowledged. But this Promise,
That Christ will be with the Ministers, and make use of them for the Conversion
of Souls, is absolute to the Ministry; there is no condition expressed, neither
is there any to be understood, for it is by the Service of the Ministry that He
intends to carry on His Work, and build up His Church in all Generations. Ephesians.
4.11, 12. He gave some Apostles, some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors
and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the body of Christ. And He has Elect Ones to be brought in
in all Ages: There shall be a Succession of godly Ones to the End of the World.
Psalm. 72.17. His Name shall endure for ever, it shall continue as long as the
Sun, Men shall be blessed in him. The Success of the Ministry is held forth in
that Parable: Mat. 22.10. Those Servants went out into the High ways, and
gathered together all as many as they found, both good and bad, and the wedding
was furnished with guests.

4. Add this likewise, That He has made good this Word many times Eminently.
The Apostles had great Success in one Country and another. Acts 14.1. They so
spoke that a great Multitude both of the Jews and of the Greeks believed. Acts
19.20. It is said, So mightily grew the word of God and prevailed. This success
in the Primitive times is represented, Rev. 6.2. Behold a white horse, and he
that sat on him had a bow, and a crown was given to him, and he went forth
conquering and to conquer. There were many in those days that suffered
Martyrdom: Rev. 12.11. They loved not their lives unto the death. So in
succeeding Ages when they broke off from Popery, many were Converted by the
Ministry, and Sealed the Truth with their blood. And in our days several
Ministers have had Eminent Success, and God has given a great blessing to their
labors: And many of them have given great Evidence of their real Conversion by
their holy lives, and the great comfort which they had in a dying day. Many
Ministers may say by Experience, as 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. The weapons of our warfare
are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds,
casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ.

USE, III. Ministers should do what they can that they may have the Presence of
Christ with them. It is true, that Christ acts somewhat arbitrarily in this
matter: yet there are rules to be attended that you may engage the Presence of
Christ with you; and it is well worth the while to take care in this matter. It
is a great comfort and encouragement to a Minister to see the Presence of
Christ with his labors. It is a smile upon him; though it be no certain sign
of Sincerity, yet therein God smiles on him: It is an honor to him. When God
sets his Seal to his Ministry, God owns him in his work. 1 Cor. 9.2. The Seal
of my Apostleship are ye in the Lord. When God is present with his labors He
makes him a blessing; which was part of the happiness of Abraham: God tells
him, I will bless thee and thou shall be a blessing. Genesis 12.2. Dr Williams,
Bishop of Lincoln, in his old Age expressed himself in this manner, That he had
born many honorable Offices, but if he did know that he had been an instrument
to Convert one Soul to God, it would be more comfort to him, than all the
Offices that he had sustained. To be useless is a reproach, to be an instrument
to do hurt is a curse, but to be an instrument of good is a great honor. Let
Ministers then be careful to get the Presence of Christ.

1. Be of an unblameable Conversation. The holy carriages of Ministers have a
natural tendency to beget aregard in the hearts of hearers; holy carriages do
command respect, and prepare Men to receive advice. They are more ready to
believe Men of good than men of bad Conversation. Holy carriages in Preachers
take off prejudices from the Spirits of hearers: It seems to Men that such
Ministers urge rules from Conscience and Compassion. But an unholy Conversation
diminishes Men's authority, their Words don't sink into the hearts of their
hearers, they don't look upon their advice as flowing from a gracious Spirit,
but from some lower principles. But Men of a holy Conversation have a room in
the hearts of others. Besides, this is a way to engage the Presence of Christ.
Evil carriages are abominable to Christ, but holy carriages are acceptable to
Christ. Men that walk holily put honor upon him; and He will honor them that
honor him, 1 Samuel 2.30. When Men carry holily, God delights to succeed their
labors. Mal. 2.6. He walked with me in Peace and Equity, and did turn many
away from iniquity. But when Men carry corruptly, He many times casts contempt
on them, and their Ministry is not blessed. Mal. 2.8, 9. But ye are departed
out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble at the Law; ye have corrupted
the Covenant of Levi, faith the Lord of hosts: Therefore have. I also made you
contemptible and base before all the People; according as ye have not kept my
ways, but have been partial in the Law. An unholy Conversation brings a blast
upon their labors. The prosperity of Religion don't depend on the labors of
Men that do not honor it: their words will not prevail without their practice:
they must Preach in their Conversation on Week days, as well as in the Pulpit
on the Sabbath.

2. Insist on those things that Men stand in special need of. All Scripture is
profitable, but the great design of the Scripture and the Ministry is to
Convert Men to God. Acts 26.18. To open their blind eyes, to turn them from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. Some Ministers speak a
great deal to Saints to comfort and encourage them; and alas, there be but a
few of them in many Congregations: The body of the People are in a perishing
condition; and there is ten times more need that Men be awakened and terrifyed.
Ministers should imitate Paul. 2 Cor. 5.11. Knowing the terror of the Lord, we
persuade men. Christ Jesus was often putting Men in Mind of Hell and the day of
Judgment, in the time of His Ministry. It is not a little hint now and then,
that will make them work out their Salvation with fear and trembling. Many Men
are in a fast Sleep, and whispering will not awaken them; the threatenings of
God had need ring in their Ears; they are so atheistical and devoted to the
World, that it is well if Thunder and Lightning will scare them; they are so
hardened, that talking moderately to them, as Eli did to his Sons, takes no more
impression on them, than on the Seats of the Meeting house. The rule is, Ezekiel.
6.11. Thus faith the Lord God, Smite with thy hand, and stamp with thy foot,
and say, alas, for all the abominations of the house of Israel, for they shall
fall by the Sword, and by the Famine, and by the Pestilence.

3. Preach in such a Manner as is most proper to take with the Conscience. Gods
way is to bless suitable Means. He don't bless healing Plainsters to eat away
proud flesh; He don't bless Cordials to take away stubborn humors: If
Ministers design to Convert Men, they had need speak peircing words. Eccl. 12
11. The words of the wise are as goads and as nails, fastened by the Moster of
Assemblies. Some Ministers affect Rhetorical strains of Speech, as if they were
making an Oration in the Schools; this may tickle the Fancies of Men, and
scratch Itching Ears; but we have Men's Consciences to deal with: Men need to be
frighted and not to be pleased. 1 Cor. 2.4. My Speech and my Preaching was not
with enticing words of man's wisdom; but in demonstration of the Spirit, and of
Power. We are not sent into the Pulpit to show our Wit and Eloquence, but to
set the Consciences of Men on fire; not to nourish the vain humors of People,
but to lance and wound the Consciences of Men. The word is sharper than a
two-edged sword, dividing Soul and Spirit, Joints and Marrow, discovering the
thoughts, and intents of the heart, Heb. 4.12. And we should use it for that
end: The Word is as an Hammer and we should use it to break the Rocky hearts of
Men.

4. Be much in Prayer for the Presence of Christ. Christ has made a Promise,
but He expects that we should sue it out: As Ezekiel. 36.37. Yet will I be
enquired of by the House of Israel to do it for them. We should turn Promises
into Petitions; one end of Promises is to help us to Pray in Faith: And this is
a way to engage Christ more eminently to fulfill the Promise. When we Pray for
the Presence of Christ, we acknowledge our own insufficiency, and that we have
need of the Presence of Christ; that we can neither do our work, nor obtain
Success without Him. When we Pray for His Presence, we acknowledge that we are
unworthy of it; that we cannot challenge it as due, but depend on His Grace, to
make it good to us; that we must have it in a way of free gift. When we Pray
for it, we acknowledge His sufficiency to help us; that if we have His
Presence, that will be enough, that then we may go cheerfully on in our work.
When we Pray for it, we show that we lay weight upon His Promise, and it is a
sign that if He does grant His Presence, we shall give Him the Glory, and
ascribe our Success to Him. Therefore we had need be much in Prayer for this,
That God's Urim and Thummim may with us; this is our encouragement that He has
said, He will cloth his Priests with Salvation, Psalm. 132.16. And as in the
Text, That He will be with His Ministers to the End of the World.

FINIS.
An Examination of the Power of the FRATERNITY.
By the same Author.
THE mistakes of one Generation many times become the calamity of succeeding
Generations. The present Generation are not only unhappy by reason of the
darkness of their own Minds, but the errors of those who have gone before them,
have been a foundation of a great deal of Misery. Posterity is very prone to
espouse the principles of Ancestors, and from an inordinate Veneration of them,
to apprehend a sacredness in their Opinions, and don't give themselves the
trouble to make an impartial Examination of them, as if it were a transgression
to call them into question, and bordered upon Irreligion to be wavering about
them; and the carnal interests of many Persons has no small influence upon
them, to prevail with them to engage violently in the Vindication of them.

And if any particular Persons have been led by God into the understanding of
those mistakes, and have made their differing Sentiments Public, it has proved
an occasion of much Sorrow; and many People have fallen into Parties, whereby a
Spirit of Lore has been quenched, and great heats have risen, from whence have
proceeded, Censures and Reproaches, and sometimes Separation and Persecution.
There have been two eminent instances of this in latter times. When the People
of England cast off the Doctriues of Popery, they retained many of the
Ceremonies of the Church of Rome; as the Surplice, Cross, in Baptism, and
Kneeling at the Lords Supper, etc. and this has been a wounding thing to their
Posterity. The Generations since have been greatly distressed by their
Contentions about those things. Many Books have been written for and against
the Ceremonies; and sometimes one party has got the upper hand, and have
persecuted the other with a great deal of harshness and severity, to the
undoing of many Families: Sometimes the other party has prevailed, and knew not
how to use their advantage with moderation, and there is no prospect of the end
of these troubles; the discords run sometimes higher and sometimes lower, but
nothing appears in Providence, but that they may be perpetual.

The other instance is in New England; The first Planters drew up a Platform of
Church Discipline, before they had much time to weigh those things, and when
they were under prejudices, from the experience of their sufferings in England;
and some of their Posterity are mightily devoted to it, as if the Platform were
the Pattern in the Mount, and all deviations from it, are looked upon as a
degree of Apostasy; others have taken the liberty to Examine it, and can
discover no foundation in the Word of God for many Positions therein: these
differences do much interrupt our quiet and hinder the flourishing of Religion.
Some Persons place a great part of their Religion in their being of this or
that party; and others who have better Principles, spend more of their zeal in
these Controversies thau is meet, and thereby it comes to pass that weightier
matters are too much neglected. Men's Corruptions are drawn forth, offenses are
given, and some times offense is taken, to the great disadvantage of the
Interest of Religion. There is a necessity of the vindicating the Truth, yet we
cannot do it without making some disturbance

In the Platform it is suffirmed, That the Brothren have power of judgment in
matters of Censure, and power in admitting of Members.

This Principle is very Popular; it is taking with them to see themselves
advanced to a share in the government: They have a greater fondness for power
than ability to use it, and nothing but light as clear as the light of the Sun
at Noon day, will prevail with some Men to part with one Inch of that power,
which they are told, does belong to them.

But I shall endeavor to clear it up, That the government of the Church is
given unto the Elders, and that the Fraternity have no power in binding and
loosing.

CHRIST JESUS is the absolute head of the Church, and keeps that part of
government entirely in His own hands, to appoint Officers and Laws for His
Church. The Civil Magistrate has power also in many Ecclesiastical cases; he
may appoint days of Fasting, as Jehoshaphat did, 2 Chren. 20.3. Jehoshaphat
feared and set himself to seek the Lord and proclaimed a Fast throughout all
Judah. And by the same reason they may appoint days of Thankgiving, they may
call Ecclesiastical Councils, they may take care of the Maintenance of
Ministers, they may Suppress those that give disturbance to the Church.

The Elders with the Church have power also occasionally to appoint days of
Fasting or Thanksgiving.

The Brethren of the Church have power to choose their own Officers. It seems
also to belong to the body of the People to appoint where their Meetinghouse
shall be set. But Spiritual power of governing the Church, by admitting of
Members, Censuing of Offenders, and taking off of Censures, does belong
entirely to the Elders.

1. Arg. Is from Mat. 16.19. I will give unto thee the Keys of the King done of
Heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and
whatsoever thou shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. And Joh. 20 23.
Christ says to the Apostles Whose sins ye remit, they are remitted to them,
and whosoever sins ye retain, they are retained. Here you may consider,

1. What is given: There be two expressions of this, The first is the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven: This intends power over the Church. The Keys are the
Ensign of Authority When Eliakim was made Steward of the Kings house, it is
expressed in this manner: Isai. 22 22. The Key of the house of David I will lay
upon his shoulder, so he shall open and none shall shut, and he shall shut and
none shall open. At this day, when a besieged City does render to the
besiegers, they deliver up the Keys as a sign of their Subjection. The second
expression is, That what he binds on earth is bound in heaven, etc. This notes
a power to inflict Church Censures, and also to deliver from them: for in John
it is explained by permitting and retaining sins.

2. The Subject that this power is given unto, viz. Firstly to Peter and to the
rest of the Apostles, and so to their Successors to the end of the World. As
the Church is to continue, so the government of the Church must be continued.
Gospel Ordinances will continue in force to the end of the World; therefore the
Gospel Church is called, A Kingdom that cannot be moved, Heb. 12.28. The Key of
Doctrine does belong to the Ministers, they are the Successors of the Apostles
to the end of the World: And the Key of Discipline belongs to the same Persons
that the Key of Doctrine does belong to. Heb. 13.7. Remember them that have the
rule over you, that have spoken to you the Word of God. The managing of the
Keys is a work of Office, and therefore does belong to those that have Office
power in the Church.

I shall not show how this Scripture has been abused by those of the Church of
Rome, for the Establishing of Papal power; But mind you how it has been
darkened by a violent interpretation among out selves, viz. That the Keys were
given to Peter partly as an Apostle, partly as a Minister, partly as a
Believer. This interpretation has more of fancy than truth: If this
interpretation were given by inspired Men, it ought to be received, but there
is not a tittle in the Text that looks that way.

If Christ had said, That He gave unto the Church the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, the Apostles, and Pastors, and Believers, might have put in their
several pleas for their shares of Ecclesiastical power; but he does not promise
to give power to the Church, but to give power to Peter; and it would be very
strange if he should give power to Peter to judge an Offender as he was a
Pastor, and yet further power to him as a Believer to give his Suffrage in the
same case among the Brethren.

The plain meaning of the Place is this, That as a reward of his hearty
confession of Christ, Christ would bestow on him the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven by making him an Officer in the Christian Church. And its absurd and
ridiculous to ask whether he is made an Officer as an Officer, or as a
Believer. It is all one as if we should ask whether the Staff be given to a
Captain as a Captain, or as a common Soldier: or to ask whether the Office of
a Governor be given to him as a Governor, or as a Freeman. The giving the
Keys to Peter gives Officepower to him; they are given unto him as one chosen
to such an Office.

2. Arg. Is taken from 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well be counted
worthy of double honor, especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine.
Heb. 13 17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and sumbit your selves, for
they watch for your souls as they that must give account.

Consider 1. Who they are to whom this Honor and Obedience must be yielded,
that are styled Rulers. And it is very evident that they are Elders,
principally if not only Teaching Elders: In Heb. 17.13. They are said to be
those that watch for their souls And v. 7. He speaks of such Rulers, as have
spoken to them in the Name of God.

2. What their Duty is toward them; They are to they them, and to submit to
them. Whence we may observe two things.

1. That the Elders are the only Rulers in the Church; Ruling in the Church is
appropriated to them. They are not called the Principal Rulers, but the Rulers.
None else has any authority to join in Ruling When they are said to be the
Rulers, it is exclusive of any other. They that are the Rulers are
distinguished from them that are Ruled If Elders are the Rulers, then it is an
Intrusion for any other to intermeddle in Ruling. To Vote in matters of Rule is
to Rule, therefore they that are not to Rule, are not to Vote. Elders being the
only Rulers in the Church, they are to do every thing that is an act of Rule.
It is an act of rule to call Offenders to an account, to Censure them and
Pardon them; so to admit Members; therefore these Services are to be done by
the Elders. For other Men to take upon them, to Vote in these cases, is to
usurp an authority that don't belong to them. Many are willing that the Elders
should be Moderators to order Church Meetings, to order Speech and Silence, to
put things to Vote; but Moderators are not Rulers. A Moderator in a Council, is
not the Ruler of the Council. A private Man may be a Moderator in a Church,
that has no Elder, when they convene to do what is proper for them, yet he is
no Ruler, he is no Church Officer.

2. They must be Obeyed and submitted unto; the Church and every Member of it
must be subject to their Government. But if the Brethren have power to Vote in
acts of government, then they have a liberty to obey or disobey; and particular
persons are only to obey the Elders in case there be a concurrence of the
Brethren with them If the Elders must be obeyed they must not be controuled or
over ruled by them. There be other titles given to the Elders importing the
same. They are called Pastors or Shepherd; and so have a government over the
Sheep: the Sheep are not sit to govern themselves. They are Overseers or
Bishops Acts 20.28. The care of the Church is committed unto them.

3. Arg. The Ministers of the Jewish Church were the sole judges in Spiritual
causes. Sometimes also they were made judges in Civil Causes, because they were
suitably qualified. 1 Chronicles. 26.29, 30. And of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his
Sons, were for the outward business over Israel, for officers and judges. And
of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his brethren, men of valor, a thousand and
seven hundred, were officers among them of Israel on this side Jordan westward,
in all business of the Lord, and in the service of the king. So in the
following verses. But the Ministers and they alone were judges in spiritual
causes. It is probable from some places of Scripture, that some Men of other
Tribes were admitted to the Ministry in Israel. The Pharisees were of any
Tribe, and they were allowed to be Teachers. Mat. 23.2, 3. The Scribes and
Pharisees set in Moses seat, all therefore that they bid you observe, that
observe and do. And it is probable that they were the Ministers in some of the
Synagogues, and did other acts of Office in admitting Proselytes, and sitting
in judgment on offenders. Mat. 23.15. Woe to you Scribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites, for you compass sea and land to make one Proselyte. Acts 23.6. Paul
perceived that one part of the council were Sadduces, and the other Pharisees
Yet these two things are sure.

1. That the government of the Church of Israel was not a popular government.
The common sort of People had no judgment in Ecclesiastical causes. Concerning
either Moral or Ceremonial uncleanness. There is not one tittle in the word of
God that Men were either condemned or pardoned by the Vote of the People.

2. That the Priests and Levites were the judges in spiritual causes. 2 Chronicles.
19.8. He set of the Priests and Levites, and of the chief of the Fathers in
Israel, for the judgment of the Lord, and for controversies. And he tells them,
v. 11. That Amaziah the chief Priest was over them in all matters of the Lord,
and Zebadiah the Ruler of the house of Israel in the Kings matters. And in
difficult cases they were to carry their appeal to the place that God should
choose; if it were an Ecclesiastical Case to the Priests, and if it were a Civil
to the Judge, and there the thing was to be finally issued. Deuteronomy. 17. from v.
7. to 12. And in the case of Leprosy, the Man was to be pronounced clean or
unclean by the Priest. Lev. 13.3 The Priest shall look upon him and pronounce
him unclean. And v. 6. And the Priest shall pronounce him clean. So in the case
of an unclean house, Lev. 14.48. Then the Priest shall pronounce the house
clean, because the plague is healed. So the Priest was to value the unclean
beast that a Man would redeem. Lev. 27.11, 12. He shall present the beast
before the Priest, and the Priest shall value it, whether it be good or bad, as
thou valuest it who art the Priest so shall it be. And if the judgment in
Ecclesiastical causes did belong unto the Ministers of the Jewish Church, there
is the like reason that it should belong unto the Ministers of the Christian
Church Ministers are now by their Function to perform all spiritual Offices in
the Church. It was the Ministers work of old to bless the People, so it is now;
it was the Ministers work of old to teach the People, so it is now; it was the
Ministers work then to put up Public Prayers, so it is now; it was the
Ministers work of old to judge in Spiritual causes, so it is now: Men yield the
case, only they say, That the Multitude have a Negative voice, and if they
think meet may stop their proceedings. As if the People were to have more
privilege and power under the Gospel, and the Minister have less. As if the
Jewish People were not qualified to have an hand in the government, and
Christian Ministers were unqualified to govern without the Suffrage of the
People. As if the Jewish Church were more unhappy than the Christian in respect
of the ignorance or unfaithfulness of the People, and the Christian more
unhappy in respect of the ignorance or unfaithfulness of their Ministers.

4. Arg. The Community are not fit to judge and rule in the Church. They must
be Men of understanding that are to judge in Civil causes. Exodus 18.21. Thou
shall provide out of all the People able men. Deuteronomy. 1.13. Take you wise men and
understanding, and known among your Tribes, and I will make them rulers over
you. There is a great deal of intricacy many times in causes, and many things
are offered to blind the eyes: there may be fair pretenses for foul actions.
Sometimes it is difficult to find out matter of fact; sometimes to find out
matter of law. So that there is great need of understanding. Solomon prayed for
wisdom to judge Israel, and Israel took notice that the wisdom of God was in
him to do judgment, 1 King. 3. ult. But the Community are not men of
understanding. Wise Men are but here and there to be found. Many of them have
not had the advantage of Reading and Study. Some of them are Men of very weak
Abilities, some of them are rash, some of them are Young, hardly Sixteen Years
of Age, so me of them are Servants; a crafty man may lead a Score of them by
the Nose; they are incapable to see into an abstruse thing. Let the government
be put into their hands, and things will be carried headlong by a tumultuous
cry. If the Multitude were to be judges in Civil causes, things would quickly
be turned up side down. We have many examples in the Scripture of the
ungovernable Spirit of the Multitude. When Christ Jesus stood before Pilate,
they cried out, Crucify him, crucify him. When Stephen pleaded his case, they
lift up their voice and stopped their ears, and ran upon him with one accord.
When Paul made his defense, they lift up their voice and said, Away with such a
fellow, it is not fit that he should live. We have no reason to think that
Christ would entrust the government of His Church with Men so incapable to
govern. We read of the cry of him that rules among fools.

5. Arg. They that are empowered by Christ to judge who are disciples, have
power to judge in other causes Ecclefiastical; but Ministers are to judge who
are disciples. Mat. 28.19. Go therefore and teach all Nations baptizing them.
The word rendered Teach, is, Disciple them; and when that was done, then they
were to Baptize them. They were not to ask the Church for liberty to Baptize
them, and if the Church were unwilling, then to neglect it; but when they
Discipled them, they were to Baptize them. If the command had been to Baptize
those that the Church Voted to be disciples, they ought to have taken a Vote
for it: but if the command be to Baptize disciples, they are made the judges
who are disciples. There is the like reason for other acts of Office: because
they are to give the Lord's Supper to qualifyed Persons, therefore they are to
judge who are qualifyed; and because they are to censure impenitent Offenders,
they are to judge who are impenitent Offenders; and because they are to forgive
them that are Penitent, they are to judge who are Penitent Paul Baptized the
Jailor and his Family, and Lydia without the consent of any Church. Philip
Baptized the Eunuch, and Peter Baptized Cornelius without the consent of any
Church. Paul Excommunicated Hymeneus and Alexander, 1 Timothy 1.20. but there is
no intimation that he had the consent of the Church. It may be pleaded, That
Paul was an Apostle, and had extraordinary power. Yet it must be yielded that
then the Brethren have power of Suffrage only in some cases, and that their
consent is not necessary to the validity of the act.

6. Arg. It was foretold in the Prophesies of the Old Testament, that the
Ministers of the Gospel should be judges in Ecclesiastical Controversies. Ezekiel.
44.24. In controversy they shall stand in judgment, and they shall judge
according to my judgments.

1. Consider, What time this has reference unto: And surely it don't respect
the time immediately after the Babilonish Captivity; for the Temple here spoken
of is not Zerubbabels Temple, for it was not built in that place where
Zerubbabels Temple was, neither was Zerubbabels Temple built after the measures
here spoken of, neither was the Land then divided according to the form here
laid down, neither was there such a Portion laid out for the Prince, neither
were there such Waters run out from the Sanctuary, either properly or
figuratively, as is here expressed; but it does respect the time of the Gospel
Church, and probably more especially the time after the destruction of
Antichrist. And the state of it is set forth by phrases borrowed from the
worship that was in the Jewish Church.

2. The Persons spoken of: who are the Ministers of the Gospel Church. They are
compared to the Sons of Zadock, for he speaks of those that have the charge of
the Sanctuary, that are to teach the People, and to carry on the Public
Worship. And several Rules are given to them to observe, that were given of Old
to the Levitical Priests; as being clothed with Linen Garments, not drinking
Wine when they enter into the inner Court, or Marrying a Widow, not coming at
any dead Person.

3. The Duty incumbant on them; in Controversy they shall stand in judgment,
and the shall judge it according to my judgments. This must be restrained to
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Controversies, such as belonged unto the Priests of
Old. In these Controversies they were to be the judges; others had nothing to
do to invade this Office. Others might not stand in judgment. It is usurpation
of a power that don't belong to them, to take upon them to judge in
Controversies. And these Ministers must judge; whatever other business they
have, they may not neglect this. God expects this Service from them, and they
do not the work of their Office if they do omit this. The judging in these
Controversies is an act of Authority and Office power, and none but those that
are Officers in the Church may take this work upon them.

1. OBj. Mat. 18.17. Tell it to the Church, and if he neglect to hear the
Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen Man and a Publican. Therefore the
Brethren have power.

A. The meaning is, Tell it to the Ecclesiastical authority, in distinction
from the Civil. Paul finds great fault with the Christians at Corinth for going
to Law with their Brethren. 1 Cor. 6.6. Brother goes to law with Brother. In
case of Offenses, Christ would not have them Prosecute their Brethren at the
Law, or avenge themselves privately; but seek to heal them. and accordingly
bring them to the authority of the Church His design is not to teach them in
whose hands the Church authority lies, but to teach them the way of the
recovery of their Brethren. When Christ spoke these words there was no Church
in being, but the Jewish Church, wherein the Elders did Rule: and this was no
new Institution, but a duty all along in the time of the Jewish Church: it was
only a reviving of an old Law.

It is no ways strange that he should call the Rulers of the Chuch, the Church.
Congregational Men must acknowledge that it is not the whole Church that is
intended, but only them that have some share in the government. The Sisters do
as much belong to the body of the Church as the Brethren. But besides, it is
frequent in Scripture, to call the Elders of the Congregation, the
Congregation. Numb. 26.24, 25. Then the Congregation shall judge between the
flayer and the avenger of blood, and the Congregation shall deliver the slayer
out of the hand of the avenger of blood, and the Congregation shall restore him
to the City of his refuge. The Elders represent the Congregation, and surely it
is as proper to call the Elders of the Church, the Church, as to call the
Elders of the Congregation, the Congregation.

2. Obj. 2 Cor. 2.6. Sufficient to such a Man is the punishment inflicted by
many.

A. It were better to read the words. The punishment inflicted before many. So
Dr. Hammond. That this is the meaning is evident.

1. Because it was Paul alone that gave Sentence on this Man. 1 Cor. 5.3, 4, 5.
I have judged already to deliver such an one to Satan.

2. Because it is spoken as the Evidence of the Sufficiency of his punishment.
If it had been by the Suffrage of many, that would have been no evidence of the
sufficiency of his punishment, it would not been the heavier for the consent of
the Brethren. But this is an argument of the heaviness of it, that it was a
Public punishment, that he was put to open shame; he was punished in the
presence of the whole Congregation. Paul had directed so, that they should be
gathered together, 1 Cor. 5.4. Whereby he was exposed to the greater shame.

3. Obj. 1 Cor. 5.12. Do not ye judge them that are within Gal. 6.1. Ye that
are spiritual restore him. 1 These. 5.14. Warn the umuly. Col. 4.17. Say to
Archippus take heed to thy Ministry. Rev. 2.20. Thou suffer that woman
Jezabel These things were written to the Churches, and so show the power of the
Brethren.

A. 1. When the Apostle writes to a single Elder, he requires him to do acts of
government. Tit 1.5. For this cause left I thee in Creet, that thou should
set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every City. And
Chap. 3. v. 10. A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second
admonition reject.

2. They that are acquainted with the style of the Prophets, may easily observe
two things.

1. That they give the reproof to the People of Israel, in such cases, where
the Rulers were the Persons in fault. Am 5 12. Ye afflict the just, ye take a
bribe. Isai. 5 7 He looked for Judgment but behold Oppression, for
Righteousness but behold a Cry. Jer. 6.6 It is a City to be visited, she is
wholly oppression in the midst of her.

2. That Commands are set down generally, when the Rulers are particularly
intended. Isai. 1 17 Relieve the Oppressed, judge the Fatherless, plead for the
Widow. Am 4.15. Establish judgment in the gate. Zech. 8.16. Execute the
judgment of peace and truth in your gates. It would be strange arguing that
because Prophets spoke these things to Israel, that the common People must have
an hand in judging. And that acts of Justice were to be done by the Suffrage of
the Multitude.

4 Obj. The taking away of the power of Brethren is the way to let Corruption
into the Church.

A. 1. There never was any way of government, propounded by God and invented by
Man, that has provailed to keep Corruption out of the Church. In a little
while most Churches have sensibly declined. The Church of Israel,
notwithstanding the order which they were put into by God himself, grew corrupt
in a little time.

2. If the Rulers and Teachers of a People grow corrupt, (...) of Brethren will
be a poor defense against Corruptions. If Magistrates and Ministers grow
corrupt, the People are not like to hold their Integrity long. If the best sort
of Men grow corrupt, they that are wont to be inferior to them in Piety, will
join in the Corruption. Jer. 5.31. The Prophets prophesy falsely, and the
Priests bear rule by their means, and my People love to have it so.

3. Humane inventions are not like to keep the Church pure. In Old England many
Ceremonies are attended under an apprehension that they are for decency and to
increase Devotion. And in New England some methods are taken to prevent
Corruption and promote Edification. But it don't become Men to reflect upon the
wisdom of God, as if they had understanding to mend His Institutions.

5 Obj. The taking away the power of the Brethren, seems to exalt the Minister
too much, and to degrade the People as if they were very insignificant Persons;
Whereas some Ministers are weak, and some of the Brethren be Men of very good
Abilities.

A. 1. The Ministers of the Gospel are hereby no more exalted than the
Ministers of the Jewish Church; neither are the People debased any lower than
the People of the Jewish Church. The Tribe of Judah was very honorable, yet it
is said that of it, No man gave attendance at the Altar, Heb. 7.13.

2. This does no more exalt the Minister or debase the Brethren, than the
confining of Preaching to the Minister. Preaching seems to be a Service of more
dignity than governing, yet People don't take it hardly that the Minister only
has the liberty of the Pulpit. It is no great honor to an able Brother, to
have as good a Vote in the Church as a Man that can neither Write nor Read. If
any of the Brethren be Men of Ability, there are other ways wherein they may
use their Talents; and if the Minister have five times the Ability as some
others, he will not think much to be debarred a Vote in Civil Affairs.

This Matter being thus cleared, there is no occasion for that Controversy,
Whether the Votes of the Fraternity in a Council are of equal authority with
the Votes of the Elders?

FINIS.

