The Valley of Hinnom. The TERRORS of HELL demonstrated; And the Methods of
Escaping the TERRIBLE MISERIES of the PUNISHMENTS of the Wicked there,
declared. IN A SERMON Preached in the Hearing, and at the Request, of a Man
under a Sentence of DEATH for a Murder; Just before the Execution of the
Sentence; and upon a TEXT by himself assigned for the Sermon to insist upon. At
BOSTON, 13. d. IV. m. 1717,

Descendamus Viventes, ne descendamus Morientes, Boston, Printed by J. Allen,
for Robert Stark, at his Shop near the New North Meeeting-House 1717.

The Occasion.
A Man whose Name was JEREMIAH FENWICK, was upon a Fair Trial brought in GUILTY
of having Murdered his Neighbor with an Axe, which he took up, and Employed a
Repeted Blow thereof, at the Person at whom his Anger was Enraged.

After he received the Sentence of DEATH for the Fact, the Great pains taken by
the Ministers of BOSTON for his Instruction and Conversion, were not without
some good Effects, and Symtoms of Repentance upon him; One of which might be
his Desire to have a SERMON of such a Tendency Preached; as is here Published,
that so such Ends as did appear to be desired by the poor Man, may be yet more
generally answered.

For which purpose, his Dying Speech, is also annexed.

A View of an Unseen World. Just before the Execution of JEREMIAH FENWICK for a
Murder. 13. d. IV. m. 1717.
WE have before us a poor Son of Death within Three or Four Hours of an Awful
Eternity, whose Condition is a most affecting SERMON unto us. But that it may
be so, I am desired by him, to Entertain you with a SERMON on a Text by himself
assigned unto me, than which the whole Bible affords not a more tremendous one.
Give now, O All ye People, every one of you, Give a most Lively Attention to
the Words of a Dying Man; yea, Attend unto the Word of the Ever-living GOD, in,

Matthew. X. 28. Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the
Soul; But rather Fear Him who is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell.
AMong the Visions of GOD, granted unto a Favorite of Heaven, we find an Angel
of the Lord flying through the midst of Heaven, and saying with a loud Voice,
Fear GOD, and give Glory to Him. Yea, But here we have the LORD of that Angel
Himself coming down unto the Earth, and saying with a loud Voice, O Fear the
glorious GOD! It is our Great SAVIOR, who Himself is very GOD, that now speaks
unto us. You are sensible, That our SAVIOR was now sending forth His Apostles
and His Ministers; to Reveal those Truths of the Gospel, which had hitherto
been Covered. The Faithful Discharge of their Ministry, would be Dangerous unto
them; would bring even the Dangers of nothing less than Death it self upon
them. To fortify them against the Fear of Death, Our SAVIOR warns them of a
destruction after Death, which is more to be feared than any Death.
Unfaithfulness unto GOD and a Neglect of our Duty to Him, will Expose us to a
Destruction of Soul as well as of Body, in a dreadful HELL, after Death; A
Destruction more dreadful than any* Death. From the Apprehension of this
Destruction we are to be quickened unto the Fear of GOD. The Fear of GOD will
Quicken us unto all possible Fidelity, Intergrity, Activity in the Discharge of
our Duty to Him; will set us above the Fear of what any Man on Earth, or even
all the Men in the World, can do unto us.

This is the sum of the matter. This, This the DOCTRINE of GOD our SAVIOR; and
the Roaring of the Lion, at which they are more stupid than the Beasts of the
Forest, who tremble not

The Destruction of the Soul as well as of the Body, in HELL, is a Thing so
much more Formidable than any Death, as that it Infinitely Obliges us all unto
the Fear of the Glorious GOD; who can inflict it on us, and will inflict it on
them who do not Fear Him.

Syrs, You are to stand, before a DOCTRINE provided by a Dying Man for your
Entertainment, as the People did of old before the flaming Mountain, upon which
there were Thunders and Lightnings, and the Voice of a Trumpet, Exceeding Loud,
So that all the People that were in the Camp, trembled at it.

There are first of all some very awful Truths of the Gospel, which must be
known, and be spoken in the Light, and set in a true Light before you.

I. It is most certain, That SIN must be Punished in Destructive Miseries upon
the Sinner; a Destruction proceeding from the Just Revenges of GOD The Holy GOD
has given us a Law, which requires our Homage unto Him, and our Kindness unto
our Neighbor. And a Just Law it is! While the great GOD is what He is, and His
Creature Man, is what He is, there will be such Things due, as His Law has thus
required. We must for ever own, Psalm. CXIX. 142. Thy Righteousness is an
everlasting Righteousness, and thy Law is the Truth. It Is a Law Originally
written on the Tables of our Hearts; and upon the Defacing of those Writings in
our Fall from GOD, we have it more fully Explained in the Sacred Scriptures
which the Prophetic Spirit has provided for us. In this Law there is a
Punishment assigned for the Transgression of it. Indeed, it were not a Law, if
it were not armed with a Penalty. And still there is Justice in all of this. It
is Just, That the Displeasure of the Holy GOD against the Transgression of His
Law, should be declared in the Punishment of the Transgressor. It is Just, That
when the Law of the Holy GOD has been Transgressed, the Crime should be
punished in those Destructive Miseries, which according to it belong unto the
Sinner. The Destructive Miseries of the Sinner, are the Just Revenges of GOD
upon him, demanding a Satisfaction, and a Reparation, for the Violations of His
Law. The Justice of GOD herein Vindicates His Violated Law; Magnifies it and
makes it Honorable. And herein He asserts and exerts those His Excellencies,
which have been Denied, been Defied, been Reproached in our Sin; For every Sin
does deny the GOD that is Above. Wherefore, from the Justice of GOD it now
comes to pass, That no Sin can be committed, but it must be Punished. Either
the Sinner must himself be miserable; or else, One must be found, that may be a
Surety for the Sinner, and shall Smart for it. That word, Romans VI. 23. The
Wages of Sin is Death: and that word, Prove. XIII. 21. Evil pursues Sinners; --
It Is a word that must be Executed. The Truth of a GOD that cannot lie, stands
engaged for the Execution of it. Upon a Sin, the Justice of GOD will demand a
Sacrifice; The Object is Destroyed, that is made a Sacrifice.

First, This is what Men have Naturally some Apprehensions of: Men are
Naturally Apprehensive of it, and bring into the World with them a Principle in
their Souls, which when it is awakened, gives them an Assurance of it; That Sin
must and will be Punished, by the Justice of GOD. It is truly affirmed, Romans I.
32. They know the Judgments of GOD, that they which commit such Things are
worthy of Death. The GOD who forms the Spirit of Man within him, and left on it
some Tendencies for a Reunion, to Himself; has made some Indelible Impressions
of His Justice on the Spirit of Man; Impressions, Convictions, Persuasions,
That GOD will punish Sin; and, That the wrath of GOD will come on the Children
of Disobedience, for doing such Things as are found in their Evil doings.
Governors themselves do Tremble, when they hear of a Judgment to come.
Emperors themselves are uneasy amidst all the Pleasures and Grandeurs of their
Palaces; It Is because they know, There is One Higher than they, who will Punish
their Misdemeanors, with Destructive Miseries upon them. The rude Pagans have
not been without their Notions of such a thing. The Barbarous Maltese
themselves, had their Notions of a Vengeance that would pursue Wicked Men; such
as Murderers. The Ancient Lawgivers, were wont in the close of their Laws, to
mention the Vindictive Justice of GOD: The clause was, Qui secus faxit, Deus
ipse Vindex erit. The Old Pagans had a sense of a Nemesis, or a Vindictive
Justice which terrified them. And it was the dread of this, which kept them so
close to the Task of Sacrificing; yea, the Dread of it brought them even to
Humane Oblations. Our common Adversary took such advantage thereof, as to push
them upon such Horrid Oblations; To make them do like the King of Moab in his
Anguish; To make them offer up no less than, The Fruit of their Body for the
Sin of their Soul. A Desire to pacify the Vindictive Justice of GOD; This is
the Origin of all the Severe Penances wherewith so many Superstitious People in
the World have mortified themselves. The Belief of this Vindictive Justice; Oh!
It has a strange Force on the minds of Men! Sinner, Thou can not shake it
off: It will haunt thee, as long as thou art in the World; It will seize thee
in all the dire Effects of it, when thou have left the World. I requst every
ungodly Man to make the Reflection; Friend, when thou have been doing an Ill
Thing, has not something within thee, told thee, A Just GOD will one day punish
thee for this! Oh! Do not slight such unfailing, such amazing praesages; Fools!
Do not any more make a mock of Sin, as you use to do!

Secondly. The Thing is yet more clearly and fully discovered, in the Book that
is given by Inspiration of GOD. Our BIBLE has the Incontestible marks of such a
Book. Now that Sin will be punished by the Justice of GOD in Destructive
Miseries upon the Sinner; This is that unto which our Bible does abundantly
Testify. Of our Bible we may say, Romans I. 18. Here The wrath of GOD is Revealed
from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men. The Book of GOD
is Expanded like the Firmament of Heaven over the Church of GOD. In this
Firmament the GOD of Glory thunders; That Powerful Voice of GOD is ever now and
then, heard Thundering there; The Justice of GOD will not let Sin go
unpunished! That Thundering Voice of Justice is here uttered from the Mouth of
GOD, Woe to the Wicked, it shall go ill with him, for the Reward of his hands
shall be given him; That Thundering Voice* GOD will render Tribulation and
Wrath, Indignation and Anguish, upon every Soul of Man which does Evil. In
this Book, how often do we find Things of such an Aspect as this! I will punish
you according to the Fruit of your Doings, says the Lord. How often is the
Anger of a Glorious GOD against Sin here told unto us! Yea, with Terms that
carry the highest Indignation in them! We must not imagine any Passion in the
Infinite GOD, like what there is in Angry Men! But such Expressions are used,
as Philo says well, For the Instruction of the Multitude. There is no
Perturbation of Mind like that of our Anger, in the Glorious God. But it means,
A Justice Resolved that Sin shall be punished. Thus it is that GOD is Angry every
Day! These, These must be our Doxologies unto Him; O Lord, Thou art not a GOD
that has pleasure in Wickedness; neither shall evil dwell with thee; The
foolish shall not stand in thy sight; Thou hate all workers of Iniquity.

II. You have been told, That Sin must be Punished. But, when, and where, shall
the Punishment be dispensed? The Proposition, which you were called but now to
come and see, was like the Pale Horse whereof you read in the Apocalypse. You
have seen Death mounted, and coming toward the Sinner; and Swallowing the
Ground with fierce Rage in the swift Advances of it. But now, HELL follows. I
am now to tell you, That the Destructive miseries brought in the Punishment of
Sin upon the Sinner; are chiefly reserved for an HELL in a FUTURE STATE; And
there will be a Destruction brought both on the Soul and on the Body, of the
Sinner, in that astonishing Punishment.

It is very plain, That the Punishment which the GOD of Truth has Threatened
for Sin, is not inflicted in the Present State. The Threatenings of GOD which
are all True and Faithful, and shall surely come to pass, are not fulfilled in
the Present State. The Sentence against evil Works is not so speedily Executed,
but that the Ungodly often Prosper in the World, neither are they plagued like
others, nor are there any Bonds in their Death: At the same time, The Children
of GOD, may say, All the Day long have I been plagued. But, O you that have
your Hearts fully set in you to do Evil, From this very Thing you may Conclude,
That there is a FUTURE STATE, wherein the Punishment of Sin, will be such that
it shall be according to that word; Mine Eye shall not spare, neither will I
have pity; I will recompense thee, O Sinner, according to thy ways, and ye
shall know, that I am the Lord, who smites you! The Argument lies thus; If
there be a Just GOD it must be so! If there be any Justice in Heaven, there
must be an HELL wherein there will be found, A strange Punishment reserved for
the workers of Iniquity. O Epicurean Atheists, If you try to weaken the
Foundation of this astonishing Argument, GOD has placed an Officer within you,
who will tear you in pieces, and there shall be none to deliver you.

They are such Important, but so very Terrible, Things which are now to be
published among you, That you may well demand some unquestionable, some
ungainsayable, Demonstrations of them. Now, I call to mind a saying, Luke XVI.
31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded,
though one Rose from the Dead. We have had coming to us from the Dead, such
Things among our selves, that a Man must render himself unworthy of a
Conversation among Men, who shall deny the matters of Fact, and the plain
Consequences of them, That there is a World of Evil Spirits; and, therefore
also, a World of good Ones. But I wave these Proofs; Nor indeed will Wicked
People hear them. I will carry you to one who is Greater than Moses and the
Prophets; even Him, who was by Moses and the Prophets commended unto us; One
also who is Risen from the Dead.

The Resurrection of our Blessed JESUS from the Dead, has had such Infallible
Proofs, that nothing but some Satanick Energy can make any Man such a Bruit, as
to admit any Doubt upon it. Now the Resurrection of our Blessed JESUS from the
Dead, is a Victorious Demonstration, That He is the SON of GOD, and the CHRIST,
the Savior of the World, and that whatever He has Declared in His Gospel, is
to be relied upon. Well* We will now hear what our Blessed JESUS has declared
unto us; and not be so Criminally unreasonable as to ask for any further
Demonstration. Speak, O Glorious LORD, and O thou True Witness, who art the
Deliverer of Souls; we will hear all that thou shall speak unto us. Lord, We
will Believe; Help thou our Unbelief!

First. Our SAVIOR has assured us of this; The SOUL of Man dies not, when his
Body dies. There are many Considerations, which render it more than probable,
That the Soul of Man is an Immortal Spirit. The Appetites for Immortality, the
Praesages of Immortality, by GOD implanted in the Soul, cannot be made by Him
in Vain. The Soul is not in its Constitution a perishable substance. It Is
evidently an Intellectual Being, of such a Constitution as to have no Seeds of
Corruption in it. The Soul so Differs from the Body, as to make us Think (and
this very Thing, To Think, is more than Body can do!) that it Survives after
the Death of the Body. Being Spirit and not Flesh, therefore they shall not
fail together. But above all, there is this to put the point beyond all
Probability. The Glorious LORD, who is the Creator and Redeemer of our Soul,
has positively told us, They which kill the Body are not able to kill the Soul.
No profane shufflings can Evade the force of this Proof! Man, Thy Soul, is a
Candle of the Lord. Thy SAVIOR who has placed this Lamp in the Earthen Vessel,
has affirmed unto thee, that it is not Extinguished by the Breaking of the
Earthen Vessel. No, He will keep it in its Existance to Eternal Ages. The
Spring in my Watch, will not be stripped of its Elasticity, and cease to be a
Spring, when it shall be taken out of the Machine whereof it now causes the
various Motions. Nor the Soul when taken out of the Body.

Secondly. Our SAVIOR has assured us of this; That the Body which is by Death
parted from the Soul, shall by a Resurrection from the Dead, be Restored unto
it. It is not a Final and Endless parting of them, when the Dust returns to the
Earth as it was, and the Spirit returns to GOD that gave it. No; The Body and
Soul, may say to one another at parting; We shall come together again. The
Glorious LORD, who Raised His own Body from the Dead, has left us no Room to
doubt of His Raising Ours, when He has peremptorily told us; Joh. V. 28, 29.
The Hour is Coming, in the which, all that are in the Graves shall hear His
Voice; And they shall come forth; They that have done good unto the
Resurrection of Life; and they that have done evil, unto the Resurrection of
Damnation. It is most certainly so! GOD Incarnate and Enthroned in our SAVIOR
will one Day Return from Heaven, and in that notable Day, according to the
working of His Mighty Power, whereby He is able to subdue all things unto
Himself, He will fetch the Seeds of our dissolved Bodies from the Chambers of
Death; He will Fill the Dead Bodies; He will return them to our Souls; to be
Re-animated, with mavelous alterations upon them.

Thirdly. Our SAVIOR has assured us of this; That after a Resurrection from
the Dead, the Wicked shall in Body as well as in Soul, be Punished with very
Destructive Miseries. Be sure, The Soul of a Wicked Man cannot but be very
miserable, from the Time of its going from the Body. It Is a Soul stripped of all
the Enjoyments, which it chooses instead of the Glorious GOD, from whom it has
wretchedly wandered; It is a Soul full of Remorse for its past Follies, and full
of Horror in the prospect of a Wrath to come; It is a Soul, Abhorred by GOD,
and Banished from GOD, and Associated with Devils, which are Tormentors unto
it. And, Oh! the Torments of it! Now, it cannot be supposed, that the Soul of a
Wicked Man, will have its Condition mended by a Return to the Body. No; The
Resurrection of the Dead will be, upon that Intention; [For so it is to be
read;] 2 Cor. V. 10 We must all appear before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST, that
every one may receive in the Body, according to what he has done, whether Good
or Bad. But, Oh! what will the Soul suffer in the Body, and what will the
Raised Body suffer with and from the Soul, when GOD shall again unite them, on
purpose to lay upon them the Punishment which belongs unto them! Syrs, Will you
hearken to the Faithful sayings of GOD! The Gospel of our SAVIOR, has given us
all possible Assurance, That GOD has appointed a Day wherein He will Judge the
World by Him; and That we shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of CHRIST;
and, That every one of us shall give an Account of himself unto GOD. The Gospel
of our SAVIOR, has given us an undoubted Assurance, That He will come to
render unto all Men according to their works; and, That then the Wicked shall
go away into an Everlasting Punishment. The Gospel of our SAVIOR has given us
a Repeted Assurance, That the Wicked shall be Punished with an Everlasting
Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of His Power;
and, That the Angels shall come forth and cast them into a Furnace of Fire;
where shall be wailing and gnashing of Teeth. After this Gospel, there is no
room for any Disquisition. The Gospel speaks these things; There is no want of
any further Demonstration.

III. Twice has the Trumpet sounded; The sound must wax Louder and Louder.
Behold, the Third Proclamation of Woe unto the Wicked, now comes quickly! You
are to be now informed, That no Death can be so Formidable as the Punishment of
Sin in Destructive Miseries upon the Soul as well as the Body of the Sinner, in
the HELL that is to come after Death. Unto this Amazing Punishment, the
Denomination given is that, Rev. XX. 14. This is the Second Death. But verily,
There is nothing in the First Death, which may be compared unto the Destructive
Miseries in that Second Death. DEATH is the King of Terrors; But in comparison
of the Second Death, it is but a Shadow of Death; It has no Terrors comparable
to those of the Second Death.

Unto this tremendous Assertion, there has been a mighty Army of Martyrs who
have born a Testimony, which ought to be far from Contemptible with us. Come
with me, to Mahanaim, and see the Hosts of GOD, and hear their Testimony. There
have been Thousands of good and wise Men, who rather than Sin against the
Glorious GOD have not loved their Lives unto the Death; but been willing to Dye
before the Term to which in the course of Nature they might have lived. When
these Men were put in mind of this thing, Death is Bitter; One of them spoke
the mind of all the rest, when he said, But HELL is more Bitter than any Death!
Death in all the most hideous and horrible Forms of it, and with all the most
Insufferable Tortures, has been set before them. This Death have they chosen,
and unto all the Torturous Cruelties which that Cursed Monster Persecution
could afflict them withal, have they Courageously and Cheerfully Exposed
themselves. Why, They have all said, No Death of the Body from the Hand of Man
can be so formidable, as the Destruction of Soul as well as Body from the Hand
of GOD, after Death, unto which our Sin against GOD would render us obnoxious.
The Servants of GOD, who have suffered Martyrdom have been the Excellent of the
Earth; and such a Spirit of GOD has rested on them, in their sufferings, that
we cannot reasonably imagine them left unto a Delusion, in the Grand Principle
that acted them. These Witnesses of GOD, ascending up into Heaven in a Cloud,
call with a Loud Voice from thence unto us; It was well worth all our
Sufferings, to escape the Destructive Miseries of the Hell, from which we are
now delivered!

What will be the more special kinds of the Destructive miseries in the
Punishment of the Damned in HELL; This is a Thing very much concealed from us,
as well as the more particular place of Torment. Our Saxon Word, HELL,
signifies, a Pit, and one that is covered over. Doubtless, our Language wants
Words to express the Destructive Miseries in that Pit of Destruction, and so it
can be no other than very much covered over. And yet the Mouth of the Pit has
been so much Discovered unto us that we shall not fall into it, except with
madness in our Heart while we live, we will go unto the Dead. You shall
presently see the Mouth of the Pit opened, and the Smoke of the Torment come
up, which is to ascend for ever and ever.

The Name which our SAVIOR uses for the HELL wherein GOD will destroy both
Soul and Body of the Wicked, even, GEHENNA; This carries in it, what is very
Formidable. It Is as much as to say, The Valley of Hinnom. Tragical Things were
done in the Valley of Hinnom, when the Diabolical Idolaters offered up their
Children to Molock there; and employed the Noise of Drums to drown the doleful
Cry of the Infants while they were Burning Alive unto the Devil. It seems, the
Ejulations of wretches Burning Alive, [But, O Lord, How Long! How Long!] These,
it seems, will give some Idea of the Punishment inflicted on the multitudes,
alas, the multitudes! -- in the Dismal Valley of Destruction.

But, you look for Demonstrations. I affirm to you, No Death so Formidable, as
the Destructive Miseries of that HELL, wherein the wicked shall be punished.
Now, Listen to the Demonstrations; yea, Tremble at them.

First. Let Righteousness, Cry, and Equity put forth her Voice. It Is thus that
she cries at the Gates of Death. Such Things as Wicked Men have most
Unrighteously done unto Godly Men, have they not been very Formidable? Those
Abominable Men, who have been, The Haters of GOD; What have they done to the
People of GOD? The Best People in the World, falling into the Hands of the
Worst, how barbarously have they been Tortured and Butchered? They have with
Boots had the very marrow forced out of their Bones. They have been stretched
upon Racks till they have been left in a swoon with their Bones all out of
Joint. They have been broken on Wheels, and many Hours have passed, before the
Coup de Grace has been given them. Slow Fires have roasted them to Death.
Authors who have written, De Crucia^^^^^ Martyrum, have not a Page, but what is
Formidable. What Formidable Things have been done upon the Best of Men, by that
Firstborn of Tyrants, the Vile Person lately at Versailles, and the rest of
his Brethren? What Formidable Things, in the Popish Inquisition? But now, We
are taught of GOD; Cor. III. 25. He who does wrong shall receive for the wrong
which he has done. The Question is, Whether there be a Righteous GOD? But GOD
forbid, That ever this should be a Question! There were an Infandous
Blaspheming in the Question. Well; since there is a Righteous GOD, and, Verily,
There is a GOD who Judges in the Earth, it necessarily follows, There must be
an HELL in which there must be a Punishment for the Wicked, at least as
Formidable as the worst Things which the Godly have suffered from them; at
least Proportioned unto the Wrongs which the Wicked have done unto the Godly.
But this will soon infer something that shall be vet more Formidable!

Secondly. We have seen HELL begun upon Earth; And from thence we may gather,
how Formidable, and much more painful than any Death, will be the Punishment of
the Wicked, in that HELL to which they are going down. If the Raised Bodies of
the Wicked, must feel Pains at least Equal to what they gave unto the Bodies of
others here, and be used no better than some Inhumane Caribbaeans do their
Slaves, they will now be worse of it, because their Souls will feel, what the
sufferers from them here, did not undergo. The Horrors raised in a Guilty
Conscience, what are they but some sparkles of HELL shot into the Souls of Men?
But these Horrors, How Intolerable! How Intolerable! It was long since
observed; Prove. XVIII. 14. A wounded Spirit, who can bear? Persons under the
Horrors of a Guilty Conscience, how Formidably are they Cruciated? They Roar by
Reason of the Disquietness of their Heart. Yea, They choose Strangling rather
than Life. One among us, kept fearfully crying out, I am all on Fire under the
Wrath of GOD! and went, and hanged himself. Some that have wounded their
Conscience by sinful Compliances and Apostasies, have been so unable to bear
the Wounds, that they have Retracted what they have done, and have gone and
have told, the Tormentors, No Death you can inflict, is a thousandth part so
bad, as the wounds which we feel in our Souls! Yea, How often have People under
the Horrors of a Guilty Conscience, grown lean, and pale, and ghastly; and been
mere Magor-Missabib's, a Terror to themselves, and all about them! How often,
have they professed, That Burning in the Fire on the Hearth, would be a
Mitigation of their Miseries! One of them over hearing People speak, about
Burning in the Fire, cried out, Oh! That is but a mere Metaphor for what my
(...) Endures! Now, In HELL, the Horrors of a Guilty Conscience do seize upon
the Souls of the wicked, in the fullest Efficacy, and with a vast Enlargement
of their Faculties, to receive the lashes of the Furies. GOD has an Instrument
of His Vengeance in the Conscience of a Wicked Man. And Oh! the Scourges, Oh!
the Scorches, which it will give unto him, when the Vengeance of Eternal Fire
falls upon him! Can any Death be so Formidable, as what is felt from a
Conscience armed with Guilt, and in the Name of the Holy GOD upbraiding a
Sinner with a Fiery Indignation?

As an Appendix unto this Article, I will offer to your View, the astonishing
Distress into which our Blessed JESUS Himself was thrown, when GOD laid upon
him the Iniquities of us all, and He underwent the Punishment, which was due
for the Sins of His Elect. Syrs, Go to Gethsemane, and see the Blessed JESUS
prostrate in the Dust, and Blood mingled with the Sweat which dropped from Him;
See Him very Heavy, very Sorrowful, sore Amazed, in most inexpressible
perplexities crying out* Oh! My Father, let this Cup pass from me! Go to
Golgotha, and see the Blessed JESUS hanging on the Tree, with His Bones out of
Joint; See Him with His Heart melted like wax in the midst of His Bowels, and
crying out, My God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me? All this done, to the
JESUS, who was Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, and Separate from Sinners, when He
was a sufferer for Sinners! And now, O Sinful ones, How will you bear the
Punishment of your own Sin? Ye sorry Briars and Thorns, How will you stand
before that Consuming Fire? The Cup which made that mighty One, our Immanuel,
to stagger, will certainly be too strong for the miserable Sinner.

Thirdly. The Punishment of the Wicked in the HELL ordained of old by the King
of Heaven for them; From whence will come the Principal Infliction of it? O
Hearken to me! The Principal Infliction of the Punishment on the Damned, will
be with an Immediate Impression from the wrath of an Infinite GOD upon the Soul
that is fixed in an Aversion for Him. O most Formidable Punishment! At the
mention of it, will not our Souls Tremble, and our Hearts be removed out of
their place? The Punishment of Sin in HELL, will be nothing less than the Wrath
of an Almighty GOD, making a direful Impression on the Soul of the Sinner. The
Sinner shall not be delivered over into the Hands of only Finite Executioners:
But the Almighty GOD Himself, will take him into His own Hands, and make him
feel such scalding strokes of His Wrath, as will be more torturous than flaming
Sulphur, or than running Bell-Metal. What will be the Fire of the Damned? There
is an awful Intimation; Heb. XII. 29. Our God is a consuming Fire. Oh! It Is GOD
approaching to them, as a Revenger, that will make their plagues wonderful.
There will be wonderful Dolours in the Punishment of Sin, which will not be
inflicted by the Administration of Creatures; But they shall be Immediate
Emanations from a Provoked, Omnipotent, Omniscient GOD, Penetrating like Hot
Lightning into the Damned Soul; Immediate Coruscations from GOD, acting as a
Consuming Fire. O Wicked Ones, I my self* will fight against you, with a strong
Arm, even in great Wrath, says the Lord. The great GOD Himself will shoot the
Thunder of His Wrath into the Desolate Soul of the Sinner; GOD with His burning
Wrath shall draw near to the Desolate Soul, and fill it with a Confusion that
no words can describe unto them who are yet in the Flesh. Lord, Thou will make
them as a Fiery Oven in the Time of thine Anger! The Lord will swallow them up
with His wrath; so the Fire shall devour them. Arrows from the Wrath of GOD
shall enter into the Soul of the Sinner; the Poison thereof, Oh! how it shall
Inflame and Enrage the Spirit! Oh! The Groans of the Malefactor, when the Wrath
of GOD shall be breaking of him; O GOD, Thy-Wrath lies hard upon me; Thy Fierce
Wrath, O GOD, is going over me! Can any Death be so Formidable? Can thy Heart
Endure, or thy Hands be strong, when I shall deal with thee? says the Lord.

Finally. There is this to render the Punishment of the Wicked in HELL beyond
all Imagination Formidable. Do you know of any Period for the Punishment? Only
an Aching Tooth, holding One for a Month together, how grievous! But the
Exquisite Miseries of the Damned, will they hold no more than a year? or will
they come to a Period in a Thousand years? or after as many Millions of years,
as there are Leaves upon the Trees, or Drops in the Sea, or Sands on the Shore;
will they then come to a Period? or, could a Scroul as wide as the System of
Our World, filled with Figures, contain the Number of years, which the Wicked
are to see passing away in the Wrath of GOD! We know nothing of any Period.
This we know, That our SAVIOR has called it, Mat. XXV. 4^. An Everlasting
Punishment. And there is a consideration, which the mind of a Christian cannot
hear proposed, but he must like Moses before the Burning Mountain of old, cry
out, I exceedingly fear and quake, at the mention of it! It is this; It Is
plain, That our Mediator unto whom GOD has committed the Judgment, will adjudge
the Wicked unto a Punishment which will be Formidable. It Is plain, That our
Mediator at the Time of the End, when He delivers up his Kingdom to His Father,
Leaves the Wicked still under their Punishment. If ever the Wicked be Released
from their Punishment, it must be after the Son of GOD, shall cease to act as a
Mediator. Now, when the Mediator has left them, in the Devouring Fire, and in
the Everlasting Burnings, Who, who will there be to bring them out? Or, Is
there any likelihood, that Souls, which have outstood their Time for Probation,
and are fixed in all Malignity, should ever be changed, and brought back unto
an unchangeable GOD, who has finally Rejected them? O Punishment hopeless of a
Period? Certainly, No Death can be so Formidable?

IV. But All have Sinned! And What? Is there no Remedy nor Escaping? Yes, my
Friends; I bring you good Tidings of great Joy! An Improvement is now to be
made of these Faithful sayings: Which are also how Fearful ones! The FEAR of
GOD, is now to be praescribed unto you, as the only Method of your Deliverance
from the Destructive Miseries which the Punishment Of Sin is big withal. Every
One will take it for granted, That the GOD who is Able to Destroy both Soul and
Body in Hell, is a GOD forever to be Feared. Who shall not Fear thee, O Lord,
and Glorify thy Name? Certainly, A sorry Worm crawling upon the Earth, urging
us to Sin against Him, cannot be so worthy to be Feared, as He. Think of this,
O all you, whom the Fear of Man, may be likely to draw into any Snare of Sin.
But I am now to advise you, That if you would be delivered from the Destruction
of both Soul and Body in Hell, it must be by the Fear of GOD. So we are
instructed, Prove. XIV. 27. The Fear of the Lord is a Fountain of Life, to
depart from the Snares of Death. O our Gospellized People; You must come into
the Fear of GOD Immediately, if you would not be destroyed both Soul and Body
in Hell, and if you would not perish wonderfully! We may justly make that
Exclamation once made by the Man of GOD; Lord, Who so considers as to know what
Power thy Anger has! Yea, even according to thy Fear so is thy flaming Wrath.
Souls, According as the Fear of GOD is in you or not, so shall the Wrath of GOD
be dispensed unto you. You are on every side surrounded with perswasives to the
Fear of GOD, perswasives Enough to render your Destruction as Demerited as
Unavoidable, if you continue the Children of Unperswadableness. But what is now
insisted on is this; Oh! may you now be persuaded unto it, Knowing the Terror
of the Lord. Come into the Fear of GOD, moved by this, Destruction from GOD, is
a Terror to me!

There are Three Things to be more particularly in the Fear of GOD, now pressed
upon you.

First. In the Fear of GOD, make your Flight unto your only SAVIOR, that you
may be delivered from the Wrath of GOD and from the Destructive Miseries in
that HELL which your Sin, has deserved for you. This, This is the Fear of GOD,
in the Evangelical Notion of it; Such a Dread of the Divine Displeasure whereto
our Sin Exposes us, as to Compel our Flight unto the only SAVIOR from Sin,
that by Him we may be Saved from it, Thus we read, Psalm. CXLVII. 11. The Lord
takes pleasure in them that Fear Him, in them that hope in His Mercies. Our
Hope in a Glorious CHRIST, is our Hope in the Mercy of GOD. Without this Hope,
there is no Genuine Fear of GOD. O People in Danger of a Damnation that
slumbers not; You are to Remember, That there is a JESUS who delivers from the
Wrath to come. You are to Remember, That we have a Great SAVIOR who has
willingly undergone the Essentials of that Punishment which was due to His
chosen for their Sin. You are to Remember, That when the Blood of our Great
SAVIOR is applied unto his chosen, to rescue them from their Punishment, He
always inclines and strengthens them, to Confess and Forsake their Sin, and
Return unto GOD. Now, you must in the Fear of GOD, fall down before your Great
SAVIOR, and with a wondrous Importunity beg it of Him; O my SAVIOR, Do thou
Reconcile me, (...) GOD, and Lead me in the Paths of Righteousness. My Friend,
Except thou do Wrestle hard for this, and as it becomes an Israelite indeed,
Weep and make Supplication to GOD for it, thou never shall be Justified.

Secondly. The Fear of GOD, when it is wrought in a Soul, there is the Life of
GOD begun in that Soul. O make out for, O make sure of, such a Vital Touch from
GOD upon your minds, as will Quicken you to live unto Him. These always go
together; Eccl. XII. 13 Fear GOD and keep His Commandments. The Fear of GOD
infused into the Heart, will make a New Heart of it, and a clean One. Oh! Let
that cry ascend from you with a matchless Agony, Create in me a Clean Heart, O
GOD! The Fear of GOD, will dispose you to be afraid of every Thing which the
Light of GOD within you, shall pronounce a sinful Thing. It will dispose you,
to fill your Lives with continual Acknowledgments of GOD, and make it your main
Design, to please Him, your main Business to Serve Him, and Acknowledge Him in
all your ways. It will dispose you, to acquiesce in the Will of GOD, and behave
your selves as under the Eye of God, and as those who must give unto Him an
Account of your Behavior. It will dispose you to follow the pattern of your
SAVIOR, and rejoice in an Imitation of Him, a Conformity to Him. It will
dispose you to Love your Neighbor* and still do to him, as you would own it
Right for him to do unto you. Without these Dispositions, you cannot look for
Admission into those Gates, which are set open for none but the Righteous
Nation. If you cannot show such Tokens of Salvation, you shall never be
received unto the Feast in the mount of GOD. Should a Soul without these
Dispositions be taken into Heaven, that Holy Place would soon purge it out,
clear it self of so disagreeable a Nuisance. Wretched Soul, Heaven is a Soil,
that cannot bear such a venomous (...) in it. A Soul that has these
Dispositions wro't in it, has Heaven it self inwrought into the very Temper of
it; and if it were possible for such a Sanctified Soul to be thrown down into
HELL, it would carry Heaven thither with it. Now, If any of you lack this
wisdom let him ask it of GOD!

Thirdly. Take the Warnings of DYING MEN, against those Transgressions of the
Wicked, which may say within our Heart, There is no Fear of GOD before the Eyes
of those who practice them. To Fear GOD, and (...) Evil, are Things that for
ever go together. We are told, Prove. XVI. 6. By the Fear of the Lord Men depart
from Evil. And will not the Fear of the Lord, then cause you to Depart from
such Evil as you hear Stigmatized in the Lamentations of Dying Men, who become
sensible of what Evil they have Committed, and what Evil they have Incurred, by
their wanting the Fear of GOD? You cannot be drawn into the Fear of GOD, by any
thing more Effectually, than by taking up, The Thoughts of a Dying Man. Oh!
That every One in this great Auditory would be prevailed withal, at least for
this one Instance and Action of Discretion; To Think seriously, If I were to
Dye this Day, how should I wish that I had ordered my Life? Then take up steady
Resolutions to Live accordingly, and so to walk in the Fear of GOD! But then,
methinks, The Words of a Dying Man, should have some Effect upon you; and
particularly, One who is to Dye this Day, and is within a few Minutes to go
whence he shall not Return! It Is not Enough that the Ruin of this poor Man does
loudly call upon you, to avoid such Paths of the Destroyer, as have brought him
into Destructive Miseries; but his own paenitent and pathetick Request is
added, That a great Notice may be taken of what is therein spoken unto you.
Behold, A poor Man from the midst of the dark shadow of Death crying to you,
with all the Anguish of a Dying Hour upon him* O Fear GOD, O Fear GOD, Lest He
destroy you Body and Soul in Hell, as He will all them that Fear Him not! Being
under Condemnation he so far does Fear GOD, as to beg it of you, that you
would, Not cast off the Fear of GOD. Shall I say unto you, That if the Fear of
GOD, will not prevent your Profaning the Day of GOD, and your Neglecting the
House of GOD, you shall mourn at the last; and be in utmost hazard of being
shut out from the Rest of GOD, and from the Congregation of the Righteous!
Shall I say unto you, That if the Fear of GOD will not Govern your Anger, you
shall be the Froward Ones, who will fall into mischief* and fall under the
Anger of GOD? Shall I say unto you, That if the Fear of GOD will not produce
your Prayer to GOD, and cause you with your Families to call upon His Name, the
Wrath of GOD shall be poured upon you, and upon your worse than Paganizing
Families? Or shall it be said unto you; O our YOUNG PEOPLE, if you will not be
the Early Seekers of GOD, and Followers of your SAVIOR, He will permit the
Destroyer to do sad Things upon you, and hurry you on to a Fearful End! All
these Things are no other what this poor Man does Entreat me to speak from him
unto you all, and beseech you to take Notice of them. From him there is now
this cry in the midst of the Assembly made unto you all; O Fear GOD in such
Things as these, lest He destroy you wonderfully!

But, O DYING MAM, as I have now spoken from you, it is Time that I once again
speak to you! Once again! -- But as never to do it again. The last Words, my
Friend, The last Words of your own FUNERAL SERMON, are now to be addressed unto
you.

Having been so concerned, -- and it is no Bad sign to be so concerned, That
your Neighbors may by the Fear of GOD, be preserved from the HELL, wherein the
Wicked shall be Punished, Every One will take it for granted, that you have
made it your own main Concern to be preserved from that Place of Dragons. You
are aware, It Is the Fear of GOD, that must preserve you! If you have the Fear
of God now at last wrought in a Soul, which has been for Three or Four and
Thirty years destitute of it, and Lying Dead in Trespasses and Sins; Then,
Then, is your Grand point secured. Oh! Lift up an unpacified cry to the GOD of
all Grace; Lord, Unite my Heart for thee, and for the Fearing of thy Name!

You have upon you some Symptomps! of a Begun Repentance, which comfort the
Servants of GOD, who have been Travailing for you. But, Oh! Be inexpressibly
sollicitous, That it be a Thorough Repentance. Man, It must be a very Heady
Repentance. It will not be a Right work, if it be not an Heart-Work. O Tremble,
O Tremble, Exceedingly; Lest the Confusion of, A Deceived Heart, prove your
Portion after all.

Wherefore, Commune with your own Heart, and let your Spirit make a Diligent
Search. O Examine; Is there no SIN, but what is become odious to me? Examine;
Is a whole CHRIST, with all His Benefits precious to me? Examine! Is there
nothing I so much long for as to have my Heart filled with the Love of GOD, and
have GOD Reigning in my Soul? O make a Severe, Exact, Thorough Scrutiny!

If you are thus Really Turned unto GOD, then may you go away Singing, Return
to thy Rest, O my Soul! -- For Thou, O Lord, have delivered my Soul from Death!

Ah, Poor FENWICK, Will thou not magnify the Grace of GOD thy SAVIOR! Of old,
a City of Refuge in the Holy Land, would not receive and protect a Murderer.
But in a Glorious CHRIST there is a City of Refuge that stands open for thee. A
Paenitent Murderer may find a Refuge there. Oh! Fly for a Refuge unto the Hope
set before thee.

Mavelous has been the Favor of GOD, in stirring up the Hearts of His
Ministers, to labor so Compassionately as they have done for thy Salvation.
But all their Compassion is but a small, faint, cold Image of what thou shall
find in the Heart of their Master, and thy SAVIOR.

Mavelous the Grace of our GOD, in making thee a Tender of that Blood which
Cleanses from all Sin, and speaks better Things than the Blood of thy slain
Brother, which cries from the Ground against thee.

Mavelous the Grace of our GOD in reaching out unto thee His very great and
precious Promises; and particularly that Word, which is worth Ten Worlds, Him
that comes to me I will in no wise cast out.

And yet more Mavelous the Grace of our GOD, if after all thy Impiety, and
Long, Long, Provoking Impenitence, He has overcome thee, to Receive His offered
Grace, and lay Hold on Eternal Life.

Then, Then may thou hear thy SAVIOR from Heaven Surprising of thy humbled
Soul, with such a Sweet Voice as that; Son, Be of good cheer, Thy Sins are
forgiven thee! Such a Sweet Voice as that; This Day thou shall be with me in
Paradise.

FINIS.
THE Dying Speech OF Jeremiah Fenwick, Who, after he had at the place of
Execution, less audibly spoken the substance of these Things, then gave the
ensuing Instrument (...) a more full Declaration of his Dying Sentiments.
I Consider my self as a dying Man, and I desire to dye giving Glory to God,
before whom I am now to make my Appearance. I offer up my Praises unto God who
has granted me such a space of Repentance, and so many helps and means to bring
me to it.

I hope, the Faithful Servants of God, will with some comfort see some Harvest
of the great pains they have taken for my Good.

To all the other Sins of a Wicked Life, I have added this; That I have too
much delayed my Repentance, even since my Imprisonment, while the Sentence
against my evil work, was not yet certain to be Executed. Though I have hereby
so affronted and provoked the good Spirit of Grace, that He might justly
withdraw for ever from me, yet such has been his Free and Rich Grace, as to
continue still to visit me with his Influences; and bring on a work of
Repentance in my Soul.

I heartily mourn for all the Sins of my Life; and above all for the Fountain
of all Sins, which I have in an Heart that is desperately wicked. I most
particularly confess and bewail my Blood-Guiltiness. I owe my Life to Justice,
for having wrongfully taken away the Life of my Brother, whom I ought to have
loved as my self. I own the Justice of the Government in their Proceeding
against me. But, Lord, there is Forgiveness with thee, that thou may be
feared.

I behold the Infinite Mercy of a God ready to Pardon; and my Soul is amazed at
it: I behold a great Savior, shedding his Blood, which cleanses from all Sin.
And I hear him saying to the chief of Sinners, Him that comes unto me I will
in no wise cast out. With a distressed Soul I fly to him, to be reconciled unto
God, and to be led into Paths of Righteousness. I am not without Hope. And one
fruit of my Hope, is, that it causes me to look on my Sins with more Sorrow for
them, and Hatred of them; which till I had this Hope, I did not care or dare to
think upon. Another fruit of it, is, that my Heart is melted, and filled with
Desires to Glorify God:

And I know not how to glorify God more, than by solemn warnings unto all
People to take heed of such Sins, as have brought me to such a Ruin as is now
come upon me.

The first thing that lies heavy on my Heart is, My Profanation of the Lords
Day, and my frequently and needlessly neglecting the Public Worship of God. A
Sin, which let all that love their Souls be afraid of* I have wounded my Soul
sometimes by excessive Drinking. A Sin that leads to many others. I have been
very vile in Swearing and Cursing. Lord, send me not among those whose Language
I have been used unto! Ungoverned Anger has brought my Death. Beware, my
Friends, of this deadly Evil. But I would especially bewail my Prayerless Life.
I had no Prayers with my Family, nor in my Retirement, in the Morning of the
Day, when I was left unto the Murder of my Neighbor. O my Friends, In the
Day, which you don't begin with Prayers unto God, little do you know what God
may leave you to.

Thus, I would as in the Presence of God, and as I am now in a short Time to
appear before my great Judge, there to give up an Account of my Actions done in
the Flesh, solemnly exhort and warn all that shall see or hear of my Tragical
and Untimely End; But more particularly Masters of Families, that they do not
neglect Prayers in their Families, and a due Attendance on the Public Worship
of God, on his Holy Day, and all other, Duties required in Gods Holy Word, as I
to my great Grief have done. I desire all, that they look back on their past
life, and seek to God, thorough Jesus Christ for Repentance, while there is a
space given to them, least they mourn at last, and say, how have I hated
Instruction? and least God in His Holy Justice should say to them, when I
called upon you, you would not hear, now you cry to me, I will not answer you.
I desire yet more especially, to warn all young Persons, to seek unto God in
their Youth and in the Morning of their Days, as believing that their whole
Life is but a short Time to prepare for Eternity; and to live in an holy walk
with God, lest they should provoke God to leave them to fall into the same Sins
which have been my Ruin. Pray, let my Advice to you never be forgotten by you,
but take Example from me; take it as the words of a dying Friend and Neighbor,
that you may not run on in sinning against the blessed God, but that you may
take warning by me, and may hearken to the Calls of God in the Gospel, with a
due and (...) Attendance on all the (...) the Gospel, which is able to make you
wise unto Salvation. Thus leaving you to the Mercy of the great God, as I do my
self likewise, I hope through the Merits of my dear Redeemer, we may have a
happy Meeting in the great Day of the Lord. Take these warnings of a dying Man.
And now, O Father of Mercies, Let these warnings do Good in the World, and let
me who am leaving the World, find favor with thee, through the blessed Jesus,
my only Savior. Amen.

J. F.
The foregoing Instrument, wad affirmed by Jeremiah Fenwick to be an Exact
Declaration of his Tho'ts, in every Clause of it. And he therewithal declared
his Desire, that it might be made as public and as useful to survivers, as
were possible;

In the Presence of us. S. S. (...) S S. (...)




FINIS.

