FAITH Encouraged. A Brief RELATION OF A Strange IMPRESSION from HEAVEN, on the
Minds of some Jewish Children, At the City of Berlin, (In the Upper Saxony) And
some REMARKS, for the Improvement of so Mavelous an Occurrence.

Psalm. VIII. 2. Out of the Mouth of Babes and Sacklings.

BOSTON: Printed by J. Allen, for T. Fleet, and Sold at his Shop in Newbury
Street, at the South End. 1718.

THERE has been transmitted unto us, an Account of a wonderful Impression made
by the Good SPIRIT of our Great SAVIOR, on some JEWISH Children in the City of
Berlin: Which has been thought worthy to be Published in diverse Languages, and
comes attested with most Incontestible Circumstances. It shall be here offered
in the Plain, and Short, and Natural Exhibition of it, which was given first at
Hamburg, in the German, and then at London, in the English Language.

A short and wonderful ACCOUNT OF THE Conversion of Three Jewish Children to
Christianity. BERLIN, Aug. the 10th. 1716.
ABOUT three Weeks ago, three young Jewish Girls, whose Names were Sprintz,
Guttel, and Esther, Daughters of Isaac Veits and Sophia Mos;es, Jews, came to
the House of Mr. Kahman a Lutheran Minister of St. Mary's Church in Berlin. The
eldest of 'em was Twelve Years old; (though the Mother gives out she is but
Nine:) The youngest was Eight, or, as the Mother pretends, but Six.

These Children desired to speak with the Minister: As soon as he appeared, the
eldest addressed her self to him first, and said: She with her two Sisters were
come to request his Protection and Instruction; for that they had a great
Desire to embrace the Christian Religion, whereby they likewise might have Part
in Jesus of Nazareth, the true God, who dyed for them, as well as for the rest
of Mankind; adding, That the sincere and unfeigned Love to this crucified God,
constrained them hereto; and that they could not possibly live any longer with
their Parents.

Mr^ Kahman, the Minister, was much surprised at what he heard, and began to
think they had, perhaps, met with some severe Usage at Home, which occasioned
their speaking to him in this Manner: Wherefore he advised them to Return home
again, and be hereafter more Obedient to their Parents. But all three flung
themselves down at his Feet, begging and entreating him, in the Name of JESUS,
whom they loved and adored, to receive them; declaring withal, That nothing in
this World had moved them to forsake their Parents House, but the sole View of
becoming Christ's chosen Ones, and to belong to Him alone; and that, Let Things
go how they would with them, they were fully resolved rather to dye, than to
leave their Jesus. Whereupon the Minister took them into his House.

The Parents having searched up and down for their Children a considerable Time
in vain, came to hear at last they were at Mr. Kahman's; to whom they went, and
demanded their Children of him: He replied, he had sent already an Account of
the Case of these Children to his Majesty the King of Prussia; and that it did
not lie in his Power to deliver up the Children to them against their own
Inclinations: However, he promised to say nothing to the Children* till he
received Orders from his Majesty concerning them.

As soon as the King had received the Account, he appointed certain
Commissioners, two of the Reformed, and two of the Lutheran Persuasion, viz.
the Reverend Dr. Jablonski, Mr. Achenbach, Possard and Thering, with strict
Orders, to make an exact Enquiry into this Matter; and particularly to
consider, whether these Children might be taken into his Majesty's Protection,
in order to be brought up in the Christian Religion, against their Parents
Consent, without infringing the Power that Parents have over their Children,
grounded on divine and humane Right.

Hereupon the Commissioners ordered the Children to be brought before them, and
appointed the Parents, in the mean while, to go into another Room adjoining,
where they might hear the whole Examination. Then they took the Children, and
examined them one after another; who all, as with one Voice declared, They
would not return to their Parents again, but would be made Christians, and
Children of Eternal Salvation.

It appeared, they could already say the Lord's-Prayer by Heart, as also
several Texts out of the New Testament, with several Hymns: The youngest could
also repeat the Articles of the Christian Faith: All which, they said, they had
learnt whilst they were at Play with Christian Children. These they rehearsed
with a wonderful Devotion; most solemnly protesting, that they would never live
nor die otherwise than Christians.

In order to try their Sincerity, the Reverend Persons entrusted with this
Matter, omitted nothing to represent the Life of a Christian as Uneasy and
Troublesome as possibly they could: However, after having done this, and laid
before them, on the one Side, how they would be despised and forsaken, even
among the Christians themselves, and be forced to work hard for their
Livelihood: They replied, That they would work till the very Blood spurted out
from their Nails, provided they might be made Children of Eternal Salvation;
[and that] though they should not be happy in this World, they hoped to be so
in the next. And when it was represented to them, on the other Side, how easily
and comfortably they might live among the Jews; and that their Father had made
fine Clothes for them, etc. they replied, They did not value that at all; the
Clothes must remain in the World; they would be Children of Salvation, and not
return to their Parents again.

After this, the Parents were called in, and the Children being placed before
them, they began to speak to them with abundance of Tenderness and Compassion;
they fell upon their Necks, kissed their very Hands and Feet, and melted away
into Tears.

The Children, not a little amazed hereat, declared with many Tears, they would
become Christians, and not return to their Parents. The middlemost, in
particular, as she was very much pressed by her Mother to go Home with her,
answered: No! But you, Mother, ought rather to become a Christian also. They
sought then to hide themselves behind the Ministers, who feigned to turn them
off, saying: They did very ill to forsake their Parents, who had such a tender
Love for them, who would make them many fine Presents, and had brought some
along with them: That, on the contrary, they were to expect among Christians
nothing but Crosses and Afflictions; they would hardly get enough to satisfy
their Hunger; but, in a Word, would be very Miserable.

The Parents being retired, and the Children once more earnestly entreated to
return Home with them, but to no purpose; it was at last proposed, to them,
That provided their Parents would also turn Christians, whether then they would
be content to go along with them? To which they, with an uncommon Constancy and
Satisfaction, immediately answered: That if their Parents would but become
Christians too, they should be their Parents still, and then they would go back
with them, and endure with them any Hardship or Tribulation; otherwise they
would never return; for that they loved Jesus above all other Views, and would,
with the highest Joy imaginable, take his Cross upon them, and follow him;
saying, They might if they pleased, put them into a Spin-House, where they
would be heartily willing to Labor: To which the youngest further added: If
you will give me nothing, let me die of Hunger, or cut off my very Head; for I
had rather lose my Life, than be separated from my dearest Jesus, who died for
me; and if you refuse to take me, he is always ready to receive me into his
Arms. I will live and die with Him.

It Is certain, that no Person present could forbear Weeping at the Firmness of
these Children, whose Speech was as sound, as it was artless; particularly Dr.
Jablonski, who has a deeper Knowledge in the Jewish Religion than most others.

At last, their Parents were permitted to discourse with 'em alone, which they
did for several Hours together; but the Children expressing all along the same
Resolution, and prostrating themselves at last at the Feet of the
Commissioners, they bid farewell to their Parents, that they might remain to
Jesus alone, and said: That nothing had brought them thither but the Love of
Jesus, and no manner of Reason should be powerful enough ever to divide them
from Him, etc.

An Account of all this has been sent to his Prussian Majesty, whose Answer is
daily expected. In the mean Time, the Commissioners have proposed, that these
Children might be instructed publicly in the Church; and when they were
thoroughly grounded in the Truth of the Christian Religion, that Leave should
be given, not only to their Parents, but to any Jew that would come and hear
them, to make what Objections they could, which should be answered by the
Children so instructed.

The Baptizing of these Children will be deferred till they are more advanced
in Age, that none may deny this to be the Work of God; and it is hoped, that
this Affair, carried on after this Manner, will tend to the Edification of many
other Jews.

These Children have such a tender Love for the very Name of JESUS, that though
they cannot as yet Read, nevertheless, knowing this Word, when they meet with
it, they bow down upon it, and kiss it with a thousand Tears: And they will
turn over whole Books to find this Name.

Lastly, They assured us, that several other Children were of the same Mind
with themselves; but their Parents kept them close at Home; notwithstanding
they did not doubt but they would find Means to escape: For the Love of JESUS
knew how to Counsel in all such Cases; and though the Parents should watch them
never so narrowly, it would in the End signify nothing at all, which they three
knew by their own Experience.

REMARKS.
I. AND now, First; How many Pious PARENTS are there, who are Travailing for
the Souls of their Children, to see a CHRIST formed in them? They cannot see
their Children walking in the Truth, but see them walking in the Vanity of
their Minds; and the sight holds them in a painful, and inexpressible Anguish.
They long, they long to see their Children Live unto God; and that they may be
able to say, This Child was Dead, and is Alive again. My Friends, Hold on
Praying, Weeping, Believing. Indeed, nothing less than an Almighty Arm, can
Change and Cleanse the Vicious Hearts of the Ungodly Children. But the Holy
SPIRIT, who is the Arm of the Lord, is no less than the Almighty GOD. Oh! Put
those Obstinate Hearts into His Glorious and Almighty Hands. He can give an
Astonishing Turn unto them. There is nothing too hard for Him. O Lord, I know,
that thou can do every thing! Believers, Behold what was done at Berlin, and
be animated.

II. But in the next place, How much may our Faith be now Encouraged, in the
Expectation of the GREAT THINGS, which the Promises of our GOD have assured us,
are to be done, for the Converting of whole Nations, to come and Worship Him,
and Glorify His Name? And more particularly, for the Conversion of the
Israelitish Nation; when He that Scattered Israel shall Gather him, and Keep
him, as a Shepherd his Flock? There are many Good and Wise Men, who are Looking
for the Kingdom of God, and those Influences from Heaven upon Earth, which will
bring the Maxims of the EVERLASTING GOSPEL into a General, and an Amazing
Operation upon a World that is now lying in Wickedness. The Intention of such
Things as have been done at Berlin (and elsewhere) is doubtless to let the
Faithful see, a few Drops, that may Comfort their Hopes of the Mighty Showers,
which GOD in His own Time, [when the Three Years and Six Months are Expired!]
will cause to fall upon the Children of Men, and He comes to dwell with Men.

III. The Words of the Excellent Person, who Writes the Preface to this
Remarkable at Berlin, are well worthy to be transcribed.

The various Motions observed in several parts of Europe, tending to a Revival
of Sound and Substantial Piety, do presage the Approach of Better Times, and a
fuller Measure of the Divine Spirit promised to the Latter Days. But then the
Intervening Night of the Judgment of GOD, provoked by a long and continued
Course of Sinning, will perhaps destroy again the Flowers, which appear up and
down on the Earth, and nip many a Tender Bud, which now begins to shoot forth.
This ought, in no wise to Stagger the Faith of True Believers, but rather to
Quicken it.

What Sweet and Heavenly Motions there have been particularly seen among many
Children, in these Latter Years, does appear from the seveaal Treatises
published on that Account. -- Particularly, whole Numbers of Children in
Silesia. -- All these Motions are but so many Glimpses, that Glance indeed at a
Larger Power of Spiritual Gifts and Graces. But then, they wear off again,
after a while, and leave an Industrious Observer of such Signs, in a Pious
Expectation of those Richer Incomes of Grace, which shall succeed? They are the
First Fruits of the Spirit, and an Earnest of a more Glorious Dispensation
which shall follow in the Fullness of Time. They ought therefore to Support the
Hopes of those that wait for the Manifestation of the Kingdom of CHRIST.

IV. How is it possible to publish the Relation of the Jewish Children at
Berlin, without an Address unto the Jewish Nation; and a Tender unto them, of
Things that should be more thought upon?

If but one Soul of all that Beloved People, should be found, and reached, and
touched, by the Things to be now laid before them, it will be well worth all
the Pains of these Expostulations. It may be, the same Spirit, who wrought upon
the Babes at Berlin, will fall upon some of that Beloved People, while they
have these Words before them. We will Prophesy over these Dry Bones, and see
what the Spirit of Life will do upon them!

What Considerations are there, which would mightily Convince them, that they
do they know not what themselves, in their Infidelity; and which, Men and
Brethren, Oh! that you would show your selves Men, and suffer them to awaken
you.

When that Just One, whom your Fathers took, and with Wicked Hands did Crucify,
was offering up His Life unto His Eternal Father on the Cross, the first Thing
he there uttered, was that mavelous Expression of Charity and Compassion for
you; [That horrid Herod, whom some of your People flattered with Messiah-ship,
when he was dying was far from treating your People so:] Luke XXIII. 34.
Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. And many of them, were a
few Days after, brought unto Repentance, and Forgiven. Syrs, You know not what
you do, in your Infidelity. You little imagine that you Blaspheme and Reject
the promised MESSIAH of GOD, and the only SAVIOVR of the World, in the
Indignities, which our Blessed JESUS continues to suffer from you. I know you
do it Ignorantly in Unbelief: But we are Waiting and Longing for the
approaching Time. Ah! Lord how long? -- when you shall obtain that Mercy, to be
Recovered out of your Unbelief; and He that is now (but will then be much more
so) the Light of the Gentiles, will then be (and they shall be most sensible of
His being so) the Glory of His People Israel. Joseph was not known to his
Brethren, at the first Interview: Anon there came a Second, at which he made
himself known unto them. In the mean Time, your Infidelity, wherein you cast so
many Ignorant Reproaches on Him, does Confirm our Faith of this Glorious JESUS,
and Commend Him the more to our Love, our Praise, and our Adoration. It was
foretold by your Prophets, [Isa. LIII. 2, 3. That when you should first see
your MESSIAH, you should see no Beauty in Him that you should desire Him; and
that He should be Despised and Rejected among you; and that you would hide your
Faces from Him, Despise Him, and not Esteem Him. It was foretold, [Psal. LXIX.
21, 22, 23, 15, 28.] That you would Reproach Him, and give Him Gall for His
Meat, and Vinegar for His Drink; and that thereupon your Table should become
your Snare, and you be Ensnared by your Besiegers, at your Passover; and that
your Eyes then should be Darkened, as now they are, and your Habitation
Desolate; and that you should be blotted out of the Book of the Living, and
your Genealigies be no longer preserved among you. It was foretold, [Dan. IX.
26. That about five hundred Years, after the Return from the Babylonish
Captivity, the Messiah should come, and be Cut off, and then a People should
Come, and Destroy the City and the Sanctuary and it should be made Desolate, by
their Abominable Armies. Yea, and it was foretold by our JESUS, whom to your
Cost, you find a true Prophet of God, even in this Obstinacy of yours, which
does refuse to account Him so! [Luk. XIX. 43.] That the Enemies of Jerusalem,
should straightly Besiege it, and lay it even with the Ground, and not leave one
Stone upon another in it. And, [Luk. XXI. 24.] That your People should Fall by
the Edge of the Sword, and be led away Captives into all Nations; and Jerusalem
shall be Trodden down of the Gentiles, until Times of the Gentiles, and their
Fourth Monarchy, now near Expired, be fulfilled. And, [Joh. V. 43.] That though
you Rejected Him, yet there would shortly come One in His own Name, a
Bar-chochab, whom you would Receive; and thereby bring upon your selves the
last Confusion. The Veil of Infidelity, with the Chains of Darkness, holding
you in the Dispersion wherein you abide many Days, must according to those
Ancient Prophesies, continue upon your Nation, until the Determined Period. But
now and then there comes in One of your Nation, whom God Enlightens with the
Knowledge of the Redeemer; and makes part of those First Fruits, which will
e're long be followed with a mighty Harvest, when the Redeemer shall come unto
Zion, and shall turn His whole favored and preserved Name from Ungodliness.
The Zeal and Hope of doing some Service of this Tendency, causes me now to say,
Come now, and let us Reason together, upon a Point, which, O Reasonable Souls,
your Everlasting Salvation turns upon. And, O Eternal and Almighty Spirit of
God; Will thou Graciously open the Eyes of the Blind, in thy long Abdicated
Nation, and cause them with a Mournful Repentance, to see and know the JEHOVAH
whom they have pierced, and effectually Persuade them to hearken unto Reason,
that so their Sins which are like Scarlet, may be White like Snow, and though
they have been Red as Crimson, they may be as Wool. Oh! Persuade them to Repent
and be Converted, that so their Sins may be blotted out, and the Times of
Refreshing may come from the Presence of the Lord!

Brethren, You are Scandalized at the Cross of our JESUS: It Scandalizes you,
that such a Suffering and Abased JESUS, ever should be your SAVIOR. But was it
not expressly Foretold concerning the MESSIAH, That He should suffer Stripes,
and be Oppressed, and Afflicted, and be brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and
be Bruised, and be put unto Grief, and have His Soul made a Trepass Offering?
You find all this, and much more, in the Fifty-third Chapter of your Isaiah's
Prophecies: A Chapter which has been blessed of God, for the Conversion of many
in your Nation; and indeed, it is to be wondered at, how any of you can shut
your Eyes against the Light of so Bright a Chapter! I beseech you, Syrs, to
Read it over again. It is most certain, that if the MESSIAH be not already
come, yet whenever He does come, He must appear in just such, I say, just such
Circumstances of Humiliation, as those for which your most Lovely JESUS is now
disliked among you. Yea, you your selves have your Tradition, concerning a
Suffering Messiah; and you speak of His Griefs, as the Greatest that any Son of
Man can ever meet withal: Things most Marvellously accomplished in our JESUS! I
pray, Syrs, consider of it. All your People have consented unto that Word of
God, Deuteronomy. XXVII. 26. Cursed is he that Confirms not all the Words of this
Law, to do them. Now, it is Evident, that not One of you have Done all Things
required in the Law; and Continued in the Doing of them. You are every One of
you chargeable with many Violations of the Law: It were easy to Convince you of
them; yea, where is the Man so Vain, so Proud, so Foolish, as not to own, I am
a Sinner! You then lie Obnoxious to the terrible Curse of God, which will shut
out all the Wretched Objects of it, from all the Blessedness of the Righteous.
You cannot avoid this tremendous Curse, but by presenting before your Holy GOD,
a sufficient Sacrifice to make Expiation for your Offenses, and Vindicate the
Honor of that Glorious Law against which you have Offended. Obedience for the
Time to come, will not be a Reparation for your past Injuries to the Law, in
those Miscarriages by which you have denied the God that is Above. It will not
be a Perfect Obedience: This you find by Woeful Experience; when you have done
your Best, you will still again, and again Miscarry. And if it could be
Perfect, it will be no more than you would have Owed if you had never Sinned.
The Payment of this Debt, would not Cancel that other of Punishment, which your
Former Sins have Contracted, and wherein you stand obliged unto the Justice of
God. Repentance for what is past, will not be an Atonement. For, if that would
have done, why was any Sacrifice, or something Punished and Consumed by the
Curse of God falling with a Fiery Indignation upon it, is by the Demand of
Divine Justice become Necessary, when the Sin which does Expose unto it, has
been Committed? And, O Miserables, what will you now do, that you may Enjoy the
Benefit of such a Sacrifice? By being deprived of your Temple, and banished
from your City, you are left utterly Destitute of your Ancient Sacrifices. The
Prediction, [Dan. IX. 27.] That the Messiah at His coming, should cause the
Sacrifice and Oblation to cease among you, has been in that very Dreadful Way,
most wonderfully Accomplished. And if you could have them, yet you fall into
many Presumpteous Sins, for which there were no Sacrifices provided and
appointed in the Law of Moses. What will you do, when you fall into a
Guiltiness, for which the Law desired not any Sacrifices, nor delighted in any
Burnt-Offerings? The MESSIAH, who was promised from the Beginning, under the
Character of the Broken, the Contrite, the Bruised one, is your only Refuge.
Your David in such a Case found Him so. [Psal. LI. 16, 17.] Every Thing without
Him, will be Despised of God. Nor indeed, can you imagine, that the mean Blood
of the Fowls, and the Flock, and the Herd, could yield Sacrifices
proportionable to the Majesty of the Great GOD, and the Quality of the
High Treason which there is in every Trespass against such a Majesty. No, The
Ancient Sacrifices all pointed you, to that which you must be constrained now
to make the only Retreat of your distressed Souls. When the Believers of Old,
leaned their Hands on the Heads of the Sacrifices, the Doctrine of that Laying
on of Hands, and the Thing they intended in it, was a Faith in the Messiah who
was to come, and be in like Manner Sacrificed for us. You must have a
Sacrificed Messiah to live upon; or else you Dye in your Sins, and perish
Miserably. Your Messiah can do nothing for you, unless by a Sacrifice He
Reconcile you to God, and so deliver you from the Curse to which your Sins have
exposed you. Nor will any Sacrifice, but that of Himself, be accepted with God.
You Read, [Isa. LIII. ^0.] It pleased the Lord to Bruise Him, and put Him to
Grief, and make His Soul a Trepass Offering. A Sacrifice, which the more you
consider, the more you will see all Interests most admirably Provided for! So
then, The Messiah must at first come, in such Obsturity, that he may undergo
Bitter Agonies, and have His most precious Blood poured out, and have the most
horrid Punishment of Sinners inflicted on Him All, just exactly, just exactly!
as our JESUS was dealt withal! Why then, Oh! why should you look for another!
And why should the Cross be the Stumbling Block, in the Way of your Faith on
our JESUS! A Cross which (...) Invites you to such a suitable Savior! A Cross
which even Assures you, that He is, and none but He can be your Savior!
Hundreds of Jews, have in our Days, been brought over to Christianity, by the
Blessing of God, on this One irresistible Argument, managed by one Renowned
Convert from Judaism, in the City of Hamburgh. Oh! that all they, who find
themselves unable to answer this Argument, would be so Wise, as to submit unto
the Right Words which are so Forcible! Indeed, this Consideration, That when
the MESSIAH comes, it must be just exacty in such Circumstances, as those
wherein our Blessed JESUS (Oh! why not yours?) exhibited Himself unto your
Fathers, is further Enforced; and it will be seen extended unto so many
surprising Instances, that we shall be able to see nothing short of a
Miraculous Infliction, in your uncured and persisting Infidelity. What can be
more Evident than this, [Gen. XLIX. 10.] That the Jewish Nation should not be
without (either Scepter or Lawgivers) greater or lesser Magistrates of their
own, till the Peace-giving Savior should come? And, [Mal. III. 2. Hag. II. 9.]
that the Messiah should come, while your Second Temple was yet standing; and
so, a greater Glory be there, than there was in the former? And, [Dan. IX. 25,
26] That the Messiah should come within five hundred Years, after the going
forth of the Commandment to Restore and Rebuild Jerusalem? So then, the Messiah
must come just exactly at such a Time as our JESUS came! And at the very Place
too; (Mic. V. 2.) Bethlehem, which is now extinguished. In looking for Another,
you look for One in whom it is impossible for the Prophesies of the Messiah to
be answered. The coming of the Messiah was not promised on any Condition of
your deserving such a Favor; the Promise was not suspended on any Merits of
yours; it was a Blessing which tarrieth not for Man, nor waits for the Sons
of Men. Your Expectation of Another, is nothing less than a Blasphemy against
the Faithfulness of the Glorious God. But God will be True, and every Man will
be found a Liar, who says, That the Messiah did not come, at the Time which the
Faithful God, had in His Oracles prefixed for it. Nay, you cannot mention any
one Thing, in the Circumstances of our JESUS, but what you may find predicted
in the ancient Prophesies of the Messiah: Nor was there any one thing in those
ancient Prophesies foretold of the Messiah, but in the Circumstances of our
JESUS, you find it marvellously Answered. All just exactly as it should be! The
Spirit of Prophecy, has given such a Testimony for our JESUS, that you cannot
refuse Him, without fulfilling another of His Oracles, which long since
declared what you should be left unto; [Isa. XLIII. 10, 17.] To Rebel, and Vex
the Holy Spirit, so that He turns to be your Enemy; He no more visits you; He
leaves you to Err from His Ways, and your Hearts are hardened from His Fear.
But that which one would think, should give a final Stroke to your Infidelity,
and eternally Bruise the Head of the Crooked Serpent, would be this; The
RESURRECTION of our JESUS from the Dead. Your Countrymen said, If He will come
down from the Cross, we will Believe on Him! Syrs, If He come up from the
Grave, will not this do as well? For an Holy One to come, with Maxims all
evidently Calculated for the Glory of God, and say, I am the Son of God
Incarnate, and my Sacrifice to God is the only Atonement that can be made for
your Sins, and if you put your selves under my Conduct, I will bring you to
everlasting Life. To prove all this, I will Dye, you shall put me to Death; and
on the Third Day I will Rise from the Dead. This being accomplished in our
JESUS, Oh! what can you reasonably desire more, to make you fall down, and cry
out, Lord, we Believe and are Sure, that thou art the Christ, the Son of the
Living God? You your selves do in your most Celebrated Writings confess, That
if JESUS be indeed Risen from the Dead, He is One, whom you ought all to
hearken to, and that He may claim a Power to supersede any of the Mosaic
Institutions. Indeed the Men of Ninive, who hearkened unto a Jonah, after he
had come alive out of the Belly of the Fish, will condemn those who have not
hearkened unto a Jesus, who comes up alive out of the Belly of the Earth, on
the Third Day after he had been buried there. Now, that our JESUS is Risen from
the Dead, is a Matter of Fact, which has been Attested with as infallible
Proofs, as ever any Matter that was in the World. After His Resurrection, He
appeared no less than Ten Times, and unto no less than five Hundred at one
Time. These chosen Witnesses, conversed with Him, and satisfied all their
Senses, that they were not imposed upon. They gave their Testimony in such a
manner, so Consistently, so Coherently, with such a Conduct, as to show, that
they were no Senseless Idiots. They willingly exposed themselves to such cruel
Sufferings for their Testimony, as to show, that it was not a Cunningly devised
Fable, which they now put upon the World. One of His Disciples, who Denied Him
just before His Death, presently appeared, as one of the most famous Witnesses
to His Resurrection from the Dead. Had it not really happened, you may be sure
this Man would have gone on, as you do, (But now, Oh! do it no more!) in the
Denial of Him. Their Holy, and Righteous, and Blameless Conversation, showed,
that they were no Impostors. Yea, God from Heaven testified for them, and
wondrously confirmed their Testimony, by the Miraculous Gifts He bestowed upon
them. You Affirm it, and very truly, That your Elijah was carried up into the
Heavens. There was but One to Witness it: But you say, and this very truly too,
That this One was a very Good Man, a Prophet of God, and a Worker of Miracles,
and One owned of God, as he would not have been, if he had been a Forger of
Lies. We affirm, That our JESUS Ascended up into the Heavens. There was a
considerable Number of Men to Witness this. And these were all good Men, and
Prophets of God, and Workers of Miracles. There is no Truth in any History upon
Earth, if they did not often Speak the Great Things of God, with the Tongues of
Angels; in Tongues which they never had Learnt, but now had them under
Angelical Inspiration; and if they did not Miraculously Heal the Sick, the
Blind, and the Lame, and Raise the Dead. God would never have done such Things
for the Forgers of a Lie. And then, utterly to overwhelm your Infidelity, by
casting a Ponderous Mountain upon it: The Spirit of God gave a mavelous
Blessing to the Faith of a Risen JESUS: He so Blesses it, where it is cordially
Entertained, that it fills the Souls of Men, with unspeakable Goodness. It
causes them to Love God, and Live unto Him, in all the most shining Instances
of Lovely Piety. It causes them to treat their Neighbors with a most sincere
Love, and a very Charming Benignity. It causes them to slight this World, and
hate and shun every vicious Thing in the World: Fills them with Heaven, and
fits them for it. The People are actually Saved who are made partakers of these
things. It Is the Faith of a Risen JESUS, which is attended with such a Saving
Efficacy. Our JESUS has herein already proved a Savior unto Multitudes, whom
He has made the Excellent in the Earth. It follows, that He is THE Savior. Oh!
That you would at last make the happy Experiment! Come and see; see, see,
whether you do not find Him so! Do not go on under the Blindness that has
happened unto you, to treat Him as your Enemy, who is your only Savior. Oh!
That they were Wise, and would consider their Latter End.

FINIS.

