A FAMILIAR GUIDE TO THE Right and Profitable Receiving OF THE LORD's SUPPER.
Wherein also The Way and Method of our SALVATION is briefly and plainly
Declared.

By THEOPHILUS DORRINGTON.

The Seventh Edition.

BOSTON: Reprinted by J. FRANKLIN, for ELEAZER PHILLIPS at Charlstown, and
Sold at his Shop. 1718.

TO THE QUEEN's MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
May it Please Your MAJESTY
TO permit me, most thankfully to acknowledge, that it is Your MAJESTY's very
gracious Approbation of another Endeavor, to revive the decayed PIETY and
VIRTUE of the Age; which as it animates me to proceed in that, and has almost
brought it to Perfection, so it was the great Encouragement of this. In which I
have endeavored to persuade and direct to the right use of this blessed
SACRAMENT; which is perhaps the best and most effectual M^ (...) has ^eft in
his Church, to promote and maintain in it the Love of GOD and of our Neighbor.
And may it please Your SACRED MAJESTY to give leave, that I may encourage
myself from the Favor mentioned, to implore and hope for the Honor of Your
MAJESTY's Patronage to this small Piece also. I am, and desire to be as long as
I live,

Your Majesty's most Obedient and Dutiful Subject, Dorrington.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
I Have in this little Book distinctly stated and represented that solemn
Covenant with Almighty God, which we all of us enter into at our Baptism.
Because since the receiving of the LORD's SUPPER is designed for a Reward and
Confirmation of that Covenant, the distinct Knowledge of that is necessary to
our Fitness for this Sacrament; and I have further dispersed through the whole,
many weighty Arguments to induce Men to keep close to that Covenant; it being
to us the only way to Salvation; that so I might at once promote in many a
Religious and good Life, a fitness for this Sacrament, and the attainment of
their everlasting Salvation.

And having made this the Subject and Scope of this Book, I think it way not be
amiss to suggest, that it is very fit to be recommended and presented by those
who have taken upon them the charitable Office of being Godfathers, or God
mothers to such as they have presented to God at the Font. It is the certain
Duty of these spiritual Parents, and the Charge laid upon them by the Church,
to concern themselves afterward, and take all the Care they can, that the
Child may be taught, as soon as it is able to learn, what a solemn Vow, Promise
and Profession, it has made by them. This Duty and Charge they would hereby in
some measure perform; especially if they would also concern themselves after a
time to know what use their spiritual Children have made of it. Certainly, if
the Duties and Charge of this most useful spiritual Relation were
conscientiously minded, and in this and the like ways performed; we should not
see so much deplorable Wiekedness among Professors of Christianity as there is,
and we might reasonably hope to see the next Generation at furthest, delivered
from the Vices and Madness of this.

And since this Covenant is implied in Baptism, when it is not expressed in our
way; this Book will be useful to read in all Families, in order to train up
young People in the knowledge of their Engagements to God, and in the way of
their Salvation, and to a fitness for this blessed Sacrament, that they may be
confirmed in that way. To adapt it the better to such an use, I have added in
the end a Prayer, which is proper to be used after the reading of any part of
the Book in the Family or Closet.

A FAMILIAR GUIDE TO THE Right and Profitable Receiving OF THE LORD's SUPPER.
SECT. I. The INTRODUCTION.
Christian READER,
THOU have here represented to thee in a little room, I think, all that is
necessary to render thee a meet and profitable Receiver of the holy and
comfortable Sacrament of the Body and Blood of JESUS CHRIST our Lord. And I
suppose it is in such a manner represented, as is most fit and likely, with the
Blessing of God to possess thee with all the Qualifications requisite to him
that comes to this Sacrament, if thou will afford this little Book a serious
and frequent perusal. If thou have been so unhappy, and so much mistaken in thy
true interest as never to have laid these things to heart before, and to have
lived in the neglect of this blessed Ordinance; I would advise, I would entreat
thee often to read and study these things, till thou art familiarly acquainted,
and deeply affected with them; that thou may to thy advantage come well
prepared to this Sacrament. If the things herein contained have already
affected thy Heart, and had a good Influence on thy Life, and thou art a
frequent Attendant on this Sacrament, it may suffice to read this Book as often
as thou ^st on the Week before thou come to it, as a good Week's Preparation
for it. And for those who communicate every Lord's Day (as I wish all
Christians did) it may suffice, commonly, to retire some time on the day
before, or get up the sooner on the Sacrament-day, and seriously meditate on
the Exercises herein proposed, which are designd' to excite him that has an
habitual fitness for this Sacrament into an actual one, and are useful for that
purpose. I say commonly this may be enough for such; but yet even they also may
find it necessary and useful sometimes, when leisure allows, to read the whole.

Because what is requisite to render a Man a mere Receiver of this Sacrament is
also necessary, and is sufficient to constitute a good Christian, and to bring
him to Heaven: Therefore I have said in the Title, that the whole Method and
Way of our Salvation is herein plainly declared. So that if any Soul be
Sollicitous about that grand and most important QUESTION, What must I do to be
saved? he may find it herein resolved. And whether this holy Sacrament may be
accounted and used as a means of Conversion to a good Life or not; yet I hope,
that by the Blessing of God, this little Book may be such a Means to many, if
Men will but think it worth their while to do so much to their own Everlasting
Happiness, as to read and consider so small a Treatise.

The PRAYER.
MAY the God of all Grace, Lover of Souls, to whom the Redemption and Salvation
of Mankind is so very dear; and who invites us to this Sacrament is the way to
Heaven, and that he may herein give us the happy foretasts of it: Bless this my
weak Endeavor, and give it a Success according to the greatness of his Power
and Love; to the promoting in many Hearts the Love of this Sacrament, and their
frequent and comfortable Attendance upon it; and to the bringing many Souls to
Happiness and Glory, for the sake of JESUS CHRIST our Mediator and Advocate,
AMEN.

SECT. II. The Creation of MAN.
WHEN it is said in the first Chapter of Genesis, that God saw every thing that
he, had made, and behold it was very good: This means, that the Creator, upon
the review of his Works, was pleased and delighted herein; and that he hated
nothing that he had made: For, what we hate, we wish that it were not,
especially not such as it is. If therefore the Creator had hated any thing that
he had made, he had made it to be such as he would not have it to be; which is
not to be supposed of Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, and of such Power as is
able to make every thing what he pleases it shall be. Mankind therefore, among
the other Works of God, were made very good, and were pleasing to our Maker.
Indeed he made Man a very Noble and Excellent sort of Creature, such as must be
peculiarly pleasing to Himself, above all things in this lower World: As we may
judge, by those words in Genesis 1.27. God created Man in his own Image. This was
the peculiar Glory of Man, and that which chiefly advanced him above the
Creatures about him. And it did principally consist in these things following:
That as he had Faculties capable of knowing, loving, and obeying God, he was
disposed to do so; He knew God to be the most Excellent Being, and did
accordingly reverence and esteem him: He knew him to be the Fountain of Good,
and his chief Good, and did accordingly fix the choice of his Will upon him;
and valued his Favor and Love, by which he enjoyed God as his greatest and
only felicity. The^e was then no Error or false reasoning in his Understanding,
no perverse Choice in his Will, no Innordinacy in any of his Appetites, no
Motions in them contrary to his Reason. In Nothing was Man inclined to
contradict his Duty to God, or any of the Eternal Laws of Righteousness. Upon
this Account it was that Man was very good, and beloved of his Maker. And being
so beloved. he lived in perfect Peace and Happiness: He was not encumbred with
any Evil; he wanted nothing that he had occasion for. It appears his kind
Creator would not cease doing for him, till he had provided for all his
Necessities and Desires; that so he might be completely happy. Man then enjoy'^
the willing and ready Service of all Creatures about him. He enjoyed himself,
and could with pleasure consider and praise God for the Noble and Excellent
Nature which God had given him: He had an easy and quiet Mind, had no conflicts
with himself, had no occasion to rebuke or fall out with himself. He enjoyed
then his God too, being assured of his Favor, and receiving the constant
communications of it. He could with great delight, contemplate and praise the
glorious Attributes of God; and the Divine Wisdom, Power, Righteousness,
Goodness and Truth, were very plea^ant to him, while he was assured that all
these were friendly, and would be favorable to him. This was Man's first
Condition; a very excellent and happy one: But alas! through his own default it
did not last long.

SECT. III. The first COVENANT between GOD and MAN.
IT is very probable, that all the particular Dealings of God with Man in this
Condition, are not told us in that short account which Moses gives us of the
beginnings of the World. It being enough for us to know in general, what is the
Spring and Source of all that Sin and Misery which is now found among Mankind;
the knowledge of which is of some Use and importance toward our getting free
from both. But what is told us of the Transactions between God and Man in that
State, we may think we shall most truly understand, and most rightly interpret,
if we guide our selves herein by the Tenor of his dealing with Mankind since
that. From what is told us then of that Time, and from what appears since, we
may learn, That it pleased the Creator when he had made Man, and had so highly
obliged him, to take upon him the Relation of a Governor to his Creature, as
he had the undoubted right of one; and he very justly thought fit to exercise a
Dominion over him for his good. It was therefore, we may suppose, promised to
Man, that he should enjoy the Favor of his Maker, and a perfect Happiness both
of Body and Soul, upon Condition that he would continue in the due reverence
and love of his Maker, and obey his Commands. And it was made known to him,
that he should fall from the best of his Excellency, from that wherein he was
so pleasing to his Maker; and from all his Happiness, if he did not continue
steadfast in his Duty, and perfectly perform it, as God had enabled him to do.
And this is that which is commonly called, The First COVENANT.

SECT. IV. The SACRAMENTS of That.
MOREOVER, God having made Man to consist of a Body and Soul, and knowing that
it is natural to him, for the Objects of his Senses to make great Impressions,
and to have a mighty Influence upon his Mind: His Wisdom and Goodness ordered
Matters so, as that his Senses might help to admonish him of his Duty, and to
assure him of his Happiness in the performance of it. And this we may suppose
was the reason and Ground of God's separating two Trees in the Garden where he
had placed our first Parents, for a peculiar and uncommon Use: The one called,
The Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; the other called, The Tree of Life.
These we may reckon to have been the Sacraments of the first Covenant: For in
these were Spiritual things by God's appointment represented by outward and
visible Signs and Actions: Man was assisted to remember his Duty and
Obligations to his Maker by that Tree, called, The Tree of Knowledge of good
and Evil: For we may suppose that the Fruit of this Tree was set apart by God
wholly for the following purpose: Man was to take care to cultivate this Tree
as well as others; but he was to offer the Fruit of it at set times solemnly
and religiously to God, as a visible acknowledgment that he owned him the Maker
of all things, and the supreme Lord, and the Proprietor of all. This was
reserved, as we may say, by God, to be a devoted thing, and Man's
Thank-offering to him for all the rest of his Gifts. And for this reason Man
was forbid to eat of it himself. For we find in later Times, it was always held
a very heinous and guilty thing for Men to ear of, or use what God had
separated and reserved to himself. Now for such a sensible outward performance,
as the solemn offering of this Fruit to God, and the looking upon it, and using
it only as a Devoted thing, was an excellent and fit means to admonish Mankind
for ever to acknowledge their Creator and Preserver as the supreme Lord and
Proprietor of all things; as it was a sensible Declaration that they did make
this acknowledgment, so it was a sensible Obligation of themselves that they
would continue to do so; and the more a help to them to continue it, and to
answer all the Obligations which naturally result from it in the Course of
their Lives.

And then the other Tree was appointed to assure Man, upon his perfect
Obedience, of his Immortality and everlasting Happiness. So that whilst he
continued steadfast in his Duty, he had right to take and eat the fruit of this
Tree: And he might take it as God's visible and sensible pledge, and as an
Instrument of Conveyance of Eternal Life and Happiness to him, in like manner,
as now we have leave from God to look upon the Rainbow, not only as the
natural effect of the Sun shining upon a falling Shower, but, as God's visible
pledge and assurance to Mankind, that he will never again destroy the World
with a Deluge of Water.

SECT. V. Of the Sin and Fall of MAN.
THIS Account shows the exceeding great Guilt and Wickedness of the Sin of our
first parents. Their Sin was, that they did cat of the forbidden Fruit; and so
they used and took to themselves what was reserved and devoted to God: It was
the bringing to a common use, that which was separated by his appointment to a
religious one, and was the profaning of a hallowed or holy thing. But let it be
considered a little how monstrous and vile this Sin of our first Parents was!
How soon had they forgotten the mighty obligations which the Creator had so
lately laid upon them! How bountiful had he been unto them! And he witheld and
reserved but one Fruit to himseif; and this, we may say, they grudged and
envied him: They would not be content with so vast a provision as he had made
for them, but would needs have this afforded too. The poor depending Creature,
that derived his Being, and all he had, would needs be sole proprietor and
absolute Lord of all things on the Earth, and would acknowledge no Superior!
They had no need of this Fruit, were perfectly happy without it; and might have
contined so happy, if they would have abstained from this; but they most
unreasonably despised their Happiness, and hazarded the losing it for the sake
of the Satisfaction and Advantage which they expected from this single Fruit.
The Creator indeed had been so good to them, they would not be lieve he would
so severely punish their eating this Fruit as he had threatened to do; and so
that which should have obliged them to be steadfast in their Duty, was most
perversely turned into an encouragement to Sin. O vile and shameful Wickedness!
Let us consider from what a vile original we all spring, and be humbled and
ashamed.

In yielding to this foul act, they lost that Holiness and Righteousness which
they had been endowed with, and by which especially they had been pleasing to
their Maker.

In this also they broke the Condition of the first Covenant, which required
that they should constantly reverence and love their Creator, and obey him in
all things. And the sad Consequence of this was, That they hereby lost the
Favor of God, and forfeited all their own Happiness. They lost all right to
the good things of this World; to the Obedience and Serviceableness of the
Creatures which God had made for them. They became liable to the penalty which
God had threatened to inflict, and immediately upon the Transgression did
deserve to have been put to Death, and to be thrown into the place of
everlasting punishment, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

SECT. VI. The NEW COVENANT.
AND the utmost Severity of the Threatening had been immediately executed in
that manner upon them, we may believe, according as it was said, In the Day
thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die: If the Son God had not become a
Mediator on their behalf. And he freely undertook to do whatever might be
necessary to tender it consistent with the Honor of God to receive his
rebellious Creatures into Favor again, to release their obligation to
everlasting Punishment, and restore them to perfect Happiness. What he then
undertook to do to this purpose, we may learn and conclude from what he did in
the fullness of time: And that was, That he would unite himself to the Humane
Nature, and would become Man. In that nature he would perf^m a perfect
obedience to God the Father, that he might merit for Mankind the Happiness
which was settled to be the reward of perfect Obedience. And to excuse Man from
the eternal Death which he had deserved by his Sin, he undertook to suffer
Death in his stead, and so to make his Death a Sacrifice for the Sin of
Mankind. Thus much did he, very kindly and of his own accord, undertake to do
for us; and he was accepted of the Father, and assured that he should, by doing
thus, obtain the Favor for us which he desired. So he procured for Man that he
should not be utterly cast off and thrown into endless Misery; but have other
Terms of Favor appointed him: And this dispensation or Appointment, is that
which is called the NEW COVENANT: And it is called the New Covenant in his
Blood, because it was procured by his undertaking to shed his Blood in the
Humane Nature as a Sacrifice for Sin. Upon this our first Parents were
permitted to live, to enjoy, in some measure, the good things of this world for
a while, and had space allowed them to make their Peace with God, to recover
his Favor, and their own Happiness.

We must know, that since it was a settled Law before the Fall of Man, that he
should propagate such as himself; and his posterity should be reckoned in the
same state and relation toward God with their Father, who began them:
Therefore when the first Parents o^ Mankind thus became polluted by their Sin,
and were fallen into the state of guilty Rebels against God; all their
posterity must needs come polluted into this world, as unclean things out of
unclean, must be born Children of Wrath, as the Scripture speaks. We therefore
have the same Task upon us which our first parents had; that is, to recover the
Favor of God and our Everlasting Happiness, by performing now the Terms and
Conditions of this Second Covenant

Let us see then, what are the Duties which it requires to be performed on our
part: and what are the Promises of it on God's part; the Blessings which it
offers to make us partakers of, upon the condition of performing those Duties.

SECT. VII. On our PART.
FIRST let us take notice of our own part of this Covenant, and observe what it
is that God requires of us, to whom the Gospel is preached, which we must do to
be saved. And because all mankind are now considered by God as guilty and
polluted Creatures; as having sinned, and being disposed to do wickedly; there
is first required of us, That we repent and turn from Sin. In the next place,
because we must return to God; it is required, That we do believe all the
Articles of the Christian Faith: And lastly, That we engage our selves, and
endeavor to keep God's Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all
the days of our life. But because the Heart of Man is deceitful and wicked, and
we are so backward to do our Duty, that we are unwilling to know it; therefore
it will be requisite to mention somewhat particularly, the Things contained
under these three general heads.

The first main Branch of our Duty is, that we repent and turn from sin: To
which purpose we must stand at a defiance with all the causes of sin, and
resolve they shall not govern us. Therefore has the Church been wont to express
this Branch of our Duty thus: We must renounce the Devil, and all his works;
the Pomp and Vanities of this wicked World, with all the covetous Desires of
the same: And all the sinful Desires of the Flesh, so as that we will not
follow, nor be led by them.

We must renounce the Devil and all his Works. It was by the Craft and
Instigation of this Apostate Spirit, the Enemy of our Happiness, that Mankind
were at first drawn into Disobedience against God. We must resolve therefore
never to have any Correspondence with him; to abhor and abstain from all those
guilty ways of consulting him, or seeking his Assistance, which the ungodly
World have ever practiced. We must never knowingly, or willingly, obey any of
his Commands, nor comply with his Temptations. We must resolve to fight against
all those Spiritual Wickednesses in our selves, which he infects the humane
nature with, such as Pride, Anger, Envy, Treachery, Lying, Malice, and Cruelty.
Must abhor to imitate or follow him in the tempting of others to wickedness; or
in the Hatred and Persecution of good men for the sake of their Goodness.

We must also renounce the Pomp and Vanities of this wicked World, and all
covetous Desires of the same. That is, we must resolve and engage that we will
not let the love of the World rule in our Hearts, which is opposite to the Love
of God. We will not let our Hearts fix on the Wealth, the Pleasures, or the
Dignities, and Honors here below: Nor will make the getting of them the Aim
and Scope of our chief Endeavor and care; nor let the Enjoyment of them be our
chiefest Delight and Satisfaction. That we will not be guided by the Customs of
the World, nor follow a multitude to do evil: That our dearest Relations, or
our most necessary and most useful friends and Benefactors, shall not be able
to influence us against the Will of God, and the Dictates of our Conscience:
That we will be ready to part with all that is dear, all is necessary to us,
and which we might otherwise lawfully keep and enjoy, when they stand in
Competition with our Love and Duty to God. And we will submit to any
Inconveniences in the want even of necessary things, rather than to do any
thing to gain them, which is contrary to the Laws of Divine Love.

We must further renounce, mortify, and abandon all sinful Desires of the
Flesh: All the irregular and disobedint Inclinations of our corrupt Nature must
be mortified and subdued. We must chase away those fleshly Lusts which war
against the Soul; the Love of slothful Ease, and Idleness, all Intemperance,
and Lasciviousness. We must forsake and abstain from all those sensual Sins,
which abuse and prodigally waste God's good Creatures; which enslave the
Thoughts and Faculties of the Soul to the Appetites of the Body; and which
render the Soul unfit for the due Exercises and Operations of its Faculties;
and which tend to clog and encum^er the Body with Diseases. We must renounce
all these three Sources of Evil, the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and must
resolve we will not follow nor be led by them. And this is the First main
Branch of our Duty under the New Covenant.

The Second is this: We must believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith.
And this re^uires of us to promise and perform the Things ^ollowing: That we
will seriously apply our ^elves, as our leisure and opportunity will al^ow us,
to make the best improvement that we ^an of the means of Divine Knowledge which
the ^rovidence of God affords us; that so we may gain as much of that
^nestimable Treasure as we can: That we will not through Negligence or Hatred
of the Truth be ignorant of any important revealed Truth. That whatever does
appear to us to be revealed from God concerning himself and our way to
Happiness, we will receive it as a certain truth, because it comes from him who
is infinite in Wisdom, and cannot be deceived; and is a God of Truth, and
therefore cannot deceive.

These Articles of our Faith are summarily comprehended in that Form of sound
Doctrine, which is commonly called the Apostles Creed, among which these are
chief ones. That we believe in God the Father, who has made us and all the
World. That we believe in God the Son, who has redeemed us and all Mankind;
which implies these things: We must believe that all Mankind are guilty before
God, and obnoxious to his Eternal Wrath and Punishment. That Jesus Christ the
Son of God, died as a Sacrfice for the Sins of Men: That he submitted to an
accursed Death, as the Punishment of Sin in our stead, and to excuse us from
suffering it for ever: That his Death is accepted with the Father as an
Atonement for Sin, and shall redound to the advantage of all those who repent
and believe on him: Who being heartily sorry for their Sins, and fallen out
with them, do forsake them and turn to God; and do expect and rely upon the
Merit of his Death, to find fa^our with God. We must believe, that as Jesus
Christ died for our Sins, so he rose again for our Justification* Having made a
full Atonement, he was released from the Bonds of Death: and is ascended into
Heaven; and that he ever lives there to make Intercession for us; that is, to
obtain and bestow upon wretched Mankind, all the blessed Benefits which his
Death has purchased for them. And we must believe in God the Holy Ghost, who
graciously applies all those Blessings to us, and who sanctifies us and all the
Elect People of God.

Further: We also are bound and required to make our open Profession of the
Religion contained in these Articles; and to own it to the World, that we are,
and will be the Worshipers of the one only true and living God, by one Mediator
between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus. And we must choose rather to suffer
any loss, or to die, than to renounce or deny our Faith. And we are bound also
to lead a Life suitable to these Articles of Faith, to let them govern our
Conversations as they ought to do: And our Faith must work or operate in the
Exercises of Love. This is the Second main Branch of our Duty under the New
Covenant.

The Third is this: That we must engage and endeavor to keep God's Holy Will
and Commandments, and to walk in the same all the Days of our Life. And this
obliges us to the Things following, That we will diligently study and learn the
Will of God, as it is expressed in the Laws which he has given us; will not
cavil nor dispute against our Duty, when we should perform it; will endeavor to
know our Duty, that we may do it. That we will love his Law, and it shall be
our constant Aim and Endeavor to conform to it in all things: We absolutely
bind our selves, and are bound to live in no willful, known, and presumptous
Sin. That we will not deliberately and knowingly trespass against the Law of
God. This Covenant indeed does not require of us to preform a perfect
Obedience; for that is a thing now above our power: but it binds us to
endeavor a perfect Obedience; that is, not to be willingly guilty of any known
Sin. There is, alas, no mere Man now, that can constantly and perfectly keep
the whole Law of God but in many things we offend all: And it is one Blessing of
the New Covenant, that it pardons Sins (as we shall see presently) which
supposes Defects in our best Obedience. Therefore also our Savior has taught
us to pray as daily for the pardon of Sin, as for our daily Bread. But this
Covenant bears with none but involuntary Sins; such as we commit through
Ignorance or Surprise, and for want of Consideration, on a sudden, when our
Ignorance and Inconsideration are not wilful, nor due to the neglect of our
selves. And as for known, will, and Presumptuous Sins, and such as are
deliberately committed; they put us out of this Covenant, and lose us all right
to the Favors and Blessings of it, till they are bitterly repented of, and
utterly forsaken.

Thus much we must heartily and sincerely bind and engage our selves to do; and
this is our part of the New Covenant. This is also called the Covenant of Grace
or Favor; and we may see that it has justly that Name, in that it admits of
Repentance for Sin, and accepts of that poor imperfect Obedience, which is all
that we can now perform: And we shall see that Name further justified, in that
it will appear to be one of the Blessings and Favors of it, that it affords us
strength to perform our Duty.

SECT. VIII. On GOD's Part.
AND now I come to represent and show what are the Favors and Blessings on
God's Part, of this New Covenant. What he offers, and promises, and will
bestow, upon our Performance of the Duties and Conditions required of us. And
these may be comprehended under these three rich and important Heads.

The First is a full and free Pardon of all our Sins. God will blot our
Iniquities, as it were, out of his Remembrance; will forget that we were
Sinners, and will treat us as righteous, Will lay aside his most just Wrath
against us: and embrace us with the Arms of Mercy and Love. He that might most
Righteously have destroyed us with an Everlasting Destruction, will rejoice
over us to do us good. He will pardon our most numerous Sins; will pardon the
greatest Offenses; will pardon even our known, wilful and deliberate Sins, and
our Customs of Sinning, upon our Repentance and forsaking of them. And a
general Repentance and a humble Behavour toward God, will obtain the Pardon of
those infirmities and involuntary Sins which we do not observe our selves to be
guilty of, and cannot be perfectly free from. And having thus pardoned all our
Sins, the Course of Mercy is free; all Obstruction of it is removed and we may
address to God with Boldness in the Name of Jesus Christ, as to a reconciled
Father; and believe him ready to afford us all that is necessary to our
Salvation.

The next Favor and Blessing of this Covenant is, The restoring of the Divine
Image in us in our Sanctification. If upon the Proposal of this Covenant to us
we do accept of it, and are willing to yield to the Conditions it requires, and
to give up our selves to a Life of Holiness and Righteousness according to the
Laws of God, He will give us Spiritual strength to perform our Duty so far, as
that we shall be accepted through the Mediation of Jesus Christ. If we will not
undertake, we shall not be able to perform; but if we will undertake and bind
our selves to do our Duty, he will enable us to perform it. It might seem a
strange thing that God should require of us to bind our selves and undertake to
do that which we cannot do of our selves, (as we do in obliging our selves to
all those things forementioned) if it were not that the very binding our
selves to this does entitle us by the Tenor of this Covenant to Grace
sufficient for us. In all the Exhortations of the Gospel to an Instance of
Duty, we may reckon there is comprehended also the Offer of Divine Assistance,
which shall be afforded to him who yields, in the purpose and desire of his
Soul, to comply with those Exhortations. No Man therefore shall have ground to
complain, that he would leave his known Sins, and do the Duties which he knows
he omits, but cannot do so: For if a man sincerely desires to leave his Sins,
devotes himself to his Duty, and Diligently uses the Means that may enable him
to do it: That is, If he waits on God for this Grace in earnest and persevering
Prayer, and a due attendance on the Preaching of the Word and the Sacraments,
that Man shall infallibly come to be able to do what he thus wills and desires.
For, He that hungers and thirsts after Righteousness, shall be filled, as our
Savior says; And God will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him. It is the
Favor of this New Covenant to help us to do what it requires us to do.

The last Favor and blessing of this Covenant, is an Everlasting Happiness
both of Body and Soul in Heaven. We are left by it indeed subject to a natural
Death; to mind us of our guilty Rebellion against God: That we may not forget
we are Sinners, and do deserve an Eternal Death: On purpose that the sense of
this might quicken our desire and concern to recover the Divine Favor, and
make us the more ready and willing to submit to the terms of recovering it. But
Death shall not long have Dominion over us: God will not leave the Soul in
Hell; that is, it shall not be always separated from the Body; nor shall the
Body be always subject to the Ignominy and Punishment of its Dissolution. Since
the Sins are pardoned which did deserve Death, the Creature shall be released
from it: And our Savour's Resurection from the Dead does especially assure the
Resurection of those that believe on him, He has also promised that he will
give them Eternal Life, and raise them up again at the last day. The Body,
then, however scattered and dispersed, and lost to all knowledge of Men, shall
be gathered together by the Wisdom of God, and be raised to Life by his
Almighty Power: And it shall be raised with great advantage; It was sown a
Natural Body, it shall be raised a Spiritual Body; It was sown in Corruption,
but it shall be raised Immotal. And the Soul shall be again united to it, never
to be separated more: But both shall be taken up to dwell in a glorious happy
place, where is fullness of joy, and pleasure; for evermore: To live in the
Fellowship and Communion of kind, happy, and glorious Angels: To dwell in the
Presence of God, and contemplate, and praise, and love him, and rejoice in his
love for ever. This is now the whole Tenor of the New Covenant, which was
procured for us by the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, our kind and powerful
Advocate.

SECT. IX. The SACRAMENTS of this Covenant.
AND this Covenant also has its Sacaments. God has appointed sensible Actions
and Signs, in and by which it is to be made between Him and Us. In the Use of
these Sacraments, we must testify our Consent to this Covenant, and signify,
that we own our selves engaged in it. And in the use of these must we wait for,
and expect the Blessings and Favors on God's part to be afforded us. It is by
these that he has determined to convey those Favors which we can at present
receive, which are the Pardon of our Sins, and the Sanctification of our
Natures; and also to assure that which we are to hope for, our Everlasting
Happiness and Glory. These we must necessarily use, then, if Means and
Opportunity be afforded us to do so, that we may be Partakers of his Favors:
And in using them, we must sincerely purpose and bind our selves to the
Performance of our Duty. The Sacraments appointed to be, as we may say, The
Instrument of this Covenant since the coming of Christ, which are all that
nearly concern us, are Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. These, and these
only, are now generally necessary to Salvation.

By Baptism we are admitted into this Covenant, and make our first solemn
Acceptance of it. By the Lords Supper we renew it, if it has been broken on our
part by any wilful Sin* committed since we were baptized: Or else we therein
testify and declare our continuance still in it, and our purpose and desire to
do so; if any of us have lived so happily since we were baptized, as never to
violate or break this Covenant by any wilful known Sin.

It is true, when we are baptized in our Infancy, we are not capable expressly
to intend and design the performances of our part in this Covenant, because we
cannot then understand or know it. But this Sacaament is in the purpose of God
designed for the Scrament of our Admission into this Covenant, since the
appearance of Jesus Christ in the World. And as that which was the Sacrament of
this Admission under the Jewish Dispensation, was by God's Appointment
adminstred to Children at eight days old; so the Christian Church has been
wont, even from the Apostles times, to administer Baptism to Infants, from
whence it is not to be doubted but they learn to do this from the Apostles
themselves: And our Saivour gives a plain Encouragement to the Practice, when
he says, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them not; for of
such is the Kingdom of Heaven. Our Church therefore, as without doubt it ought
to do, administers Baptism to Infants that they may partake of the Blessings of
the New Covenant to their Salvation.

But because there is an Engagement on the part of the Baptized Person implied
in his receiving Baptism; the Wisdom and Piety of the Church has thought fit
that it should be expressed too: That so the baptized Person may be better
convinced afterward, That he did thus engage himself at his Baptism. And
because the infant it self cannot express this, the Church has provided, that
some Christian Friends should do it for us, who are also Witnesses that the
thing is done. And they are bound to take care, that as we grow up to the Use
of our Reason, we may grow also in the Knowledge of our part in this Covenant,
and may come to understand what we are bound to.

And that the baptized Person himself may ratify and confirm his baptismal
Engagement, he must, when he can exercise his Reason, and know his part of this
Covenant, readily choose and consent to it, and solemnly renew it; and so he
must make it his own Act and Deed to devote himself to God. This our Church has
very justly ordered should be solemnly and publicly done in the recieving of
Confirmation. A thing, alas, too much neglected, to the great Decay of
Christian Piety among us: But if this were duly and generally practiced, we
should in all likelihood see more Persons live according to their baptismal
Vow, and as becomes Christians, than commonly do.

But this Discourse is designed chiefly to bring Men prepared to the Lords
Supper, that they may worthily and profitably receive that; and therefore it
must not be diverted so as to insist long on any other Subject but what is
necessary and serviceable to that design and end of it.

SECT. X. The LORD's SUPPER a Confirmation of this Covenant.
I SHALL now therefore bring the Discourse more close to the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper, which has been all this while leading and aiming toward it. And
I shall begin to discourse particularly of that, by showing, That it is
appointed by God as a Faederal Rite, and is to be used as such by us; As a
Ceremony wherein this New Covenant between God and Man is renewed and
confirmed. This, by a little search, we shall soon find to be very evident in
Holy Scripture.

Our Savior himself, when he first instituted this Sacrament, speaks thus of
it, as he was delivering the Cup to his Disciples, This Cup (...) the New
Covenant in my Blood, Luke 22.20. For what our Translation renders Testament
there, had been more exactly and properly rendered Covenant, Our Saivour's plain
meaning is this: Take this Cup as the Instrument of Conveyance to you of the
Divine Blessings of the Covenant of Grace, which are the inestimable Purchases
of my precious Blood. Again, when our Lord says of the Bread in this Sacrament,
This is my Body which is given for you; and of the Cup, This is my Blood of the
New Covenant which is shed for many for the Remission of their Sins: He plainly
means, That this Sacrament is intended ^o renew to us the Blessings and Fa^s,
which are the Purchases of his meritorious Death, and his Sacrifice which he
offered to God in dying for us. And the Apostle Paul plainly teaches us to
understand our Lord thus: For he says of the Bread this Sacrament, It is the
Communion of the Body of Christ; and of the Cup, It is the Communion of the
Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10.16. By Communion, he means the Communication of
these. It is faithfully intended by God that in the Use of this Sacrament,
those who are fit Receivers, shall partake of the Body and Blood of Christ; and
this Bread and this Cup shall be the Communication of the Body and Blood of
Christ to them: These outward Elements of Broken Bread, and Wine poured out
shall bring with them, to those humble and prepared Souls which receive them,
this Spiritual Grace: By which means they shall be partakers of the Blessings
purchased by the breaking or wounding of the Body, and the shedding of the
blood of our Saivour, the blessings procured by the valuable Sacrifice of his
Death; which are the Blessings of the New Covenant forementioned.

This Sacrament is ordained of God to be a Pledge and Conveyance of these
blessings, and shall actually and infallibly be so to meet Receivers: God will
never be wanting to his Sacraments, nor leave them without the Efficacy he
desings them for, if the Receivers be not wanting to themselves. He faithfully
intends the Renewal, and Confirmation of this Covenant with us in this
Sacrament, and will actually do it if we sincerely intend the same thing.

And that the Renewal of our part of the Covenant at this Sacrament is expected
and required by God, cannot choose but be very easily apprehended. When God
offers good things upon Terms and Conditions, he requires the binding our
selves to perform those Conditions, if we will partake of those good things;
and our embracing the Offers he makes, implies, and ought to imply, the
accepting of those Terms, and the engaging our selves to perform those
Conditions. To be sure God never intends we shall be partakers of those good
things, without performing those Conditions. When it is said, God gives the holy
Spirit to them that ask him, it is implied that asking is the necessary
Condition and Means of having; God gave his only begotten Son, that they who
believe in him should not perish, but have Everlasting Life; It Is required Men
believe as a Condition of their obtaining Everlasting Life, So when it is said,
Jesus Christ is the Author of Salvation to them that obey him; and Repent that
your Sins may be blotted out: These things evidently imply, that our Sins shall
not be forgiven, unless we repent of them; not will the Blessed Jesus himself
be a Savior to us, if we do not devote our selves to his Service, and give up
our selves to follow his Example and Conduct. Now this being the constant
Tenor of the Gospel; We must needs Conclude, that when we are offered to be
made partakers of these Blessings in this Sacrament, it is required, that if we
desire them, we must bind our selves to perform such Conditions.

Our receiving therefore of those things which are God's Pledges and Coveyances
of those Blessings upon Conditions, is an outward Profession and Declaration
that we bind our selves to do what is required of us! And if that outward
profession be not attended with an inward and sincere Intention, it is horrid
Hypocrisy, and makes a Man undoubtedly guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ:
He is reckoned to have abused and profaned the Body and Blood of Christ, as did
the wretched Men that slew him. The receiving those Elements in this Sacrament
is an outward profession and Declaration that we accept of God's Covenant, and
it certainly bi^ds us sincerely to intend our performance of the Conditions of
it.

The Apostle plainly gives this Instruction in 1 Cor. 10. in that he intimates
the partaking of this Sacrament to be a Rite of the same Nature and
Signification with the eating of the Sacrifices which had been offered to any
god. As the Eating of those Sacrifices therefore signified the owning him for
God, to whom the Sacrifice had been made, and so the obliging of themselves to
worship and obey him; and the Reliance upon that Sacrifice to find Favor and
obtain a Blessing from him; so the Eating of the Lords Supper must be reckoned
to imply and declare the same professions and engagements. This is the Eating
of a Sacrifice made to God, even the great Sacrifice of the Body and Blood of
Christ; and therefore must be ^tended with Faith or a Reliance upon that
Sacrifice to find Favor with him; the owning him to be God, and the binding
our selves to honor, love and obey him. For this reason it is that the Apostle
forbids in that Chapter those who would partake of this Sacrament the Eating of
any Feasts upon Sacrifices whi^ h^ been offered to the Heathen Idols; which
Sacrifices he says were offered to Devils: Ye cannot drink the Cup of the Lord
and the cup of Devils* Ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's Table and of the
Table of Devils; says he, v. 21. Ye cannot, may mean, it is impossible, you
should sincerely intend what is signified by both these things; that is, the
owning the true God as God, and the owning those Devils as God, for in owning
one, you do imply the renouncing of the other To be sure the true God requires,
if you own him, that you do renounce all other. Or it must mean, You ought not
to do thus. If you partake of the Cup and Table of the Lord, you must sincerely
intend thereby the owning of him; and then you must not so much as seem to own
those filthy Devils in eating of the Sacrifices which have been offered to
them. Therefore he adds in the 22d Verse, That in doing thus, they did provoke
the Lord to Jealousy; because they made a show and appearance of departing
from, and of renouncing him herein. The Apostle then plainly teaches us, that
in receiving this Sacrament, we do make profession and show of honoring and
covenanting with God; and therefore that we ought really and sincerely to
intend it.

I might show that the Name of Sacrament was given to this Ordinance by the
first Christians, because they reckoned the Celebrating this Supper to signify
the Binding our selves to serve and honor, love and obey and trust in God; to
be his faithful Subjects and Servants. And so notorious was it, that they used
it as a Ceremony of covenanting with God; that even the Heathens knew this, and
therefore one of them speaking of the Christian Assemblies in his time for
Worship (at which they always Celebrated this Sacrament) says; They met
together on a fixed Day before it was light, (this was for fear of their
enemies) and did there bind themselves by an Oath or Sacrament not to commit
any Thefts or Adulteries, nor to betray any Trust, or deal deceitfully with
their Neighbor, and the like. They then took this Sacrament as an Engagement
to be of the Religion of Jesus, and so to perform the Terms and Conditions of
the New Covenant: We therefore must, when we receive it, sincerely intend the
Confirmation of that Covenant.

SECT. XI. An Earnest Persuasive to come to the LORD'S SUPPER.
I SHALL now insist a little upon an earnest Persuasive to the frequent
Attendance upon this Sacrament, which the woeful and deplorable Neglect of these
times, and the sad consequences of that Neglect, do make but too necessary.

Let all Men know then, that when they are come to years, and are capable to
know and to renew their Vow and Covenant which they made in Baptism, they are
commanded by our Lord Jesus Christ in this way to renew and confirm it. They
are indispensably bound to receive this Sacrament in Confirmation of that
Covenant. No Man is left at Liberty whether he will receive this Sacrament or
not; but if the Providence of God affords him Means and Opportunity to do so,
he is bound to prepare himself for, and receive it. If a Man any time neglects
to prepare himself for it, and is therefore unfit, and absents himself because
he is unfit: in that case he will be judged to have neglected the Sacrament it
self. He that does not endeavor to be prepared, and receive it as often as
Opportunity is afforded him to do it in that Congregation of Christians, which
the Order of the Church and Obedience to the Governors of it does oblige him
to join with; He does so often neglect and refuse it, as he thus absents
himself from it. But the neglect and refusal of this, we must know, is the
neglect and refusal of the incomparble Blessings of the New Covenant; of having
the pardon of our Sins renewed and Sealed; the Blessed Influences of the Holy
Spirit tenewed upon us; and our Title confirmed to Everlasting Blessedness, and
our Hopes of it increased and strengthened; it is to neglect our own Interest,
and to provoke the Displeasure of God, more than by any other Sins, in
neglecting the Offers of his Grace and Mercy.

Let all those who never mind this Sacrament, nor do ever prepare themselves
for it, nor receive it, know, That they do therein intimate the renouncing of
their Covenant with God, and do cut themselves off from all Hopes and
Expectations of the Favors and Blessings of the Covenant of Grace, till they
repent of this guilty Omission of their Duty, and so come to this Sacrament
prepared for it. Oh wretched Creatures! They choose to remain in a state of
Damnation. To be sure a Man that has contradicted his Covenant since he was
Baptized, by living in any wilful Sin; if that Man does not resolve to forsake
his Sin, and come to this Sacrament, and hereby bind himself to his Duty, he
will be in the fight of God, accounted to renounce his Christianity, to deny
the Lord that bought him, to trample upon the Blood of the Covenant; the Blood
of Christ, and to despise his dying Love: And as such, a Man must inevitably
perish; so he will fall under the heaviest and sorest Perdition.

Whatever pretended Wishes a Man may have to forsake his Sins, whatever Regret
and Remorse for them, and whatever Resolutions he makes to forsake them, they
will not be accepted with God, not bring him into a Title to the Favor of this
Covenant, if he has Opportunity and Means to Partake of this Sacrament, and
refuses to do it: Because it is in and by this Sacrament that God expects and
requires the Renewal of this Covenant after we have broken nit: Our Repentance
is not completed according to the Will of God till this is done, if he Affords
us Means and Opportunity to do this. We are not Allowed to expect that he will
Accept our Resolutions and Vows in any other way, when he has Appointed us this
way of presenting them to Him.

Besides, Is it not a wonderful thing that Men should forget that this
Sacrament is appointed by God as the Means to Convey to them the strength to
perform their good Vows and Resolutions? And then he that Neglects this
Sacrament, lays himself under the Power and Tyranny of his Sins, by Neglecting
the Mighty Help which Heaven kindly affords him against it: And he binds upon
himself the Guilt of all his Sins, and as it were Seals Himself to Damnation in
refusing and neglecting this Ordinance, whereby he might be Sealed to the Day
of Redemption.

Let all Men know, that the Wilful Neglect and Refusal of this Sacrament is a
Damnable Sin of Omission, and puts every Man that is Guilty of it out of a
State of Grace and Salvation: And they that Neglect to come to this Ordinance
when it is prepared for them, may very justly Fear that God will not Bless any
other to them: For what Ground have they to think He will Bless one of his
Ordinances to them, while they Neglect another, or let them Obtain by Prayer
and Hearing the Word what he Commanded them to use this Sacrament for too, that
they may Obtain it; And then they that live in Neglect of this, are in great
Danger Never to be Saved by any other Means of Salvation.

Men may perhaps think themselves very Good Christians if they keep their
Church, attend the Public Prayers, and sometimes Hear, sometimes Sleep away a
Sermon: But if they Neglect this Sacrament, they must Expect God will Reject
all there other Performances: He that breaks the Law, in one Point, the
Scrip-says, is guilty of all; And then he that Neglects his Obedience to any
one of God's Commands knowingly and wilfully, will be looked upon and treated
by Almighty God as if he had Fulfilled none of them. Oh that Men would
Seriously lay these things to Heart, and Consider the Terrible Danger which
they put themselves into by this Neglect!

Let us be assured, that whatever it is that hinders us from preparing our
selves, and coming to this Sacrament, it is a Snare and Temptation of the Devil
the Great Adversary of our Souls: Who knows the Great and Saving Efficacy of
this Sacrament, and therefore would not have Men use it: Who knows that if we
Seriously and Frequently Attend upon this Means of our Salvation he must
Despair of ever Accomplishing our Destruction. Oh let us Defeat the Malicious
Designs of our Enemy, and Resist all Suggestions that would bear us off from
this Practice.

Let us Consider how Kindly and Lovingly the Lord Jesus, the great Lover of
Souls Invites us to it: Come unto me, says he, all ye that are weary and heavy
laden, and I will give you rest. Let us not give him cause to complain of us,
and say, Ye will not come unto me that ye may have Life. Let us consider what
noble and inviting Entertainment he has provided for us at this heavenly Feast:
He designs to entertain us with assurances of his Love, with the Divine
Influences of his Holy Spirit, with the joyful Pledges and foretasts of Heaven?
and is this what is but fit to be despised! Consider at what a costly Rate and
Price he has provided us this Entertainment! Even at the Price of his own cruel
Sufferings, and bitter Death, and of his most precious Blood. If we love our
Souls then, and have any Concern for their Salvation, let us prepare our selves
and come to this Sacrament as often as we can: If we have any true Love to the
Lord Jesus, our best Friend, our kind Savior, who loved us and laid down his
Life for us; Let us earnestly desire and seek the Purchases of his Blood, and
seek to be made partakers of them in that way in which he has appointed us; as
we shall certainly do, if we really and sincerely desire them.

SECT. XII. Of Fitness to come to this SACRAMENT.
BUT the common Pretense and Excuse that hinders Men from coming to this
Sacrament, is, That they are not sit for it, and they are afraid of Eating and
Drinking unworthily, and of incurring their own Damnation thereby. It is
therefore the Design of this little Book to show what fitness is requisite for
a worthy and profitable Receiving of this Sacrament; and to help Men to that
Fitness by the Blessing of God; which they shall not fail to obtain of him by
earnest Prayer, and the serious and frequent perusal of what is here presented.

And since in celebrating this Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, we are to renew and confirm this Covenant which we we have been
speaking of between God and us? This will abundantly direct what Preparation
and Fitness is requisite, that we may be meet Partakers of it to our Profit and
Comfort. And it is necessary that we know what the Terms and Conditions of it
are which God requires to be performed on our Parts, and what it offers and
promises on God's Part. This Matter therefore has been already for that Reason
distinctly and somewhat particularly represented.

In the next place, we must unfeignedly and sincerely choose and lay hold on
this Covenant: It must be the hearty desire, the sincere purpose of our Souls
to be engaged in it: To be bound in those happy Bonds which set our Souls at
Liberty from the Bonds of Sin and Death: We must desire the Blessings, and seek
the Favors of it, and readily accept and submit to the Terms and Conditions;
and declare, that we will expect our Salvation upon those Terms.

And also we must, certainly, be very thankful to the Son of God at this
Memorial of his Death, since he became the Mediator of this Covenant, and has
by his Death procured the Favor of New Terms of Salvation, and the offer of
Peace and Reconcilement with God upon so gentle and easy Terms.

And he who has the Knowledge of this Covenant, and this good disposition of
Mind thereupon, that Man is fit for this Sacrament, and if he comes, he shall
be a welcome Guest at the Lords Table. Now as I have represented the Knowledge
necessary to this, I shall go on to represent also more particularly the good
Disposition of Mind which we ought to come with. And I shall represent this in
such a way as will be fit to form it in Men where it is not, or to exite and
actuate it, and set it into exercise where it is. I shall represent it in the
following Acts or Exercises of it: Which you may take notice are a lively
Description of a very meet Receiver of this Sacrament. So that he who would
become fit for this Sacrament, must read and meditate on those things, till he
finds those dispositions and Affections raised in him, which are therein
expressed. And he that would know or find himself fit for this Sacrament, must
examine himself by them, and see whether they represent the State and
Disposition of his Mind or not. And if a Man be habitually possessed with such
a good State of Mind, as these things will be, I believe, very agreeable to
him, so they will be of use to stir up that Disposition into Exercise, and to
an actual Fitness for this Sacrament; As Fire is wont to kindle fire in matter
that is apt and disposed to receive it. Further, he that would behave himself
rightly and duly at this Sacraments to his Comfort and Benefit, as he must
have his mind then filled with such Thoughts and Affections as are here
represented, so the reading of these things there, if he has leisure, will be
useful to possess him with such Thoughts and Affections. And lastly, he that
would maintain the good Disposition of Mind which he has at the Sacrament, may
very profitably for that purpose, read and meditate on these things afterward;
which will be as useful to cherish and maintain, yea, and to improve in us this
Disposition of Mind, as they are to form it. All this use, I dare pretend, may
be made of these Exercises following

SECT. XIII. An Exercise of Thankful Remembrance of the Death of JESUS CHRIST.
LORD, I am not worthy to live, if I do not always remember the exceeding great
Love of my Lord and only Savior Jesus Christ in dying for me; and if I do not
most affectionately consider and observe the many and incomparable Benefits,
which by his precious Blood shed, he has obtained for Sinners. My soul; that
thou may know, in some measure, the wondrous height, the breadth, the depth,
the length of the Love of God in Christ Jesus: That thou may entertain the
larger apprehensions of that Love, which exceeds all finite Knowledge; Thou
must enlarge thy Thoughts, and take in all thou can of these dimensions of
it. Consider what a Depth of Wretchedness and Misery Jesus rescues poor lost
Mankind from! Consider what a glorious height of Honor and Happiness he
designs to advance them to! Consider who the excellent Person is that has done
all this for us! Consider what it cost him to procure for us such a Redemption!
Behold the most amazing, but most pleasing prospect in the World, Redeeming
Love! Dwell in the Contemplation of this; for surely it is good to be here!

As for the Condition into which thou were sunk, it was the vilest and the most
miserable that a Creature could fall into: It was perfectly diserable, for thou
had utterly lost the Favor of thy Maker the Fountain-Good, and forfeited all
right, and lost all hopes of ever being happy: Thou were become a vile Sinner,
odious to the pure and holy God; and were as contemptible as miserable: Thou
were obnoxious to the Eternal Wrath and just vengeance of the Almighty: Thou
did deserve to be thrown into the deep Lake of Fire and Brimstone, where is
eternal Woe and Sorrow, weeping and Gnashing of Teeth; where the wrath of God
burns for ever, and the Fire will never be quenched; from whence there shall be
no returning. Where wretched Creatures are furies to themselves, and more than
double all the Torments of Hell with this tormenting Thought, that they must
all endure for ever: They will know no intermission or respite; they will never
come to an End. This is the sad portion of Sinners: And this must all Mankind
after a few Complaining Days, spent in this low mortal Life, have been thrown
into; And there was no creature in Heaven or Earth could possibly have
prevented his Doom; no, it could never have been avoided if Jesus had not
concerned himself to help us. And he has taken away the necessity of our
Destruction; has rendered this Woe and Misery now an avoidable Thing; Is not
this a glorious Benefit?

Look down, my Soul, in serious thoughts into that horrid dungeon and lake of
Fire! Imagine as thou may well, that many wretched Souls are already plunged
into it, who sqandred away the Day of Life, the precious Time allowed them of
making their peace with God, and to avoid these Miseries! think thou see them
wallowing in Flames, pierced through with Fire, and in all parts themselves on
a Flame! And besure, if thou could hear them, thou should hear the most
dismal Howlings, bitter Complaints; some cursing the Day that ever they were
born, and all, at times, cursing themselves as causes of their own ruin. And
think now if one of these despairing Souls should have an Angel sent to it,
that should open the Prison-doors and let him out, and send him into this world
again to be in a condition and possibility of avoiding all this Misery, would
he not account this a wonderful Favor! Such as he could never praise enough:
Such as could never be worthily requited: It is, in truth, not less than this
that thou art beholden to the Love of Jesus for: It is not a less favor to be
kept from this Misery, than to be delivered from it into the state wherein thou
now art.

And thou art kept from this by the tender compassionate, and most patient Love
of the Lord Jesus! Long ago, if thou had suffered thy deserts thou had been
thrown into this Misery: Long ago have thy Sins deserved it: It is of the
Lord's Mercy that thou art not consumed. Jesus has repreived thee by his
powerful Intercession: he has procured that thou art hitherto spared; yea, he
has procured that thou may, if thou will, be pardoned; and may for ever be
exempted from enduring those intolerable Miseries. Oh, how much art thou
obliged! Say how useful, how necessary, how great is your Redeemers Love; Oh,
what Love, what Praise can reach it! Oh compassionate Love, how shall I find
Expressions suitable to thy kindness! Why was my Life so dear to thee! Why have
thou not suffered me to perish! Me, who am as unworthy of thy Favor, as I am
in distress and need of it!

And does this engage thy wonder so much, my Soul? It may indeed well do so;
but this alone must not detain it: There are yet more occasions for thy
Admiration and Praise in the Redeemer's Love! And this thou will see, if thou
consider what a Glorious Height of Honor and Happiness he designs to advance
poor, vile, contemptible Sinners to. Those that have rendered themselves
unworthy of this Earth, and even of this low, mortal Life, he intends to
advance them to Heaven, and give them Eternal Life. Those that are unworthy of
any thing that is good and comfortable, he intends to make them perfectly
happy. Those that deserve the utmost contempt of their Maker; that are fallen
under the Insults and Scorn of the abject Devils, he intends for the Honor of
seeing God, and dwelling in his blissful Presence for ever. O rich and
bounteous Love! Nothing less will serve him, but that where he is, we should
also be. Think, my soul if thou can, what Heaven is.

Think of a bright and glorious Place, where this Sun would be ashamed and even
disappear, as now the stars do at his Rising. Think of an innumerable Company
of glorious Creatures, each of them more bright than he. Think thou see them
all in Joy, all ravished and transported with Pleasure, and thy self among them
partaking of that Joy and Pleasure. Think thou were now in the Presence of the
Fountain-Good, receiving immediately from himself the Testimonies and
Communications of infinite Love! That thou were there, where no Fear or Sorrow
can ever come! Where the Joy is pure without allay! Where the Pleasure is solid
and abiding, not likely to leave thee in discontent and distaste! Where the Joy
and Pleasure shall never End! Oh how glad would thou be to see thyself there!
Thou may believe it is not: possible for thy Heart now to conceive the mighty
Joy, which would possess thee: And to this Happiness, even to this, does the
Redeemer's Love design to bring thee. He would have thee attain this Happiness:
He offers it thee on gentle Terms: He offers to guide and help thee thither, if
thou will (...) give up thy self ^o his kind and gracious Conduct. And is not
this amazing and obliging Love!

All the Joy and Happiness of Heaven may be, my Eternal Portion if I will; and
shall be so if ^m not wanting to my self. Jesus has not been ^or will be
wanting to do all that in him lies ^o bring me to it. He does not grudge me the
^ighest Bliss that my Nature is capable to at^ain, or that my own kindest
Wishes to my self ^an desire. He loves me, then, as much as I can love my self,
and is willing to make me as happy as I can desire to be; and more happy than ^
can conceive or imagine. Such is the Love o^ Jesus to a Wretch, that deserves
only his Hatred and Contempt.

But do thou know, my Soul? Can thou think who the Person is that has done
these great Things for thee? I am sure, if thou had not been told, thou
could never have imagined it. Infinite Love indeed might be supposed to be in
the Son of God; but he has infinite Greatness, Majesty and Glory too; he i^
exalted so far above us, that it were even Infinite Condescension for him to
regard or concer^ himself about the Misery which such low thing as we, had
pulled upon our selves. Besides, (...) is Infinitely pure and Holy too, and has
an ete^nal hatred of all Sin and Wickedness; and w^ became miserable by our
Sin. And he love the Father with an Infinite Love; and he mad^ Mankind to love,
and honor, and praise the Father; but they have forsaken the end o^ their
Being, and turned to hate, and despise eve^ the Good and Glorious God. And
could it b^ imagined, that ever such Persons should be redeemed then, by the
Son of God?

But be astonished, Oh ye Heavens! Sing Praises, Oh ye glorious Hosts of
Angels! Produc^ your loftiest Hymns, and help, Oh help poo^ feeble Mortals to
praise the Son of God! For it was he that became our Mediator: He too^ upon him
the kind Office of being our Savior It was the Son of God that did us this
kindness: The Eternal, the Only-begotten Son o^ God; who is the express Image
of the Father's Person, and the brightness of his Glory. This Person, my Soul,
whom thou must own to be the true and Eternal God, by whom the Worlds were
made; who sustains all things; who is the Glory of Heaven, and the stability of
Earth; who is incomprehensible in his Greatness; and to be sure, Mighty to
save, is he who regarded, us in our vile Misery, and most despicable Condition.

Who pitied us in the Misery which we had madly pulled upon our selves which we
had deeply deserved! Who loved Sinners, the most hateful things that are! Oh
the wonder! that he should retain Kindness, and think Thoughts of Love toward
us after the Abuse of great creating Love; to us who are altogether
unprofitable to him! whose Happiness is not at all necessary, nor can make any
addition to his! He had been eternally happy, if we had been for ever lost and
miserable: Yet he would not see us lost; he afforded his help, when all other
help utterly failed us, and we must have perished, if he had not helped us.

But go on, my Soul, for the way is still pleasant, and strowed with new and
various delights; and consider too, in what way and method this glorious Person
the Son of God accomplished this great Salvation! what he undertook to do, and
what to suffer, that he might save thee.

Thou must know then, that this excellent Person meditated and designed no less
condescension, when he undertook to save thee, than to become man for thy sake.
He intended it then, and in the fullness of time submitted to it. The word was
made Flesh. The Son of God took a Humane Nature, and became the Son of David:
For he was born of a Virgin, who was of the House and Family of David: A Royal
Family indeed; but in this branch of it, at east, sunk into poverty and
contempt. He who made the World, condescended to be made of a Woman! He who is
Lord of Life and Glory, became subject to the Law that obliges Creatures! He
whom the Angels account it their honor to attend and worship, made himself of
no reputation, took upon him the form of a Servant, and exposed himself to the
contempt and scorn of Men. O Son of God, how could thou endure to live upon
this earth so defiled with Sin, to converse with Sinneri? We must needs wonder,
that when thou were in our guilty world, thou did not show thy terrible
hatred and resentment of the Sins of Men in sending Plagues and Desolations
about the rebellious world. It is an amazement that thou should here go
about doing good! But this was thy constant practice: It was glorious Love, O
adorable Son of God, which brought thee down among us; and Love spoke in every
Word of thine; Love attended all thy steps; Love to mankind was exercised in
all thy Actions. What exceeding honor, gracious Lord, have thou done our mean
Nature, in taking it into a personal Union with thy self! Thus have thou
exalted it above the Angels, and abundantly vindicated it from the contempt of
Devils; who first defiled, and then utterly despised it: So low and mean is thy
condescension, and so glorious our exaltation! Behold, my Soul, the Son of God
become our brother! And as he is our brother, he does exalt us to become the
Sons of God, together with him: And his Father becomes our Father. Oh, what
manner of Love is this, that we should be called the Sons of God!

But this is not all the condescension of the Son of God to save mankind, that
he took to himself the humane nature: No, though this was much, yet he did more,
much more than this. He undertook to die a Sacrifice for the Sins of men, which
as God, he could not do; and therefore he became man, that he might be capable
of dying: And in humbling, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death,
even the death of the Cross. And here, if ever, my soul, thou will be lost in
astonishment, in considering thy Saviors love to mankind* Thou will surely
despise all things beside. Thou will like his great Apostle and Lover, be
forced to value no knowledge but that of Christ, and him crucified; and to
account all things but dross and dung, that thou may gain an Interest in this
Love. That it may thus engage thee, consider now the death which Jesus
underwent for thee.

Was it the Death of the Cross? Was my Savior crucified? And what kind of
Death was this; his Enemies, the unbelieving Jews, chose it for him, and the
Heathenish Roman Soldiers executed it. And this Death was the vilest and the
most ignominious one in the account of the Romans; such as they put none to but
the most contemptible Abjects, and the basest Malefactors. And this Death was,
in the account of the Jewish Law, an accursed one: he was reckoned accursed of
God that was hanged on a Tree. But let me consider the Indignities, the
contemptuous usage which attended my Savior's Death, and how painful and
afflicting it must needs have been to him.

As soon as the blessed Jesus was condemned to die, he was committed to rude
Soldiers who made it their sport to injure and abuse him. They stripped him of
his Clothes, tied him to a Pillar and cruelly scourged him on his naked Back.
Oh Jesu! I love and adore thee, whom those Wretches thus vilely abused! I
grieve for thy Injuries, and am afflicted with thy pain! After this they
platted a Crown of Thorns, and forced it, to make it sit fast up on his Head
wounding and tearing thereby his Sacred Temples; and then, my Soul, had I been
there, I might have seen his own Blood running down and disguising his Blessed
Face, Oh what an disguise of that Majesty and Meekness, of that venerable
Sweetness, that awful goodness which had always dwelt there! They then found
out some contemptible Purple Garment, and put it on him, and put a Reed in his
Hand to imitate a Scepter; and then mocked him with the bowing the knee before
him, and crying, Hail King of the Jews. And to show how little Honor or
Reverence they intended him in this, they most disdainfully spit in his Face,
and buffeted him about, among them, from one to another: And with out doubt, he
thought himself the wittiest of the Company, who could devise the greatest
Affront. Thus was he injured and abused, who came into this World on the Kind
Design of saving lost Sinners: Thus was the King of Glory, the King, not of the
Jews only, but of Heaven and Earth, mocked and despised by the vilest of Men.

When they had tired themselves with this barbarous Sport, and how much rather
him? They put his own Clothes on him again, and led him away to crucify him.
And on him they laid the heavy and ignominious burden of his Cross, and he
must carry a long way, the Instrument of his Shame and Death to the place of
Execution, but they had used him too ill before to leave him still able to
carry so heavy a Load; and after he had hardly carried it a little way, he fell
under it. I see, O Son of God, in this thy; Fainting under the Cross, a
manifest proof that thou did really take our Nature upon thee, with the
innocent Infirmities of it: And I cannot choose but admire and praise so
wondrous a Condescension of the Almighty for our sakes* They who used him so
cruelly before, I must needs imagine, did not exercise any Compassion to him
upon this occasion. I abhor to think, how inhumanly, it is probable, they used
him now. But they laid at last the Burden upon other Shoulders; for now their
Malice was in have to be rid of him.

When he was come to the place of Crucifixion, they stripped him of all his
Clothes, and exposed the fresh Wounds which the rud^ Scourge had given him, to
the cold Air. They said him upon his cross, and violently stretched out his
Arms, and then drove a great Na^ through each Hand: Thu^ fastening to the
transverse Beam of the Cross, those blessed Hands which had been used in the
working many (...) kind Miracle, but had never done any harm, and certainly
deserved a better usage. Then they ^ho^e one or two great Nails through his
Feet, and fastened them to the upright Beam of the Cross; those Feet which had
carried him diligently about his kind Business in the World* which was to seek
and to save lost Sinners. This being done, they set the Cross upright, that he
might hang upon those Nails, drove through those very sensible Parts of his
Body, in exquisite Pain and Torture, and exposed to the view and scorn of the
Spectators: And many of these reviled, insulted over him, and de^ided him here.
It would even wound a Heart that has any tenderness to think that any one
should be used so cruelly: and one could scarce forbear to feel some pity and
trouble at seeing even the most odious Malefactor in such a condition. But this
was not a Malefactor, my Soul, but as thy Sins had made him one!

This was the innocent Jesus, who had done no Iniquity, neither was Guile found
in his Mouth! This was thy Lover, thy Savior, thy Friend that hung here; and
all this he endured For thee. My Soul; if thou had seen the loving Jesus thus
hanging upon these Nails, and bleeding from his Head, and from his Hands, and
from his Feet; and heard his Enemies reviling him there, what Resentments
would thou have felt! Would not so sad an Object have made thy Tears keep
pace at least with the drops of his most precious Blood? Would it not have made
thee also smite thy Breast as some of the Spectators did? Could thou see
this, and not feel those Wounds, and sympathize with those Pains he endured?
When every Wound might be understood to say, Sinner, behold how I love thee:
All this I endure for thee: How then should this Sacrament affect thee, which
is a lively Memorial of his Death? What a deep sense of thy Savior's Love and
Sufferings should this create in thee? When he is here, as it were, evidently
set forth crucified before thee; I see here his pale, wounded, bloodless,
broken Body; I see his Blood poured out, and separated from it. Can thou see
this, and say, my Love is crucified, and think thou see him crowned with
Thorns, All over daubed with Dirt, and his Enemies filthy Spittle, and his own
Blood, and not be sadly grieved to think he was put to endure all this by his
love of thee? Oh, crucified Jesus, there was never Grief, there was never Love
like thine! All this endured for me! This commands and and deserves, Oh let it
cause my great Grief for, and my ardent Love to thee.

But all this which afflicted his Body, was the least part of the Sufferings he
felt; he suffered more, abundantly more, then all this in the Suffering of his
Soul: For I must consider further, that this Death of his was an accursed one
in the account of the Jewish Law; that is, in the account of God himself; for
it was he that had ordered and taught them to account it so; on purpose that it
might foretell and signify beforehand, that the Redeemer of the World should
bear in his Death the Curse and Punish- which the Divine Law had justly
threatened against the Sins of Men. This then must call to thy mind the
Sufferings of his Soul, He was made a Curse for us, and God laid on him the
Iniquities of us all. By men was he treated as a Malefactor, and by God too.
The light of his Father's Countenance, and the pleasing Aspects of his Love,
which had been always the Joy of his Soul, and the Reward of all his Labors in
his service, and till now had been constantly enjoyed, was now, when he wanted
it most, withdrawn; when he was under his sharp outward Sufferings, and when he
was at the point of Death. And in making his Soul an Offering for Sin, he was
afflicted and terrified with God's Almighty Wrath and Displeasure. This made
him cry out, who was silent before, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
He felt the Wrath which our Sins had deserved. O terrible thing! Who can
concieve what he endured? We may believe no Torments can exceed those he felt
in his Soul, except it be those of Hell, if they do.

Oh wounding Thought! This stabs and pierces my Soul: This tells me, It was not
the cruel Jew or barbarous Roman Soldier that tormented, and killed the loving
Jesus, as the vile Sinner: It is I, among the rest of Sinners, gave him his
cruellest Wounds his sharpest Sorrows: It was I that wounded, that killed my
Savior and Friend: I shed his Life's most precious Blood. Was there ever such
a thing known besides this? O Jesu, there was never any Love like thine; and
there is nothing so vile, so base as a Sinner: Greater love than this has no
man; that one lay down his Life for his Friend: But thou have laid down thine
for Enemies, for those that hated thee, yea for those that killed thee: Thou
art there on the Cross despised, that I might be honored: Thou art there in
Pain, that I might be at ease: Thou art there hungry and thirsty, that I might
be supplied with all good things: Thou art there accursed, that I might be
blessed; Thou art there deserted by thy Fathers Favor and Love, that I might
enjoy the Everlasting delights of it: Thou art there dying, that I might live
an everlasting Life in Joy and Glory unspeakable and eternal. O Jesu! Was I
more dear to thee than thine own Life? Was I to be rather indulged than thine
own Ease, and more to be respected than thine own Honor; What am I, Lord? Oh,
what is Man, that thou art thus mindful of him? There was never Love like
thine; none but a God could love thus! Oh adorable Mystery! Oh Wonder of
Wonders. Thy Greatness is unsearchable, thy Love is incomprehensible, and thy
ways are past finding out! With profoundest reverence I adore thy
Incomprehensible Love: I leave off to fathom what I can never reach, and will
give up my self to praise and admire for ever.

SECT. XIV. An Exercise of REPENTANCE.
HAve I indeed given my kind and compassionate Savior so much Grief by my
Sins, and shall they give me none? Oh that my Head were Waters, and my Eyes a
Fountain of Tears, to drench my filthy polluted Soul! But alas! it is not all
the Tears that I am able to shed which could ever make me clean, or wash out
the stain of any, the least of my Sins! Oh! I am become, it seems, so exceeding
foul, and have contracted Stains of such a nature, that nothing but this
precious Stream, my Saviors Life's Blood, can cleanse me! How am I fallen from
the Dignity and Honor of my Creation; I was made little lower then the Angels
by my bounteous Creator; but I have made my self more vile than the Beasts that
perish. I was made subject to no Creature, not bound to pay any Homage or
Service toward the glorious Angles, though made lower than them; but alas, I
have made my self a Slave to the abject, Devil, I have refused to serve God my
Maker and Friend, and have drudged for my mortal Enemy. Oh wretched Man that I
am! I have sought his Service, while I have declined thine; and run after his
Temptations, while I have endeavored to evade thy Commands. Oh, I have been
forward to Evil, and backward to all that is Good: I have combined with my
Soul's great Enemy, to hasten and increase my Damnation.

Infinite Goodness! How unjustly, how basely art thom requited for all thy
bounteous Love to Mankind! Who can conceive or express the vileness, the
Enormity of Sin! Which is a Contempt of thy infinite Majesty, a Rebellion
against thy unquestionable Authority, and Abuse of thy free Goodness, a
Defiance of thy Almighty Power, a denial of thy incomparable Wisdom, and an
Affront to all thy Glorious Attributes: Which is contrary to that Honor and
Homage whieh I owe thee as thy Creature. Woe is me that I should ever offend my
Maker! So liberal and so gracious a Father! Woe is me that I should slight and
affront the Love of Jesus my Redeemer, as I have done in cherishing those vile
Sins that he came to destroy* Oh Jesus, at what a costly Rate have thou loved
me, and merited my Love! And how loath, how slow am I to entertain the Love of
thee: Thou have loved, where thy Hatred has been deserved; and I, vile wretch,
have hated him that has infinitely deserved my Love. Thy Love to me me has been
a vast Condescension, and has caused thy Humility and Abasement; yet would
thou love the Unworthy: But my Love to thee would have been my Honor and
Glory, my everlasting Advancement; yet have I been unwilling to love thee. Woe
is me, I have been obstinate in Wickedness! Oh, how have I grieved the Holy
Spirit, in neglecting, resisting, and opposing his good and kind Motions in my
Soul; turning a deaf Ear to his gentle Admonitions, and refusing to be
converted and healed, Oh my God, in our Sins we despise thy Will, and do our
own! We disown thee, and make Gods of our selves. In our Sins we believe the
great Deceiver before the God of Truth; and follow his delusive Temptations,
rather than thy rich and faithful Promises. In our Sins we prefer Earth before
Heaven, the Creature before the Creator; and reckon there is more Happiness in
the enjoying some of them, than in the Enjoyment of Thee, the infinite Fountain
of Good.

Oh how vile, how enormous a thing is Sin! Who can sufficiently hate it! I see
O Lord, in the terrible Sufferings of my Savior, thy mighty Displeasure
against the Sins of Men, and it terrifies me to think of it. I plainly see how
odious they are to the Divine Purity; in that so worthy and great a Person, he
who is so well and justly beloved of the Father, was sorely afflicted by the
Father himself, when he bore the Sins of Mankind. I see thy hatred, O Lord,
against my Sins; I believe it very just, and I cannot choose but hate them too,
I will henceforth hate every false way, but thy Law will I love. I will love
thy Righteousness and Holiness, and utterly abhor what is so contrary to it, as
my Sins. I will account it my greatest Honor to conform to thee, and will
abandon and be ashamed to be found in the most creditable, or most applauded
Sins in the World. Henceforth will all Sin have a most deformed and ugly Visage
to my Eye; I shall never think any one charming; I shall never account any one
worthy to be desired.

But when I consider, O Lord, the course of my past Life; when I look into thy
Commands, and compare with them my Thoughts, and Words, and Actions, Oh what a
mortifying View does this Examination present me! Oh wretched Creature, I am
confounded, I am filled with Indignation against my self, when I see how much I
have had to do with this vile, this odious thing! Woe is me, and how many are my
Transgressions! They are, alas, more in number than the Hairs of my Head, and
my Heart even fails me when I review them. I have sinned in every Age of my
Life, ever since I could know or choose my Actions! Oh wretched Creature, how
early did I begin to Sin against thee! How many have been the unheeded Actions
of my Life! The most of which, I much fear, have been wicked, since they
proceeded from one so prone to do Evil as I. And how many more must the Sins of
my words in all likelihood have been, especially while I did not set any watch
upon my Tongue, nor keep the door of my Lips. And when I think how easy and
abundantly the light Mind multiplies thoughts, I tremble to think how my vain,
foolish, vicious Mind has multiplied Trangressions too. Lord, who can
understand his Errors! I am amazed at the Number of my Sins: I have sinned,
alas, against thee in every Circumstance and Condition of my Life. I have
sinned in every Relation toward Men; not doing that Honor, not paying that
Justice, not exercising that charity to my Neighbor which I ought. I can view
none of thy Commands, but it calls to mind many Sins I have been guilty of.
Very often have I repeated the same Sins; returning to them, as the Dog to the
filthiness of his vomit; and, as the Swine wallowing in the mire. I have sinned
against thy Law, and against the Gospel: Oh, how cold reception have I given to
the Offers of thy Grace and Mercy! How have I neglected the great Salvation!
Trampled upon the Blood of the Covenant, and despised my Savior's dying
redeeming Love! Oh how many of other Men's Sins have I been guilty of! By my ill
Example; by giving them needless and unjust Provocation; by tempting and
alluring them to Sin; by assisting what I ought to have hindered; by conniving
where I ought have bestowed reproofs; and by countenancing and abbetting what I
ought to have corrected and discouraged. I cannot, alas, pretend to have done
any good Action without a Mixture of Evil in it: My best Works need the Blood
of Christ to cleanse them, and make them fit to be presented unto thee: And
indeed I want that Blood to wash even the Tears of my Repentance. What a mighty
Charge am I able to draw up against my self! [ Here thou may particularly
mention those Sins thou art sensible of] But thou, O Lord, know me better
than I do my self; and I dread to think how much more thou can add to the
heaviest Charge that I can bring against my self.

I have been so vile as to Sin deliberately against thee; to do Evil, knowing
that I did Evil. I have been easily induced to Sin; the slightest Temptations
have prevailed with me; I have been, alas, accustomed to do Evil. O Lord, thou
have exercised wonderful Patience and Forbearance toward me in a long train
and course of sin^ing; and I have been so base and ungrateful as to encourage
my self to transgress by that Patience which should have led me to Repentance.

O wretched and vile Creature that I am, I have greatly sinned, I am become
exceeding guilty! What shall I say unto thee; Oh thou preserver of Men. I will
lay myself down in the Dust before thee. I am at thy Mercy, O Lord, and must
own that I have deserved the utmost severity of thy Wrath. In the sad
Sufferings of Jesus I see what my Sins have deserved. I see in his Contempt how
I have deserved to be despised. I see in his Thirst upon the Cross how I have
deserved the want of all things comfortable. I see in his Agony, and by his
Groans under the Divine Wrath, what Displeasure and Punishment I have deserved
to suffer. I see in his accursed Death that I have deserved to die, and be
Eternally accursed and cast out of the Divine Favor. O Lord, I am unworthy,
utterly unworthy to breath in this Air of thine, to inhabit this Earth; to
enjoy this cheerful Light. I am less than the least of all thy Mercies. I must
judge, I must condemn my self, I must own thou were just, and I should have but
my deserts, if I were now shut up in gloomy darkness; if I were now wrapped in
everlasting Flames; if I were feeling the Torments of the never-dying Worm, and
of endless bitter Despair.

Lord, I will punish, I will take vengeance on my self for my Sins. I will lead
a life of Mortification rather than Indulgence; I will never allow again any
high or admiring Thoughts of my self. It shall always keep me humble, to think
how great disparagement and vileness I have contracted! To consider my self a
Sinner, and that there is Imperfection and Sin mixed with the best of my
Actions.

But, O Lord, I beseech thee do not thou enter into Judgment with thy Servant,
for in thy fight shall no man living be Justified. Oh deal not with me after my
Sins; neither reward me after my Iniquities. Blessed is the Man whose Iniquity
is forgiven, whose Sin is covered. Spare me, good Lord; spare thy Creature whom
thou have redeemed with thy most precious Blood! Oh spare the miserable Wretch
that confesses his Faults; restore thou him that is penitent. Pity thou him
that is contrite: Revive the Spirit of the humble; cheer the contrite Heart: A
broken and a contrite Heart, O God thou will not despise. Give me, then, the
joy of thy Salvation; uphold me with thy free Spirit: Then will I teach
Transgressors thy ways, and Sinners shall be converted unto thee. Open thou my
Lips, O Lord, and my Mouth shall show forth thy Praise.

SECT. XV. An Exercise of good Resolutions.
OH Crucified Jesus! Great Martyr of Love! I cannot choose but acknowledge, and
admire and praise the exceeding Greatness of thy ^ying Love! Much it is, O
Lord, that I reckon ^y self beholden to thee: and what, O what shall I render
unto the Lord for all his Kind^ess and Benefits! Lord, when I ransack my ^ore,
I am ashamed, I am utterly abasht to find ^ow poor it is. Oh, what can a
Creature re^urn to his Maker? What can I give, that ^ave nothing to give? who
am nothing but that I derived from thee? Thy Goodness in^eed is such, that thou
requirest no more than ^e are able to render, and with that thou art ^ell
pleased: But that, O Lord, is so little that I cannot be satisfied with it. O
let thy ^ulness of all Excellent Grace, thy Fullness of love fill me with all
true Excellency and Love, that I may be the better and the worthier Gift to
thee.

Dearest Jesu! For the Love of thee I readily ^enounce all the flattering
Vanities of this World, all the most necessary Enjoyments of it, that I may
steadily honor and enjoy thee: I ^ccount all things but Loss and Dung, and
will ^ot count my Life dear, that I may finish my Course of Duty with Joy, and
may win Christ.

But especially, O Lord, for love of thee I ^o here utterly renounce, abdicate
and abhor (...) my most darling Sins. And it grieves me that I should ever be
so base as to entertain any Rivals of the Loving Jesus in my Heart. O Lord, I
hate them so much the more now, by how much the more I have formerly loved
them. I will utterly cast them out of my Heart; no ^ore shall they harbor
there; no longer will I entertain, no longer cherish those thine Enemies. What!
Can I be kind to the bloody Crucifiers of my Lord! See, my Soul; see these
Murderers all daubed with the Blood of ^hy Savior. Away from me ye hateful
Things: We will now instantly part, never, I hope, to meet again, never to be
accquainted more. Be gone without delay; I will thrust you out of my Soul; you
have no right to abide here. Jesus alone has right to possess and rule me. Away
vile Envy, I cannot endure the sight of thee: Be gone my Covetousness: My
Malice I hate thee: My Sensuality I will starve thee:, My Pride I will humble
thee; My Idleness thou have made me so much work to do, that I am resolved, I
see it absolutely necessary, to banish thee forever from me. All my Lusts and
vile Affections be gone; ye shall have no more kind usage here; do not expect
it.

Jesus has all my Love, I have none for you, I am all his, I am no more for ye.
Be gone, ye hateful Tyrants of my Soul. Jesus, a kind and gracious Master,
imposes gentle Tasks, but you lay heavy burdens upon me: His Yoke is easy, and
his Burden light; but your Commands are rigorous and intolerable. Jesus has
shown me great and wondrous Love: Ye promise me much satisfaction and kindness,
but perform nothing. No, ye have cheated and deceived me: Ye have robbed me of
my Peace, robbed me of my Dignity, and Glory, and which is more, ye have robbed
me of the Favor of my God. What can you do for me, if you should do all that
you promise, which is never to be expected, that is comparable with what he can
do for me; what he is willing, and has faithfully promised to do for me, if I
will but hate and forsake you; or with what Jesus has already done to testify
his Good Will and Kindness to me. Jesus made himself of no Reputation for my
sake, and that he might advance me to the Highest Honor: But ye would expose
me to the utmost Contempt of God, Angels and Devils: Jesus has died for me that
I might live for ever, but ye would kill me; Jesus rules to save, but you to
destroy. His Rewards are Eternal Life and Happiness, but your Wages is Death
and Misery everlasting. When I come to die, what fruit, what comfort can I
expect from you? Alas, all that you could ever gain will leave me then, if it
be not gone before, and I must go a poor, naked, friendless Stranger into the
Eternal World; yea, for your sakes I must, if I do not cast you off, appear a
hated guilty Rebel before my Lord and Judge, and be exposed to all the Terrors
of Divine Wrath. But the Love of Jesus will not then forsake me: Neither
Tribulation, Distress, Persecution, nor Death it self shall ever separate me
from the Love of Jesus if I will but be divorced from you. And Jesus is King of
the other World, and will send his kind Angels to receive my departing Soul,
out of the mean Tabernacle of my Body, and to conduct it to a glorious Mansion:
To welcome it from the Miseries of this sinful World, to congratulate my happy
Victory over you my Enemies, and carry me in Triumph to a Place of Bliss, and
to be with Christ. Can I then so much abandon my Reason, so much mistake my
Interest, as to have any more to do with you.

Oh Lord, the great Redeemer have Mercy upon me, and deliver me from these
tyrannous Masters. Thy Service is perfect freedom; in keeping thy Commands
there is greater Reward. Set my Soul, I pray, at liberty to run the ways of thy
Commandments. As for these thine Enemies and mine, bring them forth and let
them be slain before thee: Root them perfectly out of my Heart. Let them from
henceforth be in a decaying languishing Condition, never thrive more, and
quickly die. I will never be satisfied till I see them utterly deprived of all
Motion, Sense and Life. Oh Jesu, thy Cross, thy Nails. thy Spear are due to
these: Let them from thence receive many mortal Wounds, that thou may never
be displeased, nor I troubled or disparaged with them any more.

O crucified Love, thou have prevented me by thy Love, and infinitely exceeded
all that I can return: But I will learn of thee to love, and follow thee as
well as I can. Thou have given thy self for me on the Cross, and give thy
self to me in this Sacrament: Behold, O Lord I offer my self to thee, my whole
self, I offer and bring thee all the Faculties of my Soul, all the Members of
my Body^ I offer my Senses and my Passions: I offer all my Thoughts, my Words,
and my Actions,: I offer all my Designs and Endeavors: All the Labors of my
worldly Calling: all the Adorations of my Worship and Devotions. I offer thee
all my Possessions in the World; all the Persons that I can command and
influence to worship, honor and serve thee. I offer thee all the Days of my
Life; I offer thee my Death when thou will please to require it; and both
living and dying I desire to be thine. I desire to be entirely thine. Oh how
dearly have thou bought this poor Gift! Never was so great a Price, beside
this, paid for any Creature. I will live to my Love that dyed for me. I will
henceforth look upon my self as a devoted consecrated thing, and will ever
endeavor to remain so, and to carry my self as such. I will never be willingly
employed but as thou command and as thou allowest. Lord, for thy sake I will
love thy Law, and it shall be my meditation all the day. I will love thy
Commandments above Gold, and all false ways I will utterly abhor. Dearer shall
thy Commandments be to me than thousands of Gold and Silver, and sweeter than
Honey from the Comb. I will love nothing but what Thou love, and will hate
whatever is displeasing to thee.

I am heartily grieved, O Lord, that I have ever loved any thing but thee,
while I neglected to love thee. I am heartily ashamed to think that I should
place no Affection, where all I could offer is but due, and bestow all where
little or none is due. Especially does it vex and grieve me that I should be so
monstrously ungrateful and mistaken, as to love any thing more than the loving
Jesus. Hereafter dearest Lord, I purpose to love nothing but far below thee,
and for thy sake whatever I do love: And what is most like thee, or most
serviceable to thy Honor and Glory, shall have the most of my Love.

Henceforth it shall be my honor that I am a Servant of Jesus; it shall be my
delight and pleasure to be a Lover of Jesus; it shall be my most valued Wealth
that he is mine, and I am his. Whom have I in heaven but thee, O Lord, and
there is none in Earth that I can desire in comparison to thee. And therefore
nothing can be so sweet to me; nothing can afford me so much satisfaction and
joy, as to be able to say of thee, My beloved is mine and I am his. For me to
be thine, O Jesu, is my Honor, my Security, my Peace and Happiness
everlasting. For thee to be mine is health to my Soul, strength to do thy
Commandments; it is Joy unspeakable and full of Glory; it is Heaven on earth,
and the Heaven of Heaven; It is Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption to me, O rich and bouuteous Love. I am thine, O Lord, with all my
Soul, that thou may be mine. Oh how much shall I gain by giving my self to
thee; I shall gain myself, and be saved from everlasting Perdition, and I shall
gain everlasting happiness in the enjoyment of thee.

I am thine, O Jesu; save me, I have sought thy Precepts, Lord, sanctify me
wholly, that in Body, Soul and Spirit, I may be thine: Take a full possession
of me for the future; and let not any other Lord have dominion over me. O Lord,
I have sworn and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments. I
purpose to be steadfast unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, as
knowing that my labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. I am thine, dispose of
me as thou please: I will bear thy Yoke, I will not decline thy Cross, I will
not despise thy shame: The reproach of Christ shall be to me greater riches
than the prosperity of this World. Let but thy Grace be sufficient for me, and
then call me to what thou ple^est: I can do all things through Christ's
strengthening of me. Lord, I shall not, I hope, fear or decline to suffer for
thy sake: No: though I should die for thee, I purpose not to deny thee. But,
alas, it troubles me to think how weak and vain all my resolutions are, and how
soon they will come to nothing without thy continual support and assistance.
This troubles me; but it is my comfort, that thy Grace is easily obtained; it
may be now had for asking of it: O shield me with thy Grace against all
temptations: Hold up my goings in thy word, that my footsteps slip not: Guide
thou me by thy counsel, till thou have brought me to thy glory.

SECT. XVI. An Exercise of FAITH.
I Believe there is only one true and living God; who is the Father, the Son,
and Holy Ghost; an infinite, eternal, perfect being; the Maker and Preserver,
Owner and Governor of all things. Who has right to the Homage, Worship and
Obedience of Mankind: Who has laid upon us his Laws, and takes notice of our
Behavior; that his eyes behold all the Dwellers upon Earth, and try the
children of men; That he is always nigh to every one of us, for it is in him
that we live, move, and have our being. I believe, O Lord, that thou art, and
art a Rewarder of those that diligently seek thee: Thou have appointed a day
wherein thou will judge the World in Righteousness, and render to every man
according to his works: That those who are found wicked in that Day shall go
away into everlasting Punishment, but the righteous into Life Eternal.

But I believe also, that to the Lord our God belong Mercies and forgivenesses,
though we have rebelted against him, if in the way of his appointment we seek
his pardoning Mercy. Thou have, O Lord, blessed be thy Name, proclaimed thy
self a God, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin: And declarest, that thou
desire not the Death of a Sinner, but had rather that he should turn from his
wickedness and live. O wonderful condescension and goodness! O how sweet is thy
mercy! How glorious and great! The exceeding vileness, and the unreasonableness
of our Sins, do magnify thy Mercy beyond all comprehension and praise. Favor
and Forgiveness to a base Sinner, is that the Sinner could not expect till thou
had declared it should be obtained, and did graciously offer it.

When we here sunk into the most abject misery by a most vile rebellion against
thee; had rendered our selves obnoxious to thy Eternal Hatred and Wrath, and
deserved to follow the Apostate Angels in their Fate and Damnation, as we had
followed them in rebellion* Then did thy infinite Wisdom contrive how to show
us favor in a way consistent with thine own honor: Thou did find out a way
to spare us, and to punish our Sins; to glorify thy Justice in taking vengeance
on our inventions, and thy Mercy in saving the wretched Sinners: And God so
loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in
him, shall not perish but have everlasting Life. Thou gave, O Father, thine
only begotten Son to the condescension and meanness of taking our Nature upon
him; and to die a Sacrifice for our Sins; and on him thy well beloved Son,
did thou lay the iniquities of us all. And in his death thou have received a
full, perfect and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction for the Sins
of the whole world. Thou have laid our help on one that is mighty, and able to
save to the utmost all that come unto God by him. We adore thy incomprehensible
Goodness and Compassion to Sinners! Thou art abundant, O God, in Goodness and
Truth!

Thy Mercy is over all thy works: In Mercy thou have great delight: We remember
the glorious Exercises of it: We know, O Lord thou can pardon the greatest
Offenses; for thou have pardoned very great Sinners: David was forgiven his
base Murder and Adultery; Manasseh his horrid Idolatry, and filling Jerusalem
with innocent Blood; The vile Adulteress Mary Magdalen; The Apostle Peter, who
denied and disowned thee with an Oath; the furious Saul, who blasphemed thee
himself, and being exceedingly mad against thee, compelled others to blaspheme:
All these are Monuments of thy glorious forgiving Mercy. O what comfortable,
what joyful hopes have we in such Goodness!

We know, that having given us thy Son, thou will not deny us any thing that is
necessary to our Salvation: But if we ask, we shall receive; if we seek, we
shall find; if we knock it shall be opened to us. On that ransom which my
Savior has paid for me, and on all thy gracious promises which for his sake
thou have made, I do wholly and firmly rely. With an humble confidence, O Lord,
that we may find favor with thee, we remember before thee in this Sacrament
the bleeding Wounds of thy dear Son and his precious Death, our rich Sacrifice
for Sin. We remember before thee, and present unto thee, him whom thou have set
forth to be a propitiation through Faith in his Blood. And in his Name, relying
upon the value and acceptance of his Sacrifice. I, thy poor unworthy Servant,
humbly present my self before the Throne of thy Grace to seek thy favor,
begging leave that I may claim thy gracious promises, which in him are Yea, and
in him Amen: And that I may now entertain and delight my self with the glorious
Hopes which they afford. I desire, I hope that thou will fully forgive my
manifold and great Transgressions. I desire, I hope that thou will give me thy
holy Spirit, which thou have promised to give to them that ask thee. O grant me
that Spirit to cleanse me from all unrighteousness, to purify my polluted
Soul; to take away all the filthy stains of my Sins; to strengthen my weakness
in Temptations; to be my support and comforter under Discouragements and
Afflictions; to assist me in all my Duties; to guide my way and secure my
perseverance to the end. Thou, O Lord, who searchest the hearts, and tryest the
reins of Men, well know, wherein my greatest weakness lies; Lord strengthen
me in particular, I beseech thee, against mine own Iniquity. I desire, I hope
thou will graciously keep me unspotted from the world: Keep me from following
any of the Errors and Vices that shall ever be in Vogue with the giddy and
wicked Multitude. I desire, I hope, that thou will mercifully defend me against
the Wiles and Devices of my Soul's great Adversary the Devil. I humbly commit
my self to thy gracious keeping, Oh faithful Creator.

I desire, I hope, O Lord, that thou will bless me with health, and with a
competent provision of what is needful for me of the good things of this World;
and defend me, if it please thee, from poverty, dependence and contempt. Give
me neither poverty nor riches, but feed me with food convenient for me. I know,
O Lord, Man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upwards; that Sin entering
into this World, has brought misery and affliction with it; and that our folly
and perverseness commonly needs such discipline to make us wise and good. I
desire to submit to whatever it shall please thee to order for me; to say
always after the example of my Savior, Lord, not my Will, but thine be done. I
hope thou will deal with me according to thy Mercy, and lay upon me no more
than thou will enable me to bear. I believe thou may do me great good by my
afflictions; I pray thee sanctify them all to the promoting my Soul's health,
and my everlasting happiness: And give me, I pray thee, an humble resignation,
and an invincible patience, that I may neither despise the chastning of the
Lord, nor faint when I am rebuked of him: Let me always encourage my self with
this assurance, that these light afflictions, which are but for a moment, if
they be patiently born, shall work for me a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory. I desire, I hope thou will direct and enable me so to pass
through things Temporal, as that I may not finally lose the things Eternal. That
by thy conduct and guidance I may at last arrive safely to that happy World
where the weary are at rest ^here the wicked cease from troubling, where sorrow
and sighing, and pain and vexation, and fear and care shall all be banished;
all tears shall be forever wiped from our eyes, and we shall enjoy thee, and
all that we can desire in perfect Bliss, and eternal Safety and Quiet.

This is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be received, that Jesus Christ
came into the world to save Sinners. Lord, I receive it; Lord, I believe, help
thou my unbelief, I believe O Jesu, thou art Christ the Son of the living God,
that should come into the World. O tender and condescending Love, how dear is
that blessed Name to me! Jesus my Savior; O how full of sweetness is it, as a
rich perfume! Thy Name is as ointment poured forth! O be thou ever Jesus to me.
To thee, O Lord, I fly as a refuge from the just wrath of God I have deserved;
as able to conquer all my spiritual Enemies; as willing to receive into thy
protection all that come unto thee. Oh Lamb of God that take away the sins of
the world, have mercy upon my poor Soul; grant me thy peace. Thou invitest
those that are weary and heavy laden to come unto thee: Behold, Lord, I come,
let me find rest to my Soul.

I come to partake of the happiness of being united to thee in this Sacrament.
I believe, O Lord, the Truth of all thy promises, and the virtue and power of
all thine Ordinances: And that the Bread we break, and the Cup we drink in this
Sacrament, are not bear Signs, but real Instruments of conveyance, and the
communications of thy Body and Blood; I come then, that I may receive thy Body
and Blood; may be interested in the Merits of thy passion; that I may partake
of thy Spirit, and be entitled to the Heavenly Inheritance, which thou have
purchased for poor lost Sinners. I come to make a thankful remembrance of thy
Death, which thou did kindly submit to for the advantage of Mankind: And by
thy Death I hope to have Life everlasting.

I gladly embrace, O Lord, the offers of thy Gospel. I desire thee to subdue in
me all my rebellious Lusts and vile Affections, and as a King to rule over me,
I will account it my honor to be thy meanest subject. I desire thee to afford
me thy heavenly Instructions; teach me as a Prophet, and make me wise to
Salvation through Faith that is in thee. I desire thee to interceed for me as a
Priest in the virtue of thy most valuable Sacrifice; and to bestow upon me the
large Blessings which thou have purchased for sinners. I believe, O Lord, thou
have died for our sins and art risen again for our Justification, I desire thy
death may utterly crucify and kill all my sins; and that thy Resurrection may
revive my hopes. By thy Resurrection I desire, I hope for mine: By thy
Ascension into Heaven, I desire thee to draw my heart and affections from this
vain empty World, to the hearty love and earnest desire of heavenly things: And
I hope thou will raise me up at the last day, and bring me to be where thou
art, and give me an everlasting Life. I take this Sacrament as a pledge of thy
everlasting Love; as the evidence of Love already shown me, and the earnest and
assurance of yet greater communications to come.

My Soul thirsts for God, even for the living God: Oh when shall I come and
appear before God! When shall I see thy Face, O dear Jesus, without a veil; be
kissed with the Kisses of thy Mouth, enjoy thy self immediately? When shall
these short and faint glimpses of thy Glory be exchanged for a full abiding
sight of ^hee? When shall I leave not only to visit, ^ut to dwell with thee,
and to receive, not ^ansient tastes, but drink large draughts of ^elight and joy
from an infinite fountain of liss and joy: For in thy presence is fullness of
^oy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for ever^ore. Oh, how I long that this
my weary ^ilgrimage were done: That I were absent from the Body, that I might
be present with the Lord* That I might have no necessary diversion, dearest
Jesu, from perpetual contemplating, praising, loving and enjoying thee. For
this, however, I do wait; This I do through thy merits, and from thy infinite
love expect; and that expectation shall encourage me to labor in thy Service,
to bear thy Cross, and to follow thee whithersoever thou shall call me.

SECT. XVII. An Exercise of CHARITY.
O Jesu, thou art infinite Love! I cannot but with great delight and wonder
contemplate thee; and when I do so, I feel a pleasing constraint upon me to
love. I must account this a most excellent and divine Qualification, which is
so eminent in thee: I must reckon it my greatest honor to be conformed to the
Son of God; and therefore I must utterly dislike and hate my self for any
defect of Love I find in my self. Besides, when I think how much I am loved;
how much the (...) and bounteous Love has given, and h^ (...) it has forgiven
to me, I am forced to account my self base and extremely unworthy of this, if I
do not love much.

I will put on, then, the most extensive Charity that I can: I will wish well,
and do good to all men as far as I have power, and as often as I have opportunity
to do it: I will love my Neighbor as my self; and account him my Neighbor who
has any need of my kindness, and to whom I have it in my power to do any office
of kindness, whosoever he be. Thou, O blessed Jesu, have loved the most
unworthy Wretches! I then, will account none unworthy of my love and good will.
Thou have loved those that were infinitely below thee, and have mightily
condescended to do them kindness. I will never account it below me therefore to
do an Office of kindness to my meanest Neighbor; but rather the greater the
condescension is in the doing it, the more I will value the opportunity of
showing therein the greater likeness and gratitude to thee. Thou, Lord, have
loved those that are altogether unprofitable to thee; and from whom thou can
never receive a parallel return of Love: I will be ashamed, then, as I most
justly may, to bestow no Benefits but where I have received, or expect to
receive some.

Thou, O Jesu, have loved even thine Enemies, and prayed for those that
despitefully used and persecuted thee: And this is a glorious pattern which I
intend by the assistance of thy Grace, to imitate. As for all that have injured
me by word or deed, O Lord, I forgive them, and I pray thee to forgive them. I
am more sorry for their Error and Sin, than I am at any loss or damage, which
is come, or may come to me by their injury: Lord have mercy upon their Souls;
forgive my enemies, persecutors and slanderers, and turn their hearts. I desire
no harm to any that are my enemies, if any be so: Nor will I rejoice over them
when they fall, but rather grieve to see it; much less will I ever seek their
harm or mischief. And I purpose on the contrary, notwithstanding all their
unkindness, to do them all the good Offices which I can; consistently with a
due care of my own safety, and with other obligations and duties to thee, or to
others of my Neighbors. I purpose to study, and seek to do them good: To
return blessing for cursing, respect for contempt, and good for evil: That I
may, if it be possible, overcome evil with good.

As it is the character of Charity, not to be forward to think evil, I will
take care that no uncharitable Jealousies or Suspicions of my Neighbor may
represent him my enemy who is not so: I will take care not to interpret a
mistake into a malicious design; or that which is intended as a kindness into
an injury: But will always endeavor to take all his words and actions in the
best sense, and put the best interpretation upon them all that I can:
Especially will I do thus by the Magistrate, as being bound to it by the
obligation to reverence and honor him, as well as by the Laws of Charity; and
because it is necessary and useful to the public peace and welfare, and so is
in its effects a Charity to others of my Neighbors too.

I thank thee, O Lord, for all the kindness of my friends, and for those that
have done me any good: I pray thee, O bounteous Love, abundantly to requite
them in this world and the next; in temporal and eternal Blessings continue or
increase their store and worldly prosperity, if it may be good for them; and
especially bless them with Spiritual Blessings in heavenly things. I will
endeavor as far as lies in my power, in what I can do for their outward
estate, or for their Souls, always to express a most grateful sense of their
kindness. I will not despise the love of the meanest person, much rather will I
thakfully resent the condescending favors of those that are above one.

I make my humble supplications to thee now, O Lord, at a good time, for all
Mankind: I recommend to thy infinite Mercy all Jews, Turks and Infidels. Oh let
them that sit in darkness see thy mavelous light, and be turned from the
power of Satan unto God: That the earth might be filled with the knowledge of
the Lord, as waters cover the sea. Let thy Gospel of Holiness, Peace and Love.
O Jesu, ^n and be glorified, from the rising of the Sun unto the going down of
the same.

With great trouble and concern, O Lord, I consider how much of the wretched
world lies in wickedness! O how sad a thought is it, that such a Savior should
be offered to men, and so few receive him! How sad is it to think, that so many
thousands of Souls, for whom Christ died, are likely to go down into the dismal
Caves of Hell! That so many who might be eternally happy, and praise thee for
ever, will destroy and throw themselves into everlasting Misery: Rivers of
Waters run down mine eyes, because men make void thy law: A Law so rich in
Love, and so condescending in Grace. I am troubled, O Lord, because they do not
love thee, and because they will destroy themselves: Because they affront and
rebel against thy most obliging Goodness, and neglect so great Salvation as it
offers them.

O that I could save many precious souls from their destruction; Oh that I
could pluck them as brands out of the burning! As far as I am able, and as
becomes me to do in my place and station, I will endeavor to cure the
epidemical wickedness of the times I live in: I will earnestly endeavor to
keep those that are under my authority and power, and that are of my
neighborhood and acquaintance, and whom I can have any influence over from
going down to everlasting perdition. I will follow all that I may with advice
and counsel; and those that I may not pretend to advise, I will endeavor to
entreat, that they would be saved: And those whom I ought (...) do this to, I
will reprove and correct for any wickedness that I observe in them. I will
propagate, as well as I can, the saving knowledge, and the love of thee among
the ignorant and Careless, and those whom their Poverty hinders from providing
for themselves; by giving among them, according to my Ability, such means of
their Instruction and Reformation as thy Favor has afforded the Public.

I am greatly troubled and concerned at the Miseries and Calamities which I
hear of or see in the World: That thy Creatures whom thou did make, that thou
might love them, and that they might be happy, should pull upon themselves
so much Misery from thy just Wrath, and deserved Vengeance. Oh how sad is it to
think of Thousands of People going down alive into the Pit, swallowed up by
sudden Earthquakes, and in a moment snatched hence into Eternity, without any
time to prepare for their Departure. How it grieves me to think of the sad
Effects of pining Famine in some Places; of infectious and pestilential
Diseases in others. It wounds my Soul to consider the woeful Calamities and
Desolations that attend horrid Wars! Oh how deplorable a thing is it that Men
should seek to spill the Blood of Men, and give the Carcasses of their own Kind
for a Prey to Birds and wild Beasts. Lord, rebuke the proud Disturbers of the
World, abate their Pride, assuage their Malice, and confound their Devices.
Grant that Wars may cease in all Lands, and gentle Love and happy Peace abound!
Prosper, good Lord, those that endeavor for a just and safe Peace, that they
may attain it: and scatter thou the People that delight in War. Oh that thy
Judgments which are abroad in the Earth, might make the Inhabitants of the
World to learn Righteousness, and turn themselves to thee who have smitten
them, that thou may heal them.

As a Member of thy blessed Church I am particularly concerned for the
Tranquillity and peace, and the true Spiritual Glory and prosperity of that. O
Lord, purge out of thy Church whatever does displease thee, and is destructive
to the Souls of men. Purge out of it whatever is an Offense to those without:
Possess all Christians with this, that they are obliged to Endeavor that their
carriage may adorn and recommend their Religion in the sight of the Infidels;
and to take care their Light may so shine before Men, that they seeing their
good works, may Glorify their Father which is in Heaven. Purge thy Church, we
pray thee, from all false Doctrines and Heresies; from profaness and
Persecution; from Superstition and Cruelty; from Envy, Hatred, Malice, and all
uncharitableness. Bring into the way of truth all such as have erred, and are
deceivied: Raise up them that are fallen; confirm, and strengthen those that
stand in Piety and Virtue, and Profession of the Truth, Comfort those Parts of
thy Church that mourn, and are oppressed under a barbarous Persecution: And let
thine own Right Hand, and Holy Arm, in thy due time, give them a mighty
Salvation.

O God of Love, O Prince of Peace, and God of Order, we pray thee, let thy
Gospel promote these good things in thy Church. Grant that there may be no
hurting nor destroying in all thy Holy Mountain: That all the Members of the
Church, as Members of the same Body, and of one another, may have a Cordial
Affection to each other: Carrying themselves with all lowliness and Meekness to
each other; and with long suffering, for bearing one another in Love. Grant
that as there is but one Lord Jesus Christ, whom we all pretend to Love and
Reverence, as there is but one true Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of
us all, so we may all with one Mind and one Mouth glorify thee our God. Grant
that every Member of the Church may so know and keep its proper Place, that
there may be no Shcism in the Body.

O Jesu, King of Love, sill with thy kind and gentle Spirit all Christian
Kings, Princes, and Governors. Let no proud wrath, no malicious Envy, no
greedy Covetousness, no turbulen Ambition reign in any of them: Grant that they
all, knowing whose Ministers they are, may above all things seek thy Honor and
Glory: And that they may study to preserve the People committed to their Care
in Wealth, Peace and Godliness. That they may truly and indifferently
administer Justice to the Punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and and to the
Maintenance of thy true Religion and Virtue.

Especially, O Lord, we entreat thee to regard with peculiar Favor, thy
Servant GEORGE, our most Gracious King. Let thy Wisdom direct him in all his
Administrations; thy Almighty Pov^ promote his good Designs, that under him we
may be Godly and Quietly governed. Let thy bounteous Goodness shower upon him
abundantly all Personal Blessings, for his Body, and for his Soul, to his long
Prosperity in this Life, and his everlasting Happiness in the next. Since by
his Wisdom and Care, by his Love to thee and Goodness to us, with thy Blessing
upon his Endeavors, we enjoy the happy Liberty of thy House, and these thy
blessed Ordinances, to the Joy and Comfort of our Souls, we will never fail to
remember him in all our Prayers and Supplications unto thee.

Pour down an Abundance of thy Spirit, we pray thee, O gracious Jesu, upon all
Bishops and Pastors of thy Church. Replenish them with all right and sound
Knowledge, and a true Understanding of thy Word. Oh let not their Hearts be
governed, or their Actions be guided by the Designs of Covetousness or
Ambition: but do thou possess and rule them by a great Zeal for thy Glory, and
for thy great Design, the Salvation of Souls: Grant that they may by their Holy
Doctrine, and answerable Lives, be mightily successful in turning many to
Righteousness; and that they may save themselves, and many of those that are
committed to their Charge.

Since my Goodness, O Lord, extends not to thee; and thou art above the
receiving of any Advantage by the best returns that I can make for all thy
Bounty to me: It shall be my Charge and Care to requite thy Kindness upon thy
Servants to whom I may be profitable. I will love them, O Lord, that love thee,
and do all the Good I can, to those especially that are of the Household of
Faith: I will gladly relieve the Necessities of thy Servants which are made
known to me; will feed the Hungry, cloth the Naked, instruct the Ignorant,
reduce the Wandering, visit the sick and Imprisoned, comfort and help the
Weak-hearted, and vindicate and assist, the Fatherless and Widows in their
Distress, according as I have Opportunity and Power to do so. And give me, I
beseech thee, O loving Jesu, a just and large Notion of the Household of Faith,
that I may not confine this my Charity within too narrow bounds. Let me always
be afraid of restraining it within too narrow Limits, never of extending it too
far among Christians.

I love thee, O Lord Jesus, for making so sweet and pleasant a thing as Charity
my Duty, and do account even this an Instance of thy Charity to me. If there be
any other Exercise of this Divine Virtue, O Lord, which I have not thought of,
I desire thee, the gteat Fountain of Love, to admonish me of it, and always to
dispose me to it. Grant that in the pleasing Exercise of Love I may pass the
Time of my sojourning here in this malicious, miserable World; till I come at
length to that happy One. Where sincere, abundant and unalterable Love, and
Joy, and Glory dwell for ever.

SECT. XVIII. Prayers for Preparation.
I. O God of Love, Father of all Mercies, and Giver of every good an perfect
Gift: It is thy command, and I reckon it a kind and a just One, that I should
celebrate this Sacrament in Remembrance of the Death and Sacrifice of thy dear
Son, our only Savior and Redeemer, the Lord Jesus Christ; to make me thankful
for his Love, and for the Benefits of his Passion and Death, and that I might
be made a partaker of those incomparable Benefits: Thou have commanded me in
this way to renew my Covenant with thee; to declare my self thy Creature and
Servant, and bind my self to continue thy faithful Servant, and to live as
becomes one that had his Being from thee. O Lord, I must acknowledge it is but
too necessary for me to renew the Obligations which I am so apt to transgress.
I am therefore heartily willing: I desire to strengthen the Bands of Love, that
they may hold me the faster to my Duty. I would never be exempted from the Yoke
of thy Service! Oh do not thou cast me out of it for the sake of Jesus Christ.
And I am willing to remember my dear Savior's dying Love, to be deeply
affected with it, and therefore to use so lively a Representation of his Death,
as he has provided in this Sacrament. I must indeed own my self infinitely
unworthy of so great a good, but yet cannot choose but be earnestly desirous, O
Lord, to partake abundantly in the Merits and Benefits of my Savior's Death:
There is nothing so dear to me as to have all mine Iniquities pardoned; and to
recover thy Favor. To enjoy the excellent Graces of thy Holy Spirit, and be
consecrated for a Sacred Temple to him: To receive Earnests and Pledges, yea
and Foretasts of my future Joy and Happiness: all which are the matchless
Blessings he has purchased for me, and which thou have directed thy Church to
seek and partake of in and by this Sacrament. All this I humbly seek and crave,
through the Merits of Jesus Christ my Lord, to whom with the Father and the
Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, World without end. Amen.

II. Almighty and most merciful God, I bless thee for this Sacrament, and would
come to it with a hungring and thirsting Soul. But alas, how shall I, a poor
mean Creature, approach thy Majesty! How shall I a guilty polluted Sinner, dare
to approach thy Purity and Holiness! O Lord, I am infinitely unworthy to come
so near thee: Yet it seems, thou do not regard my unworthiness, else thou
would never have invited me. Thou invitest poor sinful Creatures in general
to this Feast; thy Guests can be none but such: if all therefore that are
unworthy to come, should absent themselves, none of us would be there; and thy
vast and kind Preparations would be in vain; I come therefore, most gracious
God, in Obedience to thy Command and Invitations. But I will come with the
lowliest Reverence and Humility; for thou have regard unto the lowly: I will
come as a returning Prodigal, for thou art willing to receive such. I will
come, hoping in thy infinite Mercy; for there is Mercy with thee, through Jesus
Christ. My great Concern, O Lord, is that I may be in some good measure fit to
approach thee, though I can never be worthy; and that I may have and exercise
those Qualifications in my attendance on thee which are suitable to this
Sacrament, and which thou requirest. I have therefore earnestly endeavored to
find those Qualifications in my self: But alas, O Lord, I dare not trust to my
own Examinations or Endeavors. Do thou, O Heart-searching God, examine and try
me: do thou, I pray thee, prepare me. I fly to thy Grace and Blessed Influence;
Lord, give me, I pray, what thou requirest to be in me. It is my great
Encouragement to make this Request, that I know I ask herein what thou art
willing to give. Thou, Lord, art always more ready to hear, than we to pray;
and art wont to give more than either we desire or deserve. Thou know I
cannot have these Qualifications but from thee: Since therefore thou have
commanded me to come possessed with them, I am sure thou art willing to give
them. Thou art desirous we should come prepared, and suitable Guests to this
heavenly Entertainment; art desirous to see thy House filled with such. Fill me
then, good Lord, and many other Souls, with those Graces which it becomes us to
appro^ach thee with, for the sake of Jesus Christ our Mediator and Advocate.
Amen.

III. O Lord of instnite Bounty and Power, I humbly pray thee, give me a
sincere and unfeigned Repentance for all my Sins: Oh let the Remembrance of
them be grievous unto me, the Burden and Influence of their Power intolerable.
Possess me with a hearty shame and Sorrow, for that I have so basely and
unworthily affronted thy infinite Majesty, and put my kind Savior to so much
grief and suffering to save me. Possess me with ^n earnest hatred of what is so
displeasing to thee as my Sins justly are; that I may earnestly and steadily
endeavor to cast them from me. Turn thou my foolish Heart from the Love of all
Sin, to the Love of thee, Do thou, O Lord, who best know all the dark
Corners of my Heart, discover to me every lurking secret Evil, which I have not
been able by my Examination to observe; and let it now be brought forth and
slain before thee.

Increase in me, O good Lord, I humbly pray, a lively Faith in thy Mercy,
through the Merits and Mediation of Jesus Christ. Help me firmly to believe thy
readiness to receive and pardon Sinners that repent and return to thee: To rely
with all Assurance on the Sacrifice and Atonement of thy Son's precious Death:
Raise in me the comfortable Hopes of all Mercy and Favor upon that sure
Foundation; and grant me to rejoice in hopes of seeing thy Glory.

Oh that my Heart may be all on a Flame of Divine Love, even a whole
Burnt-offering, when I remember and consider my Savior's dying Love to
Sinners. Especially when I see him in this Sacrament, as it were evidently set
forth Crucified before me. When I see there his broken Body, and his Blood
poured out; and consider that all this he suffered for me. Oh let such a sight
affect me, as it ought to do, beyond all expressions. Oh let it transform me
into Love. Let it make such strong and lasting impressions upon me, that I may
ever afterward be under the sweet and mighty influences of Love; always be
guided by the Laws, and aiming at the Ends of Love. Let Love and Thankfulness
to him be greatly employing my Soul when I am at this Sacrament, and be from
henceforth the great Concern and Business, the very Form and Character of my
whole Life for ever.

And since my Love cannot redound to his Advantage, make it flow abundantly
upon those that love him. Give me a free Heart and Hand, and Power to do much
good to them. According to my Power I purpose to exercise my Charity toward
them, and toward all Men, in thought, Word, and Deed at this Sacrament, I pray
that the Memorial of my dear Savior's Love, may effectually inspire me to do
so; And I purpose, and desire, and pray, that thou will be pleased to enable me
to abound in Love and good Works toward all men, through the whole Course of
my Life.

Put, I beseech thee, O Lord, my Soul in all respects into such a posture as
becomes the Remembrance of a crucified Savior, that I may be well pleasing and
accepted with thee; that thou may delight over me to do me good; that I may
have Communion with thee to the Joy and comfort of my Soul, to the increase of
Spiritual Strength, to the securing of my Perseverance in Holiness and
Righteousness all my ^ays. All which I humbly ask in the Name of Jesus Christ,
and further ^rave whatever is comprehended in his most absolute Form of Prayer,
saying,

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc. Amen.

SECT. XIX. Directions for a devou^ Behavior at the COMMUNION.
THanks be to God we have so good Provision made by our Church for the
Administration of this blessed Sacrament; that any good Soul may receive it
with great Devotion and Comfort, who will but seriously attend to what is
appointed to be said and done in that Administration; as indeed many such
Souls: accustomed to it, have found by very Comfortable Experience: Upon which
account it were much to be desired, and very advisable that those who are wont
to attend this way but once in a Year, when they enter into an office, would
persuade themseves to come more frequently to it, that they might do so with
the more comfort and advantage to their Souls when that occasion requires them
to do it: For the whole business is so ordered, that it is very apt and fit to
stir up in us the lively and vigorous Exercise of all those Graces which are
required to attend it. So that the best Advice which can be given for our due
and profitable Behavior at the Holy Communion is this: That the Communicant do
very closely attend to what is ordered to be said and done by him that
Ministers, or by the Communicant himself, while they are upon this duty.

But because the Communicants, especially where the Number is great, (as I wish
it were every where) will have some spaces wherein they may employ themselves
in some private Ejaculations and Devotions; I shall not think it contrary to
the proposed Brevity of this Book to afford them some such Devout Prayers and
Ejaculations as they may use; and I shall put them in their proper Places. But
these must be ^monly very short, that they may not be diverted from joining
with the Public Office.

To begin then, where we usually begin this Administration.

When He that Ministers is reading those Sentences of Holy Scripture, which are
designed to Exhort and Encourage the making our Offerings to Almighty God:
While you have your Offering in your hand, or when you have given it, say,

O Lord of Heaven and Earth, Maker and Owner of all Things! All that I hvae and
am is from Thee, and all is Thine. Thou do give, and thou have right to take
and use what thou please of it: I humbly present This according to my
Ability; as an Acknowledgement of thy right in me, and in all that I have; and
of thy Bounty in giving it. I present, and I humbly entreat Thee to accept This
as a token and Pledge of the Dedication of my self, and all that I have, to
serve and honor Thee. Sprinkle me, O Lord Jesus, and this my duty with thy
precious Blood, and obtain for me, by thy Merits, a great Increase of all
Spiritual Gifts and Graces to thy Glory and my Salvation. Amen.

When the Offerings are all received and set upon the Altar: He that Ministers
proceeds to make Intercessions to God for the Whole State of Christ's Church
Militant here on earth: In which it becomes every Devout Soul, as a living
Member of than Church, to join with him with very hearty Affections.

After this He proceeds to the immediate Exhortation, which is designed to
deter all those from drawing near to this Holy Ordinance, who are conscious to
Themselves that they have been negligent to prepare for it; and who live in any
known Sin. And then it goes on to Encourage those Humble Penitents, and
Faithful Souls, who have been careful to prepare Themselves; and to excite in
them those Dispositions with which they ought to come. It will be very proper
for the Communicant, while the Minister is reading this, to join with Him, and
to turn it into a Prayer.

In the next Place you are to join with the Minister with Humility and true
Godly Sorrow in a Confession of Sins, and to receive by Him Gods Absolution.

To the Sentences of Holy Scripture which He next recites to encourage our
Faith and Hope in God, it may be proper to make in your Hearts some such
Answers as these,

To those Words of our Savior, Come unto ^e, etc.

Answer. Behold, O Lord, I come: Jesus thou Son of David, have Mercy upon me.

To those Words, God so loved the World, etc.

Answer. O Father of Mercies, have Mercy upon me, and give me that Faith in thy
Son, that I may not Perish, but have Everlasting Life.

To the Words of St. Paul, This is a true Saying, etc,

Answer. Lord, I believe the truth of this, and thankfully embrace so Important
a Truth: O Christ, save me, one of the Chiefest of Sinners.

To the words of St. John, If any Man sin, etc.

Answer. Be thou, O Jesus the Righteous, my Powerful Advocate with the Father:
O Father, accept of his Death as a Propitiation for my Sins.

To what the Minister says next, you are to make the Answers directed, and to
join with Him in the Praises and Prayers following

After the Bread and Wine is by Prayer of Consecration set apart to represent
the Body and Blood of Christ; and the Ministers are receiving, you must look
upon the Elements with an Holy, Awful Reverence, and sadly call to mind the
Scourging, the Buffetings, the Crown of Thorns, the cruel Nails and spear which
wounded and bruised, which tore and killed the Loving Jesus: You may remember
the more terrible Sufferings and sharp Agonies of his Soul; which he endured
especially when He made his Life an Offering for Sin. And you should call to
mind it was for your Sins that gave Him all these Sufferings and Griefs; that
yet He endured them for your Advantage And he was Scourged, that by His stripes
you might be healed; He shed His Blood to ransom you from Hell and Misery; and
died, that He might obtain for you Everlasting Life and Happiness. And while
the rest of the Company are receiving, if they are a good Number, you will have
leisure, and may very profitably entertain yourself with reading over the
foregoing Exercises of thankful Remembrance, Faith, etc. And in reading them,
you may Exercise those Graces as you ought to do. If there will not be time to
repeat them all, you may do well to choose some such a one or more of them as is
most suitable to the present state, and disposition of your mind. For the
Devout Soul may be at one time more taken up in Admiration and praise of the
dying Love of Jesus Christ: At another time it may be especially possessed with a
deep Humiliation and Repentance; at another time it may be elevated with the
Hopes and Joys of believing; Or engaged in making Earnest Resolutions of Love,
Obedience, and Gratitude to the Great Redeemer: Or in Exercises of Charity to
the Miserable World; And your Entertainment at this spare time may be chosen
accordingly. Only this must be advised, in relation to this matter, That you
should make Observation of you^ self, whether you do not too commonly fix your
Meditations upon one and the same of these Exercises, and so neglect the rest:
For this must no^ be allowed; But you must constrain your ^^lf, if need be, to
use sometimes one, and sometimes another of these, that so you may at times
Exercise every Grace, and by the Exercise increase in all.

When you go to Receive, and see the Minister approaching with the Sacred
Bread, which represents the broken body of our Lord, look on it, and say:

Behold, my Soul, the Lamb of God, which takes away the Sins of the World.
Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and
Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing. Oh come Lord ^s, take possession
of my Soul, and dwell Thou for ever with me; that I may be the more fit for
such a Happiness, transform me into thy Likeness, by the renewing of my Mind.
Open ye everlasting Doors of my Heart, that the King of Glory may come in.

When He delivers it to you, join with Him, and say:

The Body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for me, preserve my Body
and Soul unto Everlasting Life.

And as you are eating it, say within yourself:

O Jesu, Thou art the Living, and Life-giving Bread, which comes down from
Heaven; which, whosoever eats, he shall live for ever. Thy Flesh is Meat
indeed, and thy Blood is Drink indeed: On Thee my hungry Soul shall feed, by my
Faith, with hearty Thankfulness. Let me taste and find, that thou, Lord, art
Gracious; Thou that fillest the Hungry with good things, replenish me
abundantly with thy Grace. Oh let this Divine and Spiritual Food afford me much
Spiritual Strength and Refreshment.

When he delivers the Cup, Join with Him, and say:

The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was shed for me, preserve my Body
and Soul unto Everlasting Life.

And when you have drank it, say:

Thy Love, O King of Saints, is better than Wine. As the Apple Tree among the
Trees of the Wood* so is my Beloved among the Sons: We will remember thy Love
more than Wine: The remembrance of thy wondrous ^ve shall be the frequent and
the most pleasant Entertainment of my Life: Thy Love, O Jesu, shall comfort me
in my Sorrows; shall strengthen me in my weakness; shall quicken and cure my
Sloth: and Backwardness to my Duty: Oh let thy Love even transform me into
Love. Amen.

O Father of Mercies, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom thou have set forth to
be a propitiation through Faith in his Blood, behold, I beseeth thee, this
precious Sacrifice of thy Son! Behold it, I pray thee, and turn away from me,
thy poor feeble Creature, all the wrath and Vengeance which my Sins have
deserved. This is that on which I firmly and solely rely to find favor with
thee; and this is that in which I know thou art well pleased: O Father of
Mercies, have Mercy upon me. Deal always with thy servant according to thy
Mercy; and teach me thy Statutes, that I may hereafter serve and please thee in
Newness of Life: And I humbly hope and desire to be accepted with thee, through
the merits and mediation of thy beloved Son, who died for our Sins, and rose
again for our Justification; is now set down at thy right hand, and ever lives
to make Intercession for us. Amen.

Taking notice of the Sacrament delivered to others you may thus improve it.

Jesus, the rich and bounteous Lover, has good things in store for as many as
come unto them: Jesus is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God
by him. Of his fullness do we all receive, and Grace for Grace. See, my Soul!
see here thy Master's Bounty and Love! See Him here giving even Himself to His
Friends.

My Soul, if Jesus so loved us all, we ought also to love one another. This
Commandment has He left us, that He, who loves God, should love his Brother
also. Study, then, what Offices of Love and Kindness it may lie in thy Power to
do to any of these thy fellow Communicants, and resolve upon it, for the kind
Jesus will take it as even done to him. If thou love him truly, thou must needs
love those whom he loves: Thou must pity them in all their Distresses,
Spiritual and Temporal, whom he has pitied in their misery at so costly (...)
^ate: Thou must learn to forgive those whom he forgives: Thou must be liberal
according to thy power, and their necessities, to those whom thou see the
objects of his bounteous Love. And especially thou must charge thy self not to
hate, not to do any despite or injury to any of these; for even that too would
he take as done to himself: Thou must not despise any of these for their mean
Condition in this world: He may have made the poor of this world rich in Faith:
Thou must not envy nor grudge at any of them whom the providence of God has
favored more than he has done thee in the blessings of this world. Thou must
take heed always that thy carriage be not a scandal and occasion of Sin to any
of these; that thou destroy not him whom Christ died for. And blessed be thy
name, O Lord, for these sweet and pleasant Laws. I willingly bind my self, O
Jesu, to observe these thy Laws of Love. Oh thou great pattern of Love, learn
me to love.

O kindest Jesu, thy Body was broken, and is divided amongst us to unite us to
thee, and to one another. Let it be among us a common incentive of mutual
Charity: Let it be in its effects, unity of spirit among us, a bond of peace,
and all righteousness of life in our carriage one toward another. O thou the
great fountain of Love, pour it abundantly into my heart, and into the hearts
of all thy faithful people; that we may abound in love one toward another; and
by thus bearing thy glorious Character and Likeness, in Love, may show to all
men that we are indeed thy Disciples. Amen.

When all have communicated, and the Minister begins the Prayers that remain,
you are to leave off all private Devotions, and to join with him and the
Congregation to the end.

After he has pronounced the blessing, you may privately say:

To him that loved us, and washed us from our Sins in his own Blood, and has
made us King's and Priests unto God and his Father: To him with the Father and
the Holy Ghost, be Glory and Dominion for ever, and ever. Amen.

Then rising from your knees, kindly and courteously salute your
fellow-communicants, at the parting of the Congregation.

Private Devotions after the Communion.

SECT. XX. A Meditation on the COMMUNION, to be used at Church or at Home.
OH my Soul, seriously consider how thou have been honored, how thou have been
entertained in the house of God this day? Thou have been a guest to the King of
Saints, the Lord of Life and Glory: Divine Love has been thy heavenly
entertainment, and Man did eat Angels food. Thy Savior, thy Friend has brought
thee into his banqueting house, his banner over thee was Love. Thou can not
surely very soon forget the pleasures of this Feast: Has it not left behind it
a very pleasing relish? Has it not put thy mouth quite out of taste toward the
things of this world? It is very fit that it should be so: It would become thee
for some time after this, to account this world's delights sour and insipid;
and certainly if thou meditate upon the good entertainment thou have had, it
will be so.

Jesus, the glorious Son of God, was Master of the Feast thou have been at so
lately, and he was himself the Feast, Jesus prepared it out of love to thee.
And because his great love could not (as we may easily imagine) provide any
thing better, he provided Himself to be thy rich and costly entertainment. He
has feasted thee with his Body and Blood. He has, in giving thee that Bread and
Wine, which was by the Minister according to his appointment, consecrated and
set apart to represent his broken Body, and his Blood shed for mankind, made
the partaker of the Spiritual Blessings and Benefits of his Death and Passion.
O how great things has he then bestowed on thee! Where can thou find again
such entertainment? What enjoyments of this poor world could afford it? And if
he has given thee never so much of this poor world, he has he^ in gi^ thee that
which is of infinitely great^ (...) And if he has given thee but little of the
world, thou have no reason to complain of him who has been so free, so
bounteous to thee ^o much better things. Say then to him, Oh, how plenteous,
how rich is thy goodness, Lord, which thou have in reserve for those that fear
thee, and that hope in thy mercy!

He has treated thee with the pardon of all thy Sins, however numerous, however
heinous ^d guilty. Can thou forbear to admire and (...) so great a Favor? Is
it not wondrous that (...) vast a debt should be so freely forgiven (...) Does
not this forgiveness restore thee (...) the almighty favor and love of God?
And (...) thee le^ to ^k, and ground to expect ^o^ (...) heaven, all that is
good for (...) and (...) to thy Salvation? Oh say (...), Bless the Lord, On my
Soul: All that (...) praise his holy Name; who has (...) my life ^m
destruction, who forgi^ (...) ^y S^s: Who crowns me with loving ^ness and
tender mercies: O blessed (...) the man whose transgression is forgiven, whose
sin is cove^'d: Blessed, O Lord Jesus, (...) the man that put^ ^n his trail in
thee.

He has b^stow'd on thee, my soul, his Ho^ Spirit to dwell with, and to
sanctify thee, to (...) thee with all Gra^es: ^o heal all the distemp^s of thy
Soul, thy ^sy, shameful distemp^ to make the tolerable and pleasant (...) thy
self, and ^iable and well pleasing to him. O happy Souls, that are the Temples
of this Holy Spirit! Where he dwells all things shall be in a beautiful Order;
all things composed and calm, and peaceful; all full of joy: There is a peace
which the world cannot give, and a joy unspeakable and full of glory. In them
heaven dwells already; they shall be acquainted with its incomparable
felicities here on earth; and are sealed hereby to the day of Redemption.

Thy Loving Lord, then, has given thee at this Feast, too, the Pledges and
Earnests of fu^ure Glory and Blessedness. He has even united thee to himself
after a wonderful manner; he looks on thee as a Member of his own Body; has
made thee Partaker in his Death, and intends thee to partake in his
Resurrection. He will not leave thy Soul in Hell, nor suffer thy dead Body to
lie always under Dissolution. He will show thee the Path of Life, and thou
shall dwell at his right Hand, where are Pleasures for evermore. Thou shall
dwell in his Presence, where is fullness of Joy.

Oh how like a God has thy Glorious and kind Savior entertained thee! None
could ever bestow such things on thee but he. Thou have been treated as a
Favorite of Heaven, who can not choose but acknowledge thy self a poor, vile
and contemptible Sinner. All these blessings and favors he has conferred upon
thee, and given thee in this Sacrament sensible pledges and tokens of them;
though thou art unworthy of the very meanest and commonest of his gifts to
mankind. Assure thy self, it was not for any merit or worthiness in thee, that
he has been so bountiful, but of his own free motion: There is nothing of debt
in his love, but thou must look upon it as altogether obligation.

And now, my Soul, thou must consider too the mighty obligation he has laid
upon thee. Thou art able to promise, to do nothing in return for his love, but
what he has infinitely obliged thee to. Should such a love as this ever be
forgotten; or rather should thou not resolve that thou will always retain a
grateful sense of it? And that such a love should be the greatest joy and the
sweetest delight of thy life: That such a love should make an entire conquest
of thee; and make thee subject to the pleasant laws of it, through the whole
course of thy Life. Thou can not sure, for shame, think of a less return,
than to give up thy self to him; to live to him that died for thee; to study
and love what will please him, and do it in all things. No; thou can not
think of any thing less than of being his servant, who has bought thee with so
great a price: Who has ransomed thee from hell and everlasting misery, and that
by his own cruel sufferings and accursed death.

And will it ever become thee, think thou, after thou have considered the
cruellest sufferings of Jesus for thy sake, to shrink or murmur at sufferings,
or guiltily decline them? Will thou pretend to be a follower, a disciple of
Jesus, and yet not be able to endure any thing grievous or inconvenient* Has he
suffered very grievous things for thee, worse by far than thou art able, or
will ever be called to suffer for his sake? And will thou suffer nothing for
him? Was his way to heaven encumbered with sharp thorns, and will it become thee
to murmur if thine be not strow'd with roses? Was the great and glorious Jesus
despised in the world, and must thou be mightily respected and honourd'd? Was
Jesus, the Son of David, (a rich and mighty King) mean and poor, and will
nothing serve thee but to be vastly and superfluously rich? For shame, my Soul!
These desires cannot become thee. It is enough for the disciple to be as his
master; and surely it is an honor that the servant be as his Lord, If thou will
be a follower of Jesus, thou must expect, as the world hated him, saw no form
or comeliness in him; so it will hate, and it will scorn thee: It will not see
any thing to admire in thee. Consider the sufferings of Jesus and harden thy
self; learn from him to despise the inconveniences of this life; learn to
despise its allurements. From his indifferency toward it, it is thy duty and
honor to be very indifferent too. And ^his, as all thy duty, thou will find
pleasant upon the trial of it, and a reward to thy self. This will give thee an
invincible composure and peace of mind, a happy command and enjoyment of thy
self, under all the vicissitudes and changes of this mutable, uncertain World.

Consider further, my Soul; has he blessed thee with the pardon of all thy Sins?
and does not this oblige thee to take the utmost care that thou sin no more?
Know, he that had much forgiven him, should love much; and love will not let
thee do any thing willingly, that is so displeasing and hateful to the kind and
holy Jesus, as the least Sin would be. Consider, thy sins were pardoned to
oblige thee to forsake them for ever; and this does greatly oblige thee to it:
It were horrid and monstrous ingratitude then, if the pardon of what is past
should encourage thee to begin a new score. O abhor the thoughts of this, and
reckon thou art obliged to live with great care of thy self, to take great heed
to thy ways, to shun even the appearances of evil, to abhor and avoid all
temptations to wickedness.

Consider, my Soul, the Holy Spirit is come to dwell with thee; to consecrate
thee to be a sacred Temple to himself! O divine guest! O how great is thy
honor and thy happiness! Will thou not let him know, that thou do account it
both? Will thou not study to be easy to such a guest? To show him the greatest
respects? Know then, that he must rule in thy heart; he must be, not in
compliment only, but in reality master of the house. He is honorable enough,
surely, to have such respect done him: And it will be thy advantage to give it
him. And thou must take care, that thou never admit thy lusts and vile
affections again: He will not dwell with such vile company; if thou would
retain the happiness of his presence, they must be for ever banished from thy
Soul: And sure it would be very easy for thee to see, it is not fit that they
should be allowed so much as a competition with him.

Consider too, how it becomes a Soul to live that is designed an Inhabitant of
Heaven; that is already made free of the New Jerusalem, which is above. Should
you not now conform your manners to that bright company? Should you not
consider what a kind of life they lived when they were here on earth; and set
your self to follow them, as they were followers of Jesus? The virtues which
were so eminent in their lives, must also shine in yours. They were not many of
them Emperors, and Kings, and Queens on earth, because that Fortune, shall I
say, or rather that Burden, falls to the shares of but few among mankind:
Neither were they, it may be, many of them vastly rich, and more than they
needed to be: But, which is better, and of more advantage to themselves than
either of these, they were poor in spirit; they were humble and meek; they were
temperate and sober; they were very good and merciful; all their zeal and
concern was to advance the glory of God. These are the steps thou must tread
in; this the way thou must follow, to follow them to bliss; thou can not come
to their end in any contrary way: Thou must not be conformed to this World, but
be transformed by the renewing of thy mind.

Thou must not eagerly hunt after the pleasures, the wealth, and the
preferments of this world. It would become thee to be ever very indifferent
toward them, as having already tasted and enjoyed far better things than they:
What is capable to afford thee incomparably more pleasure and satisfaction: And
especially would this become thee, as being entitled to far better things: To
more durable and useful riches, more solid and lasting pleasures, and to far
higher dignities and preferments. These the Savior and Friend has given thee
pledges and assurances of at this Sacrament; and these he will bestow at the
last day to those that love and fear him.

For thou may expect that this Jesus, whose humble sufferings and death thou
have now commemorated, will come again in Glory, with the Host of glorious
Angels attending them, to judge both the Quick and the Dead. He will come to
take vengeance in flames of fire, on them that obey not his Gospel. And will
come to reward all his faithful Servants, to be glorified and admired for his
bounty and rewards to all them that believe. Oh consider well, my Soul, that
awful, certain Day! and such as thou would then be found, endeavor now to
be; if this life be diligently employed in thy master's work, the performance
of those duties which belong to thy station, and calling, and relations; he
will then say to thee* Well done good and faithful servant, enter thou into thy
master's Joy. It will be more to thy advantage, then, to have denied thy self
now for thy master's honor and service, than to have indulged and pleased thy
self in all things; it will be of greatest advantage to thee, the^ to be found
to have been sober, and temperate, and good, and religious: When all the
honors and all the favor and applause of that Da^ will be given to such; and
no other diffe^ences among men shall be regarded, but their differences in
these things. Be sure, my Soul, ^t will not then repent thee, whatever it does
^ow cost to gain the rewards and honor of that Day. Resolve firmly then for a
good and holy Life; be never weary of well doing, for here is an everlasting
rest which shall receive thee at the end of it, and the time before thou will
reach it is but short. Be not dis^ouraged by any difficulties thou may meet
with; if thou will boldly strive, thou shall overcome them all, through Christ
strengthening thee: To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, One ever
blessed God, be all Honor and Glory, World without End. Amen.

SECT. XXI. Prayers for a suitable CONVERSATION.
I. O God, the Strength of all them that put their Trust in thee; mercifully
accept my Prayers; and because through the Weakness of our mortal Nature, we
can do no good thing without thee, grant me the help of thy Grace, that in
keeping thy Commandments I may please thee both in Will and Deed, through Jesus
Christ our Lord: Amen.

II. O Lord, the Fountain of all Power and Might, grant, I beseech thee, to me
thy Servant, Grace, to withstand the Temptations of the World, the Flesh, and
the Devil; and with a pure Heart and Mind to follow and serve thee, the only
true and living God; and let me be accepted with thee in all my Service,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

III. O Almighty God, who alone can order the unruly Wills and Affections of
Sinful Men, grant unto me thy Servant, that I may Love the things which thou
command, and Desire those glorious things which thou do promise; that so
among the sundry and manifold Changes of this World, my Heart may surely there
be fixed, where true Joys are to be found, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

IV. LOrd of all Power and Might, who art the Author and giver of all good
Things: graft in my Heart the Love of thy Name; increase in me true Religion;
nourish me in all Goodness, and of thy great Mercy keep me in the same through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

V. O Lord, who have taught us, that all our Doings, without Charity are
nothing worth: Send thy holy Spirit, I beseech thee, and pour into my heart
that most excellent gift of Charity, the very Bond of Peace, and of all
Virtues; without which, whosoever lives, is dead before thee. Grant this for
thy only Son Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

VI. ALmighty God, who have given thy only Son to be unto us both a Sacrifice
for Sin, and also an Example of Godly Life; give me Grace that I may always
most thankfully accept that his innestimable Benefit, and also daily endeavor
my self to follow the blessed steps of his most holy Life, through the same
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

VII. GRant, I beseech thee, Almighty God, that like as I do believe thy only
begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, to have ascended into the Heavens; so I
may also in heart and mind thither ascend, and with him continually dwell, who
lives and reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost, One God, World without End.
Amen.

VIII. MAY the Peace of God, which passes all Understanding, keep my heart and
mine in the knowledge and love of God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord,
and the Blessing of God Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be
upon me, and remain with me always. Amen.

IX. GLory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: As it was
in the Beginning, is now, and ever shall be, World without End. Amen.

SECT. XXII. Prayers of Recollection.
THese contain the Sum of this Book, and are made fit to be used after the
reading any parts of it in the Family or Closet.

I. O Most great and glorious God! Lord of Heaven and Earth, infinite in
Majesty and Glory, and in thy Greatness unsearchable. And as thy Greatness is
infinite, so is also thy Goodness; which thou have exercised in a manner
suitable to thy excellent Greatness: For thou art in all things like thy self,
and there is none besides thee like unto thee. In wondrous Wisdom and Goodness
have thou made the World, bounteously communicating Being and Happiness among
thy Creatures. But thy Goodness has peculiarly shown it self in thy dealing
with Mankind, and appeared in amazing Glories. It appears within us, and in all
things that are round about us. Thou have made Man a Noble Creature, little
lower than the Angels. Thou did endow him with thy glorious Image in
righteousness and true holiness Thou crownedst him with honor and dignity,
giving him dominion over all the works of thy hands. Thou have built this
beauteous world for his habbitation, and plentifully furnished it with all
things necessary and delightful to him. All our senses present us with many
instances of thy goodness to us, the earth is full of it; day unto day utters
speech, and night unto night shows knowledge of this. We cannot without the
greatest and the most wilful blindness, fail to see it; nor without the most
unworthy and disingenuous ingratitude, forget or neglect to acknowledge it.

But this, O Lord, is that which we must, with shame and self abhorrence,
accuse our selves of. All thy Goodness, and the Obligations of it, were soon
forgotten by our First Parents, and they rebelled against thee: And we are
their true and vile Offspring, going astray from the Womb, living in Enmity
against thee, and despising thy Commandments. All the Wickedness of the World,
and the Affronts have received from it, thou did foresee; and yet of thy
great Patience and Forbearance did spare our first Parents, and permit them
to propagate their base and corrupt nature! And this gives us occasion, O Lord,
to reflect upon the greatest and most glorious exercise of thy goodness to
mankind. When we were all guilty before thee, and obnoxious to thy eternal
wrath; and thy honor, and thy justice did require our utter rejection and
perdition: Yet even then did then did thy wisdom and goodness contrive and
afford us a way and means of Salvation: And thy infinite greatness, though so
exceedingly affronted, did condescend to a concern to save us I and a way was
found out suitable to thy greatness and our necessity. Even then did God the
Father so love the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting life: And then did God
the Son, in his infinite compassion to mankind, offer himself to be our
Mediator; and he undertook to purchase for us the divine favor which we had
lost, at the cost of his own abasement, in taking our nature, and dying a
sacrifice for the sins of men. O how unwearied, Lord, has thy kindness and
mercy been toward us! And how odious and detestable are all our transgressons
against thee! When we consider, O Lord, the obligations thou have laid upon us!
we are even confounded to think of the exceeding vileness and enormity of our
Sins. We are therefore forced, O Lord, to abhor our selves; we humble, we abase
our selves before thee. We acknowledge thy greatest displeasure against us to
be just and righteous, and must own, that we have deserved thou should throw
us into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil and his Angels. But,
blessed be thy name, there is mercy with thee, and thou art, through the
undertaking of our blessed Mediator, a God forgiving iniquity, transgression
and sin. We praise thee, we magnify thee, O Lord, for thine inestimable love
in the redemption of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ. Encouraged, O Father,
by the Sacrifice of thy Son, and the merits of it, we return unto thee: We
desire to return to our duty. We gladly and thankfully accept of the new offers
of Grace and Favor with thee, which thou art pleased to make us; we submit to
the gentle and easy terms thou requirest of us; and we humbly seek thy favor
upon these conditions. We were, O Lord, by the kind dispensation of thy
providence, in our early infancy, dedicated to thee, and engaged in that happy
Covenant, which thou affordest us as the way of our Salvation: but we must with
shame confess, that we have broken this Covenant, and lived too great a neglect
of it; and have added to the other Heinousness and Wickedness of our vile Sins,
the great guilt of breaking our Vows and Promises to thee. As sensible of our
unworthy Behavior herein: again, O Lord, we desire to renew those Bonds, and
we earnestly desire they may be so confirmed by this renewal of them, as that
they may never be broken any more. We renounce this wicked World, our own
corrupt Nature, and thine Adversary the Devil; we purpose not to suffer our
selves to follow, nor be led by them. We will receive, Lord, what thou
requirest us to believe; and we devote our selves to keep and obey thy Holy,
Just and Good Commandments, through the whole course of of our lives: to be
always under the Influence and Power of Love to thee, and to our Neighbors: To
love thee with all our Heart, and with all our Soul, and with all our Might;
and our Neighbor as our selves. O Father of Mercies, graciously accept of our
repentance, and return unto thee: Look upon the Death of thy Son, and turn from
us all thy wrath: Justify us freely by thy Grace; pardon all our Sins upon the
account of it; take us into thy service, and grant that we may ever hereafter
please thee in newness and holiness of life, for the sake of Jesus Christ, to
whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and Glory, for ever and
ever. Amen.

II. O Eternal Son of the Eternal Father, who inheritest the infinite Wisdom,
Power and Glory, and the infinite Love and Goodness of the Father! Jesus, thou
Son of God, have mercy upon us, O Christ hear us; be thou our Advocate with thy
Father; By thy Holy Nativity and Circumcision; by thy Meritorious Cross and
Passion; by thy precious Death and Burial; by thy Glorious Resurrection and
Ascension, take us into thy Care and Protection: Thou that have done all these
things for us, have Mercy upon us: O be thou Jesus to us, and save us from our
Sins: Give us, according to thy Promise, to them that receive thee, the
glorious Privilege to become the Sons of God? We accept of thee, O Lord, as a
King to rule us, and will Study to know and endeavor to obey thy Commands: We
earnestly desire thy teaching as our great Prophet; and will receive and comply
with thy Divine Instructions, however contrary they are to the corrupt Bias of
our Nature and our Love of this World. Lord, we purpose to conform our selves
to them by the Directions of thy excellent Example, and not to be conformed to
this World. And we will always acknowledge our utter unworthiness of the least
Good, and place all our Hopes in thy Merits and Intercession as our great High
priest. Oh let us find by the good Success of all our humble Addresses, that
thou have Compassion on our Miseries, and dostever live to make Intercession
for us. So we whom thou have redeemed with thy most precious Blood, will give
up our selves to thy Service, and show forth thy Praise, not only with our Lips
but in our Lives, by walking before thee in all Holiness and Righteousness of
Life and Conversation, to the Glory of God the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, in this and the other World, even for ever and ever. Amen.

III. O Infinite and Eternal Spirit, the Lord and giver of Life, who proceedest
from the Father and Son, who with the Father and the Son together art
Worshipped and Glorified! We pray thee to have Mercy upon us. We have promised
and resolved what is due from us; but alas, more than we are able to perform
without thy Influence and Assistance: We therefore address our selves to thee,
O blessed Spirit: Come down we beseech thee, into our Hearts; replenish us
abundantly with thy Grace; let us become thy Sacred, and consecrated Temples,
and do thou evermore dwell in us: Banish and purge out of us for ever all that
is contrary and displeasing to thee. Teach us that denying all Ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, we may live Soberly, and righteously, and Godly, in this present
World. Write thy Law in our Hearts, that we may never depart from it. Increase
and maintain our Faith; Increase and continue our Love; cherish all Grace in
us; and cause us to persevere in Holiness, and Virtue, and well-doing, to the
End of our Lives. Keep us in the Knowledge and Love of God, and of his Son
Jesus Christ our Lord. We purpose, O Holy Spirit, duly to wait for thy blessed
saving Influences in a diligent Attendance on thy sacred Ordinances, the Word
and Sacraments: O let us be always in due fitness to attend them, when the
happy Opportunities of doing so are offered us; and let them be always blessed to
us, and be effectual to promote our Sanctification and Salvation.

[Insert this when this Prayer is used in the Morning.]

We give thanks to the God of all Mercies for the safe Protection, the quiet
and Comfortable Rest of the last Night: We devote this day and all our Lives to
thy Service, in the Duties which thou give us to do; assist us mercifully, O
Lord, in all, and accept us in Jesus Christ.

[Insert this when this Prayer is used at Night.]

Enlighten our dark Souls we beseech thee, O Lord, with all the Knowledge that
is necessary to our Salva^eon: Fill us with devout Affections, and let thy Love
always possess and rule us: Be thou, we pray, our Protections this Night from
all the Perils and Dangers of it.

Our Father which, etc.

FINIS.

