Precious Treasure IN Earthen Vessels.

A SERMON Occasioned by the DEATH OF THE Reverend and Learned, Mr. Ebenezer
Pemberton, Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Boston, and Fellow of Harvard
College; Who Expired Wednesday, Febr. 13th. 1716, 17. Aetatis Suae 45.

By Joseph Sewall, A. M.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish, and Daniel Henchman, Sold at
their Shops. 1717.

To the READER.
MINISTERS of the Gospel are in more respects than one, fitly compared to
Earthen Vessels; principally in that they are as Mortal as other Men. Do the
Prophets Live for ever? But more especially, in that they are (as Earthen
Vessels use to be) of small account in the World. Christ's Kingdom not being of
this World, He did not make use of the Princes of this World, to be the
Dispensers of the Mysteries of it. Not many Mighty, not many Noble are called
to that Work. Yet some such there have been: Was not Solomon (a great King in
Israel) a PREACHER? Was not Ambrose of a Noble Roman Family? And Chrysostom of
an high Birth? And yet both these, after they had for some time pleaded Causes
at the Bar, out of a desire to do good, betook themselves to the Study of
Divinity, and became famous Preachert of the Gospel. Was not George Prince of
Anhall, a Protes;tant Minister, and an Eminent and Successful Preacher of
Christ? Was there not an Earl who became the Pastor of a Church in Geneva? But
many Indances there have not been, of honorable Personages so employed. Our
well observes, that the Work is Honorable enough in it (...), and needs not
borrow any Additional honor from the glory of the World. Also among Earthen
Vessels some are of a finer Mould than others. So among Ministers, there are
some of a more Tender, others of a more Robustous Constitution. There are (...)
Meliore luto pracordia finxit -- One of the Ancients in his Book, De Pastorali
Cura, Observes that the Apostle Writing to Timothy, Exhorts him to use
Gentleness, and to rebuke with Long Suffering; but he bids Titus reprove
Sharply, he supposes the reason to be, that Titus was of a more Mild
disposition and needed a Spur: but that Timothy was of a more quick and zealous
Temper.

Concerning that Worthy Person, whose lamented Death occasioned the Preaching
of the Judicious and Seasonable Sermon Emitted herewith, I shall not say much;
nor is it needful for me, Considering it has been done abundantly by Others. I
had peculiar reason to know him, when he was a Student at the College. I then
observed that he had a Pregnant Wit, and Strong Memory, and was an hard
Student, whence it necessarily follows that having (as he had) a considerable
time to furnish himself with variety of Learning, his accomplishments must be
Eminent. But that which made him chiesly desirable, was, his Piety. His gifts
were Sanctified with Grace and the Fear of GOD; from thence it was that when he
became a Public Preacher of the Gospel, he set himself to promote the Good of
Souls, and not to make an ostentation of his own Gifts and Learning. He had a
Natural Fervor of Spirit, which being Sanctified, made his Sermons, by the
blessing of God, the more Powerful and Effectual. His Death is the more awful,
not only in that he dyed when in his Prime; but in the same Week another
faithful Minister of God was taken away, viz. The Reverend Mr. William Brattle,
Pastor of the Church in Cambridge, whom also I had reason to have an Intimate
acquaintance with, for that I presided over the College all the Time of his
being a Fellow and a Tutor there; and I had much Comfort in his Conversation.
Had I not well known his Abilities, I would not have advised the precious
Church in Cambridge, to have Elected and Ordained him their Pastor, and at
their and his desire, performed that Office of Respect and Love, on November
25. 1696. He that holds the Stars in his right hand, was pleased to uphold him
in the Pastoral Office, some Months above Twenty Years. I am glad to see his
Character already Published; and that it is done without any Hyperbolizing,
that which is there said of him being true, and nothing but justice to his
Memory. Honos fugientem sequitur. He is the more worthy of the honor which has
been put upon him, for that (as I am informed) he desired that no mention
should be made of him in any Funeral Sermon; which although an evidence of his
Humility, does not make it unlawful for any to act contrary to his desire in
that Matter. It is related concerning that holy Man of God, Mr. Carter, who was
a Minister at Bramford in Suffolk, that he forbad any Funeral Sermon to be
Preached for him. Notwithstanding which the Renowned Mr. Samuel Ward of
Ipswich: ((...) quantus vir fuit, Scripta loquuntur) his next Lecture Sermon
was a Lamentation, for the Loss which the Church of God had sustained, in the
Death of that Venerable Old Man, who to the admiration of all Men, at
Fourscore, which was the Year of his Death, Preached with as much Vigor as at
Forty, without being subject to any decay in his Intellectuals. Mr. Brattle did
not arrive to so great an Age. Nevertheless, the Death of such an Aaron as he
was, ought to be Lamented by Survivers, Numb. 20.29. 1 Samuel 25.1. Acts 8.2.
Where shall there be found a suitable Successor? Since the College is in
Cambridge, the Pastor of the Church there should be One of very Eminent
accomplishments, One of great Learning and Orthodoxy, able to instruct the
Scholars, and to establish them in Calvinian Anti-Arminian Principles. Should
the Learned Youth be tainted with Arminianism, it may prove fatal to these
Churches. My Learned Friend and Brother Mr. Samuel Lee, when on his Deathbed,
had a great concern on his Spirit about that Matter, some body having made him
believe (unjustly I hope) that the Young Students were advised to read Arminian
Authors. God forbid. Cambridge has been lifted up to Heaven. Hooker, Shepard,
Mitchel, Oaks have been Preachers there. And what Church in the World, did
ever enjoy Four such Preachers Successively! Concerning Mr. Mitchel (my most
dear Friend, whom I can never forget) I remember the admirably Learned Mr.
Chauncey (who was also a famous Preacher in Cambridge as well as President of
the College there) when there was some little difference (and very little did
they differ in any poine) between him and Mr. Mitchel, although Old enough to be
his Father, Expressed his Love and Honor for Mr. Mitchel in these Words to me.
If I would Envy any Man in the World, either for his Piety, or for his Ability,
it would be Mr. Mitchel.

It is also of Great Importance to the Interest of Religion, that the Church in
Boston lately bereaved, should be supplied with another able Minister of the
New Testament. And considering that they have been Exemplary for their Love and
Dutiful Respect to those who have been over them in the Lord, and formerly
Spoke to them the Word of God; It is to be hoped that Christ will supply them.
In the mean Time, I bless the Lord that they are not wholly destitute, or as
Sheep without a Shepherd, but are favored with One that has been (and I Hope
and Pray that for many Tears he shall be) a great Blessing to them. The Lord
with whom is the Residue of the Spirit, double His Spirit on him. But if they
suffer him to be alone too long, under so great a burden, they cannot expect,
but that notwithstanding the Treasure which Jesus Christ has adorned him with,
the Earthen Vessel will break, when too heavy a burden lies too long upon it.
Did not Moses say, I am not able to bear this People alone, it is too heavy for
me, Numb. 11.14.

It is a good Note which a late Writer has, That Since Ministers are Earthen
Vessels, they should take heed of dashing one against another. In special, Let
Younger Ministers take heed of dashing against their Fathers. And therefore
beware of Introducing Innovations which will cause it to be so, as long as
there be any that are Conscientiously concerned to maintain the Old Religion of
New England.

I Conclude with saying, It is a Comfort that although the Earthen Vessels are
broken, the Treasure is not, nor ever shall be lost. The Word of God lives and
abides for ever.

INCREASE MATHER.
Boston, March 4. 1716, 17.
Precious TREASURE IN Earthen Vellels.
II COR. IV. 7. But we have this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, that the
Excellency of the power may be of GOD, and not of us.


IN the beginning of this Chapter the Apostle does declare that he, and his
Fellow Laborers did fulfill their Ministry with unfainting Diligence, and godly
Sincerity. He then answers an Objection which might be made against the Gospel;
in that Multitudes who live under the Dispensation of it, are not savingly
Enlightened, but perish in their Ignorance. To this the Apostle answers, that
the fault lay in themselves; Satan the ruler of the darkness of this World had
blinded their minds, lest the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ who is the
Image of God, should shine into them. The Apostle does also mention a wonderful
Effect of God's Glorious Power in which the Gospel is made use of as an
Instrument, ver. 6. This miraculous Irradiation of the mind, the Apostle
compares with that Creating work of God in commanding the Light to shine out of
Darkness at first. And truly this work of God in the new Creation in forming a
New and Divine Light in the Heart of a Sinner, is as truly the Effect of
Almighty Power, as that was when God said, Let there be Light and there was
Light.

We have in the Words of our Text, (1) A further Description of the Gospel. It
is a Treasure. (2) The Character of the Dispensers of it. They are Earthen
Vessels. (3) We have the Reason of this Dispensation; and are told why God is
pleased to put such a Treasure into Earthen Vessels. It is that the Excellency
of the power may be of God, and not of us.

1. We have a Description of the Gospel. It is a Treasure. We have this
Treasure. A Treasure, says One, is an Abundance of Things Reposited or laid up
for the supply of future wants. It denotes a Plenty and Abundance of things
Precious and Valuable.

2. We have the Character of the Ministers of the Gospel in whom this Treasure
is laid up, Earthen Vessels. The Word signisieth Vessels of Shells or Earth.
And many Learned Men render it by Testaceis, a word of the same Latitude. Some
suppose here may be an Allusion to the Pitchers in which Gideon's Soldiers
carried their Lamps. And sometimes Lamps themselves are made of Earth. The
Gospel is compared, in the Context, to Light. Now the Light of the Glorious
Gospel by which the Kingdom of Darkness is destroyed, is held forth out of
Earthen Vessels; Vessels of baked Earth. The Expression denotes their Meanness
and Frailty. Gospel Ministers are of the same Mould with others; They are
Fragil, Brittle Vessels: Mortal Dying Creatures.

3. We have the Reason of this Dispensation given, and are told why God is
pleased to put such a Treasure in Earthen Vessels. That the Excellency of the
power may be of God, and not of us. That the Hyperbole of the Power: so it is
in the Original, May be, may appear to be, may be known to be of GOD, and not
of Men; that it may be seen, and acknowledged that the Powerful (...) of the
Gospel are not wrought by Man as the chief (...) but by God.

DOCT. I. It has pleased God to put the Gospel Treasure in Earthen Vessels.
DOCT. II. One great Reason of this is, that the Excellent Power which does
accompany the Gospel in the Salvation of Sinners, may appear to be Divine; and
that the Glory of it may be ascribed to God, and not to Men.
I. DOCT. It has pleased God to put the Gospel Treasure in Earthen Vessels.
In this Doctrine there are these Two Propositions.

PROP. I. The Gospel is a Treasure. PROP. II. It has pleased God to put this
Treasure in Earthen Vessels.
PROP. I. The Gospel is a Treasure. Such is the External Revelation of the Holy
Scriptures; Much more so, is the Internal Knowledge of the Glorious Truths and
Mysteries of the Gospel. Nothing does so much improve and enrich the mind, as
the Truth of the Gospel, when received in the Love of it. For the Proof and
Illustration of this Proposition.

1. The Gospel is a Treasure, inasmuch as in the Gospel there is a Plenty, a
Fullness of what is most Precious and Excellent. There is a Treasure wherein is
an abundance of what is valuable. Now in the Gospel we have the most needful,
most useful, Discoveries made unto us: Wisdom says, Prove. 8.6. Hear, I will
speak of Excellent things, and the opening of my lips shall be right things. In
the Gospel we have the Revelation of the Glory of God in the Face of Jesus
Christ. Now to know God and Christ, is Life Eternal. The Excellency of this
knowledge is, that it gives Life to the Soul. God is the first Truth, and the
chief Good. How Precious and Excellent then must the knowledge of Him be? We may
better want the light of the Sun, then the light of the Gospel. In the
Scriptures we have the Revelation of One GOD in Three Persons; the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost. In the Scriptures we have the Revelation of that great
Mystery of Godliness, God manifest in the Flesh. By the Scriptures God gives
the knowledge of Salvation through a Redeemer to such perishing Sinners as we
are, who naturally sit in Darkness and the shadow of Death. O Low invaluably
precious is this Discovery of the Lord Jesus Christ, which is made in the
Gospel. We are by Nature guilty Sinners, deeply in Debt to Divine Justice, and
have nothing to pay: Certainly then, the Gospel is a Rich Treasure: For in this
we have Christ revealed, and offered to us; in whom there is a complete
Righteousness, and an inexhaustable Stock of Merit; the Lord Jesus Christ, the
Blood of whose Sacrifice being the Blood of Him that is God, is infinitely
precious, of value sufficient to be a Redemption-Price for the chief of
Sinners. We are by Nature altogether without strength; empty of Grace, and full
of Sin; Certainly then the Gospel is an inestimable Treasure, in which Christ
is revealed and offered to us, of whose fullness we may receive, and grace for
grace. Christ who is the Lord in whom we have Righteousness and Strength, Isai.
45.24. The Graces and Consolations of the Spirit are conveyed to Believers by
the Ministry of the Word. It is particularly said of Faith, Romans 10.17. Faith
comes by hearing, and hearing by the Word. 1 Cor. 4.15. In Christ Jesus I have
begotten you through the Gospel. In the Scriptures the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge which are hid in Christ are manifest and laid open. Agreably we have
that Expression, Ephesians. 3 8 Unto me who am less then the least of all Saints, is
this grace given, that I should Preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable
Riches of Christ. In and by the Gospel God makes known what is the Riches of
the glory of this Mystery among the Gentiles which is Christ in you the hope of
Glory. The Apostle Paul assures us that what things were gain to him, he
accounted loss for Christ: yea, says he, I count all things but loss for the
Excellency of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ my Lord. Now we have this knowledge
in the Scriptures; The Gospel is the Gospel of Christ; and the great Scope and
Design of it is to give us the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the
Face, in the Person of Jesus Christ. Undoubtedly then the Word of God by which
we are taught and instructed in this knowledge, is to be esteemed an invaluable
Treasure. The manifold Wisdom of God made known in the Scriptures is the
Principal thing. It is Better than Rubies, and all the things that may be
desired, are not to be compared with it. Psalm. 19. The Law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the Soul. -- The Judgments of the Lord are true, and
righteous altogether. More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much
fine gold, -- Here are Golden Rules laid down for the government of our Lives.
Here are Exceeding great and precious Promises that by them we might be made
partakers of the Divine Nature; which is the chief excellency and glory of Man,
2 Pet. 1.4. In the Gospel the Children of God have the promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come. Men are wont to esteem the Writings
whereby they hold their Estates: Now in the Sacred Scriptures God makes over
Himself to His People as their Everlasting Portion; and with Himself all that
they need for Soul and Body, Time and Eternity. The Riches of Grace and the
Riches of Glory are made sure to Believers in Gods Word. The Lord Jesus Christ
has brought Life and Immortality to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1.10. The
Treasures which are reserved in Heaven for Gods People, are discovered in the
Gospel, and secured to Believers. Now certainly, these Spiritual and
Everlasting Blessings are very Precious. They are a suitable and sufficient
supply for the Immortal Soul, which is our more noble part: they consist of
those things which are in their own nature of inestimable value, and which are
exactly suited to our wants and necessities. And then there is enough of them,
an abundant plenty and fullness, every way sufficient to fill all our wants, and
satisfy all our desires. Here Is every good thing, and that in abundance. In the
Gospel there is an inexhaustable Fountain Opened, at which we may be filled. A
Fountain that can never be drawn dry, but is always full and flowing. Through
the Gospel God makes all Grace abound toward His People, that they always
having alsufficiency in all things, may abound. Here then we see that the
Gospel is a Treasure, in that in it is a plenty and fullness of what is most
Excellent and Precious.

2. The Gospel may be compared to a Treasure, in that it has been in all Ages
preserved and secured for the use and benefit of the Church, by the especial
care of Gods Providence. Treasures are wont to be laid up in places of Strength
and Safety; to be preserved with great care and industry. The Promises of the
Gospel are made sure; For in Christ they are Yea, and Amen. But what I design
to consider under this Head, is the wonderful care of God's Providence in
preserving the written Word from being lost, or corrupted: To the Jewish Church
of Old were committed the Oracles of God. And it is observed that the Ancient
Jews preserved the Letter of the Scripture entire. It is said that the Men of
the great Synagogue numbered the Verses, Words, and Letters, of every Book, to
prevent all possibility of corrupting the Text Godwyn's Antiq. p. 279.
in future times. So wonderfully did God Spirit them to preserve the Scriptures
pure, and transmit them entire to Posterity. While Thousand of other Writings
have been lost, and the memorial of them has perished; the Book of God is
still preserved, by the singular care of His watchful Providence, as a Sacred
Treasure for the use and benefit of the Church. There was a Roman Emperor that
Published an Edict for the abolishing the Scriptures Fox Acts and Monuments.
Vol. I. p. 85. Col. 2. and p. 91. Col. 2. Edit, Anno 1684.
, which was engraven in Brass. Time has caten up those Brazen Pillars: Whereas
the Law of God endures for ever.

3. The Gospel is a Treasure, in that the Blessings and good things Exhibited
and Offered in the Gospel are incorruptible, and the Fullness of them is
reserved for the People of God in the Heavenly World. When Men would lay up a
Treasure, they are wont to choose the most durable things; not perishable
Commodities, as they speak. Now the Gospel does in this respect resemble a
Treasure. It is the Everlasting Gospel, 1 Pet. 23, to 25. -- The Word of God
lives and abides for ever. -- All Flesh is as grass, -- the grass withers
and the flower thereof falls away. But the Word of the Lord endures for
ever. -- And this is the word which by the Gospel is Preached unto you. The
true and faithful Witness testifies, Sooner may Heaven and Earth pass away,
then one jot or tittle of Gods Word fail.

And then as a Treasure is something in Reserve for time to come, something
laid up for a time of need: So the fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel of
Christ is laid up in Heaven for God's People. The glorious things spoken
concerning the People of God in the Scriptures, will not have their full
Accomplishment till these Heirs of Glory are received to the open Vision and
full Fruition of God in Heaven.

PROP. II. It has pleased God to put this Treasure in Earthen Vessels. God
has committed the Dispensation of the Gospel to Men fitly compared to Earthen
Vessels. Such as these are Commissioned and Empowred to Teach and Preach in
Christ's Name. They are by their Office Stewards of the Mysteries of God. 1 Cor.
9.17. A dispensation of the Gospel is committed to me. To them is given the
Ministry of Reconciliation. Now the Character which is here given to the
Ministers of the Gospel is this, They are Earthen Vessels. They are mean,
infirm, dying Creatures. They are indeed distinguished from others in this,
that they are betrusted with the Gospel Treasure, by virtue of their Office, as
they are the Ministers of CHRIST: but in other respects they are like other
Men. Yea, many times more frail than their Brethren are.

1. The Ministers of the Gospel that have this Treasure, are formed out of the
Dust, and must in a little time return to the Earth. They are of the same
Original with other Men. They may well say with Elihu, Job. 33.6. Behold, I am
according to thy wish in Gods stead: I also am formed out of the Clay. They who
by their Commission are the Ministers of God, and so in Gods stead; are yet but
as other Men in their Natural Structure and Constitution. Though they are of
Especial Use in the Temple of God, yet respecting their frailty, They are
Vessels of Earth, not of Gold.

Their Bodies are framed and fashioned out of the same Course, Earthy
Materials; in this regard they are upon a level with their Brethren. Therefore
when Cornelius fell down at Peter's feet, Peter took him up, saying, Stand up,
I my self also am a Man, Acts 10.26. These Messengers of God are Spirits in
flesh. They dwell in houses of Clay, whose foundation is in the Dust. The
Gospel Treasure is from above, from Heaven, Heavenly: but these Vessels wherein
it is contained, are of the Earth, Earthly, Such was our Father Adam, as his
Name Signifies. God formed Him out of the dust of the ground, Genesis 2.7. And the
Ministers of the Gospel, as well as others, are begotten in his likeness, and
bear his Image. Their Bodies are Earthly Tabernacles, and will quickly Moulder
down into Dust, 2 Cor. 5.1. For we know, that if our Earthly house of this
Tabernacle were dissolved. They are Children of the first Adam, in whom we all
die; they derive from him both Moral and Natural Corruption. They have the
Seeds of Mortality and Corruption in their very Make and Constitution, as well
as other Men. They are frail, brittle Ware, feeble, and soon broken. They may
say with Job 1.12. Is my streneth the strength of Stones? Or is my flesh of
Brass? No, Ministers are exposed to the same Diseases as other Men; To the same
hurtful and painful impressions. Their Bodies are as vile as the Bodies of
others; and many times more frail and crazy. 1 Timothy 5.23. -- Thine often
Infirmities. They spend and are spent in the work of the Ministry. The weight
of their work helps many times to weaken and break their Constitution. The
concern with which their Solemn Charge does impress their Minds, oftentimes
consumes their Spirits. They are wasted and worn away with the disticulties
they meet with in their Employment. The Treasure which they hold helps to
shatter and break to pieces these Earthen Vessels, As New Wine bursts Old
Bottles; to allude to our Savior's expression.

In a little time they are broken to pieces by the stroke of Death. Zech. 1.5.
Your Fathers, where are they? and the Prophets, do they live for ever? Peter
knew that in a little time he must put off his Earthly Tabernacle, 2 Peter
1.14. Knowing that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle. They are in Gods
hand, as clay in the hand of the Potter; And when the work which he has
designed for them is accomplished, He takes away their Breath, they die, and
return to their Earth. Their Bodies are Sown in dishonor and corruption As the
Priests under the Law, so Gospel Ministers are not suffered to continue, by
reason of Death.

2. They are mean, and lightly Esteemed in the World. And in this respect may
be compared to Earthen Vessels. They are not ordinarily Men of Name and Renown.
They are often esteemed as Earthen Pitchers, the work of the hands of the
Potter. They are too often filled with contempt, and cast out as Vessels
wherein there is no pleasure. 1 Cor. 4.13. We are made as the filth of the
World, and are the offscouring of all things to this Day.

I might have considered their Moral defects, and infirmities. The Ministers of
the Gospel are Sinful Men. The best of them groan under the remains of the body
of Death. The Apostle Paul uttered that heavy complaint, Romans 7.24. O wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this Death?

DOCT. II. One great Reason of this Dispensation is, That the Excellent Power
which does accompany the Gospel in the Salvation of Sinners, may appear to be
Divine, and that the Glory of it may be ascribed to GOD, and not to Men.
There is an Excellent Power which does accompany the dispensation of the
Gospel, in the Salvation of Sinners. Romans 1.16. I am not ashamed of the Gospel
of Christ, for it is the Power of God to Salvation to every one that believes.
By the Preaching of the Gospel, Satan was thrown down from his Usurped Throne,
And Christ's Kingdom was set up in the World.

Those that Sat in darkness, and were Spiritually blind, have been enlightened:
the dead have been made to hear the Voice of the Son of God and live. The Word
of God is quick and powerful and sharper than any two edged Sword piercing even
to the dividing asunder of the Soul and Spirit, Heb. 4.12. Now God has put
this Treasure into Earthen, Vessels, committed the dispensation of his word to
weak, frail, mortal Men, for this End, that the Excellency of the power might
appear to be of God, and not of Men. That we might ascribe the glory of this
power unto Him to whom it does appertain. The glorious Power of God does appear
and shine forth.

1. In Strengthening them to hold and dispense the Gospel Treasure,
notwithstanding the great Opposition they meet with in the World. God's Power
is seen in qualifying and furnishing them for their work, and in upholding them
in it. We may well cry out with the Apostle, Who is sufficient for these
things? 2 Cor. 2.16. The power of God does appear in making his Strength
perfect in their weakness, and His Grace Sufficient for them. The difficulties
and hardships they encounter, are very great. Satan rises up as an Adversary
against them. And they meet with great Opposition from the Lusts and carnal
Interests of Men. Many heavy Weights and Burdens ly upon them. They are
Persecuted for their work Sake many times, and that even to death. Now the
glorious Power of Christ does appear in sustaining them under these Pressures.
Christ ordains to Himself Praise out of their Mouths, when He gives them a
Mouth and Wisdom which all their Adversaries are not able to gainsay and
resist. The Power of Christ is seen when He makes these Earthen Vessels as an
Iron Pillar, and brazen Walls, against which the Powers of Darkness do sight;
but cannot prevail. The Power of Christ is seen in Strengthening them to all
Patience and Long-suffering under their heavy Trials.

2. In making such weak Instruments Successful in erecting and establishing
Christ's Kingdom in the Hearts of Men. The Arm of the Lord is plainly Revealed
when Men believe their Report. We read, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. For the weapons of our
Warfare are not carnal, but mighty brough God to the pulling down of strong
holds: Casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self
against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ. The glory of Christ's Power is very conspicuous in
producing such wonderful Effects by such weak Instruments. When the Gospel runs
and is glorified in the Salvation of Sinners; It is apparent that our Mighty
Redeemer girds his Sword upon his thigh, with his Glory and his Majesty. It
appears to be the Day of His Power, when those that were Enemies in their
hearts, are made a willing People, and subdued to an Obedience to the Faith. It
is evident that the Power whereby these wonderful and miraculous Works are
wrought in the Kingdom of Grace, is not Humane, but Divine. And they that
behold it must say, This is the Finger of God.

3. The Power of God appears, in that this Treasure is not lost, though the
Vessels wherein it is contained are so often broken. It is kept by the Almighty
Power of God from Age to Age. Though One Generation passes away, and another
comes; yet this Treasure constantly abides. Here then we see why God has put
this Treasure in Earthen Vessels, it is that the Glory may be ascribed unto
God; and that His Name alone may be Exalted; That we may Sing His Praises when
we see the wonderful Effects of the Gospel Dispensation, and say, Thine is the
Power and the Glory. Not unto us O Lord, not unto us; but to thy Name be the
Glory. God has chosen these weak and feeble Instruments to Dispense His Word,
that no Flesh should glory in his Presence; but that he who glories should
glory in the Lord.

APPLICATION.
USE. I. Is the Gospel a Treasure, Learn what great reason we have to Bless God
that we enjoy the Dispensation of the Gospel. The People of God in this Land
have been highly favored in this regard. God has given us his Statutes and
his Judgments. We have dwelt in Goshen, where the Light of the Gospel has
shone round about us. God has from time to time raised up such as have been
able Ministers of the New Testament, and have dispensed the Gospel Treasure as
Faithful Stewards of the Mysteries of God. O that we could in a right manner
Bless, God for this unspeakable Gift. O that we could in a due manner prize and
improve it! We are lifted up to Heaven in this respect, The Lord of His
Infinite Mercy grant that we may not be cast down the lower into Hell, for
neglecting the great Salvation offered to us in the Gospel. The Lord humble us
for all that Contempt of the Gospel, which has been found among us; The Lord
help us to be Zealous and Repent, before He come and remove our Candlestick out
of its place, and put out our Light in Obscure Darkness.

USE. II. Is the Gospel a Treasure, Learn that we should highly esteem it, and
above all things seek to be Enriched with this Treasure. We should esteem Gods
Word above Thousands of Gold and Silver, and seek for it as for hid Treasures.
We should hide it in our Hearts, and lay it up there with great care and
diligence, as we keep the most precious Things. We have that Advice, Prove.
23.23. Buy the Truth, and sell it not. We should be willing to part with all,
that we may obtain this Treasure. If we do in a right manner receive and
embrace the Truths of the Gospel, they will enrich our Souls to all Eternity.
If we lay up the Word of God in our Hearts, it will be an inestimable Treasure,
out of which we shall bring forth good things. When we hear the Word, it should
be with heedful care and diligent attention, that it may dwell in us richly in
all Wisdom.

USE. III. We should highly Esteem the Ministers of the Gospel for their Works
sake. Though they are Earthen Vessels, and their Bodily presence may be weak;
yet are they worthy of Esteem, inasmuch as they are betrusted with a Precious
Treasure, which they dispense unto us, 1 These. 5.12, 13. And we beseech you
Brethren to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and
admonish you; and to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. How
beautiful are the feet of him that brings good Tidings! Wonderful is the
Condescension of God in speaking to us by Men like our selves, whese Terrors
need not make us asraid: Let us take care that this does nor bread in us a
contempt of these Messengers, or their Message.

USE. IV. This consideration should keep Gospel. Ministers in an Humble
Dependent frame. They are Earthen Vessels, frail, infirm, sinful Creatures. And
therefore it becomes them to be clothed with Humility. They must not be
high-minded, but fear. God honors them indeed by betrusting them with such a
Treasure: But then they are in themselves, feeble, mortal Men. Certainly then
they should beware of Pride, especially of Spiritual Pride. It highly concerns
them to watch against all high thoughts, and proud imaginations. In an humble
sense of their own nothingness they should depend entirely upon God, and
glorify Him by a full and free Acknowledgment that they first receive from Him
whatever they give to Him: 1 Cor. 15.10. -- Yet not I, but the grace of God
which was with me.

USE. V. Are the Ministers of the Gospel Earthen Vessels, This Consideration
should excite and quicken them to improve their Time in their Lords Service
with the greatest Diligence. These Earthen Vessels will shortly be broken to
pieces by the stroke of Death, and then the Opportunities which they now enjoy
for dispensing the Gospel Treasure, will be at an end. Certainly then Gospel
Ministers should be not (...) in Business, but fervent in Spirit serving the
Lord. It neartly concerns them to lay opt themselves for the Glory of Christ,
and the Good of Souls committed to their Charge. They should be instant in
Season, and out of Season. They should Study, Pray, and Preach, as sensible
that their time of Ministration will shortly expire. And that they must in a
little time appear before their Judge, the Great Shepherd of the Sheep, to give
up their Account. They should stand with their Loins girt, and Lamps burning,
as those that wait and watch for the coming of their Lord.

USE. VI. This Consideration should excite us to give all diligence that we may
get much Good from the Ministers of the Gospel while they are continued with
us. In a little time you will see their Faces no more, hear them speaking to
you no more. O then attend on their Ministry with care and diligence. A little
while the Light is with you, improve it diligently while you enjoy it.

USE. VII. Are the Ministers of the Gospel Earthen Vessels, Then the People of
God should do all that in them lies, to Strengthen and Encourage them in their
Work. Particularly, They should Pray Earnestly to God for them. They should
pity them under their Infirmities, and beware of doing any thing unnecessarily,
that should grieve and wound their Spirits. They should speak comfortably to
those that teach the good knowledge of the Lord; and do what they call to
lighten their Burdens, and help them forward in their Work. They should not be
severe in Censuring them for their infirmities; but rather compassionate their
condition, and treat them with the Spirit of Meekness. Particularly, they
should Pray Earnestly to God for them, and for the Success of their Ministry.
They should make their fervent Supplications to the Great Shepherd of the
Sheep, who has been touched with a feeling of our Infirmities, That he would
succor and support them; that He would hold them up as Stars in His Right
Hand, and furnish them with all those Gifts and Graces which may be needful, in
order to their dispensing that Heavenly Treasure which is committed to them:
That both the Teachers, and those that are taught, may Rejoice together in the
Day of Christ.

Let me entreat and beseech you therefore, Brethren, to Pray to God for His
Blessing upon all His Servants in the Ministry; and in an especial manner to
strive together with me in your Prayers to God for me, That I may be supported,
notwithstanding all my Infirmities: And that since it has pleased God to take
my Pastor and my Father from my head; He would graciously give unto me His Holy
Spirit in propertion to the Work that now lies upon me, Pray for me that I may
not be alone, but may enjoy more of the Presence of CHRIST with me; That GOD
with whom is the Residue of the Spirit, would give me those Divine Influences
and Assistances which are needful.

I have been with you hitherto in weakness and fear; and it has pleased God to
Bereave this Flock while I am yet Young and Tender: Pray to God that the
Strength of CHRIST may be made perfect in my Weakness, and that His Grace may
be sufficient for me; That I may have reason to say with the Apostle, Most
gladly will I glory in my Infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon
me. Pray for me, that I may know how I ought to behave my self in the House of
God; That I may be instructed to turn many to Righteousness; that I may come to
you at all times in the fullness of the Blessing of the Gospel of Christ; and be
enabled to Save my self, and them that hear me.

USE. VIII. Learn that all the Glory of the Success of the Ministry must be
ascribed to God, and not to Men. It is our duty to comply with the Blessed God
in this His Holy Design. He puts this Treasure into Earthen Vessels for this
very end, that the Excellency of His Power may be seen, and adored. And
therefore when the Gospel does run, and is glorified, we must fall down before
the Throne of Grace, and ascribe Honor and Wisdom, Mercy and Power to God the
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. The Dispensers of the Gospel are only Ministers
by whom we believe, even as the Lord gives to every Man. We must not look upon
them, as if by their own power they wrought those wonderful Works, which are
effected by the Preaching of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 3.7. Neither is he that
planteth any thing, neither he that waters; but God that gives the Increase.
God is all in all, and therefore He must have all the Praise.

USE. IX. Is the Gospel Treasure in Earthen Vessels; Learn, that when these
Vessels are broken, we should deeply resent and bewail it. When God comes and
removes such as did faithfully keep, and dispense this Treasure; we should see
His Hand which is stretched out against us, and humble our selves under it.

Now God has in His Providence very lately given us a Demonstration of the
Truth of this His Word in Two awful Instances; viz. In the Removal of Two
Eminent Persons, The Reverend Mr. WILLIAM BRATTLE, Mr. Brattle Expired, Febr.
15, 1716, 7.
and the Reverend Mr. ERENEZER PEMBERTON, by Death. I would mention the Name of
the Worthy Pastor of the Church of Christ in Cambridge with great Respect and
Honor. His diligent Care of his Flock, and Parental Tenderness to the Students
of the College, must not be forgotten. Nor may I pass by in Silence the many
other Charitable and Worthy Deeds done by Him. But my present Province will not
permit to enter into so large a Field. To Return therefore to the Mournful
Subject which has been the Occasion of my present Meditations.

It has pleased the Holy GOD, in whose Hands our Times are, to lay this
Congregation under the awful Rebukes of His Sovereign Providence by breaking an
Earthen Vessel in which He had laid up much Precious Treasure, Treasure with
which we were enriched.

We have a peculiar share in the great Loss which the Churches of Christ in
this Land do thereby sustain. It becomes us therefore to be humbled under the
mighty Hand of God.

In a particular manner, as I have especial Reason, so I desire to be deeply
humbled under this awful Blow, whereby much of our Strength and Beauty are
consumed.

I am sensible how unfit I am to give so Great a Man His Character; And this
has been already done by Elder and much Abler Hands.

However the Relation I stand in will not permit me to be wholly Silent. Give
me leave therefore to make some Essay to pay a Tribute to the Memory of the
Deceased, whose Praise is in these Churches. I shall endeavor to do it with a
sincere aim at His Glory, who is the Father of Lights from whom comes down
every good and perfect Giving.

It pleased God to furnish him with Eminent Gifts and Endowments. And He is
justly Celebrated as a Great Schokn, an Excellent Divine, and a good Christian.

Might I presume to look upon my self as a competent Judge of Learning, and
Learned Men, I would say, He was a very great Proficient in the Study of the
Liberal Arts and Sciences.

He had a great Natural Capacity, a Large and Comprehensive Genius. And by hard
study and great Industry had amassed a rich Treasure of Learning. I suppose few
in these Corners of the Earth have been better acquainted with Books and Men.

He Read much, and had an Excellent Faculty of digesting what he Read, and of
making it his own. He had the Powers of Reasorning and Arguing in an high
Degree. He was a great Master of Speech, and was very happy in imparting his
Sentiments to others. And we may now take up our Lamentation and say; Behold
the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, takes away -- The Prophet, and the Prudent, --
And the Eloquent Orator.

These Rich Talents which His Lord bestowed freely upon him, he Consecrated to
the Work of the Ministry: and devoted to the Service of Christ in His Temple;
to how good Purpose, ye are Witnesses. He did not hide his Lords Talents in a
Napkin; but Occupied with them, Laboring in the Word and Doctrine. He did
Spend, and was Spent in his Masters Service. He was an Able Minister of the New
Testament; a Scribe instructed to the Kingdom of Heaven; and brought forth out
of his Treasure things New and Old. He was highly esteemed for the Pertinency,
Fervency, and Copiousness of his Expression in Prayer. His Discourses were
Elaborate. The Subjects of them were well Chosen, the Method was Accurate, the
Style Strong and Masculine. They were excellently well suited to make his
Auditors wiser and better; and he Delivered them with extraordinary Fervor.

I account it a great Favor of God that I enjoyed the Benefit of his Ministry
so long.

His Deeds of Charity are now mentioned for a Memorial of him. The Lord grant
that his Seed after him may be blessed!

He had a well Instructed Family. And took care to Worship God in his House.
His Repeated Requests in his Family Devotions were, that there might be a
Blessed Intercourse with Heaven.

It pleased God in His Holy Providence to Exercise him with strong Pains, and
that of long continuance, under which he was enabled to express himself with a
becoming Submission and Resignation to the Sovereign Disposal of God. And I
look upon it to be truly Wonderful, that under such frequent Returns of
distressing Maladies, he was Strengthened and Spirited in so great a measure, to
perform his Ministerial Labors in the House of GOD. Herein Gods Power was
Observably magnified in Him.

It is a Comfort and Refreshment to us that this bright Lamp of the Sanctuary
went out at last in a Sweet Perfume; that I may borrow the Phrase used by him
in his Excellent Discourse on this Subject above a Year ago. October 23. 1715.
.

These were some of his Last Words. I thank God, who has given me a good Hope
through Christ. Notwithstanding my many Infirmities; both in Public, and
Private; through His Grace, I have been Enabled to be Sincere and Upright
before Him. And I can now look for an House not made with Hands Eternal in the
Heavens, when this House of my Earthly Tabernacle is dissolved. And this Hope
is built only upon the Merits of Christ, who has Suffered so much for me; Who
Died, and is Risen again, and Lives for ever, to make Intercession for me. And
upon this Foundation is built my Hope for my Self, my Family, my Church, and
the whole Israel of God. And I thank God who has Enabled me, in a Dying Hour,
to Express this my Hope.

Thus our Worthy Pastor being Dead yet Speaks. The Voice of God in the
Removal of this his Servant, in almost the Middle of his Days, Cries to us;
and O that we were Wise to Hear and Understand it. The Lord grant that this
sore Rebuke of His Providence may be Sanctified to impress on our Minds those
Great and Important Truths which he has Spoken to us in the Name of the Lord.

The Lord help us to Remember how we have received and heard. The Lord help us
to bear in Mind how Fervently and Affectionately this his Servant did Beseech
us in Christ's stead to be Reconciled unto God. We have by him been often called
upon to Come, and accept of the Blessings of the Gospel of Christ; and Warned
of our Danger of negiecting the Gospel Invitations; Particularly in the last
Sermon which he Preached to us, which was from that Solemn and Awakning
Subject, Lord's Day, January 20. 1716, 17. P. M.
Mat. 22.5. -- But they made light of it, and went their way, one to his Farm,
and another to his Merchandise. O that I could clinch the Nail which was then
driven by the Strong and Skilful Hand of the Master of this Assembly; that
these Words of Wisdom might be as a Nail fastened in a sure place. O let not
Worldly Business, Cares and Interests, prove fatal impediments in hindering you
from Entertaining the Offers of the Gospel. O do not make light of these
Invitations, and go one to his Farm and another to his Merchandise. But now, To
Day while it is called to Day, Hear the Voice of Gods Word and Providence, and
harden not your Hearts. O do not Treasure up Wrath against the Day of Wrath, by
Despising and Rejecting the Offers of the Gospel; But now make haste to Christ
and make sure of an Interest in Him, who is the Pearl of great Price. The Lord
Jesus Christ now Speaks to you, as Rev. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold
tried in the fire, that thou may be rich; and white raiment, that thou may
be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear, and anoint
thine eyes with eye salve, that thou may see.

O that such as have hitherto been deaf to these Calls, might now have their
Ears opened, hear the Voice of the Son of God, and Live.

The Lord humble us all for our Barrenness under the Means of Grace, and help
us to search and try our ways, and to return to the Lord.

The Lord enable us to see and know the things which belong to our Peace,
before they are hid from our Eyes. May we be helped to cry mightily to God for
our selves and this whole Land, that He would not shut up the Doors, nor put
out the Lamps of His House. 2 Chronicles. 29.7.
.

The Lord Sanctify this Afflictive Dispensation to us all, and in particular to
the Bereaved Family. May God give them Beauty for Ashes, the Oil of Joy for
Mourning, the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness. The Eternal GOD be
their Refuge, and underneath let be the Everlasting Arms. Let God be the
Husband of the Widow, and the Father of the Fatherless. The Lord speak
comfortably to His Handmaid, and Graciously say to her, Thy Maker is thy
Husband. Blessed be God who made her such an Help meet to His Servant deceased,
under his strong Pains, and long continued Illnesses, and therein a Public
Blessing. The Lord graciously Reward her Labors of Love. Let the Everlasting
Father be a Father to the Orphans.

The Lord take care of this Bereaved Flock, and supply all our wants according
to His Riches in Glory by Christ. May the Great Shepherd of the Sheep who Lives
for ever, Lead and Feed this Flock, and make all needful Provision for it at
all times; That they may go in and out and find Pasture. The Lord help us to
make haste to Christ, who is the Rock of Ages, on whom the Church is Built.

To Conclude, The Lord Bless you, and keep you. The Lord make His Face to shine
upon you, and be gracious unto you: The Lord lift up His Countenance upon you
and give you Peace.

And now Brethren, I commend you to God, and to the Word of His Grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among them which are
Sanctified.

FINIS.

