A SERMON Wherein is Showed,

I. That the Ministers of the Gospel need, and ought to desire the Prayers of
the Lord's People for them.

II. That the People of GOD ought to Pray for His Ministers.

Preached at Roxbury, October 29. 1718. When Mr. Thomas Walter Was Ordained a
Pastor in that Church, by his GRANDFATHER, Increase Mather. D. D.

Acts 6. 4. We will give our selves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry
of the Word. Acts 14. 23. When they had Ordained them Elders in every Church,
and had Prayed with Fasting. Phil. 1. 19. For I know this shall turn to my
Salvation, through your Prayer, and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ.
BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, for J. EDWARDS, at his Shop next door to the
Light-House Tavern, in King Street, 1718.

THE PREFACE
IT is Asserted in the Sermon Emitted herewith, that the Lives of Ministers
depend much (under God) on the Prayers of the Lord's People for them. I am a
living Example on whom that has been verified. When I Ordained a Son who has
been since that Laboring with me in the same Vineyard, for above Thirty-Three
Years, I little thought of living to Ordain a Grandson. It is high time for me
to be willing to leave a sinful World. I bless the Lord I am willing, having
seen an end of all Perfection, and willing humbly to wait the Lord's time. The
only thing that makes this World desirable, is, an opportuniy to do Service for
Christ. But when Abilities for Serviceableness is Expired, ( as they are with
me Expiring) why should we desire to live longer! I confess I did so when I was
Young. But the case is altered with me. Now my Prayer is, that my Children, and
Childrens Children may do greater Service (if they do not they will do very
little) for Christ and for his People than I have done. Amen!

Boston, November. 6. 1718.
Ministers of the Gospel ought to desire the Prayers of the Lord's People.
HEBREWS XIII. 18. Pray for us.
THAT the Writer of this Admirable Epistle was no less an Author than an
Apostle, and particularly, that the Apostle Paul was the Writer of it, seems
evident in that there are many Paulins Phrases in it. And Peter writing to the
Hebrews or Christanized Jews, says, Our beloved Brother Paul, according to the
wisdom given to him of God, has written to you. The Conclusion of the Epistle
begins with these Words, Pray for us. Undoubtedly he intends himself in
special. It is not improbable but that there might be other Ministers of the
Gospel under Confinement with him at Rome, whom he would also have them Prayed
for. Now considering he was divinely Inspired in requesting the Prayers of
these Christians, that is documental to other Ministers that they should do the
like, and instructive also to People that they should comply with the
Exhortation.

THE Doctrine then before us, is, THAT the Ministers of the Gospel should
desire the Lord's People to Pray for them, and the Lord's People ought to Pray
for them.

THERE are Two Propositions to be insisted on.

PROP. I. THE Ministers of the Gospel ought to desire the Prayers of the Lord's
People. They need the Prayers of the Lord's People. If such an one as Paul
needed them, how much more do other Ministers, who have not his Abilities and
Accomplishments. He was an Apostle and the Chief among them. There were some
among the Corinthians who compelled him to say, In nothing am I behind the very
chiefest Apostles, 2 Cor. 12. 11. He was no less a Subject of Divine
Inspiration and Revelation than any of them. But moreover had the advantage of
a Learned Education. He was the Pupil of a very Learned Doctor, brought up at
the Feet of Gamaliel. The Jewish Writers say, that Gamaliel was the President
of their Sanedrim. Yet Paul notwithstanding all his Learning and Extraordinary
Qualifications, requests the Prayers of the Lords People for him. He does so
not only in this his Epistle to the Hebrews, but in all his other Epistles to
the Churches. And sometimes he desired the Prayers of particular Godly Persons
as well as of whole Churches. He requested Philemon to Pray for him. Yea, and
Apphia also, a Godly Praying Woman supposed to be Philemons Wife. The greatest
Saint may need and be benefited by the Prayers of the meanest Saint. It has
been related concerning that Great, Learned and Holy Man, Dr. Usher, that after
he was the Archbishop of Armagh, he would sometimes step into the Houses of
Poor Men of Eminent Piety, only to request that they would particularly Pray
for him. The Ministers of God need the Prayers of His People. For,

1. THEY are called unto a great and difficult Work, which they are not able to
manage aright without special help from Heaven; Therefore it becomes them to
say, Pray for us. They that think their Work is easy know not what it is.
Nehemiah said, I am doing a great Work, Neh. 6. 3. Why? What was he doing? He
was repairing the Walls of Jerusalem. The Ministers of the Gospel are engaged
in building not the Material but the Spiritual Jerusalem, and that is a great
Work. Precious Souls are committed to their Care and Charge, for which they
must be accountable. And if any of those Souls perish through their negligence
the Account will be dreadful. In the Verse before my Text it is said, They
watch for your Souls, as they that must give Account. Is not the work of a
Watchman attended with difficulty and hazard? The words of God to the Prophet
are exceeding awful, Ezekiel. 33. 7, 8. I have set thee a Watchman to the house of
Israel; when I say to the Wicked, O Wicked Man thou shall surely die, if thou
do not speak to warn the Wicked Man from his way, that Wicked Man shall die
in his iniquity, but his Blood will I require at thy hand. The thought of that
is tremendous. A Minister of the Gospel is engaged in a Work for which it is
said, Who is sufficient, 2 Cor. 2. 16. The ablest Minister in the World has not
self sufficiency for so great an undertaking. 2 Cor. 3. 5. We are not
sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves. Are we are able
by our thinking or studying, to prepare Sermons that shall Convert or Edify
Souls? No: all our sufficiency is of God. Therefore He is to be Prayed unto. It
is said concerning the Levites who were Ministers and Teachers, that they
managed their bearing the Ark as became them, when God helped them, 1 Chronicles.
15. 25. Then it concerns them to say, Pray for us, that God will please to help
us in the Work whereunto He has called us, and separated us.

2. THE Ministers of the Gospel reed the Prayers of the Lord's People for them,
considering they are subject to the like Infirmities with other Men. They are
indeed called Angels. Among the Jews the Chief Ruler in the Synagogue, was
called Shaliac Tsibbor, the Angel of the Congregation. Thus the Pastors of
Churches are called, the Angels of the Churches. That Name should put them in
mind of their Duty, that they should endeavor to live Angelical lives. But
they are Angels not in respect of Nature, but Office. Angel signifies a
Messenger. A Minister is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. But he is an
infirm Creature, and has not the strength of an Angel to work with. It was well
spoken by one that was Ordained in a particular Church, who said, he hoped the
Church which had called him, would consider that they had not called an Angel,
but a poor frail Man, who needed their Pity and Prayers. Ministers are subject
to the same natural infirmities with other Men. The Apostle advises Timothy, to
drink no longer water, but to use a little Wine for his stomachs sake, and
often infirmities, 1 Timothy 5. 23. He counsels him not to continue to drink Water
alone, but to mix a little Wine with his Water, for that might conduce to his
Health, who was often subject to Infirmities. Ministers are as subject to
Bodily Sicknesses and Diseases as any other Men. Epaphroditus a Faithful
Minister of the Gospel was Sick nigh unto Death, but God had mercy on him, and
restored him to Health again. It is said of the Prophet Elisha, that when Joash
wept over him, he was Sick of the Sickness whereof he dyed, which seems to
intimate that he had been Sick of other Sicknesses before that, which did not
prove mortal to him. Nor are Ministers of the Gospel free from moral
Infirmities, as long as they are in this World. The Prophet Elias was an
extraordinary Man, nevertheless, it is said of him, He was Subject to like
Passions as we are, Jam. 5. 17. The holy Man discovered too much of Passion and
Impatience, when being Persecuted by a cursed Queen, he requested for himself
that he might dye, and said, Lord take away my life, 1 Kin. 19. 4. Jonah was a
famous Prophet, his Name is honorably mentioned in the Book of God. 2 Kin. 14.
25. The word of the Lord which he spoke by the hand of his servant Jonah the
son of Amittai. Yet this Servant of the Lord was one subject to strange
Passion. It displeased him that God spared Niniveh, and he was very angry,
Jonah 4. 1. The time in which the City was threatened with destruction was
lapsed, and the City not destroyed. He thought he should have the dishonor of
being counted a false Prophet, and rather than so, he was willing that many
Hundreds of Thousands of Persons, Men, Women, and Children should perish. What
amazing, what unmerciful Passion was here. Luther according to his Name, and
the Prediction of the Martyr Huss an hundred Years before, was the Swan of his
Age; of whom Calvin in one of his Epistles says, If he calls me a Devil, I will
call him a Faithful Servant of Christ, yet he was a Man of violent Passions;
would reflect furiously, on those whose Sentiments differed from and were more
Orthodox than his. The Lord leaves the best Men to discover that they are but
Men, that so we might cease from Men, and not idolize any Man, though never so
Eminent.

3. THE Ministers of the Gospel are more exposed to Temptation than any other
Men in the World. Therefore have they cause to say to the Lord's People, Pray
for us. The Devil hates them above all other Men, for he knows they are the
greatest destrovers of his Kingdom. When the Lord Jesus Christ sent His
Ministers to Preach the Gospel, He said, I beheld Satan as Lightning fall from
Heaven, Luke 10. 18. Sometimes by the Preaching of the Gospel whole Kingdoms
have been recovered out of Satan's hand, and become visibly the Kingdom of
Christ. The Thunder of the Gospel has caused Satan to fall like Lightning. And
therefore it is not to be wondered at, if the Devil has a peculiar spite at the
Preachers of it. He will molest them with inward Temptations. Within are fears,
it may be very afflictive ones; and yet altogether groundless ones. The fiery
darts of the wicked one enter into their Souls. And he will raise Persecutions
from the Word upon them, In the Twelfth Chapter of the Revelations, the Devil
is called a Red Dragon, because of his being the Author of bloody Persecutions;
and it is said, that he cast a Flood out of his mouth. That Flood Interpreters
suppose intends the Arian Heresy and Persecution. The Historians informs us,
that that Persecution fell chiefly on the Ministers of the Gospel. And often
times it is so, that Persecuting Laws take hold on Ministers when their People
escape. They shall be Silenced, Imprisoned, and subject to severe Penalties for
Preaching the Gospel. They shall be Subjects of obloque and reproach, more than
others in the World. Shall be slandrously reported, and hear the slander of
many. If there is a Minister that the wickedest of Men cry him up, we may
conclude that he has not been Faithful in bearing witness against the Sins of
the time. Christ says, Luke 6. 26. Woe unto you when all Men, the generality of
wicked Men, shall speak well of you, for so did their Fathers to the false
Prophets. But how was it with the Faithful Prophets of God? Christ has said in
another place, Blessed are you when Men shall revile you, and speak all manner
of evil against you, for my sake, for so persecuted they the Prophets which
were before you. We often see that if there is a Tree in our Orchards, that has
better Fruit on it than others, many sticks and stones will be thrown at it. If
there is a Minister that is more useful and fruitful than his Neighbors, he
shall be sure to have many stones in own at him.

4. MANY times it sares with the Ministers of the Gospel according as their
People Pray for them. Therefore they have reason to say, Pray for us. The
Lives, the Health, the Liberty of Ministers depend much on the Prayers of their
People. They may by their Prayers be instrumental in delivering them from
feared evils. This the Apostle was very sensible of. He was afraid lest the
unbelieving Jews who hated him above any Man in the World, would have done him
mischief at Jerusalem, wherefore in his Epistle to the Romans, he does
importunately beg their Prayers, I beseech you Brethren for the Lord Jesus
Christ his sake, that you strive together with me, I Will Pray my self, but do
you join with me, in your Prayers to God for me, that I may be delivered from
them that do not believe in Judea, Romans 15. 30, 31. Truly Prayer for him was
not in vain. He was delivered out of the hands of those unbelievers when in the
eminentest danger. For they dragged him out of the Temple, and as they went
about to kill him, a Roman Colonel with his Captains and Soldiers rescued him
out of their hands. And was not that deliverance an answer of many Prayers of
the Apostle and of his Christian Friends? When a Minister is fallen into deep
Affliction, the Prayers of the Lord's People, especially if many Pray for him,
may prove his Deliverance. 2 Cor. 1. 10, 11. God has delivered us from so great
a death, and does deliver, in whom we trust that He will yet deliver, you also
helping by your Prayer for us, that for the gift, i. e. for the deliverance
given to us, by the means of many Persons, thanks may be given by many in our
behalf. When a Minister is deprived of Liberty to Preach, either by the hand of
God confining of him, or by Persecutors, it may be the Prayers of the Lord's
People for him will obtain his restoration. Thus in the Text before us, Pray
for us, I beseech you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the
sooner. He speaks after the like manner to Philemon, Verse 23. I trust that
through your Prayer I shall be given to you. We have a miraculous confirmation of
this in the Apostle Peter. He was put into Prison bound in Chains, and Four
Quaternions of Soldiers appointed to keep him. The next Morning was to have had
his Life taken from him. Did Peter live a considerable time after this, and do
great Service for Christ? He did. The Prayers of the Lord's People saved his
Life. It is said, Act. 12. 5. Peter was kept in Prison, but Prayer was made
without ceasing of the Church unto God for him. These Prayers brought an Angel
sent from Heaven, who knocked off the Chains from Peter's hand, opened the
Prison doors, and caused the Iron Gate which led into the City to open of
itself. Furthermore, Churches may by their Prayers, obtain not only Temporal,
but Spiritual Blessings for the Ministers who are set over them. Hence the
Apostle said to the Church of Philippians, who when an exercising Affliction
befell him, I know that this shall turn to my Salvation through your Prayer,
and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1. 19.

PROP. II. THE Lord's People ought to Pray for the Ministers of God.

IF they omit to express their desire for it, they ought nevertheless to Pray
for them; much more when they earnestly request it. Prayer is a mutual duty
which Pastors and People owe to one another. When a particular Church shall
Elect and Ordain a Pastor, they ought to do it with Solemn and Extraordinary
Prayer. It was so in the Apostles days, and has been so practiced in the
Churches in New England. Acts 14. 23. They Ordained them Elders in every
Church, and Prayed with Fasting. And there is great Reason why People should
Pray for those, that are called to the Work of the Ministry.

1. WE may Reason from the Relation which there is between the Pastors of
Churches, and their People. Such as are in Office Relation chosen by a
particular Church, Christ has made them Rulers therein. Heb. 13. 17. Obey them
that have the Rule over you. It is true that the Ministers of the Gospel have
no disputeck Authority. Nevertheless, they have Spiritual Authority, which
ought to be regarded. They are Hagoumenoi, as the Original Word there is, they
are Leaders and Captains, under Christ their General, when in their Ruling they
obey Him, they ought to be Obeyed. All Rulers ought to be Prayed for. Pray for
all in Authority. It was well spoken by one of the Reformed German Divines,
That if People instead of censuring and finding fault with their Rulers, which
they are very apt to do, would Pray more for them, it would be better for their
Rulers, and for themselves too. Shall Rulers in the Civil State be subjects of
Prayer? And shall not those whom God has appointed Rulers in His Churches be
so? Moreover, they are Fathers. 1 Timothy 5. 1. Rebuke not an Elder, but entreat
him as a Father. Which doubtless is to be understood not only concerning Elders
in respect of Old Age, but of Office. It is not unbecoming the greatest Man in
a Congregation to esteem his Pastor as a Father. When the Prophet Elisha was
Sick and on his Death Bed, the King of Israel visited him, and wept over him,
and said, O my Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel and the Horsemen
thereof, 2 Kin. 13. 14. Are not Fathers to be Prayed for?

2. FAITHFUL Ministers of the Gospel are great Blessings to the World. Although
they have merited nothing from God, they merit the Prayers of His People. As
the Apostle speaks in another respect, 1 Cor. 9. 11. If we have sown unto you
spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your carnal things. So
if the Ministers of the Gospel are Blessings to their People, is it a great
thing for them to Pray for them. Certainly they owe them that and more. The
Prophets were wonderful Blessings to the Lord's People. By a Prophet the Lord
brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a Prophet he was preserved, Hos. 12. 13.
There were ordinary (as well extraordinary) Prophets who were great Blessings
to the Lord's Ancient People. Such as were Educated in Schools and Colleges,
that so they might be qualified to be Teachers and Instructors of others. These
were called, the Sons of the Prophets. There was a College at Najoth, where
Samuel was the President. Elijah had Young Scholars under his Tuition. So had
Elisha after him, of whom it was said, that the Sons of the Prophets bowed
themselves to the ground before him, 2 Kin. 2. 15. It is mentioned as a
singular favor of the Lord, I have raised up of your Sons for Prophets, and of
your Young Men for Nazarites; Such as were separated and set apart for God,
Amos 2. 11. Faithful Ministers are Blessings by their Prayers: that is a special
part of the Work which they are to give attendance unto. Act. 6. 4. We will
give our selves continually to Prayer and to the Ministry of the Word. He that
would prove himself to be a Minister of God, must discover it by his
Prayerfulness. Jer. 27. 18. If they be Prophets, and if the word of the Lord be
with them, let them make intercession to the Lord of hosts. By their fervent
Prayers, holy Ministers of God, avert Judgments from their People. Jer. 18. 20.
Remember that I stood before thee, to speak good for them, and to turn away thy
wrath from them. When there was great danger of a Famine, the Prophet Amos
Prayed, and the Lord said, It shall not be. The threatened Judgment shall not
be, Amos 7. 3. By their fervent Prayers they do not only prevent Judgments, but
obtain Blessings from Heaven. When there was a sad drought for a long time, the
Prophet Elijah, Prayed earnestly, and the Heavens gave Rain, and the Earth
brought forth her fruit, Jam. 5. 18. Ministers are Blessings by the Sermons
which they Preach. Thereby they are Instruments of Converting Sinners, and so
of saving Souls from Death. It may be there is a Minister, that many Souls will
bless God that ever they knew him, because He has been their Spiritual Father.
Sometimes God has blessed one Sermon for the Conversion of many. One of Peter's
Sermons Converted Two Thousand. Such Conversions are rare: yet I remember I
have read concerning Luther, that by one Sermon he Converted a whole Town from
Popery, to embrace the Protestant Religion. There are Ministers now living that
many Thousands have been Edified by their Ministry. It may be there are many
Hundreds in a Congregation, and there is a Sermon Preached which all that hear
it will remember something, which they will be the better for it as long as
they live. Holy Ministers of God are Blessings by their Example as well as by
their Doctrine. A Minister of the Gospel should be able to say to his Hearers,
do not only as I say, but as I do: Follow my Example and it will lead you to
Heaven. Phil. 3. 17. Brethren be followers together with me, and mark them
which walk so as you have us for an example. It has been said, Ministri vita
est Cynosura, the Ministers Life should be like the Pole Star, to direct those
that are Sailing to Heaven in a right course. Indeed Ministers (though Good Men)
may err, and then they ought not to be followed. Only Christ is an unerring
Example, and it is impossible that He should Error Sin because He is God as
well as Man. Ministers are to be followed so far as they follow Christ, and no
further. 1Cor. 11. 1. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. When
a Faithful Minister of the Gospel comes to a People he does not come empty
handed, but with both hands full of Blessings. Romans 15. 29. I am sure when I
come unto you, I shall come in the fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of
Christ.

3. IF God shall bear the Prayers of a Church for their Pastor, the benefit
will be their own. God has ordained Ministers for the sake of His Church in the
World. He has not made His Church for Ministers, but Ministers for His Church.
Therefore are they peculiar Subjects of the Churches Prayers. There are some
Ministers who are eminently Gifted above others. Whatever Spiritual Gifts they
are blessed with, they are all for the Service of Christ, and of His Church, as
we see in that Scripture unto which some have given the Name of the Churches
Invantory, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22. All things are yours, whether Paul or Apollos, or
Cephas. Apostles are Ordained for your Edification, so are all inferior
Ministers. All Sacred Offices, and Officers are for the Churches benefit. Then
it is the Interest as well as the Duty of the Lord's People to Pray for such.

I might have added, that God does sometimes bring Afflictions on His
Ministers, out of respect to the spiritual good of His People as well as of
their own good, that they may be the better able instruct, and comfort and
edify them. If we are afflicted it is for your comfort and salvation, 2 Cor. 1.
6. Sometimes the Lord visits a Minister of His with Sickness. Prayer recovers
him. After that Affliction, (notwithstanding he was a godly Man before that,)
he will be more Prayerful, more Humble, and more Holy than before that
Affliction, and so a greater Blessing to His People.

THE Enquiry here will be, What things ought the Lord's People to Pray for in
behalf of His Ministers?

Answ. 1. THEY should Pray that the Lord will pour more abundantly of His
Spirit upon them. That He will furnish them more and more with the Gifts and
Graces thereof. Did not Moses make such a Prayer for the Ministers of God?
Deuteronomy. 33. 8. Let thy Thummin and thy Urim be with thy holy one. The Minister
that is Consecrated to God is in that respect an holy one. Thummin signifies
Integrity and Piety. Urim signifies Light and Knowledge. Pray that those may be
increased in His Ministers. The more sanctified knowledge a Man has, the more
sensible he is of his want of more knowledge. As we see in Agur, who was a very
knowing as well as a very pious Man. But what Opinion had he of his own
knowledge? Prove. 30. 1. We have there the Prophecy, that is a Sermon of Agur,
which he spoke to Ithiel and Ucal. They seem to be two of his Scholars, who had
an high opinion of their Teachers wisdom and knowledge, and therefore applied
themselves to him for further instruction. Alas, (says he) you come to a poor
ignorant creature. I have not the understanding of a man, nor have the
knowledge of the holy. There are many holy Men who far excel me in wisdom and
knowledge. They that have the most, have need of a great deal more knowledge.
How shall a Pastor feed his Flock with knowledge and with understanding, if he
has not himself an enlarged understanding in the Mysteries of Religion, and of
the Scriptures. There is Grace enough in Christ the Glorious Head of the
Church, to supply all His Ministers. And the more Christ fills them, the better
will it be for those that sit under their Ministry. Therefore Pray for us.
Without Christ they are nothing, nor can they do any thing. Wherefore Pray,

2. THAT the presence of the Lord may be with them. There is an encouraging
Promise for it, Mat. 28. 19, 20. Go teach all Nations, I am with you even to
the end of the World. Pray that His Ambassadors may enjoy His Promised
Presence. If they will bear a faithful Testimony against the Sins of Men, they
will have Enemies that will prevail over them if the Lord does not stand by
them. So if they stand up in the defense of the Truth. There is that which is
called the present Truth, 2 Pet. 1. 12. In the days of the Prophets, the
present Truth was a Testimony against the Idolatry and Apostasy of that time,
which if the Prophets had not enjoyed a singular protection from the presence
of God with them, they could not have been witnesses for Him. In the days of
the Apostles the present Truth, was, that the Promised Messiah is come, and
that Jesus of Nazareth is He. In bearing witness to that Truth the Apostles
were exposed to great difficulties and dangers, especially from the Jews who
looked on them as the greatest Heretics, but the Lord protected them until
they had finished their Testiomony. In these last Ages, the present Truth has
been to bear witness against Popish Idolatries and Superstitions. God raised up
Luther to be a Champion in that Cause. What powerful Enemies had he to conflict
with? He said odium et impetum totius orbis sustinui. But the Providence of God
wonderfully protected him. One says of him, That a poor Friar should set
himself against the Pope and all his Cardinals, was a miracle, but that he
should prevail in his opposition was a greater miracle, but that he should live
to be above Threescore years of Age, and at last dye quietly in his Bed was the
greatest miracle of all. A Testimony against all remainders of
Antichristianism, and the Asserting of Purity of Worship and Discipline, is the
present Truth of this day. They that appear in this Cause will be Sufferers.
Pray that the Lord will stand by them, and support them until they have
finished their Testimony. And Pray for the Ministers of the Gospel, that the
Prospering Presence of the Lord may be with them. That their Labors may be
made Successful for the Conversion of Sinners. A Minister may Preach admirable
Sermons, and continue to do so for many Years, and not one Sinner Converted,
except the Spirit of God shall make His Labors effectual. The ablest Preachers
are not always the most successful. The best Preacher that ever was on the face
of the Earth, but few Souls were Converted by His Sermons, viz. Our Lord Jesus
Christ. Never Man spoke like that Man. Yet he complains of the unsuccessfulness
of His Labors. Isai. 49. 4, 5. I have labored in vain, I have spent my
strength for naught, my work is with my God, though Israel is not gathered. God
regards His Servants not according to Success which is His Work, but according
to Labor which is our Work. Edification as well as Conversion, depends on the
Presence and Power of God going along with the dispensation of His Word. 1 Cor.
3. 5, 6, 7. Who is Paul, or who is Apollos, but Ministers by whom you believed,
even as the Lord gave to every man. I have planted, Apollos watered, but God
gave the increase. So neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters, but God that gives the increase. The increase, the success of
Preaching is all from God. Paul had never Converted the Corinthians, nor had
Apollos by all his waterings made them Fruitful, and built them up in their
most holy Faith if God had not given the Increase; Success to both their
Labors. Therefore let Ministers and People go to God by Prayer.

WE proceed now to the APPLICATION.

USE I.
IF Ministers of the Gospel ought to desire the Prayers of the Lord's People,
Then they ought to approve themselves so as that His People may be encouraged
to Pray for them. Thus the Apostle in the Text before us, encourages the
Christian Hebrews to Pray for him since he was an honest Man, having a
Conscience void of offense toward God and toward Men, notwithstanding the
false reports that were raised of him, as if he was an enemy to Moses, because
of his having rejected Juadism for Christianity. Both his Conscience and his
Conversation did witness for him. Pray for us. For we trust we have a good
Conscience, in all things willing to live honestly. If we would have the
Prayers of Good Men, we must be Laborers and not Loyterers in the Lord's
Vineyard. Godly Men will not Pray for a Loyterer except it be that God would
either mend him, or remove him. But for a diligent Labourer they will Pray.
Therefore Ministers should keep close to their Studies. They may not wander
from House to House, and then come into the Pulpit hand over head, and offer to
the Lord and to His People that which cost them naught. They must study to find
out profitable which will be acceptable Words. They must study that they may
show themselves Workmen that need not to be ashamed. There was use of Oil in
the Sanctuary; that Oil was to be beaten. A well studied Sermon, is beaten Oil
for the Sanctuary. And let a Minister Live Sermons as well as Preach them, and
then see if his People will not prize him and Pray for him. It is spoken
concerning Ministers of God, They that honor me I will honor. God will honor
them by making His People honor them and Pray for them. The Apostle directs
Timothy what he should do, that notwithstanding his being a Young Man no body
should despise him. 1 Timothy 4. 12. Let no Man despise thy Youth. The Apostle
does not only caution others not to despise him, but advises Timothy what he
should do that so he might not be despised for his Youth. But he thou an
Example of the Believers, in Word in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in
Faith, in Purity. When a Young Man shall excel in these Graces, he will not be
despised for his being Young, but rather reverenced the more for being so
Exemplary in his Youth.

USE II.
IF the Lord's People should Pray for the Ministers of Christ, they ought to
Love them dearly. Then they will Pray for them the more fervently and
frequently. Love discovers it self in Prayers and good wishes. A Person whom a
Man has an extraordinary Love for, he will Pray for that Person in a singular
manner. There was in Thessalonica an Organized Church, a Church furnished with
Teaching Officers, concerning whom it is said, 1 These. 5. 12, 13. Know them
which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and
esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. Its difficult to express
in English the full emphasis of the Greek. Hyper ek Peristhou, imports Love and
Esteem with an Hyberbole. There were some had such love and esteem for the
Apostle Paul, as that they had rather dye themselves than that he should dye.
Romans 16. 3. Priscilla and Aquila have for my life laid down their own necks, to
whom not only I give thanks, but also all the Churches of the Gentiles. It is
related that when the City of Ausburg prayed the Duke of Brunswick that their
famous Minister Urbanus Regius might be restored to them, he replied that his
whole Kingdom fared the better for that one Man, and he would as soon part with
his Eyes as let him go. The Church in Smyrna continued their love to Polycarp,
(who is supposed to be the Angel spoken of, Rev. 2. 8.) when he was under
decays by reason of a great Old Age. The nearer he was to Heaven, the more loath
they were to part with him. When Chrysostom was like to be Silenced, his People
Petitioned for his Liberty to Preach, saying it was better the Sun should not
shine, than that Chrysostom should not Preach. I plead for no extravagant
Applauses. But it must be said, that Faithful Teachers and Pastors, although it
may be they are mean, their Work is honorable, and for their Works sake they
are to be esteemed highly in Love.

USE III.
I Conclude with a Word of Exhortation. Pray for the Lord's Ministers. There
are a considerable Number, above Twenty Pastors of Churches in this Assembly,
they all say as the Apostle here does, Pray for us. Let every Godly Man or
Woman that belongs to this or that particular Church, when you are alone with
God for your own Souls, remember your Pastors before the Lord. Who can say how
great Blessings you may obtain for them? Are there not Ministers of the Gospel
here before the Lord, who have been Sick nigh unto Death, but the Prayers of
their People have kept them Alive unto this Day. I am sure there is one such. I
that am speaking to you am such an one. Let me declare it freely that the
Prayer hearing God alone may have the Glory of His Mercy. In my Younger Years I
was Three times brought to the Gates of the Grave, by dangerous Fevers which
proved mortal to some. But the loving People among whom I have been Preaching
the Gospel above Seven and Fifty Years, set Days apart to beg my Life at the
Hands of God. The last time that I was visited with an acute disease, which is
now above Four and Thirty Years since, the Church desired Blessed Mr. Eliot, to
assist them in Prayer to God. I shall never forget the words of Faith which he
then expressed to me when the Public Exercises of the Day were finished, he
came to me in my Sick Chamber with these words, Blessed be God you are ours
still, you shall not dye by this Sickness. He was persuaded God had some
further Service for me to do for Christ and for His Churches in New England,
before He would take me out of this World. And now behold I that was looked
upon as a dying Man above Thirty, nay Nine and Forty Years ago, having obtained
help from God through the Prayers of His People, continue to this Day, and have
lived so long as that I cannot, I do not desire any Friend I have in the World,
to Pray that I may live one day longer. I have great reason to say with Old
Simeon, Now Lord let thou thy Servant depart in Peace. Only Pray that while
it shall be the pleasure of the Almighty to detain me here, I may continue
serviceable to Christ and to the Souls of Men.

BUT I would direct this Exhortation in special to the Church of Roxbury. Pray
for Him who has been your Pastor now for the space of Thirty Years. He needs
and desires your Prayers, in respect of Bodily Infirmities which have rendered
him unable to attend the Lord's Work among you, as in many Years formerly. God
has encouraged you to Pray for him, since when above a Year ago, he was brought
very low, and not able to go abroad, you set apart a Day to Pray for him, soon
after which the Lord restored him to the exercise of some part of His
Ministerial Office. Continue Praying for him, and it may be God will restore
him to the full exercise thereof. And God has answered your Prayers in raising
up his Son, whom you this Day Choose and Ordain to be your Pastor in Conjunction
with his Father. And that is a rare favor of God, that a Father and a Son
should be conjoined in the Pastoral Office. I remember not Two more such
Instances in any Church in New England. Pray then for Him who is this Day to be
brought into the dreadful Bond of Office Relation. David was concerned in his
Spirit for his Son Solomon, considering that he was Young and tender, he was
but Twenty Years Old, yet called to build a Temple for God. He whom you this
Day Call to be your Pastor, is Young. So Young as the Canons would not allow
him to be Ordained. Those Canons have been dispensed with. Famous Dr. Usher was
Ordained when he was but One and Twenty Years of Age. Pray for him whom you
this Day Ordain, and notwithstanding his being Young, the Lord can make him
instrumental in carrying on the Building of His Temple in Roxbury. Pray that he
may be like the Renowned Eliot, who has by some been called, the American
Apostle, and who served Christ in the Work of the Gospel Threescore Years in
this Church. That he may be like him in Humility, in Labouriousness, in Zeal
for God and against Sin, in stedfastness in the Truth, both as to the Faith and
Order of the Gospel, and in being a Preacher of Christ, That holy Man was in
his Element when he was Preaching Christ, and would often lament that Christ
was no more Preached. Pray that he may be a Blessing not only to you, but to
your Children, yea, and to your Childrens Children, that the Children unborn
may have cause to Bless God for the Solemn Transactions of this Day. I shall
mention a Scripture to encourage thus to Pray, and Conclude. It is that in,
Isai. 59. 21. My spirit and my words shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out
of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 6. line 19. read once, p. 10. l. 20. r. despotick. l. 22. for ha. r. he.

IT has been (and is still) Customary in the Churches of New England, when a
Minister is Ordained, for the Messengers of the Churches in the Neighborhood,
consisting of Elders and Brethren, to Depute One in the Name of the rest to
give, The Right Hand of Fellowship to the Person Ordained. The like has been
practiced by the Protestant Churches in France, and in Bohemia. The Scripture
for it is, Gal. 2. 9. At the late Ordination in Roxbury, Doctor Cotton Mather
was desired to perform that Office of Love and Communion. He has been entreated
to give a Copy of the SPEECH made by him on that Occasion, which is here
Annexed to the preceding Sermon.

IT is a Thing abundantly Sensible unto all who have any true and just Sense of
so important a Matter, That the Ministry of the Gospel is a work that calls for
very great Assistences. The Men who are set apart for the Instruction of other
Men, in the Principles and Practices of the Glorious Gospel, have a Work to do,
whereof it may be said unto them, This thing is too heavy for thee, and thou
art not able to perform it thy self alone.

WE have a known saying, as undoubted as Ancient; If any Man desires the Office
of a Bishop, (and it is to a Demonstration Evident, That when the Twentieth
Chapter of the Acts was written, every Presbyter in the Church of our Savior
was a Bishop) he desires a Good Work. It was the Remark of a Father in the
Primitive Church, famous for the asserting of this parity, That the Ministry of
the Gospel, is to be considered as a Work rather than a Dignity, more of a Work
than an Advancement. Indeed the Book which Thorougly furnishes us for it, and
which never miscalls any thing, has called it, The Work of the Ministry. To
desire this Work, while he that had a Station in it, usually stood in the Front
of Danger, and as the Last, (if indeed one) of the Good Bishops of Rome
Observed, Primus ad Martyrii tormenta ducebatur; This was an Ambition that
could not easily be taxed for a Faulty one. But the only thing, that in our
more easy times of Safety, can Legitimate the desire of it, is, That it is a
Work: A Work, I say; A Work wherein we are Workers together with GOD. Thy
Ambition, O Man of God, it is to be Indefatigably Employed in the Fatigues of a
vast Labor, which requires uncommon Degrees of Diligence, of Patience, of
Self-Denial, unto the performance of it. But in such a Work, Oh! What
Assistences are called for!

IT is indeed a Good Work! The whole Intention, of it is, To do Good; The whole
Business of it, is, To make Men Good: All it aims at, is, To fill the World
with Goodness. And the Best of Men are not at all too Good for to be used in
it. I will not content myself with saying Renowned Princes have been Preachers;
but I will also say, The SON of GOD Himself, a Greater than Solomon, was once a
Minister of the Gospel.

A Good Work! And a Great One. Certainly, The Great Salvation, which it
prosecutes, is enough to render it so! The Great Objects, and the Great Effects
of it, are enough to render it so! A Minister at Work about the Gospel, and the
City of our God, may say to all Avocations: It is a Great Work that I am doing
of!

AND a very Hard Work it is, as all Good and Great ones use to be. If the Work
of an Architect, be an Hard Work, the Sweltring Husbandman will say, His Work
is barder than that; and the Soldier will more fiercely come in, and say, His
Work is yet harder than that. But what then is the Work of the Minister, who is
to Build the House of God! The Minister, who sets an Hand unto the Plough in
the Field of God! The Minister, who must Endure hard things as a Good Soldier
of our Lord Jesus Christ! What can a frail Man do in such a Work, without
Assistences!

MY Brethren; How Hard is our Work, When Legions of Devils are continually
falling upon us, with Various and Furious Temptations, to Defeat or to Revenge
the Damage which we do unto their Kingdom in the World! Can any Man be set upon
a Pinnacle of the Temple, and not be assaulted with Singular Temptations there?
Can any Man shine among the Stars of Heaven, that are the Light of the Earth,
and feel no Strokes and Stings from the Tail of the Dragon there? But at the
same time, to be encumbred with a Flesh that Sides with Satan, and is an Enemy
to every part of the Work! What Assistences are needful, that such a Work may
be carried on as it ought to be!

A Work, which lies in Watching for Souls that must before a most awful
Tribunal be Accounted for! A Work, which must prepare costly oblations not only
for a People in very different, and oftentimes very difficult Circumstances,
but also for the Lord of Hosts Himself: A Great King, whose Name is Venerable!
A Work, for which a Man must be accomplished with many Talents, if he would be
a Workman that needs not be ashamed!

WHAT Assistences must be Requisite! A Work which the Shoulders of Angels may
tremble at; How shall a Man that is a Worm, yea, though he were a Son of Man,
that is to say, a very Eminent Man, undertake it without Great Assistences?

BUT, whither, Oh! Whither shall we go for the Assistences? Lord, Whither shall
we go from Thee!

IS our Address unto Man for them? If it were so, truly our Spirit might then
be Troubled. No, our Assistences come from Him, from whom come all of our
Salvations; And, Our Help is in the Name of the LORD; in the SAVIOR whose Name
is, The Lord JEHOVAH. We have a SAVIOR, and a Great One; One Mighty to Save;
One Infinitely Able and Willing to afford us His Assistences; and One who has
Promised unto His Ministers, Lo, I am with you always, even to the End of the
World. A Word worth a Thousand Worlds!

NOW, That we may have our Blessed SAVIOR with us, and so secure and enjoy His
Gracious Assistences, most certainly the best Method that can be taken will be,
for us to have Him Always in us; For us to have Proper, Holy, Impressive
Thoughts of Him on every Turn rolling in our Minds; Our Minds ever dwelling on
Him, and so He dwelling in our Hearts: For us to have our Thoughts on all
Occasions repairing to Him, and affecting our selves with His Beauties, His
Merits, His Patterns, His Maxims, what He has done for us, and what He designs
to do: Verily, The whole Christian Asceticks, knows nothing so Enriching to the
Soul, or so supplying of a constant Light and Life unto the Soul, as this
Exercise of Godliness. And having first got a Soul as full of a CHRIST as ever
we can hold, then to have our Ministry as full of Him, as we can possibly
render it: NOW, Lo, I am with you; says our Dear SAVIOR; Yea, He has said, I
will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. And the House which our Ministry shall
make an House of His Glory, NOW! 'twill be an House which He will Glorify.

BUT, Syrs, They are our Prayers, as well as our Thoughts, that must carry us
unto our SAVIOR It was of Old said, The Lord is with you, while you are with
Him. Every Article of our Ministry, it ought surely to be carried on with our
Prayers unto Him, from Whom we have received it. In what Posture shall we
receive our Burdens, but as the Camels do, upon our Knees, and with our Prayers
unto Him, from Whom we have received it. In what Posture shall we receive our
Burdens, but as the Camels do, upon our Knees, and with our Prayers unto Him,
still casting our Burdens on the Lord?

WILL an Unregenerate Minister, an Unsanctified Minister, take this Method for
the Divine Assistences? Or, does our SAVIOR say, Follow thou me, unto any but
those who cease to remain among the Dead? Or, is a Dead Man likely to Prophecy
over the dry Bones with any Efficacy? Surely, When an Ungodly Minister, has
been called, Spiritual Nonsense, very good sense has been spoken, in so terming
of it. Can they Work to any purpose for GOD, who have not begun to Live unto
GOD?

MT Son, and my Brother, We hope that you do so; That, This my Son is Alive;
And that the Life of GOD has begun in your Soul, which will dispose you to lay
out your Excellent Faculties and Seize, with a proportionable and
incomparable Industry for the Service of the Glorious Lord, unto whom you are
this Day with all Solemnity brought under an inviolable Consecration. You are
not the Dead Man; of whom the Prophet uses that Expression, His Uncle shall
take him up; No, but being passed from Death to Life, you will in a most lively
manner apply your self unto that Work, whereof a Crown of Life will be the
Recompense.

HAVING first pointed you to the Assistences of your SAVIOR, for the Admirable
Work, which you have this Day your Hand filled withal, We are now also to
Encourage you, with our Promise of all Brotherly Assistences from the Pastors
of the Churches of the Neighborhood.

THIS Hand is in their Name now given to you, as a Token of the Helping Hand,
which we shall be at all times ready to give you, as it may be called for. By
this Hand we Testify it, That we Accept of you as One Regularly Ordained unto
the Ministry of the Gospel, and unto the Pastoral Charge of the Flock with
which we are now Assembled; and that we Resolve to do what lies in us, to
Strengthen you with all Brotherly Assistences in that Good Work, unto which you
are now devoted.

AND at the same Time, we Congratulate unto this Church of the LORD, the
Precious Gift of our Ascended SAVIOR, sent unto them so Seasonably, so
Agreeably, with such Remarkable Operations of His Providence. This Church, in
the Testimonies of Respect which they have shown unto their Pastor and his
Family, have been a bright Example of that Generous Goodness and Gratitude,
which all the Congregations in the Country may behold with Satisfaction, and
the Grace of our SAVIOR in it will be magnified.

MY Brethren, Blessed be ye of the Lord, in that ye have shown this Kindness
unto the House of one whom GOD has in his Day made a rich Blessing among you;
And now the Lord show Kindness and Truth unto you. Yea, Your SAVIOR will
Requite you this Kindness, because you have done this thing. And the Ministry
which you now Honor with even a Macedonian Liberality, will be Blessed of GOD
unto you, with such Successes, and your Souls will be so Fatned and so Thriving
under it, as will in Spiritual Blessings richly Compensate for all the
Free-Will-Offerings which with the Beauties of Holiness His pleased Eyes behold
among you. Nor shall you be losers in your Temporals, while the Sixth of
Matthew, and the Thirty Third; or the Third of the Proverbs, and the Ninth and
the Tenth, find a due Regard among you.

THE Pastor who this Day takes the Care of you, ( My Son is Young and Tender,)
must have Your Assistences, as well as the rest, that have been proposed unto
him. You will Assist him, with your Prayers for him, as you have been Exhorted.
You will Assist him with your Supports to him, as they may be needed. You will
Assist him, with giving him that Consolation of GOD, your greatly improving in
Piety under his Ministry. And may you be a Crown and a Joy unto one another, at
the Coming, and in the Presence of the Lord. Oh! The Satisfactions, with which
you will meet each other in that Glorious World; when you shall say, Great GOD,
I Bless Thee, that ever I saw the Face, and heard the Voice of this thy
Servant! And he shall say, My GOD, I Bless Thee, for all the Good, which Thou
did Employ me to do, for these thy Chosen ones! -- A Satisfaction, and a
Consolation, beyond what any Tongue may declare, or any Heart conceive! --

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by John Edwards, next Door to the Light-House
Tavern, on the South Side of the Townhouse in King Street Boston.
MEat out of the Eater, or Meditations concerning the Necessity, End, and
Usefulness of Afflictions unto God's Children. By Michael Wigglesworth, The
Fifth Edition.

SEven Sermons, By Robert Russel. The Eleventh Edition.

MArah Spoken to, Or a Brief Essay to do Good unto the Widow. By One of the
Ministers of Boston, with a Preface by Dr. Increase Mather.

A Man of Reason. A Brief Essay to Demonstrate, that all Men should hearken to
Reason.

Where also may be had Bibles, Psalm-Books, Psalters, Primers, Catechisms,
Accompt-Books, School-Books, etc.


