Mirabilia DEI.

An ESSAY On the very SEASONABLE and REMARKABLE Interpositions OF THE Divine
Providence, TO Rescue and Relieve Distressed People, Brought unto the very
Point of Perishing; Especially relating to that TWICE-Memorable FIFTH of
November. Offered in the Audience of His EXCELLENCY the GOVERNOR and the
GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Massachusetts Province, NEW ENGLAND, On the FIFTH of
NOVEMBER. 1719.

By COTTON MATHER D.D. and F.R.S.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, Printer to His Excellency the GOVERNOR and
COUNCIL. 1719.

Published by Order of His Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL.

Josiah Willard, Secr.
BOSTON, November. 11 th. 1719.
AN History of Seasonable Interpositions; Especially Relating to the
Twice-Memorable Fifth of November.
BOSTON. 5d. IX m. 1719.
GENESIS XXII. 14. It is said unto THIS DAY, In the Mount of the LORD, it shall
be seen.


AND upon THIS DAY, What Remarkable, What Admirable Occasions, has our Glorious
GOD given us to Repeat this Proverb of Israel!

AS there never was any Man on the Face of the Earth, whose Name has been so
universally known among the Children of Men, as the Patriarch Abrabam, to whom
a Great Name had been Promised by our GOD, so there is nothing more known about
this Renowned Patriarch, than this, By Faith Abraham, when he was tried,
offered up Isaac; and be that had received the Promises, offered up his only
begotten Son; Accounting that GOD was able to Raise him up even from the Dead.
This Memorable Friend of GOD, after many previous Trials, at last had his Faith
tried unto the uttermost, with an Order from the Sovereign Lord of Life, making
His usual Descent in the Shechinah unto him; an order whereof every Word was a
Thunderbolt; It was, Take now thy Son, thine only Son, Isaac, whom thou love,
and get thee into a Land, forty miles off, and offer him for a Burnt offering
upon a Mountain there. The Obedience which our Father paid unto this
astonishing Order, has been celebrated in all Succeeding Ages, and with very
many Nations. The Ancients, who have employed their Pens in the celebration,
have also told us, that the Story was rarely beheld in a Picture, without
Weeping Eyes among them. The Pagans had their famous Traditions of the Matter;
Especially That of Saturn Sacrificing of his Jeoud. The Jews tell us, That the
Two Sons of Sennacherth had like to have been a Sacrifue to the Tradition of
Abraham's. I am not sure, That Satan took Advantage from hence, to draw the
poor Pagans into Humane Sacrifices, particularly of their Children unto Moloch.
But I find philo, notably censuring and confuting the Envious Detractions of
those who would go to compare them with the Piety of our Incomparable Abraham.

The Action you know. The Action of Binding Isaac on the Altar, on the Account
whereof the whole Business is by the Jews called, Gnakidah Jitzchah, Or, The
Binding of Isaac. The brave Young Man, though above Twenty Years of Age, readily
Submitted unto this Action of his Father. Doubtless the same Eaith which was in
his Excellent Father, filled and acted the Soul of this wonderful Youth! But
what was the Issue of the Action?

Our Glorious GOD would see the Triumph of the Faith, with which He had
Enriched the Soul of the Patriarch; and at the same time give in his Isaac a
Lively, and Lovely Type of what was afterward to be done unto our SAVIOR.
Abraham does as firmly Believe, that GOD would Raise his Isaac from the Dead,
yea, out of his Ashes, as if he had seen it with his Eyes. Isaac is laid on the
Altar. Every thing is ready for the Mortal Stroke. The Father gives his Last
Kiss to the Resigning Victim. The Knife is in his hand. His hand is lifted up.
One Second of a Minute more, and the deadly Stab reaches the Heart that lay
exposed unto to it; Isaac is a Dead Man without any more ado. But behold, GOD
by an Angel from Heaven, Steps in at the very Moment: The Voice of GOD by an
Angel, calls to him, Stop, Stay, Lay not thy hand upon the Sacrifice! -- O most
Seasonable Interposition! What a Deliverance, in what an Extremity! Abraham
could not but settle a Memorial of this Miraculous Deliverance, in the Name of,
JEHOVAH-JIREH, on the Place where he received it. GOD will provide; This was
the English of it. You know, That the Mountain was also called, Moriah, which
is of the like Importance. And you know, what was afterward done upon that
Exalted Mountain of the House of the Lord. And now, Don't wonder, that we now
hear of a Proverb, which from this amazing Occurrence obtained among the People
of GOD, in the Succeeding Ages. A Proverb, which has been called, Proverbium
Tribulatorum: A Sentence fitted for the People of GOD, in every Extremity of
Adversity: A saying with which the People of GOD should animate their
Expectation of Help to come from Heaven, when any Adversity comes to an
Extremity upon them. The Proverb is, In the Mount of the Lord it shall be seen.
O People of GOD, When a Perplexity comes upon you to an Extremity like what
Abraham and Isaac saw in the Mount Which the Lord led them to, then it shall be
seen, what GOD will do for you; it shall be seen, how GOD will appear for your
Deliverance. Sooner shall the Mountain of Moriah depart, and the Hill of GOD be
removed, than this Proverb grow into a Desuetude.

Behold, The Entertainment that is now provided for you. A Relation of
Seasonable Interpositions from Heave, for the Relies of the Distressed, is what
is now to Entertain you.

A Seasonable Interposition of the Divine Providence to prevent the Destruction
of such as are upon the very Point of being Destroyed; This is a Dispensation,
much to be wondered at, and still to be looked for.

It Is no Rare Thing for the Glorious GOD, Seasonably to Step in, and prevent
the Sacrifice, which we are upon the Point of being brought unto. It Is no Rare
Thing, for the Glorious GOD Seasonably to Step in, and put by a Deadly Blow,
which is upon the very Point of being Struck at our dearest Interests.

The Succor which our GOD has for us in our Distresses, is often deferred
until we even Despair of a Deliverance. But when Things are come to an
Extremity, Then it is then He Steps in to Succor us.

We read of our GOD and SAVIOR, Heb. IV. 16. That from Him, we obtain Mercy
and find Fevour, to Help in a Time of Need. But the Time of Need, wherein the
Only Wise GOD chooses to help us, is, when our Necessity comes to an Extremity.
And then He takes as we say, the very Nick of Time, to send in His Help unto us.

We may give this LOCTRINE of Seasonable Interpositions, in the Terms of an Old
saying very common among the People of GOD, Man's Extremity is GODs Opportunity.
Is there not such a Promise as That, Zech. XIV. 7. At Evening it shall be
light. At Evening! Who would have Expected a breaking forth of Light in the
Evening? A Morning of Salvations in an Evening of Distresses! But GOD will
Perform what He does Promise. And the Upright shall in their Darkness have
Light arising to them.

We will Declare, first, THAT it has been so.

Let us for a few Minutes walk about the Field of History, and gather here and
there a Rose of Sharon; Make a brief Collection of Instances, wherein GOD has
with Seasonable Interpositions, come in for the Relief of the Faithful, when
Extreme Dangers of Ruin have sorely terrified them.

And here, Oh! Let it not be forgotten, -- indeed, I cannot go on with my
Collection, till I first make this Introduction to it! -- It must be Remembered,
That Mankind upon our First Fall, was just upon the very Point, of being made a
Sacrifice, unto the Infinite Justice of GOD: The outstretched Arm of Infinite
Justice was ready to give the Stroke. The Powers of Heaven shook; None of them
could see how it could be diverted. But GOD then did Provide a Sacrifice. The
Son of GOD with a most Seasonable Interposition did then Step in; and say, I
will be the Sacrifice. Christians, Behold your SAVIOR Sacrificed on Mount
Calvary; [Yea, some look on Mount Calvary as an Appendage to Mount Moriah!] and
then cry out, The Lord seen in the Mount! The Lord seen in the Mount! The World
has never seen any thing equal to this Dispensation. The Son of GOD, Saw, and
there was no Man, and wondered that there was no Intercessor. Therefore His Arm
did bring Salvation; HE Stepped in, and Saved at this Exremity! It has been
indeed for the sake of this Appearance of the Great GOD our SAVIOR, that we
have been made able to go on unto the Instances which we now proceed unto.

First. The People of GOD in Associated Bodies; These have all along seen the
Seasonable Interpositions of His Providence, when Distresses have grown Extreme
upon them. Let us Consider the Days of old, and the Years of Ancient
Generations: The condition of, The Bush all on a Light Fire, but yet net
consumed. When was it, that our Compassionnate GOD Looked on the Affliction of
His People in Egypt? Things were come to an Extremity; and it is said unto this
day, Cum duplic^ntur Lateres, venit Moses. The Tasks are Doubled, the Pains are
Doubled: Then comes the Deliverer! Anon, the People are brought unto a
Pi-habireth; A Mouth of Perils; Where they cannot escape, Except they Eat up a
vast Army behind them, or Drink up the Reedy Sea before them: Well, Fear not;
Stand still; See the Saivation of the Lord! How Seasonably and Remarkably the
Blessed GOD appeared on that Memorable Day! and Opened a Way in the Sea, and
Made a Peth in the Mighty Waters! -- In the Difficulties of the Wilderness,
When the People were come to the Last Pinch; were on the very Point of
Starving: how strangely does the Mighty GOD of Jacob, cause the Angels to drop
down Bread from Heaven upon them, and the very Rock to yield Rivers of Waters
unto them? And be of a Good Heart, O NEW-ENGLISH Israel; Neither will thy GOD
suffer thee to be Starved in thy Wilderness! In the Book of Judges, how often
does our GOD Raise up a Deliverer for His People, when Israel is sorely
Distressed, and has no Prospect of any Deliverance? What was the Distress of
Asia, and his People, when a Million of Rapacious Arabians Invade him? What was
the Distress of Jehoshaphat, and his People, when united Moabites and
Ammonites, and Edomites, Invade him? There was another time, When the Lord saw
the Affliction of Israel, that it was very bitter; for there was not any shut
up, nor any Left, nor any Help for Israel; But, Then! GOD found, I will rather
say, GOD made an Hand, by which He saved them. Oh! the Distress of the People,
in the Days of Hezekiah, when the Assyrian Invasion was carrying all before it!
The Capital City invested, and all on the very Point of Perishing by a Blast of
the Terrible Ones! But Now, GOD sends down His Angel from Heaven; Judgment was
heard from Heaven; GOD showed Himself Glorious and Excellent on the Mountains
of Prey: A Thunder-storm is raised, in which the Stout-hearted are spoiled. Oh!
The Joy of the Deliverance! When was a Deliverance wrought for the Church under
the Babylonian Captivity? It was, when the People found themselves in the very
Grave. Their Har^s were hung on the Willows; They were in as disperate
Circumstances as the Dry Bones of the Dead; their Cry was, Ezekiel. XXXVII. 11.
Our Hope is gone. After This, what a Design was there formed, for the Utter
Extinction of all the People which our GOD then had in the World; When Haman
had obtained a Bloody Decree to cut often every Mothers Child of 'em; all in one
day; and the Lucky Day fixed for the Execution! Was Isanc ever in such a Mount
before? But, -- Between the Cup and the Lap! O the Wonder-working Providence of
our Glotious GOD! And what became of Haman, and his Ten Sons? Antichrist and
his Ten Sons, have cause to think of That! Unto what a Low Ebb was Christianity
reduced, when such incredible Numbers of Christians had been Martyred by
Dioclesian and imagining that he had burnt all the bibles as well as kill d all
the Christians in the World, he set up his Triumphal Pillars, with that
Inscription upon them, Christiana Superstitione deleta, -- There Is an End of
Christianity, thought he. No, Sir, You're mistaken! The Next News is, A
Christian Emperor on the Throne; and a greater Number of Christians appearing,
than had ever been in the World before! In what a forlorn Condition was the
Church, on the very Point of giving up the Ghost, when the hidden Remains of
the Taborites, dispatched Four Men to travel into all Parts, upon Discovery,
and they returned with sorrowful Tidings, that the Church was Lost in hideous
Idolatries; only they were told, that there was a few Remains of the
Piemontese, which were Scattered and Conceled; no body knew where they were.
But this Darkest Time of the Night, was just before Break of Day! Presently, a
certain Monk, who had until then made none of the greatest Figure, fell out
with a Knave about the price of his Indul gences; and this brought on the
Reformation, wherein Half Europe embraced the Religion, which had been just on
the very Point of being banished out of the World.

Secondly; The People of GOD in Particular Persons; These also have all along
seen the Seasonable Interpositions of His Providence, when Distresses have
grown Extreme upon them. Call now, if there be any that will not answer thee,
and will not say, I was brought Low, and then my GOD helped me! Unto which of
the Saints will thou turn, and not find them still saying, When I was brought
very Low, then the Tender Mercies of my GOD speedily prevented me! All the
Cases of the Hundred and Seventh PSALM, are still renewed with Believers; in
every Generation. Who is there to be found among the People of GOD, but what
may have the Report of the Hundred and Seventh PSALM given of them; Their Soul
sainted in them; They fell down and there was none to help; They drew near to
the Gates of Death; Their Soul was melted be ause of Trouble, and they were at
their Wits End. But THEN! They Cry unto the Lord in their Trouble; and He
brings them out of their Distresses. How frequent a Spectacle This! A Tragedy
carried on to an Extremity; And then, GOD on a sudden, makes a Descent from the
Machin of Heaven, and all goes off more comfortably than any one could have
dreamed of! Our Father Noah, in the Darkness, and the vast Labor and Fatigue
of the Ark; Doubtless he was even spent, with waiting for on Outgate. Anon, GOD
Remembers him, and fetches him out of his Melancholy Coffin. Was not Sarah,
thrown into the Jaws of a Wild-beast, who was just ready to bring an Endless
confusion upon her? GOD then steps in and says to the Raptor, Thou art a Dead
Man, if thy prey be not presently delivered up! Jacob, can see nothing else,
but his Brother Esau just upon the very Point of doing upon him, all that the
Hound can do; to the Deer that he comes up withal. But THEN, -- Lo, GOD steps
in, to change the Heart of the Beast, and bring him to Fawning on him, instead
of Biting of him. No doubt Joseph reckoned himself shut up in a Perpetual
Prison, when an Ungrateful and Forgetful Butler, left him there, and his Feet
were hurt with Festers. But NOW is the Time, that the Word of the Lord Purges
him; The Revelation which GOD made unto him, Vindicates him, Advances him, and
he becomes the Ruler of a Mighty Nation. The Rescues of David, how often were
these, When the poor Partridge on the Mountains, was just upon the very Point
of being Siezed by the Talons of the Vulture! But GOD was ever seen in those
Mountains! At last, he cries out, I shall one day perish. Ziklag is burned, and
all he had is carried away, and his very Friends talk of Stoning him. Here is
what we may with Good Sense call, The Last Extremity! Well, O David, Now
Encourage thy self in the Lord thy GOD: Thou shall be upon the Throne
immediately! When has the Poor Widow, her Supplies brought in unto her? Truly,
When She is come to the Last Handful of Meal in the Barrel, the Last Spoonful
of Oil in the Cruse. The Three Worthies are thrown into the tremendous Furnace.
How Seasonably does the SON of GOD step down to cover them? Daniel is thrown
down to the hungry Lions. How Seasonably does the Messenger of GOD step down to
Muzzle them? Is it possible for peter to be delivered! Why He is to Die the Next
Day; Heavy Fetters are upon him; cruel Keepers are about him; A strong Prison
holds him in the straitest Custody. But GOD sends down from Heaven; and Peter
is on the Next Day Preaching to the People of GOD. Who would have imagined it?
How often is Paul just upon the very Point of being offered up? Once he says,
Act. XXVII. 20. All hope that we should be saved, was then taken away. But
still, Paul when thus Dying Daily, yet, Behold, He Lives! Doubtless, Many of
those who felt the Healing Miracles of our SAVIOR, were Healed, with very
Unexpected Cures. A Learned Physician, has written an Essay of much Erudition,
to prove, That they were all Incurable by any other Hand, but our SAVIORS, Ask
among the People of GOD: How many will you find, who have had the Mercy of GOD
coming unto them, when like Epaphroditus, they have been just Nigh unto Death?
How many have been brought into the comfort of a Calm, when the Tempest caused
'em to cry, with the Disciples in theirs, Lord, Save us; or we perish in a
Moment! How many brought out of Perplexity, when the Extremity has been such as
to throw them into an uncommon Agony? Of our GOD and SAVIOR we may say, These
are part of His ways; But how little a portion is heard of them!

We will Enquire, Secondly; WHY it must be so?

It Is with Scosonable Interpositions, that out GOD will Step in to Relieve the
Faithful, when things are gone so far that they can see none but Extreme
Dangers of Ruin before them.

It must be so; Because a Glorious GOD will give a Manifestation of His
Perfections, and will be greatly Glorified in such Dispensations. An Extremity
of Distress, brings Men to that strain; 2 Chronicles. XX. 12. O our GOD, we know not
what to, but our Eyes are upon Thee. Our GOD will have All other Help to fail
us; Then will He step in for our Help: It Is to manifest the Greatness of His
Excellencies. NOW, Help me, O Lord my GOD, That it may be known that this is
thy Hand, and that thou, Lord, art the Doer of it! It compels us to say, The
Finger of GOD is here. We are compelled now to say, If it had not been the Lord
that was on our side, our Souls must have gone to dwell in the Place of
Silence! Why will GOD our SAVIOR do such Things? It Is, That Men may see, and
know, and consider, and understand, that the Hand of the Lord has done these
things. We are told, In the Mount it shall be seen. What shall be seen? It
shall be seen, that our GOD is a Powerful, Merciful, Faithful GOD. Yea, It
shall be seen, That our GOD has Angels at His Command. For it is usually in
their Instrumentality that He Commands these Deliverances. NOW the Saved of the
Lord, will cry out, O Lord, I know, that thou can do every thing! Now they
cannot but cry out, O give Thanks unto the Lord, who Remembers us in our Low
Estate, because His Mercy endures for ever! They will go to Mahanaim, and add,
There is no Number of His Armies.

But then, It must be so, Because the Prayers, and the Frames, and the Steps,
of the Distressed Ones in their Extremities, are often such as prepare them to
See the Salvation of GOD. Our GOD brings us into Extreme Dangers; It Is to bring
us down upon our Knees. In such Exegencies our Prayers will be Cries: The Voice
of the Prayers will pierce the Clouds, will reach the Heavens. It may be said,
as in Psalm. XXXIV. 6. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard! GOD will be so
Acknowledged, and all Dependencies on Creatures will be so renounced in these
Cries, that now our SAVIOR says, It Is now Seasonable for me to step in, and
save them! Oh! Nothing like the Prayer of the Afflicted, when he is
overwhelmed! -- The Importunity of it, gives those Knocks at the Gates of
Mercy, which they cannot continue any longer shut upon.

And why may it not be said, It must be so, Because our SAVIOR will in this
way keep Alive, our Faith for the Resurrection of the Dead. Seldom is a Good
Thing bestowed upon us, till we first have had a Sentence of Death written upon
it. Extreme Dangers must bring us to That, 2 Cor. XII. 9. We have the Sentence
of Death in our selves, that we may Trust in GOD who Raises the Dead. The Faith
of a Resurrection for the Dead, is the Life of our Souls. Our GOD keeps Killing
of us, and causing us to have nothing but a black Death in our view; but then
He gives us to see, all Alive again. We Live, and say, The Lord has done things
for us, which we looked not for! It Is to Illustrate, yea, to Demonstrate this
thing unto us. The SAVIOR who does these things, will one day Show Wonders to
the Dead.

In the mean time, Oh! How Happy, How Happy, they that are in Good Terms with
the Glorious GOD! What an Happiness to have such a Friend always ready to step
in, with Seasonable Interpositions, when we have any Extreme Distress upon us!
My Friend, Embrace and Obey thy SAVIOR, and make sure of such an Happiness.

And now, What shall we say to these things?

There will e're long arrive a Day, wherein that word will be fulfilled; Rev.
XX. 12. The Books were opened. No doubt, some of the Things to be found in
those Glorious Books, will be the Scasonable Appearances of our Good GOD, for
the Help of His People, when Distresses have been growing into an Extemity upon
them. And among the rest, no doubt, the Divine Appearances, which have now been
given you, will be found in those Books of Remembrance, with a much more ample
Record of them, in all their Beautiful and Engaging Circumstances.

But I am obliged at this time to proceed no further in the Mention of those
Things, whereof I must use the Expression of the Apostle, upon the Things that
occurred in the Lives of the Ancient Hero's, The Time would fail me to mention
them.

Hitherto the Things wherewith I have Entertained you, must have this Title
upon them, These are Ancient Things. But what remains for me, is, to make some
Remarks, upon more Modern Occurrenoes, wherein the Divine Appearances, for our
Nation in general, and for this Province in Particular, have been such
Seasonable Interposition. to Relieve in an Extremity, as we have hither to
observed in the more (...) Operations of GOD.

I am to put you in Mind, of some Things done in Later Times, wherein, Thou
have Awoke, O Arm of the Lord, Awoke as in the 'Ancient Days, as in the
Generations of Old! Strange Things done for our Nation, in the Critical Moments
wherein we had been all Undone, if They had not been Done just when they were,
and if the Mercies of our GOD had not Speedily flown down unto us. Christians,
Whosoever is wise and will observe these things, even they shall understand the
Loving Kindness of the Lord.

You are all sensible, That our Nation does on THIS DAY, make an Anniversary
Commemoration of a National Deliverance from a PLOT, jast Ripe for Execution,
which cannot be Realized, and Considered, without a Shuddering Horror at the
Thought, -- That ever any Thing in Humane Shape could become guilty of so
Matchless a Villainy! The wish of the Infamous Emperor, to see the Romans
United all so together, that One Blow at the Neck, might behead them all at
Once, was now very mear obtained by a crew of horrid Romans. Incredible!
Impossible! One of the most famous among our New-English Divines, who was born
on that very Signalized Fifth of November, his Father called him Thomas; For,
said he, It will hardly be believed, and this Child will have much ado to
Believe it, that ever such a Thing should be found among the Children of Men.
But what is it, that Popery cannot be guilty of? How Abominable, How Execrable,
must Popery become unto all that will not utterly divest themselves of all
Humanity? Certainly, When the Days of Intoxication, continuing to this Day
upon, as it is judged, about Fourscore Millions of People, abandoned by the
Unsearcheable Judgments of GOD unto it, are over, it will be so!

There having been, by a Probable and Moderate Computation, at least a Million
of Sermons Preached on this Day, since the First Act of Parliament for the
Anniversary Commemoration, I may be Excused, from any Amplifications upon it.
But, though we come not into a Religious Observation of Stated Days, not
appointed of GOD, yet I am not willing to let THIS DAY pass, without making at
least this One Remark upon it; That the Bloody Destruction intended by the more
Immediate Plotters to be brought at once upon the King, Lords and Commons of
our Nation, was all to bring in a Popish Pretender. And how any can think to
Set a Popish Pretender on the British Throne, without Shedding of more Blood,
yea, and this with the more open Explosions of Gunpowder too, than the Fifth of
November would have shed, if it had gone on, an hundred and fourteen Years ago,
-- it appears an Unintelligible Mystery!

How the Old Plotters came to think of Gunpowder, as the most agreeable Tool
for them to work withal, Some have wondered, who forgot the Fate of him who had
been a Father to the King then designed for a Sacrifice. This however may be
said upon it: It is very Surprising, that a Spanish Writer, whose Name was Del
Rio, Publishing a Book of Magical Disquisitions, and the Powers of Evil
Spirits, Two or Three Years before our Celebrated Fifth of November, puts there
the very Case of the Gun-Powder-Plot, and his Decision of the Case, is That a
Father-Confessor made Privy to such a Plot in a Confession, ought by no means
to discover it. And now, whatever Hidden works of Darkness relating to that
Hellish Plot may remain Undiscovered, until the Day of our SAVIORS Revelation,
we may without any Scruple say, The Evil Spirits which Del Rio treated of, used
their Instigation to push on the Conspirators to their infandous Enterprise.
Could my Sermon reach to any of those, who are at this Day hoping to Blow up,
whole Kingdoms, and more than Three Nations, that so they may see what their
Fathers, Garnet and Company, missed of, I would Entreat these New Plotters, to
Examine seriously, Whose Instigation it is, that they are Moved withal, when
they have so little Fear of GOD before their Eyes; And they should hear me
saying, Surely, Thou will slay the wicked, O GOD; and therefore, ye Bloody men,
Depart from me! I would Expostulate with such Unhappy People. When the Just and
Necessary Oaths, are by the Best of Governors, from a Tender Concern for the
Public Safety proposed unto you, with what loud Vociferations do you Complain
and Exclaim, That your Conscience is imposed upon? May Conscience then be
hearkened to. To Swallow Oaths, against a Dissatisfyed Conscience is what no
Good Man would advise you to. But, That you impartially Labor for a Better
Conscience, a Wiser Conscience, One more Ealightened; This is the Best Advice
that we can give you. It Is nothing but a due Regard unto the Public Safety,
that makes these Oaths to be required of you: the Public Safety, for the
Disturbance whereof, no Plea of a pretended Conscience is to be admitted of.
And, Sirs, Can your Conscience tell you, That Three Nations lying in Blood, and
the British Islands in Desolations which would require the Pen of another
Gildas to describe them, would be a Desirable Spectacle? Can your Conscience
tell you, That every Protestant in the World, ought to have his Throat Cut, or
be Condemned unto Louisian Dungeons and Galleys? Can your Conscience tell you,
That the Religion which your Bible has taught you, should be Extirpated by Fire
and Sword, and the Romish Idolatries established with the most Barbarous and
Inhumane Cruelties? Are you Aware, that you Really are in a Plot, for the
Accomplishment of such Horrible Things, while you abet the cause of a Popish
Pretender, who must needs go to do them all: Certainly, It Is a fearful Judgment
of GOD, for any Man to be abandoned unto such a Conscience. Or, Can your
Conscience tell you, That if a Man be an Idoot or Lunatic, the People are not
worse than so, who do not provide (as not long ago, they did in Fortugal,) that
such an one shall not Sit and Act on the Throne of the Kingdom? Whereas, a
Roman Catholic, bound by Principle to Betray and Ruin his Kingdom, is a
thousand times more Disqualified, (as being more Unrestrainable) than such an
One! Does your Conscience tell you a Story of Hereditary Right? But, you cannot
but know, That Hereditary Right, has been many times disclamed, many times
diverted, often Superseded in the Succession of the British Monarchy. If an Act
of Parliament may not Limit and Alter, the Succession of the Crown, Those from
and through whom you derive the Right of your Pretender, had no Right at all; and
so by consequence He has no Right at all. The Hereditary Right which you insist
upon, (the Line whereof has been so often Interrupted!) vanishes into Nothing.
You cannot in any Conscience insist upon it. Thus may they be argued with! But
these are a sort of People, that NEW ENGLAND is very much a Stranger to! Our
Soil don't agree with People that have that Venom in them.

And now, was what our Nation saw in the Seasonable Deliverance, which causes
our Ancestors to make this Day like the Days of Purim, the only Instance
wherein GOD our SAVIOR, has after an astonishing manner Stepped in, to rescue
us, when we were on the very Precipice of a Perdition to be trembled at? No;
There was a Mavelous Deliverance wrought for the Nation, Forty Seven Years
before, by a swift change upon the Public Affairs; A CHANGE which if it had
been delayed a few Months longer, England might have been a Province to Spain;
And something like the Spanish Inquisition had been Established in it; But the
PROTESTANT RELIGION, -- Whither must thou have made thy Flight, O thou Daughter
of GOD!

But I will not insist on a Fifth of November, that shone Fifteen Years before
this Country was born. I will rather Stir up your Minds to the Remembrance, of
what has been done in Our Days, yea, in the very Year that is now passing over
us.

And I pray, How much does the Fifth of November, in the Days of King James the
first, outshine the Fifth of November, in the Days of King James the second; on
which Twice-memorable Day, there Landed on the English Shore, that Illustrious
PRINCE, whom GOD raised and sent for the Deliverance of our Nation, from a
Return of Popery and Slavery, the Two Grand Plagues of a woeful World, and of
Europe from the Chains that France was laying upon it. How Near, how very Near!
-- was the whole PROTESTANT Interest in the World, unto an Apparent Ruin? --
Verily, It lay bound on the Altar, and the Knife was just Ready to Strike, when
a Great King was for that purpose United with France, and had a Standing Army
at his command, and there only remained the Experiment of some New Creations in
the House of Lords, and bold Returns for an House of Commons; to introduce at
Once the Horrible Stroke!

But the Rebuilder of the Romish Jericho, found the Curse of our Glorious
JESUS, to Blast the Enterprise. That unhappy King, had no sooner boasted in a
Proclamation, That there was nothing left now to disturb the future
Tranquillity of his Reign, but a sudden REVOLUTION chased him from his Throne;
An Eighty Eight brought unto the Nation a Deliverance not inferior to that of
the Eighty Eight in the Century that went before it; and a Change came on,
whereof he must be very Insensible, who does not make that Acclamation, The
Lords doing, and Mavelous in our Eyes!

That Fifth of November, is the more to be kept in thy Remembrance, O
NEW ENGLAND, Because among the Things afterward brought into the Light, it was
found, That the Establishment of Popery in these Colonies, was an Article that
had been very particularly provided for.

Thus was our GOD seen in the Mount! And it shall no more be said, The Lord
Lives, who Saved the Parliament House, and all that was in it, from a
Desolation in a Moment, and an Utter Consumption with Terrible Things: But it
shall be said, The Lord Lives, who Stepped in, at the Moment, when all that is
dear to us, was on the very Point of going from us, and by an Happy REVOLUTION
Enabled us to sing, Our Soul is Escaped as a Bird out of the Snare of the
Fowlers; The Snare is broken, and we are Escaped.

The Memory of the Never-to-be-forgotten King WILLIAM, will be for ever
precious to all True Protestants, but none more than the New English ones, on a
Thousand Accounts; But very particularly for the Influence which he had on that
Act of Parliament, by which the Succession of the British Crown has been
Settled on the Illustrious House of Hanover, and we see therein, what is most
Valuable to a Christian and an Englishman secured unto us.

Behold, What a New Field of Wonders we are brought unto! And what wonderful
Interpositions of GOD our SAVIOR, to make Things Turn well for us, when we
have been upon the very Point of being made a Sacrifice, we are invited now to
take into our contemplation!

Every body now knows, That there was a Design with a Strong Hand carried on,
to put by that Succession to the Crown, which all the Good Men in the Nations
wished well unto. One cannot look back on the Story, without being ever now and
then in pain for the Next Event! Without being Surprised and Amazed at the
Strange Things which fell out One after another, to disappoint the Design which
the Men that betrayed the Nations to France, had brought so near, so very near!
-- to an Execution!

Our Lawful and Rightful King GEORGF, being Peaceably and Wondrously Settled on
the Throne of Great BRITAIN, to the Joy of all the Good Men in the World, it
was not long before the Popish Pretender made an Invasion upon the British
Nations, and an Infaruated Party of Self-destroyers made Violent Efforts to
bring him in. A Seasonable Death gave a Mortal Wound unto the Undertaking; very
much Dispirited the Undertakers, Disconcerted all their Measures! The Leviathen
at Versailles, being Smitten of GOD, Putrified into a most loath some Carcass,
and left off to Make the World a Wilderness, and to destroy the Cities thereof.
The Tree that sheltered and cherished the Birds of Prey was most Scasonably
hewn down by the Order of GOD. And the GOD of Beltel, in One day, gave a Double
Defeat unto the Insurrections of the workers of Iniquity. In One Day did the
Lord of Hosts powerfully defeat them, and both Dunblain and Preston saw the
Treading down of all their Strength. But He Stepped in, how Opportunely, how
much at the very Nick of Time, which Dispensations to be for ever wondered at!

The Last Winter the Men who are Like the troubled Sea, prepared for another
Invasion. A Seasonable Death again gave a Mortal Wound unto the Undertaking;
and withdrew the Assistences which the Undertakers mightily relied upon. A
Monatch who had caused Terror in the Land of the Living, was most Seasonably
taken off; And thereby, as the Oppressed Swedes have had their Gothic
Liberties Miraculously Restored unto them, so there was a Thing of Great
Consequence done toward the Priserving of ours. The Embarcation from Spain
indeed went on. But, when there was above an hundred and thirty Years ago, a
Descent from Spain upon our Forefathers, within Navy that called it self,
Invincible, GOD fought against it, and by the Stormy Wind fulfilling His Word,
confounded that Expedition. And now another Descent from Spain was making upon
us, GOD who holds the Wind in His Hand, by His own Irresistible Hand, brought
all the costly Expedition to Nothing. But He Stepped in, how Opportunely, how
much at the very Nick of Time, with Dispensations to be for ever wondered at!

O the Triumphs of Sovereign Grace, in these Divine Appearances, for our most
Unworthy Nations! I will sing unto our most Gracious GOD. for He has triumphed
gloriously!

NEW ENGLAND is Thankfully sensible of the share which it has in the Seasonable
Salvations wherewith our Nation had been thus highly favored of the Lord.

But then, How many Peculiar Salvations has NEW ENGLAND seen, wherein our
Glorious LORD has must Seasonably Interposed for us, in our Extremities. Those
Magnalia CHRISTI. ever the Seasonable interpositions of GOD out SAVIOR, to
deliver us, when Extreme Hazards of Ruin looked very dark upon, us; These are
Things which the History of NEW ENGLAND is filled withal. Many a Time, let
NEW ENGLAND now say, Many a Time, in Affliction, from my Youth, had the
Destroyers prevailed against me, if my Glorious Lord had not Seasonably Stepped
in to rescue me. Verily, NEW ENGLAND continues to this Day, having obtained
Help from GOD, in such Seasonable Dispensations!

One Time above the rest, cannot but be Remembered by many that remain to this
Day. Some who did then Jeopard their Lives in the High Places of the Field, are
now in this very Auditory. There was a Time Three and Forty Years ago, when the
fierce Indian Salvages, having Spread the Flame of a Dubious War, from One End
of the Country to the Other, Every One thought, the Summer then coming on,
would be filled with Desolations, that would very near have broke Up the
Colonics. But Behold, when Things were come to that Extremity, GOD Stepped in,
and made bare His Almighty Arm for our Deliverance. The Enemy distracted like
Beasts that are Stung with Hornets, fell an easy Prey, to the People Inhabiting
the Wilderness. Yea, Sword and Sickness in a few Months consumed whole Nations
of them!

This has indeed been the way of GOD our SAVIOR all along Appearing for us.

What a Seasonable Provision did our GOD make for us, by a Friend on the Spot,
appearing at the Court for us, at the Revolution, that we might be delivered
from a Total and Final Deprivation of all the Privileges, which distinguished
us, from the rest of the Plantations!

How often have we been upon the very Print, of being made the Prey of the
Terrible? Those which are called, The wild-beasts of the Earth, have been just
coming upon us! But the Great GOVERNOR of the World, Seasonably Stepping in,
has very Unexpectedly more than Twice done the Things, which have enabled us to
say, Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a prey to their Teeth!

How often have our Churches been upon the very Point of doing Things which
would have been attended with an Unknown Train of Disturbances? But their
Glorious HEAD Seasonably Stepping in, has put a Stop unto them, and the feared
Storms have all blown over.

But, Who can Utter the mighty Acts of the Lord? Who can show forth all His
Praise? How long a work would it be to Recapitulate the Seasonable
Interpositions, wherewith He has rescued us from Grievous Things, when we have
been upon the very Point. of being overwhelmed with them! Lo, GOD has sent
from above; He has drawn us out of many Waters.

The Improvement, which we are to make of this Experience, must be to Encourage
our Prayers and our Hopes for the continuance of it. Sirs, Let us Improve our
Experience, unto that Argument; 2 Cor. 1.10. GOD, who raises the Dead, has
Delivered us from so great a Death, and He does Deliver; and (...) trust in
Him, that He will still deliver us. The Syllogism, I confess, is not of any
such form as our common Logic allows of; But Faith Legitimates this way of
Arguing, and can Remove Mountains with it!

You will allow me to use the Language of the Day; and say, There may be Things
which may threaten to Blow up the Country, and Blow up the Churches, which have
the Beauty and the Safety of the Country in them. Let thy Watchmen set upon thy
Walls, O NEW ENGLAND, give thee yet more faithful and more solemn Warnings of
them, and may their Visions prevent thy Perishing!

But now, Why may we not Hope, That before the Distresses which the Exportation
of our Coin through the Extravagancy of our Living has brought upon us, be
brought unto much greater Extremity, the Methods which the Men of Thought have
to offer for the Stopping of that Hemorrhage, will be yet more thoroughly
Digested, will be hearkened unto, will be complied withal: And all foolish
Animosities that may hinder this Felicity, be entirely Extirpated?

Why may we not Hope, That the Intentions of those, who may be willing to see
us a Miserable People, yea, of those Treacherous Men from among our selves,
who, to recommend themselves unto preferments, propose and pursue things that
would make our Miseries Unsupportable; may by the Hand of our GOD Seasonably
Interposing for us, and with them that help us, have their Chariot-Wheels taken
off, so that they shall drive heavily, and anon be all Abortive?

Why may be we not Hope, That if any Rash Doings may be likely to Discompose
our Churches, our Strong Redeemer Seasonably Interposing, may cause those
things to fall out, that will put an End unto Days of Temptation, an give them
to Walk on in the Right Ways of the Lord, and in our Good Old Ways, in the Fear
of GOD, and in the comforts of the Holy Spirit, and be Multiplied?

O Thou Hope of NEW ENGLAND, and thou SAVIOR thereof in the Times of Trouble,
with Encouraged Hopes will we keep Looking up unto thee!

FINIS.

