SOME REASONS AND Arguments Offered to The Good People Of BOSTON And adjacent
Places, FOR The setting up MARKETS In BOSTON.

BOSTON: Printed by J. FRANKLIN, for S. GERRISH and J. EDWARDS, and sold at
their Shops. 1719.

BOSTON, Feb. 29. 1719.

Imprimatur, SAMUEL SHUTE

SOME Reasons and Arguments Offered to the Good People of BOSTON and adjacent
Places, for the setting up Markets in BOSTON.
IT is to the Surprise of all Strangers who come among us, that in so large and
populous a Town as this of Boston is, they find no particular days of the week,
nor appointed places in the Town fixed for the holding of Markets; for the more
ready and easy supply of the Town with the Provisions which are every week, and
more or less every day bro't in from the Nei'bouring Towns. All the World
besides us, have gone into the usage of Markets as a point of wisdom and
prudence, long before a Town is grown to half our Bulk and Number, not to say
without a tenth part of our Trade and business; and why it should be prudent in
us, or for our Interest, to live thus without one is altogether unaccountable.
They that have traveled into other parts of the world have there seen the
Convenience, the Order, the Beauty of their Markets; the Towns and Country
round about finding their mutual Advantage and Account in it. When we come home
again and see this comely Order and general Benefit wanting in so fine a Town,
and so many disorders and mischiefs attending both the Town and Country from
the want thereof, it seems such a defect of wisdom in us, as can hardly be
excused. We cannot think our selves wiser than all the world besides, nor that
we understand the Art of living well better than they, nor the joint Interest
of City and Country better. We cannot say that this of Markets is one of those
things wherein one would not desire to conform to the rest of the World; as one
would shun their Vices and evil Customs: I hope by the following Argument to
make it appear that the Virtue and good Morals, as well as the worldly Estate
and Interests, both of Town and Country will probably be much served and
bettered hereby. We are the Head here of a large Province, and none of the
Nei'bouring Provinces can show any thing like us; and yet if we go to New York
and Phyladelphia, we find them already come into fixed days and public
appointed places for weekly Markets. The Enquiry now before us is, Why we
should not come into the like Practice?

And here before I go a step further, I think it needful to protest unto my
Countrymen, that in this Essay I aim at the public and equal Good both of Town
and Country; that I have no private Interest separate from my Nei'bours to move
me; and that particularly I am moved by a regard to the Virtue as well as
Outward flourishing of the Country. And having said this seriously, I claim the
more regard to my following Argument.

And first I shall consider some of the manifest Benefits which would accrue
both to the Town and Country from stated and public Markets; together with the
manifest Inconveniences and Mischiefs both to Town and Country from the want of
'em.

And then, I will give some Answer to the Objections that may be made against a
Market.

First then, I will consider some of the manifest Benefits, which would accrue
both to the Town and Country from stated and public Markets; together with the
Inconveniences and Mischiefs that ly upon us for want of one.

Now the first Mischief we suffer from the want of a Market is, a great loss of
precious time every week, and one grand Benefit of a Market would be the saving
it. Time is the common Talent of all Persons, and a very precious One, which it
is every ones Interest to redeem for himself and his Family; and the Interest
of the public would be most highly consulted therein. Time improved well in
our Callings is so much money got, so much work done, so much life gained. To
lose our time then is to throw away our money and our life (not to say our
Souls) and to injure the Commonwealth, as well as our Families. But for want of
a Market and Countryman or his servant loses much of his time from week to
week, while he spends a whole day very often in the sale of those Goods, which
in a Market he would sell in an hour; and so he might be home again before
noon, and at work the other half of the day. A Market would make a quick
dispatch for the Seller; for now though the Countryman brings the very things
that I want, I know not where to go to find him, and so I sit suffering at
home; while He if he knew I wanted it would not pass by my door, and traverse
twenty Streets more in quest of a Chap. Besides, a Market being once settled
and the Customs of it well understood, two or three Neighbors in the Country
might agree by turns to bring one for another, and save one another a day or
two at home within the week; which what a mighty addition it would be to their
life and work, and estate every one can compute.

But then the People of the Town would be as great Gainers in respect of Time
by a Market, as the Countryman is. For how many hours of a Forenoon is now lost
to many Families every week, while if a pig, or some poultry, or a little
butter, or a few eggs be wanted for dinner, the Master of the House (forsooth)
himself, or at least some Servant, must Out for the supply, they know not
whither scarce, nor have they a certain place to go; but away they trapse
toward the Neck, or half over to Roxbury; or it may be the Servant runs half
over the Town, if indeed the idle Boy go not to play and come home with a lie,
that he cannot get any thing; when it may be he has never sought: So that in
short, a Market would save the Towns people many an hour or two in a forenoon
which is now utterly lost, and can be very ill spared in our Families. And
sometimes those that spare the time with much regret, and had rather be at
their work, yet are under some necessities thus to look out for supplies:
Whereas were there a Market to go to, at an appointed hour, they had better
give a penny more in a shilling for the thing they want, than be taken off their
work to go seek it.

And now that you may see how much the Virtue, as well as Estate of the Town
and Country is served by this Redemption of time in our Families and at our
Callings, I will go on into the Consideration of a second Benefit of a Market,
and Mischief to us from the want of it; which follows upon the former, Namely,

A Market would promote Industry, and prevent abundance of Idleness. Industry
is of great Account to the temporal weal of any Country, and without it no land
can flourish. Idleness is the parent of all Vice, Misery and Wretchedness to
any people.

It is thought by Strangers who have observed the Industry of other places,
that there is abundance of Idleness with us, and a manifest defect of Industry
through the Country. A Market would help to mend the matter, and herein would be
not only so much Riches but so much Virtue to us. It would make people that
bring things to market to do their best, and try to excel one another. Our
Farmers would find a greater and quicker vent for their Provisions, and would
soon contrive and take pains to bring more to us. Our good Dames in the Country
would soon find that they that make the best butter, and send it to us in the
neatest manner, would have the first sale and the best price; and so they that
send their poultry the best fatted and the best dressed; and the very Maids
that come to market as well as their mistresses at home, would be ambitious to
outdo their Neighbors, or at least not come behind them either in credit or
profit. And the like is to be said of the Mutton, Veal or Pork which the
Country daily sends in; we should soon have much more of it, and much better
fed and dressed, and all to the Husbandmans honor, and profit, and pleasure;
whose Diligence and Industry only can yield him either.

We are now forced to live on the Butchers, for we know not whether else to
send for our daily supplies, though we should be glad of a little Change oftener
than we have it, nor dare we trust our servants out very often upon the hunt
after it: But had we a Market, the Countryman would find himself courted and
encouraged to bring us more and more, and have ready money for all. This would
set him upon using both his brains and his hands more than he generally does;
and instead of a bare bringing about the Year, he would with a little more care
and labor make a great deal more gain.

But then as to the prevention of Idleness among the servants both in Town and
Country, a Market would manifestly be of great service. We daily see many
strong men that bring in Provisions, hawking and sauntring about Town (forgive
me the courseness of the Expression) to find a sale, which to a stranger looks
idle and loitering eno'; and it is a thousand pities that men so able to labor
should saunter away the day so. And as to the Children and Servants that are
sent hither to sell things, they are in danger of idling and playing about the
Town, and so of falling into ill hands and evil manners; and when they come
home it is to be feared it is too often with a lie in their mouth, "that they
made the best dispatch they could, and could not meet with a buyer: Whereas
were there a Market to carry their goods to, as they would ordinarily be soon
sold, so this false pretense would be taken away, and the idling and lying
prevented; the Master or Mistress being able to allow what time the sale and
return would take.

And then to come to our Towns-people and Servants, as much Idleness would be
prevented with us; the Mornings work in our Families would go on; our servants
would not be spoilt as they now are, nor our families distracted as they often
are by their sloth and falsehood. And so abundance of evil would be prevented.

Thirdly, Another mischief and misery upon us from the want of a Market is the
Oppression we are all under, and especially the poor, by the Hucksters
fore-stalling, engrossing and buying up the Provision that comes into Town;
which they buy almost at any rate, and then raise the price again as they
please; for they know that many in the Neighborhood must come to them, and
more especially the poor must come with their pence to 'em, to whom they parcel
out a cruel pittance; while in a Market the poor might buy more for their
money, and escape the fatal temptation to them of running upon Tick.

Another Benefit of a Market would be the Ease which both Town and Country
would find in it; together with the Certainty of Sale to the Market-man, and a
supply to the Town. Now we live at all adventures, and if we chance to meet
with any thing, very well; but if the Servant return with his hands empty, and
a down kind of look of famine, we must bear it patiently, and yet it may be
suspect his negligence and roguery: whereas had we a regular Market the Country
and Town both would know and keep their hour, go directly to their appointed
place, be sure of Buyers and sure of a Supply ordinarily, of one sort or
another, as soon as we come on the spot: and what an Ease would this be to
every body. The present work of an hour or two would be done in as few minutes;
and the present Sale of half the day would be dispatched in half an hour. We
might stand still and see the things done in a moment, which now we traverse
the Town to accomplish.

Besides, If a Towns-man wants to speak with his Friend in the Country, or if
he have any Bargain to propose to him, he knows when and where to meet him if
there be stated Markets, or he can be at no loss to send to him: or if persons
of distant Towns want to speak with one another, about any business or concern
whatsoever, they would know where to meet with one another, at a certain hour:
Which how much it will Expedite business, save time, and do a great deal of
work with ease, the Reader need not be told.

Again, If the Farmer have quantities of Corn to sell, be it wheat or any other
grain, have he some of the same sort better and some worse; how easy is it to
take Samplers of it with him to the Market, and find Chaps, bargain and sell it
all, and set the time of his delivery of it and for the receiving his money.

I will only add upon all that has been said, the Indecency among us that has
been occasioned by the want of a Market; first on the part of the Countryman,
who to my eye and ear debases himself while he trotts about the Town, crying at
every Corner what he has to sell; whereas he would else go silently and
gravely, and in a manner worthy of his Calling, of which, as Solomon says, the
King himself is served, to his appointed place, and unlade and return; And then
again We should not see our very Gentry as well as Tradesmen, traveling (as
they are not ashamed now to do) to the Ends of the Town to get a little butter,
or a few Eggs, for their Families; stooping to that which becomes their Maids
rather in a Market: These unseemly and sickly things, so much below the Country
and the Town, can have no Remedy but by a Market; which would presently put us
into Order, grace and beautify us, and every way benefit us.

And now I come to consider the Objections that may be made against a Market:
if indeed it be Imaginable there can be any made, to weigh against the
forementioned Benefits of one. But such as they are let us hear and answer 'em.

One main Objection, is already obviated in what has been said before,
concerning the Ease which both Town and Country would find in a Market; for
this answers the Market-man if he fears difficulties and troubles and
disappointments on his part from a Market: If he be ready to say, " What shall
I do with my Corn, supposing I bring any quantity of it and find no ready Sale
for it? must I carry it back again, and bring it next time at the same
uncertainty? The Answer is ready, as has been said before, The Farmer need only
to bring a Sample of his Wheat or Barley or Rye with him; or if he bring it in
bags and find no present Sale, it is but putting it into some neighboring Shop
or Store, a Courtesy which no body will deny him upon his asking it, till the
next Market Day; and where probably it will be seen, and some will be ready to
buy it at his return; or he leaving his price he may find it sold and his money
received for him. So that this is no Objection.

In the next place;

It can scarce be supposed that any will think this comely and useful Order can
be a breach upon their natural rights and liberties: But if any should say, "
We will not be tied up, we will go where we will, and sell how we will; it were
easy to answer 'em, -- That there is no liberty or freedom like that which we
find under good Laws and Rules, and wise limitations, for the mutual and common
Benefit of our selves and our Neighbors. They that will be lawless and
disorderly are sure to be in Bondage and misery: and they only who come into
Order can live free and easy. Besides that every Town has the right and power
to make By Laws and six necessary rules for it self; to which it may require
every one to submit, whether he be an Inhabitant, or he that comes there to
traffic. All must yield to what is legally judged to be for the good Order and
benefit of the place.

It may be some particular Persons or families may say, " We are better
supplied than we are like to be by a Market, for we have a sure Country friend
who brings us all that we need, and we are not so much as at the trouble of
going out of doors for it. But how easy is it to answer and shame this little
private and narrow Spirit by saying, 'That the Public ought to take an equal
care of every body, and to have every body's first regard; "that if some are so
easily and fully supplied while others suffer and are straightened, then it
behooves the Town to come into more equal and easy measures for all; "that we
ought to deny our selves for the general good, be content to take our lot, and
with our Neighbors fare;" that a Market is a more lasting supply, and consults
for our Posterity and future times; Whereas by this Objection we only consider
our own dear selves, for the present day, to the Injury of the Public, and of
our Children after us. But at last it must be said, that no person or Family
can be so surely supplied in this private way and manner, as in the more
public one of a Market: For your friend may die and you must be to seek for a
new one, and may be at a loss where to get one; but a Market once set up is a
living and certain supply that will outlive us, and provide for them that shall
come after us.

Again it is said, We have tried once and could do nothing about the setting up
of a Market: It was all Confusion, and People were ready almost to fall
together by the ears.

The Answer is, That we should have begun sooner. It had been far easier in our
Beginning. All places find it hard to alter and break ill Customs, how manifest
soever they be. The thing must be gone about with the more caution, wisdom and
prudence. We must expect difficulties and some disorders it may be at the
first; but time and experience will every day mend the matter. We must not give
over what we need and what will be so beneficial, for an ill beginning, if such
there was, or for a want of success at first. Markets must be some time or
other. We cannot live always in this disorder, and after the present wild rate.
Let us therefore attempt and try again: A good and needful thing must be
pursued.

But will any say, " What are we better than our Fathers? they did without a
Market, and why cannot we? they did not see one so needful, and are we wiser
than they? I answer, Our Fathers were wise and good Men, and we are happy in
their early Cares for us in many greater and more important Interests than this
of Markets. They set up Schools, Colleges and Churches, and no Markets. And
they are justified of their Children in their first and better Care for us. But
then their Successors should not have left the other undone. The Children of
this world are wiser in their Generation. In things that belong to the Natural
and Political Life, let us hearken to them. Nor let it seem to us a reflection
on our Fathers if we should say, that they were not quite enough Men of this
world for us: or that they took so much care of our Minds and our Immortality,
that they were a little too Negligent of these mortal Bodies. Be it so, that
such a charge might be hence drawn, which I do not think can be justly done;
yet forgive 'em this wrong; doubtless on the best Accounts they will be had in
Honor. But indeed the neglect of this comfortable provision of Markets for us,
is not to be charged upon the first Generation who had eno' to do to lay the
foundation of our Towns; the fault lies upon their increased Posterity, that
they have not timely come into these good Orders. We have entered into their
labors, but have not improved upon them as we ought to have done; neither on
temporal Accounts nor on spiritual.

However some will say, That to be sure it is not the time now to set up
Markets; the proposal is now more out of season than ever it was: provisions
are dear, and money is scarce; we must stay 'till there be more plenty of both.

And it must be acknowledged that there is some reason in the Objection. The
dearness of Provision and scarcity of Money, are great disadvantages. And if
the staying a year or two would mend the matter, it might be worth the while.
But there is no pretense of that. Possibly a Market would help to enliven us,
and quicken Business and Industry among us; and so may contribute to mend the
times. But as for our Money, what suffices to buy us provisions now will serve
us at the Markets. And it will be cheaper for us too to carry our few pence to
the Market from time to time, than to run up a score at the Huksters, and lose
a penny or two in every shilling.

Well but will not a Market either raise or lower the prices of Provisions to the
public Detriment? if the first the Town will suffer by it, and if the latter
'twill damage the Countryman. But I suppose it can do neither to any great
degree. If it should abate some of the price of Provisions it were a thing
greatly to be desired. And now indeed we of the Town raise the price upon our
selves by going to the Towns End, and buying up. Some Market people have
professed that they never intended to ask, what people have sometimes come and
bid for their goods. But if there should not be a sufficient Supply for a
Market, it is probable this Evil would not be remedied; nay the price of
Provisions would yet rise by peoples bidding upon one another. What we hope for
is, that there would be a moderate and sufficient Supply, and then the Country
will still have a moderate and sufficient Gain; and if they are quickened to
raise more than they now do, they will gain a great deal more, though the price
be lower.

But now comes the greatest Objection of all in my Account, and that is -- Our
people live so high and are so free of their little Money (not to say prodigal
of it) that a Market will never be able to supply Us: Every one is so much for
the best and dearest, and some for every thing, and for a great deal of every
sort.

Now this I confess is a formidable Objection, but too foolish and criminal a
thing I should hope to be true. Yet they say it was found so when the Market
was heretofore attempted, and some discreet Persons tell me 'twas this spoilt
the attempt then, And so it will for ever if it be not corrected and amended.
It is a vicious Extravagancy and Enormity, which we must reform in our selves.
We must be modest, humble, frugal, and every one content themselves with a
little, a bare supply for the time. Put the knife to thy throat, and cut that
rather than murder the Public. Nature is content with a little, and prudence
will make a little go far, but nothing will satisfy lust, and therefore it must
needs be mortifyed, and die as a public Enemy.

They that are poorer in worldly state should and must give way to the Rich.
Who but they ordinarily should buy the dearest and best of the kind? Providence
means it for them. It is the Government of Heaven; let us submit to it. GOD has
given into their hand more abundantly. Let not thine Eye be evil. Now and then
we that are poorer may taste of the best too and be thankful, But we should be
willing to live low, where God has set us; and having food and raiment (though
not so much of it as some, nor of so fine a sort) let us be therewith content.

Would to God there were Manna and Quails for the meanest! But that would be to
suppose a Wilderness-state, where there were no fields to plant or reap. We
look now to live by the Blessing of God on our labor and frugality, and not by
Miracles. These ceased as soon as Israel came to Cities and Villages, to
inhabit and till and Trade.

Finally, If any should object again, We have no places in the Town now left
for Markets, except in the Out-places: We are every where enclosed and shut up,
so that it would cumber the Shops, and obstruct the necessary passage of Carts
and Trucks, in the work and Merchandise of the Town from day to day.

In the first place I would answer, that happy may the Shops account themselves
where the Markets shall be seated, for it is likely to bring them good trade,
and proportionably would the rents of the Houses so situated rise.

And then as to places for Markets, as the South End of the Town cannot want
one if we please to provide one there; So the North End have the fair Square
before the Old Church there, to which might be added the fair Slip of Ground
behind it if the Town please to purchase it: And as to the middle of the Town,
if the Dock were but filled up even with the fine Wharf which is already built
out into it, and those wretched old Houses which now pinch up the way were
pulled down, it would afford a most pleasant and spacious place for a Market,
to the great Beauty and utmost Convenience of the Town.

Indeed this Proposal supposes both Charge and some private Persons submitting
their Interests to the public; but these things can never be avoided nor are
to be objected: We must always be at pains and cost too to make our selves
easy and comfortabe, and to provide for our Necessities and Conveniences.

Having thus offered my good Wishes and poor Thoughts to the Town in the
particular now before me, I ask for a candid Interpretation, or (if I deserve
it) a gentle Censure and forgiveness. I can only plead an honest meaning at the
general Advantage of the whole Town and Country in this Essay. It may be I
should use the Market as little as most of my Neighbors, if it be set up. But
if my Betters are served by it, together with the poorest, I shall be glad to
have contributed any way to the ease and Comfort both of the One and the other.

I will take leave of the Reader by obliging him with some better words than my
own, Scil.

That it has always been a Maxim with Infant Cities and Towns, when they are
grown to sufficient numbers to follow those laudable Customs and practices,
from which more Ancient and consequently wiser Cities and Towns have reaped
their greatest Benefits and Advantages: Among which Customs it is notorious
that none has been more universally pursued, through the whole World, than the
appointing proper times and places in their respective Cities and Towns for an
orderly and well governed Market; by which means their Inhabitants both poor
and rich have been well Supplied, and the Country-farmers and good Housewives
found a gainful Account.

FINIS.

