Some Short and Easy Rules Teaching The true Pronunc OF THE French Language

To the Reverend John Leverett, The very worthy President of Harvard College at
Cambridge in New England.
SIR,
THE following Pages containing a Method, consisting of many concise and easy
Rules, for the attaining to the true Pronunciation of the French Language
(extracted from the best Grammars, and from my own Experience) I humbly submit
to your Censure. I most humbly submit it to you Sir, Whom all the World allow
to be so great a Master of Learning, so well versed in all the solid and
curious Parts of Erudition.

SIR, It is no small Pleasure to me, that I have this public Opportunity of
rendering you those Thanks, which are deservedly due to the Favor you granted
me, in permitting me to instruct in the French Language some of those Young
Gentlemen who are (happily) under your Care.

SIR, the Language of Versailles is looked upon as a distinguishing Ornamant in
all the Courts of Europe.

PM sure it is no small Accomplishment to a Gentleman, and may be of great
Service to those whose Interests or Inclinations may induce them to travel.

IF I may be any ways Instrumental in serving those Gentlemen whom (by your
Favor) I instruct, it will be a great pleasure to

SIR Your devoted and very humble Servant, Tho: Blair.

Of the French Letters.
The French have twenty-five Letters.

ABCDEFGHIIKLMNOPQRSTUVXYZ.

They are pronounced after this Manner. Aw. Be. Ce. De. ^F. Eff. Ge. Aush. Ee.
Ee. Kaw. Ell. Eam. Ean. O. Pe. Kuu. Er. Ess. Te. Uu. V. Fexe. Ee. Gree. Zede.

They are divided into Vowels, Consonants, and Liquids. A Vowel is a Letter,
Which makes a sound by it self.

There are six Vowels, a. e. i. o. u. y. A Consonant, and Liquid, are Letters
Which cannot make a Sound, but when joined with a Vowel, as B is pronounced as
if it were written Be. etc.

There are fifteen Consonants. BCDFGHJKPQSTVXZ.

There are four Liquids, LMNR.

Of the Difference between Consonants and Liquids.
A Consonant in the End of a Word is lost, if another Consonant or Liquid
begins the Word following. Example, Vous parlez bien, You speak well. Read Veu
parle bien. Vous lisez bien, You read well. Read, Vou lise bien.

But a Consonant in the End of a Word is not lost, if a Vowel begins the Word
following. Example, Vous avez, You have. Where the Consonant s is pronounced.

When a Liquid and Consonant are in the End of a Word in the same Syllable, the
Consonant is lost. Example, Grand, Great. Read Gran.

When a Liquid and two Consonants are in the End of a Word in the same
Syllable, the Liquid is only pronounced. Example, Corpse, a Body. Read Cor.

A Liquid is not commonly lost in the End of Words, although a Consonant or
Liquid begins the Word following. Example, Un bon Prince, A good Prince. Un
mal, An Evil. Where the Liquid n is pronounced.

The Liquid l is cut off in the pronoun before Verbs, if the Verb following
begins with either a Consonant or Liquid. Example, il pleut, it Rains. Read i
pleut. il neige, it Snows. Read i neige. its donnent, They give. Read i done.

But when the following Verb begins with a Vowel, the Liquid l is pronounced.
Example, il a, He has.

The Liquid l when joined with s in pronouns before Verbs is lost, if the
following Verb begins with a Vowel, and the s is pronounced. Example, ils ont,
They have. Read is on.

The Liquid n is cut off in the third person of the plural Number of Verbs, if
the Vowel e is before it in the same Syllable. Example, ils parlent, They
speak. Read i parle, ils chantent, They Sing, Read i Shante.

The Liquid r is always lost in the infinitive Mood of the first and second
Conjugations. Example, Parler, To speak. Read Parle. Batir, To build; Read Bati.

Note, all Verbs of the first Conjugation end in er, and all Verbs of the
second Conjugation end in ir.

Of the Sound of the Vowel A.
The French Vowel a is pronounced as the English a in the Word all.

But when the Vowel a comes before an i marked with two points, or before y, it
has the Sound of the English ^ in the Word They. Example, Pais, a Country,
Read Pe-i. J'ay, I have. Read Jey.

Of the Vowel e.
The French e has three several Names. First, it is called Masculine, because
it has a very strong and distinct sound, as Parle, spoken. Bonte, Goodness.

It is always known by the Acute Accent wherewith it is marked, as e.

Of the e open.
The Second e is called open, because it is pronounced openly, as the English e
in the Word They.

The e open is always known when it is either in the Beginning or Middle of
Words not marked with the Acute Accent. Example, Sell, Salt. Mettre, To put.

But the following Words of one Syllable, Mes, tes, les, ces, des, are
excepted, and pronounced as if the e were Masculine.

Of the e Feminine.
The e Feminine is pronounced as the English e in the End of these Words, Come,
Done, People.

It is called Feminine, because it has a very weak, or no Sound. as Pere, a
Father, Mere, a Mother.

But it is sometimes pronounced in those Monosyallables, Je, me, te, le, ce,
se, de.

The e is Feminine, in all Syallables before s, except the first. Example,
Belles, Handsome. Read Bell.

The e is also Feminine in the Middle of the Word Mademoiselle, Mistress. And
so in all other Words, where the e is not marked with an Acute Accent. Example,
Promener, to Walk. Read Promne.

The e Feminine is not written in the End of Words, where the Word following
begins with a Vowel, but in place thereof has this Apostrophe (') Example,
J'aime, I Love. L'amour, Love.

Of the e joined to m, or n.
The e when joined to m or n, is pronounced like a. Example, Commencer, to
begin. Read Commance. Patiemment, patiently. Read Patiamman.

But when a Vowel does immediately follow the m, or n, the e keeps its own
Sound. Example, Le premier, The first. Vous venez, You come.

As also in the following Words, Jerusalem, Hymen, Examen, Methusalem, the e
keeps its own sound.

When the e Masculine comes before the e Open, the e keeps its own Sound also.
Example, Bethleem, Cananeen.

As also the e keeps its own Sound when the Vowel i comes immediately before
it. Example, Rien, nothing. Bien, well.

But these words Audience, Experience, Expedient, Client, are excepted; and
pronounced Audiance, Experiance, etc.

Of the Vowel i.
The i is sometimes a Vowel, sometimes a Consonant.

It is always a Vowel, when joined with a Consonant or Liquid in the same
Syllable. Example, Particulier, Particular. And it is always written thus i.

j Consonant always begins the Syllable, and a Vowel follows. Example, Jamais,
Never. The J Consonant is always written so J.

Of the Vowel o.
The o in French is always pronounced as the English o in the Word so.

Of the Vowel u.
The u is sometimes a Vowel, sometimes a Consonant.

U Vowel is always joined with a Liquid or Consonant in the same Syllable.
Example, Nature, Nature. Un, One.

The Vowel u is always written so u.

V Consonant always begins the Word, and is followed by a Vowel. Example,
Vanite, Vanity. Vous, You. It is always written so v.

The Vowel u is lost between g-e. and g-i. and the g is pronounced after the
English pronunciation in the Word Good. Example, Guerir, to Cure. Read Geri.
Guide, a Guide. Read Gide.

But Guise, a proper Name, is excepted and pronounced as written, as are all
other proper Names.

The u is lost between q-a. q-e. q-i. and q-o. and those Words are pronounced
as the English ka, ke, ki ko.

Of the Sound of Y.
The Vowel y is pronounced the same way as the Vowel i.

It is commonly put between two Vowels, as Ayant, and in the End of Words, as
Moy, Me. Monnoy, Money.

Of Dipthongs.
Dipthongs are two Vowels joined together in the same Syllable, Which make but
one Sound.

There are Fourteen Diptliongs.

Ai. Ay. Ao. Au. Ea. Ei. Eo. Eu. Ie. Oi. Oy. Ou. Ue. Ui.

1st. Ai is pronounced as Ai in English, in the Word Vain. Example, J'aime, I
Love.

2d. Ay is pronounced the same Way as the Ai. Example, Je Diray, I shall tell.

But when the Ai comes before the double ll, the i is not heard before them,
but makes a Change on the Syllable after them. Example, Bailler, To give. Read
Ballie.

3d. In Ao the o is not heard. Example, Paon, a Peacock. Read Pan.

4th. Au is pronounced like o. Example, Autant, As much. Read Otan.

5th. Ei is pronounced as Ai. Example, Peine, Labor.

But when an i marked with two points follows the e, those two Vowels are not a
Dipthong, but are pronounced separately. Example, Obeir to Obey. Read Obe-i.

6th. In Ea the e is lost. Example, Jean, John. Read Jan.

7th. In Eo the e is lost. Example, George, George. Read Jorge.

8th. In Eu the e is lost. Example, J' eusse, I might have. Read Juss.

But when the following ii is marked with two points, those two Vowels are not
a Dipthong, but are pronounced separately. Example, Reussir to attain. Read
Re-ussi.

9th. ie is pronounced as the double ee. Example, Marie, Mary. Read. Maree.

But these two Vowels are only a Dipthong in the end of Words, not in the
beginning or middle of Words. Example, Pieton, A Footman. Read Pi-eton.

10th. The Dipthong oi when joined with s, or t, in the second or third
Syllables, in the end of Words, is pronounced like ay in English. Example, Tu
parlois, Thou did speak, Read Tu parlay, il parloit, he did speak, Read i
parlay.

But all proper Names are excepted, and pronounced as written. Example,
Francois, Francis.

The oi is also pronounced as written before s. in all Words of one Syllable.
Example, Unfois, Once. Un Mois, a Month.

It is also pronounced as written before the Liquids L. N.R. Examples, etoile,
a Star. Neansmoins, Nevertheless Memoire, The Memory.

Before all the rest it is pronounced as ay. Example, Froid, Cold. Read Fray.
Foible, weak. Read Fayble.

11th. Oy is pronounced as the English oy. Example, Viceroy.

But these Words Je Croy, and Croyance, are excepted, and pronounced Je Cray,
and Crayance.

12th. Ou is pronounced as the double oo in the Word Good. Example, Vous, You.
Loup, A Wolf.

13th. Ue is pronounced like two uu; Eample, Morue, Codfish. Read Meruu.

14th. Ui is pronounced as uee. Example, Cuit, Boyld. Read Cueet.

Of Tripthongs.
Tripthongs are three Vowels joined together. There are Fifteen Tripthongs,
Aou. Eai. Eoi. Eui. Ieu. Oei. Oeu. Oie. Oue. Oui. Oye. Uei. Ueu. Yeu.

1st. Aou is pronounced as the Dipthong ou. Example, Aoust, agu^t. Read Oust.

2nd. Eai is pronounced as the Dipthong ai. Example, Demangeaison, Itching.
Read Demangaison.

3d. Eau is pronounced as the Dipthong au. Example, Beauty, Beauty. Read Baute.

4th. Eoi is pronounced as the Dipthong oi. Example, Asseoir, to Sit. Read
Assoir.

5th. Eui is pronounced as the Dipthong ui. Example, Devil, mourning. Read Duil.

6th. Ieu is pronounced as the Dipthong eu. Example, Dieu.

7th. Oei is pronounced as the Dipthong ei. Example, Oeil, An Eye. Read, Eil.

8th. Oeu is pronounced as the Dipthong eu. Example, Boeuf, an Ox. Read Beu.

9th. Oie is pronounced like the Dipthong ay. Example, ils pensoient, they did
think. Read i pansay.

10th. In oue all the three Vowels are pronounced. Example, Foueter, to Whip.

But if a Vowel begins either the Word or Syllable following, or if in the End
of a Word alone, These three Vowels are pronounced as the Dipthong ou. Example,
Joue, a Play. Read Jou.

11th. In oui before a double ll the i is not heard. But it causes a Change on
the Syllable following. Example, Mouiller, to wet. Read Moullie.

12th. Oye is pronounced as oy. Example, Oye, a Goose. Read Oy.

13th. Uei is pronounced as the Dipthong ei. Example, Orgueil, Pride. Read
Orgeil.

14th. Ueu is pronounced as eu. Example, Langueur, Languishing. Read Langeur.

15th. Yeu is pronounced as the Dipthong eu. Example, Les yeux. The eyes. Read,
Les eux.

Of the Consonant B.
The Consonant b in the End of Words is not heard. Example, Plomb, Lead. Read,
Plon. The m is pronounced like n.

Of the Consonant C.
When two cc meet in one Word, one of them is lost. Example, Occurrence. Read
Ocurrance.

But these Words Occir, to Kill, Accident, An Accident, and all Words derived
from the Latin are excepted, and both cc are pronounced.

The ch is pronounced as sh. Example, Changer, to Change. Read Shange.

But these Words Archange, Chaos, Paschal, and all other Words not purely
French are excepted, and the ch is pronounced as k. as Arkange, Kaos, Paskal.

The c in the End of Words is pronounced like ck. Example, Almanac, Read
Almanac.

The c with a Tail is pronounced like s. Example, Garcon, a Bov. Read Garson.

Of the Sound of D.
The D is not commonly pronounced in Words which are purely French, but only in
such as are derived from the Latin. Example, Admirer, to Admire. Administrer,
to Administer.

When two dd meet in one Word, one of them is lost. Example, Addonner, to Adict
Read, Adonne.

The D is not pronounced in the End of Words. Example, Nud, Naked, Read Nu.

Of the Sound of F.
The f is not heard in the End of Words. Example, Beuf, An Ox. Read, Beu.

When two ff are in the middle of a Word, One of them is only pronounced.
Example, Affair, Read, Afaire.

Of the Sound of G.
The G when joined with n is not prononnced, but makes a smoothing on the next
Syllable. Example, Campaign, the Country. Read Campaine.

When it is joined with the Vowels a. o. u. it is pronounced after the English
Pronunciation in the Word Good. Examples, Gage, Wages. Gorge, the Throat.
Augure, a Diviner.

Of the Sound of H.
The h is not pronounced in any Words Which are derived from Original Tongues.
Example, Homme, Man. Read Omme.

But in all Words which are purely French it is pronounced. Example, Honte,
Shame.

The h is not pronounced between C-r. Example, Chretien, a Christian. Read
Cretien.

Of the Liquid L.
The l in the End of Words is not heard. Example, Fusil, a Gun. Read Fusi.

The l is not pronounced in those Words Quelque, and Quelqu'un, Which are
pronounced queq, and quequn.

The Words ending in ol are pronounced as ou. Example, Col. the Neck. Read Cou.
Fol. A Fool; Read Fou.

The double ll is pronounced as a single one. Example, Distiller, to Distill.
Read Distile.

Of the Liquid M.
The m in the End of Words is pronounced like n. Example, Nom, a Name. Read,
Non.

But the m keeps its own Sound in all Words ending in em. Example, Jerusalem,
Bethleem.

In Words where n immediately follows, the m is pronounced as n. Example,
Condamner, to Condemn. Read Condanne.

Of the Consonant P.
The P is not pronounced in the midst of Words purely French, but only such as
are derived from the Latin. Example Soupconner, to suspect.

Ph is pronounced as f. Example, Philosophy, Read Filosofie.

The double pp is pronounced as a single one. Example, Opposer, to oppose.
Read, Opose.

Of the Sound of Q.
The Q in the End of Words is pronounced as ck. Example, Cinq ecus: Five
Crowns. Read Cinck ecu.

Of the Sound of S.
The S between two Vowels, or in the end of a Word when the Word following
begins with a Vowel, is pronouncced like z. Example, Desire. Read, Dezire. Vous
avez. Read, Vouz avez.

The S in the middle of Words before Consonants or Liquids is not pronounced,
except such as are derived from the Latin. Example, escu, a Crown. Read ecu.

The S in the end of Words is not pronounced. Example, Du pain his, Brown
bread. Read Du pain by.

These words nostre, and vostre, are pronounced not, and vot, when any word
follows them. But when another Word does not follow, they are pronounced notre,
and votre.

Of the Sound of T.
The T when joined to ia, and ic, is pronounced as two ss, or as c. Example,
Nuptial, Read Nupcial. Ambition, Read Ambicion.

The T is not pronounced in the end of Words. Example, il ait, Read il ai.

Of the Sound of x.
The x in the beginning of Words is pronounced like s. Example, xantogn. Read
Santoin.

Between two Vowels it is pronounced as z. Example, Deuxiem, the Second. Read
Deuziem.

But the Word Soixante is excepted and pronounced Soissante.

The End of the Pronunciation.
Of Accents.
The Accents fall only on the Vowels.

The French have three Accents.

The Acute, the Grave, and Circumflex.

The Acute Accent is marked thus e.

The Grave Accent is marked thus a.

The Circumflex Accent thus a.

The Vowels a and u receive only the Grave and Circumflex Accents.

The Vowels i and o receive the Circumflex Accents alone.

The Vowel e receives all the three.

Of the Accent on A.
This Vowel is marked with a Grave Accent in the adverb la, to distinguish it
from the Feminine Article la.

It is marked with a Circumflex Accent in Words where one a is taken away. As
age. and also in Words where the s is taken away. as Chatau, a Castle.

Of the Accent on E.
The e is marked with a Circumflex Accent, in Words where the s is cut off. As
Conquetc. Eveque.

The e is sometimes marked with the Acute Accent, and sometimes with the Grave.
As Vanite. Vanity. Expres. Express.

Of the Accent on I.
The i is marked with a Circumflex Accent in all Words where the s is cut off,
as Croitre. Connoitre.

Of the Accent on O.
This Vowel is marked with a Circumflex Accent in all Words where the s is cut
often, as Notre. Votre.

Of the Accent on U.
This Vowel is marked with a Grave Accent in the Adverb ou.

It is marked with a Circumflex Accent in all Words where the s is cut off. as
Bruler, to Burn. Gouter. to Taste.

The End of the Accents.
To know when Syllables are Long or Short.
The Syllables ending with c Feminine are short, As Me, Te, Quelle.

In Words ending with two ce, the Syllable is long. As Armee. An Army.

As also in Words ending with the Dipthong ie. as Marie, Mary. Where the e is
pronounced like another i.

Though s or nt follow the e in the same Syllable, it is short. as Nobles,
Parlent. Read Nobl. Parl.

But all Words of one Syllable are excepted, and the e is long. as Mes, Tes.

All Syllables where the e open is found are long. As Meme.

All Syallables in which a Letter is suppressed, or not pronounced in reading,
are long. as Doux. Sweet.

i in the middle of Words, makes its Syllable long. As Sentiment, An Opinion.

All Vowels tied to Consonants or Liquids make their Syllable long. As Sell,
Salt. Bon. Good.

All Syallables ending in ant, our, eur, eir, on, om, are long. as Aimant,
Loving. Amor, Love, Honneur, Honor. Pouvoir, To be able. Lecon, a Lesson.
Nom, A Name.

All Syllables which end with Dipthongs are long. As Jeparleray. I shall speak.

FINIS.
BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, MDCCXX.


