The New Birth, Assisted: In a Serious LETTER to One coming into it; Written by
the Reverend and Renowned, Mr. Jonathan Mitchel, late Pastor to the Church at
Cambridge in N. E. about the Time of his first Entrance on the Evangelical
MINISTRY.
Dear and Entirely Beloved Friend,
IT is an afflicting Providence from GOD, and just cause of shame to me [for I
cannot clear my self from a great deal of just blame] that I have not done, nor
can now do any thing for you in regard of those writings you desired of me: I
have, and am continually pressed with variety of urgent occasions, and much
time [in the way I am in] is daily taken up from my personal studies, besides
many incident avocations: And alas I can do little, and make but slow progress
in the long race of Learning I have to run! And it is my miserable guise,
either by wickedness or weakness, to fall short of that good I should either
get or do; and if it be so in this case toward you, it is no wonder, tho it
should be my deep sorrow! But yet considering some passages in your last and
former Letters concerning your Spiritual Condition, and knowing, by experience
in my self, the reality of such Complaints; I would not be so graceless as to
neglect you wholly therein: And though I can say or do very little, yet a word or
two might be of some use; nor do I know what guilt might lie upon me, if I
should be silent or slight in this Case! And therefore [Dear -- ] if my barren
heart would suffer me, I would present you with a few words, as if you and I
were alone in a Corner, in the presence of GOD!

The Condition you express, is the Common [but fearful] Epidemical Calamity of
those times and places where the Gospel is Preached, and among such as
outwardly carry fair: Convinced but not humbled; some apprehensions of misery
and affections now and then, but not deep effectual mournings; something
burdened with sin and misery, and wrath of GOD; but yet able to bear it, and
contented to live without being delivered from it: Knowing every thing, and
feeling nothing; or rather knowing every thing, and yet indeed knowing nothing;
in seeing, not, etc. For my own part, it is that which has been the baneful
misery of my Soul [even that very thing which thou say and mean] ever since I
knew any thing; and the Lord knows how little I am delivered from it, and how
much of my work in this point [upon which the very hinges of our Salvation
turn] is yet to do to this day! Oh [my -- ] if my heart were not Adamant, I
should weep with, and for you: And truly when I am most near God, I have no
greater request than this for my self and you, that God would use any means to
make us see things really as they are, and pound our hearts all to pieces, and
make indeed sin most bitter, and Christ most sweet; that we might be both
humbled, and Comforted to purpose! An imperfect work of the Law, and then an
imperfect work of the Gospel, is the bane and ruin of us in these days! Some
fears and affections, and then some hopes of Mercy [without finding full rest
and satisfaction in Christ only] men rest in, and here perish! But hence is the
ground of that you speak of: An heart that does not, cannot feel sin [and
consequently, no other thing that Gods word speaks of] and the wrath of God for
it, to purpose: Cannot be sensible of sin or misery in an effectual manner! Now
a word or two of Counsel to you in this Case!

First consider the end and thing you are to strive after. Secondly the way and
manner how: Your business is never to rest till you come to feel sin as an
insupportable burden, and then to find rest and everlasting satisfaction in
Christ, embracing him as your own! To go on humbling to be humbled, and to see
such intolerable evil in sin; and be so burdened with the wrath of God lying
upon you for it, as it may make sin everlastingly odious to you, and force you
to fly for refuge to lay hold of the hope set before you; and to have strong
Consolation there! This is a great thing, not easily and quickly gotten; but
sit not down at quiet, till you come to this! This is the way to make all sure!
But you will say I know not whether I ever had any true humiliation; whether
there is any thing in me that will stand by me, when an hour of Temptation
comes? Therefore now resolve, I will padle and dally with God and my own soul
no longer, I will never give God rest till He show me things really, and till I
have attained that sense of sin, and Faith in Christ Jesus, which is real and
effectual! This is the work of our lives, Job. 6.29. Let me never rest till it
be put out of all doubt, that God in Christ is mine own, and has made an
everlasting Covenant with me! This I will have, or I will be in bitterness
before the Lord while I have any Being; and for the residue of my days, I will
dwell with them that lie down in sorrow, I will have my society with such
forsaken souls; who being desolate and deserted, are free among the dead: If
the blessed God shall excommunicate this wretched Soul from His gracious
presence, [which yet is but an Act of His most Holy and Just severity] Oh! let
me find this favor in his sight, that I may also excommunicate my self from
the pleasures and enjoyment of this present World! And resolve this, If God
will not let me see the good of his chosen, [and I have nothing to say why He
should] I will mourn, I will mourn; let me live and dye in the house of
Mourning! If God will not Comfort me, nothing else shall, if I may not have
peace and rest in God, I Will have none at all; if God will take no pleasure in
me, I Will take no pleasure in my self: Let (...) be my meat continually; let me
go (...) up and down the World while I have a (...) to live: If God cast me
off, let this be my (...) Nay, [come to this pass] I cannot live, (...) God be
reconciled to me: My spirit fails, if (...) not presently! There is no being,
(...) for me, unless He speak a word of peace (...) [ Psalm. 69.2, 2, ^7.8. and
14^.4, 7.] And in a time of (...) God will help; when you are lost, God will
find you, when you are sick to death, He will (...) you, Isai. 57.16, 28, 29.
His bowels will yern (...) you (...) Never fear want of Consolation, if your
Humiliation be not ineffectual! And here (...) me (...) you of a thing or two!

Take heed least some lesser sorrows and affections (...) you, and so you be
kept from great and effectual sorrows, and from Comfort by Christ only! (...)
himself in a miserable Condition; (...) upon he goes alone, he prays and weeps
too (...) very affectionatly for mercy: Upon this (...) well and whole again!
His good (...) please him, and (...) him; though he be indeed still (...) from
Christ and grounded Comfort, as ever! (...) ^eed of this. As also secondly
(...) resting (...) hopes of mercy, or in some (...) of mercy* (...) things
give (...) good hope that God may (...) words of Comfort are sometimes (...) to
his heart (...) through now (...) these affections and hopes are very good, and
they may be true [and be sure to be exceeding thankful for any such thing; that
you have any desire to seek God, any tears at any time before him, and hope
toward him; its more than thousands have] and very good encouragement to seek
after Christ more; but not to be rested in without Christ! It Is a sign a man's
heart is false, when a little of any thing will serve him! Use those sorrows*
heart-breakings and hopes, as blessed encouragements and engagements to follow
on still, and get nearer to Christ, and to gain in upon him; but rest not till
you be sure you have Christ; and fully rest in him, and your heart live upon
him only, alone, wholly and always! Now for the way you are to take in the Case
owned and expressed by your self: I would add a little as he Lord shall help.

Do not say there is no hope, and so give over striving! Give not way to a
sullen desperateness and deadness of heart; to a dulled sunk discouraged
spirit, as it were in vain to ^^ir, and will never be better with you! Do not
say, thus it has been, and thus it is, and you cannot help it, and there leave
it! No, no, Arise and be doing and God will be with you; is an old and good
Rule! What ever your Case be, Never be discouraged: Be humble and afflicted
under sin and misery [the more the better] but never be discouraged! Resolve, I
will yet follow God for all this, come on me what will! See 1 Samuel 12.20. Know
that God is God, and not man, He can help, nay He will! He is willing to help
you, if you be not unwilling to have it: See Isai. 55.8. Jer. 33.3. Hos. 13.9.
Joh. 4.10. and 6.36 He has after-mercies for them that have abused former
mercies, Ezekiel. 39.26. Jer. 3.1, 22. If it were but a may be, Amos 5.15. Zeph.
2.3. A who can tell? Jon. 3.9. Joel 2.14. A Lord if thou will, Mat. 8.2. It Is
enough to make us follow after God to the last gasp! Secondly, look up to the
Infinite God to help you for his Names sake, and for the Lord Jesus sake. You
know you are miserable, and have unspeakable need of his help; though you do not
feel it, and be not offended with it. Upon this ground [and this is ground
enough] go to God, and tell Him; that the less sense you have, the greater is
your misery, and the more need you have of his help: None but God can pull you
out of this pit, can inlighten this darkness, and break this Adamant; to him
therefore you come according to his own Counsel, Rev. 3.18. Tell him, He knows
you and sees you though you do not know or see him, no, nor your self neither: He
can take hold of you, though you cannot take hold of him, Joh. 15.16. Bring such
an heart as you have [longing that it were better] to him, that he would mend
it: Bewail this impenitent heart, cry out of this secure sottish heart, as the
greatest evil that could befall you; beseech him to use any means to break it,
and change it: Fill your Mouth with Arguments before him; tell him of his free
[Oh hang there upon free Mercy] his tender, his preventing, his manifold rich
Mercy: Say you are resolved never to leave him till he give you this Grace
effectually, and all the Grace you want, everlasting Mercy* Cry to him out of
the thick darkness, and out of the low dungeon, Lam. 3.55. When you have no
mind to pray, when Devil and World, when heart and the gates of Hell, are
against you: Yet then, even then pray in spite of all your spiritual
Adversaries: Offer violence to the Kingdom of Heaven, stir up your self to take
hold on God; lay hold on Eternal Life, when nothing but darkness and death is
about you; when God stops his ear against you, and shuts up his heart too, yet
then fall down before him, put your Mouth in the dust; judge and loath your
self, hate your sin that brought you to this pass: Look again toward him, [as
Jon. 2.4, 7.] close with him at and upon the swords point, [ Though he kill me,
yet will I trust in him.] Bless his Name, and say as Lam. 3.22. Chatter before
him; leave your self to his Mercy, to his absolute, sovereign, mere Mercy,
renouncing all other props and comforts: See Isai. 50.10. Tell him as Dan. 9.9.
resolve to follow him, though blindfold, and see Romans 11.3^, 33. Gal. 3.22. When
you are shut up under sin and unbelief, then look to him who is able to save to
the utmost them that come to God by him: You know not how to look to him, nor
what it is to believe, nor how to go about such a thing; therefore tell God
that you come to him for Faith, as well as other things; You want every thing,
and you come for every thing: [the poorest Creature that lives] and know that
the blessed God would have you come to him in Christ for every thing: Christ
has all power in his hands to help you, Joh. 17.2. and see Joh. 6.37. Thirdly,
continue in seeking God till you find him: Follow on to know the Lord; and then
be your Case what it will, you shall know him, Hos. ^.2. Col. 4.2. Luke 18.1.
Many are very serious and earnest for a fit; but they give over before the Lord
come, and will rather patch up their Comfort and Salvation of any fashion, then
take the pains to hold out in seeking God with all their might: Multitudes
perish here. Oh! look to this; for do not think [especially in the Case you are
in] to get Grace and Christ [in the sense before spoken of] presently! No, no,
God may make you seek and wait many a day; but you shall reap in due time if
you faint not, Gal. 6.9. Diligently therefore and Constantly attend and improve
all the Ordinances and Opportunities that God gives: In special, let me speak a
word or two for your better help in them [being more private and personal] viz.
First, Meditation, [a most necessary and effectual thing which few practice:]
Get a little time to meditate daily, laying aside other things, and in other
occasions too, think as much of Spiritual things as you can* We do not see nor
feel, because we do not think of things, think of God and of Christ, of Sin, of
Heaven, of Hell, of Judgment, of Eternity, how few shall be saved, how
necessary it is to take the present time* What we come into the World for; of
quickening passages in Scripture, of Gods dealings with you, of your former life
and present Condition, etc. But you will [say, My heart is so vain and stupid,
I cannot think of (...).] I Answer, First, let this deeply humble you; and the
vileness of your heart that here discovers it self will be worth the while.
Secondly, beseech God to help you. Thirdly, By use of time you will find it
more easy. Fourthly, take advantage upon all the evil frames that at present
you feel, to apply and set on some soaking expression in Scripture: As in case
of hardness, blindness, vanity, see Romans 9.18.2 Cor. 4.4. Prove. 10.20. Yea
hence see and say, that God is true, and his word is true; for the Scripture
tells me of this heart I feel; and the rest of it will be verified upon me as
well as this. Fifthly, take the advantage of special seasons for Meditation,
when your heart is in a feeling frame [as after Prayer, after Sermon, if you
cannot before] and lay up what you get: One Truth felt in Meditation, is worth
a World, and it will make way for more. Sixthly, do something that is
equivalent and helping to it, at least when you cannot so directly meditate: as
reading of a good Book, writing of your former and present life: [that is a
thing of endless use] gathering up God's mercies, and your sins in writing
sometimes, etc. Secondly, Prayer this is the blessed means of getting a poor
soul to Heaven: And what an happiness is it, that we may pray to God! Besides
Family Prayer, get some time for secret Prayer, daily less or more: Be telling
God your heart alone; I know your occasions and labors [the Lord break my
heart for you] would not afford you that liberty that I [wretch] have: But do
what you can; love the duty, and God will pity you, wherein you are justly, and
by his providence [not your own negligence] hindered. And this is certain, He
that has an heart, shall never want time, or place to pray! Endeavor to order
your matters so, as you may have time for it: And if you could weekly have a
piece of an Afternoon [as Saturday in the Afternoon an hour or two, or as God
guides] set a part for secret and close converse with God by Meditation and
Prayer, thinking, writing, reading, examining, mourning before God; and do this
constantly, you would never repent it: The business of Salvation is mainly
carried on in secret between God and a man's own soul: And by all means provide,
that you may have your Sabbaths as free as possible all the day, and the
Evening before and after, for spiritual work: Ply God in such seasons as these
be, and be very thankful if you get but any little ground of your corruptions
and miseries: Go about your lawful occasions, not as a liberty to the flesh,
[as to think that now my task of praying is over, now I may please my self, and
refresh my heart in the World, etc.] but as the service of God, and as unto
him, because he bids you be thus employed: As when he bids me pray, I will pray
with all my might; so I will work too, when he bids me work; and not do it to
please my self, [alas, if I consider it, what pleasure or Comfort is there in
this evil World] but to please him: I will busy and employ my self in this
World, [because he bids me] but my place and my rest shall be only in God, or
no where: As Seamen go to Sea, but build their houses at Land; so I Will go into
the World, but lay up my heart and comfort and my whole support in God! I will
live in the World, but not upon it; I will live only upon God, and have my
Portion in him. And do not think that this sorrow and sense of sin, and
mourning after God, stands in a Monkish drooping sullenness and sadness, [tho'
it is certain that by the sadness of the Countenance the heart is made better;
and one should not give himself to unnecessary mirth, which is very poysonful;
nor purposely choke his spiritual sorrows with temporal delights:] But when you
have seriously spent your time with God, and have left your heart with him, and
he calls you to your occasions; go about them with alacrity and cheerfulness,
so as you may dispatch them comfortably; and carry amiably and delightfully to
those about you. And let your sorrows and sense of your Souls miseries lie deep
and undermost, so as you may recall them in their season; when you come to
pray, or be alone with God again; labor to have a constant habitual feeling of
your self, [and get as many good thoughts and affections as you can, at all
times] so as it may be livelily actual, especially in your seasons of attending
upon God; and in them drive on the business of your Soul, as if there were no
World; and as if there were nothing else to be minded but that. And if you find
your heart gone when the season of seeking God comes; then know that you have
in some measure backslidden and forsaken God; and never leave till you have
recovered it. Recall and review often the chief sins of your life that you can
remember, (...) aggravate gravate them before God in a special manner, [but
have your times of confessing and bewailing all the sins that ever you can
remember] and think of what sins or course it was that caused God to leave you,
to this woeful impenitency of heart, and bewail them bitterly. One thing more I
must add; Do not think it much to have some special seasons of seeking God,
besides those I have named. If you had a friend with whom you might now and
then spend a little time in conferring together, in opening your hearts, and
presenting your unutterable groanings before God; it would be of excellent use:
Such an one would greatly strengthen, bestead, and further you in your way to
Heaven. Spend now and then [as occasions will permit] an hour [or so] with such
a friend more than ordinary, [sometimes a piece of a day, sometimes a whole day
of extraordinary fast, in striving and wrestling with God for everlasting
mercy.] And be much in quickening Conference, giving and taking mutual
encouragements and directions in the matters of Heaven! Oh! the life of God
that falls into the hearts of the Godly, in and by gracious Heavenly
Conference. Be open-hearted one to another, and stand one for another against
the Devil and all his Angels. Make it thus your business in these and such like
ways, to provide for Eternity, while it is called to day, looking to Jesus the
Author and finisher of your Faith. But you will say [it may be] and I speak but
what I have found in my own heart, [Dear -- I deal plainly with you, as I know
you would have me do, and therefore let me suppose it should be said] This is a
tedious hard task, and my heart likes not to be so yoaked and toiled in such
things: I can take no pleasure therein; and if I should force my self to it for
a while, yet it would soon weary me: I have no heart to these things; it may be
something might be done in this way, or another might do something: but I have
no heart to it.

Answ. 1. Wonder not at this, nor think the worse of that course, because your
heart lusts against it; but think the better of it. For, the better any thing
is, and the more instrumental for our Salvation; the more it is opposed by our
vile hearts, which are enemies to God, and consequently to our own chief good.

2. Confess to God this naughtiness of your heart: beseech him to help you
against this Devil, to change your nature, and let this occasion you to see and
loath the wickedness of your nature, and be enraged against it. The spirit that
dwells in us lusts unto envy, but he gives more grace; Jam. 4.5, 6.

3 ly. Consider what is the reason why this way seems so irksome and tedious
and you have no heart to it? Is it not because of inward blindness and
security? because you see not things as they be, nor the weight and worth of
them? It is an irksome thing to a man to rise out of his bed in the Night, when
he lies warm, and knows no danger, nor urgent occasion to rise: but if he
awake, and see, his house on fire about his ears, he will make no demur about
the matter, but be glad he may rise! Verily, one real glimpse of the wrath of
God burning about us, or of Eternity that is a coming; one real glimpse of Gods
Anger [lying upon our Souls] which is infinitely above the most awful
apprehension of Man or Angel; Oh! this would make us skip at a time to pray in,
at an hour to cry out to God for Mercy in, especially if we might do it with
any hope of being heard, and saved; as now we may. So that the reason why I
have no heart to this course, is not because there is want of reason to
persuade me, but because I am blind; and I feel my blindness, I know that I do
not see things as they be, and therefore I have good reason to be deaf, to the
Counsel of mine own blind ignorant heart, and to strive by all means to see
better; and in the mean time, to believe what I do not see.

4 ly. Offer violence therefore to the Kingdom of Heaven, and be resolved in
this point; let my heart say what it will, let Hell and World be against me: My
God I must have! my God I will have! I must get sight of sin, and faith in
Christ Jesus; I must make my Salvation sure, or else I am undone for ever; and
therefore pray I will, and follow God I will, in despite of the Devil: Unto him
will I look, and [in such a Case as this] on him will I wait, who gives the
same spirit of zeal, of indignation against sin and self, as sometimes was in
holy Samuel, when he hewed Agag in pieces before the Lord in Gil^^^. Lord, thou
have commanded me to seek thy face, and thy face will I seek: I will not confer
with flesh and blood; I will not consult with Carnal reason; but what God bids
me do, that will I do, and do it with all my might.

5 ly. Know that if you Conscionably attend upon God, he will by degrees make
it sweet and easy to you: He will strengthen your heart and hands in your way
and work, Isai. 40.31. You will find it a sweet and blessed thing to stand
Confessing your sins before God, and emptying your heart in his sight, opening
all your Complaints and Soul-Concernments to him: You will find it an happiness
that you may pray to the God of Heaven, and have any Communion with him. Our
wicked hearts make religious duties irksome; else they are in themselves the
sweetest things in the World: Oh! if ever we come to know God aright, we shall
account it our happiness that we may do any thing, in way of Service to him,
and Communion with him.

6 th. Salvation is worth all our labor, be it what it will be: Is it a trifle
to be saved Eternally? Do we think to get Heaven by a good wish? or to go
thither in a Feather-bed? No, God will make us strive, and sweat, and wrestle
for it; and be sure it will quit the Cost! It will never repent us of any
Prayer we have made, or tear we have wept, when we come there! Oh! follow not
the guise of this secure World, that [in these days] is cast into a dead sleep:
Many profess, but few know what it is to work out their own Salvation with fear
and trembling. It is another matter to be a Christian indeed, than most make of
it: And of those that are sincere and lively, you see but their dark-side, you
know not what they are in secret: Follow not example, but follow the Word of
God.

Thus I have given you the sum of my thoughts, according to my measure and
manner. I beseech you make some use of this poor Letter, and read it at such
times as may most suit you* You may have many doubts and difficulties that I do
not here touch; but seek God, and he will guide you. As for your outward
Condition, follow on in these things, and your trouble for sin and soul misery,
will swallow up all other troubles; and future Consolations will sweeten all:
And whatsoever may happen to you here, yet hereafter it shall be well with you,
and in your wearisome pilgrimage it may be for a Consolation to you, that you
shall rejoice in time to come.

Now the Tender Mercies of God be with you, [Dear -- ] and the Lord lead you by
the hand to his Eternal rest, through all sins and sorrows, to his own Glory, and
your everlasting Comfort: So I remain,

Your unfeignedly loving Friend to serve you, J. M.
From Harvard College in Cambridge, May 19. 1649.
BOSTON, in N. E. Reprinted by B. Green. 1719.


