Reflections upon Reflections: OR, More NEWS from Robinson Cruso's ISLAND, IN A
Dialogue Between a Country Representative and a Boston Gentleman, July 12. 1720.

Fas est ab host doceri. Cruso's Island: Printed in the Year 1720.

A Dialogue, etc.
The Boston Gentleman. SIR, UNderstanding you are come down to represent your
Town in the approaching Session, I heartily congratulate you on the same: And
seeing the divine Providence, which Superintends humane Affairs, has allotted
you that Service, I hope you will approve your self a sincere Lover of your
Country, and make it abundantly evident, that our most valuable Interests lay
near your Heart.

It is also my earnest Wish, that his Excellency, and the whole General
Assembly may enjoy the Divine Conduct and Direction, in all the weighty and
Arduous Affairs that may come before them,; and so be (under Heaven) the happy
Instruments of lengthning out our Tranquillity.

The Country Gentleman. Sir, I most passionately pronounce Amen to your Wish;
and as to my self, as it has ever been my Ambition, so (I trust) it shall be my
unshaken Resolution, instead of Sacrificing the public Good, and Shipwrecking
a good Conscience to gratify a few designing Men, to lay out my self, as I have
Ability and Opportunity in the service of my dear, native Country. I confess
things look Discouraging, in as much as the Times may justly be said to be
troublous; in Regard of the Divisions and Animosities which are among us; but I
hope Good will come out of Evil, and a Serene Morning succeed* a Stormy Night.

B. Gent. Your Resolutions are worthy a Man of Honor, and those who invincibly
adhere to such Resolves, do truly merit Praise, the love of which is a Passion
deeply fixed in the mind of every extraordinary Person; and those who are most
affected with it, seem most to partake of that divine particle, which
distinguishes mankind from the inferior Creation. The Stoics say, we
reasonably owe more to our native Country, than to all other things in this
lower World, as she Impales the rest we love and cherish; and who stand firm in
her preservation, and on the contrary must necessarily perish with her.

From this generous Affection, so many eminent Actions have taken Birth, of
such HEROES as have gloriously exposed their Lives for the preservation of
their Country, and laid aside their private Injuries, for fear of revenging
them at the public Expense.

Such indeed, challenge a peculiar Reverence and Respect, as they are made
Instruments of the Conservation and Protection of Men; and acquire a Universal
Reputation, which is the last degree of happiness here, and after they are
fallen Asleep, it may be said of them; 'Look through yon Azure Vault! what Rays
of Light
'Dart from the HEROES glittering Forms! How Bright
'Their Radiant Crowns! --
'While here their Country's Weal had their Regards,
'Now Heaven bestows munificent Rewards:
'As in the Orb of glorious Deeds they moved,
'Superiour Glories crown their Heads above.


Thus their Memory, which is precious, shall be transmitted to the latest
Posterity, to their Immortal Honor: On the other Hand, with what marks of
Infamy do they deserve to be stigmatized, who (though Heaven has Liberally
furnished them with large Abilities to benefit Mankind) are acted by a mean,
norrow, contracted spirit, may be argued from what I have said: (for contraries
illustrate each other.) This may be called sordid Frugality with a witness;
when Men are influenced by private views, and on every Occasion sacrifice the
public Good to their particular Interests; most certainly the memories of such
shall be accursed.

C. Gent. What you have said is agreeable to the Sentiments of Mankind in
general; but, Sir, what are we to think of the Animosities, Jarrs, and
Contentions, that spirit of Party and Faction prevailing among us; (though we
have a GOVERNOR, other Plantations would give thousands of Pounds to enjoy)
Does not this look with an ill aspect?

B. Gent. Truly this is matter of Lamentation, and will be so to all good men;
for the universal Suffrage of Mankind, and the Oracles of Eternal Truth, do
abundantly evince, that a House or City, i. e. any Community of whatever
Denomination, must inevitably fall and come to Ruin, when divided against it
self.

C. Gent. But what do you assign as the Origin, and Source of our Divisions; is
not the want of a Medium, think you, one great Cause?

B. Gent. The want of a Medium may, no doubt, be assigned as one great cause of
our Calamities; for the Silver and Gold being Shipped off, and the Paper Bills
exhausted; what Oppression, Injustice, and cruel Usury; what tricking,
cheating, defrauding, and overeaching, like a Deluge, has overflowed us? to the
grievous Scandal of the Christian Name.

Hence it is that the various Schemes, and projections, and Sentiments of Men
(as their particular Interests, and private views have led them) have been
exhibited, and almost an infinite number of Pamphlets dispersed through the
Country; to this are owing, the Contests and Controversies among us, which have
been managed with such furious Zeal, and Party warmth, as has ended in Enmity,
and utter Alienation: But to say no more of former things; what think you of
Mr. Colman's distressed state of Boston, with the several Answers; and what
Reception do they meet with among you in the Country.

C. Gent. Although the Government saw good very highly to resent some passages in
that Treatise, yet I verily believe the Gentleman was far from designing any
Reflection on it (as he solemnly declares, page 9.) but that the Good and
Happiness of the Town and Country were lying near his Heart; and that most of
the things therein contained are matters of Fact, is obvious to every man, who
is acquainted with the circumstances of things, which he has set in a true
light, in the Judgment of all Judicious Men, whom I have conversed with.

When I perused a Pamphlet, containing some Remarks, etc. on the above
mentioned Tract, and observed the Author's circular way of Argumentation; I
supposed (being immersed in more sublime Studies) he might imagine himself on
some lofty Topic in Metaphysics, and so has at once been mistaken in his
Theme, and his Notions of the true Interest of his Country: It Is well he owns
himself liable to mistakes, for it requires no great Judgment or Penetration,
to detect his Absurdities and Inconsistences; although he boasts, (page 12) that
he has made Things appear as plain and certain as a Mathematical Demonstration;
and challenges any man to confute him; but (page 19.) he calls the same things,
matters of doubtful Disputation: But his wonderful Projection, to force Men (by
a fatal Necessity) to Industry, Frugality, and Good Husbandry, and so at once
to extricate us out of our Difficulties, is, to have neither Money or Credit:
(Sir, don't you think Longitude, and a Communication between us and the Moon,
will be found out quickly, and be made as plain as a Demonstration!) Surely
this Projection would soon extricate us out of this wretched Life, if the
Government should fall in with it, and I am greatly deceived, if we ever see
good days again: But I would have our Projector make the Experiment, and try
whether it is practicable to subsist any time without Money or Credit; and if
he finds it is, then let him recommend his Project to the Government.

Mr. Colman, (in page 2. and 9. of his tract) touches to the Quick an Order of
Gentlemen (as if a man should thrust a Firebrand into a Nest of Hornets) who
with shame (or rather in a shameless manner) Cry, GIVE YE: But it was not long
before one of the fiercest of 'em, being roused up, (as a strong man after
Wine) and having filled his Pandoras Box, and fitted himself for his Masters
Service, sits down, to blot with his detestable Scurrility, a Paper called the
Deadham Postscript; in which posture, were it not just to paint him (something
as I Have seen K. J --) with the Father of Lies at at his right hand to instigate
and dictate, and an huge Bowl of exhillerating PUNCH at his left to intoxicate.

But (as one says) can any be so simple as to think, the Cause he seems to
patronize can receive any Benefit by the Clamor and Railing of so mean and
sordid a Wretch, whose Tongue, as we use to say, is no Slander? Here he makes a
mighty Stir (from his tender regards for the honor of Government) and out of
his high-flying Zeal, thunders out Non-resistance and Passive Obedience, that
we speak not Evil of Dignities, and be subject to the higher Powers, in such
haste, that he jumps over the 2d Chap. of the Epistle, in which there is an
Apostolical Interrogation, which he would do well to consider and apply, for it
is directly leveld as if designed for him, Verse 23. Thou that make thy boast
of the Law, through breaking the Law dishonourest thou God? But what has this man
to do with the Gospel? Has he ever read Psalm. 50.16, and onward? Or does Paul
give a toleration for men to be drunk, and in their merry Cups to thresh their
wives, contrary to the Light and Law of Nature as well as the Gospel? Or is it
Peter? No: Perhaps it is his pretended Successor at Rome gives the Indulgence,
with promises of Pardon for all Sins, past, present, and to come.

B. Gent. Sir, What you have said brings to my mind an insufferable Affront
lately offered to the Town of Boston. On the 10 th of June, being the Day of
our Election of Representatives, and the Pretenders Birth Day there came into
the public Town-Meeting, a certain Gentleman, (or rather mercenary R -- l) and
having placd himself on the Bench, and assumed an uncommon Air of Impudence, he
began imperiously to dictate to his superiors; and out of his superabundant
Loyalty to King GEORGE, and Love to the Protestant Succession, proposed, That
all the Inhabitants of the Town (though otherwise qualified according to Law
(should have the Oaths of Allegiance and Abjuration tendered to them, before
they might be a lowed to vote: And having asserted that there was a Law
obliging thereunto (though he could not produce the same) he went on with his
talk as pertinently as a Man may be supposed to do, if he should undertake to
prove to a demonstration, that Lawyer and Liar are synonimous Terms; Till Mr.
Moderator was forced to exert his Authority to still his unruly Tongue: This
extremely exasperated the Town, to be challenged by such a d -- D --, when
perhaps there are not 400 more true, and loyal Subjects (with humble submission
to Lancashire Jack) in the Kings Dominions; but it is generally supposed he came
( as a Tool) to set the Town together by the Ears, and hinder the expected
Choice.

C. G. We are not ignorant in the Country of the confounded juggling Tricks that
have been acted just before the their choice of Representatives in the several
Towns, by sending Emissaries, and dispatching abundance of Letters (with News
from Robinson Cruso's Island) from Vill to Vill, to amuse the Country;
insinuating that if things were carried on as they were the last Session, we
must expect the same Fate, and that the Country will be ruined by the vast
Expense and Damage of broken Conventions; much like the Cry of the High-flying
Party in England, in QUEEN ANN's Time, the Church, the Church is in Danger! And
there has not been wanting their utmost Efforts, nor any stone left unturned,
to compass their Noble Designs, and make things answer their Desire, though they
have been drove to such Extremity in two Towns (as I am well Informed) to bring
in two Gentlemen, (who ate by some accounted Pillars in the House) that their
Evangelical Pastor in one, and an ungodly Aethropian in the other, were Voters
to make a Majority* and how unprecedented each of these Instances are, I leave
the world to Judge. Probably all this mighty stir has been made, to antedote
the Dose of Hellebore Mr. Colman administered to the Country, (page 9. of his
Distressed State) where he advises them to send public spirited men, to
represent them, not Sheriffs and Lawyers, who are the only men, who are
benefitted by their Neighbors Straits, and fill their Coffers out of the Ruins
of their Estates; but si populus 'vult decipi, decipiatur.

B. G. It is too well known what sly Insinuations have been used by a Set of
Rash men in Boston (before the coming together of the Convention, under the
Hypocritical Disguise of contending for Perogatives) with the Country
Gentlemen, to Induce 'em to fall into such Measures, as may endanger the Loss
of a Charter, full of Singular Privilidges (which would be very grateful to
several Gentlemen, whose Names I forbear to mention) and involve us in such
miserable Circumstances, as a little valiant talk over a Bowl of Punch cannot
extricate out of.

C. G. I had not been half an hour in Town before I was saluted by a very
corpulent Gentleman of the 'Change, who thrust into my hand a Pamphlet, which
he told me was a Word in Season, and contained Matters of great Importance; and
was very importunate with me, to give it a speedy Perusal: The Title of it was,
News from Robinson Cruso's Island; and I soon found it contained sundry
scandalous Reflections of the House of Representatives. That on purpose to show
their spite to the G -- -- n, they had put a public Affront on him, and were
guilty of the highest and most sordid Ingratitude; That they were Punch
Bibbers, and Enemies of their Country, and bringing on it the last Degree of
Slavery: And on the whole, I was far from being of our celebrated News-mongers
mind, that it was proper to be communicated, and worth Peoples knowing.

B. G. Whoever was the Author of that scandalous Pamphlet, it is generally and
on good grounds supposed to be one, whose Scribendi Cacoethes has made him
famous on both sides the Atlantic, whose Brain is overcharged with so great a
variety of News, that the Country feels themselves on many accounts the worse
for him. The main Spring of his Learned Jargon seems to be, to fright the
Country out of their Privileges, lest while they lawfully use them, they spit
in the Face of Government: And having run his Parallel to a very great Length,
anon he begins to utter grievous Menaces, and to roar and bellow like the Popes
Bull, that we have by a Train of bad Usages compelled a good Spirited Governor
to such an inflexible Resolution, that he will make us know he is our
Governor: But with submission to his Holiness, we do know he is our Governor,
(and as such, would have all due Regards paid him; But what then? Must we
therefore tamely and quietly give up all our Rights and Privileges; and so
render our selves obnoxious to the Curse of succeeding Generations?

C. G. No verily: for if we tamely give up one Inch, we shall (according to the
Proverb) find by sad Experience, we shall lose an Ell; and anon (like the
Giants after the Flood) nothing will be restrained them of all that they have
imagined; And who knows where their Designs and Desires will terminate.

B. G. But the great Controversy of late, has been touching the Assemblies
Right of choosing a Speaker; and the Governor's Power to Negative their Choice;
which Matter has been set in a true Light by an honorable Gentleman, in his
just and seasonable Vindication, wherein he has fully made it appear, That the
House of Representatives have an unquestionable, fundamental Right, to choose
their Speaker; and that the Governor has no Negative Voice in that Election;
and that the giving up of this Point, which is of so great Concern and
Importance, would give a deadly wound to the Constitution: And although that
Gentleman's Name has been greatly Canvas'd by a few, whose Endeavors have been
used to cast an Odium upon it; (yet if it be a true Maxim that Interest will
not lie) he is one who has approved himself a true Friend to his Country, a
loyal Subject to King GEORGE. One who will never be guilty of listening to a
few designing Men, nor be imposed upon by popular and plausible Insinuations.

C. G. The Choice of a Speaker is one of the valuable Privileges this Province
Enjoys, and of which, it is strange there should be any Endeavors to deprive
them.

I hope this Assembly will entirely fall in with the Sentiments of the last,
and that private differences, will no more have any influence on the Public
Affairs; (which is highly unreasonable, by how much the Public Good, ought to
be preferred to particular men's Interests) and in a word, may this Province
ever have an Assembly that will quit themselves like Men, in standing up for
the just Rights and Privileges of their Country: May we ever enjoy a just and
wise Government, that will assert and maintain the Prerogatives of the Crown,
and being extricated out of the Difficulties we labor under, may we again see
happy and glorious Days, and the Council of all such as would strike at our
Constitution be turned into foolishness; to which, every good man will say AMEN.

Before we part, Sir, I beg the Favor that you would read to me a certain
Letter, which you told me formerly, you had by you.

B. G. Sir, I shall the more readily grant your Request, because it has
Relation to some things we have discoursed of: It is as follows, viz.

Dear Kinsman. Boston, January 12. 1703, 4.
I Confess I am ashamed almost to think I should be at Home so long, and not
let you know of it till now; though after all, a New England Correspondence is
scarce worth your having.

I Refer you to Mr. -- for an Account of every thing, especially about the
Government and the College, both which are discoursed of here in Chimney
Corners and private Meetings as Confidently as can be. If there should be any
occasion you must be sure to stir your self and Friends, and show your
Affection and Respect to my Father, who loves you well and bid me tell you so.
This Country will never be worth living in for Lawyers and Gentlemen, till the
Charter is taken away. My Father and I sometimes talk of the Queen's
Establishing a Court of Chancery in this Country. I have wrote about it to Mr.
Blathwayt: If the matter should succeed, you might get some Place worth your
Return, of which I should be very glad. If I can any ways serve you or your
Friends, pray signify it to

Dear Sir, Your Affectionate Friend, and Humble Servant, P. D.


ADVERTISEMENT.
Intended to be speedily published, the true Character of the Earl of Mar;
together with the History of his secret Intriegues, and noble Adventures: His
Conduct respecting State Affairs, and an Account of his late Voyage to Cruso's
Island, with some notable Reflections on the whole: By another Hand.

FINIS.

