The Present Melancholy Circumstances of the PROVINCE Considered, and Methods
for Redress humbly proposed, in a Letter from one in the Country to one in
Boston.
SIR,
SINCE our last Discourse about the uneasy threatening Circumstances of this
Province, as to Money or a Medium of Trade. I have employed my thoughts
somewhat in the matter, and I Will briefly hint some things that have occurred to
my mind.

OUR Fathers that first settled the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, brought
some Gold and Silver with them, after a while, some Money was Coined here, as
Shillings, Six-Pences, etc. But in process of time, (even long before Silver
Money was generally Exported, or carried out of the Province,) the greatest
part of the passing Money here, was Spanish, viz. Pieces of Eight, Half Pieces,
Eight Pences, etc. This Money I suppose was chiefly the Returns made for our
Fish, Lumber, Horses, Grain, Beaf, Pork, etc. Exported or carried out of the
Country. I think this demonstrates, that in those times what we Exported of our
own produce (or the fruits of our own labor,) was more than what was Imported
from other Places, either for Food, Drink, or Clothing; therefore to make the
Balance, Money came in, and continued Circulating among us. In those times the
Wealth of this Country was on the growing band. But of late Years, I Will suppose
the Twenty last past, our Silver Money has been generally Exported, so that now
there is not a Penny of it passing between Man and Man. Though I don't know
exactly (nor I believe any one else) how much Money has been Exported this last
Twenty Years, yet I Will now suppose it to be Three Hundred Thousand Pounds; and
I Will suppose we have now about Two Hundred Thousand Pounds out in Province
Bills; what is out in Province Bills, and to be Collected by Tax, the Province
owes for, and is so much in Debt; what is out upon Loan, is owing for by
particular Persons in the Province, so that the Inhabitants of this Province
owe for the whole. Now if the guess I have made be exact, (which I don't
pretend to) or pretty near it, then this Province in what is spent and what is
owed for, are about Five Hundred Thousand Pounds sunk in their Estates, in
about Twenty Years. If my guess be right in the Silver Exported, and the
Province Bills now out, then the Conclusion I Have drawn must needs be true.

BUT how comes it that we have sunk so much in our Estates, in so short a time?
If any think it occasioned by the Wars we have had in the last Twenty Years;
I Am humbly of a different Sentiment; for we did not hire Foreigners to manage
our Wars. This Province did not send away Silver Money, to hire assistance
against Indians or French. My opinion therefore is, that our decay in Wealth is
chiefly owing to our Mismanagements, especially our Extravagance.

WHAT is Imported into the Province, and Spent here, is, or should be Paid for;
else we are dishonest, which does not become Men, much less Christians, as we
are: And if the Fruits and Produce of our own Labor in this Province, will not
make a sufficient Export to pay for what we receive from Abroad, and Spend
here; then the Silver goes to make the Balance, and pay the remainder.

AND this is the very Case, the short and long of the Business. Our Silver is
gone to pay the overplus of Imported Goods, above what our own Product
Exported, could pay. Among the Commodities Imported, some are really useful for
us, which we are not able to raise, or make our selves, some not at all, some
not as yet, or not enough of it, as Canvas, Riggin, Brass, Copper, Pewter,
Tin-Ware, Glass for Windows, Sugar, Melosses, Cotton-Wool, Paper, Needles,
Pins, Scythes, Sickles, Cutlary Ware, etc. I suppose our own Produce (if we
joined Prudence and Diligence together) which might be Exported, would be
enough to pay for all the Imported Commodities, which are really needful and
useful for us.

BUT then many things have been Imported, which have not been necessary, yet
very costly; such as Silver and Gold Lace, worn on Clothes and Shoes, Velvet,
Rich Silk, Satin, Silk Stockings, Fine Broad-Cloths, Camlets, Perriwiggs, Fine
costly Shoes and Pattoons, Ribbons, Rich Lace, Silk-Hankerchiefs, Fine Hatts,
Gloves of great price and little worth, China Ware, very Costly-LookingGlasses,
Cane-Chairs, Costly Beds and Furniture, etc. We in the Country, think that some
scores of Thousands of Pounds in late Years, have been spent by this Province
in these things, and that the Province would have been much better without
them. I don't now contend against these things as being Unlawful in themselves;
but for us to send off our Silver Money to buy them, and now not have a Penny
to pass between Man and Man for our necessary business, I think has not been
our Prudence but our great Folly.

POSSIBLY some will say, the fault is in the Middling or Poorer sort of People,
who buy these things, and go above their Ability, in doing it. The reply is,
Possibly it has been great weakness in the Richer sort to lead in these things,
and greater folly in the Poorer to follow them.

HOWEVER, its matter of Fact, that there is much needless Expense in sundry of
these things, and though some Richer Persons or Families can bear the Cost of
these Expenses, yet Poorer ones (who too much affect them) cannot; but whether
such things are spent by Rich or Poor, its all one to the Province in general.
For what is Imported and spent in the Province must be paid for by Export from
it; and if the Produce of our Labor will not do it, our Silver and Gold must go
(or rather is gone) to make it up.

AND as I Am humbly of Opinion, that this Province had much better have been
without, many Scores of Thousands of Pounds of fine costly things Imported and
spent here; so I believe other things though useful in their time and measure,
have been Imported and Spent in greater Quantities, than has been for our good,
Such as Wine, Rum, Brandy, (not to mention Tea, Coffee, Chacolet, which People
here formerly did very well without) that there has been much needless Expense
in these things, I suppose none will deny. So far and so frequently as any have
drunk to excess, the Sin of Drunkenness has been chargeable on them, which they
should seriously and penitently consider of; but I Am now considering the
matter, as to Cost of such Imported Liquors. If several Thousand Pounds Yearly,
are needlessly spent in these things, so many Thousands a Year we are hurt even
on this account, that our Export does not (without sending off Silver) equal
our Import. If out of our own Produce, a Cargo of Staves, Hoops, Horses, etc.
has for its return, a Cargo of Wine or Rum, and one Third of it is needlessly
expended and wasted here; if instead of this Third needlessly spent, the return
had been made in Silver, I think this might be called double gain. And since as
to the Cost part (besides the Sin of Intemperance) we are much hurt by the
needless Expense of Imported Liquors; I conceive that the needless multiplying
Taverns and Retailers, tends further to impoverish us. For Persons thus
employed think to get a Living by their Business, and so are for drawing and
vending as much Liquor as they can, and its to be feared, criminally encourage
others to buy, and the more is spent for what is Imported, the more must be
Exported in one thing or other to Pay for it. And though some may think it a
Public advantage to multiply Licenses for selling of Drink, to draw more
Excise Money into the Treasury; yet I conceive it to be a Public hurt, because
our Import must be answered by our Export; and yet we have not enough of the
latter to do it; therefore our Silver Money is gone. A needless multiplying of
Retailers, whether of Drink or Shop Goods, is no advantage to the Public. For
if the same Goods are bought by Ten Persons one after another, with design to
Sell again, before the Person buys them that designs to wear or use them; each
of those Ten Persons aims at Gain in passing through his hands, and the last
buyer and user pays it all; whereas if he had bought it of the first or second
Seller, he might have saved the gain which the other Eight or Nine Persons had,
and those Persons might have been employed in other Business. For though in this
case supposed, the Eight or Nine needless Retailers, get some gain to
themselves, and the last buyer and user pays it all, yet the Province, or
Public is not enriched one Farthing by their labor. If they had been employed
in Husbandry, or Handycraft-Business; there would probably have been some
produce of their labor for the Public Good; either Grain, Cattle, Hemp, Flax
raised, or Cloth, Shoes, or Utensils made, which might be serviceable to
themselves or others; but their mere banding of Goods one to another, no more
increases any Wealth in the Province, than Persons at a Fire increase the Water
in a Pail, by passing it through Twenty or Forty hands. This matter might be
considered, as to Petty Shops, especially Hucksters and Forestallers of the
Market. I would not be thought here to condemn Retailing in general, for
doubtless Persons may get an honest Living by it, and those who buy of them may
be gainers too, by having the Commodities brought nearer, which prevents the
Time and Expense of traveling farther for them. It Is therefore only a needless
Retailing (whether of Drink or other Commodities) which I look on as hurtful to
the Public, because the Persons so employed, really raise or produce no good
to the Public^, which they might do if laboring in some other and proper
business. Needless Retailers, with respect to any Public benefit, are really
Idlers; they help to spend what is Raised or Imported, but produce neither by
their labor.

THUS I Have hinted by what way and means I conceive our Silver has been
Exported, and we are sunk so deep in Debt, viz. by Importing and spending many
things which we had better been without; and by an excessive spending some
things Imported, which in themselves considered, and in their time and measure
may be reckoned useful.

Now the Question is, How to redress this grievance, and extricate our selves
from these difficulties. I think this Question is not improper to be thought
upon, by any one that wishes well to this Province, as I Am sure I heartily do.
My Opinion is, that we cannot suddenly or at once get rid of these difficulties,
which our own Folly and Extravagance have brought us into. Yet I Conjecture,
that in a few Years time, by an ordinary course of Providence we might
gradually free our selves from them. When a Traveller knows he has missed his
way, he often goes back in the same Path, 'till he is sure that he is in the
right road again. I think we should take the same method. In the mean time, let
us Cultivate Peace, Love, Unity, not be hard on one another for different
sentiments, about ways to mend our Circumstances; let us not foment Parties and
Factions, but studiously avoid them, as we love GOD and our COUNTRY, Every City
or House divided against it self, shall not stand. Thus watching against
Discord, I Will say, Let not Merchants Import needless Commodities, or if they
do, let us not buy or use them; nor use more than needs of what is useful in it
self.

LET no Wool, Hides, Leather, Grain nor Candles be Exported, when at a dear
price. Let us grow more Frugal in furnishing and adorning our Houses, in our
Cloths, Food and Drink, this we might do (many at least) without hurting our
Bodies by Cold, Thirst or Hunger. Let us be diligent and laborious, to raise,
produce, make as much as we can for our own support, as to Food, Raiment,
Tools, Utensils. Let Husbandry, (tilling theground) be more diligently and
generally followed, that Bread and Flesh may be raised, and Barley to make
Drink, that so the less Imported Drink might be called for. Let us raise more
Sheep and Flax, and make as much of our own Clothing, both Woollen ^ Linen as
possibly we can. If People would generally and purposely choose, to wear Cloths,
(Woollen and Linen) Stockens, Shoes, Gloves, Hatts, of our own Country make;
this would encourage more to Employ themselves in making these, and in growing
more skilful and exact at it, and would prevent the Import of many Thousands a
Year, for which (among other unnecessaries) our Silver is gone. Two Rules well
observed would help us, viz. Let us by diligent labor raise and make as much
as we can for our selves, of Food, Raiment, Utensils, etc. and buy no more of
Imported Goods than necessity requires, I say, the observing these Rules would
soon turn the Scales, and better our Circumstances: I Am humbly of opinion, that
a Thousand Schemes about Banks and Paper-Money, would ^^t help us like this. If
this course were well followed a few Years, we should then live more on our own
Produce, than now we do; we should raise m^re for Export than now we do; and
our Export in Fish, Oil, Whalebone, Horses, Lumber, etc. would far more than
pay for necessary Importations, and therefore the overplus would naturally (as
it were) return in Silver and Gold, and so we should have such Money as plenty
as ever. But the longer we continue in our present course of spending so much
of Imported Commodities, and raising so little by our own labors, so much the
deeper we necessarily sink into misery. By this present course we are in, we
take off the Manufactures and maintain the Laborers of other parts, even as
far as the East Indies, (by the Silks, Muslins, etc. we have from thence) and
pay for it (so far as it is done) not out of our Labor, but our Stock, for our
Silver is gone already, and we are deep in debt into bargain. Our foolish
fondness of Foreign Commodities and Fashions has almost ruin^d us. How many
Thousand Pounds within this Two or Three Years have been Expended, in only one
particular instance, viz. Camlets and trimming for Rising-Hoods, and in making
them? Has not Three Quarters of this, if not more, been needless; though the
labor in making has been paid for here, yet the Imported Materials must be
paid for by some Export. If we had now Five Hundred Thousand Pounds in Silver
Current among us, I believe 'twould soon be carried off, if we did not alter
our present course, viz. to be less fond of Foreign Commodities, and to be
more laborious to raise Necessaries for our selves.

WE in the Country think, that Plotting heads, Proud hearts, and Idle hands,
will never maintain a People; and that a close following the Wheel within
doors, and the Plough without are much better and stronger Politics. Many
complain they scarce know how to live, and I don^t wonder at it, for many
affect to live higher than they need, or can bear. You in Boston go very fine,
we in the Country are smattering at it, and coming to it, by degrees. First by
clipping and debasing Silver Money, then by sending it away, and the coming of
Paper Money in the room of it; I say, hereby Merchants Imported Goods are come
to an Extravagant Advance. When we buy European or West India Goods, we give
for some double, for others more than double the Price that was given Fifteen
or Twenty Years ago. This necessitates us in the Country, to raise in some
proportion the Price of our Grain, Flesh, Wood, Hay, Butter, Cheese, etc. We
formerly Sold Butter, Six pence a Pound, that Six Pence would buy Two Pounds of
Sugar, and if we now have Nine pence a Pound for Butter, that Nine pence will
buy but One Pound of Sugar, or thereabouts. So that when we receive so great a
Price as we do, yet we find it hard enough to rub along; and the more so,
because Boston distemper is got into the Country, that is, We and our Families
are fond of many needless Imported Commodities, and must pay the Importers or
Merchants an Extravagant rate for them. If this raising on one another in
Trade, helps some, yet it hurts more.

ANOTHER thing which very much deserves our consideration is, That Salary Men,
Ministers, Schoolmasters, Judges of the Circuit, President and Tutors at
College, Widows and Orphans, etc. are pincht and hurt more than any; for while
they pay it may be double or more, both for Imported Goods, and the Produce of
the Country, yet their Salaries are not increased (if at all) in proportion, to
what the Merchant and Husbandman raises upon one another, though they must buy of
both. If Justice and Equity don't say, their Salaries ought to be increased,
let any one judge.

BUT possibly some will say, if we do our utmost to raise necessaries for our
selves, and buy no more than necessity requires of Imported Commodities, this
course will spoil Merchandising and Trading. I reply, the good of the whole
should be preferred to that of a part. Merchandising and Trading are necessary
and profitable for us, if well managed; but mismanagement therein, may hurt a
People. Trading has carried off our Money, we have not a Shilling in Silver
Passing, and we are deep in Debt; has not this Trading almost ruined us? Is not
this, to buy and sell and live by the loss? It is not profitable to the
Public, to have too many of any particular Trade or Calling, for they must
either be idle (when they might be employed in proper business) or labor for
little or nothing, which is unprofitable to themselves, and to the Public
therein. If there be Merchants enough to manage the Export we can raise, and
the Import we need, there is enough; Supernumeraries are hurtful not serviceable
to the Public; 'twould be better they were employed in other business.

POSSIBLY, some think, that the Emitting more Paper Money would bring us out of
our difficulties, but I Am humbly of another Opinion. I think some engaged in
Trade have observed, that since the Emitting the last Hundred Thousand Pounds,
the Price of Commodities Imported, and of our own Produce, has been
considerably raised; which is not so much from the scarcity of such
Commodities, as from the mean opinion Persons have of the passing Money. The
last I have heard is, that when Silver Money is Sold (now and then a little as
some can get it) it fetches Eleven or Twelve Shillings an Ounce in Paper Money;
whereas according to our Law (Seventeen Penny Weight at Six Shillings) Silver
Money is but a very small matter more than Seven Shillings an Ounce. This
plainly shows the low value People have for Paper Money. It seems as though the
more it is increased the less it is valued. I Am prone to think, that if every
Family in the Province, had a Thousand Pounds in Paper Money; Twenty Shillings
of it, would not then buy so much, as Five Shillings will now. In this
Province, People generally desire to be Freehold, they don't choose to be
Tenants, and pay Rent. But if we take up Money whether of the Province or
particular Persons, on our Lands; we so far become Tenants to the Lenders, and
pay Rent to them. And if we cannot pay when what is borrowed is regularly called
for, but a Course of Law recovers Land from us; possibly more Land will be
taken, then we should have been willing to have Sold, for half so much more as
we have borrowed. Possibly some who have taken up Money on their Lands, by
being incapable of paying will lose them; Frugality and Diligence would have
been a greater kindness to such, than their hiring Money was.

THIS (out of true love to my dear Country, where I was born, and hitherto have
lived, without ill will to any Person or Persons whatsoever,) I Have freely given
you some hints of my Opinion, about our present uncomfortable Circumstances;
you may consider 'em, and communicate 'em to your Neighbors if they I do any
good. If you see meet to return your own thoughts to me in Writing, I should be
glad of your Opinion as to the following Queries, viz.

IF Richer and Abler Persons and Families, would abate considerably of their
Rich needless fineries, and costly way of living; therein giving a leading
Example to Inferiors?

IF needless Extravagant Expenses at Weddings and Funerals were retrenched; and
no Gloves but of our own make, given at either; nor Drink at Funerals but of
our own produce; nor Scarves but for Persons of some distinguished drunk?

IF Counselors, Ministers, Militay Commission Officers, would purposely wear
Garments, Shoes, Stockings, Gloves, Hatts, (as soon as they can get 'em) of our
own make?

IF considerable encouragement were given by the Public for the Raising and
Manufacturing of Hemp and Flax, especially that the Poor in Town and Country
might be Employed; and for Manufacturing of Iron, (whereof there is plenty of
Oar in the Land,) especially in Casting Potts, Kettles, making Nails of various
sorts, etc.?

IF Waste Lands within Townships were Taxed, to make the Owners themselves
Improve 'em, or Sell 'em to those that would, for the producing more plenty of
Grain, Flesh, Butter, Cheese, Wool, etc.

WHETHER these Methods would not be of Public Service?

BUT as to my own Opinion, it is in short what I said before, to raise what we
can by our own labor, to supply our selves, and to buy no more than necessity
requires of Imported Goods, is the most sure way to relieve us.

March 6 th. 1718, 19.
BOSTON: Printed for B. GRAY, and J. EDWARDS, at their Shops on the North and
South side of the Townhouse, in King Street 1719.


