The Reverend Mr. Samuel Man, His Funeral Sermon, On Matt. XIV. 12. Preached at
Wrentham, 1719. Upon Occasion of His Decease. To Which is Annexed, The Wing of
Safety Offered, and Rejected. A Serious and Seasonable Word of Admonition and
Reproof, to the Children of Jerusalem, or the Church who live under the Gospel;
for their refusing to be Gathered under the Healing and Saving Wings of the
LORD JESUS CHRIST. In a SERMON, on Mat. 23.37. Preached at Wrentham aforesaid.

By Peter Thacher, M.A. Pastor of the Church of Christ at Milton.

BOSTON: Printed by Samuel Kneeland, for Benjamin Gray. 1720.

The Epistle Dedicatory TO THE Church and Congregation Lately under the
PASTORAL CARE Of the Reverend, Mr. Samuel Man, In Wrentham.
DEAR FRIENDS and BRETHREN,
YOUR Uncommon Instancy and mo^^ Affectionate Importunity, has at las^
prevailed with me (though much against my Inclination, to appear in Public,
being very sensible that there is nothing of mine deserves a Public view,) to
grant you the transcript of the Sermons, which I designed more for the
Instruction of the Living then for the Commendation of the Dead; Yet it must be
acknowledged the Primitive Christians accounted it no small part of their
Religion, to do suitable Honor to the Memory of their Deceased Saints,
especially Martyrs and Faithful Pastors: Now God has said, Them that honor me,
I will honor, 1 Samuel 2.30. Indeed it is agreeable to the light of Reason and
Revelation to perpetuate the Memory of our Worthies, and to mention their Names
with due respect. The Wise Man tells us, Prove. 10.7. That the Memory of the
^ust shall be blessed; And it is a com^and given, Heb. 13.7. Remember them ^^at
have the rule over you, who have ^^oken to you the word of G^d, whose (...)
follow, considering the end of ^^en conversation. Indeed a great care ^
necessary that in all the Praises we give ^o departed Saints, we ultimately
respect ^he Glory of God, who was the Giver of all their valuable End^wments.
Their Wor^hy Actions must be set forth in a manner suitable, and with a just
design to incite the Living to an honorable imitation of them. And thus there
will be ^o real inconsistency, but an admirable Harmony between Praising the
Dead, and instructing the Living. Here then I shall insert the Just Character
of your Reverend Pastor, put in Print by a much better Hand than mine. Viz.

The 22d of May last, Dyed the Reverend and Excellent Mr. SAMUEL MAN, Minister
of the Gospel at Wrentham, in the 72d. Year of his Age; He served in the
Ministry there for Forty Eight Years, with great Diligence, Prudence, Fidelity,
Pains and Cheerfulness; though under long and great Bodily weakness and
Infirmities, to that degree, that he had not been out of his own Town for 2^
Years before his Death: He was Born at Cambridge in New England, and bred at
the College there; and though his Education was attended with some disadvantages,
yet by the Blessing of GOD on his hard Studies he attained to very considerable
Learning, Divine and Humane, and was very well qualified for a more Eminent
Station in the Church of GOD, than where he was placed, and yet from thence his
Fame went through out the whole Country. That which made his Face to shine, was
his Eminent Holiness before GOD, his Wisdom, Prudence, Humility, Meekness and
Charity before Men; Modest even to Excess. His Divinity was Solid,
Well-grounded and Orthodox, of the Old Puritan Stamp; His Preaching as it was
the effect of hard Study, Prayer and Reading: so it proved very Grave, Learned,
Methodical and Accurate. His ordinary Sermons were fit for the Press; and yet
such his humility, that he thought nothing of his worth Publishing. He Lived
and Dyed with the Interest of GOD, the Church in General, His Country, and his
own Charge in special, much upon his Heart. The Last Sermon he Preached, which
was on the First Day of March last (being Lord's Day,) was from those words,
Eccl. 1.14. I have seen all the works that are done under the Sun, and behold
all is vanity and vexation of spirit.

Now this your Dear Pastor being Dead, yet speaks (as it is said of Abel,
Heb. 11.4,) And he says to you as John the Elder said to the Elect Lady and
her Children, 2 Epistle of John, 8 ver. Look to your selves, that we loose not
those things which we have wrought, but that we receive a full reward. The Sum
of the Epistle is an Exhortation to Faith and Obedience, the reason is, because
there are many deceivers entered into the World, who deny the Lord Christ, and
therefore there is great reason th^^ Christians should look to themselves, and
that every one that has attained unto the Faith of God's Elect should look
unto himself, that he be not deceived of his Faith.

It signifies to look at, to see, to look into your selves, That we loose not
the labor that we have wrought, it might seem rather, that you have wrought;
1. Know that diverse render it thus, Loose not the things that you have wrought,
but that you may receive your reward; it being a matter that concerns every
Christian to look unto that, to keep that which he has wrought. 2. Take it as
it is rendered in our Translation, and it is to be conceived as an Exhortation
of John the Elder, as if he were now speaking his last words, and giving his
last Exhortation he was to give, and he speaks as a Minister of the G^spel u^
to them, that he had taken much pains amongst; as if he had said, We have taken
much pains amongst you, and spent our strength among you, but take heed that
all be not lost; Thus Christians should look to themselves when they have
enjoyed ^uch means as may be profitable to their ^alvation, that they loose not
the Pains and ^abour of their Faithful Teachers that ^ave been amongst them.
Both of those senses may be comprehended in the wr^ds, That Christians must
look to themselves, ^oth that they loose not their own pains and cost they have
taken; And they must ^^ke heed they loose not the pains of God's Ministers
amongst them. And so it contains a faithful Admonition unto the People of God,
to go on and be constant, keep Faith and a good Conscience, go on and persevere
as you have been taught. O know that it is the duty of those of you that have
professed the Name of God, and have practiced Godliness along time, to be
exceeding careful that you neither loose your own pains that you have taken in
the practice of Piety; nor the pains and labor of your faithful Pastor who
lived and labored with you so many Years: Therefore look that you be soundly
rooted and built up in the Lord Jesus, and established in the Faith. Abide in
Christ, and let Christ abide in you; As the Branch cannot bear fruit of it self
except it abide in the Vine, no more can you except you abide in Christ: You
must therefore see that you have a sound and perfect Union with the Lord
Christ, that your Souls be truly United to Him, not only that you cleave unto
Him, as the Ivy to the Oak, by an outward profession, or covered with an
outward bark and leaves of outward services, but see that y^^ have a Sound,
Evangelical, Myst^^^ Lasting, Everlasting Union to Him; ^^^se you will never
endure to the end and be saved; you will never bring forth fruit unto
perfection: Where there is a sound root, all is fetched from the root, the
branch has no sap, but what it has from the root, you must receive all from
Christ, Gal. 2.20. Col. 3.3, 4.

Yea if you would look to your selves that you lose not those things which you
have wrought; you must endeavor to maintain your first Light: for as the Light
of the New Man is, such is the Life. Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 5.8. Labor to keep your
Light clear and distinct, able to discern between things that differ, Heb.
5.14. And see that your practice be equal to your light. Romans 8.13. Living
after the flesh brings Death. Now your practice does equal your knowledge, when
you constantly and diligently endeavor impartially to observe and do all
things made known, as they are made known unto you. Jam, 1.25. Yea your
practice does equal your knowledge, when you most watchfully and accurately
observe and charge upon your selves, your own defects, humble your selves for
the^ before God, confess your Sins in them, beg more Grace, justify the rule
whatever becomes of your faults. Your practice does equal your knowledge, when
you look out to Christ for daily covering with His Righteousness, and for
pardon through His Blood: And when you daily look to the Spirit of Grace for more
strength to mortify the deeds of the Body. Romans 8.13. And to work all your
works in you and for you, and to bring to your remembrance the things which you
have heard from your Dear deceased Pastor. In a word, Look out heedfully to
espy the first beginnings of the decay of Godliness in its first light and
practice: as David did, Psalm. 119.59, 60. I thought on my ways, and turned my
feet unto thy testimonies. I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy
commandments. Oh! Be sure you m^^ ^ your Trade with Heaven in person ^
private, secret Communion, in the constant performance of secret duties. What
made David Eminent with God? was it not constant secret duties? Psalm. 55.17.
Evening and morning, and at noon will I pray, and cry aloud: and he shall hear
my voice. O Trade with Heaven, in Reading, Meditation and Prayer; Take your
time to visit so dear a Friend, so sweet a Savior, so Glorious a God that
expects and requires it.

In a Word, and so I close, O Look unto God in Christ for supply of his Spirit:
All is from the same Spirit, He quickens, when you are dead, He enlightens,
when you are dark, He upholds, when you are ready to fall, He restores, when
you are faint or decay. He effectually leads into all Truth. Be Earnest with
God to put his Spirit into you and yours, and cause you and yours to Live; Now
that you and yours my be filled with the Spirit, and may receive Spiritual
profit and Soul advantage by the following Discourses, is the Fervent Prayer of,

Your Souls Friend, Peter Thacher
November. 30. 1719.
The REVEREND Mr. Samuel Man's Funeral Sermon.
MATT. XIV. 12. And his Disciples came and took up the Body, and buried it, and
went and told JESUS.


TO have a Friend that is able and willing to succor in, and deliver out of
distress, is a choice favor; and to have such a Friend inviting us to repair
to Him in all necessitous Hours, and to acquaint Him with all that is
afflictive to us, assuring us that He will not only sympathize and bear a part
with us, in our Sorrows, but will find out a way, to support us under and
deliver us out of our Depths, is an invaluable Privilege! Oh who would not
Prize? Who would not improve such a Friend? Now our Text takes us by the Hand
and leads us to JESUS, the true Christians Best Friend, to whom he may repair
in all Articles of Extremity, and Junctures of distress: and may tell Him of
all that he ^ears and feels, with Faith, in Prayer, and having so done, the
true Christian may with Hannah go away, and be no more sad; firmly believing
that the LORD CHRIST will take notice of all his sad Circumstances and will
dispose all so as may be t^ GOD's Glory, and the best Good of al^ that love and
fear Him. And it i^ now my design, by this Text, to tak^ this Bereaved Church
and Congregation by the Hand, and to lead them to ou^ Dear Jesus, that they may
acquain^ Him with their bitter Sorrows, by reason of the Removal of that Brigh^
Burning and Shining Light, that for so many Years this Golden Candlestick was
richly adorned with; He can turn all to your Salvation through the supply of the
Spirit and help of Prayer, He can make up all to you in Himself which He has
taken from you in His taking of your Pious Pastor.

IN the Words of our Text we have the Disciples of John in their tears and
sorrow, at the sad news of Herod's beheading of their Master; Whereupon, (1)
They took up his Body; and this they did in testimony of respect to their
Master, and in testimony of their owning his Doctrine, and grateful Remembrance
of him. (2) They Buried it. The Bodies of the Saints should have an honorable
Burial. Though Death separates their Souls from their Bodies, yet both remain
United to Christ; therefore the Bodies of the Saints should be decently
Interred. (3) They went and told Jesus. They acquaint our dear LORD CHRIST with
their sad bereavement by Herod's bloody act, and they improve all to bring
themselves nearer to JESUS; So they pass out of the School of John, into the
School of CHRIST.

From the Words of the Text take this Doctrine.

DOC, WHEN a Burning Shining Light is Extinguished or Removed, then the
Bereaved should go and tell our Dear JESUS of their sad and sorrowful
Circumstances.

THIS was the Method the Disciples of John took when they were so surprizingly
Bereaved. And this is your Case this Day. Your Eminent and Excellent Pastor is
called home by Death, and you have (as the Disciples of John did) honorably
laid up his Remains in the silent Grave; and now your Duty is to tell your Dear
JESUS of your desolate state: You are as Sheep without your Under-Shepherd.

TO clear up this Doctrine take Four Propositions.

PROP. I. SOME of CHRIST's Faithful Ministers are Bright Burning and Shining
Lights. John is styled so, Joh. 5.35. They are Stars in the Right Hand of
CHRIST, Rev. 1.20. They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and
ever, Dan. 12.3. This Glory is the same for kind, but not the same for degree;
Some shine as the brightness of the Firmament, some as the Stars; the Stars
shine more brightly than the Firmament; and amongst the Stars also there is
great variety. 1 Cor. 15.41. There is one glory of the sun, and another glory
of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one star differs from
another star in glory. They have interest in all the Grace and good Fruits of
those that are Converted and Edifyed by them; they beget them, they nurse them,
they comfort them; therefore their Reward shall be exceeding glorious, 1 These.
2.19. For what is our hope or joy, or crown of rejoicing? are not even ye in
the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming: for ye are our glory and
joy, 2 Cor. 1.14. Indeed Eminent, Pious Gospel Ministers are Spiritual
Ecclesiastical Fathers in respect of the Dignity of their Office; They are
CHRlST's Ambassadors, that have the Word of Reconciliation committed unto them.
2 Cor. 5.18, 19, 20. They are Stewards of the Mysteries of CHRIST, and are so
to be accounted of by the People. 1 Cor. 4.1, 2. Tit. 1.7. 1 Pet. 4.10. Yea,
they manage themselves as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of GOD. Yea,
Saints in all Ages and Generations have loved, honored, and esteemed Pious and
Eminent Ministers as bright Lights; they consider what CHRIST Himself says to
Gospel Ministers; He that receives you, receives Me, and he that receives
Me, receives Him that sent Me, Mar. 9.36, 37. Luke 9.48. Saints receive them
gladly. Act. 21.17. They count them worthy of double Honor, 1 Timothy 5.17. How
beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that brings good tidings,
that publishes peace, that brings good tidings of good, that publishes
salvation, that says to Zion, thy God reigns, Isai. 52.7.

PROP. II. HOW Bright and Burning soever the Choicest Servants of CHRIST in the
Ministry may be, yet they are but for a Season here. Joh. 5.35. John was a
burning and a shining Light; and ye were willing for a season to rejoice in his
Light. As bright a Light as John was, yet he gave Light but for a Season; for
he was soon Beheaded by Herod, as in our context, and so this Light was
Extinguished. Aaron must go up into Mount Hor in the sight of all the
Congregation, and there be disrobed of his Priestly Garments and Die, Number.
20.25, 26, 27, 28. Your Fathers where are they? And the Prophets do they live
for ever? Zech. 1.5. The most Eminent and Excellent of Ministers must put off
their clay Tabernacles, that they may be clothed upon with their House from
Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. Hence says the Apostle Paul, For me to live is Christ,
and to die is gain, Phil. 1.21. The number of their Months (in the Ministry as
well as in the World) is with God, and He sets bounds to their Ministry. The
same Apostle says, I am note ready to be offered, and the time of my departure
is at hand, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept
the faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which
the Lord the righteous judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but
unto all them also that love his appearing, 2 Timothy 4.6, 7, 8.

PROP. III. WHEN this Bright Shining Light is Extinguished, the Bereaved should
bitterly lament their Loss, and be deeply humbled under the mighty Hand of GOD
Bereaving them. Thus it was with John's Disciples in our Text and context. Thus
Elisha laments the Translation of Elijah, 2 Kin. 2.12. And Elisha saw it, and
he cried, My Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen
thereof. Ingeminations, or doubling of words are frequent in Scripture,
importing much vehemence and intenseness of spirit in him that speaks. My
Father, My Father! This appropriating possessive pronoun [ My] has a kind of
deliciousness in it, and breaths abundance of affection, and carries an accent
of profound veneration. Luther said, the sweetness of the Gospel lies in
pronouns: as when a Believer can say (with believing Thomas) My LORD and my
GOD! Those things or Persons which we love most we call ours: to say such an
one is mine, is as much as to say, he is much beloved, much prized or esteemed
by me, he, as it were, lies next my heart. Propriety raises esteem. Elisha
calls him Father, for his Fatherly affection to him, and for his Fatherly
authority, which by his Office he had over him. Joash the King of Israel
acknowledges this concerning Elisha when fallen-Sick of his Sickness whereof
he dyed, and weeps over his face, and says, O my Father, my Father, the Chariot
of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof, 2 Kin. 13.14. This Church and Congregation
may thus bitterly lament over their Dear Deceased Pastor, and say, My Father,
my Father, the Chariot of Israel, and the H^rsemen thereof: He was the Chariot
of Wrentham and the Horsemen thereof, in a peculiar manner, who by his holy
Example, and Counsels, and Prayers, and Power with God, did more for the
defense and preservation of Wrentham, than all their other Warlike Provisions.
Eminent Pious Ministers are the Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen thereof,
they are the Glory and Defense of a People. Isa. 62.6, 7. These are the Lord's
remembrancers; These Watchmen are with their GOD in the worst of times. Hos.
9.8. The Watchmen of Ephraim was with my God. These are the Men that make up
the hedge, and stand in the Gap before GOD for the Land, that He should not
destroy it. And when these Gap-Men are removed, God makes way for His fiery
indignation to be poured down upon such a People. Ezekiel. 22.30, 31. Ezekiel* 13.5.
Ye have not gone up into the gaps neither made up the hedge for the house of
Israel, to stand in the battle in the day of the Lord. Psalm. 106.23. He said he
would destroy them had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach; to
turn away his wrath lest he should destroy them. They are Pillars in the House
of GOD; therefore their Death is bitterly to be lamented. They are the defense
and glory of a People, as they are wrestling Jacobs in Prayer; and by Prayer
become prevailing Isreal's. Genesis 32.24.26, 27, 28. Mat. 15.22.28. The honest
addresses of believing Souls presented with importunate boldness and humble
submission of Faith are very acceptable unto, and prevalent with our LORD JESUS
CHRIST. Hence said CHRIST, Great is thy faith; be it to thee, as thou will,
Mat. 8.2. The efficient cause of their Prayer it is the Spirit of Christ. He
teaches them to Pray and assists them in Prayer. Romans 8.26, 27. They could not
Pray except He did aid and influence them; He helps them to groan out what
Christ Himself has a will to bestow upon them. Ephesians. 2.18. and 3.12. He leads
them by the Hand, and therefore they will not be put off. There is a Spirit
above the Spirit of Man, and not below the Spirit of God, that acts them in
such Prayers; He gives them to repent, believe, submit, and to be importunate,
and they cannot let GOD alone, and therefore it is no wonder though GOD hear
them. The Subject Matter of their prevalent Prayers, it is neither less nor
more then what CHRIST has determined to bestow upon them; and He is more
willing to give than any Man's heart can be willing to receive. Romans 8.27. And
the Spirit in them makes intercession according to the will of GOD, for Grace
and Mercy to help them in time of need. They are not only Men of Faith, but
also Men of Prayers. They are Men of Prayer, and Men of Tears also. Psalm.
119.136. Rivers of Tears run down their Eyes; because Men keep not GOD's Law:
And the effectual fervent Prayer of a righteous Man avails much, Jam. 5.16.
Oh! then, how great is the Loss of such Excellent Worthies? and how much to be
Lamented? And such an One you are bitterly bewailing the Removal of.

PROP. IV. THE Bereaved must go and tell their Dear JESUS of their sad and
awful Bereavement. Thus in our Text the Disciples of John did.

AND this implies, 1. That you be very sensible of the Divine kindness in
bestowing so rich a Blessing on you (as your Reverend Pastor was,) and in
continuing of him so long to you: and you must be very thankful for this
Exaltation-Gift of Christ unto you. Psalm. 68.18. Ephesians. 4.11. Being Ascended, He
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers. Oh be very thankful that you had a Pastor given you, who showed
himself approved, a Workman that needed not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the
Word of Truth: wherein he showed uncorruptness, gravity and sincerity; He gave
attendance unto Reading, to Exhortation and to Doctrine; He did meditate on
these things; He gave himself wholly to them; and his profiting did appear unto
you all: He did Preach the pure Word; He was instant in Season, and out of
Season: He was an Example of Believers, in Word, in Conversation, in Charity,
in Spirit, in Faith, in Purity; His Light did so shine before Men, that all
that beheld his good Conversation had cause to glorify his FATHER which is in
Heaven, Mat. 5.16. And in all this Dutifully he did depend upon our LORD
CHRIST; and His Grace in him, and His Grace with him was sufficient for him. 2
Cor. 12.9. You must be very thankful that GOD continued this great and rich
Blessing so many Years amongst you: I suppose Forty Eight Years together.

THIS implies, 2ly, That you be humbled to the very Dust, that seeing you had
so choice a Price in your Hands, you made no better improvement of it, Prove.
17.16. and got no more by it. Though I hope and believe, the Word of GOD Preached
by him was the power of GOD unto Salvation to many of your Souls, (Romans 1.16.)
And 'twas the Message he brought, made his coming and Preaching so desirable,
so grateful and so acceptable to you, as it was. For there is no News so
desirable as that of the Gospel. Luke 2.13, 14. The very Angels ^ang Praise to
GOD for this News, and should not our hearts spring with joy at this good News.
Indeed this News is acceptable only to the distressed Soul. It is glad tidings
to the Poor. Isai. 61.1, 2, 3. It is Life to the dead Soul, light to the blind
Eye, Soul-health and healing to the Sin-sick-Soul; It offers Pardon, to the
guilty condemned Malefactor, that is good News to him; and such is this News to
the distressed Soul, though others mind it not, care not for it. Now there is
none so welcome and acceptable to a poor Sin-tired Soul as the Publisher and
Preacher of this good News. Oh this News which he brings puts a beauty upon him
in the Eyes of a distressed Sinner, and this Minister is the welcomest Person
that ever he knew, the best Messenger that ever he heard speak.

BUT alas, God's own Children will judge themselves for their unprofitableness
under such fructifying Opportunities as for many Years they enjoyed. And as for
others that continue in a state of estrangement from God and Christ, may they
not say with bitter lamentation, The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and
we are not saved, Jer. 8.20. May it not be added concerning some, as in Jer.
6.29, 30. The bellows are burnt, the lead is consumed of the fire, the founder
melts in vain: for the wicked are not plucked away. Reprobate Silver shall
men call them, because the Lord has rejected them. The searcher of the hearts
and trier of the reins of the Children of Men, expects that you look into your
own Souls, and see what improvement you have made of the rich Talent you have
been favored with, and with deep humility you judge your selves for all your
non proficiency in the School of Christ under such plain and powerful Preaching.

3. CHRIST expects that you come and tell Him of your distress, and that you
acknowledge that your Times and all your Changes are in His hand, and at His
Sovereign disposition. Psalm. 31.15. And that you see all in CHRIST, and enough
to make up this great loss you have sustained. Oh let this lead you nearer to
Christ, who is ever the same, and has the residue of the Spirit and can send
forth another painful able Labourer into this part of his Harvest in His own
due time. But of this in the Improvement of this Doctrine, which I now proceed
unto.

For APPLICATION, and the First USE is of Instruction.

1. Instruct. ARE Lights extinguished, and that too by their Dying for CHRIST,
Learn Hence, That true Christians should be ready not only to do, but to dye
for CHRIST. Thus John in our Text and context. Thus Stephen, thus Paul also.
The true Christian must cast up the account, what he may loose by his consent
to be CHRIST's; that so his choice of CHRIST may be a deliberate and full
choice, and he may never repent afterward of the choice that he has made. It
is a rule in the Civil Law, non consentit, qui non sentit; He cannot consent
that does not think, understanding and deliberate. And this is the reason of so
much flinching from CHRIST, and shameful Apostasy in times of Persecution. Our
Lord Redeemer deals heartily and openly with us, and tells us before hand, what
are the worst things that may befall us for His sake. Joh. 16.1, 2. The time
comes that whosoever kills you, will think he does God service. Now there
are some things that the true Christian must part with for CHRIST; and those
are his Sins and Lusts and all the vicious Pleasures he has had in them: the
true Christian must shake hands for ever with all his sinful Courses and
Companions. Romans 6.16. Mat. 5.29, 50. Ps. 18.25. And there are other things
which the true Christian may be called to part with, and give up for CHRIST: It
is uncertain whether GOD may actually call the Christian to part with his
Liberty, Estate, Relations, and Life for CHRIST: Many are never actually called
forth to such Loss and Sufferings; but because many are, and the true Christian
may be so called, he must realize them, ponder them, and subscribe those very
terms, making full account of these things, as if these Losses were now before
him. Luke 9.23. For so Christ has propounded them. If any man will come after
me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me. And so to
do is the way to honor; For those that honor CHRIST, CHRIST will honor, 1 Samuel 2.30. John honored CHRIST, and CHRIST honored John; commending him after
he was Dead, as in the Text, and crowning him in Heaven, and recommending the
Memory of his Faithfulness that cost him Life, to survivours. Faithful Saints
and Ministers of CHRIST are to be respected living and dying. John was honored
in his Life time, and he is respected in his Death. GOD expects that the Memory
of such should be sweet. Prove. 10.7. The memory of the just is blessed.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of the Saints: most precious, if
they Die for CHRIST.

2. Instruct. WHEN Church-Lights leave us, must we go and tell JESUS, Learn
Hence, That although the Ministers and Messengers of CHRIST Dye and leave the
dear People of CHRIST, yet CHRIST lives still. When John was dead his Disciples
retire and repair to JESUS. And though Your dear Pastor and Father be gone from
you, yet here is a Friend that ever abides the same: Here is a Friend, an Head
and Husband that will never leave nor forsake you, but will do all that for you
that is needful. Heb. 13.5. For He has said, I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee. When the best and choicest of our Earthly Friends dye, yet our
Lord Redeemer lives; and this should support us: For He has said to His,
Because I live, ye shall live also: and indeed all Bereavements, Afflictions
and Distresses should bring us nearer to JESUS CHRIST.

3. Instruct. LEARN Hence, That GOD's Children do meet with truly sad and
sorrowful Exigencies, respecting themselves and theirs, and the Church of
CHRIST in this World; and sore loss of Lights. They are not without Darkness
and Discomfort: For they have much Sin in them; they carry about with them a
body of Sin and Death, which occasions many a bitter Agony in their Souls, and
makes them cry out with the Apostle Paul, Oh wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver me from the body of this Death? Romans 7.24. Yea they have much sorrow
attending 'em on the account of Sickness upon their Bodies, Reproach upon their
Names, Loss in their Estates, Disappoinments in their Affairs, Affliction upon
their Families, and the like: Yea they have many anxious thoughts about the
Suffering Cause and Interest of Christ in the World; and they remember them
that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which suffer adversity, as
being themselves also in the body, Heb. 13.2. Also they are encountering with
many temptations from their spiritual Enemies: They are bitterly complaining
under the deep sense of an hard Heart, and blind Mind, and perverse Will, and
disordered Affections, and a wounded Conscience: and often they are lamenting
after the returns of GOD's Face and Favor to them and theirs, and mourning
because GOD has hid His Face from them. Psalm. 30.6, 7. In my prosperity I
said, I shall never be moved; Lord, by thy favor thou have made my mountain to
stand strong: thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled. Psalm. 77.7. Will
the Lord cast off for ever? and will he be favorable no more? is his mercy
clean gone for ever? does his promise fail for evermore? has God forgotten to
be gracious? has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? Selah. And I said,
this is my infirmity: but I will remember the works of the Lord: surely I will
remember thy wonders of old. Moreover GOD's Children have many wants and woes,
temporal and spiritual, personal and relative; and all afflictive, Their
condition may be so sorrowfully circumstanced that they may have no Earthly
Friend to make their moans unto; no Eye to pity them, no Ear to hear their
complaints, no Heart to sympathize with them, no Hand to help them; Lover and
Friend may be put far from them, and their Acquaintance be put into darkness,
Psalm. 88.18. In a word, while Christians are here in a Sea of trouble it is no
wonder if one wave and billow come upon the back of another, and all God's
waves and billows seem to pass over them: Yet if by all they are wafted safe to
the haven of Eternal Blessedness, all shall do well. 2 Cor. 4.17. For our light
afflictions which are but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory: and GOD can make your Grief for your Loss of a Burning
Shining Light to do so.

4. Instruct. GOD's Children are not hopeless nor helpless in their depths of
distress: for they have a Friend that is both able and willing to succor them
under, and deliver them out of their distresses. They have a Savior to repair
and resort unto, Mat. 1.21. One who is able to save them to the uttermost, that
come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. You
have a JESUS who is not Man only, but God Almighty also, able to bestow all
Good upon you, and to remove all Evil from you. It is true indeed, you may
boldly come unto GOD for the bestowal of Good, and the removal of Evil, in and
through this Lord Redeemer: and, No man can come to the Father but by Christ. Now
that CHRIST might successfully make way for your coming to the FATHER of Lights
(from whom comes every good and perfect Gift) for what you need CHRIST did
enter into a Covenant of Redemption with His Father, before the World was, Tit.
1.2. And for this end, CHRIST veiled His Glory, by an Incarnation, and Clothed
Himself with our Nature. Joh. 1.14. And for this end CHRIST yielded active and
passive Obedience to the Law, and satisfied Divine Justice, pacified Divine
Wrath, and Reconciled poor Souls to the Father. Ye^ for this end CHRIST took
upon Him the Three fold Office of Prophet, Priest, and King, that He might save
to the uttermost all that come to the Father by and through Him. So that now
CHRIST is the Lord Treasurer of Heaven and Earth, and has all supplies at His
own disposition for you which you can need. Yea CHRIST is the Master of
requests, and is ready and willing to intercede with the Father for the
bestowing of all that Good upon you, and the removal of all that Evil which you
ask the Father in His Name; and the Father hears Him always. In a word, our
Dearest JESUS has in Himself a fullness of all in created and created Grace;
that believing distressed Souls might of His fullness be receiving and that
Grace for Grace. Col. 1.19. Joh. 1.16. Yea our Lord Redeeme^ has in Himself a
Mediatorial sufficiency to be all too, and a Mediatorial efficiency to work all
in, and to do all for distressed Souls that they need, and come to Him for: He
is clothed with a sympathizing compassion toward distressed Souls that repair
to Him, which powerfully disposes Him to arise for their succor. Heb. 5.2.
Who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way.
This inclines Him to put forth all His Divine Abilities for them in a
Mediatorial and Soul-saving way.

5. Instruct. THAT Jesus may save distressed Soul from their distresses, He
expects that they come to Him by Faith in Prayer, and tell him what their
troubles are. Not that He is unacquainted with their woes and wants before they
Pray, for He is infinitely better acquainted with them, then they themselves
are; but that they may honor Him, and roll off their Troubles by committing
their cases to Him: And it is a Christians great duty and comfortable remedy in
sore and sad cases, in deep and difficult distresses to go and tell JESUS of
them in the way of Prayer. Heb. 4.15, 16. For we have not a^^ high Priest which
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was i^ all points
tempted like as we are, ye^ without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the
throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of
need. Consider,

1. WE are commanded to come and tell JESUS of all our troubles in the duty of
Prayer. Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble. Jam. 5.13. Is any
afflicted, let him pray. (...) (that is) does any one suffer ill or is grieved
in his Soul, Body, Name, Estate; from God immediately, or from Men, or Devils,
bring the matter thus sad, before JESUS, and tell Him of your trouble. It Is the
duty of the afflicted to Pray.

2. WE are Invited to come and tell JESUS of what we need and desire; and we
are reproved for our backwardness so to do. Joh. 16.23, 24. Verily, verily I
say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it
you; hitherto have ye asked nothing in my name; ask and ye shall receive, that
your joy may be full. Psalm. 81.10. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.

3. IT is GOD's just Expectation that we tell JESUS of our troubles, and crave
His aid. Hos. 5.15. I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge
their offense, and seek my face: in their affliction they will seek me early.
And Christ desires this of the Spouse, Cant. 2.14. O my love, that art in the
clefts of the rock, in the secret places of the stairs, let me see thy
countenance, let me hear thy voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance
is comely.

4. THERE are great and precious Promises made to those that by Faith in Prayer
tell JESUS of their sins and sorrows, of their woes and wants. Psa. 50.15. 1 John 5.14. This is the confidence we have in him, or concerning him, that if we
ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. 2 Chro. 6. from the 12. v.
to the end. and ^.12, 13. Mat. 21.22. All things whatsoever ye shall ask in
Prayer, believing, ye shall receive. Mat. 7.7. Ask and it shall be given you:
seek and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you.

5. AS God has been rich in His Promises, so He has been as rich in His
Performances. He has made good with His Hand, what He has promised with His
Mouth. Whatever His Mercy promises, His Faithfulness makes good. Psalm. 34.4,
5, 6. I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears;
They looked unto him and were lightened; and their faces were not ashamed: This
po^^ man cried, and the Lord heard him; and saved him out of all his troubles.
2 Cor. 1.9, 10. But we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should
not trust in our selves, that in God which raises the dead; who delivered us
from so great a death, and does deliver; in whom we trust that he will yet
deliver us: You also helping together by prayer for us. GOD has heard the
Prayers of others, and healed others, in answer unto Prayer; who can tell, but
GOD may hear our prayers? Nay sometimes He has heard presently before the
Person had done speaking. Gen 24.15. Thus the Prayer of Abraham's Servant, was
heard before he had done Praying, as you may see in that History. So, Dan.
9.23. At the beginning of thy supplications the commandment came forth, and I
am come to show thee; for thou art greatly beloved, etc.

The Second USE is a Word of Exhortation in diverse Branches. The First Franch
of the Exhortation is to this Church and Congregation, to Go and tell JESUS
teat now your Pastor is by Death removed from you, you are as Sheep without a
Shepherd, and that you entreat Him therefore to take care of this Flock of His.
And plead his Promise, in Isai. 40.11. He shall feed his flock like a shepherd,
he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in him bosom, and shall
gently lead those that are with young. Two Things here,

1. Pray CHRIST Himself to be your Shepherd. 2. Pray CHRIST to feed you, as a
Shepherd feeds his Flock.

1. Pray CHRIST Himself to be your Shepherd. He is a Shepherd immediately set
up by GOD the Father over the Flock; He is the Great and Good Shepherd, Heb.
13.20. 1 Pet. 5.4. The Chief Shepherd that is the Pasture as well as the Pastor
of His Sheep: and therefore He is that Good Shepherd that laid down His Life
for His Sheep that they might have Pasture. Joh. 6.51, 53, 54, 55. Other
Shepherds of the Church have but a derivative goodness from Him, and the
Pasture that they give is CHRIST in His Ordinances; They hold forth CHRIST
crucified unto them. 1 C^r. 2.2. He is such a Shepherd as has power to save His
Flock. Mat. 28.20. He knows his Sheep, and is known of them, Joh, 10.14. He
knows their Persons, their Condition, their Ways, their Wants, their Woes,
their Fears, and their Foes, and He will pity, and help, and save them: Yea
Christ is an Everlasting Shepherd: He was before the beginning, and will be
unto the end of the World: from the beginning; Mic. 5.2. Whose goings forth
have been from of old, from everlasting, Prove. 8.22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 30,
31. and for ever.

2. Pray CHRIST to feed you as a Shepherd feeds his Flock. Isai. 40.11. Feeding
in this Text means the whole work of a Shepherd in governing, defending and
supplying of his Sheep for their good. And implies,

(1.) That CHRIST makes Provision of Food and Physic for His Sheep. Oh Pray
Him to provide Food and Physic for you. That Bread may be given you to eat,
and that your Water may be sure. Isai. 33.16. Pray Him to be your Shepherd that
you may not want. etc. Psalm. 23.1, 2. Pray CHRIST to heal your Sin-sick Souls:
Sheep need not only Food but Physic. Isai. 55.5. He was wounded for our
trrnsgressi^ns, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. Pray CHRIST to be all
to you in respect of all necessaries for your way, till you come to Glory; be
it direction, provision, protection. And Pray Him to be your deliverer from
Sin, World, Death and Hell.

(2.) CHRIST as a Shepherd causes His Sheep to Feed. He causes them to take
in, and take down this Food and Physic for their Souls. Now our Good and Great
Shepherd does cause His Sheep to Eat. First, He causes them by moral
persuasion; He persuades them to Eat, and encourages his Sheep to Feed; for He
finds them very backward, Cant. 5.1. Eat, O Friends, drink, yea drink
abundantly, O beloved! Isai. 55.1. Ho! every one that thirsts, come ye to the
waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea came buy wine and
milk without money and without price. Secondly, He causes them to Eat by His
energy and effectual operation; He gives them the Grace to Eat, He gives them
to hunger and thirst, and creates in them a spirit of Life, the cause of it: He
makes them painfully sensible of their necessity, and His sufficiency, He gives
them the spirit of the command, and promise, to beget and stir up Faith to take
and eat. Joh. 6.44, 45.

(3.) CHRIST as a Feeder of His Flock, commands the Blessing upon the Food.
Psalm. 132.15. He blesses the Food for the health, for the growth, for the
fruitfulness, for the satisfaction, and for the establishment of His Sheep.

(4.) CHRIST as the Chief-Shepherd gives unto His Flock Under-Shepherds whose
Office-work and care is to feed the Flock. Act. 20.28. Ephesians. 4.11, 12. So that
if any Church at any time be destitute, hither they must seek for help, and
must Pray Him to give them Pastors after His own heart. Jer. 3.15.

(5.) CHRIST puts them not out t^ under Shepherds alone, but He is always
amongst them Himself, Mat. 18.20. Rev. 1, 13, and 2.1. He walks in the midst of
His Golden Candlesticks. Oh then let this Church and Congregation look to
CHRIST for this Feeding work, even for the whole of it, as you have had it
briefly hinted to you. And forget not to Pray CHRIST your Good and Great
Shepherd to gather the Lambs with His Arm, and to carry them in His bosom, and
gently to lead those that are with Young. Pray CHRIST to deal with every Sheep
according to his own particular necessity, state and condition. It Is promised,
That He shall gather the Lambs with His Arm, or as some translate it, into His
Arm, shall bring them together to take them up in His Arms, that is, H^ will
have a special care of dealing charily with weak and feeble ones* supporting
them under their infirmities. Isai. 42.3. A bruised need shall be not break:
and the smoking flax shall he not quench: He shall bring forth judgment unto
truth. Mat. 11.28. Come unto me (says He) all ye that labor, and are heavy
laden, and I will give you rest.

The Second Branch of the Exhortation is, To the Widow and Fatherless. It must
granted that your Loss is double; You are not only bereaved of an Excellent
Pastor, but the Widow, of a Choice Husband, and the Children of a Pious and
Compassionate Father; You see what method you are to take in this Article of
Extremity, you must go and tell JESUS of your bitter sorrows. And let me stir
you up,

1. TO a thankful Acknowledgment of the rich Blessing which for so many Years
you were highly favored with. Few so blessed (in that respect) as your selves;
Oh how did he improve his interest in Heaven for you, not only in his Excellent
Family Worship, and care to train you up in the nurture and admonition of the
Lord, and to charge you (as David did Solomon) to know the GOD of your Father,
and serve Him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind: for the LORD
searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts:
if you seek Him, He will be found of you; but if you forsake Him, He will cast
you off for ever, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. But doubtless in his secret Prayers of Faith
in his Study has he laid up a rich Stock for you and yours. Oh say to the
Divine Majesty, Thou art my Fathers God, I will exalt thee; thou art my God, I
will prepare an habitation for thee. O thank GOD for such a Husband, and for
such a Father. Oh let not any of the Children or Grandchildren of so Eminently
Pious a Father dare to meet him in the Day of Judgment in a Christless
condition.

2. BE sensible of GOD's Hand is this awful stroke, and therefore be dumb, and
open not your mouths because it is the LORD JEHOVAH that has done it. Psalm.
39.9. Remember how Aaron demeaned himself when his two Sons were taken from him
so surprizingly; He held his peace, Lev. 10.3. You must yield passive obedience
submissively to GOD's Providence, whereby you may freely and fully resign up
your selves, and all your concerns to GOD, to dispose of you, according to His
own good pleasure; you must hear the voice of this rod, and consider who has
appointed it. You must lie as clay before the potter. Isai. 64.8. and so give
up your selves to be molded and framed by your GOD, upon the wheel of
Providence into whatever condition He pleases, and say, Lo! here we are, let
the LORD do what seems Him good. Yea your must exercise Soul-humility and
repentance under this mighty hand of GOD: It is pride that makes Men quarrel at
Providence: and you must accept the punishment of your iniquity. Lev. 26.41.

3. YOU must exercise Faith in GOD's Covenant. Psalm. 94.12. and entreat the
LORD to add instruction to correction, and to give you to experience that He
does bereave you for your profit, to make you more fully partakers of His
holiness. Heb. 12.9, 10, 11. and pray Him in and under all changes to be your
unchangeable portion. Mal. 3.6. GOD is known by this title; a Father of the
Fatherless* and a Judge of the Widow: such is GOD in his holy habitation, Psalm.
68.5* GOD has promised to take peculiar care of the Widow and Fatherless. Jer*
49.11. Leave thy Fatherless Children, will preserve them alive, and let the
Wido^ trust in me. Pray that your Maker may be your Husband, and your God may
be your Glory. And let the Children Pray that they may experience what the
Psalmist did, Psalm. 27.10. who said* When Father and Mother forsook me, GOD
took me up: Thus in the multitude of your thoughts within you, let GOD's
comforts delight your Souls. You^ dear JESUS can, and I hope He will cause His
Grace in you, and His Grace with you, to be at all times, and no^ especially,
sufficient for you. 2 Cor. 12* 9. The Stream indeed is dried up, bu^ the
Fountain remains inexhaustible still; Oh repair to that Fountain, and see all
in Him which you do or ca^ stand in need of.

The Third and Last Branch of the Exhortation is, To all distressed Souls. O be
quickened to go and tell JESUS by Faith in Prayer of all your distresses
temporal and spiritual. Are you distressed with the guilt of Sin? with the
filth of Sin? with the wrath of God due to you for Sin! with temptations and
sinful injections from Satan? Oh don't sit down in your discouragements, but
speed away to JESUS, and acquaint Him with your present sorrowful circumstances.

Here take Two Motives.

1. Motive. THIS is a choice remedy against Bodily and Soul Maladies. Sometimes
the distresses are such as none can help in, or deliver out of, but GOD only.
Your Bodily Sickness may be incurable as to Men or Means: Oh go and tell JESUS,
and say, LORD JESUS, other Physicians are Physicians of no value; but if Thou will, Thou can make whole: Your Souls are exercised with many Heart-plagues,
and Soul-Maladies, and none can help, but the Physician of Souls; Oh say, help
Dear JESUS, or I perish; Thou art able to save to the uttermost all those that
come unto Thee, and to GOD by Thee. Heb. 7.2^.

2. Mot. IT is a^ready ^^nstant Remedy. Wherever you are, you may make use of
this remedy. 1 Timothy 2.8. I will that men pray every where. It is a Sovereign
Successful remedy. When all other remedies fail, this does not You may retire
to JESUS, and tell Him of all your sorrows and griefs. Thus did Jonah: He
prayed unto the Lord out of the fishes belly; I cried by reason of my
affliction unto the Lord, and he heared me; out of the belly of bell cried I,
and thou heardst my voice: all thy billows and thy waves passed ever me. Then I
said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I will look again toward thy h^ly
temple. When my s^ul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord, and my prayer
came in unto thee, into thine holy temple, Joh* 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. That
Temple was a Type of CHRIST. Psalm. 109.4. I give my self to Prayer; the Hebrew
phrase is, [ I Prayer,] that is my only remedy, that I live by. This is a
powerful and universal remedy. Mat. 17.21. This kind goes not out, but by
fasting and prayer. Prayer to JESUS has made Achitophel hang himself. It did
more against Ameleck then the Sword. The Prayer of Faith has raised the Dead;
and overcome Angels, and cast out Devils; yea the Prayer of Faith has had
influence upon GOD Almighty Himself. Exodus 32.10. Hence He said, Let me alone.
There is a kind of Omnipotency in the Prayer of Faith. Genesis 32.28. It has
brought health to Persons sick, as to Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32.24. This healed the
Father of Publius who lay sick of a fever, and of a bloody flux: to whom Paul
entered in, and prayed, and laid his hands on him and healed him, Act. 28.28.8.
The prayer of faith shall save the sick, Jam. 5.15. The Prayer of Faith has
opened Prison-doors: this it did for the Apostles, Act. 5.19. for Paul and
Silas, Act. 16.25, 26. Oh therefore be careful for nothing: but in every thing
by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known
unto God, Phil. 4.6. Are you deeply distressed by temptations? and have you
them following of you thick and threefold as the waves of the Sea? Are they
ready to overwhem you? Do your spiritual Enemies agree together to tempt you?
Are you now in such a sad case so weary of your life by temptation, that you
name every thing Marah or Bitterness: or Massah and Meribah? Exodus 1^.7. O see
you serve God with Prayer. Act. 20.19. See (I say) that you serve the Lord with
all humility of mind, and with many tears in temptations: O distressed Souls!
Go tell JESUS of them; of the greatness, multitude and urgency of them, and of
your great discouragement by reason of them: as Paul did, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9.
Very likely, corruption was edged with temptation, and both the temptation and
occasion met, (and it is thought by some that Satan sent some Delilah to lull
Youth asleep, and bind him with withes of green delights;) but his going to
Prayer made his watchful Soul displeased deeply with that flesh-pleasing force;
but he Prayed thrice, and GOD delivered him at last. GOD sometimes gives
pardon, but not prevention of temptation, ver. CHRIST bids you Pray* in Mat.
6.13. Lead us not into temptations, but deliver us from evil. There is good
reason so to Pray; for the Kingdom, Power and Glory are the LORD's. GOD bids
you to watch and pray, Mat. 26.41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
temptation: the spirit indeed is willing but the flesh is weak. And take heed
that the Devil take you not out of your trenches; see that you abide in Christ.
1 John 2.28. And now little Children, abide in Him; that when he shall appear
we may have c^nfidence, and may not be ashamed before him at his coming. Keep
home if you would be safe and fruitful, Joh. 15.5. I am the vine and ye are the
branches, (says Christ,) he that abides in Me, and I in him, the same shall
bring forth much fruit: for without Me ye can do nothing. Prayer is a great
piece of the Christian Armor. Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always with all prayer and
supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance. In
Prayer continue. Oh! tell JESUS of your temptations and variety of afflictions
by Faith in Prayer* and He will tell His FATHER, and w^ll intercede for you.
Luke 22.31, 3^. And the LORD said, Simon! Simon! behold Satan has desired to
have you, that he may sift you as wheat: But I have prayed for you, that thy
Faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen thy Brethren.

The End of the First Sermon.
THE Wing of Safety Offered and Rejected.
MATTHEW. XXIII. 37, 38. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Thou that killest the Prophets,
and stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy
Children together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye
would not! Behold, your house is lest unto you desolate!


THESE Words present us with CHRIST's kind treatment of Jerusalem, and the
indefatigable pains CHRIST took with them to bring them and theirs home to
Himself; He sent them His Faithful Prophets, and Himself labored with them:
and with the unkind and ill entertainment which they give to CHRIST and to the
Means of Grace; They killed His Prophets, and stoned His Messengers, and
refused to be gathered under His wings.

IN the Words we may consider, (1) The Means they were richly favored with;
They had GOD's Prophets and Apostles, and CHRIST Himself who came to them. They
had great offers made to them. (2) We have the Persons to whom those Means were
granted: and they were the Jews, Jerusalem, GOD's Professing People. (3) The
inefficacy of the Means, appearing in their killing the Prophets, and stoning
them that were sent unto them, and refusing to come under CHRIST's Wing. (4)
The Notice CHRIST takes of all this, with bitter Lamentation: O Jerusalem
Jerusalem! how often would I have gathered thy Children together as a Hen
gathered her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not! The Wings of CHRIST be
the Covenant of Grace. Mat. 4.2. and this they would not be savingly brought
into, but they continued unbelieving and impenitent under all, and this moved
CHRIST's commiseration and compassion toward them as in the Text, So, Luke
19.41, 42. this moved tears to fall from the Eyes of Christ, intimating to us,
that an impenitent and unbelieving Person or People, though otherwise prosperous,
they are to a spiritual eye objects of pity: because a spiritual eye sees the
end of impenitency and unbelief, and the mis^ (...) that will inevitably come
upon Men, except they repent and believe, for they will perish everlastingly. Yea
an impenitent and unbelieving People that have almost filled up the measure of
their Sin^, and are almost ripe for destruction, they are objects of yet
greater Lamentation: any sinful and unbelieving People are objects of
Lamentation: because they are filling up Judgment for themselves; but such a
People that have been long treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, and
have almost filled up the measure of Sin, they are objects of greater
Lamentation; this was the very case of Jerusalem: they had been an impenitent
People for a great while together; their Fathers were bad and they were worse;
as you may see in 27 and 32 verses, of this Chapter* in which our Text is.
Lastly, We have the fearful and fatal consequence of their impenitency,
unbelief and final refusal to be gathered under Christ's Wings: Their House is
left unt^ them desolate.

Here take TWO DOCTRINES.

DOCT. I. OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST takes exact and perfect notice of the Means of
Grace, and the success of the Means under which any Pers^n or People live. Joh.
6.36. But I say unto you, you have seen Me, (and believe not* He observes every
Person that sees His in the Glass of the Gospel, and come to trust under the
Wings of CHRIST* In, Ruth 2.12. GOD observed with high approbation Ruths pious
resolution. Ruth. 1.16. And Ruth said, intrea^ me not to leave thee, or to
return from following after thee; for whither thou go, I will go; thy people
shall be my people, and thy God my God.

1. CHRIST takes notice of the Means of Grace and the Success of those Means
because both come from Himself. The Means of Grace spring from the Mediatorial
Covenant between His Father and Himself. Isai 42.6. and 49.6. I will give thee
for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation unto the ends of
the Earth, (to enlighten them with the Word.) It is CHRIST that has made a
Purchase of the Means of Grace, and of a blessing upon those Means. Zech. 9.11.
By the blood of thy covenant I have sent forth the prisoners out of the pit
wherein there is no water. Gal. 3.13, 14. Abraham's blessing was the Covenant of
Grace, and the dispensation thereof in the Means of Grace, and the saving
blessing on the dispensation; and the inheritance of the Heavenly Canaan through
that blessing. Yea the Means of Grace are procured, and are continued to a
Person or People by CHRIST's intercession Psalm. 2.8. Ask of me and I will give
thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy
possession. 2 Cor. 6.2. For he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted and
in the day of Salvation, etc. Isai. 49.7, 8. which is God's Speech to Christ
about giving the Day and Means of Grace in answer to His intercession. Moreover
the Means of Grace and the Success thereof are dispensed and ordered by the
Hand of Christ. Rev. 1.16, 20. He receives the Gifts of the Ministry of His
Father, and He gives them unto Men. And He disposes of Men Ministerially gifted
here and there according to His good pleasure, and He gives or withholds the
success as pleases Him; as He commands the Rain to fall on one City, and not
on another, and blesses the Seed sown as He pleases.

2. CHRIST observes how long He is with a Person or People by the Ministry of
the Word, because He is His Fathers Servant in this matter, and must give
account of all that God has given Him. Isai. 49.3, 4, 5, 6. Joh. 17.12. Heb.
2.13. Behold I and the Children which God has given me. Those that thou gave
me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition. CHRIST
gives account, and therefore must take notice. CHRIST takes notice not only of
the Congregation in general, but of every particular Person in the
Congregation; as He did of the fruitless Fig Tree. Luke 13.7. Behold these
three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut it down
why cumbreth it the ground? And there is satisfaction joy and delight that
comes to Christ by the good success of the Ministry. Prove. 8.31. Isai. 53.10,
11. And contrariwise it is a grief and vexation to His Soul, and matter of
bitter complaint when it prospers not: He complains, Isai. 49.4. I have
labored in vain, etc. And in, Mar. 3.5. He looked round about on them with
anger, being grieved for the hardness of their hearts, etc. Yea Christ wept
over Jerusalem for their impenitency and unbelief, under the Means of Grace.
Luk, 19.41, 42. Yea He spues impenitent and unprofitable Sinners out of His
Mouth. Rev. 3.16. He gives them up to spiritual plagues in this life. 2 These.
2.11, 12. and revengeth fully in the World to come, with a punishment more
intolerable then that of Sodom Gomorrah. 2 These. 1 7, 8, 9.

I pass to the Improvement of this Doctrine, and the USE is a Word of Awakening
unto all unprofitable Sinners in this Congregation and Plantation. You have
been favored Eight and Forty Years with the plain and powerful Preaching of
the Word, (by your late Reverend and Excellent Pastor) who has Preached to you
the Unsearchable Riches of CHRIST; and CHRIST has taken special notice of you,
and has observed how negligent and unprofitable you have been under the outward
Mea^s of Grace* and inward motions and strivings of the Spirit with you to
bring your Souls out of a state of sin and misery, and into a state of
Salvation by a Redeemer. Oh consider the Sin of Unprofitableness under such
choice Means of Grace as you have for so many Years enjoyed, how heinous is it!
It is a Sin against the gracious Love of the FATHER, 2 Cor. 6.1. who was in
Christ beseeching you to be Reconciled. 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. Oh the condescension
of GOD! Oh the mad rebellion of the unbelieving and unprofitable Sinner! Joh.
3.16. G^d so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life, ver.
19. This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness rather than light, because their deeds were evil. These do treasure up
wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous judgment of
God. Romans 2.5. Unprofitableness under the Means of Grace and Ministry of the
Word, it is a Sin against the Grace of CHRIST; for ye know the Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor,
that ye through his poverty might be made rich. 2 Cor. 8.9 It is a Sin against
the Grace of CHRIST tendering most freely all Good to thee: Oh what moved
Christ to make the offer of Grace and Glory to thee, and not to others, but
Grace? Grace tendered CHRIST Himself, and His unsearchable Riches to thee;
Himself to be thy Father, Brother, Head and Husband; His Riches, (that is,)
whatsoever can be produced from any of His Offices to do thee Good, etc. All
this thou rejectest by thy unbelief and unprofitableness under the Ministry of
the Word. It is a Sin against the Fellowship of the SPIRIT, not to profit under
the Means of Grace. Oh consider thou unprofitable Sinner, that GOD the Holy
Ghost keeps an exact account of all His pains and patience with, and toward
thee; He has a Book of Memorial, in which He enters upon record, all His
layings out upon thee; He observes and keeps the account how many Sermons you
have heard, what Counsels were given to you by your dear Deceased Pastor, how
many Sabbaths you have had the advantage of; how many applications His Spirit
has made to your Soul; and how long His patience has waited upon you; as
sometime he said to Israel, All day long I have stretched forth my hands unto a
disobedient and gainsaying people, Romans 10.21. Yea GOD takes notice how long
His Spirit has been striving with thy Soul in, by, and together with the
Ministry of His Deceased Servant. Genesis 6.3. And how long a space GOD has given
you to work in, even to work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling.
Phil. 2.12. Now the Day is a time for work and labor. Joh. 12.35. There is a
Night coming upon you, wherein there will be no working for you in the Grave:
Your Dear Pastor must never Pray with you nor for you, any more, He must never
Preach to you any more, He must never tender CHRIST to you any more, nor Grace
and Glory through Christ; He must never set before you the sinfulness of Sin, nor
your need of a Savior. Oh thou unprofitable Sinner! Consider the danger thou
art in. This Sin provokes Christ and wearies Him. Isai. 7.13. and 43.24. This
Sin lays a Person or People under dreadful threatenings; even such as th^se,
Luke 13.3.5. Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish. And that, Mat.
3.10. Cut it down why cumbreth it the ground. This Sin brings sore Judgments
and sharp Revenge: It brings Temporal Spiritual and Eternal Judgments; Temporal
Judgments have been poured out by GOD upon those that have been unprofitable
under the Means of Grace; This has been the cause of much sorrow and distress
to GOD's professing People; Isai. 5.4, 5. What could have been done more to my
vineyard, that I have done in it? Wherefore when I looked for grapes, brought
it forth wild grapes? And now go to; I will tell you what I will do to my
Vineyard; I will take away the hedge thereof, and it shall be eaten up: and
break down the wall thereof, and it shall be trodden down. Yea for not profiting
under the Means of Grace GOD sends dreadful spiritual Judgments. For this GOD
gives up to strong delusions to believe lies. 2 These. 2.9, 10, 11, 12. 2 Pet.
2.1, 2. In a Word, Christ will punish unfruitfulness under the Means of Grace
with Everlasting Destruction; as it is written, 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. O think what
will become of such, when Christ shall come upon them as a Thief in the Night,
and rob them of all outward comforts, and of all means and opportunities of
spiritual good, and cast them out of His own sweet and glorious presence for
ever, when He shall set Himself against them as a devouring Fire, as
everlasti^g Burnings.

I now proceed to the Second DOCTRINE.

DOCT. II. WHEN CHRIST Endeavors to gather Persons, especially Young Persons,
under the special Wing of His saving Covenant by the Ministry of His Word, and
they will not be be gathered, He will severely punish them for their neglect
and refusal. This is plain in the Text.

This Doctrine contains in it these Three following Propositions.

PROP. I CHRIST Endeavors to gather Persons, especially Young Pers^ns, under
the Wing of His Covenant by the Ministry of His Word.

PROP. II. MANY of those whom CHRIST so endeavors to gather, They will not be
gathered.

PROP. III. THOSE who finally refuse to be gathered under the special Wing of
CHRIST's Covenant by the Ministry of the Word, shall be severely punished for
their neglect and refusal.

PROP. I. CHRIST Endeavors to gather Persons, especially Young Persons, under
the Wing of His Covenant by the Ministry of His Word.

Now this Proposition contains Two Conclusions in it.

1. Conclusion. THAT the Ministry of the Word is the Great, Instituted and
All-sufficient Means of gatherings Souls under the Wing of Christ's Covenant.
When I say it is the Means of gathering Souls under the Wing of Christ's
Covenant; I look on it as an Instrument in the Hand of the Spirit of Christ,
whereby He works Faith in the Hearts of Men, and so brings them near to Christ,
and under the Wing of Christ. Romans 1.15, 16. The Word Preached is the power of
God unto Salvation to every one that believes. Romans 10.14, 17. How shall they
call on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him
of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? So
then, faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, that is, by the
Word Preached, as you may see in the former verse. Gal. 3.2, 5. When I say it
is a sufficient Means, I mean sufficient without those extraordinary helps of
Miracles that for a time were granted to the World, 'till the Doctrine was
sufficiently declared and published: sufficient without those extraordinary
helps that deluded Souls are looking for, as Visions, Revelations,
Inspirations, and Enthysiastick suggestions, etc. Joh. 6.30. Mat. 12.39. What
the Word discovers, I oppose it, to any other discovery of any other thing. No
other discovery is a Means of Faith in Christ, and bringing the Soul under the
Wing of Christ. As for the Preaching of the Law; the Law indeed may convince of
Sin, and so of Soul sickness, and of death, and condemnation. 2 Cor. 3.7, 8, 9.
Romans 7.7, 8, 9. and so by the Law we become dead to the Law. Gal. 2.19. and so
may have its work upon the Heart, to make known Sin, but yet not sufficient to
finish conviction; much less to reach conversion. Joh. 16.9. Of Sin because
they believe not. Gal. 3.22. But the Scripture has concluded all under Sin,
that the promise by faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.
But the Preaching of the Law cannot bring you unto Christ. Here the Gospel and
the Ministry of it, is the only sufficient Means to bring the Soul under the
Wing of Christ. Gal. 3.1, 2. O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you, that
you should not obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been
evidently set forth, crucified among you? This only would I learn of you,
received ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?
Isai. 11.10.11, 12. Mar. 16.15, 16. Go ye into all the world and preach the
Gospel to every creature. He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved;
but he that believes not shall be damned. The Gospel was committed to Paul to
be Preached for the obedience of Faith among all Nations for His Name. Romans
1.5. To prove that the Gospel, specially as Preached has the sufficiency of a
Means,

Argu. 1. THAT the Ministry of the Word is the All-sufficient Means of
gathering Souls under the Wing of CHRIST's Covenant appears from the
Universallity and Antiquity of these Means. Thus Adam and Eve were brought
under the Wing of Christ. Genesis 3.15. Joh. 8.56. Your father Abraham rejoiced to
see my day: and be saw it and was glad. Luke 24.25, 26, 44, 45. Therefore the
Gospel is the Everlasting Gospel. Rev. 14.6. only Preached with this
distinction, From the beginning Christ's coming, it was to them in promise; but
to us, in performance. Romans 1.2, 3, 4.

Argu. 2. NO other Means were ever effectual without this discovery of CHRIST,
and this discovery of CHRIST has been effectual without other Means. What did
the Creation of the World, ( Romans 1.20.) but declare GOD's Eternal Power and
Godhead? not the way of Salvation by CHRIST. What did the terrible giving of
the Law? What did all the Miracles of Moses, and the Prophets? But the
discovery of CHRIST by the Ministry of the Gospel without Miracles, have
brought many, yea multitudes under the Wings of CHRIST. Now the discovery of
Christ, of His Name, and Truths, and Ways, comprehends all that a Minister
needs to know or preach amongst a People. 1 Cor. 2.2. It contains the whole
mystery of Godliness; both the object of Faith, and whatsoever else is
necessary morally as a means, to a gracious change. 1 Timothy 3.16. Without
controversy great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the flesh,
justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed
on in the World, received up into Glory. This is excellently set forth by the
Apostle, in 2 Cor. 3.18. We all with open face beholding as in a glass the
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even
as by the spirit of the Lord. 2 Cor. 4.1.8. Therefore seeing we have this
ministry, as we have received mercy we faint not; for we preach not our selves,
but Christ Jesus the Lord; and our selves your servants for Jesus sake. 6, 7,
v. For God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, to give the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power
may be of God and not of us. CHRIST in the Gospel is the end of the law for
righteousness. Romans 10.3.

Argu. 3. THE discovery of CHRIST in the Gospel, and the Ministry of the Word,
is the wisdom and power of GOD to Salvation. 1 Cor. 18.22, 24. For the
preaching of the cross is to them that perish, foolishness: but unto us which
are saved, it is the power of God. It pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe. Unto them which are called both Jews and
Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God, Romans 1.16. Never look
to meet with h^s Wisdom and Power to save you but in the Gospel. The Ministry
of the Word is the Instrument to convey the Spirit. Gal. 3.2. This only would I
learn of you, Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing
of faith? Act. 10.44. While Peter yet spoke these words, the Holy Ghost fell on
all them which heard the word. Act. 13.52.

Conclu. 2. CHRIST Endeavors to gather Persons, (especially Young Persons)
under the Wing of His Covenant by these Means. Psalm. 34.11. Come ye children,
hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear the Lord. Hence in the dispensation
of the Gospel He gives direction to Young Persons wherewith to cleanse their
way. Psa. 119.9. Eccl. 12.1. Act. 3.25, 26. Ye are the children of the
Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made with our Fathers, saying unto
Abraham, and in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed; Unto
you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, s^nt him to bless you, in
turning away every one of you from his iniquities. Hence He takes care that His
Ministers do not discourage but encourage Young Persons to come under Christ's
Wing. Suffer (says Christ) Little Children to come unto Me, and forbid them
not; for of such is the kingdom of Heaven. Yea our Lord Redeemer says to
Peter, Love thou me more than these? feed my Lambs, Joh. 21.15.

PROP. II. MANY of those whom CHRIST so Endeavors to gather under His Wing,
They will not be gathered. They will not come unto CHRIST that they may have
life. Joh. 5.40.

1. BECAUSE all the sight they have, is but a carnal sight; therefore cannot
produce a spiritual effect, such as coming unto CHRIST and being gathered under
CHRIST's Wing. And this appears both in the Person seeing; even a natural man,
not born of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things
of the spirit of God for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know
them, for they are spiritually discerned. And it appears in the imperfection of
the sight, or act of seeing, upon which all their knowledge is grounded, which
is full of errors and mistakes. Luke 14.18. They could not deny but the Feast
was good, and the Invitation free and full, but it was not so fit for them at
that time. So Felix would hear Paul at a more convenient season.

2. THEY will not be gathered under CHRIST's Wing, because the Arm of the Lord
is not revealed to them. (Isa. 53.1) or in them, to draw them, and teach them
effectually. Joh. 6.44, 45, 65. No man can come to me, except the Father which
has sent me, draw him. So that they have no more then flesh and blood
(enlightened by a common work) can see. Mat. 16.17. Blessed art thou Simon
Bar-jona: for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father
which is in heaven. GOD's not destroying and not mortifying their rebellion is
no proper cause of their rebellious unwillingness. GOD owes it not to them, and
they fight against the strivings of His Spirit with them.

3. THEY will not be gathered under CHRIST's Wing, because they are under
voluntary, and satanical, and penal blindness. They are under voluntary
blindness; they will not believe, they will not come under the Wing of CHRIST,
they close their eyes, and rebel against the Light, being willingly ignorant.
Yea Satan the god of this World, blinds the eyes of their minds. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; in whom the god of this
world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine upon them. Yea
GOD in righteous Judgment penally gives them up to it; it is a punishment of
their voluntary blindness that they shall not believe. Joh. 12.39, 40.
Therefore they could not believe, because that Esaias (...) again, He has
blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should not see with
their eyes, nor understand with their heart, and be converted, and I should
heal them.

PROP. III. THOSE who finally refuse to (...) gathered under the special Wing
of CHRIST's Covenant by the Ministry of the Word, shall be sev^rely punished
for their neglect and refusal. They that will not obey the Gospel, Oh how
dreadful will their condition be? 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. The Lord Jesus Christ
shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ; who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. CHRIST came to You, by
the powerful Ministry of His choice Servant, lately Deceased, to gather you
under the special Wing of His Covenant; Oh how many of you look upon your
selves as whole, and that need not (...) Physician; You see no need of coming
under the Wing of CHRIST's Covenant: Alas, you are by nature dead in trespasses
and sins, and therefore you must be gathered under CHRIST's Wing or you must
perish for ever. Woe to you who hold the Truth and Light which you ha^^ in
captivity and obey it not. See Gal. 3. 10. Without Christ you are under the
Curse, and the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness. Romans 1.18. What
then can you expect but wrath, if not saved from it? And how can you be saved
from it but by coming under the Wing of CHRIST's Covenant? And how can you come
under the Wing of CHRIST's Covenant, but by Faith? Most speedily then comply
with the offer of Salvation made to you in the Ministry of the Word: for how
shall you escape if you neglect so great Salvation? Heb. 2.3. And if you delay
to comply with the offers of it, you do very guiltily neglect it.

USE. I. OF Exhortation; and the First Branch of Exhortation is To this
C^ngregation: Oh! Admire and Adore the Divine kindness of GOD to you, that for
so many Years, He has by the Ministry of His dear Servant, who is now in
Heaven, been endeavoring to gather you and yours under the Spiritual Wing of
CHRIST's Covenant. This is a signal favor. Romans 10.15. How beautiful are the
feet of them that preach the G^spel of peace, and bring glad tidings of good
things! Let it not seem a small thing to you, that you have been thus favored
of the Divine Majesty! There is no outward thing so precious; This is GOD's
acknowleding of a People to be His own. Amos. 3.2. You only have I known of all
the Families of the Earth. You enjoyed the privilege of Shem's Tents. Psalm.
76.1, 2. In Judah God is known: His Name is great In Israel. Psalm. 147.19, 20.
He showed his Word unto Jacob, His Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel: He
has not dealt so with any nation. The Day of the Gospel is the Day of GOD's
Power. Psalm. 110.1, 2, 3. For the Gospel is the Power of GOD to Salvation to
them that believe. The Arm of the Lord is not revealed to that Soul that sees
not the matchless excellency of Gospel discoveries. Isai. 53.1. GOD hereby has
tried you whether you will be gathered under CHRIST's Wing, or whether you also
will go from Him? As sometimes He said to His Disciples, Will ye also go away?
But GOD cautions His People against refusing of CHRIST, See 2 Pet. 2.1, 2.
compared with Deuteronomy. 13.3, 4. Oh therefore embrace and hold fast the Word of
CHRIST's patience, and let none take away your Crown. Rev. 3.11. Consider
therefore and above all look after the end of the Ministry of the Word, so long
granted to you, viz. to gather you and yours under the Wing of CHRIST; and
suffer your selves to be prevailed with to run into His Arms and Bosom,
especially you the Young Persons of this Congregation; It is your duty to
hearken to the repeated Invitations which your Dear Pastor has given you in
CHRIST's Name; who has often prayed you (in CHRIST's stead) to be reconciled to
GOD. 2 Cor. 5.20. Whatever pleas you may pretendedly make of your own
impotency, they can give you no discharge from the obligation of duty, which is
lying upon you. GOD is your rightful Lord and Lawgiver; and His Commands have
an obedience due to them from you His Creatures, and you cannot withold it,
without the guilt of Rebellion. Besides, the Gospel takes off all excuse here;
because it looks upon you as being without strength in your selves, and has
accordingly provided and offered all help to you in CHRIST, whose Spirit is
ready and able to do all that is wanting. Your impotency lies in your enmity;
your weakness in your wilfulness; you cannot because you will not. Joh. 5.40.
So Psalm. 81.11. My people would have none of me. The Great GOD that made you,
commands you to believe. 1 John 3.23. CHRIST calls you to look and come to Him.
Isai. 45.22. Look unto me and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth: for I am
God and there is none else. Oh! consider that CHRIST is Able to save to the
utmost, them that come to GOD by Him. Heb. 7.25. Have you then sinned to the
utmost? Yet He that seeks to gather you under His Wing, can save you to the
uttermost; Oh refuse not to be saved! but now say with the Spouse; Draw me, and
we will run after, thee. Cant. 1.4.

Second Branch of the Exhortation. Oh take heed of counting your selves under
the special Wing of CHRIST, when you are not. You must therefore distinguish
between being under the Wing of CHRIST externally and visibly, and being under
His Wing internally and savingly; Oh it is not enough to be under CHRIST's Wing
only visibly, but really and savingly. Don't please your selves with a vain hope
as they did, Mat. 7.26, 27. Take heed of thinking you are gathered under
CHRIST's Wing, because you assent unto the Truths both of the Law and Gospel;
as they did, Romans 2.18, 19, 20. 1 Cor. 8.2.11, 12. Knowledge puffs up. Too
too many rest in assent unto the Doctrine of Godliness, which they have
recieved from Education, and common Opinion. Some think they are under the Wing
of CHRIST because they are Professors of CHRIST and of His Ways; But CHRIST
will say to many Professors, I know you not, depart from me ye cursed. Many
profess to know CHRIST, who in their works deny Him. Some think, they are
gathered under the Wings of CHRIST because they seek Him from place to place,
and seemingly follow after Him; But alas! they do not follow Him for Love, but
for Loaves; For some outward carnal advantages*

Use II. OF Examination, whether you are Internally and Savingly gathered under
CHRIST's Wing; If so, then you see all Truth and all Goodness in CHRIST; You
see Him full of Grace and Truth. Do you see all Goodness in CHRIST, and all
this Goodness, as necessary for you? Do you see that you must have CHRIST or
perish for ever? Is He the chiefest of ten Thousand to your Souls? Cant. 5.10.
Phil. 3.7, 8. Psalm. 73.25. Are you willing to deny self, to renounce, abandon,
and hate all, in comparison of CHRIST, His Laws, and Ways? Do you account
CHRIST a communicative Goodness, and only worthy to be desired as a portion for
your Self, your Children and Posterity? Do you look upon CHRIST as a most
attractive Goodness, drawing the heart, and whole Man, after Him? So that now
your Soul gives up it self, and its all to CHRIST and to the power of Christ,
desiring to be drawn into and kept in His Arms and Bosom? Cant. 1.4. And to be
continually guided by His Spirit? Psalm. 143.10. Teach me to do thy will, for
thou art my God: Thy Spirit is good, lead me into the Land of uprightness.
Psalm. 73.24. Thou shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to
glory. Do you esteem CHRIST as an All-sufficient Goodness, satisfying all right
desires? insomuch that those who are gathered under CHRIST's Wing, shall hunger
no more, nor thirst any more, but shall have all their wants supplied in
CHRIST, and He will safeguard them against the Evil of all occurrents. Indeed
the manner of seeing differs in those that are gathered under CHRIST's Wing,
from those that are not. The Soul that is gathered under CHRIST's Wing, his
sight of Christ is from God's teaching by His Spirit dwelling in him, and
enabling him to behold the things themselves; called therefore the evidences
and demonstration of the Spirit and power. 1 Cor. 2.4.10. It is written in the
Prophets, And they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that has
heard and learned of the Father comes unto Me, says Christ. The Spirit does
hold forth Christ's Glorious Person. His Offices and Benefits before his Eyes;
and then the Spirit gives the Man a clear and spiritual sight, to discern
Christ that speaks, His Authority, Truth and Faithfulness. Thus it was with
Sarah, Heb. 11.11. Through Faith also Sarah herself received strength to
conceive Seed, and was delivered of a Child when she was past Age, because she
judged Him faithful who has promised. It is the Spirit that g^ves us a mind, to
know Him that is true, 1 John 5.20. And we know that the Son of God is come,
and has given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true: and we
are in him that is true; even in his Son Jesus Christ. Yea the Spirit causes
the Soul wisely to look upon Him, and seriously to consider Him and behold Him
intensely. Isai. 65.1. I am sought of them that asked not for me: I am found of
them that sought me not: I said, behold me, behold me, unto a nation that was
not called by my name. So that He beholds the Realities themselves. See Paul's
Prayer, Ephesians. 1.17, 18, 19. That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of
Glory, may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of
him: the eyes of your understanding being enlightened: that ye may know what is
the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints, And what is the
exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe; according to the
working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him
from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places.
Moreover the Fruit of this Illumination upon the Soul, that is gathered under
the Wing of CHRIST, is, that it works effectually, and transforms the Soul. 2
Cor. 3.18. We all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord,
are changed into the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of
the Lord. It renews the whole Man, and brings forth fruit in the whole Man in
new obedience.

THE Soul that is gathered under the Wing of CHRIST has endeared Affection to
Christ; He is most precious to him; That Soul is taken up with Christ as his
Savior from Sin; from the guilt of Sin, and from the filth of Sin; as a
Savior from the dominion of Sin, as well as from the condemnation of Sin; He
desires to have Christ made of God unto him, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification and redemption.

HE that is gathered under the Wing of CHRIST, has in him a principle of
spiritual life; he has the Son, therefore also he has life. 1 John 5.11, 12. He
is mystically one with Christ, he has an inbeing in Christ and Christ in him:
but the formal Professor is without Christ: therefore without life; he is a
still-born Christian, dead still; whatever else he has attained unto: but he
that is gathered under CHRIST's Wing, has in himself a Well of Water, springing
up to Everlasting Life. Joh. 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall
give him, shall never thirst: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in
him a well of water springing up into everlasting life. This is called oil in
the vessel. Mat. 25.3, 4. They that were foolish took their lamps, and took no
oil with them: but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps. They
have the Law written in their heart, as Christ says of Himself, Psalm. 40.8. I
delight to do thy will, O my God: yea thy law is within my heart. Those that
are gathered under the Wing of Christ, they have the Image of Christ. Romans
8.29. For whom he did fore know, he also did predestinate to be conformed to
the image of his ^on, that he might be the first b^rn among many brethren. They
have the Divine Nature; 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great
and precious promises; that by those you may be partakers of the divine nature,
having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust. They have
Christ formed in them. Gal. 4.19. My little Children, of whom I travail in
birth again until Christ be formed in you. They have an inward bent of heart to
know, and do, and to walk with GOD in all His Commandments and Ordinances.

YEA He that is gathered under the Wing of CHRIST has the Spirit of Christ to
inliven, inlighten, quicken, comfort, sanctify and save him. And he that is
gathered under the Wing of CHRIST, labors to be, and to abide with CHRIST in
every state, in every condition and season, and under every relation. Psalm.
139.18. When I awake I am still with thee. He that is gathered under the Wing
of CHRIST, has Communion with Christ in His Righteousness, Sonship, Image, and
Glory. He has no expectation of Justification by his own inherent
righteousness, but covers himself under the Wing of CHRIST's Righteousness, and
is clothed with that white Robe, Isai. 45.24. Surely shall one say, in Jehovah
have I righteousness and strength. He has Communion with CHRIST in his Sonship,
he is an heir of GOD, and coheir with CHRIST: He has the Spirit of Adoption
which teaches him to cry Abba Father, and this Holy Spirit bears witness with
his Spirit that he is a Child of GOD, Romans 8.16. Gal. 4.7. Gal. 3.29. Yea he
that is gathered under the Wing of CHRIST, has communion with CHRIST in His
Image, he is changed into CHRIST's Image from Glory to Glory. 2 Cor. 3.18.

IN a Word, and so I close, He has Communion with CHRIST (inchoatively) in this
World, and (consummatively) in the coming World, in His Glory: He is constantly
preparing for his dissolution and translation in order to his full fruition of
CHRIST in Glory. He desires that for him to live may be Christ, and for Him to
dye may be Gain. He says as in, Phil. 1.21, 22, 23. For me to live is Christ,
and to dye is gain: but if I live in the flesh, this is the fruit of my labor:
yet what I shall choose, I wot not: for I am in a strait betwixt two; having a
desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better.

THUS Examine and prove your selves, whether you are Gathered under the saving
Wings of CHRIST, or not. And if you are not, it is because you will not; as you
see in the Text; and you must ^ay the blame upon your own carnal, foolish, and
most wicked ^ills; and you must know that your Blood will be upon your own
Hea^^s, if you fall under the Desolation and Destruction, threatened in the
Text. Loath then and cry out against your carnal Wills; and strive against
them, and Pray GOD to think upon you, and to change them for you, that you
perish not.

FINIS.

