Choice Dialogues Between a Godly Minister, And an Honest Countryman,
Concerning Election and Predestination. Detecting the false Principles of a
certain Man, who calls himself a Presbyter of the Church of England.

By a Reverend and Laborious Pastor in Christ's Flock, by One who has been, for
almost twice thirty years, a faithful and Painful Labourer in Christ's
Vineyard.

For whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the
Image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many Brethren.
Moreover, whom he did predestinate, them he also called: and whom he called,
them he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

Romans 8.29, 30. To the READER:
I Desire to premise a few things concerning the following Dialogues, and the
Occasion of their Publication. As to the Dialogues themselves they contain a
rich and precious store of spiritual Knowledge and godly Comfort. They speak to
the Hearts of Men in a very easy and familiar manner, so that the meanest
Plough-man, the very meanest of God's People may understand them. They treat of
that deep but comfortable Doctrine, (that Soul-pierceing Doctrine to the wicked
and unregenerate, but Soul-refreshing and Heart-comforting Doctrine to the
Saints, to all righteous and godly Folk;) I mean the Doctrine of Election and
Predestination.

And now as to the Occasion of the Publication of these Dialogues. Alas
Christians! I fear there is too, too great Occasion for them. The many
pernicious (and I fear (Alas!) Soul-destroying) Books that have been handed up
and down in the Country as well as City, to poison and debauch Men's Minds,
call aloud for these Dialogues (or other such like Discourses) to rectify
Men's Opinions in these Matters. There have been many wicked Books written (by
the instigation of the Old Serpent who goes about to deceive) which put false
Comments, and horrid Antichristian Glosses upon the best of Books, the
Fountain of all true and divine Wisdom, I mean our holy and precious Bible.
These Dialogues will rightly instruct Men concerning the true Scripture
Doctrines of Election and Predestination. These, these plain but
Heart-enlightening Dialogues will show Thee ( Christian Reader) what was the
Opinion of the holy Martyrs of the Church in the first and purest Ages of
Christianity concerning these Doctrines; and oh! I am sure we ought to follow
them, them I say who were taught the Faith of Christ from the Mouths of the
Apostles or apostolic Men, and dyed glorious Martyrs to the Truth: I say we
ought to mind what these say, rather than harken to the delusions of the great
Whore, the Scarlet Whore, the Whore of Babylon, that great Antichrist, and
others who in later Ages have new-vampt her wicked and Soul-murthering Maxims,
and have sent them abroad to bewitch the Nations. Oh Christians!
Fellow Christians and Protestants! These are direful Things, ah, these are
Heart-afflicting Matters! that we should ever hear of them in a Land of Light!
No, let us not follow these blind Guides; who (if we do) will certainly lead us
into the Ditch, but as I said before, let us follow the Example of the
primitive Church, and give Ear to those pious and godly Fathers of the Church,
who will teach us the Truth in Sincerity. Here I cannot but take notice of the
sad and deplorable Degeneracy of Mankind, who are grown (many of them) to that
Height of malicious scorning of others who happen (though conscientiously) to
dissent from them, that they will neither read the Books published by such Men,
nor suffer others to read them, if they can help it: This, this is an
unchristian-like Practice. This is so unlike the kind Dealing which
Christianity always makes use of, and so like the horrid Practice of the
Synagogue of Rome, that we Christians ought to abhor it. For the Papishes will
Suffer no Books of the Protestants (whom they call Heretics) to be Printed in
their Countries, neither will they suffer their Disciples (or rather Slaves) to
read them: I say Slaves, because those Masters who will not suffer their
Proselytes to make Enquiry whether the Doctrines they teach them be true or
false, They I say, whom they thus teach, are so far from being Disciples, that
they are mean, they are servile and abject Slaves; and utterly un-like the
rational Bereans, who are called noble in Scripture, for examining whether
those Things were so or not. The Scripture bids us examine all Things, and hold
fast that which is best. But the Meaning of this Exhortation is not, that we
should be for ever reading, reading all Books that are published, for indeed
many of them are not worth the Reading. Indeed I have heard People say that
there is scarce one in twenty of the Books written by Dissenters that have
common sense in them. Whether this be true or not, let the World judge. But if
it be true, I hope they will take more heed for the future. But be it true or
not true, this I am sure is a true saying viz. Wisdom is (...) Children. I must
say one Word more concerning this Matter, (by way of Apology for their (...)
Notions (that if the Writings of the Nonconformists (...) be not quite so
Polite as the (...) some others, it may be, (...) Writing so much; for when Men
write Books faster than People can read them, their Method of reasoning too
being perfectly (...), and their Motion being so exceeding quick, (Po^r Men!)
they cannot help being a little giddy. But their is another Reason, and a
charitable one too. There is a vast Deal of Paper made in that most christian
Country (in some Men's Esteem) Holland, so much, that they scarce know what to
do with it all; and some Men think it an Act of Charity, not to let any Thingly
upon the Hands of our good Allies, and true Protestant Brethren the Dutch.
Therefore their Charity, with their Lust after Writing, forces them to buy it
up, and then cramm it full of painful and Laborious Searches and Re-searches
after the Truth, and in Soul-Cherishing and Heart-helping Works of Edification,
Recumbency and Regeneration, Misterious Tractates all! If what has been said
concerning the Writings of Dissenters be true, (as some Men say they can make
it appear) I hope the rising Generation will mend the Matter. And to let Thee
see what Hopes thou may have of their so doing; I will give Thee some
Account of the Parts of some of the Rising Generation, who though (it must be
confessed) they are but Striplings) yet they are (some of them) wonderful,
wonderful Striplings! It has been remarked by some of their Hearers, that ( oh
dear!) they can say what they please; that even in public Prayer to God they
can say even what they please; (and there are some People who think indeed that
they do say what they please) there be others who can preach a long Sermon
without using any Notes, nay and preach three such Sermons in one Day. There be
others in this Country likewise, (but from whence they came, or how they came
hither we know not; but no Matter for that, we have them, and able Men they
are) there be others who I say are very extraordinary; whose Zeal for Preaching
(if we may believe common Fame) was so great, that they (poor Hearts half
starved) left their dear Country, and all that they had in the World, (that is
their Packs) to come into Foreign Parts to Preach. But there are some (to their
Praise be it spoken) who are of an higher Order and Abilities than these;
concerning one of whom, one of the Rising Generation, there has been lately
pronounced, by a celebrated Writer, a very extraordinary Speech, so
extraordinary, that I beg leave to transcribe part of it, (the Quintessence) it
is this, viz. Highly favored of God, are the Churches enriched with Pastors of
bright Abilities, for the building and serving of his Temple: Able to
understand the Sacred Oracles even in the Languages wherein they are given us,
and illustrate them from an intimate Acquaintance with Antiquity: -- Able to
maintain the Truth with Armor fetched from the Tower of David, and convince or
confound Gainsayers, that go to perplex us with their Controversies: -- Here (I
beseech ye) let me advise Gainsayers to take heed how they oppose them, for
here is nothing but convince or Confound, stand clear, for here is no Quarter to
be given. If any thing should be objected against the following Papers, (as I
expect there will, for there are many who call themselves Church of
England-Men, who will not like what these Papers contain) I say if any Thing
should be said against the Doctrins laid down herein, it is expected that some
of these Gentlemen (who are so able to convince or Confound) will let the world
know, whether what the following Pages contain is the true Scripture Doctrine
of these Matters or not. And indeed I will help the Gentlemen (because they are
young) to an unanswerable Argument, and such as the meanest plough-man may
apprehend; and it is this, viz. (if any Man in answer to these Papers, should
argue upon their old Hypothesis of Secret Decrees) I would have them make use
of this Argument; That two absolute Contradictions canno both be true, but the
Will of the true God revealed to us in holy Scripture is an absolute
Contradiction to those stoical and fatal Schemes; Therefore it is impossible
that those Schemes can be true. The Minor is proved to a Demonstration in the
following Sheets.

Before I conclude this Preface, I beg leave to give a little Advice to those
Persons into whose hands these Papers may fall, that they would not, if they
happen to find any Thing displeasing to them, immediately throw them out of
their Hands; it may be they may take Offense without Reason; but I entreat them
to read them quite through, lest they be guilty of Injustice, by giving Sentence
before the Trial of the Matter. I conclude with an hearty Desire that these
Papers may be attentively read over, and for this Reason, because they will
rightly instruct Thee concerning some of those Things in Paul's Epistles* which
Peter says are hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned and
unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures unto their own
Destruction. Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these Things before, beware
lest ye also being led away with the Error of the wicked, fall from your own
Stedfastness. But grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ: To whom (...) both now and forever. Amen.

Dialogue I.
Countryman. Good morrow Reverend Sir.


Minister. I thank Thee honest Countryman, a good Morning to Thee likewise,
and I pray God bless Thee. But I would know what has brought Thee to my house
so early.


C. I am come to be instructed and to know my Duty.


M. Thou art to be commended for so doing. Sit down my Friend, I will give Thee
my best Instructions concerning what thou shall inquire of me.


C. I have heard that some Men, particularly one Dr. Edwards has been
endeavoring to bring into our excellent (...) the Scotch and Dutch
Presbyterian Notions concerning Election and Predestination. Now Sir, if I have
been rightly informed concerning these rigid Doctrines, I should be very sorry
they should take place any further in the Minds of Men; because they will take
away our Free Will, and transform us into something worse than Brutes, for the
Brutes plainly discover a Freedom of Election in their Actions. They will make
God the Author of Sin. And his Punishment of the wicked to be merely arbitrary,
to condemn Men to eternal Flames, for those Sins which he had put out of their
Power to avoid! Nay to create them on purpose to make them thus miserable! the
repeating of it frights me! It seems all Blasphemy to me; to represent the
infinite Goodness and Father of Mercies, in the Colors of Cruelty it self, that
you could not exceed it in the Description of the Devil!


M. Therefore the Lutherans have charged the Calvinists with Worshipping the
Devil. For, say they, we see not the Person of God, or of the Devil. Therefore
we describe them by their Qualities. And if we make God more cruel than the
Devil, we make Him worse than the Devil. And we Worship the Devil under the
Name of God. For it is not the Word GOD that we Worship, but what we mean by
it. The Heathens did Sacrifice to Devils, and not to God, yet they called those
Devils by the Name of Gods.


C. But God is called a Consuming Fire, and a terrible God. Is there not
something of Cruelty in this?


M. You easily apprehend the Difference betwixt Justice and Cruelty. God is
Justice, but there is nothing of Cruelty in his Nature. Cruelty is delighting in
the Misery of another, without any regard to a Fault committed. As Envy is
repining at the Prosperity of another, let him deserve it never so well; for an
envious Man cannot endure to see any other in a better Condition than Himself.
But none of these can be in God.


C. Now I understand. God punishes in Justice, as He is the Supreme Judge of
the World. But if He made Creatures on purpose to damn them, this has all the
Notion we can have of Cruelty. And if He put it out of their Power not to sin,
and left them no Free Will to choose whether they would sin or not, see not how
this can be reconciled to Justice. Therefore I think no Creature is capable of
sinning but what has free will. Sin being the Inclining of the Will to Evil,
and not to Good. Which if I have no Power to do, I can neither do Good nor
Evil. I have no Title to Reward, nor am I liable to Punishment. And what a Jest
would it be in you, if you should pretend to argue with me, to promise or
threaten, to persuade me to do such a Thing, if you knew beforehand that it
was impossible for me to do it? Suppose you should tie me Hand and Foot, throw
me into a Prison, bolt and fetter me down to the Floor, lock the Doors fast
upon me, and then set-fire to it, -- then preach to me in at the Window, and
use most pathetical Exhortations to me to come out, and why would I stay there
to be burned? And should Swear to me, as I live I don't desire your Death, nor
have any Pleasure in it; and should promise me great Rewards if I would come
out; would not this be insulting my Misery, and the greatest Aggravation of
Cruelty that is possible to be imagined? Yet this is the Notion those rigid
Calvinists would have us entertain of the Goodness of God, of all his gracious
Promises, and of his Threatenings to us, if we forsake not our Iniquities, and
deliver our selves out of that Prison and Bondage of Sin into which we had cast
our selves, by our habitual wicked Courses. This is the Case, as they put it.
And I have made it easy to my self to apprehend it, by this familiar Example I
have given, that I see it before my Eyes, and detest and abhor it! But still I
have a Question to ask upon this Point. We say in the Collect for the Second
Sunday in Lent, That we have no power of our selves to help our selves. Is not
this the Case I put of the Prison?


M. Yes, fully. If we consider our Help as only from our selves. When Man had
fallen by his Rebellion against God; he was no ways able to deliver himself
either from the Dominion of Sin, or from the Prison of Death to which it was
doomed. But Christ our blessed Savior entered into that Prison in our Nature,
and in our Stead, and made full Satisfaction for all the Sins of that Nature,
to be applied to all who laid hold upon it, by a true and lively Faith, and a
sincere Repentance for their Sins. He opened the Prison-Doors, and preached
Deliverance to all who would accept of his Salvation. And to those who are
willing, he gives the Assistance of his Grace, to help their Infirmities. And
this is necessary to all the Actions of our Life. Without this, we can neither
do a good Deed, nor think a good Thought. So that all the Glory is still to
Him. Yet something is still lest for us to do. We must work with Him, because
He works in us both to will, and to do.


C. Thus then I take it. If I manure my Ground never so well, yet without the
Sun it will not bear. On the other Hand, if I do not prepare my Ground, the Sun
will not bring a Crop I did not sow. Nay it is the Sun too which, with my
Labor, does prepare the Ground, and fit it to receive the Seed. So that in
Effect all is from the Sun, both to prepare the Earth, and enable it to bring
forth the Seed. Yet our Labor is necessary, not as what produces any Thing,
but only to remove what hinders the Production. Now I compare the Sun to the
Grace of God, without which we can do nothing. And our Working, though it can
produce nothing of it self, yet it prepares the Heart to receive the Influence
of the Sun of Righteousness. So that, as St. Paul says, he that planteth is
nothing, nor he that waters, but God who gives the Increase. And this was
the Baptism of Repentance St. John Baptist was sent to preach, to turn the
Hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the Hearts of the Children to their
Fathers, to soften the Ground of the Heart, to take out those Stones and
Hardness which would hinder it to receive the Seed of the Gospel. For THEY who
are proof against even Natural Affection, are deaf to all the Charms of the
Gospel. And this was truly preparing the Way to our Savior, to fit and dispose
Men to receive his self-denying Doctrine. This is a preventing and preparing
Grace; which whosoever resists, nips the Seed in the Bud, and brings no Fruit to
Perfection. In vain then do these unprofitable Servants plead their own want of
Strength as an Excuse, while they resist that Grace which is offered them for
an Help. Suppose I was lame, and could not go where my Life depended upon it.
But then a Coach was offered me with all Convenience to carry me; and I should
refuse it, could I plead my Lameness as a Defense for me? Or, which is more
absurd, could I say, it was not in my Power to accept it? Or that He who
offered it, did not really intend it? All this Banter and Blasphemy these
Predestinarians put upon the great God.


DIALOGUE. II.
C. I have been attacked, Sir, for the last words, I spoke last Time, saying
that the Predestinarians did banter and blaspheme the great God. They say that
Predestination is a Scripture-word, and therefore no Man ought to speak against
it. And I must have some of your Help to rid me out of this; for I would by no
Means say any Thing to the Derogation of the holy Scriptures.


M. The holy Scriptures often speak to us, after the Manner of Men, which in
the Schools is called, ad Captum, that is to our Capacities. For otherwise we
could not understand them. We have no words that can properly express the
infinite Nature of God. He is eternal and dwells in Eternity, but we have no
words but of Time. We cannot conceive a Duration without past, present, and to
come, yet these cannot be in God. For then He must have a Beginning, and would
gain or lose in Process of Time, as we do. All Things are present to Him.
Therefore wherever Fore or After is attributed to God in holy Scripture, we must
take that Word ad Captum, because there is no Fore or After in God. Such is the
Word Pre-Destination, or Fore-Ordaining, or Fore-Knowing. God knows all Things.
But He fore-knows nothing, because all Things are Present to Him. So He
ordains, but He does not fore-ordain. Yet we must use these Words, because they
are according to our Capacities. But if we argue strictly and properly from
them, we shall fall not only into many Absurdities, but even Blasphemies. And
so it is as to other Words ad Captum. God is said in Scripture to repent, to be
grieved, to be angry, etc. Yet we all know God is not subject to any of these
Passions. And if we should argue strictly and properly from such Expressions,
we must deny the Being of a God, for such Passions are totally inconsistent
with the Being of a God. Now if I should argue from God's being said to repent,
that He is changeable, and 20 other Consequences might be drawn from thence,
What would Dr. Edwards say to me? Would He not tell me, that I was totally out
of the Way, and ought not to draw any such Consequences from a Word that was
only ad Captum. The same I say to Him as to Predestination, which is only ad
Captum, and no more a Scripture-Word, than God's repenting, etc. And if He will
not give me leave to draw Consequences from the one, neither will I give him
leave to draw Consequences from the other, both being equally absurd. And let
Him show me a reason more for the one than the other, if He can. Now these
Words ad Captum are to be understood comparatively, with an as if. Thus when it
is said God repented He had made Man, and it grieved Him at the Heart, it is to
express the high Displeasure of God, and the terrible Punishment of the Flood
that followed, AS IF God had repented, and been grieved at the Heart, etc. And
thus when God was willing to express the exceeding Greatness of his Love to us,
and the full Assurance we may have in his Promises, He does it with an as if
there were a Yesterday in God, and that He had then chosen us by Name, and past
an ir-reversible Decree for our Salvation, which no Time or Accident should
ever alter. In which Scripture-sense, of Predestination it is a Doctrine full of
Comfort and Assurance to all good Christians. And there is nothing hard to be
understood in it. But the Perplexities of this Dispute have arisen from taking
the Word in the strict and literal Sense, without any as if, or Comparison in
the Case, or any Allowance for a Word ad Captum: But downright supposing a
Time past in God, and the Decree already past, concerning Things to Come with
God. Which Absurdity being granted, others follow in-extricable on both sides.
For Example, such Decree being supposed to be past, it takes away Free Will;
else the Will of Man might disappoint the Decree of God. On the other Hand,
without Free Will supposed, it will be impossible to give an Account for all
the Promises and Threatenings in the Holy Scriptures, and the Protestations of
God that he delights not in the Death of a Sinner, and his earnest
Invitations to Repentance. And as this is the Perplexity of the Dispute, so
remove the first Absurdity, and all clears up on both sides. Let us understand
God's Predestination (as his repenting) to be a Word ad Captum, not to be
strictly and Philosophically inquired into, and Consequences drawn from it; but
to look to the general Import and Meaning of it, and there we understand the
Firmness of God's Promises, and of his Covenant made with us in Christ,
impossible to be frustrated, AS IF decreed in Time past, even from Eternity.
But the Decree of God being only Present, for that there is no past or future in
Him, we take the Expression only ad Captum, and see no future Infraction upon
our Free Will from the Pre-Destination of God. The whole Difficulty being as to
Time of before and after, which we are sure are not, nor can be in God.


C. Sir, I understand. And if others would take notice of what you have said,
it would stop our arguing and wrangling about it, while it is plain we set out
upon a wrong Foundation, in applying past and future to God, which is only as
to us. And it is of God only we speak, when we speak of his eternal Decrees
before Man was made. For Man was not then in the Case, otherwise than as all
future Things are present with God. But if we will apply this to ourselves,
then it will follow, that I was born before I was born, even from Eternity,
because my Birth was then present with God. And my Death is now present with
Him, therefore I am now Dead! And when I am dead, I am not dead, because all
live to Him! Thus we apply to our selves what we call his Fore-Decrees, and say
that the Freedom of our Will is now tied up by them. Therefore let me make this
Experiment. Let us leave the Word Fore out of the Dispute, and say only, that
God ordains the Punishment of Wickedness, and the Reward of Virtue; and there is
no Difficulty at all in this. But when we say (in the rigid Calvinistical
Sense) that God Fore-ordains, there comes in all the Confusion.


M. And Dr. Edwards, or any Predestinarian cannot refuse this, since they all
allow that there is no Fore or After in God. Therefore if they will speak
properly of Him, they must use Words only of the present. And will they perplex
the World, and make Men run mad, only because they will not speak properly of
God? If they pretend to argue Philosophically, and draw just Consequences, they
must use proper Words, and not dispute from Words that are only ad Captum.


DIALOGUE III.
C. The Account you gave me last Time, Sir, of Predestination has satisfied me,
that in the Scripture-sense of the Word, and taken only ad Captum, as you
express it, it is a most comfortable Doctrine, and full of Assurance to all good
Christians. But that the rigid Calvinistical Notion of it, and the Inferences
they draw from it, are not only most absurd, but likewise blasphemous against
God.


M. And the Effects of it (some of which I have seen) among the common
Presbyterians are terrible. For their Heads being perpetually filled with the
abstruse Notions of Predestination, Election, Reprobation, and Secret Decrees
of God; and that they have no Free Will or Choice what to do, but must go on as
it is secretly Decreed. This, as it of common Consequence makes Men careless;
(for why should they struggle when there is no remedy, and their Sentence is
already past, and that ir-revocably?) So it is observable, that more of THESE
dye in Despair, than of any other sort of People. I have seen them cry out on
their Deathbeds for Assurance! Assurance! Oh! What shall I do for Assurance!
And when the Merits and Satisfaction of Christ has been preached to them, they
would say, alas! What is that to me, if I be not one of the Elect? For Christ
died only for the Elect. (This is another of their Doctrines, pursuant to their
Notion of Predestination, that the Decrees of God may not be frustrated.) And
when they were asked, why they did doubt of their Election? And bid look into
their Lives, which bating humane Infirmities, were good and virtuous, in the
common Size of Mankind; and therefore that they might take this as a Mark of
their Election: They would answer, that the good Works of the Reprobate were
hateful to God, (for so they had been taught) and therefore that this was no
sure Mark. Nothing but Election! Election! was in their Minds. The Condition of
these poor People is most lamentable. Election is with them a secret Decree,
without any respect to our Works. And they can have no other Assurance of it,
but that of their own Imagination. They cannot, as the Apostle requires, be
always ready to render a Reason of the Hope that is in them. Nay they speak
against Reason, and think it rather an Hindrance to Faith.


C. I thank God my Faith (which I have learned in the Church of England) is
this, That Christ died for all Mankind, and consequently for me in particular.
And I have his Promise, which is an infallible Assurance; that if I believe and
trust in that complete Satisfaction he has made for all my Sins, and truly
repent of them, I shall be Saved. And though my Faith be weak, that I say, Lord I
believe, help mine unbelief; and my Repentance is unworthy, and fit to be
repented of, and all my Righteousness is as filthy rags, yet I despair not,
because the Satisfaction made for my Sins was performed by Christ in his own
Person, wholly without me, in which I have no Share or Part at all; I paid not,
nor could pay one Penny of my Debt, or make any Satisfaction to infinite
offended Justice; but my whole Debt was paid by my Surety, and by Him alone
full Satisfaction was made, who only could make it. And my Faith is the Hand
that reaches this Medicin to me, and applys it. The Virtue is not in the Hand,
but in the Medicin. But the stronger the Faith, the greater the Comfort.
Therefore, Lord increase my Faith, and I pray, that my Faith fail not. They who
looked upon the brazen Serpent were healed, yet some had better Sight than
others. Even so was the Son of Man lifted up, that whosoever believes in Him
should have eternal Life. Thus my Faith is in Christ, but not in my Faith it
self. And if I have but a Grain of it, as big as a Mustard Seed, the Mountain
of my Sins will be removed and cast into the Sea. If my Faith be well grounded,
tho weak, and my Repentance be sincere, though unworthy, I am upon Jacob's
Ladder, and though upon the lowest Step, yet in the Road to Heaven. Some are upon
an higher Step, and some upon a lower, but all are safe. This is my Faith, and
my Assurance, and this is the Reason and the Rock upon which it is built. But
what Reason can any Man give for his being elected by a secret Decree, which He
knows not? He fancies himself elected! There can be no more in it. For, as You
have said before, there can be no sure Mark of it, even by the Principles of the
Predestinarians. And what then could the Apostle mean (in their Sense) by
bidding us Make our Calling and Election sure? What! Is not the Decree of God
sure without us?


M. I am pleased with the Account you have given of your Faith. And you ought
to bless God that you have been educated in the Church of England, where you
have been instructed in the true Foundations of Christianity, which give all
the Assurance that the Word and Promise of God can give. And this is the
highest Reason. But the Assurance of the Predestinarians is all Imagination,
being built upon Decrees which they confess to be secret and hidden from us.
Therefore it is no Wonder they should cry out for Assurance in their Extremity.
And when they say or may think they have it, and boast in it, yet they can give
no Reason for it, and therefore it is but Imagination still. Impressions upon
the Imagination may give great Pleasure and even Raptures of Joy. And if these
are built upon the true Foundation, they are Gold and precious Stones;
otherwise they are but Hay and Stubble, and will not endure the Fire. They are
often the Delusion of Satan, who thus transforms himself into an Angel of
Light, and deceives many an unstable Soul. But they must be tried by the
Foundation. Upon which they are not built, if we can give no Reason for them,
but are Flashes and Meteors, and give a false Light. We may know them likewise
by their Effects. If such Transports leave us more humble in our selves, and
with more Love and Charity to others, they come from God. But if they fill us
with spiritual Pride, and make us look down upon others as beneath us, they
come, no Doubt, from the Spirit of Pride, and tempt us to Pride; though sometimes
without our Knowing it, and while we act Humility. There is none so proud as the
proud-humble man, who is proud of his Humility! So subtle is our Adversary,
that we must watch even over our Virtues. He mixes Poison with our Meat. So
that we often put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness. And if the Light
that is in us be Darkness, how great is the Darkness! And this must be known by
Reason. My Reason tells me, that I can build no Assurance upon Decrees which
are hidden and kept secret from me. But whatever those Decrees are, my Reason
assures me they cannot be contrary or against the revea'ld Will of God, which
is given us in the holy Scriptures; because that would be for God to contradict
Himself. Which is impossible. And therefore my Reason tells me that I may
surely trust in his Promises, and cheerfully set about my Duty, without
perplexing my self about his secret Decrees.


Dialogue the Fourth.
C. I Hope Sir, that what you have said of Predestination will satisfy others
as well as it has me. First, that the whole Dispute, as managed by the
Calvinists, is all built upon a wrong Foundation, even by their own Confession,
in arguing strictly from Words ad Captum, and which they confess to be so; and
will not suffer the like to be done in any other Case. Therefore that they ought
to stop their Disputes upon this Point, till they can find proper Words to
speak by, if they will speak properly of God. And these Disputes ought to cease
for a second Reason you have given, which is, that they are useless, because
whatever the secret Decrees of God may be supposed to be, yet that they cannot
go against or invalidate his Will declared openly in the holy Scriptures, for
that would be to contradict Himself. Therefore that we may work in Hope, and
cheerfully apply our selves to the performing of what He has commanded us; with
full Trust and Assurance in what He has promised, without perplexing and
intangling our selves in these Disputes about his secret Decrees; for they must
go according to his revealed Will. In this we are sure, and therefore these
Disputes are at the best useless to us; but of most pernicious Consequence when
taken by the wrong Handle, as you have fully showed. But there is one Thing
wherein Dr. Edwards and the Predestinarians do very much boast, they say that
their Doctrine is agreeable to our 39 Articles; and therefore that our Clergy
have apostatized (as Dr. Edwards words it) from the Doctrine of the Church of
England: and that the Dissenters are the true Church of England, because they
hold Predestination, and are against Free Will, as they say our Articles
likewise speak. Now though this be no Argument as to the Doctrine it self, yet to
those of the Church of England it is of very great Consequence, as well to
vindicate the Church of England, as to stop the Mouths of Dissenters, which are
all open upon us on this Account.


M. The tenth Article is of Free Will. Which is not at all there denied, but
rather supposed and asserted. But it supposes the Concurrence of the Grace of
God by Christ to be necessary to incline and guide our Will, and to work with
us, When we have that good Will. Which is exactly agreeable to what I have said
before of Grace and our working with it, page 6.

The 17th Article is of Predestination. And keeps to the Scripture Phrase of
God's ordaining before the World began, of calling whom he fore-knew,
justifying, sanctifying them, etc. Which is to be understood in the same and no
other sense than as these Words are used in holy Scripture, which all agree to
be ad Captum, as we have discoursed it before. And these Expressions of
Scripture are, according to our Capacities and Manner of speaking, as this
Article says, full of sweet, pleasant and unspeakable Comfort to godly Persons.
But then this Article checks the Curiosities of this Dispute (which is what I
have been blaming) and says, For curious and carnal Persons lacking the Spirit
of Christ, to have continually before their Eyes the Sentence of God's
Predestination, is a most dangerous Downfall, whereby the Devil does thrust them
either into Desperation, or into Wretchlesness of most unclean Living, no less
Pernicious than Desperation.


C. This is so exactly what you have said, that yours is but a Comment upon
this.


M. Then the Article ends thus, Furthermore, We must receive God's Promises in
such wise as they be generally set forth to us in holy Scripture: And in our
Doings, that Will of God is to be followed, which we have expressly declared
unto us in the Word of God.


C. This is just as you have concluded, That we may safely trust in God's
Promises, and perform our Duty cheerfully which He has commanded in holy
Scripture, without perplexing our selves about his Secret Decrees. Therefore
instead of these Articles being against you, or you against them, you have
perfectly followed them in your Arguments, and explained them.


M. Observe further, that there is not a Word of Reprobation in all this 17th
Article of Predestination, nothing of God's having Fore-decree'd any to Misery,
but it speaks only of those whom He has elected to Salvation. So that the rigid
Calvinists against whom we have been disputing can find no Color of Umbrage in
their Favor from this Article. Therefore whatever the Opinion of particular
Men might have been, this cannot be charged upon the Church of England.

There was a Time when some of our Divines ran in too much with the Calvinists.
In the Marian Persecution many fled to Geneva and those Parts. And the joint
Cause against Popery, together with the Smart of their own Persecution,
inclined 'em to all the favorable Opinion they could have of their Friends,
who gave them Shelter. By this Mean some were tinctured with these rigid
Notions of Predestination. And when they returned to England in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, their Reputation made this Doctrine go down more easily with
some People.

But our English Cyprian, and holy Martyr, the great Archbishop LAUD, set
himself to stop the Torrent of this Infection, and when he was Chancellor of
Oxford, He turned the Bent of their Studies from these modern Polemicks, and
Reading the Dutch and German Systems of Divinity, to learn downwards, and from
the first Beginning of Christianity, to acquaint themselves with the Fathers in
the several Ages to our Times: Whereby they would be better able to judge of
the novel Disputes of the Remonstrants, Anti-Remonstrants, Supra and
Sub-Lapsarians, etc. which then tormented the Reformation in Germany and
Holland; and wherein WE likewise took part. And that famous University
(together with her Sister of Cambridge, which took the same Method) reap to
this Day the Benefit of those pious Instructions of her learned Chancellor,
which has given them that deserved Reputation all over Europe for their great
Knowledge and Exactness in Antiquity; and the primitive Doctrine and Discipline
of the Church; and teaching us to derive our Faith from its Fountain and
Original, and to go higher up than either Luther or Calvin. For want of which
the Church of Rome has gained great Advantage against her less learned
Opposers. For this Cause Dr. Edwards has thought fit to fall foul upon
Archbishop Laud, as the Corrupter of our Doctrine. But WE bless his Memory as
the Restorer of it. The Doctor charges Him and us for bringing in what he calls
Pelagianism, and Arminianism. But He is too learned not to know this to be a
Mistake. For though we assert Free Will, yet we teach the Concurrence and even
Necessity of Grace, to enable us to bring forth Fruit unto God, as is before
explained, page 6.


C. You have made it plain even to me. And now I am frighted to think, that any
Divine of the Church of England should make such an Use of the Union of the two
Kingdoms, and to propose it in Print, as to join with the rigid Calvinists in
Scotland and Holland, and our own Dissenters at Home, against the Church of
England, which he (good Man) calls Apostate; and hopes, with this foreign and
domestic Aid, to bring us all back again to the rigid and most abhorrent
Calvinism of Predestination; to throw Men into Despair, and Wretchlessness of
most unclean Living, as our Article of Predestination speaks. But I hope this
will give sufficient Warning to those of our Clergy who yet remain firm to the
Church, that they may in Time ward this Blow which is so publicly threatened,
and already attempted!


Dialogue the Fifth.
M. There is one Point remaining that follows from that of Predestination we
have been upon; in which I would have you, Countryman, to be well grounded,
and therefore must examine you a little upon it. These Predestinarians placing
all upon the eternal Decrees of Election and Reprobation, allow not of
Universal Redemption, or that Christ died for All. Because, say they, if Christ
died for the Reprobate, it was totally in vain, and the End of his Sufferings
must be frustrated as to them. Besides that he could not intend or design to
Save those whom God had Reprobated by an eternal Decree.

Now let me see what you have to say to this.


C. As to eternal Decrees, enough has been said to that already, that there is
no arguing from it, being only Words ad Captum, and therefore not to be strictly
and properly taken. So I dismiss that Point. But now as to universal
Redemption, the Scripture is plain, which says, That Christ died for all. And
would have none to perish, but all to come to the Knowledge of the Truth. And
as in Adam all dye, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. And many other
such like Texts.


M. But all are not made alive, that is, in Christ, so as to be Saved, for many
perish.


C. Yet Christ died even for those who perish. As it is said 1 Cor. 8.11. in
the Case of giving Scandal to a weak Brother. And through thy Knowledge shall the
weak Brother perish, for whom Christ died?

Now I help my self to understand this, by a familiar Example. Suppose you came
to a Prison, and taking a List of all the Debtors, should pay all their Debts,
Costs, Charges and all. And opening the Prison-Doors, should tell them, they
were all at LIBERTY who would accept of it, and come out in such a Time. After
which the Prison-Doors should be locked again, and they should be kept there,
'till they had paid the uttermost Farthing. Upon this, some thankfully accept
of your Goodness, and come out. But there are others, who despise your Mercy, or
will not believe you, or understand not the pleasure of Liberty, but prefer the
sordid Life of a Prison, the Pot and the Pipe, and will not come out. Which is
the very Condemnation our Savior spoke of when He said, that Light was come
into the World, but Men loved Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds
were evil. The Light was offered to all. But some loved Darkness better. It is
said that Life and Death are set before us, yet some choose Death. An Habit of
Sinning contracts a Love to it, that we are loath to leave it.

The Application is this. The Debt of those Prisoners who Stayed in the Prison
was paid as well as of those who came out. And as the Release of the one is
wholly owing to Him who paid the Debt; so the Condemnation of the other, lies
wholly at his own Door, because, He would not accept of his Liberty. Something
was left to the Prisoners to do, to choose whether they would come out, or stay
in. God (though a God of infinite Mercy) will not save us against our Will. This
shows Free Will. But there is no Merit in us, when we accept of his Salvation.
We pay not a Penny of the Debt, He pays it all. And all the Thanks and the
Glory is to Him. But if He did not pay my Debt, how could I be blamed for
staying in the Prison, when my Debt lay still upon me, that I could not get
out? How could I be called ungrateful to Him who paid nothing for me, nor ever
did design it? And how can wicked Men be blamed for trampling under Foot the
Blood of the Son of God, for despising and resisting his Grace, if He Shed no
Blood for them, nor ever gave them any saving Grace?


M. I desire Dr. Edwards (or any One of his Opinion) to answer this. But this
brings me to another Point which follows in the Train of Consequences of these
Men's Notion of Predestination. For from the eternal Decrees, as they put it,
they infer that there can be no failing from Grace, because this might defeat
the Decree. And therefore that Men cannot finally resist his Grace, or fall from
it. This minds me of a remarkable Passage told by Dr. Bates, who wrote the
Elenchus Motuum nuperorum in Anglia. He as a Physician was called upon to
assist that Night that Oliver (that Christian Hero in some Men's Esteem) proved
a true Deliverer of his Country. The Usurper was in great Agonies of Mind,
often started, and asked them if they saw any Thing? At length He calls for his
Chaplains. And the first Question He asked them was, If there was any falling
from Grace? To which being answered, NO, -- then, said he, I am safe. For He
supposed that some Time or other in his Life he might have had a little Grace.
And then his Usurpation, with the Murder of the King his Royal and Religious
Master, and Devastation of three Kingdoms, besides much Bloodshed abroad, and
the Overthrow of the established Church, could do him no Hurt! This is a short
Way of quieting Conscience! and to lull Men asleep in their Sins! Thus poor
Souls are deluded by these Doctrins of Decrees!

In Consequence of which it is a Maxim with them, that God sees no Sin in his
Elect. Which is indeed, that the Elect cannot sin. They say that David was
nothing out of God's Favor while he continued in his Sin, more than before he
committed it, or than after he repented. Nay some of them have wrote expressly
against Repentance, as being a Derogation from the Decrees of God, and
supposing 'em to be conditional. Whence others have likewise spoke against
Good-Works. What! Do we think that any Thing we can do, can reverse or alter
the Decrees of God?

And as they think the Elect cannot sin, so they say that others can do nothing
else but sin. Thus the same Actions are Sin in One, and Piety in the other. As
the Poet said, The Saints may do the same Things by
The Spirit in Sincerity,
Which other: Men are tempted to,
And at the Devil's Instance do:
All Piety consists therein
In them, in other Men all Sin.


I have read in a Book of one of their celebrated Preacher's, a long Comparison
betwixt Esau and Jacob, wherein Esau was set forth with all the Advantages of
Worth and Honor, and Jacob represented as the wickedest Fellow upon Earth; and
this Use was made of it, that God chose Jacob before Esau, to show that his
Decrees were absolute, and had no respect to the Goodness or Wickedness of the
Persons.


C. Then it is all one whether we are good or wicked! Nay Wickedness has the
Advantage in many Cases, as in this of Esau and Jacob! Sir, these are monstrous
Principles! And make me now no longer wonder at what one of their eminent
Preachers in London said since the Revolution, who being asked by some of his
Brethren, what progress he had made, He said he had made many Proselytes, and
had a full Congregation; but, added he, all the Effect I have found is, That I
have preached a Congregation of Christians into a Congregation of Devils.
Perhaps not knowing the Cause, and that this was the natural Consequence of
those Doctrines he had preached to them.

And are these the Principles to which Dr. Edwards would have us reformed
backwards over, by the Kirk in Scotland and in Holland coming into the Aid of
our Dissenters at Home? A Blessed Confederacy!


M. The Doctor has given the Onset himself, in a large Book, he has lately
Printed, called Veritas Redux, wherein these Principles are set up to the
Height. He heads the Armies of the Philistines, and leads them on against the
Camp of Israel.


Dialogue the Sixth.
C. REverend Sir, before I take my leave of you, I would willingly be informed
whether what I have heard of the Dissenters be true or not. I have heard that
many of them are turned Arians and Socinians. I pray now, is it true?


M. Yes Countryman, it is too true! Many of the dissenting Ministers
themselves have publicly professed themselves Socinians; that is, they deny
Jesus Christ to be God. These are some of those of whom the Scripture speaks,
that in the latter Times Men would arise who would deny the God that bought
them. Their woeful Apostasy, Countryman, may easily be accounted for. Unhappy
Men! They have thrown off the Succession of the Priesthood, by which only the
Ministers of Jesus Christ can demonstrate that they are sent by Him. They have
likewise thrown off the sacred Festivals and Fasts of the Church, and the
comely and decent Ceremonies which have been practiced in the Church: Which
though they are (simply) no Parts of Worship, yet without them, the true Fear of
God and his true Worship cannot long be preserved. For these Festivals, etc.
are like the Cask to the Wine; The Cask is no Part of the Wine, but if thou
breakest the Cask, thou inevitably wilt lose the Wine.


C. Sir, I make no Wonder now, that those Men who so much incline to this
wicked Heresy should make such a Noise against the decent Ceremonies, etc. of
our excellent Church.


M. Your Remark is just, Countryman. This was the chief Reason, that made that
Arch-Heretick, that uncircumsised Philistine, their infamous Mr. James Pierce,
who is one of the chief of these Infidels, I say it was chiefly his Inclination
to this Heresy that made him so loudly exclaim against the Festivals and
Ceremonies of our excellent Church; particularly against our Bowing, in the
public Assemblies, at the most solemn. and devout Mention of the Name of the
ever blessed JESUS.

This made him say, in his Vindication of the Dissenters, page 531. But we can
see no Reason why we should rather bow at the Name of Jesus, than at the Name
God, Jehovah, Christ, or Savior, which is the same with Jesus.

Therefore in Answer to this arrogant and insulting Infidel, and to all other
Enemies of our holy Christian Faith, I will instruct Thee my Christian Friend
concerning the true Reason of that laudable and truly Pious Custom, I mean that
of reverently Bowing in the public Assemblies of Christians, at the solemn
Mention of the Sacred Name of the holy, the ever-blessed and always to be
adored JESUS,

The Word JESUS signifies a Savior, and is the proper Name of OUR blessed
Savior, who had this Name given Him by the Angel, before He was conceived in
the Womb. So that this is his Personal Name. The Word Christ denotes only his
Office, as He was the anointed of God, which that Word signifies.

Now, there was in the Apostles Time, a Set of Heretics, as Cerinthus and his
Followers, who denied This Jesus to be the Christ. They said that Christ, or
the Holy Spirit (for they made no Distinction) dwelt in Jesus, as in other holy
Men. That it descended upon Him at his Baptism, but left Him on the Cross,
which made Him cry, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Against these
the Apostles wrote. And the Burden of their Arguments was to prove that THIS
Jesus is the Christ. As St. Peter said, ( Act. 2.36.) Therefore let all the
House of Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus whom ye have
crucified, both Lord and Christ. And St. John says, ( Joh. 20.31.) These Things
are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God.
And 1 John 2.22.) Who is a Liar, but he that denies that Jesus is the Christ?
Wherefore St. Paul says, ( Phil. 2.10.) That at the Name of JESUS every Knee
should bow. This was owning HIM to be the Christ. Which is truly to be a
Christian. And the Bowing at any other Name, does not show this. To bow at the
Name of God does not distinguish me from a Jew, a Mohammedan, or an Heathen, who
all acknowledge a God. And to bow at the Name of Christ or the Messiah, does
not show but that I may be a Jew, for they own a Christ, and expect him yet to
come. But they expressly deny that this JESUS is the Christ. And (alas!) we have
the same Cause of distinguishing our selves at this Day, where many that
shelter themselves under the Name of Christians, (ay, and good Protestants too)
are professed Deists, and blaspheme that worthy Name by which we are called,
saying, The old Romans did him Justice to punish Him with the Death of a Slave.
-- (Oh! cursed Blasphemy!) This is taken out of a Pamphlet entit'led, The
Growth of Deism, approved and recommended by the infamous and execrable Tyndal
in his blasphemous Book of the Rights; (which Book of the Rights is highly
valued by many of the Dissenters. -- Unhappy Men!) And we shall not distinguish
our selves from these by Bowing at the Name of God. Then again, the Quakers do
expressly deny the Man Jesus to be the Christ, they run in directly with the
Heresy of Cerinthus, and say that Christ or the Light dwelt in Jesus, they
make Christ and Jesus to be two. Therefore Bowing at the Name of Christ will not
distinguish us from these. But Bowing at the Sacred Name of Jesus, is owning
THAT Person, THAT Man Jesus to be the Christ. And nothing less than this
(owning Christ) can denominate a Man to be a Christian.

I don't say it is necessary or an Article of Faith always to bow at the Name
of Jesus. But I hope I may say from the Authorities and Reasons I have offered,
that there can be no Harm in it, far less any Superstition. That it is highly
decent and a Profession of our Christianity. And that THOSE who refrain from it
out of a Principle, give Grounds of Suspicion, that they are not sound in the
Faith, and lean more to the Deists, Socinians or Principles of the Quakers,
than to the Christian Church. At least they give Countenance to these Enemies
of Christianity, while they join with them in refusing this Public Attestation
which the Church gives of her Faith in the crucified JESUS. We bow or uncover
our selves at the Name of an Earthly King, when his Grants or Patents are read.
And may we not bow at the Name of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords!


C. Reverend Sir, I thank Thee for these pious Instructions and Exhortations.
And I thank my good God, that I have not so learned Christ, as like these
Infidels to be ashamed of the crucified Jesus. No, as for me and my House, we
will serve the Lord CHRIST. And while the infidel World, and Lukewarm
Christians are ashamed to own their God and their Redeemer, I will excite my
Christian Neighbors (by my Example) in the Assemblies of Christians for
Public Worship, humbly to bow down, and with godly Reverence adore, at the
solemn Mention of the Name of our great God, and our holy Redeemer, the Captain
of our Salvation; the holy, the adorable, and ever blessed JESUS.

Reverend Sir, before I take my leave, I entreat that I may join with Thee in
offering up this Hymn to the ever-blessed Trinity, which I have learned by
frequenting our most excellent Church, the Church of England.

To Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
The God whom WE adore,
Be Glory; as it was is now,
And shall be ever-more.

THE EPISTLE OF St IGNATIUS TO THE MAGNESIANS.
IGNATIUS who is also called THEOPHORUS; to the Blessed [Church] by the Grace
of God the Father in Jesus Christ our Savior: In whom I salute the Church
which is at MAGNESIA near the MAEANDER; and wish it all Joy, in God the Father,
and in Jesus Christ.
I. WHEN I heard of your well ordered Love and Charity in God, being full of
joy I desired much to speak unto you in the Faith of Jesus Christ. For having
been thought worthy to obtain a most Excellent Name, in the Bonds which I carry
about, I salute the Churches; wishing in them a Union both of the Body and
Spirit of Jesus Christ, our Eternal Life: As also of Faith and Charity, to
which nothing is preferred: But especially of Jesus and the Father; in whom if
we undergo all the Injuries of the Prince of this present World, and escape, we
shall enjoy God.

II. SEEING then I have been judged worthy to see you, by DAMAS your most
Excellent Bishop; and by your very worthy Presbyters BASSUS, and APOLLONIUS;
and by my Fellow Servant SOTIO the Deacon; in whom I rejoice, forasmuch as He
is subject unto his Bishop as to the Grace of God, and to the Presbytery as to
the Law of Jesus Christ; I determined to Write unto you.

III. WHEREFORE it will become you also not to use your Bishop too familiarly
upon the account of his Youth; but to yield all Reverence to Him according to
the Power of God the Father: As also I perceive that your Holy Presbyters do;
not considering his Age, which indeed to appearance is Young; but as becomes
those who are Prudent in God, submitting to Him, or rather not to Him, but to
the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ the Bishop of us All. It will therefore
behove you, with all Sincerity, to obey your Bishop; in Honor of Him whose
pleasure it is that you should do so. Because he that does not do so, deceives
not the Bishop whom he sees, but affronts him that is Invisible. For whatsoever
of this kind is done, it reflects not upon Man, but upon God, who knows the
Secrets of our Hearts.

IV. IT is therefore fitting, that we should not only be called Christians, but
be so. As some call indeed their Governor, Bishop; but yet do all things
without Him. But I can never think that such as these have a good Conscience,
seeing they are not gathered together thoroughly according to God's Commandment.

V. SEEING then all things have an End, there are these two indifferently set
before Us, Death and Life: And every one shall depart unto his proper place.
For as there are two sorts of Coins, the one of God, the other of the World;
and each of these has its proper Inscription engraven upon it; So also is it
Here. The Unbelievers are of this World; but the Faithful, through Charity,
have the Character of God the Father by Jesus Christ: By whom if we are not
readily disposed to Die after the likeness of his Passion, His Life is not in
Us.

VI. FORASMUCH therefore as I have in the Persons beforementioned, seen all of
you in Faith and Charity; I exhort you that ye study to do all things in a
Divine Concord: Your Bishop presiding in the place of God; your Presbyters in
the place of the Council of the Apostles; and your Deacons most dear to Me,
being entrusted with the Ministry of Jesus Christ; who was with the Father
before all Ages, and appeared in the End to us. Wherefore taking the same Holy
Course, see that ye all Reverence one another: And let no one look upon his
Neighbor after the Flesh; but do ye all mutually love each other in Jesus
Christ. Let there be nothing that may be able to make a Division among you; but
be ye united to your Bishop, and those who Preside over you, to be your Pattern
and Direction in the way to Immortality.

VII. AS therefore the LORD did nothing without the Father, being united to
Him; neither by Himself nor yet by his Apostles; So neither do ye do any thing
without your Bishop and Presbyters: Neither endeavor to let any thing appear
rational to your selves apart; but being come together into the same place,
have one Common Prayer; One Supplication; One Mind; One Hope; in Charity, and
in Joy undefiled. There is One Lord Jesus Christ, than whom nothing is Better.
Wherefore come ye all together as unto one Temple of God; as to one Altar, as
to one Jesus Christ; who proceeded from one Father, and exists in One, and is
returned to One.

VIII. BE not Deceived with Strange Doctrins; nor with Old Fables which are
unprofitable. For if we still continue to live according to the Jewish Law, we
do confess our selves not to have received Grace. For even the most Holy
Prophets lived according to Christ Jesus. And for this cause were they
persecuted, being inspired by his Grace, to convince the Unbelievers and
Disobedient that there is one God who has manifested Himself by Jesus Christ
his Son; who is his Eternal Word, not coming forth from Silence, who in all
things pleased Him that sent Him.

IX. WHEREFORE if they who were brought up in these ancient Laws came
nevertheless to the Newness of Hope; no longer observing Sabbaths, but keeping
the Lord's Day, in which also our Life is sprung up by Him, and through his
Death, whom yet some deny: (By which Mystery we have been brought to Believe,
and therefore wait that we may be found the Disciples of Jesus Christ, our only
Master:) How shall we be able to live Different from Him; whose Disciples the
very Prophets themselves being, did by the Spirit expect Him as their Master.
And therefore He whom they justly waited for, being come, raised them up from
the Dead.

X. LET us not then be Insensible of his Goodness; for should he have dealt
with us according to our Works, we had not now had a Being. Wherefore being
become his Disciples, let us learn to live according to the Rules of
Christianity: For whosoever is called by any other name besides this, He is not
of God. Lay aside therefore the Old, and Sour, and Evil Leaven; and be ye
changed into the New Leaven, which is Jesus Christ. Be ye salted in Him, lest
any one among you should be Corrupted; for by your Savor ye shall be Judged.
It is Absurd to Name Jesus Christ, and to Judaize. For the Christian Religion
did not embrace the Jewish, but the Jewish the Christian; that so every Tongue
that Believed might be gathered together unto God.

XI. THESE things, my Beloved, I write unto you; not that I know of any among
you that lie under this Error: But as one of the least amongst you I am
desirous to forewarn you that ye fall not into the Snares of Vain Doctrine: But
that ye be fully instructed in the Birth, and Suffering, and Resurrection of
Jesus Christ, our Hope; which was accomplished in the Time of the Government of
Pontius Pilate, and that most truly and certainly; and from which God forbid
that any among you should be turned aside.

XII. MAY I therefore have Joy of you in all things, if I shall be worthy of
it. For though I am Bound, yet I am not worthy to be compared to one of you that
are at Liberty. I know that ye are not puffed up; for ye have Jesus Christ in
your Hearts. And especially when I commend you, I know that ye are Ashamed, as
it is written, The Just Man condemns himself.

XIII. STUDY therefore to be confirmed in the Doctrine of our LORD, and of his
Apostles; that so whatsoever ye do, ye may prosper both in Body and Spirit; in
Faith and Charity; in the Son, and in the Father, and in the Holy Spirit; in
the Beginning, and in the End: Together with your most worthy Bishop, and the
well-wrought Spiritual Crown of your Presbytery, and your Deacons which are
according to God. Be subject to your Bishop, and to one another, as Jesus
Christ to the Father according to the Flesh; and the Apostles both to Christ,
and to the Father, and to the Holy Ghost; that so ye may be united both in Body
and Spirit.

XIV. KNOWING you to be full of God, I have the more briefly exhorted you. Be
mindful of me in your Prayers, that I may attain unto God; and of the Church
that is in Syria, from which I am not worthy to be called. For I stand in need
of your joint-Prayers in God, and of your Charity, that the Church which is in
Syria may be thought worthy to be nourished by your Church.

XV. THE Ephesians from Smyrna salute you; from which place I write unto you;
(being present here to the Glory of God, in like manner as you are,) who have
in all things refreshed me; together with Polycarp the Bishop of the
Smyrnaeans. The rest of the Churches, in the Honor of Jesus Christ, salute
you. Farewell, and be ye strengthened in the Concord of God; enjoying his
Inseparable Spirit, which is Jesus Christ.

To the MAGNESIANS.
St. Ignatius, the Author of this Epistle, was a Companion of the Apostles, and
was taught the Faith of Christ from their Mouths: Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 3.
Cap 36.
He wrote this Epistle with many other as He was on his way to Rome, where He
sealed the Truth (of what he had taught and written) with his Blood; being cast
to the wild Beasts: Thus dying a glorious Martyr of the ever-blessed JESUS.

His Martyrdom was about seven Years after the Death of St. John who wrote the
Revelations.

FINIS

