Concio ad Populum.

A Distressed PEOPLE Entertained with PROPOSALS For the Relief of their
Distresses. In a SERMON at BOSTON; made in the Audience of His EXCELLENCY the
GOVERNOR, and the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Massachusetts Bay, NEW ENGLAND. 12d.
^m. 1719.

By COTTON MATHER, D. D. and F. R. S.

Isai. lviii. 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed by B. GREEN, for BENJ. ELIOT, Sold at his Shop in
King Street. 1719.

PUblished by Order of His Excellency the GOVERNOR.

The Valley of Vision IN The Valley of Achor. BOSTON 12 d. Im. 1719.
MY Text, and a very Awful Text, this Day, is to be, the State of a
Languishing, if not a Perishing People; A People, which I would, and every Man
here should, Study to Serve with all possible Fidelity. To introduce and
enliven my Discourse, I must first Read unto you a Text found among the
Proverbs of Israel.

PROVERBS XXIX. 18. Where there is no Vision, the People Perish.

THERE was a famous Land, and One which was once the Glory of all Lands, the
Name whereof was, The Valley of Vision. But of this Land, we Read a very sad
Story; Isai. XXII. 5. It is a Day of Trouble, and of Treading down, and of
Perplexity by the Lord of H^sts, in the Valley of Vision.

IT has been the Felicity, wherewith Our Land has been sometimes highly
favored, That though it has been a Valley for the Low Circumstances of it, Yet
it has been a Valley of Vision, for the Discoveries of the Best Things with
which it has been Illuminated. Thy Land, O Immanuel!

I will not say, That it is come to be with Ours, as it was in that Land, when
it was Lamented, There was no open Vision. There is at least One Vision that is
Open to a General View, and is generally seen by all that have the sight of any
thing at all: A Vision so plain, that he may Run who Reads it. The Vision
which every One sees is this; A Day of Trouble, and of Treading down, and of
Perplexity by the Lord of Hosts, upon this Valley of Vision, and of Crying to
the Mountains. Every body sees and says, We are a Miserable People, if there be
not something done to help us.

BUT what will this Vision of our Misery signify, unless to Aggravate it, if it
be not accompanied with a Vision of the Remedy? And if there be no Seers to
propose the Ways and Means of our Deliverance out of our Perplexity?

A Wise Man under the Inspiration of GOD, has told us, what is like to become
of a People, that have no Vision among them; None to see what their Dangers
are, and see what Methods are to be taken for a Rescue from them.

THE Divine Sentence which we now find in the Lips of the King, may be in a
Singular and a Transcendent Manner applied unto an Evangelical Intention; And
therefore, Pious Cares, that our Ungospellized Places, may have the Vision of a
Glorious CHRIST and His Gospel, not witheld from them, are herein very
powerfully Recommended, very powerfully Animated. But there is no need of
laying such a Restraint upon our Understanding of the Proverb, and the
Interpretation, and this Word of the Wise. A Doctor who has written a
Commentary on the Proverbs, has thus glossed very well upon it. If there be no
One, that Studies to see the Will of GOD, and Labors by Teaching to make the
People see it; If there be no One that is Watchful to see the Faults of the
People, and is Careful by Reproving to make the People see them; how can it be
otherwise, but that they should Perish, or be drawn away, as the Original Word
is, from the Law of the Lord?

THE Text with such a Gloss upon it, furnishes me with a Commission for a Work,
which I had never been Overcome to Undertake, if the Love of my Country, with a
View of the Distress and great Perplexity which every One sees hastening upon
it, had not been as a Burning Fire shut up in my Bones, and I was weary with
forbearing, and I could stay no longer.

IN Pursuance of this Commission, I shall take this Opportunity, when the
Auditory has in it, the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Province, and a Convention of
those who are to be the Eyes of the People in the Wilderness: I shall take this
Opportunity, Humbly but Freely, to set before you, Some IMPORTANT THINGS, which
must be seen, and the sight whereof must be faithfully declared, if we would
not have our People for the Lack of a Necessary Vision, to Perish Wonderfully.

THOUGH of the Fifty Six Years which I have seen in a Weary Pilgrimage, I have
now been Thirty Nine in the Public Service of the Churches, and found more
than Five Times Seven Years ago, such a Favorable Reception with the Heads of
our Tribes, that I might bespeak Some Regard from the most of you, in those
Terms, Audit^ Senem Juvenes, quem Juvenem Senes audierunt; Let the Younger now
hearken to One in the Confines of Old Age, whom the Elder did in his Youth
sometimes hearken to: Yet I wave all such Consideration in asking for a due
Attention from you, and put all the Regard that I Expect unto my Message, upon
the Merit of the Cause, the Truth, and the Weight, and the Importance of the
Visions; and the Vast concern of the Matter to be now set before you.

NO Time shall be Lost: But the Demand Once and again made unto a Weeping
Prophet, What see Thou? This Demand, is what I must now Express my Zeal for
the Service of my Country, in giving a faithful Answer to.

WHAT see Thou? The First Thing that I see, is what every Man does also see.
But, Oh! Why does our Eye no more Effect our Heart, upon a Sight so very much
to be trembled at? There is no Vision more plain than this; That we are a
People falling into very Grievous Distresses, yea, Growing Distresses; And
Except Heaven do Speedily interpose to rescue us out of our Distresses, if we
do not Perish, yet we shall have a dreadful Convulsion come upon us; From the
Terrors whereof many will Meditate a Removal, and there will be a Great
Forsaking in the midst of the Land.

THIS is the General State of our Case. One of the more Immediate and
Comprehensive Causes for these our Distresses, is, In that, What might
invigorate our Trade, runs not among us, either in that Credit, or in that
Plenty, that our Occasions call for. The Blood in the Body Politic is
depauperated, and has too Hectic a Circulation.

BUT there are other Follies and Errors, which Operate in Conjunction with this
Infelicity, to bring us into very Uneasy Circumstances.

THESE are the Visions, of which I may say unto you, I am grieved in my Spirit,
in the midst of my Body, and the Visions of my Head have troubled me.

THERE is -- Who sees it not? -- the Wrath of the Lord of Hosts darkening our
Poor Land, in these our Unhappy Circumstances. But then, if we would not be
guilty of that Fault; Isai. XXVIII. 7. They err in Vision, they stumble in
Judgment: The very First Thing to be Seen and Spoke, must be this. There is
nothing so Requisite, as that Repentance, which will avert from us the Wrath of
an Incensed GOD, and that PIETY which will produce Good Terms with Heaven for
us: Nothing so Requisite, as what is prescribed, Lam. III. 40, 41. Let us
search and try our ways, and return unto the Lord; Let us lift up our Heart
with our Hands unto GOD in the Heavens. People under our Distresses are usually
liable to Impressions; Any Plausible Pretenders to help them in their
Distresses, will make Violent Impressions upon them. And People had need beware
of being this way imposed on. But, Oh! That our Distresses might more dispose
us, to receive Impressions from those Counselors of Peace, who from hence urge
us to Return unto GOD. In this Return to GOD, People must more Generally
Examine what is Amiss in Themselves and in theirs, and Resolve, As for me and
my House, we will Serve the Lord! Men in Stations must bear Testimonies for the
Things that are Holy, and Just and Good, and say to the wicked, Lift you not up
the Horn. Incessant Prayers must be made unto the GOD of all Grace, that He
would Appear for us in His Gracious Providence, Reform our Disorders, and send
in Reliefs unto us: Those Cries, Lord, we know not what to do, but our Eyes are
unto thee! And all that know how to do it, must plead the Great Sacrifice for
the Congregation, that a Reconciled GOD may in His CHRIST cause His Face to
Shine upon us, and Give Peace unto us.

VERILY, If this Course were followed, here would be a Jerusalem; There would
be a Vision of Peace among us. Yea, How much of the Holy City, would Come down
from GOD out of Heaven unto us! The Ministers of the Gospel, are by their
Office, the Watchmen of the People. These Watchers, if they are, and, Lord,
will thou not make them such! -- Holy Ones, they will be always on the
Look-out, that they may see what occurs to Expose our People unto the Anger of
GOD, by which we are Troubled; and that they may see what is to be done that
the People may be brought back into the Favor of GOD, which our very Life does
turn upon. Go on, and Prosper, O Men of GOD; and Men that have Understanding in
the Visions of GOD. And, O ye Stars, Do you Fight in your Courses, against
every Thing that brings Confusion upon us. Never, Never, Let it be said, as in
Lam. II. 9. Her Prophets find no Vision from the Lord.

BUT then, the Second Thing to be seen and said, and the Vision whereof does
with some Haste crowd in upon us, is This; There are ASSOCIATIONS necessary. It
is an Old saying, Plus vident oculi quam oculus. The more Eyes there are to be
employed in it, the better and clearer will be the Vision. The Sentence is of a
great Antiquity, Two are better than One. And for this cause, what I would
propose, is; That considerate Men would ASSOCIATE for the Discovery and the
Prosecution of what may be for Public Advantage. We must not Prophesy Good but
Evil concerning our People, if we have no Vision but M^ca^ah's for them, I saw
all Israel Scattered upon the Hi^ls. If Attempts for the Succor of our
Distresses, proceed no further than this; For Sensible Persons in a Scattered
way to discern and bewayl our Distresses, and not Unite in Endeavors that we
may all get out of them; This will be but a poor Proceedure. For a Sensible
Man, to Sit alone and keep Silence, or only complain unto a Neighbor as
Unactive as himself, This may do for Lamentations. But if there be no more, the
Case must be very Lamentable. Sirs, You must Get up and be doing; But know,
that without United Endeavors, there will be nothing done to any purpose for
our Deliverance. Associations of well-disposed Men, have had Mighty Successes,
and have done wondrously. SOCIETIES for the Reformation of Manners, did Good
and Great Things in our Nation, while they continued in their Vigor. Would a
Few Men of any Capacity now Associate upon that Intention, What may be done to
Serve the Kingdom of GOD, and bring the Maxims of the Everlasting Gospel, to be
Published and Received in the World? -- there would soon be a wondrous Effect
of it; And, behold, How Great a Matter a little Fire would soon Enkindle! But
what is now proposed, is, That some Numbers of Capable Men, would form
themselves into Societies, to pursue together this Enquiry, What may be done,
to rescue our Land out of the Distresses coming upon it, and render us an Happy
People? It were well, if this were made more a point of Daily Conversation, in
our Occasional Interviews with one another. Certainly it were a more Noble
Theme than those Insipid Impertinencies, which our Daily Conversation is too
commonly made Empty withal. But I press for a more Stated Conversation upon it,
in Societies, which if they cannot themselves put their own Projections in
Execution, may yet make their Offers of Excellent Things, to those by whom they
can be Executed; and be Indefatigable! My Friends, Allow me to address you
after this Manner. Associate your selves, O ye People, that ye may not be
broken in pieces; Take counsel together, that it may not come to naught. If GOD
be with us, you will do so!

WERE this Point once gained, Methinks, it might Supersede the rest that I may
have to insist upon. And indeed all the rest, I would have to be Looked upon,
as Things chiefly tendered unto the Enquiry of such Societies for the Belief of
the Public Distresses, when they shall be Associated.

I will, in the next Place pass to the Vision, and mention of a Third Thing,
which I must call, The Grand Expedient, for the preventing of the dreadful
Perplexities, which this poor Country finds growing upon it. That which I will
again and again call, The GRAND EXPEDIENT, is, Frugality, I say, Frugality; A
Discrete, a Righteous, a Needful FRUGALITY, in our Domestic Expenses: More
particularly, A Frugality in our TABLES, and a Frugality in our HABITS. That
Man has no Vision of the Country, or of its Interest, who does not see that our
People must Perish, if a wise Frugality be not more commonly practiced. We are
perplexed with anxious Thoughts, How we shall anon get our Bread, and maintain
our selves and our Families. But I may now say unto you, as in Prove. XX. 13.
Open thine Eyes, and thou shall be satisfied with Bread. If you will but so far
Open your Eyes, as to see, what Retrenchments of Expenses are absolutely
Necessary; so Necessary, that we shall now Sin grievously, if they be not
complied withal; you will soon be in a way to Satisfaction.

YOU may not Challenge me for trespassing on the Province of a Divine, or on
the Business of the Pulpit, if I insist upon a Prudent and proper Frugality, as
a Thing of the last Consequence for the welfare of our People. Our Great
SAVIOR, who is the very Wisdom of GOD, commended Frugality to His Disciples,
Even when He Miraculously Multiplied their Bread and their Fish unto them. And
without Frugality, WE cannot avoid that Iniquity, which will carry us into the
Paths of the Destroyer, and bring a Swift Destruction upon us. It has been one
of the Unjust Invectives used by some Frowards against your Ministers, That
while we Preach Faith and Repentance unto our People, Moral Honesty is
forgotten among them. Heaven and Earth will afford a Cloud of Witnesses, That
Moral Honesty, is with the greatest Fervency imaginable Preached unto you. But
a Frugality, is now to be particularly Preached, as that without which all
Moral Honesty must quickly fail among you. You will Mark what I say unto you!
Ingenious Men may and will project many Ways and Means, to retrieve the
Difficulties that are growing upon us. But all their Projections will Signify
nothing, and we can see none but a Palliative Cure, until we so Regulate our
Expenses, that we don't every Year continually run into Debt unto Other
Countries. How shall we avoid running into Debt unto Other Countries, if we don't
Moderate our Expenses of such Things as we fetch from thence, and are not able
to Pay for? Nothing but a Frugality can help us; We Bleed unto Death, until
that Sovereign Stiptick be applied unto us. Unless this One Thing be brought
into Practice, all our Projectors will be Physicians of no value, and our Fate
will be that; Jer. XLVI. 11. In vain shall thou use many Medicines, for thou
shall not be cured.

AS to our Tables, it is noted, that a great part of Mankind, are got into a
more Plentiful way of Living than was used in the form^r Ages; when a little
Cake of Flower mingled with Oil and baked in the Embers, was a Meal for a
Gentleman; and Five such Countries as the Land of Canaan, it is thought would
scarce yield the Flesh that is now devoured in One City of Europe. Doubtless,
we may have our share in that Overdoing, which this Plentiful way of Living has
got into. Be sure, if there were some Abatement of this, the Health of many, as
well as their Purse, would feel the advantage of it. As to our Habits, it must
be confessed, that there are several Places in the World, besides Geneva, which
set most imitable Patterns unto us, and it were to be wished, that we were more
Acquainted with them, and more conformed unto them. This you may be sure of; If
they that are worth little or nothing, will Cloathe themselves at the rate of
Five Hundred a Year: and if every One will count it an Intolerable Disgrace
unto them, that they should let any One appear more Splendid in their Clothing
than Themselves; This Pride, cannot but bring us low. A Sin of Sodom, that will
soon bring down upon us, the Vengeance of GOD!

MY Friends, I am an importunate Suitor unto you, That you will allow this
MAXIM to obtain among you. It Is ordinarily so, that People cannot lawfully
Grasp at what they cannot Honestly Pay for. Yea, It were well, That People in
their Expenses to Subsist themselves, would use to Pay as they Fetch, and not
run into Long Scores, that anon will not be easy to be answered. By this Caution,
they will be the better Able to know what they are Able to do, and seasonably
keep their Stops, and not indiscreetly go beyond themselves. It Is most certain,
If People will not be satisfied except they Eat, or Drink, or Dress, beyond
their Abilities, they do but serve diverse Lusts in doing so; GOD will not
Accept their works; A Righteous GOD will be offended at what they do. For
People to Run into Debt, without a Prospect of certainly and speedily getting
out of it, is no small Iniquity. But when People shall do so, to gratify their
Luxury or their Ambition, it is an Aggravation of the Iniquity. Those Virtues of
Sobriety and Humility, Oh! could I see them, I would Speak unto them; and I
would say, By you, O Noble Virtues, we should Enjoy great Quietness, and very
worthy Deeds would be done unto this Nation, by your Providence. But I turn to
my Hearers; And let me not complain with the Prophet, I said, I will get me
unto the Great Men, and will speak unto them; But they have altogether broken
the Yoke, and burst the Bonds. No, I will hopefully press for this; The Richer
Sort of People, will do well to set a Convenient Example unto the Poorer Sort.
We must contrive to make all Goodness a Fashionable Thing. Example, I say,
Example, will go a great way to bring a Laudable Frugality, as well as all
other Good Things into Fashion. But then, that the Rich in this World, may not
be taxed for a Sordid Avarice, the Charge of GOD is to be laid upon them, that
they be Rich in Good works. If they Frugally Save any thing, let them Liberally
Spend the more on Pious and Public Uses: and this will bravely Vindicate them
from dishonorable Imputations. At the same time, It is to be demanded of the
Poor, That they do not indulge an Affectation of making themselves in all
things appear equal with the Rich: But Patiently Submit unto the Difference,
which GOD the Maker of you Both, has put between you. My Brethren, Be content
with such Things as you have: And be convinced of This, That you may not have,
what you cannot have. If you will not Hearken to this Advice, I must say, The
Poor, They are foolish; they know not the way of the Lord, nor the Judgment of
their GOD.

WHAT I shall next proceed unto, may be an agreeable Appendix, unto what has
been thus urged for. But I will make a Distinct Article of it; It shall be the
Fourth Thing, which every one that has the least Vision of any thing at all,
must needs be Apprehensive of.

INDUSTRY, I say, INDUSTRY, which is indeed but a piece of Honesty, is what a
People that would not Perish, must keep alive among them. It is the Sluggard
unto whom it is foretold, Prove. VI. 11. Thy Poverty shall come in as a
Traveller; that is to say, Suddenly, and Unlooked for, Unthought of; And thy
want as an Armed Man; that is to say, Irresistibly, and so as to make thee fall
before it. Let our People be an Industrious People, and we shall be in a fair
way to be a Flourishing People. The Diligent Hand, I can tell you, it will do
Mavelous Things; Things, which will appear little short of Magical: [You know
the Story of it!] -- And the Blessing of GOD will attend it, with an Enriching
Efficacy. Truly, None that are Able to Work, should have the Bread of Idleness
allowed unto them. Our Long Winters afford more of Liesure to the Laborious
Husbandman, than he wishes for. But were not a greater Variety of well
contrived Winter-Employments for him, then to be wished for? If the Poor will
but Work, they would make a better hand of it in this Country, than in almost
any under the Cope of Heaven. What Pity it is, that such an Hive should have any
Drones in it! The Notable Behavior of some Industrious Women in this Town,
Industrious Women, perhaps Desolate and Forsaken Widows, who so credibly
Support themselves that they also Do Good unto those about them; Certainly, it
speaks unto all our People, who are not so absurd and silly, as to think, That
Business is more of a shame than Idleness. There are Thousands of Hands in this
Country, who are capable of being set about many Profitable works; of all their
Labor there would be a Pr^fit: And if they were in some other Parts of the
World, the Hands might not refuse to Labor; But here the Mean Thessalonian
Account must be given of them, They Work not at all.

THE Wisdom that would find out witty Inventions, to Employ these Hands, would
be justly Esteemed, The Wisdom that is from Above: The Good Fruits of it would
be wonderful! Industry in a fit Business, verily, It Would not only keep off
Poverty, but also contribute, unto all Good Manners, and preserve the Morals,
and preserve the Comforts, of People to admiration. If Men of ^ngenuity, would
bring it about, That People may more generally have Something to Do, and be
more Effectually Put upon the doing of it; They would certainly do a Better
Thing, than if they should bestow all their Goods to feed the Poor; It Would be
the Charity of more obliging Benefactors.

BUT, Oh! Suffer me a little, that I may show you what I yet have, to speak, on
the behalf of GOD, and of a People, who have as yet many of His Children among
them.

I beseech you, Do not say, I am a vain Visionary, if I tell you now, in the
Fifth Place, That there is to be seen some Hazard, of such Characters growing
upon us, as will be very Disagreeable, very Disreputable, to a People of our
High Profession. Sirs, Who sees it not? We are taught; Prove. XIV. 34. Sin is a
Reproach to any People. It is very sure. We are a People so Circumstanced in
our Profession of Religion, and so Lifted up to Heaven in the Glorious Gospel,
and the Means of Instruction and Salvation dispensed unto us, that if we be not
the Best People under Heaven, we are of all People the most inexcusable. I
pray, Let us Beware of those things which will be a Reproach to any People; but
more Indelibly and infinitely so to Us, than to any People; and which being
found among us, will render us a People more likely and more worthy to Perish,
than those Families of the Earth, which have not been so known as we have been.

AND now, in the Visions of GOD, I Lift up my Eyes, and Look, and behold, A
Flying Roll! It Is, A Catalogue of Things Greatly to be Apprehended among the
People of New England; Things greatly to be Deprecated. I will tell you what I
Read in the Catalogue.

ONE Thing to be Read, is this; It will have no good Aspect upon our People, if
it should be so, that a Public Spirit, should be a Lost, and a Rare Thing
among us; -- that he who would make a Speech to the Men of a Public Spirit,
must go into the Burying Places, and Speak among the Sepulchers. A sad Thing,
if in all Consultations for the Public, every Man take all his Measures from
his own Self, and nothing must be done Except this dear Self may be Served in
it! A sad Thing, if when Things are Calculated for the Good of the whole, every
Man will obstruct them, if he don't perceive his Personal Interest served in
them! And much more A sad Thing, if Men to serve a Personal Interest will Do
Things that shall be plainly for the Hurt of the whole! GOD Avert the Omens! --
I must confess, I have often heard Strangers, with abundance of Ill Nature, and
Ill Breeding to make Reflections on the Country, in which they have been
Hospitably treated. But, it would be a sad Thing, if it should be True, what I
have heard spoken by some Eminent and more Impartial Strangers; That the Old
and Vile Proverb, Every Man for himself, and GOD for us all, Seems to have been
made for this Poor Country, as much as for most in the World! Indeed Men of a
truly Public Spirit, usually meet with such Usages, as were enough to
discourage any thing that shall not be very Gracious, very Generous. But still,
Revive, O Public Spirit; Hold on, Hold out; Thy Reward is with thy GOD: If
Thou fail, we Perish unavoidably.

ANOTHER Thing to be Read, is this. It will have no good Aspect upon us, if it
should be so, that a Levelling Spirit get so much Head among us, that no Man
shall be in any thing Superior to his Neighbors, but his very Superiority
shall make him Obnoxious to Envious Indignities, Obnoxious to all possible
Deplumations and Defamations. How contrary this, to the Spirit of Christianity,
that says, In Honor prefer one another!

A Third Thing to be Read, is this. It will have no good Aspect upon us, if an
Unloving Spirit be so prevailing, the Piques, and Prejudices, and Emulations
and Animosities, are kept in a continual Operation; and it shall be noted, That
even where they have so much Wit as to make little Noise of their Feuds, yet
you shall often find the Families not so well-disposed unto one another, as
were to be desired? How contrary this, to the Spirit of Christianity, that
says, Be kindly affection'd one to another with Brotherly Love!

A Fourth Thing to be Read, is This. It will have a very bad Aspect upon us, if
it should be so, that a Neglect and a Contempt of Education, should bring out
Schools into Darkness, and the Laws about Schools be Evaded, Eluded,
Scandalously played withal. What a woeful Degeneracy, what an horred Barbarity,
shall we soon fall into! I have read a sad Story; 1 Chronicles. IV. 22, 23. There
was a set of Brave Men, who had the Dominion in Moab: These were Ancient
Things. But then their Posterity; These were Pott^rs, and those who dwelt
amongst Plants and Hedges. Truly, We have had Brave Men in our Ancient Times.
But shall we bring this upon our Posterity, that there shall not be One
Thorough-pac'd and Universal Scholar in the Country? That there shall not be in
a whole Town, a Man who shall be Clerk enough to Write common Sense in a short
Certificate! That there shall scarce be found a Man fit for to appear any where
but among the Hedges? I must say, with the Prophet, I am aston^shed at the
Vision; But I suppose, every one Understands it.

I was going in the Fifth Place, to Read this; What Aspect will it have, if
they that most Meritoriously Serve the Public, must be Perpetually Persecuted
with a Monstrous Ingratitude? If Ill Treats, Base Constructions, Vile
Calumnies, must always be the Country-Bay, of them who rather deserve Statues,
and would have had them among the more grateful Pagans! My Friends, What will
it come to?

I was going in the Sixth Place, to Read this; What Aspect will it have, if a
Scurvy, and a Nasty Liquor, as a flood sent out from the Mouth of the Dragon to
swallow up the Church in the Wilderness, threaten to drown all that is Good in
the Land; and there be much more that is needlessly thrown away in this
Loathsome Liquor, than what being well applied, would make us the Happiest
People in the World! Men of Israel, Help! Was there ever a more Ignominious
Ichabod? A Bewitching Bottel, is like to be the Urn, the Grave, of all our
Glory. It is incredible, it is astonishing! How much Mischief is threatened unto
this poor Country, by the Excess and Abuse of this besotting Liquor. Except you
can Substitute Something that shall be more Wholesome and Heartning, for
Laboring Men in the room of it, and make it a Dishonorable Thing, for this
Liquor to be the constant Resort on all Occasions, we Perish as contemptibly as
those Countries, which Histories tell us, the Vilest Creatures have given a
Subversion to.

BUT while in our Visions, we see so many. Evil Spirits walking to and fro in
the Earth among us, I may say unto you, in the Seventh Place, That of all the
Evil Spirits, that call for Powerful Charms to be laid upon them, there is One
that has more lately begun to do Strange Things among us. A Multitude of People
are Siezed with this Evil Spirit: the Possession, it spreads, it gains, it
carries all before it. The Evil Spirit throws the People, now into the Fire,
now into the Water, into very strange Extremes. And the People will Perish, if
no stop can be put unto it. The Devil, that is Come down in great Wrath upon
us; -- Oh! that the Time were but Short! -- is, The Spirit of Extortion, that
seems to have broken all the Chains of GOD upon it. We Extort upon One another,
every Month more and more, and it is come to that pass, Through the wrath of the
Lord of Hosts, the Land is darkened; no man spares his Brother; he shall snatch
and be hungry. There seems an Epidemical Resolution in almost all People, who
can do so, to cast off all Rules in Buying and Selling, Even the Necessaries of
Life, but that Rapacious One, To Extort upon one another as much as ever they
can. In the mean time, the Poor must be cruelly Pinched; This Capital CITY of
the Province must lose very many of its Inhabitants; Those who are not capable
of Raising the Price of what they have, or of what they do, as their Neighbors
can, are ground between the Milstones. A Loud Cry of Oppression, is going up in
the Ears of the Lord of Hosts; a Cry that reaches and pierces the very Heavens.
If the Cry be not stopped, it will fetch down an Horrible Tempest!

I have passed through Five Articles of the Things that must be seen for and by
our People, that they may not Perish; And now for a Sixth, Although our Lawful
and Rightful King GEORGE has not a more Loyal People in all His Dominions, than
His New-English Colonies, Yet I see cause, and therefore I take leave, to make
it an Article among the Admonitions of GOD; We have no Vision of our True
Interest, nor indeed can we do any other than Perish, if the Dependence of this
Province on the British Crown, be not wisely Considered and Acknowledged on all
Occasions. As it was with a Permission, yea, with a great Encouragement from
the Crown of England, that this Colony first issued forth from the English
Nation, so the Protection which we find from the British Crown, and the
Relation which we bear to the English Nation, is that wherein we have
Advantages that we should be wisely Thankful for. And though we have not now all
the Privileges, which we had, when the Colony was by the Royal Charter made a
Corporation, Yet now we are made a Province, we have those Liberties, for
which, I may use the Terms of the Jewish Rabbi; If the Heavens were Parchment,
and the Seas were Ink, they would not suffice to Write the Praises due to our
GOD. It Is not from the least Apprehension of the least Inclination in our
People, to shake off their Dependence, that I mention such a Matter, for I
believe there is not a Man of our People so Madly and Vilely disposed. But what
I mean, is, To have the sense of our Dependence Operate, in our obliging
Behavior toward those, through whom the Rays of the Royal Favor are
transmitted unto us. A due sense of our Dependence on the British Crown under
our inestimable Enjoyments, will certainly prevent those Weak and Rash Things,
which might provoke our King, and those under Him who have Power over us, to
deal with us, as a People unworthy of our Distinguishing Liberties. It has been
hitherto the singular Honor and Happiness of this Country that there have not
gone home from hence, near so many Remonstrances of a Disturbed Government, as
there have been made from the other Plantations. But now, for the Continuance
of this Felicity! --

SO long as they that are sent by the King, approve themselves Worthy of the
Royal Commission, and in the Faithful Discharge of it, both Obey their Great
Master, and Express His Royal Equity and Clemency, in th^^r Ca^e for the
Welfare of His People, certainly our good Carriage toward them, will be
requisite, that we may Adorn the Doctrine of GOD our SAVIOR, and avoid a
thousand unmentionable Miseries. Men may propose to make themselves Popular, by
a Spirit of Parsimony, or by a Spirit of Contradiction; But if such Men do not
keep their stops, they may unawares prove the Betrayers, and the Destroyers of
what they have most pretended for. Truly, Sirs, We are not over-stock'd with
Friends on the other side of the Atlantic; Enough and Enough there are,
disaffected unto all of our Enjoyments: Let us not frowardly throw away the Few
Friends we have: And above all beware of every Thing, that may represent us as
an Untractable People, fit for none but a Parlaimentary Cognizance. I say unto
you, A Parlaimentary Displeasure provoked against us, -- I hope, we shall never
do any thing of such a Tendency. It Is greatly to be trembled at! --

ALL possible good Husbandry, and even a Dutch Frugality, in our Public
Expenses, may go among the Things that cannot be spoken against. But yet, Wise
Men will have their Eyes in their Heads, and Enquire, Whether by Unseasonable
Saving in One Point, we may not foolishly throw away more than Ten Times as
much in another? Be sure, To be Peny-wise and Pound-foolish, will not be, To
guide our Affairs with Discretion. It Is well-known, That our Country has too
often brought Prodigious Expenses on themselves, by not being willing to
disburse very Little Sums in the True Season of them. Our poor People have
cause to Save what they can; But at the same time, they should beware, lest any
Pretending Money Savers, do in effect prove their most Expensive Adversaries.

BUT there is a Greater Abomination, which I turn yet again to take some notice
of.

THIS Passage, Where there is no Vision, the People Perish, is by Luther so
interpreted, The People run fierce, and mad, and mutinous. It Is what I am going
to speak of. A Grievous Vision is declared unto me!

IT is not unlikely, that grievous Distresses may grow upon us. We are already
got pretty far into them; A Distressed People! Now, it is Possible, (and its
being barely Possible, is enough to bespeak a seasonable Admonition!) that the
Distresses growing into an Extremity, there may be found some Raging Waves of
the Sea, which may be for the Raising of Mutin^^s; Mutinous, and Seditious, and
Rebellious Actions may be madly rushed upon. What cannot be without Horror
thought upon! Every Man that Fears GOD, and Honors the King, and Loves his
Brethren, will approve of what I am now going to say unto you. I do now
faithfully and solemnly say unto you; That if any Men shall be so wretched, as
to make such Criminal Mutinies, it had been good for the Country, yea, and for
themselves too, that these Wretches had never been born. They themselves must
Perish, as their Fathers Theudas and Judas did, in the Days of the Taxing, and
the People that are drawn away with them, will come to naught, and be
dispersed. The strokes which the Sword of Justice, must of necessity give them,
will produce a Pity in the Body of the People, for these unhappy Creatures.
But, if the Pity should, which you may be sure, It will not! -- proceed so far as
to Abet and Shelter them, the whole Country becomes Obnoxious to the dreadful
Resentments of the Crown, and of the Nation which we depend upon. And if, as
the Antiochians, after a mad Crew among them, had committed a cursed Outrage,
sent the most eminent Minister they had among them, to intercede at the Court
of the Emperor Theodosius for them, we should send never so Many and Mournful
Intercessors, it will be well if we come off so well as the poor People of
Antioch. O our dear People, Hearken, Hearken, to the Warnings of GOD. And let
none of you dare to do any Thing but what becomes the Peaceable in Israel; Be
careful to lead Peaceable Lives in all Godliness and Honesty; and let Kings and
all that are in Authority, have all the Obedience that the Law prescribes, paid
unto them.

I am now arrived unto a Seventh Article, of those Things in which it cannot be
said, Ye have seen a Vain Vision: And it shall Conclude the Entertainment I
intended for you.

ANY Man may, without much of a Second Sight, easily Foresee such a Thing as
this; That This is not a Country where Great Estates are in our Days are to be
Looked for. It Is indeed a Geographical Observation, and the Divine Providence
is much to be Observed and Admired and Adored in it, That Countries which are
much accommodated with Good Harbors, are such as GOD has most furnished with
the Materials of Trade, and Wealth must by consequence flow in upon them. And
therefore I know not what this Well-harboured Country may see in future
Generations, after the People shall be greatly Multiplied! But in Our Time,
such is the Constitution of the Country, that many Great Estates must not be
soon raised in it. And if here and there One should rise to any thing, like
what is more frequent in some Other Places, GOD will Write a, Vanity, upon it
in such Legible Dispensations, as will proclaim unto His Children, Depart, For
this is not your Rest; It is Polluted! Most certainly, The Voice of our GOD
unto the People of New England, is that; Jer. XLV. 5. Seek thou Great Things
for thy self? Seek them not. Sirs, If you can Live Decently, without any
creepling Circumstances upon you, and can bring up your Children so as to make
a Present of a Well-cultivated Offspring unto the Succeeding Generation, and
can Do Good unto those about you; Be contented; Be satisfied; Be glad, you can
come off so; Be not Eager for any more. If you Make haste to be Rich, and
Resolve that you will be Rich, you may much sooner fall into many foolish and
hurtful things, than come at, what you are so set upon. Religion was the First
and Main Design of this Plantation; and Brown Bread and the Gospel good sort,
was the Word among the Planters. Let us be a Religious People, and we are sure
of being Fed with a Food Convenient for us. If we Seek First the Kingdom of
GOD, Our dear SAVIOR has assured us, of so much to be added unto us. Let that
Competency be enough! An Insatiable Appetite after more, will Plunge Men into
Inconveniences beyond all Ennumeration.

THUS have I in the Fear of GOD, and the Love of a People that must not Perish,
declared unto my Countrymen, What I have Seen; yea, and I declare unto you,
The Effect of every Vision is at hand. What I have done, I have done under the
Awe of that word; Son of Man, I have made thee a Watchman; Hear the word at my
Mouth, and give them warning from me.

AND now, Sirs; As Jacob said unto his Sons; Why do ye look One upon another? I
will say, Why do ye continue like People in a Maze, or Cattle that are Stung
with an Hornet? GOD forbid, That our People should now only Chafe, and Vex, and
Annoy One another: Or be so Humoursome that no Good Proposal shall be accepted,
unless the Proposer be of such or such a Party. What? Shall we remain Hungry
and hardly bestead, and fret our selves, and curse, and look upward; and there
be nothing but only Trouble and Darkness, and D^mness of Angash among us! Away
with all such Things! Oh! Deadly Symptoms! A less Inundation than what we are
threatened withal, caused the Creatures that most worry One another to sit all
down quietly together, upon an Hill in Somersetshire, and lay aside their
Antipathies. I beg it of you, I beg it of you; Oh! For the Love of GOD, Let us
treat One another Lovingly, Patiently, Handsomely; And Unite, Oh! Unite, in
Combinations, to set forward what may yet make us an Holy and an Happy People.

WHAT I have now offered, I know not how it will be Received; Be it, as GOD
shall please, I shall have the Comfort of a, Liberavi Animam, abiding with me.
I say again, I have delivered my Soul!

FINIS.

