Early Piety again Inculcated From those famous Words of SOLOMON, ECCLES. XII.
1. Remember now thy CREATOR in the days of thy Youth. IN A SERMON Preached to a
Society of YOUNG MEN, in Boston, July 10. 1720.

By Benjamin Colman.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, for D. HENCHMAN, and J. EDWARDS, and Sold at
their Shops. 1720.

Early Piety again Inculcated.
ECCLES. XII. 1. Remember now thy CREATOR in the days of thy Youth.


THE Words are among some of the last of the wise Solomon's; his dying Precept
and Counsel (as it were) to Young People. He was now Old, and happily recovered
to GOD by His Grace, from whom he had fallen after a pious Education, and a
very gracious beginning of his life: And now in the day of his repentance, and
after such an experience both of good and evil, of wisdom and folly, as scarce
any one ever had the like before him, he addresses this Exhortation to Young
People, to remember their Creator now in the days of their Youth; enforcing it
with an Argument which he had felt the reason of and which became his Age and
sad Experiment, -- while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh when
thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them.

LET Young People therefore hear with Reverence the words of the Preacher, the
Royal Preacher, King of Israel; who in the close of this his practical and
penitential Sermon warns and admonishes them; counsels, directs and charges
them; Remember now thy CREATOR in the days of thy Youth.

THIS is the Instant and important Duty of Young People; And I shall endeavor
here to show them, 1. That they have a CREATOR. 2. What it is to remember Him.
3. That they must remember Him now, in the days of their Youth.


1. I am to show thee, O Young Person, that thou have a CREATOR, and who is thy
Creator. The Great GOD is the CREATOR of all things* GOD that made the World
and all things in it, who is Lord of Heaven and Earth, He is thy MAKER; and has
made of one Blood all Nations of men that dwell on all the face of the earth,
Act. 17.24. The LORD that stretches forth the Heavens, and lays the
foundation of the Earth, and who forms the Spirit of man within him, Zech.
12.1.

THERE is but One GOD and no other beside Him. The LORD JEHOVAH is the One true
and living GOD. And by Faith we understand that the Worlds were made by Him.
Isai* 44.34. Thus says the LORD thy Redeemer, and He that formed thee from the
womb; I am the LORD that makes all things, that stretched forth the Heavens
alone, that spreads abroad the earth by my self. Jer. 10.11, 16. The god's
that have not made the Heavens and the Earth, even they shall perish from the
earth and from under these heavens; the Portion of Jacob is not like them, for
He is the FORMER of all things, the LORD of HOSTS is his name: He has made the
Earth by his power, He has established the World by his wisdom, and stretched
out the Heavens by his discretion.

MOSES informs us in the manner of our Creation: Genesis 2.7. The LORD GOD formed
Man out of the dust of the earth, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of
life, and Man became a Living Soul. And He who made the first Man is the
Creator of every Individual, Son or Daughter that has proceeded from him, or
that are yet to be born. We must own our selves the Divine Workmanship, and bow
down and kneel before the LORD our Maker. Psalm. 100.3. Know ye that the LORD he
is GOD, it is He that made us and not we our selves. When we look upon our
curious Bodies, we must lift up our admiring eyes to Heaven and say, Joh, 10.8.
Thine hands have made me and fashioned me round about. And when we look in upon
our Souls, which as plainly perceive their own Existence powers and operations,
as our Eyes survey the form and parts of our Bodies, we must again adore before
the Father of Spirits, the Creator of Angels and the Former of the Spirit of
Man within him, and say, Jer. 38.16. The Lord lives that made us this Soul.

So has the LORD our Maker spoken of Himself, and revealed Himself to us; that
we may know that we have a Creator, and Who He is.

II. I come to Enquire, WHAT it is for us to remember our Creator? And to be
sure it is here a word of great Import and Significancy, and means much; for it
stands for every thing that the Young Man owes to the GOD of his Being and
Life. More particularly,

1. It means that we be often thinking of the Great and Blessed BEING, who has
made us and all things, and that we do always preserve and keep in our minds a
lively and religious Apprehension of His Being, Blessedness, Perfection and
Glory.

RELIGION very much consists in and is preserved by our having right and
honorable tho'ts of God, and setting Him always before us. And First,

1. WE must steadfastly believe and strongly realize His Being; which is
supposed in the Act of remembering Him; for how can we remember that which we
suppose not to be, or question the Being of? Wherefore as the Apostle says,
Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God must first believe that he is. Nor is this the
easiest thing in the World for us to do, though it be one of the plainest things
in the World to be proved, that GOD is: Because there is abundance of unbelief
and infidelity in the hearts of the Children of Men, which is one great part
and proof of the Corruption of our Nature; Psalm. 14.1, 2. The fool has said in
his heart there is no God, they are corrupt, there is none that do understand
and seek God. Job. 35.10. None says, where is God my Maker --. Psalm. 10.4. God
is not in all their thoughts. This proves an unaccountable Atheism lurking in
the hearts of Men. For the first thing in Religion is that, Isai. 17.7. A man
shall look to his Maker, and his eyes have respect to the Holy One of Israel.
And what irreligion can be greater than that, Isai. 51.13. And forgettest the
Lord thy Maker, that has stretched forth the Heavens, and laid the foundations
of the Earth. Now when we have realiz'd the Being of God, and fixed that first
Principle deep in our hearts, which God Himself must do for us; then,

2. WE must always bear in mind What He is; that so we may ever maintain worthy
Idea's of Him, and always think becomingly and reverently of His Glorious Name.
We must therefore form our Conceptions of the Great GOD from His holy Word,
wherein He has spoken in a manner worthy of Himself, the things that are true
of Himself; for the Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God,
and has revealed them unto us. We must accordingly believe that God is the
Immense, Infinite, Eternal and Unchangeable Spirit, Self-existent, and Blessed
for evermore, the first Cause, Author and Creator of all things, and the
Preserver and Governor of all; for whose Glory all things are and were
Created, and in the Being and Government of all things His Perfections and
Glories do shine forth: therefore that He is (as is clearly seen from the
things that are made) a Being most High, most Wise, Almighty, most Good, most
Holy, True and Just. And we must ever remember that this blessed and glorious
and fearful BEING is ever present with us, and that we are always before Him.
Unless we have these great worthy tho'ts of GOD, it will be no honor done him
if we remember him; for an unworthy though it of Him is to do him dishonor; as for
instance, should we own his Being and withold any divine Attribute and Glory
from Him: should we say as they did -- How does God know? and is there
knowledge in the most High? The Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of
Israel regard it? -- this were to frame to our selves a defective, lame and
imperfect Deity; and in effect to think him altogether such a one as our
selves, and sink him down into an Idol or Image; a god that is good for
nothing, neither great, nor to be feared, nor to be trusted in. Wherefore if we
would at all remember our CREATOR, we must be sure to bear in mind a very
worthy Idea of Him; What he is in himself; how glorious and fearful his Name
is, And then,

3. As our Text requires me to add, We must remember what He is to us: Thy
CREATOR. We must consider him in the Relations wherein he stands to us; without
which we had as good never remember him at all: for without this we shall
neither honor him nor benefit our selves by any remembrance of him. Neither
indeed can a Creature remember his Maker, but the relation he herein stands to
God must be a principal thing in the remembrance. Whenever we remember God it
must be as our Maker. Preserver, Lord, King and Judge; our Savior, Redeemer,
and great Benefactor: that we have received our Being from him, and in him we
live and move and have it; and that God has made us for himself, formed us for
his own Praise: that we are not our own, nor to live unto our selves, but that
we depend on God, and must account to him, and can be saved only by him. This
is the acknowledgment of God which the HOLY GHOST has led us into: Thou O Lord
art our Father, and we all are the work of thy hand. We are the clay and thou
our potter: We are his People and the sheep of his hands, for of him and to him
are all things. He is the God of the Spirits of all flesh: in his hand is every
living Soul, and the breath of all mankind. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is
our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King. He is our Father in Heaven.

Thus to remember our CREATOR implies our thinking often of the Great and
Blessed Being who has made us and all things; and that we do always preserve
and keep in our minds a lively and religious apprehension of his Being,
blessedness, perfection and glory: that God is, and what he is in himself, and
what he is unto us. Not a day, nor yet an hour should pass us, without some
actual remembrance of our blessed Maker, Preserver, Judge and Savior. And we
should never pass a though it of this great and blessed Being, without a most
profound veneration, fear and love.

Which leads me to say,

2. THE remembering of our CREATOR must be with a Mind and Soul duly affected
with the glorious Idea of Him, and toward the glorifying him. We must remember
him with admiring and adoring Souls; we must remember him with a holy fear and
dread; we must remember him with love, gratitude and delight of Soul; The
desire of our Souls must be unto his Name and to the remembrance of him: Our
meditation of him should be sweet unto us, and we should be glad in the Lord.
We must remember him and trust in him, whose Name is a strong Tower; the
righteous flies thereunto and are safe. Psalm. 20.7. Some trust in chariots and
some in horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our God. We must
remember who and what he is and resign to him in all that He in his Governing
Wisdom orders for us. As Elihu teaches, Job. 26.2, 3. Suffer me a little, and I
will show thee that I have yet to speak on God's behalf; I will fetch my
knowledge from afar, and will ascribe righteousness to my Maker: He that is
perfect in knowledge is with thee. In a word, We must remember our CREATOR and
device our selves to him for ever; make our Choice of him for our God and
portion, and the Consecration of our selves to him, to his service and glory
here and hereafter believing in his Covenant-faithfulness, and looking for his
sure mercies, and the Everlasting Enjoyment of Him in supreme glory and
blessedness. So the Psalmist remembered God upon his bed, and meditated on him
in the night watches; his soul followed hard after him, and in the shadow of
his wings he did rejoice, Psalm. 6.3.7.

THIS is to remember God with the religious veneration of Creatures that are
made capable of knowing him and loving him; and O how thankful should Sinners
be that they may and can thus remember their Holy CREATOR; remember him and not
be troubled, not be confounded and overwhelmed at the remenbrance of him.

IN this Affective sense we pray that God would remember us; that he would
think upon us for good according to our needs, remember that we are dust;
remember us with the favor that be bears unto his chosen: remember all our
offerings, and accept our burnt-sacrifices; remember for us his tender mercies
and his loving kindness, which have been ever of old. And if this be for God to
remember us, then for us to remember him can mean nothing less than that we
bear upon our minds and hearts, a due and lively sense of his Excellent Majesty
and Greatness, of his Poliness and Purity, of his Justice and Truth, of his
Grace and Mercy (the glory wherein he passes before sinful Men) and render him
those pious Affections which these Glories of his exalted Name call for from us.

IN this latitude and extent the Text is to be understood, and such let thy
Remembrance of God thy CREATOR always be: Sanctifying to thy Soul, and having
the Government of thy Life: This is that remembering of God which only is worthy
of Him, who searches the heart and who demands it of us; who is a jealous God
and will not be mocked; and if thou say -- Behold we know it not, -- does not
he that pondereth the heart consider it? and he that k^^^eth thy Soul does not
be know it? and shall be not render to every man according to his Works?

AND thus we have considered the Import of the Duty prescribed in the Text,
What it is to remember our CREATOR. I shall now add a few words with respect to
our manifes Obligations to do so. And First,

1. WHAT serve our Eyes and the visible Works of God for, but to remember us of
our Creator? As soon as we do but observe and consider the Light which God has
made for us to see by, and our Eyes the light of the body by which we see, and
the various beauteous (...) which surround us and present themselves unto our
sight; what must we first think or but the GOD that made all these things? made
them in the elegant Order wherein they are and as in the elegant Form wherein
we behold our selves? that is to say, the first thing that occurs to the
rational Mind, upon his surveying his own Body and the visible Universe is the
Greatness and Glory of the Creator. This the Man is instantly put in mind of,
namely Of the GOD that made him and all these things. For the Heavens declare
the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handy work, day unto day
utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge, Psalm. 19.1, 2. That
Person is stupid and brutish therefore that live in such a World as this is,
and minds not the invisible things of GOD, which are so clearly seen from the
things which are made, even His Eternal Power and Godhead. We are utterly
without excuse if we do not know God and glorify him as God, with admiring and
thankful Souls; because that which may be known of God is manifest in these his
Works; wherein God has showed of himself to us, even the glories of his
Incorruptible GODHEAD, Romans 1.20.

WHO can behold the Sun when it shines, or the Moon walking in brightness, and
not own the GOD that is above? Or when we consider God's Heavens the work of
his singers, the Moon and the Stars which he has ordained; must we not admire
the Greatness and Condescension of God in what he has done for us Psalm. 8.
Init. We must either make God's of the Hosts of Heaven and worship them, as the
Heathens foolishly did, to the infinite dishonor and offense of the Great
CREATOR; or we must fall down and adore Him, who has divided them among all the
Nations of Men that dwell on the face of the whole Earth. Deuteronomy. 4.19. Why has
God spread out the sky over us, which is (as He Himself says of it) like a
Molten looking-glass, but that when we look up into it we may see the CREATOR,
the Face of GOD in it. Every Work and every Creature of GOD which Man beholds
with his natural eye, loudly proclaims to him the Creators Being, perfections
and glories, and bids him to remember Him. When God had gone through a long and
sublime Account of his Works, in one part and another of the visible Creation,
then Job cries out -- Now mine eye seeth-thee. The Psalmist could not look upon
these, but as one dazzled with the Creators Glory, he breaks out, Psalm. 104. O
Lord my God thou art very great, thou art clothed with honor and majesty, who
coverest thy self with light as with a Garment; who stretchest out the Heavens
as a Curtain; who lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, who makes
the clouds his chariots, and walks upon the wings of the wind: the Glory of
the Lord shall endure for ever, the Lord shall rejoice in his works. And again
he calls upon the Sun and Moon and Stars of light to praise their MAKER; yea
upon Mountains and all Hills, Eeasts and all Cattle, as well as Kings of the
Earth and all People.

BUT we need not look off from our own Bodies, to be put in mind of GOD. Let us
but look in one another Faces, and observe their beauty and comely proportion,
the Grandeur and Majesty which is visible therein, and can we forget the GOD
that has formed us what we are? Who framed these elegant Bodies, this sublime
Countenance, these seeing eyes, and hearing ears, and speaking mouths, and
agile hands? He that first made he Earth, he only could thus refine it and
animate it. Remember I beseech you Him that his formed you of the clay! You
must forget your selves sooner than you can your CREATOR. Or, were you deaf and
blind and dumb and lame, yet there would remain eno' to remember you of GOD.
Job. 10. 10. Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and have fenced me with
bones and sinews. Psalm. 139. 14. I will praise thee, for I am fearfully and
wonderfully made; mavelous are thy works and that my soul knows right will.

Now what serve these visible Works of God to us, if not to remember us of Him
from day to day? these call upon, and admonish us from day to day to keep him
ever in our minds, for they keep him ever in our sight; and our eyes should
affect our hearts.

2. WHAT serve our Souls for, and those rational Powers wherewith God has
endowed us, but to remember him. There is a Spirit in Man, and the inspiration
of the Almighty gives us understanding. This we are as sensible of, and the
operations of our living Souls are as evident to us, and to one another, as the
light of the Sun is to our eyes, and the forms of every Creature. We think, we
speak, we reason and discourse, and form Idea's of things we never saw, and
whereof bare matter, and outward form can give us no intimation. We find within
our selves the power of remembering and recollecting, calling things to mind and
keeping them in mind. Who now gave us this power, and made us for this? should
He not be remembered by us? Can we consider this spiritual power in us, and not
say, Where is God my Maker, who has taught me more than the beasts of the
Earth, and made me wiser than the fowls of Heaven? Job. 35.10. How well does he
deserve to be degraded from this honor and glory wherewith he is crowned, (
made but a little lower than the Angels, an Angel in flesh) that remembers not
the God that made him this Soul! Let him lose that Soul which he so debases!
let him be turned down from his Throne, like Nebuchadnezzar, among the beasts
of the Field, and let a beasts heart be given him! let him be driven from his
dwelling with Men, and let him eat grass as an ox, and his hairs like theirs be
his clothing! let him wear no more a humane shape, but cover him with Eagles
feathers, and change his fingers for birds claws; till he know and bless the
most High his Maker, and honor Him that lives for ever and ever.

O Man, endued with a Heaven-born immortal Soul, a spiritual Intelligence, that
knows and wills, and thinks and reasons and resolves, that recollects it self
when it pleases, and dwells on what it will, and contemplates and searches into
thy self and other things as thou please; can thou or dare thou to forget
thy Creator, who gave thee these powers? From within thy self thou know in a
very great measure what GOD is, the Living, Eternal, Immortal, Immense Spirit,
most Wise, Holy and Good; Almighty, most Perfect, most Blessed, the Father and
Former, and the only Portion of Immortal Spirits? And cans thou be and think
and ever forget this Blesed BEING, whose Offspring thy Soul is, and in whom
thou do live and move and have thy being? Can HE be ever far from thee? is He
not ever nigh unto thee? in thy heart and nouth! He only searches and knows
thee, and understands thy tho'ts afar off: there is not a vord in thy tongue
but he knows it altogether: whither will thou go from his spirit, or whither
can thou fly from his presence? He is ever present with thee, and should he
not be so to thy Mind.

THAT only among the Creatures here below can ascend to him, can know and love
and laud him, receive and entertain Him: What House can we build him, or where
is the place of his rest? He dwells not in temples made with hands, but in
living, holy, gracious Minds of his own preparing, sanctifying and
enlightening! Thy Mind, thy Memory, thy Adoring Though It is something like His own
Simplicity, Spirituality and Immensity, a spacious Palace for his glorious
Residence; lift up your heads ye Heavenly Gates, and be ye lift up ye
Everlasting-Doors, and thy CREATOR, the King of glory shall come in! HE that
made thee this Soul, in his own Image, and for his own praise; here ever to be
remembered and adored.

WILL thou not remember thy MAKER, O my Soul; who formed thee above matter and
all corruptible things! who formed thee vaster than the Universe thou see,
for thou can add the Heavens of Heavens unto the visible ones in thy enlarged
tho'ts Who made thee swifter and brighter than the rays of light, so that in
one moment of time thou can pass the fixed Stars up to the Father of Light?
That Soul deserves to lose the pover of thinking any more for ever, except it
be on its own Guilt; that does not employ it tho'ts on GOD, and how he may be
glorified and enjoyed by him: and well does he deserve to lose the faculty and
power of remembering any thing, but his own wretchedness and misery, who forgets
his Maker.

IN a word, Each noble Faculty of the Humane Soul is made for GOD; the Mind to
know him, the Will to choose him, the Conscience to act in his Name and by his
Authority, the Memory to keep him always in mind, and every Affection of the
Soul to place on him; And not to think of, or not to keep in mind, this great
and blessed BEING; not to remember Him evermore with the highest love, desire
and delight; how unnatural and inhumane and impious a thing must it be in our
own Consciences! What can be more ungrateful and base? It is worse than
brutish, it is devilish. It is a vile abuse of our selves, for as One says, Our
Memory is as a noble Cabinet made for the laying up this Excellent Jewel in,
our Great Creator, his Word and Works and Will; and shall we fill it with straw
and pebbles, with dung and filth! What an abuse is this to God who made us
these living Souls and made us for himself. Once more,

3. WHY has God reveald Himself to us in his Holy Word, the Inspired and
written Scriptures of Truth; and why has he instituted and appointed to us the
Ordinances of his Worship, but that we should always preserve a believing
thankful and devout Remembrance of him.

THAT we might know him and not forget him, he has written to us the great
things of his Law and Gospel, his Great works of our Creation and Redemption;
for these begin and finish the Old and New Testament, which are given us by the
Inspiration of GOD. These are put into our hands, and laid open before our
eyes, and are written for our learning, and we are commanded to read in them
day and night, and to search them daily, and to keep in memory the things that
are spoken to us, and not turn away from Him that speaks from Heaven. Here we
read of God's Being, his Name, his Nature; Perfections, Glories, Works, and of
his Law, Covenant, Promises and Threatenings, what we are to believe concerning
him, and what duty he requires of us; how he will be worshipped served and
glorified by us here, and how we may come to enjoy him for ever.

MAN by his Apostasy from God had sadly lost the knowledge of him. The World by
wisdom knew not God: and as for tradition it it could not keep up the
Remembrance of him. In pity and mercy to our necessity he therefore made a
Revelation of Himself, his Truth and Will unto us; for we needed a Dayspring
from on high to visit us and enlighten our darkness, and guide our feet in the
way of holiness, spiritual duty and worship. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These words which I
command thee this day shall be in thy heart, and thou shall teach them
diligently unto thy CHILDREN: and talk of them when thou sit in thy house,
and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou
risest up: and thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, and thou shall
write them upon thy posts --, and beware lest thou FORGET the LORD thy GOD.

AND that we may the more effectually preserve a religious Remembrance of GOD,
the Ministry and Preaching of the Word is instituted to us; and God's Sabbaths
and the Ordinances of his House are appointed to us for the more solemn
Remembrance of Him. And all little eno' to prevail on a few of us to remember
our Creator, in any suitable manner.

THE Sabbath we know was from the beginning appointed for the Remembrance of
our CREATOR thereon. It is a Holy Memorial of his Rest. And the House and
Worship of God was from the days of Moses, and is to the end of the World, to
keep God in our minds: therefore we come to Pray before him and Praise him, and
hear his Word, and observe the Memorials and Remembrances which he has ordained
to us of Himself.

HIS Sanctuary, his Tabernacle, his Temple in Israel were the place which he
chose and hallowed to put his Name there. 1 Kin. 8.16. Exodus 20. 24.2 Sam.
7.13. The Passover Ordinance to the Children of Israel, was in a special manner
to them a Remembrance of the LORD their GOD; of His Redeeming power and mercy,
and Covenant-kindness and faithfulness to them, and of their holy awful Bonds
to him. Exodus 12.14. This day shall be a memorial to you for ever. 13.9. And
thou shall show the reason of it to thy Son after thee, and it shall be a sign
unto thee upon thy hand.

AND so in like manner, the Preaching of the Gospel with us from Sabbath to
Sabbath, and the Administrations of the Sacraments of Christianity from time to
time, are to revive upon us, and keep in us a lively and affectionate
Remembrance of God our Creator and Redeemer. Therefore has he required that
from Sabbath to Sabbath all flesh should come and worship before him; and in
effect has he said of every Ordinance do this in Remembrance of Me. But of the
Word Preached, as I was saying, what has a more natural and powerful tendency
to keep up the Remembrance of GOD than this? 1 Cor. 15.2. By which ye are
saved, if ye keep in memory what I preached unto you, (which unless you do) you
have believed in vain. 2 Pet, 1.12, 13. Wherefore I will not be negligent to
put you always in remembrance of these things, though ye do already know them:
yea I think it meet as long as I am in this tabernacle to stir you up, by
putting you in remembrance; that so after my decease you may ever remember them.

THUS the Revelation that God has given us in his Word, the Ordinances of his
Worship, the Ministry of his Word, all serve to this one End and are intended
by God thereunto; namely, to remember us of our Creator and Savior, and cause
us to remember him with a becoming devotion and solemnity and to walk before
him in all holy Obedience for ever and ever.

AND so I have briefly shown from the visible Works of God, from the nature of
our own Souls, and from the Revelation that God has made of Himself and his
Will to us in his Word, that it is our duty to remember Him our CREATOR.

I come now unto the Third and last Head under the Doctrine, and the first and
principal scope of the Text, which is,

III. THAT thou must remember Him NOW, in the days of thy YOUTH. Remember now
thy Creator in the days of thy Youth. Now instantly, now in Youth eminently and
more especially; Begin now; do not delay, defer or put off, till some uncertain
hereafter, and particularly not to Old Age, the Evil days, which the Text
speaks of afterward.

THE Words do not mean to limit the Remembrance of GOD to our Youthful days
only: nor to allow us to forget him in riper Age or Old Age; or if we have
forgotten God in our Youth we may not think that the Text does not concern us:
It is the perpetual duty of Man in every Age of his life to remember his
Creator, and it is as much incumbent on him in Old Age as in our Early Life:
but the meaning of the Text is, that Youth is the time to begin this duty in,
and that it is of great importance to the whole Life that God be remembered
then. Remember thy Creator NOW whether thou be Young or Old, but especially if
thou be YOUNG begin now to do it.

1. FIRST then let me say, We must remember GOD our MAKER now, whether we be
Young or Old; whether we have remembered or forgot him in days past; yet
instantly and for all times to come let us preserve a devout remembrance of
him. Now speaks the present time, immediately: and also from henceforth, always
hereafter, through all our future days. Time is in a constant course and
succession; Now is gone in the breath wherein it is uttered; and yet Now is
ever present with us, and ever passing away. It ever continues the same.

NOW is a little Image of Eternity; it is the first and the last, ever existing
and ever the same. When GOD, the ETERNAL, pleased to make known himself to
Moses, as a Man is known by his Name, he said, Exodus 3.14. I AM that is my
Name. Truly if we would know the measure of our life and days, what it is, this
short word Now, importing the instant moment of our passing life is all that is
ours. God exists in an Eternal Now; without beginning of days or end of time;
We exist in one instant passing moment, and our age is as nothing before Him.

To remember our CREATOR Now takes in the whole of this passing life; which now
only is; for the days past are irrecoverably gone; and we are not sure of a
breath to come. Wherefore Now, this instant, is all that we have, or are sure
of, to remember our Creator in: Do it now as you would at all, do it now and
you do it always. Now as Young as thou art remember God thy Maker; Now do it,
i. e. still, as long as thou have any Being. Now, that is to day while it is
called to day; and now will be to morrow if it comes as truly as to day is. You
actually forget God, if now he be not in thy mind and memory. If you say you
will do it hereafter, that it will be time eno'then; this is the thing which
the Precept in the Text forbids, and would warn you against: that is the sure
way ever to forget God. Now is the only time we have, or that God will accept;
2 Cor. 6.2. Now is the accepted time and now is the day of Salvation. Psalm.
119.44. So shall I keep thy law continually for ever and ever.

I close this head with a wise and good Though It of Dr. Hickmans; The time past is
fled and gone for ever, and leaves nothing behind it but either the comfort of
having discharged our duty, or the sad remembrance of our neglects. The time to
come is it self nothing; the fond imagination and forlorn hope of the sluggard
and the spend-thrift. The time past is already dead, the time to come is yet
unborn; but Now is our life.

BUT yet neither is this the immediate Scope of the Text, what that means by
Now is the days of Youth: to that the Text limits it:

Wherefore,

2. MORE especially Young People must remember their Creator now, in the days
of their Youth.

TO YOUNG PEOPLE therefore I shall confine my self in the rest of my Discourse,
and on them I am to press the Duty as especially incumbent on them. The Text
implies and supposes that they especially are in danger of forgetting their
Creator, that they from their Early Childhood should be carefully instructed in
the knowledge of Him, and that they carefully receive and retain the
Instructions of their Parents, Tutors and Ministers.

BUT I shall only lay before the Young Person these Three Reasons why he, is
peculiarly obliged to remember his CREATOR now in the days of his Youth.

1. BECAUSE it is exceeding honorary and well pleasing to GOD that he do so.
Now the first End of your Being is to please and honor your CREATOR, and to it
you ought in the first place to apply your selves. This GOD requires of thee.
Prove. 8.17. Seek me early. 23.36. My Son, give me thy heart. OUR SAVIOR'S
words and action were a plain declaration and a lively Emblem of the pleasure
he has in early Piety; When he said of little Children, Suffer them to come to
me, of them is my Kingdom; and when he took them up into his arms and blessed
them. The LORD our GOD, required the first ripe fruits under the Law, and his
Soul desires it under the Gospel; And the one was but a Type and shadow of the
other. Under both Testaments, we have many beauteous Instances, from righteous
Abel down to gracious Timothy, of GOD's pleasure in and glory from an Early
Piety. The time would fail me to speak of Enoch, Isaac, Joseph, Joshua, Samuel,
David, and SOLOMON in his Glory. Who but GOD should have the first possession
of the mind and heart, or the first fruits of the Life? The first affections of
a Creature made to be Religious, must be sacred to GOD. It is both a high
dishonor and injustice to the Great CREATOR, to rob him of this; and a thing
very pleasing to the Devil.

ADD here these two very serious Considetions: What abundance of Sin against
GOD, and Dishonor to him is prevented, if we Early remember Him? and what a
foundation is laid for Service and Glory to Him herein, if He spare us in his
World? As long as we forget Him we shall be sinning against him; and as soon as
we begin seriously to remember Him we shall be serving and glorifying him. The
Infant in Years becomes a great Sinner and a high Offender against the GOD of
his Being out of whose Hands he is but just come, if he do not begin to
remember his Creator: and what a Generation of Vipers are the little brood like
to be that run astray as soon as they born, without any check or restraint upon
them from the Remembrance of GOD? Genesis 8.21. On the contrary, What a World of
time is saved and work done, if we begin betimes and hold on? What proficiency
in Grace is the earnest Youth like to make, if he sets out soon and keeps on,
though he run but slow! The way will rid away apace, and he get a great way a
head! the Child may die a hundred years old! be further on his way, and have
done more for God, than a late Penitent of that Age; might such a one be
supposed. He that grows in Grace while he does in Stature may in his Youth be a
Man in Christ Jesus.

2. IT is exceeding Profitable and beneficial to our selves if we remember our
Creator in the days of our Youth. Is it GOD's honor and glory that we remember
Him Young? it is as much our own Interest and happiness, present and future.

THE Pious Youth prevents a world of evil and mischief, guilt and misery to
himself; and a world of good comes to him. If we forget GOD in our Youthful
days we make sad work for an after-repentance, and a sorrowful Remembrance
there will be of our folly and wickedness as long as we live. No body knows the
darkness and remorse, the sorrows and anguishes, the wounds and dolours of Soul
that it may procure you; or which is a worse plague, what blindness and
hardness, insensibility and obduracy! Besides the Woes which the Prodigal is
usually reduced to in Body and in worldly Circumstances, wherein he is made to
possess the Sins of his Youth, through many an evil day and month of vanity and
mourning, Prove. 5.11.

ON the other hand, by early Piety and Religion the Young Person puts himself
under the care and blessing of a Gracious Providence. He makes Jacobs Choice of
GOD and Vow to Him; and GOD makes the same Covenant with him. Genesis 28.20. Like
Jabez he prays, and GOD gives him his Petition. He is like a green Olivetree in
the house of GOD, and trusts in his mercy for ever and ever, Psalm. 52.8.

MORE especially, He that remembers his CREATOR in the days of his Youth is
blessed on Spiritual Accounts. This is the BLESSING which he early seeks and
finds. He is like to blessed with an Abundance of Grace and of the gift of
righteousness; as was before hinted. What a spiritual Mind is this like to be
in mortal Flesh! and what a Divine life is he like to attain in Communion with
GOD? How natural and familiar, easy and pleasant will a Godly life be rendered
by Use from thy Youth-up! What a Preparation will it be against the Evils and
Afflictions of the present life; and what a preservation from the Evil? Psalm.
71.17, 18. What a peaceful and happy Death may well close this comfortable
life, and O the exceeding Great and Eternal weight of Glory to this happy
Person! If there are Degrees of Glory in Heaven, as doubtless there be, These
are like to be High therein, who beginning Young in the good ways of the LORD
hold on and out to the end. These eminently have glorified CHRIST on Earth, and
he will glorify them with himself for ever. These are the Rich in Grace, and
ripe for Glory. These shall have an Entrance administered abundantly into the
Joy of their LORD, and be taken near to the B some of JESUS. To what Crowns and
Mansions shall they be taken who by a patient continuance in well doing have
been seeking after Glory Honor and Immortality! This Tribe of righteous Abel,
living long in the Worship and Service of GOD, if they come not quite up to his
Crown of Martyrdom, seem to come next to it.

THUS the Benefit is vast to us both present and future. on temporal and in
spiritual respects, by remembering your CREATOR now in the days of your Youth.

3. And lastly, IT is the way to be singularly useful and blessings to Others
if we remember our CREATOR in the days of our Youth. We are not born for our
selves only, but also for the good of others: and as soon as may be we should
be benefitting others; and how soon can GOD make us beneficial to others? His
Grace in us betimes, makes us useful betimes.

To be particular:

1. WHAT comforts and blessings will this render you to your Parents and
gracious Friends? if they see you remember your CREATOR Now in the days of your
Youth. How lovely will it render you in their eyes, and how much their Joy?
Such Children are their Parents Crown, and such Youths are the Staff of their
Old Age, and happy the Father in such a Son, happy the Mother in such a Dau'ter.

SOLOMON tells us, and it is the first of his Proverbs strictly so called;
Prove. 10.1. A wise Son makes a glad Father. And again he says to the Young
Man, 23.15. My Son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even mine;
yea my reins shall rejoice when thy lips speak right things. Children know not
what joy they would give their Parents by Early Piety.

EVEN Parents that are not Converted to GOD themselves are glad to see their
Children Pious and Religious; yea it may be the means of their Conversion, and
sometimes has been. But if a Parent be gracious it both delights and edifies
him to see the Grace of God in his Child; it enlarges his heart in thankfulness
to God as well as in love to his Child. Prove. 23.24. The father of the
righteous shall greatly rejoice, and he that begets a wise child shall have
joy of him; thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee
shall rejoice. Therefore remember thy Creator now, that while you are in the
house of your Parents, they may have comfort in you, and when you are for your
selves their comfort in you may increase.

2. A Child that remembers his CREATOR, and he that does it in his Youth, is
like to be a blessing to his Brethren and Sisters, while he grows up with them
and afterward; a blessing also to the Servants of the Family, to the play-mates
of his Childhood, and the Companions of his Youth. Such a Child may be the Salt
of the Family, and season the whole house. A little leven leveneth the whole
lump. If in your Childhood and Youth you remember your Creator you will pray to
him, and not only Pray for your selves but for your Parents, and Brothers and
Sisters, and for the Servants of the House; and who knows what your Prayers may
do for them, and for your selves? And the Praying Child or Youth often leads
others to Prayer, puts them on Praying, and it may be Prays with them, as well
as for them. A pious Child in a Family is like to put others in it on Secret
Prayer, either by Word or by his Example. It reproves others that are careless,
tho'tless and prayerless; to see one that is younger tho'tful and concerned
about his Soul, and retiring to Pray. Yea how often have elder Persons been
instructed and corrected by the knowledge and good behavior of Young Children.
"This Child reproves me, and teaches me, may many a grown Person say; seems to
understand and know more than I do, and to be better than I am. And it is an
admonition usually well taken, when it comes in our way. Now let our Young
People be desirous thus to benefit all about them from their Early days, that
others may already bless GOD for them.

3. IF you remember your CREATOR now in the days of your Youth, it will be the
way to make you Blessings in the FAMILIES into which the Providence of God may
bring you, and in the RELATIONS wherein you shall hereafter stand. When the
Young Man, or the Maiden, goes into Service here or there, happy may the House
be where into they come. They are like to be the faithful, diligent, prudent,
humble Servants; like the devout Eliezer the Servant of Abraham, in whom the
heart of his Master could safely trust, and who religiously discharged every
trust committed to him. A Servant that was a Son to Abraham, and a kind of
Father to Isaac. A Servant that carried every Affair wherein he was concerned
unto GOD, and did every thing as to the LORD and not to Man, doing the Will of
God and of his Master from the heart. A good Servant is a rich blessing to a
Family. Such a one was Jacob in the house of Laban, if he may be called a
Servant there, and what a blessing did he bring with him, as well as carry away
with him, out of his Uncles Flocks? Such a Servant was Joseph in the Egyptians
house, prudent and diligent and fearing GOD; and GOD blessed the house or the
prison wherever he came, and made all that he did to prosper. Nay what a
blessing to Naaman and his house was the poor girl of Israel, that remembered
and spoke of the GOD of Israel in the Land of her Captivity? Thus it is the way
to make the Young Person a Blessing in the Family that receives him, if he
remember his Creator in his early days.

BUT then there are other and Superior Relations which the Young Person hopes
in a few Years to come into, and this will make him a blessing to his own
Family when he comes to have one; a blessing to his Consort if he marries, a
blessing to his Children if God give him any, a blessing to his Servants when
he has them under him. And so the Young Woman becomes a blessing in the house
of her Husband, a blessing to her Children and Servants, if from her early days
she be truly. Religious. Prove. 31.28. Her Children rise up and call her
blessed, her husband also and he praises her. Happy the religious pair, that
thus come together in their Youth, live in holy love, walk in their house with
a perfect heart, and go hand in hand toward Heaven.

LET such Tho'ts as these inspire and charm our Young People into a timely
remembrance of their Creator, that they may live and be such blessings in one
domestic Relation and in another. And now to come to our more public Relations
and Capacities,

4. IF you remember your Creator now in the days of your Youth, it will make
you Blessings to the World you live in, and to the Generation you are to serve
by the will of GOD. This it is that will make us good Neighbors, and useful to
our Town and Country. This is the best foundation too that we can lay for a
more extensive serviceableness, and the being good Magistrates or Ministers.

YOUNG People that now remember their Creator, are the Earnests of the presence
and favor of GOD with the next Generation. This is the generation of them that
seek him, and that shall be accounted of by him for a Generation, Psalm. 22.30.
They are the good tokens upon a People, wherein GOD is speaking graciously
concerning them for times to come. These will arise and declare unto their
Children, the works and praises of the LORD; that they too may set their hope
in GOD and keep his commandments, Psalm. 87.7. Then Religion is not like to die
with the pious of this Generation, nor to be buried in their Graves; but to
survive when the Gracious that now live are gathered to their Fathers.

IN three respects you will be like to be great Blessings in your day and
place, if now you remember your CREATOR in the days of your Youth; by your
Prayers, by your Example, and by your knowledge and wisdom.

I will add some other Motives and Considerations, further to Excite our Young
People to the Duty before us.

1. NOW is your learning time, and what should you first learn but the things
of GOD, and what has regard to your Supreme Good and Everlasting Welfare? In
Childhood you are put to School, in the beginning of your Youth you are put to
Trades; what is there to be done for you in these early Years but to instruct
you? what business have you to do but to learn? what you now learn you are like
to retain; if you don't learn now 'twill be hard to do it hereafter. But of all
things that you have to learn there is nothing needful in comparison with this,
the things of Religion, the things of your Everlasting Peace and Salvation.
This only makes you for ever. Other things may serve you here, that saves you
for ever. Other things serve you for the Body, this is saving to the immortal
Soul. By other knowledge you may be useful to others in temporal respects, by
this thou may he serviceable to their Everlasting Salvation. Therefore learn
this in the days of thy Youth, thy learning time; learn to fear and serve God.

2. YOUTH is thy beautiful, thy lovely and acceptable time. This is the prime
and bloom, the flower, vigor and strength of thy life. This Beginning and
Excellency and Firstborn of thy life devote to God.

3. NOW O Young People is your choosing time, and commonly your fixing time; and
as you fix now it is like to last. Now you commonly choose your Trade; betake
your selves to your business for life, show what you incline to, and how you
intend to be employed all your days. Now you choose your Master and your
Education or Occupation. And now you dispose of your self in Marriage
ordinarily, place your Affections, give away your hearts, look out for some
Companion of life, whose to be as long as you live. And is this indeed the work
of your Youth? and is it not time for you to fix too in your General Calling,
your Heavenly Calling? your Fathers business and the working out your own
Salvation? Where now is the love of an Espousal toward GOD? who claims you in
the style and relation of a Husband, as well as of a Father and Master! You are
to choose for your life, and to dispose of your self probably for Eternity!
whose and where and what you will be! how dreadful is the though it! will thou now
forget thy SAVIOR and thy Soul? despise Heaven and Eternal Glory? and cast
away thy self into the arms of the World, the Flesh and the Devil! and into the
flames of Hell for ever! God forbid! Wherefore now in thy choosing time remember
thy Creator, and choose the ways of God, the things that please him.

4. Consider, YOU that are Young, Now may be your only Season. Young as you are
you may die to day or to morrow. You may die in Youth, and your life be among
the unclean, your lot with them for ever, your Eternity among the unclean
Spirits of Hell. You are not sure of living to be Old, though you are ready to
hope for it, and to promise your self some hereafter to repent and remember God
in. God may cut short, cut off the thread of your life, and in a moment send you
down into the place of torments.

5. WILL NOT you remember your CREATOR now? it may be He will never give you of
his Grace to do it hereafter. Justly may he deny it to you when you are Older.
Nay you will be less disposed to remember Him then. Custom in Sin will harden
you in it; you harden your selves from his fear while you live without the
remembrance of him. Satan and lust blind the mind and fear the Conscience by
their possession. They usually hold the possession we give them in our Youth.
How few are Converted in riper years! Youth is the time of saving Impressions
for the most part. Of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, of such on whom God begins
to work while they are Young.

6. AND Lastly, Let Young People consider seriously how they are obliged and
engaged, privileged and advantaged above others, to remember their Creator
now. You are not the Children of Heathen, nor born in the regions of darkness,
where Men are without the knowledge of the true GOD, the Great Creator of all
things. You are not of the Families of the Nations where God is unknown and
forgotten. You are not Educated in utter ignorance as they are, nor led into
their barbarous Doctrines and worship of Idols and of Devils. GOD has given you
his Word, the Holy Scripture, and made Himself known to you in it. The Son of
GOD Himself has come to give you an understanding, and to reveal GOD unto you,
his Will and the way of a Sinners Salvation. You are informed from the Holy
Word, who made you, and how you were made holy and happy; and how you come to
be born a Sinner, and what GOD has done to save you, and what you must do to be
saved. GOD has taken you under the wing of his Covenant, and into a Visible
Covenant and Church state from the day of your birth, it may be; and directed
you to be separated and marked as one of his Flock. Your Parents have privately
and publicly dedicated you to Him, as your GOD; avouch'd Him to be so, engaged
you to be the LORD's, vowed you to Him with much Solemnity, before you were
born and since. Now they say to you -- You are the Children of the Lord your
God; see that you remember your Covenant bonds, be holy to Him. They have
instructed you in the knowledge of him, and taught you in his ways. Herein they
have been at some pains; more than you think of; as the Prophet speaks, Isai.
28.9. Whom shall he teach knowledge? and whom shall he make to understand
doctrine? them that are weaned from the milk and drawn from the breasts? for
precept must be upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon
line; here a little and there a little; and with stammering lips and another
tongue; you have been spoken to, to instill into you in your Infancy and
ignorant state some knowledge of your CREATOR. We have spoken to you in your
own language, to your capacity when Babes, and to your ability to receive words
in your Childhood. And since that you have been charged by Parents, by
Ministers, by Guardians and Friends, that you remember and keep in mind what
you have learnt of GOD and your Souls, and seek to GOD betimes. Yea it may be
your dying as well as living Parents have Charged you, O our Children; or they
may do so. They have (it may be) Prayed over you many a time, and you have
heard 'em; they have Wept for you and over you, and begged of you, yea
entreated you -- about your Souls and your duty to GOD, and that you might be
blessed of Him, They have Prayed for you, as Abraham for his Ishmael! they have
Educated you, as he did his Isaac, the Son of the Covenant; they have put you
upon getting the blessing, as Rebecca did her Jacob: They have poured out
Prayers for you as Job did for his Sons, for he said it may be they have sinned
and forgotten their Creator: They have cried to GOD for you as David did for
his Solomon, Lord give my Son a perfect heart; -- and then have come and warned
you as he did him, -- My Son know thou the God of thy Fathers. Your Parents (O
Child) have vowed you to GOD in a manner as Hannah did her Samuel, and will you
not abide by the Sacred Act and by the Sanctuary! they have opened their mouth
expressly concerning you, more than Jeptha did concerning his Dau'ter, and you
must say with her noble resolution and reverence, My father -- it shall be as
thou have said before the LORD. They have charged you as Jonadah did his Sons,
and will you not obey their voice? And it may be they have had occasion to fear
concerning you, and with a melting Soul to warn and say to you -- What my Son,
and what the Son of my vows --, will thou not remember thy CREATOR? can thou
dare to forget him and Sin against him.

THUS, and much more our Children and Young People are obliged and engaged and
advantaged to remember their Creator; and if they do it not they are
presumptuous and rebellious against GOD and their Parents; they are unnatural
and profane, and it were better for them (dying so) that they had been born of
Heathens and never known GOD, or been known of Him.

FINIS.

