THE Distressed State Of the Town of BOSTON Once more Considered. And Methods
for Redress humbly proposed, With Remarks on the pretended Country-man's Answer
to the Book, Entitled, The Distressed State of the Town of Boston, etc With a
Schaeme for a BANK Laid down: And Methods for bringing in SILVER MONEY Proposed.

By John Colman.

Boston, Printed for Benjamin Gray, at his Shop in King Street.

The Distressed State of BOSTON Further Considered.
SInce the Publishing of my Letter, Entitled, The Distressed State of the Town
of B^ston: Several pretended Answers have been Published, with Design to amuse
the Country, by insinuating, that the State of the Town is not as I have
Represented it; and that I have assigned wrong Causes for our Distresses. But
it is a vain thing to endeavor to persuade People contrary to what they daily
Experience; Had the Gentleman who has given himself the trouble to make
Answer, projected something for a Medium of Exchange, to pass among us, which
is the only way to Extricate us out of our Difficulties; he would have merited
well of his Country; but to fault what others do, and propose nothing, ( save
the empty notions of leaving off Trusting, and allowing Interest on Book Debts;
Things impracticable at any time, but more especially in our present
Circumstances) seems to me much below the Character of him, who is accounted
the Author; the Writer doubtless thinks he has done wonderful things in his
Answer, but I believe I shall soon make it evident, that he has not in the
least answered my Letter; and demonstrate, he talks very ignorantly, and like a
man utterly unacquainted with Trade, AND THE STATE of HIS COUNTRY ALSO.

He owns himself so short of a common Understanding, that after (...) careful
R^^iew of my Letter, he cannot find the Important Matters he has omitted
answering; I am sorry to find him so ^^il of Apprehension, that he cannot see
the Evils I complain of, and the Remedy I drive it; What Proposal has he made,
to supply us with a Medium of Exchange? Without which, it is impossible this
Town or Country can Subsist; What Method has he thought on, to prevent the
vast number of Lawsuits? Which it is a Scandal to the Land to name. Has he
Projected any way to bring in Silver, as the Paper-Bills sink! or has he
Contrived how to keep what does Come in, from being Shipped off again; Has he
shown us the Art of Living without a Medium! Has he found a way to prevent
Mercinary Men's Oppressing their Neighbors, by anticipating, as well as
exacting Interest, or by taking their Lands at half Value! Has he Contrived,
how those who Live on their Salaries, shall be paid without Money! But bove
all, What Contrivance has he found, to support this poor Town the hard Winter
approaching? Can they Subsist from day to day, without the Ready Penny! These I
think to be Matters of Importance, and what any man might have seen to be my
Design in Writing that Letter; but he has passed them over in Silence, being
so intent I presume, on sinking the few Bills which are yet abroad, and thereby
completing the Ruin of the Land: (to gratify the ambition of a few) That he
could not see these Things. THOUGH OF THE LAST CONSEQUENCE TO US.

And that I may not be Charged with being Uncharitable, I shall next consider
his Proposal of Leaving off Trusting, and allowing Interest on Book Debts,
which is the only Remedy he proposes to Extricate us out of our Difficulties;
the Proposal is so contrary to the Spirit of Christianity, that it fills me
with Horror when I think of it. For I find poor People must have neither Money
nor Credit, it this Charitable Man might have his Will, unless on the hardest
Terms he could invent. Indeed, the Gentleman will allow, They shall be Trusted
S^x Months (provided they will from that time be content to allow Ten per Cent.
Interest; When he knows, that in the Method we are in, there will not be in (
seven years at most) a Bill Abroad, to Pay either Principal or Interest; The
Law has wisely limited Interest to Six per Cent. but that will not content
him; he would be thought wiser than the Law, and therefore is for Ten per Cent.
Truly his Brain seems to be addled with these Notions, that he forgets the
Scriptures, though (if I am not out in my guess) his Profession is to Study
them; I would advise him to Consult the Divine Oracles, and see whether Usury
is so much encouraged there; and until he has proved by Scripture, that Six
per Cent. is too little, not to think himself wiser than THE LEGISLATOR.

Again he says, That making the Bills a lawful Tender, would not have kept up
them Value, and gives this Reason, because our Import is more than the Produce
of the Country will ^ay for. A very poor Argument truly! When did we Raise
sufficient to Pay for our Import! Does not our Import from one place, pay for
what we Import from another place? Is not our whole Dependence on Trade? Do we
not Export one Commodity, and Bring in another; and then Export that, and Bring
in another? And this keeps the wheel a-going, imploys our Ships, and Men
Abroad, and our Tradesmen at Home also; Silver was Shipped off as much before we
had Province Bills, as since in proportion to our Trade; and ever will, while
the Merchant can find it a better Return than Goods; Is it not so all the World
over? What Place is there, from whence they do not Ship off Money, when it
suits their Occasions? Does not England Ship off vast Sums to the East Indies,
and other Places? And does not the scarcity or plenty of Silver there, govern
the Price of it, as well as other things? Does not England drein all the
Plantations of Money, though they have Sugar, Indigo, and other Commodities to
make Returns with. I am persuaded, if the Bills now Abroad, were all Sunk this
Day, and there was so much Silver in its place, if the Silver were effectually
secured from being Exported, it would not be One Penny better than the Paper
Bills; neither would it have the least influence on the price of any
Merchandise whatsoever; for what would the Silver be better than the Paper, if
it could not be Shipped off, but remain among us. Nay, it is plain, that the
Paper would be better than the Silver, because of the Five per Cent. allowed
thereon in Public Payments; so that it is plain, Silver is no longer Money
with us but Merchandise; and therefore the Bills ought not to be esteemed of
less value, because Silver Rises, it being no other than Merchandise; and
sought after by none but those who want to Ship it off, as they do other
Returns And farther, If we had as much Goods Imported from England as formerly,
(in proportion to what we are grown to) can the Gentleman imagine, they would
Sell for Two Hundred per Cent. No, It is a Maxim in Trade, The want of a Thing
makes the worth of it; and therefore I say, if we had as full a Supply as
formerly, Goods would be at the old Prices, and Silver would have staid with
us, notwithstanding we had Province Bills; Exchange would have been as usual,
and Returns also; so that you see, it is the Plenty or Scarcity of Goods which
over^s every thing; and if so, surely it is our Interest to court and encourage
Trade; for it is the Price of European Goods that governs the Exchange, and the
Price of Silver, and all other Returns; and this is very plain, for though the
Bills grow scarcer, yet Goods of all sorts keep up their Prices: Nay, the
scarcity of Bills helps to advance the Prices of Goods; for there being not a
Medium to pay with, the Seller, if he must take other things in Exchange for
his Commodities will make his Price accordingly; and ^hen the Shops, when they
come to answer the Merchants Notes, are obliged to advance according to the
Prices they give; and by this means the burden ^s laid on the poor Tradesmen
and there the Hardship CENTERS, AND THEY ARE THE PEOPLE OPPRESSED THEREBY.

As I have said before, Money was always Shipped Home* and yet all that has
been Ship^d off, would not have Run us into these Difficulties, but that the
Scarcity of European Goods have kept up their Prices, and there has not been
sufficient Returns, to pay for what has been Imported; and the Springs from
whence we used to have our Money, have failed of late, viz. Jamaica, Curizo,
etc. so that there seems to be a complication of Misfottunes attending us,
which has Involved us in these Distresses; and I can see no likelihood of our
having a Silver Medium, but by having a Paper Medium; as I shall show you
before I have done. For 1 There is no hopes of having Silver from Jamaica, etc.
because of late years they find it more advantageous to bring Cocoa, and other
Commodities from the Coast of New Spain, where they Trade, than Money; and this
I experienced, by a Vessel I had on that Coast, not long since. And 2. We must
expect none from Old Spain, or Portugal, or the Streights, while our Fish
Merchants can Remit their Money to England or Holland, and make Two Hundred per
Cent. profit, on their Goods from thence; or if they will bring Iron direct
from Bilboa, may make Three Hundred per Cent. The Treasurer of this Province,
lately gave One Hundred and Forty per Cent. for a Bill of Exchange, to pay our
Agent; then surely there is little likelihood of Goods falling, if such an
Exchange be given; for as you Settle the Exchange between England and us, the
Price of European Goods, and of Silver, and all other Returns will rise and
fall accordingly; wherefore most certainly the way to make this Place flourish,
is to make Trade as easy and free as possible, by having a sufficient Medium
to manage it, and by encouraging every body to come to us; let them bring as
much Goods as they will, the more they bring, the Cheaper it will be; it is
reasonable to believe, that if we had of late Imported as much European Goods
as formerly, in proportion to our Growth, they would have been at the old
Prices as in times of Peace; and then One Hundred Pounds would have gone almost
as far in making Returns, as Two does now; and the Silver would have staid with
us also. And another Reason is, when European Goods were plenty, we Shipped off
great quantities to other Places, and brought other Returns for them; and this
ENCOURAGED OUR NAVIGATION, AND WAS A GREAT ADVANTAGE EVERY WAY.

We are pretty much Circumstanced like Holland, we Raise but little; if it were
not for our Trade, we might Starve; and it is easy to see the advantage of our
Trade, by our Neighbors; who though they Raise for themselves, and supply us
also; yet I presume none will deny, but that this Province has grown in Riches
and Strength faster than any of 'em; and may do so still, if it be not our own
faults; for as we decline, so they decline also; so that it seems to me, as if
Providence had designed this Place for the Head of these Provinces, if we are
not wanting to our selves. The State of Holland I observe, (who are allowed to
see their Interest with respect to Trade as much as any Nation in the World)
are for drawing every body to them; and their Duty's on what ever is Imported,
is but a trifle from the Importer, they lay the Duty's on the Consumption; but
let Trade go in a manner free; and the Reason is this, say they, we are sure of
getting by every Ship that comes to us; whether they get by coming to us, is
their business to consider, and not ours; and what I have said is true, with
respect to this Country also; but more especially with respect to this Town,
whose Flourishing, or Decay will have a very great influence on the Estates of
the whole Country.

The Gentleman says, What I say about burthening Trade, with heavy Duty's, he
will not call Evasion; neither will any man, who remembers when Rum was Three
Pounds Six Shillings, Eight pence per Hogshead, Duty's, Wine, Fifty Shillings
per Pipe, etc. This was it which drove away our Trade to the Neighboring
Governments; for before these Duties were laid, Carolina, Virginia Pensilvania,
Rhode Island, Connecticut, Pisca^aqua, etc. as well as our own Seaports, had
their chief Supply from us; but these heavy Duties put them on Trade, and they
soon found they could supply themselves at better Rates than with us; and now
are got to that height, that they oftentimes supply us with the Commodities
they used to buy of us; but perhaps the Gentleman never heard this before.

Again, he seems more positive, then is consistant with Prudence; He says, he
is sure, that to Emit more Bills, according to any Public or Private Schaeme,
which has been yet Projected, will, but increase and prolong our Misery. I
confess it is easy to Foresee what may be the Consequences of Emitting more
Bills on the Public Scheme; for we may expect the same Causes will be attended
with the same Effects, but what may be the advantages, or dissadvantages of a
Private Bank. I am of opinion, no man can foresee, until we have tried the
Experiment, and see the conveniences and inconveniences thereof; I am of
Opinion, that a Private Bank would not have been attended with the
inconveniences the Public has been; and yet I don't pretend, that Silver
would immediately fall in price, if there were a Private Bank; neither would it
rise; for I see no reason to think that Silver will fall in Price, until Goods
from England fall in their Prices; but it is easy for the Government to make
the Bank Bills, as good as the Province Bills; and they would not be daily
Sinking as the Public Bi^^^ are, to the great discouragement of Trade, as well
as Distressing men in their particular Affairs.

Again. The Gentleman is s^^e be says, that to leave off Trusting, as far as
it is practicable enough to do it, would in some time set all things to Rights;
and in another place be says again, he would have it left off as far as it
might be left off well enough; I think I may well enough put his Sense against
my Friends Logic he finds fault with; but I hope that Trusting will for the
future grow more and more out of fashion with us; for that long Credit has
hurt us, no body will deny; But to make Laws to prevent it, or to charge the
Debtor Ten per Cent. Interest, if he slips his time, agreed on with his
Creditor, is what I presume was never attempted in any place whatsoever: Were
Money so plenty, that men received nothing but Money for their Labor; and were
this Truck Trade at an end, and the Trader Sold all for Money, and bought all
with Money; Then I should think it a more proper time to propose such Laws,
then now, when more then three Quarters of the Payments are made by Barter and
Exchange of one Commodity for another; and it will be many years before it can
be expected to be otherwise.

Our Circumstances are such at this Day, that the Traders contrive how they can
get others into their Debt, who they think will have Returns to Sell, that so
they may secure to themselves the Refusal of the Commodities they Raise, or get
out of the Sea, or Import from Foreign Parts, and think they serve themselves
by paying beforehand; because thereby they purchase that with Goods, which
otherwise they must pay Money for; Nay, they have this double advantage; by
this means they are sure in an ordinary way, to have the Commodities they shall
want; and get off their Goods many times which would lie on hand, if they had
not such ways to Dispose of them; but these Mysteries in Trade, the Gentleman
is unacquainted with.

But I suppose we are to abound with Silver by and by; For the Gentleman tells
us, there was Ten Thousand Pound in Silver brought in from one place the last
year, and the like Sum Shipped off in one Ship which Poundered. I am sorry a man
of his Character should be so weak to impose on the World in a matter wherein
he may be so easily Detected; I have made Enquiry, and there was not One
Thousand Pound aboard that Ship, there might be a little Gold also; but in all
there was not much above One Thousand Pound, and the Ten Thousand Pounds he
tells us was brought in is at best a misrepresentation; for any one who Reads
his Account of that matter, would think there was so much Money Imported hither
from a Foreign Port; whereas it was Money brought to Rhode Island; and I have
reason to believe, it came great part of it from the Pirates; and Gentlemen
went up from hence, and bought up the Money, Hides, and other Goods for Returns.

Again, He tells us, There are Bills enough to Buy up all the Produce of the
Country, and the Silver, etc. but I think I have proved the contrary; but were
that true, Is there enough to Buy and Sell with in the Shops, is there enough
to pay Laborers and Tradesmen, without forcing them to take Goods, which they
know not what to do with, except to put them on their Backs; for which some
people are very angry, and say they go beyond their degree; whereas the People
would not Expend it in such ways, if it were at their own disposal; and the
Merchants cannot pay them otherwise than by Shop Notes, because the Shops cannot
Sell for Money; and consequently cannot pay Money to the Merchants; and thus is
Trade miserably imbarras'd, and the Poor oppressed, for want of a Medium; I
cannot but observe, that my Friend owns there is not enough to pay Laborers;
and I must observe also, that he takes no care how they shall be paid.

I have heard some lay the Cause of the Distress^s of the Town on the People;
and say, Pride and Laziness will bring any People into such Circumstances; but
I think whoever gives that Character of this Town, abuse them; they who say so
of them, perhaps never did a days work in their Lives. This Town is as
industrious a place as any, if they have Work to do; if they stand idle, it is
because no man has hired them; not that I will say, there are no Drones in the
Hive. There are indolent Thoughtless People in all Places, but the Body of the
People are willing to be doing, if they can find Employment. But it is well if
for want of Business, the People do not get an habit of Idleness* and run into
Vices, which when once accustomed to* it is hard breaking themselves of.

Next he tells us, he has found two inconsistances; he says, if the Import be
so small, one would think the Produce of the Country will be sufficient for
Returns; but I have told him already, that the Import being small, the Goods
fetch near double what it used to do; and that we don't Raise half the Returns
we make, but Import it by our Trade; If we did not by our Trade to the Islands
North and South Carolina, Virginia, etc. Import Pitch, Tar, Hides, Tobacco,
Rice, Skins, Sugar, Oil, etc. What should we have to make Returns with? And if
we had not occasion for these Returns, what would become of our Trade, on which
the Welfare of the whole depend? His other Inconsistency is, That it is the
Interest of every private man to Sell his Silver to the highest Bidder, then
says he it is the Interest of the Country in general, because all the private
persons contained in it, will make up the whole Country; a wise Speech I
protest, worthy of seven years study at the University; Well, I Will venture to
inform the Gentleman in this mysterious point; That which is the Interest of
every man Collectively as a Body, is the Interest of the Country in general,
because in that Relation they are the Country; but nothing is more certain,
than that it may be the Interest of Private Men to Buy up Silver, and Ship it
off; and that their doing so, may be hurtful to the Community. And now what is
become of my Friends Inconsistencies?

Again, he tells us, Our Silver and Gold is gone already, and our Lands will go
next, (if Trusting be allowed) I presume he don't mean, that the Factors will
Ship them off for England. So then, after all this mighty Tussel, he is come to
me at last; for that I say, is what People are afraid of; That the Lands will
fall into a few hands, and so we shall have a few Lords, and the Body of the
People Beggars.

But now I have met with one Clause that I can heartily join with him in and so
will all the four Provinces. He says, He is of the mind, that it is
impossible, that either Town or Country should subsist without some Medium or
other. And I Will venture to be as positive as he; I am sure he is in the Right

As to the Opinion of the Whale-men, where the Gentleman has lately been, I
confess I am ignorant; but of this, I am well assured, that it is the opinion
of by far the greatest part of the four Provinces, that unless there be more
Bills, made on one foot or other, the Country will be ruined; and to make more
on the old Scheme we see will never do; therefore I hope it will be done by
private men, and I make no doubt we shall see the good Effects thereof: Our
Answerer indeed tells us, a Private Bank will involve us into greater Mischiefs
than the Public has done, but that his is only Opinion: And I must tell him,
that man in Trade, whom I presume have have as much reason to understand these
things as himself, are of a quite different opinion.

( Well, but now my Friend sensible of his weakness, and tells us, he doubts he
shall be playing the fool again; and I confess, I am very apt to believe him,
for I have seen little else in his whole performance; by what he says in his
twelfth page; he seems to fear the Government being biased by the Power of
Money as well as the Bankers; but I have a better opinion of those Worthy
Gentlemen, and would hope there is no danger of that; and that if ever a Bank
be Erected, the Government will have a careful and jealous Eye over it, to
prevent the Bankers doing any thing which may be hurtful to the Public; and
farther, I am of opinion, it always will be in their Power so to do.

Well now I find the Gentleman answers a whole Catalogue of Evils which were
mentioned to him by this short Sentence ( Leave off Trusting) this is his
sovereign Remedy to cure all Maladies: Nay, he tells us, this will bring Silver
amongst us again, but I protest I cannot believe him, because I observe, that
since we have given less Credit then formerly, Money yet grows scarcer than
ever; and what is worse still, Silver does so as well as Bills; whereas he told
us, that Silver would come in as the Bills left us, and stay amongst us.

But the Gentleman tells us, If People cannot Live in the Town, let them go into
the Country; but certainly he spoke before he thought, when he made that
proposal; perhaps the Gentleman is in hopes of a good Benefice in the Country
in time, ( though he is no Salary Man at present he tells us) and it may suit
him well enough to go there, and be maintained honorably, as I would have all
of his Function be; But it is very hard for Tradesmen, who have Lived all their
Days in the Town, and have got Families, to pluck up Stakes, and remove into
the Country, to seek their Subsistence in a way they have never been accustomed
to; and know nothing of; and again, there are abundance of People in the Town,
who make a shift by their Labor, to maintain their Families comfortably; but
lay up little aforehand, such People have nothing to carry with them into the
Country; so that they and their Families must be more miserable there, than in
the Town: but I think he would have them turn Laborers (a very hard proposal I
confess) and says, they want their Labor in the Country, if they would work
at a moderate rate, and tells us, they don^t want Money to pay them; but I find
the people in the Country generally differ very much from the Gentleman in this
matter; and complain they cannot get Money to pay Taxes to the Government, and
the Ministry; and say, if there be not some Medium found, their Stocks must go
quickly for these Uses; and their Lands at last. I have heard that some say, it
will never be good times, until Laborers come to work for a Groat for
Sixpence a day; but I hope it will never be so in New England; and that the
Poor will always live like men, as hitherto, through the good Providence of God
they have done, and not as bad or worse than our Indians; as it is in some
parts of the World.

Again, My Friend tells us, There is no danger of People getting their
Neighbors Lands at half value; but we have only his bare word for it; for I am
sure, he has not given us any reason to induce us to believe the contrary;
though he answers that matter darkly, I Will set it in so true a light, that he
that runs may Read it, suppose Silver should come to Twenty or Thirty Shillings
per Ounce, as it is at Carolina; for it may come to be so scarce, that it cannot
be purchased at any rate; for I say, the plenty or scarcity of it, governs the
Price of that, as all other things; then I suppose our good friends will value
Thirty Shillings in Bills, to be worth Six Shillings and Eight Pence; and Men's
Estates will be taken from them at a price accordingly; and so an Estate which
cost a Thousand Pounds, will go for Two Hundred, and this is the Contrivance to
keep the Estates in many men's hands; but the Gentleman may preach it long
enough, before he will bring any body to believe him.

Well, now the Gentleman comes to see his Error, and owns, that he has
expressed himself in too strong terms, about shortning Credit; and allows some
Credit is necessary among Traders; and therein he says no more than the whole
World will justify him in: But yet I see his great aversion to Foreign
Commodities clings to him; and his whole plea is for a Ready Money Trade; these
things seem wonderfully to affect him; Though the Medium is so Exhausted, that
there is scarce one Eight part of the Trade managed with Money, and what Money
is abroad, is daily going into the Treasury, and all methods used which can be
thought on, to prevent making more; (yet all his Proposal is to give no Credit,
but rather all hands turn Usurers) How consistent this is with a Money Trade; I
leave my Answerer to Determine.

Again he says, That man has a mind to think hard of the Government, who
thinks that they will not (where things come to Extremities) admit Mortgages to
be Redeemed, and Taxes to pay in the Produce of the Country, or in Silver. A
fine Speech I confess, as if any man were so ignorant to think, that the
Mortgagee would Refuse Silver, or that Silver would not answer for Taxes; May
not I call this an amusement, or what what will you call it?

Some among us have had the advantage of Selling their Silver, and advancing
thereon, until they have Raised it to Twelve Shillings per Ounce; by this they
have advanced their Estates one third part, and now they have no Silver to make
an advantage by Selling, they are for turning the Scale; just now the Bills
were too light for the Silver, and therefore they must have Twelve Shillings,
for Eight Shillings worth of Silver: And now they would have every thing
Regulated by what Silver was at, when it was plenty amongst us: And when the
Bills are all in, you must procure 'em Silver at Eight Shillings per Ounce;
nay, it may be at Six Shillings Eight Pence, to Redeem an Estate, because you
don't procure 'em Province Bills, according to the Tenor of your Mortgage, when
it will be impossible to procure Province Bills to do it; for admit there were
enough Bills abroad to redeem all the Mortgages to the Public; what will
become of the Mortgages made to Private Men, and of the Bonds abroad from man
to man, on Personal Security; where is a Medium to Discharge them with? The
only Method that the Gentleman has contrived to Extricate us out of our
Difficulties, is to turn Usurers; but after all he has said thereon to show
the feazibleness of it, I believe all Trading Men will think ( as he seems to
be aware they would) that it is the most unhappy one he could have hit on; and
had he consulted the Prophet Nehemiah, he would have known better, then to have
made such a Proposal. But I think I have said enough concerning our Methods in
Buying and Selling, to show the impossibility of coming into his Proposals at
present: Were Money as plenty as in Solomon's Days, the Government I am
persuaded, would never be brought into such a Law; much less in our present
Circumstances. I am sorry the Gentleman has meddled in an Affair, in which he
is so ignorant; and made himself a Tool to a party, some of whom perhaps know
as little of Trade as himself: There are some who would be glad of Silver to
pass among us again, but will never venture any part of their own Estates to
bring any to us. All their Cry is, when the Bills are sunk, we shall have
Silver, but don't consider the Difficulties which attend bringing it in; We
have a little comes in now, because it fetches Twelve Shillings per Ounce; but
were it at Eight Shillings per Ounce, you wo^ld not have a Penny, because Goods
would be more advantageous to the Importer.

I would advise the Gentleman to stick to Divinity for the future, and have
done with the Mysteries of Trade, I find they are too wonderful for him; and
(as he seems to own) past his Comprehension. I like him much better in the
Pulpit, there I Will willingly receive his Instructions; but now he is out of his
Sphaere, and so he must Excuse me, if I differ from him in Opinion.

Proposals for a Medium of Exchange.
I Had Thoughts at the Meeting of the General Court to propose a Method for a
Bank, which may answer the Occasions of the Land at present and be a means to
bring Silver to pass among us again in time; for it is my fixed Opinion, it must
be the work of time, and that it will be many years before we must expect a
Medium of Silver current with us; and the Method I would propose, is as
follows.

1. That a suitable Sum be agreed on, and that a Land Bank be Erected, for we
have no other Foundation to build upon.

2. That no Inhabitant in the Province, who has an Estate in Lands, be
Excluded from being a Partner therein; because the more persons are concerned
in it, the better will the Credit of the Bills be which are issued therefrom;
it being their joint Interest to encourage and support it; and those who put in
their Lands as Security, to be Entitled to the Profits, which is but
reasonable, because their Lands are laid under an encumbrance to give the Bank
a Being.

3. That no person have ou^ (...) more than two Thirds of the Value of his
Lands, for which he shall pay Six per Cent. Interest in Bills.

4. That the whole profits, arising by the Interest, after the necessary Charge
is defrayed, be laid out in Silver on the best terms it can be purchased, and
remain in the Bank as a Fund, or colateral Security, until the profits amount
unto the original Sum Emitted; this will add to the value of the Bills, and as
the Profits grow by the Interest, so will the Bills grow in value; and by this
Project I suppose, in about twenty years, the Profits will amount to the Sum
first Emitted; and the Bank may (if it be those best by them who then have the
management of Affairs) In one day Call in all their Notes and pay everyr one
Silver for his Note, at Eight Shillings per Ounce, and thee will be the same
Sum abroad in Silver, which was abroad in Paper before

5. I would propose, that any person concerned in the Bank be paid in Bank
Notes, or have Credit in the Books of the Bank be a^ his Election: This will be
a gteat ease in Trade, as well as safe for those Concerned.

For First, It will be an easein Trade, for any man, who has Credit in the
Bank, may draw a Note on the Bank, and his Creditor, will go and receive his
Bills, or have so much Transferred to his Account, by virtue of his Note, or he
may Endorse his Note to a third person, and he to another, and so from man to
man; by which much time may be saved. And Secondly, by this method he who has
Credit in the Bank runs no Risk of his Bills, either of Fire, Thieves, or any
other Casualty; and though this being a new thing here, People at first perhaps
may rather choose to receive and pay their Bills away themselves; yet in a
little time the ease and convenience of it would be so obvious to every man,
that there would not be abundance of Notes, or Bills abroad: and this would be
a great means to prevent Counterfeits; and I am of opinion, a short note on
stamped paper, part printed* and part written, would be safer than Engraven
Plates; how easy it is to Counterfeir those plates, experience has shown us;
and certainly the Notes should be filled and Signed by good Pen men; for it is
easier to Counterfeit bad Writng than good. As to the method of managing such a
Bank, it is time enough to propose that, when the Government are Consenting to
it.

These things I have thought on, as a likely method to keep us alive, until
Silver become again current among us, which I fear will not be very suddenly;
for I can see no way to bring in any quantity of Silver; for while European
Goods continue so very high, we cannot expect it from Old Spain; and the Islands
who used to fetch it from Mew-Spain, find it their Interest to Trade with them
for other Commodities rather than Silver; so we cannot expect much from them:
What little comes in, goes away as fast as it comes for Returns to England; how
vain then is is for us to pretend to have Silver to pass among us; and all men
agree in this, that there is no living without some Medium: Then surely what
can be the design of those who oppose every thing of this nature, and propose
nothing to Relieve us: We are a dependant Government, and have our bounds set
us; our Charter carries with it ^e plus Ultra: We are to do nothing which may
seem to bear hard on the Trade of Great Britain, else I would propose that some
way be contrived to prevent the Exportation of what Silver comes in; tho it be
but little it, would help us something; but there is no way, but by making
severe Laws, and to see them carefully Executed; and whether it would be
allowed us by the Crown so to do, is what we have reason to suspect: However,
I Will venture to mention them, and so leave 'em with them, whose Province it is
to consider what is most proper to be done at such a time as this is. (1.) That
a Law be made, that neither Buyer nor Seller, shall give or receive for Silver,
more than Eight Shillings per Ounce, on penalty of forfeiture of the Money, and
Six Months Imprisonment; the Money so forfeited, to go to the Informer. And
(2.) That every Master, Sailor, or Freighter, before any Vessel Sails, be
obliged to Swear, that they neither have, nor will put an Ounce Aboard their
Vessel they Sail in, or Freight on: This I confess would be attended with
difficulty; but could it be effected, it would keep your Silver, and raise the
Value of your Bills also: for what would the Silver be better than the Bills,
if it could not be Shipped off: It Is plain, that the day you prevent your silver
being bought and Sold as Merchandise that day will your Paper Bills be equal,
if not superior to Silver, according to Act of Parliament: so that Silver
being as I said before, only Merchandise, the value of your Bills ought not to
be regulated thereby, any more than by the Price of O^l, or any other Returns,
did Silver pass Current in payment amongst us, at Eight Shillings per Ounce as
formerly, and the Bills would pass in Trade but for Fourteen Shillings in the
Pound, then I would own the Bills were Fifty per Cent. worse than the Silver,
and not until then.

But it is a vanity I confess to think that a private Bank would answer,
without the Government support and encourage it by suitable Laws, as they have
done the Province Bills: and why they should refuse so to do, I must leave:
What is the Interest of Private Men, surely is the Interest of the whole in a
matter of this nature, it being of a public nature, though in the hands of
particular persons: if such a Bank were allowed to go on, the Government might
so steer it by their Laws, that it would never be in the power of the Bankers
to do any thing prejudicial to the Public Good,

Most certainly the Country would be greatly enriched by it: That I think I can
make very plain, and the Riches of a place very much strengthens it, suppose
these were Two Hundred Thousand Pounds Emitted on Land Security, which with
what Public Bills are now out might I am of opinion, sufficient to manage the
Trade at present: The Interest thereof would be Twelve Thousand Pounds per
Annum, allow One Thousand Pounds per Annum to Officers, and for other Charges
in managing it: There remains Eleven Thousand Pounds per Annum. This is so much
gained, and no man hurt by it: for if a man Mortgage his Estate: Surely none
will say, he is the poorer for so doing, since he Receives so much thereon,
either to pay his Debts, or to improve in Trade, and those who want it* for
neither of the before mentioned Uses, will yet be fond of being concerned in
the Bank because they can let their Bills out to Interest on personal Security,
and be entitled to their Profits in the Bank at same time* so that the Country
will be 200000 l. Richer, if this Projection were set on foot, as soon as the
Subsciptions are full.

But some will say, what signifies the Profits in the Bank, when it is
proposed, they should remain there, and not be divided: I answer, it will
answer the end of the Person concerned, as well as if divided; for in a few
years, when the Profits are come to be worth dividing: Any man who is minded to
part with his Profits, whose occasions oblige him to do may Sell it to his
Neighbor, as Bank Stock is Sold in London, every day; and no doubt in a few
years the Stock here would be so transferred from man to man daily as it is
there, and I can see no harm in improving a man's Money this way, any more than
in any other way: it behooves every man in Buying and Selling, to have a care of
Sharpers: for they may be Cheated other ways, as well as by Stock Jobbing.

But the grand Argument with some men against a Paper Medium is this: They say,
Paper has no intrinsic value in it, and ridicule it, saying, what value is
there in a piece of Paper? But I think that a very weak argument, and indeed
unfair, to compare Bank Bills, or Province Bills to blank Paper: What
intrinsic value is there in Silver, or Gold, more than in Iron, Brass, or
Tinn, but only the common acceptance of it by men in Trade, as a Medium of
Exchange. Is not every thing in this World, just as men esteem and value it: If
a man give me his Bond, it (...) good in my Opinion, as Silver* and the only
reason (...) it is so, is, because it will pay my Debt, or (...) wherewith to
Pay it: Surely then if a Bank Note (...) ^^swer for that end, and will purchase
for me Food, (...) and Clothing, and all necess^^ies of Life, it answers all
the ends, which Silver and Gold can answer for: and then why is there not as
much intrinsic value in one, as in the other: We find by daily experience,
that our Bills will answer all* he aforesaid ends: and therefore I say it i^*
and ^ught to be esteemed as good as Silver: Nay* it is better to us than
Silver, because it cannot be Ship't off, but will remain with us: Another
Objection against a Private Bank is, that the Bankers will Emit so much of this
Paper Medium, that we shall be filled with it and the plenty of it will make it
of no value. This Objection I think is already obviated, for if it be under the
inspection of the Government, as I have already proposed: They will appoint
Visiters, to whom the Books must always lie open, so that it will not be in the
Power of the Bankers to Emit any thing more than what the Government approve
of. No doubt but they will (as the Province Bills fink) find it necessary to
allow the Bank from time to time, to make as many Bank Bills as they sink of
the Province Bills.

I have been in the Bank of England and have observed the great Conveniences
thereof and am persuaded in the time that Bank has stood: Such a Bank as I
have proposed, would answer our Occasions as well as the Bank of England or the
Bank of Holland answers with them: The only Argument which is brought against
it, is, That they have Money; and any man may have Money for his Note on
damand: There indeed we differ, they abourd with Money, but we have none at
all; Had we a plenty of Silver as formerly, we should have no need of a Bank:
But I am persuaded we shall never have Silver pass among us again as Money,
until Trade take such a Turn, that Europaean Goods falls so in prices, that it
will not answer to send away Silver, or that we by going on Manufactures live
more independent of them for that being our main Trade: The plenty or scarcity
of their Commodities, will govern Exchange, and consequently the price of
Silver. So that I say, there is no likelihood of having a Medium of Silver,
without having a Medium of Paper (...) to manage our Trade, with mo^^ life then
of (...) has been managed* The question then will be, (...) it cannot be done
by the Public: That I know (...) ^ost pleasing to many Gentlemen, and I could
(...) ^^ll in with them, if I did not think the inconveniences and mischiefs
attending (...) will be greater by far in our Circumstances, than in the hands
of private Men, and under the inspection of the Government) Were we not a
Dependent People, I should have quite different tho'ts. Doubtless the.
Parliament of Englund might so Establish a Public Bank there, as to make it
equal, if not superior to any private Bank; but then it must be observed, that
they are the grand Court of the Empire, and accountable to no body: whereas we
can do nothing, or at best all that we do is nothing, without the Sanction of
the Crown.

Thus I have adventured to give my thoughts as to the Causes of our present
dark Circumstances, which I have done, with a sincere aim at the Public Good;
I Acknowledge my unfitness for such an undertaking: and wish that some of the
Bright Gentlemen of our Land (of which it is not Barren) had saved me the
labor; and that some of them would yet bestow a few Hours in thinking what may
be for the Releife of the Place, and indeed this I think to be the duty of
every Man, and would hope that out of the Projections of many, something may be
found that may be of service: what I have now written I expect will be Received
according to the dffierent Sentiments and Interests of Men; I am sorry for the
growing divisions amongst us, and believe our growing difficulties are in a
great measure the cause, and wish that a Remedy may be found to heal them, I
conclude with this wish, That, the Blessing of Heaven may attend the General
Court in their present Sessions; in all the arduous affairs which may come
before them, and that they may be the happy Instruments in the Hand of the
Almighty to Repair our Breaches, that the Blessing of them that are ready to
perish may come upon them.

Boston 20th July 1720.

