AN ACCOUNT Of a Strange Appearance IN THE HEAVENS ON Tuesday-Night, March 6.
1716. As it was Seen Over Stow-Market in Suffolk in ENGLAND.

BY THOMAS PRINCE, M. A. Of Harvard College in Cambridge in N. England.

Joel II. 30, 31. And I will show Wonders in the Heavens and in the Earth,
Blood and Fire and Pillars of Smoke. The Sun shall be turned into Darkness and
the Moon into Blood, before the great and the terrible Day of the LORD come.
BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, for D. HENCHMAN, at his Shop over against the
Brick Meeting House in Corn-Hall. 1719.

Price 3 d Single, and 2 s. and 6 d. per Dozen.

Advertisement.
THE Author being desired by several Gentlemen to Communicate the following
Piece of Natural History to the Public, He takes the Opportunity to gratify
them upon the Repetition of something like it in ENGLAND on the 19th of March
last: Especially considering that Our Country has not yet been duly informed of
this rare Phoenomenon, though it was observed and admired almost all over EUROPE:
And though Dr. HALLEY in the Transactions of the Royal Society, and Mr. WHISTON
in a Piece by it self have wrote on the Subject; yet an Account so Particular
by any single Eyewitness has not yet been divulged to the World.

IT lies in His Journal in a Letter to his Kinsman in LONDON, who Communicated
it to Dr. HALLEY aforesaid the Renowned and Learned Savilian Professor of the
Mathematics in the University of OXFORD; Who did Me the Honor to signify that
He was so Pleased with the Relation, as He had Thoughts of Printing it Himself
with His Remarks on the Subject. I suppose the coming out of Mr. WHISTON'S
Account was a reason of Preventing Him.

TO Mr. Francis Prince in LONDON.
DEAR COUSIN, COMBS, Thursday March 8. 1716.
THIS is to give You an exact Account as possible, of a most amazing Appearance
in the Heavens, which I myself with all the Town of STOW-MARKET, beheld for
above Half an Hour together, on the last Tuesday Night between 7 and 8 of the
Clock.

I WAS then occasionally at the Town aforesaid which is about 2 Miles off the
House where I live, and in Company with several Ladies discoursing of the
present Face of the Public Affairs. We had just been Reading in one of the
News Papers of Sea Monsters lately observed in the Mediterranean: and one of
the Company told us Her Husband bro't a Report from NORWICH of a wonderful
Sight in the Air seen over the City 2 or 3 Nights ago. This sort of
Conversation led some of the Elder of them into a Relation of such kind of
Appearances They had heard their Parents or other People speak of, as happening
in ENGLAND a little before the Civil War.

IN Opposition to This I very freely inveighed with some uncommon degree of
Warmth and Assurance; Attributing such Things as Those to the fertile Tongues
and Inventions of some Romantic People, and the fanciful and fearful
Imagination of others. When I was almost rude in Depreciating the Stories and
Opinions of the Ladies; a little Girl came running in a Fright to tell us,
There was a Great Sight in the Air. Upon this observing them to listen with
some Concern and Fear, I confess I coud'nt forbear Laughing easily, and telling
them in some sort of Triumph; I Believed it was from the Whimsies of such
little Gi^^^ as these that such Reports and Apparitions arose. However, To
oblige the Gentlewomen, I went out, which was about a Quarter after Seven, and
was forced immediately to fall a Sacrifice to what I then at least thought to
be their more Orthodox Judgment. Heaven itself seemed to undertake their
Argument and to prove it in so surprising and evident a manner that I dare not
any longer resist them. I saw what I could never have imagined before, and what
I believe is utterly impossible for me to represent exactly to your Imagination.

THERE seemed to be a great Stream of smoakey Light rising in the N.E, reaching
from near the Earth, ascending and waving like the Light of a great House or
Bon-fire in a dark Evening about half a Mile off, which we therefore though it it
at first to be: But soon altered our minds when we saw it increasing in Breadth
Length and Brightness, and pushing forwards, retreating and advancing in the
shape of a Broad Sword and like the shooting Vibrations of a very high Blaze,
until it extended to the Point over our Heads. As it increased in Bigness, so
did it likewise in the Swiftness and Fury of its Motion and grew by Degrees
into a bluish, (...) and fiery Color, almost like to that of the Flame of
Brimstone. Both the Color and Figure continually changed I know not how, 'till
at length on a sudden it brake forth into the Appearance of a raging and mighty
Torrent of bloody Waters, that at first looked like the sudden giving way of a
Damm, and the Sea bearing all irresistibly before it: Whereupon all that Part
of the Heavens over us turned of an inconceivably bright Rainbow Color, and
immediately run into an admirable, inexpressible Confusion of an infinite
Variety of Motions that were amazingly quick and terrible to behold.

I KNOW not how to give you an Idea of this part of the Appearance; unless you
may conceive something of it by the various and most violent Motions that are
in a great Body of Waters, when an higher Stream happens to descend and
impetuously rush into another. Sometimes they ran into Circular Forms,
sometimes into Ovals, sometimes the Circles and Ovals were variously compressed
on their sides by their approaching nearer to one another, or the greater
Interflux of the nameless and unknown known Matter. Sometimes th(...) winding
within and hastily pursuing one another in the manner of Whirlpools, and
sometimes they ran round and crossed like an 8, and in numberless other
different Figures; that something resembl'd the various, quick and confused
Rambles of Flies in the midst of a Room, or of Spiders on the surface of a
Pond; or the perplexing Contortions and Turnings of a great Heap of living Eels
just covered with Water in the bottom of a Boat; or as the little Foldings and
Ridges at the Tops and Bottoms of the Fingers; or to mention no more
Comparisons, like the Figures it is probable you have seen of CARTESIUS'S
Vortices.

ALL this while, the Brightness, Bloodiness and Fieryness of the Colors
beforementioned together with the Swiftness of the Motions increased, insomuch
as we could hardly trace them with our Eyes; 'till at length almost all the
whole Heavens appeared as if they were set on a Flame, which wrought and
glimmer'd with Flashes in a most dreadful and undescribable manner. It seemed
to threaten us with an immediate Descent and Deluge of Fire, filled the Streets
with loud and doleful Outcries and Lamentations and frighted a great many
People into their H(...) and we all began to think whither the SON OF GOD was
next to make His Glorious and Terrible Appearance, or the Conflagration of the
World was now begun. For the Elements seemed just as if they were melting with
fervent Heat, and the AEtherial Vault to be burning over us like the fierce
Agitations of the Blaze in a Furnace, or at the Top of a fiery Oven: and the
glimmering Light looked as if it proceeded from a more Glorious Body behind
that was approaching nearer and about to make its sudden Appearance to our Eyes.

WHILE we expected and wondered what would be the next Alteration and dreaded
the Consequence; all on a sudden the flaming Body above us brake into
innumerable Spears of Light, that at first darted every way and across one
another, but in a little while they conformed to the same Point of Motion and
played in a regular and astonishing manner. At first it seemed as if the very
Frame of the World was a Dissolving: But afterward one would have thought that
there was a furious Battle of Invisible Spirits, that the Powers and
Principalities of the Air had broke out into a fierce Contention, and that
transforming themselves into Angels of Light They were con^^^ted into Seraphick
Flames and Figures that are said to resemble their Natures.

THESE distinct and various Lights were in the shape of Swords, and their
several Bodies did not appear entirely at the same Time, but seemed to begin at
one End and shoot a prodigious way to a sharp Point in a moment, like one
continued Blaze of a flying Firebrand. As they continually appeared and
streamed, so they continually vanished, like the lucid Path of a Rocket, while
others were incessantly making their Appearance in different Places round
about. The Motion of them all was now pointed Upwards, and reached some a
greater and some a lesser extent: But none above more than from about 8 or 10
Degrees of the Horizon to about 6 or 8 from the Zenith. For the most part they
flashed unequally: But sometimes they seemed to begin, shoot and blaze all
together and made the Earth almost as light as Day. And then their Appearance
was like a Thousand Glittering Swords or Blazing Stars shooting upwards from
all sides of the Hemisphere, but leaving where their Points ended a vacant
Space in the Center of about 10 or 12 Degrees ^^^^eter, and sometimes of a
roundish and sometimes of various multangular Figures, directly over our Heads.
For there seemed to be a remarkable Part of the Heavens above us which they all
violently pushed at, but could never enter.

THUS they continued their Exercise for about a Quarter of an Hour, but
Decreased by Degrees both in Number, Quickness and Brightness till they left
the Heavens as they were before, and indeed all the Time of this amazing
Appearance almost as Clear I think as ever I saw them. It was the more
unaccountable and wonderful that there was no palpable Cloud hung over us: But
we saw the Stars shining very plainly all the while in the Intervals of the
Spears and in the very Places where they were, as soon as ever they vanished;
unless when the Brightness of the Apparition was so excessive as to drown their
Light.

AFTER the Scene was over, which was a little before 8 of the Clock, there was
every now and then a single Flash or Streak or 2 of Light as before in diverse
Parts of the clear Firmament, and some of these retained their Appearance for
above the Length of a Minute, which none of the other did ever reach near unto:
But as the Light of these was always considerably fainter, so they
proportionably continued longer before they entirely vanished.

I THEN walked with a Gentleman out of the Town and went up on a Rising Ground,
whence we saw a thick and lightsome Cloud directly in the North, and very near
the Horizon if not adjoining to it, that appeared exactly as if the Full Moon
was behind it, which was not to rise till after Midnight, and that we supposed
to be the Scource and Mine-head of all this surprising Train and Fire-work of
Nature. Every now and then we saw Beams of Light issuing from it, somewhat
like, but brighter than those we often see from the Sun through the Crevices of a
dark and broken Cloud, that made it to resemble the Royal Artillery of Pikes,
Spears and Swords and other Armor that are commonly placed under the Kings
Picture. And as the Cloud arose the Streams increased and flashed toward us,
and we thought the Aerial Armies were going to rally and make another onset:
But they retreated again, as the Cloud passed on by the Borders of the Horizon
to the West and slowly moved to a greater Distance from us.

BY the Brightness of the Fiery Pillars and the strange Illumination of the Air
remaining, I came home a foot about 10 of the Clock, when the Ground and
Heavens were every whit I think as light as immediately after Sunset. I sat up
and watched till 3 in the Morning when I could discern nothing more of them:
But they continued very visible till between 1 and 2; when the Heavens began to
be overspread with Clouds, and the Moon arose, which put a gradual End to this
real and most incomprehensible Vision.

THUS have I given you a bare, and I Am pretty sure an exact Historical Relation
of Things as I saw them. I have repeated it to Several who were Spectators with
Me, and entirely agree to my Description of the Manner, Appearance and Process
of this wonderful Prodigy. I might easily make a great many Philosophical and
Moral Reflections on the Things I have written and others I saw: But for
several Reasons which you see I have not room for, I desire to be ex^us'd at
Present.

I SHALL only take Notice, that whither we consider the Part of the Natural
Day, the Time of the Night, the State of the Sky, the Place of the Moon or the
Season of the Year; It was on all Accounts most conveniently suited and
ordered, and therefore very plainly seems to be designed by PROVIDENCE for a
general Observation and Terror. Accordingly we perceive already that it was
seen much in the same Manner and at the same Time by Multitudes in the Towns
and Villages round about its, even to the Distance of 20 or 30 Miles, and I
believe in all these Parts of the Kingdom. But I doubt you did not see so much
of it at LONDON: Because we observed that the Southern Quarter from us which is
over the City was in a great measure exempted from these Celestial
Illuminations.

I SHALL Conclude with telling you, that at the Beginning, Rise and Hight of
this Apparition, I could not sometimes forbear imagining, that Mr. WHISTON'S
Hypothesis was coming to pass, and that the Train of a Burning Comet was then a
seizing on this Terrestial World. But when the Blazes, and Pillars of Smoke
ascended from every side of the Horizon, I was then ready to think, the
Subterranean Fires were violently and successively issuing out of gaping
Caverns and Vulcanoes in the Country round about us.

GREAT and Marvelous are thy Works O Lord! The Enlightened Heavens show forth
thy Glory: and the Flaming Firmament thine handy Operations! Thy Signs are
Unsearchable: Thy Judgments are a great Deep: Thy Path is as in the mighty
Waters: Thy Footsteps are not known: and thy Ways and Purposes are past finding
out!

And so Dear Cousin, I Remain Your most Obliged, etc. Thomas Prince.

2 Pet. III. 10,-14. BUT the Day of the LORD will come as a Thief in the Night,
in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a great Noise, and the Elements
shall melt with fervent Heat; the Earth also and the Works that are therein
shall be burnt up. Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved; what
manner of ^ersons ought Ye to be in all holy Conversation and Godliness:
Looking for, and Hastening unto the Coming of THE DAY OF GOD; wherein the
Heavens being on Fire shall be dissolved, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent Heat! Nevertheless, We according to His Promise, Look for New Heavens,
and a New Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness. Wherefore, Beloved, Seeing
that ye look for such Things; Be diligent that ye may be found of Him in Peace,
without Spot and Blameless!
FINIS.

