Mr. Colmans Sermon Before The General Court, November 19th. 1719.

The Blessing OF Zebulun and Issachar.

A SERMON Preached Before the Great and General COURT or ASSEMBLY in BOSTON,
November 19. 1719.

By Benjamin Colman.

BOSTON, N. E. Printed by B. Green, Printer to His Excellency the GOVERNOR and
COUNCIL, for Samuel Gerrish, at his Shop. 1719.

In the House of Representatives.
BOSTON, Nov. 20th. 1719.
ORdered, That the Rever^^^ Mr. Colman be requested to give a Copy of his
Sermon Preached Yesterday, before this Court, in the Public Audience, in order
to its being Printed.

John Burrill, Speaker.

The Blessing OF Zebulun and Issachar.
DEUTERONOMY XXXIII. 18, 19. And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy
going out; and Issachar, in thy tents.

They shall call the people unto the mountain, there they shall offer
sacrifices of righteousness: for they shall suck of the abundance of the seas,
and of treasures hid in the sand.


THE Chapter contains the Blessing wherewith Moses the Man of God blessed the
Children of Israel before his death. He had been a Father to them, even as if
he had begotten and conceived them; He had carried 'em as in his bosom, as a
nursing father bears the sucking child, toward the land which God had sworn
unto their Fathers to give them: And now like Jacob, their natural Father, he
dies, as he had lived, loving them, caring for 'em, praying for and blessing of
'em. He had been their Governor and Commander in chief, and having had a
Princely Education in the Court of Egypt, and being highly accomplished by the
spirit of wisdom, meekness and courage for the Government of Israel, he was by
the Divine Election constituted King in Jeshurun; as our Context has it: And
now like another David he dies praying for and blessing the Inheritance of the
Lord over whom he had been ruling. Again, He had been a Prophet of the Lord
unto and among his People; Moses the Man of God, and an Eminent Type of the
Great Prophet and King of the Church; and now like the Ascending JESUS, being
about to leave his People, he lifts up his hands in prayer and blesses 'em. Yea
his Blessing of the Tribes, like that of Jacobs to his Sons, is a very famous
Prophecy, wherein he foretells the Lot of the Tribes, their Genius, Situation,
Employments, Honors, and Services; what should befall them hereafter; And the
Event answered his words, and showed that he spoke by Inspiration and the
Spirit of Prophecy.

The particular part of the Prophecy and the Blessing now before us is that
which respects Zebulun and Issachar; who are here put together because of their
Consanguinity and Nei'bourhood, being the Sons of one Mother, and their lots
joining together, which Moses in Spirit foresees and foretells. Now the
Prediction and ^^nediction, in common to both, respects 1. Their situation,
business and employment. 2. Their felicity and prosperity in their respective
station and business. 3. Their Religion and devotion toward God, which is best
of all.


1. The Blessing and the Prophecy here respects the Situation, business and
employment of these two tribes; Zebulun in his going out, and Issachar in his
tents. Zebulun was to inhabit on the Seacoasts, and his business was to ly
chiefly in trade and merchandise. As Jacob had long since foretold of him; Genesis
49.13. Zebulun shall be for an Haven of Ships, and his Border shall be unto
Zidon. "They had three ports on the Sea of Genesaret, and were not far from the
Mediterranean. It was a tribe of Merchants and Mariners. Their going out, though
sometimes it was to War, nor are they without their praise for valor; (see
Judge. 5.18. and 1 Chronicles. 12.33.) Yet it seems meant of their Voyages,
Exportation and Importation by Sea.

On the other hand, Issachars lot was more Inland, and his business more at
home, in his tents, as the text speaks. His was a more retired, and in his
Estimation a more happy, Country Employment, in tillage and feeding cattle.
Issachar had his quiet and profitable husbandry; and was well contented with
it; for as Jacob had prophesied of him long before, He s^^ that rest was good
and the land pleasant, while the Sea looked rough to him (says One) and he
bowed himself to labor.

2. The prophecy and the blessing here supposes and respects the felicity and
prosperity of these two Tribes, in their respective place and business: Rejoice
Zebulun in thy going out, and rejoice Issachar in thy tents. It is a Prayer for
each; let them rejoice, GOD grant 'em Cause of Joy both the one and the other;
this blessing I wish them from GOD. And it is a Prophecy, that they should have
reason to rejoice, and should be made to rejoice. It is a Promise of Joy from
GOD, whose blessing gives the Prosperity and the Joy. And it sounds also like a
Grarulation with them on this prospect; Moses joys in it, congratulates 'em
upon it; gives the blessing with a dying Fathers Joy --; My son, the Lord be
with thee, and prosper thou. Finally, It is a Precept to both one and the other
to rejoice in their lot, in their work, and in the blessing of GOD upon them
therein. Only observe, Zebulun is twice named: And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice
Zebulun in thy going out. This trading Tribe seems to have a double portion of
Joy and prosperity assured to it. Their prosperity comes over again therefore
in the next verse; They shall suck of the abundance of the Seas, and of
Treasures hid in the Sand. Some read -- The Inundation of the Sea; such the
flowing in of riches to them by it; their prosperity should be as a stood. They
should import abundance, and be enricht by their commerce and trafick; have
treasures in gold and silver, or in other things of equal value.

Treasures hid in the Sand. The Sand of the Seas and Rivers sometimes have
considerable quantities of gold and silver mixed in it. Besides that pearl,
coral, amber grease, etc. grow in the sea, and are fetched from the sandy
bottom of it. Thus Mr. Pool. But if Zebuluns coast were happy and rich in fish
like ours, I should rather go into that most natural Interpretation, the
Immense riches which we take from the sea by our books, our nets, and
Harping-Irons; the Cod and the Oil.

3. I come now to the last and best part of the Prophecy and the Blessing,
respecting these two Tribes and Brethren, Zebulun and Issachar; and that is
their Devotion toward God; as indeed how much obliged the One and the other to
serve the Lord with Joyfulness of heart in their abundance, and to consecrate
their Gains to him? They shall call the people unto the Mountain, there they
shall offen sacrifices of Righteousness.

Happy People! prosperous and pious! the one a good reason for the other; the
one no hindrance of the other. GODS blessing a people obliges them to be
religious; and yet how often is prosperity a means of a peoples Irreligion. A
prosperous people ought in justice and gratitude to be a devout people; and
happy it is when it is so. How happy Issachar and Zebulun in this that it was
foretold and promised of them, that they should be so. This was to be blessed
indeed. Let this be the Blessing of Town and Country, of the Seacoast and
Inland, of Husbandman and Marinet, Merchant and Trades man; in this let all
agree and unite --, Namely, to call one another to the Mountain, to offer there
the sacrifices of righteousness.

They shall call: how call? inform, instruct, invite, persuade, admonish and
exhort, excite and stir up one another, by word, by example, by influence; with
readiness and cheerfulness.

They shall call the people: what people? why 1. Their Neighbors and brethren
among whom they dwelt, and through whose towns and villages they passed as they
went up to Jerusalem. Or 2. Foreiners, the people of other Countries, that came
to trade among them, or to whom they sailed: they should inform them of Isreal's
GOD, his laws, his works, his name and house and worship; they should propagate
religion abroad by their Merchandise, and proselyte strangers at home. Happy
Zebulun, peculiarly advantaged for this, and that had a heart to improve it.
They shall call the people --

-- To the Mountain: what Mountain? the Mountain of the Lords house, Mount Sion
in Jerusalem; which was Mount Moriah. Here is a a prophecy of Solomon's Temple
there, the House of Worship. There was the Lords Altar at last fixed, and there
the Rest of his Ark. There the place of Sacrifice and Offerings, whither the
Tribes of Israel were commanded three times a year to appear before the Lord,
and not to come empty. Thither the Tribes went up, the tribes of the Lord unto
the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the LORD; and as they
went up they were will not to call upon one another saying, Let us go up to the
House of the Lord, Psalm. 122.

There they shall offer sacrifices of Righteousness. Such as the Law required
of them. Such as in gratitude and justice were due unto GOD from them. Such as
became their wealth and worldly state, as GOD should bless and prosper them.
There they offered Burnt sacrifices of fatlings, with the incense of rams;
bullocks with goats; their peace, their thank, their free will Offerings. --
Was this their Character and praise? let it be ours.

I come therefore to make a few practical and instructive Notes or Observations
from the Text.

I. And in the first place I observe, That GOD the Wise and Great Governor of
the world appoints, ordains and determines our Times and our Habitations; and
the Callings and Employments of people as well as the places of their abode.
Known unto GOD are all his works, from the beginning of the world unto the end
of it. There is not a place nor person or thing in it, nor a circumstance of
one or the other, but what is ordered by infinite Wisdom and Goodness, and with
consummate unerring Counsel. So in particular, are the habitable places of the
earth, the times of their flourishing, and who shall inhabit the same, through
the successive Generations of men. This the Apostle observed to the people at
Athens, and it is a prime and great Principle in the Doctrine of Divine
Providence; That God who made the world and all things therein, Lord of heaven
and earth, who gives to all life and breath and all things, has made of one
blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the earth, and bath
determined the times before appointed and the bounds of every ones habitation,
Acts 17.26. The times and circumstances of every person, in all the nations of
men, that dwell on all the face of the earth, are foreknown and determined by
the great Creator and Governor of all things. He that appointed the Earth to
be an habitation for the Children of men, has appointed to the Children of men
a distinction of habitation upon the earth. He made the earth to be inhabited
in one place and in another, and Man to multiply upon it, and to disperse over
it. He sets the bounds of Nations and appoints their times; the times of
Persons also and their dwelligns. He fits persons for the days and for the
places which he allots unto them; and by a differing Genius directs and
inclines one to this calling and abode, and another to that. He forms one man
for his husbandry and another for his merchandise. One loves the Seacoast and
another the Inland; One the trading busy Town, and another the retired silent
Villages. There is as much difference in men, though made of one blood, their
inclinations and capacities, gusts and relishes, as there is in places, times
and occasions. How near in blood were Zebulun and Issachar, and even their lots
adjoining too, and yet the one situated and made for trafick by sea, and if
Occasion for war; the other for pasturage and peace. So Esau and Jacob lay
together in one womb, and were born in one hour, we may suppose (and then under
the same Planet, if there were any thing in that) and the boys grew up
together under the same Roof, and the same Institutions of their gracious
parents; but the one was a cunning hunter, a Man of the field; the other a
plain man, dwelling in tents, Genesis 25.27. The one for an active, the other for
the contemplative life; the one a hunter of the feirce or timorous wild beasts
of the woods, the other a mild and gentle shepherd whose pleasure it was to
feed and tend useful sheep. Thus Providence first variously inclines and gifts
men, and then disposes of them here and there, to this or that: forms some for
the City and places 'em therein; some for the Country and seats 'em there;
inclines some to the Sea, and sends 'em forth into the world for the service of
many places; but keeps most ashore on the dry land, the more natural Element to
us; settles some in the Seaports, others in the Inland Towns and upon pleasant
Rivers; and it makes vastly for the common Good that men are so variously led;
some to a book, some to trades, some to the sea, and some to rural affairs.
It Is well it is so, says One on the Text; 'twas for the common good of Israel,
that the men of Zebulun were for Merchandise and the men of Issachar for
Husbandry; for if the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? and if
the whole were the ear, where were the seeing? Wherefore it is the wisdom and
duty of every one to accommodate themselves to their own proper places and
business, as God has called every one and disposed of them; wherever and to
whatsover it be; and it is a great happiness to be well pleased without place
and work.

II. I observe from the Text, That it is the Blessing of GOD that makes one
Place or another, and the Men of one Occupation or another prosperous and
successful. Issachar and Zebulun here are sharers in the same Blessing from
GOD, according to the Promise, Deuteronomy. 28.3 -- 7. Blessed shall thou be in the
city and blessed in the field; blessed in the fruit of thy ground; thy cattle,
thy kine and thy sheep; and blessed when thou come in and when thou go
out. Town and Country flourish by the same blessing of GOD, the GOD of the sea
and dry land. He teaches the merchant as well as the husbandman discretion; The
way of man is not in himself, it is not in him that walks to direct his
steps. It is GOD that girdeth a man with strength and makes his way perfect.
He blesses the work of our hand. He crowns places and persons with his
goodness. It is a vain and impious thing to look for success and prosperity in
any of our affairs, but by the blessing of Providence; and as evil is it to
ascribe the success that does at any time attend us to our own prudence or
diligence. This were to deify our selves, and to deny the GOD that is above; to
do sacrifice to our own net, and burn Incence to our own drag. Psalm. 127.1, 2.
Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain that build it; except the
Lord keep the City the watchman waketh in vain; it is vain for you to rise up
early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows. Deuteronomy 8.17. Say not thou in
thy heart, my power and the might of my hand has gotten me this wealth; but
thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for it is he that gives thee power to
get wealth.

To GOD therefore the Prophet directs the Husbandman, to ask wisdom and
strength, to depend on his blessing, and to give his praises when he reaps his
harvest. Isai. 28.23 -- 29. Give ye ear and hear my voice, hearken and hear my
speech. Does the plowman plow all day to sow? does he open and break the clod
of his ground? When he has made plain the face thereof, does he not cast
abroad the fitches, and scatter the cummin, and cast in the principal wheat,
and the appointed barley, and the rye in their place? For his God does instruct
him to discretion, and does teach him: -- This comes forth from the LORD of
Hosts, who is wonderful in counsel and excellent in working. It is supposed
here that the husbandman applies himself to his business with a great deal of
pains and prudence, from the sowing his seed to the threshing it out again;
that he does it all with a discretion and judgment equal to the labors of the
Summer season; But then all his skill, and the happy fruits of his labor, are
from GOD, the LORD of hosts, by whose excellent wisdom and counsel it is, that
men do any thing wisely and discreetly.

Has the Husbandman an Understanding for his work? or has he strength of body
for it? or are his oxen strong for labor? does he manure his ground well and
prepare it for the seed he sows? does the seed take root and spring and yield
him the expected Increase? have the rains fell and the sun shone on his fields
and pastures and orchards? how readily will he acknowledge his immediate
dependence on the hand and blessing of Providence in all these things?

And have not the Merchant and the Mariner as much dependence on the blessing
of Providence, and as much to acknowledge of it, in their prosperity and
successes? If they have wisdom for their business, which calls for a more
extensive knowledge of men and places, and the present seasons too; is it not
from GOD that they are instructed to discretion in their Voyages and ventures?
And as to their successes, does not GOD govern the winds and the seas, preserve
them in its ragings, and timely relieve them from its calms, and bring them to
their desired haven? Psalm. 107.23. They that go down to sea in ships, that do
business in great waters, these see the works of God and his wonders in the
deep. Well do they when they go forth to commend themselves to the care and
protection of Him, that has the waters in the hollow of his hand and the winds
in his fist; and when they come home alive, well do they to give Him praise on
high, who is mightier than the noise of many waters, than the mighty waves of
the sea.

If our Merchants look upon their stacks of fish, must they not own the
munificent hand of Providence as much therein, as the Husbandman in the stacks
of hay and corn? it is hard to say which has most of the divine bounty to show,
the barn-floors or the storehouses? And which is most formed for the enriching
us, the Inland-country for the drying our fish, and our beauteous Havens for
the receiving our Ships? And when the Merchant has housed his stores, and the
Husbandman has gathered in his, after cares and hazards it may be pretty equal;
still both depend on the continued watch of Divine Providence, to preserve
their substance from fires and from thieves, from moth and rust and vermin:
And yet when they open their stores for sale, they still depend on the
direction of Providence in their dealings with men; whether they shall fall
into honest or dishonest hands: and how often after all the labors of the
field, and the dangers of the sea, is the Increase made the spoil of the knave
and the unjust!

If then Zebulun be made to rejoice in his going out, or Issachar in his tents,
it is from the Blessing of GOD, upon which both the one and the other do alike
depend, and through Grace are alike under. For our text teaches the Husbandman,
the mariner, the tradesman and the merchant, that they do alike need and do
alike enjoy the Blessing of Providence; should seek it, observe it and ascribe
all their successes or frustrations to it. Which may suffice for the Second
Observation.

III. I would observe further from the Text, concerning the wisdom and bounty
and equal regards of Providence toward the people of one place and business
and of another; -- That riches and affluence, the comfort and happiness of life
is not confined here or there, but is common to one as well as the other; and
that GOD has wisely ordained the City and Country to have a mutual dependence
one on another; need of and benefit by one another. Issachar and Zebulun are
equally the Care of GOD, and he would have 'em both happy and rejoicing; Yea
and one in the other; for as they are Brethren so they are blessings one to the
other, and are politically as much interested in one another prosperity, as
they are naturally and by blood related to one another. So that neither has the
one any cause to envy the other, or to despise the other; but both abundant
reason to have the same care, honor and affection one for the other.

Zebulun has his pleasures, his stores and treasures; his toils too and cares
and fears; his breaking losses, shipwrecks and sore disasters. To day he
rejoices in his laden Ships, as they spread their fails and swim down the Tide
before the gentle gales, promising himself by the favor of GOD a rich return:
Or with a greater Joy he makes his distant Sails coming in, and as they greaten
to his eye so it may be his joyful hopes rise of the riches importing to him.
But how often does Zebuluns fears rise like the stormy wind, and toss him like
the troubled sea, and put him at his wits end? And how often does his heart
sink, like his stores in the mighty deep? it melts in him because of trouble.
The Day of the Lord of Hosts is upon the ships of Tarshish, and the loftiness
of man is bowed down, and the hau'tiness of men laid low, Isai. 2.16, 17.
Jehoshaphats Voyage and venture, who set out his ships with a view of much Gold
they should bring him from Ophir, but the first news of 'em is that they were
broken to pieces. Now comes in fitly the Burden of Tire, the Mart of Nations,
and the Harvest of the River her Revenue; but her ships howl, the Inhabitants
of the Isles are mute, Zidon is ashamed, the sea says -- I travail not; And
now what becomes of the joyous City, the crowning City, whose merchants are
princes! when the Lord of hosts purposes to stain the pride of all glory, and
to bring it into contempt. (see Isai. 23. Init.)

Who now would envy Zebulun his lot, his pleasing prospects, -- or gains? what
ventures and hazards does he run, what pains of mind endure? more then the
laboring body ever felt? Issachar is easy and at rest at home while the winds
blow, and the rain fall, and the storms beat. He has the pleasure of the Sun
shine too, his Soul calm as the light, and as the sweet air he breathes. All is
verdant and flourishing about him, by the favor of Providence. GOD makes him
to ly down in the green pastures, and leads him beside the still waters, and
restores his soul day by day, and year after year. His pastures are clothed
with flocks, and his valleys are covered with corn; they shout for joy, they
also sing. How many beauties ever entertain his eye, and what musical sounds
his ears? I mean not the softer notes of numerous Birds, of various notes, that
sing among the branches; but the music of his lowing herds, and bleating
flocks, which salute him daily and call him their Lord and Master. Which way
soever he turns his eye or bends his steps, the grass, the corn, the trees are
growing, the milk and honey flowing for him: so Issachar reaps the abundance of
the earth, while Zebulun sucks of the treasures of the sea, and has the joy of
the harvest his peculiar.

And yet lest Zebulun should envy his Brothers rest and plenty, Issachar has
his equal share of daily cares and constant labors; he goes forth unto his
work until the Evening; his earth brings forth briars and thorns, which he must
subdue, and he eats his bread in the sweat of his brows; he seems to live
meaner and fare harder generally than those of the city, but his food and sleep
is usually sweeter than theirs; he is liable also to the blasts and loss of his
Estate and Substance, if GOD withhold the rain or if he sends an excess of it,
if he command the Sun to scorch it it or if he forbid it to shine eno' thereon;
or if he commission the stormy winds to rend the laden trees and tear up the
Corn almost ripe for the fickle, or his ligatnings to fire and burn up the
stacks of hay and the corn in the barn. So the Tempest produces at GODS will as
many wrecks ashore as at sea; and the same rains that drown the growing Corn
and grass which was ripe for the scithe and the sickle, equally wash away the
treasures of fish taken from the sea, which need the kind heat of the Sun on
their flakes, as much as the mown grass does in the Meadows.

Thus equal are Zebulun and Issachar in their gains and pleasures, and in their
losses and sorrows, as GOD pleases to distribute the one and the other. So
little neason have the Town or Country to repine at their own, or to grudge one
another state. Yea so much reason is there at times, both to congratulate and
also to pity one another. We have in the end no private advantage one over the
other, nor any private Interest opposite to each other. As in the natural body
one Member cannot say to the other, I have no need of thee; so we are united by
GOD, and are both of the body, and have the comfort and service one of another,
and should have the same honor for and Joy in one another; having the same
care one for the other, and each one seeking the others wealth. Yea it is a
very fatal thing for Town and Country to entertain Jealousies of, or grudgings
at one another Interests or prosperities; or to conceive that it can be the
Interest or prudence of one to oppose, strai'ten, or put any hardships or
burden on the other. No, both should bear the common burdens together, yea
bear one another burdens, seek one another ease, rejoice in each others
successes, and so fulfill the law of love.

As One therefore says on the Text,

"Let Zebulun thank God for the gains, and make the best of the troubles and
losses of his Merchandise; and not despise the meaness, nor envy the quietness
of Issachars tents: and let Issachar be well pleased with the Retirements, and
content with the smaller (but surer) profits of his Country seat, and not envy
the show that Zebulun makes of greater riches and pleasures. But let their
mutual love, and pleasure in one another weal, be like their relation to,
dependence on and Interest in one another.

IV. I will make but one more Observation from the words, which is, That when
GOD makes people to prosper, be it in their husbandry, or in their merchandise,
he justly expects a very thankful and devout Return from the, as of worship and
praise, so in Offerings to him out of their Estates. So the text supposes and
requires of Zebulun and Issachar, that as GOD made them to rejoice in their
going out and in their tents, that they should call the people to the Mountain,
to offer the sacrifices of Righteousness to God.

It is our duty to rejoice before the LORD, in the sober cheerful use of all
the good things that the bounteous Providence of GOD gives us to enjoy. This
was a repeated Precept to Israel and a Statute of the God of Jacob; his Law as
gracious herein, as his Providence is bounteous to his People. See Deuteronomy. 12.12.
and 18. v. But then it is a standing and most equitable Rule too, "That
whatsoever we have the comfort of, GOD must have the Glory of: the Good things
whereof GOD gives us the Use we must use according to his will and for his
honor. Zebulun and Issachar must agree in this: both Town and Country must be
religious and devout, and minister together to the Worship of GOD, the support
of religion among themselves, and the propagation of it among their Nei'bours;
while they do together partake of the bounties of Providence. When the Mariner
comes in with his rich freight and cargo, when the Merchant receives a rich
Return for what he exported, when the Tradesman has been blessed in the work of
his hand, and the Husbandman has reaped boutifully of his fruitful field, GOD
expects from one and the other that they bring their offerings to his Mountain,
sacrifices of Righteousness: first the spiritual-sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving, from a devout and affected heart; the calves of our lips, giving
thanks to his Name, in public and solemn manner; and together herewith the
Obedience of our lives, and the offerings of our hands, in works of piety and
charity: first Our selves, Soul and body, a living sacrifice, which is but our
reasonable service; and then of our substance a meet proportion, which we
should hold sacred to GOD and to religious uses; sacred to GODS house and
worship and ministry, a worthy allowance; and sacred to the poor, who are his
Receivers also: Phil. 4.18. An Odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable,
etc. Heb. 13.16. But to do good and to communicate forget not, for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased.

Out Text forbids that Religion should be excluded from the Town or Country, or
that it should be confined to either. Nay it supposes that the genenous and
zealous support of it be the common spirit of both. That the Town be stirring
up the Country to it, and that the Country be as forward to promote it in the
Town. That both be Exemplary themselves in practical Godliness and devotion;
and that each be calling upon the other, to regard with due reverence the
Mountain of the LORD among us, his House and Ordinances, his Sabbath and
appointed worship, and to give an Entire Obedience to all his holy Laws and
Commandments, which he has given us for our Good.

The trading and Sea port Towns are apt to grow profane and loose in their
Manners; the Sea casts up the mire and dirt of profane swearing and cursing, of
excessive drinking, rude speech and carriage among them: Worldliness, pride,
vanity and sensuality, Uncleaness and every worldly lust that wars against the
soul are bro't in among them. These not only eat out much of the life of
religion in such busy places, but very often destroy the form of it. The Cares
and pleasures of the world devour the place. And yet there is sometimes a
singular spirit of piety and charity in populous and trading Towns; and as the
head ought to care for the body, so it is in fact true that the chief and rich
trading Towns often do most in promoting Religion in other places.

Indeed they ought to do so; having usually more capacity and ability, and more
opportunities and calls hereto, than other places. They have ordinarily more
knowledge of the Necessities of other places, keep correspondence with them,
have their Interests among them, and have their Influence upon them. They are
the Canter of the Province, or of the Kingdom; as the Heart lies in the midst
of the body, and is continually receiving and transmitting the blood (which is
the life) from and to every part; whereby also spirit and heat is in a
perpetual circulation. And then it must be said too, that in populous Places
there are commonly Persons of a generous and public spirit, that live in a Nei
bourhood and Acquaintance, and put one another upon and unite and concur in
noble Charities, and projections of pious Services, in other places as well as
among themselves. Through the favor of GOD it has been and is thus in London,
and it is so in Boston; and I pray GOD it may still be so.

But I would not have this honor in the text appropriated to Zebu un, the
trading Tribe. Mr. Henry observes that Expositors have gone too much into the
Appropriation of it to him; as if his alone were the praise here, of calling
the people unto the Mountain; there to offer the sacrifices of Righteousness.
GOD forbid, but that Issachar too have his part in this Blessing, in this
glory. It ought equally to belong to him. Pray GOD it ever may, as we trust it
did of old.

Our retired Inland Towns are (I hope) a more humble, meek, sober, temperate
people: They should be so, for they are free from many of our temptations, and
are more out of the way of evil customs and examples imported with our
Merchandise. They have more of the Wish, which the Town is ready to make for it
self; Rid me of strange Children, whose mouth speaks vanity. And yet if we
survey the Country places -- Is not drinking and wantonness, worldliness,
unrighteousness, and penury of spirit prevailing among them? Where is the place
almost that does any thing in way of assistance to others, for the propagation
of religion? and how many places are sadly wanting in the just and comfortable
support of it among themselves? Is not the maintenance of the Ministry and the
School accounted a burden, and evaded as a greivance, in many of our Towns? How
are the sacrifices of Righteousness wanting in such Tents of Issachar! how do
such call the people unto the Mountain of the LORD! do they do it by word, or
by Example? far the contrary! how do they need to be called upon themselves,
not to forget and forsake the same?

Far be it from us to think this of Issachar; Unworthy then to have been one of
the Tribes of Israel. No, it appears that this peaceful retired Tribe cherished
Learning, and yielded many learned persons. One of the Caldee paraphrasts reads
the Text, Rejoice Issachar in the Tents of thy Schools. Certainly then they
were a tribe noted for the Schools. And Onkelos more particularly, as I find
him quoted, reads -- Rejoice Issachar, who computest the times of the
solemnities at Jerusalem, when the Tribes of Israel shall be gathered to the
Sanctuary. By which it should seem that the Almanacks of Israel came from
Issachars tents. And agreably we find in David's time the Children of Issachar
thus uncharacterized, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. That they had Understanding of the times to
know what Israel ought to do. [This surely means something more than their
skill in the proper seasons for sowing, and planting and pruning; to know what
Israel ought to do in managing and improving their land Bp. Patrick.
: the more noble Interpretation seems the more genuine; they understood not
only the natural times, Mr. Henry.
but also the Ceremonial and Political; the times appointed for the solemn
Feasts, and when to call the people to the Mountain; Also the Public Interests
of the Nation, the temper of the people and tendencies of present Events. It Is
the Periphrasis of States men, that they know the times, Esther 1.13. Such use
to come out of Issachars tents to Parliament: Men of consummate Wisdom and
equal Interest and Influence; the beads of Issachar two hundred, and all their
Brethren at their Commandment. In this critical Juncture, says Mr. Henry, they
knew that Israel ought to make David King: 'twas not only expedient, but
necessary; the present posture of affairs called for it.

Happy Tribe! that knew both how to rule, and how to obey; that had both those
who were Intelligent and judicious to lead, and others modest and obsequious to
follow. I Such let the Blessing of our Inland-places be from the LORD our GOD!
yea such the blessing in common to Zebulun with Issachar; such their love of
knowledge and learning, and such the Consecration of their parts and estates to
the service of the Sanctuary and of the Public.

They shall call the People unto the Mountain, and there make their Offerings.
Let Zebulun Mr. Henry in loc.
improve his Commerce with the nei bour Nations to whom he goes out, for this
noble purpose, to propagate Religion among them, and invite them into the
knowledge and service of the GOD of Israel. 'Twere well if the Enlargement of
trade with foreign Countries might be always made to contribute (as it has
greatly done) to the spreading of the Gospel. Perhaps this Prophecy concerning
Zebulun looked as far as the first preaching of CHRIST and his Apostles, which
began there, and so in a sense, and the highest sense, they might be said to
call the people to the Mountain, scil. into the Kingdom of the Messiah. Let
this be still done by the may of the Sea, as it was there in Galilee of the
Gentiles, Mat. 4.15. In this best sense of all, let Zebulun suck of the
abundance of the seas. Isai. 60.5, 16. The abundance of the sea shall be
converted unto thee, the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee; -- they
shall come with acceptance upon mine altar, and I will glorify the house of my
glory: Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows: --
Thou shall also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and the breast of kings --

The meanwhile let Issachar be zealous and forward for the LORDS Holy
Solemnities, and their zeal provoke many. As it has been often observed, that
though places of Concourse have commonly more of the light of Religion, they that
dwell in the Country have more of the life and heat of it. So let vital piety
flourish in Issachars lot, and his Schools not die; let his devout Families
frequent the Sanctuary of the LORD, and bring Offerings to his House out of
their substance; the males of their flocks. In a word, "Let the merchandise of
Zebulun, and the hire of Issachar be HOLINESS to the LORD; for them that dwell
before the LORD (i. e. His Ministers) to eat sufficiently, and for durable
clothing. Isai. 21. ult. --

[It was a Law to Israel in their three solemn Feasts, when they called one
another to the Mountain, that they should not appear before the LORD empty, but
says the Law -- Every man shall give as he is able, according to the Blessing
of the LORD thy GOD which he has given thee, Deuteronomy. 16.16, 17. How peremptory
is this Injunction, both the prohibition and the precept! they shall not appear
before the LORD empty, -- every man shall give as he is able. GOD is absolute
in his demand of an offering at our hands, as well as from our lips; this
constitutes the sacrifice of Righteousness, both coming from the heart: but
then how equal, moderate and gracious is the Demand; let every man give as he
is able and as GOD has blessed him. It is but something of what GOD has first
given; a part of his Blessing returned to Him again; only let it be in
proportion to the Ability with which He has blessed thee.

The Phrase there is yet more peculiar, None shall see my face empty. In those
times none approached before their earthly Prince or Ruler without a Present,
to express their respect and honor, affection and duty. And a late Traveller
Mr. Maundrells Journey from Aleppo to Jerusalem. p. 26.
tells us, that unto this day in those Eastern Countries, the friend that
visits another carries a present in his hand; from which he illustrates the
words of Saul to his servant, when he proposed it to his Master to go unto the
Seers House; -- 1 Samuel 7.9. There is not a present to bring to the Man of God.
In like manner, GOD our great Benefactor is not to be worshipped without some
present in our Hand. The devotion which fills the heart, will the hand also
with offerings to the LORD. We must honor the Lord with our substance, and
with the first fruits of all our Increase. He who requires us to pray and to
praise him, has required us also to support his Worship and to give alms
always. The tribute of praise is an empty thing, without the tribute out of our
Estates too. We may not defraud or rob GOD of one Due or another. He has taxed
us, and appointed his Receivers; and has He not right and power to do so? He
requires a worthy part for his Worship, and a generous part to the poor.

So let us come before the LORD on his Sabbaths, on Fasts, and Thanksgiving
days. Methinks none of these should pass without a Contribution for the poor,
or for some pious use. It seems a great defect among us, where such Solemnities
have passed without Collections. It is the stated practice of the Church in
Cambridge, and some other places, on Thanksgiving days, and I wish it were a
custom in every Congregation through the Land.

So let our Thanksgivings be days of gladness and feasting, a good Day and of
sending portions, Esther 9.19. Can there be a day of religious Gratitude, a day
of holy rejoicing in GODS benefits, a good day in the sight of GOD, a good one
to the poor, or can it be a good one to out own Souls, without acts of Charity
and alms attending it? the morsels we give away shall more comfort our hearts
than those we eat, and if we give a portion to six and to seven so manifold
shall our satisfaction increase, by their rejoicing with us in every good thing
we enjoy, and by their blessing GOD for it and us.

And in our days of fasting and humiliation this is the sacrifice of
Righteousness. Isai. 58.7. Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that
thou bring the poor that are cast out to thine house? when thou see the naked
that thou cover him, etc.

Some are richer than others, and so able and obliged to do more in works of
Charity and Piety than others. To whom much is given, of him shall be much
required, Luke 20.48. The ability of people is known to GOD and to themselves.
They should not out of vainglory give beyond their Ability, nor should they
from a niggard spirit deny the proportion wherein GOD has given to them. The
rich men in our Saviors day cast into the Treasury of the LORD out of their
abundance, the poor widow bro't her mite: 'twas her all, and so more than their
Offerings. The Princes and rich men in Moses time, and in David's, gave
magnificently toward the Tabernacle and the Temple; the poor bro't meaner
offerings, but no less acceptable from them. And this is the standing Rule yet,
(for Reason, Righteousness and Equity are the same for ever, and alike honorary
to GOD under both Testaments). 1 Pet. 4.11. Let him do it as of the Ability
which GOD gives, that God in all things may be glorified. GOD cannot demand
less and be just to Himself, or have us just to him. We cannot do justice, and
love mercy, and walk humbly with our GOD, if we do not give to the worship of
GOD and the necessities of men, in some proportion to the Estate with which GOD
blesses us.

If GOD has blessed thee, will thou not give something at his demand, out of
his blessing, his gift to thee? Is not this an easy rent to thy Proprietor, a
reasonable piece of Gratitude to thy Benefactor? Will He continue to give,
continue to bless thee, if thou withholdest more than is meet? will it not tend
to thy decrease? for what if he withhold his hand too? withdraw his blessing,
which makes thee rich?

He that has blessed thee, knows thy estate what it is, and he knows thy works
and thy charity: He measures both the one and the other, and may take the
forfeited loan, and sue out the Principal for want of receiving his yearly
Usury. The detaining his tithe may lose thee the whole. And thy Bonds are as
fairly liable to be tyth'd to him, as thy Lands: for do they not ly open to his
eye, locked up as they are in thy Cabinet; and are so many Records under thy
own hand of his Gifts to thee, and thy Obligations to Him. Wherefore lay by in
store for pious uses, as the Lord thy GOD prospers thee.

O if the men of every Tribe, and of every degree, would but come into this
kind and righteous spirit, the face of the earth would be changed, the world
come into order and beauty, and felicity would return and remain here below.
GOD would pour out his blessing, that there would not be room to receive it.
And with the riches of his bounty there would come no sorrow. But the Grace
that seasons our hearts would sweeten the Enjoyments of our lives, and render
us a treble blessing in them. Psalm. 85.9, -- 13. Surely his salvation is nigh
them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our land. Mercy and truth are met
together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other. Truth shall spring
out of the earth, and righteousness shall look down from heaven. Yea the Lord
shall give that which is good, and our land shall yield her Increase.
Righteousness shall go before him, and shall set us in the way of his steps.]

And now the LORD, the GOD of Zebulun and Issachar, bless us with this gracious
and blessed spirit, out of his House this day! I though it it not amiss to improve
this one more Opportunity granted me of speaking to the Town and Country
together. And the rather let it seem seasonably because GOD has given us a good
year both in our Husbandry and Merchandice, for which we have lately been
offering up our solemn Thanksgivings. And now that the season for Charity is
come on, having a long and cold Winter before us, and the poor always with us;
let us be moved to Emulation which shall have their hearts most enlarged, in
Gratitude to GOD, in Devotion at his House, and in Alms in secret; And GOD who
searches the heart, and sees in secret, will reward it openly.

FINIS.

