A LETTER FROM One in the Country to his Friend in Boston, containing some
Remarks upon a late Pamphlet, Entitled, The Distressed State of the Town of
Boston, etc.

BOSTON: Printed by J. FRANKLIN, for D. HENCHMAN, and sold at his Shop over
against the Brick Meeting House. 1720.

SIR,
THE Papers and Pamphlets you lately sent me were a very acceptable Present,
for which I return you hearty thanks. We that live more than half a hundred
Miles from Boston, are apt to be very fond of knowing what is a doing among you;
though sometimes after we know it, we find too much reason to lament it. So it
has happened in part to me. The pleasure of a Letter from my Friend, and of
learning the Remarkable occurrences of the Town was considerably dampt by the
concern which one of the Pamphlets gave me. I mean that Entitled, The
Distressed State of the Town of Boston. Not that my Personal Interest is any
more affected by the Nations in the Pamphlet, than that of almost any ordinary
man in the Province. My Interest either does already, or will very quickly (as
you well know) lie chiefly the same way with the Interest of the Author of the
Pamphlet, who is (I suppose) one of them that cast their Bread upon the Waters.
But my trouble proceeded only from a Sincere Regard to the Public Welfare,
which I apprehend the Gentleman has utterly mistaken, and even the true
Interest of his own Town too; and yet he has set his Mistakes (as I take 'em
to be) in so plausible a light, as will be very likely to lead many others
astray with him; And should the Government and Country fall into his measures,
I am greatly deceived if we should ever see good Days again, so long as such
measures should be pursued. Besides, the Gentleman has represented things in
such a smart and moving manner as (I fear) will tend much to stir and irritate
men's Passions and revive those Heats and Animosities, which have done us too
much mischief already.

However, I don't imagine he did this with any design to disturb the public
Peace. I suppose these things lay much upon his Spirits; and therefore when he
set himself to writing, his heart (unobserved by him) waxed hot within him, and
that naturally and almost necessarily enlivened and sharpened his expression.

As to your desire of my Thoughts upon the subject, the place which I live in
is so remote, that I cannot be informed of the certain truth of several matters
of Fact, which might serve much to enlighten and direct me; but yet I am
persuaded from the Reasons of things, that (as I said before) the Gentleman is
utterly mistaken in his Notions of the true Interest of his Country. However, I
am liable to mistakes as well as he; I must leave it therefore with you, and
with any to whom you shall think good to communicate my thoughts, to judge of
the justness of them, and whether my Reasons are sufficient to support them.

In setting down my thoughts, I shall take notice,

1. First, Of some ill Uses which have been made of our Province Bills, and
some unhappy Consequences of making such evil uses of them. And,

2. Secondly, I shall make some Remarks upon the most observable Passages in
the Pamphlet it is self.

1. First then, concerning the ill Uses which have been made of our Province
Bills, and the unhappy Consequences of such uses.

When the Government first issued out our Province Bills, the Trading Part of
the Country found themselves furnished with a New Medium of Exchange, which
would answer the ends of Trade well enough among ourselves: Upon this they
quickly improved the Advantage put into their hands to import foreign
Commodities in far greater quantities than the produce of the Country would
make Returns for; and therefore they soon began to export the Silver Money
passing among us to make Returns with; which Silver they bought up with the new
Medium which the Government had put into their hands. When by this means Silver
became a little scarce, they were obliged to give some considerable advance in
Province Bills to purchase it. And this advance became greater still and
greater in proportion as Silver grew more and more scarce. Besides, which I
think some have remarked, that it received an observable Increase, upon the
Postponing the Taxes, and the Emissions of Loan Money once and again; so that it
was lately at the rate of about Twelve Shillings an Ounce, and I suppose it
continues thereabouts still.

Now Silver having for this Reason been reserved for diverse Years past to be
sold for Exportation, by this means Paper gradually became almost the only
Medium of Exchange among our selves: The very Counters which pass among us for
Penies had like all to have been swept away: Many of the Traders sometime after
the Emission of the Loan Money (as I remember) buying them at considerable
Advance in Province Bills to send away, though they pass but for halfpence in
England; so vile were the Province Bills in the Eyes of the Men, who now cry,
they shall be undone if they have not more of them, that they would lavish them
away at the rate of Twelve Shillings for an Ounce of Silver, and give fourteen
Pence (as I think I have been told) some of them did for a dozen Counters,
which they knew would go but for halfpence a piece abroad! And I desire to
know whether the very Men who turn poor Laborers and Trad^^ men off with one
half or Two Thirds Goods, cannot still find Province Bills enough to purchase
Silver at the rate of about Twelve Shillings an Ounce, whenever they hear of
any to be sold? But this only by the By at present.

Now as the Value of Paper has gradually sunk in comparison with Silver, so
the Merchants have advanced upon their Goods in some proportion, and so the
Price of the Country's produce has been gradually rising also; save that through
the abundant Blessing of God upon the Husbandry of the Land last Year, the
plenty of Provisions has lowered the Price of it for the present; but had it
not been for the plenty, the price of it would have been as extravagant and the
sale as quick as ever. something of the same nature may be said of our Oil,
which partly through the good Success of our Whale-men last Winter, but more
especially by an Accident (which I forbear to mention) is said to be falling
too. But as for other things which have not met with some such accident^^
^ration, as far as I can learn, their price continues as high as ever.

That this is a true account of the rising of all Commodities and Necessaries
of Life to the extravagant price they have been at for some Years past, is
evident, because any man might all along, and may still with Silver Money, at
seventeen penny weight, buy almost any Commodity or Necessary, at pretty near
the same rate he might before our Province Bills were first issued out. I say
almost any Commodity, etc. and at pretty near the same rate, etc. because I am
sensible that in some things, at some times there has been a difference
especially those things that are proper to be exported to other Countries, as
Fish, Oil, etc.) for which there is another manifest Reason to be assigned, and
that is this, That the Importation of foreign Commodities was for some Years so
vast, that all the Silver our Merchants could procure, and the whole Produce of
the Country besides, were not sufficient to answer for it. This obliged our
Merchants to catch greedily at any thing that would serve to make Returns with,
and this gave the Possessors of such things an advantage to raise the price of
them, even above the difference which there was between Paper and Silver.

Thus the Trading part of the Country making an ill use of the advantage which
the Emission of Province Bills gave them, by importing a vast quantity of
needless foreign Commodities, have in the first place found themselves
necessitated to buy up, and send off all our Silver and Gold to the perplexing
and almost ruining the whole Country: and secondly because These and the whole
Produce of the Country together were not enough to make Returns with, therefore
they have caught eagerly at every thing fit to be exported, and by doing so
have raised the price of such things: And this they have done to their own
Confusion, for now the price of such things is so high that there is hardly any
thing f^^ to be exported, that will turn to any account in other Countries; And
so no man knows where to make an Adventure, to see a new penny for an old one:
Not because there is not money enough still to purchase all the produce of the
Country fit for Exportation (for if there were not, and so these things lay
upon the Producer's hands, I am sure they would soon be cheap enough) but
because we value our Paper money so little, and prize our Country's produce so
high, that every thing costs more pence here among our selves, than it will
fetch again abroad in Foreign Countries. Now whether Emitting more Bills be the
way to increase our Value for them, or to lower the price of our Country's
Produce, I leave the World to Judge.

But this Mischief of sending off our Silver and Gold, and raising the
Country's produce to such an extravagant price, is not all, for before the Law
for shortning Credit, the Gentlemen concerned in Trade (to clear their
Warehouses and Shops of Goods the faster and make room for a new Store, and
Enliven Trade) were very fond of Trusting out great quantities of Goods, with
almost any Body that would take them, And I doubt the same humor prevails two
much still. Now we simple Country People being mightily pleased with fine
things far fetched and dear bought (so long as we could have goods without
paying ready money for them) made no scruple, many of us, to take up much more
upon trust than we earnt money to pay for, hoping that a plentiful Crop of Corn
or some other Smile of Providence would enable us to pay for all, one time or
other. And since, when we have been dunn'd and worried by our Creditors, we
have cried out for more money too. Whereas the truth of the Case is, if there
had been a Million of Province Bills Emitted, we could not have paid our Debts,
unless Money had been given us, or we had sold or Mortgaged our Lands to procure
it, for we have had nothing to spare, which was worth money, but what we have
had and may still have money for (unless it be Provision just at this time by
reason of the present plenty of it) but all we could produce has not been near
enough to discharge the vast Debts we had foolishly contracted.

And now what shall be done in such unhappy Circumstances? Why, say the
Traders, Do but two things and the Wheels will all be set a moving again, and
every Body almost will have an opportunity to improve his Talent.

1. First, Let the Act for Limitation of Credit be repealed. If this be done,
Country People will throng our Warehouses and Shops again, and take as much on
trust as ever. And then,

2. Secondly, Let a private Bank be established. This all honest well-meaning
People will go and Mortgage their Estates to, for money to pay us for the Goods
we have trusted them with: We shall most of us be Bankers our selves, and by
that means (first) we shall have men's Estates mortgaged to us. And then (in the
next place) we our selves shall get the very money again immediately for which
those Estates were mortgaged. When we have gotten such a fine sum of money, we
shall snatch at every thing fit for Exportation more briskly than ever. This
will raise the price of such things higher than it has been yet, and then it
will turn to but little Account to send them elsewhere; and so we shall
complain again, that no man knows where to make an Adventure to see a new penny
for an old one: Unless (perhaps) those of us that are Bankers, should have our
Mouths partly stopped with forfeited Mortgages, and the rest of us should take
better Care than we used to do, to trust none but such as have good real
Estates, which will pay for all at last.

I would not be understood to think, that the Author of the Distressed State,
etc. and other Gentlemen in Trade, who wish to have the Limitation Act repealed
and a private Bank established, do really say, or so much as think within
themselves, that all the above mentioned pernicious consequences would follow
thereupon. Far be it from me to imagine so vile a thing of them. My opinion is,
that they are sensible that such a Repeal and such an Establishment would give
them some present Relief, and that they have never looked thoroughly into the
Train of wretched Consequences which will ensue.

I have therefore mentioned these things only as Consequences which I apprehend
will unnavoidably follow from the natural operation of things, upon the Repeal
of that Act, and the setting up of a private Bank, whether Men are sensible of
it now or not. But I believe the Consequences will appear genuine to every
disinterested Person (as soon as ever they are suggested to him) without any
Argument to demonstrate them to be so.

2. I proceed now in the second place, to make some Remarks upon the most
observable Passages of the Pamphet it is self. In doing which I shall have
frequent recourse to the Truths already advanced.

Boston, which was within these ten Years one of the most flourishing Towns in
America, will within half so many more Years be the most miserable Town, etc.
page 1. The flourishing of Boston depends upon the flourishing of its Trade.
The Distressed State of the Trade of Boston, is not owing to the want of
Province Bills wherewith to purchase the produce of the Country to be exported
on Adventures. All the produce of the Country is now bought up, and most of it
at an extravagant price too; and all the Silver and Gold besides, as fast as it
comes in, by our Authors own Acknowledgment, p. 3. The Difficulty is owing
therefore to the high price of the Country's produce, that it will not turn to
account to send it elsewhere. And this is a mischief the Merchants have brought
upon themselves by the means abovementioned; and the emitting more Bills of
Credit will rather increase than lessen the evil, because it will occasion the
Value of the Bills sinking yet lower, and the produce of the Country rising
higher in proportion.

But if there were nothing of all this, yet I should not wonder that the Trade
of Boston fails now considerably; and I believe it will continue to do so (at
least for a time) more and more. For this I think I can give two good reasons.

1. First, Several other Towns in this and the neighboring Provinces, which
during the late French War, depended chiefly upon Supplies from Boston, and
traded themselves but little, and some not at all to foreign Parts, are now
getting more and more into a foreign Trade, to the supplying in good measure
not of themselves only, but of the adjacent Country also.

2. Secondly, The extravagant Price foreign Commodities have been at for some
years past, has put Country People lately upon making more for themselves and
buying less from abroad. And this I hope they will continue to do still more
and more; for which reason I could almost wish, that the price of foreign Goods
might yet continue as high as ever.

The Medium of Exchange is so exhausted, that in a little time we shall not
have wherewith to buy our daily Bread, p. 1. Actions speak louder than Words,
and with more truth and certainty. It is a certain Truth, that the greater want
men feel of any thing, the more they value it, and the more loath they are to
part with it. Therefore I beg you, Sir, to inform me whether your Merchants can
still find Province Bills to lavish away at the rate of Twelve Shillings an
Ounce for Silver, whenever they can hear of any to be sold. If this be the Case
(as I doubt it is, for our Author himself confesses, p. 3. that Silver and Gold
is bought up yet, as fast as it comes in) then it is certain, the Merchants have
Medium enough to carry on the same Trade still, which has hurt the Country and
themselves too all along, by exporting not only all the produce of the Country
bought at an extravagant Price, but also all the Silver and Gold they can get
besides, in order to bring in a needless excessive quantity of foreign
Commodities, or to pay for them which are already brought in. And whilst this
Trade is driven, it is vain to look for better Times. For while more is imported
from other Countries and consumed among us, than our own produce alone can
balance, we must continue growing poorer daily. And while there are so many
Province Bills standing out, as that Merchants can find their Interest in
buying Silver with them, most things will unnavoidably continue dear, in
proportion to the difference the Merchants make between Paper and Silver.

And indeed if Province Bills were become so scarce, that the Merchants could
not catch at the produce of the Country so eagerly as to hold up the
Extravagant Price of it, and so had no occasion, nor indeed possibilty of
sparing them to buy Silver, I don't see that any body would be put to much
greater difficulties than they are now. For if it were once come to this, that
the Merchants could not find their interest in exchanging Province Bills at any
advance for Silver, then our Province Bills would be equally prized, and would
purchase as much as Silver at seventeen penny weight, as indeed they ought: And
so the price of all things would fall in proportion.

Now if by the lowering of the price of other things, Twenty Shillings will
purchase me as much a while hence as Forty will now, then when such time comes,
I shall be able to shift as well with Twenty, as I can now with Forty. So that
the growing Scarcity of our Province Bills, seems to be the only means to raise
the Value of them, and to lessen the price of the Country's produce. And when
once our Bills are valued as high as Silver, then the Silver and Gold, which
our Author himself acknowledges comes in, will be sure to stay among us; and
not before. Then also the cheapness of things fit to be Exported, would soon
teach our Merchants where to make Adventures to see something more than a new
penny for an old one.

Next comes a complaint of the vast number of Law suits, of Writs out against
honest Housekeepers, who cannot raise money to pay their Debts, unless they will
sell their Houses at half value. And this because they are obliged to work for
half or two thirds Goods. With us in the Country Estates are near as high in
Value as ever. No man has Houses or Lands to sell, but what may have Money for
them if he be reasonable in his Demands. If Estates are sunk near half the
value in Boston, I desire to be informed, whether Numbers of Trades^^^ (...)
have not removed thence into the Country within these few Years? And whether by
this means Tenements and Houses have not been emptied of their Inhabitants? If
this be the case, it is no wonder their price is fallen; for who that has an
House to live in himself, would buy one (for ought he knows) to stand empty? Or
who that has no House of his own, would give a great price for one, when enough
others stand empty ready to receive him for an easy Rent?

I desire also to be informed what it was that drove these Laborers and
Tradsmen out of Boston? Whether it was not being turned off with half Goods, by
them that saved their Bills to buy Silver, that they might send for more Goods,
and so pay their Laborers again after the same manner? If this be so, the case
of your Laborers is much to be pitied, and they would consult their own
Interest if more of them would remove into the Country. We want their Labor,
and should be glad to give them their Wages. We cannot make the improvement of
our Lands which we desire, for want of Laborers: Laborers think us obliged to
them, if they will work for us at almost any rate.

The Law which was made about Twenty Months since to shorten Credit, happened
to be very ill timed, etc. I also am of the same Opinion but for a very
different reason; And I will add, not so effectual as were to be wished
neither, I think not so effectual, because so long a time as two Years was
allowed for trusting; and so people have not been sufficiently discouraged from
running needlessly into Debt. Whereas had the time been limited to but a quarter
or half a Year, far the greatest part of the Debts, which our Author complains
men are now arrested for, had never been contracted. And I think it was ill
timed, because it was not made many Years ago: If it had, and had been made so
strict as to have utterly prevented trusting one another in Trade, I am sure
the Silver and Gold could never have been swept away, nor any of the Calamities
we are now groaning under been brought upon us. For it is easy to see, that if
we had never trusted one another, the worst Husbands of us all could not have
spent more than we earnt; for when we must pay ready Money for every thing we
buy, we cannot buy more than we earn Money to pay for; unless we borrow Money at
Interest to support our Extravagance; a thing which but few would have been so
foolish as to have done. Indeed when Debts are already contracted, Do but set
up a Bank to borrow of, and we have found from sad experience already, that men
will be ready enough to mortgage their Estates for money to pay their Debts. But
(I say again) where Debts were not before contracted, few men would have been
so foolish, as to borrow Money at Interest to provide needless Fineries and
Gew-Gaws for their Families. The Folly of so few could not have affected the
Country. Now as none of us could have spent more than we earnt, had we not
trusted one another, so doubtless many people in the Country would have been so
prudent as not to spend so much. And had some earnt more than they spent, and
none been in a capacity to spend more than they earnt, I am sure the Country in
general must have been on the thriving hand: It could not have consumed so much
in foreign Commodities, as it would have raised of it is own Produce. The
Exportation therefore would have been greater than the Importation of foreign
Commodities; and so Silver and Gold, instead of being exported at the rate it
has been, would have been continually coming in to make the Balance.

And as, if we had never fallen into the way of Trusting, we should never have
come into the Difficulties we now labor under, so, if we could all agree to
leave it quite off, it would immediately begin to turn the Scales in our
Favor: For when no man can consume more than the yearly product of his
Husbandry, Manufacture, Fishery, etc. will furnish him with money to pay for, if
at the same time there be a number of People who wont spend all their yearly
produce for foreign Commodities; then it is plain, that the yearly Produce of
the Country must be more than the Consumption oe it; and if the yearly produce
of the Country be morf than it is Consumption, then there will be yearly a
Surplusage of the Produce of the Country to be exported. For this overplus
(part of our Export) it will be to no purpose to bring in foreign Commodites,
because the Country will not consume such a quantity: Therefore our Merchants
must have their Returns for this Surplusage (...) our Produce in Gold or
Silver, Immediately, unless they have Debts to pay first in foreign Countries.
All this (I think) is as plain and certain as a Mathematical Demonstration, and
I challenge any man to confute it. I don't therefore see need of any other
Project. Do but wholly leave off trusting, this alone will do the Business, and
make all things begin to go well quickly. If you object, That it is
impracticable to contrive a Law so as to put an utter end to Trusting; I am
persuaded that is a Mistake. I think if I had time to enter upon the Argument,
I could easily tell how an effectual Stop might be put to trusting by a Law, in
such a natural and necessary way, as that hardly any body would ever come to
suffer the Penalty of it; and then certainly, no body has any reason to fear
it.

Upon the whole, it is the Duty of Civil Rulers to consult the Welfare of the
Public. Our Legislators saw the Door, at which all our Calamities have broken
in upon us, standing wide open: They have puffit it partly to; and so have in
some measure checked the madness of the People, who without Fear or Wit were
running into Debt, to their own Ruin, and the Ruin of them that trusted them,
and of the whole Country. And now whether what our Legislators did, was
inconsistent with Justice and Mercy, let the World judge I am only sorry that
the Door was not close shut and barred. If it had been so, we should have felt
the comfortable effects of it before now. There would have (...) no opportunity
for the Oppression complained of p. 2. And the Mercy of the Government in
hindering inconsiderate People from doing themselves harm, would have prevented
the need of Private Persons extending their Compassion and forbearance to them
whom they had dealt much more kindly with, if they had refused to trust them.

I shall add one thing more, with reference to the Limitation of Credit, which
I don't remember that any of the Writers about our present difficulties have
taken any notice of. Nothing is more certain, than that a Trade may be gainful
(at least for a time) to Merchants, which yet may prove ruinous to their
Country. It is said the Trade with France would ruin England by draining it of
its Money, if the dangerous Importations from France were not discouraged by
excessive Duties in England. England being a Sovereign State, may secure it is
self this way; but we who are a poor dependent Province, may not discourage
some Importations which we may think injurious to us, by incumbering them with
heavy Duties. The only way we have to secure our selves, is to put an end to
Trusting, or to allow but a very short time for it. For if People may not only
pay out all the Money they earn for foreign Goods, but may also run as much into
Debt as they please besides; and if they are gotten very much into the way of
doing so, then it is very likely that as the Merchants have already carried off
all our Silver, so they will in a short time make themselves Masters of most of
our Lands also for Book Debts. Since we have lost our Silver, it concerns us to
look well to our Lands.

I believe by this time every Body's Belly is full of the Public Bank, etc. I
wish it were so; but I fear this is not the case. I know no good that it has
done: But if I am not mistaken, it has prolonged our Miseries, divided the
Country into Parties, and given many menan Opportunity to involve themselves
worse than they were before.

Many of the Borrowers of the Loan Money, and of such as have a mind to borrow,
are become so vain as to fancy, that that Money will at last be paid by the
Province, or else that it will never be paid at all. And truly I cannot tell
what might be done of that nature, if Borrowers should generally have the doing
of it. However, I hope I shall make it evident, that it is every Man's
Interest, who is not a Borrower to consent to neither of these Things.

For the First, I am sure it is not just that my Estate should be taxed to help
(...) voluntarily, and it may be needlessly run himself into.

As for the second, the not paying these Bills in at all, This every Man that
has any of them in his possession is concerned to look to, whether he knows it
or not. And that for this reason; It is not the Governments saying, This
indented Bill of so much, shall be in value equal to Money, and so turning it
into the world, which really gives it it is value (as some perhaps fondly
imagine) but because we know that we must all pay Taxes, and these Bills will
enable us to pay these Taxes as well or better than any thing else; therefore
it is that we value the Bills yearly emitted, for defraying the Charges of the
Government, and if these Taxes had never been postponed, the demand the Bills
would have been in for paying Taxes, would have made us esteem them at an
higher rate than we do now.

Again, because we know that there are good real Estates laid in Pawn for all
the Bills emitted by way of Loan, and because we know that within a certain
Term of Years, if we have any of these Bills in our hands, the borrowers must
certainly buy them of us at their full value to redeem their Mortgages:
Therefore it is that we accept the Loan Bills, and esteem them as Money. Now if
this be the truth of the Case, then, if ever it should be enacted that these
Bills should never be called in, they would at once lose all their value, and
be worth no more to them that have them in their keeping, than so many bits of
Blank Paper.

Or if the calling in of these Bills should be deferred beyond the set time, it
will make men doubt whether they will ever be called in or not, and so their
value will sink in proportion to the Jealousy men have about it, which will
likewise be to the Loss of the Possessors of them; so that it is plainly the
Interest of every man in the Province that is not a Borrower, and has any of
these Bills in his keeping, that they should be called in precisely at the time
appointed, to redeem the Estates that are laid in Pawn for them. For nothing
else but this, when the time is once expired, can make them as good as Money to
those in whose hands they shall be at that time.

There will be more than Threescore Thousand Pounds to pay, and nothing to pay
it with; for the Bills come in for the Interest: How then shall the Principal
be Paid? This is putting men on impossibilities.

This is all a great mistake; and yet it is a mistake almost every Man I meet
with has fallen into, and is concerned about. If any man would clear up the
difficulty, and publish it to the World, it would tend much to quiet the Minds
of People, and so do good Service However, I cannot but wonder a little that
those Gentlemen who are not able to solve the difficulty themselves, should
imagine the General Assembly could all be so much in the dark as not to see so
very obvious an Objection as this, and provide against it. Sir, I have neither
Law-book nor Votes of the House by me, and therefore I fear I shall not be able
to solve the Difficulty so clearly as otherwise I could. However, I remember
that the Act for emitting the 100000 l. Loan, expressly provides, That the
Profits (that is the Interest) be applied for and toward the support of the
Government, as the General Court shall from time to time direct. Now the
Interest of the Loan Money is but 5000 l. a Year, whereas, the General Court (if
I mistake not) has for some Years past granted at least 10000 l. to defray the
Charges of the Government; now this is the whole Interest of the Loan Money and
as much more emitted yearly. If it be objected, that when 10000 l. is granted
yearly for the support of the Government, there is also at the same time a Tax
granted to his Majesty in some Year to come, for calling in these Bills again.
I answer, that this will create no difficulty to the Borrowers of the Loan
Money; because these yearly Emissions for the Support of the Government must
continue till the ten Years for the standing out of the Loan Money are expired:
And the Taxes granted for calling in these Bills, are set at several Years
distance (the number of Years I don't now certainly remember,) so that the very
last Year of the Loan Money, there will be Bills enough standing out, to pay not
only the Interest, but also the whole Principal.

But there is another answer easier to be understood than this. Some years ago,
the Tax for bringing in our Province Bills was Two and Twenty Thousand Pounds a
year. At length the Government thought fit to ease the People of so great a
Burden, and so reduced the Tax to but Eleven Thousand Pounds a year, and
proposed to bring in the other half by Impost, Excise, etc. After the Emission
of the Loan Money the Tax was again reduced (to what Sum I don't now remember)
and the Interest of the Loan Money was added to the Impost and Excise, to help
make up the Two and Twenty Thousand Pounds, which should have been brought in
by the Tax alone. So that every Year that Five Thousand Pounds is paid as
Interest of the Loan Money, at the same time Five Thousand Pounds which would
otherwise have been brought in by Tax, is left standing out. And therefore at
the Ten Years end, there will be Fifty Thousand Pounds standing out, which, had
it not been for the Interest of the Loan Money, would have been paid in by that
time by Tax. And this the Borrowers of the Loan Money will have to pay that part
of their Principal with, which has been drawn in by Interest.

I hope this comes fully up to the Difficulty, and is plain enough for any Man
that will but set himself a thinking, to understand; and will clear the
Government of the unjust Imputation of being worse than the Egyptian
Taskmasters.

We are told, we must expect no more Bills, and Silver and Gold is bought up
for the Factors as fast as it comes in, and Shipped home, etc. p. 3.

And so it always will be, while we have such plenty of Bills that the
Merchants and Factors can find Advantage in doing so. But I should think it
prudence for the men who drive this Trade, not to lisp so much as a word about
the miseries of poor People in Boston. I believe other Folks will think of
these miseries often enough, and of the true reason of them, without being put
in mind, by the Men that cause them. If our own Merchants are not guilty, but
they are the Foreign Factors only that drive this Trade, let not our own
Merchant join with them in a Cry for more Province Bills, and make the miseries
of poor people in Boston a Plea for it; but let them tell the world the plain
Truth, That these poor People are paid in Goods for their Labor not for want
of Province Bills, but because Factors save their Province Bills to buy up
Silver and Gold, as fast as it comes in, that they may ship it home to their
Principals* and so procure more Goods to pay Laborers and Tradesmen with: Let
them tell the world, that it is by this means that Honest, Industrious People
in Boston are brought to such Extremities, as to sell their Pewter and Brass to
buy Food.

The Gentlemen who are against emitting more Bills, think we have Money enough;
that there are two hundred thousand pounds out in all the Provinces. A
wonderful Cash to manage the Trade of the four Governments: etc. p. 3.

I am my self at present in no Capacity to conjecture the Sum of the Bills
standing out in the four Provinces; but let it be what it will, I think I am
capable of proving, that there are enough of them to carry on a Trade as large,
as it is for the Interest of the Provinces to have carried on. And I hope I
shall do this with an Argument that every man can understand. There are
Province Bills enough to buy up, at a reasonable rate, all that can be spared
of the Product of the Husbandry, Fishery, etc. of the whole Country. Let them
that have any of these things to sell, offer them but at any thing near the
rate they used to sell them for some Years ago for Silver, and I am certain
they will soon find Buyers, and Money enough. Nothing will ly upon their hands,
except there be something not fit to be exported, which great plenty has made
a Drug of.

Now if there be Money enough to buy, at a reasonable rate, all the Produce of
the Country that can be spared, then every man that raises any thing to make
Money with, may turn it into Money, and lay out all that Money with Traders for
foreign Commodities, if he pleases. So that it is a plain Case, that we have
Bills enough still to enable every Man in the Province (if they were all minded
to be so much of Simpletons) to spend all that he can earn in the Year, on
Traders for foreign Commodities. And what would the Traders have more? Must Men
spend more than they earn? Must public and private Banks be established, that
so when People have spent all they have earnt, they may know where to go and
borrow more, to lay out for things they have no need of? And must the Lands of
the Country groan under Taxes and Mortgages to uphold these Fooleries? All this
must be done forsooth! Not for fear Trade should not be large enough still, but
for fear it should not be so large as it has been for many Years past, to the
impoverishing and almost ruining the Country. I have read but little in the
History and the Customs of other Countries: Pray, Sir, inform me, whether the
Governments of other Countries, use, when Traders have fooled away all their
Silver and Gold, to be so very careful to provide another Medium for them, to
play the Fool with again? I am apt to guess, that the Care in such Cases has
commonly been, to lay Trade under such Restraints, as that it cannot be carried
on, but to the Advantage of its Country.

Out own Bills are boarded up, with what noble Design I know not, but it gives
room to suspect the worst, etc. p. 4.

This Cry I have observed frequently to be made at some convenient Seasons; but
why Money should be hoarded just at such Times, or why men should hoard Money
now, that have not always made it their Custom to do so, I never could well
imagine. It is commonly accounted a true Saying, that Interest will not lie;
therefore I cannot think that any let their Money lie by them unimproved, in
hopes of getting their Neighbors Lands at half Value; because I see no
likelihood that such a thing will ever be effected. When once our Province
Bills are by their Scarcity become equal in value to Silver, If the Government
will but admit Taxes to be paid, and Mortgages to be redeemed with Silver, or
the produce of the Country, those that have hoarded up Province Bills, will be
glad to break up their Hoards, and get rid of them as fast as they can, lest
they should become useless to them. Indeed if any Gentlemen that employ a great
number of Laborers, do (at some Seasons when it will serve a Turn to have a
Clamor raised) turn off their Workmen with two thirds instead of one half
Goods, or make them wait a great while for their Money part, and tell them they
cannot help it, the Bills are hoarded, when it may be at the same time they are
buying Silver with them; (I say if any do so) it is plain there may be
advantage in it; and so there is room to suspect the worst; though I don't know
that any such thing as this has been practiced.

The Gentlemen that cry, no more Bills, are only Usurers, and men who live on
Salaries, Officers of the Courts and Lawyers, etc. p. 4. I will add all
understanding Husbandmen, that I meet with, who have been so good Husbands as
not to entangle their Estates.

It is not sinking the Bills of Credit that will bring in Silver, etc. If he
had said sinking the Credit of the Bills it had been very just. It must be done
by going of Manufactures, etc. No great matters will or can ever be done at
Manufactures while Labor is so dear; and Labor will always be dear, while
Bills are cheap. Necessity is the Mother of Invention, and will teach men more
Projects as well as more Industry and Good Husbandry than the Emission of more
Bills. I desire to be informed what Project, what Manufacture has been set on
foot to any purpose, by the 50 and 100 Thousand Pounds lately Emitted? The money
has been generally Borrowed (as far as I can learn) to pay Debts contracted
before, by virtue of long Credit. And if an hundred Thousand Pounds more were
emitted it would quickly go the same way.

I am sorry to see the Ministers of the Town so Silent etc. p. 5. If any of
those Gentlemen can by writing set the true Interest and Duty of the Country
(at such a day as this) in a clear light, they will do God and their Country
excellent Service: but I hope they will be very cautious what they deliver in
the name of God from the Pulpit, about these matters of doubtful Disputation
which perplex the Government.

The Gentlemen who oppose the Schemes for Emitting more Bills on Land Security
never propose any other, etc. p. 5.

No Projects will serve the turn, without Industry, Frugality and good
Husbandry. Do but leave off Trusting, or shorten Credit as much as possible,
and this will make us all Industrious, Frugal, and Prudent, whether we will or
not, And I believe in the way we are now in nothing else will.

Most certainly it was a very wrong step to crush the private Bank, etc. I
cannot but hope that it will still be crush't. And that for the following
Reasons.

1. Because such an Emission of Bills will keep their Credit always low, and
that will make the produce of the Country proportionably high, that it wont
turn to Account to send it elsewhere, and so our Merchants will always be at
the same Loss they are now, where to make Adventures. It will also make Labor
always dear, so that we shall never make any great Improvement in Husbandry or
Manufactures. And at this rate Silver and Gold will always be one of the best
things that we can make Returns with, and therefore will be bought up and Shipped
off as fast as it comes in, and so we shall never get through our Difficulties.

2. Because we have found by the unhappy Experience of the Public Bank, that
if there be but a Bank to run and borrow at, the Ill Husbandry, Vanity and
Folly of the People is such; that in a short time most of the Estates in the
Country would become involved; And I think it much more for the Strength,
Safety, and Interest of the Country both Civil and Religious, that the Estates
should continue as at present in many men's hands, than that a few Gentlemen
should be Landlords, and all the rest of the Country become Tenants.

If you ask me why these Ill consequences will follow upon a Bank in this
Country rather than in England? I answer, because as I observed before, We are
not a Sovereign State. We may not check an extravagant Importation and
Consumption of some foreign Commodities, by heavy Duties. The only way of doing
this is, by shortning Credit, so that People may not be able to consume more
than they earn: And by not suffering a Bank for People to run to, and undo
themselves by borrowing.

3. I am against a private Bank, because that when the Province Bills which are
now out, shall once be drawn in, all the Cash of the Country will then be at
the direction of the Bankers. And it is easy to foresee this Consequence, that
whatever Project they may have in their heads, how inconsistent soever it may
be with the public Welfare, they wont want means to bring it to pass. Nothing
will be restrained from them.

Fortifying our exposed Settlements would encourage People to Sit down and till
the Earth. This would bring dawn the prices of Linen, Canvas, Provisions. p. 8.
I am inclined to think on the contrary, that one Reason of the great scarcity
of Provisions we have been afflicted with of late years, was that so many
People have gone into new Plantations, where they have not yet been able to
raise their own provisions. It would conduce more to the bringing down
Provisions, to have the Land already taken up, better Improved by more
Laborers upon it, than to have new unsubdu'd Lands entered upon.

But if our Author indeed desires, that the price of these things should be
brought down, why does he tell us Country People in the next Page that the want
of money will lower the price of all our produce, that he may excite us also to
join with him in a cry for more Money? The falling of our Provisions will enable
him to export them to the Islands as in former times. If there was a Bridge,
etc. The Poor who want Employment, would do better service, to disperse
themselves in Country and till the Ground.

I hope our Friends will send men spirited for our Relief, to represent them,
etc. I hope also Men of a Public Spirit, and heartily concerned for the
Welfare of their Country, will be sent. Not Sheriffs and Lawyers, etc. I will
add, not Men in difficult Circumstances, who have involved themselves by their
own Indiscretion. They that cannot order their private Affairs with Discretion,
will make but poor Managers for the Public. Besides, whatever shall be
proposed for the Public Good, Men in a needy Condition will be sure to
consider in the first place how it will affect themselves, and if it be likely
to increase their Straitness and Difficulty a little, (though but for a time)
they had need be Men of great Integrity to give their Consent to it.

Thus, Sir, I have given you my Thoughts with a sincere aim at the Good of my
Country; and without prejudice or affection to any Man, or Party of men. If you
think they may be of Public Service, you have leave to make them as public as
you please. If they are just, no man has reason to be angry: If they are
Mistakes, I shall be heartily sorry for it. If the Mistakes are dangerous, I
hope the Gentlemen who think them so, will be so just to their Country as to
warn it of them.

I have written these things in the utmost Hurry immaginable, for fear of
losing the Opportunity to convey them. If you meet with any thing out of Place,
or expressed too sharply or too obscurely, impute it to my great Have, which
wont allow me to correct and alter.

I am, etc.
April 23. 1720.
FINIS.

