A Peoples Living in Appearance, AND DYING in Reality, CONSIDERED.

A Sermon Preached before the General Assembly, of the Colony of CONNECTICUT,
at Hartford, May I2 th, I720.

By STEPHEN HOSMER, Pastor of the Church in East-Haddam.

Published by Order of Authority.

NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by TIMOTHY GREEN, Printer to his Honor the
GOVERNOR and COMPANY I720.

A SERMON Preached at the ELECTION, etc.
REVELATION III.I. -- I know thy works, that thou have a Name that thou Live,
and art Dead.
CONSIDERING the curious Workmanship of God, in the Regularity, comely
Proportion and mutual Usefulness of all things, in their Original Frame and
Contexture; and how all kinds of Creatures did serve in their several Places,
and according to their several Capacities, to show forth the Glory of Him who
gave them their Being, Beauty and Activity; it is a wonderful and abasing
Consideration, to every Contemplative and Serious Soul, that there is now no
more Stability and Decency, especially in humane Proceedings. But that
Darkness, Disorder, Sin and Death, have thus Invaded, and overrun the World.
Indeed the World has suffered Miserable Overthrow and Ship wreck; but it is a
strange as sad, that nothing will reduce the Children of Men, to that Love and
Obedience to their Maker which was Originally founded in their Natures.

When the Lord appeared in his Greatness on Mount Sinai, it looked as if men
would be afraid to be bad Israelites; and in His Graciousness on Mount- Sion,
as if men would be persuaded to be strict Christians: but thus it is, Scarcely
any thing less than Heaven, will make the Saint Serious; or any thing less than
Hell, will make the Sinner Silent. There is and will be Sin in the best of
Saints; and Sinners in the best Regulated Societies and Churches.

Indeed the Apostolic was a truly Golden Age; yet in the Churches of Christ
there was Dross as well as pure Gold; there were Infirm Saints, and bold
Sinners Hypocrites and Falsehearted, as well as Sound and Sincere Professors.

The Apostle mentioned in the beginning of this Book, spent great part of his
Ministry among the seven Churches of the lesser Asia; and most of them were
grown Corrupt and Defective, when he wrote to them from the Isle, where he was
Confined, for the Testimony of Jesus Christ.

This Book in General Contains many Prophetic Visions; and in them a solemn
representation of the present and succeeding State of the Church of Christ.

This Epistle is particularly directed to the Seven Principal Churches of this
Lesser Asia, and the three First Chapters although they expressly mention these
Churches and no others, yet (the number Seven in Scripture Signifying a
complete thing) they Indifferently respect the Universal, under such like
circumstances.

In the first part of this Chapter, the Apostle directs himself to the Church
in Sardis, in the Person of the Angel or Overseer of it. Where we have.

I. A Description of its State. That although it had a Name to Live, yet was
really Dead, or at lesst ready to Die.

2. A Remedy prescribed against the Disease, under which it Labored. Be
Watchful, etc. Remember therefore, how thou have received, and heard, and hold
fast and repent: To return to their first state, and have recourse to the
primitive institution, and form of Doctrine delivered to them by the Apostles
and Apostolical men. Doubtless Tertullian's Rule borrowed from hence, is very
safe and may be depended upon, viz. Quicquid primum Illud verum.

3. A Threatening denounced in case of neglect If therefore thou shall not
watch, I will come upon thee as a Thief. v. 3.

4. A Commendation given to some who had kept themselves from those
Corruptions, which prevailed among the rest: together with due Encouragement
given to all to return to God. v. 4. and 5.

What I would take notice of in the Words read; is a discovery of the Unsound
(or a General Description of the) Condition of the once Gloriou Church of
Christ in Sardis. And it is put in mind,

I. What it was in Name. Or what it seemed to be. Thou have a Name that thou
live. It not only retained its Name of Christian Church, and made a Public
Profession of the only true Religion in the World, but was Favored with
agreeable Advantages; and so might be yet very considerable, in the account of
such as took notice of the outside, or show, but not of the Power of Religion.

2. When it was in Reality: And art Dead. Not Absolutely, but Comparatively;
for there were a few names in Sardis that had not Defiled their Garments. Although
the generallity were gone off from God, yet there were some few that cleaved to
him. As for rest altho'they might retain somewhat of the form of Godliness, yet
had in a great Measure lost that good Spirit, which had before Influenced them,
and kept them alive. So that they were now Dead. Or as said in the next Verse,
ready to Die. What ever the World thought' of them, or they of themselves;
although their Profession might be high, and their Advantages considerable, yet
they were evidently and certainly Languishing.

Hence the Truth which offers it self to us; and may be Insisted on at this
time is this, viz.

That a People may, and sometimes have a Name to Live; and yet are really in a
Dying Condition.

A Man may esteem himself, and be looked upon by others as having a healthy and
firm Constitution; when some fatal Disease has Seized him in a Vital Part. A
Man may nave the Advantage of a fair Estate, and yet be really Poor. And not
only a Person, but a People may seem to be something, when they are nothing.
The Church of the Laodiceans said it was Rich and increased in Goods, and had
need of nothing. And yet was Wretched, and Miserable, and Poor, and Blind, and
Naked.

And if we look back to Israel of Old we shall find, that there was no Nation
upon Earth so Favored; that had such a Name and privileges: God did lead his
people like a Flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron. Psalm. 77. ult. Moses was
as a King in the Army; and Aaron Ministered in things that were Typical and
Sacred: Moses brought their causes before GOD; and Aaron Offered their
Sacrifices to God, and Israel had Laws, Statutes, Judgments and Ordinances
accordingly: Yet were they a Proud, Stiff-necked, Murmuring, Unbelieving,
Ugrateful and Idolatrous People; And did Backslide from God, with a perpetual
Backsliding.

Baalam in the Twenty-third and Twentyforth Chapters of Numbers, seems to be
Transported, at the light of Isreal's Glory and Felicity: And yet in the very
next Chapter, we Read of Isrels Committing Whoredom with the Daughters of Moab,
and Joining themselves unto Baal-peor.

David says 2 Samuel 7.23.2.4. What one nation in the Earth, is like thy people
even Israel -- For than have Confirmed to thy self thy people Israel to be a
people unto thee forever: And thou Lord art become their God. Yet are they
often Branded in Scripture with that Character of a Rebellious house. And in
the time of the Gospel our SAVIOR calls then Serpents, and Generation of
Vipers. The Martyr Stephen (after he had given them a short account how Gods
gentleness had made them great) calls them Stiff-necked, and Uncircumcised in
Heart, and Ears; Tells them that they did always Resist the Holy Ghost; as
their Fathers did so did they. Which of the Prophets (said he) have not your
fathers persecuted? and they have slain them which showed before of the coming
of the just One, of whom ye have been (...) the betrayers and murderers: Who
have r^c^ived the law by the disposition of Angels, and have (...) kept it,
Act. 7. 5I, 52, 53.

Israel indeed did sometimes revive a little; when God raised up some Eminent
Reformers of poured out his Wrath upon them in terrible manner. Yet their
returnings to God were Ordinarily Hypocritical, or Partial, or of no long
continuance: For indeed the Body of them were rotten at the Heart, and their
Wound Incurable.

In Speaking to the Truth before us, I shall Consider,

I. When a People may be said to have a Name to Live.

II. When they may be said to be in Dying Condition. And,

III. What makes such a People thus Decline and Languish.

I. When a People may be said to have a Name to Live. Now a People may be said
to have a Name to Live, on the account of the great show and appearance which
they make of Living. Now in this a Peoples real Advantages may be very
considerable. And at this time we shall rather insist on the Privileges and
Advantages which a People Enjoy, than upon the mere Profession and show which
they make.

So then People may be said to have a Name to Live, on the account,

(I.) Of their Civil. (2.) Of their Sacred Interests and Advantages.

[I.] With respect to their Civil Advantages and Privileges. And this may be
considered.

I. With respect to the Rules by which a People are Guided. And

2. With respect to the Rulers by whom they are Governed.

(I.) With respect to the Rules by which a People are Guided. And they are
contained in a certain Body of Laws, Composed, Altered, and Increased, by
Persons of great Wisdom, Fidelity and Piety ('it is like not without many Serious
Prayers to God) and so Accommodated to the State, and Circumstances of that
People for whom they are made.

(2.) With respect to the Rulers by whom they are Governed. And they are such
(for it is supposed that nothing hinders except among a People themselves, but
that they may have such to Rule over them if such there be) as are qualifyed
according to the direction of Gods Word.

And so under whose Wise and Faithful Conduct, a People may sit safely, and
Comfortably under their own Vines and Fig Trees: The Feeble, the Simple, the
Poor, the Fatherless and Widow, may Shelter themselves from the Violence and
Fury of the Oppressor. Men's Lives, Liberties and Properties may be Secured from
the Malignant, Proud and Covetous: Controversies may be Decided, doubtful
Causes Determined; Good Orders Established, the Virtuous Encouraged, Well-doers
Rewarded; Criminals, Profane and Profligate Persons Punished, and brought to
Shame. In a word all things that tend to a Peoples Advancement, may be
farthered; and all things that tend to their Ruin and Dissolution Suppressed.

Moreover such Rulers are as a Fortress, and Bulwark to Religion. For such
Encourage, Command, and see to it, that Ministers, and Men of all Ranks and
Conditions, Worship God in a Solemn Manner; that God be Publicly Magnified for
all his Favors. That Men Humble themselves for their Sins, and under Gods
Judgments. They Discountenance and Punish bold Intruders, and such as Advance
Damnable Doctrines and endeavor to Subvert the Established Religion; the
Interrupters of Gods Worship and Ordinances, the Prophaners of Gods Holy
Sabbaths, the Blasphemous, and such like.

[2.] In respect to their Sacred Interests, and Privileges.

As,

When they have the True Word of God among them; and that in their own proper
Dialect, which they may use without restraint, and in which they have a
sufficient account concerning God, and themselves; of the Works of God in
Creation, Providence and Redemption; Precepts to Awaken, Oblige and Guide them;
and Promises to Quicken amp; Encourage them. Or in a Word whatsoever is
necessary to Furnish men thoroughly to every good Thought and Affection, Word
and Action. Also when a People have God himself nigh them, ready to hear their
Cries, to Correct their Errors, to Supply their Wants, and to give His Holy
Spirit to them that ask Him. Moreover when a People have Gods Ministers, who
Labor to Convince their Consciences, to stir their Affections and
Inclinations; especially in things that relate to Faith, Repentance and
NewObedience; do Solemnly Administer the Seals of the New Covenant, Reprove
Sinners, and cut off the Incorrigible from the Inheritance of the Lord.

Now although a People so Favored, may be Languishing and Dying with respect to
their Spirit and Practice, in things truly amiable; yet these things put them
under great Advantages of moving, toward the Unity of the Faith, and of the
Knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the
Stature of the fullness of Christ, as the Apostle expresses it, Ephesians. 4.I3.

We may say concerning such a People, as Moses concerning Israel, -- That the
natios which shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation
is a wise and understanding people. For what nation is there so great, who has
God so nigh unto them, as the LORD our God is in all things that we call upon
him for? And what nation is there so great, that has statutes and judgments so
righteous --? Deuteronomy. 4, 6, 7, 8. It was spoken of, as a singular Favor, that
God made known His word unto Jacob, His statutes and judgments unto Israel.
Psalm. I47.I9. Such a People ride upon the High Places of the Earth, and God
feeds them with the Heritage of Jacob their Father. Isa. 58.I4.

II. When a People may be said to be in a Dying Condition. And

I. When they are going from, their first Estate: are past their Flourishing
Years. All things have their turns of Goodliness and Beauty; Vegetables, and
all kinds of Living Creatures have their Springing and Increasing Season: For
God has made every thing Beautiful in His time. Eccl. 3.II. Yet as there is a
Time to be Born, so likewise is there a Time to Die. And as there is a time
with Commonwealths, Churches, Towns, particular Families, and Persons, when
all things look like a rising Sun, and Spring Morning; so it sometimes happens
that there is a Change in the Countenance and Complexion of all these things.
As there is a time to rise, so ordinarily a time to fall. The Wise man gives us
a very apt Figurative Description, of the Decline of Humane Strength and Glory;
the Decrepit State of the Children of Men, after a considerable space of
Health, Strength, Beauty and Activity. In the day when the keepers of the house
shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease
because they are few, and those that look out of the windows be darkened, And
the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is low,
and he shall rise up at the voice of the Bird, And all the daughters of music
shall be brought low; Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and
fears shall be in the way, and the almond-tree shall flourish and the
grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail, Eccl. I2. 3, 4, 5. Thus
the Eyes are dim, the Ears dull, the Countenance wan and pale; and many other
Symptoms of a Declining condition.

When a People have had their Flourishing time, and are past the Flower of
their Age; If Justice, Righteousness, Holiness, Meekness, Brotherly-kindness,
and Charity, meet with another manner of Entertainment than heretofore; it
would be as Wonderful as Comfortable, if such a People should again return to
the days of their Youth.

2. When the means used for a Peoples Recovery prove Ineffectual. Although the
Body natural be Incident to diverse kinds of Diseases, yet there is generally
Balm, and Physicians to be had; but in case the Physicians be Skilful and
Faithful, the Means used Proper and Suitable against the Disease, and yet take
no good Effect, the Disease seems Deadly, and the Wound Incurable. Thus when a
People are come to that pass, that neither Sickness, or Health, War or Peace,
Scarcity or Plenty, Mercies or Judgments, Corrosives or Lenitives; the unweared
endeavors of the Magistra^^ (...) Ministry avail, to a Peoples Conversion; or
so much as to any considerable degree of Reformation; but a People will run
over Law and Gospel, and do that which is right in their own Eyes, in Despite
of the Powers above and below; they are like the Ground that Yearly brings
forth nothing but Briers and Thorns; (Notwithstanding its drinking in the rains
that come often upon it) and is therefore Rejected nigh unto Cursing, Heb. 6 8 Or
like the Vineyard, which after all that was bestowed upon it, brought forth
nothing but Wild Grapes; and was therefore Condemned to be laid waste, Isa. 5.6.

3. When a People have no Heart, and so will take no pains to help themselves.
Not only refuse, and scorn the Help of others, but will do nothing for their
own Relief. Either are so Stupid that they have lost all manner of sense of
their Condition, or else are so Listless, that they will rather run the Chance
and Hazard, of every thing that is Dear and Valuable, than be at any
considerable Pains and Charges, for their own Deliverance. Now when a People
are so Besotted, and Stupify'd, that they are grown into an Indifferency
whether they Live or Die, they will tamely Yield to the course of their Disease;
if it Mitigate of it self well; if it rage it is all alike. Sometimes a People
are so Infatuated by Satan, and Buried in their own Vanitys, that they have not
a thought about diverting the course of their Sins, or Gods Judgments: They
Imitate the Old World, that could Eat and Drink, Marry Wives, and give in
Marriage, till Noe entered into the Ark, and so the Flood came and Destroyed
them all. And likewise Sodom, that could Eat and Drink, Buy and Sell, Plant and
Build, until the Day that Lot left them; and it Rained Fire and Brimstone from
Heaven, and Destroyed them all, Luke I7.27, 28, 29. Now such a People (and more
especially, a Professing, and Privileged People;) as have no Heart nor Spirit,
to Reflect on their Wickedness; to look into their Spiritual Condition; but can
say to themselves, Take your Ease, Eat, Drink and be Merry; when the very
Heavens are ready to reveal their Iniquity, and the Earth to rise up against
them; verily such a People are Dying with a Witness: They are at least in the
way to Commit all Iniquity with Greediness; and to treat God, and all that is
Good with High-handed Contempt.

III. We shall consider, What makes such a People Decline and Languish. And
here I intend only to give a few hints at some Plain and Obvious Things, that
Hurt and Weaken a People. And

I. The Unexemplariness of Men that make a Principal Figure, in the Places
where they Live: And this, on the Account either of their Age, Abilitys,
Profession or Improvement either in Town, Church or CommonWealth. If such as
these don't carry it well, are False to their Word; to their Trust; are
Contentious, Covetous, Uncharitable, Proud, Intemperate, Unjust, Cruel, Wanton,
and the like: I may say that such as these (especially) by such manners, do
give a deep Wound to Religion, and Virtue, in the Places where they Live. And
the ill Savor of these things will Diffuse it self as far as their Improvement
and Names Extend. As Dead Flies in the Ointment of the Apothecary, causes it to
send forth a stinking Savor: So does a little Folly him that is in Reputation
for Wisdom, and Honor, Eccl. I0.I. And as on the one hand such are had in
abomination by the truly Pious, and such as are hurt by their Unexemplary
Conduct; so on the other hand, many will make use of such men's Lives, as an
Argument to Justify, or a Cloak to Cover, their Practical Contempt of Virtue,
and Goodness. There is in many a great Ambition to Imitate those that are above
them, in Vice as well as Virtue.

2. And (which was touched in the foregoing particular) the Disproportion there
is between the Pretenses and Practice of many High Professors, hurts a People.
Some make a Loud Noise about Religion; cry out concerning the Sins of a Land;
are very severe in censuring others; give Sacred Things a high Character; are
Zealous for God and Christ in Words and Gestures; and yet are themselves very
Corrupt, and Defective in some considerable Articles of a Christian Life. It
may be they P^^ Tithe, of Mint, Anise, and Cummin; and yet Omit the Weightier
matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith. Do Strain at a Gnat, and Swallow
a Camel, Mat. 23.23, 24. Make their Boast of the Law, and yet through breaking
the Law Dishonor God, as the Apostle Expresses it, Romans 2.23. Such are
Disserviceable to Religion; for if they be Men of an Established Reputation,
many will do like them, expecting to Fare in the Day of Judgment as well as
such: As for others as men loath them because they esteem them Hypocrites, so
many will be ready to Abhor the very Religion of which such make so notable a
Profession.

3. The Declining Religious Communication; especially by the Wiser sort of Men
Weakens a People. God Commanded Israel, not only to retain His Words in their
Hearts: But to talk of them when they sat in their Houses, when they Walked by
the Way, when they lay Down and when they Arose, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Doubtless the
design in this Charge was, that the Knowledge and Love of these things, might
be Preserved, and Promoted among them. But this is (it may be) by many of the
Abler sort, accounted a Contemptible way of Improving their Talents; they think
it more proper for the Weak and Feeble part of Mankind. But this is no
Dishonor to Men of Understanding: The Psalmist thought so, when he Declared
that he would speak of Gods Testimonies before kings and not be ashamed, Psalm.
II9.46 Were these things duly Maintained, and Promoted among both Great and
Small, and the Great would Soberly Condescend to Men of Low Degree, 'twould it
may be give no little Life and Energy to Religion and Goodness among a People;
for so all would be Directed, Comforted, and Encouraged. Ointment and Perfume,
Rejoice the Heart; so does the sweetness of a man's Friend by hearty Counsel.
Iron sharpneth Iron, so a man sharpneth the countenance of his Friend, Prove.
27.9, I7.

But if the more Accomplished, mind nothing but Earthly things, the Simple are
in great danger of erring in their Spiritual Converses, and Degenerating with
them.

4. Neglecting the Rising Generation has no little tendency toward the Ruin
of a People. If their Government and Education in Families, and their Spiritual
Nourishment in Churches, be for the most part neglected; what may be expected,
but an Increase of Sinful Men?

And here I might add, that of Men's Living so Remote, from Places of Public
Worship and Education. For although it seems Unavoidable as to many; yet it has a
fatal tendency: For not a few are ready to make use of such an Inconveniency,
if not as an Argument to Justify, yet as an Excuse for the Ignorance and
Irreligiousness of themselves and theirs. And indeed Ignorance, Rudeness, and
Profaneness reigns among many such. In not a few such Unhappy Families, is
found a sad Neglect of the Soul; and a readiness to Embrace any Vanity or
Iniquity, to which their Hearts Incline them and Satan Tempts them. It would
Grieve ones Soul to see a Numerous and Plentiful Increase, of reasonable
Creatures Scattered up and down the Wilderness, as Sheep, having no Shepherd.

The IMPROVEMENT of this Truth may be in Three Words;

I. By way of Instruction.

II. By way of Reflection.

III. By way of Exhortation.

I. By way of INSTRUCTION, in a few Inferences.

And

I. Hence there is just Grounds to fear that it will not be long before such a
People will be really Dead. How long it shall be precisely, or whether it shall
be so or not God only knows; for God can Work and none can hinder; he can
recover them that are deadly Wounded; the Effusion of his Holy Spirit, would
soon alter the face of all things; GOD can Fill the Valleys, and bring every
Mountain and Hill Low; he can make the Crooked Strait, and the Rough way
Smooth, Luke 3.5. Yet according to the nature and manner, of most things under
the Sun, that which is Languishing, and ready to Vanish away seldom Revives.
Particular persons indeed have been under manifest Decays, yet have been
Restored: But when they have been Apparently under the Symptoms of Death, have
seldom Lived long. Applicable to this is that Objection which Israel seemed to
offer against themselves, If our Transgressions, and our Sins be upon us, and
we pine away in them, how should we then Live? Ezekiel 33.I0, And here we may say
concerning a People, that have been, and yet are, under Advantages to recover
themselves, that in case Death rides upon the Pale Horse, it is to be expected
that Hell will follow after. And that the less Privileged part of Mankind, yea
Hell it self will be moved and say, Art thou also became weak as we, art thou
become like unto us?

2. It Is a Miserable Life that such a People Live. Indeed there be some who
although they dread those malignant and acute Diseases, to which the Body is
Incident; and are Intolerable restless when under them: Yet can be Patient,
Easy, yea Cheerful, under those of a more Terrible Nature and Tendency. Now
although it be thus, a Peoples Sinful, and Discomposed Circumstances, are a
Provocation to God to Blast their Endeavors, to reduce them to great Straits,
to deny his Blessing to the means which they Enjoy, for their Natural, and
Spiritual Comfort. By these they are also Exposed to great Shame and Disgrace,
as also to be Devoured one of another.

3. That such a People, are but an Unnatural, and sadly Mistaking People, if
they do not be bestir themselves. The very Brute Creatures, have their various
ways by which they express a certain Impulse, when any Evil or Danger is before
them. And as they are very quicksighted in discerning their Danger, so are they
no less Active, and Industrious, to secure themselves.

And as for men there be but few whose Self-preserving Principles are so
Stupifyed, Weakened, and Lost, but will Seasonably, Voluntarily, and Expensively
lay out themselves, for the preventing or removing, those Evils especially
which apparently Threaten their Natural Life. And what Satan said with respect
to Job is doubtless true in the general, Skin for Skin, yea all that a man
has, will he give for his Life, Job 24. How then does this upbraid men's
Negligence, in those things that greatly concern the Comfort of their Natural
Life; as also that state of theirs, which is to be Immutable, and Everlasting?

It looks as if the Apostasy had so Inverted the order of Humane Nature, and
Reason, that great things seem Indifferent; and that which is Sinful, or of no
great Moment, as the Magnum Op^rtet, in no case to be Neglected. But since the
Gospel is so suitable to Convince Men's Judgments, to Excite their Affections
and Inclinations; or in a Word to recover them from their Blindness, Stupidity
and Prejudice, a People are Inexcusably Unnatural, it it may be said of them
with Reference to their Sinful Condition, in the Words of the Prophet, Isa. 42.
ult. And it has set him on Fire round about, yet he knew not; it burned him,
yet he laid it not to Heart.

4. ' It Is a very Melancholy Prospect, to see such a People Aggravating their
Disease and Hastening their own Death. It would fill one with Horror (...) see
a Man offering Violence against his own Life. It was a sad sight to behold the
man possessed with Devils among the Tombs, crying and cutting himself with
Stones. But its more surprising to see a People (under many Advantages to help
themselves) not only dying to all that is good, but living to all that is Evil.

For a People to work against that little life which remains among them, as
it is otherwise amazing, so particularly in regard that it reflects on GOD, as
if He had made them destitute of the Principles of Self-preservation; as if God
had beautified and completed only the grosser part of the man, and left the
Soul (which is the very Essence of the man) halfformed, incapable of acting in
a proper manner, fixing on suitable Objects, proposing right ends in the
various actions of Life: or rather as if the Soul were made like a Kingdom
divided against it self. But furely GOD made man upright, Eccl. 7. ult. and
it is Man himself that has sought out many inventions. Man was made a little
lower than the Angels, and crowned with glory and honor, Psalm. 8.5. GOD has
given us good assurance that He takes no pleasure in the death of him that
dies, Ezekiel. I6. ult. It Is therefore a fearful thing, for men to say when they
are tempted to destroy themselves, that they are tempted of GOD.

II. By way of REFLECTION.

It becomes us to consider whether this be our Case; that if so, we may think
Soberly, and Meanly of ourselves: Yea that we may remember and be Confounded,
and never open our Mouths because of our Shame.

Now it may be there are many forts as well as great numbers among us, that are
not only Dying themselves, but their Diseases being Infectious, are pernicious
to others.

I shall make a few Reflections on some of them. For as much as those that do
most at Ruining themselves, and those among whom they dwell, do least at
Reflecting on themselves for it. And,

I. The Negligent. Some there be, that are it may be grossly Negligent, in, and
of their Families; Neglectful of the Government, and Education of their
Children; bring them up indeed, but not in the Nurture and Admonition of the
Lord, Pray not at all among them, or for them; or if they do, it is but rarely,
and as faintly. Fury belongs to them that call not on the Name of God, for such
do not a little toward, Devouring Jacob and laying his Habitation Desolate,
Jer. I0. ult. Many of these it is like would gladly be looked upon as very
Devout in their Closets, but it seems to be no great breach of Charity, to
Conclude, that such as are Heathens in their Families, are not very good
Christians in their Closets. It sounds like a Contradiction, that Men should
have a tender Regard to their own Souls, and none to the Souls of those that
are about 'em.

Some plead they want an Institution for Family Prayer. Very like, such were
never at a loss about the Institution, before they had lost the Inclination.
And if they could regain the Disposition, they would soon furnish themselves
with Arguments both Rational, and Scriptural, to justify such a Practice. I
suppose this is a point most Disputed, when and where Iniquity does abound, and
the Love of many is grown Cold.

Again, Those that Neglect the Public Worship and Ordinances of God. Not only
the Holy Sacraments are practically Despised; but the Ordinary Worship of God.
The House of God is Unfrequented by them. They are far from the Psalmists
spirit, who accounted a day in Gods Courts better than a thousand, Psalm. 84.
I0. But these will easily be detained. Some pretend Works of Necessity and
Mercy, or Bodily Indisposition (more seigned than true) some Difficulty in the
season, and such like: But the bottom of all is the want of an Heart to the
Duty.

It Is Probable there be those that have little Heart to attend on the stated
Worship of God, who cheerfully wait on some other Public Solemnity's and as
probable that their design is Earthly and Sensual, that it is more for their
Recreation than their Edification; for the Gratification of their Lusts, rather
than the salvation of their Souls. Most likely, they aim at what God solemnly
forbids, viz. Rioting and Drunkinness, Chambering and Wantonness -- And instead
of putting on the Lord Jesus Christ, they intend to make Provision for the
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, Rom, I2, I3, I4.

Moreover such as Neglect their Callings, Work not at all, or but very little:
whose Hands refuse to Labor. These set ill Examples, are Chargeable and
Burdensome; are making U proars, and carriying on Factions in the places where
they Live; whilst the Honest Laborers, are Sweating and Toiling to Maintain
them: for by that time the Laborers have gathered in their Increase, these
wanderers have devised some Unjustifiable methods, to make a considerable part
of it their own.

2. Men of Unsavory Language. Yea, yea; and Nay, nay; is as easy to Pronounce,
as the Profane Stuff, the Vain Jests, and Horrid Oaths, now in Credit with
many. The Apostle James sets forth this Mischievous, Inconsistent Folly, to the
Life, telling us that the Tongue is a fire, a world of Iniquity, that it sets
on fire the course of nature; and is set on fire of Hell. That therewith men
Bless God and Curse men, which are made after the Similitude of God. Jam. 3.6,
9. If such did seriously consider the Evil which they bring upon themselves;
how hurtful they are to their fellow Creatures; what confusions, and quarrels
they are the Authors of, by such Communications; and what an Account Men will
have to give at last for every Idle Word. 'Twould lay them under some Restraint.

3. Excessive Drinkers. Indeed every Creature of God is good; strong Drinks are
so; and would be a considerable Support to the natural Spirits, Revive humane
Nature, make Men more fit for Service, were they Improved in due season, manner
and measure. The Psalmist tells us that Wine makes glad the Heart of man,
Psalm. I04. I5. But the Immoderate use of these things, is exceeding Hurtful:
Multitudes to their cost have found it so. This is a Sin which is but seldom
Repented of, or Forsaken, till it is too late: until Nature is so weakened
weakened and disordered; that it cannot perform its several Offices: And the
Body cannot by any means, or Medicines, be Reduced to a good state; but must
return to its Dust after much Languishing and Misery. And as for the Souls of
such, it is most likely they are going to that Wrath, which they have Treasured
up, through much Impenitency, and hardness of Heart.

By Intemperate Drinking, much time is wasted, estates diminished, and so the
Drinkers, and their Families Impoverished; their Names are ruined, their
Stomachs overcharged, their Brains over heated, and their Consciences feared.
This makes the Diligent Sluggish; the Frugal Prodigal; the Wise Simple; the
Modest Impudent, and Loathsome, both in Words and Actions: Would to God such
would be Advised by Solomon, and not took upon the Wine, when it is red, when
it gives his color in the cup, and moves it self aright: For he assures
them, that afterward it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder.
Prove. 23.2I, 32. Such often experience the Truth, of what he Asserts; but
cannot be persuaded to embrace his Counsel.

Taverns are too often the places of ungodly men's Extravagancy's; the Chambers
where mischief and vanity walk in Triumph: here men of all Ranks and
Professions, are made the Song of Drunkards; here strises, debates,
whisperings, swellings and tumults, are Cherished; here men cast firebrarnds,
arrow, and death, and then say that they are in sport.

And I might here say, that when and where it so happens, that men of loose
Principles, greedy of filthy lucre, left to their Liberty; men whose
subsistence depends upon this manner of living are the Masters of such Houses;
they that will be filthy, may be so: for they shall have opportunity to gratify
their Lusts, and Friends to cover the multitude of their Abominations.

4. Such as Revile, or Speak Evil of Rulers. We are bound, not to speak evil of
any man; and then certainly not of Rulers. To revile any is a Sin, because it
is a Transgression of Gods Command: but its greatned and aggravated, when
directed against Superiors. Such as speak evil of the things that they
understand not, cannot be innocent, or excusable, since the Apostle sets them
forth, by natural brute beasts, made to be taken and destroyed; 2 Pet. 2.I2.
Such a Sin must be great, which strikes at the power of those that Govern; and
the peace of them that are Governed.

Complainers and Revilers always make some fair colors and pretenses for what
they say against Rulers. And it is no new thing, for men to think themselves
right in their own cause, although the whole proceeding be really a very wrong
thing. Korah and his Company, boldly told Moses and Aaron, that they took too
much upon them: But God soon Convinced them of their error and folly in a
terrible manner.

If Rulers really do amiss; (as there is none Absolutely Perfectly and
Invariably Good but GOD) it better becomes men to Pray for them, than Prate
against them.

Now although we are to treat Rulers with great Deference, and entreat them as
Fathers; yet good Rulers will Bear to be Humbly and Modestly put in mind of
their failings and mistakes: yea will doubtless say with David, let the
righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness; and Let him reprove me, it shall be
an excellent oil, which shall not break my head, Psalm. I4I.5.

But to Curse and Revile is the way of an inconstant, headstrong,
stiff-necked, and haughty Generation. John came neither eating nor drinking,
and they say, he has a Devil: The Son of Man, came eating and drinking, and
they say, behold a gluttonous man, and a wine bibber, a friend of publicans and
sinners, Mat II.I8, I9. And such kind of treatment as this, may Civil Rulers,
(as well as JESUS and his Messenger) expect, (and the more faithful the more
curses) from such as cannot bear to be Reformed nor Governed. Such men would be
thought to have a very great affection, for the Public Weal, I suppose this to
be a very indirect way to promote it. May not such Revilings rather be thought
to be the effects of Pride, Prejudice, Envy, Emulation, and such like?

If any such Covet the Honor of being Rulers; they may do Wisely to consider,
the Burden as well as the Honor of Government: And what an Emperor once said
when he Observed people to gaze on his Purple Robe and Golden Crown, Did you
know what Cares are under them, you would not take them from the Ground to have
them.

If Honor be the thing that such aim at, they should therewith remember, that
they would take but little Pleasure in it, if others should at this rate
attempt to practice upon them: Yea a Vainglorious Spirit, can scarcely bear
the least Affront. Haman declared, that the glory of his Riches, the multitude
of his Children; and the singular respect the King and Queen had showed him,
(having honored him above the rest of the Princes) Availed him nothing. Ester
5.II, I2, I3. And that which filled him with discontent and rage was, that
Mordecai refused to rise up or move for him.

III. By way of EXHORTATION.

If this Truth be Applicable to us, then this Word may be Directed

I. To all such as have, or shall this Day be called to take the Civil (and
therewith not a little of the Religious) Concerns of this People under their
Care and Management.

Let all such be humbly Entreated to be of one Heart, in endeavoring to be to
this People, as the Rain upon the mowen Grafts: as showers that water the
Earth. Such must needs Pity us; for as our Sins are upon us, so the Hand of GOD
is often touching us.

I may at this time offer a few Words, more especially to the Honorable
GOVERNOR, and DEPUTY- Governor, with the Worshipful ASSISTANTS.

You will give me leave ( Honorable and Worshipful) Humbly and Submissively to
Beseech You to do what may be done for this languishing People that are round
about you. You have for some time observed us to be ready to Die; but as yet we
are not quite Dead.

What I would here say, is only to stir up your pure minds, by way of
remembrance.

And then, That something extraordinary is expected from Civil Rulers. Such are
hereunto unto Appointed by God, and designed by Men; to do something more than
others. And as they are laid under singular Obligations, so have they some
special Opportunities of Improving their Talents, for the good of a great many.
Those to whom much is Given and Committed, of them GOD will require, and men
will expect the more. GOD expects you should be, Good men Pray that you may be,
and only ungodly men desire and endeavor that you may not be, the Glory and
Stability of our Times.

There be many that can do little more than Pray for us; and those that are
Persons of considerable Abilities, are obliged to restrain the Improvement of
them, within the boundaries of their several Stations: And that which might be
very Disorderly, and sinful in some others to do or attempt, may be a great
Duty and virtue in Rulers. GOD is a God of Order, not of Confusion: And as in a
Natural Body, so in a Civil, there be indeed many Members; yet all have not the
same, but their several Offices. So that although the design of an action be
good, yet if in the doing of it men break their Ranks, and step out of their
Places, God will not be well Pleased with them. Now God has put into the hands
of Civil Rulers, the Reins of Government and the Sword of Judgment, that they
might be able to restrain and subdue those hardy Sinners, that will not be
reduced by Counsel, Persuasion, or Example.

Again; Although it may be very discouraging in it self, to be Concerned with a
People of a froward spirit; yet the more troublesome we are grown, the more need
have we of your Zeal and united Endeavors for our Amendment.

If Rulers at such a time should slacken their Hands, good Men in some pang of
Zeal, might be apt to step out of their Places: And as for the Wicked, they
want nothing but an opportunity to thrust themselves into other men's Offices;
and put all things into Confusion. Absalom persuaded the people, that there was
no man deputed to hear them: and then adds, Oh that I were made a judge in the
land, that every man that has any suit or cause, would come to me, and I would
do him justice, 2 Samuel I5.4. And his Project with a few Kisses, took with the
People, and thus he stole away their Hearts: But a terrible Convulsion,
Distraction and Slaughter soon followed.

In the Korah rebellion, Moses does not sink under discouragement; nor say as a
little before, Numb. II.I4. I am not able to bear all this people alone,
because it is too heavy for me. But bestirs himself, and puts on the Courage
and Zeal that became him; and GOD wrought with him, and for him; for His own
Glory, and Isreal's Safety and quiet, in the Conviction of the Congregation, and
in the Destruction of those Sinners against their own Souls.

And further; It is to be Acknowledged, that you have done many worthy deeds
among us, and for us. And although there may be ungrateful and ungovernable
Spirits among us; yet it is to be hoped that there remains very significant
numbers, that will heartily Submit to your Government, and strengthen your
Hands, in all your further endeavors for our good.

Moreover; If you should recover us, you would have a double portion of the
Glory and Comfort of such a happy Revolution: You shall spend the remains of
your days in quiet; after you have seen what I doubt not you prefer above your
chief Joy. You shall be highly Esteemed; and men every where, shall Bless God
that has made you the healers of our breaches; yea you shall (by way of
Eminency) be had in everlasting Remembrance.

Also; I may say, we are a People, many of whose Fathers, were some of the best
of Men. Men of excellent Spirits. We may in a good sense, be said to be
Children of the stock of Abraham: Children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant
which God made with our Fathers. Act. 3.25. Were we the Children of base men,
yet it would grieve you to see us pine away in our Iniquities: And much more
since we are not only Gods Covenant People; but such for whom, our Fathers have
laid up a liberal stock of Prayers.

And may I here add; That when you shall arrive at the pleasant Land, those of
our Fathers that are gone before, shall Embrace you, with exceeding Joy and
Thankfulness for your Care and Kindness, to their Perishing Progeny.

Finally; So often as your Inferiors stand before you at the Bar; are you put
in mind of the great, and Notable Day: when you shall be plentifully rewarded,
for all the good, you have done, or may do, for us. What you give to this
People shall be given you again; good measure, pressed down and shaken
together; yea running over. I trust you will be able to say at last with
Hezekiah, Isa. 38.3. Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked
before thee, in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is
good in thy sight.

2. To Gospel Ministers.

Both God and Men expect, that the Zeal, Wisdom and Faithfulness of this
venerable Order of men, should be somewhat Excelling. Such are called the Salt
of the Earth, and Light of the World. And as they represent CHRIST, so its
expected that they should imitate him, and cleave closer to him, (especially in
a Declining time) than is expected from some others. CHRIST was Industrious,
Zealous, Holy, Harmless, and Undefiled; and spent His whole time and life, for
the destroying Satan's Kingdom, and advancing the Kingdom of God in the World:
All his Ministers should, and all good Ministers will labor to be, and do so.
Much is expected from those that Profess Christ; but more from such as
Personate Him. It was a very solemn Question our SAVIOR put to the Apostles,
Will ye also go away? Joh. 6.67. Which shows that if all others should
Apostatize and forsake him, yet he expects that his Ministers should stand by
him. Its left upon Record for an everlasting Praise to the Apostles, that they
continued with CHRIST in his Temptations, Luke 22.28.

Again; The work of such men is a work of the greatest Weight and Moment: They
are properly and nextly Concerned about the Souls of Men, and their Eternal
Salvation. If a man lose his Life through the neglect of him that has the charge
of it, yet it is possible his Soul may be Saved; or if he lose his Estate in
like manner; yet it is possible he may recover himself, and gain another as good
or better: But if the Soul be lost the man is gone forever. All the treasures
in the World cannot make up this Loss. It Is not thousands of Rams, or ten
thousands of rivers of Oil that can redeem him, Mic. 6.7. Therefore they that
have the charge of Souls, have a concern of Infinite Worth.

Again; Such by reason of the Nature of their work, are advantaged to be some
of the most Spiritual men in the world. Their work is properly Spiritual: they
are necessarily, principally, and in a manner entirely, taken up about such
things, as nextly concern, the Kingdom of Christ, and the Eternal State of men,
They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: they shall put
incense before thee, and whole burnt-sacrifice upon thine altar, Deuteronomy. 33 I0
Such are under singular Advantages to know the Will of God; to be Confirmed and
Established in the great Doctrines of the Gospel: to know the Greatness and
Cer^ainty of man's Misery by the First, and of his Felicity and Blessedness by
the Second Adam. And Christ seems to have put so much of his Spirit and Power
upon Ministers, as gives them some peculiar advantages of influence upon the
Children of men.

It being thus, its expected that Ministers be men, frequent and mighty in
Prayer especially when men are generally going off from God, It is very
observable, how the Spirit of Supplication rested on Elijah; for his heart
being hot within him, and his Soul grieved on the madness and misery of Israel
he Pray^d and said, Lord God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Israel let it be known
this day, that thou art God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I
have done all these things at thy word, Hear me, O Lord hear me, that this
people may know that thou art the Lord God; and that thou have turned their
heart back again, I King. I8 36, 37 Now in such solemn and servent Addresses to
GOD, Ministers may expect the Concurrence of all that are fearers of God, that
have a genuine Love to mankind that have not bowed the Knee to the Idols of
this Generation; that have been looking and longing for the Returns of God's
Holy Spirit upon a People, that are almost Revolted and Gone.

But if Israel be not Gathered; if the Founders melt in vain; if the Fig Tree
do not blossom; if there be no fruit in the vine, and the labor of the Olive
fail; yet will it be exceeding Comfortable for such to be able to say at
Christ's appearing and Kingdom (as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of GOD)
according to their measure, with the Psalmist; Psalm. 40.9 I have Preached
Righteousness in the great Congregation. I have not refrained my lips, O Lord,
thou know.

3. To the Whole CONGREGATlON.

Let us all be prevail^d with to do our true Endeavor, and take Pains with our
Selves Families, and one with another, according to our several Abilities
Conditions and Obligations; that we maybe a living People, as well as have a
Name to live that we may not be dead while we live. Were all that are here
present before the Lord, dead to sin and alive unto God, it may be we should
more generally (in a little time) revive as the Corn, and grow as the Vine.

As for those that have been the great Instruments of Wounding and Weakening us,
and will still do wickedly, come on it what will; they should remember, That if
GOD should give Us the Cup that may yet be in His Hand (although many may be
ready to promise themselves tha^ the bitterness of Death is passed) such shall
wring out the dregs of it and drink them, Psalm. 75.8. As they loved Cursing so
it shall come upon them, as Oil into their bones; and as they delighted not in
a Blessing, so it shall be far from them.

O let us not be so Ung^ateful to GOD, so Unkind and Unnatural to our Serves
and to our Children, as to perpetuate our Apostasy: Humanum est Peccave,
Diabolicum Perseverare, et Angelicum resurgere. We shall be very inexcusable
and unpardonable, if it may be said after all that God has done with us and
for us; That GOD called, and we refused; the god of this world called, and we
attended: That neither the Hopes of Salvation, nor the Fears of Destruction
were strong enough to call us back, from darkness unto light; and from the
power of Satan unto God.

To close all: Would to God there were so much Life in us, as was in Ephraim,
when he bemoaned himself thus, Thou have Chastised me and I was Chastised; as a
Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke: Turn thou me and I shall be turned; for thou
art the Lord my God, Jer. 3I.I8. For then might we expect the like Comfortable
returns of Divine Compassion: For since I spoke against him I do earnestly
remember him still; therefore my Bowels are troubled for him, Ver. 20. And that
this Speech would be again used among us; The LORD Bless thee, 0 Habitation of
Justice, and Mountain of Holiness. Oh! That it might Please GOD to say
concerning us, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their
hearts; and will be their GOD, and they shall be My People.

FINIS.

