Five SERMONS ON Several Subjects.

I. A Birthday SERMON, Preached on the Day when the Author attained to the
Eightieth Year of his Age.

II. A dying Testimony to the Sovereign Grace of God in the Salvation of His
Elect, Containing Three SERMONS.

III. Believers encouraged to Pray from the Consideration of CHRIST'S
Interceding for them, and with them.

By Increase Mather, D.D.

Romans 11. 6. If by Grace then it is no more of works. 2 Pet. 1. 11. Moreover, I
will endeavor that you may be able after my decease, to have these things
always in remembrance Christiani fiunt, non nascuntur. Tertul. BOSTON: Printed
by B Green, for Daniel Henchman, Sold at his Shop. 1719.

The Preface.
THE SERMONS emitted herewith, were not written with my own Hand, but taken
from me when Preached, by One that has a rare dexterity in Writing Characters,
the same Person, who at first in Short hand, and after that in a very Ligible
hand transcribed the Sermons on the Beatitudes, lately Printed. Upon the
Perusal of these as well as those, I find them to agree with what I delivered:
but therefore plainess of style, and inculcations must be expected.

I have endeavored to declare the great Truths of the Gospel with all possible
plainess, and perspicuity, that the most ordinary Capacities might understand
and be edified.

The Occasion of the Discourse concerning the Sovereign Grace of God in the
Salvation of the Elect, was, a Letter which a Worthy Minister, who lives in a
Town remote from Boston sent to me, proposing that I would Preach and Publish
some Meditations, on Ephesians. 2. 8. I was the more willing to comply with his
desire, that so ^ who am Expecting Death every day (and for that reason call
these Sermons, my dying Testimony) may leave something with that dear Flock
(among whom I have been Laboring for the space of Eight and Fifty Years) which
may help to confirm them after my Decease, in those Gospel Truths, in
opposition, not only to the Errors of Pelagius, Papists, and Socinians, but of
Arminians, and Semi-Arminians; such as Amyrald, Testardus, Camero, Tilenus,
(not to mention any New Methodists of our own Nation) whose Writings are known
to Learned Men, and well refuted by the very Learned Peter Du Moulin. These
Discourses are not Published for the Instruction of great Scholars, but for the
Confirmation and Establishment of the ordinary sort of Readers. And therefore
they are not handled in a Polemick or Scholastic way, but in a Plain,
Practical, and Scriptural Method.

The Reverend and Learned Mr. Clarkson (who when belonging to the University,
was Tutor to that Eminent Man Dr. Tillotson late A. B. of Canturbury) has
Written a Judicious Discourse of Free Grace, with whose Sentiments I fully*
concur. As also with Dr. Grew in his Excellent Sermons of Justification.

It is with the Lord to make my Endeavors on a profitable Subject to become
profitable. I often think of (and I wish Young Preachers would think of it) the
Advice of the famous Dr. Sibs to Young Thomas Goodwin* (who afterward proved a
no les^ famous Doctor than the other) Young Man (said he) if ever you would do
good, you must Preach Christ and Free Grace.

No Man can expect any thing great from me, as on other accounts, so in respect
of my great Age. It is true, that there is sometimes an instance of an Old Man
of whom it may be said as it was of Moses, and o^ Caleb, That Age has not
debilitated him.

Nec tarda senectus Debilitat vires animi, mutatque vigorem

It cannot be said so of me. Nevertheless it is some Encouragement to me, that
there have been aged Men, (and aged Ministers too) who have brought forth fruit
in Old Age, by Writing as well as other ways. Dr. Sheaf wrote a profitable Book
when he was, (as now I am) arrived to the Eightieth Year of his Age. There is a
blessed Promise, Psalm. 92. 14. They shall still bring forth fruit in old age.
Death (if the Lord shall so please) is far more Eligible than a useless Life,
supposing it to be a death in the Lord. Blessed are the dead which die in the
Lord, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.

BOSTON, Sept. 23. 1719.
A Plain Discourse Concerning every Man's BIRTH SIN.
EZEKIEL XVI. 5. -- In the Day that thou wast born.
THE design of the Prophet in the beginning of this Chapter, is to declare the
woeful condition the Jews were in before such time as God called them to be His
People: They had no cause to be Proud of their Pedigree, yet they were so. They
boasted that they had Abraham for their Father, and that they were descended
from such great and good Men as Isaac and Jacob; but the Prophet (...) them to
understand that they were (...) better than if they were descended (...) the
Canaanites, whom they had (...) meanest esteem of. Nay, the Amorite^ the worst
among the Canaanites. (...) Father was an Amorite, and thy Mother an H^ttite.
In this with the preceding and following Verses Jerusalem is compared unto a
wretched Exposititiou^ Infant, cast out not in the Stree^ where it might have
some pity, but (...) the open Field, where none eye pitie^ it nor looked after
it. Thus by Parabolical and Allegorical Expressions the Prophet sets forth the
Miserable state (...) the Jewish Nation when in Egypt* There is also a
Mysti^^l Spiritual Meaning intended in the words; Namely to signify that such
as this is the case o^ all the Elect of God, till He shall please to Regenerate
them. Wherefore the Doctrine is,

DOCT. That the Children of Men are bor^ very Sin^^^ Creatures.

There is a Birth-Sin that every Man has cause to be sensible of, and to be
humbled for all his days: Men do bring Sinful Natures into the World with them:
It is not only true that they are Sinful, but that they are born so. The
Pharisees said to the man that was born blind, Thou wast altogether born in
Sin: What they said was true, and if they said so of themselves, it had been as
true. It is true of every Man that comes into the World, that he is altogether
born in Sin. For the clearing the Doctrine, we shall first prove, That it is
so. 2ly, Inquire, How it comes to pass? For the proof of the Doctrine.

1. The Holy Scriptures declares it. Genesis 8.21. The imagination of man's heart
is evil from his youth. The Heart is put for the Soul, and all the powers and
faculties of it; the Imagination of the heart, is the Mould in which thoughts
are formed. The heart is like a Mint in which evil thoughts are Coined
continually. Thus it is with Man, not with this or that Man, but with every
Man, and this from their Youth. The Hebrew word, Nagnar, is sometimes
translated, a Babe, even Babes have this evil in them. The Children of Men can
no sooner think, no sooner set their imaginations on work but they are thinking
and imagining that which is evil; and they can no sooner Speak, but they Speak
that which they ought not. Psalm. 58.3. They go astray as soon as they are born
speaking lies. Childred are apt to do so as soon as they can Speak; and they no
sooner do any thing but they do that which is Evil. Isai.48.8. Thou wast called
a transgress^r from the Womb. Thou wast called so; that is to say, Thou wast
so: as that phrase is often to be so understood in Scripture. True it is, That
as Man did at his first Creation come out of Gods hands, there was no Sin in
him. Eccl. 7.29. God made man upright, but they have sought out many
inventions. They, our first Parents, Adam and Eve, sought out many sinful
Inventions; and all their Children after them are doing as they did. When God
Created Man, he was made in the Image of God. Gen.5.1. In the day that God
Created Man, in the likeness of God made ^e him. But then it is said in the
third Verse, That Adam begat a Son in his own likeness. The likeness of Adam is
set in opposition to the likeness of God. Another Scripture speaks to this
purpose: Job 11. 12. Man is born like the wild asses colt It is not only true
that he is foolish and unteachable, but that he is born so: As it is said,
Folly is bound in the heart of a Child. There is a bundle of folly in his Heart.

2. This is evident, In that Infant Children are obnoxious to the wrath of God.
Ephesians. 2. 3. Children of wrath by nature. Sometimes they bring into the World
with them sad tokens of the displeasure of God. Some are born Blind, some are
born Deaf, and so continue to be dumb all their days: Others bring woeful
diseases into the World with them; Natural diseases which show they are subject
to Moral diseases. Nay, they are subject to Death as soon as they come into the
World; by that Argument the Apostle proves that Infants have the guilt of Sin
upon them. Romans 5. 14. Death reigned over them that had not sinned after the
similitude of Adams transgression. That is to say, That had not been guilty of
any Personal Actual Sin; Death reigns over them, therefore they are under the
guil^ of Sin, the wages whereof is Death* And there have been some Infants in
the World, that God has manifested a special indignation against them: so the
Infant Children of the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15. 3. GOD commanded Saul that he
should destroy the Amalekites, particularly, The Infant and the Suckling. And
is it not said concerning the Infant Children of the Babylonians? Psalm. 137. 9.
Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy little ones against the Stones.
Would it be so, if Children in their Infancy were altogether free from Sin? How
many thousands, it may be Millions of Infant Children did there perish in the
flood* how many when Sodom and Gomorah was destroyed? Concerning those that
destruction fell upon, in the 7th. Verse of Judes Epistle: It is said, They
suffer the vengeance of eternal fire.

3. Men are naturally indisposed unto that which is good, and inclined to that
which is evil. Original Sin (as every Man's Birth-Sin has ever since Austin
expressed it by that Name, been commonly and fitly called) consists in these
two things, An^ indisposition to that which is good, and an inclination to that
which is evil.

(1) Men are Naturally indisposed unto that which is good. Jer.4. 22. To do
good they have no knowledge. Tit. 1. 16. They are unto every good work
reprobate. A work that is Spiritually good, the Natural Man has neither skill
nor will for the performance of it. ^ Cor.2. 14. The natural man receives not
the things of the spirit of God, neither can be know them. He is not only
unable, but averse to that which is Spiritually good. Therefore, when any good
Motion is proposed to Sinners, presently they make excuses; it is natural for
them to make excuse, Luke 14.18. When the offers of the Gospel was set before
them, it is said, They all with one consent began to make excuse. And the
better the Motion is, the more averse are Men naturally to close with it. What
can be better than to come to Jesus Christ: Yet Christ complains, Joh.5.40. Ye
will not come to me that ye might have life. Hence, Men are presently weary
when engaged in a thing that is good: They say, as in, Mal.1.13. What a
weariness is it? Thus the Jews concerning the Sabbath Day, Amos 8.5. They said,
When will the Sabbath be gone. Do we not see Men are weary of Sabbaths, and
hardly allow to GOD the ful^ of the time they ought to do, the Seventh part of
time. Are not Men weary of Sermons? How many come and sleep at Sermons. Men by
Nature do not love that which is holy; they don't love holy things, nor holy
Men, they don't love the Holy GOD, by nature. Romans 1. 30. They are haters of
God: They are (...) there is in their hearts a Stygian, a hellish hatred of the
blessed GOD; and they are haters of JESUS CHRIST the Holy One of GOD. Christ
therefore says, Their Soul abhorred me, Zech. 11. 8. They don't love the
Children of God as such; the Seed of the Serpent have an Antipathy against the
Seed of the Woman. Men in their natural estate are the Seed of the Serpent:
there is enmity in their hearts against the Seed of the Woman: Those that are
godly they don't love them.

(2) Men are naturally inclined to that which is evil. Jer.4.22. They are wise
to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge; if there be an evil Motion
they presently comply with it. It is not true, which some assert, That Men
become Sinners only by imitation, or by learning from others. Some Sins are
learnt from others, yet if Men should live where they should see no Sin
committed, they would Sin against GOD. Suppose a Child brought up in a
Religious Family, and never heard a ly told in his life, yet that Child
committing a fault will go to cover it by telling a lie, which shows that to
Sin is Natural. Some have committed such Sins as none in the World before them
did the like. Romans 1.30. They are inventers of evil things: which shows they
then are Sinners by Inclination, and not only by Imitation. Yea, a sad truth it
is, That the worst of Sins, the vilest of Abominations are natural to the
Children of Men, though it may be God keeps them from committing them. The
Apostle showing what Men are by Nature, says, Romans 3.15. Their sent are swift
to shed blood. Why? are all Men Murderers? Truly, they have Murderous hearts
within them. That holy Man Mr. Bradford, who dyed a Ma^tyr, When he heard of
any One Executed for Capital Crimes, would strike upon his breast and say, In
this heart of mine (...) that which would make me commit the (...) Sin, if God
by His Grace did not (...) me. All sorts of Sins are natural to (...) Mat. 15.
19. Out of the heart proceed (...) Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornic^tions,
Thiefts, false Witness, Blasphemi^s These proceed out of the heart; (...) they
are in the heart: how should the^ proceed out of the heart, if there was
nothing of them there. So that all sor^ of Sins are natural to Men in this
the^^ corrupt, fallen estate. This may to some seem impossible, because there
are Si^^ which seem contrary the one, to the ^ther; as Prodigality is contrary
to C^vetousness, yet in the same heart a^^ both these. We see sometimes a Man
that has been Notorious for his Prodigality, afterward that very Man shall
become as Notorious for his Covet^usness; then these corruptions are both of
them in his heart. It is very true* There are special Sins which some Persons
are more apt to commit them, tha^ others, according to their natural Tempers;
some are naturally more subje^^ to anger, being of a passionate disposition;
others are more subject to a spirit of revenge; others to Intemperance, and the
like: Nevertheless, it is true, That all sorts of Sins are in the hearts of
Men, and those Sins which they may seem to have an Antipathy to, yet even those
Sins are in their heart, and it may be will discover themselves at the last.
Saul seemed to have an Antipathy against Witches and destroyed them, yet this
very Saul goes to the Witch of Endor to inform him how the War he was engaged
in should prosper. It has been noted of Julian the Apostate, That he did
abominate some Sins, As that of Drunkenness, and Stage Play, but it was because
of some inconveniences that attended them; he did not hate them as being Sins
against GOD. Men naturally dislike the Law of God, ^ay they make it an occasion
of Sin. The holy Apostle confesses it was so with him before his Conversion:
Rom.7.8. Sin taking occasion by the Commandment, wrought in me all manner of
concupiscence. Because the Commandment, said he, should not do such a thing,
therefore he was the more ready to do it. Austin in his confessions does bewail
it, as that which did discov^^ the natural corruption of his heart, Th^^ when
he was an Ungodly Youth; (...) would go into his Neighbors Orchard and Steal
Apples: Whereas (says he^ I might have had the same kind of A^ples in my
Fathers Orchard, and bett^^ too, and been welcome to them; but ^^cause I could
have them in my Father Orchard without Sinning against God therefore I did not
care for them; (...) because he transgressed the Eighth Commandment if he had
them out of (...) Neighbors Orchard, he chose to (...) them there.

2l^. We come to enquire, How it (...) to pass; Whence is it, That Men are
(...) thus Sinful?

Ans. 1. Adams Sin is the cause of (...) all the Sin, Death, and Misery, that
(...) been in the World ever since Adam, (...) Sin of his has been the Original
of (...) Rom.5.12. By one man sin entered into (...) world and death by sin, and
so death (...) upon all men for that all have sinned, 1 (...). 15.22. In Adam
all die: If in Adam (...) die, then in Adam all have Sinned. (...) Sin is the
cause, the original, (...) that Inherent Sin, that corruption which is in the
hearts of Men. Romans 5. 19. By one man's disobedience many were made sinners.
Truly as many as ever shall be in the World, as many Men, Women and Children as
ever were born into the World, by the disobedience of Adam are made Sinners and
guilty before GOD. Some may be apt to think this is hard, Is this reasonable,
why should we be punished for Adams Sin? We could not help what he did in
eating the forbidding fruit. But it should be considered that Adam was not a
particular but universal Person, the Representative of all Mankind: now the
act of a Representative is justly imputed to those he does represent; though we
did not choose Adam for our Representative, God chose him for us. If Adam had
not Sinned, we should all have fared the better for it: Not Original Sin, but
Original Righteousness would have been propagated. Men then would have been
born with a perfect Image of God upon them; therefore it is just and reasonable
that when he sinned they should be deprived of that Image, and be punished with
Original Corruption.

2. Men are born of Sinful Parents* Their next and immediate Parents convey a
Corrupt Nature to them: We (...) in natural respects it is so; there (...)
diseases that are Hereditary, that go from Father to Son, from one Generation
to another, diseases that run in the blood. Truly Original Sin is such a
disease, it runs in a blood throughout the whol^ race of Mankind. It is like
the Leprosy in the Family of Gehazi, 2 King.5.27* The Leprosy of Naaman the
Syrian sh^^^ cleave unto thee, and unto thy seed (...) ever. It is so here,
Original Sin is Leprosy, and it cleaves to the Children of Men from one
Generation to another it cleaves to them for ever; qualities (...) the Nature
are Propagated. It is true Personal qualities are not always Propagated, but
qualities of the Nature ar^ Thence it is that the Children of godl^ Men, are as
much subject to Original Sin as the Children of other Men, because Grace is a
Personal Property which is not Propagated, but Original Sin is property of
Nature, thence does continue to be Propagated. We see this (...) David's
confession, Psalm.^1.^. I was shap^ in iniquity and in sin did my Mother
conceive me. Yet David's Mother was a gracious holy Woman. In one of the Psalms
he takes notice of it; I am the Son of thy Handmaid: As for his Father Jesse,
he doubtless was a very holy Man. The Jews in their Writings when they speak of
J^sse David's Father, Call him Jesse the Righteous; they speak Hyperbolically
concerning him, That when the Angel of death came to him, he could not find any
thing in him for which to take his life from him, but remembered Original Sin,
and so killed him. Certain it is, Jesse was a holy Man, for he was one of the
holy line; that is, One from whom our Savior Christ was lineally descended,
and they were all of them holy Persons, but though Jesse David's Father was a holy
Man, and his Mother a holy Woman, yet he confesses that he was shapen in
iniquity, and conceived in Sin. All Creatures the evil qualities of their
Nature are Propagated with them. A Wolf, his Wolvish nature is Propagated to
th^se that pro^eed from him: ^ Wolf though he never saw any one destroy a Sheep,
he does it naturally. So Serpents bring Poison in their Nature (...) the World
with them. Thus it is wi^^ the Children of Men, they are Serpent^ Christ calls
the Scribes and Pharise^ Serpents and ageneration of Vip^rs. Th^^ we see the
Doctrine cleared in the particulars that have been mentioned.

FOR APPLICATION.

USE, I. Hence No Man in the Worl^ has cause to be Proud, but to walk Humbl^
and Mournfully before the Lord, and to (...) ashamed. For Sin has made him to
(...) a vile Creature, which he has cause (...) confess and bewail. As Job did,
Job.4^*4. Behold I am vile. Every Man man say so, Behold I am vile; and he was
^ vile Creature as soon as he came into the World, a loathsome Creature in the
sight of God. The Lord here says by the Prophet, I saw thee when thou was^ cast
out to the leathing of thy person in the day that thon wast born. Every Man by
Nature is that loathsome Person. It i^ true that Actual Sins makes Men
loathsome before the Lord. Prove. 13. 5. The wicked i^ loathsome. Original Sin
much more. Is not a Plague sore loathsome? What then is the Plague of the
heart. Is not a Leprosy a loathsome disease? What then is the Leprosy of the
Soul. In the Chapter concerning the Plague of Leprosy, viz. Lev. 13. We read of
him that has that Plague, from Head to foot, verse. 12. Truly Original Sin is
such a Leprosy, it over spreads Sinful Creatures from head to foot, all over
them: That Men have cause to say, as Job also did, Job 42.6. I abhor my self
and repent in dust and ashes. Men have cause to abhor themselves on the account
of Original Sin, if on the account of Actual Sins much more on the account of
Original Sin, that is the worst Sin that any Man has been guilty of. Rom.7.13.
That sin might become exceeding sinful. He speaks of Original Sin, and could
not call it by a worse name than it Self, even that of Sin, and Sinful Sin. It
may be some of you have been over taken with vile Sins, that if they were known
you would be ashamed of yourselves. But let me tell you, thy Original Sin,
there is more evil in it, than in any Actual Sin that ever thou wast guilty of
in thy life, for it is a (...) Sin that others proceed and spring (...) Suppose
a poisonful Tree, that the leav^^ are poison, the berries are poison, (...) is
much more poison in the root of (...) Tree. Do Actual Sins make thee loat^some?
There is a root Sin, Origin^^ Sin, which makes thee more vile, (...) loathsome:
But where are the Person^ how few are they? that were ever tro^bled for this
Sin. How many of (...) that hear me this day never shed (...) Tear in their
lives because of that Original Sin which makes them loathsome (...) the sight
of God. Those old Heretick^ the Pelagians said, There was no evil i^ it, and
that its a foolish thing for a Man to be troubled for Original Sin. And (...)
is related concerning Bellarmine, when he would set himself to be humbled
before God, he could not see that he ha^ cause to be humbled on the account
(...) any Sin that he had been guilty of, bu^ that so he might have something
to (...) humbled for, he would reflect on the follies of his Childhood. Ah!
Miserable Man! he knew not his own heart, (...) knew not what he was by Nature.
The holy Apostle Paul was of another judgment; he laments it, he went mourning
all his days because of his Original Sin, and cries out, Oh wretched man that I
am! What! You a wretched Man, that have done so much good in the World, been an
Instrument of Converting many Souls! Ah but (says he) I have Original Sin
remaining in me, that makes me cry out, O^ wretched man that I am! The Lords
Servants, yea, the best of them should have an humbling remembrance of what
once they were, Ephesians. 2.11. Their Souls should ^e humbled within them, when they
remember the day when they were naked and are, and polluted in their blood,
Ezekiel.16.2^.

USE, II. If Men are by Nature so sinful as has been proved, Then every man
must either be made partaker of a New Birth, or perish Eternally. Regeneration
is absolutely necessary to Salvation. The Mouth of the Son of God has declared
it, and that with a double Verily. Joh. 2. 2. Verily, verily I say (...) thee.
Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. No! he cannot,
Can a Man that has no Interest in Christ the Only Savior be Saved? when the
Scripture says, He that has the Son has life, (...) he that has not the Son has
not life? (...) that has no Interest in Christ can he (...) Saved? As for the
Unregenerate (...) it is certain that he has no Interest in (...) Lord Jesus
Christ. 2 Cor. 5. 17. If (...) man is in Christ he is a new creature. (...)
then, think seriously and sadly on th^^ Art thou a New Creature? Has (...)
created a clean heart in thee? Has (...) given thee another kind of heart,
anoth^^ Nature than once thou had? If (...) thou have no Interest in Christ.
Christ said* If I wish thee not thou have no part (...) me. If thou art not
washed in the bloo^ of Christ, and washed with the Spirit (...) Christ; if thou
art not made partak^^ of the washing of Regeneration and Renewing of the Holy
Ghost, it is mo^^ certain thou have no Interest in the Lo^^ JesusChrist. Can a
Man be saved whos^ Sins are not forgiven? One Sin Unpar^^ doned is enough to
sink a Soul to the bottom of Hell. One of thy Sins has (...) Mouth like Hell,
wide enough to swallow up thy Soul; but now if thou ar^ not Converted,
Regenerated, not any One Sin that ever thou wast guilty of in thy life is
forgiven thee. Acts 3. 19. Repent and be converted that your sins may be
blotted out. Then if thou art not Converted, thy Sins are not blotted out, they
all are remaining still in Gods Book. And Men by Nature are not holy, but holy
they must be or they shall never see Heaven. Heb.12.14. Without holiness no man
shall see the Lord. Think sadly on this. Let Parents consider of this, Your
Children are diseased; there is a Mortal disease on them, if God don't
Mercifully heal it they will die and die for ever: they derive this disease
from you, Wont you endeavor that they may be healed that so they may be saved?
You will say, We cannot give Grace to our Children: Well, but you may use the
Means, and then you don't know what God will do for them: You may set before
them an holy example. Believe it, Sirs, There is many a Child of godly Parents
shall go to Heaven, and the holy example of their Father has been the Means of
their Conversion to God. Then be very holy. Take heed that your Children do not
see their Fathers Nakedness and be hardened thereby, as Ham was. Walk before
them in all holy Conversation; (...) them, and Charge them. Solomon (...) the
Instructions he received (...) his Parents was a Means of lasting (...) to him.
I was my Fathers Son, (...) only beloved in the sight of my Mother; (...)
taught me also, and said unto me, get (...), yet understanding, keep my
comm^^ments and live, Prove.4.3. Lay the ^^lemn charge of God on your Child^^^*
What a solemn charge did David (...) his Son Solomon? Thou Solomon my (...)
know, and serve the God of thy Father, (...) thou seek him he will be found of
thee, (...) if thou forsake him he will cast thee for ever. It is reported
concerning (...) holy Man, That upon his Death (...) he said to his Children,
Let not any of (...) dare to see me at the Day of Judgment an Unregenerate
State, if you do, I (...) to you, I your Father will be a witnes^ ^^gainst you,
and will join with the Lord Jesus Christ in passing a Sentence of eter^^^^
Condemnation upon you. And be much Prayer for your Children. You (...) not what
Prayer may do for them. (...) may be you may Pray down Grace (...) their
hearts, though you may not see ^nswer presently, if you hold on Praying. ^t may
be God will say to you, as to A^raham, concerning his wild Son Ishmael, ^ have
heard thee, and will bless him. That ^nstance of Monica the Mother of Austin,
^s well known. Austin was a vain ungodly Youth, his Pious Mother was extremely
troubled for him, went into her Closet, continued Praying that God would give
him Grace; She went to Ambrose, and made her complaint to him, with a flood of
Tears, Oh what shall I do that my Son Austin may be Converted. Said Ambrose,
Don't trouble thy self, that Son of thine shall be Converted, I will never
believe that a Child of so many Prayers and Tears shall perish. In a while
after, That Young Man became One of the most holy Men on the face of the earth.
Then let Parents go on Praying to God for their Children.

Let me now apply my self to Children, I would speak a word to them; You
Children do you hear, In the Name of the Lord I declare it to you, That if you
be not New born it had been good for you that you had never been born. You will
be the unhappiest Creatures in the world; It would been better for you (...)
have been a Dog, a Toad, a Serpent, (...) the vilest Creature on the Earth,
(...) those doleful Creatures, when they (...) there is an end of all their
Misery, (...) you Children, if you die before you (...) New born, as soon as
you are dead (...) your Eternal Miseries come upon (...) Have you not heard of
a Young (...) perhaps Ten Years Old, that would (...) alone and Pray and cry to
God, (...) his Sins, and beg Mercy of God; and (...) that reason for it, I
don't know (...) may die; as Young as I am I may die, (...) I should die before
I have Repented (...) my Sins, and turned to God, I shall (...) Miserable for
ever more. You Childr^^ You may die as to your bodies; but (...) have Immortal
Souls within you (...) shall never die; if when Death (...) you are found New
Creatures, such (...) have turned to God, holy Angels will (...) sent to carry
your Souls to Heaven; (...) if you die in your Sins, without (...) New
Creatures, Devils will be sent (...) carry your Souls to Hell. The (...) make
you, to think of it. As to (...) who are past their Childhood, Young (...) Hear
the word of the Lord. Consid^^ that you are by Nature, how necessary it is that
you should become New Creatures, have New Natures given to you. I have seen a
Book which speaks of a Young Man, who on his Birth day, Prayed earnestly that
he might be New born. Oh that many Young Men would make that Prayer not on
their Birth day only, but on other days also. You may die in your Youth: Have
not some of your Companions you were will not to walk with, been struck with
Death? God has struck them dead. How do you know but that He may deal so with
you? Many times Young Men that have lived under the Gospel all their days, and
hardened their hearts, and gone on in ways of Sin, God kills them while they are
Young. Job 36. 14. They die in Youth, and their life is among the unclean. It
is oftentimes so, Young Men whose life is among the Unclean, God strikes them
dead in their Youth. Oh consider of it, and turn to the Lord!

USE, III. Hence then Believers on Jesus Christ ought to be very willing to die
and leave this World that so they may have a perfect deliverance from that Sin
(...) brought into the World with them. As (...) the Believer in Christ, The
day of his (...) will be better to him then the day of (...) birth. In the day
of his birth he (...) a Sinful Creature; but when once (...) happy day of his
death is come, ^e (...) then be Sinless. The Primitive Chris^^ans we find they
were very willing to (...) and leave this World. 2 Cor.5.8. William rather to
be absent from the body and to (...) present with the Lord. Doubtless, (...)
was one reason that made them so (...), that they might be delivered (...) the
remainders of Original Sin. For long as Gods Children are in this Wor^^ they
shall be grievously troubled (...) Indwelling Sin, and that is to them a
c^^tinual burden. Romans 7. 24. O wretc^^^ man that I am who shall deliver me
fr^^ this body of death? Original Sin (...) shall deliver me from it? Suppos^
living Man is chained to a dead loath (...) Carcass, will it not he very
grievous him to think he must be chained (...) dead Carcass continually? So it
is (...) the Child of God; Original Sin is a (...) loathsome Carcass, he is
chained to (...) but death will deliver him; he will then be delivered from
that Sin for ever. Rom.6.7. He that is dead is freed from Sin. A Child of God
is not only then freed from the dominion of Sin, so he is in this life; but
from the very being of (...): When once he is dead, he shall never have one
vain Thought in his heart any more; he shall never speak one unprofitable Word
any more: Who would not be willing to die to attain such happiness? Especially
they that have been a long time in this World, have had this Sin in them a long
time; certainly they should be willing to die. He that now Speaks to you, is
such an One. I bless the Lord, I am very willing to lea^e this sinful World;
God has made me willing, yea, desirous of it. This very Day Four Score Years
are expired since I was born a sinful Creature. I trust in the Lord with
Submission to His Will, that I shall never see another sinful Birthday, but
that ere long, I shall be gathered to my Fathers, and be with the Spirits of
Just Men made perfect, and with Jesus Christ to behold His Glory; Amen, dearest
Lord!

Preached in Boston, June 21. 1719.
Sovereign Grace Proclaimed.
SERMON, I.
EPHESIANS, II. 8. By Grace ye are Saved: --
THE Apostle in the beginning of this Chapter declares to the Ephesians what
they were before they had Faith in Jesus Christ, that they were dead in
trespasses and sins, and were Children of wrath; he also declares what the were
since they had true Faith in Christ they were brought into a state of
Salvation: Which Salvation, in the words before us, is described from the
Suprea^ Cause and Original of it; Namely, (...) Grace of God. The holy heart of
(...) Apostle was much set upon that Subject of Grace, therefore he mentions it
no less than three times in four Verses. In the 5th verse rather than not
mention it he brings it in by way of Parenthesis: He no sooner speaks of
Salvation but he thinks of Grace, as we see in verse 5,7,8. By Grace here, is
not meant that Grace which is wrought in Believers, or Sanctification; although
it is true there is no Salvation without that; without holiness no man shall
see the Lord: but hereby is meant Grace without us, or the Grace of God. So
then the Doctrine before us is,

DOCT. That the Salvation of Believers on Jesus Christ, is to be ascribed
wholly to the Sovereign Grace of God.

There are three particulars that may be inquired into. (1) What is implied in
this Salvation the Text speaks of? (2) What is meant by the Grace of God? (3)
How it does appear that the Salvation of Believers must be ascribed wholly and
only to the Sovereign Grace of God.

Quest. 1. What is implied in this Salvation the Text speaks of?

Answ. This word Salvation is a (...) comprehensive word; as on the (...) hand
that word Death is a very comp^^hensive word; in Death all evils Spi^^tual,
Temporal, Eternal, are implied even so by Salvation all desirable go^ is to be
understood, A deliverance fr^^ all evil, and the communication of all go^*

1. It does imply a deliverance fr^^ evil, from all evil, in special from th^^
which is the worst, the greatest of evi^^ and the cause of all other evil
whatso^ver: Namely, Sin. Mat. 1. 21. He (...) save his people from their sins.

(1.) This Salvation imply's in it a d^liverance from the guilt, and
condem^^tion due for Sin. Rom.8.1. There is now (...) condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus. It is not said, there was none, (...) now they are
in Christ there is none; (...) Believer is in no more danger of etern^^
condemnation then if he had never be^^ guilty of Sin. Jer.50.20. Though their
inquity be sought for there shall be no^ Their pardoned Sins shall be as if
th^^ had never been: pardoned Sins are sa^^ to be blotted out: a Debt blotted
out (...) as if it had never been. So Sins that (...) pardoned shall be as if
they had never been committed, as to any eternal condemnation for them:
Believers stand before God as sinless and guiltless. Rev. 14. 5. They are
without fault before the Throne of God.

(2.) It imply's a deliverance from the dominion of Sin, which indeed is no
less a Mercy than deliverance from the damnation of it; for a greater evil
cannot befall a poor creature than to be a slave to Sin: Believers are delivered
from that slavery: God has made them to be blessed free Men. Joh.8.36. If the
Son shall make you free ye shall be free indeed. The Son of God has made
Believers on Him free from the power and dominion of Sin. The Apostle does not
only affirm this, but he proves it. Rom.6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over
you, for ye are not under the law but under grace. You are not under a Covenant
of Works, but you are under a Covenant of Grace: The Covenant of works did
command Obedience, but it did not give any power to obey. As the AEygptians,
commanded the Israelites to make brick and gave them no straw to make them
with. But in the Covenant of Grade, there is a power goes alo^^ with the
Command, GOD will enab^^ them to do what He requires of the^* This Salvation is
peculiar to Believer on Jesus Christ, and it is a great deliverance.

(3.) This Salvation imply's a deliverance from Death. Where Sin reigns (...)
is unto death, but where it does no^ reign it is not so. Christ says, Joh.8.5^*
He that keeps my saying ^e shall never (...) death. It is true, as to the death
of (...) body, natural death, Believers on Christ are as much subject to that
as other Me^ but they are delivered from the curse^ it, the sting of it; their
death is not ^ cursed, but a blessed death. Rev. 14.1^. Blessed are the dead
which die in the Lo^^ They are delivered from the Seco^^ Death; on them the
Second death has (...) power: they are delivered from t^^ death of the Soul. As
David speaks Psalm* 116.8. Thou have delivered my soul from death. Every
Believer his Soul is del^vered from death. What is the dea^^ (...) the body
compared to the death (...) the Soul? The death of the body it (...) soon over,
but the Second Death, whi^^ ^iezes on the Soul, that is more tormenting, more
painful than any bodily death, and yet will never be over. Rev. 14. 11. The
smoke of their torment ascends for ever and ever. But this death Believers
are delivered from. 1 These. 1. 10. Jesus has delivered us from the wrath to
come. The Second death, is called the wrath to come. After a miserable Creature
has been weltring under that wrath Ten thousand Millions of Years, he is no
nearer an end of his Misery than the first day fit came upon him. Now this
Wrath to come Believers are delivered from it, and sure it is a great
deliverance.

(4.) Believers are delivered from the power of Satan; from the power of evil
Angels which have power over other Men, so as they have not over Believers on
Jesus Christ. Col. 1. 13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and
has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear son. There were some temporal
Salvations which were Types of this Salvation; as that deliverance out of
Egypt which was a great Salvation; but this is a greater. It is a sadder thing
to be a slave to the Devil than to be a slave to Pharaoh. So redemption out of
(...) was a great Salvation, and (...) Typical of this Redemption I am spe^^ing
of. Isai. 49.^4. Shall the lawful (...) be delivered? shall the prey be (...)
from the mighty? The Devil is the Mi^^ty enemy. The Elect of God were some
accounts, become lawful (...) to him, in as much as God for the (...) of Men
had delivered Mankind into (...) hands: now deliverance from (...) mighty enemy
is a great Salvation. (...) Christ said to Paul, Act.26.18. That he (...) him
to the Gentiles, to turn them (...) darkness to light, and from the power Satan
unto God. Belivers before (...) had Faith in Christ were Satan's Serva^^ now
they are Gods Servants.

(5.) In this Salvation, positive (...) is employed. God will give Grace a^^
Glory, and no good thing will He (...) hold from Believers in Christ. God (...)
not indeed Promised them any great m^^ter as to Temporal good, as to Tempo^^^
blessings to be bestowed on them; (...) indeed there are but few of them (...)
have much of these blessings. Jam. (...) God has chosen the peer of this world
(...) in Faith. But then God has promised them Spiritual blessings, which are
far better and more desirable. Ephesians. 1. 3. He has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly places in Christ. The positive g^od implied in this
Salvation is in Scripture called Eternal Life. One Scripture says, He that
believes shall be saved; another Scripture expresses the same thing, by
saying, He that believes has everlasting life: Everlasting life consists
chiefly in a full and eternal enjoyment of God: nothing can make a Man happy
without the enjoyment of the Chief good, and that is God. Psalm.48.14. This God
is our God for ever and ever, He will be our guide even unto death. This is
Salvation, the great Salvation, to have God for our God, and that for ever and
ever.

Quest. 2. What is employed in Grace? When it is said we are saved by Grace.

For Answer, Grace imply's, That Undeserved ^avour which God as a Sovereign
does manifest to some of His Creatures. It is said concerning the Primitive
Christians, Act. 4. 33. That great Grace was upon them: because they had great
favor with all People; so the favor God is expressed by that of Grace. Rom* 2.
This Grace, wherein we stand. That to say, this favor of God: therefore (...)
Apostles in their Salutations, (...) Grace, and Peace: By Grace we are
understand the favor of God, and Peace the sense of that favor; this ^^vour
which is showed to undeservi^^ Creatures is set in opposition to the which is a
due debt. Romans 4. 4. To (...) that works is the reward not of grace, (...) of
debt. Thus a Man that works and (...) his wages given to him, that is (...)
grace, it is debt; he has earned what given to him: but Grace it is undeservi^^
it is altogether free. There is so^^ difference between Grace and Mercy respect
of the object thereof, the object of Mercy is a Miserable Creature, the object
of Grace is an Undeserving Creatu^^ There is some difference between Grace and
Love: though Love is the original Grace, for there may be love between equals;
nay there may be love between Inferiors and Superiors, there ought (...) be
so; Subjects may love their Princ^* But Grace imply's Superiority. (...) speaks
like a King, and as the Lord of Heaven and Earth: Exodus 33. 19. I will be,
gracious to whom I will be gracious: I will show mercy to whom I will show
mercy. Kings single out whom they please to be their favorites, sometimes
those that are very unworthy: and shall we limit the most high God, shall not
He single out whom He pleases to be the objects of His Divine favor? There is
the common Grace of God, all Creatures are the subjects of that. Psalm. 145. 9.
The Lord is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works. He does
good to all: there is common Grace which all the works of God are the subjects
of; but then there is also Special Grace that the Elect of God are the subjects
of, and this is the Grace that brings Salvation. Psalm. 106.4. Remember me, O
Lord, with the favor that thou bear unto thy people, O visit me with thy
salvation. Thus we see what is intended by Grace: It is the free favor of God
which He is pleased to manifest to His People, though they deserve it not.

Quest. 3. How it does appear that the Salvation of Believers is to be ascribed
wholly to the Grace of God?

Ans. This is evident, 1. In that Go^ does not stand in any need of Men. Job. 2
2, 3. Can a man be profitable unto God, as (...) that is wise may be profitable
unto himself. Is it any gain to him if thou make thy (...) perfect? No,
therefore David says, Psa^* 16. 2, 3. My goodness extends not to th^^ but to
the saints on the earth. Men (...) be the better for us, may have adva^tages
more ways than one by us, but God is not advantaged by any thing we c^^ do. God
indeed has commanded Men th^^ they should Pray to Him, that th^^ should Worship
Him; but it is not because He stands in need of any of the^^ Services. Acts
17.25. God is not worshipped as though he needed any thing, seeing (...) gives
to all life and breath and all things* He that has given all things to all, c^^
need none. God may say to the greate^^ Man in the World, I have no need of thee
God may say to the wisest Man in t^^ World, I have no need of thee; He (...)
say to the best Man in the World, I ha^^ no need of thee; He has better
Creatures than Men are, Ten thousand time ten thousand of them, holy Angels
th^^ never sinned against Him, yet He (...) not stand in any need of them
neither: for God was blessed in and of Himself before ever there was any World,
any Creature, most blessed in the enjoyment of His own Infinite Perfections:
God is called in Scripture by that Name of El-Shaddai, h. e. God who is
sufficiency it self.

2. That the Salvation of Men is from Sovereign Grace, special favor, and not
any desert of theirs, is manifest in that they are not worthy that God should
bestow Salvation on them, but the contrary. The best Man in the World is not
worthy of the least Mercy. Was there a better Man in the World in his time than
Jacob? Yet he says, and speaks very truly in it, Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy
of the least of all thy mercies. Men are not worthy of any temporal Salvation
to be vouchsafed unto them, much less of eternal Salvation. God said to Israel,
when He promised Salvation to them, Ezekiel. 36. 32. Not for your sakes do I this,
be it known unto you, O house of Israel, but for my own sake. Not for any
desert of yours, but that I may make known my own Name, my Grace, Goodness,
Mercy, therefore will I do it. They that have Grace wrought in their Souls are
very sensible of their own unworthiness. Th^^ we see in the Centurion, Mat.8.8.
Lord (says he) I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof. And we see
it in (...) Converted Prodigal, he was made se^^^ble of his own Unworthiness;
Luke 1^* 21. I am no more worthy to be called (...) son. I say, Men are not
worthy of S^^vation but the contrary; they are worthy of Damnation: they that
dese^^ Damnation, it is impossible they should deserve Salvation; yet this
every M^^ in the World has done, deserved Death and eternal Damnation. All Men
in (...) World are Sinners in the fight of G^^ Rom.3.23. All have sinned and
come sh^^^ of the glory of God. Adam sell short, (...) did not hold on in the
way of Obedience all his Posterity, all the Men in (...) World are guilty of
Adams Sin, it is become theirs; and they are guilty of Original Sin, an evil
Nature, that (...) might justly send them from the Wom^^ to the Grave, so to
Hell for ever. (...) if they see a Serpent they will kill hi^ though that Serpent
never hurt any one; (...) soon as they come into the World they will kill them,
because there is a poisonous nature in them. The Children of Men who are the
Seed of the Serpent, if God should kill them as soon as they come into the
World, and send them down into Hell, He were just in so doing. And Men have
been guilty of many Actual Sins; they have been guilty of innumerable Sins
against God. Psalm. 40. 12. Innumerable evils have compassed me about,
iniquities more than the heirs of my head have taken hold on me. Every Man may
say so, that Sins more than the heirs of his head have taken hold on him; and
there is not any one of all those Sins but it has deserved Hell. Rom.6.23. The
wages of sin is death. And what death? Death Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal;
the first, and the second Death is due for every Sin: Then if the Lord is
pleased to bestow Salvation on Men it must needs proceed from Grace, and not
from any desert of theirs.

3. The Truth is further evident, if we consider what Man is, what a poor
Creature Man is. Psalm.8.4. What is man that thou art mindful of him? The
Original word is, Enosh, which signifies M^^rable Man. Men are in the Script^^^
compared to the meanest, the most de^^^cable Creatures in the World; (...)
Worm: I am a worm and no man, (...) King David: they are compared to (...)
hoppers, that are despicable Creatu^^^ Isai. 40.22. The Lord sits in the
(...) of the earth, the inhabitants the^ are as grasshoppers before him. What
Man? Psalm.39.5. Verily every man at best estate is altogether vanity. Not (...)
Men, but every Man, and that at his (...) estate; is not only a vain thing, but
(...) it self: Then if God bestows Salvation upon any, it is certainly from
Gra^^* It is Grace in the Great GOD so much to look upon His Creatures. Job 14.
Will thou open thine eyes upon such a^ (...) Mephibo heth said to David, What
is (...) servant that thou should look upon (...) deal dog as I am? What
then is Man (...) the Great GOD should look upon such one, or take the least
notice of his Man, consider him as what he was in Original before ever he was
guilty Sin. Job 4. 19. They Would well in (...) of (...) their foundation is in the
dust. (...) made out of the dust, and his Soul dwells in a Tabernacle of clay,
that God should suffer any Man to speak to Him, it is Infinite condescension.
Abraham said, Genesis 18.27. I which am but dust and ashes, have taken upon me to
speak unto God. There is an Infinite distance, and disproportion, between the
Great GOD, and Men. Eccl. 5.2. God is in heaven, and thou upon earth, therefore
let thy words be few. Says Solomon, Thou art a poor Earth-worm, God is an
Infinite Majesty, therefore we need have a care what we say when we come before
Him. That God should vouchsafe to bestow signal Salvation upon so poor, mean a
Creature as Man, Is not this condescending Grace?

4. If we consider where God finds His Elect when He first begins to bestow
Salvation on them, We must needs say it is from Grace that they are Saved.
Where does God find His Elect when He comes to Convert them? He finds them in
the High Ways. Luke 14. 23. The Lord said to the servant, go out into the high
ways, and compel them to come in. Use arguments with them to persuade them to
come in to the Lord Jesus Christ. *God finds them in Prisons, in Dungeons,
(...) He comes to save them. Zech. 9. 11. (...) the blood of the Covenant I
have sent (...) thy prisoners out of the pit. What a c^^dition does He find
them in? In a wo^^ loathsome condition. Ezekiel.16.5,6. I (...) thee, (says the
Lord) when thou (...) cast out to the lothing of thy person, (...) when thou
wast in thy blood, I said unto the Live. God finds them among His E^^mies when
He comes to Convert th^^ Col.1.21. Ye were sometimes enemies. (...) you are not
so now, you may th^^ Christ and Grace for it. God finds th^^ in the Devils
Kingdom, doing the Dev^^ drudgery, than, and there He calls the^ God calls them
out of that Kingdom darkness into His own blessed Kingdom sure this is an
evidence of glorious Gra^^*

5. The Truth asserted will be ma^^fest, if we duly consider the Soveraign^ of
GOD. He has an absolute Domini^^ over His Creatures: GOD has as great Dominion
over all His Creatures, as the Potter has over his clay, and shall (...) clay
say to the Potter, What do th^^ do? Why have thou made me thu^ May not the
Potter make one vessel (...) honor, and another vessel to dishonor, as
pleases Him: And may not the Great GOD make this Man a vessel of honor,
another Man a vessel of dishonor; and who may dare say to Him, What do thou?
There have been Men that have pretended to absolute power, and dominion, over
other Men. Nebuchadnezzar was such an one. Dan.5.19. It is said of him, Whom be
would be killed, and whom he would be kept alive. The Householder said,
Mat.20.15. May not I do with my own, what ^ will. All the Creatures in the
World are Gods own, therefore He may do with them, and to them, according to
what His Sovereign Will and Pleasure shall be. Job 41.11. Whatsoever is under
the whole heaven is mine, says God: then God may do with His Creatures as
seems Him good. Moses wonders at the free Grace of God toward Israel, that He
should single them out from all other Nations in the World, to become His
peculiar People, Deuteronomy. 10.14,15. The Elect of God, are singled out to become
the subjects of His eternal Salvation: This proceeds from free love, and
immerited favor.

6. A Sixth demonstration of the Doctrine is, That the Salvation of Believers
p^^ceeds from Divine Election as a firm, (...) alterable foundation, and that
is (...) free Sovereign Grace.

7. A Seventh demonstration, is, (...) there are three great things contained
this Salvation, viz. Conversion, Just^^^cation, Glorification. These are all
(...) Grace, and are hereafter to be spoken with the Application. Only one Use
this time.

USE. If Salvation is from Grace, (...) certainly any way to pervert and to
(...) the Grace of God, must needs be a (...) great evil. If Men Sin the more
beca^^^ of the goodness of God in Temporal blessings which He bestows on them,
it p^^vokes Him highly, it provokes Him take away His blessings from them. H^^
2.8,9. They know not, that I gave (...) corn, wine and oil; therefore I will
take way my corn, and my wine in the (...) thereof. They prepared these things
Baal. This causes miserable Har^^ many times, that in the season the^^ the Corn
is taken away. So other bl^^sings, When Men have Wine, or (...) Strong drink,
and they abuse it,and themselves with it, this is to prepare it for Baal. When
God gives them Clothing ^o cover their Nakedness, and they are Proud of their
Clothes, this provokes God to take them away; and not only ^o take away their
blessings, but to in^^ict heavy Judgments on them. Rom.2.^,5. Despisest thou
the riches of his goodness, after thy hardness of heart treasurest (...) unto
thy self wrath against the day of wrath. Men bring treasures of wrath upon
themselves, when they so abuse the goodness of God; when they take occa^^on
from thence the more to sin and dis^onour His Name. But it is much more ^vil to
abuse the Grace of God in the Gospel, when from thence they indulge themselves
in Sin. Rom.5.20. Where sin ^bounded, grace did much more abound. In ^he
beginning of the next Chapter, the Apostle says, Shall we continue in sin that
grace may abound? God forbid. Shall we so (...) in Sin that Grace may abound in
^ardoning of it? God forbid, says he. (...) is a most horrid thing for Men to
Sin against God because He is a gracious Sin^^rdoning God. There were wretched
^ntinomians in the World in the Apostles days, who, because they were not to
(...) saved by the Moral Law, but by faith ^ Christ, therefore would disregard
(...) Moral Law, they would live in the (...) transgression of it,
notwithstanding (...) written in the hearts of Men by (...) that they ought to
obey it. Such Men (...) pretend to faith in Christ, but certa^^ they have none.
So says the Apost^^ Jam. 2. 17. Faith without works is (...) For Men to pretend
to faith, yet not (...) good works, works of New Obedienc^ is a vain pretense,
and so they (...) themselves. It is true, No Man shall be ^^ved on the account
of his works, in a ^^venant way, yet this is certain, God ^^^mands, that
Believers should live ac^^^ding to that holy Law which He has h^^ven to His
People of Old, and (...) shall remain for ever: therefore (...) the Apostle
say, Do we by faith make (...) the law, nay we establish the law. (...) Men are
saved not for the sake of (...) Obedience to the law, but for the sak^ Christ,
shall we then live as we list, (...) break the law of God; No, the (...)
establishes the Moral Law, although as a Covenant, yet as an eternal (...) If
any one shall say, the more I Sin, and the longer I continue in Sin, the more
will the Grace of God be magnified in pardoning my Sin, therefore, I will go on
in Sin adding one Iniquity to another, this is to abuse the Grace of God in the
highest degree: let me tell you, there is hardly a blacker sign of Reprobation
than this. Jude speaks of Men that turn the grace of God into laciviousness.
They would say, though we Sin ever so much God is able to forgive us, and the
Blood of Christ has made atonement for the Sins of the World, therefore let us
go on in Sin. Now (says he) these are ungodly Men and they were of old Ordained
to condemnation. So then, this evil is heinous. For the grace of God that
brings Salvation, That is, the Gospel which is a Doctrine of Grace. This Grace
of God, teaches Men to deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live
soberly, righteously and godly in this present World.

SERMON, II.
THE Doctrine which we upon is,

That the Salvation of Believers is he wholly ascribed to the Grace of God.

We have showed, What is employed* this Salvation; that it implies a d^^^verance
from all evil, and the comm^nication of the greatest good. We (...) showed,
What is meant by the (...) of God? namely His undeserved fav^^^ which He is
pleased to manifest as Sovereign to some of His Creatu^^^ Also we begun to
inquire, How it (...) appear, that the Salvation of Believ^^^ is from Grace?
Five particulars (...) been mentioned. We proceed to a (...) Demonstrat on of
the Doctrine before (...) which is,

6. That the Salvation of Believers built upon the Electing Love of God, an a
sure, a never failing Foundati^^ 2 Timothy 2. 19. The foundation of God stands
sure, having this seal, the Lord knows them that are his. That there are some
among the Children of Men, whom God has from Eternity chosen unto Salvation, is
a glorious Truth which we had never known, if the Scriptures had not revealed
it to us, these are all known to the Lord, they are all numbered by Him, and
that not only as to the number numbering; but as to the number numbered, as
Divines speaks. That is, God has determined not only now many shall be Saved,
but who they are. Election is particular and personal, therefore Christ said,
Joh. 10.3. I know my sheep by name. As for those that are not the Elect, they
are compared to Goats, the Elect are compared to Sheep, and Christ knows them
all by Name; knows, what the name of every one of them is. Again, Christ says,
Joh. 13. 18. I know whom I have chosen. We find in Scripture, there are some
who are vessels of Honor, that are vessels of Mercy, Romans 9. 23. that God will
magnify His Mercy upon for evermore; there are some whose Names are written in
the Book of Life. As Paul said of Clement and some others that were his fellow
laboure^ Phil. 4. 3. that their Names were wri^ten in the Book of Life; and
the^^ are others, of whom the Scripture say^^ Their names are not there. So,
concerni^^ the worshippers of Antichrist, Rev. 1^* 8. It is said, That their
names were (...) written in the Book of Life. There is (...) blot in God s
Books, therefore as (...) those whose Names are there, it is certain, that they
shall have Eternal Li^^ they shall obtain Salvation. Romans 1^* 7. The election
has obtained, the rest (...) blinded. All Mankind are distinguish^^ into the
Election, and the rest that (...) Election shall obtain, is evident from (...)
considerations.

1. When God decrees the end He (...) decrees the way, and the means of
obtaining that end: the way to the obtaining Salvation is Faith and Holiness.
God has decreed that the objects of His Election shall have Faith and Holiness
given to them; God has so determined and it will be accordingly. The Ele^^ are
said to be pred^stinated, Romans 8. 29* Whom he did fore know, namely, with a
knowledge of Love, them he did predest^nate to be conformed to the Image of his
Son. Now Predestination has respect to the means as well as the end. The Elect
of God shall have the means of Grace vouchsafed to them. Suppose it to be never
so improbable, Providence, which is the Execution of the Decree, will bring it
to pass. It is said, Ezekiel. 47. 10. That from En-gedi, even to En-eglaim, They
shall spread forth nets. That is, from one end of the dead Sea to the other,
there were Fishers, and they cast their Nets, and there were many Fishes taken
thereby. Suppose a People to be as wicked as Sodom and Gomorr^h; yet if they
belong to God, they shall have the means of Grace, and it shall be made
effectual to their Conversion and Salvation. The Lord said to the Apostle Paul
concerning the City of Corinth, Preach the Gospel to them, for (said the Lord)
I have much people in this City, Act. 18. 10. The Word of God shall be a means
to be get Faith in the Elect. Acts 1^. 48. As many as were ordained to Eternal
Life believed. Hence, T^^ 1. 1. We read of The Faith of God's Elect. They that
belong to Election either they have Faith or they shall have Faith, if they
have Faith, it is a sure sign they are amon^ the Elect of God, He has promised
tha^ they shall have Salvation. There is such a promise made concerning the
House (...) Israel, that was figurative; the House (...) Israel, were a Type of
the Elect of Go^ Israel was a People which God cho^^ out from the rest of the
World. This promise was made originally to Our Lo^^ Jesus Christ, Isa. 53. 10.
God promis^^ to Him, That if he would make his So^ an offering for Sin, he
should see his (...). That then the Elect of God should (...) converted to Him.
The Apostle speaks of a Promise of Eternal Life before (...) world began, Tit.
1. 2. How was the^ such a promise? to whom, but (...) our Lord Jesus Christ in
the Covena^^ of Redemption. God promised that Hi^ Elect should have ^ternal
Life given (...) them. And to the Elect the Word of (...) will be made
effectual to cause them (...) be holy, as well as to believe. 2 These.2.13. God
has from the beginning chosen (...) to salvation, through sanctification of
(...) spirit and belief of the truth.

2. Another consideration that evidenceth the truth we assert, is, The
Stability and Immutability of the decree of God; that which God has decreed it
shall stand for ever. Psalm.33.11. The counsel of the Lord stands for ever,
the thoughts of his heart to all Generations. Therefore the Apostle speaks
concerning the Immutability of the Counsel of God. Heb. 6.17. Men indeed they
change their Minds, they decree a thing and don't perform it, they don't see
all things at once, their second Thoughts are wisest. It is not so with the
blessed GOD, whose Wisdom is Infinite, His counsel shall stand, particularly
that of Election is said to stand. Romans 9. 11. That the purpose of God
according to Election might stand. It shall stand and no alteration shall be
made in it. Therefore, it is said, as was but now mentioned. The Lord knows who
are his, having this seal. A thing that is sealed is unal^erable; so it is in
this case: therefore Christ comforts His Disciples from this consideration,
Luke 10. 20. That their names were written in heaven. But if their Names could
be blotted out after that, it could not be any great matter of comfort and
rejoicing to them. We see then the Salvation of Believers is built on the
Electing love of God as on a sure foundation. Now Election proceeds from Grace,
Romans 11. 5. it is called, The Election of Grace. It is not from any works in
Men* No. Deuteronomy.7.7. The Lord loved you, because he loved you. Nothing out of God
Himself can be given as the reason of it: It is then from Grace; it is not from
any holiness, from any worth in Men, for before ever they had a Being God had a
purpose of Mercy to them. It is sai^ of Jacob, before ever he either did good
or evil, God had loved him and chosen him; therefore it cannot be from any
works of holiness in Men. Ephesians.1.4. God has chosen us before the foundation of
the World, that we should be holy. Not because we are holy, but that we might
be holy: we cannot suppose any cause of it, but the free Grace, and Favor of
the most High. We cannot say the Merits of Christ has obtained Election, though
all the saving benefits flowing from Election ha^ been Merited by Christ's
Obedience, yet we cannot say that Election was Merited by Him; for Christ
considered as Man, and as Mediator, is an object of Election. Isai.42.1. Behold
my servant, mine elect, in whom my soul delights. Therefore it is said of
Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 20. That he was ^ore-ordained before the foundation of the
World, but was manifest in these last days. We see then Election proceeds from
the free love of God. Joh.3.16. God so loved the world that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. God did not first send His Son into the World, and then love
the World; but He loved the World of His Elect, therefore He sent His Son into
the World to be their Savior; then it must be resolved into the good pleasure
of God that He chooses these and those, to eternal Salvation. It may be said
indeed God did appoint some to Salvation that His Mercy might be glorified for
ever. God did Reprobate others that so His Justice might be glorified for ever:
True, but why did God choose Jacob rather than Esau? Why did He choose Peter
rather than Judas? No reason can be given of it, but the Sovereign Will and
Pleasure of the Most High GOD. Ephesians.1.5. According to the good pl^^sure of his
will. Mat.11.25. Jesus (...) I thank thee, O Father Lord of heaven (...) earth
because thou have hid these things (...) the wise and prudent, and have
revealed (...) unto babes, even so Father for so it seem (...) good in thy
sight. Thus it must (...) solved into the Sovereign Pleasure (...) Him who is
the Lord of Heaven and Eart^* I have the rather insisted on this, becau^^ there
have been some in the World, (...) would not have the Ministers of the Gospel,
Preach the Doctrine of Election Nay, there have been Prelates, that ha^^
prohibited their Clergy from Preachi^^ the Doctrine of Election. It is a
stran^^ thing that any Men that believe (...) Scriptures should do so: For
there (...) hardly any one Article in the Christi^^ Religion, that is more
frequently m^^tioned in the Scripture than this of (...) Doctrine of Election:
Christ speaks (...) it again and again. All the Apostles spe^^ of it in their
several Epistles, especially the Apostle Paul, very singularly in (...) Epistle
to the Romans.

We go on to a Seventh Demonstrat^^^ of the Doctrine before us, which is, (...)
the principal things contained in Salvation ^re from Grace, therefore Salvation
must needs be so. There are especially three things contained in this
Salvation. (1.) ^ffectual Calling, or Conversion. (2.) Justification. (3.)
Glorification. These are the great things contained in Salvation, and they are
all of them from the Sovereign Grace of God.

1. There is that of Effectual Calling, (...) the Conversion of Sinners to God.
2 Timothy.1.9. He has saved us, and called us, not according to our works, but
according to his own purpose and Grace. Has Called us and Saved us, that is,
has brought us into a State of Salvation, by an Effectual Calling, this
according to His purpose and Grace; that is to say, His gracious purpose: So
then it is from Grace. If we search the Scriptures we shall find that
Conversion is from Grace. The cau^ing Faith to be in the Soul, proceeds from
the irresistible Grace, the Efficacious Will and Power of God, and not from Men
themselves, not from any thing that Men ^re able to do, all is from Grace. Jam.
^* 18. Of his own will begat ^e us, with the word of truth. Though Men may Preach
the word it will never Convert a Sinner, ^^ver Regenerate them, if the Power^^^
Grace of God do not accompany it. (...) is true, We are bid to work out our ow^
Salvation with fear and trembling, (...) then it is added, It is God which
work^^^ in you both to will and to do of his own (...) pleasure, Phil. 2. 13.
There have (...) some in the World who have assert^^* That the Conversion of
Sinners is effect^^ by nothing but mere Moral Swasion; (...) the Ministers of
God must set before Men the good that will follow, if (...) believe, and the
evil that will follow, (...) they do not believe; they say there nee^ no more;
and that Men can change (...) own hearts: but how much otherwi^^ does the
Scripture speak which declar^^ that it does require an Almighty Pow^^ to cause
a Sinner to become a Belie^^ on the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ Ephesians.1.19,20.
The exceeding greatness (...) his power to usward who believe accordi^^ to the
working of his mighty power, whi^^ he wrought when he raised Christ from (...)
dead. A Mighty Power, an exceedi^^ Mighty Power, the same Power that (...) put
forth when He raised Christ from (...) dead, this is put forth in causing a
Sinner to become a Believer on the Lord Jesus Christ: either Sinners can
Convert themselves, or they are Converted by the irresistible Grace of God;
they do not nor can they Convert themselves. Ephesians. 2.8. Ye are saved by Grace,
through faith, and that not of your selves it is the gift of God. Even faith it
is the gift of God, then not from Men themselves. The truth is, they have no
Mind to believe, their Wills are set against believing on the Name of the Lord
Jesus Christ. Joh.5.40. Ye will not come to me that ye might have life. Nor
have they any ability of themselves to believe, if God do not enable them.
Rom.5.6. Without Christ, and without Strength. As long as a Sinner is without
Christ he has no Spiritual Strength, therefore except God shall draw the Soul
to Christ it never will come. Joh.6.44. No man can come to me excep^ the Father
draw him. Sin draws the Sinner away from Christ, and there is the World to draw
him back, and all the Devils in Hell are set to keep him from coming to Christ,
therefore unless Almighty Power do draw him he will not come. It is said* a
corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good fruit: Men naturally are corrupt Trees.
Faith, Holiness, Repentance are good Fruit; they cannot bring forth this good
Fruit. (...) is said of the Unbeliever, He is to every good work rebrobate; he
cannot do any thing pleasing to God. Moreover, the Truth before us is evident
from the things where-unto Regeneration is compared in the Scripture. It is
compared unto and called a Creation; a Converted Sinner is made a New Creature.
Ep^.2.10. We are his workmanship created (...) Christ Jesus unto good works. A
work of Creation is a work of Almighty Power* The New Creation is no less an
effect (...) the Almighty Power of God than (...) first Creation. Again,
Regeneration (...) compared unto a Resurrection: So (...) this second to the
Ephesians, you has (...) qu^ckned who were dead in trespasses and sins: You
were dead, aye, but you (...) made alive; and can the dead ma^^ themselves
alive; those that are in woeful Grave of Sin and Misery, have they Power to
bring themselves out of their Graves? No, they have not. It was sa^^ concerning
the Converted Prodigal, (...) 15.32. This my son was dead, but he is alive. So
it is with the Sinner when he is Converted, when he truly believes in the Lord
Jesus Christ; before that he was dead but then he is alive: the Almighty Power
of God, the irresistible Grace of God has made him to be alive; then as it is
said in the Prophet Ezekiel, Ezekiel.37.13. Ye shall know that I am the Lord. None
but God can do such a thing, When I have opened your Graves, and brought you
out of your Graves. Thus does God do to His Elect, He opens their Graves and
brings them out of their Graves, that show's Conversion is from the
irresistible Grace and Power of God. Therefore also it is in Scripture set
forth by that of giving a New Heart: Ezekiel.36.26. A new heart will I give you,
says God, and a new spirit will I put within you; I will take away the heart
of stone and I will give you an heart of flesh. Who can give a New heart? The
heart is put for the Soul with all the Powers and Faculties of it. The Soul
with all the Powers and Faculties of it, when once Converted, when Grace is
bestowed on the Sinner, these are all wonderfully changed, and renewed. I will
take away the heart (...) stone, and will give you a heart of fles^* Who can do
this but God? Who (...) turn a stone into flesh? none but God (...) do it. It
is therefore evident that the Conversion and Salvation of Sinners must be
ascribed to the Sovereign irresistibl^ Grace of God. It will appear yet
further* If we consider what manner of Sinne^^ some are, or have been whom God
(...) pleased to Convert, and when it is (...) does Convert them; not only such
(...) have been guilty of lesser evils, but some times those that have been
very gre^^ Sinners, God has been pleased to besto^ converting Grace upon them.
Thus the^^ Ephesians the Text speaks of, they (...) been very Notorious
Sinners, they ha^ been the greatest Idolat^rs in the World beside that they had
been guilty of So^^cery, Act.19.19. It is said of them, the^ used Curious Arts;
but when they were Converted, they burned their books, wit^ a holy indignation
at themselves; and the price of them was fifty thousand pieces of Silver, which
is fifteen hundred Pounds, Sterling, in English Money. (...) much did they give
to obtain these wicked books, which was a most abominable Sin in the sight of
God; yet God made them New Creatures, turned those vile Sinners into eminent
Saints of God. We have a remarkable instance hereof, in the Apostle Paul, he
had been a very Notorious Sinner, although not as to Immoralities, yet he had
been the chief of Sinners, he was a great Persecutor, the chief of Sinners
because he was a ringleader among Persecutors, he was a great Blasphemer of the
Name of Christ, and he would punish Christians, and persecute them even to the
very death, and was consenting to the blood of the Martyr Stephen, and yet he
found Mercy with the Lord, and how so? 1 Timothy.1.14. The grace of our Lord was
exceeding abundant toward me. Not only Grace, but abundant Grace, and exceeding
abundant Grace: And then the time when the Lord came upon Saul to Convert him.
So as to other Sinners when in the height of their wickedness, when prosecuting
their wicked designs* with all their might, then God comes and changes them,
makes New Creatures of them. It was so with Saul, when drawing near to Damascus
with an intention to persecute the Christians there, where on his Journey
before he came to the City, God met with him and Convert^ him, changes his
heart, that this Saul afterward Paul, who had been the greatest Persecutor of
Christians, becomes the greatest lover of them, and the greatest instance of
Converting Men to Christ of any Man in the World. And in the second Chapter of
the Acts, we have (...) wonderful evidence of the Soverai^^ Grace of God. The
Jews had just been Crucifying the Lord Jesus Christ, and was there ever a
greater Sin committ^^ in the World? Now when that blo^^ was reeking on them,
God comes a^^ Converts them, when that blood had ju^^ been shed by them: Men
might have thought that God would have sent the^ active to Hell, but instead of
that He Converts them, makes New Creatures (...) them. There have been some of
the Elect of God, whom He has left to fall into some great Sin to the wounding
(...) their Conscience, and has made that Sin of theirs to become an occasion
of their Repentance, and turning to God. (...) have then cause to cry. Grace!
Grace! that ought to be admired by all the Saints on Earth,and by all the
Angels in Heaven.

2. Another thing cont^ined in Salvation, is, Justification. Believers are
Justified. Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith we have peace with God, through
our Lord Jesus Christ. Abraham is styled, The Father of all that do believe.
Why so? because all that do believe must be justified the same way that Abraham
was, not by works, but by faith in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Thus it
is said, Genesis 15.6. which is the first place in all the Bible that speaks
expressly of believing: It is said, Abraham believed in the Lord and it was
counted to him for righteousness. He was therefore looked upon as a justified
Man because he believed on the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Now this
Justification is from free Grace. Tit. 3.7. We are justified by his Grace,
(says the Apostle) that so we might ^^ve hope of eternal life. Yea, by Grace
indeed, by the greatest and freest Grace. Romans 3. 24. Being justified freely by
his Grace. There are two things implied in Justification, both of them are from
the rich, free Grace of God. One thing implied in Justification, is the
forgiveness of Sin* As for the justified person his Sins are forgiven, that is
an evidence of Infinite Grace. Considering how great a wrong Sin is unto God,
and how much it does provoke Him; if God does forgive a sinner it must needs be
from Grace, therefore God says, Isa. 43. 25. I will blot ou^ your sins, for
mine own sake. Not for your sakes, not that you deserve any* such thing; but
for my own sake. That He might magnify His wonderful Grace and Mercy on poor
Creatures, He forgives many Sins and great Sins too. We have a Parable to this
purpose, Luke (...) 41, 42. There was a certain Creditor* that had two Debtors,
the one owed hi^ fifty pence, the other owed him five hundred pence, they had
nothing to pay, and he frankly forgave them both. Thus not only they that owe
fifty pence; but they that owe five Hundred pence, yea, Thousands, God frankly
forgives them: They have nothing, they may not plead that they deserve to be
forgiven. It is more*over not only a free, but a full forgiveness, that God
does favor Believers on Christ with. He forgives not some of their Sins only,
but all of them. Col. 2. 13. He has forgiven us (...) ^^espasses. Their Sins
shall be as though they had never been; their Sins are so forgiven, as that not
one of them is to be found. Jer. ^0. 20. If their Iniquity be sought for, they
shall not be found, there shall be none. Why! It is all carried away into the
wilderness of everlasting forgetfulness; it shall not be found when God has
par^ioned it. Another thing implied in Justification, the Sinner is accepted as
Righteous. For the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to him, not Christ's
essential Righteousness, then he would be God, nor his habitual Righteousness,
for then he would be perfectly sanctified; but Christ's active Righteousness is
imputed to the believer. What Christ has done God accepts of it as if the
Believer himself had done it. 2 Cor.5.21. He has made him to be sin for us
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. He has been made so only
by imputation. Rom.5.19. As by the disobedience of one, many were made sinners,
so by the obedience of one many are made righteous. Hence one of the Martyrs
has an admirable expr^^sion, Behold (says he) here is a wonderful exchange,
Christ has my sins, and I ha^^ His righteousness. Christ has my si^^ has
answered for them, and I have (...) Righteousness imputed to me. (...) would
magnify his law and make it hon^^rable, therefore there must be a comple^^
Obedience to the Law of God, and (...) case His Law is transgress^d, then the
p^nalty of the Law must be submitted (...) The Lord Jesus Christ has undertak^^
both these, He has fulfilled the Law: (...) Him all Believers are looked upon,
as (...) they had kept the Law, so have a rig^^ unto eternal life. Rom.8.4. The
righ^^ousness of the law is fulfilled in us. (...) is it fulfilled in us? but
with respect (...) the Lord Jesus Christ, He has fulfill^^ the law, He has done
all that the law (...) God required to be done; He never di^transgress it in
Thought, Word, or Deed now because Christ has done it, Believe^ are said to
fulfill the law, for what he (...) done is imputed to them. Christ (...) has
submitted to the penalty of the (...) He was made a curse for us, that we mig^^
be delivered from the curse. He w^^ wounded for our transgressions; He had our
iniquities laid upon Him, the punishment due to us was laid upon our Lord Jesus
Christ, Isa^. 53.1. Thereby He has made full satisfaction to the Justice of
God, so has obtained Life and Salvation for us; the passive Obedience of our
Lord Jesus Christ, as it is usually called, or the Obedience of His Passion and
Death, has been a full satisfactory price offered to God: therefore it is said,
Rom.4.25* that He rose again for our justification. Hereby it is evident that
Believers are justified, that a perfect satisfaction was made to God by Christ's
dying. Christ was put into the Grave for our debt; in as much then as God has
opened the Grave and let our Savior Christ come out of the Grave, we may
conclude He has made full satisfaction to the Justice of God; the reason is
because Christ is our Surety. Now if the Surety pay the debt, it is as if the
debtor himself had paid it: So has Christ our surety who is called, The Surety
of the New Testament. If it be objected, If we are saved by the Righteousness
of Christ, How then is it by Grace? For answer, Salvation by the Righteousness
of Christ and by Grace do very (...) consist. There is not only Grace but
abundant Grace, in our being saved by (...) Righteousness of Christ. Romans 5.
15. (...) gift by grace which is by One man Jesus Christ has abounded to many.
If God (...) accept of the Obedience of another (...) our behalf, it is Grace.
The giving (...) Christ, the greatest and most glorious (...) that ever was or
that possibly could (...) was from Infinite Grace; His being (...) His Son
should endure such Su^^^rings that He might obtain our Salv^^^on, was wonderful
Grace. It is theref^^^ said, Heb.2.9. Christ has tasted death (...) every Man,
by the Grace of God. The^^ is a New Covenant made and this is (...) the
Righteousness of Christ. Christ (...) the Mediator of the New Covenant; (...)
Covenant of the Gospel is the Coven^^^ of Grace. Tit. 2.11. It is said, The
Gra^^ of God which brings salvation; has appear^^^^ to all men: The Gospel is
that Grace. (...) is Grace that has appeared to all M^^* Thus concerning Grace
in Justificati^^* There is a third thing contained in (...) Salvation, Namely
Glorification, I sha^^ leave that and the Application of (...) Doctrine to
another time.

SERMON, III.
MANY things have been spoken for Demostration of the Truth before us. The last
time we entered upon a Seventh Demonstration, namely, If we consider the
principal things contained in this Salvation, we shall see it is from Grace.
There are (as we have said) especially three things contain^d therein,
Conversion, Justification, Glorification. Concerning Conversion and
Justification, that they proceed wholly from Grace, you have heard. We go on to
show, that the Glorification of Believers, also proceeds wholly from the free
Grace of God. I say then, Believers on Christ shall be Glorified, not one link
in the Apostles Golden Chain, as some of the Ancients have called it, shall be
broken, viz. that in Romans 8. 30. Whom he did predestinate them ^e also called,
and whom he called, them he justified, and whom he justified, them (...)
glorified. Believers then shall be made the subjects of Glory, and that is from
Infinite Grace. 1 Pet. 5. 10. The God of all Grace has called us unto his
Eternal G^ory. If God were not a God of Infinite Grace, it could not be so; one
that has deserved Hell more than a Million times over* could never not only be
delivered from thence; but also be made partaker (...) a glorious Heaven. This
Glorification (...) called Eternal Life in Scripture; an^ that is called Grace.
1 Pet. 3. 7. He^rs of the Grace of Life. There are especially two
considerations which set forth the wonderful Grace of God herein.

First, If we consider the greatness of that happiness, which God will bring
Believers to the Enjoyment of. And, ho^ great is it? That neither I nor any Man
living can declare. 1 Cor. 2. 9. It hi^ not entered into the heart of man to
conceive, what God has prepared for them that love him. It is beyond all
Expressions, beyond all Conception Glorious* It is in Scripture set forth by
Metapho^^ and Similitudes, of such things as are of greatest value among Men;
by that of (...) Treasure, Mat. 6. 20. Lay up for yourselves Treasures in
Heaven. By that of ^ Crown, Rev. 2. 10. By that of a Kingdom* which is the
greatest Riches and Dignity among Men. Jam. 2. 5. Has not God chosen the poor
of this World, rich in ^aith, heirs of the Kingdom. It is set forth by that of
a Rich Glorious Inheritance. Ephesians. 1. 18. The Riches of the Glory of the
Inheritance. Believers in another World shall in some respects be made equal to
the Angels of Heaven. Luke 20. 36. They shall be equal to the Angels. The
Children of the Resurrection shall be so, being the Children of God. They shall
be, (though not equal to) yet made very like unto the Lord Jesus Christ. 1 John
3. 2. We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. When the Day comes
that Believers shall see Jesus Christ as He is, in all His Glory, they shall be
made like to Him; as to their Bodies which shall be made like to Christ's
Glorious Body. Phil. 3. 21. He shall change our vile Bodies, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious Body. Then how Glorious will their Souls be in
respect of that Holiness, that Grace, which they shall then be filled with?
Again, If we consider the continuance of this Glory, that sets forth the
wonderful Grace of God. In that respect Believers in Christ are happier than
Adam in Parad^se was: Adam was a happy Man before he sinned against God; but he
was in a state wherein he might lose his happiness, might be turned out of
Paradise,and he was so when he sinned; but it shall not be so with the
Believer. Rev. 3. 12. I will make him a pillar i^ the temple of my God, and he
shall go out (...) more. It was truly affirmed by one, th^^ Believing Job when
on the Dunghill was ^ happier man than Adam in Paradise, namely in respect of
that state he was brought into; then what is Job now when his Soul is in
Heaven? And what will Jo^ be in the Resurrection, when with his Bodily eyes he
shall see Jesus Christ (...) is God? This sets forth the freeness and Riches of
the Grace of God, that He should take fallen Man, and bestow a happiness on
them that they cannot be deprived of. As for Life in this World it is a fading
thing, no Man can enjoy that long; the greatest Men must be Subject to Death,
and the best Man also. Do the Prophets live for ever? but as for Life in
Heaven, that shall never have an end. Those things which we see, are but
Temporal; the greatest happiness Men enjoy in this World, is momentany; but now
that in Heaven is not for Time, but for Eternity. 2 Cor. 4. 18. The things
which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are Eternal. And
it is as sure that the Believer shall enjoy this Glory as if he were now in the
actual Possession of it. It is therefore said, Joh. 3. 36. He that believes has
everlasting Life. It is not only true that he shall ^^ave; but that he has
Everlasting Life; he has it in the beginnings of it; and in the faithful
promise of that God that cannot lie. It is said of Believers in the Context,
Ephesians. 2. 6. He has made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. In
respect of Christ their Head, He has made them to sit together in heavenly
places. And, as sure as Jesus Christ is in Heaven, Believers shall be there in
a little time. These things set forth the Grace of God. Thus for the Doctrinal
handling of the Truth.

For APPLICATION.

USE, I. If Men are Saved by Grace, then they are not Saved by their own free
Will. There have been those in the World, who have maintained, that Men are
Saved by the Power of their (...) free will; that they have naturally a free
will to that, that is good, as well as to th^^ which is evil. They say the
reason why some are Saved and not others, is not because of any special Grace
of God toward them; but because some impro^^^ the power of their own free will
mo^^ than others do; this was the opinion (...) Pel^gius, Austin therefore
calls him (...) enemy of the Grace of God. This (...) was condemned by a whole
Synod (...) Palestine, and afterward by three other Synods, to be Heretical. It
is certainly ^ great Error. How can Men be Saved, (...) the Power of their own
free will, when they have not a free will to that which is Spiritually Good,
till God by His powerful Grace shall renew their wills, and of unwilling make
them willing? Psalm. 110. 3. Thy people shall be willing in the Day of thy
power. God does show the power of His Grace in making those that are unwilling
to become a willing People. As Men have no power to do that that is Spiritually
Good by nature; (...) (...) power* to will it neither. It is God works in you
both to will and to do of His own good pleasure. Christ says, Joh. 15. 5.
Without me ye can do nothing. One of the Ancients descanting on those words of
our Savior, speaks thus, Christ does not say without me, ye can do but little;
He does not say without me, you can do no great Matter; He does not say you
cannot, except with great difficulty do that that is necessary for you to do,
but you can do nothing that is Spiritually good without Christ. The fruit will
be according to the Tree it grows upon. Mat. 7. 16. Men do not gather grapes of
thorns, nor figs of thistles. Men must be otherwise than what they are by
Nature, or they cannot bring forth good fruit, the fruit of Grace, of
Salvation, no they cannot. Luther wrote a book with that Title, The Servo
Arbitrio. Concerning that will that is a slave, He would not call it the will
Liberum Arbitrium, Free will, because the will of the Sinner is a captive, a
slave to the will of the Devil. 2 Timothy 2. 26. Taken captive by him at his will.
Nay, that which is sadder, the will of the Sinner is a slave to the Lusts, and
vile Corruptions of his own heart. Jo^. (...) 34. He that commits sin, is a
servant (...) sin. It is added, If the son make you (...) then you shall be
free indeed. Till Chr^^^ the Son of God renew the will of (...) Sinner* he has
not a will to that which is Spiritually good. The will of Man (...) the worst
thing in him. Jer. 17. 9. (...) heart is desperately wicked, and deceitful
above all things, who can know it? Mat. (...) 19. Out of the heart proceed evil
thought* murders, adul^eries, fornications, (...) false witness, blasphemies.
Can Grace (...) Salvation proceed out of such an hea^^ as that is? The Apostle
says, 1 Cor. (...) 7. Who makes thee to differ? If thou ha^^ Grace and another
has none, Who ma^^ thee to differ? The Proud free will may say, I made my self
to differ, I ma^^ use of my free will, when others d^^ not. The Psalmist says,
Psalm. 1^5. 1. (...) unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto (...) Name be glory,
because of thy mercy. But now if Men could Convert and so Sav^^ themselves by
the power of their ow^ free will, they might say, Not to the Mercy of God, but
to us be glory give^* The Apostle says, Romans 9. 16. It is not (...) him that
wills nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. Whereas if the
Conversion, and Salvation of Men did depend on their own free will, and not
wholly on the Grace of God, the Apostles words might be inverted, and it might
be said, it is not wholly God that shows Mercy, but of him that wills, and of
him that runs. Nothing can be more contrary to the Scriptures than to say,
That the Conversion of Men depends on themselves, that Regeneration is from the
Power of their own free will. If a Man is indeed Regenerated, He is born not of
the will of the flesh; not by the power of his own carnal will, but of God.
Jam.1.18. Of his own will b^gat ^e us by the word of truth.

USE, II. If Men are Saved by Grace, then they are not Saved by their own
works. Thus does the Apostle declare in the Context before us, By Grace are ye
saved, through Faith, and that not of your selves, ^t is the gift of God, not
of works least any man should boast. He says the same again to Timothy, 2 Timothy
1. 0 He has saved us and called us, not according to our works, ^ut according
to his own Purpose and Grace. That is to say, of His own gracious purpose. And
the same again, in his Epistle to Titus, Not by works of righteousness which we
have done, but according to his mercy ^e saves us If it is by Grace (...) not
by works; for these two are contradictory, they are (...) one wit^ another. So
does the Apostle arg^t, Romans 11. 6. If by Grace, then is it no mo^^ of works;
if it be of works; then is (...) more Grace. How often is it said (...)
Scripture, We are saved and justified (...) Faith, in opposition to a being
saved by works? Faith does not Save or Justify (...) it is a Grace wrought in
us; but in respect of the object of it, the Righteousn^^^ of Jesus Christ. To
be Saved by Faith (...) the same with being Saved by the Right^ousness of
Christ; for Faith i^ the Gra^^ that gives us an Interest in that Righteousness.
I will mention but two pla^^ Arguments, that evince the Truth before us.

1. The best work of a Christless Sinn^^ does not deserve the name of a good
(...) Tit. 1. 16. They are to every good work (...) probate. The Tree that is a
bad (...) the Fruit of it will be bad. Mat. 7. (...) A corrupt tree, cannot
bring forth good ^ruit. An unbelieving Sinner is such a (...), therefore he
cannot bring forth good fruit. That is the misery of a Christless Sinner, he
never did one good work in all his Life, that God did esteem, and accept as
good. What if he pray? Psalm. 109. 7. His prayer becomes sin. What if (...) does
perform any other Religious Du^y? Hag. 2. 14. That which they offer is ^^clean.
That as long as a Man is in a (...) state, he cannot perform any one good work,
will appear if we consider what is necessary, that so a work may become a good
work. It is required, not ^^ly that the matter of it be such as God requires;
but that it proceeds from a right Principle, from a Principle of Faith in the
heart. This you see in the instance of Cain and Abel, Heb. 11. 6. Without Faith
^t is impossible to please God. Let a Man*s work be whatever it may be, if he
has not Faith in Christ, he does not please God. As now Abel's offering was
plea^ing to God, because he had Faith in Christ that was to come into the
World. Cain's ^ffering God did not accept of it, because (...) had no Faith.
Again, the end must be such as God approves of, else the work is not a good
work; a corrupt end will spoil a good work, as we see in J^hu, wh^ he executed
Judgment on the bloody house of Ahab, he did what God Commanded; but because
his end was no^ good, it was in God's account no better than Murder; therefore
God threatened, that he would avenge on the house of (...) the blood of Jezr^el,
Hos. 1.6. We see it in the Pharisees, they would Pray, they would give Alms,
and the like; but they did it to be seen of Men, that spoiled their good works,
that they found no acceptance with God. Among the Gentiles the Heathen, some of
them would (...) such works as made them famous; they excelled in Morality,
that the World cried them up and admired them; but Austin said truly, that
those works (...) theirs, for which the World admired them, were Splendida
peccata, but splendid Sins, beautiful abominations.

2. The best works of the best Men (...) the World are attended with a great
dea^ of imperfection. They come very much short of that which the holy Law of
Go^ calls for. Feign they would come upt^ that perfection, but they cannot.
Romans 218. For to will is present with me, but (...) to perform that which is
good I find not. There is iniquity in the holy things of the Lords Servants.
Well did the Psalmist (...), If thou, Lord, should mark iniquity, ^ Lord,
who shall stand? Psalm. 130. 3. May we not speak as the Church does, Isai.^^*6.
All our righteousness are as filthy (...). Can we then think to Merit Sal^^^ion
by them? It is impossible it should (...) so, considering there is so much
imperfection in the best works we do: Who can make a Prayer without an
unsuitable or impertinent thought in his heart? Suppose a Man to confess Sin
never so Penitently, he needs pardoning Mercy in respect of that confession.
Austin Prayed, Lavo lacrimas Domine, Lord wash my Tears, my sinful polluted
tears. Suppose a Man not only to Pray, but to Fast as well as Pray, and to pour
out many tears before God, because he has sinned against so good a God, yet
that Man, his years need washing in the blood of Christ, that they may find
acceptance with God. We see then Men cannot be saved by their own works. The
Doctine of Men's being saved by their own good works, their Meriting Heaven
thereby is one of the fundamental Errors of Popery. And there is nothing more
contrary to the Gospel, the great design where of is to Exalt Christ and Grace,
and to abase Man. What could be more proudly spoken than the Speech of a
Jesui^ed Papist, who sai^, That if God would give him Heaven gratis he would
not accept it so, he wo^^^ do something to deserve it before ^e would accept
it. Can a Sinner Merit Heaven, that has Merited Hell so often? Eccl. 7. 20.
There is not a just man upon earth that does good and sins not. Indeed
there are just Men in Heaven that are always doing good, and who do not sin;
but there is not one such just Man upon Earth. As for a Meritorious work there
must be some proportion between the work done, and the reward; whereas there is
no porportion between out works, and the reward of eternal Life. If Men could
Merit by their Obedience, it would be by their Passive Obedience, but it is
said, Rom.8. 18. The sufferings of thi^ present time are not worthy to be
compare^ with the glory which shall be revealed in (...). No proportion,
therefore no Meritorious work.

USE* III. Since Believers on Christ are the objects of special Grace, and the
subjects of Salvation, Sin is more evil in them than in any Men in the World.
Sin, is called the evil. Joh. 17. 15. Keep them from the evil. It is the evil
of evils: one Sin has more evil in it than there is in all the afflictions in
the World. It is impossible there should be a Sin committed that shall be a
little evil, considering against whom it is committed; nevertheless some Sins
are greater than others. Sin is aggravated from the consideration of the person
committing it. For an Indian, a Heathen to commit a Sin, it is not so bad as
for a Christian to commit the same Sin. If Men are only visible Christians
their Sin is worse than if others that do not make their Profession should be
guilty of the same Sin, because they Sin against their Baptism that obliges
them not to Sin. One that was tempted to Sin repelled and overcame the
temptation by this consideration, I am baptized, therefore I dare not commit
such a Sin. Thence it is if Men who profess the Name of Christ shall be guilty
of Scandalous Sins, God will punish the^ with the greatest Severity. When
d^stroying Judgments are coming upon the World for the iniquity thereof, God
usually begins with His own Profess^^^ People: Judgment begins at the house of
God. When there was a Commission (...) slay utterly Old and Young, God says,
Ezekiel. 9. 6. Begin at my Sanctuary. (...) says of His professing People, Amos
(...) (...) only have I known of all the Families of the earth, therefore I
will punish you for (...) your iniquities. Such Men as have (...) to be
Christians, but have only given their Names to Christ, and (...) their Hearts,
they are Hypocrites, therefore they shall have the forest Pu^^^^ment in another
World; the dark^^ Dungeon in Hell is reserved for Hyp^crites, therefore the
forest punishment is so expressed, Mat. 24. 51. Give him (...) portion with
Hypocrites. But when (...) only those that are Professors, but (...) Believers
in Christ shall fall into Sc^^dalous Sins, it is worse in them than (...) any
Men in the World: God may (...) of Believers as of His Vineyard, Isai. (...)
What could I have done more for my Vine^^rd that I have not done. So God may by
of Believers, What could I have done more for them, I have given them that that
is better than all this World, I have given Grace to them, which is a greater
Mercy than if I had given them all the riches of this World, I have given
Christ (...) them, and will they Sin against me? ^ foolish people and unwise
thus to requite (...) Lord for His kindness, and for all He ^^th done for you!
O do not thus re^uite the Lord! It is the blackest ingratitude that possibly
can be: you can^^t dishonor the Lord more than by ^inning against Him, after
all He has (...) for you: will you do that? Heaven and Earth may stand
astonished at it. (...) grieve the Spirit of God excee^ingly: When a Godly Man
Sins the Spirit of God is grieved more than when an Ungodly Man shall commit
the same Sin. The Lord says of such an one, Psalm. ^^. 12, 13. If it had been an
enemy I could have born it, but it was thou my friend. So ^oes God say, If a
wicked Man had committed such a Sin, if a wicked Man had (...) himself drunk,
or the like, I could better have born it, but it was thou (...) friend, thou a
Believer in Christ, thou a Godly Man, this grieves Him, it goes to His heart.
And there is the greatest Sacrilege in it, when a Believer shall commit
Scandalous Sins against God, because he is United to Christ. 1 Cor.6.15. Know
you not that your bodies are the members of Christ. Shall I take the Members of
Christ, says the Apostle, and do wicked thing with them, God forbid, O
horrible, shall a Man take that Tong^^ that is united to Christ and Sin with
that? Shall he take those hands that a^^ united to Christ, and Sin with them*
Oh let it not be! Moreover, when such Sin, when Godly Men fall into
Scand^lous-Sins they do a great deal of hurt (...) Religion; they dishonor the
Name of God exceedingly; it makes the Wor^^ ready to become Atheists, and to
thi^^ there is nothing in Religion. Th^^ when David sinned fearfully against
Go^ the Prophet Nathan said to him. Th^^ have, given great occasion for the
name of Go^^ to be blasphemed. So it is, when such a One, so good a Man a David
shall Si^ David's Sin did a great deal of hurt after he was dead and his Soul
in Heaven. Some of the Ancients say, That Pagans were prejudiced against the
Christian Religion, because of David's Sin. They would say, There was one David
King over the Jews, he was guilty of Adultery and of Murder; they say this was
one of their good Men, we will not be of their Religion that have done such
wickedness as this. And it has encouraged Christians to Sin and to do wickedly.
Some have said, St David, cur non Ego? has David committed such Sins, why
may not I venture to do so as well as he? Thus he has given great occasion to
the enemy to blaspheme. And God punishes the Sins of such in a terrible manner,
though after their Repentance, He forgives them as to Eternal Judgment for them;
yet, not as to temporal punishments. The Prophet said unto David, The sword
shall never depart from thy house. All his Days after, one sore Judgment after
another did befall him.

Let the fourth USE, be an Antidote against Despair. Let no Sinner Despair of
the Salvation of his Soul; but consider the Grace of God, say not, you don't
know what Sins I have been guilty of. Let thy Sins be what ever they may be, I
am sure thou have not out sinned Infinite Grace. Romans 5. 20. Where sin
abounded, Grace did much more abound. Though thou have been guilty of abundance
of Sins, there is a greater abundance of Pardons with the gracious God. Isa.
55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous (...) his thoughts,
and let him return unto (...) Lord, and he will have mercy on him, and to our
God for he will abundantly (...). There is abundance of Pardons with God for
the greatest Sinners, if they will Repent and forsake their Sins, and turn to
God in Jesus Christ. Say not, I have been guilty of all manner of Sins, I have
tra^^gressed against the first and second Table of the Moral Law; but does not
Christ say, Mat. 12. 31. All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto
men, except the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost. And as for that Sin, I am
persuaded there (...) not one that hears me this Day, that eve^ was guilty of
it; and the reason why that Sin is not forgiven, is not because there is not
Grace enough in God to Pardon it; but because such Sinners never will return to
God, and beg Pardon of Him. No, their hearts are hardened, they trample under
foot the Son of God, count His Blood worth nothing; they continue to do Despi^e
to the Spirit of Grace. It is not so with thee. No one that hears me, but it is
possible he may be forgiven. Do we not find in Scripture, that very great
Sinners have been Converted and Pardoned? What Sinners had the Corin^^^ns been?
Some of them had been vile ^^domites; yet they were forgiven upon their
Repenting and Believing, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Such were some of you; but ye are
washed, ye are s^nctified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and by the
Spirit of our God. What horrid Sinners were the Jews who Crucified the Son of
God? Was there ever a greater Sin committed in the World, than that of
Crucifying the Son of God? Yet those very Men, some of them had their Sins
pardoned for the sake of that Blood, through the Infinite Grace of God. Oh
then, Despair not. Shall I say to thee, If thou should Despair now Life and
Salvation is offered to thee, that Despair of thine, will be a greater Sin than
ever thou have committed in all thy Life before. And (...) not godly Parents
Despair of the Conversion of their Children, although at prese^^ it may be, there
is little signs of it, but the contrary. It may be thou have a* So^ or a
Daughter, that is a grief of heart to thee, yet Despair not, you know (...)
what Infinite Grace may do. It may be as for that Son of thine that ev^^ breaks
thy heart, it may be God will bring some sad affliction upon him, and set him a
praying and crying to God* (...) was so with Ma^^asseh, he was the (...) a very
godly Father; yet was notoriously wicked, and continued a long time to (...)
so; God brought a grievous affliction upon him, and then he humbled himself
greatly before the God of his Father and prayed unto Him. It may be (...) will
deal thus with that ungodly Child of thine. Some that have been notoriously
wicked have been Converted and proved eminent Saints afterward. Some of you
have heard of Mr. Rogers of D^^^am in England; in his Young Days (...) was very
extravagant, inasmuch as (...) kinsman whoMaintain'd him at the University, was
so offended at him, as (...) (...) was resolved to cast him off, and to (...)
no further care of his Education; (...) God met with him, made a Convert of
him. This Man that had been (...) wicked, became not only an eminent Convert,
but an eminent Preacher of the Gospel, and was an instrument of (...) more
Souls to God, than perhaps any one Man in his Time: When it was so, his kinsman
would often say, (...) the sake of John Rogers, I will never (...) of any Man.

USE, V. Lastly, Let us magnify and (...) the Grace of God. And how? By
^^^ribing all we are, all we have, all we can do, none of it to our selves; but
(...) to the Grace of God; as the Apostle does, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Not I, but the
grace of God, which was with me. It is related concerning the famous Mr. Knox,
that when on his Death Bed, the Devil Temp^ed him to think that because he had
^een very faithful in the Discharge of his Ministry, that therefore he had
(...) a Reward from God; but he (...) and overcame the Temptations with those
words, Not I, but the Grace of God which was with me. Have we any Temporal
Blessings bestowed upon us, as every one has that hears me this Day^ It is from
Grace. If we are alive, it is of the Lord's Mercies we are not consumed, it is
because His compassions fail not. Ascribe it to the Grace of God. If you have
common Mercies, temporal Blessings, much more if you have Spiritual Blessings,
Mercies that concern your Souls; ascribe it to Grace. Have we the written Word
of God? Have you the Bible in your hands, in your Houses? Ascribe it to the
Grace of God. Do you live under the Gospel? The Gospel of the Grace of God, it
is called; (...) that Preached to you? Acknowledge Grace in it. Some of you
have had Companions in Sin, they are Dead, and gone out of this World! Is thy
Companion (...) Sin, Dead! is he roaring in Hell, and art thou hearing a
Sermon? O the Grace of God! Yet more, If God has Saved us and Called us;
brought us into a state of Salvation, by an Effectual Calling; then our Cry
should be, Grace Grace! Wonderful is this Sovereign Grace of God. And we should
glorify God by living to Him, by doing all we can to promote His Glory. Think,
has God done such things for me, what shall I do to promote His Glory in the
World! and if the consideration of the Grace of God shall have that Effect upon
us, as to cause us to be more holy, that will be an infallible sign that we are
those very Persons whom Infinite Grace will make the partakers of Eternal
Salvation. Well then, let us be always admiring the Grace of God. Grace and
Glory will He give. Admire the Grace of God, in the Glory He will bestow upon
Believers one Day, it is an astonishing thought. Believe it, the Day is coming,
when it will be admired by all reasonable Creatures in Heaven, on Earth, and
under the Earth. The Day is coming, When the Elect of God will stand and wonder
at God's bestowing such a Salvation on them, the wicked shall see it and
admire; and all the Angels of Heaven will be swallowed up with Everlasting
admirations at it. The heart of the Devil will stand amazed at what God will do
for His Elect. Thus it shall be, according to that Scripture, with which I
conclude, 2 These. 1. 10. When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and
to be admired in all them that believe.

Preached at Boston, Aug. 16. 1719.
BELIEVERS Encouraged to PRAY, From the Consideration of CHRIST'S Interceding
for them, and with them.
REVELATIONS, VIII. 3. And another Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a
golden censer, and there was given unto him much Incense, that he should offer
it with the Prayers of all Saints upon the golden Altar, which was before the
Throne.
IN the former part of this Chapter the Apostle John declares; that he had a
Vision of Seven Angels with Seven Trumpers, thereby intimating terrible*
Judgments, Wars and Confusions that were to come upon the World. Here is also
Notice taken how Christ would take care of the safety of His People in those
times of trouble, that were at hand. In this Verse there is another Angel
spoken of, I saw another Angel, (says the Apostle) an Angel that did differ
from those Seven that had the Trumpets given to them; this Angel heard the
Prayers of all the Saints of God in the World, and He did offer Incense; which
shows, that thereby Christ and He only is intended. The Angel here mentioned
did offer Incense upon the Golden Altar, which was before the Throne. This has
respect to what was customary among the Children of Israel, there was an Altar
of Incense, a Golden Altar which the Priest did offer Incense upon; and that
Altar is said to be before the Throne, because it was before the Holy of
Holies, which was said to be the Throne of God. All these things were Typical,
they have respect to Christ, to what He has done and will do: which will appear
in opening the Doctrine from them.

DOCT. That Christ is an Intercessor for His People, by means of whose Merit
and Mediation their Prayers find acceptance with GOD

THE Doctrine may be opened in several Propositions.

PROP. I. That Christ is and ever was, and ever will be an intercessor on the
behalf of His People.

This is a Scripture Truth, a Mystery that is not known but only by the
Scriptures, and by revelation from the Spirit of God. The Scriptures both of
the Old and New Testament do bear Witness to it. In the Old Testament we read
of Christ's Intercession for His People. Zec^. 1. 12. The Angel of the Lord
said, how long shall it be, O Lord, of Hosts, ^re thou have mercy on Jerusalem,
and on the Cities of Judah, against which thou have bad indignation; and the
Lord answered the Angel with good and comfortable words. That Angel was the
very same with the Angel in my Text, expressed in verse 11. by the Man that
stood among the Myrtle Trees. This Truth is more abundantly declared in the
Scriptures of the New Testament, where we often read concerning the
Intercession of Our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans 8. 34. He is at the Right hand of
God, and makes intercession for us. Hence Christ is said to be an Advocate. 1 John 2. 1. If any Man sin, we have an advocate with the ^^ther Jesus Christ the
righteous. The work of an Advocate is to answer the Impleadings of an
Adversary. The Adversary of the Saints of God, is the Devil, who does accuse
them; and sometimes very falsely, as we see in that instance of Job; and
sometimes he has matter for his accusation; but then Jesus Christ, the
righteous Advocate, does (...) His Servants, He pleads for them when Satan does
accuse them, and plead against them; This we see, Zech. 3. 1, 2. Joshua the
High Priest, stood before the Angel of the Lord, and he was Clothed with filthy
Garments, and there stood (...) at his Right Hand. The accuser was (...) to
stand at the Right Hand; so Satan is represented as standing at the Right Hand
of Joshua; the Angel of the Lord, which is Christ, said, The Lord re^^ke thee
Satan, is not this a brand pluck^ out of the Fire. He is but newly brought out
of Babylon, if something of the (...) Garments of Babylon, is still upon him,
that is not so much to be wondered at. And He said, Take away his (...)
Garments, and cloth him with change of Raim^nt. Thus Christ is an Advocate for
His People. And there were Typical Intercessors of old, among the People of
God, which had respect to what Christ would be and do. Thus Moses was a Typical
Intercessor, Psalm. 106. 23. Moses stood before him in the breach, to turn away
his wrath, lest he should destroy them. God had destroyed them, had not Moses
ste^t in, and by His Intercession prevented; and we see how it was, Exodus 3^.
Moses fell down before God, when the People had grievously Sinned and provoked
God to destroy them. God had threatened to consume them in a moment. Lord, (says
he) forgive the Sin of this People, If not, blot me I pray thee out of thy
Book. Has not Christ said, Rather her me Die than thy People perish. Samuel
also was a Typical (...) on the behalf of the Children of Israel, when they
were in great Distress. 1 Samuel 7. 9. Samuel offered a Lamb for a burnt offering
unto the Lord, and Samuel cried unto the Lord for Israel, and the Lord heard
his. God was pleased to accomplish a wonderful Salvation for his People as that
time, he was in that a Type of our Lord Jesus Christ. Again, The High Priest
was a singular Type of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Priest was to offer
Sacrifice; then to enter into the Sanctuary, there to offer Incense. Thus
Christ has offered Himself a Sacrifice, has not done that only, but has entered
into the Sanctuary, into the holy place, and there He offers Incense. It is
said, Heb. 8. 4. Is he to (...) Earth, he should not be a Priest. Why? the
Priest did not his office completely, if he did not after he offered Sacrifice,
enter into the holy place of offer Intense: so (says the Apostle) Christ would
not be a Priest, would not do His work fully, if He had not gone to Heaven, to
offer Incense after He had offered Himself a Sacrifice for His People. Thus
Christ is an Intercessor for His People, and He ever will be so, even to the
end of the World. Heb. 7. 21. He is a Priest for ever, after the order of
M^^chisedeck. Ver. 2^. He ever lives to make Intercession. So that He
continues to be an Intercessor on the behalf of His People, even throughout all
Ages of the World. Yet we may not suppose, Christ now in Heaven intercedes in
such a way and manner as in His Estate of Humiliation He did; but He intercedes
as becomes His state in Glory: We see the pattern of it, Joh. 17. 24. Father I
will, that those whom thou have given me, be with me, to behold my Glory. I
will, Christ Intercedes as one that makes a Legal demand, that what He has
bought and paid for, should be granted unto Him.

PROP. II. That the Elect of God are is a peculiar manner the Subjects of the
Intercession of our Lord Jesus Christ. As He Died for them, so as not for
others in the World, Joh. 10. 15. I lay down my life for the sheep. Not for the
Goats, but for the Sheep, even so He Intercedes for them so as not for others.
As the High Priest when He entered into the Holiest of all, had the Names of
all the Tribes of Israel on his Breast; so now that Christ is in the Holy of
Holies, He has the Names of all the Elect of God written on His Heart. Consider
the Elect of God.

1. As Unconverted. Christ intercedes for them while they are in an Unconverted
Estate. Joh. 17. 20. I pray, (says Christ) not for these alone. Not for my
Disciples only, or for them that do Before; but for them also which shall
Behave. Therefore it is, that they do Believe; that is the reason the Elect of
(...) are made Believers. They shall not (...), not one of them, in an Estate
of Sin (...) unbelief, because Jesus Christ has interceded for them, that they
might Believe. We have a remarkable Scripture ^^cerning this, Isa. 53. 12. He
made Intercession for the transgressors. That Scripture was gloriously
fulfilled, when Christ interceded for those heinous transgressors, that
Crucified Him. He ^^gged for them, that God would forgive them; and God did
forgive many of them. Some of those very Men that (...) a hand in Crucifying
our Lord Jesus Christ, they were Converted and their Sins were forgiven. We
find, Acts 2. Peter said to those Jews, you have with wicked hands Crucified
Him, whom God has made both Lord and Christ. Now when they heard this they
were wicked in their heart, they Repented, they did seek to God for pardoning
Mercy and were pardoned. Here then was a wonderful fruit of the Intercession of
Christ for His Elect, before they ever did Believe. The Lord says, Psalm. 2. 8.
Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine Inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. The Heathen Nations have been
given to Christ, Whole Nations of Heathens have been Converted to Christ. The
Roman Empire of Pagan became professedly Christian. Here is the reason of it,
Christ's Interceding that it might be so. God said, Ask of me, and I will give
thee the Heathen, and the uttermost parts of the Earth. Of Old Europe, in
special Britain, was looked upon as being in the uttermost parts of the Earth;
and there Christ has a People belonging to Him, according as God promised. Of
latter times, these American parts of the World, where we are have been
esteemed the uttermost parts of the Earth, these are the goings down of the
Sun; but here in these uttermost parts of the Earth, God has given to Christ a
Possession, Christ has taken Possession here, even among the very Indians; and
it is a great work of God, one of the mavelous things of this last Age, that
among the poor Indians in this part of the World, there are above Twenty
Indians that Preach Christ every Lord's Day: Thus has God given the uttermost
parts of the Earth to Christ, according as He said, Ask of me, and I will give
them to thee.

2. The Elect of God considered as Converted and brought home to God, as made
Believers on the Lord Jesus Christ, are in a most peculiar manner the Subjects
of His Intercession. Christ Prays for them, Joh. 17. And He says, ver. 8. They
have Believed. Christ Intercedes for them, Heb. 9. 24. He is entered into
Heaven it self, to appear in the presence of God for us, to be an Intercessor
an Advocate for us; namely, for us who Believe. And in the Text before us, it
is said, He does offer Incense, for all Saints; that is, for all true Believers
in Christ; for all Saints are true Believers in Christ, and all true Believers,
are Saints; they are Sanctified in Christ Jesus for these Christ is concerned
as an Intercessor; and what does He intercede for?

PROP. III. The Lord Jesus Christ, Does Intercede for Believers, that their
Prayers may be answered; that God would give to them the things they humbly
Pray and seek unto Him for. We find when the People were Praying without the
Sanctuary, then the Priest was Offering Incense within. Luke 1. 10. We Read of
Zacharias the Priest, that he did offer Incense on the Altar; and that then the
People were Praying without. And doubtless there is an Allusion to that in the
first Verse of this Eighth Chapter of the Revelations, where it is said, There
was silence in Heaven for the space of half an hour. Thus it was among the
Jews, when they were offering Sacrifices, there was not silence; but the Temple
rang with Music while the Sacrifices were offering; but after they offered
Sacrifice, Incense was offered, then all was silent. So then, Christ in Heaven
is Interceding for His People, that their Prayers may be heard. When they are
Praying on Earth out of the Holy Place, then He is Interceding with God before
the Throne in Heaven; and the very things they Pray for, Christ does desire on
their behalf, that those things may be granted to them. He desires they may
have those things which are the main Petitions that they present to God. As
now, Believers Pray to God that they may be kept from Sinning against Him, that
of all evils they may be preserved from Sin, that is the request of all true
Believers: Christ has made that Prayer on their behalf, Joh. 17. 15. I pray not
that thou should take them out of the World: that is, before they have done
all the work thou have appointed for them; but I pray that thou should keep
them from the evil. What is the evil? Sin is the evil of evils, the greatest of
evils; now Christ Prays for Believers, that they may be kept from that, that no
Sin may ever prove a ruining iniquity to them, and it will be granted.
Believers Pray that they may have Grace to persevere, that they may hold on in
the way God has commanded them to walk in; that is a special request which all
true Believers earnestly present to God, that they may hold on to the end, may
never turn aside from God: and Christ has made the same request to God, that
they may Persevere in the way of holy Obedience to Him. He said to Peter, Luke
22. 31. Satan has desired to sift you, but I have prayed for thee that thy
faith fail not. The faith of the true Believer shall never fail, though as to the
actings, and the exercise of it, there may be a failing, yet as to the habit of
faith, that shall never fail; when the Grace of Faith is really wrought in a
Soul it shall never fail. The Believers is like a Tree that may be shaken by
the wind, but is never plucked up by the roots: So the wind of temptation may
shake the Believer grievously sometimes, but his root of Faith shall abide fast
and firm. Believers Pray that they may be brought safe to Heaven at the last;
and Christ has interceded with God that it may be so. Christ has said, I will
that they be with me where I am that they may behold my glory. They Pray that
their Salvation may be carried on to a glorious perfection; and Christ in
Heaven does intercede for them that it may be so. Romans 5. 10. We were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall
be saved by his life. Saved, that is, our Salvation perfected, by His Life, by
His living to be an Intercessor, So Christ in Heaven intercedes for Believers
that they may be brought safe thither, that their Salvation may be carried on
to the highest degree and perfection, which is intimated, Heb. 7. 25. He is
able to save to the uttermost them that come to God by him, since he ever
lives to make intercession for them. Save to the uttermost, that is to say,
the Salvation of Believers is carried on to a most glorious perfection, there
shall be nothing wanting. And why? Christ ever lives to make Intercession. Thus
we see what Believers Pray for themselves, Christ Prays with them, presents the
same desire before God that they present to him.

PROP. IV. As Christ does intercede for Believers, so it is on the account of
His Merit, and Mediation, that their Prayers are accepted with God. The Prayers
of Believers are very acceptable to God, He takes delight in hearing them.
David therefore said, Let my prayer be as incense. Incense was a sweet perfume,
very delightful to the senses; let my Prayer be so, says David. The reason why
the Prayers of Believers are so, is because of the much incense that comes out
of the Angels hand. Hence the Prayers of the Saints are so grateful to God:
alas! there is many times that in their Prayers which is unsavory, that He
might say to them, Your incense is an abomination to me; and threaten them as
He did the Jews, I will not smell the savor of your sweet odours. God might
say so of our Prayers that have so much sinful Infirmities in them, and in the
best of them too: How come they then to be so acceptable to God? It is because
of Jesus Christ, He by His Incense does take away the ill savor of our
Prayers, and does present to God, that, that is highly pleasing to Him. It is
therefore said, Rev. 5. 8. There were golden vials full of odours, which are
the prayers of Saints. Golden vials; there were Censers made of Gold that the
Incense was put into: the Prayers of Saints are very Odoriferous, very pleasing
to God. How comes that to pass? It is because Christ Intercedes with them and
for them. Christ's Intercession will always prevail. Whatever Christ does ask
for, it will certainly be granted. Suppose the thing to be never so Miraculous.
Did He not say to Peter, If I would pray to my Father for it, He would
presently send an (...) my of Angels to desend my twelve Disciples: Yea, twelve
Ligions of them, as many as made a Romen Army, and more if I would but pray for
it, Mat. 26. ^3. And did He not say to God? Joh. 11. 42. I know that thou
bear me always. What Christ does Intercede for it is always accepted with
God. That His Intercession is prevalent, and shall be regarded, and answered,
is evident from several things.

1. The Intercession of a special favorite is regarded. When Esther was highly
in favor with the King of Persia, he said to her, F^th. 5. 3. Queen Esther,
what is thy petition, and it shall be granted. Our Lord Jesus Christ is highly
in favor with the King of Heaven, the King of all the World, and what He does
Intercede for will surely be granted. God never did deny Him any thing, never
will deny Him any thing: He is infinitely dear to God, therefore shall not go
with a denial. Isai. 42. 1. Behold mine Elect in whom my soul delights. The
very Soul of God does delight in the Lord Jesus Christ, therefore He will grant
what He requests.

2. It is evidently so, If we consider the Relation Christ does stand in
toward God. Sometimes a faithful Servant has a great interest in his lord, and
will be heard in what he requests. We read concerning the Centurion, Luke 7. 2.
That he had a Servant sick who was dear to him. Never was any Servant so dear
to his Master, as Christ is to God: Christ as Mediator is Gods Servant, and the
best and dearest Servant that ever the God of Heaven had; the most Wise, the
most Prudent Servant, that ever God had, Isai. 52. 13. Behold my Servant shall
deal prudently. And He is a most Faithful Servant. It is said of Moses, he was
faithful to him that appointed him: but Christ is more worthy than Moses.
Therefore God did commit to Christ all His Elect. He trusted Him with all His
Elect, and Christ did faithfully take care of them all. Joh. 17. 12. Of those
thou have given to me, I have lost none, says Christ. The Elect of God that
are given to Him, He will not lose any One of them. God has trusted Him with
them, and He will be faithful. Christ is dear to God, not only as a Servant,
but as a Son. We behold his glory as the glory of the only begotten of the
father, Joh. 1. 14. God has many adopted Sons, but One Own Son, Christ is His
only begotten Son. There came a voice from Heaven and that more than once, when
our Savior submitted to Baptism, and when with His Disciples on the holy
Mount, He was transfigured, that voice came from Heaven, This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased. God delights in Him more than in any One else,
more than in all the Creatures in the World; all the Angels in Heaven are not
so dear to God as Jesus Christ is.

3. CHRIST has purchased what He Intercedes for. Purchased it with the Price of
His own Blood, Heb. 9. 12. He is gone not without blood into the holy Place, He
is gone to Heaven with the Merit of His blood, and pleads that before God
continually: He has deserved what He asks for. The Altar of Incense had blood
Sprinkled upon it, this signifying that Jesus Christ Intercedes by virtue of
His blood. The high Priest after He offered Sacrifice once in a Year, did enter
into the holiest of all, and there Sprinkled blood on the mercy seat, teaching
us that God is become Merciful to us through Jesus Christ, and that Christ
Intercedes on the account of what His blood has Merited; that He desires
nothing at the hand of Mercy but what He has Purchased at the hand of Justice.
We may then be sure what Christ Intercedes for in behalf of His Elect, shall be
graciously answered. For the blood of Christ is Infinitely Meritorious, because
it is the blood of God: Not the blood of a mere Man, but of One who is God as
well as Man. So the Scripture expressly declares to us, Acts 20. 28. The Church
of God which he has purchased with his own blood. God with His own blood, that
is Christ who is God. He is also Man, so was capable of shedding blood, as God
Man He has Merited what He has shed His blood for: the blood of Christ has a
powerful Voice. We are come to the blood of sprinkling, which speaks better
things than the blood of Abel. Abel, his blood cried for Vengeance, but the
blood of Christ cries for Mercy on the behalf of Believers, of those, which
this blood by the hand of faith is sprinkled on, it cries and says, Let this
Sinner be forgiven, notwithstanding all his Sins he has been guilty of, let him
be saved Eternally; then it must needs be so. We (...) then what Christ
Intercedes for shall (...) granted. We see the Doctrine cleared (...) opened in
the particulars mentioned.

USE, I. We should make sure that we (...) of those for whom Christ does
Intercede. Then happy are we, considering Christ's Intercession always prevails:
and what does He Intercede for? Joh. 17. 17. Sanctify them through thy truth.
That Grace may be given to His Elect. Christ Prays that Sanctifying Grace may
be given to His Elect: And as for Believers who are Sanctified, it is His
Prayer that they may be more Sanctified, that more Grace may be given to them.
Are not those happy Men, happy Women, concerning whom this is true? Surely they
are. Christ Prays that they may be where he is, and He is ascended into Heaven:
He is gone to the Father, therefore gone that He may prepare a Place for them.
Christ by His Intercession does prepare a Place in Heaven for all true
Believers on His Name. It is true, there are some subjects of Christ's
Intercession that cannot know they are so, Namely, the Elect of God while
Unconverted; but there are others may know Christ is Interceding for them,
Namely, true Believers may know that Christ Intercedes for them, by their
having the Spirit of Prayer; if they have the Spirit of Prayer it is certain
Christ does Intercede for them. Joh. 14. 16. I will pray the Father and he will
send you another comforter, even the spirit of truth. If God has sent his
Spirit into our hearts, making Intercession, in us, we may know Christ is
Interceding for us before the Throne of God in Heaven. The Apostle says, We
know not what to Pray for as we ought, but the Spirit of God makes
Intercession in us with groans that cannot be uttered, If we have the Spirit of
God making Intercession in us, we may believe, we should believe, Christ is
Interceding for us. Indeed Men may practice the duty of Prayer, yet not have
the Spirit of Prayer; yea, a Man may have the gift of Prayer, able to Pray an
hour or two, yet not have the Spirit of Prayer. Zech. 12. 10. I will pour the
spirit of grace and supplication, upon the house of David. If there is a Spirit
of supplication, there is Grace wrought in the Soul. The Spirit of Prayer, What
is it? It implies a continual Inclination (...) Prayer; a Man that has the
Spirit of Prayer, cannot for his Life live without Prayer; if he has been from
God a while he cannot be at rest till he go to God again. The Spirit of Prayer
makes a Man desire chiefly Spiritual blessings; Nay, (...) God should put him
to his choice, Tell Me what thou would have, Earthly or Heavenly good things,
He says, Let me have Spiritual blessings; he Prays that God would give His
Spirit to him; and will not God give His Spirit to them that ask it? We are
sure He will. When a Man does desire that Christ's Interest may prevail in the
World, rather than any thing else; a Man that seeks in the first place the
Kingdom of God, that is the Man that has the Spirit of Prayer, and may know
Christ Intercedes for him.

USE, II. The other Use is a word of Encouragement to practice this Duty of
Prayer. Seeing we have an Intercessor in Heaven that presents our requests to
God, that is encouragement enough to this duty. And what should we pray for We
should Pray that the Interest of Christ may prevail in the World. In the
Printed Proclamation for this day, We are directed to Pray, That the Interest
(...) Christ may prevail all the World over. (...) Christ Intercedes for us, it
is most reasonable that we should Intercede for His Interest. Psalm. 72. 15. It
is said concerning Solomon, Prayer shall be made for him continually. Christ is
the Solomon there intended. Why, are we to Pray for Christ? Certainly He needs
none of our Prayers who is blessed for ever; we are not to Pray for His Person,
but for His Kingdom, that His Interest may prevail every where; that we are the
rather to Pray for, because there are Prophesies i^ the written word of God
that such (...) Day shall come. Dan. 2. 35. The little (...) shall become a
great Mountain, and fill the whole Earth. There is a promise of the enlargement
of Christ's Kingdom, that it shall fill the whole Earth. We should be the more
fervent in Prayer for this, because the Time draws on a pace. I don't doubt,
but there are some here living will see the beginning of those glorious days,
that are Promiss'd concer^ing the Church of God. We read of Daniel, that when
he knew by Books the time for the deliverance from Captivity was at hand, he
set himself to Pray with fasting. When we know the Time for the enlargement of
Christ's Kingdom is (...) hand, we should set our selves more fervently to Pray
that it may be so. And truly if there be a Spirit of Prayer on that account,
That will be a blessed sign that the time is near. And it must needs the near,
for it is said, When the Seventh (...) shall begin to sound, the mystery of God
shall be finished. The Mystery of God, is the glorious Kingdom Christ shall
posses in this lower World; and it is past doubt, we are come to the close of
the Sixth Trumpet. Well then, the Seventh Trumpet will sound in a little time,
then behold what is said; it is said, Rev. 11. 15. The Kingdoms of this World
are become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for
ever and ever. Therefore let us Pray, that it may be so; we don't know what God
may bring out of the present Commotions and Shakings of Nations: This we know,
before those glorious Times come there will be dark and dismal times, terrible
shakings of Nations and Kingdoms. The Lord has said, I will shake all Nations,
and the desire of all Nations shall come into his Temple. What God will bring
out of the present shakings, is known to Himself; if there be a Spirit of
Prayer, that will cause shakings to be among the Nations. It is said in the
Context before us, after the Prayers of the Saints with the much Incense given,
There were Thundrings and Lightnings, and an Earthquake. Some have supposed
that there was a Notable fulfillment of that Scripture, by what was done in the
days of the Emperor Theodosius, He with his Army was surrounded with Heathen
Enemies, before he would give them Battle, He fell down on his Knees at the
head of his Army, Prayed earnestly to God to be with him: God sent Thunder and
Lightning, and an horrible Tempest, which beat back the Weapons of the Enemies
upon themselves, and gave him a glorious Victory: that Victory made a Mighty
Revolution in the World. We should Pray then that the true Religion may prevail
in the World, because the Kingdom of Christ does consist very much in True
Religion. There is but (...) true Religion, the Christian Religion is the only
true Religion: in the Christian Religion, the Protestant Religion is the only
true Religion. As for Papists, they belong to the Kingdom of Antichrist, not to
the Kingdom of Christ; they are wicked Idolaters, such if any in the World are
Enemies to Christ: We should Pray against that Interest. It is matter (...)
humiliation that of late Years the Protestant Religion has been decaying, and
the Popish Interest on the growing hand. So in the Palatinate, where for (...)
Generations the Prince Palatine was a Protestant, now he is a Papist. In Poland
of late there have been severe (...) against all Protestants. In Saxony, that
Duke (whose Progenitor was the first Prince that embraced the Protestant
Religion) that so he might be capable of being a King of Poland, has renounced
the Protestant, and espoused the Popish Religion; and we are informed that this
last Year his Son has done the like. We likewise hear that in Hungary,
Protestants are Persecuted. Also that those Places which in the late War were
taken from the Turks, are put into the hands of Papists, who are worse and more
bloody than the Turks. Luther advised the Emperor of Germany, that he should
make War rather against the Pope than the Turk, as being the greatest Enemy in
the World to the Kingdom of Christ. We ought to Praise God who has given our
Nation a Protestant King, whose Ancestors have ever been Protestants. His Royal
GrandMother famous for her Piety, dyed in Exile for her Religion. His
Grandfather was deprived of the Kingdom of Bohemia for His being a Protestant.
Behold how God has rewarded Him, in bestowing Three Kingdoms on His GrandSon,
our King GEORGE. And this National Mercy is the greater, in that diverse of our
late Kings were not so. One called Himself a Protestant, that was a Papist:
Another renounced the Protestant Religion, and designed to restore Rome again
in England. What came of it? Truly the curse of Joshua fell upon him. Joshua
cursed the Man that should go to rebuild the Walls of Jericho, cursed that Man
and His Children. So that King (...) went to build the Romish Jericho, the
(...) of JESUS has fallen on him and to his Family, Josh. 6. 26. Since God has
given us a Protestant King, we ought to Pray much for Him. It is said of One of
the Kings of Persia, when he gave encouragement to build the Temple, they were
to Pray for the Life of the King, and of his Sons, Ezra 6. 10. Thus our King
has given encouragement to build the Temple, we should Pray for Him for His
Life, and Pray for His Family. And when we Pray for our Nation, shall we not
Pray for our selves, for poor distressed New England. It is well that we have
begun the Year with solemn Prayer. If the Harvest should fail, what a Miserable
condition shall we be in? If we have Showers from Heaven, it is God that gives
them. God says, Zech. 10. 1. Ask of the Lord rain, and he will give you Showers
of Rain. What shall be done that we may be delivered out of the grievous
distresses upon us? Alas! for the Sins of New England. Alas! for the Sins of
Boston; What unreasonable Oppression is in the midst of us? The Merchant
Oppressing the People in the Country, the People in the Country Oppressing the
People in Boston: but who does the Oppression chiefly fall upon? Not so much
upon the Rich, as upon the poor; the poor are like to be crushed to death Alas!
that there are the Sins of Sodom among us! Many in Boston are guilty of the
Sins of Sodom. Is there not Pride? Poor People will go beyond their rank, and
beyond their ability, which is a great iniquity, and very provoking to God.
Fullness of bread, and of drink, great abuse that way; Drunkenness is become a
common Sin among us. Abundance of Idleness: There is not that Industry among us
as ought to be. How many spend their Time in Taverns; if they spent their Time
Industrously, they might live comfortably. When as there are too many, that
their Wives and Children are perishing at home, when they are Idling in Taverns
or Public houses. Alas! Sinful Boston, do thou not see, that Poverty is
coming on thee like an armed Man, and that many of thy Houses will be forsaken
and left desolate. Now the great question is, What shall we do that we may be
extricated out of our difficulties? You say, Blessed is the Man that can tell
us what should be done. Some say that if an old Law of the Colony were revived,
That no Merchant should ask above Four Pence, or Six Pence in the Shilling for
what he Sells, that would bring Money into the Country, and save the Land from
ruin. That Is a matter out of my Province to meddle with. I have nothing to say
about it, but I can tell you of another thing that must be done, and if it be
done, God will deliver Boston, and New England, out of the dismal straights and
difficulties that are upon us: The thing to be done is, to Repent and Pray.
Don't think Praying alone will do without Repentance, without Reforming and
Returning to the Lord; but if you do that, I can assure you in His Name, He
will deliver you out of your distresses. I will bring you a plain Scripture for
it. Jer. 18. 7, 8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and
concerning a Kingdom, to destroy it; if that Nation against whom I have
pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to
do unto them. Well then, let there be that Repenting, that Returning to the
Lord that He now expects from us, and we may be sure of it, God will be as good
as His Word, and turn from His Anger, and be pleased with us: Only do it
without delay; don't put it off till hereafter, Remember the words of the
Prophet: Zeph. 2. 3. Seek the Lord ye meek of the earth, before the decree
bring forth; Seek righteousness, seek meekness, it may be ye shall be bid in
the day of the Lords anger. Be in earnest with God. And I will conclude with
the words of a Martyr, Pray, Pray, Pray, never more need than now.

Preached at Boston, on a FAST Day, April, 2d. 1719.
FINIS.

