Cleansing our Way IN YOUTH Pressed, As of the Highest Importance: And
Observing the Word of GOD Recommended, As the Only Sufficient Means.

In a DISCOURSE Upon PSALM. CXIX. Ver. 9. Wherewith shall a Young Man Cleanse
his Way? By taking heed thereto according to thy Word.

By THOMAS FOXCROFT, M.A.

With a Recommendatory Preface, by the Reverend Mr. WADSWORTH, Pastor of the
First Church of CHRIST in Boston.

BOSTON: in N. E. Printed by S. KNEELAND, for. S. GERRISH, and Sold at his Shop
in Cornhill, near the Brick Meeting House. 1719.

A PREFACE.
AS it is Man's Sin, Shame and Misery to be estranged and alienated from God; so
it is his duty, honor and interest to return to God, be acquainted with Him,
conformed to His Image and possessed of His special favor in Christ. Men
considered as Fallen and Apostate (as they derive from rebellious Adam) are
running away from God, and posting on in the broad way to destruction; but the
Son of God was manifested to destroy the works of the Devil, to reduce sinful
Men, and bring them back to the only Author of their being and blessedness. He
suffered, the just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God. He gave
himself for us, that He might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify us to
Himself for a peculiar People zealous of good works. And His Holy Word, the
Holy Scriptures are the grand Means or Instrument of purifying Sinners: they are
able to make Men wise to Salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus. The Scope and
tendency of them is, to turn Men from darkness to light, from the power of
Satan unto God. Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is truth. The
Sanctification of the Spirit, does not go without the Belief of the Truth. All
therefore who enjoy the Word of God, should diligently Read, Hear, Study the
same, meditating on it Day and Night: they should endeavor and pray that they
may rightly understand it, and universally and continually conform their hearts
and lives unto it. All under the Gospel should do so, and the sooner they
begin, and the more constant and vigorous they are in such a course, so much
the better; so much the more 'twill be for God's Glory and their own Advantage.
Young Ones therefore should be most speedy, hearty, and also unmovable and
diligent in conforming to God's holy revealed Will. A serious reading the
following Sermons, must needs be proper to move and quicken them to such a
Life. They contain such strong Arguments, weighty Motives, lively and cogent
Inculcations of Duty, plain representations of the danger of careless sloth and
negligence, and such suitable Directions; as that a serious, healty, attending
to them, and regarding of them, must needs be very useful and profitable to all
Young Persons whatsoever. Indeed a serious, deliberate perusing of them, cannot
but be profitable to all Persons whatsoever, even the Oldest, and those that
have made most proficiency in the practice of Piety: here they may find fresh
occasion, to bewail their deficiences and short comings, as well as to praise
the God of all Grace for the great things He has done for their Souls. They Are
profitable for Old Sinners, that by considering how they have trifled away
their precious Opportunities, abused Divine Patience lengthened out to
long-suffering, practically despised the Precepts, Promises, Threatenings of the
Glorious God, and thereby rendered themselves grievously obnoxious to His most
terrible Vengeance; they may be moved and quickened, to the most speedy
vigorous endeavors to get their peace made with God, before their near
approaching Death overtakes them. They Are profitable for those who have Young
Ones under their Care, that they may be moved hereby to do their utmost for
their spiritual good and benefit. But as these Sermons were more especially
designed, for the benefitting of Young Persons, so to such I would hea^tily
recommend the serious reading of them, that thereby (through the Blessing of God)
they may be enlightened, awakened, convinced of their sin, guilt, danger, and
of their absolute need of Christ, of His Righteousness to justify them; of His
Spirit of Grace to renew and sanctify them, and lead them in paths of
righteousness for His Name sake. That the Laborious Endeavors of the Worthy
Author of these Sermons, (My Fellow Laborer in the Gospel, and in the same
Church) may be followed with God's efficacious Blessing, and made instrumental
of spiritual saving Good to those who partake of them; is the Prayer of a mean
unworthy Servant of JESUS CHRIST,

BENJ. WADSWORTH.
Boston, October ^8. 1719.
THE Author's EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THE Abounding of Iniquity in a Christian Land, is just matter of Lamentation,
and is a daily Grief to such as have at heart the Concerns of God's Glory, and
the best Interests of this People. And it is the unquestionable Duty of All, to
endeavor in our several Stations, according to the Talent committed to us, to
promote an happy Reformation. -- And if the Rising Generation among us might be
induced to Cleanse their Way, This would be one glorious ste^nd afford a most
hopeful prospect of the desired Blessing. -- A serious view p^culiarly at the
benefit of our Young People produced the subsequent DISCOURSE: which is the
Substance of sundry Sermons, first delivered from the Pulpit in the Course of
my Ministry about a Year and Half since, and more lately (at desire) in Sum
repeated to a Society of Young Men, meeting privately for Religious Exercises
on LORD's-Day-Evenings. -- And at their repeated Request, (Not without the
Solicitation and Approbation of some worthy Friends, whose Judgment and
Importunity not to hearken unto in such a Case should seem not altogether
Decent,) I have at length suffered this small Tract to appear abroad; not
daring to run the Risque of incurring Guilt, by obstinately rejecting the pious
desires of Any, and utterly refusing an Opportunity of doing Good, (which none
should be backward to) though in never so inferior degree. -- Indeed I confess,
(what has been an objection of no little weight with me,) that the World is
full of Elaborate Treatises on all Points of practical Divinity: and
particularly the Subject of the following Composure has been already handled by
sundry superior Pens. And from imagining, that, after their Excelling Labors
upon it, any new Light could be added thereunto by the Essay of so poor a
Scribe, I am abundantly checked by an apprehension of my insufficiency. -- But
there are Multitudes of Readers, and many of them doubtless not owners of those
Writings, and besides among them there is a great diversity of Genius,
Inclination, and Relish; and hence a variety of Tracts on the same Head by
different Hands is but convenient; according to that known saying of One of the
Ancients, Utile est Plures Libros a Pluribus fieri. To have the same Argument
treated diverse ways is use^ul. In a Variety, it is probable, every one may find
what will please and profit him. -- Therefore with all due deference to the
Excellent Writings of Others, I humbly offer the ensuing Pages particularly to
the Perusal of Young People, hoping they may be of some Service. And if this
End be answered in any measure, I have enough to satisfy me, that I have done
but my Duty in making Public these few Sheets. -- And I am (perhaps too) prone
to think it savours of little less than Pride, to be invincibly averse to
speaking to the World from the Press, in pursuance of our Office, when there is
a probable Prospect of doing some Good, although our performances may come vastly
short of others for Light and Force.

And it cannot be thought, but that in Discoursing on such a common Theme, I
may have adopted some Hints from Others: and indeed sometimes I have chosen to
speak my own sense in borrowed Language: where I have taken this Liberty, the
Reader may observe, I have constantly comma'd the same, or marked it thus (")
unless possibly some few Sentences may have slipped me. -- Many, I am very
apprehensive are the defects in these few Papers: But the Performance* such as
it is, (Humbly leaving the Event with GOD as to it is Entertainment and it is
Success, and Earnestly begging that it may be serviceable to His Glory, and the
Good of Souls,) I present it to you, relying on your Candor for the Allowance,
you will easily discern it needs; and now requesting your Prayers for me, I
commend you to God, and to the Word of His Grace, which is able to build you up
and to give you an Inheritance among all them which are sanctified, through
Faith that is in Christ Jesus. Amen.

Thomas Foxcroft.
Boston, Nov. 2. 1719.
ADVERTISEMENT.
I hope the Reader will Excuse Lesser Errors: and Correct what are more Gross,
as follows;

PAge 9. Line 33. read it is offspring. p. 10. l. 7. r. under stood. p. 27 l.
27. r. be sor ted. p. 41. l. 15. r. trem ble. p. 68. l. 8. for no r. now. p.
71. l. 6. r. if we die. and l. 7. blot out we, after or, if. p. 79. l. 14. r.
tempo rary. p. 108. l. 5. r. v^tiates. p. 127. l. 26. r. operative. p. 150.
Marg. bot. r. Colli nges. p. 168. l. 11* We are in this respect dignified. p.
182. l. 22. r. in the day.

Cleansing our Way in YOUTH Pressed, As of the Highest Importance* AND
Observing the Word of GOD Recommended, As the Only Means.
PSALM. CXIX.9. Wherewith shall a Young Man cleanse his Way? By taking heed
thereto according to thy Word.


THE Divinely Inspired Author of this long and copious Psalm was doubtless King
David, the sweet Singer of Israel; The Matter of it is of the highest
importance; the Composition of it is most accurate and artificial; The Scope
and Design of it is to adorn the Character, and celebrate the Glories of God's
Word, to declare the Psalmists own great and long Experience of the admirable
sweetness, and usefulness of it, and to recommend it to every ones devout
study, ^rm ^ief, and practical observation.

IN our Text, The Word o^ God is prescribed and commended to Young Men, as the
Rule and Means of Spiritual Purification. Wherewith shall a Young Man etc. This
is called by some, The Young Man's Practical Catechism, set down by way of
Question and Answer. Others indeed take the whole Verse to be one entire
Question, standing thus, Wherewith shall a Young Man cleanse his way, to take
heed to thy Word? The Original will admit this Construction, and some Ancient
Versions (as Mr. Shower on our Text observes) do countenance it. The sense
(says He) accordingly is, "How shall Young Men be purged by Divine Grace, so as
thereby to be qualified for Obedience to (the Word of) God. It is a kind of
Prayer (in a Poetic strain) for that Grace, which is necessary to holy
walking." So Cleansing the Way of Youth is considered as a Means to promote
their practical conformity to God's holy Law. Psalm. 119.101. I have refrained
my feet from every evil way, that I might keep thy word.

BUT most Interpreters understand the latter Clause to be distinct, and to come
in by way of Reply to the former; so directing Youth to a careful observation
of God's Word, as a necessary and useful means to rectify and cleanse their
way. Psalm, 119.11. Thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin
against thee.

WE may here observe, that the Word [ thereto] is not in the Original, but is a
Suppletive of the Translators, and I shall presume to leave it out.

THE Terms in the Text are all obvious and easy. By [ a Young Man] is meant
Youth Literally, although some interpret it of a " Child of God, o^ the New man,
according to the Phrase of the Gospel"; Youth Indefinitely, all Persons in
their Early Days, not any appropriate Sex or Individual; Youth Irrestrictively,
It is not to be looked upon as Exclusive of, or in contradistinction to other
Ages; Elder and Younger are under the Direction of the same Rule, and the
Obligation of the same Law.

BY [ cleansing his way] is meant a rectifying his inward Principles and temper
of mind, and a reforming his outward practice and tenor of Life, which are
defiled by Sin; a recovering himself and cleansing his way from moral
pollution, a breaking off from Sin, the unclean thing, which defiles a Man, a
washing off this filth with the Tears of Repentance; purifying his Soul in
obeying the Truth. There is indeed another Purging our Sins, which sounds the
same with Pardon and Justification, He is faithful to forgive us our Sins and
to cleanse us, etc. The Blood of Christ cleanses from all Sin. But this
belongs wholly unto God, (Who can forgive Sins, save God only?) and is not the
Cleansing intended in our Text. The Cleansing here spoken of relates to the
work of Sanctification, and implies the Mortification of our Lasts, and the
Reformation of our Lives. In this work we are subordinate Agents, working
together with God and in the strength of his Grace. 'Twas Naamans pride and
folly, when he came to ^lisha to be cleansed from his Leprosy, He would have
had the Prophet do all, and Himself nothing; This is the error of the wicked;
the Prophets direction is that, Go unto Jordan, wash thy self seven times in
it, and thou shall be clean. -- Up and be doing and the Lord shall be with thee.

BY [ thy Word] is meant the Oracles of God, even All Scripture that is given
by Inspiration of God. Indeed the Writings of the Old Testament are here
particularly referred to, these only, (and that but part of them) being extant
in David's time. But the rest of the Old Testament, and the whole of the
New Testament, being Divinely inspired, and profitable to make Men wise unto
Salvation, they are also to be considered as implied in the Word spoken of.

BY [ taking heed] to the Word of God, is meant a diligent observing or keeping
of it. This is the genuine import of the Original Word [ Shamar.] It is
variously translated; Sometimes to observe, Genesis 37.11. His Father observed the
saying; So, Josh. 1.7. Be courageous, that thou may observe to do according
to all the Law. Sometimes to take heed to, sometimes to keep; It is thus
differently rendered in one and the same Verse. Psalm. 39.1. I said, I will take
heed to my ways, -- I will keep my mouth. So, Dan. 7.28. I kept the matter in
my heart. So in the Verse before our Text, I will keep thy Statutes, -- and in
17 Verse -- that I may live and keep thy Word. Again, Sometimes to preserve,
Psalm. 116.6. The Lord preserves the simple. Again, to mark, Psalm. 130.3. If
thou should mark iniquities --

IF Young Men would Cleanse their way, they must take heed to God's Word,
sollicitously study, critically observe, and seriously ponder it, carefully
apply it, and diligently conform to it.

THE General DOCTRINE from the Words, is This, Viz. THAT, For Young Men to take
heed to the Word of God, is the most proper and effectual method to purify and
preserve their way from sinful Pollutions.

IN this DOCTRINE there are several Things supposed and asserted. As -- (1.)
THE Way of Youth is defiled. (2.) It greatly concerns Men in their Youth to get
their Way Cleansed. (3.) IF Young Men duly observe the Word of God, they take
the most direct course to purify and secure their Way from sinful defilements.


PROP. I. The Way of Youth is defiled; and that in respect of Natural Corrupt
on, and Actual Pollutions. Cleansing is an Act, which in its nature speaks the
object impure, and implies a Change from loathsome defilement to delightful
purity. The way of Youth is polluted, and needs a purifying Change. Here
consider,

1. THE Humane Nature was Universally depraved, and defiled upon the first
Apostasy, and this Universal Corruption descends to the whole Natural P^sterity
of Fallen Adam in all succeeding Generations. It is a Truth too palpable and
notorious to be disputed, that the Nature of Man is lamentably disrobed of it is
primitive unblemisht purity and perfection, and is now clothed with a most
shameful abiding pravity and pollution. The natural Conscience and daily
Experience of every Man ^re a Cloud of Witnesses: The Ordinance of ^sm does
evidently suppose it, and the unerring Oracles of God do plainly and
peremptorily assert it. I need only mention two Places; Genesis 6.5. God saw, that
every imagination of the thoughts of Man's heart was only evil continually. Here
is a sad imputation upon Man, His Heart is Evil, (his Nature corrupted,) the
Thot's of his Heart are Evil, (The settled apprehensions, and inclinations of
the Heart are by nature falsely biased, and greatly infected,) The Imagination
of the Thot's of his Heart is Evil, (the careless rovings, as well as
deliberate workings of the Mind are vicious and sinful,) Every Imagination is
evil, is only evil, and that continually. This is the Indictment exhibited
against Man, and the Witness is infallible, unexceptionable. God saw it, -- and
God has said it, that God who judges righteous judgment, and whose Word is
instead of a Thousand Witnesses, seeing it is impossible for God to lie. God is
an Eyewitness, He saw it. It is said, Psalm. 53.2. God looked down from Heaven
upon the Children of Men, to see if there were any that did understand, that
did seek God: and it follows in the 3d ver. They are altogether become filthy;
so in the 1st ver. Corrupt are they, and have done abominable iniquity. Men are
by Nature corrupt, their noble Faculties are vitiated, and degenerated from
their Original Constitution. The whole head is sick, the whole heart is faint,
there is no soundness in them, nothing but bruises and putrefying sores. Their
wounds stink and are corrupt* They are all over an unclean thing, and as for
their Nativity, in the day they were born, they were cast out in the open field
to the loathing of (...) Persons, weltring in their own Blood, T^ whole Spirit,
Soul and Body filled with a loathsome Disease; They are altogether become
filthy, or (...) and stinking, as it might be translated. Whatsoever e^ternal
neatness, or spiritual purity some pretending Sinners may boast of, it is
certain, their Nature is so overspread with abominations of desolation, that
they are a loathsome stench in the Nostrils of the holy God, and an odious
Spectacle to Angels. They are abominable and to every good work reprobate.
Their whole Man is defiled, They are full of Sin against the Holy One of
Israel, full of the abominable thing, which His Soul hates. The rational
Powers have lost their moral rectitude, simplicity and order, and are under a
deplorable Metamorphosis, miserably disfigured and degraded. The Understanding,
the Eye of the Soul, has lost its Divine Light and Influence, and is benighted
under a Vail of thick Clouds and Egyptian darkness. The Will having lost its
first governing principle and true native liberty, is contracted and confined
to debasing and defiling objects, fastened and fettered in the most ignominious
servitude, is impotent and repugnant to that which is Good, but strongly
inclined to that which is Evil. The Affections and Passions have broke the
restraints of Reason, and cast off the reins of the Divine Law, are impetuous,
imperious, and rove without control. The Memory, is corrupt and unfaithful
shutting out and letting slip the Good, receiving and retaining the Evil, as a
Sieve lets out the Flower, but keeps the Bran. The Conscience is defiled, and
debaucht, This Monitor within, this Judge in the breast, does not faithfully do
its Office, in accusing, and excusing condemning, and approving, etc. being
blinded (...) ignorance, or bribed by corrupt Affection^ ^he ^our Appetites and
Powers, which should do ^ce, mount the Throne, and usurp the D^. The Senses,
which were to be Informers and ^ends to the Soul, are now armed in opposition
against it, and hold a treacherous correspondence with its Enemies: They
frequently make false reports, and are guilty of many fatal mistakes; They are
become Instruments of Sin and Satan, and by means of them, the Soul is often
taken in the Snare of the Devil, wounded by his fiery Darts, and led Captive in
the paths of the Destroyer. And which is the emphasis of this infamous misery,
the Sinner is contented in it, and pleased with the bondage of Corruption.

NOW the Foundation of this deplorable Change in Man's Nature was laid in the
first and grand Apostasy. The deadly poison of the first Sin has shed a
virulent tincture, an impure taint into the blood of all Nations, and Persons
on the face of the whole Earth. This doleful defilement and deformity was
brought on our Nature by the first Transgression, which was a common guilt, and
of universal influence, reaching all Mankind, and transmitting an unavoidable,
and habitual stain to the whole humane Race. And this arises from the Relation,
which we all bear to the first Sinner, i.e. Adam. We derive Original Sin,
considered as a Disease, from him, naturally, as he was our common Parent: and
considered as part of the Curse, meritoriously, as He was our common
Representative. -- Adam was the Protoplast, and the Root of humane Nature, Vid.
Dr. Bates, Fol. p. 10^. etc.
The natural Principle and Fountain of all mankind; God ^ormed Eve (the Mother
^iving) of a Rib taken out of Adam, and them Twain into one Flesh by the Bond
of ^riage, and of that one Blood he has made all Nations of Men, Act. 17.26.
Now the Fountain being defiled by Sin, all the Streams must partake of the
infection, so as that None can be pure who is born of a woman, Job 25.4. For
Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one, Job. 14.4. Pure Waters
do not issue from an impure Spring, no more do a pure Seed derive from impure
Progenitors. This is as impossible, as to gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of
Thistles. A corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruits, Mat. 7.18. Whatsoever
is born of the flesh, is flesh, Joh. 3.6. Corruption and carnality is fast
rooted and woven into the very Being of Man, and together with that descends to
us by natural consequence* and necessary succession. We are born of the flesh,
and of the flesh we reap corruption. With our natural Body, we receive from our
Parents the Body of Sin and Death. Original Corruption is called the Body of
Sin, because it is derived with our Bodies to us, and chiefly reigns in the
members of the Body; and it is termed Flesh, partly, and principally because it
is conveyed by carnal propagation. It is called the Old Man, because it is
primitively derived from Adam, the First Man, and in the way of natural
Generation devolves even upon latest Posterity. It is one immutable and eternal
Rule in Nature, that Every Creature beget its like, and that not only in regard
of the same Genus or Species, but also of the particular Affections that are
appropriate and praedominant. This is obvious in the various sorts of Animals
in the World, they all hold the ^stinguishing complexion of their princip^d
"retain the vein of their Original, the ^ty of their Extraction". Thus a
Leopard does not only convey its general nature, (and so beget indifferently
any Brute-Creature,) but also conveys its own peculiar properties, and eminent
characters, which make it Offspring like unto itself. So^ Man conveys to his
Posterity not merely the humane Nature in general, but also the adventitious
qualities, and impressions, that eminently affect it. A sinful Man produces not
only a Man, a rational Animal like himself; but a sinful Man, like himself,
corrupt and depraved. Hence we are told, Genesis 5.3. That Adam begat a Son in his
own Likeness, after his Image; and called his Name Seth. By this here is not to
be understand barely a likeness in respect of natural frame, and external form;
This is too trivial a Thing to be bro't in so solemnly as it is here, and
besides, it should seem more proper to have made this remark at the Nativity of
Cain, or Abel, the first born of Adam, rather than of Seth, between whom and
them, many Births (no doubt) intervened: it must therefore be understood of the
corruption of Adams Nature, and the aim of the Holy Ghost in this observation
was to acquaint us with the Entail of this infection upon the natural
Descendents of Adam; Hence, it was reserved 'till the birth of that Son, in
whose Progeny the Species was to be continued, and the Covenant to be entailed,
and this was Seth, through whom the Line went down to Noah, who after the Flood
(in which all the Old World perished, except his Family, consisting of Eight
Persons) was the Primogenitour of Mankind, and from whose Son Shem the Church
of (...) was propagated, and the Promised Seed ca^ ^y lineal Descent. Of that
Great and Holy M^ Seth, it is observed, he was born in Sin, even as Cain, that
wicked one, (the Sanctifying Grace of God alone making a difference) and that
"this meaning of the words might not be overlook't, there is an emphatical
repetition of the same thing; Adam begat a Son in his own Likeness, after his
Image". The Image wherein Seth was begotten, the Image of Adam, seems p^a^ly to
be spoken of by way of Antithesis or opposition to the Image wherein Adam was
created, the Image of God. The Divine Image chiefly consisted in knowledge, and
true holiness, but he lost these moral qualities, and contracted the Reverse,
which the Holy Ghost here calls his own Likeness; in this Image Seth is said to
be begotten, intimating his receiving a corrupt Nature from Adam, and this
being particularly observed of Seth, who was the common Progenitor of the whole
succeeding Race of Mankind, intimates that the Contagion would spread, and the
depravation, in which he himself was born, would be haereditary, and as a
walking Pestilence hand down it is malignity from Father to Son, even to the End
of the World.

AGAIN, Adam was the Moral Head of all Mankind, descending from him by ordinary
Generation. He was our common Proxy or Deputy, and had a power to choose and
act, not only for himself, but for his universal Progeny. All Mankind were
radically in him as their natural Original, and virtually in him as their
Surety, Surrogate, or Vicegerent; By him they were all to stand, or in him to
fall.

HERE we must note, that Adam though created in a state of Innocence, yet was not
fixed in a state of absolute impeccability. Though perfect Ho^ess was a natural
and concreate excellency, and he had an innate power necessarily consequent
upon his primitive constitution, as well as supernatural ability to have
performed complete obedience, and have prevented his Apostasy, yet it was such
as properly belonged to a rational free Agent, in a state of probation, and was
no ways, inconsistent with that moral freedom of will, which put him into a
state of mutability, and exposed him to the efficacy of sinful temptations, and
rendered him capable of rewards and punishments.

AND accordingly it pleased God to treat him, as such, in a Faederal way;
entering into a Covenant with Adam, as standing in a public capacity and
personating all his Descendents, wherein He promised Life, and threatened Death.
And besides the invariable moral Law, internal and subjective to his reasonable
nature, it pleased God to make trial of Adams obedience by a particular
positive external Prohibition, in a matter of pure indifference antecedently to
the Divine Precept, but becoming obligatory merely by the will of the Lawgiver.
This prohibition was, that he should not eat of the Tree of the Knowledge of
Good and Evil, Genesis 2.16. And this special Command was of the same obligation,
and guarded with the same Sanctions, as the Eternal Law of Creation. The giving
of it, was a mark of Sovereign Dominion, and the observing of it would have
been a reasonable Service, and most refined obedience.

BUT Adam (to the just astonishment of Heaven and Earth) through unaccountable
carelessness was decoyed by the insinuating Tempter into rebellion ^ruin. Being
drawn by Satan's Lures, he strangely revolted from God, leaped the boundaries of
the Divine Law, and brake through all restraints and preservatives, and did
voluntarily eat of the forbidden Fruit. Now this rebellious transgression in
its nature contained a violation of the whole Law, an entire renunciation of
God, and embracing the Creature as the chief Good, and Satan as the best
Master. Hence the habit of Original righteousness was lost, and all moral
excellencies effaced and extinguished, and an universal permanent corruption and
foul deformity introduced, by a judicial act of God as a part of the Curse, and
punishment of the first Sin. And now this Original corruption and degeneracy,
considered as a punishment, is meritoriously derived from Adam, and "falls
under the ordination of divine Justice". It is not only a fatal Legacy left us
by our First Parents, but a Divine Curse entailed upon us. All Mankind were
legally Parties in the faederal transaction with Adam in innocence, and were
understood to be virtually Accomplices in his Rebellion; hence his
transgression was not appropriate and merely personal, but a common Guilt, a
Sin of the whole Nature and universal Race; And the Punishment has a
proportionable extent and adaquate comprehension. Hence Spiritual Death which
is one part of the Curse, and the wages of Sin, is the unavoidable Lot of all
the Children of Adam, through the righteous Judgment of God. Our First Parents
sinned and are not, and we have born their iniquity; God visits the iniquity of
the Father upon the Children from Generation to Generation. All the unhappy
Descendents of Adam do taste the sour fruits of his Apostasy, and inherit the
foul impurity of his Nature; and that justly, without any breach upon the Laws
of common Equity: For, That which is allowable and unrebukable in the Gods of
the Earth, is much more so in the Great GOD of Heaven, whose Kingdom rules
over all, and a Scepter of righteousness is the Scepter of His Kingdom. There
can be no color of pretense to impeach the Government of Injustice barely for
permitting Children to suffer such Evils, as are but the punishment of their
Fathers Sins, wisely and justly allotted to them by the Laws, which they are
subject unto. The Public Authority is not satisfied (for instance) with the
punishment of Treason in the single Person of the Rebel alone, but his Estate
is confiscated, his Dignities forfeited, his Blood stained, and nothing but
ignominy and poverty descends to the unconsenting Heirs, by virtue of some
humane Constitution. And after this, what can we object, what room have we to
dispute the Divine Justice in the communication of Original Sin, to the
Posterity of Adam, since they, being in his Loins as their Parent, and in his
Covenant as their Representative, are interested in the guilt of his first
Transgression? Being thus entitled to the Penalty, it is justly inflicted upon
them. Therefore with the Apostle we must believe with our hearts, and confess
with our mouths, That in Adam all die, By one Man Sin entered into the World,
and Death by Sin; and so Death passed upon all Men, for that all have sinned.
By the offense of one, judgment came upon all Men to condemnation, and by one
Man's disobedience, many were made Sinners, 1 Cor. 15.22. Romans 5.12, 18, 9. We
must every one acknowledge with the Psalmist, (Psalm. 51.5.) Behold I was shapen
in iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. All Mankind agree in their
native pravity, "whatsoever difference there may be in their Climates,
Colors", and outward Circumstances. This Spiritual Death not only reigned from
Adam to Moses, but it is an Epidemical Plague, that reaches all Men to the
latest period of the World.

2. THIS Original Corruption is the Seminary and Principle of all Actual Sins.
This is the Womb that conceives vanity, and brings forth iniquity, Mat.
15.18, 9. Out of the heart, i.e. as depraved, proceed evil tho'ts, murders,
adulteries, and every evil work. It Is Lust in the heart that conceives and
brings forth Sin, Jam. 1.15. All sinful tho'ts, words and deeds are the issue
and product of our corrupt nature. They are the works of the Flesh, (Gal.
5.19.) All the Sins of Life take their rise, and derive their Original from the
corruption within, as Streams from the Fountain, Fruit from the Tree, or
Branches from the Root.

3. THIS Corruption stains and defiles every Age of Life. It is a principle
that is always stirring, never still; a Fountain ever flowing, and foaming out
impurities. It taints our very Conception, "It is interwoven with the whole
Thread of Life"; There are always even in the most sanctified, while in this
imperfect state, some unhappy Remains of the old Leaven. It Is as the fretting
Leprosy that will never be purged out, 'till the walls of the House be pulled
down* It is an early and permanent Disease; it begins with our very Being, and
cleaves fast unto us. This is the Sin, that dwells in us, and the Evil that is
always present with us, ( Romans 7.20, 1.) The Body of this Death is so
inseparably chained to our Bodies of Flesh, that they take their first breath,
and search their last gasp together. There is no Period of Humane Life, wherein
any can say, I am pure from Sin, (Prove. 20.9.) The root of bitterness shoots
out, and the corrupt Tree brings forth fruit in every Season. No Age can lay
claim to a privilege in this Case. From the Infant of Days to the hoary Head,
there is none exempt.

4. THE Age of Youth has it is peculiar and abundant pollutions. Hence we read
of Youthful L^sts, (2 Timothy 2.22.) and of the Sins of our Youth, (Psalm. 25.7.)
The different Ages of Men have their diverse Lusts and various Corruptions. The
impure Streams run in distinct Channels, agreeable to the differing Complexions
of Men in the several Stages of Life. Covetousness seems to be the more
peculiar Lust of Old Age; Ambition the predominant vice of Middle Age, and
Sensuality the emphatical blemish of wanton Youth. Yet these special Sins are
not so appropriate, but that sometimes they may all conspire in one Age, even
as there is an universal collection of Lusts and the habit of all Sins in the
corrupt Nature. And if we behold among the Youths, particularly; how
notoriously do these black Characters meet in the first Scenes of Life* Here we
see the Children of Pride, the First born of Hell, bloated with Ambition,
vainly puff't up with swelling arrogance, and walking in an empty show; and
there we behold the Sons of Perdition, thirsting after the wages of
unrighteousness, and panting after the dust of the Earth; an heart have they
exercised with covetous practices, steaming with Earthly desires, cankered with
impatient envy, or racked with vindictive malice: Here we see others, as
natural brute Beasts, walking after the Flesh in the Lust of Uncleanness,
having eyes full of Adultery, beguiling unstable Souls, and sporting themselves
with their own deceivings, through much wantonness, lying securely in the
embraces of the unclean Spirit; and there we behold the Children of
Disobedience, the Lovers of Pleasure in swarms, dissolving in Sense, and
drowning in Epicurean luxury, overcharging themselves with Surfeiting and
Drunkenness; They run wild and mad into all excess of Riot, into many foolish
and hurtful lusts; They fit in the Seat of the Scornful and walk in the counsel
of the Ungodly, They do evil with both hands earnestly, and weary themselves to
commit iniquity; full of all subtilty and mischief are they, Sons of Belial,
Enemies of all righteousness, who make a mock of Sin, and cease not to pervert
and scoff at the right ways of the Lord, they bend their tongues like their bow
for lies, and their Mouth pours out foolishness, they proceed from evil to
evil, drinking in iniquity like water.

THERE is a Generation that have no sense of their Filth derived or contracted;
They walk in the way of their own hearts, and In the fight of their own eyes;
They are like the Swine that love to grovel in the dirt, and tumble in every
filthy Kennel, They wallow in muddy sensualities as their Element, without
desires of Purifition, and having no fear of God before them.

THERE is also a Generation, that are pure in their own eyes, and yet they are
not cleansed to this day. They call themselves of the holy City, are come forth
out of the waters of Judah, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in
truth and righteousness. They make a fair show in the flesh, keep the outside
of the Cup clean, but broth of abominable things is in their Vessels. They have
perhaps kept themselves from the pollutions of the Times, and attained some
colorable appearances of Piety and Virtue by the help of common Grace,
Christian Education and the like^ or have reformed some Evil ways. The Drunkard
is become Temperate; The Profane is grown Precise, and wears a sanctimonious
mien and air; The Prayerless has taken up the form of Godliness, etc. And hence
they flatter themselves in their own eyes, and are ready to repeat the proud
Pharisee's vainglorious Speech, I thank God, I am not as other Men, unjust,
filthy; When (Alas!) that God who has a bright prospect into the hidden parts,
knows that like him, they are but whited Walls, and really remain still in the
state of unrenew'd nature. They think themselves secure of an interest in the
Divine Favor, and expect to be forever bathing themselves in the fullness of
Joy, when, Alas! They are ready to be ingulph'd in the whirlpool of Eternal
Damnation.

PROP. II. IT greatly concerns Men in their Youth to get their Way Cleansed.
This Proposition is grounded on the Psalmists great concern and sollicitous
Enquiry, How Young Men might Cleanse their Way? Which shows the importance and
necessity of it is being done. We may here Enquire into Two Things.

QUES. I. HOW are we to Cleanse our Way?

Ans. 1. UNIVERSALLY and Entirely. Thus we are exhorted, 2 Cor. 7.1. Let us
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. So, Jam. 4.8.
Cleanse your hands, and purify your hearts, i.e. all external actions, and
internal motions -- Our Language should be purified; our Mouth a Well of Life,
affording sweet and pure waters. No corrupt communication may proceed out of
our Lips, but our Speech should be with Grace, good to the use of edifying,
that it may manifest Grace in us that speak, and minister Grace unto others
that hear, Ephesians. 4.29. -- Yea, Our whole external Behavior should be purified;
we should abandon every evil and false way, and become holy in all manner of
conversation civil and religious; walking in all the Ordinances and
Commandments of the Lord, in all duties Personal and Relative, blameless as the
Children of Light.

AND above all, We should see to it that the Spring of all be Cleansed, that we
get a clean heart and a right spirit renewed within us. Pure Religion is
founded in a pure Heart. We must purify our Souls in obeying the Truth -- (1
Pet. 1.22.) If the Fountain be muddy all the Streams must needs partake of the
infection. The Rule is, (Mat. 23.26.) Cleanse first that which is within, that
the outside may be clean also. Unregenerate Morality is but the Leaven of the
Pharisees, which is vile Hypocrisy. We are still in the state of carnal nature,
and are but painted Sepulchers, unless all the powers of our Souls are washed
in the Laver of spiritual Regeneration. We must not only cast away our Filthy
rags, and put off the Garment spotted by the flesh, and cleanse our selves from
outward visible pollutions, but must disgorge all carnal Lusts (those sweet
morsels) in our foul Stomachs, and must put on the beauties of true holiness,
and be molded into the Image of Heavenly purity, else we are a loathsome
stench, and abhorred spectacle to the Holy One of Israel. The way of the Heart,
as well as the ways of the Lip and Life, is to be cleansed. Thus the work of
self-purification must be Universal. The cleansing must be proportionable to
the defilement; The Plaster as broad as the Sore. One filthy Lust, remaining
in it is power, will be as a dead fly in the precious ointment, and make all
unsavory.

A. 2. CONSTANTLY and Perseveringly. It is a work of daily revolution, and
perpetual duration. Undefiled Religion is attained gradually and by tract of
time. Our brightest Graces, and best Duties have some alloy, some mixtures of
impurity; and we contract much pollution in our daily walk through this
defiling World, by unhappy falls and stumbles, and even they that are washed
and made clean every whit, yet have need to wash their feet, (Joh. 13.10.) And
it should be the daily care even of the Regenerate, to be cleansing themselves
from the remains of carnality, and pressing after a more perfect purity.

THUS "the Extent of this purifying is comprehensive of the outward and inward
Man, from sinful inclinations and vicious acts; and the Continuance of it must
be, 'till we are cleansed from every spot, and become glorious in Holiness".
Progress and Perseverance in this work is an invariable Character of Sincerity,
and "the Crown of Christianity". We read, (Job. 17.9.) The righteous shall hold
on his way, and he that bath clean hands shall be stronger and stronger. We
have not only that Precept, (Isai. 1.16, 7.) Wash ye, make you clean, cease to
do evil, learn to do well: but also that, (1 Timothy 5.22.) Keep thy self pure; --
Continue in the way of well doing. The days of our Purification indeed must run
parallel with the days of Life.

QUES. II. WHY does it concern Men in their Youth thus to Cleanse their Way? To
clear this Head, let us consider the following Particulars.

Ans. I. Consider, THAT Cleansing our Way is a Work of absolute necessity and
everlasting consequence. It is necessary in order to our acceptance with God
here, and enjoyment of God hereafter. There is a firm and indissoluble
connection between Holiness and true Happiness, which consists in the favor
and fruition of God, the Chief Good.

(1) THERE is a Legal Necessity of Cleansing our Ways. A Necessity from the
indispensable obligation of a Divine Precept, and the inviolable constitution
of the New Covenant. This is the will of God, even our Sanctification; God has
not called us unto uncleanness, but unto holiness, (1 These. 4.3, 7.) This is
prescribed and imposed, as the invariable Term of Salvation. Touch not the
unclean thing, and I will receive you, (2 Cor. 6.17.) Follow holiness without
which no man shall see the Lord, (Heb. 12.14.) And this is a wise and just
Establishment, necessary to secure the honor of God's Government, to magnify
his Law, and declare his righteousness. Who then may resist His Will?

Again, (2.) THERE is a Moral Necessity. A Necessity from the Nature and Reason
of the thing. The Unclean Sinner (while such) is absolutely unfit for the
Divine Favor, and utterly incapable of Divine Blessedness. What fellowship can
righteousness have with unrighteousness? What communion has light with
darkness? And what concord has Christ with Belial? (2 Cor. 6.14.) The
happiness of Man lies in communion with God, and the enjoyment of Him. But now
the Sinner and Ungodly are excluded from this happiness by a moral incapacity.
H^w can Two walk together, except they be agreed? How can Two opposite tempers
subsist together, without Eternal Jarrings? Mutual Endearments, and happy
Correspondence between one and another, are founded in a congruity of Natures,
and a conformity of Inclinations. Unless then we are made Partakers of the
Divine Nature, it is utterly impossible for us to enjoy God, or stand in His
sight with any contentment or satisfaction. And were we translated in a state
of polluted Nature into the immediate presence of God, in which is the fullness
of Joy, it would be no better than an Hell unto us. The Entertainments of
Heaven would be nauseous and distasteful to us, not suiting the false relishes
of vitiated Sense; The Employments of Heaven would be a disagreeable and uneasy
Task to ou^ indisposed Powers. In a Word, The most irreconcilable
contrarieties may as soon compromise or incorporate, as an unregenerate
polluted Sinner obtain and enjoy the undefiled Inheritance in Light. Heaven
moral (as one speaks) is an indispensable Qualification for Heaven local. Into
Jerusalem, which is above, that Holy City, enters nothing that defiles, (Rev.
21.27.) Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who shall stand in his
holy place? He that has clean hands and a pure heart, (Psalm. 24.3, 4 -- Psalm.
15.1, 2.) Except a Man be born again he cannot see the Kingd^m of God, (Joh.
3.3.) Consider this ye that forget God, and let no Man deceive you with vain
words: Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God?
Be not deceived, (1 Cor. 6.9,) The Cleansing of our Way is a matter (we see) of
the highest Importance, and the last Necessity; Holiness ought then to be the
subject of our principal and most serious care, and the object of our most
vigorous and early pursuits. This is the One Thing needful. Eternity depends
upon it, an Eternity of weal or woe. A matter of this infinite concernment
surely challenges our first and chief regards. The great Interests of Eternity
claim and deserve a prior consideration and superior labor to secure them,
than the low and little concernments of this transitory Life. How foolish then
are they, how wildly do they act, who mispend the best of their Time in serving
diverse Lusts, and terminate the Cares of their blooming Youth on this perishing
World, who mind Earthly things, and neglect the Great Salvation? But how wise
are they, that Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, That make
it their first and great care and endeavor to work out their own Salvation,
That employ the first opportunities of Life to make their Calling and Election
sure? -- Who then among you is willing to consecrate his Service this Day unto
the Lord? These things should quicken all from the womb of the Morning, even
the beginning of their days, to devote the Dew of their Youth, their earliest
affections to the Lord, and to begin betimes to Cleanse their ways. Is it not a
work of the greatest weight and moment? What Business or Concern is there that
may be set in opposition to, or stand in competition with it? Say not then, I
pray thee have me excused, on any pretense whatsoever. The necessity and
excellency of the work, speaks the unreasonableness and baseness of delays.

A. II. Consider, THIS Life is the only space, or season for the accomplishment
of this Work. "This World is the great Laboratory for perfecting Souls for
Heaven", the only state of prob^tion and preparation for Eternity. If ever we
Cleanse our ways, it must be now. There is no wisdom, nor device in the Grave,
whether we are going, (Eccl. 9. 10.) The Night comes, wherein no man can work,
(Joh. 9.4.) This is the day of Salvation, (2 Cor. 6.2.) They that go down into
the pit cannot hope for the truth; the Living, the Living they shall praise
thee, (Isai. 38.18, 9.) To him that is joined to the Living, there is hope, To
him only. -- Death puts an irrevocable period to the Day and Means of Grace, to
the Strivings of the Holy Spirit, and the Offers of Salvation: It seals us up
among the irreparable Ruins of the Apostasy, and fixes us under an Eternal
impossibility of Recovery. As the Tree falls, so it must lie. The Spirits in
Prison, shall not come forth, until they have paid the utmost Farthing. They
are bound in Chains of darkness, which cannot be broken; They are under a Yoke
of Bondage, that cannot be shaken off.

A. III. Consider, THE Work is Great, and the longest Life is not more than
proportionable to it. Cleansing our Ways is not some light and easy Business,
the work of an hour or a day. It is a Complication of great Services to be
done, and of great Difficulties to be overcome. It is an hard work, many acts,
many exercises are implied in it, enough to employ the whole Man in its best
vigor, and to fill up the whole Life in its longest duration. In order to pure
Religion, we must search and try our ways, and be much in Self-Examination, We
must act Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, which
are laborious as well as constant Exercises; And we must lay out our selves in
the work of Mortification and Reformation, the well-doing of which will require
our utmost Industry, Vigilance, and Resolution, and challenge some Tract of
Time. Solemn Resolutions are to be formed and fixed, Knowledge to be dug for,
strong Prejudices and Corruptions to be conquered, ill Customs to be renounced,
subtle Temptations to be resisted, and strong oppositions to be encountered.
Finally, Many and diverse Duties to be put in practice, and acts of positive
obedience performed, A large Field of work to be gone through, and many a weary
step to be taken. We had need then enter into it betimes, rise early, take the
wings of the Morning, and go forth to labor until the Night, rejoicing with
the Sun to run our race. The Task is hard, and many holy Christians that have
feared the Lord from their Youth, spent their Vigorous Age in this work, and
continued in it, even unto Length of Days, have after all their Toil and long
Labors, not counted themselves to have apprehended, neither to be already
perfect, but have professed to reach toward things before, and confessed very
humbling Remains of impurity both of Flesh and Spirit behind still to be
cleansed away. They that begin soonest are but scarcely saved. We must confess
then, that great is the guilt and folly of such as delay this most necessary
and difficult work, flattering themselves that they shall have Time enough
hereafter. Most are apt to dream, they have a long Day before 'em, and so may
safely give a loose for the present to their Youthful Lusts, and hope to do
this work, at their Leisure, in more advanced Years: -- But alas! the entire
Life of Man is but a little space for such a Business of Eternal consequence,
and Infinite difficulty. Not but that the Time allowed is sufficient, if we had
but wisdom to Husband our opportunities aright: yet it is not more than is
requisite in order to do this work to the lest advantage. -- Is it not then
most egregious folly to think of crowding that into a narr^w corner of our Day,
which will take up the whole. O think of the greatness of your Work, and the
shortness of your Day, and judge whether it be not time to begin, and folly to
defer.

A. IV. Consider, Youth is the fittest and most advantageous Season to begin
this workin. Consider, Now the work it self is really less, than it will be
afterward. The work is always great and difficult, but by Age it grows upon us;
more work is made for Self-Examination, Repentance, and Mortification. Sins are
multiplied, Corruptions are strengthened, the Understanding more darkened, the
Heart more hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin, the sensual Appetites and
Passions grown more headstrong by customary indulgence, the Cords of Iniquity
twisted harder, the black Chains of Lust fastened and more difficult to be
dissolved, the Conscience more defiled with dead works, deeper pollutions
contracted, and more heavy loads of filth to be disburthen'd, when we have lain
long soaking in our corrupt state; Spiritual Diseases more putrified and harder
to be cured. By long and inveterate Custom Sin grows more natural to us, and we
are reduced almost to an impossibility of recovery. Hence the Scripture says,
(Jer. 13.23.) Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots?
Then may you also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. When ill Habits are
obstinately r^oted by frequent and continued repetition of Sin, there is
unspeakable difficulty attending the extirpation of them. How hard and painful
a work to repent of them and subdue them! In this Case we may very aptly apply
those sayings of our Savior, It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of
the Needle; Straight is the Gate; With Men this is impossible, but with God all
things are possible! Thus the Work is made greater and more difficult by
delays. Moreover, in Youth our advantages are greater; then we have special
Helps, Opportunities and Conveniences. If we now begin our work, we have in an
ordinary way more Time before us to do it in. And now the Spirit of God is
peculiarly striving with us; the Angel of the Lord most forward to come to the
Pool, and move the Waters of healing; And Youth is the Age of Discipline, most
capable of Instruction, most flexible to Convictions, most susceptible of
Impressions. Now the Understanding is ordinarily most ready and perceptive, the
Will most obsequious, the Affections and Passions most governable, the Memory
most deeply receptive as well as strongly retentive, and all the Faculties of
Life most apt and able for Service and Employment. For Youth is the Age of
Business, (as well as tractableness,) the Morning of our day, the Excellency of
our strength, the Spring of Life, most free and vigorous for Labor, disposed
to Action, and admirable at dispatch. Now the Faculties of Soul and Body are in
their prime, most capable of bearing the difficulties and doing the duties,
that attend the work of Sanctification. -- Is it not besotting folly then, to
defer cleansing our ways, and let slip this Golden Opportunity, and make that
the task of drooping Sickness, or supine tottering Age, which demands the most
sanguine Efforts of sprightly Health and active Youth? But further, Youth is
more under the checks of Conscience, and the restraints of Shame and Modesty,
which are a good Barrier to secure us against Sin, and a mighty Help to reclaim
us from it. And moreover, in Youth we have commonly fewer Encumbrances and less
impediments to clog us in doing our work. Now we are not so enslaved to the
Prince of Darkness; the soul Spirit, that works in the Children of
Disobedience, has not ordinarily such a full possession of us, nor absolute
dominion over us as yet, and now his Temptations have not so easy access, and
his assaults may with less difficulty be warded off, by the discrete, vigilant
and resolute Youth; And further, Now we are not ordinarily so far plunged into
the World; we are not so much exposed to the Cares of discouraging Want, nor
the Snares of treacherous Affluence, nor the burries of perplexing Business.
And by an Early Conversion and Consecration of our selves to God, we shall
greatly forestall our tempting Adversaries, and save our selves many Conflicts,
recover our selves from the Snare of the Devil, and escape the Corruptions that
are in the World through Lust.

A. V. Consider, THE Time of Youth, the present Time, may, for ought we know,
be the only Season allowed us for this work. For,

1. THE Arrests of Death may soon irrecoverably terminate all our
Opportunities. The Time is short, and very uncertain; Death will speedily, He
may suddenly, serve the Execution upon us: And Death's Commission is not dated
by Seniority; Mortality is not governed by the course of Nature, but the
Ordination of Heaven. The warm Blood and vigor of healthful Youth is no
protection against the King of Terrors. When the Decree brings forth, None can
stay his hand, No Man has power over his Spirit to retain it. How often do we
see invincible Death making a Prey of the mighty, taking away Young Men in
their full strength, breaking the bars of Iron and the gates of Brass. The
strongest Constitution and most unbroken Health of Body cannot stand the
dreadful Shock; neither will this secure from the danger of a sudden
Dissolution. Some unkindly Breath of Air may in an instant extinguish the light
of Life, when it is like to burn a long while yet. Unnumber'd Diseases, we are
subject to, that may speedily stop our breath; we know not but some fatal
Distemper is now latent in our Bodies, however hale and lusty we may seem,
which will shortly break down the clayey Tabernable, and gather us again unto
the Dust; and a Thousand Disasters, many unforeseen Casualties we are obnoxious
to, any one of which may quickly dispatch our unwilling Souls into an awful
Eternity, and in a moment bury us in despairful horror! And most surely they,
Whose Life is among the Unclean, may expect to Die in Youth, and not to Live
out half their Days! By their Lusts and Vices they are hastening their end,
jogging the Glass, and preparing the Instruments of Death for themselves; and a
Thousand to One if they are not snared in the work of their own hands, or
snatched away in an awful manner by some surprising and unexpected Providence!

HOW Dangerous then are Delays of our Great Work! To depend on Hereafter is to
"presume merely on a remote possibility", and to hazard our Eternal safety on
the most precarious bottom in the World, and if this sandy Foundation fail us,
we sink into irretrievable Misery. Let us no longer then trifle away our
precious and hasty moments. Let us not flatter our selves with the uncertain
reversion of so much as another Day to further Adjournment of our work, but
even to Day, while it is called to Day, (This very Evening,) Let us everyone
set about it, working out our Salvation with fear and trembling, and doing with
might what our hands find to do, because the Night comes, and we know not what
shall be on the morrow. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not
what a day may bring forth. This Evening cannot be too Early, because
To-morrow-Morning may be too Late. In a Word, We cannot begin too soon, nor make
too quick dispatch. Be we as speedy and active as possible, the nimble sands of
Time will run down faster than our work goes on, and ou^ Glass will go nigh to
run out, before we have finished our Christian Race. Consider this ye Sinners,
and give ear, be not rebellious; for the Lord has spoken, -- Give Glory to the
Lord your God before he cause darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the
dark Mountains, and while ye look for light, he turn it into the shadow of
Death, and make it gross darkness. But if ye will not hear, my Soul shall weep
in secret places for your pride, and presumption, Mine Eye shall weep and run
down with tears.

2. OR, Some Distemper may utterly bereave us of our Capacity for this work. We
are incident to many things, that may fatally impair our rational Powers, and
as much disenable us to all religious intents and purposes as Death it self.
May not an Apoplexy, or, Lethargy, a Delirium or Stupor, suddenly seize us,
that we shall become as 'twere Dead, while we Live? May we not be bewildred
with Melancholy, or distracted with Madness? May we not be harrass't with
tormenting Pains, and restless Agonies, that shall utterly unhinge us, and
unfit us for religious Duties? Or, may we not soon be thrown into a weak,
shattered, languishing condition; be exercised with frequent faintings, be
attended with a constant laxness of the Animal Spirits, and decays of bodily
strength, and be followed with the lingering forerunners of Death; so that our
enfeebled Powers shall not be capable of bearing the earnest Care, nor doing
the intense Work of Repentance, and we shall have but little or no force and
freedom of mind left us to attend the Great Concerns of our Souls, and shall
probably be debarred hereof, lest it should prevent the Cure of our Bodies.
These Considerations should startle us out of our secure and dilatory frame. We
are all concerned in this Case. None can plead an exemption. Such Evils have
surpised Others that as little suspected any danger as we. What though we are
Young, hearty and lusty? so were many of Them, yet they were taken in the
snare, immediately staked down, and reserved in Chains to the day of
Destruction. And now what claim have we to a privilege from this awful
Judgment? Let these things awaken us to make all sure and safe by a through
Repentance, and Purification of our ways, while there remains a space and
possibility.

3. OR, The Means of Grace may be taken away, and the Spirit of Grace withdraw
from us, and forsake us for ever. Supposing Life and Health and Reason should
be prolonged, yet how know we, but that we shall be deprived of the Means of
Holiness and helps to Salvation? The righteous God may cause the Sun to go down
over His despised Prophets, call home His Ambassadors, and make the Joyful
Sound to cease; He may justly punish us with a Famine of the word of the Lord,
remove his Candlestick, pull down his Tabernacle, and leave us to perish for
lack of Vision. Or, if God continues the external Means, yet He may be provoked
to withold the influences of His Spirit; and so we shall receive the Grace of
God in vain, and enjoy the Means but in Judgment. It is certain our special
Opportunity of Grace may expire before the day of Life. As the Stalk may
continue after the Flower be dropped off* As the Tree may stand a while, after
it is past bearing Fruit. So a Sinner may outlive his particular Day of Grace,
i. e. the Season of the Holy Spirits Motions, and Operations upon his Heart.
Men may by obstinate resisting the Holy Ghost, and a resolved impenitency under
the Gospel, provoke Him to cease striving with them, and give them over to the
power of Satan and their own Lusts, and leave them under a moral impossibility
of Repentance unto Life. Our Day of Grace (says a Learned Divine) may have a
much shorter period than our Lives; Dr. Sherlock. Disc. of Death, page 164, 9.
Edit. 16.
we may outlive the possibility of Repentance, God in His just and righteous
Judgment may give up the Children of disobedience to a state of hardness and
impenitence, and they may wander about in this World, as the Israelites did in
the Wilderness, under an irreversible Doom and Sentence. And hence the Apostle
to the Hebrews exhorts them, (Heb. 3.7, etc,) To day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, as your Fathers tempted me, with whom I was grieved,
and so I swear in my wrath, they should not enter into my r^st. -- But why to
Day? Is it only because our Lives are uncertain, and we may die before to
Morrow? No, but lest we provoke God to swear in his Wrath, that we shall not
enter into rest. It should engage us to a speedy Repentance, to consider, that
we may provoke God to such a degree, that He may pronounce the final Sentence
on us, That we shall never enter into Heaven; long before we leave this World.

THE Day of God's Forbearance often survives the Day of His Mercy. Sometimes He
endures with much long suffering the Vessels of Wrath; but frequently He cuts
short His Work in Righteousness; and the brighter any One's Day of Grace is,
(it is observed) it is usually the shorter. The Old World God spared an Hundred
and Twenty Years, but Israel, whom He had favored above all the Families of
the Earth, giving His Word unto Jacob, He endured their manners but Forty Years
in the Wilderness. The Lord does gradually withdraw His grieved Spirit and
neglected Grace from rebellious Sinners, and finally abandons them to a
reprobate sense, intumulates their forsaken Souls under judicial blindness and
hardness in their frozen Grave; That is the fatal Sentence passed against them,
Let him that is filthy, be filthy still, (Rev. 22.11.) Because I have purged
thee, and thou wast not purged, Thou shall not be purged any more from thy
filthiness, 'till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee, (Ezekiel. 24.13.) And
then their Case is irremediable. And this may be the sad state of Multitudes in
the World, who discern not their fearful doom. And this may very Early be the
deplorable condition of Sinners. We have many instances hereof on Sacred
Record. Cursed Cain was but of a few days, when he was driven out from the
presence of the Lord. Scoffing Ishmael was cast out, when he was but about
Twenty years of Age. Profane Esau, who too soon took upon him the Gentleman,
and devoted himself to recreation and sport, having once wearied himself for
very vanity in the violent pursuits of the Field, Sold his Birthright to Jacob
his Pious Brother, for a small refreshment, and so forfeited the Blessing, and
was rejected; and this was when the B^ys were yet growing up, (Genesis 25.27.) --
How many Young Men think you were in Jerusalem, when Christ beholding that
City, wept over it, and said, If thou had known, even thou, at least in this
thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace! but now they are hid from
thine eyes?

INDEED the Day of Grace, as the Day of Life, has differing Periods; with some
it is more permanent, with others more transient. With many we see it lasts no
longer than the time of Youth. "And if these Golden Days be lost (says a
Venerable Servant of God, whose Praise is in the Gospel, Dr. Increase Mather,
in his Call to the Rising Generation. Edit. 2. page 148.
throughout all the Churches; if the Days of Youth be lost,) probably thou will
be undone for ever. I must needs tell you that f^r the most part it is so, that
Men are either Converted in their Youth, or not at all. We read but of One that
was called at the Eleventh hour. If a Tree do not blossom in the Spring, it is
commonly dead all the Year after; So they that are not Converted in the Spring
of their Age are rarely Converted at all. Now and then One is Converted in Old
Age, but such Examples are exceeding rare; especially it is true with respect
unto those that have in the Days of their Youth lived under the Means of Grace,
heard many Sermons, experienced frequent Strivings of the Spirit of God with
their hearts: if they remain Unconverted until the Days of their Youth are past
and gone, the Lord usually gives them up to judicial hardness of heart that
they shall never be Converted, never Saved. Young Men think sadly of it in the
fear of God". O hearken to this solemn warning, consider and improve it; Beware
of Delays; Quench not the Spirit, Resist not always the Holy Ghost, Do not at
any time say unto Him, Go away and come again to Morrow, lest you Sin away the
Influences of the Spirit; O do not this abominable thing which the Lord hates,
lest the Spirit of the Lord depart from you, and an evil Spirit from the Lord
trouble you. Be instructed, O Seed of Jacob, lest his Soul depart from you,
lest be make you desolate; lest you unhappily incur the condemnation of
Ephraim, He is joined to Idols, let him alone. -- O seek the Lord while he may
be found, (Isai. 55.6.) They that seek him early shall find him, (Prove. 8.17.)
But if thou forsake him in the time of Youth, perhaps He will cast thee off for
ever, (1 Chr. 28.9.) It is a bold and bloody adventure in sinful Youth, a
dreadful risque they run, to forego the present Opportunity upon the false
presumption of a mere convenient Season hereafter. We are all of Us probably
within our limited Day of Grace: But how soon, how suddenly our Sun may set,
God only knows. The present time may be our last Opportunity; and to expect
renewed offers of Grace upon the least refusal or delay to accept, is not
founded in any Divine Promise and is repugnant to the universal Tenor of the
Divine Threatenings. We stand every moment upon the Brink of perdition, nigh
unto Cursing; How know we, but that our Eternal concernments depend upon what
we are this Evening, this Instant a doing? How know we, but that the revolution
of a few hours or minutes will irreversibly conclude our day of probation? --
It is high time to awake unto Righteousness, to consider our ways and turn our
feet unto God's testimonies. Young Men, my Brethren, hearken to the voice of
God, and no longer harden your hearts against the impressions of His Grace, and
the solemn Invitations of His Word, which speaks to you, to each of you, My
Son, give me thy heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways, (Prove. 23.26.) Wash
thy heart from thy wickedness, that thou may be saved, how long shall thy
vain tho'ts lodge within thee? (Jer. 4.14.) Do this now my Son, and deliver thy
self, Give not sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids; if thou save
not thy life to night, perhaps to morrow thou shall be slain. Procrastination
is infinitely dangerous. The least delay may cost us our Souls. Let us fear
lest we come short, and look diligently lest any man fail of the grace of God,
(Heb. 12.15.)

A. VI. Consider, TO begin this work in our Youth, is what the Great God
requires of us, and is infinitely pleased with in us. God is our Creator,
Preserver, and Sovereign Ruler. We owe Him all possible Homage. We are under
the most inviolable Bonds of obedience to His revealed Will. Now God commands
all men every where to repent, (Act. 17.30.) And by virtue of this general
Precept we are obliged to repent immediately, without delay. It is a Maxim in
Law, (as One in a certain place testifyeth) that where no day of Payment is
limited, the Debt is presently due. The Debt of Repentance toward God is
according to this just principle to be paid forthwith, though there were not any
express and direct specification of the time of Youth. But we have the most
plain and peremptory injunctions of Early Obedience. We are not left to our
liberty as to the time, any more than as to the thing. He that has bidden us to
repent and amend our ways, has also bid us do it now, betimes; and there is the
same obligation upon us to take the Time, as to do the Work, He has set us.
Well then, Young Men are indispensably bound to regard and obey those Precepts,
wherein they are positively and strictly commanded to be sober and pious
betimes: As, Psalm 148.12, 3 Young Men, and Children, Let them praise the name
of the Lord. So, Prove. 8.32, etc. Now hearken unto me, O ye Children; Hear
instruction, and be wise. So, Eccl. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days
of thy youth. So, ver. 12, 3. And further, by these words of truth, my Son, be
admonished of the vanity of the World, and the evil of Sin, and Let us hear the
conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God and keep his commandments: for this is
the whole duty and happiness of man. And to mention but one instance more; 2 Timothy 2 -- The Apostle exhorts Timothy and in him all other Young Men, in this
wise, Flee youthful lusts, but follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace,
with all them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart. Thou therefore my Son,
be strong in the Grace, that is in Christ Jesus. Study to show thy self
approved unto God. Thus Early Religion is enjoined upon Us by the Commands of
God. And as it is a necessary compliance with His Preceptive will, so it is
most highly pleasing and infinitely delightful unto Him, which consideration
should excite us to it. Behold, now is the accepted Time, now is the acceptable
Year of the Lord. It was an Ordinance of Old, Exodus 22.29. Thou shall not delay
to offer the first of thy ripe fruits, The first born thou shall give unto me.
The first-ripe Fruits (in kind) are ordinarily among Men most valued, and most
eagerly embraced. The Firstborn is the pride of nature, the beginning of
strength, and the excellency of dignity. These God expected should be dedicated
to Him, and that without delay: which under a Typical consideration does
plainly intimate, that Young Men should not delay to consecrate the First
Fruits of their Time, the prime and best of their strength to the Lord. With
such sacrifices God is well pleased, The Lord accepts them with a sweet savor.
The kindnesses of our Youth (the Flower of Age) are what He takes infinite
complacency in. The Blossoms of Early Piety how lovely, how fragrant are they
to Him! The tender Plants that are growing up before the Lord, what a grateful
and pleasant sight* The Delight of Heaven, and the Hope of Israel! Such as fear
the Lord in their Youth are acceptable to God, and approved of Men. Good Men
have no greater joy than to see their Children walking in the truth. There is
joy in the presence of the Holy Angels over such. The Lord of Glory takes
pleasure in them; His delights are with the Sons of Men. He was well pleased
(in the days of His Flesh) with the Hosannahs of Children, and took particular
notice of them, giving Glory to God, who Out of the mouths of Babes and
Sucklings had perfected praise. He was pleased, to have Little Children come
unto Him, and He took them up in His Arms and blessed them. As a good Shepherd
He gathers the Lambs with His Arms, and carries them in His Bosom, the Seat of
Love. What an affectionate Concern did He express, and what a compassionate
Charge did He give to Peter, about the Lambs of the Flock? Of the Young Man in
the Gospel which came to Him with some good inclinations, it is said, Jesus
beheld him, and loved him. John, supposed to be the Youngest among the first
Disciples, was emphatically The Disciple whom Jesus loved, which also leaned on
His Breast at Supper, the Favorite place. Young Converts are peculiarly set as
a Scal on His Heart, and as a Signet on His Right Hand. They are near and dear
to Him, and precious in His sight. The godly Young Man Daniel had that
testimony, A Man Greatly Beloved. Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me, and
those that seek me early shall find me. Such as honor Him with their First
Love, are repaid and crowned with his special Love. The Kings favor is toward
such a wise Servant. But such whose Childhood and Youth are vanity, who give
themselves to Youthful Lusts, are the abhorred of the Lord, odious to the pure
Eyes of His Holiness, and obnoxious to the severe Revenges of His Justice; and
while they go on in their trespasses, the Wrath of God abides upon them. It is
a base indignity; and most unsufferable provocation to the Holy God, to deny
Him the reasonable Service He requires of us, to misemploy the noble Powers
we have received from Him, and yield them as instruments of unrighteousness unto
Sin, to pervert His Gifts to His dishonor, and practically to prefer Sin,
Satan and the World (our great Enemies) to God and Christ our great Benefactor
and only Savior. This is high handed contempt of the Blessed God; and those
simple and foolish Youths that offer this base and insolent affront to the God
of all their Mercies, are the objects of His just displeasure, and holy
indignation. God is angry with the wicked every day. He despises them that
despise Him. The face of the Lord is against them that do evil. All the
Attributes of God are armed with terror, and charged with vengeance against the
workers of iniquity. If then we desire to be accepted and owned of God, we must
now break off from our iniquities by Repentance. The awful though it that while we
continue impure and impenitent, we are under the wrath and curse of God, This
should rouse us out of our security; and the joyful though it that by Early
Religion we prove what is that good and acceptable will of God, and walk worthy
of the Lord unto all well-pleasing, this should encourage and quicken us now in
the Days of our Youth to yield our members instruments of righteousness unto
God. This is the will and pleasure of God, who has Sovereign Authority to
determine the Time, who is infinitely Wise, Just and Good, and therefore knows
and chusest the best Time. Let God's Time be Our's. Every thing is beautiful in
its season, The work of the Day in it is Day. The Manna was to be gathered in
the Morning, then it was sweet and agreeable, but if neglected, it became
loathsome and distasteful.

A. VII. Consider, YOUNG Men that are Baptized, are under the most solemn
Engagements now to Cleanse their Ways. Baptism is a standing Ordinance of the
Gospel, which All should be Partakers of; and none should dare, as they would
not wrong their own Souls, to live in the contemptuous neglect of it. But I
presume, that every one here present has passed under that blessed Ordinance.
If so, you are obliged then to Cleanse your Way, as you would answer the Sacred
Ends and Bonds of your devoted state, and act agreeably to your Character and
Profession. Baptism is a Sign and Seal of the Covenant, which obliges to
universal purity. As many then as are Baptized into Jesus Christ, are Debtors
to the whole Law of Faith. In Baptism we renounce all our Sins and Lusts,
Earthly, Sensual, and Devilish; we profess and promise to live Godly in Christ
Jesus, to walk according to God in the Spirit. If then we prostitute our selves
to any ^ase lust or wicked practice, and alienate our selves from the life of
God, we retract our Baptismal Stipulation, we trample on the most sacred Vows,
we reproach that worthy Name whereby we are called, and renounce our Interest
in the blessed Promises. And what Man does not tremat the though it of this
profane, treacherous, and impious dealing with God and our own Souls? Verily
our Baptism will profit us nothing, without newness of Life. Baptism saves us,
not by putting away the filth of the flesh, but by the answer of a good
Conscience toward God, 1 Pet. 3.21. What will the outward washing with Water
avail, without the inward washing of Regeneration. If we still walk after the
Flesh, and wallow in filthy lusts, our Baptism will no ways be serviceable or
beneficial to us; nay, it will ^e a witness against us. He that is Baptized,
and believes not, is condemned already, condemned ^ut ^f his own mouth.
Ungodly Christians are Sinners above all Men. The Heathen World Sin at a
cheaper rate than they. Double Guilt and an aggravated Ruin belong to such.

AND let not any think to ^lude this Argument by flattering themselves, It will
be soon enough hereafter to think of fulfilling their Baptismal Engagements. O
deceive not your selves by this vain pretense into sinful delays. The Baptismal
Covenant binds to present and perpetual obedience. It is of the nature of an
Espousal; whereupon one is obliged immediately to forsake all others, and be
entirely devoted to her Husband. -- The Promise in Baptism has the nature of a
Vow. Therein we take the Oath of Allegiance to God, and bind our Souls with a
Bond, professing to give our own selves to the Lord; and having opened our
mouth, we cannot go back, nor put off. The Rule is, (Eccl. 5.4.) When thou
vowest a Vow unto God, defer not to pay it: for He has no pleasure in fools;
Pay that which thou have vowed. Pay it fully, pay it presently. Consider this,
hear and fear: Are you under the Bonds of Baptism? Then you have vowed to God
the Service of your Youth; and if you neglect to perform the Vow, you incurr
the guilt of Perfidy, and the most abhorred Perjury. To vow and not to pay is a
mocking of God, and lying to the Holy Ghost. And these Fools in Israel are an
abomination unto the Lord. Take heed therefore to your selves, lest ye forget
the Covenant of the Lord your God; for the Lord your God is a consuming Fire,
even a jealous God, (Deuteronomy. 4.23, 4.) I beseech you, immediately come into that
necessary and noble Resolution, (Exodus 15.2.) The Lord is my God, and I will
prepare him an habitation; my Father's God, and I will exalt Him.

A. VIII. Consider, BY Cleansing our Way in our Youth, a present Tribute of
peculiar Honor is paid to God, and the Foundation laid for illustrious
Revenues of Glory to His Great Name. The Earliness of our Repentance and
Obedience is highly Honorary to God, as it intimates a peculiar sincerity,
voluntariness, and fervency in our hatred of Sin, and love to God; an high
Esteem of the Divine Laws, and the vigor of Grace in our Souls enabling us to
break through the many difficulties and strong temptations of the Youthful Age,
and in the face of alluring Pleasures, against the general stream of Custom and
Example, etc. to amend our ways, and Exercise our selves unto Godliness, To
give that the first of our Time, and the strength of our Days. -- These things
tend much to the honor of God. Their Singularity offers praise, such things in
Youth are a precious Rarity, which gives them a peculiar Charm and Beauty, and
makes them more to the Praise of the Glory of His Grace. They are abundant also
by many thanksgivings to God; whiles others beholding the good Conversation of
such, Glorify God for their professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, and
for the exceeding Grace of God in them. The rising flourishing Plants are the
bright Ornaments of the Garden of Christ at present, and they afford a prospect
of yielding hereafter much fruit whereby our Heavenly Father is glorified. An
Early Conversion prevents much dishonor, which otherwise would be done to God
by the iniquities of Youth, and upwards; and it also tends to bring much
positive Honor to God, in a vigorous and long exercise of Grace and practice
of Duty. The warmth and activity of Youth under the direction of a gracious
principle within, renders us Vessels unto Honor peculiarly meet for our
Masters use; we are at present more inclined to action, and more fitted for
service, and we are like in an ordinary way to have a longer time of Labor, to
contract a stronger disposition and affection to God's Glory, and to meet with
better and greater Opportunities to promote His Kingdom and Interest in the
World than others. The sooner we rise in the Morning, the more Time we have
before us, and the more work we shall probably get done by the Evening.

AND now has the Early Cleansing of our Ways such an Aspect upon the Glory of
God? Surely then we are obliged by all the ties of Duty, Justice, and
Gratitude, forthwith to engage in this work, Giving Glory unto God. Not to do
this, is the highest injustice, a robbing our rightful Lord of His due; and the
blackest ingratitude, an unworthy return to our Great Benefactor. And shall we
thus requite the Lord? O foolish and unwise!

A. IX. Consider, GREAT, and manifold are the Advantages and Privileges, which
by Early Piety, we secure unto our selves. There are not only great Revenues of
Glory accrueing from it unto God, but the richest Vintage of Good redounding
unto us. It is both Glorious to God, and auspicious to Man. Lam. 3.27. It is
good for a man, that he bear the yoke in his youth. The Yoke of Christ, if we
take it upon us Early, we shall bear it more easily, more honorably, more
profitably, and shall reap many happy advantages in Life, at Death, and in the
Eternal World. Let me say here,

1. THE sooner we begin to Cleanse our Ways, we shall obtain the greater
Honor. Pure Religion is a Crown of Glory to any one, and makes a Man more
Excellent than his Neighbor; But it shines with a peculiar beauty and luster
in the ruddy Youth, and makes him more honorable even than his Brethren. There
is an Excellency of Dignity in Early Religion, and Double Honor belongs unto
it.

CONSIDER here, This Work puts real Excellency upon us; hence the sooner we
begin, the greater Degrees of Dignity we are like to arrive unto. This
Employment does Exalt, as well as Exercise, our reasonable Powers, It polishes
and ennobles our best Faculties, and tends to the recovery of our degraded
Nature from its present vile condition to it is pristine glory and perfection.
Here by we put on the most bright and lasting Beauties, and cloth our selves
with Honor. Hereby we attain the blessed End, for which we were created, the
Glory of God; and hereby we are made Partakers of the blessed Image, in which
we were created: and inasmuch as it is thus perfective of our Nature it is
really honorable True Holiness is true Honor. "Serious Piety sows the seeds
of the most solid Greatness." An Heathen could say, Virtue is the only true
Nobility. Hence the Apostle puts them together, (1 These. 4.4.) Possess your
Vessel in Sanctification and Honor. The Holy of the Lord, Honorable, -- are
Characters, which God the infallible Judge of Excellency has inseperably
connected, and what God has joined together, let no man put asunder. Holiness
is the mark of distinction between the precious and the vile. The Saints are
the Excellent in the Earth, (Psalm. 16.3.) And the Young Saints appear among
them as Stars of the first Magnitude. They are the Firstborn among many
Brethren, the most Precious Sons of Zion, in whom the Beauties of Holiness are
most conspicuous, and are like to be most illustrious. The sooner we begin to
purify our selves, the nearer approaches we are like to make to the perfection
of beauty, and the nearer conformity we shall attain to the most bright and
blessed Being. The Work is Honorable and Glorious, and the more so, the sooner
it is begun, and the longer it is continued in.

AGAIN, Consider, As the Work it self puts real Excellency on Us, so the early
beginning of it manifests many Excellencies in Us, that are highly honorable
in all. -- Is Sincerity honorable? This honor have those that are Religious
betimes. The Religion of such seems to be more chosen, free, willing and
Cordial. They seem to be led by a generous and ingenuous Principle of Love to
God and His ways; while others in the views of approaching Death and Hell are
awed by the terrors of Conscience, and acted by the involuntary and servile
principle of Fear.

AGAIN, Is Gratitude honorable? This honor also has the Pious Young Man. A
Principle of Gratitude is truly great and excellent in any. Now this appears
with most lively Characters in the Religious Young Man; Such an One gives an
undoubted testimony of His thankful resentment and high esteem of the Divine
Favors, He makes the speediest and noblest returns, even the service of his
best days, and of the Years wherein He finds pleasure.

AGAIN, Is Courage and Magnanimity honorable? This honor also belongs to
Early Penitents. It shows an admirable greatness of Soul and Fortitude of mind
in Young Men, (whose age is ordinarily inclined to softness and pleasure) to be
able to withstand the Charms and despise the Smiles of an enticing World, to
overcome the Temptations of a flattering Heart, and a tempting Devil, and
maugre all the Discouragements that surround them* to break off from their
Sins, and enter into Leag^e against the works of darkness and the powers of
darkness, and bind themselves out to the service of God, resolving to keep His
righteous Judgments; This, I say, shows signal vigor and valor of Mind, which
is a Garland of Glory to pious Youth.

AGAIN, Is Wisdom, honorable? This honor is theirs also. They choose the best
of Ends, they are engaged in the best and most necessary work, they improve the
best of their Time and Strength in it, they embrace the first and fittest
opportunity, They hereby prevent a great many dangers and evils, and take the
best method to secure and promote their highest Interest, They lay up in Store
a good Foundation against the time to come, etc, All which are Characters and
Expressions of true Wisdom. If thou be wise, thou shall be wise for thy self. A
wise man's heart discerns time and judgment. He that gathers in Summer is a
wise Son. A good Understanding have they, that discern Things that differ, and
approve things that are most excellent. -- And how valuable, how honorable a
thing is Wisdom? In her left hand is Honor. The Wise men after the flesh are
the Men truly of high degree in the World. But now the Wisdom that is from
above as much excels the Wisdom of this World, Light excels Darkness. The
Wisdom of God is an Ornament of Grace to venerable Old Age, and a Diadem of
Beauty to amiable Youth. The Young Man's discretion makes his face to shine.
Who is as the wise Young Man? Who among the Sons of Men may be compared with
him?

AGAIN, Consider, Early Religion is honorable, as it entitules and leads to
many excellent and worthy Privileges. (1.) Such as are Religious betimes are
ordinarily privileged with the Love and Esteem of Men. They obtain a good Name,
which is better than precious ointment. To be sober, just, holy, temperate, is
lovely, praise worthy, and of good Report.

GOOD People do affect and respect all, especially Young Men, that do
virtuously. Romans 16.5, 7. Salute my well beloved Epenetus, who is the
first fruits of Achaia unto Christ. Salute Andronicus and Junia my Kinsmen, and
my fellow Prisoners, who are of Note among (or with) the Apostles, who also
were in Christ before me. Would you be of Note and Well beloved among the
People of God, and in honor be preferred before others? Then be Religious
betimes, and get into Christ before others. It is one Article in the Character
of a true Citizen of Sion (Psalm. 15.4) In whose eyes a vile Person is
contemned; but he honors them that fear the Lord. And the Royal Psalmist
professes, as to Himself -- (Psalm. 119.63.) I am a Companion of all them that
fear thee. (Psalm. 16.3.) My Goodness extends to the Saints, the Excellent in
whom is all my Delight. And there is that Divine Precept, -- Be kindly
affectioned one to another in the love of the Brethren, in honor preferring
one another. (Romans 12.10.) The Rich should condescend to Men of low ^e, and the
Elder should be ready to serve the Younger, they should treat the Younger Men
as Brethren. And such as truly fear God will be far from despising their Youth:
Young Men that are sober minded, all sober People will esteem highly in love
for their works sake. -- Yea, they commend themselves to every Man's
conscience. They are accepted in the sight of all the People, a Delight to them
that do well, a Terror to them that do ill. Sincere and undisguis'd Religion,
even in the Young Man, carries with it such a Grandeur and Majesty, that it
extorts universal Respect, and strikes even the loose and profane with a
secret Veneration. It is said, (1 Samuel 18.) Saul was afraid of David, because
he behaved himself wisely in all his ways, and the Lord was with him. Mr. Henry
Notes upon the place, "Those are truly great, and to be reverenced that have
God with them. Men think the way to be feared, is to huff, and hector and
threaten, which makes them feared by Fools only, but despised by the Wise and
Good; whereas the way to be both feared and loved, feared by those to whom we
would wish to be a terror, and loved by those to whom we would wish to be a
delight, is to behave our selves wisely". Nebuchadnezzar highly esteemed the
lovely Young Man Daniel, in whom was the Spirit of the Holy God. Ahab stood in
awe of Elias. Wicked Herod had a great value and veneration for John Baptist;
Mar. 6.20. Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and
paid regard unto him. Holy Paul, his presence was awful, among the Soldiers,
among the Mariners, and where ever he came. "The Image of God in Adam was a
terror to the Beasts: and this Image repaired in the Saints, is awful to wicked
Men: even the Unclean Spirit that possessed the Damosel at Philippi, could say
of Paul and Silas, These are the Servants of the most High God." True Piety in
the poorest Saint commands regard and reverence, even from the greatest among
the Ungodly. In this sense may that o^ the Psalmist be understood, (Psalm.
149.8, 9.) To bind their Kings with Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters of
Iron, This honor have all his Saints. There are Scoffers indeed, Boasters,
Despisers of those that are Good, who profess neither to fear G^d, nor
reverence Man, who openly blaspheme Religion, throw contemt on the Godly, and
caress their Brethren in iniquity. But the opinion of such (Be it real) is not
to be minded, because they are blind and cannot see afar off, They have not
eyes to distinguish between things that differ, nor hearts to approve things
that excel: And their Say is not to be heeded, because they often prevaricate
with their own Consciences, and give the lie to the inward sober sentiments of
their Souls. And after all the floods of Reproaches which they have poured on
Religion, it is beauty remains untarnisht. The Moon is not sullied with the foul
breath of the Dogs that bark at it.

THUS we see Good Understanding gives favor in the sight of Man. Men will
praise thee when thou do well. To follow Righteousness is the way to be in
reputation for wisdom and honor. And the earlier we begin, the more shall we
be esteemed while Living, and praised when Dead. One of the Philosophers once
said of Virtue, It makes poor Men Wealthy, Old Men Happy, and Young Men
Honorable. The Gracious Youth, his Name is Excellent, and his Memory Blessed.
How do the celebrated Names of Abel, Enoch, Joseph, Samuel, David, Obadiah,
Josiah, Daniel, John, Timothy, and others, shine in the Sacred Story? These all
by their early Obedience obtained a good report, and being Dead are yet spoken
of with honor. Their Works recorded praise them in the Gates, and at the
mention of them, universal Posterity rise up and call them blessed. And now do
not these things move you? -- A Good Name is an Ornament of great Price, a
Blessing of superlative worth and importance, affording many valuable
advantages to all, especially to Young Men; and Youth is the best opportunity
for securing a fair and lasting reputation. Now it may be done to the best
advantage. And if these Considerations will not prevail with you; Let me add
another, even the Divine ^ recept which binds it as a Duty upon you. That
sacred Injunction directed to Timothy does ^nquestionably reach and oblige you,
-- Let no Man despise thy Youth. q.d. Do nothing to stain and blemish thy
Youth, and expose thy Name to the contemt of any one. Young Men are here called
upon so to behave themselves in Word and Conversation, as to preserve an
unsullied luster on their Character, and establish a durable interest in the
good Opinion of others.

BUT further, (2.) There are many inestimable Privileges and Dignities, which
they, that cleanse their way in their Youth, receive from God, who is the
Fountain of Honor: It shall be for their honor from the Lord God. Since thou
wast precious in my sight, thou have been honorable, (Isai. 43.4.)

1. SUCH are invested with many Honors in the Life that now is. -- They are
admitted into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. Civil Liberty is
honorable as well a^ ^ightful, much more Spiritual Liberty. The Saints are
delivered from the Bondage of Corruption; The Law of the Spirit of Life in
Christ Jesus has made them free from the Law of Sin and Death; They are the
Lords Freemen, free indeed. They also have the Privilege of the Divine Love and
Favor, Presence and Communion. It is an honor to stand in the Kings Presence,
to have His Ear, to be accepted in His sight, etc. Greater honor than this has
no Subject. Such honor have all the Servants of the King of Heaven. They have
free access unto Him, gracious entertainment and fellowship with Him, the
favor of His Ear, the smiles of His Face, the kisses of His Lips, the embraces
of His Arms, and refreshing tastes of His Goodness. The high and lofty One
dwells with them, manifests Himself to them, so as He does not to the world,
lifts up the light of His countenance upon them, reveals His secret unto them,
makes an everlasting covenant with them, and satisfies them with good things,
The secresy of His presence is their pavilion, and His banner over them is
love. He also clothes them in rich and royal Apparel, He puts on them the white
Robes of Christ's Righteousness, the Garments of Salvation, and the Ornaments
of Grace, which are in the sight of God of great price. And He puts magnificent
Titles upon them, He adopts them into His Family and enrolls their Names among
the Firstborn, calls them Children of the most High, the Brethren and
Companions of Christ, and votes them His Favorites, the Heirs of His Love and
Kingdom. He styles them Kings and Priests to the Father, Friends of God,
Servants of the Lord God Almighty, etc. the lowest of which sacred Epithets
does more adorn and exalt One; than the Names of the Great Ones of the Earth.
He also Honors them with the peculiar care of His faithful Providence, with the
Ministry of the holy Angels, and with the special Assistences of the Divine
Spirit, the Spirit of Glory. He graves them upon the palms of His Hands, sets
them as a Seal upon His Arm, and keeps them as His Jewels and peculiar
Treasure. He guides them by His Fatherly Counsel, encourages them with His
gracious Eye, leads them with His tender Hand, and upholds them with His
Everlasting Arms underneath. He also fights their Battles for them, and crowns
them with Victory over all their Enemies, Crucifies the Flesh and the World,
and bruises Satan under their feet.

AND sometimes He exalts Pious Young Men to uncommon Grandeur in the World,
causes the Glory of their House to increase, and makes them to ride on the high
places of the Earth, As Job, Joseph, Moses, David, Daniel, and others. The
Favorite^Youths in the Kingdom of Grace, became the visible Dar^ings in the
Kingdom of Providence. It is sometimes seen, that the Evil bow before the Good,
and the Wicked at the Gates of the Righteous. Behold, the Lord makes them of
the Synagogue of Satan to come and worship before their feet, and to know that
He has loved them.

AND further He sometimes dignifies them with great Usefulness in the World. He
makes Pious Young Men to be for a Praise and a Name and a Glory unto Himself,
and singular Blessings to their Generation, the strength and glory of ^ People,
the very Breath of their Nostrils, their Crown and Riches. Sometimes He makes
them the Pillars of the State, and sometimes He sets them for Burning and
Shining Lights in the Church. Their Mouth is made a Well of Life to the World,
and their Prayer as Salt unto the Earth, to purify and perpetuate it. By the
blessing of the Upright the City is exalted. Judgments for their sake are kept
off or removed, and Mercie^ continued, restored or added, although a blind and
wicked World is ignorant of them, and acknowlegeth them not. -- Thus God Honors
godly Young Men in the Days of their Life. And will none of these things move
you?

2. GOD Honors such also at their Death. Then it pleases the Lord of Glory to
bestow high Marks of distinction upon such. They dye in a ^ed of Honor. Bright
Beams of Glory enlighten the dark Valley of Death. It is said of David, who was
godly betimes, that He dyed full of honor. God does not then strip His Children
of their Glory, nor lay their Honor in the dust. It is the Reproach and Curse
of the Wicked, that their Glory shall not descend after them. But it is the
Blessing of the Righteous, especially such as were so betimes, that their Rest
is Glorious. The Glory of their Last Days is greater than of the Former. At
their Death the Ministration of the Spirit is exceeding Glorious; then they
receive more Honor from Men; and then the Lord assigns them a most honorable
Attendence, and those that were Pious betimes, a more honorable than others. He
appoints them a special Guard out of the highest Order of the Blessed Angels. A
bright Host of those Ministering Spirits, that flourish in Heaven with an
Immortal Youth, are sent forth to minister unto these Heirs of Salvation, to
encamp round about them, and be the Conv^y of their departing Spirits.
Moreover, He translates them to a most Glorious Place, to the Regions of Light,
and there He prefers them to the highest Seats of Honor, to a superior Post
and Station, to an exalted Office, and Employ, and furnishes them with the most
bright and distinguishing Accomplishments, etc. Such is the Honor which the
Great God puts at Death upon them that are godly betimes.

3 HE will put Illustrious Honor on such in the Great Day, the Day of the
manifestation of the Sons of God. Then their Faith shall be found unto praise
and glory and honor. Now it does not appear what they shall be, but when Christ
who is their Life shall appear, They shall be like Him and appear with Him in
Glory, and be honored with many honors. In that Day of the restitution of all
things, They shall receive the Adoption, and the Redemption of the Body. When
the Wicked shall awake to shame and everlasting contemt, They shall have a
blessed Resurrection to Honor and Praise, in the Day of Christ, who shall
change their vile Body, and fashion it like unto His own glorious Body. And the
Bodies of those shall hereafter be most conformed to Him in that visible Glory,
whose Souls have been here most conformed to His invisible Image through
Sanctification of the Spirit. Such shall in an eminent manner come unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. And further, In the Day of
Judgment, (the Precious and the Vile, the Clean and the Unclean being
separated) they shall be placed at the Right Hand of the King of Saints; and
nearest to Him, -- which speaks superior Respect. Moreover, They shall receive
a most glorio^s Sentence, filled with all imaginable tokens of dignity and
endearment; their smiling Judge will then own and bless them, honor and magnify
'em before the universal Consistory of Men and Angels. Furthermore, They shall
then sit upon the Bench by the Judge, as Assessors with Him, approving,
applauding, and giving their Voice in, the Sentence of Condemnation passed upon
the World of the Ungodly, and the Spirits of Darkness, (according to our common
interpretation of those Texts, Mat. 19.28.1 Cor. 6.2, 3.)

4. And finally, WHEN this awful Solemnity is over, a more joyful Scene will
open, a Glory shall follow; then will the blessed Judge arise out of His
Tribunal, and return in Triumph to His Everlasting Kingdom, and the Ransomed of
the Lord shall make part of the shining Train that will follow Him; and they
shall enter with Him the City of the Great God; there they shall be received
into the Chambers of His immediate Presence; The Place where His Honor dwells
shall be their Everlasting Habitation. The Kings Daughter shall be brought unto
the King in Raiment of needle work and in Clothing of wrought Gold, she shall
enter into the Kings Palace, the Ivory Palaces which He has prepared, She
shall be presented as a chaste Virgin unto God, be sweetly embraced and caressed
in the Arms of His Love, and receive an Euge from the Mouth of Blessing. Her
Husband also he praises her, then Christ will eminently be an Honor to them
that believe; Then the Royal Bridegroom will emphatically rejoice over the
Queen standing at his right hand in Gold of O^hir, as a Bride adorned for her
Husband, sitting with Him on his Throne, beholding Him in his Beauty, and
sharing with Him in His Glory. And then every Mouth shall be filled with the
High Praises of the Lambs Wise. All the Heavenly Choir will rise up and call
Her blessed, and every one speak of Her Glory, the Glory revealed in Her, and
the whole Heaven shall ring with Congratulory Acclamations, welcoming of Her to
Her Heavenly Fathers House, Her blessed Eternal Home. This Honor have the
Saints, even all they who have done virtuously; but such as have excelled,
shall have a more Excellent Glory. Indeed the meanest among all that shall be
beautified with the Great Salvation, will be (as it is said of the Kings
Daughter) all Glorious, dignified with an excellent Greatness and triumphant
Glory; in comparison of which all the pomp and splendor of this present World
is but an empty show and a painted shadow. But those who have bro't most Honor
to God, shall receive most Honor from Him. And those that have feared God from
their Youth are of this happy Number. He will exalt the Horn of these, the
praise of all His Saints, a People near unto Him, His peculiar Treasure; He
will set them on high. Among the many Sons that He will bring to Glory, these
shall be dignified with the weightiest Crowns, the most flourishing Laurels,
the richest Mansions of Glory, the most splendid Entertainments, the brightest
Visions and the nearest Views of the Eternal Majesty, etc. In a Word, Such
shall receive more abundant Honor in the Life that now is, and Glory exceeding
abundant in that which is to come.

THIS, This shall be done to the Man, the Young Man, whom the King delights to
Honor. Thus the Wise inherit Glory, Riches of Glory. Thus, Young Man, Pure
Religion is Life unto thy Soul, and Grace unto thy neck, it shall promote thee,
it shall bring thee to honor when thou do embrace it, it shall give to thine
Head an Ornament of Grace, a Crown of Glory shall it deliver thee. -- By
Humility and the Fear of the Lord comes Honor. O let Young Men be persuaded
then so far to consult their own Honor, as now in the Days of their Youth to
purify themselves. Be exhorted to put away Sin, which is a reproach and causes
shame; Be exhorted to follow Righteousness, which exalts a Person or People,
and in the ways of well doing seek for Glory and Honor.

THIS was the first Advantage of Early Religion mentioned, It is most Honorable.

2. THE sooner we Cleanse our Ways, We shall obtain the more Pleasure, Comfort
and Satisfaction. Our Work will be more easy to us at present (as we heard
before) and will be more delightful to us afterward, and greater will the Joy
of our Salvation be, if we begin in Youth to Cleanse our Ways.

1. IF we begin Early to Cleanse our Ways, we are like to meet with greater
Comfort than others, in the Days of our Life. Let me say here --

(1) OUR Work is like to be more easy and pleasant to us. The Work indeed
implies hard Duty and laborious Service, therefore it is compared to entering in
at a strait Gate, taking upon us a Yoke and bearing a Burden, etc. But if we
accustom our selves to bear the Yoke in our Youth, it will afterward sit more
easy on our Necks, it will not gall and fret us: the Commands will not be
grievous unto us. Custom will lighten the Burden and endear the Yoke. If we
enter early into our Labors, we shall (by that time most others think of
entering) come to esteem our Work not only a reasonable service, but perfect
freedom, and with an enlarged heart to run the race set before us. And the
longer we walk in the Paths of that Wisdom which is first pure, the more we
shall find them by happy experience to be ways of pleasantness, and paths of
peace. We shall find the hardest Duties of Christianity grow easy and pleasant.
How severe and difficult soever Repentance, Mortification, enduring the Cross,
and the like, may seem to Flesh and Blood, yet they will in time grow
delightful to the Early Convert. How harsh and self-denying soever it may seem
to others to forgive injuries and put up affronts, the Young Disciple may by
sincere and constant Prayers and Endeavors bring himself to take more pleasure
in Christian Forbearance, and Forgiveness, than others do taste sweetness in
Revenge. How hard soever and unpleasant it may be to others to submit to the
Righteousness of Christ, and trust wholly and only in that for Pardon and
Salvation, yet the Young Disciple will in the strength of Divine Grace by
frequent acts of Faith unfeigned, be bro't at length (with Paul the Aged) to
glory in the Cross of Christ, and to know nothing but Christ and Him crucified,
willingly and firmly to confide in His Merits and highly to prize such his
Confidence, as having great recompense of reward.

THUS, Use will take off from the difficulty of our Task, and bring us in time
to go on with alacrity over the most wearisome stages of Duty. The Principle of
Grace in the Saints does so harmonize with their Work, as to incline them to
it, and the longer they have possessed and exercised this Principle, the more
vig^rous and active it daily grows, which renders their work daily more and
more natural. And finally, it becomes their Meat and Drink to do the Will of
God. They taste a Divine Delight, and take an high Satisfaction in their Duty,
which the carnal World have no sense nor relish of: and while others that began
late are drudging and toiling, and driving heavily, those that began s^on are
walking at liberty, and are in their Work as in their Element, rejoicing as a
strong man to run a race, making Gods Statutes their Song, counting their Work
their Wages.

(2) SUCH as begin Early have ordinarily more of the Comforts of the Holy
Ghost. They are made to drink larger Draughts of the River of His Pleasures, He
extends (...) unto them like a River, and glory like a flowing stream; as one
whom his Mother comfort, so are they comforted, their heart rejoices and
their bones flourish like an herb; Thus the hand of the Lord is known toward
these his Servants. He gives them peace of Conscience and Joy in the Holy
Ghost, and anoints them with the Oil of Gladness above their Fellows. The
Spirit applies His comforting influences to them, brightens their Evidences of
a good Work wro't in them, and gives 'em a satisfying sense of their Interest
in the great and precious Promises, and thus He creates in them a holy serenity
and security of mind. -- They are filled with comfortable reflections; when
they review their past Life, at any time, This is their rejoicing, even the
testimony of their Consciences, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not
with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God they have had their conversation
in the world. And they are filled with pleasing tho'ts of the safety and
felicity of their present state, The spirit witnessing with their spirits that
they are the children of God, that they are passed from Death unto Life, etc.
and also with refreshing Prospects of their future happiness, delighting their
Souls with the abundance of their expected Glory. -- They have the peace of God
which passes all understanding, Joy which a stranger intermeddleth not with.
Comforts which the smiles of the World cannot bestow, and which the frowns of
the World cannot bereave us of. They have strong Consolation which makes them
sing in the ways of the Lord, and gives them boldness in all their approaches
to God in holy Duties. They have comforts that balance and silence all their
Griefs, that brighten their Days of Darkness, that sweeten their bitter Cups of
Affliction, that temper their most fiery Trials, and afford them Light under
Darkness, Ease under Pain, Joy under Sorrows, Contentment under Necessities,
and Satisfaction in a Little of this World, 2 Cor. ^.10. As sorrowful, yet
always rerejoycing, as having nothing yet possessing all things. They see the
Hand of Love overruling all things for their Good, which consideration
accommodates their frame to their state, and attempers their mind to all Events
of Providence. Thus holy David, who made the Lord his Trust from his Youth,
could say by happy experience, In the multitude of my (disquieting) tho'ts
within me, thy comforts delight my soul. (Psalm. 94.19.) Divine Consolation does
likewise sweeten the common Comforts of Life, and season all their Earthly
Enjoyments. They taste the special Goodness of God in his ordinary Bounties,
which gives them a peculiar relish and superadded suavity, turning water into
wine. The Commands of God, they teach us how to abound, they direct the
acquisition, enjoyment and improvement of the good things of this World, so as
to secure us the comfort of them and preserve us from the snares of 'em: But
the Comforts of God they do further sublimate and refine the most pleasant
enjoyments of this World, they give life and spirit and a more exquisite relish
to them.

THUS it appears that Religion ministers to the tranquillity, peace and pleasure
of Life. How true and faithful are those sayings? -- Great peace have they that
love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them, (Psalm. 119.165.) The work of
righteousness is peace, and the effect of righteousness quietness and assurance
for ever, (Isai. 32.17.) True satisfaction is to be found only in pure
Religion. Such lead the most quiet and peaceable lives, that live in all
godliness and honesty. None enjoy themselves like those that live godly in
Christ Jesus. There is no peace, says the Lord, unto the wicked, (Isai. 48.22)
Either in the midst of laughter their heart is heavy, or afterward their mouth
is filled with gravel. At best the pleasures of Sin are but jejune, and
insipid, and of mirth it may be said, What does it? These things will neither
give ease to a wounded Spirit, or a pained Body, nor give security to a fearful
Heart; and such as live in wantonness and pleasure on Earth, have a secret Worm
gnawing in their Breasts, that eats out all Satisfaction, that often stings
them, and speaks indignation and confusion to them, that "they spend their days
like Men under the Sentence of Death, while the Execution is suspended. And
they that go on still in their trespasses, are multiplying the causes of grief
and the grounds of terror, and do expose themselves to more severe Lashes of a
guilty Conscience, and must expect more terrible Convulsions while they
continue impenitent, and a more terrible Conversion, if ever they are bro't to
Repentance. When Persons go on in Sin, adding iniquity to transgression, they
are treasuring up Wrath against the day of Wrath, or storing up sorrow upon
sorrow against the Day of Mercy, and if ever they are saved, it will be so as
by Fire, it will be with fear, being pulled with doleful shrieks out of the
Fire. Their long course of Sin will cost them a sad and shameful Repentance,
many tears and fears and desponding thot's, even as the pangs of Death, and the
agonies of broken bones. Then will the Lord write bitter things against them,
and make 'em to possess the iniquities of their youth. Then they shall be
ashamed, yea even confounded, because they bear the reproach of their Youth:
and it may be their hearts shall reproach them so long as they live, and they
shall remember the Wormwood and the Gall, and feel the sting of Youthful Lusts,
as a sword in their bones, and go mourning in bitterness of soul, walking in
darkness and having no light, all the days of their remaining Pilgrimage on
Earth.

NOW this is many times (if not always) prevented by an Early Conversion.
Hereby Young Men remove sorr^w from their hearts, and put away evil from their
flesh, and lay the foundation for abundance of peace in all their ensuing days.
They secure lasting comfort and satisfaction to themselves. The fruit of
righteousness is sown in peace. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. They
the to the spirit, shall have the fruit of the spirit, (...) is love and peace.
He that sows to the flesh, shall reap thorns, vanity and vexation of spirit.
Suffer then the Exhortation; In the morning of Youth sow your Seed, sow to your
selves in righteousness, Break up your fallow ground, (cleanse your hearts from
vile affections and filthy lusts, and apply yourselves to all works of Piety,
Justice, Charity, and Sobriety,) for it is time to seek the Lord, till He come
and rain righteousness upon you; ye have plowed wickedness, and reaped
iniquity, ye have eaten the fruit of lies, (Hos. 10.12, 3.) What fruit had ye
in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? (Romans 6.21.) For the end of these
things is terror and confusion. Let the time past of your life suffice then to
have been doing evil: Now learn to do well, and you will reap the peaceable
fruits of righteousness. The Young Convert will in the diligent practice of
Godliness spin out his Life in a golden thread of solid contentment and
satisfaction.

2. IF we Cleanse our Way in our Youth, we are like to have greater Comfort and
Peace at our Death. Death is not far from any of us; Death is behind the Young
Man's, back as well as before the Old Man's face. And it is a most solemn and
tremendous thing to Dye, it is a dreadful shocking time to Nature, and a trying
time to Grace: It is usually a dark and difficult hour with the Children of
Men. -- As to the Wicked and Ungodly, such as Dye in their Sins, whether Young
or Old, it is their common lot to Die in distress and horror. Indeed this is
not the Case of every one without exception. It must be granted, that too any
Die in a perfect indolency and stupidity through ^oss ignorance, or in wretched
security, through ^mptive hopes and strong delusions: They perish with a lie in
their right hand, and have no bands in their Death. They dye, even as they
lived, tho'tless, senseless of their Sin and Misery, and fearless of their
approaching Doom! Their Life (it may be) was full of Hal^yon-days, they had the
Sun of Prosperity shining warm and bright upon them, They swam in the delights
of sense, Things ran glib and smooth, they met with little or nothing to ruffle
their tranquillity or cloud their serenity; Peace, Peace was the joyful sound;
Soul, Take thine case, eat, drink, and be merry, thou have Goods laid up for
many Years -- were the pleasant notes they struck to themselves. Their
Consciences were gage'd, their presumption strong, their security sottish! Thus
they lived; and in like manner they die. Even when the bright Lamp of Life is
burnt down and expiring, they have no dread of that black and dismal Eternity
that is advancing upon them. Though the glittering Sword of Divine Justice be
brandisht over their Heads, though the Heralds of the Gospel proclaim War, and
cry out, Fire, Everlasting Fire over them, yet they are unmoved, unaffected;
they are undaunted at the very Gates of Hell and in the Suburbs of Destruction.
They fence themselves with Iron, and their Brow is Brass. Let Mount Sinai smoke
and flash, and the Law threaten and L^ghten as it will, it is but an amusement,
not an amazement to them. They shut their Eyes and stop their Ears against any
thing that might disturb them, and quietly sleep in the Embraces of Self-love.
Their minds are steeled against the dint of Convictions, the warmest efforts
will not fasten the Arrow^ of sharp Rebuke in their brawny Conscience. The
fiercest shower of fiery darts will not enter this rock, will not warm this
frozen clod, Here they either break or cool. -- Though it may be sometimes the
sound of War is in their Ears, a dreadful sound, yet like a hollow sound in the
Air, it soon languishes and vanishes. Though they may sometimes feel a spark of
heat or see a gleam of light, and give a start as one in a Dream, yet they
continue sleeping, and the Terrors of the Lord are but as a Vision of the
Night, and as a Dream when one awakes. They are quiet from the fear of evil,
and big with expectations of the Glory to be revealed, and it may be wait with
a seeming impatience for the happy minute, when they shall excharge the present
imperfect pleasures of Hope for the joys of full Fruition. They make Lies their
refuge, and Falsehood their confidence. When passi^g into the Ocean of Eternity,
They make a Bridge of their ow^ shadow, and so plunge themselves into the
Depths of Misery. From hopes high a Heaven they fall as deep as Hell. A Clo^d
of Delusion carrys them with transports of joy into the Den of perdition, and
they are awakened from their pleasing dreams by the doleful and hideous
Outcries of the Damned. -- Oh deplorable disappointment! Oh fatal presumption!
-- But this notwithstanding, how many are there, that have lived in heedless
Security, and in a perpetual neglect of the Great Salvation, who at last lie
down in sorrow, over^med with despairing Consternation, and with ^eful
a^stuations at the approach of ghastly Death, swallowed up in an abyss of
confusion in the view of the Pale Horse and H^ll following. When ^re Hypocrites
are fastened to the Bed of Languishing, bound with the cords of Affliction, and
hang by a slender brittle thread over the Everlasting Burnings, Oh how is the
pleasant Theater now turned into a black and melancholy Scene! Where is the
hope of the Hypocrite, when God takes away his Soul? How are they bro't into
D^solation, as in a moment! They are utterly consumed with Terrors. How are
they struck with quivering horror at the prospect of that amazing Change that
is hastening upon them? How do the sensual Joys of their careless unthinking
health flee as a shadow, and vanish as the morning Cloud? their laughter issues
in tears of Confusion, and their carnal mirth ends in heaviness, lamentation
and black despair! Their Calm and seeming Sunshine is exchanged for an Horrible
Tempest. Now the dark side of the Cloud is turned toward them. Killing
Vexations succeed their false and flashy Satisfactions. They have much sorrow
and wrath with their Sickness, (Eccl. 5.17.) And they die in the bitterness of
their Soul. (Job. 21.25.) Destruction from God is now a Terror to them. Now the
fiery indig^ation of that God, with whom is terrible Majesty, flashes in
their^s, and the Law Thunders loud in their Ears: Now the deceiving Tempter
puts off his smiling flattering Airs, and turns a Dire Tormentor, gnashes upon
them and is busy to distract them with wrathful terrors: Now their hurtful
Lusts rend and rage as so many waking Furies* Now their inflamed Conscience
bites as a Serpent^ stings like an Adder, takes hold on vengeance, and renders
Tribulation to whom Tribulation is due. Now Conscience (which (it may be) they
had by some unhappy Arts hitherto bribed and baffled) speaks to their
Confusion, accuses them, testifies against them, condemns and punishes them.
Conscience looks over it is faithful records and draws up a black Indictment,
reads it with a terrible Grin and Frown, and stabs at the repetition of their
Guilts; It lashes the Deceiver, scourges the Drunkard, stones the Adulterer,
wounds the Blasphemer with the piercing Echo of his profane Oaths and Curses,
strikes a mortal qualm on the hardened Infidel, awfully surprises the
Hypocrites in Zion, musters up the most exasperating considerations, and
impresses them on the awakened minds of Dying Rebels, so that they are like a
troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, They are afflicted tossed with Tempests, and
not comforted, they are troubled on every side; without are fightings, within
are fears, indignation and self revenge, all is in a tumult and fermentation.
Clouds and Darkness gather about them, and the pains of Hell get hold upon
them. And now in this day of distress, all Creature Comforts take to themselves
wings and flee away; Their refuges of lies fail them at a time when help and
comfort would be doubly welcome. Riches will not profit them in this Day of
Wrath, Carnal Pleasures will not now divert or refresh them, neither will the
most exalted Honors be able to support their sinking minds, or sooth 'em into
quietness. Now the World appears an injurious and perfidious Cheat; Now Sin
appears exceeding Sinful, exceeding hurtful; Now Hell, which opens it is mouth
wide upon them, appears the most Terrible of Terribles, exceeding dreadful. No
No Arts of Oblivion can cancel the remembrance of their Sins, which strikes
like a dagger to the heart; No soft Airs can lay the evil Spirit, nor
palliating remedies subdue the anguish of their bleeding miseries. They are
driven away in their wickedness, and a Whirlwind hurls them out of their
place. Thus it is with the Ungodly, this is their common End.

BUT with the Godly it is not thus. The Day of their Death is often the Day of
the gladness of their hearts, a lightsome hour, a Time of refreshment from the
presence of the Lord. Indeed to some even of the Children of God Death is
sometimes awful and terrible, especially to such as have been too lax in their
actual Preparations, and to such as are of a scrupulous and timorous temper,
and to such whose Repentance was late, in the close of a sinful Life; To these,
and the like, Death is not seldom a dark and difficult time. Youthful follies
do often sit heavy on the Children of God in a dying Hour, and give dreadful
alarums to their fear, and dreadful shakes to their hope, and they pass out of
the World in a gloomy Cloud, filled with distressing doubts. But as to such as
have from their Youth feared God and served Him faithfully, it is seldom knows
that they die ^ncomfortably. Pious Young Men, that are nip^ in the Blossom, do
often look Death in the face, with an unshaken Faith, with good hope,
tranquillity and joy, satisfied with Life, and desiring to depart. And those
Pious Young Men, that grow up into Trees of Righteousness, and bring forth
fruit even to Old Age, such are ordinarily refreshed with strong Consolation in
the Valley of the shadow of Death, and are full of holy longings to be
transplanted into the Heavenly Paradise. Indeed sometimes the first
apprehension of such an awful and important Change, as Death, approaching, does
startle the best Christians, and throw 'em into no little concern, hurry and
anxiety. But it is generally seen, that upon renewal of their Repentance and
Faith, and a review of their past Experiences, etc. they soon revive, and
recover. The Clouds scatter, and the Sun breaks forth upon them and shines with
a new and surprising glory and pleasancy. Though weeping may endure for a Night,
yet joy comes in the Morning. Unto the upright there arises light in
darkness, (Psalm. 112.4.) Mark the perfect man and behold the upright; for the
end of that man is peace, (Psalm. 37.37.) Such especially as have served the
Lord with all their strenth, and die in a good Old Age, do dye not only full of
Years, but full of Comfort. Their Early Religion then affords them an Harvest
of substantial Comfort, which makes a Deathbed easy to them. They have the
Testimony of a good Conscience, which takes out the sting of Death, and the
Earnest of the Spirit which takes off the terror of Death. They have hope in
their Death, and finish their course with joy. They have many times such
comfortable reflections and joyful prospects, as refresh them greatly under the
sorrows of Pain and Sickness, and ravish the Soul amidst the agonies of a dying
Body, and the throws of reluc^^g Nature. -- And verily it is such an awful and
difficult thing to die, that in such an hour to have an unreproaching Heart,
and the full assurance of Faith, is a Cordial of unspeakeable worth, and all
that a Man has would he then give for it. True peace and comfort in the shades
of Death is an abundant recompense for the labors of a whole Life. One sweet
Transport then is such a seasonable Refreshment, as richly makes amends for all
the pains that can possibly be taken in the work of Religion. -- Oh that we had
all of us hearts to believe and consider these things aright! Oh! could we duly
realize the unspeakable happiness of having Divine Comforts in our last
Moments, Living Comforts in our dying Moments, when we most of all need
Comfort, and when it will be most welcome, This could not but very movingly
recommend to us a Life of pure Religion, and quicken us now in the days of our
Youth to turn our feet into the way of holiness. And could we duly realize the
unspeakable Agonies of an unprepared convinced Sinner, when Death arrests him,
it would chill and damp the heats of Youthful Lusts, overcast the pleasures of
Sin, and greatly embit^er them unto us. O Let us be often considering our
Latter End, and think how awful Death will be to them, whose Life is among the
unclean, and how joyful it will be to them, who are undefiled in the way. And
let us now get Sprinkled from an evil Conscience in the Blood of Christ, and
exercise our selves always to keep a Conscience void of offense, and then may
we have confidence toward God; and let us continue in the ways of well doing,
and hold fast the rejoicing of hope firm to the end. If we are religious
betimes, and give Diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, we may
expect to live comfortably, and die triumphantly, having great boldness in the
Faith, and being transported with Heavenly Visi^ns, -- Or, if die not so, yet
calmly and composedly, or, if we not so, yet safely and happily. If we do not
depart in Peace, nor pass off the Stage in Triumph, yet we shall have a safe
passage through the darksome Valley, and be translated to the lightsome Regions
of Joy. Though our "Souls may leave out Bodies with an unwilling shrug", though we
may groan out our Souls with black and melancholy views, yet contrary to our
fears, and beyond our hopes, our departed Spirits shall enter into Rest, into
Joy, our Masters Joy. We shall be received into Paradise, a Place all calm and
pleasant, bright and beautiful, adorned with the Presence of the Lamb, who is
the Light thereof, and in whose Presence there are Rivers of pleasures for
evermore. We shall be presented faultless and without spot before His Face in
Glory, and that with exceeding Joy. We shall rest from all our labors, griefs
and temptations, lay aside our mourning weeds, and put off ou^ melancholy Airs.
All tears shall be wiped from our Eyes, sorrow and sighing shall flee away; all
afflictive Evils vanish, all complaints cease, and inconceivable pleasures
succeed and ravish our happy Souls.

3. WE shall have boldness and joy in the Day of Judgment. When the Wicked
shall awake to shame, and come trembling and astonished before the
Judgment Seat, covered with confusion, filled with horror, and crying out to
the Rocks and Mountains to fall on them and hide them from the wrathful face of
Him that sits on the Throne. While the Wicked are in this wretched and
dismal Case; on the contrary, The Righteous, and peculiarly those that were
righteous betimes, shall hold up their heads with joy in the Day of Christ,
when He shall appear they shall have confidence, and not be ashamed before Him
at His coming, (1 John 2.28. -- 4.17.) Think, with what smiling faces and
ravished hearts, we shall mount up to meet the Lord in the Air, with what
transports we shall receive the Euge of our blessed Judge, with what triumphs
we shall entertain the Congratulations of the holy Angels and our
Fellow-Saints, and with what raptures of delight we shall shout forth our
thankful Doxologies to the Great Redeemer, our judiciary sufferages to the
Sentence past on the wicked World, and our Songs of holy exultation, glorying
and triumph over Satan, and all our accursed Adversaries.

4. THINK, how, after the Judgment is ended, We shall make part of the happy
Retinue, that will with our glorious Head mount up to the blessed Seats, above
the visible Heavens, and make their Public Entry into the City of Peace; how
with the ransomed of the Lord we shall return and come to Zion with songs and
everlasting joy on our heads; and how we shall there obtain joy and gladness,
even the fullness of joy, Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. In Heaven we shall
enjoy the most pure and perfect, sweet, solid and satisfying Pleasures.
Pleasures, that will infinitely outweigh the heaviest sorrows, pains and labors
that may fatigue us in our pursuits thereof; Pleasures that will infinitely
exceed the most transporting delights of this World: Pleasures that will
infinitely outbid our biggest expectations, and out-reach our present most
raised conceptions: Pleasures that will never sower nor wither: Pleasures
indefective and undecaying. -- In Heaven we shall be admitted to the open
Vision and full Fruition of God, our exceeding Joy: and there we shall
emphatically rejoice in Christ Jesus; there we shall most intimately solace our
Souls in happy Communion with the Royal Bridegroom; There will be the utmost
Heights of mutual affection, complacency and endearing intercourse: and there
we shall enjoy the delightful Society of the Angels; and Just Men made perfect;
and with them we shall join in admiring, adoring and magnifying our Creator,
Redeemer and Sanctifier, having our Hearts filled with Ecstasies of Gladness,
and our mouths with cheerful Songs of Praise. And in this happy State, Company
and Employment, We shall spend an Eternity, a joyful Eternity, which is the
Crown and Perfection of all. -- Behold! This is the Recompense of the Just. The
common Reward of all the Saints of the Lord is to Drink of this River of His
Pleasures, and to Banquet with the King in His Royal Palace; but they who have
served Him the longest and the best here, shall drink the largest draughts of
Heavenly satisfaction and refreshment hereafter. They shall be exceeding
abundantly satisfied with all manner of pleasant fruits, with the feast of fat
things, and the Wine of Consolation, when they shall sit down with Christ at
His Table on the Mountain of Spices.

THUS we see how Early Religion tends to promote our peace and comfort in this
World, and our joy and bliss in the next World. It is a never-failing Spring of
the noblest, the most generous and sublime Delights; which the sanctified Soul
in this Life relishes a satisfaction in, that the whole confluence of Earthly
comforts and the sweets of Sense cannot afford, nor the absence of them can
ta^e away; and which the glorified ^oul in the other Life will be filled with
unknown Transports and Raptures in the complete enjoyment of.

AND now what a forceable Argument is this to engage Men in their Youth to
cleanse their ways? Youth is the Age of Pleasure: Delight is the peculiar bait
or temptation to draw and allure Young Men. Let the Pleasures of Religion then
powerfully recommend unto them the practice of Religion. Hearken to the counsel
of God by the wise Man; My Son forget not my l^w; but let thine heart keep my
commandments: for length of days, and peace shall they add to thee. Bind them
about thy neck, write them upon the table of thine heart. Get wisdom, get
understanding, All her ways are ways of pleasantness, and happy is every one
that retains her.

3. ANOTHER Advantage of cleansing our ways in Youth is, that it will be more
for our interest, profit and benefit. The Apostle tells us, Godliness with
contentment is great gain, 1 Timothy 6.6. So in the 4th Chapter, 8th. ver.
Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come. -- Blessings are on the head of the just.
In keeping of the Commandments they have a great Reward, and after this an
exceeding great Reward. Behold, the Righteous shall be recompensed in the
Earth, and much more in the Holy Heaven. Let me say here briefly;

1. IF we cleanse our Way in Youth, We are like to obtain greater Blessings in
this Life, both Secular and Spiritual.

(1) SECULAR and External Blessings. As Temperance has a natural tendency to
secure our Health and Ease, and Humility to exalt us to Honor; so Frugality,
Fidelity, Justice, and the like Virtues are the surest method to promote our
outward Prosperity. -- Art thou Poor and Low in this World? Religion will
contribute to your Advancement. The diligent Hand makes rich; and Religion
tends to promote Industry: The Blessing of the Lord makes Rich; and the
promise of this, is only to the Righteous, to them who seek first the Kingdom
of God, and seek this World after a Godly sort. Further, to be conscientious,
upright, and honest, is the way to find favor and good understanding in the
sight of Men; By undisguis'd humility and unaffected piety Men ingratiate
themselves with all thinking sober People; every one will be ready to pay
respect to them, to put confidence in them, and put them into business and
employment, etc. because they are true Men, the faithful in the Land. All which
Articles conspire to promote the Poor among the Brethren. Or, art thou Rich in
this Worlds Goods? Your Religion will still serve your temporal Interest, as it
teaches you how to abound, directs and influences the enjoyment and improvement
of your Estate, so as tends to secure and increase it. -- And sometimes Good
Men, especially such as have feared God from their Youth, have met with signal
Prosperity* in the World, have been the visible Favorites of Providence, and
remarkably distinguished on outward accounts. We Have many Instances on Scripture
record: Abraham, the Father of the faithful, was rich in Cattle, and in Silver
and Gold, etc. So good Jacob; All that he did was made to prosper, and the Man
increased exceedingly, and had much Cattle, and Maidservants and Menservants,
and Camels etc. And was not Joseph exalted in the Land of his Affliction, made
Lord of all Egypt, and Possessor of the peculiar Treasures of Kings and
Provinces? And was not Job rich in Substance, and the greatest of all the Men
of the East? and did not David die in a good Old age, full of Riches? -- Indeed
it must be confessed, this is not the standing and common Lot of the Righteous.
No; Many that are the Holy of the Lord, are the Poor of this World. God does
not give to all his Children a rich abundance of outward Enjoyments, nor may
any expect this but with great submission; yet all have the undoubted Security
of His inviolable Promise for a present sufficiency. Hence in the Inventory of
the Believers privileges (1 Cor. 3.22.) the Apostle inserts the World and
Things present. They have a just Title to so much of the World as may be truly
for their Advantage, and verily they shall not want any thing, that their
Heavenly Father knows they have need of, Mat. 6.32, 33. The Lord is a Sun and
Shield, He will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from
them that walk uprightly. (Psalm. 84.11.) Surely the Curse of the Lord is in the
house of the wicked; but he blesses the habitation of the just. (Pro. 3.33.)
The Tabernacle of the upright shall flourish, and in the house of the righteous
is much Treasure: but in the revenue of the wicked is trouble, and vexation of
Spirit. And better is a little with the fear of the Lord, than great riches and
trouble therewith. (Prove. 15.6, 16.) -- How abject and obscure soever any of
the Saints may be in their outward Circumstances, though they are wretched and
miserable and poor, and blind, and naked, yet they are rich and increased with
Goods, and have need of nothing; they have the fear and favor of God, the
Merchandise whereof is better than the Merchandise of Silver; and the gain
thereof than fine Gold, more precious than Rubies, and all things thou can
desire are not to (...) compared thereunto. Better is it to be of an humble
Spirit with the lowly, than to divide the spoil with the proud. (Pro. 16.19.)
So, Pro. 9.18, 19, etc. Riches and honor are with me, (says Wisdom) yea,
durable riches and righteousness. My fruit is better than Gold, and my revenue
than choice Silver. I lead in the way of righteousness, that I may cause those
that love me to inherit substance, and I will fill their treasure. -- And when
they are visited with distressing and afflictive dispensations, God is
chaste^ing of them for their profit, Heb. 12.10. Though They sow in tears, they
reap in joy, they reap the fruits of righteousness, which are vastly
preferrible to the gain of this whole World. -- But now as to the wicked, they
are digging mischief for themselves; oftentimes the way of the wicked seduceth
them, and transgressors are snared by deceitful Works; "Sin opens the
floodgates for an Inundation of temporal Evils." -- But though the Wicked
sometimes prosper, it is but in judgment, and their Treasures profit not. Go to
now ye rich Men, howl and weep for your Miseries that shall come upon you. Ye
have heaped treasures together for the last days. Ye have lived in pleasure
upon Earth; Ye have nourished your hearts as in a Day of Slaughter (Jam. 5.1,
etc.) God will curse your very Blessings, there will be poison infecting your
most pleasant Cups, and all you outward success and prosperity will be only
like ^he Banquet of Old provided for the Persian Captive, The late Learned and
Reverend Mr. Pemberton. Advi^e to a Son. page 16.
reserved for Sacrifice, who was fed high, that he might bleed more freely,
when he should fall a Victim to the Altar.

(^) SPIRITUAL and Internal Blessings* Peace and (...) in the Soul are the true
Riches. (Luke 16.11.) Now if we are religious betimes, we are like to obtain a
greater Stock of Divine Comforts, and more happy Experiences of Spiritual
Consolation, (as we heard before.) -- We shall also have Grace multiplied to
us, as well as Peace. If we begin early to cleanse our way, we shall in an
ordinary course ^r^ive to great degrees of Holiness, and extraordi^ry measures
of Grace. To him that seeks shall be ^iven, and to him that has shall be
added, He shall have abundance of Grace, and the gift of righteousness. Early
obedience is like to grow unto eminent obedience. -- It must be owned, that
such as are sincerely pious will persevere. There is no final Apostasy from
real Grace: We have not so much as one Example hereof in the Sacred Story,
neither does the Doctrine of the Gospel countenance such an opinion, and it is
against the whole stream of the Divine Promises. And God is faithful that has
promised, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able, but
will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear
it. (1 Cor. 10.13.) Whosoever is born of God, does not commit Sin; for his seed
abides in him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. I have written
unto you Young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you,
and ye have overcome the wicked one. (1 John 2.14. -- 3.9.) I am confident of
this very thing, that he who has begun a good w^rk in you, will perform it
until the day of Jesus Christ. (Phil. 1.6.) Such as are begotten again, are
kept by the mighty powers of GOD through Faith unto Salvation. (1 Pet. 1.3.5.)
This is the great security of the Saints, that they are kept by the power of
God: and this consideration may establish their hearts against the fears of a
final miscarriage. Provided we be sincere, (says a Great Divine) He will not
suffer us to be set upon by temptations that are too big for us. Or, in case of
temporal falling, These are the Words of A. Bp. Tillot son. Fol. Vol. ad. page
314, 316, 317.
the Providence and Goodness of God will give us the Grace and opportunity of
recovering our selves from our fall by Repentance. For the Providence of God
may sometimes, for wise ends and reasons, see it fit to leave good Men to their
own frailty, and to faint and fall shamefully, and this sometimes in order to
their more glorious Recovery, and the greater triumph o^ their Faith and
Constancy afterward; sometimes to punish their vain Confidence in themselves,
as in the case of Peter, who declared more resolution, and bare it out with a
greater confidence than any of the Disciples, when he said to our Savior, Though
all Men forsake thee, yet will not I; and yet after this He fell more
shamefully than any of the rest, so as to deny His Master with horrid Oaths and
Imprecations, and this, though our Savior had prayed particularly for Him, that
his Faith might not fail. From which Instance we may learn, that God does not
engage Himself absolutely to secure good Men from falling, in case of a great
temptation and trial; but if they be sincere, He will not permit them to fall
finally, though He may suffer them to miscarry grievously for a time, to convince
them of the vanity of their confidence in themselves and their own Strength.
The Promise of God is not absolute, that good Men shall be preserved from
falling; but that the Temptation shall have a happy Issue, and that they shall
not finally miscarry. For Promises of this Nature are to be interpreted by us,
and understood, as we do our Saviors Prayer for Peter before his Fall, that
his Faith should not fail finally; but though he fell through too much Confidence
in Himself, He should through the grace of God assisting Him be enabled to
recover by Repentance.

INDEED it has sometimes been awfully seen, that Persons have declined from
good beginnings, and their latter end has been worse than their beginning: But
it must be said concerning such, They had not root in themselves, (Luke 13.21.)
They had only the external form of Godliness, and were destitute of any vital
Principle within to perpetuate their Obedience, and by the just judgment of God
for their hypocrisy and prevarica^tion were left to the lusts of their own
heart, and the power of Satan. This was particularly the Case of Simon Magus.
The Promise of God does not engage him to prevent Hypocrites discovering
themselves; but their guilt exposes them to his righteous Judgments.

AND on the other hand, it has been joyfully seen that such, whose hearts were
right with God, and sound in His Statutes, have been steadfast in His Covenant,
and continued in the ways of well-doing to the End. That of the Wise Man has
often been exemplified, (Prove. 22.6.) Train up a Child in the way he should go;
and when he is old, he will not depart from it. How true is that Observation
concerning the godly Man? (Psalm. 1.3.) He shall be like a Tree planted by the
rivers of water, that brings forth fruit in his season; his leaf shall not
wither.

AND as the truly Religious will persevere; so they will improve in holiness.
It is one Character of Sincerity, to reach forth to the things which are
before, pressing toward the mark. Hence, such, as are sincerely religious in
Youth, are like to make great proficiency in the Christian Life. They will be
not only steadfast and immovable, but always abounding in the work of the Lord.
The tender Plants early set in the Garden of Christ, shall grow up into Trees
of righteousness; and the Branches of the Lord, which he makes strong for
Himself, shall be as the fruitful Boughs of goodly Trees; they shall be fat and
flourishing, and bring forth abundantly the fruits of holiness. They are like
to bring forth more and better fruit than others. They will still bring forth
fruit in Old Age; (Psalm. 92.14.) -- There is a spiteful and malicious Proverb
in the World, that A Young Saint will prove an Old Devil: The Author of which
was the Devil, the Father of lies: It is a lie and the truth is not in it.
"There is the greatest Fear, that a Young Devil will prove an Old Beelzebub.
How many Young Saints have attained Mnason's worthy character, An Old Disciple?
(Act. 21.16.) And how many, that were early Christians have in time come to be
eminent Christians? Verily Saints in Youth are like to become Angels in Age.
Obadiah feared the Lord betimes, and so came to fear him greatly, (1 Kin.
18.3.12.) Job even from his Youth walked in the ways of pure Religion, ( Job
31.18.) and see how the Lord boasts of him, (Job 2.3.) Have thou considered my
servant Job, that there is none like him in the Earth, a perfect and an upright
Man? and still he holds fast his integrity. Indeed in the whole Constellation
of Scripture-Saints, none shine with a more radiant and conspicuous Glory than
those who cleansed their way in Youth. The Time would fail me to speak of
Joseph, and Samuel, and Josiah, and David, and John, and Timothy, and others,
who were all rich in Faith and good Works, and arrived to uncommon improvements
in Grace and spiritual Experiences, having set up the gainful Trade of
Godliness at their first setting out in the World. -- As the Body of Sin and
Death gathers strength by Age, and "Vices like ill weeds grow a pace, and if
they once take to the Soil, it will be hard to kill 'em": even so, the
principles of the Heavenly Life, implanted in Youth, will deeply root and
sweetly ripen with Age, and the powers of the New Man will come to excel in
strength and influence. If we partake of the Divine Nature betimes, we shall
grow to a greater spiritual stature, receiving Grace for Grace, and going from
strength to strength: we shall come to be almost complete and perfect men in
Christ, when others are but as Newborn Babes. -- Perfection in Grace is
attained by various steps of ascent, and degrees of growth, and the more speedy
our beginning, the higher will our advances be and the greater our progress.
Such as set out early in the Christian race, keep on steddily, and spend the
vigor of active Youth in running it, are like to stretch a great way forward by
that time their day declines, and to get far a head of others, who began late.

NOW that Early Religion is of such happy consequence in the present Life,
should be a prevailing Argument and Inducement to all Young People to get
sanctified betimes.

2. IF we cleanse our ways in our Youth, we shall obtain richer Blessings in
the Heavenly Places. Death is a most profitable Change to the Godly, ( To them
to die is gain, Phil. 1.21) And the Resurrection also will bring unto them much
gain, the Fruit they now bring forth shall then abound to their account.

IN this World the Saints have greater Riches than all the Treasures of Egypt;
but the most of their Estate lies in a better Country, even an Heavenly. They
have an House in Heaven, a Building not made with hands; They have an
Inheritance in Light incorruptible and undefiled, They have Treasures in the
Everlasting Kingdom, goodly Pearls of great price, and all kind of Riches,
which are satisfying realities, better and more enduring substance,
incomparably superior to all the Wealth and Riches of this World which are but
lying vanities. The Saints have a Title to the Unsearchable Riches of Christ,
(in competition with which they count every thing but loss,) they are
joint-heirs with Christ, Heirs of God; they have God Himself, who is the
Fountain of Blessedness, for the Portion of their Inheritance, and their
exceeding great Reward. Now they have the earnest of the Inheritance in the
Graces and Comforts of the Holy Ghost; Hereafter they shall receive the reward
of the Inheritance, when the Time of refreshment and the redemption of the
purchased p^ssession shall come. As an Heir, when come to Age, enters upon his
Estate: so shall they upon the Eternal Inheritance, purchased for them by the
precious Blood of Christ, settled upon them by the Promises of God -- a goodly
heritage indeed, a very worthy Portion, unspeakably great, and invaluably rich!
Who can declare the riches of the Glory of the Inheritance of the Saints? Eye
has not seen, neither ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man,
the things which God has prepared for them that love him. We know in part, but
how little a portion is heard? The happiness of Heaven is too big and bright a^
Object for our present weak and imperfect powers to conceive or take a view of.
It Is enough to fix and fill our boundless desires, equal, yea transcendent to
our wishes, and immortal as our Souls.

BEHOLD, ye Children of God, the end of your Faith, the hope which is laid up
for you in Heaven! And consider, ye Sons of Men, the Prize of the high Calling
of God in Christ Jesus. Consider, Young Men; Eternal Life is set before you;
Lay hold on it. You are now upon Probation for the high perferments, the rich
entertainments, and unperishing enjoyments of Heaven; you are Candidates for an
incorruptible Crown, and for durable Riches, as well as Joy unspeakable. -- Now
can any one too soon secure a Title to this invisible and invaluable
Inheritance? Is not this our chief Interest? And is it not our great Wisdom to
give the preference to the supreme Good, and to improve present advantages, the
first opportunities, to make haste and not d^lay, to settle our grand Concerns,
and make sure work in a matter of the last consequence to us? If a Man has a
price in his hands to make himself (as we speak) for this World, by a good
Bargain, or the like, if he have no heart to it, will not all Mankind point at
the Fool? He that is wise will be pr^fitable unto himself, and he that
understands his way will with industrious care embrace and improve all fair
opportunities to enrich himself. If a wealthy Friend should assure him Ten
Thousand Pounds upon very easy and reasonable Conditions; would he not hasten
seasonably to fulfill them, and take all possible care to please and endear so
generous a Benefactor? Now this is our Case; The God of Heaven offers to us a
Reward, infinitely preferrible to this whole World, upon the best security, if
we will cleanse our ways, and serve before him in holiness, which is but our
reasonable service. -- It is the madness of folly then one moment to delay
accepting the offer and complying with the terms. Consider; If we begin a life
of pure Religion in our Youth, we secure the Reward, and make our Election
sure, that we are safe and happy both living and dying. And, moreover, should
it please God we live on to more mature Years, or Old Age, we are still
greatening and increasing our reward. If we continue to bring forth fruit, and
grow in Grace, we are still laying up Treasures in Heaven; and when we have
finished our weary Pilgrimage here in a strange Land, we shall receive the
Kingdom, and by Inheritance obtain more excellent Riches in Glory. Great will
be our Reward in Heaven, greater than others. -- For our impartial Judge will
proportion the Prize to the length of our Race, and the constancy and fidelity
of our Service. He will give to every man according to his works, in respect of
quantity as well as quality: He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly;
and he that sows bountifully shall also reap bountifully. Hence, They that
like Hananiah, fear God above many, they that, like the Apostle, labor more
abundantly, than they all, they that set out early in the way of God's
Commandments, that strive earnestly and endure to the end, such shall receive a
far more exceeding, triumphant, and hyperbolical Reward. -- And is not this a
good reason why we should cleanse our way and begin our great work in our
Youth? O Let us aspire after the highest degrees of Glory, and the largest
share of the Heavenly Treasures. Let us set our Affections on things above, and
let us set our aims high; high as Heaven, as the heights of Heaven. Let a
generous and brave ambition, to be as holy, and as happy, as possible, possess
and actuate us betimes, and influence us, now in our Early Days to purify our
Soul in obeying the Truth, and apply our selves unto every Good Work, that if
God lengthen out our Lives, and Opportunities, and afford us proportionable
Assistences, we may come to be rich toward God, and to shine as Lights in the
World: and when the Earthly House we at present tabernacle in shall be
dissolved, we may be translated to a brighter Orb, a better Country, and there
we may inherit a double Portion, and shine forth as the Sun, while others only
glimmer as the Stars. O Let us give all diligence, begin soon and be abundant
in the Work of the Lord, and press toward the mark for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus, if by any means we might attain unto the
richest Inheritance among the Saints in Light. Let us fear, lest any of us
should so much as seem to come short. Be diligent unto the coming of the Lord,
that no Man take away thy Crown. Let not any mean temptation whatsoever induce
us, any longer to neglect the Great Salvation, when every moments neglect will
lessen the noble Prize, should we at last obtain it. If ever we are brought to
mind the things of our Peace, we shall very heavily reflect on the many
precious opportunities of getting and doing Good, which we have irretrievably
lost; and we shall blush and grieve in the prospect of those many degrees of
Glory, we have forfeited, by out-sinning the days of Youth, our best days. --
Thus I Have been beseeching you by the mercies of God: But if I have not
prevailed with you yet, --

LET me now persuade you by the Terrors of the Lord. If you are not fond of
Heaven; it may be you are afraid of Hell. Hope of happiness, and Fear of misery
are the powerful Springs of action, and the great Engines to move rational
Creatures; and no passion of humane Nature has a more constraining and
governing influence, than Fear. If therefore this bright prospect of Eternity
has not allured you, I will now shift the Scene, change hands, and turn the
gloomy side to affright you.

KNOW then, O Young Men, if you walk in the way of your own hearts, and in the
sight of your own Eyes, and impenitently indulge Youthful Lusts, Know it, I
say, that for all these things God will bring you into Judgment, and punish you
with everlasting destruction. Whatever apprehensions dissolute Youths may now
have about an invisible eternal state, However they may drown the present
secret whispers, or louder clamours of a convinced Conscience, and stifle their
presaging fears of an Evil Day to come, by the hurries or Business, by the
noise of sensual riot, or flattering Company, or the stupifying opiate of
infidel Saducism; Though for the present they may bravely mock at fear, and
securely laugh at Hell and Judgment, as only the poetical Fiction of some wild
luxuriant Fancy, or the politic Invention of some aspiring humane power to awe
the World; However they may resolve the secret rebukes and fears of a guilty
mind into the impressions of a superstitious Education, and accordingly give
themselves up to the government of humor and passion, and pursue their ungodly
Lusts with an affected and resolved blindness, and unbounded license; yet let
such remember, that as sure as this World had a Creator, so surely has Mankind
a Judge; even the Lord God who is Almighty, and can call us to an account; He
is just also and righteous, and cannot but do it; He is infinitely wise and
knows how to do it? He is invariably true and faithful, and has He said it and
will He not do it? "If the Word of God be true and there be any weight in the
reason of the Thing," we must all one Day appear before the Judgment Seat of
Christ, and give up a strict Account; All Ages and Sizes of Men, Childhood and
Youth not excepted, neither the Persons nor the Actions of Youth. -- Even these
shall be bro't into Judgment. Such as die Young shall surely come upon trial,
as well as others; and the lusts and follies of blooming Youth must be recko^'d
for at the Bar of God, as well as the Sins of riper Years, and withering Age.
The Sins of one of Sixteen are cognizable before the flaming Tri^nal of Divine
Justice, and just matter of Eternal Condemnation, even as the Sins of one of
Sixty. There are many profane and prodigal Youths, who though they are not sunk
so low, as to deride the belief, and dispute the possibility or probability in
general of their being Judged; yet there is reasonable ground of jealousy, that
they are tainted with a corrupt expectation of an absolute indulgence for their
juvenile follies, and flatter themselves that their Age will justify their
present levity and indiscretion, Vid. Dr. Sherlock. Disc. of Judgment. Edit. 7.
page 290, etc.
that a gracious God, will take compassion on the weakness and giddiness of
Youth, as He winked at the times of ignorance: And hence at present they
presume to live as they list; they think they are now their own Masters, and
live at a mad rate, and in wild extravagance. But let Young Men consider, that
they (even as such) are accountable to God as well as others; they are now even
in their imperfect beginnings the Subjects of Divine Government; reasonable
Agents, capable of knowing the differences of good and evils, endowed with a
power of choosing and refusing, are under the jurisdiction and direction of the
Divine Laws, and capable of being governed by them; and hence are responsible
and liable to be judged for the keeping or breaking of them. But further, this
may be argued from the impartial Justice of the Nature of God, who without
respect of Persons judges every man. (1 Pet. 1.17.) Young Men are equally
subject to His Laws, and obnoxious to His Judgment with others: should the
Judge then exempt Young Men, or the Age of Youth, from trial, (only for some
particular circumstances or considerations, which do not at all touch the merit
of the cause,) This would be Partiality and accepting of Persons, from which
the Divine Nature is at an Eternal distance. But further, this Age is really
and strictly more inexcusable, than any other: There are hardly any Temptations
befall us in this stage of Life, but what are common to Men, or may be
balanced by the peculiar difficulties of another state. Nay Youth, before it
is actually debauched, and native corruptions grown incorrigible, meets with
the slightiest difficulties and the fewest temptations, and has the most
powerful Checks, Restraints and Advantages of any Age, (as has been showed
before.) And now for Young Men to break through all th^se Obligations, and to Sin
in the face of such diswasives, induces an heavy aggravation of their Guilt,
and speaks 'em to be in danger of the Judgment; and as surely as God is
immutably just and holy, their Youthful Lusts will not escape His righteous
Censure. -- Besides it would be an indelible reproach to the Divine Wisdom to
grant such an indulgence to Youth, and let the follies thereof escape with
impunity. Can it become the wise Ruler of the World to act so repugnantly to
the great ends of His Government, as to license the villainies and frenzys of
Youth? When this is the Age most flexible and governable; the Age of hopes and
of leisure, and the critical Age which ordinarily determines the bias of the
mind, and forms the character of our after-Life in this World. For God to loose
the reins to this important Age, and not pre-engage it to his own Service, and
antidote it against the tempting Lures of the God of this World, by the fears
of Eternal Judgment, (which only can weaken the attraction of earthly Goods,
and embitter the relish of fleshly Pleasures, and powerfully curb and cool
voluptuous licentious Youths in their eager pursuits of carnal Satisfactions,)
and for God to permit Satan to take the early possession of them, and lead 'em
captive at his will, to habituate 'em to evil practices and prejudice 'em
against serious Religion, which prepossessions will "give law to riper Years",
and render it infinitely difficult to reduce and reclaim them from the errors
of their ways to the wisdom of the Just, This would be of fatal tendency to
strengthen the hands of the wicked One, and to lesson the Authority, blast the
Designs, and cloud the Glory of the Divine Government. And therefore the Judge
of the whole Earth, who is God only wise, must be acquitted of an imputation,
so absurd, and so full of abuse and indignity. And as sure as God is wise in
heart, and mighty in strength, glorious in holiness, and just in all his doings
toward the Children of Men, so surely may we expect, that God will judge and
punish Youth, since it is so reasonable, expedient, and necessary. -- Let none
of us then go about now to banish the thots of Judgment, that we may securely
live in carnal ease and wa^tonness, as if our Youth would excuse our ^ew^ness:
But let us ever live under the awful sense, and governing influence of a future
reckoning. If thine heart be wise, O Young Man thou will be in the fear of the
Lord all the day long, and there shall be a reward, for the Judge stands at
the do^r. But if thou hate instruction and despisest reproof, and obeyest
unrighteousness, does not he that pondereth the heart consider it? and He that
keeps thy Soul does not He know it? and shall not He render to every Man
according to his works? Thou art inexcusable, O Man, whoever thou art* We are
sure that the Judgment of God is according to truth against them, which commit
such things. And think thou this, O Man, that thou shall escape the judgment
of God? Or despisest thou the Riches of his forbearance, not knowing, that the
goodness of God leads thee to repentance? But after thy hardness and
impenitent heart, treasurest up to thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and
the revelation of the righteous judgment of God, who will render indignation
and wrath, tribulation, and anguish unto every soul of man, that does evil.
Therefore hear now this, thou that dwell carelessly, that art given to
pleasures, Hearken, simple Young Man, that art surfeiting on the sickly
satisfactions of Sense, and roving in the forbidden paths of Sin; look forward,
look downward, and consider, What fruit thou art like to have of these things!
the end whereof are the ways of Death. Consider what will be thy Lot, the
Portion of thy measures from the Lord. Verily, if you go on to add iniquity to
transgression, you are a Vessel of Wrath fitting for destruction. And if you
die in your Sins, Everlasting Burnings will be your Portion! If Death remove
you in ^ guilty state, This shall you have of my hand, (says the Lord,) you
shall lie down in sorrow, and perish in your Corruption. When the slender
thread of Life (the Silver Cord) shall be ^ut asunder by the Sword of Justice,
your unprepared Soul must drop into endless misery. Think not, O vain Man, that
the Sinner and Ungodly shall inherit Eternal Life. I tell you nay; but except
you repent in time, you shall perish wonderfully. The Word of God which
endures for ever has told us, Romans 8.13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall
die; You shall die inevitably, die eternally. -- If you die in Youth, and have
not cleansed your ways, your guilty Soul shall be dragged by the Unclean Spirit
into the place of Him that knows not God, the den of Dragons* from whence
there is no retreat, nor reprieve: And where instead of the present forbidden
mirth of Fools, and the forfeited joys of the Blessed, you must reap eternal
sorrows and insupportable torments, and be broken to pieces with the agonies of
a wounded Spirit. You sport and revel it now perhaps, glory in your shame, and
brave it out in foolhardy presumption: But let Destruction from God be a
terror to you. O be persuaded no longer to harden your heart, lest ere long
that Sentence of Death ring in your Ears, Depart, depart, ye cursed into
Everlasting Fire; And Thou mourn at the last, and in enraged confusion make
that bitter lamentation, -- How have I hated instruction, and have not obeyed
the voice of my teachers! Who can dwell with the dev^uring Fire -- and come to
feel by unhappy experience, that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the Living God.

AND if God spare your Life yet longer in this World, and you continue to Old
Age, and after all die impenitent, and are not not washed from your filth, and
healed of your disease, do not imagine that the Holy Heaven is a Hospital to
entertain the halt, the blind and corrupt; do not think that God will
prostitute the glorious Immortality, and receive your expiring Soul, still
thirsting after sensual satisfactions, but no longer capable to relish nor
allowed to enjoy them* I tell you nay* But you shall be turned into Hell, the
proper receptacle of them that forget God: Yea, you shall be thrust down to the
lowest and hottest Hell, into the depths of Hell! O how dreadfully aggravated
will your Damnation be by your continuance in Sin! The wages of every Sin is
Eternal Death; and every Degree of Damnation is unsufferable: But a much sorer
Punishment will some have than others. The Degrees of Misery, which the wicked
shall be condemned to, shall correspond with the degrees of Wickedness which
they are charged with. The Hypocrites in heart heap up wrath by every days
impenitence, They are but filling up their measure, and crouding their Ephah.
The openly prostigate are by every days guilt piling up fuel for Hellfire, to
enrage its flames, and heat their Furnace seven times hotter; They are
treasuring up heavy aggravations, and adding to the weight of their future
Misery.

YOU then, that have made a Covenant with Death, and seem to be accelerating
your own destruction, and taking Hell by force and violence; Go on, Go on (I
say) in the ways of Sin, take your fill of carnal pleasures, "give a loose to
all your fire", never baulk your sensual appetites or passions, never stick at
any thing to gratify the flesh, take your ease, eat, drink and be merry, never
think of abandoning your selves to the mopish, melancholy life of Religion,
never listen to the checks of Conscience, shut your eyes against the light of
God's Word, and let nothing interrupt you in your sinful carriere; Rejoice, O
Young Men, in your Youth, and walk in the way of your own hearts: -- But know
ye, that for all these things, God will bring you into Judgment. Consider, O
foolish wretches, consider, before it be too late, O consider, that all this
will be but a glittering Prelude, a flourishing Preface to a miserable
Eternity, (Ah, how miserable! Verily no wit nor words can fully declare, or
conceive; nor tongue of Men nor Angels can say, how miserable your future state
will be,) where the most doleful Tragedes and sad Scenes of gloomy horror shall
incessantly harrass your guilty minds, full Vials of the burning wrath of God,
Wrath to the uttermost, shall be poured into your capacious Souls; a rebuking
Mind shall sting and wound you as a gnawing Worm in your bosoms, the
remembrance of former Sins shall be as gall and poison, the iniquities of Youth
and upwards shall sit heavy upon you, a burden too heavy; your ungrateful
refusals of offered Mercy shall sink you into deeper misery, your many foolish
and hurtful Lusts shall rend as so many wild domestic furies, and cast forth
the rage of their wrath with flames of Fire; you will be the scorn of Devils and
the objects of their cruel hatred, They'^ gnash their teeth and prey' upon you,
bitterly taunt and triumph in your destruction; and your Tempters to Sin and
Companions in misery will be your perpetual Tormentors: "You that are now
Partners in Sin, when you come to be sharers in Woe, as Tares bound in bundles
for the Fire, you will be a terror to one another". In a Word, you shall suffer
the unrecoverable Less of every blessed Enjoyment, Earthly and Heavenly, of all
Good real and imaginary: and Evil shall be present with you, all manner of
Evil; All the Curses, written in the Book of the Law, shall come upon you in
their perfection: -- So that your complicated misery shall be intolerable, and
you shall with bitter accents repete that despairing exclamation of cursed
Cain, -- My punishment is greater than I can bear! And all this is unavoidable
and irretrievable. How shall we escape? When once your impenitent Souls are
passed into Eternity, the impassible Gulf is fixed, the acceptable Year of the
Lord is past, the Door is shut, you are then past hope and help. Hell has now
closed its mouth upon you, and nothing can break in sunder the Bars of Iron, or
burst the Gates of Brass; now the Compassionate and Almighty Savior of the
World is become your Enemy; His Power is armed with Vengeance, and His M^rcy
clothed with Fury, and as a consuming Fire His jealousy burns against you, and
will be continually discharging hot Thunderbolts upon you and dissolving in
floods of Fire, and all the billows of His flaming wrath shall be rolling over
you, and the smeak of your Torments be ascending up for ever and ever! -- So
that after the ^most periods imaginable are spent in this unutterable
unsufferable misery, it will then be but the beginning of sorrows; for there is
an Everlasting Punishment, and an unknown never-expiring Eternity of Wrath yet
to come, which is the very Emphasis, the killing Accent of Hell Torments, and
the Sting of the Second Death. And this the damned Sinner shall undoubtedly
know; and his despairful prospects of Eternity, (that black and boundless
Abyss!) shall continually fetch in new Terrors, give fresh wounds to his
bleeding Soul, and exasperate the flames of his incensed Conscience.

AND now, my Son, by these things be Thou admonished. Let Young Men be Warned
to flee from the Wrath to come. Seeing ye look for such things, give diligence,
that you may be found of your Judge in peace, without spot and blameless, that
you may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, and worthy to escape all those
Things, which shall come to pass, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from
Heaven with His mighty Angels, in flaming Fire taking vengeance on them that
know not God and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall
be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and from
the glory of His power; when He shall come to be admired in all them that
believe, to be glorified in the Salvation of His Saints, but to get to Himself
a Great Name in the Everlasting overthrow of His Enemies. O hearken to the
Words of the Curse, and take the alarm, fear and fly from the Snares of Death:
and hearken to the Words of Blessing, take the Invitation, and lay hold on
Eternal Life.

SEE, I have set before you this Day Life and Good, and Death and Evil. I call
Heaven and Earth to record this Day, that I have set before you Life and Death,
Blessing and Cursing: Therefore choose Life. -- I have been offering you the
most weighty and solemn Considerations to move you to cleanse your way in
Youth. O Bring again to mind now, ye Transgressors; Hearken to me, ye
stout-hearted, that are far from righteousness; Remember, and show your selves
Men. Let what has been said have a warm impression upon you, ^ink deep into
your Hearts, and produce the desired Effects. Hear, and your Souls shall live.

PROP. III. IF Young Men duly observe the Word of God, They take an effectual
Method to cleanse, and keep, their way from sinful pollutions.

I have been showing you, how much it concerns Young Men to cleanse their way;
I am now come to tell you how this may be done; namely, by taking heed unto the
Word of God. Observing God's Word is the only sufficient Means of Spiritual
Purification.

I shall speak to this Head under two Articles. As, (1) The Word of God has a
Cleansing Influence. (2) If we observe the Word of God, we shall experience
it is Cleansing Virtue.

Artic. I. THE Word of God has a Cleansing Influence, or an efficacy to cleanse
our Way.

TO clear this Head, Let us attend to the following Particulars. -- (1.) The
Word was given to us for this End. (2.) It is excellently fitted for this End.
(3) It is the Instrument, which the Sanctifying Spirit ordinarily makes use of.
--

I. Consider; THE Word was given to us for this blessed End. The high and
gracious design of God in giving us His Word was, that it might be a Well of
Salvation to us, out of which to draw water with joy, living water, the water
of purification, to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, from the pollutions of
carnality and many foolish filthy Lusts, which drown the Soul in perdition.
This Fountain was opened for the Inhabitants of Jerusalem to wash in from all
Sin, and from all Uncleanness, that they may be sanctified and cleansed with
the washing of water by the word, (Ephesians. 5.26.) This River was not created for
us to s^ort our selves in and make the divertisement of a few idle hours, as
Leviathan (the King over all the Children of Pride) sports himself in the hoary
deep: but for us to wash our selves in; and that not only our Heads, (cleansing
them from the defilements of Error,) and our Hands, (cleansing them from the
impurities of open Vice,) but also our Hearts, purifying them from the
defilements of Hypocrisy, and secret Lusts,) and our Feet, (cleansing them from
the dirt and pollution, they contract at any time by false steps and unwary
slips, when running the way of God's Commandments,) yea, our whole Man, Spirit,
Soul and Body, cleansing our selves from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit,
perfecting holiness through the Word of Sanctification. Thus says the Apostle,
(2 Timothy 3.16, 7. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, -- that the Man
of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works; and that foul
Sinners may be transformed into Vessels of honor, sanctified and made meet for
the Master's use. This is the great and good end, which God propounded in
giving His Word. And Infinite Wisdom would not have so done, if the Word had
not an aspect upon, and some relation and proportion to that blessed End.
Inasmuch then as the Word was given to us with this view, and upon this design,
by the only Wise God, we may hence infer, that the Word has a proper influence
to cleanse our ways. And if this End be not eventually obtained on All that
enjoy the Word, it is owing to the Sinners contemptuous neglect of the Word, or
resolved opposition to it, which converts the Sovereign Balsam into killing
Poison: and is no ways owing to any weakness, or u^aptness in the Means. For in
the next place*

II. Consider, THE Word is in its own Nature (as a Means) excellently adapted
and accommodated to this Design. It has a perfect aptitude and direct tendency
to this E^d, and is every way calculated to help us in the work of
self-purification. Consider Two Things; It is full of Light, and it is full of
Power.

(1.) IT is full of Light; both to detect, and to direct.

1. IT is full of detecting Light. It is a Light, which makes manifest. It
brings many hidden things out of Darkness, and illustrates many known things,
elightening the Eyes, and making w^se the simple. (Psalm. 19.7, 8.) It discovers
to us the primitive purity, and innocence of humane Nature. It discovers to us
its present depravation and pollution: It discovers the reality and original,
the nature, extent, and various workings of corruption in Man; Hereby the Body
of Sin is anatomized, The plague of our hearts and the evil of our ways made
known unto us; It discovers all the secret spots and deformities of the Soul,
and all the defilements and irregularities of the Life, and shows us how evil a
thing and bitter it is, that we have forsaken God. And it discovers the Ground
or meritorious Cause, and the Author or efficient Cause, of our Sanctification,
together with the usual method, the appointed means, the absolute necessity,
the possibility and glorious advantages, and different degrees, of Spiritual
purification. It paints out the Sinner in his true colors, and exact features,
and it draws the Saint in His full proportion and distinct complexion. So that
whosoever looks into the perfect Law of Liberty, searching and trying his ways,
may there beh^ld his own natural face as in a Glass; may discern what manner of
Man he is, and what the way that he takes, whether it be the way of Sinners, or
the path of the Just; and how far he is advanced: What are the evil ways that
must be forsaken, and what are the right ways, that must be walked in. Which
leads me to the next thing; That is,

2. THE Word is full of directing Light. It is profitable for instruction in
righteousness, (2 Timothy 3.16.) It is useful to lead us into and guide us in the
good way. It is a Light to our Eyes for discovery, and a Lanthorn to our Feet
for direction. It is the Wisdom of God, profitable to direct, to be desired to
make one wise, able to make us wise unto Salvation, (2 Timothy 3.15) -- All we
like sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one to his own way, and are
naturally wandering on the mount of Corruption and in the wilderness of Sin; We
have gone from mountain to hill, and have forgotten our resting place the Holy
Hill of Zion, and know not the way thither; and we should have wandered
endlesly in the Regions of the Shadow of Death, if the Dayspring from on high
had not visited us, and a sure word of Prophecy been given to us, which is as a
(...) shining in a dark Place, a Light to our feet, and a Lamp to our paths,
(Psalm. 119.105.)

HERE Let me say concerning this Gloriuos Light,

1. IT directs our feet into the way of peace. It gives knowledge of Salvation,
by the remission of Sins, through the tender mercy of our God, (Luke 1.77.8, 9.)
and the Righteousness of Christ therein revealed, from says to faith, (Romans
1.16.) Herein are made known to us the Things which belong to our Everlasting
Peace: Herein we are directed to the God of Peace, as our End, and only
satisfying Portion; and to Christ, as the Way, which way of Peace, we had never
known without the help of Divine Revelation. The Lord Jesus Christ speaks of
Himself, as The Way, the Truth, and the Life, (Joh. 14.6.) The true way of
Life, the living and true way. He is the Do^r whereby we enter into Peace, The
new and living way into the holiest, which He has consecrated for us through the
Vail, that is to say, his flesh, (Heb. 10.2^.) This is the way of God, and No
Man ^ometh to the Father but by Christ, i.e. to God as a Father. This way of
God is in His Word expounded to us perfectly. The Scriptures are they which
testify of Christ, ( Job. 5.39.) and they alone. The great mystery of
godliness, God manifest in the flesh, Those faithful sayings, (worthy of all
acceptance,) that Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners; and that
we have peace with God through His Blood, -- These Glorious Truths shine forth
only in the Gospel. In all the admirable Volumes of the Celebrated Ethnic
Philosophers, there is not the least hint, or tittle of Christ, and of
Salvation through Him. "The work of Redemption is not engraven on the work of
Creation, nor of Providence". Apostate Man's Salvation is not a Thing
necessarily inferred from the Being and general Goodness of God, of which He
never left Himself without witness. (Act. 14.17.) The Heathen World had but a
very weak and wavering apprehension of the Mercy of God. And the Method of this
Salvation, is mysterious, and sublime, above the flight of humane reason, how
highly soever exalted, and no doubt it was a surprise to the Angels of Light
and the Spirits of Darkness, that the Only begotten Son of God should assume
our Nature and therein be obedient even to the cursed Death of the Cross; and
that in Christ crucified God should be reconciling the World unto Himself, not
imputing their trespasses. This way of Reconciliation is above the ken of the
most penetrating natural understanding, and is brought to Light only in the
Gospel of Peace. And without this, it might have remained a secret for ever.
Christ is the Light of the World, and the Word of God is the only Telescope to
discover this great Luminary to the World. Flesh and Blood could never have
revealed Christ unto us, (Mat. 16.17.)

2. IT directs our feet into the Way of Holiness. The Word describes to us the
good old Way, the way to Zion, and directs all our steps. Here is a sufficient
directory for the whole Duty of Man. It propounds the right Principles, exact
Measures, and true Ends of Obedience.

GOOD Principles are essential to pure Religion; such as Faith in Christ, the
Fear and Love of God, Hope in His Mercy, etc. These are ^cessary Ingredients of
sincere Goodness, prescribed in the Word of God; concerning some of which the
Philosophers of old knew nothing, and of the others they took but little notice.

WITHOUT Faith it is impossible to please God, (Heb. 11.6.) Whatsoever is not
of Faith is Sin, (Romans 14.23.) "By Faith Christians may derive a worthiness and
virtue to their meanest performances," -- but without the vital efficacy of
this Grace all their glittering duties are but dead works, and lifeless
shadows, unacceptable to God, and unavailable to Salvation. But now without the
Scriptures, we should be entirely at a loss, as to this supernatural Grace.
Hence it is said, Joh. 20.31. These are written, that ye might believe that
Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through
his name. The Object of Faith is only revealed in the Scripture, and so the
ground of Faith depends on the Scripture. True Faith is built on the Testimony
of God, and is resolved into the authority and veracity of God speaking in His
Word. But how shall any one believe, without knowing the testimony that is
given? How is it possible for any to believe aright concerning the Redeemer,
either as to matter or manner, without revelation? -- and this is to be found
no where but in the written Word, or Bible, (Romans 10.14, 17.) This is the alone
adaequate Rule and Foundation of Faith; and that Faith (whatever it relates to)
is not Divine, but merely Humane, which arises barely from natural Light.

AGAIN, As to the Grace of filial Fear, we should also be at a loss without the
Scriptures. We may indeed be struck with a trembling horror, and servile dread
of God, from some amazing displays of His terrible Greatness, and awful
Holiness in the works of Creation and Providence; but that is no gracious
passion, which is only tormenting to sense, and throws the mind into a storm
and confusion It is only the Scriptures that bring to light those ingenuous
considerations, that are proper and apt so to temper and purify this affection,
as to render it an acceptable reverence, and godly fear.

AGAIN, As to the Grace of Love; in this we should be very defective without
the knowledge of the Scriptures. Love is the generous principle of willing
obedience to God, the substance of universal Religion, and the perfective
character of moral Virtues. Now the writings of the wisest Heathen say little
or nothing of this affection. The Scriptures only recommend, and enjoin this
Principle; and they only furnish us with suitable and sufficient excitations to
enliven and actuate it. Love has a great many incentives from the Goodness of
God Essential, Creating, and Providential; But this Grace "never breaths like
it self", 'till animated and warmed by motives of a superior strain. Unless the
Love of God in Christ constrain us and inflame our affections, when we thus
judge that Christ by the grace of God tasted Death for every man, our Love is
not genuine, and true; but where is the Love of God in Christ revealed, save in
the Scriptures?

Lastly, THE knowledge of the Scriptures is necessary to the constitution of a
regular Hope. As Hope is the Anchor of the Soul, so the Promises of God are the
Basis of Hope; But these are revealed in the Scriptures only. It is th^n
through comfort of the Scriptures that we have ho^, (Romans 15.4.) Without
Scripture-foundation our Hope is nothing but Dream, and presumption, and a
thing of naught. -- Thus as to the Principles of Obedience.

AGAIN, As to the Parts of Duty, what a miserable loss should be at without the
conduct of Scripture Light? The whole World indeed, even the People that ^it in
darkness, have some confused notion of a Supreme Being, are touched with some
slight impressions of that homage we owe to God, from the dictates of natural
reason: but they run into an unaccountable variety of the rankest Errors and
Superstitions. Religion changes with every Air, and puts on a new face (...)
every Climate, where the Light of God's Word does not shine. Every one walks
in the way of his God, in the way of his own heart, and in the sight of his own
eyes. There are that follow after lying vanities, and do service to them, that
are by nature no God's. (Gal. 4.8.) There are that know God, but glorify Him
not as God, being vain in their imaginations. (Romans 1.21.)

AS for the Positive Institutions of the Worship of God, (agreeable to what One
observes) they resulting immediately from His arbitrary and absolute Will,
Hence such as are strangers to the written Word, must undoubtedly be
unacquainted with their nature, number, ends and uses. And for want of a
careful regard to the Word of God, what fopperies and follies do such, as enjoy
it, many times bring into the Worship of God? What vain Oblations do they
offer, and what corrupt things do they Sacrifice to the Lord, who take their
measures from a luxuriant Invention, and not from divine Revelation?

AND then, as to those Duties that are Moral, of immutable reason, and
perpetual obligation, the Word of God is a most necessary and sufficient Guide
unto us. It gives us a complete System of natural Religion and moral Virtues,
such as the best Masters of Morality in the Heathen World could never afford.
Their purest Ethics were stained with impure mixtures, with corrupt Precepts,
or false permissions; and the greatest Length that ever any attained by the
help of their most excellent rules, was only a negative purity, moral honesty,
and superficial civility, justice, kindness and honor; all which is vastly
short of our just obligations. The School of Nature was never so illuminated,
as to be able to teach us our universal Duty. But the Word of God "sets before
us a Rule of Life pure and perspicuous, in nothing superfluous or defective,
but comprehending the entire duty of Man". The Law of the Lord is perfect,
(Psalm. 19.7.) The Scripture contains all the Ordinances, and Commandments of
the Lord. It tells us what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God;
It shows us what is good, and what the Lord our God does require of us, and
that in it is full latitude, and extent. It describes all those works of
Sobriety, (which more immediately respect the government of our selves) and all
those works of Righteousness, and Charity, (which do principally respect our
carriage toward our Neighbor (and all those works of Piety, (that chiefly
respect our behavior toward God) which general Heads comprize the sum of our
Duty, and are the Epitome of that Holiness, which is the appointed condition of
Salvation. The Precepts of the Word extend to the whole Man, direct all the
Powers of the Soul, and preside over the senses and members of the Body. They
reach to all Cases, and Times, and instruct us how to behave our selves in
every station and relation, in every state and condition of Life. The Word of
God* prescribes the most perfect Law and consummate indefective Rule to order
our Conversation by, that ever the World heard of. Blessed therefore are they,
and highly favored of the Lord, unto whom He has written the great things of
his Law.

AGAIN, The Word of God states the true Ends, which should influence and
governs us in all our actions, in order to their rectitude. Purity of intention
is a necessary qualification, yea, the very Life and Soul of a good work. And
be an act never so specious and commendable for the substance and manner,
unless it be directed to a right end, the beauty of it is spoiled and the
reward forfeited. A wrong end is a dead fly in the precious ointment; This
corrupts and vatiates our best performances. A great part of our Duty then lies
in fixing right aims, and proposing regular ends. Now there are inferior and
subordinate ends, as the real felicity of our own Souls, and the true Good of
our Neighbors, and there is also a principal, or ultimate end, as the Glory of
God, to which our actions should be directed. Our duty is not perfect, unless
we therein aspire after the Glory of God, as our supreme end. Nothing is more
reasonable, than that we do all for the Glory of God; seeing we derive all our
powers and enjoyments from Him, we should improve all for Him; "we do all by
Him, therefore we should do all to Him": Besides, this is the same end, which
God Himself acts for; Hence it must needs be the best and highest, and
challenges the priority of all other ends in our intentions.

NOW this noble and is no where prescribed, but in the Word of God. That
enjoins an habitual, and implicit designation of this in all our actions, and
an actual or express intuition and volition of it in more weighty cases. See,
Man 15.16. 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. 1 Pet. 4.11. 1 Cor. 10.31. -- But where else is it
propounded? As for the Pagan Philosophers, they were most notoriously deficient
in this matter. In their most refined Morals, they never mentioned it. They
chiefly recommended virtue, only as the way to honor and ease in the World, or
a means of pleasure, and internal Peace; And the utmost pitch they ever came
to, was to propose the reasonableness, the amiable rectitude and inherient
excellency of virtue: But this is still too low and mean a motive. "For Virtue
is but a Ray of the Deity", and we are not perfect in any good work, "unless it
be finally referred to His Glory who is the Principle and Pattern of it". It is
then the distinguishing character of God's Word, It Is peculiar dignity above
all humane Writings, that it directs our performances to the most worthy end,
the Glory of God. -- Thus the Word of God, directs us into the way of Holiness.
It is a Light to the paths of righteousness, The wayfaring Men, though fools,
shall not err therein. (Isai. 35.8.) To enjoy the Word is then a great mercy
and benefit to a People. What advantage has the Christian? much every way:
chiefly because that unto them are committed the Oracles of God, (Romans 3.1, 2.)
Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation, and as for his
judgments they have not known them. Praise ye the Lord.

THUS I Have shown, that the Word is full of Light, discovering what is necessary
for us to know and believe, and directing us in what is necessary for us to do
and practice, that we may be saved. And thus the Word operates objectively in
the work of Sanctification.

(2.) THE Word is full of Energy, and Active Virtue. Thus, says a Judicious
and Learned Divine, Mr. Charnock, 2d. Vol. page 235, 6.
The Word seems to have an active force upon the Will, though the manner of it be
very hard to conceive. It Is operative in the hand of God for Sanctification.
The Petition of our Savior, (Joh. 17.7.) Sanctify them through thy truth, thy
word is truth, seems to intimate more than a bare objective relation to this
work; it both shows us our spots, and cleanses 'em. It is a Seed: Seed though
small, is active. It Is a Glass, that not only represents the Image of God, but
by the Spirit changes us into it, 2 Cor. 3.18. How powerful is that Word,
which changes a Beast into a Man, a Devil into an Angel, a Clod of Earth into
a Star of Heaven! It Is above the power of all moral Philosophy, and the
Political Government of the best States. It Is power appears in the Subjects it
has been instrumental to change, (Hearts full of the filthiest lusts, have
thereby been transformed into Vessels of purity.) And in the suddenness of it is
operation (How have Troops of unmaster'd Lusts fled at the Voice of the
Gospel-Trumpet, like a Flock of frightened Birds, and left their long possessed
Mansion!) and one part, one particle of the Word has wrought wonders many
times. -- A single sentence, one plain Scripture has killed a Man's Sins, and
erected an Heavenly Trophy in a Soul; which shows the power and efficacious
virtue of the Word, acting more vigorously than all humane Reason in the World.
This the experience of every Age can testify. Though the Word be not a natural
Instrument to work necessarily, yet it is liken'd to natural Instruments, which
are active under the efficiency of the Agent, which manages them. And an
Activity seems to be ascribed to it by Scripture- Metaphors. A few of which if
we now consider, they will clearly represent the effective influence and active
power of the Word to Cleanse our Way.

THE Word is compared to Light; which is of an undefilable quality in it self,
and a purifying influence as to other things: Hence it is called the refining
pot of Nature; The World would be an unwholesome Pesthouse without it. Light
and Purity go together. Where the Word truly irradiates the dark mind, it also
purges the defiled Conscience.

AGAIN, It is likened to an Hammer, (Jer. 23.29) The Word often breaks in
pieces the hard hearts of Men, these rocks within us; it beats down the nest of
filthy Lusts in the Soul: It drives home convictions, reproofs, and
instructions in Righteousness, and fastens good impressions on the Conscience,
as Nails in a sure place. Hence while Peter Preached his Hearers were pricked
in their hearts, Act. 2.37.

AGAIN, It is likned unto Fire; (Jer. 20.9. -- 23.29. Luke 12.49.) This Holy
Fire purifies the Soul, it consumes the stubble and chaff of Corruption, purges
away the dross of Earthly affections, and refines the Gold, Silver and precious
stones of Grace and Sanctity, it warms the Soul, and softens it as wax, to
receive an Heavenly impress; it enlivens the chilled affections, and it unites
the heart unto God.

AGAIN, It is compared to a Sword, (Heb. 4.13. Ephesians. 6.7.) By this the Captain
of our Salvation, when here on Earth, kept off and vanquished the unclean
Spirit, saying, It is written --. By this we defend our selves against the
strong Man armed, who meets us in our way, as a roaring Lion, and if 'twere not
for this victorious Weapon, the least he would do, would be to throw us down, and
worry us in the mire of carnal pollutions. Further, the Word, as a Sword, also
is sharp, quick and powerful, it peirces deep, shows to the Sinner his inward
unsoundness, touches him to the quick, and opens a passage for the putrid
virulent humors to issue forth.

AGAIN, The Word is compared to Honey; and that not only for it is sweet relish,
but it is purging quality.

AGAIN, To Milk (Heb. 5.13. 1 Pet. 2.2.) which has a clarifying, cleansing
property, applied outwardly, and a restorative, corroborating virtue, taken
inwardly: Even so the Commandment of the Lord is pure, the Law of the Lord is
perfect, restoring the Soul, (Psalm. 19.7, 8.)

AGAIN, To Food; It is the Bread of Life, and Meat which perishes not. The
Christian that eats thereof, that eats to satisfy his Soul, shall walk, and
not faint, so as to fall into the miryclay; shall run and not be weary, so as
to sit down in the dirt, or stumble down, and be entangled again in the
pollutions of the World.

AGAIN, To Leaven, (Mat. 13.33.) which works in a secret powerful manner,
producing qualities like it self. Such an assimilating power there is in the
Word. It is very pure, and when hid in the heart, it changes the foul
qualities, and transforms us into the image of it is own purity.

LASTLY, To Water; This Holy Water serves to quench the fiery darts of the
Unclean Spirit, and to wash away our defilements, and make us whiter than the
Snow. Hence, it is said, (Joh* 15.^.) Now are ye clean through the Word. So (1
Cor. 6.9, 11.) Some of you were the chief of Sinners, but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified. -- So (Ephesians. 5.26.) That He might sanctify and cleanse us, with
the washing of water, by the word. So the Waters in the Prophet's Vision, are
to be taken in a mystical sense, to signify the Gospel of Christ, ( Ezekiel. 47.)
though in the Letter they may mean the Waters, that by Aqueducts, or
Conduit-Pipes laid under ground, were conveyed from the Fountain Etam (as some
observe) into the Temple for the cleansing of the Sacrifices, and for other
Temple-uses. --

THE Word is particularly compared to Rain, (Deuteronomy. 32.2.) Showers of Rain serve
(among other things) to cleanse our Streets; the sweeping streams carry off the
filth and dirt, that we may walk and keep our feet clean. And so the small Rain
lays the dust, and mightily befriends a pleasant walk or Journey. Even so the
Waters of the Sanctuary sometimes come in an impetuous manner, and powerfully
bear down our filthy Lusts and cleanse our ways: and sometimes the small
droppings of the Word gently distill, and so lay our corruptions, which
otherwise the wind of Temptation would blow up to defile us, and to blind our
eyes, and stop us in our course, or turn us out of the path, and run us upon
boggs, and into sloughs and miles. -- It might be further observed here, that
Rainwater is the most cleansing, if we use it to wash our selves with; in this
the Word is like unto it.

HITHERTO I have spoken of the Word only in it is general notion: We may now
view the several more eminent Parts of it distinctly, which seem to be these,
viz. Truths, Precepts, Threatenings, Promises, Histories, Examples, and consider
how all and each do operate to purify the heart, and promote the Sanctification
of the whole Man.

I. THE Doctrines of the Word have a cleansing efficacy. The Dogmatical, or
Doctrinal part of Scripture, or those Truths, that are the object of Faith,
have a rational tendency, and moral influence to promote our holy living. 'Twas
the reproach of the Heathen Theology, that on many accounts it was the
instrument of vice; it ascribed not only the weak passion, but odious vices of
Men to the God's, representing Jupiter as an Adulterer, Bacchus as a Drunkard,
etc. And many of their sacred Mysteries, as well as solemn Ceremonies, (as one
observes) were of such a Nature, that instead of refining and elevating, they
rather corrupted and debased their Votaries, and immerst them in all those
abominable pollutions, which sober Nature abhorred, and which rendered 'em more
vile than than the filthiest Brutes. But now the Principles, and Truths, and
Mysteries in the Word of God, have a proper influence toward the
spiritualizing and purifying of us, and perfecting our Natures. The Apostle
calls the Doctrine of the Gospel a Form of sound Words, (2 Timothy 1.3.) Wholesome
Words, (1 Timothy 6.3.) i.e. pure and incorrupt in themselves, and tending to
prevent spiritual distempers, or restore to the Soul it is spiritual health: and
a Doctrine according to Godliness, i.e. tending to the advancement of practical
Piety. So the Apostle styles it, (Tit. 1.1.) The Truth which is after
Godliness, i. e. productive of Godliness. "Lusts grow from Error and Deceit;
hence they are called Lusts of Deceit: and Holiness grows up from Truth; hence
it is called, The Holiness of Truth. (Ephesians. 4.22.4.) This is the triumphal
Chariot, wherein Christ rides Majestically to the conquest of Hearts. Psalm.
45.4. And in thy Majesty ride prosperously, because of Truth or upon thy
Truth". Hence, the Apostle calls the Doctrine of the Gospel c^r most holy Faith
(Jud ver. 20.) as being the means of promoting holiness in us. So we read of
being purified by Faith, and sanctified by Faith, (Act. 13.9. -- ^.1^.) i.e.
The Christian Doctrine suitably entertained and applied by the believing Soul.
So we read, (Joh. 17.17, 19.) of being sanctified through the Truth, and of
purifying our Souls in obeying the Truth, (1 Pet. 1.22.) ^.e. in subjecting our
selves to the Truth of the Gospel. The Apostle tells us, (1 Timothy 1.5.) The end
of the Commandment (...) which some say signifies properly a Declaration) is
Charity, out of a pure heart, and a good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned. All
the Articles of the Creed are designed and adapted to lead us into the exercise
of Godliness, and to make us Partakers of Holiness; to abstract us from
material and sensible objects, and to cleanse us from our fleshly impurities.
-- Here we are led into the most just apprehensions of the Blessed God, His
Nature, Perfections, and Works, so sublime, as to strike us into a reverential
Awe of Him, and yet so endearing as to inflame our Love, and charm us into an
imitation of His moral and imitable Excellencies. Here we have represented to
us the dignity of the Divine Image, and our present capacity or susceptibleness
of it, and this tends to fire us with a generous ambition of assimilation to
God. Here we have an account of the guilt, and filth and misery of our natural
estate, and this tends to check the tumor of pride and arrogance, and to make
us low in our own Eyes: Here we are taught the vileness, deformity and
malignity of Sin, that it is loathsome and provoking to God, and injurious to
our own Souls, and this tends to incense us against Sin, and excite our
penitential sorrow for it: Here we have the infinite advantages, and ineffable
beauties of holiness displayed, and this tends to enamour us with Religion:
Here we are told the vanity of the World, which tends to take off our thot's
and affections from things below: and here Life and Immortality are brought to
Light, and the Glories of the future state emblazoned, which has a happy
tendency to make us set our affections on Things above, and labor for the Meat
which perishes not; and here the Terrors of Death, and the Horrors of Hell
beneath are set before us, which tends to quicken us to flee from the Wrath to
come, and to lay hold on Eternal Life. And the great Gospel-Doctrines, that
Jesus Christ came into the World to save Sinners, that He gave Himself to
redeem us from all iniquity, and to destroy the works of the Devil, and to
bring us into the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, etc. These Truths are a
means to create in us an aversion and indignation against Sin, (which was the
meritorious and procuring cause of Christ's Death and Sufferings, and which in
the Cross of Christ appears so exceeding sinful, and exceeding hurtful,) and
tends to excite our desires and endeavors to obtain that Sanctification of the
Spirit, which is the blessed purchase of Christ's Death, and to get our
Consciences purged from dead works by his Blood, and the Old Man in us
crucified with Him, and the Body of Sin destroyed by His Cross. -- The Mystery
of Christ is called the Mystery of Godliness, (1 Timothy 3.16.) partly and
principally because it tends to encourage and enforce the practice of Piety.
Hence the Apostle puts these two things together, growing in Grace, and in the
Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, (2 Pet. 3.18.) So ( Chap. 1.2,
3.) He speaks of Grace being multiplied through the knowledge of God and of Jesus
our Lord, and says, that all things are given to us, that pertain to life and
godliness, (i.e. that tend to cherish the life of Godliness, or promote holy
Living) through the knowledge of Him that has called us to Glory and Virtue. And
in a Word, there is no Mystery in Scripture, that is like the Tree of Knowledge;
only pleasant to the Eye, and a Tree to be desired to make one wise; but every
mystery, if pursued in its just and genuine consequences, is to us as the Tree
of Life, from whence we may gather the fruits of righteousness. There is no
Doctrine of natural or revealed Religion so abstruse and speculative, but some
practical application may be made of it. Some Articles at first view indeed
seem to be altogetheri sipid and barren, as to Piety and Devotion, and to
receive their end in Theory; but "as the Licorish stick, at first, looks like
any Weed, but chew it and you suck sweetness; so those Mysteries, that seem to
be most contemplative and remote from practice", have a vein of Piety running
through 'em and enriching them, and a sacred virtue may be extracted from 'em, to
promote vital practical Godliness, and cherish the true spirit of Devotion.
Hence we are said to adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things, (Tit.
2.10.12.) when thereby we are influenced to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts,
and to live soberly, righteously and godly in the present world, and we blemish
the Gospel, and give occasion for the way of truth to be evil spoken of, (2
Pet. 2.2.) when we do not hold the mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience.

SUCH is the Genius and transcendent Excellency of Scripture-truths, they tend
to make us holy, working effectually in them that believe; (1 These. 2.13.) and
they carry with them a peculiar attractive power to engage our belief of them.
There is a visible stamp of Divinity upon them, and a mighty evidence, and
force of reason and majesty shining in them; There is an unparalled strain of
Rhetoric in the Word, ( The Truth as it is in Jesus,) far above the art and
insinuations of the most celebrated Orators. It sets off all it is faithful
sayings, with an uncommon Life, with a charming beauty, and agreeable
simplicity and perspicuity, (which is voted by the best Masters of Oratory to
be the truest Eloquence) so as to render them worthy of all acceptance, and to
work the mind into a religious prostration and succumbency. Scripture-Truths
come recommended with all the motives of credibility, and adorned with the
Authority and majesty of God, and are wisely calculated to convey information
to the Understanding, and conviction to the Mind, to awe us into a belief of
them, and to make good impressions on the Conscience, and influence the practic
Powers. Hence it is said, (Psalm. 19.7.) The Doctrine of the Lord is perfect,
restoring the Soul; [as the Margin of some of your Bibles renders it.]

II. THE Precepts of the Word have a cleansing efficacy. Consider here,

1. THEY oblige to the most exact and exalted purity. The Word of God gives us
a most strict, as well as sure rule of Life. It has not only reduced our "duty
to a greater certainty, but raised it to a greater perfection", than any other
Institution in the World. The Gospel supplys the defects of the Jewish Law, and
corrects the Errors of the Heathen Philosophy. It forbids all Sin of every
denomination and degree; It strictly enjoins universal Holiness, and commands
that we labor after the most critical and consummate obedience in all
instances of duty. It Is true indeed, that personal complete obedience, as the
Condition of the Covenant, or Term of Salvation, is not expected nor demanded
under the Gospel, which makes allowance for our infirmities and short-comings;
if that had remained, we must have perish't for ever: But notwithstanding, the
Law, as a Rule, obliges without abating at all of it is binding force, or
contracting it is genuine extent. -- There are not in the Word of God any impure
indulgences, it gives no countenance to Sin in the least. It prohibits not only
outward gross acts of pollution and sensuality; but all inward irregularity of
thou't, and carnality of affection: It requires the real and internal
mortification of every Lust, every favourite-Lust, without exception. The
Commandment is exceeding broad, Psalm. 119.96. It reaches to the whole Man and
to our whole behavior under all circumstances: And the Law is spiritual, (Romans
7.14.) exceeding spiritual, and very pure. It commands us to abandon every evil
way, to stifle Sin in it is very first invisible conception in the heart, to fly
the instruments or occasions of it, to abstain from all appearances of evil,
and approaches to it: In a Word, whatsoever looks like Sin, or leads unto it,
is to be dreaded and avoided, as interfering with pure Religion: it forbids
even a lustful though it, and a covetous desire; it lays a restraint on the most
retired motions of the Soul, and corrects those secret risings of rebellion
within, in which the most inquiring Philosophers could discern nothing of
vitiosity or impurity. By the tenor of the Divine Law we are unclean, if we do
not study to avoid even the least pollution in heart and life; "Yea, by the
measures of the Gospel, we are unclean, unless we have active purities". We
must follow after all positive substantial Holiness, and exercise real Grace,
and not only so, but endeavor to excel in Virtue, and grow in Grace; and we
must not only comply with all matters of absolute Duty, but whatsoever things
are honest, or becoming our Profession, lovely and of good report, desirable,
commendable, and justly approved of Men, even these Things must be considered
and drawn into practice. We must exercise our selves to have always Consciences
void of offen^e both toward God, and toward Man, (Act. 24.16.) We must walk
circumspectly, (Ephesians. 5.15.) accurately, exactly, unrebukably. We must endeavor
to live in all good Conscience, and to walk in all the Ordinances and
Commandments of the Lord, blameless, (Luke 1.6.) We must ever follow that which
is good both among our selves and to all Men, (1 These. 5.15.) and be perfect in
every good work, (Heb. 13.21.) and stand complete in all the will of God, (Col.
4.12.) and be holy in all manner of conversation, (1 Pet. 1.15.) we must
endeavor to walk worthy of the Lord, (1 These. 2.12.) we must strive and aim to
recover our primitive innocence, yea to attain Angelical Sanctity, yea a Divine
Purity. Though we come short, yet we must follow after. (Phil. 3.12.) We must be
Followers, Imitators, of God us dear Children, (Ephesians. 5.1.) We must aspire to be
holy, as He who has called us is holy, to purify our selves, even as Christ is
pure, (1 John 3.3.) and to be perfect, as our Heavenly Father is perfect, (Mar.
5.48.) We must press toward the work, (Phil. 3.14.) and be always abounding in
the work of the Lord, (1 Cor. 15.58.) if by any means (...) may attain unto the
resurrection of the Dead, the purity of the Resurrection state. -- Unto such an
height of holiness (we see) the Law of God obliges us. Well then might the
Psalmist say, The Commandment of the Lord is pure, the Judgments of the Lord
are righteous altogether: (Psalm. 19.8, 9.) and surely they that walk according
to this rule, must needs be blameless and harmless, and unrebukable in
holiness, shining as Lights in the World. They that keep these Precepts
diligently, must needs perfect holiness, and be removed from that which
desileth and works abomination and that makes a lie.

2. THE Precepts of the Word carry in them the highest Equiry and most evident
Reason. They are founded in the Divine Nature, and are the visible Image of
God's Holiness. -- They are also commended to us by the Example of Christ; and
require nothing of us, but what He who is the wisdom of God, though it fit Himself
to do. -- And they are every way becoming the dignity and perfectly suited to
the Nature and Condition of Man. They contain nothing, but what is entirely
agreeable to the genuine dictates of natural Reason, and the regular
inclinations of the humane Will, and what has ever been approved, consented to
and conformed to by the wisest and best of Men. Obedience to them is the
exercise of our reasonable Powers, and the exaltation of our rational Nature.
(The Law of God tends to the perfection of the ^oul, Galai I^e The ^l^gia, etc.
page 179.
as it orders and directs all the faculties, functions and operations ^f it to
their proper objects, and proper Ends:) And it does greatly consult and
contribute to our present tranquillity, as well as future felicity. Hence the
Apostle calls the Law of God a perfect Law of Liberty, (Jam. 1.25.) And hence
the Psalmist makes that profession, (Psalm. 119.45.) I will walk at liberty: for
I seek thy Pretepts. And hear how Moses challenges all the World to show a Body
of Laws so wise and equal, so honorable and good -- Deuteronomy. 4.6, 8. What Nation
is there so great or famous, that has statutes and judgments so righteous, as
all this Law which I set before you this day? Keep therefore and do them, for
this is your wisdom, and for your good, (Deuteronomy. 10.13.) And hear how the Apostle
magnifies the Law, telling us that the Commandment is holy, just and good,
(Romans 7.12.) that the obedience of Faith is a reasonable service, and that to
prove the will of God, is to prove what is good, acceptable and perfect, (Romans
12.1, 2.) And do we not read, (Isai. 46.8.) that to turn our feet unto God's
Testimonies, is to show our selves Men? When we keep the Commandments of God,
we walk as Men, we act like reasonable Creatures: This is worthy the noble and
exalted powers, which set Man above the common level of the visible Creation;
and by this we attain the great end of our Being, and secure our highest
interests: whereas to violate the Divine Precepts is to cross the design of our
Creation, to prostitute our excellent Nature, and render our selves more vile
and miserable than the Beasts that perish. Sin is a reproach, and Lust a hard
Master: but the Service of God is the truest Freedom, and puts the noblest
Character upon us. It is the employment of our best powers for the best ends.
-- Let none then charge God foolishly, as if His Ways were unequal, or traduce
His Commandments as grievous Impositions. Verily all the wit of Angels and Men
could never have drawn up such a complete, unerring and unexceptionable System
of Laws as those of God. Upon an exact calculation and due consideration of
things we shall find, that the Divine Laws both moral and positive are the most
wisely chosen, the most equitable, condescending and beneficent, the most
excellently adapted to the nature and circumstances of Men, and so every way
fitted to court our love, to captivate and engage every one's rational choice,
and religious observation. They are faithful sayings and worthy of all
acceptance. -- More to be desired than Gold. They have no Pefect in them that
should demand any Additions, nor Error that should call for Correction, nor
Rigor that should require Moderation: But they have such an undeniable
fullness, purity, perspicuity and reasonableness, as challenges our observation,
and must needs recommend them to all Men of impartial judgment and unprejudiced
reason. -- And it is owing to the ignorance and malignity, pride and
perverseness of Men's hearts, if they live in the transgression and contempt of
God's righteous Judgments. They are the froward in heart and the Fools in
Israel that despise and break the Commandment. Such are at war with their own
Consciences, and bid defiance to their own reason, and the avowed principles of
Mankind. There is no judgment in their goings; Their way is their folly.
Solomon gives Sinners their most proper and just character, when he so
constantly styles them Fools. -- The Godly Man alone is the truly wise Man. The
wisdom that is from above is pure. The Fear of the Lord is the perfection of
wisdom. A good understanding have all they, that keep his Commandments. Let
none then be wise above what is written. Let no one think himself too great a
Philosopher to become a Saint; or too great a Master of Reason to become
obedient to the Rules, and patient under the Restraints of the Law of God.

3. THE Precepts of the Word carry in them the most Sacred and Sovereign
Authority. The Majesty of God, the Great God, shines in them with the strongest
light, which gives them the most awing and governing authority over the
Consciences of Men, and on this depends their cleansing efficacy. -- Under the
notion of were Rules, the Precepts of the Word only direct us to cleanse our
way; and considered as reasonable and good Rules they are apt to persuade: but
considered as the will of God, our King and Judge, they carry with them a
transcendent power and authority to oblige and constrain us to universal
Purity. -- Authority it is, that gives virtue and influence to any Rules or
Constitutions. Long experience sufficiently testify, that dry rules and bare
suasion are but of little significancy with a degenerate and ungovernable
World; especially with Young Men, whose Reason is slender and weak, but their
Passions big and strong, and impatient of any restraint. Look where we will, we
find that the most wholesome Advice, unless clothed with Authority, is but
trampled upon and contemned. We see that the wisest Directions, though
accompanied with the warmest exhortations, and the most compassionate
entreaties, nay though strengthened with the most conclusive reasonings and the
most convincing expostulations, are but of small account with the generality,
unless enforced by some Venerable Power. Now there is no Authority so ^ful, so
binding, and controlling, as that of God. And there are no Laws have such
apparent signatures of Divinity upon them, as the Precepts of the Bible. They
bear the most palpable and indelible impresses of a Divine Authority. Here are
visible the bright footsteps of infinite Wisdom, Justice, Holiness and
Goodness. The Precepts of the Word are an authentic Copy of the Divine
Perfections and an uncounterfeit Instrument of God's revealed Will. They bear
the royal Stamp, and carry in them such an uncontestible and irresistible
Authority, as produces (at least) an intellectual veneration and submission in
the most hardened Rebels. Where the word of a King is, there is power. Surely
every word that proceeds out of the Mouth of God, the King of Kings, must
come armed with uncontrollable authority and majesty: and who is able to resist
the wisdom and spirit of power, which breaths in His universal Law? Therein the
great Lawgiver speaks to us as One having Authority. The Word of God is quick
and powerful (vital and eperative) and sharper than any two edged Sword,
piercing even to the dividing asunder of Soul and Spirit, and of the joints and
man w^nd is discerner of the thought and intents of the heart, (Heb. 4.12.) The
Precepts of the Word pierce to the hidden and most intimate parts of the
Sinner, they go to the very Well Head and first springs of motion, and take
cognizance of the most secret initial workings of Lust, and powerfully strike
conviction into the brawny Conscience, breaking through all opposit^on, and "bind
down a sense of guilt" on the mind, admonish, accuse and condemn even where the
most accurate Precepts of Philosophy could never reach, and where the strictest
methods of humane Discipline have no influence. -- Hence the Law of God is very
justly called the royal Law, (Jam. 2.8.) It is the chief and sovereign Law, and
it carries a most Kingly Power, Grandour and August Majesty, that when it
speaks, every attentive mind cannot but hear the Voice of God, which strikes
with awe and commands reverence. And this is the peculiar advantage of the
Divine Law, which gives it superior influence above all other Laws. This
magnifies it, and makes it honorable, and powerful. The dread Majesty of God,
so conspicuous in the Divine Precepts, gives them a far more exceeding
imperative authority and impressive power.

NOW (to conclude this Head) Do the Precepts of the Word aim at such high
Purity, and do they carry in them such uncontestible Reason to recommend them,
and such uncontrollable Authority to enforce them: Then they are extremely
fitted to make their own way into the hearts of Men; and where they find
suitable entertainment, will be an efficacious means to cleanse our way. They
are of such a nature and complexion, and so qualified, as that they are very
apt to draw Men's regards, and win us over to the observance of them; and as
many as walk according to these Rules, must needs be undefiled in the way, and
without rebuke.

III. THE Threatenings of the Word have a cleansing efficacy. The wise
Legislator has seen meet to annex a minatory Sanction to His Law; to be a
Guardian of it is Authority and Honor, to be a Terror to Evildoers, and a
dissuasive from Sin which is the Transgression of the Law. And the Divine
Threatenings are every way fitted to subserve the designed end.

THIS I Will endeavor to clear under the following Conclusions. --

1. FEAR is a Passion, rooted in the Nature of Man. An Aversion to Misery is
natural to every one. No Man is made without fear. -- The Report of the
Understanding is the Rule of the Will, in all regular motions of the Soul. What
that represents as evil, and apprehends as future, this abhors and flies from.
-- Hence, The Threatenings of the Word which are messages of Evil to guilty
Sinners, are a proper medium to use with them to restrain them from Sin,
inasmuch as they address one of the Passions of humane Nature, and are a just
Alarm to the Fears of Men.

2. FEAR is the most powerful Principle of Action. Hope and Fear are the two
great springs of motion in humane nature. But Fear is the more violent and
vigorous Passion, "Usually the fear of Evil more deeply and strongly affects,
than the hope of Good". And Fear is also more easily touched. It is easier of
access, as well as more impetuous in exercise. It has a quicker, as well as
deeper, resentment. Fear is a tender, a zealous, and restless Passion. When
struck with an object, it is more speedy and pressing in its flight, than Hope,
when drawn by an object, is in it is pursuit. "Therefore Laws are secured by
Punishments, not by Rewards". Hence the Threatenings of the Word are a most
suitable Argument to make impression on Mankind, in that they are apt to work
upon one of the m^st powerful and active Passions of Humanity.

3. THE Divine Threatenings are completely fitted to be the most forceable
excitations to Fear. They are every way excellently calculated to work
powerfully, most powerfully, on the Fears of Men.

This will appear,

1. IF we consider the Cleanness and Plainness of them. They are as full and
express as possible. They are not given in dark hints: But are drawn in the
clearest Colors. We have fair warning, sufficient notice of our danger, and
there is no room left for Doubts, that should weaken the impression or lesson
the terror of the Threatening. The Law of God Thunders out the dire Anathema,
that, unless we stop our Ears, we cannot but hear the Words of the Curse: It
lightens and flashes in our face, that unless we wilfully shut our Eyes, we
cannot but see our fearful doom. -- Now this is a great advantage to the Divine
Threatenings. For the motive of Fear is an apparition of some Evil. And the
clearer the report of danger is, so much the higher does our fear rise in
proportion. Hence the Divine Threatenings, speaking so plainly, do speak the
more sensibly, and the more effectually reach the Fears of Men.

2. IF we consider the infallible and inflexible Truth of them. The Evils, they
denounce, are undoubted Realities: and the Comminations themselves are plainly
revealed, and are accompanied with the strongest Motives of Credibility. They
are delivered in the most preremptory Terms imaginable, and we have the highest
assurances of their certainty. The God of Truth (whose words endure forever)
has revealed them from Heaven, and has added an Oath for confirmation, which
is an end of all strife. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto
Sinners the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an Oath: that by two
immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a
strong persuasion, and that there might be no room to dispute or question the
Execution of His Threatenings. How constantly are the Divine Menaces introduced
with the solemn Preface -- Thus says the Lord -- and, As I live, says the
Lord --? And how awfully does the Lord swear in His Wrath against the obstinate
Sinner, where He says, As I live, surely mine Oath, that He has despised,
even it will I recompense on his own head. -- And this is one great Advantage
to the Divine Threatenings, and gives them great power over Men's Fears. For the
just Object of Fear is Evil apprehended as future. The immediate ground of Fear
is the apprehension of an approaching Evil. It Is the sense of danger, that
moves fear: and the stronger the apprehension of an Evil is, the stronger is
the passion against it. Hence the Divine Threatenings, giving us such full
assurance and convincing evidence of the real futurity of the unseen Plagues
and Punishments of the Wicked, must needs have a mighty force, to awaken and
actuate the Fears of Sinners.

3. IF we consider the superlative Greatness and Extent of them. The Threatened
Evils are great, exceeding great, beyond expression, and above all conception.
The Threatenings address us with a most formidable scene of Miseries, such as
Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard of. Sinners are threatened with extreme and
everlasting punishment, -- a punishment, as intolerable as the Wisdom of God
could invent; as severe, as the Holiness of God could excite Him unto; as
heavy, as the Power of God can inflict; and who knows the Power of His Anger?
Strong is the Lord that judges, mighty in strength, wise in heart, and
glorious in holiness. -- The Divine Threatenings denounce infinite Evils, the
most dreadful and devouring, which the stoutest atlas must tremble and sink
under, and the weight whereof the most hardy Sinner has not patience nor power
to endure. -- The Scripture represents to us the Everlasting Punishment under a
variety of Names, that speak terror and amazement to every considering Soul. It
is described by Death; by Slaughter; by Perdition and Destruction; by a Loss of
the Soul; by a Destruction of Soul and Body in Hell; by Departing from God; by
being cast into utter darkness; by Dwelling with devouring Fire and everlasting
Burnings; and (which is the Sum of all) by abiding under the Wrath of God; and
finally (which is the effect of all) by wailing and gnashing of teeth, and
being in torments day and night, for ever and ever. The threatened Punishment
incomparably exceeds all the terrors of sense. The Sufferings of the present
time, in their full Collection and highest Degree, are not worthy to be
compared with the misery to be inflicted on the Damned. It is worse than Death;
it infinitely outweighs the utmost evils we can imagine, and infinitely
out-reaches our most unbounded fears. Even according to thy fear, so is thy
wrath, and infinitely more, Psalm. 90.11. -- "One spark of God's Wrath firing
the Conscience, is more terrible, than the most fearful Evils in the World", to
affect, and excite the fears of Men. It is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God. The Damnation of Hell is infinitely terrible. The
Sinners in Zion may well be afraid, and fearfulness surprise the Hypocrite,
when they think of the Fire and Brimestone, and the horrible Tempest, that will
be the Portion of their Cup. -- The expected Evil must be looked upon (...)
great, ponderous and powerful, and not ( easily, at least) to be grapled with,
in order to it is creating fear and causing fright. And the degree of Fear is
ordinarily correspondent to the apprehended bigness and weight of the object.
Therefore the Divine Threatenings which are charged with Evils of such an huge
bulk and tremendous aspect, and which make so big a Thunder, must needs (if
they be duly considered and attended to) work most prevalently on the passion
of Fear, and raise it to the highest pitch. Destruction from God must needs be
a Terror to us. Our flesh may well tremble for fear of it.

4. Consider, THE imminent danger Sinners are daily in of the Execution of the
Divine Threatenings upon them. The wicked and impenitent are every day obnoxious
to revenging Justice. Black Clouds of Divine Wrath hover over their heads, and
threaten bitter desolations; and who knows how soon Almighty Vengeance may like
Thunder surprise careless Sinners, and in a moment utterly consume them? When
they are saying, peace and safety; then sudden destruction may come upon them,
and overtake them as a thief, and they shall not escape, (1 These. 5.3, 4.) God
in His long-suffering waits to be gracious; but His patience will sooner or
later have had its perfect work, and His Threatenings will surely one day have
their complete accomplishment on rebellious Sinners. The Vision is yet for an
appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though it tarry, it
will surely come, it will not tarry, (Hab. 2.3.) And, for ought any one knows,
the appointed time of forbearance may be just expiring; and the time of
vengeance may be hast^ upon him, even the sad time when Justice shall triumph
in the sudden execution of the Curses, written against the Ungodly. -- Hence,
the Divine Threatenings must needs deeply touch the Spirits of every considering
Sinner. For as the bigger the Evil, the greater the Terror: so the nigher an
Evil approaches, the higher our dread rises in proportion. Apprehended nearness
gives us a quicker and stronger resentment of danger. It is then a great
advantage to the Divine Threatenings, that the Scripture leaves the particular
time of their Execution uncertain, and in general represents it as near at
hand, even at the Door. And it exposes the mad presumption of that evil
Servant, that says -- My Lord delayeth his coming. It tells us the fearful
danger there is in putting far from us the evil Day, and warns us not to
flatter our selves with the vain hopes of a long indulgence; and exhorts us to
flee from the wrath to come, and so much the more, because the day approaches.
The Word of God represents Sinners, as standing on the very brink of misery, as
hanging over the mouth of the pit, and being in danger of Hellfire. -- And is
not this matter of trembling consideration? What more fearful Lesson of horror
could be read to secure Sinners to awaken them? This redoubles the terror of
the Threatening. -- We read, that Sampson, when asleep in the embraces of his
beloved Delilah, awoke immediately on that cry, -- The Philistines be upon
thee, Sampson. But that is a more dreadful sound, -- The Wrath of God is upon
thee, Sinner, and the pains of Hell, and the horrors of an Everlasting
Darkness, are getting hold upon thee! -- And surely if Men are not deaf, they
cannot sleep out these terrible Claps of Thunder, it must needs startle their
Consciences, and put them in fear, chill their Lusts, and awaken very careful
thot's how they may escape the impending Evils. "Do but believe, and you must
tremble, were you a Devil". God hangs the Sinner over the flames of Hell, and
causes the devouring Fire to sparkle and flash in his Eyes; and if this does
not daunt and scare him, what can God do more to terrify the audacious Wretch?

5. Consider; THE Divine Threatenings are proportioned to the Sinners
Provocations. There is an exact harmony or correspondence between our Guilt and
Doom. All the impenitent are under the condemning Sentence of the Law, -- a
Sentence big with frightful horrors. But some do not Sin under so easy
circumstances as others, their Sins are loaded with peculiar aggravations; as
being committed against clearer Light, more endearing Love, and stronger Bonds,
longer continued in, and oftener repeated, etc. Now as these things and the
like, do enhance their Guilt, so they do entitle Sinners to a greater
Damnation, and fill their Sentence with more heavy and ghasdy woes. By every
Sin addition is made to the number of our deserved stripes, and the weight of
our future punishment. And thus the sma^ of a Rod gradually arises to the
torment of a Scorpion. -- And this Consideration adds to the terror of the
Divine Threatenings, makes them to appear with a most grim and dreadful face, to
speak in a whirlwind with the loudest and most moving accents, and to shoot
their arrows with fiery indignation.

6. Consider; THE Threatenings are backed with the most pathetical and powerful
Expostulations. God, who is the God of Patience, spares the wicked, suspends
the infliction of condign punishment, stretches out His Hand all the day to
gain saying Rebels, and warns them of their danger, meets them in their mad
carriere, sets the point of His glittering Sword against them, and the terrors
of Death in battel-array before them to check their presumption, and offers all
the dear dissuasives of Love to bank up their way, and with many compassionate
Calls beseeches them to depart from the snares of Death, and with the tender
sympathy of a Friend and Father He reasons the case with perishing Sinners, --
O Generation, ye have not obeyed my voice, why have ye done this? Wherefore say
ye, we are Lords, we will not come unto thee? What iniquity do you find in me?
Why will you contend with me? Who ever hardened himself against Me and
prosper'd? Cannot I do with you even as this Potter? Do ye provoke me to
jeasousy? Are ye stronger than I? Turn ye, turn ye^ for why wi^ ye die? Why
should thou destroy thy self? And He upbraids their folly, and laments their
obstinacy, How long ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? Will thou not from
this time cry unto me, My Father, thou art the guide of my Youth? We unto
thee, will thou not be made clean? when shall it once be? How long will thy
vain tho'ts ledge within thee? Circumcise your selves unto the Lord; lest my
fury come forth like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the
evil of your doings. And when thou art spoiled, what will thou do? Can thine
heart endure, or can thine hands be strong in the day that I shall deal with
thee? And what will ye do in the day of visitation, when I shall blow upon you
in my wrath? To whom will ye flee for help? And where will ye leave your glory?
-- Thus does the Lord, who might instantly in Justice let fly at Sinners,
mercifully stoop to debate with them, and to argue the case with bleeding
bowels. And these gracious Expostulations and Exprobrations speak with the most
piercing conviction to guilty self-destroying Souls. There is a peculiar
emphasis in these solemn Appeals and affectionate Interrogations: They prick
the Heart, and stab the Conscience; they are as so many pointed darts, or
piercing stings.

THUS we see, that the Threatenings of the Word are every way a most powerful
argument to excite the fears of Men; enough to shake the proudest Cedars, and
strike the stoutest Sinners into trembling horror. -- Which was the 3d Thing.

Pass we now to the Last Particular; which is.

4ly. FEAR is a very strong Dissuasive from Sin, and the ordinary initial
Motive to Religion. It is the foundation of Repentance from dead works, and of
Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Conviction of Guilt, and Fear of the Wrath
of God, are the first steps to Conversion, and the groundwork of Reformation.
Sinners generally will not be bro't to Repentance, nor entertain a serious
though it of Heaven, till they meet with a rough Sea, and an horrible Tempest;
'till they are stormed with black and dismal terrors, they will never quit the
embraces of their beloved Lusts; 'Till tortured on the rack of a wounded
Conscience, they will not confess and give glory to God; 'Till they are bro't
to a sense of their danger and perishing condition, they will not be persuaded
to repair to the Great Physician; 'Till stung with the arrows of God, they will
not look to the brazen Serpent; they will not fly to the City of Refuge, 'till
driven by the Avenger of Blood. Sin will not be a burden, nor Christ precious
to them, 'till Destruction from God be a terror to 'em. But when the Divine
Threatenings strike a dread upon the Conscience, and awaken an affecting sense
of Danger, This tends to produce a flight from the ways of wickedness, and a
disposition and application unto serious Godliness. The pressures of fear are a
damp to the pleasures of Sin, and tend to make the bond of iniquity to be the
gall of bitterness to us. Prevailing fear tends to embitter Sin and to cool the
heat of Lust, to check the power of corruptions within, and to disarm, control
and conquer temptations without; For as the Wise Man observes, (Prove. 1.17.)
Surely in vain is the net spread in the sight of any bird: perceiving the
snare, it will fly the bait. And when Men know and feel the terrors of the
Lord, This tends to put them upon working out their Salvation with fear and
trembling. When they are afraid of his Judgment, this incline them to hearken
to reproof, and and receive instruction, to learn righteousness, and break off
from their sins by repentance. Solomon tells us, Pro. 166. By the fear of the
Lord, Mendepart from Evil. So (Chapter 8.13.) The fear of the Lord is to hate evil.
The Psalmist observes, (Ps. 19.9.) The fear the Lord is clean, (as in it is own
nature, so) in it is effects. It is preliminary and introductory to pure
Religion. It is a strong curb of restraint, to keep us back from the soul ways
of Sin; and a sharp spur of constraint, to excite us to obedience, and quicken
us in the way of righteousness. Fear will put the Sinner upon Expostulating,
with tempted Joseph, -- How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against
God? -- and upon enquiring with the trembling Jailer, -- What must I do to be
saved? -- It will put the Sinner upon considering with the repenting Prodigal,
-- How many hired Servants of my Father have bread enough and to spare, and I
perish with hunger: and upon resolving with him, -- I will arise and go to my
Father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned against Heaven, and before
thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son; make me as one of thy hired
Servants. -- Repentance ordinarily takes it is first rise from a sense of the
guilt, misery and danger of a natural state. Legal Terrors open the ear to the
Spirit's discipline, and prepare the way of the Lord. When a Man sees Evil
pursuing him, and his heart meditates terror, how willing will he be to hearken
to any probable Methods of Escape, and how welcome the views of some sure
Sanctuary at hand, to retreat unto? So, the Sinner, when warned of God, and
moved with fear at the dreadful reports of Wrath in the Threatenings of the Law,
how does this dispose him to entertain the blessed reports of Mercy, and
embrace the offers of Life in the Promises of the Gospel? The Terrors of
Everlasting Death prepare him to receive the glad Tidings of Salvation by
Christ, and to fly for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before him. The fear
of Hell at first disposes us for the love of Heaven: to escape the one, we fly
to the other. Were it not for the Torments of Hell, Dr. Bates, Fol. page 227.
(which are more easily conceived by us, whilst we are clothed with Flesh,
than Celestial Joys, and therefore more strongly affect us) Heaven would be
neglected, and be as empty of Saints, as it is full of Glory. To awaken us out
of the deep lethargy of sensual Lusts, (the most pleasant music is
ineffectual,) nothing less is requisite than cutting and scarifying. Sinners
will "break through the hedge of the Law, unless they feel those wounding Thorns,
the fearful Threatenings in it". The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, the
first piece of the Armor of Light, the commencing essay of repentance, and
initiative to holiness of Life. The Spirit of bondage to fear, which comes in
by the application of the Threatenings, prepares the way for the Spirit of
Adoption, which comes in by the application of the Promises. The Law is a
Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, (Gal. 3.24.) And when Legal Terrors are
balanced and brightened with Evangelical Hopes, we shall rise to a blessed
perfection in holiness. Fear alone is not of sufficient efficacy to cleanse our
way: Hence God has added many gracious Promises in His Word, to work upon us
by the principle of Hope. Which leads me to another Head.

IV. THE Promises of the Word have a cleansing efficacy. It has pleased the
Great Lawgiver to annex (not only a minatory, but also) a Promiss^ry Sanction
to His Law, which is every way fitted to draw forth our Hope, to endear and
sacilitate our duty, and excite to obedience. The great design and manifest
tendency of the Divine Promises is to allure and engage us to cleanse our way.
The Apostle Peter tells us, (2 Pet. 1, 4.) That they are given to us, that by
these we might be partakers of the Divine Nature, i. e. transformed into the
image of Divine purity. And another Apostle uses them as an argument or
incentive unto holiness, (Romans 12.1, 2.) I beseech you by the mercies of God,
that ye present your selves a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God; and
be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your
mind. So likewise (2 Cor. 7.1.) Having these promises, let us cleanse our
selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit. q. d. Having such a price in
our hands to get wisdom, the wisdom that is pure, having such a blessed motive
and means to animate and assist, induce and enable us to cleanse our ways, as
the Promises. Let us improve our happy advantage. -- These Scriptures plainly
show, that the end and office, and proper influence of the Divine Promises is
to make us pure and holy. -- And this is the Point, which I am now to
illustrate. And here a very large Field of Discourse opens before us: But I
shall content my self with these following Hints.

(1.) THE Promises have a purifying influence upon us, from the kind and
quality of the subject matter, or Things offered in them. The Goods contained
in the Promises are --

1. INFALLIBLY Real. They are not some illusory and imaginary Things, the
shadows of a Dream, and the wild visions of luxuriant fancy that have no Being
like the lying Vanities (which our deceitful Lusts do often promise us: but
they are substantial realities, bro't to light by the Gospel of Jesus Christ,
who as He purchased them by His Death, so he has given assurance to all Men of
the certainty and truth of them by his resurrection from the Dead. Now this
thought lays a sure foundation for Desire and Hope; and obliges us to cleanse
our ways from a principle of self-love.

2. ABSOLUTELY Necessary. The Contents of the Divine Promises are not
indifferent and insignificant matters, of little or no concern to us, which we
may be without or enjoy, and our case be much the same: No; but they are of
infinite weight and indispensable necessity, the true foundation of humane
felicity, the One Thing needful, upon which our All depends; To miss of which
is utter ruin, but the enjoyment is our making for ever. -- Now this
Consideration has a mighty tendency to kindle desires, and awaken endeavors to
secure an interest in the blessed Promises.

3. SUPERLATIVELY Excellent. Hence the Promises are called exceeding great and
precious Promises. (2 Cor. 7.1.) The Blessings, treasured up in them, are the
most sublime and valuable; Better than Thousands of Gold and Silver; more sweet
also than honey, and the honeycomb: unspeakably preferrible to the whole
confluence of earthly Beatitudes; every way proportionable to our various
necessities, equal to our cravings, and adaequate to our capacities, enough to
satisfy our desires, satiate our hopes, and complete our happiness. Hence the
Promises are suited to attract our affection and tempt our ambition. -- In
every Man there is an unquenchable thirst after felicity, although we pursue
various objects according to our different resentments of happiness; and when
the object is considered as attainable, this begets hope, and hope produces
endeavor. Hope is an operative and industrious Principle; it is the grand
incentive and instrument of active diligence; and it draws forth the practic
Powers and invigorates our endeavors in proportion to the apprehended worth
and importance of the desired Good. The greater and more excellent the object
hoped for, the stronger influence will the hope of it have upon us, and the
more powerfully will it wing and animate our endeavors, and draw us to use the
means of obtaining it. -- Now the Divine Promises engage the highest
satisfactions, and propound the most desirable objects of Hope: and hence they
must needs (if duly realiz'd and considered) have a very attractive influence
on Men; for they address in the most powerful manner to the fundamental
principle of self-love, which breeds insatiable Desires to promote our own
happiness, and to the praedominant passion of Hope, which produces
indefatigable Industry in the pursuit thereof. And those must be unreasonable
Men, and divested of humanity, whom a belief of the Promises of God has no
influence upon, to induce 'em to serious Religion, which entitles to the
highest happiness.

4. SPIRITUAL and Rational. The Goods presented in the Promises are not carnal
but spiritual; They are not the sordid trash of this vain perishing World,
visible, material and sensual enjoyments, Provision for the flesh, only suited
to pamper the Body: But they are ghostly, immaterial, supernatural, Angelical
felicities. They are Spiritual Blessings, and Heavenly Things, (Ephesians. 1.3.)
Manna from Heaven, fitted to refresh and ravish, to feast and solace the Soul,
the great Soul of Man. -- Indeed the Body is not utterly overlooked. The
Promises secure external Necessaries to the Godly in ordinary cases. Godliness
has the promise of the Life that now is, (1 Timothy 4.8.) So we read, (Mat.
6.33.) Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added to you. What Things? We are told in the foregoing verse;
All these Things which your Heavenly Father knows that ye have need of. Bread
to eat and Raiment to put on. -- But this provision for the Body is made with a
remote view to the Soul, to ease and accommodate that. And the Capital Promises
relate immediately to the Soul: These are spiritual, in that the Goods they
tender are of a spiritual nature, and the Recipient is the Spirit of Man.

NOW this Spirituality of the Promises does tend by a sort of natural efficacy
to dispose and engage Men to walk not after the flesh but after the spirit.
Hence the Apostle observes, (1 John 3.3.) Every man that has this hope in him,
purifyeth himself. If a Man have a firm belief of the Promises, a realizing
view of the spirituality of the Goods promised, and any hope to obtain them, he
must needs be concerned to get his vitiated appetite purged and his carnal mind
spiritualized, that he may be a meet subject of these refined and immaculate
fruitions.

THUS I Have argued from the Nature and Quality of the Promises in general. I
might now illustrate the Truth before us by an induction of Particulars; And
say, --

1. THE Promise of Pardon does manifestly and mightlly tend to animate and
excite us to cleanse our ways. By this Promise the great impediments and
discouragements to Repentance are removed. Hereby our Unbelief is helped, and
suspicious diffidence concerning God's reconcilableness to Sinners superseded.
The uncovenanted Goodness of God would have been but a very uncertain
foundation of Hope, and a very weak inducement to Repentance. But now the
Promise of Pardon is a firm ground of Hope, and an encouraging motive to
Repentance. And such a Promise the Word of God sets before us. The Gospel sets
forth the Lord Jesus Christ as a Propitiation for Sin, and Preaches remission
of Sins through his Blood; and it proclames the Name of God, the Lord, the Lord
God, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, ready to forgive; and abounds with
Promises of Pardon. Hence, the Gospel is called the Gospel of Peace, the Word
of Reconciliation, etc. -- Now by the Promise of Pardon, Sinners have their
doubts resolved and their fears relieved touching the Divine Mercy: And this
greatly tends to overcome our guilty disaffection to God. For while terrible
apprehensions of the Deity possess the heart, it is frozen with a stony rigor,
which the hope of Mercy only can dissolve. Despair chills and cools all essays
to repent, and hardens Men in the love and practice of Sin. A hopeless mind and
a careless temper are common Companions. Faith and Hope are the root and
principle of Repentance and Obedience. The prospect of recovering the lost
favor of God strongly invites Sinners to cleanse their ways. -- Besides the
Promise of Pardon is such an endearing expression of God's Love and Good Will
unto self-ruin'd Man, as most powerfully leads to Repentance: This is a
mighty dissuasive from Sin, and a forceable persuasive unto Duty. A believing
view of the free Grace and rich mercy of God in the Redemption by Christ, tends
to beget in us kindly relentings and remorse for Sin, to warm and soften our
hearts, and dissolve them into a current of penitential tears and religious
affections. -- To consider how we have forfeited the favor of God; To
consider, that we may now obtain a Pardon, that the most heinous Sins, and the
chief of Sinners may obtain mercy of the Lord; To consider, that God offers
freely and irreversibly to bestow pardoning mercy on us, on us, who
indispensably need it, and are infinitely unworthy of it, -- surely, if there
be any principle of Honor, any spark of ingenuity, or gratitude remaining in
us, we must be drawn by these hands of Love and persuaded by the Mercies of God
to present our Bodies a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ. What can be more welcome to a condemned Criminal than a Pardon? God
offers this to an obnoxious World. Surely these glad Tidings of great joy
should not only check our desponding fears, but melt our congealed affections,
excite in us Repentance toward God, ravish our love, and inspire our Souls
with flaming desires, and firm resolutions, in all things to obey and please a
God, so abundant in Goodness and plenteous in Mercy. And surely if the
consideration of the Promise of Pardoning Mercy has not this effect upon us, we
must be base and ungrateful to the last degree, and have hearts more insensible
than the Rocks.

2. THE Promise of the Holy Spirit is another very engaging motive to cleanse
our ways. The Word of God promises us the Spirit of Grace to be our Teacher,
Guide, Sanctifier and Comforter. And what good News must this needs be to a
lost and disconsolate, perishing World, a World that lies in wickedness, and in
darkness! What a suitable and needful Blessing is the Spirit of God? Through the
supply of the Spirit, we who are naturally without strength, shall be enabled
to perfect holiness, and to work out our Salvation. But without the Divine
Spirit we must have languisht in fruitless attempts, and perished for ever in
our corruption. There is nothing else is able to revive and recover us out of
our natural state of carnality. The most happy constitution of Body and the
most excellent natural temper of mind, with the most perfect rules of living,
the highest motives and the best patterns are not sufficient Restoratives.
There is no principle of recovery in our degenerate Nature, and as well may a
dead Carcass revive and act of it self, or the lifeless Clay form it self into
a Vessel of Honor, as Apostate Man by his own single efforts, or with the
universal confederacy of Creature aids, sanctify himself and perform obedience
unto righteousness. If we have not some superior Power to help our infirmities,
we must for ever despair of possessing our Vessel in sanctification and honor.
-- Now the Promise of God offers the Holy Spirit, whose Grace is sufficient for
us, a perfect Salve for our impotence. So that the consideration of our own
inability, or of the powerful opposition of our conspiring Adversaries, need
not damp nor discourage our endeavors to do the will of God, and to make our
calling and election sure. The Spirit, who is promised us, is a Spirit of might
and power, of Wisdom and of Grace; every way more able and willing to help us,
than our Enemies to hinder us. -- Now to consider, that without supernatural
influences we must necessarily and unavoidably perish; To consider, that the
Divine Spirit is offered to us, and that by His effectual energy we shall be
able to do all things, shall be fortified against all Difficulties, and
furnished unto all Duties; and by the power of His might we shall be enabled to
purify our Souls in obeying the Truth unto the end. -- What persuasive
considerations are these? What powerful incentives to provoke us to Good Works?
What can tend more to elevate our drooping spirits, to enliven and actuate our
diligence, and make us to excite and exert our selves (with a due dependence on
the Holy Spirit) in the mortification of our Lusts, and the purification of our
Lives?

3 THE Promise of Heaven is likewise a powerful motive to cleanse our way. This
is the Promise, which God has promised us, even Eternal Life (1 John 2.25.) an
happiness becoming His infinite sufficiency to confer, and us to seek after: a
pure and perfect Blessedness. "So glorious and attractive ( says One) that if
duly considered, no Man can possibly refuse it". -- This Happiness is Great,
Unsearchably Great. None can comprehend the just measure, the exact number, and
weight of the Treasures and Glories of Heaven. They pass understanding. And
this consideration tends to dash all enticements to Sin, and to animate us
(against all intervening difficulties) in the pursuit of this glorious Prize.
-- And it is Holy, as well as Great: Pure and Spiritual. It is what Flesh and
Blood cannot inherit. Our Bodies must be spiritualized and our Souls purified,
in order to a capacity for and enjoyment of it. Now what a sovereign attractive
must this consideration be unto holiness? And how will the serious
contemplation of Heaven by a kind of natural influence spiritualize our tho'ts
and purify our affections? They, that have a belief and hope of Heaven, will
desire to anticipate their expected Blessedness; and therefore will the often
looking at the things that are unseen and eternal: and by thus having their
conversation in Heaven, the Holy Heaven, by thus beholding the Glory of the
Lord, they will be gradually changed into the same Image from glory to glory.

THUS we see in some measure, how the Promises have a cleansing efficacy in
respect of the Subject Matter.

(2.) THE Promises have a cleansing efficacy from the Tenor and Manner of their
Constitution and Proposal. Here it may suffice to say,

1. THEY are Delivered in the fullest and clearest Terms. "They are not wrapped
up in Clouds and dark Aenigmatical Insinuations, wherein Men must exercise
their Sagacity as well as their Faith". But they shine out with the clearest
Light, and we all with open face behold in them, as in a Glass, the great
Things, which God has laid up for them that love him. Here the recompenses of
pure Religion lie fair and open to prospect. The Messages of Peace are most
plain, express and explicit, and give us a true conception and full conviction
of those glorious unseen Realities, of which such as enjoy not
Gospel-revelation can have but very loose and obscure apprehensions. And this
gives the Promises of the Word an attractive influence.

2. THEY are Confirmed with the most inviolable Securities. If the Promises
were doubtful or uncertain, the encouragement to seek an interest in them would
be but weak and faint: But they are stable as the Ordinances of Heaven. They
are ratified with the strongest assurances. They are sure Words of Prophecy,
most evident and certain, proceeding out of the mouth of God, the God of Truth,
and sealed by an Oath, to show the immutability of his counsel, (Heb. 6.17.)
Now this is an excellent character that must needs greatly recommend them to
us, and beget us to a lively hope. This World's Goods are uncertain Riches: But
the Blessings offered in the Promises are sure Mercies. And what more prossing
incentive to Religion, than this? It is the Apostle's chosen Argument, (1 Cor.
15.58.) Therefore my beloved Brethren, Be ye steadfast, immovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor shall
not be in vain in the Lord.

3. THEY are altogether free, gracious and gratuitous. They are the pure result
of free Grace and sovereign Mercy. As to the Blessings themselves contained in
the Promises, it is owing to the rich Love and mere Mercy of God, that they are
obtainable. The Redemption by Christ was the production of free Good Will, and
most voluntary self-moving Grace. God has shown exceeding riches of Grace in
his kindness toward us by Christ Jesus, (Ephesians. 2.7.) God was under no
necessity, nor obligation to save Sinners. Nay, He might without any
impeachment of His Justice have caused His fury to rest upon the whole race of
sinful Man, and have punished as with swift destruction, and that without
remedy, as He did the whole Crew of Apostate Angels, who immediately on their
revolt were clapped in Chains, and are reserved as Prisoners of Justice unto the
day of Perdition. Nay, the Righteousness and Holiness of God demanded this, and
called for Vengeance to consume us utterly: But Mercy rejoiced over Judgment,
and triumphed over our Unworthiness, and provided a Savior for us; in and
through whom God is reconciling the World unto Himself, and magnifying His Mercy
toward Penitent Sinners, without any detriment to His Justice, or defilement
of His Purity. Here is Love, unmerited, unasked, unforced; Love without Example
and beyond Expression! Love which we are as incapable to conceive of, as we
were unworthy to be the objects of! And surely this Love of God (if duly
considered) must constrain us, must strongly and sweetly draw our hearts, and
warm our cold affections, and kindle in our Souls a flaming Love; Love sincere
and pure, which will be in us a perpetual spring of obedience, and a living
principle of undefiled Religion. But, as the Love of God, His great and free
Love, is seen in the Blessings procured for us and offered to us: So it is seen
also in the Promises themselves. It is a further instance of His Free Grace,
that He should make Promise of the Blessings unto us, That He should not only
invite us, but indent with us* and make an everlasting Covenant in all things
well ordered and sure; Here is free and condescending Goodness. God might have
ruled us in a way of arbitrary Sovereignty, and have offered His Blessings in a
way of mere Bounty: But He has humbled Himself to enter into Bonds, and engage
them to us by way of Contract, passing His Roya^ Word, and confirming it with a
solemn Oath, that we might have strong Consolation, and strong encouragement
unto Duty. -- What Riches of Goodness are here! What an obliging and endearing
method of Grace is this! And how does the consideration of God's free and
generous Goodness in His Promises tend to conquer the Sinners obstinacy, and
melt him into grateful Resentments, and work up his heart to a kindly
Repentance.

4. THEY are Conditional. Some indeed assert, that the Covenant of Grace is
absolute and unconditionate: but this is contrary to the universal strain, and
tends to subvert the whole design, of the inspired Scriptures. The Word of God
inviolably connects the Precepts and Promises, Duties and Blessings. The latter
are manifestly and unalterably entailed upon the former. -- As to the Promise
of Pardon; how evident is it, that we can never receive it, unless we have
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, a Faith which
works by Love, and which purifyeth the heart? -- Again, As to the Promise of
the Spirit, if we would obtain it, it is required that we invite Him by Prayer,
that we cherish His holy motions, conspire with Him in our endeavors, and
improve the Means. " There is a common Grace (says a famous Divine) which God
denies to no Man, Dr. John Colliges, of Provid. page 476.
by virtue of which Men may Read, Hear, Pray, live a civil Life, leave gross
and flagitious courses of Sin, and thou have no reason to complain of God for
not giving thee his special distinguishing Grace, while thou do not do what
in thee lies to amend thy ways, and turn to God. Let us leave our disputing
questions -- and apply our selves to our own duty, and do what God commands
us, for which we have encouragement enough. I dare assure thee, that God,
neither ever yet was, nor ever will be wanting in His further Grace unto those
Souls, that have made a due improvement of His common Grace, and done what in
them lay toward their own Salvation". -- And to the same purpose speaks a very
Aged and Judicious Divine among us; -- " Sinners (says he) can do more toward
their own Conversion, Dr. Increase Mather. Awakening Truths, tending to
Conversion. page 71, etc. And, Now or Never. page 93, etc.
than they do or will do. They have power to avoid those things which are an
hindrance of Conversion, and they have power to wait on God in the use of
means, which has a tendency to promote Conversion. And most certainly if Men
improve their natural abilities as they ought to do, there will not one Sinner
in all the reprobate World stand forth at the Day of Judgment, and say, Lord,
Thou know, I did all that possibly I could do; for the obtaining Grace, and
for all that thou did withhold it from me. And as to such as do not give
diligence to do what they can in order to obtain Grace, This their slothfulness
is the death of their Souls. Prove. 21.25. The desire of the slothful kills him,
for his hands refuse to labor. Prove. 13.4. But the Soul of the diligent shall
be made fat". -- We must exert our natural powers, we must use the means and be
found in the way of Duty, and frame our doings to turn unto the Lord, (Heb.
^.4.) else it is presumption to expect special Grace, and depend on obtaining
supernatural assistances. We must use well the advantages we at present enjoy,
as ever we expect to have more and better given us. For so runs the Promise,
(Luke 19.26.) Unto every one which has (improved what He has already
received,) shall be given (increase of Grace:) and from him that has (i. e.
improveth) not, even that be has shall be taken from him. -- Lastly, As to the
Promise of Heaven and Eternal Life; How plainly and peremptorily are we told,
that Except a Man be born again he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, that
without holiness no man shall see the Lord, and that only the pure in heart
shall see God? It is not more certain that Christ is the only Savior, than
that He is the Author of Salvation to none but them that obey Him. These
Considerations are of excellent efficacy to dash the vain presumption of
careless Transgressors, to arm and antidote us against Temptations, to restrain
from Sin and quicken unto Duty. The Conditionality of the Promises is a
circumstance, which gives life to all the rest, and makes them operative
toward the producing a good Life. It is a great advantage to the Promises,
that God has linkt our hopes and our duty together. And indeed when we consider
the infinite disproportion between the Reward and our Service; we must resolve,
that he had no other design in making His Promises Conditional, than to engage
us by our Interest to that holiness unto which he saw our Inclinations did not
bind us; that it was the Artifice of His Love to ensnare us into two Pelicities
by proposing of one, to enforce us to take one Good in the way to another,
Virtue in passage to Glory.

5. And Lastly. THE Promises are backed with the most moving Exhortations and
Expostulations. The Great God, because He delights to show mercy, descends to
reason the case with secure Sinners, who forsake their own Mercies, and
beseeches them to embrace His glorious Offers. Thus, (Isa. 55.1, 2, etc.) Ho,
every one that thirsts, Come ye to the waters, and be that has no money:
Come ye, buy and eat, yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without
price. Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor
for that which satisfyeth not? Hearken diligently unto me, and eat that which
is good, and let your Soul delight it self in fatness. Incline your ear and
come unto me; hear and your Soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting
covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. So, (Isai. 1.18, 9.) Come
now and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet,
they shall be as white as snow, -- If ye be willing and obedient. -- So also,
(Prove. 1.22, 3.) How long will fools hate knowledge? Turn you at my reproof:
Behold, I will pour out my spirit unto you. So likewise, (Hos. 10.12.) Sow to
your selves in righteousness, reap in mercy: Break up your fallow ground: for
it is time to seek the Lord, till he come and rain righteousness upon you. And
so, (2 Cor. 5.20 -- 6.1, 2.) Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though
God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to
God. As workers together with him we beseech you, that ye receive not the grace
of God in vain. For he says, Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is
the day of Salvation. -- Let us fear, lest stighting the promise of entering
into Rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. How shall we escape if
we neglect so great Salvation? (Heb. 2.3. -- 4.1.) -- Now what winning Oratory,
what ravishing Suasion do these generous Invitatious, these condescending
Entreaties, and convincing Expostulations carry in them? What an edge do they
put on the Promises, and how strongly do they tend to persuade the Will, and
inflame the affections, and engage us in the love and practice of that
Holiness, without which we cannot inherit the Blessed Hope? But Thus much for
the Promises.

V. THE Histories in the Word have a cleansing efficacy. A great part of the
Bible is Historical; giving us an account of many memorable matters of Fact,
relating to past Actions of Men and Events of Providence. The Reading whereof
must needs be very entertaining to all, and very edifying to them that will be
at the pains, when they read, to reflect seriously and apply wisely. Of such a
nature and tendency is the Account we have in Scripture, Of the Creation and
Fall of Man; Of Judgments executed on the Wicked; Of Miscarriages of Good Men,
and Chastisements inflicted on them therefore; Of great outward Afflictions, and
inward Temptations, and Difficulties the Children of God have been exercised
withal; Of the Conversion of great Sinners; Of the wonderful Appearances of God
for His Church, This Subject is fully handled by a Worthy Writer, in a Treatise
Entitled, Observations on the Holy Scriptures. Chap. 2. To which I must refer
the Reader.
and for particular Saints in times of danger or distress. -- The Narratives of
those, and other things, which the Scriptures present us with, are very
instructive and a most profitable improvement may be made of them. They have a
very propitious aspect upon holy Living. They were written for our spiritual
profit, and are good to the use of edifying, to minister Grace unto us. Thus
the Apostle witnesses, (Romans 15.4.) Whatsoever things were written aforetime,
were written for our Learning. So, (1 Cor. 10.11.) All these things happened
unto them for Ensamples: and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the
ends of the world are come. And agreably we are told, (2 Pet. 2.6. and Jude
ver. 7.) That the Judgments executed on the wicked Sodomites are set forth for
an example unto those that should after live ungodly. And on the other hand,
the Apostle Paul tells us, (1 Timothy 1.16.) For this end I obtained mercy, that
in me, the first or chief Sinner, Jesus Christ might show sorth all
long-suffering, for a pattern to them which should hereafter believe on Him.

VI. THE Examples of pure Religion, upon Scripture-record have a cleansing
efficacy. Example is the most powerful attractive to Practice. It affords
superior Light to direct, and carries in it a peculiar charm to persuade. Good
Examples teach us our Duty with a much fuller emphasis, than bare Precepts.
Example is most compendious, most pleasant and efficacious method of
instruction. It is most informing and affecting. It speaks most convincingly
and strikes us most sensibly. The holy Lives of the Saints are a silent and
most effectual reproof of Sinners, and greatly tend to cover them with shame.
And they are a living incentive to the Penitent; they tend to cherish their
hopes, by representing their Duty as practicable, and they tend also to tempt
their ambition, and provoke them to a laudable Emulation.

NOW the Word of God furnishes us with the best and brightest Patterns of
Holiness. There is the grand Example of Jesus Christ, which is eminently
recommended to our regards. This is a most perfect, full, and infallible
Example, affording complete, universal and unerring direction. -- And it is
also most obvious and familiar, excellently accommodated to our present
imperfect state, and to the different circumstances and capacities of Men,
making our way straight before our face, and leading us in a plain path. -- And
it is clothed with such respects, as cannot but powerfully persuade us to
imitation. It Is the Precedent of Him, who is our Sovereign; and carries a
binding force with it, and challenges our conformity thereunto as matter of
Duty. Again, It is the President of One, who is the Chief among Ten Thousand;
and invites us to study a resemblance from the motive of Honor. And moreover,
It Is the Example of Him, who is our compassionate Savior, who subsisting in
the former nature of God, thought it not usurpation to be altogether equal with
God: but made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
Servant; and being found in fashion as a Man, He humbled Himself and became
obedient unto Death; and this to purchase Heaven and Happiness for us, (Sinners
and Enemies against Him,) and to leave us an Example, to lead us in the way
thereunto. Now what an endearing and unparalled instance of Condescension,
Kindness and Mercy is here? And how should we be induced from the ingenuous
principles of Love and Gratitude to follow the steps, and imitate the virtues
of our dearest Friend, and most generous Benefactor.

BUT further, besides the perfect Example of Christ, we have the Examples of
the Saints; which though imperfect, yet are not superseded by the former: But
also have their singular use in the Christian Life, even as the Stars are
sometimes profitable to direct as well as the Sun. Hence we are called upon,
not only to look unto Jesus the author and finisher of our Faith, and to
consider Him: but also to be Followers of them who through faith and patience
inherit the Promises. And indeed, though the Example of Christ, in respect of
it is perfect purity is more sure to direct us: yet on some accounts the
Examples of the Saints (they being Men of like passions with us, of like moral
infirmities, and not only in all points tempted like as we are, even as Christ
was, but also, as He was not, sometimes overcome by the power of Temptations
and overtaken with faults,) may seem more suited to encourage us. They seem to
come nearer, and to be more equal and level to us. And for this reason, The
Lives of many Holy Men are written and registered in the sacred Pages; And we
are bidden to follow them as they followed Christ; to observe their Virtues and
take Example by them, as well as to observe their Falls and take warning from
them.

SO that, (we see) if there be any force in Example to tempt and allure us unto
holy Living, the Word of God must needs have a very powerful influence upon us.

THUS I Have (in some measure) made it appear, that the Word of God in it is own
nature as a Means, is excellently fitted and greatly tends to purify our way:
and have considered the whole Frame of the Word, and shown how all the parts of
it do admirably conspire and harmonize in promoting our Sanctification. --
Which was the Second Thing. Pass we now to the Last Particular, which is --

III. THE Word is the chosen Instrument of the Holy Spirit, and is ordinarily
accompanied with His Influence. The Word has a perfect natural congruity and
aptitude, and an instrumental causality, to cleanse and sanctify us. It has so
much and no more in it self. But over and above what virtue the Word carries in
it is own nature abstractly considered, there is an additional cooperating
influence of the Divine Spirit. Indeed what Help we have by the Word itself is
the fruit of the Spirit; but this is not the whole of the Spirit's influence in
the work of Sanctification. Besides this, There is an internal agency of the
Holy Spirit upon the Heart, a secret Divine Power, which accompanying the Word,
gives life and efficacy thereunto.

THERE is a Common Grace, or general assistence of the Spirit, always attending
the Word, and dispensed to all, though not in an equal degree, and proportion,
which has a tendency to Conversion, and is sufficient to take off the idle
pretense of spiritual impotence, and renders all those inexcusable, that under
the Gospel remain carnal and disobedient. Hence such are said to receive the
Grace of God in vain, and to resist the Holy Ghost.

AND there is a more Special Grace, or particular Assistence, accompanying the
Word unto the Souls of some, which works effectually in them, and these are
ordinarily such as have improved former and lesser Assistences. Those who are
humbly and diligently using the Means, praying for the Spirit, concurring with
His holy Motions, and abandoning their evil ways, it is the usual method of the
Spirit, to derive unto them higher and more peculiar Assistences, to create in
them a clean heart, and make them Partakers of the Divine Nature, to make them
perfect in every good work, to do the will of God, working in them that which
is well pleasing in his sight. This is the standing method of the Spirit's
proceeding with those, who enjoy the Means of Grace, from which He does not
ordinarily vary. Indeed "the Apostle Paul, before his Conversion, was so far
from being under any preparatory disposition, that he was employing his
strength to destroy the Faith of Christ, at that time, when he was effectually
called by him". But this is an extraordinarry instance, to show the sovereignty
and power of Divine Grace. And they that take encouragement from it to neglect
and slight the use of Means, under a show of waiting for the Spirit, and do
magnify this, and nullify that, are Men of strange presumption, and do cast a
foul indignity on the wise appointments of Heaven, and offer violence to the
established method of Grace. -- The Word and Spirit (in ordinary cases) have a
concomitant, though not equal, Agency in our Conversion and Sanctification; The
Spirit as the Efficient, the Word as the Instrument. The Spirit ordinarily
works by and with the Word. Hence, we find Sanctification of the Spirit, and
belief of the Truth put together, (2 These. 2.13.) Hence, the Gospel is called,
The Ministration of the Spirit, The Sword of the Spirit, The Law of the Spirit
of Life, The Power of God unto Salvation. Hence, when the Gospel comes in
power, it is said to come in the Holy Ghost, (1 These. 1.5.) Hence, The Saints
are said to purify their Souls in obeying the truth through the Spirit, (1 Pet.
1.22.) and to be the Epistle of Christ, ministered by the ministers of Christ,
written not with Ink, but with the Spirit of the Living God; and beholding in
the Word as in a glass the Glory of the Lord, to be changed into the same image
from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, (1 Cor. 3.3, 18.)
Hence, The Apostle makes that appeal to the Galatians, Received ye the Spirit
by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith? (Gal. 3.2.) -- These
Scriptures make it sufficiently evident, that the Word is the ordinary
instrument of the sanctifying Spirit, and accompanied with His sacred Presence.
It is the Chariot in which He rides forth conquering and to conquer; The Wings,
by which He descends into the Soul; the Channel in which He conveys the waters
of Purification. And we have a gracious Promise, ( Isai. 59.21.) that the Word
and Spirit shall always be concomitant.

THUS I Have somewhat largely Discoursed on the First Article proposed to
consideration, which was, that The Word of God has a cleansing influence. I
proceed now to say something very briefly to --

Artic. II. Which is this; namely, IF we take heed to the Word of God, we shall
experience it is cleansing efficacy.

HERE I might premise; That, If ever we expect the Word of God should cleanse
us, we must necessarily take heed unto it. The Word indeed is a means of
Sanctification, and a most fit and powerful means; but we can never reap any
saving benefit from it, without a due regard to it, and improvement of it.
Therefore the Young Man in order to cleanse his way, is directed in our Text,
to take heed to the Word of God. We must observe it strictly, as the Original
imports. We must carefully mark it, and set our heart to it. We must search the
Scriptures for knowledge, as for precious substance, and must hide it in our
hearts, and there preserve it as a Treasure. We must incline our ear to wisdom
and apply our heart to understanding. We must meditate in the Law of God day
and night, and have respect to all his ways. We must receive and reverence the
Word, as the Word of God: We must acknowledge it is authority, yield our selves
up to the power, and acquaint our selves with the contents of it. We must be
much in conversing with the Word Written, and frequent in attending on the Word
Preached: We must take heed also how we hear and how we read.

WE must take heed to the Truths of the Word, as the Standard of our Faith, and
hold fast the form of sound words, in says and love which is in Christ Jesus.
So likewise we must take heed to the Precepts of the Word, as the Directory of
our practice, and observe them as Sailors do the Compass whereby they steer; We
must inform our selves of the Rule, and conform our selves unto it. Again, We
must take heed to the Threatenings, to learn our danger and quicken us to avoid
it, as the Traveller is circumspect and careful to spy and shun Praecipes,
Sloughs and Bypath. Again, We must take heed to the Promises, to learn our
happiness, and animate us to pursue it, as the Racer locks to the Prize that is
set before him: And further, we must take heed to the Examples in the Word to
imitate them, as a Painter looks on the Object, as the Writer observes his
Copy, or the Workman his Pattern. In short, We must take heed to the whole Word
of God. We must set our hearts to all things whatsoever it testifies unto us,
(Deuteronomy. 32.46.)

WE must take heed to the Design and Use of the holy Word, keep that in our
eye, affect our hearts with it, and always use the means with serious views to
the blessed End.

MOREOVER, We must take heed to the Spirit, by whose Inspiration the Word was
written, and by whose Blessing it is succeeded; we must realize the necessity
of His presence with the Word, we must implore His special Influence to
accompany it, rely on His powerful Grace to render it efficacious, lay our
Souls open thereunto, observe His workings in us, cherish convictions, and
improve every good impression He makes on us by the Word at any time.

AND if we thus take heed to the Word, we shall find it an effectual method to
cleanse our way. This Truth is evident as from other Considerations, so
especially from the Promise of God, and the Experience of the Saints. -- The
Promise is unto such. Thus we read, (1 Jam. 1.25.) Whosoever looks into the
perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, he being not a forgetful
hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed. So,
(Mar. 4.24.) Take heed to what ye hear: And unto you that hear shall more be
given. So (Isai. 55.1.) Hear, and your Soul shall live. -- These blessed
Promises unto those that hear, or observe and take heed to the Word, are a
sufficient ground of assurance, that such shall not fail of the Grace of God.
-- And the universal Experience of the Saints is an abundant confirmation of
this Truth. 'Twas in this way they all escaped the pollutions of the world;
they purified their Souls in obeying the Truth. To which of the Saints will thou turn? If we appeal to the Saints in Light, they will with one voice tell
us, that by observing the Word of God they were made meet for their
Inheritance. If we enquire of the Saints that are in the Earth, they will
profess with the Psalmist, By the Word I have kept me from the paths of the
destroyer. The Word have I hid in my heart that I might not sin against God.
Salvation is far from the wicked, for they seek not his statutes. But my heart
stands in awe of his word. I have hoped for his salvation and done his
commandments. I will never forget his precepts, for his word has quickened me.
I will walk at liberty, for I seek his precepts.

OBSERVING the Word is then a most sure and infallible method of cleansing. The
Word of the Lord is tried. It is a means, that never has failed such as have
diligently improved it; and this is sufficient Argument, it never will. And as
many as take heed unto the Word of God, must needs be undefiled in the way, and
also do no iniquity. Whosoever is born again, not of corruptible seed but
incorruptible, by the word of God, he does not commit sin; for his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin, (1 Pet. 1.23. and 1 John 3.9. compa.)

THESE few Hints may suffice for this Last Article.

AND thus I Have finished the Doctrinal Handling of the Text, and in some sort
cleared the Three Points proposed to be spoken to; Namely, That the way of
Youth is naturally defiled: That it greatly concerns Persons in their Youth to
get their way Cleansed: And Lastly, That if Young Men (or any others) duly
observe the Word of God, they take a most direct and effectual method to
cleanse, and keep, their way from sinful defilements.

AND now I proceed to make some brief APPLICATION of these Things distinctly.

USE. I. IS the way of Youth defiled, What ground of Self-abasement is here?
How should this shame and humble us? How should it correct the vanity and
mortify the levity of Young Men, to consider their natural depravation and
contracted defilements? Consider this, ye that forget God; and Be not
high-minded, but be ye clothed with humility. Pride not your selves in any
Privileges of Birth or Education, in any accomplishments of Body or Mind, in
any temporal enjoyments or external advantages of Life, and the like; for so
long as your way is defiled, this tarnishes the glory of all, and sheds a fatal
taint into all the Blessing you enjoy, renders your Persons odious in the Eyes
of the Holy God, and exposes you to all the Curses which His infinite Wisdom
can invent, or His infinite Power inflict, which is shame and terror enough. It
is owing to ignorance and inconsideration of these things, that so many Young
Men, as well as others, are vainly p^fft up by their fleshly mind, and walk in
the lust of Pride. They would rate Themselves and their Accomplishments a
little lower, did they but consider what black and filthy feet these proud
Plumes walk upon; or what roots of bitterness they are, which bear these gaudy
flowers, what corrupt Trees they are, which bear these painted fruits. Our
original Corruption and actual Pollutions are sufficient matter of humiliation
to us, and a just allay of swelling arrogance. We may well bemoan our selves as
wretched Men, 'till we are delivered from the Body of this Death, however happy
we may be as to Bodily or Mental Endowments, or Worldly Enjoyments. And we
should temper the tho'ts of the one, by suitable reflections on the other, to
make us lowly in our own Eyes, and to keep us from thinking more highly of our
selves, than we ought to think.

USE. II. DOES it greatly concern Men in their Youth to get their way cleansed?
This might be improved --

1. TO detect the Folly, and show the Misery and Danger of all Young People,
(and much more of Elder People) who contentedly abide in the state of polluted
nature, and resolvedly go on in their ways of iniquity.

2. TO rebuke the madness and wickedness of those Sons of Belial, th^s^
Children of the Devil, and Factors for Hell, who try to corrupt and defile
^oung Persons: who not only do iniquity themselves, but also take pleasure in
them that do the same, and take pains to hearten and harden deb^cht Youths in
sinful ^es, and by cursed Example solicitation, or otherwise try to pervert
the way of the innocent, and tempt them to practice wicked works with
themselves, and so to betray them into the snare of the Devil, and the miseries
of Hell.

3. TO move and quicken all to serious Self-Examination, How they are spending,
or have spent, their Youth, whether in the dangerous Omission, or diligent
Prosecution, of so weighty a concern, as cleansing their way.

4. TO Lament and Mourn over the unhappy growth and prevalence of carnality in
the rising Generation among us.

5. TO Exh^rt and Warn all lo^se and careless Young Men, with diligence and
without delay to set about the great Work before them, even to cleanse their
hands and purify their hearts.

6. TO Exhort and Excite Parents, Masters, Tutors, Guardians, and all such as
have any inspection or influence over Young Ones, to a Zealous Concern, and
Seasonable Endeavors to promote purity and holiness in them, by wholesome
Instructions, and solemn Charges, by wise Reproofs, and authoritative
Restraints, and due Corrections, by good Examples, by fervent Prayers, etc.
Unto the neglect of which vigilant Care over Youth, are very much owing the
wickednesses of this Degenerate Day.

7. IT might further be improved, To commend and encourage those Young People,
who are seriously and seduously engaged in the important work of cleansing
their way, as through the Grace of God there are some, however dissolute the
present Time is.

8. TO show how deeply indebted, and what b^nds of gratitude such are in, unto
the God of all Grace, whom He has blessed with an early Conversion, and a pious
Youth, while multitudes of others are perishing in their chains of filth, and
by Youthful lusts are ruined for ever.

THESE Things afford matter for a large Discourse: But it is the Application of
the Last Preposition, that I intend to speak most and yet but briefly unto. Let
us therefore come to --

USE. III. IS the Word, if duly observed, such an effectual means to cleanse
our way? Hence,

1. WE have one very good Argument for the Divinity of the Word. It is no mean
Argument, that the Word Written is of Divine Inspiration, and the Word Preached
of Divine Institution, That they are instrumental of the most Divine Effects,
the most Honorary to God, and Beneficial to Man; such Effects as all the
Philosophy of the sagest humane Writers could never produce. By the Word, Dead
Souls are quickened, Hard Hearts softened, Defiled Consciences purged, and the
whole Spirit, Soul, and Body sanctified, turned from Darkness to Light, and
from the power of Satan unto God. -- Surely, Here is the Wisdom and the Power
of God. These illustrious Effects and Triumphs of the Word, evidence it to be
the Word of God, and not the Word of Man. And he must be strangely blind and
stupid, that does not in these Things read it is Divine Authority and Original.

2. HENCE, It is an invaluable Privilege to enjoy the Word, and what bespeaks
our thankful Praises. To have the Scriptures to search, and the Word Preached
to hear, is a Great Favor of God; a Blessing that cannot be sufficiently
valued. It Is the greatest outward Privilege. The Apostle declares the Jews of
old had manifold peculiar Advantages in the enjoyment of the Divine Oracles.
(Romans 3.1, 2.) And our Savior tells His Disciples, what a great Blessing they
enjoyed in the Gospel, how much greater than they of old; (Luke 10.23, 4.)
Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see. For I tell you, that
many Prophets and Kings have desired to see those things which ye see, and have
not seen them; and to hear those things which ye hear and have not heard them.
We that enjoy the Gospel, are highly favored indeed. Unto such may well be
applied that (in Deuteronomy. 32.29.) Happy art thou; who is like unto Thee, O People
saved by the Lord? Dignified and blessed even above the darling Saints in the
Old Testament-Times; how much more then above the Great Ones in the Earth, who
have not the Word? Verily, To live under the Light of the Glorious Gospel, though
in the meanest Cottage or Hovel, is a greater Happiness, a goodlier Heritage,
than without it to live in King's Palaces and the high Places of the Earth. How
then should we prize the Gospel, and be thankful for the Word of Life!

AND it is a Distinguishing Favor, as well as Great. For there be many
Persons, yea Nations in the World, who have the same necessity and occasion for
the Word as we, and we as they, and they are Originally no more unworthy than
our selves, and as capable of the Benefits of the Gospel, and yet are destitute
of the Word, and are left to the guidance of Nature's faint confused Light, and
have no better Instructors than the Sun, Moon and Stars; while we have a more
sure word of Prophecy, which is as a shining Light, and have Pastors and
Teachers, to feed us with understanding, and to teach us the good knowledge of
the Lord. In this case we must say, (as in, Romans 3.9.) What then? are we better
than they? no, in n^ wise. And as in Luke 10.21. I thank thee, O Father, Lord
of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the wise, and have
revealed them unto babes: Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.
The uncontrollable Liberty and unaccountable Sovereignty of God is to be seen
and owned in this conduct of Divine Providence. And surely a Favor, so
incomparably great and ineffably gracious, as the Dispensation of the Gospel,
is what challenges the highest gratitude. O Let us ever be filled with admiring
th^t's and the most thankful resentments of the great and discriminating
Goodness of God unto us a giving us His Word. The Psalmist admonishes us of
this our duty; Psalm. 147.19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob, He has not
dealt so with every Nation. -- Praise ye the Lord. -- And Let us adore the
Patience and Forbearance of God toward us, and His sovereign Grace, in
continuing to us His Word, notwithstanding the visible contemt shown unto it by
multitudes among us, and the innumerable Forfeitures we have made of this
Privilege. There are many Places in the World, where the Word was once sent and
prevailed mightily, but having abused their liberty, and rebelled against the
Light, The Candlestick was justly rem^d from them, and the fruitful Field is
become an ^owling Desert and a desolate Wilderness. And this also had long
since been our mournful Doom, if God had dealt with us according to our just
desert. Astonishing is the Patience of God toward a sinful Land! -- And
further, Many Persons, who once enjoyed the warm Sunshine of the Gospel, are
laid in their cold Graves, and ^ld up in the bottomless Pit, are gone beyond
all hope and help, while we are spared. O the unmerited Goodness and wonderful
Long-suffering of God usward! Surely, such distinguishing Mercy deserves and
demands special returns of Gratitude.

3. HENCE, We learn the Reason and Motive of that Opposition which the Word of
God meets with from Satan. The Word of God is a Well of Salvation, a Fountain
of Truth and Purity. It has a powerful Efficacy to turn Men from Darkness to
Light, from Sin to Sanctity, and is able to make them wise unto Salvation. It
instructs those, whom Satan would have remain ignorant; it converts those whom
He would have abide in their Sins; it sanctifies those, whom He would fain
defile; and comforts those, whom He would have to be disconsolate. And thus it
crosses his designs, and thwarts his interests, clouds the glory and weakens
the nerves of his Government, lessens the number of his Subjects, and threatens
the the destruction of his Kingdom. -- And this is the ground of his spite and
spleen, malice and malignity against the Word. Hence it is, that the God of
this World, whose Kingdom lies in darkness and wickedness, sets himself to
oppose the Gospel and blast the endeavors of Ministers, and by many subtle
stratagems and with indefatigable industry labors to undermine and invalidate
the Word, to bring it into contemt, to foment prejudices against it, and bar
it is good Entertainment, to stifle Convictions and damp pious Affections
kindled in any awakened Soul, and to enliven and enrage the Corruptions, that
have been chilled and cooled, by the Word. That wicked One endeavors to rob us
of the good Seed, to shake it out of our minds and memories: and to sow Tares
instead of it. Mat. 13.19, 23.

4. SEE the madness and misery of those, who put from them the Word of Life.
Such as ^spise the Word and reject the Counsel of God, that, being weary of the
Word and Ordinances, as too great a Charge and unprofitable Burden, or to
obtain better Worldly Accomodations, do forsake Wisdom's Gates, and remove
there Habitations into the dark Corners of the Land; or that being settled in
such Places, sit easy and contented without the Gospel; or that, dwelling in a
valley of Vision, either wholly or greatly neglect to read and hear the Word;
Such do manifestly reproach the Wisdom of God and slight one of the greatest
instances of His wonderful loving kindness toward them, and greatly provoke
His wrath against them; and they despise and wrong their own Souls; and make
them a Prey to every Adversery; they forfeit many happy advantages, and
opportunities for securing their best and highest interest, they lose many
precious Benefits, more worth than a World; They seem to court misery and
danger, to choose Death, and to be invading their own destruction: and unless
timely Repentance and Reformation prevent, they will have a much sorer
Punishment, than such Heathen as never had the Word sent unto them. And what
amazing stupidity is here? What Fools are such, and how great Enemies to God
and Themselves!

5. SEE what Adversaries to God and to Mankind they are, that oppose the
Spreading of the Gospel in the World. Who are for banishing the Holy Bible,
which God has written to us, and the Sacred Officers which Christ has set in
His Church for the work of the Minister, out of the World; who wou^d hinder the
Gospel of Christ, and have His Sanctuary be desolate, and are for having the
Word, neither read nor heard; -- what monsters of wickedness are such? Who are
they, but The Children of the Devil? What are they doing, but Fighting against
God, and Drowning Men in Perdition? They are doing the Lusts of their Father,
the Devil; and the Everlasting Punishment is like to be their wages. Unto such,
how fitly may we apply the foul Character of Elymas the Sorcerer, given of him,
when he withstood the Apostles, and sought to turn away from the Faith Sergius
Paulus, the Deputy, who desired to hear the Word of God, -- O full of all
subtilty and all mischief, thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all
righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?
Behold now, the hand of the Lord (the wrath of God) is upon thee! Act. 13.7, --
10.

6. HENCE, We infer the Stability, and Duration of the Word and Ministry to the
End of the World. Is the Word instrumental of such happy and illustrious
Effects (as we have heard,) Does it bring so much Glory to God, and Benefit to
Man? Then we may be sure, that the Golden Candlestick is fixed on perpetual
Foundations, and will not be removed for ever. The Word is the standing means
of Grace in the Hand of the sanctifying Spirit; and so long as there will be
need of the Sanctification of the Spirit, the Word will be profitable for
instruction in righteousness. Now so long as the Word will be of use, we may
depend on it, the Divine Spirit will secure it is continuance. He will protect
His own Inspirations and Instruments against the utmost Violence of Hell and
Earth, and transmit the Oracles of God sale and pure to latest Posterity. Though
Flesh, World, and Devil are united in restless attempts against the Word and
Ministers of Christ, yet these shall survive all their impotent Fury, and
nothing shall ever be able to put out the glorious Light, or still the joyful
Sound.

7. IT is a happy Symptom, and bodes well to a People, when the Word is sent
unto them. The Word is designed and adapted to purify and profit Souls: That is
the great End and genuine Efficacy of it. Now the infinitely wise God is not
wont to send the Means, where He does not design the End, and produce the
Effect in a greater or lesser measure. Hence is that of the Apostle, (2 Cor.
2.14, 5.) Now Thanks be unto God, who always causes us to triumph in Christ,
and makes manifest the savor of His knowledge by us in every place. If we
read the sacred Story and trace the Prophets and Apostles and Primitive
Preachers of the Word, we shall find that in all Places where the Report of the
Gospel was heard, The Arm of the Lord was revealed, an effectual Door was
opened unto them of the Lord, and certain Men clave unto them and believed. We
may therefore with safety conclude, that, where God sends His Word and settles
the Ordinances of His Kingdom among a People, it is with intentions of Mercy
toward them, and though many may mock and blaspheme, yet some shall believe and
turn unto the Lord.

8. HENCE, We are informed, what is to be looked upon as true Evangelical
Preaching. Namely, That, which, as to matter, is becoming sound Doctrine; and
agreeable to the Oracles of God, and which, as to the method and manner, tends
most to advance the great Design of the Word, even the Conversion and
Sanctification of Souls. Those are true Gospel Ministers who speak forth the
words of Truth, and declare the Counsel of God, His whole Counsel, who labor
in the Word and Doctrine; who do not spend their Ministry on little matters of
doubtful Disputation, or barren Speculation, but adapt it to the use of godly
Edifying, and preach those substantial Truths, that are according to Godliness;
who study to show themselves approved unto God, Workmen that need not to be
ashamed; rightly dividing the Word of Truth; but shun vain Bablings, and
endeavor to commend themselves to every Man's Conscience in the sight of God;
Not as pleasing Men, but seeking the profit of many, that they might be saved;
whose Aim and Study is, to purify a peculiar People unto God, zealous of good
Works, and who draw the Waters of the Sanctuary, which they dispense, out of
the Well of Salvation, the Holy Scriptures. -- These are Good Ministers of
Jesus Christ, and in doing this, they take the best Method to save themselves,
and those that hear them.

9. HENCE, A Learned and Faithful Ministry should be esteemed and entertained,
as a great Blessing. One great part of the Work of Ministers is, to explain,
confirm and apply the Doctrines of the written Word, and to represent and urge
the Duties and Motives of Religion, in the most plain and convincing manner
they can, with the clearest Light and the warmest Zeal, to inform the
Understanding and inflame the Affections of those that hear them. They are to
Preach the Word, to be instant in season, and out of season, to reprove, rebuke
with all authority, and exhort with a^ng suffering, and Doctrine, and to watch
in all things, to watch for Souls, as they that must give account. -- Now, how
necessary, how suitable a Blessing to Mankind is the sacred Ministry! And how
great a Benefit, when accompanied with the Divine presence and influence! It
has pleased God by the foolishness of Preaching to save many. And Faithful
Ministers have the Promise of His Presence and Blessing to accompany them, even
to the end of the World. -- Surely then the Enjoyment of a Learned and Pious
Ministry ought to be resented, as an invaluable Privilege, by a Person or
People. And how great is the guilt and folly of those, who undervalue this holy
and blessed Ordinance, and discard it from a pretense of the sufficiency of the
written Word, or from any corrupt motive whatsoever? And how great is the
injustice and impiety, the wickedness and baseness of those, that villify,
abuse and discourage the Faithful Ministers of the Word, and endeavor to stop
their mouths and break their hearts, by cruel Mockings, by insulting Cham-ism,
by insolent Korah-ism, or by sacrilegious Niggardliness, and the like? And how
little love to Christ or concern for His Interest may those pretend to, who can
behold or hear of such unsufferable indignities, and not manifest any
Tenderness or Resentment? -- But how may it hearten and animate Faithful
Ministers under such unworthy Treatment, to consider, whose Servants they are,
what Divine Work they are engaged in, and what an exceeding great Reward is
reserved for them in Heaven? And how wise and praiseworthy are such, as esteem
Ministers highly in love for their works sake?

10. HENCE, We see, what Obligation lies on a Professing People to encourage
the Means of Education. The Word Written and Preached is the ordinary Medium of
Conversion and Sanctification. Now in order to obtaining these Benefits by the
Word, it is requisite, that Persons be diligent in Reading and Hearing of it;
And in order to these, how expedient and necessary is it, that there be Schools
of Learning; those of a Lower Character, for the instructing of Youth in
Reading, and those of an Higher, for the more Liberal Education of such, as may
be devoted to the Work of the Ministry? The Religious Concerns of a People
demand the Public Care and the common Regards of All toward the Means for
Educating of Youth, especially to the Schools of the Prophets. These things
must be upheld and encouraged, or else Religion will soon bid us farewell, our
Glory fade away, and a Flood of Evils break in upon us. The rising Youth are
the hopes of a People, and an instructed Seed, a godly Seed, are a Crown and an
happy Omen to them. It stands them in hand therefore to promote and pursue all
proper methods for the propagation of knowledge, purity, and good order among
the rising Generation. And such as do this are to be commended, as truly wise
and faithful to their own Interests, and doing that which has an eminent
relation to the Honor of God. And so are they, who having at heart the
Concerns of Posterity, are training up their Sons for Prophets, and taking a
pious care for the succession of a Learned and Godly Ministry among them, which
is of so great necessity, importance and advantage to Mankind.

11. HENCE, It should be the Care of Parents, and all Superiors of whatever
character, to bring the Young People under their inspection, into an early
acquaintance with, and affection to, God's Holy Word. Parents, Masters,
Mistresses, and the like, have the Souls of their Young People in part
committed to their Charge, and it is their necessary Duty to bring them up in
the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. Since the Word is so profitable to
Souls, they should do their endeavor wisely and diligently, that the purifying
Truths and holy Laws of God may be written on their minds with fair and lasting
characters. They should begin early with them, Teach them to Read, Catechize
'em, Hear 'em read the Bible and other pious Books, Explain and Inculcate the
Doctrines and Duties of Christianity, Giving them Line upon Line, and Precept
upon Precept, here a little and there a little; and bring them to the House of
God to attend the Public Preaching of the Word, Endeavor to possess them with
a just Veneration for the Word Preached, Take an account of the Sermon from them
afterward, and press it upon them in the most solemn and pathetical manner to
affect their Souls and incline their hearts to wisdom. -- Thus to do, Superiors
are bound by all the Ties of Duty, Interest, Comfort and Honor. It is
mentioned, ( as One observes) not only to the praise of Young Timothy, but of
Those that were concerned in his Education, that From a Child he knew the Holy
Scriptures, which were able to make him wise to Salvation, through Faith which is
in Christ Jesus. -- And the Apostle John speaks of the Elect Lady with honor,
rejoicing greatly, that he had found of her children walking in the Truth.

12. HENCE, We should all examine our selves and enquire, what improvement we
have made of the Price, that is in our hands: What entertainment we have given
to the Word of God; what influence it has had upon us; what benefit we have
reaped from it. Let us make serious inquisition into this matter. To move
hereunto, consider; This is an Enquiry of the last moment; of such consequence,
that those must be charged with astonishing stupidity, who can live easily and
calmly without endeavoring to get the important Case comfortably resolved.
Again, consider; Multitudes, that enjoy the Word, do miss of the purifying and
saving effects of it; They are planted by Rivers of Water, and fit under the
droppings of the Sanctuary, and yet are perfect strangers to spiritual purity.
To profit by the Word is not the common and infallible Lot of all that enjoy
it. Further, Many deceive themselves with gross mistakes about this matter.
They take up with a mer^e Orthodox Faith, which is but the Faith of Devils,
instead of that Faith which purifyeth the heart: They take up with a transient
delight in the Truth, and have not root in themselves; As those, Mat.
13.20.-They rest in some partial reformation and seeming appearances of Grace.
And with these things, and the like, they flatter themselves into ruin.

THESE Considerations should put us all upon speedy, diligent, and impartial
Self-Examination, how the Case stands with our selves.

13. HENCE, We have one Rule for the Trial of our spiritual State by. The holy
Word of God being the ordinary instrument of Conversion and Sanctification,
Hence, Such as apprehend themselves to be Regenerate, in order to know the
truth of their Conversion, must enquire, whether the Change, they conclude
themselves to have experienced, were wrought by the Word or not. If the Word
has had no influence in their apprehended Conversion, there is sad ground to
supect the reality of it. They that are born of God, are begotten by the
Gospel; they that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, are sanctified by the Truth,
the word of Truth. -- And such, as may have forgotten by what means the first
impression was made on their Souls, Such as drew in the breath of Life
insensibly in Youth, should now enquire what conformity or correspondence there
is between the frame of their Souls and the form of sound Words; should see
what characters or footsteps there are in them of the sanctifying Word of God,
and whether they are changed into the image of it is purity. And if so, then
they may be assured of the certainty of their Conversion, and that the Gospel
is the power of God to their Salvation, although (it may be) they cannot call to
mind the particular Word, that was the means of their Conversion.

14. HENCE, We learn the great Reason and Occasion of Men's not profiting by
the Word, to wit, because they don't duly observe and take heed unto it. If Men
would get their way cleansed, they must take heed to the Word. But the
Generality neglect, disregard, and despise the Word. They take little or no
care to get a good understanding of it; they don't give due credit unto it;
they take no pains to lay it up in their minds and charge their memories with
it; They seldom or never meditate in God's Law; they are little or nothing
affected with the Word: They don't reverence and love and delight in it. The
great Things of God's Law are counted and treated by them as a strange Thing.
And now unto this neglect of, and disrespect unto, the Word of God, is owing
the Unprofitableness of many under the Gospel. The Word does not profit them,
not being mixed with Faith, nor duly attended to.

THE Last Branch of the USE is an EXHORTATION. (1) To Sinners, (2) To Saints.

1. TO Sinners. O Let all, and particularly Young Men, that are yet in a state
of carnal and polluted Nature, be persuaded to purify their Souls in obeying
the Truth, and to cleanse their way by taking heed to God's Word.

TO move hereunto consider, --

1. THROUGH the forbearance of God you have still an opportunity prolonged to
you. God might justly before now have put an utter end to all possibility of
your Conversion and Salvation, and have appointed you your portion among the
unclean Spirits in Prison: but through the riches of His Patience you are yet
spared, and your day of Grace lengthened out; the Spirit striving with you, and
the Means of Grace continued to you. And O that this Goodness of God may lead
you to Repentance, and His Long suffering may be Salvation to you!

2. Consider, GOD takes notice of your neglect and abuse of His Word, He
resents it, and will one Day reckon with you for it. The Author of Salvation,
who has purchased for you and bestowed on you the spiritual Advantages you
enjoy, has also made you Debtor in His Accompt-Book for all the Talents be
trusted with you. He takes a Memorandum of your Privileges and Opportunities,
and also of your Improvements; of your Receipts and your Returns. He observes,
how long you have enjoyed the Means of Grace, What space for Repentance has
been alow'd you, How many Sabbaths and Sermons, How many Calls and Warnings you
have had. And He marks against you all your unfruitfulness, your impenitence,
unbelief, hardness of Heart, and uncleanness of Way, your mispence of His
Gifts, refusals of His Calls, and abuse of His Patience; He beholds your base
and unworthy deportment under, and contemt of, your invaluable Liberties and
Privileges, and His Soul is vexed from day to day with your filthy
Conversation, your impurity of heart and life. And He will one Day strictly
reckon and severely deal with you therefore. And what a miserable Account will
you have to give up?

3. Consider, YOU are altogether defenseless and inexcusable. Gospel-Sinners
are left without all excuse. You have no just Apology imaginable to make for
your selves. You cannot plead ignorance, either of the nature or necessity of
this work of cleansing your Way; for your Duty in this matter is fully asserted
and explained. You cannot plead the impossibility of the Task, for Examples are
set before you. Neither can want of sufficient motive and encouragement be
pleaded, for an exceeding great Reward is propounded and assured to you. Nor
can you plead invincible impotence, for you have the Word, Ordinances and
Ministers of Christ; the best Means and Helps, and you have the Almighty Spirit
of God, whose Grace is sufficient for the Chief of Sinners, and nothing but a
resolved neglect will prevent the enjoyment thereof. Neither finally, can you
plead want of Time and Leisure; (...) many, that have not lived longer under
the Means than you, and have had equal encumbrances, impediments, and
avocations, have yet given diligence to cleanse their way, and have perfected
holiness in the fear of God. -- All Pleas and Pretenses then are utterly
removed. You have no cloak for your sin, (Joh. 15.22.) How justly may God
expostulate with you, as in Isa. 5.4. What could have been done more unto my
Vineyard, that I have not done in it? Wherefore, when I looked that it should
bring forth grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? How unworthy, how
unaccountable and inexcusable is this? -- The just Charge and Complaint lies
against you, (Joh. 6.40.) Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life.
And, (Jer. 13.27.) Woe unto thee, will thou not be made clean? And, (Prove.
1.14.) I have called, and ye have refused, I have stretched out my hand, but ye
have set at naught all my counsel, and did not choose the fear of the Lord. --
Therefore thou art inexcusable, O Man, whosoever thou art. And your own
Conscience will condemn and silence you; will bear witness against you, will
stop your mouth and strike you speechless, in a day when God shall judge the
secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, according to the Gospel.

4. Consider, YOUR Gospel Advantages, (if you perish at last) as they enhance
your Sins now, so they will inflame your Sentence hereafter. Your Guilt is
aggravated by your Gospel-Privileges. The provocation of your Sins, is
increased from your living under the Gospel and Means of Grace. Your Sins are
committed against the most shining Light, and endearing Love, against all
possible restraints and preservatives, in contemt of the Word of the Kingdom
and the Spirit of Holiness: which speaks much wilfulness, stubbornness and
during presumption, and infinitely height^ the malignity of your Sins, and the
indignity of your offenses. So that you are under a vastly heavier load of
Guilt, than any of those who Sin without the Law. -- And consequently you shall
also receive an heavier Curse and greater Damnation. As many as have sinned
without the Law, shall also perish without the Law, die without mercy, and
every transgression receive a just recompense of reward: How then shall we
escape if we neglect so great Salvation, which at first began to be spoken by
the Lord? And of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall they be though it
worthy, who have trodden under foot the Son of God and have done despite unto
the Spirit of Grace? -- We read, Luke 12.47, 8. That servant, which knew his
Lord's Will and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall
be beaten with many stripes. But be, that knew not, and did commit things
worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes. For unto whomsoever much
is given, of him shall much be required: and to whom men have committed much,
of him they will ask the more. Gospel-Sinners are the Chief of Sinners, and
therefore they will be the wretched Objects, on whom vindictive Justice shall
have it is chief and most formidable Triumphs throughout the unknown Lengths of
Eternity. Abused Mercy will be enraging oil to the fire of God's indignation,
and will add infinitely to the weight of their doom, and load it with killing
aggravations. Mountains of Guilt and Filth lie upon them now, and a World of
insupportable Woes and Miseries will be their Portion hereafter. Consider this
ye that forget God; Consider, that by your impenitence of heart and impurity of
life under the Gospel you are emimently treasuring up wrath against the day of
wrath. O Believe and Tremble; and think not to escape the righteous Judgment of
God, without speedy Repentance and Reformation.

5. Consider, THERE is the utmost Danger of your final miscarrying, The World,
the Flesh, and the Devil are all joined in a malicious conspiracy to ruin you,
and are acting with the utmost art and unwearied diligence in pursuit of their
cursed designs against you. These Enemies of your Souls, and of all
Righteousness, by a thousand wiles endeavor to render the Word of God of none
effect unto you, to imprison the Truth in unrighteousness, and wrest the
Scriptures to your destruction. They seek to harden you in unbelief, enmity and
disobedience to the Law of God; To blind your Eyes, that the Light of the
glorious Gospel should not shine into your hearts; To prejudice you against the
Truths and Precepts of Religion; To suppress every pious Thought, to damp every
good inclination, and break every devout Resolution; To inspire vain thoughts
and inflame corrupt affections, To entangle you in the pleasures of Sin and in
the cares and snares of the World; and so to drown you in perdition. -- This
tells you that your Case is extremely dangerous. -- But further, you are in
danger by the stroke of Death, which may soon irrecoverably seal up your hands,
and period all your opportunities of doing or getting Good. And moreover, You
are in danger of Spiritual Judgments. You have received the Grace of God in
vain; And who knows but that He may ere long bereave you of His despised Word
and Ordinances, or blast them to you; send a famine of the Means: or else of
the Spirit, so that, though you may read the Letter, and hear the sound of the
Word, yet you shall never smell it is sweet savor, nor feel it saving power,
but rather wax worse and worse under the Means, that should profit you? -- O
meditate much, ye Gospel-Despisers, on that awful Text, Isai. 6.9, 10. (a Text
repeated no less than 6 or 7 times in the New Testament, to declare it is
extraordinary importance and draw your attentive consideration,) and also on
that, Mat. 3.10. -- Meditate on these Texts. Meditate Terror, and Let your
hearts tremble, lest there be written your mournful Case and fearful Doom. --
But let not any humble contrite Soul pervert those Scriptures to his
discouragement. Let them be improved to quicken you to work out your Salvation
with fear and trembling, and give diligence lest any Man sail of the Grace of
God. -- This is the End of all the foregoing Considerations, And, Oh! that they
may have this effect upon you. Seriously ponder them, and let 'em excite you to
cleanse your way by observing the Word of God.

AND if this be the Desire and Resolution of your Soul, Let me for your
encouragement add, that God is ready to assist you: and for your help let me
offer these Hints by way of Direction.

1. MOURN over, and be afflicted for, all your past neglects and abuses of the
Word. Consider what an evil and bitter thing it is, that you have been
despising the Word, and breaking the Commandment. Consider what indignities you
have been offering herein to the Blessed God, what affront to our gracious
Savior, what outrage against the Holy Spirit. Consider the ingratitude, the
injustice, and many heinous aggravations of your past guilty deportment. And
let your Soul be humbled in you, when you remember these things; spread your
case before God, pour out your heart in penitent confessions of your great
guilt, and ardent supplications for Mercy to pardon, and Grace to help you.

2. FOR the Future improve this blessed Mean^ of Grace, the Word of God, with
all Diligence and Care.

1. BE frequent in the Duties of Reading and Hearing. Converse much with the
Holy Scriptures* and be often waiting on God in His Holy Sanctuary. -- Imitate
the noble Bereans in searching the Scriptures daily: and as the Kings of Israel
were enjoined, Read in this Book of the Law all the days of your life. -- And
further, (as the Apostle directs, Jam. 1.19.) Let every man also be swift to
hear. Wait daily at Wisdom's Doors, in season and out of season. Seek for
convenient opportunities of Hearing; embrace 'em readily; improve 'em
diligently. If you neglect and omit any occasion needlessly and wilfully,
perhaps you may then miss an acceptable Time and a good Day for your Souls.

2. ENTER on these Exercises with due Preparation. Dismiss the cares of this
World, and the pleasures of sense, which choke the Word, which stop your ears,
shut your eyes, and harden your heart against it. Awaken and summon together
your most serious Thoughts, and labor by holy musing to warm your Souls, and
work 'em into the most solemn Frame. Come to the Word with a free spirit, with
a good and honest heart, with humility, meekness and teachableness, suppressing
all Pride and Passion, all Prejudices and Prepossessions with respect both to
Doctrines and Persons. Come with the disposition of serious Learners, and not
of censorious Carpers. -- Come also with sincere views and unfeigned aims at
the great End of the Word. Let not Curiosity, Custom, Company, Reputation,
Interest, or the clamours of a rebuking Conscience, or any corrupt motive, be
your inducement to Read or Hear the Word at any time; But let a Desire to
please and honor God, and profit your own Souls, be your governing principle.
This is the End, which God propounds in giving us His Word; and this is
answerable to the nature of the Word, and becoming the dignity of rational
Creatures. And if you come with this good intention, you may hope that God will
add His Blessing; but otherwise you have no ground for any such expectation.
And further, you must by previous Prayer invoke and engage the promised
Assistences of the Holy Spirit. The preparation of the heart in Man is from the
Lord, and from Him comes down the Blessing. God can put your Hearts into, and
keep them in, a right Temper, and can teach you to profit. And He has said, He
will be enquired of by the House of Israel, to do this thing for them.
Therefore ply the Throne of Grace, and Give your selves to Prayer, when you
apply your selves to the Word of Grace, and give attendance to private Reading,
or to Public Hearing.

3. ATTEND Diligently, and with the whole bent of your Soul, when actually
engaged in these devout Exercises. Be not trifling, perfunctory, heedless,
remiss, inadvertent. But experect, vigilant, earness, constantly and
universally attentive. Beware of drowsy sloth, and sleepy negligence. Beware of
a clouded Eye, a closed Ear, and a roving Mind. As ever you would profit by the
Word, yield the most wakeful, steady and lively atten^ion unto it. Consider,
who speaks to you in the Word, even the Great God; Consider what is spoken to
you, even Things of the greatest Concern; and let these tho'ts strike an awe
upon your mind, and awaken you to give earnest heed unto the Word.

4. ENDEAVOR to Apprehend readily. Be not slow of apprehension, and dull of
bearing, a People of no understanding. But let him that reads, and him that
bears, understand. Employ your best reason and consideration, and set your
heart to know and understand the words of the Lord. We must read and hear with
the Spirit and also with understanding.

5. BELIEVE freely and fully. Realize it, that the Scriptures are of Divine
Inspiration, (...) yield a ready and firm assent unto the Truth of all you find
written there. And the Word of Hearing, let that also be mixed with Faith,
without which it cannot profit you. Whatsoever Doctrine the Ministers of the
Word preach unto you, if they speak according to the Law and the Testimony, you
must receive it not as the word of Man, but as it is indeed the word of God,
and that without delay and without reluctance. Be not faithless, neither be
slow of heart to believe. If you believe not our Report, you will not have the
Arm of the Lord revealed to you.

6. RECEIVE the Word affectionately and submissively. Receive the Truth in the
love of it. Esteem every Word of God highly in Love, as a faithful saying and
worthy of all acceptance. Delight in the Truth after the inward Man. What is
said, however it thwarts your Opinions, Lusts or Interests, Receive it with
meekness. God will give Grace to the humble, and the meek He will teach in His
way.

7. APPLY faithfully and wisely. The neglect of prudent and impartial
self-application is the ruin of multitudes. It is the misery and folly of not a
few, they shift off what they read and hear upon others, and do not discern or
consider it is relation to themselves, nor apply it to their own Souls. And it
is the unhappiness of others, they apply all to themselves right or wrong,
without discerning be^wixt things that differ, and so often pervert the
Scriptures to their own destruction. -- You must be ca^eful to avoid both these
Errors. You must be vigilant to spy what touches and affects your own
Condition, and readily take the Portion carved for you, whether it be an
Instruction, Rebuke, Advice or Consolation. Critically remark what points at
your case, and with all impartiality take it home, and hide it in your heart.
Judicious and serious Application is the Soul of Hearing and Reading, as well
as of Preaching.

8. FORM suitable Resolutions, mixed with pious Ejaculations. Submit to every
Word of God, and resolve on future conformity thereunto: and let that be the
secret language of your Souls, -- Good is the word of the Lord. -- Teach me thy
way O Lord; I will walk in thy truth: I believe, Lord, help mine unbelief. --
Thou have commanded us to keep thy Precepts diligently. O that my ways were
directed to keep thy statutes! I will run the way of thy commandments, when
thou shall enlarge my heart. -- Let these in general be the pious breathings of
your Souls under the Word. And moreover, form devout Resolves and Petitions
agreeable to the Tenor and Quality of every particular Truth.

9. TREASURE up the Word in your Memories. Be not forgetful Hearers. Let the
Word of God dwell in you richly. Hold fast the form of sound words, which you
read; and keep in memory what is preached to you. This is your Duty, and will
be much for your advantage every way, to enrich you with knowledge, to fortify
you against Error and Sin, and to furnish you unto every good Thought Word and
Work.

10. MEDITATE on the Word seriously and intensely. Digest what you hear and
read, by d^vout After-consideration and close Reflection. Ponder upon it, and
commune with your hearts about i^ This will have a happy tendency not only to
fasten it in your Memories, but also to fix and further its efficacy on your
Souls, and to invigorate and perpetuate it is influence on your Lives. Better
read one Chapter or hear one Sermon, and carefully ruminate upon it, than
several in the neglect hereof. Meditation is the best Friend and Help to
Knowledge and Grace. 1 John 2.14. I have written unto you Young Men, because ye
are strong, and the word of God abides in you. -- Therefore Give thy self to
meditation, that thy profiting may appear to all. Dwell on the Word by
After-thought, revolve it in your mind, press and urge it on your heart, and
never leave till some warm impression be made, Some religious passion drawn
into vigorous exercise.

11. FOLLOW the Word with earnest Supplications. Labor always fervently in
Prayer, that God would sanctify you through the Truth, and teach you to profit by
his Word; That He would write every Truth you hear or read, by the Finger of
His Spirit on your heart, with deep and indelible Characters; that He would
seal instruction to you and make every Word an ingrafted Word. -- And you will
find it a most wise and beneficial practice, to pray over, as well as think
over, the Particulars of the Sermon you have heard, or the portion of Scripture
you have read, especially if accommodated to your case. Repeat them not only to
your selves, by Meditation; but also to God, by Supplication. Turn all into
Prayer. Use your best skill to Form them into an Address to God. No Scripture
is so Speculative and Doctrinal, but that it is also Practical and Devotional.
-- And when you Pray, Pray in Faith, relving on the efficacious Spirit, and
meritorious Blood of Jesus Christ for Assistence and Acceptance.

12. WATCH against all that tends to damp and destroy the influence of the
Word. Keep down Lust, which wars against the Soul, and rebels against the
Light; which resists the Convictions and repels the Dictates of the Word. Take
heed l^st you be hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin. -- Keep out the
World; watch against the Inroads of Worldly Cares and Fears, and beware of
sinful Company, and watch against Worldly Enticements and Satisfactions; all
which tend to chill the influence and quench the efficacy of the Word. -- And
keep off the Tempter; who with many wiles and unwearv'd labor seeks to choke
the Word, and steal away that Good Thing that is committed to us, and to
inspire vain Tho'ts and inkindle vile Affections and Desires in us. Stand
therefore upon your guard, keep up a lively Care and holy Jealousy over your
selves; Keep an eye upon the Enemy, Acquaint your selves with His Devices,
Watch all his Motions, Resist him steadfastly; and Keep your hearts with all
Diligence.

In the Last Place, ^HERISH every good Motion begotten in you by the Word, and
pursue every pious Inclination quickly into exercise. Carefully observe and
preserve every Beam of Light and Spark of Fire, that drops in upon you. Study
to maintain and improve every Heavenly Impression, and to nourish good
Beginnings. Strike while the Iron is Hot. Take the first opportunity, while
your Heart is under the warm sense and influence of the Word, to answer the
Call of God and obey that form of sound Doctrine, which is d^liver'd you. The
Primus Impetus (as One observes) affords a great advantage, if it be improved;
Possibly in the vigor of it, you may overcome those great difficulties and
oppositions which have been too hard for you formerly, and may otherwise give
you imp^diment hereafter; and these being mastered, your pro^ress will be
easier. Therefore immediately set your self to comply with every Direction of
the Word, and presently reduce every gracious disposition into Act. Does the
Word convince you of any Error? Immediately retract the same. Does it reprove
you for any Sin? Immediately forbear and repent of it. Does it condemn you for
any indulged Lust? Immediately set about the mortification of it. And
whatsoever Grace or Duty has been recommended to you, Immediately come into the
Exercise and Practice of it. Grieve not the Spirit by Delays. And ^ee to it,
that you endanger not your Souls by Partiality. Let your obedience to the Word
be not only Speedy, but also Universal. Let all the Powers of your whole Man
pay their homage to the Word; and let all the words of the whole Law receive
your homage and regards, that you may be perfect and entire, wanting nothing.
You know what was the Condemnation of the Young Man in the Gospel, -- One Thing
thou lackest --. Take heed lest you fall after the same Example of unbelief.

THUS much for the first Brach of the Exhortation. In the next place, --

2. I am to Address the Saints, or those that have felt the Divine power and
efficacy of the purifying Word. Receive the Exhortation which speaks unto you
in a few words.

1. LET God have the Praise and Glory of all the purifying Effects of the Word.
Eye and Adore the Hand of God, in the cleansing Efficacy of the Word upon you.
Don't burn Incense to your own Drag, nor raise a Trophee to the power of Means,
and the skill of Instruments. But Let him that gloryeth, glory in the Lord. Set
the Crown on the Divine Efficiency, which works all in all. And magnify the
Divine Mercy. See the exceeding Grace of God, in what He has done for your
Soul; and pour out your thankful Praises.

2 WALK humbly in the sense of your remaining Impurities and Deficiencies. Give
to GOD the Glory of His Grace; and take to your Self the shame of your
imperfections. Consider your many defilements, and defects, and contrarieties
to God's holy Word, mourn over 'em, blush for 'em, and Be not high-minded, but
Fear. Rejoice with Trembling.

3. HIGHLY Prize the Word, as one of your best Privileges, and constantly
improve it. It has been the Means under God of producing the most noble and
excellent Effects in you; has translated you out of your natural state of
Darkness, Uncleanness and Misery, into an Heavenly state of Light, Purity, and
Peace. And surely this consideration should strongly commend and endear it to
you, as it did to the holy Psalmist, who said, (Psalm. 119.140.) Thy Word is
very pure: Therefore thy Servant loves it. -- Maintain a high Value for it,
pay a great Regard unto it. Account the Enjoyment of it one of the most
desirable Articles of your pr^sent happiness. Look on the Word as a Treasure,
better than Thousand of Gold and Silver. Keep it in the midst of thine heart.
Let it never depart out of thy mouth, nor from before thine eyes. Be much in
meditation upon it. Be diligent in the improvement of it. Let not mercy and
truth forsake thee: bind them about thy neck, write them upon the table of
thine heart.

4. STUDY to adorn the Doctrine of God your Savior in all things. Let your
conversation be as becomes the Gospel. Let your Actions be a continual Comment
on the Word, and so a bright Ornament to your Profession. As you experience the
efficacy of it in your Hearts, let others observe the influence of it in your
Lives. Let the Purity of the Word be visibly exemplified in your universal
behavior, and Holiness to the Lord be written on your whole Conduct. See that
you walk circumspectly, giving no offense, giving no occasion to the Adversary
to speak reproachfully, and to blaspheme the Name of God and His Doctrine. But
let your Light so shine before Men, that others seeing your good works may be
brought to glorify God in the day of visitation.

I Shall now shut up all with that of the Apostle, (Phil. 2.15, 16.) Be
blameless and harmless, the Sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a
crooked and perverse Generation; among whom shine ye as Lights in the World:
Holding forth the word of Life; that I may rejoice in the Day of Christ, that I
have not run in vain, neither labored in vain.

AMEN.

