A DISCOURSE Concerning the Public Reading OF THE Holy Scriptures By the LORDS
People, in their Religious Assemblies: Delivered at Tisbury, August 12. 1719.

By WILLIAM HOMES, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Chilmark on Martha's Vineyard.

Luke iv. 16. And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up: And as his
custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath Day, and stood up for to
Read --. 1 These. v. 27. I charge you by the Lord, that this Epistle be read
unto all the holy Brethren. Col. iv. 16. Quare detestabilis est in Deum
contumelia, quod Papistae Scripturam obscuram esse and ambiguam insimulant.
Quorsum enim loquutus esset Deus, nisi liquida invictaque in ejus verbis se
proferret veritas?

Calvin. in Act. 18.28. BOSTON: Printed by B Green. 1720.

To the honorable Judge SEWALL.
SIR,
THE open Contempt that is put upon revealed Religion by some, while they
prefer Man's corrupt reason before it, and advance the Oracles of Reason, as
they call them, above the Oracles of GOD, as a more Infallible rule of Humane
Practice; makes it the necessary duty of all that have a due regard to the
Honor of GOD, and the Credit of our holy Religion, that they evidence, upon
all occasions, a high and honorable esteem of the holy Scriptures.

AND we cannot better, I am persuaded, Manifest the great value we put upon
those Sacred Records, than by our thankfulness for them, our earnest endeavors
to acquaint our selves with them, by the diligent Improvement of all Means that
GOD has appointed in order there-unto, and particularly by a frequent,
reverent and attentive Reading and Hearing of them Read; both in Public and
Private; and by regulating our Faith and Practice by them, as the Infallible
Rule of both.

THE Public Reading of the holy Scriptures has been, I think, the general
Practice of the Catholic Church, not only under the Law, but under the Gospel
also, from the days of CHRIST, and His Apostles, to our Times; and why this
Practice should be discontinued by any of the Disciples of the blessed JESUS, I
see no reason: I am persuaded it cannot be alleged to be any part of our
Reformation from Popish Superstition.

IF the ensuing Discourse shall, through the blessing of GOD upon it, be made a
Mean to stir up any of better parts, and greater abilities, to Examine this
Matter Impartially, and set it in a clearer light; so that the Practice of the
Reading of the Holy Scriptures in our Public Assemblies, may be revived among
us, I shall rejoice in it.

I am very sensible that the performance is mean, and bears no just proportion
to the dignity of the Subject, therein handled; and all the Apology I shall
make for it is, That when I studied the Sermon, I had no thoughts that ever it
should be made more Public, than the Preaching of it in a small Congregation,
should make it. But after I had delivered it in Public, a Friend of mine
desired the perusing of my Notes, which I made no difficulty to grant him; and
he showed them to others, and some of those, whose judgment I highly value and
esteem, being of Opinion that the making the Discourse Public may be of some
use: I have submitted to their judgment, though I know it must appear under some
disadvantages.

May it please your honor, I cheerfully embrace this Opportunity to offer you
my grateful acknowledgments for all the favors and marks of respect which you
have been pleased to confer upon me, and particularly upon my Arrival in this
Country with my Family.

THAT GOD may signally bless your Honor with all needful Blessings; and
continue you long a useful Instrument of the advancement of His own Glory, and
of the good and welfare of your Country; and that after you shall have served
your own Generation by the will of GOD, you may fall asleep in the LORD, our
Exalted SAVIOR, is the sincere Prayer

Of him who is your Honors Most humble and much obliged Servant, William Homes.
Chilmark, Feb. 26. 1719/20.
A Discourse Concerning the Public Reading of the Holy Scriptures.
DEUTERONOMY XXXI. II. When all Israel is come to appear before the LORD thy
GOD, in the place which he shall choose; thou shall read this law before all
Israel, in their hearing.


THEY that believe that there is a GOD; must acknowledge that He is to be
worshipped by His Reasonable Intelligent Creatures.

THE Notion we have of the glorious GOD, as the first Cause of all things;
necessarily leads us to Conceive of Him, as the Chief Good; and that every
thing in the Creatures, that does any way contribute to their Safety, Comfort,
or Usefulness; must be derived from Him.

AND the Idea we have of GOD as a Being Infinitely and Transcendently Excellent
in Himself; and Independent upon all other Beings; and that all His Creatures
do entirely depend upon Him, in their Beings and Operations; leads us to
Conceive of Him, as the Supreme Governor of the World, and that all His
reasonable Creatures stand obliged to offer up to Him, such Service as is
agreeable to His own Nature, and to the Capacity that He has given them.

FROM these Considerations of GOD, it naturally follows, that it belongs unto
Him only to give Rules and Directions how He will be worshipped by His
Creatures: and that all ways of worship, that are not agreeable to the Rules
and Directions which He has given concerning it; must be displeasing to Him,
and unprofitable to our selves.

AND I think, that Protestants are generally agreed in this, that the Holy
Scriptures contain the Revelations of GOD's Will concerning His own Worship,
both as to the Matter and Manner of it: and therefore when any Question arises
among them, relating to the Worship of GOD; they must have recourse to the
Revealed Will of GOD, contained in the holy Scriptures, for the Resolution of
it; as that alone, which may be safely depended upon.

THE Worship that the LORD requires of His People, is either Internal, or
External, answerable to the two principal parts whereof Man Consists, viz. Soul
and Body. Internal religious Worship consists in the Soul's being rightly
affected toward GOD the object of divine Worship. When the mind is Enlightened
with Supernatural Knowledge whereby we are enabled to conceive of GOD,
according to the discoveries He has given of Himself; and when He is feared,
and loved above all; when He is submitted unto in all things, trusted unto, and
depended upon at all times; and when we entertain a deep and abiding sense of
His Goodness, in His dealings toward our selves, and others. External
religious Worship consists of such words, actions, gestures, duties and
performances as serve to signify and declare the Inward subjection of our Soul
to GOD; and our being suitably affected toward Him; and that contribute to our
entertaining becoming Conceptions of Him, and to promote and increase our
Esteem of Him, and subjection to Him.

THE External Worship due to GOD by Man, is either Private or Public. Private,
is that religious Worship which the LORD'S People offer up to GOD Privately,
either in their Families, or by themselves alone. Public, is that religious
Worship that the LORD's People offer to GOD Publicly, whereby they do
Publicly and Solemnly declare their subjection to GOD, and dependence on Him.

IN the words we have now read, we have one of those pieces of External
religious worship which GOD requires His People to offer up to Him, in their
Public Assemblies; viz. The Reading of the Holy Scriptures; and all ranks of
Persons are Commanded to hearken thereunto, Men, Women, Children, and
Strangers; all must reverently attend upon this part of Divine Worship.

THE Doctrine that falls under our present Consideration, is,

DOCT. THAT the Reading of the Holy Scriptures, and the bearing of them Read,
is a part of that Worship which GOD requires of His People, in their Public
Religious Assemblies.

IN prosecuting this Doctrine, I shall observe the following Method:

(1) I shall endeavor to show that the Reading of the Holy Scriptures, and the
hearing of them read, is a part of GOD's Public Worship. (2) I shall give some
account how this part of GOD's Worship should be performed by His People. (3) I
shall draw some Practical Inferences from the whole.
AS to the first of these, that the Reading of the Holy Scriptures, and the
hearing of them read, is a part of GOD's Public Worship, will appear, if we
consider.

1. THAT the LORD does very expressly require the Reading and hearing of His
Word, as a part of His Public Worship. In the Text now under Consideration,
When all Israel come to appear before the Lord thy God, in the Place which he
shall choose: thou shall read this law before all Israel, in their hearing.
Gather the people together, Men, Women, and Children, and thy Stranger that is
within thy Gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear the
Lord your GOD, and observe to do all the words of this law. This Command is so
express, plain, and full, for the Public Reading of the Holy Scriptures, that
all who take the Revealed Will of GOD for the Rule of their performances, and
acknowledge the Scriptures of the Old Testament, to be of equal authority with
those of the New; must also own their obligation to the performance of this, as
a part of GOD's Public Worship; if they duly consider the matter: for all
Moral Precepts, given to the Church of the Jews, under the Law are as binding
upon us Christians, as they were upon them. Neither can it be alleged, with any
show of Reason, that this is a Ceremonial or Temporary Precept, which did
concern the Jewish Church, under the former dispensation only; seeing the end
of the Command, and the reasons annexed to it, by the Spirit of GOD, to enforce
it, concern all the professed People of GOD, to the end of the World, as much
as they did the Jews, under the Law. The Reasons annexed to this Command are
two, viz.

(1) THOU shall read this Law before all Israel in their hearing, That they may
hear and scarn, i. e. That they may so hear as to learn. We must study so to
read and hear the Word of GOD, that we may understand the Mysteries of our holy
religion out of the Revelations and Discoveries He has given of them in His
word. We must read and hear the Scriptures that we may learn what is our duty,
toward GOD, toward our Neighbor, and toward our selves. The Scriptures must
be read and heard, that the LORDS People may learn what they are to expect at
the hand of GOD; provided they shall continue Constant, and faithful in their
Obedience to Him: and what they have to fear, if they neglect their duty, and
transgress His Law.

(2) THE Law must be read before all Israel, That they may hear and fear the
LORD their GOD, i. e. That they may Worship and Serve the LORD, after an
acceptable manner. The LORD will have His People to learn their Obedience to
Him, out of His Own Word: for the Revealed Will of GOD, contains the Rule and
Measure of that Worship and Obedience which we owe unto Him: therefore it is
added, That they may observe to do all the words of this Law: i. e. that they
may observe to do every thing that the Law commands to be done.

NOW these are the things that we have as much need to learn, as the Jews had;
and are as much obliged to do, as they were: and therefore seeing the Reading,
and Hearing of the holy Scriptures, in our Public religious Assemblies, is a
mean appointed by GOD to these Important purposes; it ought not to be neglected
by us. And the Reasons of GOD's Command, being the same to us, that they were
to the Jews under the Law; the Command it self must oblige us, as much as it
did them. And that it was the Will of GOD, when He first gave this Law to His
People, that this Ordinance should be kept up in His Church, in all succeeding
Generations; and that it should be made a part of their stated Public Worship
every Sabbath Day, seems to be clearly intimated in these words in the 13th
verse. That their Children which have not known any thing, may hear and learn
to fear the Lord your God, as long as you live in the Land, whither ye go over
Jordan to possess it. And thus the pious Jews under the Law, did understand
this Precept, seeing they made the Public Reading of the Law and the Prophets,
always a part of their Sabbath Days worship, Of which Ainsworth out of the
Jewish Doctors gives us the following account, in his Annotations on Genesis 6.9.
These three Letters in the Hebrew Bibles do signify the Parasha, or great
Section of Moses Law, which was a Lecture on the Sabbath Day, read in the Jews
Synagogues, as is observed, Acts 15.21. to which was added a Lecture out of the
Prophets, Acts 13.15. And the first Paragraph or Section (which is from the
Creation hitherto) they call Bereshith, i. e. in the beginning. The second,
which reaches to the XII. Chapter, they call Noe; and so the rest.

There are in all, 54 Sections in the Law, which they read in the 52. Sabbaths,
joining two of the shortest twice together; that the whole may be finished in a
Years space.

Here the Jewish Doctors write thus. It is a Common Custom, throughout all
Israel, that they finish wholly the (reading of the) Law in one Year: beginning
in the Sabbath, which is after the feast of Tabernacles, at the first Section
of Genesis: In the second Sabbath, at, These are the Generations of Noe. In the
third, at, The Lord said unto Abram, Genesis 12.1. So they read and go on in this
order, till they have ended the Law, at the feast of Tabernacles. So far he.

THAT this was the continued practice of the Jews, even in CHRIST, and His
Apostles time, is evident from several passages in the New Testament. As that
in Acts 15.21. For Moses of old, has in every City them that Preach him, being
read in their Synagogues every Sabbath Day. Here we may observe, (1) That the
Reading of the holy Scriptures, is called, by the Inspired Historian,
Preaching. (2) That the Practice of Reading the holy Scriptures in their
Synagogues, was, by the Jews repeated every Sabbath Day; and consequently, was
a part of their stated Public Worship.

IT is recorded also in Acts 13.14. That when they; viz. Paul and Barnabas,
departed from Perga, they came to Antioch in Pisidia, and went into the
Synagogue on the Sabbath Day, and sat down; And after the reading of the Law
and the Prophets, the rulers of the Synagogue sent unto them, saying, Ye men
and brethren, if ye have any word of Exhortation to the People, say on. Here we
may observe, (1) That the reading of the Law and the Prophets was attended upon
by the Jews, as a part of GOD's Public Worship; seeing it was performed by
them, in their Synagogue, the Place of GOD's Public Worship; and on the
Sabbath Day. (2) That this Reading of the Law and the Prophets did precede
Exhortation, (or that which we commonly call Preaching) and that it was
distinct from it. (3) That the Apostles of our Lord JESUS CHRIST did attend the
Reading of the Law and the Prophets, as a part of GOD's Public Worship.

AND our Savior also Himself did countenance and approve this Reading of the
holy Scriptures, in Public, as a part of GOD's Worship, by His frequent
attending upon it; and by His practicing of it Himself. We are informed by the
Evangelist Luke, Luke 4.16, 17. That he came to Nazareth where he had been
brought up: and as his custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the
Sabbath Day, and stood up for to Read. Here we may observe, (1) That it was our
Saviors Custom to attend the Public Worship of GOD, as performed by the Jews
in their Synagogue on the Sabbath Day; where the Reading of the Law and the
Prophets was a considerable part of that Worship. (2) That our Savior did Read
the holy Scriptures himself, as a part of GOD's Public Worship, and that it
was His Custom so to do; which no doubt is recorded for our Instruction and
Imitation.

AND from the Practice of the Jews in their Synagogues in making the Reading of
the Scriptures a part of their stated Public Worship, the like order was
brought into the Christian Church; and the Reading of the Scriptures is made
part of the Office of the Ministers of the Gospel, as it had been of the
Priests and Levites under the Law. Timothy is commanded by the Apostle, in 1 Timothy 4.13. To give attendance to Reading, as well as to Exhortation and
Doctrine. These Epistles to Timothy and Titus have been considered as a
Directory, given by the Spirit of GOD, to these two Evangelists, how they
should behave themselves in the House of GOD; and in them, to all
Gospel Ministers in all Succeeding Ages of the Church; and as the Exhortation
and Doctrine, which the Evangelist here is directed to give attendance unto,
are of a Public Nature; so the Reading pointed at, seems also to be. The thing
he was to read, no doubt, was the holy Scriptures; and the Reading it self a
Public act of his sacred Office, and cannot be restricted to his Private
Studies, which he was to follow in order to his being fitted and prepared for
Public Work.

THE inspired writings also of the Apostles were Commanded to be Read by
Christians, in their Public religious Assemblies. It is Commanded by the
Apostle, Col. 4.16. When this Epistle is read amongst you, Cause that it be
read also in the Church of the Laodiceans; and that ye also read the Epistle
from Laodicea. The Apostle gives a very solemn Charge to the Church of
Thessalonica to the same purpose, in 1 These. 5.27. I charge you by the Lord
that this Epistle be read unto all the holy Brethren.

AND it is highly probable that what was enjoined these Churches mentioned, was
expected from, and practiced by all the Christian Churches, to whom the Apostle
wrote. And this will appear, if we consider, (1) That the Apostolical Epistles
sent to particular Churches, are directed to them as a Society. (2) The
Doctrines insisted upon in these Epistles are of a Public Nature, and concern
all the Members of the Church; and therefore all had a right to be acquainted
with them.

THIS Public Reading of the holy Scriptures was appointed by GOD as a mean for
the preserving the Knowledge of Himself among His People, and to stir them up
to persevere in their Obedience to Him; and therefore whenever this came to be
neglected, the LORD's People did quickly sink into Idolatry and Immorality. In
the wicked Reigns of Manasseh and Amon his Son, it seems the book of the Law of
GOD was lost; which was found by Hilkiah in the Reign of Josiah, while they
were repairing and cleansing the Temple. And in these two Reigns the Jewish
Church was degenerated to an astonishing degree. And the most glorious
Reformations that were set on foot in that Church, were begun, and carried on,
by restoring this Ordinance. It is recorded of King Josiah, that pious Prince
and great Reformer, in 2 Chronicles. 34.29. Then the King sent, and gathered all the
Eldors of Judah, and Jerusalem, and the King went up into the house of the
Lord, and all the men of Judah, and Inhabitants of Jerusalem. And the Priests,
and the Levites, and all the People great and small; and he read in their ears
all the words of the book of the Covenant, that was found in the house of the
Lord.

THE same Method was followed by Ezra the Priest, in his pious endeavors
toward the carrying on a universal Reformation among the LORD's People, after
their return from the Babylonish Captivity, as is recorded, Neh. 8.2, 3. And
Ezra the Priest brought the Law before the Congregation, both of men and women,
and all that could hear with understanding; upon the first day of the second
Month and he read therein, before the Street, that was before the water gate,
from the Morning, until midday, before the men, and the women, and all those
that could understand.

THUS we have seen that the Reading and Hearing of the holy Scriptures Read, in
the Public Assemblies of GOD's People, has been expressly commanded by GOD
Himself, both in the Old and New-Testaments: And that this Public Reading, and
hearing of the Scriptures, has been practiced by the godly, both under the
Law, and under the Gospel, as a stated part of GOD's Public Worship, and that
CHRIST Himself and His holy Apostles, did countenance and approve of it, both
by their being frequently present at it, and by their own practice.

AND it is highly reasonable that the LORD's People should continue the
practice of Reading the holy Scriptures in their Public religious Assemblies,
not only because GOD has expressly commanded it, which indeed should have the
most powerful Influence upon us, in all our undertakings and performances; but
also because of the unspeakable advantages which we may expect from it. The
Apostle Paul assures us, 2 Timothy 3.15. That the Scriptures are able to make a
man wise to Salvation through faith which is in Christ Jesus.

THE holy Scriptures may be considered as an Epistle sent down from Heaven, by
GOD Himself, to the Children of Men here below, containing in it, a plain and
full Revelation of all the Mysteries of our holy Religion; and a Declaration of
those Divine Truths which must be known and firmly believed by us, in order to
Salvation: and the Infallible Rules by which our Lives and Practices must be
regulated: And the sure Charter by which we hold our Title to Heaven, and to
all the valuable Blessings and Privileges made over to us, in the
Gospel Covenant. And indeed, the most excellent, useful, and edifying Sermons
that can be Preached, are so, only as they serve to explain the holy
Scriptures, and to stir up Men to comply with the Will of GOD revealed in them;
and to follow the Directions which GOD has given us in His Word. And therefore
our acquainting our selves with these blessed Records, by the diligent
Improvement of every mean that the LORD is affording us, in order there-unto;
must be both our Duty and our Interest; of which, frequent Reading, and hearing
of them Read, both in Public and Private, is one, and perhaps, as proper, and
as frequently blessed of GOD, as any. What is said concerning the Book of
Revelation, Rev. 1.3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words
of this Prophecy, and keep those things that are written therein, holds true of
all the rest of the Books of holy Scripture.

THE holy Scriptures, in all things necessary to Salvation, are plain and easy
to be understood, and are as well-accommodated to humane weakness, as the
discourses of the most Celebrated Preachers ordinarily are, or indeed can be:
and therefore the Reading of them to a Public and vulgar Auditory, must be as
likely to promove a Peoples Instruction and Edification, as Preaching;
especially considering that it is a mean of GOD's own appointment, in order to
this end, as well as that. And it looks too like our putting a slight upon the
holy Scriptures, and our being too regardless of GOD Himself, the Author of
them, when we thrust the Reading of them out of our Public religious
Assemblies: and that even after the LORD has so plainly signified His Will to
us, that He would have the Public Reading of His Word continued among His
People, and practiced by them, as a part of His Public Worship.

Obj. 1. IF it be objected against the Public Reading of the holy Scriptures,
that Bibles are now plenty, and most of Christian Families are well stored with
them, and the LORD'S People are, almost universally, capable of reading them in
Private; and therefore our Reading them in Public, is needless.

To this I answer,

1. THAT though Bibles are plenty, and most of Christian Families are well stored
with them, and the LORD'S People are almost universally capable of reading
them; which is a Mercy that should be acknowledged by us, with all
Thankfulness: yet we have no assurance that they do universally do so, or even
that the greater part of them make Conscience of the doing of it, either by
themselves, or in their Families; though this be their duty, and they Sin if they
neglect it.

2. THE LORD has Commanded the Reading of His Word in Public, as a part of
His own Worship; and therefore our Private reading of it, how diligent so ever
we may be therein; can never free us from the obligation of this Command. This
ought to be done, and the other not left undone.

3. THE LORD'S People may warrantably expect a special Blessing upon their
Reading and Hearing the Scriptures in Public, beyond and above, what they can
expect upon their Private reading of them, especially when the Public Reading
of them is wilfully neglected: for the LORD has promised, Exodus 20.23. In all
Places where I record my name, I will come unto thee, and bless thee. When we
make Conscience of attending upon the LORD in His own Ordinances, Institutions
and Appointments, to which He has annexed His Promises; we may, with some
degree of Considence, hope that the Spirit of GOD will concur to the making of
them effectual to the promoting and carrying on our Edification and Salvation.

Obj. 2. IF it be alleged, that the Public Reading of the Scriptures would
consume much time, which otherwise might be Improved to greater advantage. I
answer.

1. THAT seeing the Public Reading of the holy Scriptures is GOD's own
Ordinance, Time must be allowed for it. If GOD has Commanded His People to Read
the holy Scriptures in Public, that they may learn to Fear Him; it must be
great presumption and undutifulness in them, to think or say that it is either
needless, or that it is not a proper mean for reaching the end we propose to
our selves therein, and therefore that it Deserves not Time to be spent in it.

2. IT must be a putting some degree of Contempt upon the holy Scriptures, to
think or say that it is not worth while to spend Time in the Public Reading of
them. They that make this objection against the Public Reading of the
Scriptures, are not likely to spend much Time in the Private Reading of them;
seeing they have so low an esteem of them. They that can say with holy David,
Psalm. 119.97. O how love I thy Law! It is my meditation all the day: will not
begrudge the Time that is necessarily spent in the Improvement of proper means,
in order to their being more thoroughly and universally acquainted with it.

BUT seeing it is generally acknowledged by Christians, that the Public
Reading of the holy Scriptures is a duty which GOD has enjoined His People the
performance of, and that the far greater part of professed Christians do
actually practice it, I shall not, at present insist any longer in the proof of
it, but proceed to the second general Head, Which is to Inquire, How this part
of GOD's Public Worship ought to be performed by the LORD'S People? And,

1. IT ought, without doubt, to be performed with much Reverence and Solemnity.
Thus did the Church of the Jews attend upon it. It is recorded in Luke 4.16.
That our Savior stood up, when He addressed Himself to the Reading of the
Scriptures, as an evidence, no doubt, of the reverent regard He had to these
Sacred Records, and that He might Instruct us by His holy Example. We are
informed, Neb. 8.5. And Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people;
(for he was above all the people) and when he opened it, all the people stood
up. And indeed it is highly reasonable, that this part of GOD's Public Worship
should be attended by His People with holy fear and reverence, seeing herein
GOD speaks to us in a more Immediate way; and that about matters of the
greatest Importance. If reverence be due when we speak more directly to GOD, as
in Prayer, It must be very becoming and necessary, when He speaks to us.

THE Jews before they engaged in this part of GOD's Public Worship, did
address themselves to GOD, whose Word they were about to Read, in solemn
Prayer. It is said in Neb. 8.6. And Ezra blessed the Lord, the great God, and
all the People answered, Amen, amen, with lifting up their hands: and they
bowed their beads and worshipped the Lord, with their faces to the ground. And
it was usual with them also to conclude the Public Reading of the ^^w, with
solemn Prayer: As Ainsworth out of the Jewish Doctors, observes, upon the Text
now under our Consideration.

2. THE holy Scriptures ought to be Read and Heard, by the Lord's People, with
much Seriousness and Attention, with a heart prepared, and very desirous to
Learn and Understand the mind of GOD held sorth to us in His Word. When the
great GOD speaks, Carelessness and Indifferency in us, is very unbecoming, and
unsuitable. It is recorded in Neb. 8.3. And he read therein before the street
that was before the water gate, from the morning until midday, before the men,
and the women, and those that could understand; and the ears of all the People
were Attentive unto the book of the Law.

3. THE holy Scriptures ought so to be Read, that they may be Understood by the
People, before whom they are read. The end of this Public Reading is, that the
People may learn to fear the LORD; and therefore they are so to be read, that
this end may be effectually reached. They are therefore to be Read in a
Language wherewith the People are acquainted: and the difficulties that may
occur in our Reading, ought to be cleared to the capacity of the Hearers. And
such observations made upon what we Read, and such Inferences drawn from it, as
may contribute most effectually, to it is being put in practice. Agreeable to
this Method, it is observed in Neb. 8.8. So they read in the book, in the law
of the Lord distinctly, and gave the sense, and caused them to understand the
reading.

4. THE holy Scriptures should be Read, by the LORD's People, in their Public
Assemblies, Orderly. What was practiced by the Jewish Church, with respect
here-unto, we have seen already; they began at the beginning of the Old
Testament, in the Sabbath after the feast of Tabernacles; and so read the whole
over in order in the space of a Year. This they did no doubt, that the People
might be acquainted, with the whole revealed Will of GOD. There is no part of
holy Scripture unnecessary; no part of it is unprofitable; it is all useful,
edifying, and instructive: and therefore no part of it is to be passed over in
our Reading; no part should be omitted: we are told, 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture
is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof,
for Instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished, unto all good works. The Command of GOD to His People is, that His
Law be Read in their Public Assemblies; and the design of the Command cannot
be fully answered by them, if any part of it be omitted in their Public
Reading of it. It is observed of Joshua to his Commendation, Josh. 8.35. That
there was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua read not, before
all the Congregation of Israel, with the Women, and little Ones, and the
Strangers that were conversant among them.

WE have this Reading of the holy Scriptures in Order, recommended to us by the
Assembly of Divines at Westminster, in their Directory for Public Worship, in
these words; It is requisite that all the Canonical books, be read over in
Order, that the People may be better acquainted with the whole body of
Scriptures.

THE LORD has not determined in His Word, how much of the holy Scriptures
should be Read at one time by His People, in their Public Assemblies; that
seems to be left to Christian prudence to determine. The whole revealed Will of
GOD must be Read; and therefore it should be Read in such Portions, that the
LORD's People who attend upon this Public Reading, may be acquainted with the
whole counsel of GOD.

THIS Public Reading of the holy Scripture, does by no means, free the LORD'S
People from the Private Reading of them: GOD has Commanded both, and therefore
both must be made Conscience of by all that would approve themselves to GOD. As
to the Private Reading of the Scriptures, we have the following direction,
Deuteronomy. 6.6. These words which I command thee this day, shall be in thy peart and
thou shall teach them diligently unto thy Children, and shall talk of them,
when thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou
lie down, and when thou risest up. And thou shall bind them for a sign upon
thy band: and they shall be as frontles between thine eyes. And thou shall
write them upon the posts of thine house, and on thy gates.

The APPLICATION.
1. HENCE we may infer, That it must be Culpable in any who profess themselves
to be the LORD's People, to live in the neglect of the Public Reading of the
holy Scriptures in their Religious Assemblies, as a part of GOD's Worship; upon
what pretense soever this may be done, seeing we have GOD's express Command for
the doing of it, and the Example of CHRIST and His Apostles, proposed to us,
for our Imitation therein.

IT cannot be supposed that our Reading a verse or two for a Text, on the LORDS
day, or a few verses quoted by us, in the course of our Sermons, for the
Confirmation and Illustration of the Doctrine we undertake to explain and apply
to our hearers; can be any tolerable answering of the design of this Command;
seeing it is certain that notwithstanding all the People hear out of the holy
Scriptures this way, they may remain great Strangers to no small part of GOD's
revealed Will.

AND the diligence of some, in Reading the Scriptures in Private (for I do not
take this to be universally practiced by the LORD's professed People) can no
way satisfy for our neglecting to Read them in Public. GOD's Commands should
be obeyed by all that have subjected themselves to His Authority. It would he
very undutiful in any of the LORD'S Servants, when He Commands them to Read His
Word in Public, to answer, No. there is no need of our doing so, we can Read
it in Private to as much advantage. This would be to arraign the Wisdom of GOD
as defective, in appointing a thing to be done by His People, and that in His
own Worship, that is unprofitable and needless, and a calling in question His
Authority over us. It belongs to Him to give Direction how He will be
worshipped and served by His Subjects and Servants, and He does not allow, that
any of His Commands be debated by them. It is our duty to Obey GOD; and not
prescribe to Him. It is without doubt, the necessary duty of all, who have any
true zeal for the Glory of GOD, and the credit of Religion, that they manifest
an honorable regard to the holy Scriptures, by declaring publicly and
practically, that they look upon them as the Infallible Rule of faith and
practice, at a time when all revealed Religion is decry'd by many; and whole
volumes written against it by Men who pretend to a greater share of
understanding and penetration than others. Surely it must be our duty to do
what we can toward the stopping the awful progress of the present prevailing
Apostasy.

2. THEY that live in the allowed Omission of this part of GOD's Public
Worship, because they do not look upon it as any part of their duty; are hence
exhorted to allow this matter a Serious and Impartial Examination. You cannot
otherwise acquit your selves of too great a degree of negligence about the
Worship of GOD. It is very reasonable that when we are Charged as guilty of a
culpable Omission in any part of our practice; especially in the Worship of
GOD; that we examine and try whether the Charge be just and well grounded, or
not. And this matter, as all others relating to the Worship of GOD, must be
examined by the revealed Will of GOD: The Rules and Directions GOD has given
us, how He will be worshipped and served by His People, must be carefully
Inquired into.

WE must, by no means, make the Custom and usage of those we live among, the
standard by which this is to be tried; seeing the prevailing Custom of the
Places Men live in, does too often mislead them in point of Practice. Neither
is this matter to be tried by the example of Men, though otherwise great and
good; seeing the best may err, and therefore are to be followed no further than
they have followed CHRIST, and have conformed themselves to the Rules of the
Gospel. Here therefore we would propose such Questions as these to our selves,
to be fairly debated by us.

QUEST. 1. IS the Reading of the holy Scriptures a duty that the LORD has
commanded His People to perform in their Religious assemblies, as a part of His
Public Worship?

2. IS that Law whereby GOD has so expressly Commanded the Public Reading of
the Scriptures, a Ceremonial, or a Moral Law? For without doubt, if it be a
Moral Law, we are as much obliged to the observation of it, as the Jews were
under the former Dispensation.

3. IS the Reading of a verse or two for a Text, and a few quotations, in the
course of our Sermons each Lords day, a sufficient answering of the design of
this Law, whereby GOD has enjoined the Public Reading of His Word?

4. IF it be a Moral Law, and consequently of perpetual Obligation; and our
Reading a verse or two for a Text, etc. each Lord's Day, does in no measure
answer the design of that Law; how can we fairly account for our living in the
Omission of a Duty, that GOD has so expressly Commanded us?

IT is very reasonable that we should consider these Questions seriously, and
impartially, in order to our coming to such a Resolution of each of them, as
may be safely depended upon by us. And what I have said in this discourse, may,
I hope, be of some use toward our framing a safe answer to each of them.

3. IF upon Examination we find, that the Public Reading of the Scriptures is
a Duty that GOD has Commanded His People the performance of, as a part of His
Public Worship, and that we have lived hitherto in the culpable neglect of it;
Let us now resolve upon a speedy Reformation; as that which will be most
acceptable to GOD, and most safe for our selves. It is sinful in any to go
about to justify their practice in that wherein they are evidently faulty. And
it is no less dangerous for Men to persist in a practice, after they are
convinced that it is wrong; upon what consideration so ever this may be done.
What tho it be alleged against us by some, That we are bringing in a New
Practice, contrary to the received Custom and Usage of the Country wherein we
live. If we be singular herein, it is but by our returning to the good Old Way,
that GOD Commanded His People to walk in, that we are so; and this can be no
culpable singularity.

HE that has Commanded us, Not to follow a Multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2.
Will, without doubt, approve of our Reforming what we find amiss in our own
way. And it is a Truth of perpetual Verity, that they that have respect to all
God's Commandments, shall not be ashamed, Psalm. 119.6. GOD will show a tender
regard to their honor and reputation, who make Conscience of honoring Him, by
doing their duty faithfully and constantly. The LORD has laid it down, as a
constant and fixed Rule of His proceedings with the Children of Men. 1 Samuel 2
30. Them that honor me, I will honor; and they that despise me shall be
lightly esteemed.

OUR love to GOD and His Laws should Constrain us to comply with every thing
that He makes known to be our duty. Neither Custom, nor the Example of Others,
nor our own Inclinations must be our Rule in the Matters of GOD and Religion:
but the revealed Will of GOD: To this we must study to conform our selves in
all things; not turning to the right nor to the left hand from that straight
path that GOD (who is our Lawgiver, and shall be our Judge) has directed us to
walk in. Blessed is that servant whom his Lord when he comes, shall find so
doing, Mat. 24.46.

I shall conclude what I design upon this subject at this time, with the
following Directions.

1. WHEN we Read, or Hear the holy Scriptures Read; We should Consider them,
not as the words of Men, but as the Words of the Living and True GOD, whereby
He discovers to us matters of the biggest Importance. And therefore that they
ought to be Read and Heard with the profoundest Reverence, and the greatest
Attention and Application of Mind that we are capable of. It is recorded to the
honor of the believing Thessalonians, 1 These. 2.13. For this cause thank we
God without ceasing, because when ye received the word of God which ye heard of
us, ye received it not as the word of men, but (as it is an truth) the Word of
God, which effectually works also in you that believe. When we are Reading,
or Hearing the Scripture Read; we should think with our selves, Now the great
GOD the Creator and Supreme Governor of the World is Speaking, and He direcis
His Speech particularly to me, in matters wherein His own Glory, and the
Welfare of my own Soul are nearly concerned; and He is observing how I behave
my self in the present duty; and will call me to a particular and strict
Account how I behave my self herein: and therefore I had need to manage the
Duty I am engaged in, with all seriousness and circumspectness.

2. IN our Reading and Hearing the Scriptures, we should seriously Consider, to
what End the LORD gave his revealed Will to Men, and has so clearly revealed
Himself to them therein. We are told that all Scripture is given by Inspiration
of GOD, and is profitable for doctrine for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness, that the Man of GOD may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works. The Scriptures are given that we may learn to
fear GOD, that we may be directed how we may glorify GOD, and enjoy Him for
ever; and therefore in our Reading and Hearing of them Read, we should study to
fall in with GOD's glorious Design in giving His Word to us: Otherwise we must
fall mort of the End which we should propose to our selves in these religious
Exercises.

3. WE should seriously Consider, that we must give an Account to GOD, how we
have Improved His Word, how we have Read it, and how we have Heard it, and what
profit and advantage we have had by both, and what effect the Word of GOD has
had upon us. Have we been led thereby to frame right Conceptions of GOD, of our
selves, and of the World? And what Influence it has had upon our Conversation?
Have we been thereby induced to engage in the Study of a Universal Holiness? to
a ready and cheerful Obedience to all GOD's Commands? And to an Entire
Resignation of our selves to the Will of GOD in all things?

IF we receive no advantage by our Reading and Hearing of the Scriptures, we
may conclude that there must be something amiss in our way and manner of doing
of it, which we should search and try, until we have found it out; and when we
have found it we should immediately set about the Reforming of what has been
amiss in our managing of that Important Duty.

To Conclude, In our Reading and Hearing the holy Scriptures, we should look
unto, and depend upon GOD for His Blessing upon His own Word, that it may
become the Power of GOD to Salvation to all of us. That we may be gradually
prepared for Heaven, and for the Immediate Enjoyment of GOD the chief Good; For
so an entrance shall be ministered unto us abundantly, into the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, 2 Pet. 1.11.

FINIS.

