A DISCOURSE CONCERNING Kindness.

Being a SERMON Preached in Boston, on the Lord's Day, Febr. 28 th. 1719, 20.
And now Published, with some Enlargement, at the Importunity of Many that heard
it.

By Thomas Foxcroft.

Tit. 3. 1, 2, 8. Put them in mind, -- to be ready to every good work, To speak
evil of no Man, to be no brawlers, but gentle, showing all meekness unto all
men. -- These Things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they which have
believed in God, be careful to maintain good works. 2 Pet. 1. 7, 10, 12. Add to
Godliness, Brotherly Kindness and Charity: -- If ye do these Things, ye shall
never fall. -- Wherefore I will not be negligent to put you always in
remembrance of these things though ye know them, and be established in the
present truth. Romans 15. 14, 15. And I my self also am persuaded of you, my
Brethren, that ye also are full of all Goodness, filled with all knowledge,
able also to admonish one another. Nevertheless, Brethren, I have written the
more boldly unto you in some sort, as putting you in mind. BOSTON: Printed by
S. KNEELAND, for S. GERRISH, and Sold at his Shop in Cornhill. 1720.

A Practical Discourse Concerning KINDNESS.
COLOSSIANS III. 1^. Put on -- Kindness --.
ONE Incomparable Excellency of the Gospel-Institution, and an unexceptionable
Argument of the Divine Original and Authority of it, is the noble System of
Practical Duties and Moral Ver^^es, which it affords us. For therein the
Agenda, or matters of Practice, ((...) well as the Credenda, or matters of
Faith,) are more exactly stated, more perspicuously discovered, and wisely
elevated to a greater height of Purity and Perfection, than in any other
Religion in the World. The Gospel of Christ is a most perfect Law of Liberty, a
complet^, universal and unerring Directory, comprizing our entire Duty; fully
supplying the defects of the Jewish AEconomy, and infallibly correcting the
Errors of the Gentile Philosophy. Very just and true are those observations of
the Psalmist, That the (...) is very (...)* and the Commandment ^^c^^ding
broad. For it reaches to the whole Man in all it is Powers, and to our whole
^ehaviour in all Cases and Capacities. It prescribes our Duty toward God and
toward Man, toward our Selves and toward Others, and that in its just
latitude and genuine extent, without rigor, mistake, or deficiency. --
Particularly, it gives us the most perfect Canons for the government of our
Conduct toward our Neighbor: and among the many other Branches of our Duty
toward others, which it invites and obliges us to the observation of, That too
unfashionable virtue of Brotherly Kindness is none of the least considerable.
With Injunctions and Directions whereunto the Gospel so abounds, that it may
well be styled, The Law of Kindness, The royal Law of Love. -- As in a
multitude of other Places, so particularly in our Text, we are called upon to
come into the practice of this excellent Virtue. The Exhortation speaks to us
on this wise, -- PUT ON KINDNESS. -- These are the Words of inspired Paul, the
great Doctor of the Gentiles, and come armed with the Majesty and Authority of
the Prince of Peace, in whose Name they were delivered; which consideration
bespeaks our attentive Regards unto them. And I am apt to think, the Meditation
is not unseasonable. -- I shall not detain you with a needless Analysis of the
Context: but will immediately apply my self to consider the words, as they lie
before us, under an abstracted view. Our Text needs little Explanation. -- The
Original Word here rendered Kindness, is elsewhere variously translated,
Goodness, Grace, Gentleness, Easiness, Courteousness, Bounty, etc. It generally
^igni^ies that Habit or Principle, whereby we are inclined and study to
accommodate our selves and become sweet and pleasant, or useful and profitable
unto others; whereby we desire to deserve well of all, and endeavor to succor
one another in all offices of benignity. The Phrase -- Put on -- is
Metaphorical, alluding most commonly to the putting on a Garment. Hence,
Brotherly Kindness (the Thing to be put on) is here resembled to a Vesture; and
that not ^^^ptly, as might easily (...) shown. As for instance; Garments are
for Necessity and Safety, for Strength, Comfort, and Convenience: Even so of
the same Importance, Service and Consequence is Christian Kindness. This
Spiritual Armor, This Coat of Maile is of such Behoof and Necessity, that if
we are found Naked and Uncloathed upon, we lie open and exposed to innumerable
Evils and Perils: and have nothing to screen us from the strokes of God's
vindictive Wrath, and want that which tends to protect us against, and help us
to bear up under, the Blows of Man's Malice: and this as a Girdle about our
Loins, will strengthen, steady, warm and accommodate us very much in attending
the Services and discharging the Duties of our several Stations and Relations.
-- Again, Garments are for Distinction of Persons. Men are, or should be,
distinguished from one another by their Habit or Clothing, agreeable to their
various Ranks and Conditions in the World. It is allowed, that Persons of
Quality, the Great and Rich, such as dwell in King's Houses be dignified and
distinguished by wearing of Soft Raiment and Costly Apparel! But for Inferiors
to appear above their Order and Place, and to affect an Equality to Superiors,
(the Page to go like his Master,) this threatens Consumption and Confusion to a
Commonwealth, and is an Enormity not to be tolerated by any wise and just
Government. -- This is another Property, wherein the Virtue under consideration
may be compared to a Garment. Brotherly Kindness is what God would have
Believers to distinguish themselves from others by. This is in Scripture made
one distinctive Character and Badge of the Christian Profession. Thus, Joh. 13.
35. By this (says our Blessed Savior) shall men know that ye are my
Disciples, if ye have love one to another. So, 1 John 3. 10. In this the
children of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil: whosoever does not
love his Brother, is not of God. Brotherly Love is the very Mark, and Livery of
our Lord's Family. It is one of the Criteria, whereby Believers are to manifest
themselves a peculiar People, separate from Sinners. And by this Professors in
the first Times of the Gospel signalized themselves; Hence they were called by
some not Christiani, but Chrestiani, from a Greek word, (like that in our
Text,) signifying their Benignity and Sweetness of Disposition. -- Again,
Garments are for Ornament. Thus had the Holy Priest of old his Garments for
beauty and glory, that He might look great in his Ministrations. Thus the King
has His Royal Apparel to show forth the honor of His Majesty. So likewise the
Bride has her comely Attire for Ornament and Splendor. -- Thus in like
manner, Brotherly Kindness is none of the least Ornaments of a Christian. This
is one of the Garments of Salvation, the White Raiment of the Saints, and is to
them as the Princely Robes, the Priestly Vestments, and the Wedding-Garments.
It Is part of the King's Daughters Apparel, whose Clothing is of wrought Gold,
and her Raiment of Needle Work, very curious and costly, truly rich and highly
valuable, clean and bright; and of a sweet smell, like the smell of Lebanon,
like the precious oyn^ment upon the head, that ran down upon Aarons beard, that
went down to the collar of his Garment. Brotherly Kindness puts no small luster
upon the Beauties of Holiness: When Professors add to Godliness, Brotherly
Kindness, This is the Church's Glory; This renders it beautiful as T^rzah,
comely as Jerusalem, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible as an
Arm: with Banners. -- The Ornament of a meek, quiet and kind Spirit is in the
sight of God of great price. It Is an Adorning much more excellent and valuable
than Gold, Pearls, or the most costly Array, much more recommending than all
the Bravery of the Daughters of Zion. Christian Charity, that Diadem of Beauty,
and Ornament of Grace, is an adorning of the Soul, the more noble Part: And
verily such as are invested with this Garment of Praise, even Solomon in all
his Glory was not arrayed like one of these. This is the great Beauty of our
Profession; it is an Eternal Excellency; the Excellency of Dignity; and such as
are destitute of it are truly clothed with Rags and Shame, although they may
wear all the external Ensigns of Honor. These without That, are but a Reproach
unto Men. Benignity and Beauty are so nearly related and inseperably wedded,
that (I find) the very same word which in one place is rendered Kindness,
Goodness, Mercifulness, etc. is in another place rendered Goodliness, Glory, or
Comeliness: which intimates no less than that Christian Kindness puts a
Loveliness on the Soul, makes the Face to shine, and is truly amiable and
honorable in all.

NOW this goodly Raiment, is what the Apostle exhorts us to Put on. -- Put on
Kindness. -- The Phrase t^lls us, that this Virtue is Preternatural: not a
native Adjunct, but an additional foreign Quality. By the Fall we were stripped
of this Spiritual Garment, and we come naked into the World. A Man may with as
much propriety and truth be said to be born dresst, with his Clothes on his
Back, as endued with a true Principle of Charity in his Heart. It Is a Complaint
of an ancient Date, and ever true of all in the state of unrenew'd nature, --
Homo Homini Lupus. -- Men are naturally mere Wolves, living in malice and envy,
hateful and hating one another. There may be* indeed the shadow and appearance
of Love in a Wicked Man, but not the Truth and Reality.

AND when we are Exhorted to Put on Kindness; It may note, -- That we should
get furnished with the Mantle of Christian Charity, provide our selves with it,
Have it in a readiness and not have it to seek in time of need. -- And that
this should be proportionable to us; answerable to our Statu^e and Figure. --
And that we should be every one Personally clothed with it, that we our selves
learn to show Kindness, and not excuse our selves with the pretense of others
Charity, any more than we should be content to go naked or ragged, while others
appear in rich Apparel. -- Again, It intimates, that we should bestir our
selves and give diligence to work our Hearts into a charitable Frame; that we
don't lazily and sluggishly sit down and expect to be clothed, without any
endeavors of our own; but that we our selves be active, and essay to put on
this Heavenly Temper; yet this with an humble dependence on the help of the
Holy Spirit, whose Garment it is; of His preparing, and His putting on as the
Supreme Agent. -- We must put it on, as some close under-Garment; gird it tight
and fasten it firmly about us, and not let it hang loose and ^lack, which will
lessen it is comeliness and warmth. -- We must put it on, as our ordinary Attire,
which we cannot do without, and which we wear every Day and all the Day long. We
must put on Charity as duly as we put on our wearing Clothes. There must be an
habitual fixed disposition to it, and a persevering exercise of it. "We must
always appear in it, as in our Clothing, and never without it"; and reckon our
selves undrest, to our shame, if it be off at any time. -- We must put it on as
Armor: We must buckle it on regularly and be covered with it entirely, as
Soldiers completely Armed: and we must daily be proving our Armor, that we may
grow skilful and expert in the use of it, and that it may not be a burden to us.
-- We must put it on as an Ornament; with as much care and exactness as a Bride
puts on her nuptial Attire; with as much Delight and Satisfaction as a Prince
elect, His Crown and Robes of State; and with as much Solemnity as the High
Priest of old His goodly Minesterial Apparel. -- In a Word, Our Charity must be
visible, apparent, and shine before others, as Rich and Splendid Raiment upon
us does; and hereby we should appear great and distinguished from others, as a
Man by the peculiar Habit of his Office. We should take a Pleasure, and a sort
of holy Pride, in wearing of it, as our Glory, Honor and Praise. -- Thus the
Apostle in our Text calls upon Christians to put on, as the Elect of God, Holy
and Beloved, Kindness.

THE only Note or OBSERVATION I shall insist on from these Words, is This, viz.

DOCT. THAT Kindness to others is one part of Practical Christianity, of
indispensable Obligation upon every Professor: a Gra^e which all should be
endued with, -- a Duty which all should apply themselves to the Practice of.

IN handling of which Prop^^^^^, I shall observe this Method. (1) Explain the
Nature of Kindness. (2) Show the Extent of it. (3) Our Obligations hereunto.
And Finally make some brief Application.

I. TO show the Nature of Christian Kindness. And here, This Virtue may be
considered, either as Seated in the Heart, or as Exhibited in the Life, and so
it implies both Benevolence and Beneficence: a bearing good* will unto our
Neighbor, and being on all occasions, obliging and officious, amicable and
Serviceable unto others.

1. IT may be considered as seated in the Heart: as a Grace or inward Habit;
and ^o means that frame or temper of mind, whereby we are in all regards
favorably disposed, and kindly affectioned toward others. It implies a
certain Good Nature, Sweetness, Softness, Compassion, Lenity, Civility,
Candor, Ingenuity, and Generosity of Spirit. -- This Benignity works
differently according to the various Circumstances of the Object, and extends
to all it is Concerns. Thus, in Case of our Neighbors Welfare and Felicity, it
will move our Joy, and create Satisfaction. Duty obliges us to Rejoice with
them that do Rejoice, (Romans 12. 15.) an^ Charity (where it reigns in any Soul)
does incline and excite hereunto. A true Spirit of Kindness is utterly
inconsistent with prevailing Envy. Hence the Apostle seperates these Two, 1.
Cor. 13. 4. Charity is kind, Charity envieth not. A Charitable kind Temper will
not repine but rejoice at the Prosperity of others, when it is for God's Glory,
will be sincerely glad to see them flourishing in the World, rising in their
Reputation, and various temporal Interests, reigning in Peace, Wealth and
Power: But especially Christian Kindness will rejoice greatly to see Men
walking ^n the Truth, to see their Souls prosper; will delight it self in the
growing abundance of their Spiritual Glories, Delights and Riches. Charity
rejoices not in Iniquity: but rejoices in the Truth, (1 Cor. 13. 6.) Upright
Christians have no greater Joy than this, 2 Epist. Joh. 4. -- Further, In Ca^e
of Adversity, This Kindness will excite our affectionate Sympathy with our
Neighbor; It will make us weep with them that weep, (Romans 12. 15.) and bear
the Burdens of other^, (Gal. 6. 2.) and with bleeding Bowels mourn and grieve,
when Providence frowns on 'em, and blasts their Credit, Health, and Worldly
Interests: But above all, it will draw forth our compassionate Regards to them
under Spiritual Troubles; will make us commiserate impenitent Sinners under the
insupportable weights of Guilt, and Fear and Misery that lie upon them; and
pity the Saints under their various Griefs, and Doubts, and Cares and
Infirmities, which lie as so many Loads upon them. -- A truly Christian benign
Spirit has a ^ender fellow-feeling with them under all (...) grieved for the
affliction of Joseph, and remembers them that are in Bonds, as bound with them,
and them which suffer adversity, as Suffering with them. In a Word, It divides
both Joys and Griefs. It deeply resents and shares in, both the Evil and the
Good, which others meet with. It Is the Language of a charitable Spirit, That,
-- Who is strong and I am not strong? who is weak and I am not weak? who is
offended, and I burn not? 2 Cor. 11. 29. -- Further, In case of Injuries and
Affronts received, it is slow to anger, desirous to forbear, and ready to
forgive. We read, Jo^l 2. 13. The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger
and of great kindness. And He would have us show our kindness in the same
manner. Ephesians. 4. 32. Be ye kind one to another, tender hearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you. And this is the
Disposition of a truly Christian temper. Hence Kindness, Meekness,
Long-Suffering, etc. ^are in our Text joined together as of near affinity. And
we read, (1 Cor. 13. 4, 5, 7.) Charity suffers long, and i^ kind, is not
easily provoked, bears all things. It is not hasty nor severe in it is
Resentments; It chains up our Passions, and will not suffer them to rise into
transports of fury, and boil up to excessive heights upon every petty
Displeasure, nor wi^^ suffer Revenge to fasten on our Thot's, or Anger to rest
in our Bosoms: but makes us easy to be entreated, inclines us to long for
bearing, and enables us quickly to digest an injury; knowing that it is the
discretion of a Man to defer his anger, and his glory to pass over a
Transgression. -- Moreover, In Case of the Infirmities of our Brethren, a
Charitable Kind Spirit will dispose us to bear 'em, and conceal 'em. We are
bidden to receive him that is weak in the Faith, and to bear the infirmities of
the weak. And we are told, that Charity will cover the multitude of Sins; Sins
of common infirmity, and grosser Sins reformed. It will excite us not only to
hide them from the view of others, but also to put 'em (as much as possible)
out of our own ^ight, to bury them in Oblivion; to excuse and make the best of
them: True Charity will keep us back from evil Surmisings, rigorous Censures,
and severe Criticisms on our Neighbors Conduct. It will make us candid in our
Interpretation of what others say and do; applauding what is Good, and setting
it off with all the advantages that the discretion of an honest heart can
suggest, and forbearing to aggravate what is Bad. It will make us jealous over
our selves least we call Good, Evil, and Sweet, Bitter; 'twill make us cautious
not from single acts to infer a rooted custom; cautious how we judge of Men's
Principles and Ends in any action, and wary not to draw up any rash conclusion
from inevident Symptoms, and undemonstrative Circumstances, and wary not to
condemn Men upon uncertain Reports, as is too much the manner of an
uncharitable World; but is as criminal, as common. And it will make us take
heed that we don't condemn beyond the Importance, as well as Evidence, of the
Fact; careful not to imagine Bad worse, industriously to lay on weight, and
load an apparent Failing with unreasonable Aggravations; to roll it like a
Snow-ball, and make a Mountain of a Mole hill; to doom that "a mortal Plague,
which may be only one of the Spots of God's Children". It Is a Maxim in Law,
that, In d^^biis ^emper fit praesum^io in meliorem partem; as One informs me.
And then in all doubtful and difficult Cases, where there is room for a
favorable sense, and which will fairly admit of a good Construction, as
Christianity does oblige, so Charity will engage, us to think the Best, to make
all possible Allowances and Abatements, least we should be over-wise, and
righteous overmuch. We read, 1 Cor. 13. 5, 7. Charity thinks no Evil,
covers all things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all
things. Charity will keep us from being too curious and scrupulous, nice and
captious, apt to take offense and str^^t to mark what is amiss. The Charitable
Christian finds so much out of order at home, that he has little will to gaze
abroad; He finds so much work for Self-judging, and ground for Self-loathing,
that he has very little leisure to play the Momus on his Neighbors. -- But
Furthermore, in Case of Difference of Opinion in some lesser Matters, (that
don't strike at the Foundation, and in which the Godly Learned are of ^arious
minds,) we should see to it that we be wise unto Sobriety, that we do nothing
by partiality, but judge righteous Judgment, that we don't over-interpret and
blacken the supposed Errors of others, but put the fairest Glosses upon them,
and allow to others the privilege of every Plea, that may be made in their
Excuse, from Ignorance or Weakness, from the prepossessions of Education* from
the influence of others upon them, from Personal Prejudices, or invincible
Temptations, or from the want of necessary means for their Conviction, etc. And
we must be careful not to lay too great weight upon the Matters in variance,
nor be too stiff and tenacious of our conceits, but in lowliness of mind be
ready to suspect our own Judgment, (the Best being such as know but in part,)
and take heed that we be not divided in affection from those, from whom we
differ in Apprehension, that our unhappy Dissension of Judgments bree^^, not a
more unhappy Disunion of Hearts, but that notwithstanding the contrariety of
our Opinions, we keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace and Love,
each esteeming other better than himself.

THUS I Have considered the Grace of Kindness, as it is seated in the Heart. In
the next place, --

2. IT may be considered, as Exhibited in our Lives. Kindness must be not only
our Temper, but our Practice: and indeed the more it is our Temper, the more
'twill be our Practice.

1. IT must be shown in Speaking Kindly. Our Language should express our inward
Affection, and breath universal Amity. Out of the abundance of the Heart, the
Mouth should speak forth the words of truth and soberness, of Love and
Kindness. It is part of the Character of a Virtuous Woman, Prove. 31. 29. She
opens her mouth with wisdom, and in her tongue is the law of Kindness. The
Law of Love written in the heart, should influence and govern the Tongue, and
dictate the most ingratiating, the most endearing Expressions. A kind Spirit
will put us upon seeking out acceptable words. A soft Answer and goodly Words
are the Dialect of Sincere Charity. -- Our Discourse for the Matter of it
should be under the direction and restraint of the great Law of Kindness. In
Conference with one another we should speak Things benign and grateful weighty,
useful and entertaining. Omne tulit punctum, qui mis^uit Utile Dulci.
We should be careful to let no corrupt communication proceed out of our
mouths, but that which is good to the use of edifying: and all Evil-speaking
must be put away from us. We must guard against every Thing, that carries in it
Malevolence, Pride, Insult or Provocation, must lay aside all hard spe^hes,
grievous words that stir up anger; and all foolish Jesting, which is not
convenient; bring no railing accusation, nor evil Imprecations. It Is for a
foul-mouthed Shimei to curse, a blasphemous Rabshakeh to revile, or a bloody
Jezebel to insult and threaten. And then in our Talk of others, we must take
heed le^t we at any time or in any measure incur -- that foul Character the
Apostle gives of some, (1 Timothy 5. 13.) Tatlers, Busy-bodies, speaking Things
which they ought not. We must shun Whispering, Tale-bearing, the fuel of
strife, and Backbiting, the quench-coal of Love, and common Plague of the
World. When we talk of others, Let it be of the Good Things that may be found
in them; which is ever the more humane and ^he more honorable Part. If we give
our mouth to evil, and our tongue frame deceit, we trespass upon the common
Laws of Equity and Humanity, and forfeit that blessed Character of a Citizen of
Zion, which ^s given in Psalm. 15. 3. He backbiteth not with his tongue, nor
takes up a reproach against his Neighbor. -- And further, as to the Manner of
our speaking, It should be tempered with Goodness, and sweetened with Benignity.
Our Speech, both as to the Phrase and Delivery, should be soft, familiar and
winning. Indeed we must not wheedle and cajole, fawn and flatter, sooth and
complement; having men's Persons in admiration because of advantage. Neither
may we on the contrary snap and snarl, or huff and hector, nor yet flout and
ridicule. It Is for a wicked Ishmael to scoff, a churlish Nabal to answer
roughly, for the proud Babylonians to bellow as Bulls, for a treacherous Judas
to speak with flattering Lips, it is for Children to throw dirt and squibbs in
each others face, and for Madmen to cast Arrows and Firebrands at one another:
and see thou a man hasty in his words, there is more hope of a Fool than of
him. -- Our Speech should always be with Grace, seasoned with S^lt. (Ephesians. 4.
6.) Salt, in allusion to its uniting Quality, was among the Hebrews an usual
and apt Metaphor for Peace and Friendship. Unto which our Savior very plainly
alludes, Mar. 9. 50. Have Salt in your selves and Peace one with another. --
Our Lip^ should speak Peace, and our Conversation ^avour of a well-disposed and
good Nature. We should be affable, communicative and use an honest freedom, and
also be respectful and courteous, avoiding all hars^ Sounds, all jarring Notes,
and grating Accents. 'Twas Naphtali's famous Character, -- That, Genesis 49. 21.
He gives goodly words: And this must be our endeavor if we would approve our
selves the Peaceable in Israel. The sincere Love of the Heart should flow out
at the Lips. Upon all occasions our Speech both as to matter and manner should
be kind. Thus In administering Reproofs; in doing this we must not cast Stones
and shoot Arrows at our Brother, nor give hard and biting Language, as the
manner of some is. Our Hearts should be steeled with Courage, and yet the
Admonition be tempered with Compassion, which will be an excellent oil that
will not break the Head, but will tend to soften the Heart and heal the wounds
of Sin. Even when the Case requires us to be somewhat warm and sanguine, and to
rebuke sharply, yet, then Brotherly kindness should bridle our Tongue, indite
and order our Speech, so as that our Rebukes may not sound like the cutting
Revilings of a wrathful Enemy, but the compassionate Chidings of a displeased
Friend. We must not dress our Reproofs in Satyr, not launch out into undue
vexatious Comments and Invectives. We must exercise a godly jealousy over our
selves le^t at any time there be out breakings of vicious wrath, and we deceive
our selves by palliating it with the fair, but false, pretense of pious Zeal.
To offer close convincing Expostulations, allayed with the Correctives of
humble loving Expressions, is the method of a wise Reprover. A soft tongue
breaks the Bones. -- So in managing our Contests and Disputes with one
another we should put away all bitterness and wrath and clamor and evil
speaking. We should speak the truth in Love, even when we contend earnestly for
the Faith. We should endeavor fairly to state, and mildly to debate matters in
difference, with easy words and unru^^l'd passions. It Is prescribed
particularly as the Duty of a Minister (who by Office is set for the defense of
the Truth,) that He must be apt to teach, no striker, but patient, not a
Brawler. (1 Timothy 3. 2, 3.) But this Rule is of equal Obligation upon All; none
have a License to smite with the Tongue, the Tongue of Deceit, nor the Tongue
of Calumny. There should be no Noise of Axes and Hammers in the House of God.
The Servant of the Lord must ^ot strive, or be contentious, but gentle unto all
men, in meekness instructing those that oppose, endeavoring to convince them
by sound Doctrine, and sound Speech that cannot be condemned. We should for
bear all Personal Reflections, and blakning Contumelies, all needless
Gainsayings and perverse Disputings, all intemperate Heat, Eagerness, and
Impatience of Contradiction. And we should represent the Adversaries Opinion
and Arguments heartily, and not go about to aggravate them by strained
Innuendo's and forced Insinuations, to put false colors upon 'em and fasten to
them all the ill consequences, which a critical Eye may think it discerns. We
must judge charitably, equitably, (as we would have our Opponent judge of us,)
and not dig up mischief as evil men do, nor (as is too much the fashion of an
envious captious World) brand every slip or side-step as an Apostasy, call
every misapprehension an Heresy* nor vote every little Miscariage worthy of
Excommunication; or send Men to Hell presently as Reprobates, because they are
not in every Punctilio of our mind, or cannot fall in with our measures. We
must honor all men, and not trample on any, and set those among the Dogs of
our Flock, whom for ought we know Christ has set with the Lambs of His. Mr.
Henry.
-- These are Methods that are very contrary to the Laws and very injurious to
the Interests of Christanity. The Scourge of the Tongue has driven more out of
the Temple, than ever it drove into it The Sons of Thunder, whose Tongues are
set on Fire of Hell, do by their ^oul breath, by the noisome Fumes of their
untemper'd Zeal, not a little cloud the Light of the Truth, and ^ully the
Beauty of Religion. By the ^^^y and violence of the Contest, they often
Shipwreck a great deal of Love, and do that hurt to the common cause of Christ,
that the Defense of the point in controversy will never be able to make amends
for. Thus the Remedy is sometimes of worse consequence, than the Disease. Truly
were there more Love mingled with our Reasoning, Benignitas Dissidentibus
Magnes and magnus persuadendi Art^f^x.
this would shine with a stronger Light and more convincing Evidence. The words
of wise men are heard in quiet, and prevail more than the cry of him that
rules among ^ools. In a word, If any man teach otherwise and consent not to
who Home words. He is proud. We ought to avoid (as much as we can) all vain
Bablings and opposition of Science falsely so called. We should not be of a
Disputatious Wrangling Spirit, and have an Itch of Arguing: and when we happen
to be got into an Argument we must not be fierce, noisy, dogmatical, or
pertinacious: but meek, gentle, condescending, yielding. Job in Dispute is not
unwilling to put the Case, Be it indeed that I have erred. -- And now, these
Rules will hold Good, not only with respect to such Disputes as arise from
differing Sentiments in matters of Faith and Opinion, (which I have had
particular reference to,) but also with respect to such as arise from various
apprehensions about matters of Fact, and from interfering Claims, in matters of
Right and Property. -- But how contrary to these Rules is the general Practice
of the World? What little Love is their to be found in their Disputes, in their
Discourse and Converse? How faulty are the Best, in this point, on every
occasion? The Language even of God's Children ^avours too little of Brotherly
Kindness. Among them there is too much of mutual Galling and Jangling,
Exacerbation and Bickering one with another. And among others there are many
unruly and vain Talkers and Deceivers: -- a Generation of Vipers are they, a
sort of speaking Brutes, they sharpen their Tongues like a Serpent, Adders
poison is under their L^ps; Their words are often as pointed Darts, and their
Pens are dipped in Gall and Vinegar. -- There are some such Hot-Spurrs, such High
Spirits, that they can hardly change a few words with any, especially with
Inferiors, but presently they must clash, must fall into a peevish outrage,
give a loose to their indignation, and as raging waves foam out their own
shame. They are too like churlish Nabal, who was such a Son of Belial, that a
man could not speak to (...). They are so humoursome and vexatious, that those
of their own House and the Neighborhood may take up the Lamentation and say,
that Briars and Thorns are with them, and that they dwell among Scorpions, and
the man that shall touch them had need be fenced with Iron and the staff of a
Spear. Cursed be their Anger for it is fierce and their Wrath for it is cruel.
-- O my Soul come not thou into their Society; Unto their Assembly, mine
Honor, be not (...) united. -- When I behold one in a Passion and Rage,
methinks, I see something like Ezek^e^'s Vision, -- A Whirlwind, a great Cloud
and a Fire enfolding it! -- and it also puts me in mind of Elijah's Revelation.
-- Behold, The Lord passed by and a great and strong Wind rent the Mountains,
and brake in pieces the Rocks, but the Lord was not in the wind; and after the
Wind an Earthquake, and after that a Fire, but the Lord was in neither of them:
But after the Fire came a still small Voice, and God was present. -- Where the
Spirit of God dwells and rules in any Soul, He makes His appearance not in a
Storm and Hurricane, in wild noise, and flame; He shall not cry nor His voice
be heard in the Street. -- The waters of Shiloh run smooth and gently. The
Spirit blows powerfully; yet not with a rough Wind, but a sweet and gentle
Gale. And if we are led by the Spirit, our Moderation will be known unto all
men. Our Lips will drop honey: and not spit venom, or speak Fire. Husbands
will not be bitter against their Wives, nor Wives refuse subjection to their
own Husbands: Parents will not be apt to provoke their Children, nor Children
to speak with froward and perverse L^ps. Masters will forbear Threatening:
Servants will not be apt to answer again, etc. Our Speech on all occasions will
drop as the Dew and distill as the small Rain: We shall be smooth-tongu'd to
all, and speak 'em fair, but this in simplicity, not speaking l^es in
hypocrisy; as Achitophel, whose words were smoother than Butter and softer than
Oil, when at the same time War was in his heart, and drawn Swords under the
insidious cover of his profuse Blandishments. So Joab smiled and stabbed
together, in the same instant embraced his Friend and imbru^d hands in his
Blood. -- They that are such, who cry Peace, Peace, where their is no Peace,
and by good words and fair speeches go about to deceive, verily they serve not
our Lord Jesus Christ, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 16. 18.

2. OUR Kindness should influence our Actions and Deportment toward others. We
must love not only in Word and Tongue; but also in Deed and Demeanor. Some
interpret the Original Word [(...)] as intending a certain Placedness, Morum
facilitatem and suavitatem, Comitatem, Urbanitatem, etc.
Civility, Courteousness, Sweetness and Easiness in our Behavior, whereby we
endeavor to please others, and willingly accommodate our selves to them for
their Good. So that of the Apostle, ( Romans 15. 2.) may be taken as a
Description and an Injunction of the Duty in our Text, -- Let every one please
his Neighbor for his Good to Edification.

THIS Virtue may be considered, as opposite to Pride and Scorn: Contrary to
this Good Behavior is a Lofty, Domineering, Neglectful Carriage, a
Magisterial, Insolent, Regardless, Supercilious Air; Taking State and keeping a
Distance: and being difficult of Access: So all Actions and Gestures imperious
and disdainful, a big Look, haughtiness of Countenance and Po^^ure, etc;
pointing with the Finger, Shooting out the Lip, o^ Tongue; and so all Mimical
Postures and cruel Mockings; It Is a part of the Character of a Godly Man, that
He ^itteth not in the seat of the Scornful. It was the unhappy Complaint of
Job, My Friends scorn me, mine Enemies have gaped upon me with their mouth,
They Have smitten me on the cheek ^^proachfully. Mine Acquaintance are estranged
from me, and my familiar Friends have forgotten me, yea, Young Children
despised me; I a^ose and they spoke against me, etc.

AGAIN, This Virtue may be considered, as opposite to rash Anger and Passion:
Contrary to this good Behavior, is a fiery and furious Carriage, a being
impatient and in a flame upon every little Disgust; Rising up hastily, knitting
the brow and sharpening the Eyes, and darting wild Looks, stamping with the
Poor, gnashing with the Teeth, snaking the Cane, doubling the Fist, taking by
the Throat, Fighting, Dueling, etc. All which is unmanly and unchristian. Sour,
Waspish, Fierce and Boisterous Turbulent Carriages are unbecoming the Disciples
of the meek and lowly Jesus, and give great occ^asion to the Enemy to
b^aspheme; and no pretenses of Temper, Custom, etc. will excuse such, in the
Eyes of a Jealous God.

AGAIN, Contrary to this Virtue is an affected Rusticity and Clownishness: as
refusing the decent Ceremony of the Hat or Knee, Some Things I take leave to
mention here, (as also afterward,) though more proper under a former Held.
courteous Greetings and Farewells, and other Civilities of common Converse;
and neglecting to give Persons their proper Titles of Respect, and ^o show
reverence to Superiors according to their several Characters, Stations and
Relations, not rend^ing Honor to whom Honor belongs; contrary to that of the
Apostle, Romans 13. 7 and contrary to the very Light of Nature, tending to
destroy all Distinctions of Order and Quality among Men, and throw all into
Confusion. -- Allowance indeed is to be granted in these Things for difference
of Education: but when Persons affect a ru^^ course Carriage, they are to be
condemned as walking disorderly. Religion is no Friend to Rudeness and
Incivility. It is Prophesied to the Praise of the Tribe of Naphtali, that they
should be of a refined polite and amiable Mein, comparable to the smoothness
and sweetness of the loving Hind, (Genesis 49. 21.) Good Breeding is a worthy
Excellency, when managed with Prudence, and not degenerating into courtly
Servility, ceremonious Foppery, and impertinent Officiousness. The Christian
and the Gentleman, Serious Piety and true Gentility, are well consistent; ^ay
give a luster to each other, and in conjunction each appears most amiable and
shines with a peculiar charm. It is an ill sign, when a Man's Religion corrupts
his good manners, and disposes him to be disrespectful to others and forgetful
of his Duty and Distance, and such do deform themselves, and blemish their
Profession. (...) was a rough Man: but Jacob was a smooth Man: and it was not
well done of Jacob in personating his Brother to disguise himself with the
Skins of Goats. It Is Mr. Henry's apt reflection upon this. -- That they who
affect to seem rough and rugged in their Carriage, do put the Beast upon the
Man, and really disgrace themselves by disguising themselves.

AGAIN, A too great Austerity and Rigidness is disagreeable to a true Spirit of
Kindness, and unbecoming the Christian Profession. Religion does not consist
in, nor encourage to, Stoical Reservedness, Severity, Formality, ^our Looks,
demure Carriage, Unsociableness, and the like. Our Savior has left us an
Example, contrary to and condemning this Carriage. He was free, familiar, open,
affable, friendly, (as well as Holy,) in all manner of Conversation. A visible
sweetness reigned in His Countenance, and whole Behavior. A mixture of Gravity
and Pleasancy, is most agreeable to the true Temper of Christianity, and most
adorns the Doctrine of God our Savior. Allowance indeed is to be made for some
Tempers and Circumstances: but when Austerity is needlessly affected, it is
highly to be condemned.

AGAIN, A prevailing Stiffness and Humor s^mness in our way, is disagreeable
to a true Spirit of Kindness. A being self willed, self-pleasers altogether in
Cases of indifferency shows very little of a Christian Temper. To be
immoderately tenacious, and inflexible in maintaining our own Rights and
Practices, unapt to recede from our particular Humor, to please others for
their Good, is not to act as becomes the Gospel. In the School of Christianity
we are taught the great Lesson o^ Self denial, and the generous Art of
Obliging. It is but acting a Christian part to be condescending and complying,
in respect of the lawful Customs, Humors and Manners of the Places and Times
we live in, and the Company we converse with. Thus the Apostle Paul professes
himself a Servant to all for Jesus sake; represents himself as becoming all
things to all men, and studious to please men in all things. And we are bidden
to follow him, as he followed Christ herein. We must consider one another, and
submit our selves one to another, as free, and not using our Liberty as a cloak
of maliciousness, but as the Servants of God. We should study the Tempers of
Men, their Humors and Practices, and whatsoever Things are just, whatsoever
Things are honest, whatsoever Things are lovely, whatsoever Things are of good
report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think of these
Things, and put them in practice. The affecting needless singularity, and
indulging our selves in the perverse frowardness of walking contrary unto
others, is very inconsistent with the wisdom which is easy to be entreated.
This Character of the wisdom that is from Above, [(...)]
speaks a virtue that is complying; which is the genuine meaning of the
Original Word, a Disposition obsequious, tractable, complaisant: a Temper that
will influence us, patiently to suffer our lawful Liberty to be narrow'd by the
just Laws of the Higher Powers, and to retrench it our selves in a charitable
condescension unto weak Consciences; taking heed lest by any means this Liberty
of ours become a stumbling block to them that are weak. -- But when I speak of
Compliance, I mean not a yielding in matters of Duty, but of Liberty, in Cases
of Indifferency or of bare Expediency. I mean not a Time-serving Flexibility,
servile Popularity, and following the Multitude to do Evil. I mean not a
criminal Connivence, and falling in with our Company in sinful ways; nor the
mean Arts of Sycophantry, whereby abject Spirits study to get or grow in the
favor of Great Men upon whom they have a dependence, by applying and adapting
themselves unto the various humors of such. -- I mean not a Compliance with
others in any thing that shall be prejudicial to them, to their Souls
especially: or that shall injure and endanger our own Souls. We stretch the
Complement too far, when our Complaisance. betrays us into any breach of Duty
and Conscience. -- But I mean a Compliance only in a point of Christian
Liberty: a foregoing our own Inclination and Pleasure, yea and Interest too,
when the so doing has an influence considerable upon the Reputation of
Religion, the Spiritual Benefit of others, and the Tranquillity of the Public.
-- Suitable to this was Abraham's prudent condescension in the unhappy Contest
between him and Lot. Genesis 13. 8, 9 And so was the carriage of the Council, -- [
Act. 15.] in their not insisting upon the strict Right of Things, but
accommodating those Controversies of the Primitive Times about the Jewish
Rites, by such a moderate Expedient, as might most effectually heal and compose
those Differences.

3. KINDNESS is to be shown, in a cheerful Performance, and a thankful
Acceptance of all Offices of Love. (1.) In doing Kindnesses to others.
Significatur Voce [(...)] Facilitas ac Promptitudo praestandi Beneficia.
Bonitas speciatim intelligi videtur, qua quis and a nocumentis abstin et, ac
benefacere paratus est. -- Beneficentia, etiam summa, insignis, prorsus
immerita, gratuita, etc. Vid. Leigh. Critic. 1 Par. p. 79. and 2 P. p. 287. and
Sup. p. 39
In this sense the Oririginal Word in our Text, is by many interpreted, as a
studying the Good and Benefit of others; a Readiness to do all Acts of
Kindness; an Easiness to be used and employed for the Good of others: and
indeed a promptness to exceed herein, and freely to do Good Deeds for others,
beyond what either our Duty, (...) ^oes strictly challenge. So the^^ (...) R^m.
2.4. D^spisest thou the Riches of His Goodness? (...) the (...) answering to
that ^n our Text^ (...). Thou have showed unto David great mercy, -- and --
great kindness. (...) Most men will proclaim ever^ (...) his own Goodness. The
word in (...) places evidently (...) -- They then that put on Kindness (...)
L^beral in (...) Rich in Good Works (...) to all B^^^tifulness* ready to
distribute* (...) Communicate, and to serve others in Love. By our works must
Kindness be made perfect* (...) what does (...) profi^^^ We read, Prove. 10 22.
The de^^re of (...) kindness: and a poor man is better than a L^^r. There are a
^ort of ^word Men^ whose Kindness all expires and terminates in fruitless
Desires and empty Good-Wishes: who give smooth wor^s and make (...) Pretenses
of doing mighty Things* put all their (...) Professions and Promises come to
^^ttle or (...) Poor Man who does Good according to what ^e (...), (...) whose
Heart exceeds (...), is better than those. From such an One (...) accents the
Desire for the Deed, take the (...) Work. But where God has furnished any with
Advantages and Opportunities of Doing Good, He expects (...): And where a
^^^nciple of Loving Kindness prevails, will make a Man (...) and studious to be
a Public Good, and a common (...) to his Generation to serve both Church and
State according to his Talent, and to do all the good Turns which he is able
for those within the Sphere of (...) activity and (...), and that not of
constraint, in a ^our and ^elucting condescension to the importunity of such as
ask a (...)* but of a ready mind, and with all the tokens of Good Will, (...)
his kindness is no more Kindness. The kind Christian will not be for
monopolizing and appropriating his Gifts and Accomplishments* Abilities and
possessions. Time and Talents, wholly to himself but he has a generous
Ambition in the use of all to seek the profit of (...). He will give all
diligence to promote the Good of the Souls of others, will heartily endeavor
the Reformation of Sinners, and the Edification of Saints, by Praying for them,
by administering Instruction, Advice, Admonition, Exhortation, Consolation, etc.
to them as the matter may require; and also be ready to serve their external
temporal Interests, to defend their just Rights, Liberties and Enjoyments, to
protect their Persons in a time of danger, to relieve them in their various
distresses, and supply them in their necessities, and assist them in whatsoever
business they have need of him: and also to their Good Name, to secure their
rising Credit, or support their sinking Reputation, and vindicate abused
Innocence against the unjust assaults of Calumny. -- These, and such like
Services, a truly Kind Christian will do for others. Such friendly Assistences
he justly accounts so many due Debts, and holds himself bound to discharge the
same.

AGAIN, Kindness is seen and shown in a thankful Accepting of Good Offices from
others, and a readiness (when their is occasion) to come under, and make
acknowledgment of, Obligations to others. A Commerce or Reciprocation of Good
Deeds, a mutual Giving and Accepting of Kindness, is one considerable Point of
good Neighborhood. A free Asking, and Receiving, Kindnesses of others, as
their is need, discovers no little good Nature and Friendship, and may be
called Passive Goodness and Generosity. But it speaks a certain Malignity, to
be unwilling to make use of others at all, (as if one were independent and
self-sufficient,) and be backward to be obliged or beholden unto any, and
^urlily to reject kind Offers and Proposals made. This malignity is seen in
spurning at just Reproofs, refusing wise and reasonable Advice, necessary
Charities, etc. Further, It is the Property of a truly Christian temper, to
make suitable Acknowledgment of the Bonds we are under to others; to be apt to
aggravate Benefits received, and ready to make all proper Returns and
Requitals, in such a way and manner as speaks Humility, Gratitude and
Benevolence: and not so as will bewray Pride, Envy, Ill Will, uneasiness and
impatience under, and a sullen haste to discharge our selves of, our
Obligations.

AND thus I Have in some sort stated the true Nature of Kindness, and shown what
is implied in the Duty of the Text. Pass we now to another Thing proposed,
which was --

II. To consider the Extent of this Kindness.

AND here in a Word, It is of universal Comprehension, and that as to the
Object and Subject, and Act. It must (as to the Object) be diffusive,
catholic, not under confinement to any particular Person, but impartially
dispensing its generous influences unto All, according to ability and
opportunity. There is Kindness due to all of every Language, Condition, Temper
and Persuasion. Our Kindness must not be confined within the narrow Precincts
of our own Nation, Land, Town, Church, Neighborhood, Kindred or Family, nor
limited to those of our particular Party, of our way, Principles and Humor,
etc. It must reach unto all, whether our own Countrymen, Acquaintants and
Relatives, or Strangers, Aliens and Foreigners, whether Friends or Foes;
whether agreeing with us, or differing from us, in a Persuasion and
Inclination; whether Jew or Gentile; Bond or Free; High or Low, Rich or Poor;
Good or Bad. We must be gentle unto all men and do good unto all men, but
especially unto them, who are of the household of faith, (Call. 6. 10.) and that
to all the Saints, (Col. 1. 4.) -- Again, This Kindness should be universal in
regard of the Subject: as all Persons have a right to this Kindness from
others, in point of Privilege: So all are under Obligation to show this
Kindness unto others in point of Duty. It is what concerns All, whether
Superiors, Inferiors, or Equals. Either the Act, or at least the Principle,
must be found in all, without any Exception. -- Again, This Kindness should be
universal, as to the Exercises of it. We should be ready to all those various
Acts and Carriages, which are expressive of this Temper; and should practice
this Virtue in all our several Relations, in all Businesses and Concerns with
others, upon all Occasions and at all Times, in Thought, Word and Deed,
according to our Power, unto our Lives End; and this without respect of
Persons, not knowing any man after the flesh, not being upon any partial
Considerations or finister Views Liberal in our Exhibitions of Kindness to One,
and In^fficious to Another. -- No^ that we can suppose, we may not make any
distinction between Men EMINENTLY GOOD, and EXCEEDINGLY BAD, either in
conferring Benefits, in contracting Friendships, in Electing to Offices, in our
Intimacies, or the like. Or that Christianity means to root out all Distinction
of Orders and Offices among Men, and to bring Superiors and Inferiors upon
one common Level, and to entitle all (of however different Qualifications or
Degrees* to the same Expressions of Honor, Respect and Love, Putting no
difference: No; but what Christianity demands of us, is that we Love all with
the same Sincerity, and that we have the same forwardness to do all Proper
Offices of Kindness, and pay all due and suitable respects to One as to
Another, doing nothing by Partiality.

I come now --

III. TO consider what Grounds of Obligation and Encouragement there are to
Christian Kindness.

I Shall single out from among many others the few following Arguments, which I
shall but glance upon. As,

1. TO be Kind to others, is required of us by many Divine Precepts. Besides
our Text, there are multitudes of other Scriptures that bind this upon All.
Thus, Ephesians. 4. 32. Be ye kind one to another, So 1 Pet. 3. 8. Love as Brethren.
Be Pitiful, be courteous. This indeed is one of the great and capital Laws of
the Gospel, and of the same Obligation and Importance with the Law of Faith.
Hence Faith in Christ, and Love to our Neighbor, are enjoined together, as one
and the same Commandment, 1 John 3. 23. -- And now, do we profess Homage to the
blessed God, as our Lawgiver and King, and shall we trample on the Royal Law of
Love, and transgress one of the Substantial and Cardinal Duties of Religion,
peremptorily enjoined, very frequently and most earnestly pressed and
inculcated upon us? If we think we can approve our selves obedient Children, in
the neglect of this weighty matter of the Law, we grossly delude our selves.

2. THIS is to imitate the Best Patterns. Besides the many Examples of the
Saints, who have obtained a good Report, we have the most engaging Example of
the Blessed God, and of our gracious Savior. Our Heavenly Father is of great
Kindness, full of Compassion, and abundant in Goodness; He is kind, even to the
unthankful and the Evil. Well then may we make that Inference, of our Savior,
(Luke 6. 36.) Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful: And
that of the Apostle (1 John 4. II.) Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought to
love one another. Conformity to God is Man's chief Excellency and Beauty. God's
Goodness, or Kindness is what He reputes His chief Glory and dearest
Perfection. And shall we not aspire after this bright and shining Character of
the Divine Image? Be ye imitators of God as dear Children, and walk in Love,
Ephesians. 5. 1, 2. Moreover our Lord Jesus Christ has left us an Example, that we
should follow His Steps. ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Kindness and Love of God our Savior, How He Pleased not Himself, went about
doing Good, followed after the Things which make for Peace, and abounded in all
the various Offices of Love to the Souls and Bodies of Men. And His Example is
monitory of our Duty, and bids us Go and Do likewise. Phil. 24, (...). Look not
every man on his own Things, but every man also on the Things of others. Let
this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus. We should write after the
excellent Copy, He has set us; and by a diligent i^itation endeavor to show
forth the Virtues of Him, who has cal^ed us, else in vain do we call Him Lord
and Master. If the Spirit of Christ (the great and common Benefactor) be not in
us, in vain do we call our selves by His Name.

3. THIS is to act agreeably to the End of our Creation, and the true
Principles of Humanity. This is becoming the Design of our Being, and the
Dignity of ou^ Nature, entirely consonant to the genuine Dictates of natural
Reason, and the regular inclination of the sanctified Will. And it indicates a
certain Greatness and noble Generosity of Soul, it carries in it an unalterable
Excellency and singular Amiableness. It Is the high commendation of this Virtue,
that it is approved of men, [as well as acceptable to God] and is one of those
things against which the^e is no law, Gal.5. 22, 3. Whereas the contrary argues
a narrow, little, base Spirit, beneath our noble Nature, bordering upon the
Temper of Hell, and is hisst at by all the World. To follow Charity and
Kindness is but to follow Nature, and pursue one great End of our coming into
the World. Hence Benignity may well be termed Humanity.

4. THIS puts a Luster on all our other Excellencies. Are we wise or Witty, or
Learned, or Dextrous in Business, or have we Wealth, or Power, or Reputation,
or other Accomplishments and Qualifications whatever, They furnish us with so
many Advantages for being kind* useful and beneficent to others: and the
employing them to this end is what sets the price upon them, and gives them
their true Excellency. Without this they have no Glory in comparison. This is
the Excellency of Dignity, and the Excellency of Power, the Crown, the Beauty
and Perfection of all our other Beauties and Perfections. This (even Ceteris
paribus,) all things else alike makes ^ Man more Excellent than his Neighbor,
and more honorable than his Brethren.

5. THIS is one distinguishing Character, and Cognizance of a Child of God.
This is mentioned as one eminent Effect and Fruit of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 27. --
And in our Text it is brought in as a Sign and Argument of our Election,
Sanctification and Acceptance with God. Put on ( as the Elect of God, Holy and
Beloved,) Kindness. And it is observed, that the Word which in our Bibles is
Godly is sometimes in the Original Kind. Thus Psalm. 4. 3. Know that the Lord
has set apart him that is Godly, for Himself. So Psalm. 60. 10. -- And in other
Places, where we find in our Translation The Saints, it is in the Hebrew The
Kind ones. Thus psalm. 148 14. He exalts the Horn of His People, the praise of
all H^^ Saints; -- a people near unto Him. So in the next Psalm (...) Verses.
-- All which plainly intimates, that true Kindness (...) Companion and (...)
Evidence of true Godliness.

6. THIS recomm^^^ (...) to the ^^teem and (...) of Others. It has all happy
tendency to invite (...) the common Friendship and (...) Love (...) We read,
Ho^. 11. 4. (...) th^^ (...) with bands of (...) that Men are (...) drawn (...)
^^^^ness, (...) is no such powerful (...) and endearing attract ^word. There
are no (...) engagements (...) and respect. (...) gen^^ous Tempe^ (...) spirit
^n obliging (...) and a readiness to (...) the Offices (...) Humanity I (...)
Things carry in 'em a Thousand conquering Charms* enough (methinks) to melt and
subdue the most on (...) and inflexible Disposition. When a Man's wa^s (...)
please the Lord, they will please Men (...) and (...) make our very (...) to be
at peace with us. Who (...) be that will harm you, if ye be followers of that
which is Good, ^ollowers (...) Him that is Good in (...) Such are accepted in
the sight of all the People. -- Now an interest in the anections of others, is
^word o^ great importance and affords many valuable advantages to (...) This
gives us a (...) influence upon them, and singular Opportunities o^ doing good
to their Souls: This ^espeaks the (...) of the saints for us. It likewise ^s
our Security and Re^u^e in Times of Difficulty^ (...) which ^ll in the most
flourishing Condition (...) expect to meet with, of one (...) or other, more or
(...), sooner or later) Such especially (...) have been oblige^ (...) us
heretofore w^ll (...) be ready to ^^ew Kindness to us (...) every Good M^n will
be (...) to e^^eem himself a Debtor* (...) show himself a Friend unto (...). --
But now every ones Hand and Heart i^ apt to (...) the unkind (...) David's
against Naba^* (...) and (...) Miser.

7. THIS (...) promote our present peace and Comfort. It will yield Comfort to
(...), Personally consider'd^ 'twill promote the private pleasure of our Lives
and the comfortable Enjoyment of our Selves. 'T will be a secret Spring of Joy
and Satisfaction inexpressible and inexhaustable, and will help us to escape
the impression of Evils innumerable. The felicity of a generous^ ^oul ^s
unspeakably great. Hence the Apostle Peter to enforce his Exhortation to
Christian Kindness. (1^ pist. 3. 8. 9.) does in (the 10th and 11th ver.) add,
For he that will lov^ Life and see Good Days, -- Let him eschew Evil and do
Good, Let him thus seek peace and ensue it. And then ( Relatively considered)
it will have a most happy Tendency to our comfortable Living in the World How
easy and happy should we be in every Relation, in all manner of Conversation!
The Bond of Love is the Cement o^ ^ellowship and Communion. The Comforts and
Benefits of Society are very ^^ny, and exceeding great; and these very much
depend upon the maintaining of mutual Kindness. Without this (...) Community
can be happy and blessed. While this is wanting, it is impossible we should ever
experience, How good and pleasant a Thing it is for Brethren to dwell together
in unity. What Is the occasion of all the Tumults and Distractions of this
divided Age? Whence come Strises, and Contentions, Brangles, and Quarrels among
Men? Come they not hence, even of their Lusts, that war in their members? Jam.
4. 1. The want of a (...) Spirit of Kindness, and the Reigning of Envy,
Self-will and Self-love, and the harsh methods of false i^ temperate Zeal, and
unreasonable Partiality, give rise to no small part of the Disorders and
Miseries under which an unhappy World is groaning. Could but the generous
Principle of Kindness recover it is Power and Rule in the Hearts of Mankind, and
have a governing influence upon their Action and Carriage, what a wonderful
Revolution, what a bright Scene of Glory would this bring on? How would this
prevent or suppress all unnatural Hostilities among the Nations; Broils,
Seditions and Factions in States and Commonwealths; Schisms, Animosities and
Confusions in Churches; Ruptures, and Convulsions in Towns and Neighbourhoods;
Estrangements and impertinent Ja^^s and Squabbles in Houses and Families;
Heart-burnings, Distances and Disquietments among particular Persons. A Spirit
of Love and mutual Kindness would soon slay all our Enmities and extinguish our
Heats, adjust our Differences, and banish all That which embitters our
Conversation at any time; it would settle the World in Peace, and greatly
sweeten our Communion together. The Earth in this regard would become a lively
Emblem and Image of Heaven, the Region of Blessedness, of perfect Order, and
uninterrupted Harmony; our Houses would be so many Temples of Peace, sure
Dwellings, and quiet resting-Places, and Jerusalem, as a City that is compact
togegether, Beautiful for S^ituation, and the joy of the whole Earth; We should
see Good Days, and delight our selves in the abundance of Peace, if true
Catholic Charity did animate and govern Societies and Persons. But (alas') ^or
want of this, How often is this present Evil World as a Troubled Sea when it
cannot rest, a very Den of Dragons, and a mere Babel of Confusions; full of
Thunder and Storms, which throw all into an uproar and threaten to put the very
Foundations out of course.

BUT to mention only One Thing more; --

8. and Lastly. GOD observes our Behavior in this matter, and will one Day
call us to an account. The Apostle improves this Argument to dispose us to the
Christian Temper, Phil. 4. 5. Let your Moderation be known unto all men. The
Lord is at Hand. -- The Lord is at hand, as an Observer of our Thoughts,
Desires, Words, Actions and Carriage toward one another. A consideration this;
which should awe us into a careful Government of our Temper and Behavior
toward others. -- Again, The Lord is at Hand, as a Judge; and that both in
respect of Providential Judgment now, to chastise our Failings, or to assist
and reward our sincere Endeavors to comply with our Duty toward others: And
further in respect of the future Eternal Judgment. The end of all Things is at
Hand, The Judge is ^t the Door, who will judge the World in Righteousness, and
render to every man according to his Works. Then He will enquire into our
Demeanor toward our Fellow Creatures, (as well as toward Himself) And they
shall have Judgment without Mercy, that showed no mercy, Jam. 2. 13. He will
render unto them that are contentious and obey unrighteousness, Indignation and
Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish upon every Soul of Man that does Evil: But
Glory, Honor and Peace to every Man that works Good, Romans 2. 8, 9, 10. All
our Dispositions to, and Expressions of, Christian Kindness, are an Odor of a
sweet s^^ll, acceptable and well pleasing to God, and go up for a Mem^ria
before the Lord: and in the great Day of Accounts He will not be unrighteous to
forget our Work of Faith and Labor of Love. Then our secret Kindnesses, which
never took Air in the present World, shall be publicly, proclaimed and openly
rewarded; and that universally, and perfectly, yea far more exceeding
abundantly. Our Morsels which we have dispensed to the Poor, shall be
recompensed with the Food of Angels, Our Cup of cold Water with the Fountain of
Life, our Rags with shining Robes, our Penny with an Eternal Weight of Glory,
our Services of Love with all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly Places in Christ
Jesus. These Things will abound to our account. Eye has not seen nor Ear
^eard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the great things, which God
has prepared for them that in all things approve themselves unto Him by
Long-suffering, by Kindness, by Love unfeigned.

THUS we see in part upon what Accounts the Excellent Virtue under
Consideration deservedly challenges our Care and ^tudy.

NOW for the Application of what has been said, I shall add a few Hints.

USE I. HENCE, We may see, how miserably a great Part of the Professing World
do (...) in the^^ Christian Duty, and fall short of their just Obligations. How
widely distant from the Rules aforesaid is the Practice of many, even of such
^s make the greate^^ pretensions to Christianity? How small a figure does
Brotherly Kindness make in their Lives and Actions? How few do we find
Imitators of the Blessed Jesus, who was meek and lowly, kind and good, and
ready to all Offices of Love! How few are, to be found, like the innocent Do^^
and the pleasant (...) Too many are rather (...) D^^^ and Swine, barking and
tearing one another: like Beasts of Prey wild and fierce, even as roaring (...)
o^ ranging Bears^ -- (...) General, there is too little of the Temper and
Spirit of the Gospel of Peace to be found among Professors. The Love of many
waxes (...). A vi^ious Spirit of Self-Love usurps the Throne of Motherly
Kindness. Wrath and Bitterness many times supply the place of Meekness and
Moderation. Our Ears are too often grated with the (...) Noise of the Saw of
Contention. We too often ^ear the Defamings of many. The work of the Flesh are
frequently too evident among Christians, which are these, Hatred Variance,
Emulations, (...), Debates, Whisperings, Backbitings, Swellings, Tumults, and
such like, 2 Cor. 12. 20. Call. 5. 19. etc. When such Characters of Hell as
these become the genius and complexion of a People, This renders it too
notorious to be dissembled, that Christian Kindness (...) under a lamentable
Declension among them. And are not these Evils too rampant and prevalent in
this Degenerate Day? O how do many in these unhappy Times dishonor God and
discredit their Profession, gratify the Devil and injure their Neighbor, by
visible Breaches of the common Laws of Charity and Kindness! These Things
should be observ^d and resented by every serious Soul with the (...) shame and
sorrow. -- Not that I am now Exhorting (...) Judge and Censure others* I don't
mean to (...) the Office of an Observator and Censor (...) (...) up ^n
Inquisition, and pragmatically pry into the Lives (...) Actions of others, to
spy Faults and make critical (...) that is said and done amiss in the World.
No; (...) this is far ^^om me. This vile Temper and (...) too much the crying
Reproach of the Generality (...), to need any Excitations there (...) ^ut what
I (...) is, th^^ we lay to heart and mourn after a (...) over the iniquities of
(...), whose Sins are (...) before all men* that (...) scandalous Uncharitable*
(...) time in those about us, (...) in the (...) partake in the Sins of other
(...) by no^ resenting, we virtually approve the Commission of them; and (...)
fetch the gu^lt into o^r own Bosoms, and entitle our selves to the deserved
punishment.

II. LET us all Examine our selves, and be humbled for all our Departure, from
^he Duty of the Text. Instead of spending our Time in judging and inveighing
against others, however guilty, We shall do well to ^^ll to mind our own
Transgressions, and to humble our selves in the consideration of our own too
great disregard to the Law of Kindness. Doubtless if we review the records of
Conscience, and consider the habitual frame of our Hearts and the general
course of our Lives p^st* we shall find matter enough for Self-condemnation and
Humiliation. In many things we all offend, and perhaps in nothing more, than in
this point of Christian Kindness. Let us all then ^e persuaded to make due
Inquisition every one into his own particular Case, and see how it stands with
us. Let us bring our selves to the Touchstone, call our selves to an Account,
and accomplish a diligent search. Let no Temptation prevent us from this
necessary, (however disagreeable) Scrutiny -- What has been already offered,
may serve both for Direction, and Incentive to us. I shall not spend Time in
Repeating. I will only add, that we shall do well to consider the distinct
Periods of our Lives, our diverse Places of Abode, (...) several Relations, our
various Conversations, and the like, and take Cognizance (as far as we can) of
our Thoughts, Affections, Passions, De^^^ns Words, Actions, and universal (...)
toward others. Willingly let no Article escape (...) Consideration* Let
Conscience deal faith (...) an^ in censuring our Miscarriages. Let us (...)
over all with the deepest Remorse and Self-^^^sement, and (...) fly to the
atoning Blood (...) Christ (...) Remission.

USE. III. (...) put on Kindness* and let (...) cloth ^s. Th^^ Ver^ue (...) in
the Judgment and Conscience of every (...) is (...) in the Lives of (...). But
(...) O man (...) thy self, (...) thou neglec^^^;t to practice what thou (...)
deservedly Praise* Happy is he that condemns not himself in that thing which
be allows and approves. O Let us all study to act up to our Principles, and
to adorn our Profession, by mutual Endearments and Expressions o^ Kindness. Let
us endeavor a blessed Resurrection and Recovery of that ancient Spirit of
Love, which was so much the beauty and strength of the Church in primitive
Times. Let us endeavor to blow up that holy Fire, which is at present under
such awful Decays; Revive the things that remain and are ready to die. Let
Brotherly Love continue; Let us Love as Brethren and live in Love, Be kindly
affectioned one to another, walk charitably, Be courteous, obliging, useful,
serviceable unto others by all instances of Kindness which lie in our power. --
And let our Love be without Dissimulation, without partiality and without
hypocrisy. Let us Love in Sincerity and godly simplicity, doing all offices of
Love heartily as unto the Lord. Let all our Expressions of Kindness be managed
after a godly sort; with an eye to the Will of God, in a way of obedience, and
with an aim at the Glory of God as their ultimate end, and finally with Faith
in the Merits of Christ for Acceptance with God. -- And let our Kindness be
Universal, extending to all as we have opportunity. -- Also Uniform and
Constant. Be not variable and sickle, kind to day and cold to morrow. Let not
every little Occurrence that displeases us, presently overcast our Faces with a
sullen Cloud, alienate our Hearts, shut our Mouths, and close our Hands. Let
our Kindness be as the S^^* which with his Beams scatters Mists, and breaks
through Clouds, that would hinder it is benign Influence and interrupt it is Light.
Our Kindness should shine forth with the brightest and warmest Rays, and that
continually.

LET us follow after such Charity, and aim at this exalted Benignity. Let it be
our Care and Concern to get our Hearts ^urnisht with the Principle, and our
Lives filled with the visible Exercises of true Christian Kindness. And in
Order hereto, Let us observe the following Rules, which I shall only hint, and
leave you to enlarge upon them in your Meditations at Leisure -- Let us then
see to it, that we get the Causes of Unkindness taken away; Subdue Pride; Watch
against unjust Prejudices, which naturally alienate our Love; Effect not
unnecessary Reservedness and Retirement, which tends to ^our the Mind, and damp
the Affections; Beware of dividing Principles and Lusts; Be not devoted to a
Party, Have not any Man or S^tt of Men in undue Admiration; Party-Friendship
does in effect engage us in Opposition to all but our selves, and leads to
numberless unhappy Consequences: And let us learn to deny ou^^ selves, our
Wills and Interests; Diligently observe the Shame of Unkindness in others;
Consider how ill we take unkindness from others; Aggravate our own Unkindnesses
and not too easily forgive our selves; Get acquainted with Relative Duties,
Study our Opportunities of showing Kindness, Watch all Occasions, give not way
to groundless Excuses; Resist all Temptations to Unkindness; Often meditate on
the many Excellencies and Advantages of mutual Benignity: Endeavor to keep
Company with kind and Friendly Persons, which will provoke us (...) ^^^ulation;
Keep in our Eye the bright Example of Jes^^ Christ, Contemplate the wonderful
Loving Kindness of God our Savior, which will tend to shame us into an holy
imitation: Let us be much in unfeigned Prayer for the good of others, Carry
them (especially any whom we may be less inclined to) in the Arms of
importunate Supplication, to the Throne of Grace, This will by a sort of
natural efficacy work our hearts into a benign Frame. Let us also be much in
prayer for our selves, that God would put within us the Grace of Kindness,
cherish the same in us, quicken and (...) and draw it forth in all proper
Exercises; And let us lay our Souls open to Divine influences: Moreov^r, let us
be frequently Examining our Proficiency and Improvement in this Virtue, and be
often thinking of the Recompense of Reward. And finally, Let us con^id^^ one
another, to provoke unto Love and to Good (...)

MANY more Directions, I suppose* might be added; But Th^se Rules sincerely and
generally practiced, would (...) turn this wild Wilderness into a pleasant
Para^^ce, would transform the Church (which is in a very (...) sense too often)
Militant, into a blessed Resemblance to the Church Triumphant; and afford an
happy Opportunity to repeat that Angelical Anthem, (Luke 2. 14.) Glory to God
in the Highest, and on Earth Pea^^, Good will toward men. -- Now to have done;
I shall leave with you that Apostolical EXHORTATION, (Ephesians. 4. 1, (...) c.) I
therefore -- be^eech you, that ye walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are
called, with all Lowliness and Meekness, with Long-suffering, forbearing one
another in Love; Endeavoring to (...) the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of
Peace. -- And be ye kind one to another. -- And will add no more, but my
Desires concurrent with th^^ Apostolical BENEDICTION, (Ephesians. 3. 14, etc.) For
this cause, I how my kn^^s unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom
the whole E^^ily in Heaven and Earth is named, That He would grant you
according to the riches of His Glory, to be (...) with might by His Spirit in
the inner man^^^ ^^at Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; That (...)
being rooted and grounded in LOVE, -- might be filled with all the fullness of
God. Now unto Him, who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask
or think, Unto Him be Glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all Ages,
World without end. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
Ately Published; A Discourse upon PSALM. CXIX. 9. (...) Being the Substance of
several Sermons, by the (...) Author, And to be Sold by Samuel Gerrish, near
(...) Old Meeting House.


