The Right Way to Shake off a Viper. AN ESSAY, UPON A CASE Too commonly calling
for Consideration; What shall Good Men do, when they are Evil Spoken of?

With a Preface of Dr. INCREASE MATHER,

The Second Impression.

Vipereas rumpo Verbis and Carmine fauces. 1 Cor. 4.12, 13. Being Reviled, we
Bless; being Persecuted, we Suffer it; being Defamed, we Entreat. 2 Cor. 4.4,
8. In all things approving our selve(...) the Ministers of God in much Patience
--. By Honor and Dishonor; by Evil Report and Good Report: as Deceivers and
yet True. Cum recte vivas, ne Cures verba Maloru(...). BOSTON: Printed by S.
Kneeland, (...) Gerrish, and Sold at his Shop. 1720.

Nec mihi Ignominiosum est pati a meis, quod passus est CHRISTUS; nec illis
gloriosum facere quod fecit Judas.

Cyprian. Innocentia et Virtus Lateret, nisi accepisset Injuriam. Dum viciatur,
Effulsit,

Sen. Ep. 72. A PREFACE Of the very Reverend Dr. Increase Mather.
IN Men's Defaming their Neighbors (Especially such as have deserved better
usage,) there is no Little Evil. Not only does our Savior CHRIST instruct us
to do as we would be done by, but the moral Philosopher among the Gentiles, by
the Light of Nature, Says, Quod tibi fieri non vis alteri ne seceris.
Nevertheless, as Great an Evil as it is, many are guilty of it: And many of the
Best and most Serviceable Men in the World, have been Exposed unto it. The Holy
Prophets heard the Defaming of many. The Apostles of our Lord JESUS CHRIST,
being Defamed, yet Blessed those that were most Abusive to them. Nor was there
ever any Man in the World mere Defamed, than He that has been the SAVIOR of
it; who has taught His Disciples to Forgive their Enemies, to Bless those that
Curse them, and to Do Good unto those that Hate them.

The ESSAY now to be offered unto the Reader was Printed at London Nine Years
ago. But I never saw it until within these few Days; nor list I to Enquire
after the Author. I find in it not only Erudition and Ingenuity, but that which
is a thousand times better, a Gospel Spirit of Real Piety: And that the Author
(whoever he be) is a Person of Great Reading and Acquaintance with Learned
Writers; and has made his Knowledge subservient unto his Religion. I have
therefore advised the Reprinting of it in Boston; Hoping that GOD will bless
it, both for the Conviction of them who are concerned as Transgressors, and for
the Confolation of them who may be concerned as Sufferers, by Defamations.

Increase Mather.
Boston, Sept. 1. 1720.
THE Occasion of the Ensuing ESSAY.
IT has been Earnestly wished by some, yea, it has been the firstborn of their
Wishes, That whatever special Temptation and Affliction befalls them, the
Glorious Lord may have some Revenues of Glory; yea, and his People also some
Revenues of Service from it. There are those who have seen their Desire in this
Thing remarkably Accomplished; and it has been Sweet unto them; it has
remarkably Sweetened the Bitterness of all their Exercises. I would ye should
understand, Brethren, that the Things which happened to me, have fallen out
rather unto the furtherance of the Gospel. But then, if we are at any time
Exercised with Injurious Defamations, why should not this Temptation and
Affliction be improved as well as the Rest, and the Church of Christ, wherein
the CASE occurs to all that will live Godlily, be Interested, ((...) we can
attain to it) in the improvement of it?

It is a Pleasant Criticism of Cocceius, that the Church is Compared unto a
Garden of Nutts; partly because Good Men must, like Nutts, be well knocked and
broken, before others can get that Good which is to be gotten out of them. If
the Reader get any Good, by an ESSAY now put into his Hands, let him Adore the
Faithfulness of the Glorious LORD, who Ordered a Servant of his, to be knocked
with some Calumnies and Reproaches; which awakened him, (instead of Answering
and Confuting them, as it is Easy for him to do.) to set himself upon
Strengthening his Brethren with a Discourse on a CASE, wherein very many are
concerned. It must be confessed that he had also in this ESSAY, a very
particular Eye to Another Servant of God, whose Watchfulness and Faithfulness
and Industry, had not Excused him from unkind usage (which every wise Man looks
for) in an Evil World. Plutarch wrote a Treatise, De Capienda ab hostibus
utilitate; how to Profit by ones Enemies. But Plutarch was a Stranger to such
Maxims as this ESSAY is Composed of. And both the Author and his Friend, has
great cause to take Satisfaction in the Divine Providence, that has brought
them forth, for the Service of the People to whom we owe our All.

The Famous Dod, had been so greatly Defamed by an Officer of the College
whereto he belonged, that his vexation upon it, threw him into a Fever. But God
Sanctified it for so much Good unto him, that he sort for his Defaming Accuser;
and for the sake of the Good he had gained by him, heartily forgave him all the
Wrong he had Suffered from him. Anon the Accuser himself saw and owned his
Error. If the Author of this ESSAY, may not only gain the Good proposed in it;
but also do the Good that is intended by writing of it; he will have
Superabundant Reason to forgive those that have been abusive to him; yea, though
instead of a smaller Number, and worthier of a better Name, their Name were
Legion.

Among other Assaults upon him, he has had first and last above a dozen
Pamphlets Published against him; unto any one of which, he never made the least
Reply; except it were that which the University of Helmstadt lately made unto
an Abuse put upon them, Visum est non alio Remedio quam generoso Silentio, and
pio contemptu, utendum nobis esse; ( Silence and Contempt they thought the best
Reply.) This un-replying Silence has not proceeded from the Weakness of his
Cause, but from the Strength of it. For what loss of Time is it, [ill to be
spared out of a Short Life!] to draw a Saw with a People who have no Reason or
Honor in them? Those Children of unreasonableness write nothing worthy of a
Reasonable Man's Consideration. They themselves arm the Considerate Reader with
their own Refutation; To Recite what they say is to Refute it. The Men, and
their Pens have been such, that still when his Adversary has written a Book; he
might well take it upon his Shoulder, and bind it as a Crown unto him. The
Invectives of such People, we have been taught by an Archangel; how little
Notice, and with what Patience, is to be taken of them. And sometimes there is
occasion to think, how Maximus Tyrius resolves the Case; (...). Whether being
Injured, we may make a Return or no? Says he; It Is not at all convenient, that
an Honest Man should Wrestle a fall with one of another Character; for they
were not brought up under the same Tutors, or unto the same Exercises, nor do
they expect the same Success or Applause of what they do; so that, miseret me
ejus Pugnae, (...) impar est congressus. All that he does is this. At the
taking of Cadiz, Fort Philip, and all the Spanish Galleys fired on Sir Walter
Raleigh in the Van of the English Navy; Raleigh scorned their Fire, and
answered with a Flourish of Trumpets, without shooting a Gun, till he saw his
Time, and then did notable Execution. He takes leave to say; he will not once
Fire on any Libellers and Revilers. He wishes what is here exposed, may be as
acceptable a melody to good Men as a flourish of Trumpets. There may come a
Time for such things to be done, as may render the Adversaries ashamed of their
Ab^^veness.

One who is not the most unexceptionable Author in the World, though a mighty
Clerk, a very great Scholar and Writer, [Monsieur Le Clerc] has written a
Discourse beyond all Exception, upon that Problem, An semper Respondendum
Calumniis Theologorum; or whether the Calumnies of Divines, written against a
Man, are always to be Answered by him. He wisely Answer's; No, by no means,
it is perfect loss of Time. Do you go on writing of such Books as will be of
lasting Benefit to Mankind. Those Books will be your sufficient and perpetual
Vindication, The Sober part of Mankind, will be so far from regarding the
Calumnies Published against you, they will but abhor the Publishers.

This agrees well with what Sarracius wrote unto Salmafius, when he threw away
his Time in answering the many Books written against him: Non dubito quin te
aculeate dicta angant, quietemque tuam perturbent, sed semel te oportet,
claudere Aures omnibus illis maledictis, hominesque ulcisci, Compos^ione
operum, que te digna sint. A noble Revenge truly! To say nothing unto the
Calumniaters: but to write something, that mankind shall be the better for.

If Divines writing against a Man (which none such ever did yet against the
Author of this ESSAY, that he has been sensible of,) are so little to be
Regarded, what then are Men who proclaim themselves little better then
Atheists, and the Profane Pamphlets, by such Men darted against him? The Dirt
of a STREET as little to be Regarded!

Virtuous Men it seems have had that Opinion of a Paper which I have seen,
dispersed amongst a People so instructed, and so disposed, that in a little
more then one Weeks time, it was with very near an Universal Abhorrence, chased
out of the World. It strangely disappeared at once, and hardly any one Man
would so expose his own Reputation as to be known to countenance it. That
Atheiftical Paper, had a Collection of gross and vile Falsehoods, wherein the
Author of this ESSAY is Belyed, with an uncommon degree of Malignity. He has
been at a Loss, about a proper Conduct on this Occasion. On each of the
Passages, (which traduce him in the Points wherein if he ever did well, and as
became an Honest Man in his Life, it was in those Points!) He might give the
Answer, which honest Valerius magnus, thought it enough to repeat on every
Charge which his Adversary then falsely made upon him; Mentiris impudentissime:
It Is a most impudent Lie! But on the one side, had he consulted Flesh and
Blood, the Cry would have been, Nos haec Patiemur inulti? An Aristotle would
have told him, It is a Slavish thing, when we are used Contumeliously to suffer
it without making Returns. An Isocrates would have told him, You must think it
a Base thing to be outdone by your Enemies in Ill turns, as by your Friends in
Good ones. As Terence taught us at School that Evil Maxim: Veterem serendo
injuriam invitas Novam. And should he employ an Hundredth part of that Armor of
Righteousness, both on the Right Hand, and on the Left, that is, both Defensive
and Offensive, wherewith he is furnished on this occasion, the poor men could
not but repent of their having meddled with him. On the other side, Christianity
prescribes a world of Silence, and Patience, and Goodness, upon such
Provocations; and we have an admirable Savior and Pattern, who, as a Sheep
before the Shearers is dumb, so he opened not his Mouth. He resolved therefore
to treat that Libel with Silence, and as unworthy of an Answer; God rewarded
his Resolution, and also supplied him with an Answer, in the Conscience of
every Man who had any real Virtue or Honor in him. Indeed, if a Man were not
altogether so richly favored of the Lord abroad, it were no little Favor to
have that within which may comfort him, in the Testimony of his Conscience. It
was a pleasant Answer from an honest Man unto a passionate Lord, after he had
patiently heard him call him abundance of bad Names; Your Honor may speak as
you please, but I believe not one Word of it; for I know my self to be an
honest Man. However this was the course taken by him. He knew no person of the
least Credibility in the World would ever assert such things to his Face, or in
his Life; and should he but merely mention the Names of those Blades who
divulged the Libel, this alone would be (though his own sufficient Vindication,)
yet such an exquisite piece of Revenge upon his Enemies, as is not agreeable
with his Principles. Wherefore he remains wholly silent for the present. But
lest, after his Death, any wicked Men should go on, to make Advantage of such
things, as they have done by his Renowned Grandfather before him, he leaves
behind him such well-attested Instruments in Manuscript, as being produced,
will forever bury in confusion all attempts, to wound Religion by wounding a
Servant of it. We may and should speak upon some Wrongs; not for the revenging
our selves, but for the suppressing of Lies that may hurt our Usefulness.

In the mean time, he would be loath to come short of a Musonius ( commended
for it by Grotius) who protested, he would never Sue any Man upon an (...),
upon an Action of Defamation, or suffer another to do it on his behalf. He may
go on in doing all the good Offices for his People that he can; he is
invulnerable. Some Names are so Oil'd that no Ink will stick upon them.

It was the Counsel of Sadoletus to Erasmus, Te ita crebro, and a tam multis
peti, and mirum sane mihi, and Permolestum est. Nec video, quae sit causa, nisi
existimatio tua, quae in tam alto sita est loco, ut omnibus flatibus Invidiae,
Proposita esse videatur; sed ego si isto loco essem, una semel defensione in
universum omnibus responderem, Hoc opere edito, Perenne mihi silentium
susciperem, adversus malevolos; Querum insolentiam iniquasque Calumnias, cum
Res ipsa, and veritas, tum tua Excellens Fama, virtusque Refutaret. You see, he
Counsels him to Answer once for all, and let one Book be a full and final
Answer to all the Calumnies that should be cast upon him. It Is hoped that the
Author of this ESSAY will have no need of any other Answer to Calumnies. This
one Book is Answer enough; after this, he need never trouble himself about any
more; he may go on in the better Work which his Hand finds to do, and not turn
aside for any.

APPENDIX.
I Remember, Castellio writing a little Treatise, de Calumnia, he gives a mark
by which to know Calumnious People; Si illum Libellum suum far nequirent,
That is, if his little Book disturbed them. It Is possible, there may be some so
Envious, that this little Book will disturb them, though written with all
possible modesty, and concealment of the Author. It will be a disturbance to
them, that an Author whom they love not, should be thought an Honest Man in the
main, or do any Good in the World. Certainly such Persons will approach near
the Character of Calumniators. I will only say, I do not know many Distempers
of the Body, but what a Good Man would rather choose to suffer, than to be
distempered with such a depravation of Mind, as these People are under the
Power of! Lord! deliver me from such unreasonableness!

There is a well-known Set of Men, concerning whom the Author might with Job
complain, They raise up against me the ways of their Destruction; that is to
say, I am, as I may say, the Beaten Path of their pernicious Reproaches. But
when that Just Man made it his complaint, I am a Brother to Dragons, he found
his Account in the True way of shaking off a Viper. Had his Exemplary Patience
been even better than it was, it would not have been the worse for him, when
GOD blessed his latter end.

How many Diseases has the Practice of all Ages cured with Vipers? Our
Dispensatories fetch noble Medicines from them. Italy saw a Leprosy cured, by
the poor Lepers casually falling into a Cave, which was filled with the Breath
of the Vipers rendevouzed there. I have my self made a fine Anodyne and
Febrifuge, with the Gall of Rattle-Snakes. The main study of the Author is, To
get his own Heart and Life healed of all that he can find amiss in it; by the
Exercise of PIETY, which the Sibilations of Slanderers, may excite him to.

And now, he calls to mind, what the Patient Servant of GOD said; Had my
Adversary written in a Book, surely I would hind it as a crown unto me. Honest
Mr. Terry tells us; when an Eastern Emperor sends any Letters with commands
unto a Governor, he rides forth with Attendents, to meet the Letters; he
lights, and falls to the Earth, and so takes them from the Messenger, and lays
them on his Head, and binds them fast; and then returning to the place of
Public Business, he reads the Letters, and he does what they come for. If it
should be so, that any Adversary write a Book, to expose him with Detrectations
and Scurrilities; he will consider it, as bringing Letters to him ( howbeit the
Libeller means not so!) from the Glorious King of Heaven; and he will find out,
and follow and obey the Orders of Heaven in such a dark way sent unto him. This
will be all his Answer to them, GOD will make THIS a Sufficient and Eternal
Confutation to them!

In this Country a Native anointing himself with the Fat of Snakes, becomes
Invulnerable and Impenetrable to the Sting of Snakes; He can handle them
securely; They Will coy'l about him, unable to do any Harm unto him. Reader, Thou
have hear, an Axungia Viperina prepared for thee. Anointed thus with the Fat of
the Vipers, thou need not fear any Encounter with them!

THE True way of Shaking off a VIPER.
THERE is a CASE which all good Men, that ever were of any Consideration in
this Evil World, have had occasion to take into their own most serious
Consideration. A CASE it is, whereto a right Answer cannot but be acceptable to
all Good Men; cannot but be serviceable to exert and increase their goodness,
and bring about the Glory of HIM that has adorned them with it.

The CASE is,

What should Good Men do when they are Evil spoken of?

Or, What should be the Conduct of a Christian, when Defamations are ordered
for him, to Exercise his Christianity?

Upon this general Case of all Good Men, the FIRST thing that I would propose
is this; Let the defamed Christian set himself immediately to Consider, what
his carriage ought now to be. My Friend, Be more solicitous to do well under
Defamations, and be the better for them, than how to vindicate your self
against them. Let this be the first care on this occasion. Immediately pour our
your fervent Supplications before the glorious GOD. Lord, Enable me now to
glorify thee, Oh! leave me not to any Frowardness or Foolishness, that may
dishonor thy Name, when my own has dishonor cast upon it. Immediately set
your self to study, and contrive, What is that behavior wherewith I must now
endeavor to glorify God? Study and contrive, What shall I do, that I may in
the Issue find that I have cause to bless the Name of God, for those very
things, wherein mine seems to be Wounded? When a scurrilous Person once
notoriously abused a very virtuous Person, the wronged and patient Servant of
the Lord said, 2 Samuel 16.12. It may be the Lord will look upon mine affliction,
and that the Lord will requite me Good for his Cursing this Day. Truly, if you
do after this manner begin your encounter with Defamations, it is beyond any, it
may be, that the Lord will Requite you good for the Cursing of your Friend
Shimei; He has already done you that good which abundantly makes amends for all
the Cursing; you are most certainly in the way of coming at good that will
surpass all Imagination. Blessed, Blessed of the Lord art thou, Oh! thou Cursed
of them that have Blessings far from them! Having proposed and premised this
Blessed Introduction to all manner of good, I will proceed unto a more
particular description of a defamed Christian pursuing the Honor of
Christianity.

1. Acknowledge the Sovereignty of God, and not only this but the Righteousness
and Faithfulness of the Sovereign GOD, in all the wrongs which the defamatory
invectives of any Man, may offer you. If Dirt be cast upon you, my first Advice
to you is, what was once given to the Prophet, Go down to the House of the
Potter. Adore the uncontrollable Sovereignty of God which may make you a Vessel
of Dishonor, on a much worse account than that of being a little reproached,
by some in whose Reproaches, perhaps a Man is really Honored. With a most
profound Adoration of the Divine Sovereignty, confess, that if God single out
you, to be made an Object of numberless Indignities and Malignities, and
satisfy himself, in beholding what is done to you, and by you under them, there
is nothing to be murmured at. For ever submit, yea, though the dispensations of
Sovereignty be never so dark, mysterious, unsearchable; and with all possible
submission, say; Lord, I am willing to be whatever thou will have me to be; do
what thou will with my Name; if thou will have it vilified, let it be so; only
let thy Name for ever be glorified. I may tell you, this Resignation will have
admirable consequences. It had so, when a Servant of God oppressed with a world
of obloquies, thus resigned himself; 2 Samuel 15.26. If the Lord say, I have no
delight in thee, behold, here am I, let Him do to me as seems good unto Him!

To the confession of Divine Sovereignty, let there be added a confession of
the Divine Righteousness. As you are a Creature, you must allow Sovereignty to
lay you low. Because you are also a Sinner, you must not wonder, if
Righteousness make you vile. Follow the example of the brave Emperor
Mauritius, who being stripped of his Purple, and run down into the most abject
and wretched Circumstances, lift up his Eyes to Heaven, and only said, O Lord,
thou art Righteous, and Righteous are all thy Judgments! It is most certain
that there cannot be the least wag of a Tongue, or scratch of a Pen against
you, but it is permitted by God. Of your most Calumnious Adversary, you may say
as that Great Man did of his abusive Shimei; 2 Samuel 16.11. The Lord has bidden
him! It will be but a due compliance with the Righteousness of God, for you to
confess before him, That He is infinitely just, in the greatest Injustice that
any reproachful Man can offer you. You know so much amiss by your self, that if
it were all known abroad in the World, they who now falsely speak what is ill of
you, might very truly speak what is a great deal worse. Make your Defamations a
provocation unto you, to humble your self deeply before God for the secret Sin,
which by leaving you to be defamed, you may see, he sets in the light of his
Face. Under the Law of Ceremonies, if he that had an Issue did spit upon
another, the Person spat upon was thereby defiled: Sir, if an unclean Wretch
have spit upon you, it becomes you to enquire, Whether you have not upon you
some Defilement that is to be washed off, and make a new flight to that which
will cleanse from all Sin. Perhaps you are at a loss, What may be your more
special Sins which are scourged by God, in the Reproaches which are cast upon
you. My Friend, It were a very proper thing for you, upon the first blowing up
of any Storm of Obloquies, presently to fall down before the Lord with this
Petition; Lord, Show me wherefore thou contendest with me. And then go on with
an impartial inquiry, a Self-judging, a Self-loathing inquiry. Nisi essent
peecata, non essent flagella. I am sure there will need no long Divination, to
bring you unto this one sensible stroke of Repentance; Lord, I have not
Honored thy Name as I ought to have done, and therefore thou art Righteous in
all the dishonor that my Name labors under. Had we been more concerned for
the Name of God, who can tell, but He would have been more concerned for ours?
When you go on, it may be you will find, that you have not always been so
tender of your Neighbors good Name, as you should have been, or so cautious of
making right, fair, exact Representations, when he has been spoken of. At
least, when you have heard a Neighbor with too much Truth, ill spoken of,
there has not been that grief in you, and that Leve which rejoices not in
Iniquity, as there should have been. The Injuries done to your Name, are it may
be to Chasten you, for this too common miscarriage. Behold therefore the
Goodness and Severity of God! Severity, in his not leaving such a most frequent
fault without Chastening. But Goodness, because you are Chastened of the Lord,
that you should not be condemned with the World, and in another World. Or, it is
possible you may have treated some very impious and vicious Persons with too
much of Complaisance and Complement; though your design might be nothing under
Heaven, but only to win upon them, that you might do them Good, and make them
Good, and bring them to do Good; yet you may have indiscreetly sorgotten the
last of the Proverbs of Solomon. God may therefore correct this indiscretion of
yours, by making such Persons to be the Instruments of bringing very great
Reproaches upon you. Briefly, Carry on the Scrutiny with all the accuracy
imaginable, to discover the Righteousness of God in your most unrighteous
Desamations. Upon the discovery, Repent of what has been amiss; abhor it;
bewail it; weep to the Lord, that for the sake of that Blood, which cleanses
from all Sin, you may have the Pardon of it. Oh! happy Reproaches which quicken
us in the great work of Repentance! Be as meek as a Lamb, under the Injuries
that are done you; let the Righteousness of God, shining therein, make you so.
But fly to the Lamb of God: And verily when you have conversed with the Bleed
of the Lamb, you will have white Robes upon you: White Robes, I say; You may
desy Earth and Hell to bespatter them.

That which makes me the more to urge a great regard unto the Righteousness of
God in your Defamations, is this; Even Persecutions that come upon us for the
Cause of GOD, yet oftentimes carry Castigations in them. Rarely do there come
any violent Persecutions on the Churches of the Lord, until they have by their
Formality, and Contention, and abounding Iniquity, ripened themselves for such
Calamities. Old Cyprian will tell you so. The French Resugees at this day, may
tell you so. And yet Persecutions do at last prove Privileges to the People of
God. Thus particular Servants of the Lord may be Persecuted, because Heaven has
a Favor for them; they may be the Favorites of Heaven. Yet, Oh the Wisdom of
our God! The sorrows brought on them in their Persecutions, may be also to
bring them unto Repentance for some Errors which they have been guilty of. The
most excellent, but Reproached Confessors of Christ, bearing the Reproach of
Christ, may yet also bear, at the very same time, a Rebuke for Sin. When the
admirable Paul underwent stoning, he was honored in it; adorned by it; vastly
enriched; every Stone thrown at him was, to him as good as a Pearl. Some think,
that while he lay in a Swoon under those Outrages of his Enemies; Now was the
time that he was caught up, and had one of his Raptures, either that into
Paradise, or that into the Third Heaven. Yet, no doubt, this Martyr of the
Lord, when he came to himself, soon made this reflection; Lord, When the Blood
of thy Martyr Stephen was shed, I was also standing by. The share he had in
stoning the Martyr Stephen, was now to be again repented of. And so was the
Burning of the Martyr Lambart, when that good Man the Martyr Cranmer was going
into the Fire. Consider what I say, and the Lord give you Understanding. For I
may now put you in mind, that by being brought thus to see the Divine
Righteousness, you will come to a most Experimental sight of the Divine
Faithfulness in what has befallen you. One that had been very much Defamed,
could say, Genesis 50.20. God meant it unto good. If you get so much good by your
Desamations, as to discern the Righteousness of God in them, and obtain, what
is Ill in you, to be forgiven and amended, it is plain, God has meant it unto
good. You may go on with Praises, with Wonders, and say, Lord, In Faithfulness
thou have afflicted me! It will most certainly be so, if you now set your
selves to improve in Piety, by means of the Defamations, which are by the
Impious hurled at you. O Man of God, You may be awakened unto the doing of much
good, by being evil spoken of. We say very truly, Malice is a good Insormer,
though it be a had Judge. You may by malicious Desamations be Informed of those
Points in your Conduct, which may need a better guard upon them. You may be
being Reproached, be advised of those things, which ought to be Reformed. It
contributed mightily to the advancement of Temperance in the Blessed Monica,
that one reproachfully called her a Wine Bibber. It would be wisely done of
you, under Defamations, to search and try your ways. Particularly whether, though
what your Enemies have said of you, be false, yet the holy Eyes of God have not
seen in you some Fault akin to that which has been charged upon you. If you
find it so, Oh! mourn for it, and turn to God. This is the Language of Heaven,
in the bad Language of the evil Tongue, in the Fire spit at you by a Tongue set
on Fire by Hell. At least, you may find this, that you should grow more eminent
in those Graces, and in those Duties which are most contrary to the Charges of
your Enemies upon you. They, it is true, abuse you, and yet at the same time
they exhort you, they excite you. God by them calls upon you; My Child, You are
not yet come to a due Eminency in those good things, which are just contrary,
most contrary to the ill things, that are spoken of you. Oh! be quickened unto
an eminency in all goodness, by the Evil spoken of you. A Great Man of
Macedonia profesed himself much obliged unto the Chief Men of Athens, That by
their Abuses they taught him how to Speak and how to Live, better than he
should have done without such Monitors. Perhaps you may have Enemies, who being
sensible that you have some Friends who think well of you, are so uneasy at it,
and so resolved upon rendering you unserviceable, that they will make venomous
Insinuations of your being an Hypocrite,: That all your Profession, all your
Appearance, all the Flame of your Zeal to do Good, is but Hypocrisy. A wondrous
Venom! Yet you have heard of the Patience of Job. I am verily persuaded, the
End of the Lord, in permitting such Insinuations, is to awaken you unto a more
thorough Trial of your own Sincerity, and unto a more hearty Doing of those
things, which will be infallible Demonstrations of your own Sincerity. I have
read, or heard of one who never arrived unto the joyful assurance of his own
uprightness, until an abusive Neighbor had called him an Hypocrite. The
faithfulness of the Lord our Healer, makes the sickly Doses of Defamation,
(though they may seem sometimes unto us, pretty churlish ones, and a little
strong of the Metal) operate thus toward the healing of our Distempers; Hereby
our Iniquity is purged, and all the Fruit is to take away our Sins. The Tongue
that is a sharp Sword, serves only, as in the well known Story, to open and
relieve an Ulcer of dangerous corruption in us. Workers of Iniquity may for a
while prevail against you; much Injustice and Injury may be done you, in many
Defamations, uttered by Workers of Iniquity. But if unrighteous Men prevail in
their unrighteous Works and Words against you, it is that your Transgressions
may be the more purged away. See this, and say, O Lord, Great is thy
Faithfulness! But it shines with a most Heavenly Luster in that Preparation for
Heaven, which is marvellously promoted in us, by Defamations on Earth. The Dirt
of Reproaches is, as the Martyr said of it, (and there never was a Martyr
without a share of it!) only to scour you and make you bright, that a high
Shelf in Heaven may be assigned for you. You must have a Name reviled on Earth;
it is, that so you may be the fitter to find a Name written in Heaven. There will
be a Resurrection of Names as well as of Bodies, in the Day when God shall
raise the Dead. All the Good that you have done; all your Prayers all your
Alms, and the Steps of your watchful Walk with God; all the brave efforts of
your Self-denial; all the continual Contrivances to serve Christ and his
People, and your Neighbors, in which you have been swallowed up every Day [not
one Day without them!] for many, many Years together; they being sprinkled with
the Blood of the Lamb, shall be found in the Lord's Book of Remembrance: They
shall be proclaimed in the Golden-Streets of the City of God. That you may be
prepared for, what shall be done for the Man whom the King of Heaven will
honor, in the World to come; you must in this World, be abased with quite
another sort of things reported and believed of you, and be patient under it.
God will first have you lie in the Dust, first have you thrown in the Dunghill,
and willing that it should be so, before he sets you with the Princes of his
People in the Heavenly Places. We read, He calls the Stars all by their Names.
By the Stars the Jewish Interpreters understand the Just (of whom we read, they
shall shine as the Stars.) God knows what is done to their Names; and will have
them willing to go by other Names; to be called by very mean, and vile, and ill
Names, before he takes them to shine among the Stars. How sweet, how sweet will
be your arrival among the Angels of God, going from a World which you found a
place of Dragons! a World where your complaint was, My Soul is among Lions, and
I lie among them that are set on Fire! Yea, and who can tell, but you may yet
shine the more as Lights in this World, for the snuffing which, your
Defamations have bestowed upon you? While the snuffing was a doing, it
threatened wholly to put out the Lamp, or it was a Lamp despised; presently it
shines the more for it. How often have you seen it, that cruel Defamations have
been but Forerunners of a greater and brighter serviceableness. God first
chastens and instructs and humbles his dear Servants. By and by, they see rest
from the Days of Defamation; they prove more serviceable than ever they were in
their Lives before; and a Pit is dug for the Wicked, they are cut off in
their own Wickedness. A Man is never fit to be very serviceable, until he be
humbled, and broken and grieved, and made nothing of, and willing to be so.
Then, then he is fit for the Masters use; Defamations do contribute unto it
admirably! A Joseph must be flouted at as a Dreamer; the basest Person in the
World, must go to fix a Character of baseness upon him; and this only because
Hell could not obtain its ends upon him, He out-lives the rage of them that
hated him and vexed him. He shone brighter, and he did more afterward a
thousand times than ever in his Life before: The God of his Father belped him.
The intent of Satan, and of your other Enemies, may be by Defamations for ever,
to spoil your Serviceableness. God overrules them; God disappoints them; your
Opportunities to be serviceable do not lie at their mercy. God is perhaps
fitting of you to do some Good, which at present you little think or know of.
You know not now, but you shall know hereafter. In the mean time, Oh! Glorify
the Faithfulness of God.

II. Embrace your Defamations, as affording you precious Opportunities to
exemplify a Patience that shall glorify God; and imitate the exemplary Patience
of your admirable Savior. Usually Defamations are no little Provocations.
Nothing so usually and easily provokes Men to intemperate passion, as to be
Reproached. The Old Pagans and Stoics that could bear every thing else, found
Repreach to be insupportable. This would make them roar as loud as Waves on the
Egean shore. He was a great, and a strong Man, and a Scholar, yea, a Master of
a better Philosophy, who yet complained, Reproach has broken my heart. For
Patience to get the upper hand of Passion on this occasion, and moderate it,
and regulate it; verily this is a more perfect Work of Christianity. Sir, If
you may be so happy as to attain unto it, you may, instead of being troubled,
say, I am happy that I ever had the occasion! Upon the first advice of any
Abuse offered unto you, resolve, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not
with my Tongue; I will keep my Mouth with a Eridle, while I have before me what
the unbridled Mouth of Wickedness has uttered of me. But make your Application
to the God of all Grace, for the Grace to keep this Resolution. If you resist
the first Impressions, the first Resentments, which you may too readily feel,
upon vile Reproaches, you have gained a great Point; you have steered clear of
abundance of Sin; you will be more able afterward to carry on a strain of
lovely Patience, and merit the Judges Motto, Prudens qui patiens; A prudent Man
is a patient Man.

Let me beseech you, after this, to maintain most exact watch, a most severe
guard, upon your self, least while the Waters of strife are broaching, your
provoked Spirit may at any time speak unadvisedly with your Lips. The meekest
Man in the World, you know did so; and you know it went ill with that Good Man
for doing so. My Friend, Your Calumnious Adversaries furnish you with valuable
Opportunities, to adorn the Doctrine of God your Savior, and to do such things
as are done by none but those that may lay hold on the Comforts of Eternal
Life. The Blessed Eliot's Three Words, Bear, Forbear, Forgive: Now, now is the
time for them to come into exercise. All tendencies to Revenge upon your
Enemies, the Wrongs which they have done you, must now be abhorred, be
suppressed; must be looked upon as worse things than the worst of your Enemies.
It Is probable, they may be such People as may deserve to have much Evil spoken
of them. However, it is now decent for you to be more sparing in speaking of it,
than you would have been, if you had suffered nothing from them. Leave that
just Work to others; there is hazard least you over-do, or least some
revengeful glance of your own do work in it, if you go to meddle with it.

On the other side, If you know any Good of those that have spoke ill of you,
be you not averse to speak that Good, and not ill pleased if you hear it spoken
by others. How famous, how precious is the Name of Calvin, for the Answer which
he gave, when he was told, that the angry Luther put some hard Names upon him!
An answer so recited, so esteemed, by all the World, that there is no need now
of my telling any of my Neighbors what it was. But be sure that your Heart
stand always in awe of that Word; Prove. 20.22. Say not thou, I will recompense
Evil: And, Romans 12.17. Recompense to no Man Evil for Evil. Athenagoras, I
remember gives this description of the primitive Christians: It Is counted an
indefferent thing, for a Man to revile another, by whom he has been first
reviled. But we Christians, do speak as well as ever we can of them that speak
nothing but Evil of us. And Justin Martyr bears this just Witness for them; We
don't ask, that they who have most accused us, and abused us, and falsely
spoken all Evil of us, may be punished for it; no, it is punishment enough to be
left unto such Folly and Rashness. Oh! Do not look upon this generous Patience,
as impracticable, or a lesson only for the Elohim, whose Dwelling is not with
Flesh! Rather look upon it as an Unmanly weakness, to be unable to bear the ill
Words of other Men. It is a pretty Remark; when Abishai could not bear the
railing Tongue of Shimei; says David unto him, What have I to do with you, ye
Sons of Zeruiah? Now Zeruiah was their Mother. Why, the Sons of Zeruiah? He
seems to intimate, You have more of your Mother than of your Father in you; you
talk as if you were of the weaker Sex; if you had the Souls of Men in you, a
few ill Words would not be such an intolerable grievance with you.

If you will hearken to me, you shall take little notice of the Affronts that
are offered you: For the most part they are not worth your Notice. When the
famous Doctor Sands was ignominiously carried on a lame Jade through the City
of London, a base Woman in scorn threw a Stone at him, and hit him full on the
Breast; he took no other notice of it, but only made this mild Answer, Woman, I
pray God forgive thee! This was notice enough. Commend me to the sweet spirited
Melancthon. Osiander, an hot Man, had preached against Vitus Theodorus.
Osiander made the Pulpit the Stage on which he acted and vented his
disaffection to that Servant of God. What shall I now do, says Vitus Theodorus?
I know what Passion would have done; Come up with him, and make the Pulpit a
Cockpit. No, says my dear Melancthon to him; I beg you for the love of God,
and I charge you, that you do not answer Osiander again: Hold your peace; go on
in your Ministry; make as if you heard nothing. Anon Osiander found that he had
lost himself among the People of God; and Vitus Theodorus was no loser by his
Conduct. If it would not be too much of a Contradiction to the very Design
which I am upon; too much of an Encouragement unto a Passion, the very least
and first Ebullitions whereof I would have to be discountenanced; I would say,
You cannot more certainly Revenge your selves upon your Defamers, than by a
Resolution to take little Notice of them. You cannot more gratify them than by
bestowing much notice upon their spiteful Folly, and being much discomposed at
it. Hoc I^acus velit. Besure, it is for the most part a point of prudence to
let the Tongue-Squibs go out of themselves. Do you forget them, and they will
soon be forgotten by all the World; Irritation will do no good. Chrysippus
being told that one privately reproached him, replied, Say nothing; else he
will go on to do it publicly too. But I throw aside this Consideration, and in
the room of it, I will bring in what the brave old Marquess of Argyle observed.
Men would seem (says he) to be very Jealous of their Honor, when for Words
spoken in prejudice or diminution of it, they commence Suits and Processes
against the Speakers of them; but there is nothing so below a generous Spirit,
and which argues more weakness of Mind, than that they connot contemn Words,
that are vain and uttered in haste. I can set my Approbation to this; that I
never knew any Man that got Advantage by so doing: Thus that Noble Person. The
Truth is, Omnis injuria est in sensu patientis. Let the Sun say nothing, but
only shine on, when Owls or Snails complain of him. I still advise, take little
notice of impertinent Stories; Be as a Great Man once among us, would often
advise all wise Men to be, Tattle-Proof. Indeed Concience of the Ninth
Commandment, may oblige us to confute some sorts of Slanders with Vindications.
When Religion is like to suffer by our Silence, or when many of our Godly
Brethren, are in danger of taking up a false Character of us, if we be Silent;
Then it is a time to speak. But for the most part we shall enjoy most Peace, by
holding our Peace. Especially, if God has placed us in Circumstances of Honor,
and Service, that shall render our Esteem, as rough and strong as a File, to
every little whiffling thing that shall go to grate upon it. It Is a Threadbare
saying, but never to be worn out; always of use to wise Men when others go to
pick Holes in their Coats; Magnum Contumeliae Remedium Negligentia: The best
way to Conquer many Contumelies, is to Contemn them. The best way to silence
many Contumelious People, is to despise them. It is a Maxim of Wisdom; Prove.
12.19. A lying Tongue is but for a Moment. Lies are usually short lived things.
Do you by your Piety, and Innocence, and Usefulness, take away what must be
necessary to support the credit of the Lies, with all reasonable Men; and for
the most part, you need not concern your self; the Lies will be but for a
moment; they will dye away of themselves; the only way to keep them alive, will
be for you to keep up the Talk of them with Laborious, Troublesome, Noisy
Vindications. The Jews have a Proverb, Lies have their Feet cut off; they cannot
stand long. To use the Ancient Phrase, Tempus mendacio Lupus, a little Time
will be Wolf enough to devour it. My Friend, All would have been dead long ago,
if you had not unadvisedly commenced a Lawsuit upon it.

I will here take the Liberty to Transcribe another Passage which I have
somewhere met withal.

If I hear that any Person has done me If rong, in Word or Deed, I find, it is
often (perhaps not always) the best way in the World, not to let them know that
I have any knowledge of it. The best way is to forgive and forget the Wrong,
and bury it in silence. For besides the Consideration due to the internal
Advantage, reaped by such Christianity, there is this to be Considered; Such is
the malignity in the most of Men, that they will hate you, only because you
know they have wronged you. They will as far as they can, justify the Wrong
they have done; and because their wicked Hearts imagine, that you must needs
bear a Spite unto them, for the wrong you have received from them, they will
bear a confirmed Spite unto you on that vile account. Whereas I have often
found, that my concocting with Patience and Silence, a slight or an hurt that
has been offered me, has been followed (and rewarded by God,) with this
Consequence; that the very Persons who have wronged me, have afterward been
made Instruments of singular Service to me.

I meet with a notable Passage among the Axiomate Philosophiae Christianae,
written by Christopher Besoldus above an Hundred Years ago; Axioms whereof
every one is more valuable then an Ingot of Gold. Says he; They who take an
Antidote, will not swell upon the bite of a Viper, provided the Antidote be good.
We pretend that we have taken Humility and Mansuetude for our Antidote; if when
we are bitten by maledicent People, we swell, and are in a feverish rage upon
it, our Antidote was not good. Signum id est Humilitatem nostram, and
Mansuetudinem esse fucatam. If there were no other Argument for your long
suffering, methinks the loss of Time that unavoidably attends our Prosecution
of every Calumny, were enough to afright us from it. You have but a little Time
to live; you have lost a great deal of Time already: You have abundance of Work
to do for God in your own Heart and Life, and Family; perhaps, you have work to
do for the Churches of the Lord; the Devil would feign make this Work lie by;
he throws Calumnies in your way, to divert you from your Work. Instead of
serving the Lord and his People in the most significant Methods, your Time is
to go this way: To fend and prove, and at last gain this weighty Point; Such a
vain Man has said something he should not have said. A weighty Point!
Certainly, Discretion shall preserve thee, Understanding shall keep thee from
this Folly. You had better say to the most of Calumnies; I cannot spare the Time
for you: Say, I am doing a great Work; why should the Work cease, while I leave
it, and come down to you?

And now, after all the pains I have taken to dissuade you from speaking on
this occasion, I will prrswade you to speak; and this, unto the best Purpose
imaginable. I must set before you the Heavenly Counsel and Command of our
Savior, Math. 5.44. Pray for them which use you despitefully. You must give me
leave to press this with a very great importunity upon you; that whenever you
understand that any Person has injuriously defamed you, and abused you, you
make this very thing an occasion for you, to pray for that Person; Pray for him
now by Name, if you never did so before; before you go to rest that Night,
mention the very Name of that Person before the Lord, and let this Prayer be
made without Lips of Deceit: Lord! Pardon that Person, and Bless him, and make
him wise and good, and do him good! Be not able to rest until you have done so.
When you have done this, Oh! the Peace, Oh! the Joy, which may now fill your
Mind, in the assurance of your own Pardon from the Lord! The comforting Spirit
of God, in the Grace now exercised by you, seals your Pardon. Receive his
Testimony, Child be of good cheer, Thy Sins are forgiven thee! A blessing worth
a Thousand Worlds: I am importunate with you to assure it in this excellent way.

Upon such a Text as that; Psalm. 92.11. Mine Eye shall see my Desire on my
Enemies; mine Ears shall hear my Desire of the Wicked that rise up against me:
I have heard one say, It gave some shock to his Thoughts; it compelled him to
behold none but the great Messiah speaking: When it came to be sung in the
Assemblies of Zion, the Thoughts constantly awakened in him were, Lord, My
Desire is, that my Enemies may be pardoned, and come to have a share with me in
the Blessings of Goodness. This truly were to sing with melody in the Heart
unto the Lord. Hereupon I consulred the Original: I found, that this Word, my
Desire, is not in the Original: I wished that some other Word of supply might
be brought into the Translation, instead of my Desire: Why may we not Read,
What God shall do, or, what shall be done? Accordingly, Darby, in his version
of Psalms, when that Clause comes, Psalm. 54.7. Mine Eye has seen its Desire on
my Enemies; turns it so, Thou make my Focs to fall before mine Eyes.

One says very truly, It Is an easy thing to forgive Injuries, when God has
changed the Properties of them, and turned them into Blessings. I hope, you
have got so much good by your Defamations, that you can bless God for them;
then it will be no hard thing for you to wish a Blessing on the Author of them.

Nor shall your Generosity stop here. It is a part of the gracious Yoke which
our Savior has laid upon us; Math. 5.44. Do good unto them that hate you. I
think you should watch the next opportunity after an Injury, and particularly
after an injurious Defamation, to do some kindness unto the Person that has
Injured you; Do something wherein he may be the better for you. It was an
ancient Maxim Disce diligere Inimicum, sivis cavere Inimicum. Sir, Love your
Enemies, and you will bravely arm your self against your enemies. Never decline
any Justice or Service, which may lie in your way to do for such a Person,
because he has Defamed you; but let his ill-doings provoke you to Love and good
Works; provoke you to invent some way of being useful to him, which else you
had never thought upon. Your Discretion may so manage the Circumstances of your
Action, that the Man shall not be hardened in Sin by what you do. It may be so
managed, that you may find the sweet accomplishment of that Word, Romans 12.20.
If thine Enemy hunger, feed him; if be thirst give him Drink: For in so doing
thou shall heap Coals of Fire on his head. That is to say; thou shall melt him;
effectually and thoroughly melt him. The Expression may seem to carry some
Damage in it, but the Allusion has not been commonly understood; it alludes
unto them who are concerned with the melting of Metals; the Metals which will
not be melted by Fire put under them, are melted when Coals of Fire are beaped
upon them; are laid over the Crucible. It may be by such a good Conduct of
yours, you may overcome Evil with Good. You may bring your Adversaries to such
a Renorse, that they shall bear this glorious Testimony for you; He is a good
Man. Whether this be done or no, it is most certain you will, by such a Conduct
exceedingly glorisy God: Your concern for such a Conduct, will exceedingly
discover the Love of God flaming in your Soul: The Consolations of that Love
will be wonderful! be wonderful!

I will now observe to you this one thing more. There are none that have so
much occasion to endeavor a good carriage under Desamations, as a faithful
MINISTER of the Gospel. Upon that Clause in the Fifth Petition of the Lord's
Prayer, Forgive us, as we Forgive; says Luther, Mirabilis esthaec additio! The
like Appendix might have been added unto the other Petitions; as before this,
Give us this Day our daily Bread, as we dispense daily Bread unto those who are
about us; and after this, Lead us not into Temptation, as we are loath to lead
others into Temptation. Indeed we should look upon our selves as being so
obliged. But then our Savior intimates unto us; that on our Charity and
Forgiveness toward our Neighbor, will depend all the other good Operations
which are thus to be pursued. It is a World full of such Offenses, that except
we can forgive, we shall do very little good unto our Neighbors. But it is a
Remark, as I remember, of a French Writer, that in this Platform of Prayer, the
condition of a Minister is peculiarly accommodated. I will not go through all the
Particulars; it is enough to Note, The ungodly part of Mankind will multiply
Injuries upon every Faithful Minister. His fulfillment of his Ministry, will
expose him to the Envy and Malice of many People, and a Thousand Injuries. For
such in a peculiar manner, is this Petition calculated; Forgive us our Debts,
as we forgive our Debtors.

It was the happy Rule of a Minister which I have somewhere found recited in
these Terms.

It is a Rule with me, rather to suffer and bury in silence, any manner of
Injuries and Abuses from absurd People in the Flock, than to manage any
Contention with them, on any Occasion. Let the Matter or Issue be what it will,
I shall generally gain more in regard of the Great Interest, by Remitting of my
Right, than by pursuing of it.

A Minister, above all other Men, should soar to Heaven, live in Heaven, keep
near Heaven; and if he will do so, I tell you, what will be his Experience.

The Incomparable Newton has demonstrated, That the weight of Bodies, or the
force of their descent toward the Center, decreases, as their distance from
the Center increases. A Ton weight on the surface of the Earth raised
Heaven-wards unto the height of one semi-diameter of the Earth, from hence,
would weigh but one Quarter of a Ton. At three semi-diameters from the surface
of the Earth, it would be as easy for a Man to carry a Ton, as here to carry
little more than an Hundred Pounds. I know, the further you fly toward Heaven,
the more (if I may use the Faulconers Word) you must Lesson. There is great
Reason why it should be so! Desamations will be some of the things by which you
must be lessened. It Is true, Defamations are heavy Things, they are hard to
carry; it is hard to carry well under them; some of them are a Ton weight. But
my Friend, If you were as near Heaven as you ought to be, you would make light
of them; you would bear them wonderfully.

III. It may be some relief of your Disquietments under your Defamations, to
consider what Company you have in your Affliction; to consider, how defamed and
ill spoken of, the best of Men in the World have been before you. What you
undergo has much Temptation in it; But Sir, no Temptation except what is common
to the best of Men. This comfort for the miserable, seems to be recommended as
no miserable comfort by our Savior; Math. 5.11, 12. Blessed are you when Men
shall Revile you, and Persecute you, and shall say all manner of Evil against
you falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for so persecuted they
the Prophets which were before you. Well known is the Story of that Knight, who
going to his Martyrdom, and seeing himself, because of his Quality, excused
from the Chain worn by the other Martyrs, he cried out, I Pray let me be a
Knight of that Order; and asked that he might wear a Chain as well as they!
There never was an useful Servant of God in the World without so many
Defamations; that if you should be wholly without them, and all Men should
speak well of you, you might well question, whether you are a Saint of their
Order or no. The Enmity fixed at the beginning between the two Seeds, has ever
since been operating in Defamations: The Third Chapter of Genesis has predicted
them; for all that will renounce and oppose the Kingdom of Satan in the World;
and such is the Influence of Satan, on the Tongues of his Children, that he
continually procures the Prediction to be accomplished. Moses, the Writer of
this, was a famous Instance of it; Moses, the greatest Man, [Let the Insolent
Critic of Amsterdam say what he will!] that ever shone in the World for four
Thousand Years together; An Angel in Flesh. How often did his own People Defame
him in their Murmurings: The People that were under more Obligations unto Him,
than unto any Man under Heaven! So impertinent, as to make a Story, that there
was an Arabian Woman, unto whom he had hearkened more than he should have done.
The Pagans did their part also in (...) of him. He had once a Leprosy on his
Hand most miraculously, most honorably circumstanced; the Ancient Historians
hereupon spread a Story, that he was a Leper, and for this cause driven with
his People out of Egypt. Yea, which is unaccountable: The Accounts which the
wicked Jews themselves, in their Talmuds, give both of Moses and of David,
would render them the most scandalous Men that ever were in the World.

The Time would fail me, to mention all the holy Prophets, who have joined in
the Complaint made by one of them; Jer. 20.10. I heard the Desaming of many.
They have been Defamed as the Troublers of Israel, when they were the Chariots
of Israel. They were Deserted and Defamed, until they have retired unto the
funiper-Tree.

Under the New Testament; the matter has not been mended; the old Enmity has
been carried on in the old way, which wicked Men have Trodden. The Apostles of
our Savior, could appeal to all that knew them; Ye are Witnesses, how Holily,
how Righteously, how Unblameably we have behaved our selves. But then, those
Men of God were called unto this mavelous Proof of their being so. 2 Cor.
5.4, 8. Approving our selves as the Ministers of God, in much Patience, by
Dishonor -- by Evil Report. Above all, thou must not be forgotten, O Paul, who
did labor, (and in this way, suffer) more abundantly then they all. Nor thy
Thorn in the Flesh, -- the strange Aversion which the Christianized Jews had
unto him, on the score of his labor among the Gentiles: A Reproachful Aversion
which could not be removed. The Gracious God, though besought thrice by his
Prayerful and Faithful Servant, yet would not remove this Buffeting
Encumbrance, but have him content with the Favor which he had in other things
bestowed upon him. In the early Times, the Primitive Christians, how defamed
were they? Such vile Accusations were brought unto the Imperial Throne against
them, that some of the best Emperors looked on them as the worst of People; a
Trajan himself became their Persecutor. The Church was long with Child, and in
Travel, (full Two Hundred and Eighty Eight prophetical Days;) before the
Revolution, when the Accuser of the Brethren, could be no more heard against
her; yea, and after that Constantinian Revolution, it was astonishing to see,
how professed Christians, but shamefully divided ones, persecuted one another
with Defamations: Especially the Arians against the Orthodox. The one Example
of Athanasius may be enough; you may learn all from what was done to that one.
Church History reports, that Caedes, Adulteria, Furta, quicquid atrox confingi
poterat, sancto viro objiciebantur. They accused him for Beating some other
Ministers, and offering them horrid Outrages; and for Spoiling and Robbing of
Churches. The Arians Compelled him to do some necessary Things for his own
Defense, and then those unreasonable Men, complained of him for doing those
Things. They accused him for Murdering a Man, and cutting off one of his Hands
to serve certain magical Purposes: though the Man anon appeared alive, safe and
sound, unto the confusion of the Accusers. They accused him of a Criminal
Conversation with Women; though the Accusers were anon confounded by their
Confessions which the Wretches made, that they never saw any thing amiss by
him, Sometimes their Accusations prevailed so far as to compel his retirement
out of the Town. The chief Rulers were violently set against him. The corrupt
Clergy hated him, and would have had him utterly Deposed. The Glorious CHRIST,
whose Cause he Espoused, strangely Supported him, and Preserved him; Once by
singing of Psalms, he so charmed the Soldiers who came to sieze him, they could
not meddle with him. He had many Triumphs over his Adversaries: He often saw
them reduced unto such Confusion that they were afraid, they were ashamed of
owning themselves to be his Adversaries. At last, he dyed peaceably and
honorably in his own City, after he had been a Bishop for six and Forty Years.
I will trouble Antiquity to spare us one Example more, from the many which it
might afford unto us. Narcissus the serviceable and admirable Minister of
Jesusalem; a Man of such a shining sanctity, the sore Eyes of envious Men were
offended at the brightness of it. Three of them accused him of Unchastity, and
swore to it with dreadful Imprecations; one wished that he might be burnt if he
had not spoke the Truth; the second wished, that he might Rot alive; the third
wished, that he might lose his Eye sight. Very few believed the Accusation; yet
this humble and modest Servant of God withdrew upon it. But the Vengeance of
God soon followed the Accusers; the House of the first unaccountably took Fire,
and he with all his Family were burnt to Ashes; the second fell into a disease,
in which he did Rot and Die; the third saw this and was terrified, and owned
the wicked Combinations, and with the very Tears of his Repentance he wept his
Eyes out. Narcissus then returned and became a brighter Saint then ever he had
been in his Life before. I mention this, because the Authors of Defamations
ought to be afraid of the Judgments wherewith God may vindicate his wronged
Children, who bear patiently all the Wrongs that are done unto them, and commit
themselves to him that Judges Righteously.

Indeed, those great Men, who illuminated the Primitive Churches, met with
strange Absurdities in the dealings of their Adversaries with them. Their
Adversaries let them see, how ready they were to catch at any thing that might
look defamatory upon them. Jerome for Instance, had written some very applauding
things concerning Origin; yet afterward he wrote other things greatly
condemning of him. Ruffin for this, raised an horrid Clamor against Jerem, as
being a Man of no Truth in him; yea, Austin himself censured Jerome for Levity
and Inconstancy. It was a mistake in them; Jerome defended himself with this
fair Apology: I commend the Man for his Accomplishments; But I always disliked
his Principles. I highly valued his Abilities; but I did not thereby tie my
self up from disliking what is to be found amiss in him. A Man may be
Reproached as Inconstant when he observes the Rule of the truest Constancy.
It Is the object, and not he that Changes.

Let us come down to the Time of the Reformation, we shall not find this way of
wickedness then reformed. Good Men were still defamed wonderfully. What hideous
Defamations of the most excellent Men in the World, are the Writings of such
Men as Tympius, and Cochleus, and Genebrard stuffed withal? To such a degree of
Defaming did the sottish Malice and Madness of their Adversaries carry them,
that they printed Stories about the tragical Deaths of these Excellent Men,
while the Men were yet living: But forced, it seems, by writing and printing of
Answers, to prove that they were indeed Alive.

None suffered more this way then the famous Luther, whereupon our Whitaker
made that Remark; Pelix ille, quem Dominus eo honor dignatus est, ut Homines
nequissimos suos haberet Inimicos. There is a sort of wicked Men whom it will
be your happiness to have your Enemies; you are honored if you may enjoy their
Enmity. What smutty Stories did they invent and foment concerning the admirable
Beza? I will not mention the rest of the notoriously defamed Hero's; but only
the Great, the Sweet, the dear Calvin must not be left unmentioned. France
never saw a better Man; and yet how odious the Name of Calvin? The Witlings of
the time (a knot of them at Bruxells particularly) laid their Wits together to
write Athestical Pamphlets of Modest Inquiries upon him. The Title was,
Calvino-mastix. They made their Satyrs as pugnent as they could; they
indroduced the enraged Prince of the Bottomless Pit, as threatening to Plague
the World with the most pestilential Monster he could procure for the
punishment of Mankind. This cursed Monster must be Calvin! They charged him as
being guilty of the Villainies and Forgeries which produced (as they said) his
being burnt on the Shoulder for a Rogue. They Stigmatized him for one that in
treating certain possessed People, had scandalously misbehav'd himself. When he
was dead, what a hideous Character did Bolsecus publish of him, which passes
among the Adversaries of the reformed Religion, for a true History of the Life
and Death of Mr. Calvin? It accuses him, as being a Drunkard, an Epicure, a
Whore-master, the worst of Men; That he pretended unto certain Supernatural
Powers of Heaven; but was detected in his deceit: That he dyed eaten up with
Lice (the Word Phthisis they extended into Phthiriasis) blaspheming of God,
invoking of Devils, detesting his Work of Reformation, and cursing the Day that
ever he put Pen to Paper. Yea, and in the English Nation it self, how odious
the Name of Calvin? Though the true Friends of the Reformation have generally
concurred with Dr. Hoyl, when he said: That great Instrument of Gods Glory, John
Calvin, was a Man of whom I had almost said, as once it was of Moses, That
there arose not a Prophet since like him in Israel, nor since the Apostles Days
was before him. His Works the World may admire how they could be so many, being
so good, and so good being so many; Yet you will find a venomous Dr. Heylin, (a
Son of the Church, who usually discovered a Soul as Black as the Ink he wrote
withal;) dress him up in Sambenito's; and at the best make but a Reverend
Scribler of him.

I am very much mistaken, if the most Reformed Country in the World have no
Sons of Bolseus in it. I will no longer believe some Defamations which I see
published in some of the most received English Histories. No, nor some that
have been rashly taken up from Tory Reporters, and Published in the life of our
Baxter himself, concerning such Persons as our Goodwin, and our Owen; Servants
of God, as unworthy to be exposed for taking wrong Steps as the Historian. And
that holy Man, the Historian whom I now mention, might remember that he was
himself accused of a criminal Familiary with a lewd Woman, yea, and with
killing a Man in cold Blood; though he was really a Man of as much Grace and
Worth as most that ever the Nation had. I will tell you why I will not readily
believe such Stories. I have known ill Men to spread Stories (like themselves)
of certain Cheats and Frauds as used by some Servants of God in Religious
Matters; when I have certainly known that the Stories have been Lies, and vile
Fictions of ill-minded Men: And, I can cheerfully say, The Great God knows the
Truth of this Declaration; Yea, I have seen the Remarkable Judgments of God on
the Authors of them. But such Men as Goodwin and Owen had done so much to pull
down the Kingdom of the Devil in the World, that the Devil must, by
Defamations, take an exemplary revenge upon them. And some Good Men were so ill
affected unto their most valuable Brethren, as to let themselves be therewith
imposed on. And I will take leave to transcribe a Passage from the excellent
Owen on this occasion. A Man may have the Blessing of God and the Curse of a
professing People at the same time. Man's Condemnation, and God's Absolution do
not seldom meet upon the same Persons, for the same things. If you do the Will
of the Lord, pray think it not strange, if among Men, Curses be your Reward,
and Detestation your Wages. I mention this Observation by the by, because you
may live to have occasion for it.

The Glorious God has in this way, exercised his most faithful Servants. It has
been to humble them, and prove them, and do them good in the latter end: Of
such Defamations I may say as Jerome concerning other Calamities: They are
Monitors put upon us, to Humble us, in similituainem Triumphantium, as when the
Conquerors of old rode in Triumph, there was a Person placed behind them in the
Triumphal Chariot, who as often as the Citizens made their Acclamations,
whispered them in the Ear with an, Hominem te esse memento; Remember, Sir, you
are but a Man. When the Servants of God have Triumphed with continual
serviceableness, the Way of Heaven has been to clap Detracters upon them, from
whom in the midst of the Acclamations which the obliged Churches of God have
bestowed upon them, they have had the most wholesome Admonitions.

IV. The Conformity to the ever blessed JESUS, whereto His Defamed Servants, do
and may arrive, should be much in their Eye, under their Defamations. Looking
after an Adequate notion of Honor, I finally determined upon this; All true
Honor lies in a Conformity to the admirable JESUS. Wherein a Man is
Conformable to the admirable Savior of the World, so far, and no farther he is
an Honorable Man. Thence I infer, to be Defamed, may be to be Honored: For I
am sure the Savior of Men was extremely Defamed among Men; Despised and
rejected of Men. It was foretold of him that he should be spoken against: And
it was fulfilled unto extremity; there was not a Person in all the Land so
spoken against. Indeed he had some that stood by him, yet they were but some;
We read, Joh. 7.12. Some said, He is a Good Man: Others said, no, but he
deceives the People. In the Visions which the beloved John had of our Savior,
we see, Rev. 1.15. His feet like unto fine Brass, as if they burned in a
Furnace. The Learned Grellot has a curious Thought upon it. Our Savior passed
through a burning Furnace of Afflictions, that so he might come to His Glory.
Grievous Defamations were some of the scorches, that afflicted Him in that
Fiery Furnace, and compelled him to cry out, Psalm. 69.19, 20. Thou have known
my Reproach, and my Shame and my Dishonor: Mine Adversaries are all before
thee; Reproach has broken my Heart. He took a Friendly notice of some that had
not the best of Reputation; but with no other intention than the charitable one
of a Physician, intending to recover his Patients. For this he was Defamed, as
a Familiar Friend of Wicked People. He Compassionately provided a large
quantity of Wine for the Neighbors at a Wedding-Feast: For this he was
Defamed, as a Wine-Bibber. He did wonderful things to deliver poor People from
the Hands and Hurts of Evil Spirits: He was requited with being Defamed as one
that carried on an unlawful Converse with Evil Spirits. No man heard his voice
in the Streets: He fled from all the very Whispers of a Temporal Kingdom; yet
he was Defamed as one that moved Sedition. A Thief was preferred before him. His
own Kindred had those among them, who maltreated Him; and called Him all that
was bad. I find by Travelers, the Jews to this Day make this their great
offense against Him. He went about doing of Good; yet a great part of Mankind
conspired for to treat him as an Evil Doer. Though He could challenge all Men
living to tax him with the least Ill thing, yet He was Numbered with
Transgressors; He was Crucified between Two Robbers: From whence Hierocles,
almost Three Hundred Years after, published and fomented a Tradition, that he
was a Highway-Man, the Head of a desperate Crew of Banditti. Thus a Generation
of Vipers, the most remarkable Set of the Seed of the Serpent that had been in
any Generation, stung the Holy, Harmless, Undefiled JESUS! O Disciple; How, how
can thou propose any other sort of treatment, than what thy Glorious Lord met
withal?

There never can be better Advice given to a Defamed Christian than that, Heb.
12.2, 3. Look unto JESUS, who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right Hand of the Throne of
God; consider him that endured such contradiction of Sinners against himself,
least ye be wearied and faint in your Minds. Accordingly in the Defamations
that you suffer, you may very allowably examine, What conformity to the
Sufferings of the Lord JESUS CHRIST may be discovered. Indeed we must with all
the Contrition and Confusion imaginable, make the Acknowledgment of the
penitent Sinner, who was Crucified with our Savior; We suffer justly: We
receive the due Reward of our Deeds. Our Lord never did any thing amiss. But
this does not forbid us poor Sinners, to consider what there was in the Sorrows
of our Savior, to which any thing in our Sorrows may be conformable. It is an
observable Passage, in Col. 1.24. I rejoice in my sufferings, and fill up the
signatures of the Afflictions of Christ. The Greek word used there properly
signifies the hollow Marks and Strokes of the Seal, which are filled up with
Wax. In your Defamations you may without Immodesty, (but Oh! do it with a very
trembling Modesty!) observe perhaps, the Signatures which may as the Wax under
the Seal, answer something that befell CHRIST in his Afflictions. A brave Man
once undergoing very batharous Indignities as well as the loss or his Life on
the Scaffold, cheerfully said upon it; What a deal of do here is, to make a
poor Sinner like his Blessed Savior? I make the more bold with this Matter,
because Antiquity has told me, Contumelia sunt Christi insignia. This may be
the glory of Defamations and Indignities. If you find yours to have any of this
glory in them, Oh! count it a glory, and rejoice in it, with Joy unspeakable
and full of Glory.

The great thing that remains, is your Imitation of a Glorious CHRIST under all
the provoking Defamations that are heaped upon you. Of him you read, 1 Pet.
2.21, 23. He has left us an Example that ye should follow his steps; who when
he was reviled, reviled not again; when be suffered, he threatened not, but
committed himself to him-that judges righteously.

Are you in the Hands of the Shearers? Oh! that you could imitate that Lamb of
God! His incomparable Meekness, and Patience, and Silence! His readiness to
Forgive his most unreasonable Adversaries! When all manner of Evil was not only
spoke of him, but also done to him, he expressed no undue Resentments; he did
not let fall one outrageous or intemperate Word; he silently concocted the
Wrongs that were done unto him; he left to his Eternal Father, the Way and the
Time of his just Vindication; He prayed for his Persecutors; His obliging
Prayer for them was, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.

If you follow the steps of your suffering Savior, I will set before you the
Consolations of God, which Oh! how can they be small unto you? There will
infallibly belong to you those Great Consolations of God: 2 Timothy 2.12. If we
suffer we shall also Reign with him. The Scars which your Defamations and other
Calamities leave upon you, will be the Marks of the Lord Jesus born upon you:
The Marks, which as often as you look upon, you may with a Triumphant Faith
conclude; My Glorious LORD intends a part in the Glories of his heavenly
Kingdom for me! My Friend, You will find the Joy of such Considerations to be
inexpressible.

It Is a Blessed thing to suffer like your Glorious LORD; but then if you suffer
for him, or if the Cause of the malignity, which disposes ill Men readily to
utter or to receive Defamations against you, be your known serviceableness to
his Interests, and Churches, this is a vast addition to your Blessedness. Your
Christ-like behavior under the Sufferings, will consummate the Tokens of a
great Reward in Heaven reserved for you, and of your being one Day with him to
behold his Glory.

Here, Sir, is the consummating Point of your Conformity to your Savior.
First, You must be full of CHRIST: always thinking of him, acting for him;
watching all occasions decently to make mention of his Glories; daily pleading
of his Sacrifice, flying to his Righteousness; resigning to the Possession of
his holy Spirit; admiring, studying, following, of his holy Pattern;
perpetually rendering some Acknowledgments to him by your self, and bespeaking
Acknowledgments of him from others; this must be the very business of Your
Life! Then, you must be as CHRIST was, full of Benevolence and Beneficence to
Mankind; ever filled with Compassions toward the Miserable; ever doing to them
all the Kindnesses imaginable: Particularly contributing to the Reconciliation
of such as are at Variance; and seeking out poor and mean People, and with
delight stooping to any kind Offices for them; and all this upon his account;
continually contriving, how to be serviceable unto all that are about you;
relishing of no Pleasure comparable to that of doing any Service whereof you
may be capable; thankful to any one that will but show you an Opportunity how
to do Good, and not needing any Arguments and Perswasives to lay hold upon it:
Having imprinted on your Mind a deep apprehension of your being but a Steward
of all your Possessions in this World; and in a discreet and faithful
Stewardship, dispensing all to just such uses as your Great Redeemer has
prescribed for all.

When you have gained these two Points, you may be Tempted now to think, It Is
well; it is all! No, my Friend; it is not well, it is all spoilt, if there be
not a Third super-added. It is this; If you thus glorify CHRIST, you must be
greatly exposed unto the Envy and Hatred of a Malignant World; you must look to
be as he was Despised and Rejected of Men. Satan Operating on the Minds of Men,
will procure you a vast Encumbrance of Prejudice from the World. Men will have
a strange Aversion for you: Yea, many that pass for Good Men will have so; and
yet not be able to give any good Reason for their Aversion. Well, you must
cheerfully undergo all the Neglect, all the Contempt, all the Obloquies that
shall be cast upon you. Your Love to a Glorious CHRIST, and your Hope of being
loved by Him, and like to him, is to carry you cheerfully through it all; yea,
though you should be hated as the Offscouring of all things. You must be willing
that the Providence of God, and the Disesteem of Man, should make a very
Nothing of you; and this not only from a Mind really, convinced that you are
Nothing, but also from the mavelous Exinanition of your glorious Christ, when
he came into the World. Now, it is Finished!

This is the Point of Conformity to your Blessed Savior which I mightily press
upon you; a Spirit Reconciled unto Humiliations; a Spirit that will not only
submit to, but even delight in Humiliations; a Spirit not averse to Diminutions.

And among the precious Discoveries of such a Spirit there is especially one,
which you shall allow me to insist upon.

You know, that the beloved Apostle mentions Pride as the last part of the Old
Man which dies within us. It Is the Pride of Life; it Lives to the end of our
Life; till we our selves do die. I have been inquisitive, What is the last
Essay of Pride? It is doubtless, for an humble Man to be willing to be thought
humble; or, to be impatient, when Pride is charged upon him. This then is the
Thing which I demand of you. Be always really, heartily, inwardly loathing your
self; really esteem others Wiser and Better than your self; really shun
Honors, be averse to them, afraid of them; never be uneasy at being
over-looked by other Men; or if there be Three Hundred in Sparta Preferred
before you. The very first Motions of a Design to make your self a Name,
suppress them immediately. After all this, be not angry if you are still called
a proud Man. It is the easiest thing imaginable for disaffected People to find
something or other by which they will imagine to justify their passing such a
Censure upon you. But now let not such a Censure produce the least impatience
in you. I was not well satisfied with a very Good and Great Man, the Martyr
Cyprian, for this thing; he had his Adversaries, whose principal Clamor
against him was, that he was a Proud Man; he wanted Humility: Now the only
Symptom of it that I know of was, that he took the pains to write a Letter, in
his own Vindication against that foolish Calumny. His best Vindication, and the
best Confutation of the Calumny, in my poor Opinion, would have been to have
born it patiently, and have said nothing at all.

I will mention to you one Circumstance of Conformity to your Blessed Savior,
which if it should occur in your Experience, I would not have you wonder at it.
Our Savior having had Heaven opened, with astonishing Testimonies of the
Divine Favor to Him, at his Transfiguration in the Mount, he presently met
with what was grievous to him; an horrid Spectacle of one possessed with a
Devil, and something in the carriage of his own Disciples, which administered
Grief unto him. In Conformity to this, it has been the Observation made by some
Servants of God, That just after they have been admitted unto a more than
ordinary Familiarity with Heaven, the Evil Spirit presently entertains them
with some vexatious Object; something that proves very Troublesome and Abasing
unto them; and most probably some Obloquy raised by the Devil against them! It
may be, you have (especially on the whole Days which you have set apart for the
Religion of the Closet) had an admission into Heaven, yea, into the most Holy
Place of Heaven, by a lively Faith beholding JESUS in the Holy of Holies
concerned for you; you have been swallowed up with Raptures of Assurance, of
what the Glorious One has done and will do for you. It has been with you a time
of astonishing Irradiations from the Heavenly World! Now let it not surprise
you, if you immediately have to do with People that have the Evil Spirit in
them. Oh! It Is an un-known Power that the Devil has over the Minds and the
Tongues of Defamatory People! Nor let it be a surprise to you, if some from
whom you might expect better things, be now left unto something that may grieve
you wonderfully. Rejoice, again I say, rejoice, in this Conformity to your
Savior. Paul; If thou have been in Heaven, expect a Messenger of Satan, (some
Zedekiah) immediately to Buffet thee.

V. Let not your Defamations be the Discouragements of your Usefulness; by no
means be discouraged from well-doing by being ill spoken of.

Doubtless, one Design of Satan (the Prince of Defamers) in raising a storm of
Defamations on you, is to overset your Disposition for the Service of God. But,
Oh do not gratify him! So, when the Prophet heard the defaming of many, he fell
into that unhappy Pang, Jer. 20.9. Then I said, I will not make mention of him,
nor speak any more in his Name. I hope, Sir, you will be better advised. If you
had not been a Fruitful Tree, it may be, there had not been so many Stones and
Sticks thrown at you. Now, my Friend, Bear not the fewer Good Fruits, because
of what you have thus met withal. What a Triumph was that? Romans 8.37, 39. We
are more than Conquerors, -- DEPTH -- shall not be able to separate us from the
Love of God. Though you are brought into a Depth of Disgrace, and laid low by
Defamation, yet, Oh! Love God, as much as ever, and Love the Service of God
with a Flame that shall never be Extinguished. Let no Defamations retund or
flatten your brave Resolutions, to do all the good that ever you can. Ignatius
of old, said unto Polycary; (...), Stand steady like a beaten Anvil. Give me
leave to address you with the like Advice. Bear all the Blows that are given
you: And after all, Be what you were before; Be as firm in your Intentions and
Endeavors to do Good as you were before. Yea, Be much better than you were
before; let nothing issue from you but bright Strictures of Piety and Patience,
and sparkling Devotion and Usefulness. The Great God is by the Defamations
which you are smitten withal, making a Trial of your Sincerity and Fidelity; He
is trying whether you will serve Him upon purer Principles than the Praise of
Men. Oh! that you may be able to say, When I am Tried, I shall come forth as
Gold! It is a wonderful Speech of Plato, For the Trial of true Virtue, it is
necessary that a Good Man, [cum nihil injuste agat, famam sustineat maximae
Injustitiae] should be Defamed as an Evil Doer, when he does all things well,
justly and fairly; and that be should hold on immovable under such
Discouragements.

I will mention to you, Two very observable Experiments; things which I have
often observed in the Course of my Pilgrimage.

First, It is a Passage which the Famous Baxter has in his Christian Directory:
If you be famous for any Grace or Good Works, expect to be Defamed for the
quite contrary; I have known some that have given away almost all they had to
the Poor, and hardly kept Necessaries for themselves; yet these Persons have
been accused of Covetousness, Unkindness, Hard Dealing. It Is most certainly so.
Insani sapiens Nomen feret, AEquus Iniqui. If you decline a Thousand
Opportunities to make your self a Name, and very patiently bear, and almost
seek to be overlooked, yet you shall be called, The proudest of Men. I you are
always devising Liberal Things, and ever scorn little Things, yet you shall be
Reproached as, a Man looking always for Gain If you contrive all the Methods
imaginable not only to be Good, Loving, Tender in your several Relations, yet
you shall be treated as a very unkind Person, and perhaps most unkindly by them
that have the least Reason for it. Methought, I have often seen some
resemblance of this Matter in a thing which I have seen befalling a Minister,
when in the way of his Pastoral Duty, he visited Persons possessed with Evil
Spirits; the Persons, though they knew every one else in the Room, yet through the
unaccountable Operation of the Evil-Spirits on their Eyes, the Minister who was
most likely to do them Good, still appeared so dirty, so ugly, so disguised
unto them, they could have no knowledge of him. So misrepresented shall Good
Men often be to the Minds of People, when Evil Spirits are working on the
unperswadable Children. Sir, If ever you find it so, remember that God is now
Trying of you, whether you will grow in that Grace; hold on in that Good Work;
for which you have hitherto had so small Encouragements, in the Representations
of the Neighborhood.

Secondly, It Is a Passage which I have somewhere else met withal, Though I have
done good Offices for all Men whatsoever, as they have come in my way, yet a
great part of them, whom I have distinguished by doing of something peculiar
for them, have afterward treated me most ungratefully, and abominably; have
proved Prodigies of Ingratitude. Indeed, it is no rare thing, for Great
Services, to be worse rewarded than Great Injuries; They that were lately your
Dependents, will be shortly your Defamers. It is a Maxim of Seneca unmasked;
Men bear a secret Hatred unto those who have most obliged them. Make your self
a Scaffold for another to rise by; when he is up, he will kick you down if he
can. The Prophecy is fulfilled in Private as well as Public Instances; Men
shall be unthankful. The French Protestants must for this very cause be
destroyed by their Tyrant, because they brought him to the Throne, and made him
able to Destroy them. Sir, If you meet with such usage too, let it not at all
dishearten you from doing unto Eight, those good Offices which you have done
already to Seven: But learn to do Good for its own sake; do it, hoping for
nothing again.

O Blessed Improvement of Defamations! My Friend, Make it, and the issue will
be Glorious. Your Experience will be that, Genesis 49.23, 24. The Archers have
sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him, but his Bow abode in
strength. You know not what good Arrows of Service may yet be sent from you
among the People of God; perhaps the more for the Mischiefs which the Archers
have attempted upon you. Don't sit down, and sink down under Discouragements,
as if your Opportunities to do Good would be utterly lost by the malice of your
Defamers, with a Tempest of Defamations; don't say, I shall one Day perish by
their Hands, on Tongues, or Pens. But say, O my Soul, Hope in God, for I shall
yet praise him! God will wonderfully rescue your Opportunities; they are not at
the Disposal of your malicious Enemies. And you know not what may happen to
hamstring those Enemies, or to muzzel the Lions that you are thrown among. It Is
very possible they that are now your Enemies may come to befriend you
wonderfully, and your Defamers may prove the very Instruments of your Good;
yea, of your doing more Good, and of that by which your Fame will be but
advantaged and propagated. I have heard a Servant of God make this Observation,
That he has been Dafamed and Abused by some, and he has out of Obedience to
CHRIST, forborne to take notice of it: CHRIST has afterward put it into the
Hearts of those very Men signally to assist him in his most valued
Serviceableness. Yea, If you duly humble your self under the mighty Hand of
God, and Rage of Man, it would be no new thing, if anon you find the
Accomplishment of that Promise, Zeph. 3.19. I will get you Praise and Fame in
every Place where they have been put to shame. Or, while these Envious Men are
wishing and striving, that you may come to nothing, they may do so themselves.
Non ego sic cecidi, quamvis abjectus! It may be, they will become so
contemptible and so miserable, that you shall have them Objects, not so much of
your Indignation, as of your Commiseration. Their Esteem shall be very little,
and the Divine Providence will order it, that they shall be the less Esteemed
for their disaffection unto you. It may be, God will give you that room in the
Hearts of his People, and such a Testimony in their Consciences and Sentiments,
that Malignity toward you shall be reckoned a Mark of an Ill Man by very many
of them. The Intoxicated Creatures find, that they have in Truth only done the
part of a Viper in the Fable. Their own Viperous Tongues bleed by licking of
the File; but the Servant of God is found Invulnerable. As you know, the
Scripture gives it as a good mark, to be a Lover of Good Men; so when the Poet
would Paint out his Thersites as a very sorry Wretch, this is the finishing
stroke of his wretchedness; He (...) an Adversary to the brave Ulysses. Yea, It
is possible God may punish them, with reducing them to low and sad
Circumstances, wherein they may need some of your assistances: They must fly
for help to the very Man, whom they have Abused.; and, Sir, I assure my self
that you will readily and heartily help them, and utterly forget all their
Abuses, as if they had never been offered. The Governor Eutropius did but
affront Chrysostom for his faithful Rebukes of his Briberies and Oppressions;
anon the Emperor strips Eutropius of his Offices, and he is like to fall a
Sacrifice unto his Enemies. Eutropius the flies to Chrysostom for Defense; and
Chrysostom is the Man who most now defends him from his Enemies. Yea, it is
possible that God may bring the fate of a Pashur upon him that smites the
Servants of God; and the smitten Saint must be the Man, whom the dying and
woeful Sinner then begs to Pray for him; which you may be sure he cannot but do
with all the Charity imaginable. Some that have been more than ordinarily
virulent, and violent, in uttering their Calumnies against Good Men, have
hastened upon themselves that which is incurred by them who will not keep their
Tongues from Evil, but that which I know you would be very loath to see come
upon the worst of your Calumniators. It was a strange provision among the old
Roman Laws, of the XII Tables, Si quis carmen occentassit, qnod alteri
flagitium parit, Capitale esto. The plain English of that old Latin is, That it
was a Capital Thing to Publish a Reproach which procured Infamy to another Man.
Our old Arnobius, having occasion to twit the defamatory Pagans with it, I find
citing it with this Explanation; Carmen malum conscribere, quo Fama alterius
Coinquinetur.

The awful Hand of Heaven oftener executes that strange Punishment than Men are
well aware of. Vavasor Powel's Maxim was a very true one, The less a Good Man
strives for himself, the more will the Great God strive for him. Unjust
Enemies, who are false Witnesses, breathing out Cruelty, being with much
Moderation and Resignation of Mind, put over into the Hands of the Living God,
find it at last a fearful thing to fall into those Hands; there are Arrows on
the bent Bow of Providence ordained against the Persecutors, (whose Teeth are
Arrows, and their Tongue a sharp Sword;) None knows how soon the Holy God may
let them fly; especially if their Persecutors carry on their Malignity with
such unwearied and impetuous molestation, that while they live, a diligent
Servant of God can proceed little further in doing of Good in the World. At the
same time, you don't know what God may do for you. Moses had not been so
magnified by God, if Aaron and Miriam had not abused him, and abased him.
Something may fall out that shall more Signalize you, and magnify you among the
People of God, than any thing that has ever yet befallen you.

GOD is to be adored in such things; but though I make the briefest Mention of
them that is possible, I would not have mentioned them at all, if the things
had not been of so frequent occurrence, as to be worth your Observation; and at
the same time, I know you will desire concerning most of them, that they may
not Occur in your own Experience. You had rather see God Saving of your
Personal Enemies, then for your sake smiting of them; and, If you saw the
uplifted Hand of God ready to discharge Thunderbolts upon them, you would beg
for them, Lord, spare them, spare them.

I will rather Conclude with this Advice.

PRAYER, PRAYER, which has heretofore doubtless been the Breath of your Life,
ought now more than ever to be so. The best Resolution that you can take up, is
that of the Psalmist; The Mouth of the Wicked, and the Mouth of the Deceitful
are opened against me; they have Spoken against me with a Lying Tongue; but I
give my self unto Prayer. If the Storm of Obloquy upon you be more than
ordinary, it looks as if the Lord called you unto something more of Retirement;
Sitting alone for a while, and keeping Silence, and putting your Mouth in the
Dust; while you give your Cheek to him that Smites you, and you are filled full
of Reproach. How many Psalms will you in this Retirement, and Religion of the
Closet, find prepared for you, to Direct you, to Support you, to Supply your
Supplications? especially, the Third, the Thirteenth, the Seventeenth, the
Twenty-Seventh, the Thirty-First, the Thirty-Eighth, the Forty-First, the Fifty
Fourth, the Fifty-Sixth, the Eighty-Sixth, the Ninety-First, the Hundred and
Ninth, the Hundred and Thirty Eighth, the Hundred and Forty Second, the Hundred
and Forty Third. The worst of Dragons have been Charmed by such Psalms as
these. My Friend, The Footsteps of God, even when he is treading on you, will
drop Fatness into your Soul; if you are brought unto such Employments, and
being made thus Fruitful (though in a Low Valley) you may shout and also sing for
Joy. Even when thrown into a Dung-Cart, you may be (as the Martyr in that case
Expressed it,) as a sweet Odor unto God; yea, and unto his faithful People
too. Be concerned thus to Glorify the Name of your Holy LORD; and fear not; HE
will take a sufficient Care of your Name. And at the very time when your Name
is trod in the Dirt, among Men on Earth, it will, being written in Heaven, be
precious among the Angels of Heaven, to whom you and your bringing Forth fruit
with Patience, are made a Spectacle, and where a Crown of Glory is ready
waiting for you. Having brought you thither, I cannot break off any where more
agreeably but there, (whither, My Friend, all you present Sufferings are
carrying of you!) There, I leave you.

Postscript.
THUS you have seen the True Way of Shaking off a Viper. When the Viper Coyled
about the Hand of the Servant of Christ, (for Bochart will allow him to do no
more; not consenting to the Christian Fathers and Poets, who will have the
Teeth of the Viper struck into him;) it was, as one wittily says, Non ut
Laederet, sed ut Ornaret; not an Injury, but an Ornament unto him. The Ancients
had indeed a sort of Bracelets, called (...), or, a wrist Serpent, mentioned in
Athenaeus and Hesychius, and others. Our Defamers will adorn (...) than they
annoy us, if we take this Method with them, which we have now agreed upon.

When Paul shook off the Beast into the Fire, some ingenious Men and Arator
among the rest, make it a Type of what befalls our Great Adversary, Satan, the
Old Serpent, cast into Hell, for assaulting the faithful People of God. But Oh!
Let us lift up our Hands, yea, although the Viper has stung them; yea, because,
they have done so: Lift up our Hands to Heaven with fervent Cries to the God of
all Grace, that He would bring all our Humane Defamers, (though we are never so
inhumanely treated by them) Thither, even to Heaven; there to share with us in
the Happiness, to which even they have promoted our Arrival; there again I
leave you.

Psalm. XCI. 13. Thou shall victorious tread on the black Serpent, and the Asp:
the Dragon and the Great Dragon thou shall trample under foot.

Melius responderi non potest Calumniatorum Maledicentiae quam non respondendo.

Melch. Adam. in Vita Bezae. A Speech of the Martyr Vineditirus. Rage and do
the worst, that Malignity can set thee at work to do; Thou shall see the Spirit
of GOD strengthen the Sufferer, more than the Devil can do the Inflicter.

FINIS.

