A Further Testimony Against the Scandalous Proceedings of the New-North Church
in Boston.
AN Ordination or Instalment of a Minister in Boston, in which the Ministers of
the Town could not in Conscience be Concerned; and in which the Churches sent
unto to give them the Right Hand of Fellowship, have some, if not the most of
them refused to send their Messengers; And in which after the Ordination, there
was no Right Hand of Fellowship given, And in which there was no Solemn Charge
given to the Person Ordained or Installed, And in which there was no Express
Ordination-Prayer, is a Nullity and no Ordination, but an heinous Transgression
of the Third Commandment; The like to which was never before known in
New England, no, nor in the Christian World; But has been a Scandal and
Dishonor to New England, and a Reproach to the Church Discipline here, and has
a Tendency to Prejudice Strangers and others, and has been an hurt to all the
Churches. Neighboring Churches have just cause (according as the Platform of
Discipline directs them, Chap. 15.) to admonish, and to renounce Communion with
a Church that has acted so Scandalously, except they Repent.

AND whereas they met with Opposition, it was their Duty to have delayed until
they could have proceeded regularly and with peace.

THEY have offended CHRIST in a refusing the help of a Council, when earnestly
advised to it by all the Ministers of GOD in Boston, which would (by a Divine
Blessing) have prevented that Sin and Confusion which has since followed. Not
only our Platform of Church Discipline, but the Scripture, Nay the Light of
Nature directs to a Council, when there is want either of Light or Peace. I say
then, that their rejecting that Scriptural Remedy has been a very great Scandal.

THIS I who have been an Unworthy Servant of CHRIST in the work of the Gospel
for more than Fifty Eight Years in Boston, and who have been willing to the
utmost of my Capacity to serve these Churches in both Englands, being now Aged,
and expecting every Day to be called out of this World, account it my Duty to
leave this as my Dying Testimony with the Churches in New England.

Increase Mather.

BOSTON: Printed for B. GRAY, and J. EDWARDS, at their Shops on the North and
South side of the Townhouse 1720.


