A Seasonable TESTIMONY To Good Order IN THE CHURCHES Of the Faithful.
Particularly Declaring the Usefulness and Necessity of COUNCILS in Order to
Preserving Peace and Truth in the Churches.

By INCREASE MATHER, D. D. With the Concurrence of Other Ministers of the
GOSPEL in Boston.

2 Samuel 20.18. They were wont to speak in old time, saying, They shall surely
ask counsel at Abel: and so they ended the matter. Prove. 13.10. Only by Pride
comes Contention: but with the well advised is wisdom. Pro. 24.6. In the
multitude of counselors there is safety BOSTON, N. E. Printed by B. Green,
for D. Henchman, and Sold at his Shop. 1720.

To the READER.
IT is known to those few in the World, who have any knowledge of so obscure
and inconsiderable a Person as I am, that in my Judgment I am for the
Congregational Church Discipline, as it is in the New England Platform
declared. Which is no Abatement unto my great Esteem and Honor, for our
Brethren of the Presbyterian Peswasion; among whom I know, there have been as
Pious and Learned Persons, not only in England and Scotland, but also in
Holland, France, Geneva, and Switzerland, and elsewhere, as any whom the World
has known. When the Divine Providence ordered my Residing at London for about
Four Years, I did my utmost to promote an UNION between those of the
Presbyterian and Congregational Persuasion; and have received Thanks from the
most Eminent of them, for those my Endeavors, which through the Blessing of GOD,
were not without Success. They have been since known by the Name of, United
Brethren. But I am far from Approving Morellianism, or Brownism, or
Independency, which is disclaimed, not only by our Renowned Hooker, but also in
our Platform of Church Discipline. My declaring for the Decisive Power of
Councils, is not upon a Notion lately Espoused by me; my Learned Tutor Mr.
Norton, from whom I received Principles of Truth in my Youth, not to be
forgotten in Old Age, has Judiciously handled that Question in his Answer to
Apollonius, a Dutch Presbyterian. Dr. Hornbeck, sometimes a famous Professor in
Leyden, gives the preference to that Book, unto any that he had seen Written in
Defense of the Congregational Discipline.

I advance nothing in the following Papers, but what I have asserted many Years
ago; particularly, in, The First Principles of New England, Written Fifty Years
since; And in my, Order of the Gospel, Printed, both in Boston and at London,
Twenty Years since, I handled that Question, Whether there ought not to be an
Agreement, that Matters of Importance, Particularly, the Ordaining, the
Deposing, and the Translating of a Pastor, should be with a common Consent? I
there show, that it was so, in the Next Age to the Apostles, and that Cyprian
assures us, it was so in the Churches of Africa.

It was at the Desire of My Brethren, several Ministers in Boston, that I set
my Name alone to this Testimony; in the Composing and Approving whereof, there
were more hands than mine. I say, My Brethren, and not, My Sons, though I am the
Natural Father to the Eldest of them; and in some Sense a Father to the Two
Next Eldest of them, who were my Academical Children, when Students at the
College Thirty Years ago. I rejoice that I have such Brethren, and that when I
am just going out of the World, I shall Leave Ministers in Boston, who, I
trust, will defend the Churches, when I shall Sleep with my Fathers.

May our Lord JESUS CHRIST walk still in the midst of His Golden Candlesticks,
and hold the Stars in His Right Hand, and cause us to Remember whence we are
fallen, and to do the First Works.

Boston, March 1st, 1720. INCREASE MATHER.

A Seasonable TESTIMONY To Good Order in the CHURCHES of the Faithful.
Given by Several Ministers of the Gospel in BOSTON.
IT appears a Duty incumbent on us, whom the Hand of the Glorious LORD that is
the King of Zion, has Placed as Pastors and Watchmen of Churches in a City set
upon an Hill, to Publish unto the World, and leave with the Churches throughout
the Country, a Testimony, relating to the Order of the Gospel: And Expressing;
(that so they whom we address, may the more suitably Receive the Testimony) the
Sentiments of our Synods, and of such Divines as have been in some Sort
Master Builders among those by whom our Churches have been Edified: whose
Thoughts cannot but Challenge a Great Attention, from those to whom GOD has
made them the Instruments of so much Illumination. The Design of our present
Action being partly to do a Justice unto the Reputation of Churches, the
Managements as well as Ministers whereof should be the Glory of CHRIST, and
partly, to make an offer of what may be of some use, to direct their Steps on
recurring Occasions that may arise of no little Consequence to their
Tranquillity; we may Comfortably Ask and Hope for the Blessing of Heaven upon
it.

I. THE first Case that at this Time calls for our Consideration, is, The
Release of a Pastor from the Solemn Charge of a Congregation, which he has
taken upon him. Upon this there have been once and again Published, some
Determinations, which have been Entertained without Exception in our Churches;
From whence, (without Repeating the Causes of a Removal there allowed of) we
transcribe these words, as Expressive of what we would have ever to be thought
upon. [ Thirty Cases.] A Pastor settled in the Service of a People, is to be so
sensible of his Designation by the Spirit and Providence of the Lord JESUS
CHRIST for that Service, and of the Account that he must give unto GOD about
his Behavior in it, that his Removal must not be rashly attempted, but with
much Consideration, Consultation, Supplication, and Sincere Desire to follow
the Conduct of Heaven in it. The Frowns of GOD use to follow Removes, that have
not so been Regulated. Again That the will of our Lord about the Removal of any
Pastor from his People may be understood, it is requisite, that the Minister do
not entirely Assume to himself, the Judgment of his own Call to Remove, but a
Great Regard must be had unto the Direction of the Churches of our Lord, in the
Neighborhood. Once more. If much of Scandal will certainly ensue upon the
Removal of a Pastor from his People, That should weigh down many Circumstances
that would rather invite it. And, It becomes not any Minister, to Seek his own
Translation, by first offering himself unto it. It is accordingly our
Apprehension, that such a Removal ought still to be attended, at least with Two
Qualifications to Legitimate it, and render it Inoffensive unto the Churches of
GOD.

First. IT is requisite, that the Reasons of the Removal be laid before
Authentic Judges; even such as may be most likely to pass an Impartial
Judgment upon them; and by these be pronounced such, that the Removal thereupon
may be Justly and Wisely proceeded in. And, where it can be obtained, we think,
that nothing less than a Council of Churches in the Neighborhood, should have
the Matter laid before them. For, if such a Council, be according to the Order
and Practice, of these Churches, always Convened, for the Ordaining of a
Pastor, it stands to Reason, that there should as much be requisite for his
Removing; it being, as it was by a very confiderable Number of Eminent Divines
on a Great Occasion in these Churches once pronounced, A very considerable Act
of the Kingly Government Exercised by our Lord JESUS CHRIST, in His Churches.
Accordingly, a General Synod, in the Year 1662. have determined, That the
Translation of a Pastor, is a Point, wherein the Communion of Churches is to be
Exercised; and the chief way of Communion there Propounded, is Expressly that
of Councils. And certainly so Important an Affair will demand such a
Cognizance. Wherefore, If a Minister be upon a Removal from his Flook,
especially when there are no sufficient Causes Evident for it, and the Flock
Earnestly Propound and Request, that the thing may be laid before a Council of
the Neighbour-Churches, but he refuse it, it may be feared, that it is an Hour
of Temptation with him, and that his Way is not Right before the LORD.

Secondly. IT is requisite, that the Reasons be found such as are Consistent
with the Solemn Vow, which a Person who receives the Pastoral Charge of a
Church, makes unto our Glorious LORD, for the saithful Discharge of his
Ministry, and the Labor and Patience of One that must give up an Account unto
Him; and Consistent with the fervent Love, which One that has the Pastoral
Charge of a Church, ought to bear unto his Flock; having them in his Heart, as
the Servant of GOD speaks. To Die and to Live with them. Very Plain are the
Directions of that Word, which they Preach unto others; [Act. XX. 28.] To have
regard unto all the Flock, unto which the Holy Spirit has made them Overseers,
and (...) of GOD, which He has purchsed with His own Blood. And [1 Pet. V. 2.]
To feed the flock of GOD, taking the Oversight thereof, not by Constraint, but
willingly, and with a Ready Mind. And according hereunto, there can be nothing
more suitable for them, then that Language; [1 These II. 8.] Being
affectionately desirous of you, we were (...). Imparted unto you, not the
Gospel (...) ly, but also our own Souls, because ye were dear unto us. And, [2
Cor.XII. 5.] I will very gladly spend, and be spent for you, though the more
abundantly I love you the less I am loved of you. Most certainly, No Views that
are of a mere Carnal Tendency, may operate in such a concern as this, where the
flaming Eyes of an Heart-searching LORD, who walks in the Midst of His
Churches, will with an Holy Displeasure observe them. Nor may the Churches have
Stumbling Blocks laid before them, to tempt them unto Hard or Mean Thoughts of
the Ministry from whence they Expect the Word of Truth, and the Gospel of their
Salvation.

II. ANOTHER Case that calls for our Consideration, is; How the Right of a
Particular Church to Choose their own Pastor, is to be Exercised. Now herein we
for ever adhere to the Sentiments, which we have some Years ago, declared in
these Terms. A Body of Christians Associated for all the Ordinances of the
Gospel, are a CHURCH of our Glorious LORD, which have among other precious
Privileges, a Right from HIM, To Choose their own Pastors. The Churches which
have Recovered this Right from the Oppression of Man, under which many Churches
of the Reformation are to this day groaning, ought to keep the Precepts and the
Favors of the Lord, and not easily part with what He has given them.
NEVERTHELESS, A Church in the Exercise of this Right, ought in all possible
ways consistent therewithal, to consult the Edification and Satisfaction of
their Neighbors; Especially those, on whose Assistance to carry on their
Affairs, they may have much Dependence. The Church ought so to Manage their
Choice, that if the Neighbors have any just Dissatisfaction, all the Respect
required by Scripture and Reason, and Gratitude, may be paid unto it.

And long before this Instrument, which was given some Years ago, it was
declared in the well-known, Thirty Cases; That a Particular Church owing a
Great Regard unto the Church Catholic, in the using of its own Right, is bound
to Consult the Satisfaction and Edification of Others, in their Election of a
Pastor. And, That Churches in their Election of a Pastor, are to consider the
Benefit of All that are to be his Hearers, and more particularly the
Concurrence of such, as are by the Covenant and Appointment of GOD, under the
Church-Watch among them. And, That Churches may suffer their Elections to be
Directed, yea, and be Diverted, by Considerations, which they owe to others in
the Vicinity, without Surrendering their Liberties to be Smothered by any that
would unjustly Impose thereupon.

UNTO this, we now add our further Declaration, That a Church may be guilty of
doing what is very Wrong, if they use the Right which they claim, in such a
way, as to forget those Indispensable Maxims of our SAVIOR. [Rom.XIV. 19.] Let
us follow the things that make for Peace, and things wherewith one may edify
another. And, [2 Cor.XII. 26.] Let all Things be done to Edifying. And, [1 Pet.
V. 5.] All of you be subject one to another. And, [Phil. II. 3.] Let nothing be
(...) through strife; but in lowliness of Mind, let (...) other better than
themselves. And therefore, if they be a Minor part of the Church, which are
earnestly set against the (...), which a Major part shall make of a (...); but
this Minor part are considerable by Number, and behave themselves as (...)
Christians, willing to have their (...) determined by proper Judges, and have
(...) a Plea of (...) for their Dissent, (...) appears they cannot without Sin,
under their present Apprehensions, Acquiesce in the Choice, and the
Consequences of it, the Church ought now to do nothing Rashly, but with
convenient Pauses, and with all due Methods for Satisfaction, Wait until it
shall please GOD, that the Dissatisfyed Brethren shall have no cause to
Complain of an Oppression upon them; Especially, when the condition of a
Church, may be such, that their Immediate Proceeding unto a Settlement shall
not be absolutely Necessary.

III. A Third Case calling for our Consideration, is, The Power of Councils,
and the Respect which particular Churches and Persons owe unto them. Now our
Platform does in Express Terms assert, That Synods orderly assembled, are an
Ordinance of CHRIST, and many times necessary to the well-being of Churches,
for the Establishment of Truth and Peace therein. [ch. 6.. 1.] And, That when
any Church wants Light or Peace among themselves, Churches ought to meet
together by their Elders and other Messengers, in a Synod, to consider the
Point in Doubt or Difference, and having found out the way of Truth and Peace,
(...) commend the same unto the Churches whom (...) may concern. [ch. 15.. 2.]
And more particularly, That Neighbour-Churches are (...) be advised withal, and
their Help used, when Pastors are to be tried and chosen. [ch. 8.. 8.] And a
General Synod of our Churches, 1662. has directed, That Churches do seek and
accept Help from, and give Help to, each other, in Matters of more than
ordinary Importance, as Ordination, Translation, and Deposition of Elders, and
such like. Agreeably to which, the Law of the Colony once required, the
Approbation of Three or Four Churches, to every Ordination. And those Divines
who have Seemed to be Pillars in the Revived Congregational Discipline espoused
by our Churches, have generally expressed the same concern, that the Usage and
Honor of Ecclesiastical Councils, might be Maintained. The Synod at the Savoy,
Earnestly asserts, That it is according to the Mind of CHRIST that Churches
holding Communion together, do by their Messengers Meet in a Synod, or Council,
to consider and give Advice, -- [Thes. 26.] On such occasions as the Churches
in this Country have also thought proper to come under such a Cognizance. The
famous Apologists, (Dr. T. Goodwyn, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Simpson, Mr. Buroughs, Mr.
Bridge,) p. 16. etc. assert an Obligation hereunto, in the Common Law of
Communion of Churches. Yea they profess, they look upon it as the most to be
abhorred Maxim, and the most Contradictory and Dishonorable to Christianity
that a Single and Particular Society of Men Professing the Name of Christ, and
pretending to be Endowed with power from Christ, should arrogate unto
themselves an Exemption from giving an Account, or being censurable by
Neighbour-Churches about them. So far (say these Supereminent Divines of the
Congregational way) were our Judgments from that INDEPENDENT Liberty, which has
been imputed to us. Dr. Ames Maintains That as the Right of calling an Ordinary
Minister, is in the Church, which he is to serve, so, that Matters of Great
Weight should be managed as much as may be, with the Consent of Particular
Churches, confederated in Synods. [Med. l. 1. c. 39.. 27, 30, 32, 36.] And, The
Elders of New England, in their Answer to the XXXII. Questions, p. 64. profess
their Entire Consent with Dr. Ames. 27. Mr. Buroughs, in his Irenicum, says, [
p. 43.] Those in the Congregational Way acknowledge, that they are bound in
Conscience, to give Account of their Ways, to Churches about them: And that
Synods are an Ordinance of Jesus Christ, for the helping of the Church against
Errors, Schisms, and Scandals. And that these Synods may, by the Power they
have from Christ, Admonish Men or Churches in His Name, when they see Evils
continuing in, or growing upon the Church. Yea They may by a Solemn Act in the
Name of Jesus Christ, refuse any further Communion with them until they Repent.
Mr. Cottons Book of, The Keys has all along been of high Account in the
Churches of this Country; And in that Book, (as well as in the Preface to it
Written by Dr. Goodwin,) there is a full Testimony born, to the Interest which
Councils ought to have in ordering the Affairs of Consociated Churches. It is
more particularly said, That it is an holy Ordinance of CHRIST, for Particular
Churches to join together, in a Consociation among themselves, to administer
their Church Affairs, which are of Weighty and Difficult and common
concernment, not without common consultation, and consent, of other Churches
about them. Now Church Affairs of Weighty and Difficult, and common
concernment, we account to be, the Election and Ordination of Elders,
Excommunication of an Elder, or any person of Public Note, -- and Employment;
the Translation of an Elder from one Church to another. Mr. Hooker's Survey,
(Preface, p. 11.) observes. Consociation of Churches is not only lawful, but in
some cases necescessary. When causes are difficult and particular Churches want
light and help, they should crave the assistance of such a consociation.
Churches so meeting, have right to counsel, rebuke, etc. as the case does
require. In case any particular Church shall walk pertinaciously, either in the
profession of Error, or sinful practice, and will not hear their counsel, they
may and should renounce the right hand of fellowship with them. Dr. Owen, in
several of his Treatises does advance Positions of the same Aspect on the
Necessity and Authority of Regular Councils, for the welfare of particular
Churches. In one of his former, [Catech. p. 224.] he says, Churches ought to
preserve a Mutual Holy communion, and Exercise it in making use of the Advice
of one another. And in case any Church give offense to other Churches, other
Churches may require an Account from them. Admenish them of their Faults, and
withold Communion from them, in case they persist in the Error of their way;
and that because in their Difficulties, and before their Miscarriages, they
were bound to have desired the Advice of other Churches; which being neglected
by them, the other are to recover the End of it unto the utmost of their
Ability. Thus Dr. Owen. And in one of his last, he has these Memorable words.
[Nat. of Church. part 2. p. 251.] No Church is so Independent, as that it can
always, and in all cases observe the Duties it owes unto the Lord CHRIST, and
the Church Catholic by all those Powers, which it is able to act in it self
distinctly, without Conjunction with others. And the Church that confines its
Duty unto the Acts of its own Assemblies, cuts it self off from the External
Communion of the Church Catholic: nor will it be safe for any Man to commit
the conduct of his Soul to such a Church. -- Every Particular Church which
Extends not its Duty, beyond its own Assemblies and Members, is fallen off from
the principal End of its Institution. And every Principle, Opinion, or
Persuasion, that inclines any Church to confine its Care and Duty unto its own
Edification only; -- is Schismatical. But Great has been the Army of them that
have Published such Truths as these, whereof something may be further seen in,
The first Principles of New England, Printed in the Year 1675. Unto all which
we may add, what our celebrated Norton, has in his Last Sermons; Particularly,
that passage, Let us acknowledge the Order of the Eldership in out Churches, in
their Way, and the Order of Councils in their Way, duly backed and Encouraged;
without which, Experience will witness that these Churches cannot long consist.
Nor are the words of the worthy Mr. Samuel Danforth, (once Pastor of Roxbury,)
in his Election-Sermon, in the Year 1670. unworthy to be recited. In our First
and Best Times, what Pious Cate was there of Sister Churches, -- that in those
that wanted Peace, their Dissensions might be healed? What Readiness was there
in those Days to call for the Help of Neighbor Elders and Brethren in case of
any Difference or Division that could not be healed at home? What Reverence was
there then of the Sentence of a Council, as being Decicive, and issuing the
Controversy? According to that Ancient Proverbial saying, They shall surely ask
Counsel at Abel, and so they Ended the Matter.

FROM whence, it will follow That if any of our Churches presume to Transact
their more Weighty Affairs, and such as are of a Common Concern to the Churches
in their Neighborhood, with a Contempt of such Councils of them as ought to be
advised withal; or, if they shall upon grievous Differences arisen among them,
refuse the Advice of those who urge them to make use of the Remedy, which the
want of Light and Peace among them calls for: and much more, if they shall
proceed in Matters after the Neighboring Churches have signified, that they
cannot countenance their proceedings; those Churches will be far from
Expressing the Wisdom which is with the well-advised; and will greatly Sin
against the Second and Third Commandment; and will practically go too far
toward Excluding themselves from Communion with the Churches of the Faithful.
Indeed, the more Councils and Synods are disregarded and slighted, so much the
more disorder and confusion will (we fear) grow and prevail in all the Churches
in the Country; which GOD of His Infinite Mercy prevent.

IV. CONCERNING the Case of Reinstalling a Translated Pastor, which may also
call for some Consideration; we need only Report, what has been the Practice,
of our Churches, in those very Few Examples, that have been most generally
approved of. The Pastor having been (with the Advice of a Council) Regularly
Released, and then Dismissed, from the Church where to he has been Related, the
Church, whereto he has been upon a Translation, have sent unto the Neighbor
Churches, to come and countenance his Instalment, as they do for an ordinary
Ordination. The Instalment has been with all the Circumstances and Solemnities
of an Ordination. Only, the Imposition of Hands, (which formerly was Renewed on
such Occasions; Not as a Reordination to the Ministry, but as a Disignation to
the Charge of the Particular Flock:) has been laid aside of Latter time, in a
Compliance with the Conscientious Indisposition to it, in some worthy Ministers
arriving from Foreign Parts among us, and invited into the Pastoral Care of our
Churches. But yet a Charge has been used to be given by the Moderator, for the
faithful Discharge of his Ministry, in this Place; and suitable Prayers
accompanied it; unto which has been added, The Right Hand of Fellowship, from
the Churches. And indeed, All such Things ought for ever to be done Decently
and in Order. And as we hear, Unbiassed Strangers coming among us, have
sometimes confessed, That the most Solemn Actions they have ever seen in their
Lives, have been the Ordinations in the Churches of New England; so we cannot
but wish, that they may never lose any thing of their Solemnity.

To which end we find reason also to add our Testimony against all Indecency
and Irregularity in the Management of a Public Dissent from and Opposition
unto the Ordination or Instalment of a Pastor over a Flock, whenever there
may be Occasion for so Melancholy an Action, which rarely happens. We
acknowledge the Right that every Christian has, and much more, that any Number
of aggreived Brethren have, in an orderly Manner to object and declare against
the Ordination of a Minister, or his Induction into the Pastoral Office over a
Particular Flock, when they apprehend Sufficient Reasons for doing so. But then
Christianity requires that this be done, when it becomes necessary, with much
Modesty and Calmness, Meekness and Gravity, Wisdom and Seriousness; and not
with a Noise, Wrath and Bitterness, Disagreeable to such a Solemnity. Wherefore
also, every Church ought very Carefully to avoid all Provocations, that may
have a Tendency to drive things unto such Extremities; and therefore Seasonably
to hear, and duly to Consider, what the Dissatisfied may have to offer.

FINALLY; We know not what Irregularities may come to be committed in any of
our Churches, as Days of Temptation, and of Defection, may grow upon us. The
Case may so happen, [with Sad Reflection may we say so!] that Churches may with
much Temerity, Reject the Advice of Other Churches, and carry on their Affairs
with so much Disorder and Confusion, as may open the Floodgates for a Torrent
of Strife and Sin to break in, and much Damage arise to the Kingdom of GOD. In
this Deplorable Case, there is an awful Proceedure directed in our Platform.
[ch 15.. 2.] If a Church be Rent with Divisions among themselves, or ly under
any Open Scandal, and yet refuse to Consult with other Churches, for healing or
removing of the same, it is Matter of just Offense, both to the Lord JESUS, and
to other Churches. -- And therefore the State of such a Church calls aloud
upon other Churches, to Exercise a fuller Act of Brotherly Communion; to wit,
By way of Admonition. -- And, If still the Offending Church continue in
Obstinacy and Impenitency, -- and if they hear not the Synod. -- the Synod
having declared them to be Obstinate, Particular Churches, -- are to declare
the Sentence of Non-Communion respectively concerning them. And though for some
special Reasons, in such a Day, it may so fall out, that the Churches may not
hasten unto such an Awful Proceedure, Yet it becomes those concerned, seriously
to Consider what is their Duty, least the Holy LORD, who Walks in the midst of
His Churches, and is a GOD that will not be mocked, may testify His Displeasure
in ways that are greatly to be trembled at: For, Our GOD is a consuming Fire:
And, He is Terrible in His Holy Places.

Increase Mather. With the Concurrence of Others, Ministers of Boston.
BOSTON: 29. d. XII. m. 1719, 20.
FINIS.

