Mr. Foxcroft's Sermon On the DEATH of His MOTHER.

A SERMON Preached at Cambrige, After the Funeral OF Mrs. Elizabeth Foxcroft,
Late Wife of Francis Foxcroft Esquire Who died there, July 4th. 1721. In the 57th
Year of Her Age.

With an ADDITION, chiefly referring to Her Death: Also a Funeral POEM of the
Reverend Mr. John Danforth.

By T. F. One of the bereaved SONS.

Ruth 3.11. All the City of my People does know, that Thou art a virtuous Woman.

Psalm 22.10. Thou art my God from my Mother 's Womb.

Psalm 86.16. O give thy Strength to Thy Servant, and save the Son of Thine
Handmaid.

2 Timothy 1.3, 5. I thank God, -- when I call to Remembrance the Unfeigned Faith,
which dwelt first in thy Grandmother, and in thy Mother.

Proh! Quales Foeminas habent Nov-Angli!

BOSTON in New England: Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish, at his Shop
nigh the First Brick Church. 1721.

ERRATA.
Page 9 lin. 26. Blot out [that occurr] p. 23 l. 12. d the p 24 l. 20 for an, r
and. p. 28 l. 17 for put, -- p. 36. l. 23. d. of. p. 53. l. 16 r. Implum'd.

TO The Honorable FRANCIS FOXCROFT Esquire
SIR,
I Have presumed, without Your Leave, to inscribe to your Name the following
DISCOURSE, (for the Substance preached in Your Hearing, but now published with
some Enlargements and Additions,) which I hope You will easily excuse, when You
consider how naturally I was led into this Dedication. Notwithstanding the
Meanness of the Composure, yet (the Subject being so grateful to You) You were
pleased to order it to the Press; herein imitating good Jacob, who erected a
Monument on his beloved Rachels Grave, as a Testimony of His Respect to Her,
and to be a standing Memorial of Her Life and Death. And it is in obedience to
Your Command, (as well as at the Request of others, and (to speak the Truth) in
pursuance of my own Inclinations,) that this Sermon (...). And since It comes
abroad under Your Patronage, I need not make any manner of Apology for exposing
it to public View; although I imagine my self not unfurnisht with sufficient
Excuses both for Preaching and Printing on such an Occasion. It would be Enough
to say, I have good Example for it in many Instances, as well Ancient as
Modern. Some Expositors (as one observes Dr. Mather's Ornaments for the
Daughters of Zion. p. 6.7.
) judge, that the Description of a Virtuous Woman, in the last Chapter of the
Proverbs, is Solomon's Reciprocation in the praise of his incomparable Mother
Bathshebah: having first recorded some of her wise Sayings and godly Counsils,
( The Prophecy which his Mother taught Him,) He proceeds, ('it is Thought,) in a
grateful sense of his Obligations to Her, and in Honor to her Memory, to draw
her Character, and give an Encomium of Her, which would remain on durable
Record, after the most lasting Marble Statues should be crumbl'd into Dust. And
You may have read how Nazianzen, and Austin have celebrated Their Mothers
Names, and handed them down to Posterity with great Honor. You may remember
also that the noble Romans of old have sometimes bestowed the Respect of a
Funeral Oration on Their virtuous Mothers; and this under the favorable
Umbrage of the Public Authority, which decreed such Honor to Them. And many
worthy Examples of fresher Date (and some among our selves) might be produced;
as well as other Arguments offered in Justification of what I have done to
contribute a little toward embalming the Name of my ever honored and truly
memorable Mother. But the Thing carries it is own Vindication: It being a just
Tribute to her known Deserts; a proper Expression of Filial Duty; An
Acknowlegement due to our ascended LORD, who has given such Grace, and so many
Excellencies to a frail Woman; and a Service to the Church of CHRIST, as it may
provoke a laudable Imitation in others, to consider the Account that is given
(tho very imperfectly) of her holy Life and Death; in both which She was so
conspicuous and eminent a Pattern, whereby, though dead, She speaks to the
Instruction of Survivors.

HER Memory, I know, SIR, needs not the Help of my Sermon, or any Thing else,
to make it Perpetual with You. Her Person and Character were too precious to
You to be easily forgotten; and your Thoughts too deeply impressed by her Death,
to suffer the melancholy Resentments of your afflictive Loss to desert You
soon. You knew her Worth too well, and will feel your Want of Her too much,
ever to need a Remembrancer. And tho I am abundantly sensible of the Greatness
of your Loss and the Deepness of your Wound; yet my Relation has made Me as
unfit to offer any Lines of Comfort or Words of Counsil to You on this sad
Occasion. Your own Meditations can furnish You with sufficient Matter both of
Consolation and Direction.

SIR, I cannot but take a just Opportunity here to say, What Reason We have to
adore the Divine Goodness in Prolonging to Us the Enjoyment of so valuable a
Parent: and what a double Satisfaction it is to Me, that while I am dropping my
Tributary Tears over a Deceased Mother, I can by this Address make my public
Acknowlegements to a living Father; who was by unwearied Kindness, and great
Care in our Education, laid us under all possible Bones of Love and Gratitude.

MAY GOD still lengthen out your Life, restore and confirm your Health, comfort
you and help you still to glorify Him in all your Tribulation, increase your
Usefulness in the Post of Honor and public Service you sustain, and take you
safe (tho late) to the Place of perfect Purity, Peace and Joy; whither our dear
Mother (who was so much the Staff of your Hands, as well as the Desire of your
Eyes) is gone before you!

MAY the SPIRIT of Grace make Us (and our Children) Ornaments to your Name, and
Heirs of Your and Her Wisdom, Faith, Holiness, and Usefulness: that so We may
all at last Meet again at the right Hand of CHRIST, and spend a blessed
Eternity together in our Masters Joy! And now I pray GOD bless the following
Papers, devoted to His Glory, the Honor of the Dead, and the Use of the
Living; and make them serviceable to the good Ends, for which They are
sincerely designed by

Honored Sir, Your most Dutiful, Though Afflicted Son, THOMAS FOXCROFT
Boston, Aug. 23. 1721.
A SERMON occasioned by the DEATH of Mrs. Elizabeth Foxcroft.
PSALM XXXV. 14. -- I bowed down heavily, as one that mourns for his Mother.


HAVING been invited, to take the Opportunity of my being here this Day, to
preach unto You, I thought it would not be improper to entertain you with some
seasonable Meditations, which I have lately had on this Text, upon the most
affecting Occasion that has ever occurred to Me in the few Years I have lived.

DIVINE PROVIDENCE has seen meet within a little while to take away by Death
Mrs. Brattle, Mrs. Leverett, Mrs. Hutchinson, etc.
several Mothers in Israel, (who have some of their Relations in this Place)
Devout and Honorable Women, whose Memory is blessed; And we cannot but be
sensibly touched with the repeated Stroke in the Removal of Another the last
Week, that was also valuable to all and nearly related to Many of us here
present. Truly the Blow is heavy, and the Breach wide. And to be affected with
so solemn a Providence, as the Departure of Persons of Name and Worth, of Piety
and Serviceableness, Is what every common Neighbor is under civil and
christian Obligations to. This is what the special Friends and Acquaintants of
the Deceased, who have a nearer Concern in the Loss, are more peculiarly
obliged to. -- But the Relatives are under natural and the strongest Bonds to
Mourn the Death of Pious and Useful Persons -- --. That I might more
particularly suit my Discourse to the Case of Relatives in Mourning; especially
of Children for the Loss of a gracious Mother, which is the melancholy Case of
not a Few in this Audience, (and may be so of Others e're long) I have
therefore chosen the Words before Us for the Subject of our present
Consideration; -- I bowed down heavily, as One that mourns for his Mother.

THE Person here speaking is holy David, the Royal Psalmist of Israel. He makes
a Protestation of his cordial Love toward and tender Sympathy with his Enemies
and Persecutors under their Afflictions. They rejoiced indeed in his Adversity:
but he mourned in their's. If they were visited with Sickness, he Sympathized
with them, and carried it toward them with the greatest Compassion and the
kindest Usage: If they were removed by Death, He Mourned for them, bowing down
his head in great heaviness, and condoling the Loss, as though there had been an
intimate Friendship or near Relation between them: Yea, his Grief at their
Death did bear some Proportion and Similitude to the Sorrow of dutiful
Children, bereaved of a dear and desirable Mother; such an One as David's own
was, and whom perhaps he may now refer to more immediately. At their Death, he
took on, as for the Loss of his own Mother, a gracious and tender Mother. This
discovers the Psalmist to be one of an excellent Spirit, and a truly
extraordinary Compassion; a Man made up of Pity and Benevolence, and acted by
the superior Principles of Religion. He has set us an Example of uncommon
Humanity, and Charity; which challenges Consideration and Imitation. But I
shall not insist here. -- I design to take Notice only of the Allusion or
incidental Hint in our Text, -- of One's Mourning for his Mother, -- which
intimates the Lawfulness, and Decency, yea and Duty of lamenting the Death of
near Relations, and particularly of a dear and good Mother.

AND this is the Point of Doctrine now (as GOD shall help) to be discoursed
upon: IT is Lawful, yea Proper, and a Duty to m^^^^ the Death if near
Relations, and particula^^^ of a tender and religious Mother.

THE Decease of such is a just Matter and Motive of Lamentation. Our nearest
and dearest Relatives must die and go to the House appointed for all living.
Father and Mother must be separated from us by Their or Our Death. The
strongest Ties of Nature or Affection cannot continue our Union together in this
World, when Death comes to dissolve the same. And the Parting with loved
Relations, is a proper Occasion of Grief. Their Death is a very Melancholy
Thing, and to be laid to Heart. The Removal of a tender Parent, of a delightful
Child, of a loving Brother or Sister, or any affectionate and beloved Relative
whatsoever, is a Mournful Dispensation, and to be seriously resented and
suitably improved. But I shall confine my self to speak particularly of the
Death of a pious and dear Mother. The Death of such an One calls for peculiar
Accents of Grief. This is a Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation.

HERE we may consider briefly some of the Grounds and Reasons, that warrant and
require Children's Mourning on such an Occasion* The following Particulars may
suffice.

I. THE Death of a tender and gracious Mother infers the Loss of a great and
comprehensive Blessing; and therefore is a deplorable Evil. The proper Object
of Grief is a present afflictive Evil, whether ^^^ivative or Positive. The Want
or Loss of Good (...) Negative Evil; and calls for our Mournful Re^^^^ments.
Hence the Bereavement of a dear and ^^^cious Mother, (whom to enjoy is one of
the chief Felicities of this lower World,) must needs be accounted a most
proper Subject of deep Lamentation.

A wise and good Mother is a very valuable Blessing. Her Usefulness is
extensive, Her Opportunities of doing Good considerable, and her Life is
therefore precious.

OUR wise and virtuous Mothers are no little Ornaments to the Places where they
dwell; These Daughters of Zion are none of the least of Zion's Glories, They
are some of the Excellent in the Earth* And when Death translates these shining
Lights, it casts a gloomy Shade on the Town, and Family; it thins the Glory,
and casts down the Beauty of Israel.

AGAIN, Our Pious Mothers are a Defense (as well as Honor) to the respective
Places of their abode: And the Town and Family, from which they are removed,
are weakened by their Fall, in proportion to the Degree of their Piety, Wisdom,
and Influence. Devout Women are many times (in conjunction with others)
instrumental to the Protection of a Family or People from desolating Judgments.
They contribute to the Safety of a House or Place, sometimes by their prudent
Counsels, sometimes by their importunate Prayers; yea sometimes by their very
Presence: The Presence of these holy, humble Ones, to whom the gracious GOD
has a special Respect, is often a Remora to the Execution of Divine
Threatenings on Others, who are ripe for the Indignation of the LORD. For their
Sakes GOD does many times mercifully suspend deserved Judgments, or moderate
His Judicial Dispensations. -- And therefore the Departure of these pious,
praying Persons should affect and grieve the Living. The taking away of such is
as a pulling down the Pillars of an House, or a plucking up the Stakes out of
an Hedge. When such die, so much of the Strength fails, and of the Defense is
gone.

FURTHER, They are more Positive and Active Blessings; and are not only the
Means of keeping out hurtful Evils, but also of bringing in many real and
desirable Benefits. They are many ways useful by their Gifts and Graces, by
their Prayers, their Example, their Advices, Reproofs, Instructions, etc. The
whole House fares the better for the wise and good Mother, in all it is
Interests. The Health* the Estate, Reputation, good Order, Virtue and Religion
of the Family, and Place, are all greatly subserved by Her. -- When therefore
our gracious Mothers die, the Town and Family, (which have enjoyed their
Presence) are so much Impoverished, and the common Treasure sunk. So much of
the principal stock is drawn out of the Bank. In that House, where the godly
Mother ceases, The Measure of Gifts and Graces, and the Number of Prayers and
Services are lessend; which is as the letting out of so much vital Blood and
Spirits, whereupon Sickness and Weakness of the Body ensues.

SURELY then we ought to lament the Death of our honored and pious Mothers
with a very peculiar Sorrow. We ought to bewail it on the Account of the
general Loss, which the whole Family and Town sustains.

AND We should every One bewail his own Personal Loss therein. We should sadly
lay to heart our own particular Concern in the common Bereavement. We [the
Children] are some of the greatest Losers. When our pious and wise and careful
Mothers are taken away, Who can say how many Blessings we are deprived of by
this one awful Blow? It infers a mighty Change, a dreadful Breach on our
Comforts, and often a sad Increase of our Cares. Though when we enjoyed them, we
did not sufficiently value and improve them; yet when they are gone, we soon
find a lamentable Miss of them. What a Melancholy Vacancy does their Removal
make? When they die, We lose the Sight of them, which was so much the Desire of
our Eyes. We lose their Wisdom, Abilities and Graces, which rendered them such
Delights and Helps unto us. We lose their profitable Conversation, and can no
more take sweet Counsel together with them. We want their wise Advices, their
faithful Admonitions, their holy Examples, their devout Prayers, and Labors of
Love. We can no more enjoy any kind Assistences from them of any sort. Death
puts a Period to all their good Offices. Their works follow them, -- in this
sense.

A great and sore Loss then do the Posterity of gracious Women receive in their
Death. And this Reflection bespeaks a very sensible Grief on so sad an Occasion.

II. THE Death of an useful gracious Mother is commonly a Rebuke on her
Surviving Posterity for their Sin. Considered as a Natural, and much more as a
Penal Evil, this Loss is greatly to be lamented. There is many times much of
the Wrath of GOD mixed with this Affliction: And the Consideration of this may
well put an Edge on our Resentments and add Weight to our Grief. Such a
Bereavement is often a stroke of Vindictive Justice. The Sin of the Children
sometimes inflames the Wrath of GOD, and procures the Death of their Mother.
They are vile and wicked, and not worthy of Her; or are full of guilty
Provocations with reference unto her. If we over-rate, and over-love our
valuable Parents, if we place all our Dependence on and Delight in them; if we
make the Enjoyment of them the great Solace of our Lives, and build our Hopes
of future Comfort too much on their Continuance, and are loath to leave them at
the Divine Dispose: If we idolize them, and give 'em that Seat in our Hearts,
which only belongs to GOD our sovereign Ruler and only sufficient Portion, and
do not desire and rejoice in his Presence and Favor as we ought to do; This
may justly provoke Him to separate from us the beloved Object. GOD is jealous
of His own Rights, He will not admit any Rival or divide His Glory with
another: If He observes Parent or Child lie too near our Hearts, and take up
too much Room in our Breasts, whereby He is shut out from those Regards which
are due unto Him, no Marvel if He make a Breach, to testify His Displeasure --.
And on the other hand, if a gracious Parent be neglected, undervalued, and set
at naught, This is greatly provoking to GOD; and no Wonder, if He so resent the
Sin, as to punish the Guilty with a Bereavement of their despised and abused
Privilege --. Alas! how prone are we to be basely unthankful for our good
Parents, especially our pious Mothers, while they are spared to us? And how apt
to slight the many Advantages that we enjoy or are capable of receiving by
them? How disobedient, or unkind, or negligent are we prone to be in our
Carriage toward them? -- And now, it may be for some such Miscarriages as
these, that GOD is visiting of us. He takes away our over-valu'd Parent, in
Displeasure at and in Testimony against our Idolatry. Or He bereaves us of the
contemned Blessing, to punish our criminal Ingratitude, and Undutifulness: He
will make us to know the worth of it by sad Experience of the Want of it.

THUS the Death of a wise and good Mother is sometimes a Punishment of Sin and
a Fruit of revenging Wrath, in a special manner. And in this Dispensation
indeed there is ordinarily a Mixture of holy Displeasure.

AND is not this a Mournful Consideration? Should not this Thought make our
Hearts bleed, and our Eyes flow with Tears of Sorrow? Verily it is our Sin,
that is the Sting in every Affliction: and GOD's Wrath which is the Bitterness
in every Cup. The Divine-Judgment is the Gall and Wormwood in our Adversities,
the great Aggravation of our Sorrows: and our Eye may well be consumed because
of Grief, when GOD is chastening Us in His hot Displeasure, Truly it well
becomes the most unbroken and heroic Minds to melt into soft and tender
Passions, to relent and sigh under the Tokens of Divine Anger, and at the
Remembrance of Sin, which pulls down the Wrath of GOD on our guilty Heads --.
An awful Regard then to the Hand of Divine Justice in taking away a pious
Mother should influence Us to mourn such a Death. The Frown and Rebuke of
Providence herein should awaken a most afflictive sense of Her Removal.

III. GOD allow, expects, and requires, that We mourn on this Occasion. GOD has
formed our Nature so as that We are capable of being moved with different
Passions and Affections, according to the Variety of Objects that occur,
whether good or evil, present or absent. And while some Things are suited to
actuate our Joy; Others are fitted to agitate our Grief. These latter are
present Evils; and when they are perceived, Nature is disposed to sorrow. A
mournful Sensation of Bereavements, and other Afflictions, is but agreeable to
the Law of our Creation, to the Tendency of our Nature, and the Dictates of
right Reason. It agrees to our present Make and Frame; and is according to the
primitive Design of the Powers of Sense and Passion which are so deeply planted
in Us: and it is impossible indeed, while in the Body, to be untouched with
sorrowful Impressions within, when oppressive Troubles without invade Us. No
Affliction is for the present joyous, but grievous. However suppose it not an
Impossibility, yet it is a culpable Irregularity. It is unreasonable and
irreligious. Our afflicting Passions, as well as others, were originally
intended for Exercise; the proper season whereof is a day of Trouble. And They
were designed for good Ends; which cannot be attained without the seasonable and
regular exerting of Them. Reason then condemns a Stoical Apathy under
Afflictions: and Religion does no less. Christianity does not command nor
commend, nor tend to effect a stupid Insensibleness under the Hand of GOD.
Piety is not intended for the Extinction of Reason and Subversion of Humanity.
But the Design of Religion is to correct the Disorders of natural Affections,
to guide and help Them in their Exercises on proper Occasions. Gospel- Light is
designed to direct Us, and Gospel- Grace to assist Us, in governing our
Passions to their respective Ends and adjusting them to their various moving
Causes. Religion then does not forbid, but only moderates ana regulates, our
Sorrow under bereaving Dispensations. We may lawfully give Vent and Ease to our
disquieted Minds in pensive Groans and Complaints, and let out Grief operate
and express it self in all natural and decent Ways --. Yea, This is what lies
as a Duty upon Us, to order our ininward Frame and outward Behavior according
to our Condition, in Compliance with the Methods of Providence and from a
Reverence to the holy Hand of GOD. We are to regard the Work of the LORD, and
to consider His Operation in all that befalls Us; and should study to comport
with the Design and answer the Call of every Dispensation. Accordingly under
Bereavements We are called to Weeping and Mourning; and GOD approves and
expects, that We feel the stroke, that We be inwardly affected, and breath out
our Grief in all the humble Expressions hereof: This is intimated in that
Observation of the Wise Man, Eccl. 7.2. It is better to go to the house of
Mourning, [so He calls the House where Death comes] than to the House of
Feasting: for that it the End of all Men, and the Living [if They are wise and
godly] will lay it to Heart. And so in that Caution of the Apostle, 1 These.
4.13. I would not have You to be ignorant, Brethren, concerning Them which are
asleep, that Ye sorrow not, even as others which have no Hope. -- He allows the
Sorrow; but checks the excessive Degree, and reproves perhaps also some
unseemly Ways of expressing It.

IV. GOD is highly displeased at a sinful Stupidity under such a mournful
Bereavement: and to indulge This is truly a Symptom of wretched Hardness, and
Abjectness of Mind. If we are not sensible of Judgments and do not resent the
Displeasure of GOD in them, it is an awful Sign of carnal Security, and a
daring Affront to the Divine Providence. There are many heavy Complaints on
Record against the obdurate Jews of old upon this Account. Thus we read, Isai.
42.25. He has poured upon Jacob the fury of His Anger; and it has set Him on
fire round about, yet He knew it not; and it burned Him, yet He laid it not to
Heart. So in Jer. 5.3. O Lord, Thou have stricken Them, but They have not
grieved; They have refused to receive Correction; They have made their Faces
harder. than a Rock. And in the next Verse He calls this Carriage Madness; I
said, Surely These are foolish; for they Know not the way of the Lord; They
consider not the Judgment of GOD. And the Wise Man enters a Caveat against this
Folly, Prove. 3.11. My son, Despise not the Chastening of the Lord.

TO be stupidly blind and not see the Hand of GOD smiting Us, or to be wilfully
indolent and not feel the Weight and Smart of those Blows we receive, loudly
proclaims our want of a Christian Temper of Soul, and sadly evidences the
Hardness of our Hearts and Atheism of our Minds. "Indolence under the Effects
of GDD's Anger is (as One speaks) like the stilness of the dead Sea, whose Calm
is a Curse" --. To be resolvedly insensible and inconsiderate under Afflictions
is to harden our selves against Discipline, and set GOD's Judgments at
Defiance. It is to strengthen our selves against the Almighty. It is a profane
Neglect and Contempt of the Divine Wrath. And hence must needs offer very great
Provocation to GOD. Nothing more exasperates, than a slight of one's
Displeasure. To make light of the Wrath of GOD, is most certainly very
incensing to Him. -- It is therefore prodigious Folly and Sin to be unaffected
with GOD's Frown in the Death of near and dear Relations, and particularly of
our valuable Parents. Some in this Case shift off all troublesome Impressions
by flying to remaining temporal Comforts; or by an abusive Applying the
Consideration of Death's being the End of all Men, looking on It as a necessary
Event, a Thing of Course, and common to every One, as what could not be
avoided, and for which there is no Remedy: and therefore It must be endured;
Grief will be no Cure --. In some such Ways as these, Many seek Relief, and
bear up Themselves by these Methods under the Loss of Their Parents, and other
Relatives; without any View to the Hand of GOD or Sense of His Anger out
against Them. -- But surely to be thus caseless under Divine Rebukes, upon any
Grounds whatsoever, discovers great Vanity of Mind, and a secret Infidelity in
the Heart. Where a Principle of Grace is in it is due Operation, It will
influence the Understanding to consider the Tokens of GOD's Displeasure, and
will soften the Heart, and cause a very tender and permanent Feeling of Them.
Insensibility under the strokes of GOD's Hand is not religious Constancy and
Fortitude, but a wicked and foolish Stupidity. It argues a very unhappy State
of Soul; and offers a very heinous Indignity to Divine Providence.

V. SOMETIMES the Death of a pious Mother leads the Way and opens the Door to
many other Evils: be-sure carnal Security under such a stroke of GOD lays open
to more heavy Judgments. Sometimes such a Bereavement is the Forerunner of
great Evils. The Righteous is taken away from the Evil to come.

AN Increase of moral Evil is often consequent on such a Providence. At the
Gap, which the Death of a wise and good Mother makes, does many times enter in
a Torrent of Impieties and Vices. It is very grievous to think, what
Ungodliness, what Unrighteousness, what Contention, what Intemperance, and
other foolish Lusts, have found their Way into Families, after the Removal of
the pious Mother; whose grave Presence, and prudent Counsels, and Reproofs,
together with Her holy Example, had kept a Check on the vicious Dispositions of
the Children, and Others, while She was alive: but being now free from this
Restraint, They give Themselves a Loose and Indulgence in Sin. Yea what a
sensible Decay of Religion, and Growth of Wickedness has there been sometimes
among the Body of a People in a Town upon the Death of a Number of the godly
Mothers therein; who have so considerable an Influence in Family-Religion,
which is necessary to Public Order! It is too notorious, that sometimes a
deplorable Change soon appears in the rising Posterity, when the gracious
Mother is taken from Their Head: A degenerate Seed rises up; and when it is
thus with any Number of Families in a Place, the old Proverb is often verifyed,
A little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump. --

MOREOVER, the Death of such is often the Forerunner of afflictive Judgments.
The Removal of the pious Mother makes way for penal Evils to come in upon the
Family. There are Deaths perhaps to be multiplied, or other Calamities to be
inflicted; and from a tender Respect to this gracious Woman, GOD does gather
Her (as He did Josiah,) to Her Grave in Peace, that Her Eyes may not see, and
Her Heart be grieved at the Evil to be brought on Her Children and Relations:
And that He may not be put to deny the Requests of this fervent Intercessor on
their Behalf --. This precious One must be safely lodged in Heaven, out of the
Reach of all Griefs and Sufferings, before the destroying Angel has Commission
to execute Judgments on Her Posterity. The Jewels are secured, before the
Rubbish is consumed. The Wheat is housed, when a Storm is rising: and then the
Doves flock to the Windows.

IT looks ominous to the Family, when the pious praying Mother is taken away,
who was One that stood in the Breach to turn away Wrath. The Death of such an
One leaves the surviving Mourners under an ill Presage: and the Cry of the
Deceased unto Them is that, in Luke 23.28. (Sons,) Daughters, Weep not for me,
but weep for your selves --. Weep and howl for your Miseries that are coming
upon you.

BUT a supine and stubborn Apathy and Incorrigibleness, when under the Frown of
Providence in the Removal of so great a Blessing, does for certain expose to
and forebode still further Evils. Cold and carnal Security under this Judgment
defeats the good Ends of It, and renders it altogether unprofitable to Us. And
not only so, but it lays us open to yet more terrible Rebukes. If We will walk
contrary to GOD, He also will walk contrary to Us, and punish us still seven
Times more, (Lev. 26.23, 4,) He has many other ways to afflict us. And if we
are unaffected with one Judgment, He will proceed to another. Verily, None ever
hardened Themselves against GOD, and prosper'd He will multiply aggravated
Mischiefs on careless unsubdued Sinners. With the obstinate, He will show
Himself obstinate. He will add to Their Yoke; and if They feel not the Whip, He
will chastise Them with Scorpions. If more gentle Stripes are despised,
sometimes cutting Blows are given, 'till utter Destruction comes. But supposing
there be a Reprieve from Temporal Ruin, yet most certainly there is an
Everlasting Perdition, to which irreclamable Sinners are reserved, in the
coming World.

TO be unhumbled then under such a bereaving Dispensation, and impenitently to
disregard the Hand of GOD, is an ill Omen of more heavy Judgments approaching.
Let this Thought serve to deter Us from such Guilt and Folly; that there may be
no Occasion for renewing the Complaint, in Isai. 57.1. The Righteous perishes
and no man lays it to heart, and godly ones are taken away, None considering,
that the Righteous is taken away from the Evil to come.

VI. TO mourn such a Death has a Tendency to our spiritual Benefit, as it
assists our right Improvement of it. It will be profitable, not only to
tolerate, but to excite and strengthen a mournful Sense of our Affliction; not
only to admit, but to enforce the Impressions of Sorrow upon this Occasion.
Solomon observes, that by the sadness of the Countenance the Heart is made
better; and therefore the Heart of the Wise is in the House of Mourning. On
such an Occasion, the Wisdom that is from above will dispose and engage our
Hearts to mournful Affections, and a religious Improvement of the sorrowful
Providence: And by this means, The Affliction may turn to our great Advantage.
That which in it self is so grievous an Evil, may be made instrumental of the
most blessed Effects, by the Grace of GOD. Out of the Eater may come forth
Meat; and Honey be sucked out of the Wormwood.

IF we lay to heart the Bereavement, Our Minds will more attentively regard the
holy Lessons to be learnt from such a Dispensation, and more easily receive
Religious Impressions. Our Hearts must be subdued and melted in order to the
good Purposes of Divine Grace. And when They are tender and softened under
Troubles, We are in a greater Disposedness to be wrought upon by the
sanctifying Spirit. Worldly Sorrow tends to godly Sorrow: for when the Spirit
is tamed and sober'd, and reduced to a considering Frame, It will more readily
observe and resent the moral Cause of Afflictions, which is Sin --. And the
mournful Sense of our Trouble will have a happy Tendency to wean Us from
Creature Comforts, considering the uncertainty of Them. -- And to promote our
Acquaintance with GOD, and Desires of His Favor, the good Part which can never
be taken away. -- It will also help to fix on our Minds a becoming Gravity, and
check the Vanity We are so incident to. It will tend to put us on serious Work,
and stir us up to Duty; to awaken our Activity in preparing for our own Death,
and finishing the great Business, of Life. In a word, A true gracious Mourning
pulls out the sting of the Affliction, and turns the Curse into a Blessing, the
Cross into a Comfort.

THIS is the Benefit of laying to heart the Death of near and dear Relatives,
and this Consideration should induce Us to entertain and cherish a pensive
sense of our Affliction in the Decease of a godly Mother.

VII. WE should be influenced hereto from a Principle of Honor, and Love to
our deceased Parent. A gracious Mother in Israel, is an honorable Character.
The Scriptures do every where put abundant Honor upon these Handmaids of the
Lord, and peculiar were the Regards shown to such by our blessed Savior in the
Days of His Flesh See Mr. Colman's, Duty and Honor of Aged Women, p. 5, 6.
. Their name in Israel is that, Highly favored, and blessed among Women! The
devout Mother is worthy therefore of a Singular Respect from Men, especially
from Her own Children. The Fifth Commandment requires Us to honor our Mother,
well as Father. And a solemn mourning Her Death is one very fit and decent
Expression of our Reverence to Her. A Tribute of Tears at our Loss of Her is a
very just piece of Homage to her Worth, and a proper Instance of Filial Piety,
due by all the Laws of Justice and Gratitude. To refuse Her this mark of
Honor, infers a reproachful Imputation, and is the most unpardonable Baseness,
and Slight upon Her. To part with Her as if We suffered nothing by our Loss,
and were as happy without Her, as with Her, implys a very dishonorable
Reflection, and is great Injustice to Her Merits. To die unlamented is
sometimes denounced as a Curse; Jer. 22.18. And the contrary promised as an
Honor; Jer. 34.5.

AND to mourn Her Death is an agreeable Testimony of our Love to Her, as well
as Honor for Her. A pious Mother ought to have a deep share in our Affections;
and We should testify our Love in all the proper Expressions of it. A suitable
laying to Heart and lamenting Her Death, is none of the least Tokens of filial
Affection; and therefore is what we are obliged to. Innumerable have been the
Proofs of Her Love to Us, Her tender Cares and endearing Labors for Us from
the Womb; and such as truly are beyond our Retaliation. And it may be, when We
seriously reflect, our own Hearts reproach Us for many Omissions of filial Duty
in Her Lifetime, and that We have not given such Proofs of our Love to Her,
Care of Her, and Delight in Her, as were due from Us. We should therefore now
endeavor to repair former Defects by this last and solemn Instance of Love and
Respect. Let Her die lamented, to show that she lived desired, Let Her Death be
a Grief to Us, to show that Her Life was a Joy to Us. We should account our
good Mothers worthy of this double Honor; and are inexcusable, if We do not
pay it Them.

VIII. WE have Scripture-Example to argue for this mourning the Death of our
gracious Mothers. I shall mention only one Instance; and that is Isaac mourning
for his Mother Sarah. This is intimated in Genesis 24.67. Isaac brought Her into
his Mother Sarah's Tent, and took Rebekah and she became his Wife; and He loved
Her: And Isaac was comforted after his Mother's Death. Sarah had been dead now
about Three Years: Yet the sorrowful sense of Her Death was not worn off till
now. It continued till the Comfort of a new and nearer Relation was brought in
to balance it. Truly an affectionate and dutiful Son was Isaac to His Mother
while living, and an hearty Mourner for Her when dead.

NOW this was written for our Ensample and Admonition.

AND thus I have shown, That it is lawful and proper, yea a Duty to mourn the
Loss of a dear and gracious Mother. I have been longer on this Point than I
designed, and it may be also than there was need, especially in the present
Case. Though many times, I must confess, there seems to be too much necessity for
the pressing and inculcating this Duty on the careless Posterity of some Pious
Women, upon the like occasion. Indeed Children's Love and Regard to their
Parents living or dead, commonly needs a Spur, though the Parents too often need
a Curb.

BUT now being convinced of the Duty; our Concern is to know, How we may
discharge it aright. I shall therefore briefly hint at one or two necessary
Qualifications of this Mourning.

I. IT must be well-grounded, and flow from Religious Principles.

I might in the first Place have said, It must be a Real and solid Grief; not
an airy Pretense and affected Show. It must be inward, and not lie merely in
Words and Actions. The Heart must be full; Impressions within agreeable to
Expressions without. But this is not all: It must be a Religious Grief;
Voluntary and Chosen, Intelligent and Rational, Pious and Devout; It must be a
gracious Passion, raised upon spiritual Principles and Views.

FAITH in the Providence of GOD must lie in the Foundation of this sorrow. In
the Mourning our Loss, there must be a Respect to the original efficient Cause,
and an acknowlegement of the Divine Dominion over Us and all our Enjoyments. We
must see the Providence of GOD in the Bereavement; and it must be very humbling
to Us, to consider the Hand that smites us.

THERE must be the Fear of GOD in Exercise, and a Sense of His Displeasure,
sitting heavy upon Us. An Apprehension of the Frown and Rebuke of Divide
Providence in the Affliction, should move the inward Springs of Passion, and
more sensibly affect Us than the outward Trouble however severe and piercing.
And the Consideration of our Guilt and Demerits should yet more deeply affect
our Hearts, sharpen our Resentments and fill Us with Bitterness of Soul. Sin,
the deserving Cause of our Affliction, must sting our Breasts and tear our
Bowels.

AND further, Our Grief must be animated by a Principle of Love to GOD, The
Reason of our Mourning must not be so much the Loss of a mere Creature-comfort,
as that We are deprived of a Blessing, in which We saw and enjoyed much of GOD.
We must lament after GOD, who in the Removal of pious and useful Persons, so
far withdraws Himself, and calls home His Spirit. This Though It must give a
peculiar Accent to our Lamentations, that a Godly Person is ceased, who had
much of the Presence of GOD with Her, and was a rich Blessing to Us on
Spiritual Accounts; and by whose Death so much of our Defense and Glory is
departed, and so much of our Spiritual Stock of Gifts and Graces, Prayers and
Services gone; that one Token of the Divine Presence is taken away, and one
Stream from the Fountain of living Waters dried up, which was a Refreshment and
a Furtherance to Us in the Way of Life. -- This is to mourn after GOD, and
according to GOD, when mourning under Bereavements. -- Thus Love to GOD, must
be the Root of our Sorrow.

AGAIN, There must be a Spirit of Obedience acting of Us. Our Mourning must be
from Conscience of Duty, and in Submission to GOD's Authority, who expects and
demands This of Us. Our mourning the Death of a gracious Parent should be in
Obedience to the 5th Command, which (as has been observed) requires Us to pay
this our last solemn Respect and Duty to our Father and Mother. It must also be
with sincere Aims at the Glory of GOD, (which our Christian Mourning under such
a frowning Providence has various ways an Aspect upon) and not merely in
Compliance with the Impulses of Nature, or with the decent Usage of the World.

THUS We must be influenced by Spiritual Principles and Motives in our
Lamenting the Death of a pious Mother. Else though natural Affection may work a
little, It is but as the Groaning and Howling of the Beasts that have no
Understanding. Our Grief is but a carnal, absurd and insignificant Passion; and
profits us nothing. And indeed unless We are moved by such Religious
Principles, it will be exceeding difficult, if not impossible, to govern our
Sorrow aright; which is another Thing incumbent on Us. Wherefore,

2. OUR Mourning must be well regulated; and that both as to the Degree and the
Duration.

AS to the Degree; This must be proportionable to the occasion; a great
Lamentation, answerable to the Greatness of the Loss: Our Sorrow in the present
Case (the Death of a wise, good and excellent Mother) must be very deep and
pungent. This is a just Debt of Honor to the Memory of the Dead, whose
Relation to Us was superior and nearer than most, and a due Reverence to the
Hand of GOD, the Blow whereof now comes nigher to Us, and lies heavier upon Us,
than in most other Cases. This is intimated in the the Text, I bowed heavily,
as one that mourns for his Mother. And yet We must carefully watch against
Excess, and all the Signs of it, as Rage, Despair, Neglect of Duty, Ingratitude
for Mercies continued, and the like.

OUR Sorrow is inordinate, when it exceeds the just Merits of the Cause; so
when our private Grief excludes the sense of Public Calamitys; when it causes a
Brutish Oblivion of former Mercies and a base Contempt of present Enjoyments;
when it unfits Us for, diverts Us from, or distracts Us in the Duties of our
Civil or Christian Calling; when it breaks our Health, and our Spirits sink
under oppressive Heaviness; when we voluntarily amplify and aggravate our
Affliction, give Way to and delight in Melancholy, and foolishly cherish our
disconsolate Frames by one unhappy Method and another, refuse to be comforted,
and are deaf to such Considerations as tend to suppress or allay our Sorrow:
When We suffer our Grief to degenerate into sullen Discontent, impatient
Frowardness, or angry Murmur against Divine Providence; and break out into
extravagant Speeches or turbulent Actions. When it is thus with Us; onr Sorrow
is exorbitant, and swells beyond it is proper Banks, And such intemperate Grief
in all the Signs and Expressions of it, is to be most heedfully guarded
against, let the Bereavement We are under be attended with never such wounding
Aggravations. Surely it is meet to be said unto GOD, I have borne Chastisement;
I will bear the Indignation of the Lord; and truly, it is good for a Man, that
He patiently and submissively bear the Yoke in His Youth. We must take heed,
that we do not fret and fume and fling as the Wild Bull in a Net, or be
untractable as the wild Ass which is used to the Wilderness. We must not Roar
like Bears (as the Prophet speaks) but Mourn sore like Doves, with a humble and
quiet Spirit. There must be a Christian Calm in the Mind, and quiet Resignation
to the Will of GOD; as becomes those who believe His Sovereignty, Wisdom,
Goodness an Faithfulness to His Promises; and as becomes those who are not as
others, without Hope. We must not mourn as blind and ignorant Heathen, who were
Strangers to the Faith and Hope of the Gospel, for such as die in the Lord. We
must calm our ruffled Passions, and ease our oppressed Minds by considering the
Designs of Providence, and the Encouragements of the Gospel. Concerning them
who sleep in Jesus, We believe that they are removed from us to their
unspeakable Gain, received to Glory, translated to a better Country, even an
Heavenly. And concerning our selves, We have Hope, that GOD will sanctify their
Death unto Us for Spiritual Profit, and repair the Loss with unperishable
Blessings in Christ Jesus; and there is Hope, if We are Followers of Them who
through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises, that We shall with songs of Joy
meet them in Heaven again, never (never) to part more. -- And now with these
Hopes We should temper our Grief, moderate our swelling Passions, and bank up
our flowing Tears, at the Decease of our wise and holy and excellent Parents.
-- Thus as to the Measure, our Grief must be under the Restraints of Reason and
Grace.

SO as to the Duration. Our Grief must neither be of too short, nor of too long
a Continuance. On the present extraordinary Occasion, before it must not be a
transient Pang of sorrow: but there must be a lasting Impression of such a
Providence. We must not soon forget our Affliction and let our sorrowful
Resentments quickly cool and die away. Isaac's Grief for His Mother's Death was
not worn off of a long Time, as was observed before. -- Nevertheless, It must
not (neither) be an obstinate Course of restless Melancholy, as if the Loss
were invaluable and irreparable. No; this resolved, fixed, Grief cannot be
reconciled with Christian Submission, and therefore is not to be indulged. Though
it is lawful and prudent to let Nature have it is genuine Operation, and breath
out it is Grief with freedom; yet sanctified Reason must set the Bounds both as
to Degree and Duration. The Wisdom that is from above must limit the Time of
our Funeral-sorrows, by regarding the Rules of Duty and Decency.

AND thus I have shown, How and Why We are to mourn the Death of a gracious
Mother.

BUT are We only to mourn and weep? Will Tears for the Loss suffice? Nay; but
our Mourning must be accompanied with and occasional of various other Duties
and religious Exercises, Dispositions, and Resolutions; which I shall mention,
and so conclude.

THUS, Under this sorrowful Bereavement, We must be strict and serious in
Self-Examination, with reference to our Conduct in the Relation of Children to
the Deceased. We must examine our selves and try our Ways, with Diligence and
Impartiality. And if We find in any Instances or Degrees We have approved our
selves dutiful and obedient Children, and have been a Comfort and not a Grief
and Heaviness to our Mother, then We should rejoice with thankful Praises to
GOD; unto whose Grace We must ascribe all that has been commendable and
praiseworthy in Us. -- And on the other hand, Whatsoever has been amiss (as no
doubt there has first or last been much so,) We must repent hereof with Shame
and Grief of Heart. If We have erred, in an inordinate Love to, Delight in, and
Dependence on our deceased Parent, while with Us; or if We have slighted Her,
been disobedient to Her, under-valu'd the Mercy of GOD to Us in Her, and not
sought the Good by Her that was to be gotten, We must lay it to Heart now We
are mourning Her Decease* We must humble our selves before GOD for all the
Follys and Failings of every Kind, which we stand chargeable with.

I will here take Leave to transcribe a Passage to my Purpose, out of an
excellent Author, which has occurred to me since the Delivering my Sermon:
Children should consider upon the Death of Holy Parents, in what Instances They
failed of harkening to their Counsels, and following Their Instructions,
Admonitions and Examples; of paying that Honor, Reverence, Duty and Obedience
which GOD Commands. They should then remember, consider, and mourn to think how
often their Miscarriages against GOD, and Them, were a Grief and Burden to
their Souls, and made them walk softly: They should recall the Vanity of Their
Childhood, and review the Stubbornness, and Frowardness, and Intractableness of
their Youth; and the many particular Provocations They were guilty of while
Their Parents lived; against their frequent Reproofs, against the Cry of Their
Prayers, and the meaning of their Tears, against Their many Warnings and
compassionate Calls to Repentance, against all the Methods GOD used to awaken,
humble and reform Them: Is not This the Voice of such a Rod to many Children,
when their godly Parents are taken away by Death See Mr. Shower's Mourners
Companion, Part 1. page 164.
?

WE should hear the Voice of GOD, and study to answer His Call in the present
Visitation, by sincerely Repenting of all our Misdemeanors, in the Character
of Children. We must Sorrow to Repentance; this is to be sorry after a godly
manner, as is hinted, 2 Cor. 7.9. We must pursue one Grief with another,
Natural with Spiritual. This is a Diversion of our Resentments to the right
Object. When We turn the Current of our Grief, upon Sin, (from the Effect to
the Cause) then our Tears run in their proper Channel. The Sorrow of this
World, works Death; but Godly Sorrow works Repentance unto Life. As, when a
Man bleeds dangerously in one place, then, to open a Vein elsewhere, turns the
Course, and prevents the fatal Consequence.

THUS our Sorrow for the Bereavement, must be followed with Sorrow for our
Sins, which have provoked GOD to contend with Us by so awful and awakening a
Providence. And with Repentance toward GOD, there must be Faith toward our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, whereby We rely on Him for the Remission of our Sins through
His Blood.

AGAIN, We should remember and give GOD the Glory of all that was excellent and
valuable in our deceased Parent. Her Infirmities (the few she might have) which
are put off with Mortality, We must cover in Silence, and bury in Oblivion; but
Her Excellencys, that were many and which are perfected in the Glory of GOD. We
must call to Mind, admire, and speak of. This is a very natural and fitting
Concomitant of our Mourning, and a due Tribute of Honor to Her Memory, as well
as a just Regard to the Honor of Divine Grace, by which She was what She was,
and which ought this way to be magnified. Let GOD then have the Glory of those
shining Graces and Gifts that adorned Her. Let Her Children rise up and call
Her blessed; Let Them speak aloud Her due Praises: Let Them speak often to one
another, and on proper Occasions to Others; Let them tell how She lived, and
say how She died. Let Them say what an exact, through, universal Christian She
was; what a loving and obsequious Wife; what a careful, wise and tender Parent;
what an affectionate and respectful Sister* what a discreet and condescending
Mistress; what a true and constant Friend; what a courteous, benevolent and
obliging Neighbor, etc. In a word, we must endeavor modestly to set forth all
the various Parts of Her bright and just Character; which made Her Person so
lovely and venerable to Us while She lived, and will render Her Memory ever
precious and delightful to Us, now She Is gone: And which in her Lifetime She
desired (in great Humility) might be hid (as much as possible) from the View
and Observation of the World; not desiring (nor able to bear with) the Praise
of Men: but now She is out of Hearing, it is nothing less than Decency and Duty
in Her Children to stand up and tell of Her good Deeds, and relate Her Virtues;
and never to mention Her Name, but with the utmost Respect and Honor. A
laudable Thing it is in the Children of such an excellent Parent, to set
Themselves to show forth Her deserved Praises: it is a good and pleasant Work,
which We should always be ready to Rise up and engage in See Mr. Colman's
Funeral Sermon for Mrs. Hirst, from Prove. 31.28. page 9, 16.
. It is a work We are much advantaged for, being so well acquainted with Her
worth; and are much obliged to, being so greatly indebted to Her (under GOD)
for our Being and Education. And it is made a part of the Elogium given the
virtuous Woman, that She has Children who rise up and call Her Blessed. It Is
none of the least of Her Honors, that She is praised by those who have had
such peculiar opportunities to know fully Her manner of Life, and most retired
Carriage; from whom She most highly deserved; and whose Praises (if any at all)
She would chiefly covet. Give Her then of the Fruit of Her hands, let Her reap
the Honors She has so dearly earned; and let Her own Works (Her virtuous
Children, who are in a great measure Her Work in the Lord) praise Her in the
Gates See Mr. M Henry's Sermon on the Death of his Mother, also from Prove.
31.28 page 8.
.

FURTHER, We must recollect and thankfully acknowledge to GOD the many Favors
and Blessings He has Dispensed to Us in and by our deceased Parent. A wise and
good Mother is a singular Mercy; which does not fall to every ones share. This
is the Gift of GOD, a rich Gift and invaluable Privilege. Wherefore We should
praise GOD for the Riches of His Goodness, in the Disposal of Us into this
happy Relation. We should bless GOD, that ever We had so excellent a Parent;
that He did choose out such a Person to bring Us into the World, and to bring Us
up in the World; who was of so admirable a Temper, easy and soft, yet without
Weakness; so prudent in Her Conduct toward Us, using Authority without
Severity, being strict without Ill Nature; so tenderly careful about, and
watchful over Us; so early and constantly painful in Instructing and Educating
of Us; so solemn in Her Charges upon Us to give up our selves to GOD; so
fervent and unceasing in Her Prayers for Us; even travailing in Birth of Us
again until She could see Christ formed in Us: so exemplary in Her Walk before
Us; so assisting to Us in our Walk with GOD; being always a prudent Counsillor
and faithful Monitor to Us, exciting Us to Duty, reproving Us for Sin, warning
Us against Temptations, directing Us in Difficulties, encouraging Us under
Doubts and Fears, comforting Us under Troubles and Afflictions, and confirming
Us in the Way of Truth. These, and many other good Offices of Here Is from our
Birth, We have to remember, and ought to acknowledge with the most grateful
Sense of Divine Goodness to Us herein. Every Relative is to Us all that and
only that, which GOD makes the same to be. We ought then to bless GOD that We
have had so great a Blessing in a Mother; And We must be very thankful that We
enjoyed her so long; A Privilege which not a few in the World are denied. What
poor shifts had We made in our Minority, if We had not had a good Mother to
comfort Us? Dr. C. Mather's Maternal Consolations; a Sermon on the Death of His
Mother, from, Isa. 66.13. page 10.
. If She had not been continued to Us, until our Arrival to Maturity, How many
Blessings and Comforts had We missed of? How many Disadvantages had We met
with? We should be thankful then that She was spared to Us so long.

AND further, We should observe and resent the various Mercys mixed with the
Judgment. We should take a thankful Notice of what Comforts remain to Us. Have
We our honored Father still living, or kind Parents in Law, or tender
Consorts, or loving Brothers and Sisters, and other Relatives and Friends
continued to Us? We should be thankful herefor. It is of the Mercy of GOD, that
We are not left altogether Solitary and Desolate. And then the Comfort We had
in the Manner and Circumstances of our late Parent's Death, should be observed
with Gratitude. Thus had We by reason of Her previous Illness and Languishment,
a weaning Time, and space for preparing to meet GOD in the Way of Judgment? Had
She opportunity and assistance to glorify GOD by extraordinary Acts of Faith,
and an inviolable Patience, and Submission to the Divine Will on her Deathbed;
by a lively exercising and expressing Her Love to, and Delight in GOD. Her
Trust in Christ, Her Repentance for Sin, Her Gratitude for Mercys, Her Contempt
of the World, Her Desire and Hope of Eternal Life; and by leaving Her Testimony
for the Excellency, Sweetness and Benefit of a Holy Walk and Communion with
GOD, (upon long Experience even from a Child,) Was this the Case? Truly it is a
very comfortable Reflection, and just matter of Thanksgiving. But it is yet
more comfortable; if We had Opportunity to be present with Her in Her Sickness
and latter Moments; to see the End of the Lord; to behold the Trial of Her
Faith, and Her Example of suffering Affliction; to see the happy Exit of Her
good Conversation in Christ; Her Patience in waiting at the Door, and her Hope
of entering within the Vail: to hear Her dying Prayers for Us, to receive Her
dying Counsels to Us; and attend Her heavenly Discourses, wherein out of the
good Treasure in Her Heart, She brought forth good things new and old. If We
had Opportunity to be thus edified and comforted by Her on Her Sickbed, This
must needs be a very refreshing Mixture in our bitter Cup, and bespeaks very
thankful Acknowlegements of the Divine Favor to Us.

AND now (I may add) Let Us gather up as many as We can of the wise Sayings and
gracious Words that fell from Her Lips; the wholesome (...) is, solemn
Exhortations, and faithful Warnings She gave Us, as well in the Time of her
Life, as at her Death: Let us often think them over, and endeavor to imprint
Them in our Memories that they may not be lost; and let us resolve to act
conformably to Them, lest We mourn at the Last (when Her Words shall rise up in
Judgment against Us,) and say, How have I hated Instruction and despised to
obey the Law of my Mother?

LET us also remember her Pious Example, (in which was given us a fair Copy of
every Christian Grace and Virtue,) and be Imitators of Her as dear Children.
Let us ever keep her excelling Pattern in our Eye; and those Things which We
have both learned and received and heard from Her, and seen in Her, do; and the
GOD of Peace shall be with Us. Diligent Imitation of Her will be the best
Expression of our Love to Her, and the truest and most significant Commendation
of Her. To tread in Her Steps, to transcribe Her Virtues, and exhibit the Image
of Her Perfections in our own Lives, This will be to erect for Her the most
honorary and lasting Monument; This will make Her Name to live, and preserve
Her Memory ever fresh to all that knew Her. And in this Way we shall (it may
be) obtain the same good Report of all Men which She had, and as She has done,
leave a sweet Perfume on our Name at Death; and have the like happy Exit out of
the World; and an equal Inheritance with Her in Glory; and perhaps in like
manner leave of our Posterity to be serving GOD on Earth while We shall be
praising Him in Heaven. Let us resolve then to be Followers of Her, even as she
also was of Christ. Let us study to resemble Her in all the various
Excellencies, which make up her comprehensive Character; Aspiring continually,
if by any means We may rise up to this admired Model, and not come behind in
any Gift, in any Virtue, in any Praise. Let us walk in the same Spirit of
Repentance toward GOD, and Faith toward our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Let us imitate
Her solid, regular, and lively Devotion, Prayerfulness, and universal
acquaintance with secret Religion; Her Reverence and Love to the Word and
Ordinances, Sabbath and Servants of the LORD; Her godly Sincerity, holy
Jealousy, Tenderness of Heart, Mortification, and continual Circumspection over
her Self; Her Catholic Principles, and Communion with all Christians who hold
the Head; Her undisguis'd Humility, unaffected Gravity, Modesty, Reserv'dness,
Purity, Patience, Meekness, Peaceableness, Ingenuity, Candor, Charity,
Prudence, Diligence in Business, Goodness and Fidelity in all Relations,
Aequanimity in all Conditions, etc. In a word, Let us be engaged by the happy
Influence of Her Example to walk within our Houses with a perfect Heart, to
bring up our Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, and look well
to the ways of our Household; to study Usefulness in our respective Places, and
serve our Generation according to the Will of GOD: and let us give Diligence
herein so much the more, (abounding in Prayer for our selves, and ours, and
others, and being fruitful in every good Work,) that we may contribute
something toward filling up the Breach, made by Her Removal, in the Family,
Church, and World, that Her Absence may be as little perceived as possible.

LET us seek to have our Loss made up in GOD. Let us be earnest with GOD, the
GOD of all Grace and Comfort in and through JESUS CHRIST, for all needful Support
under, a sanctified Improvement of and Advantage by so heavy a Stroke; Let it
be our Hearts Desire and Prayer that We may be made spiritual Gainers by our
temporal Losses; that the Want of Creature Comforts may prepare us for and be
supplied with Divine Enjoyments. Let this bereaving Providence quicken Us to
remember our Creator in the Days of our Youth, to choose the Unchangeable
JEHOVAH for our GOD and Head, our Guide and Portion. Let us make Him our Trust
from our Youth, that when Father as well as Mother leave Us, GOD may take Us
up; who ever lives, though Parents and Relations are not suffered to continue by
reason of Death; and whose Word is full of gracious Encouragements to the
Posterity of Believers. He has styled Himself the Father of the Fatherless, and
with Him the Motherless find Mercy. Let us then engage and animate our Selves
in the Service of GOD, and Dependence upon Him, from the Consideration of our
pious Parentage, or Descent from such as were so nearly related to and
interested in the blessed GOD. And let us improve the Death of our dear and
holy Parents to quicken ourselves to place our Happiness more in GOD, and
invigorate our Love to and Delight in Him; to abstract our Hearts from all
Earthly Comforts; and turn our Desires and Hopes toward the Heavenly Joys,
which our glorified Parents are Partakers of in the Presence of the Lamb. While
(excited by the present Stroke) We are giving Diligence to do all that Duty
toward our Surviving Relatives which is due, and to get all that Good by 'em
which is possible, and are weaning our selves from them, and sitting loose in
our Affections, under the sense of Their Mortality and Ours; We should be
endeavoring to have our Conversation much in Heaven; should seek the Favor
and Presence of GOD, and thirst after Communion with Him more and more, which
will abundantly compensate for our Loss; and should in Faith and Love be
holding some kind of Converse with our dear departed Relatives, See Mr (...)'s
Mourner's Companion, 1st part, 194 page
by meditating on Their admirable Perfections, and blessed Employments and
Entertainments, in Their glorified State; by rejoicing in Their Advancement to
Heaven, more by far than We should have done for their temporal Preferment of
any sort or degree here on Earth: by daily preparing to follow Them; and often
refreshing our selves with the Hope of a joyful Meeting and eternal Abode with
Them in another and better World; into which we should be looking the more
frequently and delightfully, because of Those that are gone before Us. -- They
are gone, and We are hastening after Them, and We know not whose Turn it will be
next. The Blow of GOD's Hand is come near Us, is awful to Us; and loudly calls
upon Us in such Language as that, (Mat. 24.44.) Be ye also ready: for in such
an Hour, as ye think not of, the Son of Man comes. Our dear Parents being dead
yet speak: We may suppose Them speaking to Us, their Children in such words as
those in 1 Chronicles. 28.9. (which are King David's dying Charge to His Son
Solomon, and with which moving Words I shall now shut up my Discourse,) Know
Thou the God of thy Father [and Mother,] and serve Him with a perfect Heart and
a willing Mind: for the Lord searches all Hearts, and understands all the
Imaginations of the Thoughts: if Thou seek Him He will be found of Thee; but if
Thou forsake Him, He will cast Thee off for Ever. AMEN.

AN ADDITION.
THE foregoing Sermon on the Death of my late honored Mother, was designed and
calculated more for the Instruction and Edification of the Living, than the
Commendation of the Dead. Yet from the few occasional Hints interspersed in the
Discourse, (though not particularly applied to Her, because in General applicable
to and intended for the other excellent Gentlewomen, (Her dear Friends in
Heaven before Her,) whom I did also design to commemorate, and for the Loss of
whom our Tears are set a flowing afresh by this repeated stroke,) I say, from
the few loose Hints given in the Discourse, We may in some Measure form Her
Character. I did not aim at a full exact Portraiture and Description of Her: or
if I did, I Am sure I have wonderfully fallen short, and miscarried in the
Attempt. What has been said might here be confirmed, and Abundance more be
added with great Truth and Justice. But I confess, I am afraid to enlarge any
further in Her just Praises, lest They, that know Her not, should tax my
Veracity, and imagine me to be bribed and bias'd by my Affection and Relation
to Her. And as for Those that were acquainted with Her, They need not me to
illustrate Her worthy, or recall to their Thoughts what so endeared Her to Them
while living, and causes them (now She Is dead) to speak of Her in such Terms of
Respect and Honor, as loudly proclaim Their just Value for Her Memory, and
deep Resentment of Their Loss. Her intimate Friends were chosen Ones, and good
Judges of real Merit: Unto Them I appeal as Witnesses to the Truth of all that
I have spoken in Her Praise: and to Them I leave it to tell, Why They will so
readily own, She was distinguished from the greatest Part of Her Sex, and had
not many Equals. -- Only I will venture my self to say, That few, I believe,
have passed through the World with greater Repute, and more general Esteem, or
more fully come up to the rare Character of the Virtuous Woman, given by the
Wise Prophetess in the last Chapter of the Proverbs. She was indeed blameless
and greatly beloved from Her Youth up. She was (as I Am told by yet-living
Witnesses) an apt, a grave, a very promising and desirable Child; and as She
grew in Years, so she increased in Wisdom, and in Favor with GOD and Man. --
She had the Happiness to be born of excellent Parents, (Two of the most eminent
Christians in Their Day,) who took great Care not only for Her polite Breeding,
but her religious Education; and the same unfeigned Faith, that dwelt in them,
was found in Her also. She was in subjection to Them with all Gravity, and (as
the Apostle teaches all Young Women to be) Sober, discrete, chaste, a keeper at
Home, [reserv'd, diligent,] good; and in Behavior as becomes Holiness;
unspotted with those Vanities and Vices, which are the too common Blemishes of
unguarded Youth. She was a Pattern of strict Virtue, Morality, and good
Carriage. And as bright an Example of Piety and Devotion; early addicting Her
Self to Retirement for Closet-Duties; Delighting in Prayer and Meditation, in
Reading and Hearing GOD's Word, and in religious Acquaintance, and Conference
with good People. -- And Her Piety was undissembled; a vital Reality, built on
solid Principles, inspired from Above. Her Religion was not Superficial: but
internal, and deep-laid on a good Foundation of Repentance from dead Works, and
of Faith toward GOD. She was the Eternal King's Daughter, by Spiritual
Regeneration; and therefore glorious within; which was the Character (She has
pleasantly told Me) a Pious Minister once complemented Her with, when Young.
She was indeed an (...) and real Christian. And (as I Have known Her humbly own
with admiring Praises of the Divine Goodness to Her) She had, in Her Youth, a
good Hope through Grace; and was persuaded of a saving Work of the Spirit in Her,
upon searching Her Heart, and examining Her self by the Characters of the
Regenerate laid down in the Scriptures, and comparing Her own Experiences with
those of other true Penitents. -- And as She was an Early Convert, so by a
patient Continuance in Well-doing She came to be an Eminent Saint. She was a
rare Pattern of steadfast Perseverance, and Growth in Grace. And (which is all I
shall add concerning Her Life) in the several Relations, that She came into,
She was very Exemplary to the last; She died well reported of for good Works;
having been obedient to Her own Husband; having brought up Children; and guided
well Her House; having lodged Strangers; having washed the Saints Feet; having
relieved the Afflicted; and diligently followed every good Work.

AND what now remains, but to say something about the Manner of Her Death; Her
Frame and Carriage in Her last Hours? And all I intend to offer, shall be
(chiefly from my own Observation and Memory,) some Passages that may tend to
the Honor of GOD's Grace in and with Her; or be proper for our Imitation,
Encouragement and Quickening.

HER Patience was truly admirable. She was exercised for some Time with great,
continual and very tedious Pains, which were a sufficient Trial of Her
Patience; But She bore all with a Christian Silence and steady Calmness and
Firmness of Spirit. And when a very shocking Turn sometimes forced Her to lisp
out a Complaint of, Pain, Pain! She would instantly correct Her self, and
rebuke Her [seeming] Impatience; saying, But it is my heavenly Father, who is
thus chastning of Me, and I deserve it, -- I deserve what is infinitely worse.
And I hope all is meant unto Good. Once in some of Her last Moments, She spoke
out with a pleasant Look and Tone, saying, O this is incomparable Pain! -- and
repeated the surprising Expression. She had almost an invincible Fortitude of
Mind. She waited on the Lord, and He strengthened Her.

AND Her Resignation was as remarkable. Her often-repeated Words were, I freely
submit to the Will of my heavenly Father, whether for Life or Death. I Am
content; His Will be done! I am willing to die; or if it be His Pleasure that I
shall live still and suffer, I am also willing. I leave my self wholly to His
alwise Dispose. Only She added, Let GOD be with Me, and help Me to endure to
the End!

HER Contempt of the World was singular. She was got above the Desire and Love
of Life. Once on my putting the Question to Her; If She desired to live any
longer here, Upon what Motive it was? She replied with a certain Vehemence,
(that spoke Her Sincerity,) "I don't desire it at all, Child. -- Only She added
this suitable Corrective; I submit entirely to the Will of GOD; I am willing to
live and suffer yet, if He will be with me. -- Once She seemed to forbid us to
pray for Her being any longer absent from the Lord. And it is remarkable that
when asked, What special Petitions She would have put up for Her? I don't
remember, that She at any time mentioned Recovery: but Pardon, and Acceptance
with GOD, and His gracious sanctifying and comforting Presence with Her, were
the Sum of Her Desires. -- When her Indisposition began to grow upon Her, She
was apprehensive of Death's Approach, and said, I have done with this World;
all my Concern now is to see my way safe and clear out of it.

SHE was in a very humble, lowly, and penitent Frame. She abhorred Her self,
and repented in Dust and Ashes. She said, GOD is now chastning me for Sin. I
deserve all this, and Infinitely more. -- Upon which I asked Her, Whether She
spoke of any more heinous Provocation, which She though it might be the particular
procuring Cause of this Visitation: But She answered with great Modesty in the
Negative; saying, No, No; I bless GOD, who by His Grace has kept Me. I cannot
accuse my self of allowed heinous Transgressions, nor do I know of any Sin
unrepented of. -- Still She said, She deserved all that was laid upon Her; and
that was Her Petition, Lord, Hear in Heaven, and Forgive, Forgive, and do, for
thy mercy's sake.

AGAIN, The Fear of GOD was in a very vigorous Exercise. She had a powerful
sense of GOD on Her Mind, the highest Reverence of His awful Majesty, and a
becoming Dread of His terrible Displeasure. It was a great Expression of Here Is;
Leaving this World is nothing to Me, Putting off this Body seems nothing to Me;
but (being jealous over her self with a godly Jealousy, as becomes the best and
brightest Saint on this side Heaven, She added,) To think of going into the
Presence of an infinitely holy and Heart-searching Judge, This makes me blush
and tremble.

SHE had a strong and genuine Faith in Christ. She said, I am a poor
unprofitable Servant, and have Nothing to boast of. Free Favor is my only
Refuge. I have nothing to depend on, but the free Mercy of God in Christ; and
in that I trust. -- She thus expressed Her Faith in the Righteousness of Christ
alone for Justification; renouncing all Dependence on Her own Righteousness, as
a sandy Foundation, that, if trusted to, would deceive Her into Ruin; realizing
it, (as I have known Her sometimes to express Her self,) that the Imperfections
attending Her best Obedience were enough, to provoke the holy GOD to condemn
Her, though She were guilty of no other Sins; and that nothing but the Merits
and Intercession of CHRIST were to be relied upon. -- She also acted Faith in
CHRIST, as Her Strength, as well as Righteousness, often calling upon Him in
such Terms as these; -- O my compassionate High Priest, my Strong Redeemer,
Help Me, Help Me, O my Compassionate Savior! Put underneath thine everlasting
Arms, support and save Me. -- It might have been said unto Her, O Woman great
is thy Faith!

AGAIN, Love to Her GOD, and SAVIOR, was now kindled into a Flame.

WHEN I was once endeavoring to assist Her in clearing up the Evidences of Her
Adoption, among other Questions of Trial, I asked Her, Whether She could
heartily join with the Psalmist in saying to GOD, Whom have I in Heaven but
Thee, -- Here She prevented me and said, Yes, Yes, and there is none upon Earth
that I desire besides Him! -- Her Heart was full of holy Longings after GOD.
She often breathed out her flaming Desires in such pathetical Expressions as
those; Lord, Lift thou up the Light of thy Countenance. O let thy Face shine
upon me, and be merciful unto me. O my GOD, I am cast down; Thou set Me in
Darkness; Thou hidest thy face from Me: and what shall I do? Mine Eyes are unto
Thee. I cry to Thee, O my GOD, in the Daytime, and in the Night: but Thou
answerest Me not. O my GOD, in Thy Favor is Life. Crown Me with thy Loving
kindness.

HER Love to CHRIST was in a fervent Operation. She expressed the highest Esteem
of Him, the strongest Desire toward Him. Once on Her saying, O my precious
Savior, Look on me with an Eye of Pity! -- I took Occasion (with a View to
helping Her discern one Evidence of Her Faith in Christ,) to repeat to Her that
Scripture, To Them that believe, He is precious: -- Upon which, She expressed
Her admiring sense hereof, saying, O how precious! He is altogether lovely! --
She said that, The Enjoyment of Christ was all Her Desire. And that, This whole
World was Nothing, Nothing to an Interest in Christ. And that, If She might but
go to be with Christ, that would be infinitely better than being here.

MOREOVER, Her Hope and Confidence in GOD did not fail. She had lived a Life of
Dependence on GOD and made Him Her Trust from Her Youth: and She had been
begotten to a lively Hope of Salvation. And now the Time was come that She must
die, She had the Hope of the Righteous and the Peace of the Upright in Her End.
She was not indeed one of them who have no Bands in their Death* nor of that
happy Number, who have the full Assurance of Faith and Joy in the Holy Ghost.
Yet once (I remember) after a long silence (when I presume She had been deeply
engaged in Meditation and Prayer) She suddenly opened Her Eyes and with a kind
of Transport uttered these Words, Now I have hold of Him, Now I Have Hold on him.
O let Him never leave me! Let me never lose my Confidence in him! -- Yet the
Clouds soon returned after the Rain. Humble Doubts and Fears prevailed; and
sometimes She was in great Darkness. One would have expected indeed that such
on extraordinary Life of Holiness and Communion with GOD as She had led, should
have terminated in a most comfortable and joyful Death. Yet GOD, who exercises
a Sovereign Liberty in the Dispensation of His Comforts, was pleased to order
it otherwise with this humble contrite Christian. She was full of
self-diffidence and the deepest self-abasement to the last: And yet in the
midst of all Her Darkness and greatest Distress, She had Faith in a lively
Exercise, and some mixture of Hope, which was as an Anchor to Her Soul, and
kept Her from being over-set with her oppressive Fear and Grief. She always
called on GOD, as Her GOD, with a humble Familiarity, and an observable
Emphasis. She often used these Words in the Agonies of Her (...) Faith. My GOD
help me. My compassionate Father help me. I have trusted in Thee, my GOD; let
me never be put to Confusion. I hope in thee my GOD; let me never be confounded.

ONCE in a continuing Fit of acute Pain, She thus expressed Her Trust in GOD; I
am in Pain: What shall I do? I am weary with my Groaning all the Day. O Lord,
mine Eyes are upon Thee. Lord, strengthen Me. O Lord, my Hope is in Thee;
whither else should I go? In Thee do I trust: I have trusted in Thee: I must
trust in Thee; and I will. Yea though thou slayest Me, yet will I trust in Thee.
-- Which last Words (the Words of Holy Job in his Affliction) She often used.
-- Under the sense of Her unusual Darkness of Mind and Dullness of Affection,
These were some of the admirable Breathings of Her unshaken Trust and
Resignation; My GOD! Thou hidest thy Face from me, Thou make me walk in
Darkness. But I submit: I Am content, I Am content. I am at thine al-wise
Dispose. I desire the Light of thy Countenance* and value it above this whole
World: but if Thou shall see meet still to hide thy Face from Met, I submit, I
submit to thy Holy Will. Only I will yet hope. On Thee my GOD do I wait all the
Day long. I hope I shall yet praise Thee.

AT another Time (the last Opportunity I had of speaking with Her,) She seemed
to have a more comfortable and cheerful Hope: These were some of Her Words, I
hope in my GOD. O my strong Tower and Defense! I hope in Thee, my GOD. I now
hope, and this is my Refreshment. -- And again, She said, O my GOD, Thou art my
only Hope and Confidence. Thou supportest and strengthenest me, and buildest me
up in my Faith.

AND again, When She was in the apprehension of Those about Her, drawing near
to the Close of Her Life, My Father to minister to Her Support, repeated some
Part of the 23d Psalm, and as He was saying those Words, When I walk through the
Valley of the shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil; for thou art with Me, --.
She interrupted Him, and supplied the Rest, saying, Thy Rod and thy Staff, they
comfort Me --. She was heard to say diverse Times, Come, come, come: How long,
how long? -- Thus it seems, the Clouds passed away at the Approach of Death,
and at Evening there was Light.

BUT I remember, whenever She had any Reviving, She was continually sollicitous
lest She should be deceived. She would often pray, O let not my Hope make Me
ashamed. Let it not be the Hope of the Hypocrite, that shall perish! Though once
She added, It cannot be so; I am no Hypocrite: I know I am not. And I think it
was upon Her uttering these Words (which She did with an Air of Assurance
uncommon to Her,) that I asked Her, Whether the Hope She had did serve sensibly
to wean Her from this World, and increase Her Hatred of Sin, and inflame Her
Desires toward GOD, etc. And She answered with Humble Thankfulness to GOD, in
the Affirmative. -- I told Her then Her Hope was certainly the Fruit of the
Spirit, a good Hope, which would not be disappointed.

AND (to add only a Word or two further) She was full of the tenderest
Expressions of Love to every Body, and very thankful to Her Friends for their
kind Visits, and for every (the least) Service or Office of Love done by any:
And never was a Person more lowly-minded; She was clothed with Humility; She
could see nothing in Her self, (She said) that should deserve such Love and
Respect from People, as was shown Her, and admired what could be the Reason of
it, etc. -- But (what is more) She had a Divine Zeal in Exercise, that put Her
upon dispensing Holy Counsels, Cautions and Encouragements to all about Her, as
was needful; which She did with great Fidelity and Affection, as well as Modest
and Discretion. How pathetically did She exhort one and another to Order Their
Conversation as becomes the Gospel, to watch over Themselves, to take Heed to
Their ways; and walk in the Way of Truth: adding once this remarkable and very
moving Expression. "MY GOD will not be mocked, MY GOD will not be mocked.

HER Dying Counsil to Us, Her Children, (which may We never forget!) was that;
O take Heed, take Heed; and be diligent to make your Calling and Election sure.

SHE spoke to all in General about a Death-bed-Repentance, and gave Warning
against the great but too common Folly of depending on it.

SHE expressed Her sense of the great Importance of actual Readiness for a
Dying Hour, and to excite hereto was the Tendency of that Counsil, Prepare to
meet thy God, O Israel! -- Which were some of her last Words, and spoken with a
most awful accent and aspect.

FURTHER, She was full of Prayer. She was praying always in the Holy Ghost;
being fervent in Spirit, and with a great Facility pouring out her Desires
(chiefly) in Scripture-Expressions; For her Bible was very familiar to Her, She
had from a Child known the holy Scriptures, and taken uncommon Pains, to
treasure up the Word of GOD in Her Heart and Memory. She was much in Prayer for
Her self, continually looking to and calling upon GOD in CHRIST for Mercy and
Grace to help Her. -- She also prayed for Others, Particularly She left Her
Blessing on Her Children; when we were standing round Her Bed, and calling Her
Blessed, acknowleging our Obligations to Her, and expressing our deepest
Sympathy with, as well as dutiful and solemn Wishes for Her; She ceased not to
pray for Us, and to bless Us in the Name of the Lord, and this not only in
General, but in Particular; (not forgetting Those of Her Children that were
absent; and Her Children's Children, even the Children that shall be born;) and
the last Words She was heard to say, were those Let my Children Live in Love
and Peace; and let the GOD of Love and Peace be with them, for Ever and Ever.
Amen!

SHE was very desirous of the Benefit of other's Prayers with Her and for Her,
while Living.

BUT now no longer! She is got beyond the Reach, and above the Need of our
Prayers. She is gone where She is eased of all Her Burdens; where Her Sighs are
turned into Songs; Her Griefs and Groans into Joy and Praise; Her Faith into
Vision; Her Hope into Fruition; Her Grace into Glory. Having born the Cross on
Earth, She now wears the Crown in Heaven: While We are left behind in Tears,
bewailing our Loss; [a Judgment, I Am humbly sensible, (to speak for my self) I
was too ripe for,] And not knowing the Things that shall further befall Us. GOD
grant it may not prove such a Beginning of sorrows, as the Death of pious
Rachel was; upon which the Affliction of Joseph in a few Months ensued! We
should therefore humble our selves under the mighty Hand of GOD; and be earnest
with Him in Prayer, that He would not proceed in His Controversy with Us. --
Howbeit, if the Spirit of Joseph (the same Spirit of Faith and Patience, of
Grace and Supplication) does but rest upon Us, whatsoever may be the Evil to
come, though We should have Sorrow upon Sorrow, Yet (as He said) GOD means it
unto Good. If We do but patiently bear, and religiously improve afflictive
Providence, We shall find by happy Experience, that Sorrow is better than
Laughter, which is one of the wise Proverbs of Solomon, though an uncouth Paradox
to the carnally-minded: but when GOD has finished His Work, the Mystery will be
unriddled. The Day shall declare it.

BUT indeed our Concern now is not so much, what ill Events this Visitation may
be the unhappy Forerunner of, or how We shall be able to bear them; as what
good Account We shall be able to give up of our Deportment under and
Improvement of the present Affliction, and how We shall apply it to make Us
better prepared for the next, whatever it be. -- O that We may have Wisdom and
Grace to demean our selves aright under this heavy Trial, and accommodate our
selves to the Intentions of Providence herein; so that though We are Losers in
our Comforts, yet GOD may be a Gainer in His Glory! O that We may never forget
the wise Lessons We Have been taught, or lose the holy Impressions (I hope) We
have received, by this mournful Dispensation! O that hereby our Hearts may be
more loosened from all Earthly Friendships and Enjoyments! That CHRIST (our
best and never-failing Friend) may be more endeared to us; and our Affections
more set upon the Things that are unseen and Eternal! O that We may be made
more thoughtful of Death and Judgment, and be quickened in our Preparations
therefore! O that We may be learning from the Example of our dear Deceased
Friend and Parent, how to Live, and how to Die! She was holy and humble, through
Her Life, and the same at Death; and these are the two great Characters; which
speak the Christian acceptable to GOD and entitled to Heaven. What though She
had not that fullness of Hope and Comfort in Her End; but after all Her
Diligence to make Her Calling and Election sure, was trouble with Doubts and
Fears, when She came to die. We must not, because of This, doom it a vain Thing
to take Pains in working out our Salvation, nor be discouraged from a Life of
Religion. For (Remember) the Cloud had a bright side; and notwithstanding all
Her Darkness, She made a glorious End; being in the midst of her greatest
Temptations and Distresses, full of Faith and humble Hope, fervent Love, Prayer
and Praise. And truly it is worth the while to Live over Her strict and holy
Life, that We may die Her happy Death, and our last End be like Here Is. -- Let
us labor then to get our Souls inspired with a noble Emulation, and fired with
a generous Ambition to be and do like Her. Let us covet to equal, and if it be
possible to excel Her in all that was imitable both in Her Life and Death. We
have the same Spirit of Grace to assist Us, and the same Recompense of Reward
to allure Us; and what can We desire more? -- Consider, If we (Her Children)
serve the Lord and do Worthily in Israel, We may perhaps inherit more of the
Good and Grace of the Covenant, than She; as Jacob's Blessings prevailed above
the Blessings of his Progenitors. This Consideration should induce Us to be
Followers of Her excellent Pattern. And it should also be a moving Argument
with Us, that this will greatly redound to Her Honor, as well as ours, When
there is an Entail of Religion upon Posterity; It is indeed a blessed and
glorious thing; This Religious Succession puts a living Beauty and Luster on
the Name and Race. But a very peculiar Dignity is put on the first and grand
Parents, who were the Beginning of this noble and happy Stock. It was the great
Glory of Abraham, next to his being the Friend of GOD, that he was the Father
of the Faithful. This honorable Character makes his Name Shine in the sacred
Story, and endears his Memory to universal Posterity; and it will be none of
the least of his Honors in the Day of the Manifestation of the Sons of GOD, to
appear as the common Head to a numerous and glorious Offspring; and to be able
to say, Lo! Here am I, and the Children which thou have graciously given thy
Servant!

An ELEGY upon the much Lamented Decease of Mrs. ELISABETH FOXCROFT of
Cambridge in New England, (late Excellent Consort to the Worshipful Col.
FRANCIS FOXCROFT, Esquire and Daughter to the Honorable, our late Judge and
Deputy Governor, THOMAS DANFORTH Esquire of blessed Memory,) Whose Funeral was
Attended, with great Honor, on the 6th Day of July, 1721. Her Immortal Spirit
having been Translated to the Paradise of GOD some Days before.
EMINENT Honor, and Esteem,
And Goodness too shall be my Theme.
The Beauties of the Character
No Panegyricks can Declare.
Attempts are Vain: Yet Grief will speak;
And Duty too must silence break.
Most Shining was the Piety
Of that Renowned Family,
From which (To Heaven be all the Praise;)
This Heroine Extracted was.
This Branch Reared up Her Graceful Head
From the Chaste and Sacred Marriage Bed:
Exciting in Dear Parents Breast,
A Thankful Joy, and happy Rest.
The main Concern was to obtain
Her Clearance from the Guilt and Stain,
Of Adam's Sin which reaches All;
With (...) Formation of Her Soul
The MEDIATOR They address;
In Prayers of Faith Their Wish Express,
A Miracle might Change Her State,
Her tender Soul Regenerate,
Furnish Her well with Every Grace,
And Fix Her in the Heavenly Race.
At Heaven's High Throne of Grace, Their Prayer
And Pious Vows Accepted were;
And Love and Power Immense so wrought,
She Is from a State of Nature brought;
Her Parent's Darling's Sanctified;
Kept Spotless; and now Glorified.
No Care, no Pains, no Cost were spared
She might be Polished and Prepared;
Instructions, Counsels were not Waste;
Her Orient Soul Implem'd so fast.
Unto Dear FOXCROFT She is Given;
To Help Him in the Way to Heaven;
A Partner of His Joys, and Cares;
Which, with His Griefs, She freely Shares:
But O! the Blessing, in a Wife!
While She Continued in this Life!
Deceased, She leaves this Legacy,
A dear and Fragrant Memory.
Rare Virtues, in a Rare Degree,
Thou Precious Soul! did Shine in Thee:
Good Prudence, humble Industry,
With undissembled Piety;
Amidst Domestic Pains and Care,
Thy Tradings still for Heaven appear.
Thy Ripe'ning Time, did well Employ
For Blessed Immortality.
Abundantly did Thou Inherit
That Ornament, the Quiet Spirit.
Thy Willing Hand took up the Cross;
And Every Furnace Purged the Dross.
In Meekness, Patience, Charity,
Thou did excel most gloriously.
From Thee, the Splendours, that did flow,
To Heaven's Refulgent Grace we owe.
Thy Children do Thee Blessed Call;
Thy Husband Praises Thee; And All
Lament the Loss our Land Sustains:
Compensate' only by Thy Gains.
But, Gracious Soul! What? Must Thou go?
And leave Us, in a World of Woe?
Thou Radiant Gem! Thou Glorious Star!
Than Rubies Richer, and more Rare!
While in the Body, much Desired!
Most Faithful, Useful, and Admired!
What? Go so soon? Why? Is this Fair
So soon to Leave Thy Children Dear,
And let thine Honored Head sit down,
Deprived of His Joy and Crown?
A Crown more Bright than the Galaxy!
Fit to be Worn by Majesty!
How could, with such a willing Mind,
Thy Ransomed DUST leave here behind!
Earth's Magnet lost its Influence,
E're Thy Translation did Commence:
And many Items of Remove,
Fixed Thine Affections more above.
Peace of Dependence held Thee fast:
Peace of Rejoicing shone at Last.
All Perilous Encounter's over;
You Are Landed on the Haleyon-shoar;
Where Just Men's Spirits Perfect are,
And bid Adieu to Pain and Fear.
There Meet Thee now Ten Thousand Quires,
To Greet Thee with Their Heavenly Lyres.
How sweetly all their Sonnets flow!
Far sweeter Melody than here below!
Thou Gain'st, But We the Losers are;
Thy Work is Praise, still Ours is Prayer;
"Thy Worthy CONSORT, now in Tears,
"GOD lengthen out His Useful Years!
"Conduct His Soul to the Highest Shore,
"To meet Thee there and Part no more!
"As Thou Thy Parents Piety
"Partookest, so may Thy Progeny
"Share Thine! CHRIST's Church Acknowledge will,
The Cov'nant-keeping GOD lives still.
Thy Reverend Son thy Grace Partakes,
Heavens Herald, He in Duty makes
Thy Virtues, from the Pulpit, Known:
By Telling Thine, He shows His Own:
May Heaven His Pious Years and Labors Crown!
AMEN.
Maestus Composuit, J. DANFORTH, V. D. M, Dorcestriae.

FINIS.

