An Essay, To Prove the Through REFORMATION of a Sinning People is no^ to be
Expected; however Pious RULERS may be Spirited for the Work, Except the Heart
of the PEOPLE be Prepared for it: Together with some Proper and Seasonable
MOTIVES to Men in every Order to Engage in this (...) and Necessary Work

In a SERMON PREACHED Before the General Court of Election at Hartford in the
Colony of Connecticut, On May 11 th, 1721.

By Jonathan Marsh A.M. Teacher of a Church in Windsor.

Isaiah xlix. 4. Then I said, I have Labored in Vain, -- Ezra x 4 Arise: for
this matter belongs unto thee* we also will be with thee: be of good courage,
and do it. Published by Order of Authority

N. London, Printed and Sold by T Green, Printer to the GOV. and COMPANY, 1721

A SERMON Preached at the Election, etc.
II CHRONICLES XX.33 Howbeit, the high Places were not taken away; for as yet
the People had not prepared their Hearts unto the GOO of their Fathers.
WE have the History of Jehosaphat's Reign in this, and in the Three foregoing
Chapters: Being set on the Throne of his Father, (as we read Chapt. 17. ver.
1.) He sets himself betimes to seek the LORD God of his Father, and to promote
the Work of Reformation in Judah; GOD was pleased to own him in this work, and
to crown him with Riches and Honor; ( Ver 5, 6.) so that the fear of him fell
on the Nations round about; they bring him Presents and pay him Tribute, ( Ver.
11) Hence we might note; That the best way for Princes when they come to Sit on
the Throne to Provide for their own Honor and safety and for the good of their
People, is to begin with matters of Religion. If a People over whom they Rule
be grown Corrupt the best way they can take to make their Reign Long and
Prosperous, is to set about the Work of Reformation in the first place. We Read
of his care for the Safety of Jerusalem and his doing much Business in Judah,
by Building Castles and Citys of Store in it, ( Ver 12,) and Placing his Men of
War in the Fenced Citys, to the end of the Chapter. Hence note; That Religion
is no hindrance to Worldly Business; Men may be concerned for the one and not
neglect the other. Subordinata non puganan; Both these Ends may be pursued to
good Advantage by the Heads and Rulers of a People: But alas! The Brightest
Suns have their Spots, and the Best of Men have their Defects. We Read of an
Error in, his Conduct in the beginning of the next Chapter in his Joining in
Affinity with Ahab, and going up with him to Ramoth^ (...) to Battle against
the Syrians, in which Engagement his Life is Exposed, and Ahab receives his
Death's Wound; The Story of this of which I give you a brief hint is contained
at large in the Eighteenth Chapter. We Read of his Returning in Safety to
Jerusalem ( Chapt. I9. Ver 1.) And of his being Reproved by Jehu the Son of
Hanani the Seer for what he had done ( Ver. 2) After this he Visits the Kingdom
from one end of it to the other, the better to know the state of his People,
and further to Reform what he found to be Amiss among them, or to supply and
make up what might be wanting. We Read of his setting Judges in the Land
throughout all the Fenced Citys of Judah, and giving them a Solemn Charge (
Ver. 5, 6, 7) So of his setting Officers over the House of the Lord, to inspect
the Service, Worship and Government of it, ( Ver. 8.) And of his giving them
their Respective Charges and Directions to the end of the Chapter.

[But however the Prophet had told him of his Error in Uniting with Ahab and
Assisting him that was Gods open and Avowed Enemy, and that for this there was
wrath upon him from before the Lord, i e. God was Angry for it, and would give
some special Testimony against him for it in the way of his Providence.]

Now the beginning of this Twentieth Chapter in which the Text is contained,
seems to have some respect to that Rebuke and Threatening; as if God were about
to fulfill and to accomplish it; for we read here that the Men of Moab, Ammon
and Mount Scir, a Numerous Baud are Combined against him; upon the Report of
this he is sore afraid; sets himself to Seek the Lord, and Proclaims a Fast
throughout all Judah, ( Ver. 3, 4.) We read of his Prayer in the Audience of
the Congregation, (from the 5 Ver. to the 12 Ver. inclusively.) So of the
Answer and the great Overthrow of his Enemies Consequent upon it (from the 14.
Ver. to the 25. Ver.) The People of Judah are much Affected with this Signal
Salvation wrought for them by the Mighty Hand of God; So that they Assemble
themselves in the Valley of Berachah to Bless the Lord, ( Ver. 26.) We Read of
their Triumphant Return to Jerusalem, ( Ver. 27, 28) This great Overthrow
wrought by the Hand of the Lord, strikes a Dread into the Enemies of Judah; So
that the Realm has Rest and Quiet round about: And the Chapter Concludes the
Scene of his Happy Reign, for we Read of his Death and Burial in the beginning
of the next:

Yet in the Close of all, his Imperfection as noted in Two Things.

1. In this, That he did not Complete the Work of Reformation.

2 In his Joining with Ahaziah that was very wicked, in matters of Business and
Trade; An Evil like to the former, in Uniting with his Father Ahab: For this
God is Angry, and the Measures concerted between them are broken. [See this
from Ver. 35. to the end of the Chapter.] But my work is to Consider his
Failing in the first Head, ( Ver. 33) In the Words note then these two Things.

1. That though Jehosaphat went a great way in the work of Reformation, yet he
was not Able to go through with it: Instance is given wherein he Failed; We are
told, He walked in the ways of Asa his Father, (Ver. 32.) And Departed not from
it, doing that which was right in the sight of the Lord; howbeit the high
places were not taken away. By high Places in Propriety of Speech, we
Understand the Hills, High Grounds, places of the Earth above others; and the
Original Word will bear this sense, it signifies in its Primitive the Height of
any thing, as the Top of Hills and Mountains, etc. And is here Metonimically
used to Express the Altars Erected in such Places for Sacrifice, or any Images
set up in them for Religious Worship, or their Worshipping the True God in such
places from a Corrupt Conformity to the Heathen: We read concerning the Heathen
Nations that they had Many gods or Subordinate Deities; they Limited them to
particular Kingdoms, Cities, Hills, Groves, etc Agreeable to this notion they
set up their Temples, Chapels or Altars for Worship, in their Respective
Places; Now the Men of Israel and Judah had learnt their way and were very
hardly brought off from it: Hence it is noted as a Failure in him and some other
of the Pious Kings of Judah set to Reform the People: though they did many
things in the Work yet here they Failed and came short. But here seems to arise
a Difficulty to Reconcile the Text, with Chap. 17. Ver. 6. For there we Read,
that he took away the high places and the groves out of Judah. Two Things are
offered to Reconcile the Texts.

(1.) That he took them away in part, but not in whole; only such where Images
were Worshipped.

(2) They might be taken away in the beginning of his Reign and be set up a new
in the latter part of it; when the King was grown into Years, and not so well
Able to look after the state of the People, or else was now grown more Remiss
in matters of Religion.

2. Note the Ground of this; For as yet the People had not Prepared their
Hearts to the God of their Fathers: They had not got their Hearts Acted and
Prepared for this Work, so as to pursue it, and to go through with it. The Word
in its root signifies to Fit, Form, Prepare, Confirm, etc. It Is sometimes taken
in an Ill sense and points out the Judgments of God, ready to be brought on
Wicked Men, which he has fitted for them, Psalm. 7.13. He has prepared for him
the Instruments of Death, etc. And it is no more than what a Sinning People have
cause to expect, if they prove Incorrigible for all the means used to Reform
and to Amend them. Judah is here Blamed, and not the King in the Case; they
were not Prepared and steadily bent to Seek the Lord God of their Fathers in
Sincerity; and to Conform to him in every thing, without any Reserve. They
would Worship the True God, yet not be Confined to the Temple, but for
Convenience, Ease, and from Affection to their Ancient Custom, would yet
Worship him in the High Places. This Jehosaphat was Forced to Connive at, or
was not Able to Redress. Antiquity is very Venerable in matters of Religion,
and proves many times a good Passport for Error: their Disease was very
Inveterate and hard to be Cured. Jer. 13.23 Besides there might need Prudence
to be used here (as in every Reformation of Weight) to carry on the Work by
degrees; least by driving too fast, he should beget strong Prejudices in the
People against it. And so he might lose the ground that he had gained.

From the Words thus Opened, we may note this Doctrine.

DOCT That however, Pious Rulers may be Spirited for the Work of Reformation;
it is not to be Expected they should go through with the Work, except the Heart
of the People be Prepared and Disposed for it.

It Is given as the Reason in the Text, why King Jehosaphat came short in the
Work and did not finish it, though a Man of Spirit and Resolution for the Work:
even because the Heart of the People was not touched aright, cast into Gods
Mould, so as to seek him in Sincerity, their Heart was not right with God:
Hence Obedience was Partial and Feigned, now wherein it was Agreeable to their
Interest, Temper and Humor, they were ready to Conform; but wherein
Convenience, Custom, Particular Affection did Oppose, Prejudice Weighed the
Balance to the Contrary side, and there was nothing more to be done.

In the Handling of the Doctrine, I shall Labor to give some Answer to these
two Enquiries:

Quest I. When may a Corrupt and Sinning People, be said to be Prepared for the
Work of Reformation?

Quest II. How does it appear that Pious Rulers however Spirited for the Work,
are not like to go through with it, except the Heart of the People be Prepared
for it?

Of these in Order:

Quest I When may a Corrupt and Sinning People he said to be Prepared for the
Work of Reformation? When is the Heat Fitted, Bent and Disposed for this great
Work? We may take up the Answer to this Enquiry, in the following Heads

1. When they are willing to use the Means of Conviction. A People grown very
Degenerate, are unwilling to use the Means of Conviction The have choice means
of Conviction in the Word, and so in the Providence of God but they don't care
to u^e them for this end: So God Complains of Israel when he sent his Prophets
among them, to tell them of their Sins, and to Denounce his Judgments, they
would not hearken unto them, Jer. 7.25.26. The like is Noted of the Judgments
of God upon them at times, though Compared to the Light that goes forth, Hos.
6.5. Speedy in their motions, terrible in their operations; yet they were
carried by the impetuous motion of their corrupt Affections, headlong into Sin
without using the power of Self-reflection God had given them, Jer. 8 6. The
same spirit Christ Himself notes in the Jews in his day, That they shut their
Eyes against the light, and did very much oppose the Means of Conviction from a
love to their Lusts, Joh. 3 19 But now when they are brought to see the need
they stand in of Conviction, and to use the means for this end; to submit to
Duty, and to reflect on their ways, they may be said in a degree to be prepared
for the work: Jer. 2.23. See thy way in the valley, and know what it is thou
have done.

2. When they have any clear Conviction. When they are brought not only to
submit to the means of Conviction, but Warnings, Reproofs, Threatenings and
Judgments have been set home, so as to give them some distinct view of their
evil ways and corrupt carriages, they now lie fair for a Reformation; When a
People see their Pride, Murmurings, Intemperance, Injustice, Covetousness,
Formality in Religion, visible Contempt of God's Word and Ordinances, etc.
there is now some ground to hope these and other Sins they are guilty of may
come to be Reformed. A People under this Conviction when called upon to Return,
will know wherein they ought to Return. Particular Persons are in the way to
Reform when they fall under clear and strong Conviction; and it is so with the
Body of a People. Hence Searching and Trying as the means of Conviction is
spoken of by the Church, as antecedent to her turning to the Lord, Lam. 3.40

3. When they see their way of Sin to be Destructive and Ruinous to them. A
Sinning People whilst secure are very apt to flatter themselves to ward off
Threatenings and to fence against Judgments. See Deuteronomy. 29.19. and Isa. 28.15 It Is
the frame of Particular Persons in a state of carnal Security; and it is the
frame of the Body of a People, till God comes to Convince and Awaken them; They
see not the deadly and fatal tendency of their ways: But now when God will
Reform and Amend them, He shows them their way is not safe but dangerous; that
it is not the way to Prosper, but it is the way to Destruction, Romans 3.16. And by
this means he checks them in their Career, and makes them afraid of their
Course. There is a natural dread of Misery in every man: hence men must Think
of turning their way when they see it leads to Ruin. We see this to be founded
in the light of Reason, in the Instance given of the People of Nineveh when
threatened with sudden Destruction, they are brought by it to Reform and to Cry
mightily to God for Mercy, Jonah 3.7, 8, 9.

4. When they see they are in the way to be a happy People, upon their
Reformation and Return to God. A Sinning People bro't into Distress by
Sickness, Poverty, Famine, Sword, Bondage, Usury, Injustice, Opression, etc. if
they be not quite past feeling, they are wont to show an Uneasy Spirit; They
want to have these Evils removed and to be bro't into good Circumstances, but
they see not how it is to be brought about by a better Regard to the Rules of
Religion, they be not convict that the Evils bro't upon them are the fruit of
their corrupt Carriages; Hence see not that Reformation is the way to Prosper;
they cannot see their Happiness to be secured by their being a Religious People;
some that are better than others fare no better than others but worse in some
respects, according to that remark. He that departs from evil makes himself
a prey, Isa. 59.15. Hence when called upon to be Just and Honest in their
dealings, to te Sober, Temperate, True and Faithful, to be Quiet and Peaceable
men; they presently Object and say, Cui bon^, What shall we get by i^? Is there
any Profit in it? And so long as they can see none, they are Prejudiced against
Religion; Reason as they, Job 21.15 What is the Almighty that we should serve
him, and what profit should have if we pray unto him? But now an Argument
drawn, Ab Utili, is well relished by them: and is as a sweet smelling Savor in
the nostrils of Carnal men; when they come to see' will be the way to Prosper
and to be a happy People, it is to be hoped they will resolve as Israel, Hos
2.7. I will go and return to my first husband, for then it was better with me
than now.

Quest II. Whence is it we are not to expect that Pious Rulers, however
spirited for the work, should be able to go through with it, except the Heart
of the People be prepared for it? To this I Answer in Two things, which may
serve to clear up the Doctrine and to set forth the ground and reason of it.

1. Because there be many Sins that will escape their Notice and Observation.
If they be very curious and wakeful in their Remarks, yet there will be many
deeds of Darkness that will escape their notice: There will be secret
Intemperance, Uncleaness, Wantoness, Injustice, Lying, Forgery, Idolatry, etc.
Ezekiel. 8.12 See thou what they do in the dark? Hence if there be good Laws
made for the curbing Men from Sin and the Executive Power be lodged in the
Hands of those that are men of Spirit and Resolution for the work: they cannot
use it for the Correcting such Secret Wickedness, The fear of Punishment will
curb men from the open Acts of Sin; but men will be getting into secret
Corners, and there carrying on their Wicked Designs: Besides, some Actions not
Private in their nature, will be kept from the Cognizance of the Judge, for the
want of just and timous Information. Men under Oath at such a time to make due
Presentment of breaches of Law, will not have that Conscientious regard to their
Duty as they ought to have: Men called in as Witnesses before the Judge,
against the Criminal, will be very backward to do their duty; they will trifle
at a strange rate with a solemn Oath, rather than disgust a Friend or disoblige
a good Nei'bor: and there may be this temptation too to decline it in some even
a conscience of guilt. That they are chargeable with the same Crime, and there
only needs Complaint or Information to be made against them in order to their
being called in Question; which their Neighbors will be sure to make (being
privy to the matter) if they don't favor them as much as possible in the Case
depending Now if the Sins of a People don't come under the Notice of Rulers,
they are not in the way to Reform and Amend them. Now such Sins involve a
People in Guilt, and lay them open to the Judgments of God, if they be very
great, of a deep dye; become general; and are not so properly Secret, but are
kept hid from Public Censure by the Countenance or Connivance of others; and
there is not that care taken as might be to cut off the occasion of them: To
this some Judicious Divines refer the instance of Achan, Josh. 7.11. And we
have a like observation, 2 King 17.9.

2. In regard at such a time a People are guilty of many Sins which Rulers are
not able to Reform, though they do come under their Notice and Observation. The
carriage of a People may be such as may provoke God to anger many ways, and
expose them to the Judgments of God;and yet their Actions not be Censurable by
Civil or Ecclesiastical Rulers. It Is easy, for instance, to observe a great
deal of Pride in the Gesture and Attire of a People; irreverent Carriage
toward Superiors; a great deal of Worldliness and Covetousness; that the Heart
of a People is gone off from God and gone after the Creature; that they are
much more concerned about getting Land and Money and Stock, than they be about
getting Religion revived, and securing the Salvation of their Souls. Again, A
great deal of Coidness and Formality in Religion, Contempt cast upon the
Worship and Ordinances of God; a great deal of precious Time spent in a vain
unprofitable way; much Injustice and Dishonesty in dealing, pinching on the
straights and necessities of men; so of the working of a Froward, Contentious
and Repining Spirit; for which the Land Mourns, And God is greatly displeased
with a People for such sins as these are, and yet these things are not
Censurable Evils in the Civil Government, nor yet in the Churches of God And
there are these two Reasons to be given of it.

(1) Because they are so General. Corrupt Practices that are not of the
grossest nature, they grow to be general in a time of public declension among
a professing People; so it is with the Sin of Covetousness, there is a vein of it
to be seen in all Ranks and Orders of men, Jer 6.13. Ezekiel 33.21. Sometimes the
Corruption of a People show it self in a Murmuring Complaining spirit against
GOD those he has set over them in place of Rule; now this displeases God, Numb.
11.1. But the Sin being general, there is nothing to be done by Rulers in a
Coersive way to restrain it; the Sin is general and being supported by men of
influence the power of Rulers is not sufficient to check it, So 'twas with
Corah and his Accomplices; they were mighty men, Men of renown in the
Congregation; they durst to withstand Moses and Aaron God's Ministers to their
faces and doubtless had made a sad overture among the People had not the Lord
signally appeared for the help and vindication of his Servants, by the terrible
destruction bro't on the Heads of the Rebellion, Numb. 16.3, 33, 34 The like I
might observe concerning Pride, Intemperance, Injustice, and Oppressive
Dealing, when once they come to be general among a People; when Vice comes to
be general, and it is abetted by men of power and influence, it now grows fierce
and rampant as a lion; and there is little to be done by Rulers to tame it: the
torrent of Sin is now grown so mighty that the power of Rulers can do but
little to stem it: Hence they sit down now and grow discouraged, Moses does so
when the weight and burden of the People lay upon him, though a man of
extraordinary Grace and Gifts, and favored at times with uncommon Assistance
in his work, See his Complaint in the case, Numb 11 14. I am not able to bear
all this People alone, because it is too heavy for me.

2. Because there is so much pleaded in the Defense of them. A People grown
corrupt in general, they come to be bold and daring; they will (to be sure some
among them now declare their Sin as Sodom and hide it not, Isa. 3 9. They will
set up and justify some things very corrupt; they will plead in the defense of
a Worldly Covetous spirit, under the color or specious pretense of Prudence,
Diligence, Frugality, Necessity etc. When times are hard and difficult, now the
law of Self-preservation calls for it; it is needful in order to their support
and the maintenance of their Families. So the intemperate and inordinate use of
the Creature, it is covered under a Plea of lawful Christian liberty. The
corrupt Affections of men now greatly darken 'em, that they cannot judge aright
of things. Pride, Passion, Envy, Hatred, regard to Credit, Profit, etc. set men
on work to devise Arguments to defend unlawful Actions; and serve greatly to
prejudice them against what is offered to show such practices to be
Unjustifiable. Some actions that men will own to be sinful, in se; and cry out
of as such, they assert them to be lawful, (...) et nunc, i e. Circumstance of
time, place, person, etc. duly considered: If they take notice men are striving
to do them a mischief, they count it no wrong to injure them; they will render
reviling for reviling; they will deceive the deceiver, and take the cunning in
his own craftiness; they are governed more by the rules of carnal Policy, than
by the Purity and Simplicity of the Gospel; Romans 12.19. Dearly beloved, avenge
not your selves, etc. Now if for these things they are checked by those God has
set over them in Church, or State, they are apt to Censure them as acted from a
blind Zeal, as Rash, Heady, Censorious, Nice to a degree of Superstition; It Is
hard to give them any Conviction in the case; if a People have sufficient Light
held forth before them, they will not receive it, See it in them, Mal. 3.7. --
Wherein shall we return? But I proceed to the Use of the Doctrine.

USE, I Hence it is an Error, when the work of Reformation don't go on, presently
to cry out of Rulers; and to say, it is because they don't do what they can in
the work. A People are apt to err here and the Religious part of them too; they
complain of the Sins of the times; say there is a great deal of Pride,
Contention, Quarrelling, Intemperance, Lying, Deceit, Cheating, Oppression,
Idleness, Sabbath-prophanation, Neglect of God's House and Worship to be seen
among us; Sins testified against Year after Year by the Lord's Messengers; and
what have been often mentioned from this awful Desk in this Anniversary
Solemnity: But still there is no change; the Complaint is the same; we are said
to be yet in a Dying Languishing way. Now what is the Reason? Now some presently
run here, Rulers be not spirited for the work; they don't lead out in it;
Ministers be not so Zealous for the work as they should be. But if there be a
failure here in men of an higher Rank and Order, it is not wholly to be resolved
here that there is nothing done in a general way toward a Reformation; now
this is clear from these Two things.

(1) In that a sinning People may Reform in many things if Rulers fail in point
of Duty Were a People spirited for the work, they might do much to promote it.
if they had not their direction and assistance in it from Rulers as might be
desired. Men may reform what they know to be amiss, and may be found in the way
of duty in order to further conviction: Facienti quod in se est Deus non
den^get gratiam, is a good rule suitably qualified, however strained by some
too far so as to Eclipse the Glory of God's Grace and Power appearing in the
work of Conversion. Doubtless were a People spirited to do what they can in the
work, the change would soon appear to be great and very visible. No man can
deny, if intemperance, it is with him to lead a sober life if he pleases. The
like we might note of many other corrupt practices Men live in and allow of:
The reason why they be not reformed, is not for the want of Ability, but for
the want of a Disposition; though I grant whenever Vicious Men do reform and
amend, the preventing Grace of God is first to be seen in Convincing and
Awakening them to see the Evil of their way and the destructive tendency of it,
according to that, Jer. 2 19. And so the work is his; but in this work God
works no new principle or Gracious bent in the Heart; but does stir Men up to
improve the Power he has given them. Hence Searching and trying are join't with
turning, Lam. 3 40.

(2) I they be not Disposed ta Reform, they wont do it if Rulers do their
utmost in the Work. If Rulers Exercise much though it on the Work, and Improve
their Wisdom to devise means for the Supp^essing of this and the other Vice;
Ye^ if they pursue the methods laid with utmost Application of mind; if the
Heart of a People be bent the quite contrary way, twill fa^^ much of the
desired Effect. Good Laws m^^e on purpose to cut off occasions of Sin wont do
it. Punishments Inflicted on Transgre^sors Convict, wont do it; It may Curb men
from more open Acts of Sin; But they will Sin in Secret Places: Yea Experience
shows some to be Irreclaimable by this means; they are Incorrigible in their
way; if Punished severely they Regard it not, See Prove. 25.I5. They have
stricken me, etc.

USE, II. This Doctrine Suggest that Religion is much to be Regarded in the
choice of Men for Civil Rule over us. A Professing People are to have a good
Regard to it in their choice, as a necessary Qualification in men whom they set
in the highest and most eminent Stations among them: Rulers should be Just men
fearing God, hating Covetousness, Exodus 18.21. So the Royal Prophet teaches, 2 Samuel 23.3. He that rules over Men must be Just, Ruling in the Fear of God. To
Regard this much and to promote Men of Religion and Piety (if they be otherwise
Qualified) is the way to bring Religion into Credit and into greater Esteem;
And it may be a Motive to every good Man to labor to Excel when he sees that
Piety and Zeal for Religion is the way to Promotion: To be sure it is greatly to
be Regarded by them in a Corrupt and Declining time, if a people would have any
thing done to purpose by them to promote and to help forward the Work of
Reformation; Here two Things in particular.

1. They need to choose Men of Wisdom and Understanding in the state of the
People. The Heads and Rulers of a People are ever de Jure, some of the Wisest,
and most Knowing of them, and they will be such de Facto, in an Elective
Government, if a People know how to use the Privilege put into their Hands;
Men in a Public Capacity need to set themselves to know men; and to be very
knowing in the state of a People, they are called Pastures, Isa. 44.28. Jer. 3
15. Mic 5.5 They need to look well into the State of their Flock, to be sure
they must do it if they intend to do any thing to purpose for their
Reformation; They need to know well their Customs, Tempers, Virtues and Vices,
to be able to suit their Administrations to their State They are called Nursing
Fathers to the Church of God, Isa. 49.23. And they need to be able to look well
into the state of their Children. It Was well with the Tribe of Issachar when
favored with such Men, and with the Body of Israel too, 1 Chronicles. 12.32.

2. Men of Spirit and Courage for the Work. They need to be men of Wisdom, to
know the state of a People well, and to devise proper means for the Redress of
what is A miss among them; So they need to be Men of Resolution to pursue such
a good design, with utmost Application and Vigor. Men set in the Seat of
Judgment need Courage in order to their doing any thing to purpose, to check
the Corrupt Passions and Capricious Humors of some unreasonable Men, that seem
to act at times as if they were Void of Fear, as he speaks of himself, Luke
18.4. Wherefore was it that King Solomon's Throne was Supported by Lions? as we
read, 1 King. 10 20. but to show as a great Casuist Dr. Saundersous's Sermon,
ad Magistratum, on Job 29 14.
notes on the Place, That a Lion like Courage is necessary for the King on the
Throne, and also for the Judge on the Bench. It Is Expected when Iniquity is
rampant and begins to ride forth in Triumph, that now the Rulers of God's
People should rise with hol^ indi^nation against it (...) now like mighty men
they gird their Sword upon their high, and show themselves Valiant for the
Cause of God, in using of it for the piercing and wounding of the Kings
enemies, so as that they may be brought to submit themselves. So to do is (...)
imitate CHRIST, whose Agents and Representatives they are, Psalm. 45 ^, 4, 5.
Men of a temporising spirit at such a time; that enquire whether (...) comport
with their ease and q^i^t among men; whether 'twill be for their Credit o^
wor^d^y Interest, and on suspicion in the case decline what they might do, will
do but little for the checking Vice and Immorality a such a time among a
People. Ca^nal Reason is not now to be consulted if men will do their duty, See
Paul's rule in the case, Gal. 1.16. I conferred not with stesh and blood, etc.

USE, III Learn hence a lesson of Gratitude to our Rulers for the Pains they
have taken in the work of Reformation among us. We have been a People highly
favored in this regard: we have not only liberty to be as good as we will, in
Doctrine, Worship, and Manners, but are urged and encouraged by them to be a
great deal better. Our Rulers have taken a great deal of pains to set up the
Pure Worship of God among us; to (...) our Church Order and to bring us to a
better Uni^or^ity in point of Pra^^ice, so that the Ministry be Suppo^^ed and
that he Honor of that Order be maintained: Many good and excellent (...) have
been made to cut off occasion of Sin, to supp of Intemperance, Injustice,
Idleness, Contention, Company Keeping, Rio^ing, Sabbath ^^ophanation, ^o to
keep us from g^os^ Ignorance I^ religion, Contempt of the ^ublick (...) God,
etc. Such laws we have which in duly regarded, we should ^oon appear a much
be^te^ People than now we (...) No^ though the Work is not yet car^ied of to
desi^ed Effect; Yet what i^ done by them this way for our good, ought to be
accepted by us with all Thankfulness. We are to Express our Gratitude to them
in such (...) as these are.

1. By Speaking well of them. The Work is great, the Design high and noble:
Hence they deserve praise for it when ever they lead out in it. The^ are
approved of God in it and he expects his People give a testimony of Respect
unto them in it, in speaking, of it to their Praise It bodes ill to a People
when they make them the Objects of envy and ^^etia^ion; when they cry out of
them as Injurious and Oppressive, for the pains they take to correct their
Exorbitances, Such Men seem to be in the high road to Ruin. If what Man can do
will not restrain them, they ^ly open to the Sword of God's Revenging Justice, and
if he takes them in Hand and is in earnest, their case it will be Dreadful,
Ezekiel. 22.14 Can thine Heart endure, or thine Hand be strong, etc. To speak Evil
of Dignities in this case is Brutish, and vile Ingratitude: Such seem to be
without Understanding, to be lest of God, and devoted to Ruin, 2 Pet. 2.11,
12. It Is horrid Presumption and dating Wickedness to revile such as they are,
the Ministers of the great God; and wear his High and Sacred Name, Exodus 22.28.

2 By being Quiet and Easy under their Admiministrations. To be sure their
Endeavors this way calls for a Charitable Eye; and a People are to express
utmost Satisfaction in them, as tending to promote their best good and
interest. And their Conduct in other matters is not to be Censured, except on
just and very weighty reasons Dubia in meliorem partem sunt interpretanda, is a
good and charitable Rule, and the Justice and Honor due to Government obliges
every man to regard it. If Rulers can find such a spirit among a people, this
tends to work on their Ingenuity, and to confirm them in the way of their Duty:
Whereas the contrary ( conceiving them to be men subject to like Passions)
tends to damp their Spirits and to dishearten them in their Work Hence It Is
most Obvious to note in men a backwardness to do this or that Service, when
they see it will not be well accepted 'Twas well in Israel in ^^acids time, when
there was so good an Understanding between him and the people, 2 Samuel 3.36.

3. By giving them suitable Maintenance and Support, proper to Maintain the
Honor and Dignity of their Place Indeed a People whole Circumstances are mean
and low, that cry out of Debt, Mortgage, Usary; That Liberty and Property are
like to go, and that they are bro't into Bondage, Neh. 5. Are apt to think that
Rules (to be sure if they be Men of good Es^ates) should be Men of Nehemiah's
Spirit, who set himself to seek the Welfare of Judah without a due regard to
his own Interest; or Exacting what he might in Justice from them, as we read,
Neh. 5. Also that at such a time they should act under the Influence of that
caution given by the Prophet to Baruck, Jer 45 5. And seek thou great things
for thy self? Seek them not -- But however, a Pious and Compassionate
Magistrate may at such a time Cedere de suo Jure, Recede from his own right;
Yet it is ever to be owned by a people as a natural Obligation they are under
to pay them Tribute and as it is plainly founded in reason, so it is Bottomed on
the express rule of the Gospel, with the reason annexed to it, as we read, Rom
13 6. For this cause pay you Tribute also; for they are Gods Ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing.

USE, IV. Let this Doctrine be Improved to Encourage Our Rulers to be still
pursuing the great Work of Reformation among us What they have done this way we
have heard is ever to be Accepted with Thankfulness and due Regard from this
People. And though it has failed in some things of desired Success, for the
want of a Heart in the People, prepared and disposed for the Work; yet it has
not been in Vain, the have therefore reason to be Encouraged to pursue so
Great, so Honorable and Necessary a Work.

And here in all Submission, I would Apply my self, To the Honorable the
GOVERNOR. the Deputy Governor, and the Worshipful ASSISTANTS of this Colony.
Such on whom the Lot of this Days Election may fall, and who man by the Wise
and Gracious disposing of Providence, be set in place of Chief Rule over this
People And here (though but a Child) I know I may speak with good Assurance, in
regard the Subject is so Weighty in it self and appears so plain, to be the
Cause of GOD.

Suffer me then, ( Much Honored and Esteemed) to Suggest a few things to you
to Encourage Confirm and Establish you in the pursuit of Reformation Work among
us, as in the Fear of God;

1. There is more yet to be done by you in order to our Conviction The good
Laws made partly by your direction and Influence; Have been of use to correct
some and to lay others under a (...) that otherwise might have been corrupt So
to save us from Public guilt which we should have incurred had there not been
such case taken; As we see in the Instance of Achan, Josh. 22 20 But yet we
need more to be done in order to conviction: We must first see what it is we have
done, and know it is (...), before we are like to Reform (...) in Generalibus
(...). Deceit lies hid in (...). It Is in General owned we are a Sinning People,
have lost our first love, and are in a D^^ng, Declining way: But when we come
to think of the sins of the times or to enquire where our disease lies, we don't
seem to be so well agreed: Particular Ministers may take pains on days of
Public Humilation, and at other times to point out our sins to us, as knowing
it is of Necessity in order to any good and hearty Confession of Sin upon such
Solemn Occasions: But this don't carry the weight with it as it would do if
something were set forth in a more public way, as the fruit of the united
Prayer this day, and Deliberation of our Heads in the Civil and Sacred Order:
Something of this nature has been done by the Rulers of this People in former
distresses to good effects; and it may be not more needed then, than now.

2. It Is Expected by God and Pious thinking Men, that you should lead out in
this Work. God Expects it of you and it is one end of his setting you in your
high and exalted Station. If men in a private capacity, many of them can do but
little in it; excepting to get into Corners and there to weep and mourn over
our Abominations, because as Zuinglius Speaks of Carotostadius in another case;
Non habent satis Humerorum, their shoulders are too weaker for the burden; Yet
the Wisdom given you; The Authority vested in you does furnish you for the Work
if any thing be to be done as to Means. Conceive then ( Honorable and
Worshipful) the LORD speaking to you in this case, as to Joshua the Captain of
His People when under Dejection for that Israel were smitten down by the men of
Ai, on the account of Achan's Sin, Josh, 7.10. And the Lord said unto Joshua,
Get thee up, wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? Further, It Is what pious
thinking Men Expect from you; They look to see what you will do more in this
Day and Time of our Distress and Trouble. Me thinks I here them with a united
voice Addressing of you as he did Ezra on the behalf of the distressed Jews
upon their Return, Ezra, 10.4. Arise for this matter belongs unto thee, etc.

3 You have great and worthy Examples set before you for your Imitation in this
Work If we look into the Old Testament we have many Instances of it; View the
state of the Jewish Church in the time of Moses and in the succeeding Judges,
So in the History of the Kings afterward when it came to be a Kingly
Government; when ever God had any thing remarkable to do for the better
Ordering of that People, in Doctrine, Worship or Manners, He raised up those to
be Rulers and Heads of the People that were spirited and furnished for the
Work. Again, If we look into New Testament times and observe the State of the
Church since the coming of Christ, we may find when the Princes of the world
were bro't into the bosom of the Church, they ever looked on themselves
Concerned for the Good of it. The first General Councils called for the
suppressing Heresy and Error, were much under the Care and Direction of the
Roman Emperors, called to Embrace Christianity. The Reformation set on foot by
Luther was much Abetted by some Princes in Germany when they came to fall in
with his Doctrine and to renounce Popery; Witness their united Agreement to,
and Signing that Famous Augustane Confession drawn up by Melancton, and
presented by him and Luther to Charles the V th. at Ausburgh in 1530. Besides
the Congruity of Religion with the Civil Interest of a People is so natural,
that the best Moralists, have ever placed the care of it in the Head of their
Political Maxims, it is spoken of by one as Vinculum Omnas Societatis, fulcrum
Legum Recte Sanciendarum, as the bond of all Society, the Prop and Pillar of
the State, without which Good Laws cannot be made, much less Supported and
Maintained, so as Societatis humane fundamentum by another, i. e. The
Foundation of Humane Society. Vide Plato, Lib. 2. De Repub and Cicero, Lib. 2.
De natu^^ Deorum, as Cited by Turretine on this head, vol. 3. p. 555
So needful has the care of it, been ever thought by the Masters of Reason for
the good of a People.

4. You have the Charge of a People taken very near to God, and as we hope dear
to Him. The Lords portion is his People, Jacob is the lot of his Inheritance,
Deuteronomy. 32.9. So Moses in that Divine Song sets forth in an elegant strain of
Language, how the wakeful Eye of Gods Providence had been upon that People for
good in the following Verses; And if we compare our state with theirs, we may
find in many things a good Harmony between them. Now as it is your Honor to
have the Rule and Government of a People taken so near to God, put into your
Hands; so it should make you very tender of their Interest; and in special move
you to do your utmost to engage the Gracious Presence of God with them: Now in
nothing can you so well provide for it, as in laboring to promote the Interest
of Religion among us. God regards the Temporal good of his People, but nothing
so dear as their Spiritual interest; Psalm.87*2. The Lord loves the gates of
Zion, more than all the dwellings of Jacob.

5. It Is the way to provide for your own Honor and Safety. Your Authority is
Venerable and you are Obliged to maintain the Honor of it; But in nothing can
you provide for it more than in showing a tender Regard to Gods Honor, and a
fervent Zeal for Religion among us Phinehas is Zealous for his God when
Iniquity is Rampant and goes barefaced; and is Acted and Abetted by the Heads
or some of the chief among the People, and for this he gets an Immortal Name in
the Sacred Story, besides God gives him the Promise of an Everlasting
Priesthood, Numb 25.13. God tells Eli, them that honor me, I will honor, 1 Samuel 2.30 And we find it to be so in the Kings of Israel and Judah, that set
themselves to seek the Lord, and to promote the Interest of Religion; Besides
this you will provide for your own safety; secure your standing in a Stormy
Day: And if after all your Pains for our Reformation, the Work fails of Success
and we remain an Irreclaimable People, and so ly open to Public Judgments; you
may hope God will be your hiding place and cover you under the shadow of his
Wings, as he speaks, Psalm. 32.7 Thou art my hiding place, thou shall preserve
me from Trouble; thou shall compass me about with Songs of Deliverance, Selah.

6. It Is the way to have Joy and Comfort in your end. We say you are Gods,
according to Psalm. 82.6. In regard of your high and eminent Station; and the
Power vested in you, carries in it something of the Impress, and semblance of
the Majesty of the Great GOD; but you look on your selves to be Mortal, and
that you must ere long by Death the King of Terrors, be brought on a level with
other men, by laying your heads in the Dust. The Change is great, and we doubt
not but you live in a prospect and view of it. Now in nothing are you like to
find more Peace and Satisfaction, when you come to pass through the dark and
shady Valley and to resign up your Spirits into the Hands of CHRIST, than in
the view of your sincere endeavors and unwearied pains for the Reviving
Religion among us; this will lay a sure Foundation for our lasting Happiness,
if it be Effected, and for your unshaken Peace. You will, now from the View of
your good deeds and God's acceptance of them, look exceeding bright and gay,
and triumph over the great Conqueror; and you may with good Nehemiah, put God
in mind of your gracious Concern for the good of this People, and look for
additional Glory on the account of it; according to the gracious Economy of
the New Covenant, Neh. 5.19. Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all
that I have done for this People.

USE. V. Let this Doctrine be Improved to Excite the Ministers of the Gospel to
be laying out themselves in this great Work of Reformation, among us. Suffer I
beseech you the Word of Exhortation from me ( My Fathers and Brethren in the
Work of the Ministry) That you will have the Dying sinking Cause of Religion
among us ever at Heart; and be restless and impatient in your Minds till
something more be done for our Recovery from our sad Declension from the Life
and Power of Godliness. Consider ( Reverend and Beloved) the Care of Religion
is put into your Hands in special: You are by Office and Designation set apart
for the Work and Service of CHRIST in his Church: The distinction of Episcopi
ad extra et ad intra, is ancient in the Church. Vide Eusebius in vita
Constantini, as Cited by Turretine, Part 3. Page 358.
However Pious Rulers may look on themselves concerned for the External good of
the Church, yet You are by Office to inspect her Internal State, or to labor
to get a good Understanding in the state of Souls committed to your Charge*
Besides some of you have lived to see and to know a great deal concerning the
state of this People; It Is many Years since you have taken upon you the care of
Souls. You have been under singular Advantages as the Watchmen set on the walls
of our Jerusalem, to spy out our Sins, Diseases, and Dangers. We that are
Younger, eye you as Prophets and find our Spirits much subject to you: We
Revere your Age, Gravity, Gifts and Graces. And Rejoice God has set you up as
Pillars in His House for the support of our Doctrine and Discipline. We bless
God for you, ever rejoice in you; and it must ever be our Prayer ut sers in
Coelum redeatis; That it will please the Lord of the harvest to call you home
late from your work: Mean while be a assured that as your advantages are and
have been superior; So we are ever looking as you get on in your way to the
Glorious World, so you rise in the aspiration of your Souls for the Reviving
Religion; and in a more ardent zeal for the good of your Children that some
good foundation may be laid for the Securing the Gracious presence of God with
them when you are gathered to your Fathers. And here then give me leave (though
unworthy to dictate any thing to you,) To Suggest one or two things relating to
your Public work as what may be proper to revive us in this our time of
general Deadness.

1. Do what in you lies in your ministry to reach the Consciences of men:
Regard this mainly in the choice of Subjects and in the method of handling
them: In a corrupt time there is a great scarcity of Godly men among a People
many are secure and fast asleep in Sin, they stand in great need of Terror,
and are like to perish and go down to Hell without it. In a Popular Audience
Ministers are not so much to Regard the Smoothness of Language, Exactness of
style, as the weight of their matter, the strength and pungency of their
motives; At such a time to play the Orator is to amuse the minds of men and to
lull them into a state of Indolence and Insensibility, the Wisdom and Fidelity
of Ministers is seen at such a time in speaking piercing words to their
hearers, Ecc. I2 II the words of the wise are as goads, etc. Divine Truths are
so Pure Sublime and Spiritual as that they need not the Garnishings of humane
Eloquence to set them off; but they appear most bright and majestic in their
native dress: The great Apostle Paul was a Masterworkman and knew well how to
handle the Sword of the Spirit that is the Word of God, and we find him (though
on some special Occasions speaking much in the style of an Orator, yet) when he
comes to Preach CHRIST or the Terrors of the Law, he uses all freedom and
plainness of Speech. See 1 Cor. 2.4 and 2 Cor. 5.11

2 Labor to open the nature of Conversion and to urge the Necessity of it upon
your Hearers. A People in a corrupt time grow dark as to conversion work, few
Experience it and such as have it it is not in so distinct a way as is to be
desired, now Ministers need to revive the Doctrine, to lend the People into the
understanding of it and to convince them of the absolute necessity of it in
order to Salvation; as Christ has taught, John 3 3. Except a man be Born again
he cannot see the Kingdom of God. It Is the way to have the Ministry crowned with
Success, and to take off the Prejudices of the People against it; It Is easy to
observe a Spirit of Jealousy prevailing in the People of this Land against the
Ministry of it; Hence every Difference, though of a lesser nature from the
Primitive Constitution of these Churches, is Suspected by some Religious and
Holy men and cried out against, as Innovation and a Degree of Declension and of
Apostasy, as the way to invest the Ministers with the Sole power of Church
Government, and to cut off the Privilege of the Brotherhood; a thing which
that great Ornament of Piety and learning in this Land, viz Mr OAKS, took
notice of and made a very close Remark upon in his Election Sermon many Years
past; And there is something of the Leaven to be seen since if it has not been
Growing: Now what is to be done for a Remedy in the case? Lets Labor to come
up to and if possible to go beyond those gone before us in a Spirit of Zeal for
Practical and Experimental Piety; And if God give success it may tend to
Convince men that God is with us, as with them; And that he has showed to us
something of the form and fashion of his house, as well as much of it to them;
And that they did not in their Platform set up their Pillar of ne plus ultra,
and say to their Successors, hitherto shall ye come and no further; These
Renowned Patrons did Great and Wonderful things, and their Name is ever to be
precious to us; their thoughts on Conversion Work have doubtless been Improved
upon by some of a Refined though it and great Experience since. But Oh! the Field
is large, the Well it is very Deep, and men of the brightest ability and most
Exact Experience may yet be very Profitably Improved in the study of this great
mystery of Application work; We need yet to be Informed as to the Nature of
true Conversion in particular, as to the Manner how the Soul is prepared for
Christ, how it is bro't to Believe, and what are the fruits and effects of Faith,
by which it may be known when it is wrought. Besides consider it God Works thus
for Conviction and Conversion, twill pave the way for a General Reformation
among us; and if it be brought about this way, twill be more Permanent and
Abiding. Whereas when the^e is a show of it arising from External Motives only
it is not wont to hold. As we read of Israel, when moved to seek God from slavish
fear, when his Judgments were among them, Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36, 37. Again I
might note to you for your Encouragement in this great work; if CHRIST the King
and Head of his Church prospers you in it; and makes you the happy instruments
of converting many Souls; you shall be though it upon when he as Judge shall give
out his Aureola's to his Favorites, and you shall see 'em, and look upon every
one of them as your Joy and Crown in the day of his appearing, Dan 12.2 and 1
These. 2.19, 20. And how bright will you appear in Company with those Chosen
ones bro't in by your Ministry, when you Present your selves and them before
your great LORD, and are able to say to Him, Behold me and the Children which
thou have given me; To allude to Heb 2.13.

USE, VI. Let it Excite the General Assembly to Endeavor this Work in their
present Sessions. We Look upon You Gentlemen as a Society of Men Delegated,
Chosen, set apart and concerned for the Good of this People: The trust Reposed
in you is great; the Eyes of this People are much upon you to see what you will
do for the Promoting their Public Interest, we Eye you not only as Boni viri
Good men, but as Boni Cives Good Common wealths men, as men set for the Good of
this People: and sure we are that in nothing can you provide more for our
Safety, Peace, and lasting Tranquillity, than in doing something Extraordinary
for the Reformation of manners and for the Reviving Religion among us; Give me
leave then to suggest a few things to you as Relative to our state

1. It Is with you to make and Enact such Laws as are most proper to cut off
Occasions of Sin among us. It Is with great Joy and Satisfaction we read and
observe the good and wholesome Laws made by you to check Vice and Immorality;
in particular, Intemperance, Rioting, Injustice, Contention, Idleness, gross
Ignorance, Sabbath Profanation, neglect of the Public Worship of God, etc.
But there is need of doing more to cut off occasions of Sin; Perinnus licit^^
is ever to be observed in a corrupt time: Professors at such a time make a sad
abuse of some lawful Liberties, and so abuse them to Licentiousness; that they
need to be kept in by a very close Rein. Things lawful in se, cease to be so
when they prove occasions of Sin; hence not to be Tolerated. See it in the
Brazen Serpent, that Hezekiah that great Reformer in Judah took away when 'twas
abused to Idolatry, 2 King. 18.4.

2. We look to you to Constitute such to be Judges of the Law, as are men of
Understanding, Courage and Zeal or the work of Reformation among us. Judex est
Lex loquens: It Is the Judge that gives life and spirit to the Law; He gives it a
Mouth to speak; and an Edge to cut by, seeing it is duly Executed. Hence the
Judges ought to be men of Knowledge in the Law, they need to be men of Spirit,
and Resolution for the work. They need to be men of Deliberation and counsel,
to search out a matter Cunctari Judecantem decet imo oportet faith Seneca
Seneca, Lib. 2. De Ira.
And this Holy Job tells us was his care as a Judge or chief Ruler Job 29 16.
The cause which I knew not I searched it out, They need to be men of Fidelity
and Conscience to Judge as in the Fear of God according to Jehosaphars solemn
charge given to his Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. It Is what the Light of Reason
Suggests; hence that Rule of Cicero qui induit Personam judicis exuit amici, he
that puts on the Person of a Judge, puts off the Person of a Friend; he is not
to Judge from Friendship, Favor and Affection but from an Impartial view of
the cause. Now they being constituted much from your influence and motion it is
Expected you see to it they be men suitably qualified for the work, else the
End of the Law is like to be Vacated and to be made no better than a Dead
Letter.

3. It Is with you to temper the Law, so as may best answer the Rule of Justice
and Righteousness among us. It Is wont to be said, there is a Latitude in the
Rule; and it must be attended here if the Law answers the great end of it,
since there be more cases than particular Rules to act by. In some cases the
Law may be too Straight and Rigorous here you are to Temper it with Equity,
else the great end of Justice can never be answered, which is suum cuique
Tribuere, to give to every man what is his due, and without a due regard to
this, the general Rule of Direction cannot be attended as it ought, Isa. 1.17 --
Seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed Judge the Fatherless plead for the Widow;
Besides without this Temperament it may hurt the Innocent, or bear too hard in
Criminal cases on the Guilty; by exceeding in Punishment the measure and
proportion of the Crime. Again, it may be too lax if some Instances, and here
it may need to be strained up to reach the case of men. It cannot but be
Grievous to Wile and Tender Judges, so to Conscienti us Jurors to see the
Wicked Man Justified, or go off clear in his Wickedness, because the case is so
Circumstanced as that the Law of the Government wont reach it, when the reasons
are strong and forcible to persuade him Guilty of the Crime laid to his Charge:
Farther as more agreeable to my Work, and more within the Compass of my Line. I
might tell you there is this Mischief and Inconvenience attends it, if the
Action be such as stumbles some of the best of men, and they reckon it is what
deserves Ecclesiastical notice, its a great clog in the case, and tends very
much to cripple Discipline. If the Law Justifies the Man in what he has done,
or at least don't Condemn him; it is by some thought a Justifiable pretense for
some corrupt Actions, and it is thought little less than Presumption for the
Church now to enquire into them.

4. It Is with you to promote and forward the means of Education. We thank you
for your pious care in the Provision made for the Support of stated Schools in
our Towns; So necessary in order to our esse or very being as Christians,
without which our Children and Families many of them would soon sink into
Atheism, gross Darkness and Ignorance for the want of proper means of
Instruction But there needs something more to be done in scattered places, to
make the Benefit of our Schools more extensive, without which they wont be kept
up with a good agreement; it grates the spirits of men to see the Privilege of
their Neighbors and they not able to share in it, to be sure without
extraordinary charge, which don't come within the compass of many poor
Families. Again, the College, or Public Nursery of Learning, calls for your
particular Care and Concern: It was Erected on a pious and good Intention, and
calls for your Providential Care to bring it into Honorable Circumstances.
Here the Causa Procreans et Conservans go together. You have Presidents worthy
of Imitation, for the promoting of Learning in the Neighboring Province. The
Building a House for the Rector has been proposed to your care, and if seems a
work of necessity to be done: The Objection made by some against it, is this,
that there is too great a Spirit for Learning in the Land; more are brought up
to it than will be needed, or find Improvement; hence a snare will be laid for
those devoted to it, and Learning will grow into Contempt. But it is better to
err here in the Excess, than in the Defect, besides the number of those
favored with a liberal Education don't seem to be too many as yet in our Land,
and we have not as yet reason (Blessed be God) to look with a Jealous Eye on
the Sons of New England, Trained up in the School of the Prophets; since in
general they prove so well; and are men when they come to enter on the Stage of
Action of the best Principle, most extensive Though It and refined Morals. It might
further be observed in the case, There may be a good use made of it to bring
Learning into Credit, by making greater Advances in it; finoe where there is
Choice, there is no necessity of Men's crowding Young and Raw into the Pulpit:
And the though it of it tends to awaken those devoted to the Ministerial Work, to
greater Pains and Industry, to get a good Measure of solid and substantial
Learning; since in this Age of Light men are in danger to stand by as Useless,
where there is Choice, if they don't labor to Excel; and since the People are
grown so wise and knowing in Men, as that when a Price is put into their Hands,
they know how to use and improve it.

5. We look to you much to promote the Peace and Quiet of this People. It Is one
great End of Civil Government; and for this end we are to Pray for Rulers, as
the Apostle exhorts us, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. -- That we may lead a quiet and peaceable
life, in all godliness and honesty, under 'em. There is much of a spirit of
Contention and Uneasiness among us; the fruits are sad: There has been a great
Cry of Poverty, Debt, Bondage, Oppression, hard Usage; in the Land of late; We
are said to be in the way to sink into Ruin, for the want of a Medium of
Trade. It may be though it our Pride, Prodigality, Strifes separate Designs and
Views, without a due regard to the Public Good; in a word, Our changing our
God, our Glory, for the Creature that cannot satisfy us or make us a happy
people, has brought us into this Calamitous State. There is a great deal of
Strife and Contention sometimes on one Head and sometimes on another; Iniquity
it abounds among us, and it is much to be seen in the want of Christian
Compassion and good Neighborhood: Hence Lawsuits are multi-ply'd beyond
Measure, and strangely continued, to the great Expense of Time and Money; to
the creating and fomenting of Divisions In Town, Church, and in Particular
Families; as also much to the Stain and Reproach of our Holy Profession: Some
use it as a Medium to get their Honest Right; some to save their just Right;
and some to keep others out of their just and proper Due. Now if in this day of
our Trouble and Perplexity, in this time of trending down in our valley
Vission, there be any thing to be done by means to believe us, and quiet our
disturbances, it is With you much to do it, and the doing of it, as twill turn
our darkenss and shadow of death in to the morning, Amo* 5. 8. So twill give
you a Room and Name in the hearts of this People never to be blotted out.

USE, VII. Let it Excite the Body of this People, to engage in the great Work
of Reformation. There has been a mighty Spirit in the Assembly, and out of it,
for Land. But Oh! When shall we see men of influence, foresight and business,
forming themselves into Societies, to set forward the Reformation of Manners
among us. The Body of the People to be sure need to Engage in this work, since
as we have heard, if they are not spirited for it, or their hearts prepared and
disposed, it is like to fail in the Hands of Rulers, if never so much spirited
for the Work. Let Parents and Heads of Families then set to work: Our Families
must be Nurseries of Piety and Learning, in order to its going well with the
Commonwealth. See to the Education and Instruction of Children, and all under
your Care: Resolve with David, to walk before God in your Houses with a perfect
heart, Ps. 101.2. Use your Authority to curb all under your care from Sin and
Vanity. Personal and Family Reformation is necessary, in order to that which is
Public: And the work must begin here, if ever it comes to be General. See to
it then that you put away Wickedness from your Tabernacle; Job II.I4. If
iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy
tabernacles.

By way of Motive to this Work, let us Consider these following things.

1. It Is in our power to reform many things that we know to be Amiss. Many
things are found amiss among us that are very plain and obvious; and none of us
can have the face to say, it is not within our compass to reform them: God in the
Public Covenant, calls on a Sinning people to reform, now this shows it is what
is practicable by them, Jer. 7.3, 5. Amend your ways and doings. So Jer. 26.13.
The Obedience God calls for from his Covenant People, considered in a
collective way, is what they are capable of from common Assistance and a due
Attendance to the means of teaching they do enjoy. Men that are Intemperate,
may reform, and come to be Sober Men: Men given to Strife and vain Jangling,
may study to be quiet and do their own business, as directed to do, 1 These.
4.11 Men unjust and uncharitable, may labor to be just and honest in their
dealing, and kind and charitable to others: Men that Neglect the Public
Worship on Sabbath Days, and on other occasions, may put honor upon it, by a
steady and constant attendance on it: The same Legs that will Carry a Man to
the Tavern, will Carry him to the place of Public Worship, if he will put them
to the Service. If Men want Saving Grace, and so are incapable in statu quo,
i.e. in their present condition of gracious actings, yet they are capable of
External Conformity to the Rules of the Gospel: Men when urged to Reform, say
they cannot; but it is because they Will not. Hence God Charges it on the Corrupt
and Sinful Will of man; Psalm 8I.II. But my People would not hearken to my
Voice, and Israel would none of me.

2. We have choice means of Conviction in things wherein we are Dark. We have a
great deal of Light held forth to us to show us what is Sinful, and that the
way of Sin is destructive and ruinous; in the Pains taken by our Rulers to
Check this and the other Vice: We have great light held forth to us from the
Word of God; the Ministers of Christ have not ceased to show unto us our
Transgressions on this public and solemn Occasion, and also at other times;
besides, the Providence of God have been many times very Convincing, and have
served to point out Sin in particular, Hos. 6.5. So that if we use the Means of
Convictions, we are in the way to be Enlightened; Our ignorance under such Means
of light, renders us very inexcusable; Joh.3.19. This is the Condemnation, etc
God represents the Carriage of his People when got into such a frame, as Brutal
or worse, Isa. 1.3. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib: but
Israel does not know me, my People does not Consider.

3. We shall lie open to Public Judgments till we do Reform. God may spare us
from his wonderful Patience, and he may give us a respite now and then from
Public Judgments; He may bestow many Public Favors on us; He may give us
Peace, and Health, and Plenty, as the fruits of his Benignity: for his ways are
not as ours, but infinitely above them, Isa. 55. 8. But there is no way to save
us from Public Guilt, but by giving to us a spirit of Repentance; See Isa.
4.4. When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the Daughters of Zion,
and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from midst thereof, by the spirit
of judgment, and by the spirit of Burning. The Spirit of God is there Promised
in the times of the Gospel to work for Conviction on the hearts of men, as a
Spirit of Judgment to Convince them, as a Spirit of Burning to Refine them, to
Consume their greater and lesser Iniquities, See Charnock's Gloss on the Text,
Vol.2 Page 259
It being so then, it follows, if there be a great deal of pains taken by Civil
Rulers to cut off Occasions of Sin, and to save us from public Guilt If
Minister obtain Mercy of the Lord to be Faithful, such as knowing the Terror of
the Lord, use proper means to persuade men, as Paul Speaks 2 Cor. 5 11 If there
be much of the Purity of Doctrine and Worship to be seen among us Again, if
there be a number of Godly, Holy Persons in our Towns, such as show by their
Discourse and Conversation, that they have been with JESUS. Further, Though God
at times is pouring out his Spirit for the carrying on Conversion Work, in a
Remarkable manner, in particular places, yet according to the tenor of the
Public Covenant, as we are a Body Collective by it, till we come to Reform and
Amend in the General, we ly open to Public Judgments.

4. The work of Reformation, if it be General, will make way for our being a
Happy People. The Covenant People of God are under singular Advantage to be a
happy People; It Is God's primary intention to make them so when He takes them
into so near a Relation to Himself, Deuteronomy. 33.29. Happy art thou, O Israel: who
is like unto thee. etc. Hence if it don't prove so in the Event, it is ever
charged upon them as their own fault. The Promises of the Covenant are great,
and the good of them is made over to a People upon condition of Obedience that
they are under special advantage to perform; Now this Obedience is called their
Righteousness, Deuteronomy. 6 25 And it shall be our righteousness, if we observe to
do all these Commandments before the Lord our God, as He has commanded us: i.e
That for which they are Justified and Accepted before God as the Heirs of the
Promise. According then to the Nature of the Covenant and God's Economy in the
Government of the House of Israel; we may conclude were Religion revived, we
should soon see the face of our Land Renewed; the distempers of our Civil State
would be healed; no more Complaint that the Head is sick and the Heart faint;
to use the words of the Prophet, Isa 1.5. Our Heart Jealousies, Animosities,
separate Interests would cease. Men would sstudy Love and Unanimity in all
their Concerns; they would agree to Prosecute the Public Good truly and
faithfully: And as an Ingenuous Writer See Norris Miscellany's. Page 171.
in his fine way of Expression, notes on the conduciveness of Christian Charity
to the good and benefit of Humane Society; Nothing would now be wanting to
Verify and Realize the Dreams of the Golden Age; to Anticipate the Millennial
Happiness, and to bring down Heaven upon Earth. Society would stand firm and
compact like a Mathematical Frame of Architecture, supported by mutual
Dependences and Coherences; and every man's Kindnesses would return again upon
himself in the Circle and Reciprocation of Love.

Besides Now Conversion work is like to go on and many Souls Saved from Wrath
to come, and bro't to be the Heirs of Life: The Public Church shall share
largely in that Promise, by God's Gathering in of His Elect, Isa. 54. 13. Thy
Children shall be taught of God; and great shall be the Peace of thy Children.
So Isa. 55 13. Instead of the Thorn shall come up the Firtree, and instead of
the Briar shall come up the Myrtletree; and it shall be to the Lord for a Name,
for an everlasting sign which shall not be cut off.

To Conclude then, Let us all Unite in this great Work, and join servent
Prayers with the Means used, that they maybe crowned with Success: Let us with
Ephraim, take words and return; Hof. 14.2. Take with you Words and turn to the
Lord, say unto Him, Take away all Iniquity and receive us graciously. So will
we render the calves of our Lips.

THE END.

