Good Soldiers Described, and Animated. A SERMON Preached before the Honorable
Artillery-Company, in Boston, June 6th. 1720. Being the DAY of their Election
of Officers; And now Published at their Request. And in Obedience to His
Excellency the GOVERNOR: His Honor the Lieut. GOVERNOR, and Several of His
MAJESTY'S Honorable COUNSELORS.

By THOMAS SYMMES, A. M. Pastor of the CHURCH in Bradford.

Eccl. 9. 18. Wisdom is better than Weapons of War. BOSTON: Printed by S.
KNEELAND, for S. GERRISH, and D. HENCHMAN, and Sold at their Shops, 1720.

PREFACE.
AFTER the Great and Extraordinary Acceptance which the following SERMON met
with, from so Numerous and Judicious an Audience in the Delivery of it from the
Pulpit, I cannot but think it will be very acceptable to every one from the
Press. I can by no means therefore comply with the desire of the Reverend
Author to me, that I would Excuse his yielding to the Printing of it. I think
none that heard it will allow me to say a word on that head: And after such an
uncommon Attention as the Discourse commanded when it was uttered, there is no
room neither left for me to commend it to them that heard it.

THE Author in a kind and obliging Letter to me ascribes the unexpected and
undeserved Favor of GOD to him, unto the Prayers of a very religious People,
which Heaven has committed to his Care; upon whom he had called to strive
together with Him in Prayer to, GOD for him, that his Service might be accepted
of the Saints. And now that it has pleased GOD to give a remarkable Answer unto
their Prayers, I beseech Him also to give 'em Humbleness of Mind, whereby they
may accept aright and improve His Grace shown them.

IT is a peculiar Honor to any Ministers of the Gospel, (and through Grace we
have not a few among us who share in it) when in retired Places of Service; out
of the way of Fame or any worldly reward, they are diligent in their Studies
and laboring in the Word and Doctrine, to feed the Flock of GOD among them;
Studying to show themselves approved unto GOD, Workmen that need not to be
ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth; that by the help of GOD they may
be wise to win Souls, be Masters of acceptable Words, and meet to stand and
teach (if called of GOD thereto) before the Greatest of Men. The Author is
among us a shining Example of this Diligence and Proficiency, and GOD is
pleased to own and crown his Labors with an uncommon Success: There being
within these Three last Months added to the Church in Bradford no less than
Forty and Six Persons: May they indeed be so many Seals of his Ministry, and
his Joy in the Day of CHRIST, and the LORD add many more to 'em daily, such as
shall be saved.

MAY their worthy Pastor be long continued, a more abundant Blessing to them,
and a diffusive one to others: And particularly I pray GOD that this Martial
Lecture Sermon may be as profitable to the Gentlemen of the ARTILLERY COMPANY,
and others of us, in the Reading of it, as it was Pleasant in the hearing: That
as the Preacher was unto us as a very lovely Song of one that has a pleasant
Voice, and can play well on an Instrument; So now that we have heard his words
we may be of them that do 'em; And then we shall indeed know WHO has been among
us.

Boston, June 24th, 1720. BENJAMIN COLMAN.

AN Artillery-Election SERMON.
I. CHRON. XII. 33. Of Zebulun, such as went forth to Battle, expert in War,
with all Instruments of War, fifty thousand, which could keep Rank: they were
not of double Heart.
THE Relations in which the All-wise GOD, the Supreme and Absolute Monarch of
the Universe, is pleased in His Adorable Sovereignty to place the Children of
Men to this state of Probation. And the Powers, He sees meet to furnish them
with, for the Service of their Generation in their respective Posts, are very
many and various: yet all of them are Essential, or atleast Useful and Needful
to the Well-Being of the Body Politic; Insomuch, that the Mechanic cannot say
to the Civil Magistrate, I have no need of thy Conduct and Protection: nor can
the Civil Magistrate say to the Laboring Tribes of Zebulon and Issachar, I
have no need of your Obedience, and the Fruits of your Painful Industry; seeing
even Crowned Heads themselves do (under God) depend continually on them for
their Establishment, Preservation, and Supplies.

AND as it is GOD, the Fountain of Honor, who in His uncontrollable and
mysterious Providence makes Men to differ; setting up one, and pulling down
another; and distributing Gifts to them, as to kind and degree, according to
His Holy Will: So He requires and expects, that every Man should abide in his
Calling, and seek to excel in his own Sphaere, in the Improvement of all his
Endowments and Enjoyments for the Honor of GOD, his Bountiful Benefactor, and
the Interest of his Prince and Country.

INDEED Men may seek to Excel, and may really do so, in some respects; and yet
how much so-ever They may value themselves on the score of their Foreign
Excellencies, They deserve little Commendation, because they don't seek to
Excel in their proper Business: or because they have no higher view, than their
own Credit or Secular Interest, in such their seeking to Excel.

THUS, for a Clergyman to be an Ingenious Mechanic, or a considerable
Statesman, but a Mean Divine, a poor Clerk; or to seek to Excel, because he
loves to have the Pre-eminence: or for an Advocate to be able to play skilfully
on a Musical Instrument, while he is a Weak Disputant, and a Dull Orator; or to
seek to Excel in the Art of Pleading, merely to draw the more Clients, and fill
his own Coffers: In a Word, for a Professor of the Art of War, to be a Great
Astronomer, but unacquainted with the Mysteries of his own Profession; to be
Timorous, or False-hearted; or to seek to Excel in this Art, merely to gratify
an Ambitious Humor, -- How Dishonorable and Unbecoming is This!

WHEREAS for Those, that are set at the Upper End of the World, and hold the
Reins of Government, to seek, that they may Excel in the Secret Mysteries of
State Policy, and in all their Public Administrations, of Civil Power, to the
Happiness, and (as far as may be) to the Satisfaction of the Commonwealth: And
for such, as Wait at God's Altar, to seek, that they may Excel (according to
their Advantages) in Ministerial Gifts, and in Grace, to the Edifying of the
Church, the Salvation of their own Souls, and the Souls of those that hear
them: For those that are Employed in Educating of Youth, to seek, that they may
Excel in Learning, and in the Art of Teaching, to the Softning the Manners, and
Greatning the Minds of Youth, and Forming them for Public Service; still
Training them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord: And for all Men of
Business, and all Sorts of Relatives to seek, that they may Excel in their
various Capacities and Stations for the Public Good: Briefly, for such, as are
called to Learn, and as occasion serves, to Practice the Art Military, to seek,
that they may Excel in all Martial Accomplishments and Atchievments, for the
Security and Preservation of the Lives, Liberties, and Properties of the People
of GOD; This is Good and Acceptable in the sight of GOD our Savior.

AGREEABLY in the Sacred Oracles we find Good Soldiers, still mentioned with
Honor: And particularly in our Text, the Soldiers belonging to the Tribe of
Zebulun are commended, as being Men that Excelled in Martial Qualifications.

IN this Chapter before us we have an Account of Two Musters of the Militia of
Israel.

THE First, which was partly at Ziklag, and more fully at Hebron, was very
considerable: for we are told, ver. 22. that there came to David to help him,
until it was a Great Host, like the Host of God: i. e. innumerable, like the
Stars or Angels, which are emirently GOD's Hosts.

THE Second was a General Muster at Hebron. Agreeably we read, Chap. II. 1. All
Israel gathered themselves to David unto Hebron --.

Now, Here let usobserve the Great and Noble Design, the Glorious Occasion, and
Joyful Issue of these Musters.

THE Design of the Former Muster was to make David, King over Judah; which they
effected to very good Purpose, and great Satisfaction, and Advantage: and David
reigned over that Tribe only Seven Years; during which, there was a long War
between the house of Saul and the house of David: But David waxed stronger and
stronger, and the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker, 2 Samuel 3. 1. David
rose gradually; being first Anointed King in Reversion; then in Possession of
One Tribe only, and at last of All the Tribes. And thus (says the Pious and
Excellent HENRY) "The Kingdom of the Messiah, the Son of David, is set up by
Degrees: He is Lord of all by Divine Designation, but we see not yet all things
put under Him, Heb. 2. 8. But, Lord, How Long!

THE Occasion of the Latter Muster was, to perfect the Translation of the
Kingdom of Israel from the House of Saul, after, the Death of Ishbosheth, to
the Illustrious House of David; or to make David King over All Israel, ver. 38.

Now the Service, thus done by the Israelitish Regiments for their Prince and
Country: occasioned Joy in Israel and many Thanksgivings to God: which, with
their Military Skill, Obsequiousness, Courage, Loyalty and Faithfulness, is
recorded to their Everlasting Praise, and for the Perpetual Instruction,
Imitation, and Encouragement of that Order of Men: And also to teach the People
of GOD, what Regards are to be paid to Men of their Character.

IN our Text we are informed, 1. Of the Quota of the Tribe of Zebulun, in this
General Muster; They were Fifty Thousand. 2. We have their Character,
consisting of Diverse Articles; which we may particularly Consider and Explain,
in speaking to this Observation from the Words, as related to the Context: Scil,

THAT Good Soldiers are an Useful, and Honorable Order of Men, and a Great
Blessing to their Prince, and Country.

SUCH Soldiers, as are described in our Text, are no little part of the Beauty
and Strength of God's Israel. They Are an Honor to their Prince and Country,
and deserve well of both.

IN Discoursing this Point, I shall, First, consider the Duty and Character of
Soldiers, so far as it is laid before us in our Text. Secondly, Endeavor to
confirm the Truth of our Doctrine. Thirdly, Make some Practical Reflections:
and Conclude with a Brief Address to the Gentlemen, that have called me to this
Service.

First. WE are to consider the Duty and Character of Soldiers, as Exhibited to
us in the Text: or What sort of Soldiers these Zebulinites were.

And here,

1. THEY were (what it is proper all, that profess themselves Soldiers, should
be) Expert in War. Instructi ad Bellum. They were not Raw and Unacquainted with
the very Rudiments of Soldiery: but were well Disciplined, and like Abraham's
Servants, Trained up in the Art of War.

THE Field-Officers, and all under Authority amongst them, were Men of Good
Conduct; knew the Business of their respective Posts, how to behave themselves,
and how to govern in an Army, both in the Camp and in the Field of Battle,
according to the Usage of those Ancient Times. To allude to what is said of the
Men of Issachar, They had Understanding, in Military Affairs, to know what
Israel ought to do. They were no Strangers to Martial Law, and knew well When,
and How to put it in Execution.

THE Private Soldiers were Skilful, and Dextrous in Handling their Arms, and
Obeying the Directions of their Commanders; so as to Defend themselves, and
Destroy their Enemies. It was the Commendation of those, that came to David at
Z^klag, Ver. 2. that they could use both the Right Hand and the Left, in ^^^ing
Stones, and shooting Arrows cut of a Bow: And of the G^dites, ver. 8. that they
could handle Shield and Buckler: And of the Chosen Men of Benjamin, Jud. 20.
16, that they could every one sling Stones at an hairbreadth, and not miss: i.
e. with great Exactness. Now it is Evident both from Reason and Scripture, that
all, that are called to be Soldiers, are obliged, as far as possible, to
imitate these Examples in Military Skill, and Expertness in War.

2. THEY were (what it is very desirable all Soldiers should be) Men that could
keep Rank. (...). They deserved order, which is the Beauty and Strength of an
Army. The Officers could do their part, and the private Soldiers their's; that
their Ranks might not be broken by the Enemy; or that the Army might Rally
again immediately, and repair any Breach that might happen, and still make g^^^
their Front, and maintain their Ground, and prevent Disorder and Confusion in
the Army, which often proves fatal in a Battle. Now this denotes and requires
not only Skill, but (...) and Strength and (...) of (...). They were Men of
Strong Bodies, able to endure Hardness, and perform great Exploits; Effective
Men. They were also Men of Great Souls, that would die a Thousand Deaths,
rather than play the Coward, and basely fly from their Colors, or desert their
Posts: Men, that were not afraid to look their Enemy in the face; nor were they
terrifyed with the Thunder of their Captains, or of their Shouting. Men, whose
Hearts were inflamed with a true Martial Fire, that many waters could not
quench, nor the floods drown: Men, not dismayed, but animated by Difficulty,
and resolved on all proper occasions with that brave General, Joab, 2 Samuel 10.
12. To play the men for their People, and the Cities of their God; leaving the
Event to Him, whose is the Victory.

EVEN thus, Men, fit for Battle, are Men of Might, ver. 8. who have faces like
the faces of Lions, and are as swift as Roes upon the Mountains, not to flic
from, but to pursue their Enemy. It Is desirable, they should, with David, be
girded with Strength, that even the bow of Steel may be broken by their arms,
Psalm. 18. 34. Then though ( the Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the
strong, yet) Humanely speaking, it may be hoped, that from the blood of the
slain, and from the fat of the mighty, their Bow will not turn back, nor their
Sword return empty.

3. THEY were (what it is highly reasonable and needful all Soldiers should be)
Men, that were not of Double Heart. Absque Cord and Cord. They were True Men;
Men of Integrity. Double-heartedness is opposed to Faithfulness. Psalm. 12.
init. Help Lord for the Faithful fail -- with a double Heart do they speak: q.
d. They pretend a kind and upright Heart, while their heart is really cruel and
deceitful. They have diverse Setts of Tho'ts, and speak according to the Company
they are with. Such double-minded Men, don't make good Soldiers; there is no
trusting of them, no depending on such Unstable Souls.

THE Men of Zebulun were not so: they were not governed by private, sinister
Views, like furious Jehu, pretending Zeal for the Lord of Hosts, Zeal for the
Church, the Church; whilst his main design was to aggrandise Himself and
Family. No, they abhorred every thing so mean and little, and had still the
great Interests of their King and People very much at Heart.

[ THEY were not of Double Heart,] This may intend, that they were faithful to
one another. The Officers were faithful to each other; not striving to break
one another from Envy, Revenge or for filthy Lucre: And they were faithful to
the Soldiers under them, not imposing on them unnecessary Burdens, nor
betraying them to their Enemies (as Joab did Uriah,) not robbing them of, or
detaining from 'em their Wages, or invading their Privileges; but carefully
instructing them, by Precept and Example, in the Art of War: improving all
their skill and interest for their safety and happiness, and to render them
serviceable.

THE Private Soldiers (we'll hope) were also faithful to their Commanders, and
one to another. They cheerfully observed the Laws of the Camp: were at their
Officer's Commandment, verse. 32. And every one minded His own Business.

THUS it is needful that All military Men, whether Officers or private Soldiers,
should be faithful to one another. That they should be of one heart, in
promoting the great Ends of their Calling, (as the Israelites were of one
heart, to make David King, ver. 38.) that they should stand by one another, and
endeavor to Preserve, Assist and Encourage one another. If Soldiers are not
faithful to one another, if their heart be divided one from another, they will
soon be found faulty: they may easily mischief, yea destroy one another, and
it is well, if they don't do so.

AGAIN, The Zebulunites were not of double Heart, but loyal and faithful to
their King, and Country. They all (at least by their Representatives) readily
took the Oath of Allegiance at the King's Coronation. 2 Samuel 5. 3. And in
taking of it, they swear in Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness; without
any mental Reservation; for they came with perfect heart to Hebron, to make
David King, ver. 38: And there David made a League with them. Considered
collectively, they were not of double heart, i. e., They were not some for
David, and others secretly against him. And considered distributively, they
were not of double heart: i. e. They did none of them pretend to be David's
Friends, while in their hearts they favored the Family of Saul. In short, None
of them (says the ingenious Mr. HENRY in Loc.) had any separate Interests, but
were all for the Public Good.

EVEN so, All Soldiers should be loyal to their rightful Sovereign, and
faithful to their Country. Disloyalty and Rebellion in Soldiers, especially in
Officers, is an horrid Crime, and of wretched Consequence.

INDEED, we don't exhort to Passive Obedience and Non-Resistance in the utmost
Latitude, in which those Doctrines have been preached up by some, who (as the
Pharisees and Lawyers did of old,) bind heavy Burdens on Men's shoulders, while
they Themselves will not touch them with one of their fingers. For (as an
Excellent Divine of the Church of England observes) We ought not to press on
others, what in like circumstances we ourselves are unwilling to perform. Mr.
Burket.
But we have sufficient Warrant to put all our Hearers (and consequently
Soldiers) in mind, To submit to the King, as Supreme; and to Governors, as
unto them that are sent, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14. To exhort every Soul, to be subject
to the Higher Powers, Romans 13. 1. Not to speak evil of Dignities. 2 Pet. 2. 10.
Jude. 8. And especially, not to speak evil of the Ruler of their People, Act.
23. 5. but to fear God and honor the King, 1 Pet. 2. 17.

Now when Soldiers are thus loyal, as David was to Saul, while his Subject; and
as David's Soldiers were to Him; that can say heartily to their Prince, as
Amasai of old, ver. 18. Thine are we David, and on thy side, Thou son of Jesse:
The very Hearts of pious Princes and Rulers will be knit to such a Militia, as
David's was to those, that came to Him at Ziklag, ver. 17.

ONCE more, May Not we suppose, they were not of double heart, but faithful
toward God? Some of them doubtless, and we hope many among fifty thousand, were
Israelites indeed, not only toward their Prince, but toward their God. However,
we are sure that all Soldiers should be so. All Men should serve God with
Uprightness and with Singleness of heart. Their heart should be right with God,
or they should be truly Religious. Soldiery is not inconsistent with the most
eminent Virtue, the most shining Sanctity, the most elevated Piety.

I suppose, the Sun never shone on Three braver Warriers, than Abraham, Joshua
and David: And yet who more Renowned for the Power of Godliness, than those
Worthies? Cornelius, a Roman Captain, was a devout Man, and one that feared God
with all his house. And he had a devout Soldier that waited on him continually,
Act. 10. 2. 7.

THOUGH Men, in some sense, may be said to be G^od Soldiers, that are none of the
Best Christians; yet the Better Men are, ( Coeteris Paribus,) the better
Soldiers they make. And verily such only are truly Religious, who are Sincere,
and in whose Spirits there is no allowed Guile. And such Soldiers may expect to
have God on their side, (when called forth to Service) to cover their Heads,
and fight their Battles, to help them to do valiantly, and to tread down their
Enemies. And such Only may expect to have the Lord of Hosts with them and for
them: and to have occasion to call upon one another, saying, Sing ye to the
Lord, for He has triumphed gloriously!

So then, Soldiers should be Good Men, and True: Faithful to one another, Loyal
to their Prince, and Devout toward God. And truly such, as are not Upright
toward God, it is to be feared, will not long be Loyal to their Prince. Neither do
they deserve, nor can they expect, their Prince should be faithful to them: For
such, as we are toward God, we may expect others will be toward us. Psalm. 18.
25, 26. David was an upright Man, a Man after God's own heart; and God blessed
Him with subjects, that were loyal and not of double Heart. But it is time to
say,

4. THESE Zebulunites were (and it is necessary all Soldiers, especially when
called to Service, should be,) Well Armed. They appeared on this Occasion with
all Instruments of War, (i. e. that were then in use and proper for that
Service) to suppress any Insurrection; and to put down and subdue such as might
presume to oppose the King's Coronation; to keep the public Peace, and grace
the Solemnity.

SOLDIERS without Weapons are but naked Men. Counsel and Strength for War will not
do well without Weapons of War. Indeed Wisdom is better without Weapons of War,
than Weapons of War without Wisdom. Eccl. 9. 18. But alas! though Men are as
skilful as Abraham, as valiant as Joshua, and as loyal and devout as David,
(who was a Nonesuch for Faithfulness, 1 Samuel 22. 14.) yet unarmed, they are
unfit for Service, a mere and an easy Prey to their Enemies in ordinary Cases!

IT was great Policy in the Philistines of old, to suffer no Smith to dwell in
the Land of Israel, (while they had Dominion over them) lest the Hebrews should
make them Swords or Spears, 1 Samuel 13. 19. And it was no less Prudence in
Abraham, not only to Train his three hundred and eighteen Men; but to have Arms
ready to fit them for an Expedition on the least imaginable Warning. And sad
was the Case of Israel, when in the day of Battle there was neither Sword nor
Spear found in the Hand of any of the People. -- 1 Samuel, 1^. 20.

SOLDIERS should then he Armed. But this is not all: They should have Armor
suitable for them; Such as they are used to, and are capable of managing:
otherwise their Condition will be like David's when going to encounter the
great Goliath, in Readiness Armor: which because He had not proved, He wi^ely
begged to be excused from wearing it. Briefly, They should have Armor, if it
may be, adapted to the Circumstances of the Enemy, they are to fight with. Mr.
HENRY observes on that Parenthesis in David's Elegy [Also he had them teach the
children of Judah the use of the Bow.] -- That the Children of Judah knew
before now how to use the Bow. -- But of late they had made more use of Slings,
because cheaper. Now David would have them see the Inconvenience of this, (for
they were the Archers of the Philistines, that here so hard upon Saul, 1 Samuel
31. 3. who could do Execution at a greater distance with their Bows, than Judah
could with their Slings) and to return to the use of the Bow, and so be able to
out do theeir Enemies at their own Weapons. 'Twas pity (says he) but those,
that had such good Heads, and Hearts, and Hands, as the Children of Judah: It Is
pity indeed, but that skilful, courageous, loyal, and devour Soldiers should be
well Armed.

I Will only add,

5. THESE Zebulunites were (and all Soldiers should be) Men ready, when called
thereto, to go forth to Battle: Or to improve their military Abilities for the
Service of the Public. They came up willingly to Hebron in Arms, to attend
whatever Service there was for them to do There. And no doubt they were as
ready afterward to serve David in his Wars, or to go out to Battle against the
common Enemies of Israel. Thus in the days of Earak the Zebulunites were among
those, that are commended in the triumphant Song of Deborah, the Israelitish
Virago, for offering themselves willingly, and jeoparding their Lives unto the
Death in the high Places of the Field, Jud. 5. 18.

ON some extraordinary Occasions Those, that are not bred to War, may be called
forth to Battle: Thus that Heroine, Deborah, took notice, that out of Zebulun
came those to fight against Sisera, that handle the Pen of the Writer: Then
according to Sir Richard Blackmore's Paraphrase, The Scribes of Zebulun, and
Learned Men,
To weild the Sword, laid down the Pen,


How much more should those, that are furnished with military skill and
courage, cheerfully improve these Talents, when Providence gives them occasion;
and fight for their Brethren, their Sons, and their Daughters, their Wives, and
their Houses? Neh. 4.14.

INDEED, Soldiers are not always (it may be but seldom) called to list as
Volunteers in military Service; because it is reasonable, there should be an
Equality: But when Soldiers are called forth by those in Authority, they should
willingly engage in whatever Service, they are called to; and not choose with the
Reubenites to continue in the Sheepfolds, to bear the Bleatings of the Flocks;
rather than venture into the Camp, to be regaled with the martial sound of the
Drum and Trumpet: lest they expose themselves to the bitter Curse, denounced of
old against such, as came not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord
against the Mighty.

BUT thus I Have considered the several. Articles, in the Character of these
Zebulunitish Soldiers, with what brevity I could: and proceed now to the Second
general Head of our Discourse, which (that I may not be guilty of Tediousness) I
shall but touch upon.

LET us then consider,

Secondly, THE Evidence of this Truth; That the described Soldiers, or such as
answer this Character, are an useful and honorable Order of Men, and
consequently a Blessing to the Public. Here,

1. WE may argue the Truth of our Observation, from the honorable mention,
made expressly or by way of allusion, of this Order of Men and of their office
and work in the Sacred Oracles. Here we find the Lord Himself in the Song of
Moses, (Exodus 15. 3.) styled a Man of War. Here also we find our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is Co-essential and Coequal with the Father, termed a Leader and
Commander to the People; (Isai. 55. 4.) And Captain of the Lord's Host, (Josh.
5. 14.) for it was doubtless He, that appeared to Joshua at Jericho with a
Sword drawn in his Hand.

IN a Word, Many of those, of whom the Apostle (in the Eleventh to the Heb.)
tells us, the World was not worthy, were famous Warriors. And these
Scripture-Heroe's are celebrated, amongst other things, for this particularly,
(to the Immortal Honor of good Soldiers, who are also good Men,) That through
faith they subdued Kingdoms; stopped the mouths of Lions; and waxed valiant in
fight, and turned to flight the armies of the Aliens.

2. WE may further argue the Truth of our Doctrine, from the Judgment of the
Wisest and Best of Men; and from the Experience of the People of God in all
Ages. If we consider the days of old, and read what is reported concerning
Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, His arming his trained Soldiers, that were
born in his house, and consequently had their military Education under him; and
the use He made of them: And if we consider, what is storied of David, (who is
Himself frequently styled a Man of War,) How He took Care and gave Order, at
his first coming to the Throne, that his Subjects might be instructed in the
Art of War: we may be satisfied, what was Their Judgment in the Case. And if we
search the Histories of succeeding Ages, we shall find a mighty Cloud of
Witnesses to the present Truth.

BUT to look no further, than our own Land; The Magistracy and Ministry of the
Country have from the Beginning acknowledged the Valuableness of this Order of
Men. The Civil Magistrate, by granting Commissions to military Officers, and
making good Laws for the Observation and Encouragement of frequent Trainings,
Annually: And by countenancing and cherishing for many Years, and even to this
Day, the ARTILLERY COMPANY in this Town: and the Ministers of the Gospel, by
the many Sermons, they have Preached to this COMPANY, amongst other Tokens of
their Regards for good Soldiers, have amply signified their Judgment in this
Case.

BESIDES (as I said) the Experience of all Ages does also evince, that such
Soldiers, as these Zebulunites, are very useful for the preservation and
security of the People of God. They are useful to prevent mischief. Solomon's
Lifeguard of valiant Men, had every Man his Sword on his Thigh, because of
fear in the Night. Cant. 3. 8. Again, They Are useful to revenge Injuries, done
to the Public: to recover Captives and Spoil, taken by the Enemy. Thus Abraham
with his Soldiers bro't back his Brother Let, and his Goods, and the Women also
and the People, Genesis 14. 16. David with his men, they recovered all, that the
Amalekites had carried away: and rescued his two Wives: there was Nothing
lacking to Them -- David recovered all. 1 Samuel 30. 18, 19. They Are useful to
suppress and destroy the Enemies of God's People. An Army with Banners is
terrible to the Enemy. When all Nations compassed David, like Bees, He
resolves, that in the name of the Lord* He would destroy them.

Finally, WE may argue, that such Soldiers, as we have heard described, are a
public Blessing, an useful and honorable Order of Men, from Their Contrary.
However, this Consideration will illustrate the Truth before us, as it is the
nature of Contraries to do. Not only undisciplined and cowardly, but disloyal,
treacherous and mutinous Soldiers are a Reproach, and Plague to their Prince
and Country. Contraria juxta se posita, claruis elucescunt.
Such Soldiers are but Armed Enemies; a most dangerous Sort of Men, both to
Church and State. They that are not for Us, are against Us; and the more expert
in War, the more bold and daring, the more active and strong, so much the worse.

Too many recent Instances, in the British Empire, do sadly verify this
Assertion. O that this might never have been to be told in Gath, and published
in the streets of Askelon!

BUT to mention no other Argument; I pass to make two or three Reflections on
the preceding Discourse. And,

First, FROM what we have heard, we may infer, Whether we are, and what we must
be and do, if we would approve our selves, good Soldiers of Jesus Christ. Why;
we must answer the Character of these Zebulunites; be such Soldiers under
Christ, as they were under David. If we are real Christians, we are listed
under Christ's Banner; we are all, of whatever Age, Sex, or Quality, engaged in
a Holy War. Our Enemies are very many, politic, powerful, deceitful,
malicious, and indefatigable. Our eternal Happiness depends on our being good
Soldiers, under this our Glorious Captain, or Generalissimo of the Saints, in
this our militant State.

Now if we are, and would approve our selves such, we must be his willing
People, (Psalm. 110. 3.) and serve Him not of constraint, but willingly: not for
filthy lucre, but of a ready mind.

'DIVINES say indeed, that in Baptism Christ gives Men Press-Money to serve
Him: but He would not have them do it against their wills. He draws his People
with the Cords of a Man, and the Bands of Love, Hos. 11. 4. He directs his
Ambassadors to compel Men to serve Him, by force of Argument, not by force of
Arms. All Real Christians offer themselves willingly, to serve in His War
against their Ghostly Adversaries.

AGAIN, We must be clothed with the whole Armor of God: of the several Parts
of which the Apostle speaks in the 6th of Ephesians. -- We must put on, and keep on
our whole Armor, Night and Day, during Life.

AGAIN, We must not be of double Heart. We must be faithful and charitable one
to another. As we are One Body, we should study to be of One Mind; to be sure,
of One Heart. If the Hearts of Christ's Soldiers are divided, it is very
lamentable. It pleases the Adversary; He has his wish: Divide and Impera, is an
Old Maxim with Him.

THIS also grieves the faithful Servants of Christ: For the Divisions of Reuben
there were great Searchings of Heart. It weakens the whole Army; And the more
considerable the Persons, the more fatal. It wounds Religion; provokes God to
withdraw from his People: But I forbear --. Christ's Soldiers should live
peaceably one with another; and beware of making a mutiny in the Army: They
must stand for, and stand by one another: forgive one another, and not fight
with their Fellow Soldiers: Mat. 18. ult. 24. c. ult. They should bear one
another's Burdens: Gal. 6, 2. Rejoice in each others Wealth; for by this it is,
that all Men know we are Christ s Disciples, His Soldiers, even by our loving
one another, Joh. 13. 35.

AGAIN, We must be loyal and dutiful to Jesus Christ. We must be at his
Commandment, and follow Him, wherever He calls us. We must heartily espouse,
and as far as possible maintain his Cause, and not imprudently betray it, or
basely disown and desert it. We must therefore be strong and very courageous:
not timorous and faint-hearted. The fearful lead the Van amongst those, that
shall be sent to the Bottomless Pit, Rev. 21. 8. We have to do with a restless
Adversary, who (as was said of Marcellus, a Roman Commander,) is never quiet,
Nec Victor, nec Victus, neither Conquering nor Conquered. We must therefore be
in good Earnest, and resist him steadfastly in the Faith: and not fight, as
those that beat the Air. It Is not eno' to ' make a flourish with our Weap^ns,
as that Phrase signifies. Slight Skirmishes will not serve the Turn; we must come
to downright blows; and either kill or be killed. And therefore,

Finally, WE had need be very skilful in spiritual Soldiery; Expert in this
War. We must not be ignorant of the Devices, and Stratagems of Satan. We must
know our selves* and realize the Vanity, the extreme Vanity of the World: And
we must study to be more exact and accurate in managing our spiritual Weapons,
in our spiritual Warfare.

WE must expect to meet with hard Things (as some of Us have done already! and)
as Those have done, who are arrived, where the Wicked cease from troubling, and
where the Weary are at rest: But let us not faint, nor be dismayed; He who has
delivered us, does deliver; and in him we trust, that He will yet deliver us, 2
Cor. 1. 10.

IF we are real Christians, we have a glorious Commander, and a good Cause:
We Have good Armor, and good Company: and if we overcome, ( And we shall
Overcome!) we shall then have a glorious Reward.

LET us then encourage our selves in the Lord our God, who has given Leviathan
to be Meat to his People inhabiting the wilderness. Our Enemies are already
vanquished. Christ, our Captain, has overcome. We may therefore triumph before
the Battle; and with loudest Shouts of Joy cry out, Thanks be to God, who
gives us the Victory; nay, who makes us more than Conquerors through Jesus
Christ our Lord!

Secondly, HENCE it is evident, that it is desirable, that such Soldiers, as have
been described, and the Methods and Exercises proper to train them up should by
all means be encouraged and countenanced.

SINCE such Soldiers are a Public Blessing, the People of God should be
thankful for them; show them due Respect; Give them deserved Praise; and not
grudge them a plentiful Reward of their difficult and hazardous Services.

HENCE also it follows, not only that it is praiseworthy in Christian
Legislators to make Laws to oblige all proper Persons to attend Trainings and
military Exercises; and This even in Time of Peace, that they may learn the Art
of War; seeing Preparation for War, may be a means to prevent it, or, however,
many pernicious Consequents of it: But also, that it is highly reasonable, that
all in Authority, whether Migistratical or Military, should take Care, that
those Laws are duly executed, and not trifl'd with and evaded; by Officers
shifting off Trainings to the Edge of Winter, when the Days are short, and
often cold, and little can be done; and then indulging the private Soldiers to
come unseasonably, and to mispend their Time, and abuse Themselves in Drinking
some inebriating Liquor; and not to break up till late at Night; turning
Trainings into vile, intemperate Frolicks.

I only enquire, whether such Trainings are not a scandalous Trifling with a
Wise, Just and Good Law, and to be greatly Discountenanced? And wish to Heaven,
that the Field-Officers in each New-English Regiment, or Those that ought to
inspect that Affair, be they who they will, would always exert themselves, to
prevent Disorders of this Kind; and add upon the whole, The good Lord pardon
our Training-Day-Sins!

WHEREAS, Training-Days appointed and attended in season, and duly improved for
the right Ends of Training, (Scil. to make Men expert in War, and prepare them
for military Service) are agreeable to the Will of God, and pleasing to Jesus
Christ, and of great advantage to the Commonwealth, tending to furnish it with
a well-disciplin'd Militia.

Finally, LET all my Hearers of the Military Order suffer a Word of
Exhortation: Labor, I beseech you, to answer the Character of these
Zebulunites; that has been set before you, as the Time would allow.

STUDY to be expert in War: To be able to keep Rank: And be not of double
Heart. Let such especially, as are Officers or Commanders, or that may probably
be so, seek that they may excel in military Accomplishments.

To this End, Let all, whether Officers or Private Soldiers, be diligent in the
use of Means. Conscientiously attend Trainings. Use makes perfect, in handling
Arms, and in all military Postures and Motions, as well as in other Things.
Give your selves to Reading. Read frequently Histories of famous Warriers. The
Scripture, and other Histories afford abundance of such Examples. Read also the
excellent Sermons (of which there is an abundant Supply in the Country, both
ancient and modern) wherein Soldiers are counseled, encouraged, and taught what
they should be and do.

AGAIN, Be much in Prayer to God. Military Skill, and Courage, and Faithfulness
are the good Gifts of God. The great God instructs the Husbandman to
Discretion; He vouchsafes also to teach his Servants, whom he calls to such
Service, the Art of War: And there is None teaches like Him. Now these good
Gifts are to be obtained in a way of Prayer, Ask, and it shall be he given you:
for every one, that asks, receives.

ALL those famous Hero's of your Order, that you have read, or heard of, or
seen. They have received all their Skill, and Courage from GOD. David could
say, Thou girdest me with strength. Psalm. 18. 39. He tencheth my hands to war.
2 Samuel 22. 35. -- Go then to God in the Name of Christ, who gives to all Men
liberally, and upbraids no man; and what he sees good, he will give unto you.

BRIEFLY, Give God the glory of all your military Seize, and Exploits;
and improve them for his Glory. Thus did David, Psalm. 144. 1, Blessed be the
Lord my strength, which teaches my hands to war: and my fingers to fight. His
is the Glory: And He is worthy to receive it; And expects that what we win by
Prayer, we should wear with Praise. This is the way to have our Gifts
increased, and continued with Comfort. Let not then the strong Man glory in his
Strength; nor the valiant Man glory in his Courage: nor the skilful in his
Conduct: But let him, that glories, glory only in the Lord, who is the Glory
of all His People, and particularly of the Military Order.

LO these Things, we have searched them, so they are; hear them, and know them
for your Good, Job. 5, 27.

I shall now conclude with a brief Address to the Ancient and Honorable
Company who have called me to preach the Word at this time.

GENTLEMEN,

I easily believe, there is no need of dissuading Men of your Character from
the horrid Vices, by which too many of the military Order in our Days have made
Themselves Infamous. And I please my self, that you need no Arguments to
prevail with you to continue loyal to the wisest and best of Kings upon Earth,
our rightful and gracious Sovereign, King GEORGE: or to submit to His
Excellency, the GOVERNOR, whom GOD has set over us: and to love your Country,
and to be ready, if called thereto, to sacrifice your Lives for it is
Preservation and Prosperity.

INDEED, Our Lord Jesus Christ, the Blessed and the only Potentate, who has the
absolute Power of Peace and War, has for the present caused Wars to cease to
the Ends of the Earth. And we shall have great cause to praise the Name of the
Lord, if there may still be Truth, and Peace in our days: and to say, Let King
GEORGE live for ever, by whose wise and powerful Influence, under GOD, we enjoy
great Quietness.

BUT alas, What Changes are in the Right Hand of the most High, is beyond
Humane View. This we know, that it is a sinful, contentious World, we live in:
That the Time is not come, when the Nations shall learn War no more: That (as a
grave Divine, now with God, would sometimes say,) We cannot expect any long
settled Peace; but must look for frequent Tumbling and Overturning, till the
Man of Sin become a Son of Perdition; and His Kingdom come (The Lord hasten
it!) wherein there shall be no Adversary, nor evil Occurrent.

AND verily if we consider, how Iniquity abounds, even the Iniquities foretold
by the Apostle (2 Timothy 3. init.) to be the Sins of the last Times: and see how
the Love of Many to Jesus Christ, His Church, the Ministers of the Gospel, and
to one another, waxes cold; We may justly expect perilous Times, yea that a
Day of Trouble is near. -- Deus avertat Omen!

I do therefore beseech you, (Brethren, and all the Sons of Mars amongst us,)
that you will attend your Military Exercises from time to time, not only as an
ingenious, laudable, and manly Recreation; but as a Preparation for War. Were
your Martial Exercises indeed only for Diversion; yet considering the Nature of
them; and how often the Christian Life is in Scripture compared to a Warfare;
what Occasion they minister for noble and very useful Reflections; and
especially when I consider, how often the inspired Doctor of the Gentiles in
his incomparable Epistles, does allude to the Grecian Games: I must be excused,
if I can see no Reason to ^^ndemn, but rather to applaud Your Custom of having
a Sermon annually preached to you; wherein you may be minded, how you ought to
govern your selves in respect of your Exercises, and what spiritual Use you,
and others may make of them. How much more obvious is the Propriety of these
your Anniversary religious Solemnities, if we consider their Original, and I
suppose still professed Design of upholding them?

I beseech you then, to remember what you have received and heard, from Year to
Year, from many faithful and eminent Ministers of the Gospel, who through the
Goodness of GOD do several of them remain unto this present, but I suppose the
greater part are fallen asleep.

AND I will only add, (for alas, what shall He say, that comes after so many
Masters of Reason and Divine Oratory!) Remember, that how strong, and
courageous, and skilful, and well-arm'd, how rich, and honorable, and learned,
how virtuous, and useful, and well-beloved soever you are, still at your best
Estate you are every one of you altogether vanity. You are mortal, and must die
like other Men. You are accountable to the Judge of all the Earth, who is no
Respecter of Persons, for all that is done by you on this Stage of Action. And
if you are not good Christians, Israelites indeed, as well as good Soldiers,
you will be miserable through eternal Ages.

SEE to it then, that you are not of Double Heart; but be faithful unto Death,
and whatever you do, and particularly in your Military Exercises, Do all to the
glory of GOD, and in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Verily I say unto you
Blessed are those Soldiers, yea Blessed for ever, are all they, whom the Lord,
when He comes, ( and He will come quickly,) shall find so doing.

AND now the Lord of Hosts, who is the God of Peace, and Captain of our
Salvation, be with you, and all His People. AMEN!

Tibi, Domine!
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Daniel Henchman, and Sold at his Shop.
SErmons wherein those Eight Characters of the Blessed, Commonly called the
Beatitudes, Are Opened and Applied in Fifteen Discourses. To which is added, A
Sermon concerning Assurance of the Love of Christ. By Increase Mather, D. D.

A Treatise Concerning Conversion: Showing the Nature of Saving Conversion to
GOD, and the Way wherein it is wrought; Together with an Exhortation to Labor
after it. To which is added a Lecture Sermon had at Boston, July 2. 1719.
Wherein the way to know Sincerity and Hypocrisy is cleared up. By Solomon
Stoddard, Pastor of Northampton.

THE Wars of the Jews. In Two Books. With the most Deplorable History of the
Seige and Destruction of the City of Jerusalem. And the Burning of the Temple
therein by the Romans, under the Command of Titus Vespatian, the Roman Emperor,
etc.


