A DEFENSE OF THE NEW ENGLAND CHARTERS.

By JER DUMMER.

Pulchrum est Patriae benefacere, etiam benedicere haud absurdum est.

SALLUST. LONDON: Printed by W. WILKINS, Reprinted at BOSTON: in N. E. by S.
KNEELAND, for S. GERRISH and D. HENCHMAN, and Sold at their Shops. MDCCXXI.

To the Right Honorable the Lord CARTERET, One of His MAJESTY's Principal
Secretaries of State.
MY LORD,
HAving lately had the Honor of presenting the Humble Address of the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay to His Majesty for the Continuance of their Charter
Privileges, which they apprehend in some Danger; It seemed agreeable at the
same Time, to explain the Right which the Charter Governments have to those
Privileges. Nor could an Argument of this Nature be so properly addressed to
any other Person as Your Lordship who, in Your high Station, have all His
Majesty's Colonies and Plantations within Your Province, and under Your
immediate Care.

MY LORD, the Colonies I plead for, ask only Justice; yet if their
Circumstances should require the Royal Grace, they humbly hope they have some
Claim to it from their firm and exemplary Loyalty. For it may be said to their
Honor, that it is not known there is a single Person in all the Charter
Governments, whatever there may be in the rest, who is not zealously devoted to
His present Majesty, and to the Succession in His Illustrious Family.

IT would be, my LORD, a rash and ill-judg'd Attempt in me, to enter here into
Your Lordship's Character, as the manner of Dedicators is; I shall not
therefore presume to mention those great Abilities which have distinguished
Your Lordship in foreign Courts as well as our own; but only beg leave to
express my Thanks for that amiable Goodness, so conspicuous in Your Lordship,
which softens the Brow of the Minister, and makes our Access easy, when public
Business calls us to attend Your Lordship.

MAY You long continue an Ornament and Support to His Majesty's Councils.

I am, With profound Esteem and Respect, MY LORD, Your LORDSHIP's most Obedient
and Devoted Servant, Jer. Dummer.

A DEFENSE OF THE New England CHARTERS.
THE general Name of New England, includes in its common Acceptance the
Province of the Massachusets-Bay, the Colony of Connecticut, the Government of
Rhode Island, with Providence Plantations, and the Province of New Hampshire.
The Three former are Charter Governments: The last, viz. New Hampshire, never
had any peculiar Privileges, but is under the immediate and absolute Direction
of the Crown. The Massachusetts, as it is the first of all the Colonies in
Extent of Territory and Number of Inhabitants, was the first incorporated,
having obtained their Charter from King Charles the First, in the Fourth Year
of his Reign. The Colony of Connecticut received theirs from King Charles the
Second in 1662, and the Fourteenth Year of his Reign. The Government of
Rhode Island had theirs in the Year following. These Charters agreed in all the
main Points, confirming to the Patentees their Title to the Soil, and giving
them ample Privileges for the well ordering and governing the respective
Plantations: They had Power to make a Common Seal; to plead and be impleaded;
to call General Assemblies; to make Laws, so as they were not repugnant to the
Laws of England; to assess the Freemen; to constitute all Civil Officers; to
array the Inhabitants in warlike Posture, and use the Martial Law, when
Occasion required. And it was provided further, That in case any Doubts should
arise, the Charters should have the most favorable Construction for the
Benefit of the several Corporations.

INVITED and encouraged by these Advantages, a considerable Number of Persons
dissenting from the Discipline of the Established Church, though agreeing with it
in Doctrine, removed into those remote Regions, upon no other View than to
enjoy the Liberty of their Consciences without Hazard to themselves, or Offense
to others. Thus the Colonies went on increasing and flourishing, in spite of
all Difficulties, till the Year 1684, when the City of London lost its Charter,
and most of the other Corporations in England, influenced by Fear or Flattery,
complimented King Charles with a Surrender of theirs. In this general Ruin of
Charters at Home, it could not be expected that those in America should escape.
It was then that a Quo Warranto was issued against the Governor and Company of
the Massachusetts Bay, and soon after a Judgment was given against them in
Westminster Hall. At the same Time Sir Edmund Andross, then the King's
Governor of New England, did by Order from Court repair to Hartford, the
Capital of Connecticut, with armed Attendants, and forcibly seized their
Charter for the King. Rhode Island, finding there was no Remedy to be had, made
a Virtue of Necessity, and peaceably resigned theirs. But as soon as the News
arrived of the happy Revolution in England, these Two last mentioned
Governments re-assum'd their Charters, and put themselves under the old Form of
Administration, in which they have continued ever since. The Government of the
Massachusetts, cautious of offending their Superiors at Home, and considering
there was a Judgment against them in the Court of Chancery, though most unfairly
and illegally obtained, did not think it advisable to make this Step; but sent
Agents to Court to supplicate, in a humble Manner the Restoration of their
Charter. To what Mismanagement, or other Cause it was owing, that they did not
obtain it, and that this Loyal Corporation was the only one either in Old or
New England, that did not recover its lost Liberty under our late Glorious
Deliverer King William, it is now too late, and therefore to no Purpose, to
enquire. A new Charter was ordered, which the Province now has, and is not much
more than the Shadow of the old One. For by these new Letters Patents, the
Appointment of a Governor, Lieutenant-Governour, Secretary, and all the
Officers of the Admiralty, is vested in the Crown. The Power of the Militia is
wholly in the Hands of His Majesty's Governor, as Captain General. All Judges,
Justices, and Sheriffs, to whom the Execution of the Laws is entrusted, are
nominated by the Governor, with the Advice of His Majesty's Council. The
Governor has a Negative upon the Choice of Councillors, which is both
peremptory and unlimited: He is neither obliged to render a Reason, nor
restrained to any Number. All Laws enacted by the General Assembly are to be
sent Home for the Royal Approbation or Disallowance. There is, besides, one
very comprehensive Article inserted in this Charter, that no Laws, Ordinances,
Elections, or Acts of Government whatsoever, shall be of any Validity, without
the Consent of the King's Governor signified in Writing.

BY these Reservations, the Prerogative of the Crown, and the Dependence of the
Province thereon are in the most effectual Manner secured, if there had been
any Danger before, as I hope in the Sequel of this Discourse, to demonstrate
there was not. And yet it happens unaccountably that this Charter of King
William, so limited and restrained, is as obnoxious as either of the other
which have their full and entire Force. Accordingly when about Six Years since
a Bill was brought into the House of Commons, and twice read, for regulating
the Charter and Proprietary Governments, This was one among the rest, and the
first named in the Bill. And though the Honorable House thought fit, upon
hearing the Petitions presented to them on that Occasion, to drop their
Proceedings, there is Reason to believe they may at another time resume them.
It is in this View, that I have put together my Thoughts on the Subject, which
for Methods sake I have disposed under the following Heads:

1 st, I shall endeavor to show, that the Charter Governments have a good and
undoubted Right to their respective Charters.

2 dly, That they have not forfeited them by any Misgovernment or
Maladministration.

3 dly, That if they had, it would not be the Interest of the Crown to accept
the Forfeitures. And,

4 thly, I shall make some Observations upon the extraordinary Method of
Proceeding against the Charters by a Bill in Parliament.

1st. Proposition, That the Charter Governments have a good and undoubted Right
to their respective Charters.
As to the first Point there can be no Difficulty. The Charters were Granted by
the Crown, and the King is acknowledged to be the Head and Fountain of all
Corporations and Franchises. For though my Lord Coke takes notice, That a Body
Politic may be established by Prescription, yet such Prescription is only
valid upon a Presumption that there was an Ancient Grant of the Crown, which by
the Injury of Time was afterward lost. I need not insist upon what no Body
controverts; but it is material to observe, that the American Charters are of a
higher Nature, and stand on a better Foot, than the Corporations in England.
For these latter were granted upon Improvements already made, and therefore
were Acts or mere Grace and Favor in the Crown; whereas the former were given
as Praemiums for Services to be performed, and therefore are to be considered
as Grants upon a valuable Consideration; which adds Weight and Strength to the
Title.

To increase the Nation's Commerce and enlarge her Dominions, must be allowed a
Work of no little Merit, if we consider the Hardships to which the Adventurers
were exposed; or the Expense in making their Settlements; or lastly, the great
Advantages thence accruing to the Crown and Nation. It would be an endless Task
to recount all the Disappointments, and Disasters that befell the first Planters
in these Enterprises. I shall therefore only say in General, that after many
Dangers in their Voyages over the Atlantic, which was not such an easy
Navigation a Hundred Years ago as it is now, they arrived at an Inhospitable
Shore and a waste Wilderness, where there were few of the Necessaries, and not
one Accommodation of Life; where the Climate was so extreme, the Summer Heats
so scorching, and the Winters so long and so cold, that the Country seemed
scarcely habitable; and to sum up their Misfortunes, they found themselves
inevitably engaged in a War with the Natives. So that by Fatigue and Famine, by
the Extremity of the Seasons, and by a War with the Savages, the first Planters
soon found their Graves, leaving the young Settlements to be perfected by their
Survivors.

To omit all this, I shall only be particular in the Expense, which was above
200,000 l. in settling the single Province of the Massachusetts Bay. The Account
stands thus: The Freight of the Passengers cost 95000 l. The Transportation of
their first Stock of Cattle came to 12000 l. The Provisions laid in for
Subsistence, till by Tillage more could be raised, cost 45000 l. The Materials
for Building their first little Cottages came to 18000 l. Their Arms and
Ammunition cost 22000 l. These several Articles amount to 192000 l. not taking
into the Account the very great Sums which were expended in Things of private
Use, that People could not be without, who were going to possess an uninhabited
Land. I must add, that 192 Ships were employed in making this great Plantation,
and Twelve Years were spent before it was brought to any tolerable Degree of
Perfection.

As great, however, as this Expense was, I believe it will appear that the
Settlement of New England was not more chargeable to the Adventurers, than it
has bin in its Consequence profitable to Great Britain. There is no sort of
British Manufacture, but what the Subjects there demand in a greater or less
Proportion, as they have Ability to pay for it; every Thing for the Use,
Convenience, Ornament, and (I say it with regret) for the Luxury and Pride of
Life. Some of the oldest and most experienced Traders to those Parts have by
Computation made these Exports arise to the Value of 300000 l. per Annum. The
Imports from thence are equally beneficial to the Kingdom. They brought home
Bullion as long as they had any left; and now they are so exhausted they can no
longer send it directly, they continue to remit it by the Way of Stain,
Portugal and the Streights; It is there they sell their Fish, and the Produce
of it comes hither in Gold and Silver, or Bills of Exchange, which is the same
thing.

OTHER and better Returns than Money it self they make in Masts, the fairest
and largest in the whole World, besides Pitch, Tarr, Turpentine, Rosin, Plank,
Knees for Ships, and other Species of Timber for various Uses. These,
especially Pitch and Tar, were formerly purchased of the Swede with Crown
Pieces at intolerable Prices; but since the Encourgement given for their
Importation from New England, they have fallen to half the Value. It is to be
farther considered, that what we take of these Commodities from our own
Plantations, is brought Home in our own Ships, and paid for with our
Manufactures.

New England also imports Logwood for the dying our Woollen Goods in Quantites
sufficient for our own Use, and a Surplus with which we furnish Holland,
Hambro', and other Markets in Europe. It is wholly owing to the Industry of the
People of New England, that this useful Commodity is reduced from 30 and 40 l.
per Ton, which we used to pay for it to the Spaniard, to 12 l. per Ton, which
is the present Price, and out of this 12 l. there is 4 l. 5 s. 0 d. paid to the
Crown for Custom.

OTHER Articles might be mentioned, as Whale-Oil and Finns, which are yearly
imported from New England in no contemptible Quantities. They are useful in
several Manufactures; and if nor had from thence must have been purchased of
the Dutch with ready Money and at excessive Prices.

IT IS true, New England, makes no Sugar, but it assists the Islands that do;
without which Assistance they could not make it, at least not cheap enough, and
in sufficient Quantities to answer the Markets in Europe. For if the Sugar
Islands were obliged to sow Wheat, and plant as much Indian Corn as they
wanted, they must needs plant the fewer Canes, and by consequence make the less
Sugar. From thence they are also supplied with Horses for their Mills, Timber
for their Sugar Works, Staves for their Cask, and what is more considerable,
with Barrel Pork, Mackrel, and refuse Cod-Fish for their Negroes, without which
their Labor would yield nothing to their Owners. For were they to feed their
Slaves with Beef and other Provisions from Britain and Ireland, the Expense of
a Plantation would devour the whole Produce of it. There are now such great
Quantities of Sugar made in the French and Dutch Plantations, and so much
imported from Brasil by the Portuguese, that our Sugar Islands need all
Advantages to make this Commodity cheap and in Plenty, that we may be able to
outdo, or at least equal our Neighbors in the foreign Markets.

IT may be added, that New England is a good Nursery of Seamen for the Navy. I
believe I may affirm, that there was hardly a Ship, during the last War, in the
Royal Navy without some of their Sailors on Board, which so distressed the New
England Merchants, that they were obliged to man their Ships with Indians and
Negroes.

WHAT I have said amounts to this: THAT New England received her Charters on
this express Condition, of settling Colonies for the Benefit of the Crown:

THAT she was at a vast Expense, and through incredible Difficulties
accomplished the Work even beyond what was ever hoped or expected.

AND then the Conclusion, that I would draw from these Ptemises is this, THAT
to strip the Country of their Charters after the Service has been so
successfully performed, is abhorrent from all Reason, Equity and Justice.

BUT it is urged, That the Crown does not take back the Soil, though it does
the Charters; which indeed is saying very little or nothing The Crown, strictly
speaking, neither did nor could grant the Soil, having no Right in it self.
Queen Elisabeth gave out the first Patent to Sir Walter Rawleigh in 1584; and
if she had any Right, what was it and whence derived? It was not a Right of
Inheritance, because those Countries did not descend to her from her Ancestors.
Not of Conquest, because she neither conquered, nor attempted to conquer them.
Besides, it would be pretty hard to conceive how a Conquest, where there was no
preceding Injury or Provocation, could create a Right. Nor did it arise by
Purchase, there being no Money or other valuable Consideration paid. Nor could
she claim by the prior Discovery or Pre-occupancy, as the Civilians speak,
because that gives a Right only to derelict Lands, which these were not, being
full of Inhabitants, who undoubtedly had as good a Title to their own Country,
as the Europeans have to theirs. And sure no Body will say in plain Terms, that
we have any Claim upon the Foot that we were Christians, and they Heathen;
which yet I know some Persons of no obscure Fame have tacitly suggested. Rome
it self, as imperious as she is, never carried her Pretenses to this Height:
For though some of her Doctors have taught, absurdly enough* that Dominion is
founded in Grace, none of 'em ever said that Property was. There remains then
no other Right than what is derived from the native Lords of the Soil, and that
is what the honest New England Planters rely on, having purchased it with their
Money. The Indian Title therefore, as it is decry'd and undervalu'd here, seems
the only fair and just one; and neither Queen Elisabeth by her Patents, or King
James by his afterward, could give any more than a bare Right of Preemption.

AND yet admitting that the Crown granted the Soil, to how little must the
Value of such Grants amount, all Circumstances considered? The Patentees were
not only obliged to travel a Thousand Leagues beyond Sea, but to purchase the
Grants over again of the Natives, before they could be put into Possession. The
Land it self was of a rough savage Nature, encumbered with unprofitable Woods,
and of no Use till by vast Labor and Expense subdued and cultivated. For to
speak the Truth, those Parts were but bare Creation to the first Planters, and
their Labor like the Beginning the World.

So that which Way soever we take it, I think it is plain, if the Crown resumes
the Charters, it will take away the Whole it gave, and deprive the Patentees of
the only Recompense they were to have for all their Toils and Fatigues, which
they thought to have conveyed safe to their Posterity. Could they have imagined
this, could they have foreseen that their Privileges were such transitory
things, as to last no longer than their Work should be done, and their
settlements completed, they had never engaged in so hazardous and difficult an
Enterprise. They would never have parted from their Native Land being neither
Criminals nor Necessitous; and those Countries which have since added so much
to the Wealth and Greatness of the Crown, might have been a barren Wilderness
to this Day; or what is worse, and more probable, might have bin filled with
French Colonies, whereby France would have reigned sole Mistress of North
America.

I believe it will be generally allowed, that my Argument is thus far right, if
I can make good my second Proposition, VIZ.

2d Proposition. That these Governments have by no Misbehaviour forfeited their
Charters.
THAT these Governments have by no Misbehaviour forfeited back their Charters to
the Crown.

SOME of the ablest Common Lawyers that England could ever boast of, have
maintained that a Corporation, being an Ens Rationis, is in it is Nature
indissolvable, and that therefore no Abuse of it is Franchises can effect it in
point of Forfeiture, or determine its Being. If this Argument should be thought
too subtle and metaphysical, I hope however it will be allowed an Extreme on
the other side, that a Corporation should be threatened for every Offense to be
seized into the King's Hands. The Subjects Abroad claim the Privilege of Magna
Charta, which says that no Man shall be fined above the Nature of his Offense,
and whatever his Miscarriage be, a Salvo Contenemento suo is to be observed by
the Judge. If therefore they have committed Faults, let them be chastised, not
destroyed, let not their Corporations be dissolved for any other Crime than a
Failure of their Allegiance. But I need not go into this or any other nice
Point of Law, it being sufficient to show that the Charter Governments are
clear of the several Facts which have been objected against them, and assigned
as matter of Forfeiture. In the Bill that was brought into the House of
Commons, there were two Allegations against the Charter and Proprietary
Governments, which I shall first answer, and then go on to consider such other
Complaints as I have met with from Time to Time against these Governments.

THE first Charge in the Bill against the Charter Governments is, The 1st
Charge against the Charter Governments, that they have neglected the Defense of
the Inhabitants, answered.
that they have neglected the Defense of the Inhabitants. This I must own, if
true, and such Neglect was voluntary, while they had the Means and Power of
Defense in their Hands, was a high and treasonable Breach of their Trust and
would be the strongest Argument that could be brought for a Resumption of the
Charters. But now, if I shall prove that these Governments, especially the
Massachusetts and Connecticut, have in all past Times defended the Inhabitants
both by Sea and Land, as well against the French as Indian Enemy: If I shall
prove that they have all the late War protected one of the King's Provinces
lying on their Confines, which would otherwise inevitably have bin lost; and
that another of these Provinces took no Part in the War, but maintained a
shameful Neutrality with the Enemy, whereby the whole Weight of the War fell on
the Massachusetts; If I shall prove that they have frequently carried offensive
Arms into the French Territories, and made one important Conquest, since
annexed to the British Crown; and that all this was done at their own vast
Expense; then, I hope, New England will stand fairly acquitted of this supposed
Crime of Neglecting to defend the Inhabitants, and be allowed not only
irreprehensible in this respect, but to have highly merited of the Crown and
Nation.

THESE FACTS are so certain and so well known, that I Am persuaded this had
never bin assigned as a Reason for dissolving the Charters* but with a special
View to Carolina, which, when this Bill was brought into the House, was reduced
to extremity by a War with the Spanish Indians; and being neither able to
defend themselves, nor obtain Succors from their Lords Proprietors, addressed
the Crown to take them under its Protection. It was therefore natural enough to
mention this in the Bill; though with humble Submission, it being the single
Case of one Proprietary Colony, it should in all Reason have bin restrained to
that, and not extended to the Charter Provinces, which are neither alike
constituted, nor were in the same Distress. For New England, as I shall
presently show, has defended it self from the first Beginning to this Day
without being burdensome to the Crown, though not without great Struggles and
Difficulties.

IT IS TRUE, they did not commence Hostilities, nor even take up Arms of
Defense, till they found by Experience that no other Means would prevail. The
first Planters, far from using the barbarous Methods practiced by the Spaniards
on the Southern Continent, which have made them detestable to the whole
Christian World, sought to gain the Natives by strict Justice in their Dealings
with them, as well as by all the Endearments of Kindness and Humanity. To lay
an early Foundation for a firm and lasting Friendship, they assured the
Americans, that they did not come among them as Invaders but Purchasers, and
therefore called an Assembly of them together, to enquire who had the Right to
dispose of their Lands; and being told it was their Sachems or Princes, they
thereupon agreed with them for what Districts they bought, publicly and in
open Market. If they did not pay a great Price for their Purchases yet they
paid as much as they were worth. For it must be considered, that Land was of
little Use to the Natives, and therefore but of little Value. They lived
chiefly on Fish and Fowl, and Hunting, because they would not be at the Pains
to clear and break up the Ground. And as for their Meadows and Marshes, they
were of no Use at all, for want of neat Cattle to feed them, of which there
were none in those Parts of the World.

THE English had no sooner made some necessary Provision for themselves, than
they applied their Cares for the Benefit of the Indians, by endeavoring to
bring them from their wild manner of Life to the civil and polite Customs of
Europe. For this purpose, they marked out Land to build Indian Towns, supplied
them with all proper Utensils for Building, prescribed to them forms of
Government, and above all, omitted no Pains to bring them acquainted with the
Gospel. After some Time, when it was found necessary, the Colony made a Law to
forbid any Person's purchasing Land of the Indians without the Approbation of
the General Court, to prevent their being over-reached or ill used in their
private Bargains: and some Land, lying very convenient for them, was by another
law made inalienable, and never to be purchased out of their Hands, than which
nothing could more demonstrate the Colony's Care and Concern for the Natives.

I THOUGHT my self obliged to make this Preface to the main Argument, that I
might wipe off an unworthy Aspersion that has been cast on the first Setlers of
New England, that they never treated the Savages well, but encroach'd on their
Land by Degrees, till they fraudulently and forcibly turned them out of all. It
was far otherwise, as I have shown; yet nothing could oblige the Indians to
Peace and Friendship. They were alarmed with the strong Jealousies of the
growing Power of the English, and therefore began a War with a Resolution to
extirpate them, before they had too well established themselves. Yet as
terrible as this Prospect was to Two or Three young Colonies, who had work
enough to defend themselves against Famine, which in a cold barren Country
surrounded with Enemies star'd them in the Face, they nevertheless made no
Application to the Crown for Assistance, but drew up Articles of Confederacy
among themselves, by the Name of the United Colonies of New England, for their
mutual Defense. This done, they took the Number of all the Males in the several
Plantations, and raising a Poll Tax according to each Person's respective
Ability, they with one Consent laid aside their Ploughshares and Pruning Hooks
for the Sword and the Spear, and under the Command of Major-Generals, whom they
chose after the manner then in England, marched directly to the Enemy's
Headquarters, and strongest Fortifications, from whence they drove them with
great Precipitation. Nor did they stop there, but pursued them through all
their Recesses, 'till they obliged them to enter into a solemn Treaty of Peace.
Such however was the perfidious Nature of the American Savages, that they soon
renewed the Hostilities, though to their own fatal Cost. For if the English
experienced a Variety of Fortune, as could not but be expected in the
Vicissitudes of War, yet they were for the most part victorious, and in the
Course of some Years, after many terrible Slaughters of the Enemy, subdued and
utterly extirpated Seven or Eight fierce and populous Nations.

I AM sensible some have endeavored to depreciate these Conquests, as gained
over a rude barbarous people unexercis'd to Arms; which if granted, still it
cannot be said, that the Defense of the Inhabitants was neglected; and therefore
the Charter Governments can fall under no Censure, if they should be thought to
have merited no Praise. But if it be considered, that the New England Forces
contended with Enemies bloody in their Nature and superior in Number; that
they attacked them in deep Morasses, defended with Fortifications sufficiently
strong, though not regular; and that the Assailants were not provided with Canon,
nor could approach by Trenches, but advanced on level Ground: And if to this be
added the vast Fatigues of their Campaigns, where Officers and Soldiers lay on
the Snow without any Shelter over their Heads in the most rigorous Winters; I
say, if a just Consideration be had of these Things, Envy it self must
acknowledge that their Enterprises were hardy, and their Successes glorious.
And though the brave Commanders who led on these Troops, and most of them died in
the Bed of Honor, must not shine in the British Annals, yet their Memory ought
to be sacred in their own Country, and there at least be transmitted to the
latest Posterity.

THE inland Parts being now at rest, the War was removed to the Frontiers,
which were cruelly harrass'd by other Indian Tribes, animated and assisted by
the French of Canada, who have given the Massachusetts but few Intervals of
Peace, and those very short ones from that Time to this Day. All this while
THAT Government was never wanting to protect the King's Subjects within their
Jurisdiction, even in the remotest Parts of it. They kept Troops on foot, no
less than Six or Seven Hundred at a Time, to cover the Barrier Line, and built
Forts wherever they were necessary; one of them named William-Henry, but
commonly called Pemaquid Fort, because built on a River of that Name, was in
the Heart of the Enemy's Country, and deserves a particular Description. It was
built of Stone in a quadrangular Figure, 737 Foot in Circumference, without the
outer Wall, and 108 Foot square within the inner ones. It had 28 Ports, and 18
Guns mounted, 6 being 18 Pounders. The Wall on the South Line fronting to the
Sea was 22 Foot high, and above 6 Foot thick at the Ports, which were 8 Foot
from the Ground. The round Tower at the West End of this Line, was 29 Foot
high: The Wall on the East Line was 12 Foot high, on the North 10, and on the
West 18. It stood 20 Rod from High Water Mark, and was garrisoned with 60 and
sometimes 100 Men. The Expense in building and maintaining this Garrison was
considerable, yet the Province cheerfully submitted to it; nor did they decline
rebuilding it, after it was surpised and demolished by the French, for any
other reason, but that it was found by Experience, the Enemy could come many
Miles wide of it, and attack their Frontiers. They therefore built Forts at
Saco and Casco, and other Places most exposed which answered the same End.

BY this Care the Power of the Enemy was very much broke, and the King's
Province of New Hampshire from whence the Royal Navy is annually supplied with
Masts, has been preserved, which otherwise must have unavoidably been lost,
being unable to help it self, and receiving no Succors from Home. New York,
another of the King's Provinces, has always kept it self in a State of
Neutrality, contributing nothing to the common Safety, whilst the Canada
Indians, joined by Parties of the French, used to make their Route by their
Borders without molesting them, and fall upon the Out Towns of the
Massachusetts. This Behavior was the more unpardonable in that Government,
because they have 400 regular Troops maintained among them at the King's
Charge, and have the five Nations of the Iroquoise on their Confines, who are
entirely dependent on them, and might easily, had they bin engaged in the
common Cause, at all Times have intercepted the Enemy in their Marches, and
thereby have prevented the Depredations committed on his Majesty's Subjects.
Solemn and repeated Applications were made to the Government of New York, by
the Governors of the Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rhode Island, in joint
Letters on this Subject, but in vain. The Answer was they could not think it
proper to engage their Indians in an actual War, lest they should endanger
their own Frontiers, and bring upon themselves an Expense which they were in no
Condition to provide for. And thus the poor Charter Colonies were left to bear
the whole Burden, and do all the Work themselves.

THE Province of the Massachusetts Bay has been equally sollicitous to protect
their Inhabitants by Sea, against any Foreign Invasion. For this End they have
kept their Militia well trained and disciplined and by an Act of the Assembly
obliged all Persons, under proper Penalties, to be well provided with
Ammunition and Arms, that they might be ready in case of a sudden Descent from
Abroad. Boston, which is their Capital Town, and principal Seaport, is
fortified with Two Batteries to the Sea, one at each End of the Town; and about
a League from it, at the Entrance of the Harbor, there is a strong beautiful
Castle, which is by far the finest Piece of military Architecture in the
British America. It was built by Colonel Romer, a famous German Engineer, at
the Countries Expense, and is called Castle William. It is a Quarre surrounded
with a covered Way, and joined with two Lines of Communication from the main
Battery, as also a Line of Communication from the main Gate to a Redoubt, which
is to prevent the Landing. It is well situated near the Channel, to hinder
Ships from coming up to the Town, which must all come within Pistol shot of
this Battery. It is mounted with 100 Pieces of Cannon, several of which are
placed on a Platform, near High Water Mark, so as to rake a Ship fore and aft,
before she can bring her Broadsides to bear against the Castle, and some of
these Cannon carry 42 Pounders. In Peace there is an independent Company of 50
or 100 Men, I Am not certain which, that constantly are on Duty; but in time of
War 500 able Men are exempted from all other military Duty, to attend the
Service of the Castle at an Hours Warning, upon any Signal given of the
Approach of an Enemy. To prevent the Castle's being surpised, there is a
Light-House built on a Rock appearing above Water two Leagues from the Town,
which makes a Signal to the Castle of the Appearance of any Ships and their
Number. The Castle again warns the Town, and if there be 5 Ships or more in
time of War, an Alarm is given to all the adjacent Countries by firing a
Beacon. The Province has also a Galley or Frigate well manned in time of War, to
guard the Coast from Privateers, and to convoy their Home Trade. In short,
nothing that could be done for Defense of the Subject by Sea or Land, has bin
left undone. It is really astonishing to consider, and difficult to believe,
that these little Governments should be able by their own Strength, and at
their own Charge, to perform such great Things.

AND YET this is not all that must be said in their Defense. For as I have
before observed, they have discovered a noble Zeal to enlarge the British
Empire, by undertaking several chargeable Expeditions against the strongest
French Settlements in America. In the Year 1690 they made an Armament against
Fort Royal, which was a Nest of Privateers, and a Dunkirk to the American
Trade; besides that it was the Head Quarter, from whence Parties of French and
Indians issued out, and fell upon the Eastern Parts of New England. They made
themselves Masters of the Place with all the Country of Accadie, and Sir
William Phipps who commanded in chief, administered to the Inhabitants an Oath
of Allegiance to the Crown of England; in which State that Country remained
till the Peace of Ryswick* when it was delivered up to the French. The great
Service done the Crown by this Acquisition, is now too well known to need being
particularly mentioned.

THE New-Englanders being willing to pursue this good Success, made an Attempt
against Canada the same Year, with a Fleet of 32 Sail of Vessels, besides
Tenders, having on Board 2000 Men, whilst at the same time a little Army of
1000 English and 1500 Indians were to march by Land and attack Mont-Real. It Is
true, they fatally miscarried, (and who can answer for the Fortune of War?) But
this ought not to lessen the Merit of an Enterprise, which they so well
intended, and by which they so greatly suffered. It cost 150,000 l. in Money,
and what was infinitely more valuable, the Lives of 1000 Men. Nor were these
Vagrants, such as are picked up here in the Streets, and disorderly Houses, and
thence pressed into the War, but Heads of Families, Artificers, and robust
young Men, such as no Country can spare, and least of all New Settlements,
where Labor is the dearest Thing in the World, because nothing so much wanted
as Hands. They did not indeed fall by the Sword of the Enemy, if that could
alleviate their Misfortune, but by a Camp Fever, by Famine, and various
Disasters in their return Home, occasioned chiefly by the early Approach of a
severe Winter which made it impracticable for Provisions to follow them.

GREAT was the distress to which these poor Colonies were reduced by this
expensive and improsperous Expedition; yet by the wise Conduct of the
Governments, and the Industry of the People, they so well recovered themselves
in less than 20 Years, as to resolve upon making another Visit to their French
Neighbors, whom they saw daily growing in Power, and threatening in time to
destroy all the English Settlements. But not thinking themselves strong enough
to deal with Quebeck, they were content to make only an Attempt on Port Royal,
which was done accordingly, though not with the former Success, the French Fort
being now strong and regular, and well provided for a Defense or Siege.

NOT discouraged by this Repetition of Misfortunes, when the late Queen
signified to these Governments, her Royal Intention to reduce Canada, and
required them to provide their Quota of Troops; it cannot be imagined with what
Alacrity they came into it, and made in all Respects ample Provision for it.
And though the Court altering their Measures did not see meet at that time to
proceed in the Design, yet the Colonies were put to near the same Charge as if
they had.

THE next Year they raised a Body of Troops again, which commanded by Colonel
Nicholson, with 500 Auxiliaries from hence, made another Descent upon Port
Royal and reduced it. For which Service they were promised by her then Majesty
considerable Advantages in respect of Trade and the Fishery, to which it is
hoped a just regard will be had, when Nova Scotia is brought under a Civil
Establishment.

ONE may imagine now that these Colonies were quite out of Breath, and needed a
little Rest. Yet presently after, when the great unfortunate Expedition was set
on Foot against Canada under the Command of General Hill and Admiral Walker,
they furnished more than the Quota assigned 'em, and provided all Necessaries
for the British Troops in so short a Time, that if they had not been animated
by an extraordinary Zeal, would not have been possible. And notwithstanding
some People found it necessary to blame New England, the better to excuse
themselves, yet it has been acknowledged to me by English Gentlemen, who were
then on the good, and well experienced in these Affairs; that such a Fleet and
Army wanting the Necessaries they did, could not have been dispatched on so
short Warning from any Port in England.

MY Answer to this Article of Accusation would be imperfect, if I did not still
further observe, that these Governments have assisted and relieved the most
distant of His Majesty's Islands, and the remotest Settlements on the
Continent, when in Distress, upon no other Inducement, than that of being their
Fellow Subjects. I Will give Two or Three Examples.

WHEN in the Year 1703, or about that Time, Jamaica was in Fear of an Invasion,
and desired some Help from the Government of the Massachusetts; They,
notwithstanding the length of the Voyage, which is often 8 or 9 Weeks, sent
them two Companies of Foot, commanded by Colonel Walton, and Captain Larimore,
both very gallant Officers. The Companies arrived safe, and served there two
Years, sometimes on Shore, and at other Times as Marines on Board the Man of
War, then in the Service of the Island; and I believe very few of these
Soldiers ever returned to their Native Country.

IN 1705, when Nevis was plundered and ruined by Ibberville, New England
charitably, and of their own accord raised 2000 l. for their Relief; which they
sent in two Vessels, each having 1000 l. on Board in Flower and Salt Provisions
for their Subsistence, and in Materials for Rebuilding their Houses and Mills.
This they did generously, neither desiring nor receiving any Returns, when that
Island came into more prosperous Circumstances.

AND now lately, when Carolina was engaged in a War with the Spanish Indians
and wanted Arms and Ammunition, they were supplied with both from Boston.

UPON the whole, what a vast Fund of Merit have the Charter Governments raised
to themselves from a long Series of Faithful and Heroic Services! And how
strangely out of Countenance must this Objection look, that they have neglected
the Defense of the Inhabitants! I have only to wish, that His Majesty and His
Ministry had leisure from the important Affairs of the Nation, and of Europe,
to consider their Merit, and then I assure my self, instead of depriving them
of their present Privileges, they would continue them forever; and, if there
were room for it, add as many more.

THE other Charge in the Bill is, The 2d Charge in the Bill against the Charter
Governments, that they have exercised arbitrary Power, answered.
That they have exercised arbitrary Power. If this be aimed at the Proprietary
Governments, which however I don't accuse, I have nothing to say, but am sure
that the Charter Governments stand clear of it. The Thing speaks loudly for it
self. For in the Governments, where there are Charters, and those Charters
entire, all Officers Civil and Military are elected by the People, and that
anually; than which Constitution nothing under Heaven can be a stronger Barrier
against arbitrary Rule. For should it be allowed, that the People, corrupted or
deceived, might instead of wise Magistrates choose Tyrants and Oppressors to
Lord over them one Year; yet it cannot be imagined, that after they have felt
the Smart of it, they will do so the next. Nor can there be a greater
Obligation on the Rulers themselves to administer Justice than that their
Election depends on it the next Year. Hence the frequent Choice of Magistrates
has bin ever a main Pillar; upon which all who have aimed at Freedom in their
Schemes of Government, have depended.

As the Reason is incontestible, so the Fact is apparent, that these
Governments, far from retrenching the Liberty of the Subject, have improved it
in some important Articles, which the Circumstances of Things in Great Britain
perhaps don't require, or will not easily admit:

To instance in a few; There has bin from the beginning an Office erected by
Law in every Country, where all Conveyances of Land are entered at large, after
the Grantors have first acknowledged them before a Justice of Peace; by which
means much Fraud is prevented, no Person, being able to sell his Estate twice,
or take up more Money upon it than it is worth. Provision has likewise been made
for the Security of the Life and Property of the Subject in the Matter of
Juries, who are not returned by the Sherriff of the County, but are chosen by
the Inhabitants of the Town a convenient Time before the sitting of the Courts.
And this Election is under the most exact Regulation, in Order to prevent
Corruption, so far as Humane Prudence can do it. It must be noted, that
Sherriffs in the Plantations are comparatively but little Officers, and
therefore not to be trusted as here, where they are Men of ample Fortunes. And
yet even here such flagrant Corruptions have been found in returning Juries by
Sherriffs, that the House of Commons thought it necessary in their last Session
to amend the Law in this Point, and passed a Bill for choosing them by Ballot.

REDRESS in their Courts of Law is easy, quick and cheap. All Processes are in
English, and no special Pleadings or Demurrers are admitted, but the general
Issue is always given, and special Matters brought in Evidence; which saves
Time and Expense; and in this Case a Man is not liable to lose his Estate for a
Defect in Form, nor is the Merit of the Cause made to depend on the Niceties of
Clerkship. By a Law of the Country no Writ may be abated for a circumstantial
Error, such as a slight Mis-nomer or any Informality. And by another Law, it is
enacted, that every Attorney taking out a Writ from the Clerk's Office, shall
indorse his Surname upon it, and be liable to pay to the adverse Party his
Costs and Charges in Case of Non-Prosecution or Discontinuance, or that the
Plaintiff be Nonsuit, or Judgment pass against him. And it is provided in the
same Act, That if the Plaintiff shall suffer a Nonsuit by the Attorney's
mis-laying the Action, he shall be obliged to draw a new Writ without a Fee, in
case the Party shall see fit to revive the Suit. I cannot but think that every
body, except Gentlemen of the long Robe and the Attorneys, will think this a
wholesome Law, and well calculated for the Benefit of the Subject. For the
quicker Dispatch of Causes, Declarations are made Parts of the Writ, in which
the Case is fully and particularly set forth. If it be matter of Account, the
Account is annexed to the Writ, and Copies of both left with the Defendant;
which being done Fourteen Days before the Sitting of the Court, he is obliged
to plead directly, and the Issue is then tried. Whereas by the Practice of the
Court of King's Bench, Three or Four Months Time is often lost after the Writ
is served, before the Cause can be brought to Issue.

NOR are the People of New England oppressed with the infinite Delays and
Expense that attend the Proceedings in Chancery, where both Parties are often
ruined by the Charge and Length of the Suit. But as in all other Countries,
England, only excepted, Jus and Aequum are held the same, and never divided; so
it is there: A Power of Chancery being vested in the Judges of the Courts of
Common Law as to some particular Cases, and they make equitable Constructions
in Others. I must add, that the Fees of Officers of all sorts are settled by
Acts of Assembly at moderate Prices, for the Ease of the Subject.

IT were easy to mention other Articles, but that I persuade my self it is
needless. The Charter Governments are celebrated for their excellent Laws and
mild Administration; for the Security of Liberty and Property; for the
Encouragement of Virtue, and Suppression of Vice; for the promoting Letters, by
erecting Free-Schools and Colleges; and in one Word, for every Thing that can
make a People happy and prosperous, To these Arts it is owing, that
New England, though she has attained but little more than the Age of a Man,
with all the Disadvantages under which she labors in respect to her Trade and
Climate, and almost a perpetual Indian War, has hitherto flourished far above
any other of the Plantations.

THIS being the Case of the Charter Governments, let us turn the Tables, and
see how it fared with them when in an evil Reign they lost their Charters. Then
the Governor or New England with Four or Five Strangers of his Council, Men of
desperate Fortunes, and bad if any Principles, made what Laws, and levied what
Taxes they pleased on the People. They without an Assembly, raised a Penny in
the Pound on all the Estates in the Country, and another Penny on all imported
Goods, besides Twenty Pence per Head as Poll Money, and an immoderate Excise on
Wine, Rum, and other Liquors. Several worthy Persons, having in an humble
Address represented this Proceeding as a Grievance, were committed to the
common Goal for a High Misdemanour; denied the Benefit of the Habeas Corpus
Act; tried out of their own County; fined exorbitantly, and obliged to pay 160
l. for Fees, when the Prosecution would hardly have cost them so many Shillings
in Great Britain. And to complete the Oppression, when they upon their Trial
claimed the Privileges of Englishmen, they were scoffingly told, Those Things
would not follow them to the Ends of the Earth. Unnatural Insult; must the
brave Adventurer, who with the Hazard of his Life and Fortune, seeks out new
Climates to enrich his Mother Country, be denied those common Rights, which his
Countrymen enjoy at Home in Ease and Indolence? Is he to be made miserable, and
a Slave by his own Acquisitions? Is the Labourer alone unworthy of his Hire,
and shall they only reap, who have neither sowed nor planted? Monstrous
Absurdity! Horrid inverted Order!

THESE Proceedings, however Arbitrary and Oppressive, were but the Prelude: The
Catastrophe was, if possible, yet more dismal. Having invaded their Liberties,
by an easy Transition the next Attack was directly on their Properties. Their
Title to their Lands was absolutely denied by the Governor and his Creatures
upon two pretenses: One, that their Conveyances were not according to the Law
of England; the Other, that if they might be thought to have had something like
a Title formerly, yet it now ceased by the Revocation of their Charters. So
that they who had fairly purchased their Lands, and held them in quiet
Possession for above Fifty Years, were now obliged to accept new Deeds from the
Governor and pay for them a third Part of their Value, in order to ascertain
their Titles or otherwise they would be seized for the Crown.

IT would be an Injury to Virtue, if I did not in this Place pay distinguished
Honor to the Memory of an honest and worthy Patriot, Col. Shrimpton long since
deceased, who being rich in Lands, was courted to receive new Patents gratis,
that others might be drawn in by the Authority of his Example; but when he was
appriz'd of their Design, he chose rather to have his Lands seized (and they
were seized) than by such a base Compliance betray his Countrymen into the
Snares prepared for them. I should not have thus far entered into the Detail of
Things so long past, but to show from Experience, as well as from the Reason
and Nature of the Thing, that Charters are not the Causes of Arbitrary
Government, but indeed strong Works raised against it, which once thrown down,
Oppression rushes in like a Tide, and bears down every thing before it.

HAVING thus answered the Allegations of the Bill, in a Manner which I hope may
be satisfactory, I am next to consider such Arguments as I have met with in
Conversation from Persons in the Ministry and others.

WHAT I have heard most insisted on is, The Third Objection, that the Acts of
Trade are disregarded, answered.


That the Acts of Trade and Navigation, made on purpose to render the
Plantations beneficial to Great Britain, are disregarded in the Charter
Governments; and that this Evil cannot be effectually cured, but by a
Resumption of the Charters.

TO which I answer very particularly and distinctly,

1 st. THE Complaints on this Head are for the most Part of an old Date, and
when the Bill against the Charters was depending in the House of Commons, were
produced from the Files of the Plantation Board, whither they had bin
transmitted in former Reigns, when Custom-house Officers in the Plantations
were such great Rarities, that One Collector served Four entire Provinces. And
can it be thought strange that Merchants, whose Business is Gain, should have
sometimes for Lucre transgressed the Acts of Trade, when there were no Officers
to see them duly observed? The Case is vastly different now. Officers of the
Revenue are multiplied, and are extremely rigorous, so that instead of their
Complaints of unfair Traders, the Merchants on the other hand greatly complain
of the Oppression of the Officers. Ive seen an Account of such intolerable
Hardships imposed on fair well-meaning Traders, under Color of Law, that one
would hardly give Credit to the least of the Articles, if the Whole had not bin
delivered publicly in an Assembly of one of the Provinces by a worthy Member,
and afterward printed with his name to it. The Author I refer to, after a
Recital of the several Facts, in which he is very full as to every
Circumstance, draws up this melancholy Conclusion, That the Custom-House
Officers had by their violent Practices either seized or driven away all the
Vessels belonging to that Part of the Country, so that they had no Sloops left
to carry their Produce to Market in the adjacent Colonies.

2 dly. IF there be some late Complaints, perhaps upon Examination, they will
appear to be ill grounded. I can speak this knowingly with respect to a
Complaint, transmitted not long since by the Surveyor General of North America
and the Collector of New London, against His Majesty's Colony of Connecticut.
These Gentlemen, one or both of them, drew up a Charge against that innocent
and loyal Colony in very severe Terms, as setting the Laws of Trade and
Navigation at the utmost Defiance. Whereas in Truth and in Fact, the Instances
they produced of such Defiance were clear Proofs of that Colony's Inclination
to support the Laws of Trade and their own Traffic; and on the contrary, what
the Custom-House Officers insisted on was manifestly subversive of both, and
could serve no End in the World but enhancing the Collectors Fees. The Case is
this: There are on the Coast of His Majesty's Colony of Connecticut Eight
convenient Ports or Harbors for Shipping. The Government there did from the
Beginning place a Naval Officer in each of them, to see that the several Acts
of Trade were duly observed. After the Act of the 7th and 8th of King William,
the Collector of the Colony appointed a Deputy in each of these Ports, who
required all Masters of Vessels, Outward and Inward-bound, to Enter and Clear
with him as well as with the Naval Officer, whether they had any Goods on Board
paying a Duty to the Crown or not; which they submitted to, though not obliged by
Law, as Sir William Thompson the late Solicitor General has upon a full and
impartial State of the Case given his Opinion. The present Collector, thinking
it best to receive all the Fees himself, refuses to make any Deputations, or
allow the Power of the Naval Officers to be sufficient in his Absence, but
commands all Masters of Vessels whatsoever to repair to the Port of his
Residence, and there to Enter and Clear with him: By which Regulation Seven of
the Eight Ports are left open for illegal Traders, to the great Detriment of
the Crown; whilst with equal Injury to the Subject, Sloops sailing from one
Town to another, or perhaps to a neighboring Province with no better a Cargo
than a few Deals and Turnips, shall be obliged to go sometimes 120 Miles out of
their Way, which often happens to be further than the Port of Delivery, to find
the Collector. The Agent for the Colony has fully represented this Hardship to
the Commissioners of the Customs, and shown the Injury that will be done to the
King as well as the Subject by this Establishment; but all in vain, there is no
Redress; and what puts one out of all Patience, this very Case is cited as one
Allegation among others to support the General Charge against the Charter
Governments that they carry on an illegal Commerce.

3 dly. IF IT were true that some Persons did now and then concern themselves
in an illegal Trade, can it be thought just or reasonable that the whole
Community should suffer for their private fault? No Body will say that the Acts
of Trade are perfectly observed in the Provinces immediately under the Crown,
or in Great Britain it self. I believe there is no Corporation in the Kingdom,
being a Seaport, wherein there are not at some Time or other contraband Goods
imported, or other Goods clandestinely run, to the prejudice of the King's
Duties. In this Port of London great Abuses are daily committed in spite of
the utmost Vigilance to prevent them. The Fraud of relanding Callicoes after a
pretended Exportation, only to receive the Drawback, is a most flagrant
Instance, if One either considers the Perjuries that attend it, or the immense
Sums that are thereby robbed from the Public, or the vast Injuries that are
done by it to the honest Linen-Draper. And yet, whoever used this, or any other
Cheat of the like Kind, as an Argument to disfranchise this Ancient
Corporation? The Rule of Law is, Noxa Caput sequitur; and it is agreeable to
Natural Justice that every Man should suffer for his own Transgression. On the
other part, if a Corporate Body were to forfeit their Privileges for every
private Person's Offense, they would be of no Value. A Charter so limited could
not stand a Week, nor would be worth the Expense of the Great Seal.

4 thly. I MIGHT still make a further Remark. If the Grievances complained of
were not antiquated Stories, but subsisting at this Time; if they were fairly
represented; and lastly, if it were equitable that the Crimes of Persons in a
private Capacity should be expiated by the Public, yet no Conclusion could be
drawn from these Premises prejudicial to the Charters, because the dissolving
them would be no Remedy in any sort. The Reason is plain, that putting this
Case, not only the Inspection of Trade, but the Prosecution, Trial, and
Punishment of every Offender would rest in the same Hands, and be carried on in
the same Manner as before. All the Officers of the Revenue are in the present
State of Things appointed by the Crown; all Breaches of the Acts of Trade,
saving a single one excepted by Act of Parliament, are cognizable only in the
Court of Admiralty, where the Judge and every inferior Officer are created
either by Commissions under the Broad Seal, or by Warrants from the Lord High
Admiral. The Laws of the Country are not pleaded in that Court, but Acts of
Parliament, and when, they are silent, the Civil and Maritime Laws take place.
The Forms of Proceeding, were they of any Consequence, are regulated after the
Manner practiced in Doctors Commons. If then his Majesty should resume the
Charters, nothing more could be done to preserve the Acts of Trade than is at
present, and therefore how plausible soever this Pretext may appear at first
sight, it is plain upon a nearer View that there is no Weight in it.

I am appriz'd that the Judge of the Vice-Admiralty in New England has often
complained home of the frequent Prohibitions served on him from the Courts of
Judicature there, which he says, Weaken and in a manner suppress the Authority
of that Court, and all the good Ends for which it was constituted. But neither
does this Matter in the least relate to the Charters, though there were Reason
for the Complaint, as on the other hand, I shall immediately show there is
none. The Right of the Courts of Common Law within the Province of the
Massachusetts, to restrain the Excesses of the Admiralty Jurisdiction, are not
derived from their Charter, but from subsequent Laws of the Province, confirmed
afterward by the Crown; which Power therefore, whether the Charters stand or
fall, will remain unhurt, and still the same. But the Matter of this Complaint
is wholly groundless, which I must particularly show, because a Handle has bin
taken from it to hurt New England in its Charters. I therefore take leave to
say, That the superior Court of Judicature for the Province of the
Massachuset's Bay has a legal Power to issue Prohibitions to the Court of Vice-
Admiralty: That it is very fitting and necessary such a Power should be lodged
in that Court: And, lastly, that the particular Cases wherein the Judges of
that superior Court have hitherto exercised this Power, were apparently
without and beyond the Admiralty Jurisdiction.

To begin with the Power it self: It Is founded on an Act of the Assembly passed
in the 11th Year of King William, and by him confirmed, entitled, An Act for
establishing a superior Court of Judicature, Court of Assizes and General Goal
Delivery. The Act after a Recital of several Powers vested in the Court, has
this general Clause: And the said Court is hereby vested with the same Power as
fully and amply to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever as the Courts of King's
Bench, Common- Pleas and Exchequer within His Majesty's Kingdom of England have
or ought to have. By Consequence then, if the Court of King's Bench has a Power
to restrain the Court of Admiralty in England, this Court of Judicature must
have the same in New England.

THE Reasons for such a Restraining Power are as strong in New England as in
Great Britain. It has bin ever boasted as the peculiar Privilege of an
Englishman, and the grand Security of his Property to be tried by his Country
and the Laws of the Land; whereas this Admiralty Method of Trial deprives him
of both, as it puts his Estate in the Disposal of a single Person, and makes
the Civil Law the Rule of Judgment; which though it may not perhaps properly he
called Foreign, being the Law of Nations, yet it is what he has not consented to
himself, of his Representative for him. A Jurisdiction therefore so sounded
ought not to extend beyond what Necessity requires, that is, to nothing but
what is really* transacted on the High Seas, which not being infra Corpus
Comitatus, is not triable at Common Law. If some Bounds are not set to the
Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, beyond which it shall not pass, it may in Time,
like the Element to which it ought to be confined, grow outrageous and overflow
the Banks of all the other Courts of Justice. This Danger is still greater in
the Plantations, where neither the Judge nor any of the Inferior Officers of
the Admiralty have Salaries, or perhaps other Dependence than upon what they
get by their Fees, and therefore must be strongly tempted to receive all
Business that comes before them, however improper for their Cognizance.

IN vain do the Advocates for the Admiralty urge on this Occasion that an
Appeal lies home, and therefore if a Cause tried there be found to be Coram non
Judice, Justice will be done to the injured Party on the Appeal. For if this
Argument has any Force, it would take place in England, because an Appeal lies
here from the Sentences of the Admiralty to the Court of Delegates, and yet
that is not thought a sufficient Reason to prevent the Court of King's Bench
from granting Prohibitions when they think them necessary. Besides it is to be
remarked, that the Appeal does not lie to the King and Council as it does from
other Courts, but to the Judge of the Admiralty* and therefore one may imagine
that the Appellant will have but a cold Cause of it; for I believe it has bin
rarely found that any Court was forward to limit its own Power.

IF then the Court of Judicature in New England has a right in general to award
Prohibitions against the Court of Vice-Admiralty, there will, I believe be no
Dispute as to the particular Instances wherein they have exercised this Power.
Hitherto there have bin but Three; nor did the Judges come into these, but upon
solemn Argument first had before them by the ablest Lawyers on the Spot. Not
that I suppose there was any real Difficulty, but it being a Case prima
Impressionis in that Country, 'twas thought proper to proceed so deliberately.

ONE Prohibition was granted on a Libel filled upon the Wool Act of the 10th and
11th of William III. which provides, That all Offenses therein mentioned shall
be tried in some Court of Record, which it is certain the Court of Admiralty is
not. Another was issued to stop Proceedings in a Cause which had bin tried
before at Common Law, and received the Judgment of the Court. If the Court of
Vice-Admiralty should assume such a Prerogative as this, instead of being
confined to Maritime Affairs, it would be the Supreme Court in all Causes, and
the Dernier Resort of Justice. The Third Prohibition was upon a Charter Party
made and executed upon the Land with a Penalty under Hand and Seal, which
nevertheless was libelled in the Court of Admiralty, and the Judge would very
gravely have heard and determined it, on a Color of it is having relation to a
Voyage, or at least to something which was to be performed on the Seas. Although
this is so far from being a good Reason, that there are many Cases in the
Books, where a Cause has bin wholly Maritime, and even the Contract made upon
the High Seas, yet because it was reduced to Writing afterward and Sealed on
the Shore, it has bin adjudg'd to be without the Admiralty Jurisdiction. My
Lord Coke is so clear and full upon this Subject, and the Limits of the
Admiralty Jurisdiction are so exactly described in the several Acts of
Parliament made for this End, to say nothing of the Cases in the Books, where
great Damages are given for infringing the Rights of the Common Law, that I
shall refer to them Vid. My Lord Coke's Fourth Institutes, as also the several
Statutes of 13 R. 2. Cap. 5.15 R. 2. Cap. 3. By the Statute of the 2d. H. 4.
Cap. 11. in Case a matter Tryable at Common Law be brought into the Court of
Admiralty, the Party grieved shall recover double Damages. See the Statute of
27 Eliz. Cap. 11. as also the Cases in the Books, particularly that of Sir
Josiah Child and Sands in Salk. 31, 2. where an Action was brought on the
Statutes of 13 R. 2.15 R. 2. and 2. H. 4. for arresting a Ship by Admiralty
Process, the Matter not being within the Connusance of that Court, and though
there was no Suit, nor any Plaintiff or Defendant, yet it was held to be a
Prosecution, and double Damages were recovered, Error was afterward bro't, and
the Judgment affirmed.
and pursue this Argument no further.

ANOTHER Thing alleged against the American Charters is, The 4th Objection
That they have made Laws repugnant to the Laws of Great Britain, answered.
That their Governments have made Laws repugnant to the Laws of Great Britain
contrary to the Powers given them, and thereby have incurred a Forfeiture of
the Charters.

IF the Massachuset Charter were singly in Question, this Allegation would have
no place, because no Act passed by that Assembly has the Force of a Law till
the King's Governor has assented to it, and then it comes home for his
Majesty's Approbation, who if he pleases, annuls it. There is therefore no
Danger of their making Laws repugnant to the Laws of Great Britain; or if they
should, there being a Remedy always at hand, if it be not made use of, the
Fault will lie some where else, and cannot affect the Province.

BUT let us examine a little, whether any of the other Governments acting under
Charters may deserve this Censure* in order to which, we must consider what
this Phrase [REPUGNANT TO THE LAWS OF ENGLAND] imports. I believe it will be
easily allowed, that a Law may be various from the Laws of England, and yet not
repugnant to them; or otherwise these Governments must make no Laws at all,
which no Body will say, who knows that a Right of Legislature is the most
essential Part of their Charters, and what indeed the Reason and Nature of the
Thing make absolutely necessary. Every Country has Circumstances peculiar to it
self in Respect of its Soil, Situation, Inhabitants, and Commerce, to all which
convenient Laws must with the nicest Care and Judgment be adapted; whereas the
Laws of England are calculated for their own Meridian, and are many of them no
ways suitable to the Plantations, and others not possible to be executed there.

THIS Point, however clear and evident, has not bin always rightly understood.
There was a pretty extraordinary Instance of it a few Years since, with respect
to a Law in force in Carolina for choosing Jurymen by Ballot. This was part of
their Original Body of Laws framed by the famous Earl of Shaftsbury, and what
they had found by Experience a great Preservative to their Liberties and
Properties. Yet I don't know how it happened, the Lord Palatine and other Lords
Proprietors of that Province, imagining this Law to be repugnant to the Laws of
Great Britain, and that they should thereby incur a Forfeiture of their
Charter, directed their Landgraves to get it repealed. The People in that
Government, unwilling to part with what they so much esteemed, sent over two
Deputies express to set the Matter in a fair Light before their Lordships. When
they arrived, I accompanied them at their Desire to the Board, where after some
short Debates, we satisfied their Lordships that their Charter could be in no
Danger on this Account, and that one Law might be various from another without
being repugnant to it.

HAVING premised this Distinction, I answer the Question in direct Terms, That
then a Law in the Plantations may be said to be repugnant to a Law made in
Great Britain, when it flatly contradicts it, so far as the Law made here
mentions and relates to the Plantation. Contraria sunt ad idem: And therefore
one Thing cannot be said to be contrary to another, that does not immediately
relate to it, and diametrically oppose it. For the Purpose, if a Law passed
here has its Force restrained to England, Wales, and the Town of Berwick on the
Tweed, no Law in the Plantations can properly be said to repugn it; because
whatever Diversity there may be between them, yet one having no manner of
Relation to the other, they are not repugnant. I believe I am Right in my
Logic, but am sure I am as to the legal Acceptance of the Phrase, because
what I advance is founded on the Words of an Act of Parliament. It is the 7 th
and 8 th of King William, which (Cap. 22. Sect 9 th.) Enacts, That all Laws,
Bylaws, Usages or Customs at this Time, or which hereafter shall be in
Practice, or endeavored or pretended to be in Force or Practice in any of the
Plantations, which are in any wise repugnant to the beforementioned Laws or
any of them, SO FAR AS THEY DO RELATE TO THE SAID PLANTATIONS OR ANY OF THEM,
or which are any ways repugnant to this present Act, or to any other Law
hereafter to be made in this Kingdom, SO FAR AS SUCH LAW SHALL RELATE TO AND
MENTION THE SAID PLANTATIONS, are illegal, null, and void, to all Intents and
Purposes whatsoever. If then we'll take the Sense of the Phrase from an Act of
Parliament, (and where can we have a better Expositor?) no Man will pretend
that there ever was a Law made in the Plantations repugnant to the Laws of
Great Britain. And yet I am apt to think that if an Assembly should do a Thing
so illegal, they ought to be punished for it themselves, and not their
Constituents. They were chosen and delegated by the People to frame Laws
according to the Powers given them by their respective Charters, which if they
exceed, why should a whole Country suffer for their Offense? This would be to
punish the Innocent for the Guilty, and is not agreeable to the Law in other
Cases, where if the Trustee does any Act that is illegal and beyond his Trust,
the Cestuyq. Trust is not obliged by it, nor to be hurt for it.

IF the Words will receive any other Construction than what the Act of
Parliament has put upon them, I think it must be supposed to be this; that the
Patentees should not under color of their particular Charters presume to make
any Laws inconsistent with the great Charter and other Laws of England, by
which the Lives, Liberties and Properties of Englishmen are secured. It seems
reasonable enough to think that the Crown might intend by this Injunction to
provide for all it is Subjects, that they might not be oppressed by arbitrary
Power; but in whatever distant Part of the World they were settled, being still
Subjects, they should have the Usage of Englishmen, be protected by the same
mild Laws, and enjoy the same happy Government, as if they continued within the
Realm. Consider the Expression in this Light, and the Colonies (which I am
defending) are still safe, having in no respect impaired, but many Ways
improved the Liberty of the Subject, as I have before shown under another Head.
If hereafter so unaccountable a Thing should happen, that those Privileges
which were designed as Fences against Oppression and Despotick Power prove the
means to introduce both, and the Body of the People should petition to be
relieved from the Yoke of their Charters, for my part, I Will be no longer an
Advocate for them. Only in the mean Time, I heartily wish they may not be
disturbed, but rest in Peace till then.

A 5th Objection, that the Charter Colonies will grow great and formidable.
answered.
THERE is one Thing more I have heard often urged against the Charter Colonies,
and indeed it is what one meets with from People of all Conditions and
Qualities, though with due respect to their better Judgments, I can see neither
Reason nor Color for it. It Is said, that their increasing Numbers and Wealth
joined to their great Distance from Britain will give them an Opportunity in
the Course of some Years to throw off their Dependence on the Nation, and
declare themselves a free State, if not curbed in Time by being made entirely
subject to the Crown. Whereas in Truth there is no Body though but little
acquainted with these or any of the Northern Plantations, who does not know and
confess, that their Poverty and the declining State of their Trade is so great
at present* that there is far more Danger of their linking, without some
extraordinary Support from the Crown, than of their ever revolting from it. So
that I may say without being ludicrous, that it would not be more absurd to
place two of His Majesty's Beef-Eaters to watch an Infant in the Cradle that it
don't rise and cut its Father's Throat, than to guard these weak Infant
Colonies to prevent their shaking off the British Yoke. Besides, they are so
distinct from one another in their Forms of Government, in their Religious
Rites, in their Emulation of Trade, and consequently in their Affections, that
they can never be supposed to unite in so dangerous an Enterprise. It is for
this Reason I have often wondered to hear some Great Men profess their Belief
of the Feasibleness of it, and the Probability of i'ts some Time or other
actually coming to pass, who yet with the same Breath advise that all the
Governments on the Continent be formed into one, by being brought under one
Viceroy, and into one Assembly. For surely if we in earnest believed that
there was or would be hereafter a Disposition in the Provinces to Rebel and
declare themselves Independent, it would be good Policy to keep them disunited;
because if it were possible they could contrive so wild and rash an
Undertaking, yet they would not be hardy enough to put it in Execution, unless
they could first strengthen themselves by a Confederacy of all the Parts.

BUT to return from this short Digression: Our Neighbors of Holland, who are
allowed to be a wise State, did not entertain these Jealousies of their
Subjects in India, when they were a young and growing Plantation, nor do they
even now when they are a potent flourishing People. Had they done so, and in
consequence of it restrained and checked them, Holland would not at this Day
have drawn such immense Riches from that Part of the World, and furnished all
Europe with Indian Commodities. And yet what Reason can be assigned for the
Jealousies we entertain of our Colonies, which the Dutch have not, and far
stronger with respect to their Batavian Subjects? If the Distance be urged as
an Argument, every body knows that New England is but a thousand Leagues from
the British Shore, but the Dutch must run eight Times that Ground from
Amsterdam before they arrive at Batavia, Or if the Number and Power of the
Inhabitants should give any Umbrage, this is an Article which with respect to
Batavia will not admit of the most distant Comparison. The General of that Place
maintains a Port superior to many Sovereign Princes in Europe, and has all the
Kings in Java in a manner Tributary to him. He has 3000 standing European
Troops, not reckoning the Natives* and all the Dutch Inhabitants live in that
flowing Wealth and Plenty which makes Batavia look like the Capital of a Great
and Mighty Empire. But do the States of Holland look on this their prosperous
Condition with envious or jealous Eyes? Just the reverse; they do every thing
in their Power still to promote and advance it, well knowing their foreign
Plantations cannot thrive, but they must receive the Benefit of it themselves,
and therefore justly esteem the Wealth of their Subjects Abroad as their own
Riches. Why then should not Great Britain form the same Judgment, and proceed
by the like Measures in regard to her American Dominions, from whence she
receives the greatest Advantages? It were no difficult Task to prove that
London has risen out of the Plantations, and not out of England. It Is to them
we owe our vast Fleets of Merchant Ships, and consequently the Increase of our
Seamen, and Improvement of our Navigation. It Is their Tobacco, Sugar, Fish,
Oil, Logwood and other Commodities, which have enabled us to support our Trade
in Europe, to bring the Balance of some Countries in our Favor, which would
otherwise be against us, and to make the Figure we do at present, and have done
for near a Century past, in all Parts of the commercial World.

THE Mother Kingdom must therefore needs rejoice in the Prosperity of every one
of her Colonies, because it is her own Prosperity. The Fable of the Belly and
Members illustrates this Argument. It would be unreasonable for the Belly to
grudge the Labor of digesting the Food and dispersing the Blood and Juices to
the extreme Parts, seeing they return purified and exalted in the Circulation.
There Is a close Analogy between the Natural Body and the Body Politic; as in
the one, a Finger cannot ache, but the Whole feels it, so in the other the
remotest Plantation cannot decay, but the Nation must suffer with it.

IF it be said that the Charter Colonies are not so valuable as some of the
rest, I answer, that the Inhabitants have the more need of their Charters to
make them amends; for People must have some Encouragement to sit down on a cold
and barren Soil. Yet I have shown before that they are many ways of great Use
and Advantage to the Crown; to which I add, that they will be more so than ever
in a few Years, to strengthen the British Empire in America against the
formidable Settlement of Loisiana, which for some Years past has bin carried on
by the French with great Expense, and with the utmost Vigor and Application.
This Country was given by the late French King to the SieurCroizat, but is now
(as every Body knows) in the famous Missisippi Company, who have a Fund of a
Hundred Millions of Livres for this very Purpose, and are daily sending over a
vast Number of People for Tillage, as well as all sorts of Artificers, with
proper Materials for making a Settlement. It is situate on the great River of
Missisippi, and by help of the superior Lakes and Rivers, on some of which the
French have already erected Fortresses, a Communication may be made between
New-France and the Gulf of Mexico, which indeed was the very Scheme of the
French Court in projecting this Enterprise, as is expressly declared in the
Preamble to Croizat's Patent. It Is easy then to see that the French will be
hereby enabled to draw a Line, and in Time have a Chain of Towns on the Back of
all our Colonies from the Borders of Cape-Breton to the westermost Part of
Carolina. And what Briton can consider this without being in Pain for the Fate
of our Provinces in future Times? Especially since we know that the Illinois
and other Warlike Indian Nations lie near the French, and for many Reasons,
which it would be too much a Digression to recount here, are devoted to their
Interest, and by consequence ready at all Times to join their Forces in any
Attempt against us.

THIS being the Case, I think with humble Submission, it is very preposterous
to amuse our selves with vain, imaginary Prospects of what is scarce possible
to come to pass, and neglect doing what is absolutely necessary; I mean, the
enlarging and supporting our Provinces, that they may be able to defend
themselves against being one Day totally extirpated by a Foreign Power. And
then I have only to suggest an old approved Maxim, That every Thing is best
preserved by the same Principles by which it was at first formed, and
consequently the best Method of encouraging the Charter Colonies is, to
preserve their Privileges inviolate, without which they had never binsetled.

The 3d Proposition, That it is not the Interest of the Crown to resume the
Charters f forfeited.
ANOTHER Proposition I advanced was, That if these Governments should be
adjudg'd to have forfeited their Charters back to the Crown, yet it is not the
true Interest of the Crown to resume them.

IT is a generally received Opinion, that the People in the Plantations have an
Interest distinct from that of the Crown; when it is supposed at the same time,
that the Interest of the Governors, they being the King's Representatives, is
one with the Crown; and from these Premises it is concluded, that there cannot
be too much Power given to the Governors or too little to the People. Whereas,
with humble Submission, I conceive this to be a very wrong Judgment, and that
the Reverse of it is true. The only Interest of the People is to thrive and
flourish in their Trade, which is the true Interest of the Crown and Nation,
because they reap the Profit of it. When on the other Hand, the View that
Governors generally have is private Gain, which being too often acquired by
discouraging and oppressing Trade, is not only an Interest distinct from that
of the Crown, but extremely prejudicial to it. The Trade of a young Plantation
is like a tender Plant, and should be cherished with the fondest Care; but if
instead of that, it meets with the rough Hand of Oppression, it will soon die.
The proper Nursery for this Plant is a free Government, where the Laws are
sacred, Property secure, and Justice not only impartially, but expeditiously
distributed. For to what purpose shall the Merchant expose his Estate to the
Dangers of the Sea, the Enemy, and many more Accidents, if after all he cannot
save it at Home from Rapine and Violence?

As this is evident, so is it that whatever injures the Trade of the
Plantations, must in Proportion affect Great- Britain, the Source and Center of
their Commerce; from whence they have their Manufactures, whether they make
their Returns, and where all their Superlucration is lodged. The Blow then may
strike the Colonies first, but it comes Home at last, and falls heaviest on our
selves.

THAT Governors are apt to abuse their Power and grow rich by Oppression,
Experience shows us. We have seen not many Years since, some Governors seized
by their Injured People, and sent Prisoners to Whitehall, there to answer for
their Offenses. Others have fallen Victims on the Spot, not to the Fury of a
Faction or a Rabble, but to the Resentment of the whole Body of the People,
rising as one Man to revenge their Wrongs. Others after being recalled, have
been prosecuted at the King's Bench Bar, pursuant to an Act of Parliament made
in the Reign of the late King William, whereby it is provided, That Governors
shall be impleadable at Home for any Injuries done in their Governments Abroad.
We have had more than one flagrant Instance of this very lately, where
Governors have bin convicted and censured not so properly for oppressing, as
for a direct plundering their People, and such other Acts of Mis-rule and
lawless Power, as one would not have thought it possible they should have
committed if Experience had not shown it to be more than possible.

I don't however intend by what is here said, to reproach our own Nation, as if
we were greater Sinners than others, or to reflect on the present Times, as if
they were worse than the former. I know that the same Abuses have bin practiced
in every Age as well as this, and in Foreign Colonies as well as our own. The
ancient Romans were as brave and as virtuous a People as any in the World, and
yet their Proconsuls or Governors were very guilty in this respect. Their
Corruption was so notorious as to be distinguished by the Name of Crimen
Repetundarum, a Phrase not used in any other meaning, and derived from the
Obligation which the Roman Senate laid on their Governors to make Restitution.

NOR have the modern Governors in the French and Spanish Plantations bin less
Criminal. It Is a famous Story of a Great Minister at the Court of Madrid, who
writ to his Friend the Viceroy of Peru, that great Complaints were made
against him for having extorted immense Sums of Money from the People in his
Government; Which, says he, I wish may be true, or else you are undone. It
seems the same Thing that wounded him, was necessary to heal him; and what put
him out of Favor, was the only Thing could restore him,

INDEED it can hardly be expected but these Corruptions must happen, when one
considers that few Gentlemen will cross the Seas for a Government, whose
Circumstances are not a little straight at Home, and that they know by how
slight and uncertain a Tenure they hold their Commissions; from whence they
wisely conclude, that no Time is to be lost. And then for the Account to be
rendered at Home, that is not thought of at so great a Distance, for Procul a
Jove, procul a Fulmine.

TO enlarge then the Power of Governors, is to give them greater Power to
oppress; and to vacate the Charters is to enlarge their Power, the Government
in that Case of Course devolving upon them; as we see in those Plantations
which never had any Charters, but are immediately dependent on the Crown. There
they have, in a manner, the entire Legislative and Executive Powers, or at
least so great an Influence on the constituent Parts of the Former, as leaves
them little (...) than Nominal Sharers, serving rather as Screens to the Govern
(...) a Defense to the People. The Militia is absolutely vested in (...)
Governors, which influences all Elections of Representatives: They appoint
Judges, Justices, Sheriffs and other Civil Officers with the Consent, it is said
indeed, of the Council; but that such Consent voluntary or involuntary will
ever be refused, seems too much to be expected, if we consider that although the
Governors do not indeed appoint the Council, yet they recommend proper Persons
to the King; and it may be supposed, that a Gentleman who is entrusted with the
chief Command of a Province, and is actually on the Spot, will be thought the
best Judge who are fit to serve, and therefore his Recommendations will almost
always prevail. Besides, if there be a Turn to serve, or an Emergency real or
imaginary, and any of the Members should be so refractory as not to give into
his Measures with an implicit Faith, the Governor can suspend as many of them
as he pleases; and when he has reduced the Board under a Number limited in his
Instructions, he can then fill it up to that Number instanter with whom he
pleases; and who will they be, may we presume, but such as are passively
obedient to his Will? And too many such there are to be found in all Colonies
so constituted, who are content to be sadled themselves, provided they may ride
others under the chief Rider. I must farther observe, that where there are no
Charters, there are Courts of Equity established, in which the Governor is
always Chancellor, and for the most part Chief Justice, and Ordinary at the
same time; which puts the Estates, Lives and Liberties of the Inhabitants,
saving the Liberty of Appeal at Home, entirely in his Disposal; and even an
Appeal in all Cases under a considerable Sum, in all Case; of the ordinary
Jurisdiction, and in all Cases Capital, is either disallowed by his
Instructions, or wholly in the Governor's Breast to allow or not

THE Sum of my Argument is, That the Benefit which Great Britain receives from
the Plantations, arises from their Commerce: That Oppression is the most
opposite Thing in the World to Commerce, and the most destructive Enemy it can
have: That Governors have in all Times, and in all Countries, bin too much
inclined to oppress. And consequently it cannot be the Interest of the Nation
to increase their Power, and lessen the Liberties of the People. I am so
sanguine in this Opinion, that I really think it would be for the Service of
the Crown and Nation to incorporate those Governments which have no Char^^^^
rather than Disfranchize those that have.

THE last Thing I proposed to consider was, The 4th Proposition, That it seems
inconsistent with Justice to Disfranchize the Charter Colonies by an Act of
Parliament.
how far it may be consistent with Justice, to deprive the Colonies of their
Charters, without giving them a fair Trial or any previous Notice.

IT is certain, that Bills of Attainder, such as this would be, have bin seldom
used in England, and then only upon the most extraordinary Occasions: As when
flagrant Crimes have been committed of a new and unusual Nature, against which
the Law had made no Provision; or when the Witnesses have avoided, and perhaps
by the Contrivance of the (...); or lastly, which is the most common Case, when
the attainted (...) having himself absconded, and fled from Justice, has
thereby made (...) extrajudicial Proceeding Justifiable. It is also as certain
that neither of these Things can be pleaded in the present Case, which I need
not be particular in showing, because not suggested, nor is there the least
Color for such Suggestion. And yet I pretend to know the People in the Charter
Governments so well, and to be so thoroughly acquainted with their meek
Principles of Obedience, that I dare affirm if such an Act should pass, however
rigorous and severe they might think it within themselves, they would not let
fall an indecent Word of their Superiors, but would receive the News with the
lowest Submission: So great is their Loyalty to the King, and so profound their
Regard for the Resolutions of a British Parliament, the wisest and most august
Assembly in the World. However, seeing there is no such Act already passed, and
it is to be hoped from the Honor and Justice of Parliaments, never will, it
cannot be thought a Crime modestly to state the Hardship of the Case: I don't
mean with respect to the Merits of it, which have bin already considered, but
as to the Manner of Proceeding by Bill in Parliament. It is a most sacred and
unalterable Rule of Justice, and has ever bin so esteemed by all the civilized
Nations of the World, that no Person be deprived of Life, Liberty or Estate, or
any thing he possesses, till he has had Time and Opportunity to make his
Defense. And if the Matter in Judgment be of great Value, dearly paid for, and
long enjoyed, it adds much to the Weight of the Argument, and aggravates the
Injury in depriving the Possessors unheard. Now this is the Case of the Charter
Governments. How great the Purchase Consideration was, has been before said;
but how valuable the Charters themselves are can never be said, Liberty being
inestimable. And for the Time they have enjoyed them, were they not on Record,
it would be what the Civilians call Immemorial, one of them being above
Fourscore Years standing. It seems therefore a Severity without a Precedent,
that (...) People who have the Misfortune of being a Thousand Leagues distant
from their Sovereign, a Misfortune great enough in it self, should UNSUMMON'D,
UNHEARD, IN ONE DAY be deprived of all their valuable Privileges, which they
and their Fathers have enjoyed for near a Hundred Years. It Is true, the
Legislative Power is absolute and unaccountable, and King, Lords and Commons
may do what they plea^, but the Question here is not about Power, but Right:
And shall not the Supreme Judicature of all the Nation do right? One may say,
that what (...) Parliament cannot do justly, they cannot do at all. In maximis
minima est ^ntia. The higher the Power is, the greater Caution is to be used in
the Execution of it, because the Sufferer is helpless and without Resort.

WHEN in an Arbitrary Reign, the Charter of New England was (...), a Quo
Warranto first gave the Colony Notice to prepare for their Trial. Although this
was a Prosecution at Law, and the High Court of Parliament is not strictly
confined to the Forms of the Courts below, yet it is not doubted but the great
Fountain of Law and Justice will have some regard, if not to all the Rules made
for inferior Judicatures, yet to such as are Essential to Justice. And so in
other Cases it has. For the Purpose: If a Bill be brought into the House of
Commons that touches any Man's Property in Ireland, it must lie 30 Days, that
the Party may have Notice and not suffer unheard. Why then should not a
reasonable Time be allowed to the Subjects in America, in Proportion to their
more distant Situation; seeing they are no less the Subjects of the Crown, than
the Inhabitants of Ireland; and Liberty is at least as valuable as Property;
and surely the concern of whole Provinces challenges as much regard as the
Interest of a single Person. If it should be said, as I confess a great
Minister once said to me, That the Regulation of Charters must be looked on as
Part of the public Economy, and not as the Affair of any particular Person or
Province; I humbly apprehend, with the utmost Deference to that great Person,
that this does not reach the present Case. It Is indeed very reasonable that all
public Affairs be subject to the Determination of the public Wisdom, and
there is no Occasion to notify any Body, because every Body is supposed to be
present in the Representative Body of the Whole; but here the Provinces to be
censured and deprived have no Representative in Parliament, and consequently
must be considered as absent Persons suffering unheard.

I KNOW of but one thing more that can be said to palliate a Proceeding against
the Charters in this way, which is, That the Provinces always have their
respective Agents at Court, who may be heard by Petition before the Bill passes
into an Act. To which I answer, first, that sometimes they have Agents here,
and at other Times they have not. Next, that a Bill may pass into an Act
without the Knowledge of the Agents, they having no Citation. This had once like
to have bin the Case, when a Bill of this Nature was formerly brought into the
House of Commons; and certainly had proved so, if the Agent for New England had
at that nice Juncture bin indisposed in his Health, or but a Day's Journey out
of Town, or if he had not bin more than ordinarily active and diligent when he
was in Town. And, lastly, I must oberve that Agents are only instructed in
Things that fall within the ordinary Course of Business, and when any thing of
a new and extraordinary Nature is brought on the Carpet, they have a general
Instruction to pray for Time in order to notify their Principals, and receive
their special Commands. Besides, it is well known that the Right Honorable the
Lords Commissioners for Trade and Plantations were, at the Time before
mentioned, prepared to urge many Complaints both New and Old; to which Facts it
had bin impossible for any Agent to answer oretenus, without being ever
appriz'd of them. To conclude, what those Governments desire of their
Superiors at home is, that they may not be judged and condemned unheard. And I
cannot but flatter my self they will obtain it, whether I consider the
Reasonableness of the Demand it self, or the celebrated Justice and Lenity of
His Majesty's Government, or the Importance of the Thing in Question to the
Provinces concerned. I mention this last particular, being sure they would
reckon the loss of their Privileges a greater Calamity, than if their Houses
were all in Flames at once. Nor can they be justly blamed, the one being a
reparable Evil, but the other irreparable Burnt Houses may rise again out of
their Ashes, and even more Beautiful than before, but it is to be feared that
Liberty once lost, is lost for ever.

THUS I have ventured into the World my Thoughts on the New England Charters;
happy! if my imperfect Essay may provoke some learned Pen to do full Justice to
the Subject, which yet in the great Scarcity of Friends that these Governments
have, seems too much to be expected. In the mean Time, being my self a Native
of one of them, I could not forbear showing my Good Will; for how little soever
one is able to write, yet when the Liberties of one's Country are threatened,
it is still more difficult to be silent. The Dumb Son of Craesus, when he saw an
Attempt made on his Father's Life, broke into sudden Speech by a strong Effort
of Nature. It Is a fine Passage in Sallust, which I Have placed in the Title Page
of this little Work, Pulchrum est Patriae benefacere, etiam benedicere haud
absurdum est. Every Man would be ^ubitious to do his Country each of these
Services, and if I have not been Fortunate enough to attain to Either of 'em,
THIS shall be my Satisfaction, that I have always aimed and endeavored at Both.

FINIS.

