THE SALVATION OF THE SOUL Considered. The NATURE of that Great SALVATION
declared; WITH DIRECTIONS for the Obtaining, AND INCENTIVES to the Pursuing, of
it. In a brief ESSAY, designed for a Dispersion by Hands at Work for the
Kingdom of GOD.

-- LECTORIS de Vita, Animaeque Salute, Tractatur, -- BOSTON: Printed by B.
Green. MDCCXX.

THE Salvation of the Soul, Considered in a brief ESSAY, prepared for the hands
that are at work on the Designs of the Common Salvation.
MAy our Gospellized People, now give Attention, a just and strong Attention,
to the most Important Matters, that ever any People had, or can have, Set
before them. The Most-concerning, the All-concerning, Matters are Set before
us, in those Words, I. Pet. I. 9. The END of your FAITH, the SALVATION of your
SOULS.

EVERY Word is Ponderous; it weighs like the Mountains of GOD. The Inspiration
of the Almighty, employs the Pen of an Apostle from Him, to Recommend unto us,
a Faith in a Lovely JESUS; the Faith of what He will do for His Followers, at
that Second Coming of His, which is to be looked for. In the Prosecution of
this Intention, We are here treated with Two Things; First, An Incomparable
Blessedness, for the obtaining of which every Man has cause to be unspeakably
Sollicitous; An Inestimable Blessedness, which if thou Lose, O Man, What will
it profit thee, if thou gain the whole World? This Blessedness, is, The
Salvation of the Soul But then, Secondly; The Way wherein we are made Partakers
of this Blessedness. T'wil be the End of our Faith; Our Way to it, is by a
Genuine Faith in the JESUS, who alone can Lead us into the Rest which remains
for the people of GOD.

That which I am in the most awakening Terms, to oblige your most Serious
Thoughts upon, is This Faithful saying of GOD; Oh! Let it be counted worthy of
all Acceptance with you!

The SALVATION of the SOUL, will be the END of a True FAITH in Our Glorious and
Mighty, and Only SAVIOR.

Seasonably and Effectually to make sure of a part in the Salvation, whereof
the Blessed JESUS is the Author, to as many as obey Him; This, This is the
Thing, which you are now with an Uncommon Importunity to be pressed unto. For,
my Friends, Our SAVIOR has instructed us, It Is not every one that shall be
Saved: No, It Is not every one that pretends to own Him for a Lord, and makes a
fair pretension to Religion, that shall be Saved. Multitudes, Multitudes, are
they who perish, by a most Sottish Neglect of their GRAND INTEREST; And you
have cause to Think upon a Question, which GOD now puts unto You, but which
indeed all the Angels in Heaven can give no Answer to; That very Solemn
Question, Heb. II. 3. How shall we escape, if we Neglect so great Salvation!

The first Thing that is now to be done, is to assert the Existence of the
Subject, the Welfare whereof we are now Entreating you to be wisely concerned
about; And this is, The SOUL. This Assertion is to be introduced, as an
Undoubted Preliminary, to what we are going upon; Job XXXII. 8 There is a
SPIRIT in Man. A SPIRIT capable of Discerning and Arguing and Affecting: A
SPIRIT which Reasons, and Compares, and Judges, and Chooses; A SPIRIT which a
Man of Reason, when he feels himself a dying, does commit into the Hands of a
Faithful Creator. O Man, Thou have a SOUL, the Existence whereof ought to be
how Real, and how Awful, to thee! Indeed, it might seem a Needless Labor, yea,
and a Cutting Satyr, to take any Pains for the convincing of a Man, that he has
a Soul within him. Should any Man Doubt whether he has a SOUL within him, his
very Doubt would be an Evidence of it. So wondrously would that Man Confute
himself, who should thus go to degrade himself into the class of the Beasts
that Perish. It was the Ridiculous Mistake of the poor Americans, who when they
first saw some Europeans on Horse back, took the Horse and his Rider to be but
One Animal. But much more worthy to be Ridiculed, arc the Epicureans who take
not the Body and the Soul, for very Different Substances. My Friend, Thy Body
is but a Cabinet unto a Jewel, the most precious in the World; A SOUL, A SOUL
which has many Incontestible Demonstrations (besides those of well-attested
Apparitions,) of its Immortality. A SOUL which is capable of Doing more for
GOD, and of Tasting more from Him, than all the Creatures in the whole Visible
Creation. A SOUL, whereof a SAVIOR who has been Powerfully declared, The SON
of GOD; and the True Witness, who delivers Souls; has declared unto us,
Matthew. X. 28. It cannot be killed, by that which Kills the Body. A Text, which
the Men of corrupt minds, who are for that Scandalous Epitaph on a Dead Man,
Here lies the whole of the Man, in vain Study to make Evasions from. That SOUL
of thine, O Man, When will thine Ears be open unto the Cries which it makes
unto thee? Verily, There is the Voice of GOD crying to Every Man, in the cry
which his own SOUL makes unto him. When, O Man, will thou show thy self a Man?
Thy Dying Body is abundantly cared for. When shall the SOUL, that is to Survive
the Body, have a due care bestowed upon it? Thy Body is fed; But thy SOUL is
famished. Thy Body is clothed; But thy SOUL is naked. The Distempers of thy
Body, thou seek a cure for. Thy SOUL is pining away in its Iniquities. Thy
Body is falling and hastening down into the Pit of Corruption. Oh! what
Provision have thou made, that thy SOUL may be then Received into Everlasting
Habitations?

The Subject is then agreed upon; The next thing to be done, is to prevail with
you, that you would pursue the Welfare of this Noble Subject; A point which,
One would think, should now need no further to be spoken to. Do but Remember, O
Man, That thou have a SOUL, and thou can not but Acknowledge, that it must
be, The ONE THING that is Needful, to Consult the Welfare of it. But that this
Design may be well pursued, we will Maintain Two Positions.

My First POSITION is; The SALVATION of the SOUL, is to be the Grand Point of
Solicitude, with all that are going down to the Dust, whereof none can keep
alive his own Soul. But now, What is implied, what is contained, in, The
Salvation of the Soul? SALVATION! O comprehensive Word! O Incomprehensible
Good! SOUL, It Is beyond all that thou can Ask or Think!

First; In the Salvation of the Soul, there is a Deliverance from all the
Miseries to which by our Fall from GOD, we are become Obnoxious; all the
Miserable Circumstances of those whom GOD counts for His Enemies. The doleful
Outcry of all Mankind, may be That, Lam. V.16. The crown is fallen from our
Head, and woe is unto us, in that we have Sinned. Soul, T'wil be thy Outcry,
whenever the Sleep of Death upon thee, is going off. The Apostasy from GOD,
begun by our First Parents, has plunged us all into a woeful Condition. The
Soul, involved in the Sin of our First Parents. and having by Actual Sin also
Denied the GOD that is Above, may make its Bitter Lamentations. O wretched One
that I am! I have the Wrath of GOD abiding of me* and His direful Curse is
dispensed unto me, even in my Prosperity, as well as my adversity. I am Sick of
Grievous Diseases. I am a Slave to Satan, and I serve diverse Lusts. When I am
driven out of this Tabernacle, I am like to fall into the Hands which it is a
fearful thing to fall into. There is danger that my Return unto it at a
tremendous Day of Judgment, will be only to undergo a Strange Punishment
reserved for the workers of Iniquity. And Oh! What will become of me, when This
Earth shall become like a Fiery Oven, and as a mighty, flaming, blazing
Furnace, which all the Wicked of the Earth shall be thrown into! O Soul in
wondrous Perils, To be Rescued from all this Confusion, is that Salvation,
which is now set before thee, in the Word of Truth, which is the Gospel of thy
Salvation.

But then, Secondly; There is in the Salvation of the Soul, a Positive Good,
conveyed; All the Good which is promised unto the Fear of GOD: and Oh! How
Great is ihat Good, which GOD has laid up for them that Fear Him! The Salvation
which we have in our View, is in the Sacred Oracles which describe it unto us,
called, Life Eternal. The Thing of which we are often and often informed in the
Holy Book, which none but an Holy GOD, and One who cannot Lie, can be the
Author of, is That; 1 John II. 25. This is the promise that He has promised us,
Eternal Life. Herein, first, there is a Sentence of Life passed upon us, and
our Sin is Pardoned. In our Pardon, GOD restores us to His Favor, and in His
Favor there is Life. There is a Justification of Life, wherein a Gracious GOD
says unto us, The Lord has put away thy sin; Thou shall not Dye: Says unto us,
Be comforted, Thy Sins are forgiven thee. Herein there is that thing done for
us; Romans V. 19. We receive the Gift of Righteousness, and reign in Life by
JESUS CHRIST. In the Salvation of the soul, there is a Release given to the
Soul, from the Bonds to suffer the Destruction from GOD, which His Violated Law
lays upon the Sinner; and the Soul may Sing, Lord, I will praise thee; for that
though thou wast Angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou do comfort
me.

But then, Secondly; There is an Entrance into Life; which is made by our
coming to Live unto GOD. We are Quickened with Influences from Above, which
Enliven us, and Enable us to pay those Regards unto the Living GOD, which we
have heretofore paid unto our Idols. We have that Life of GOD begun in us,
wherein the Praising and Pleasing of GOD, becomes the Main Scope of our Life;
Self is dethroned, and GOD resumes His Throne in our Souls. We terminate our
Loves and Hopes and Joys, no longer in Creatures, but pass from them and
through them unto GOD: We Die to Creatures, and Live unto GOD. And it is with us
according to That; Romans VIII. 2. The Law of the Spirit of Life in CHRIST JESUS
has made me free from the Law of Sin and of Death. The Salvation of the Soul
does Relieve and Remove the Maladies which the SOUL is depraved withal, and
fill the Soul with the Love of GOD, and of the Neighbor.

And now,

Thirdly; The Life Eternal, which had its Inchoation in This World, has its
Consummation in another and a better World, after our Departure out of This.
And here first, There shall be that Word accomplished, Romans VIII. 10. If CHRIST
be in you, the Body is dead, because of Sin, but the Spirit is Life, because of
Righteousness. Our Spirits will, at our Expiration, fly away, into a Paradise,
where they Live unto GOD and are Comforted. But then, anon shall be that Word
accomplished, 1 Cor. XV 53. This corruptible must put on incorruption; This
mortal must put on immortality. The Salvation of the Soul, will prove the
Salvation of the Body too. It Is observable, That the Salvation of the Soul, is
to be received at the Appearing of the Lord; even when He shall come to Raise
the Dead and Judge the World. The Soul will not be in all circumstances as it
would be, till that Great Revolution. We shall then have our Bodies fetched
back from the dark Chambers of Death, and given back to our Spirits, filled
with an Ethereal matter, and made Luminous and Vigorous, and Salted, or made
Incorruptible with the Fiery Robe, whereof we were stripped by the First
Transgression. Our Life being Redeemed from Destruction, at the Resurrection of
the Dead, our Youth will be Renewed, and we shall have Bodies, wherein we shall
mount up as with the Wings of Eagles. Then we shall be sheltered under the
Wings of the JESUS, who Delivers from the Wrath to come; find with Him a
shelter from the Devouring Fire, and the Everlasting Burnings, which they that
Know not GOD, and Obey not His Gospel, shall be doomed unto. Then, Then we
shall be taken into the Holy City, which has the Glory of GOD giving Light unto
it. There we shall have all Tears wiped away from our Eyes. There* we shall be
Filled with all the Fullness of GOD* There GOD will become All in All unto us.
But, O the Duration of this Felicity! An Eternal Salvation! After we have been
in that Life of Glory and Honor and Immortality, for Thousands of Myriads of
Millions of Ages, and such as it would even tire all humane Understanding to
cast up the Numbers of, we shall be no nearer the Period of it, than the First
Moment that we came into it.

Behold, the SALVATION of the Soul, which we do with Vehemence now urge you to
be Vehemently concerned about: A SALVATION which certainly you cannot but own
to be well worth all the Pains that can be taken for it. O go to Work about the
Salvation with Fear and Trembling, lest by presumptuous and contemptuous Delays
you provoke the GOD, who Works in us to will and to do of His own good
pleasure, to withold from you those Aids of Supernatural Grace, without which,
you will continue as you are, and fall short of entering into Rest. SOUL, Delay
no longer; but hearken to

My Second Position which is, There is a Blessed SAVIOR, a Faith in whom will,
for the End of it, have the Salvation of the Soul. Men and Brethren, You are
now coming to Know the way to the City. It Is after this manner, that the
Servants of the most High GOD must show unto you the way of Salvation.

First, We have a most powerful and most merciful SAVIOR, whose Name is JESUS
because He saves His People from their sins. In our Blessed JESUS, has our GOD
fulfilled that Word unto us, He will send them a SAVIOR, and a GREAT ONE.
Messengers from Heaven have made this Proclamation unto us, Luke II. 10. I
bring you good Tidings of Great Joy, which shall be to all People; unto you
there is born a SAVIOR, who is CHRIST the Lord O wonderful! O wonderful! The
Eternal SON of GOD, a Person who is ONE GOD with His Eternal FATHER, has taken
the Man JESUS into One Person with Himself This GOD man, is become the Mediator
between GOD and Man, and gives to Man a view of Returning to GOD. By His
Mediation it is, that His chosen People arrive to the Salvation of the Soul.
That this our SAVIOR Died, and Rose from the Dead, and was Received up into
the Heavens; this is a Thing whereof we have many Infallible Proofs. It Is a
Thing that has been better proved, than any matter of Fact, that ever was in
the World. There needs no more to prove, than He is the SAVIOR, which His
Gospel has Reported Him to be, and that what He has Revealed in His Gospel
about the Salvation of the Soul, is to be relied upon. This is the SAVIOR, who
presents Himself a Sacrifice to the Justice of GOD, upon our pleading whereof
we receive the Remission of sins. This is the SAVIOR, who by His Obedience to
the Everlasting Rules of Righteousness, has furnished them who have none of
their own, with a Plea for their Acceptance with GOD. This is that SAVIOR* who
appears as an Advocate for us in the most holy Place, and saves us to the
uttermost, by Everliving to make Intercession for us. Here is the SAVIOR who
Guides our Feet into the way of Peace, and Inclines us to the Things that are
Holy and Just and Good, and Works in us that which is well pleasing in the
sight of GOD Here is the SAVIOR, who being the Lord of Angels, and having all
power given to Him, orders our whole State, and performs the Thing that is
appointed for us. In Him we have a SAVIOR, who having made us meet for the
Spiritual Blessings in the Heavenly places, does first of all take our Departed
Spirits into His Custody; and by'nd by, Revive our Bodies into Agreeable and
Everlasting Habitations for them; And so* Reunite us unto GOD, in the endless
enjoyment of Him, and of all things in Him. A SAVIOR, who is very GOD; One
whose Name is JEHOVAH; One Who is Over-all, GOD Blessed for ever: And because
He is GOD Almighty therefore mighty to save. Because He is JEHOVAH therefore
Salvation is to be expected from Him; He is the True GOD; therefore Eternal
Life is to be found in Him. Oh! what a SAVIOR! Soul, How can thou hear of
Him, and not Adore Him, not Embrace Him, not cry out unto Him; O my Lord, and
my GOD; Say thou to my Soul, I am thy Salvation!

Secondly, Our Great SAVIOR in His Gospel tenders the Salvation of the Soul,
to every Soul. Our SAVIOR, Lo, He sends forth His Voice, and that a mighty
Voice; and it reaches to the Ends of the Earth: Shall not the very Dead now
feel it reaching to them; and Live upon it! Isa. XLV. 22. Look unto me and be
ye saved, all the ends of the Earth. What is the Gospel, but the Salvation of
the Soul tendered unto Every Soul of Man, that has done Evil, and would be
saved from Evil? Now concerning this Gospel, our SAVIOR has given this
Commission, Go ye into all the World, and Preach the Gospel to every Creature.
There is not one among all the Children of Men, to whom it may not be said. Ah,
Sinful Creature; Ah, Ruined Creature. There is a JESUS, able and willing to
save thee, out of all the Ruins, which by sinning against GOD thou have brought
upon thee! Soul, What a Sweet Invitation has thy SAVIOR given thee? Come to
me, all you that Labor and are heavy-laden, and I will give you Rest! What a
Sweet Invitation; Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters; Come
unto me, Hear, and your soul shall live! To over come thy Unbelief, O Invited
Soul, He has kindly Spoken a word worth a World; A Word which has broken
Millions of Hearts; And shall Thine be Obdurate! Joh. VI. 37. Him that comes
unto me, I will in no wise cast out. Soul, Be thy Sins never so many, never so
heinous, and be thy Plagues never so wonderful, thou shall yet be welcome to
thy SAVIOR, if thou come unto Him: His Grace is a Fountain Set Open for thee.
Though thy case appear never so desperate, yet there is Hope in Israel concerning
this Thing. Thy Salvation may not be despaired of. It Will be a crime in thee,
to conclude, That the Day of Grace is over with thee, or that thou have Sinned
Unpardonably.

Thirdly. But the Salvation of the Soul cannot be had, without Believing in the
Glorious and Mighty, and only SAVIOR. The Greatest CASE that ever was answered
in the World, hear now what Answer is to be given unto it. The CASE has been
propounded, and, Oh! that it were oftener so, and with a Soul full of Troubles,
-- Even this, What shall I do to be Saved? The Reply given to it, by the
Apostles of GOD, is a very Authentic one; Act. XVI. 31. Believe on the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, and thou shall be Saved. FAITH is the Flight of a Distressed
Soul, unto our Blessed SAVIOR. The End of this Faith and Flight is, The
Salvation of the Soul. It Is the End which Faith does Aim at; and the End which
Faith does Come at. Our SAVIOR has given us This Definition of the Faith which
seeks and finds the Salvation of the Soul; Joh. V. 40. It Is a Coming to Him,
that we may have Life. The process of a Saving Faith shall be now Set before
you. SOUL, Be Restless, till thou have passed through it, and made sure of thy
Salvation.

First. Become sensible of what you are, and how much you want Salvation, while
you are at a Distance from your SAVIOR. To the Christless, must be said, what
we have in Rev. III. 17. Thou art wretched and miserable and poor and blind and
naked. O Fall into an Heart-melting Meditation; What am I but a Child of Wrath,
and a Prey to the Terrible, and Full of a loathsome Leprosy? Until my SAVIOR
Pity me? Where must my Portion be, but in a Place of Torments? Except my
SAVIOR Pity me* O my SAVIOR, Necessity is laid upon me, to come unto thee,
and Woe unto me, if I do it not! But under the Convictions of this Necessity, at
the same time confess your selves Unable to come unto your SAVIOR, yea, and
Unworthy that GOD should help you to come. Let the Sovereign Grace, that shines
forth in Drawing to your SAVIOR, all that come unto Him, have a due Confession
made of it. From the Depths cry unto the Lord: and say, Lord, I can Perform
nothings, Lord, I do Deserve nothing; But, O my SAVIOR, Draw thou me, and I
shall Run unto thee.

Secondly Look for no less than the whole Salvation of the Soul, in Looking to
your SAVIOR. You must come to your SAVIOR in all His Offices; come to your
SAVIOR for all His Benefits; come to your SAVIOR, on all those Purposes; 1
Cor. I. 30. Made of GOD unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness, Holiness, and
Redemption. If your first Errand unto your SAVIOR be, That by His Blood you
may be cleansed from all Sin; yet this must not be all your Errand. You must go
to Him, That He would Instruct you, Govern you, Rectify all that is amiss in
you, and bring you to a Perfection of Holiness is the Fear of GOD. It is by
coming into the Covenant of Grace, that our Salvation is assured unto us: Even
that Covenant, which is the Echo to that Covenant of Redemption, wherein our
SAVIOR has Engaged for us, and Eternal Life was promised before the World
begun. We come into the Covenant of Grace, by consenting that our SAVIOR
should be to us, do for us, according to His Engagements in the Covenant of
Redemption, on the behalf of them, whom in His Covenant He becomes an Head
unto. Our SAVIOR has Promised for His Elect, That He will make that Expiation
for their Offenses, which will bring them into a Reconciliation with GOD. Say
now, O my SAVIOR, I trust in Thee So to Save me! Our SAVIOR has also Promised
for His Elect, That He will Purify them, and make them zealous of Good Works,
and write the Law of GOD in their Hearts, and guide them with Counsil, and
bring them to Glory. Say now, O my SAVIOR, I trust in Thee so to Save me.

You see Faith at Work, for the Salvation of the Soul. The Expression leads me
to insist upon that: It must be a Working Faith; else, O Vain Man, It Is Dead,
and will never bring thee to Life.

Wherefore,

Thirdly; Your Faith must Work by Love. It must fill you with the Love of your
SAVIOR. This Love must keep you always at Work for Him, and in the work which
belongs to a Life of PIETY: still Remembering that He says unto you, I know thy
works. You must come to that; Gal. II. 20. I Live by the Faith of the Son of
GOD. Repair to your SAVIOR for His Direction in Every thing, and Order the
Steps of your Life by His Word. Repair to your SAVIOR for those Impressions of
His Good Spirit, which will make you full of Goodness, and make the Service of
GOD, the Business of your Life. Repair to your SAVIOR, with fervent Prayers to
Him, and with precious Thoughts of Him, on all Occasions; and make Him the
Rock, whereto you will Resort continually. Repent most heartily of the Sins
which have brought you into such a want of a SAVIOR; and lead a Life of
Repentance before Him. Faith and Repentance are what GOD has joined, Man may
not separate them. If your Faith be not a Repenting Faith, be sure, it is a
Counterfeit, Let your SAVIOR be the Pattern of your Life; and walk even as he
walked. Faith in your SAVIOR, must bring the Blood of your SAVIOR, to run
warm in the Veins of your Souls; with Desires and Studies of a Conformity to
Him. You must Imitate a SAVIOR who hates Wickedness and loves Righteousness.
Imitate a SAVIOR, whose Meat and whose Drink it was to do the will of GOD.
Imitate a SAVIOR who took patiently whatever Cup His Father gave unto Him; and
was a Sheep under the shearers when wrongs were done unto Him; and who went
about still every where doing Good. Let your SAVIOR Live in you; and Oh! Do
you Dye to every thing but Him: Look upon all things here, with a Sacrificing
Eye, and bear the killing things with which your SAVIOR will make you Dead
unto the World, Crucified with Him. Having so Lived by Faith, anon you are to
Dye in Faith, and committing your selves into the hands of such a SAVIOR, go
away Rejoicing in the Hope of the Glory of GOD. Now Dye saying, O my SAVIOR, I
know whom I have believed; I cheerfully commit my All unto thee.

This it is to Believe unto the saving of the Soul!

Thus have you, the Way to the Salvation of the Soul plainly laid out before
you. Now what remains is to execute that Command. Compel them to come in. The
Compelling Force of some EXPOSTULATIONS, is now to be tried upon you. Hear a
few Right Words, and GOD make them Forcible.

Expostulation, I. Are you willing to undergo the dreadful pains, that must
unavoidably be undergone by those with whom the Salvation of the Soul is
Despised, Refused, Forfeited? Believe you not, That God will bring every Man,
and every work into Judgment* Believe you not, That the Everlasting Punishment,
which the Wicked shall be adjudg'd unto, will be a most Formidable Punishment?
Believe you not. That a Soul, which has been always listed among the
Adversaries of GOD, shall be siezed with His Fiery Indignation, and banished
from Him into a most hideous Darkness, where they will be shut up and cannot
come forth? In the Perdition of Ungodly Men, foretold by the mouth of your
SAVIOR, is there nothing to be trembled at? Will the Ungodly have an easy Time
of it, when they are Broken into the Place of Dragons, and made
Fellow Sufferers with the Devils whom they have hearkened to? Have we not known
some in in this World, unto whom the Horrors and the Tortures of a Guilty
Conscience have been so Intolerable, that they have cried out, of Burning to
Death, but as a Metaphor, to what they suffered? Can thy Heart endure, or can
thy hands be strong, when I shall deal with thee, says the Lord?

Expostulation, II. In Receiving the Salvation of the Soul, will you not
receive what will be a sufficient Recompense of all your striving for it? Even
in this Life, did ever any sincere Follower of our SAVIOR, once regret the
Labors and the Hardships of the Christian Warfare? Have they not all born this
Testimony, That the ways of Wisdom are pleasant ways, and all its paths are
peace; and the most bitter thing in a walk with GOD is much sweeter than the
Sweetest thing in the Tents of wickedness? But in the Life to Come, Oh! What
will be done for the Soul, to which an Infinite GOD shall multiply the Tokens
of His Loving kindness? Verily He will do it as a GOD! Are any Pleasures
comparable to those which you shall find in the Presence of GOD, in which there
is Fullness of Joy? Are any Riches comparable to those, in which you shall be
Heirs of GOD, and Inherit all things? Are any Honors comparable to those that
you shall have in a Royal Priesthood unto GOD? Such a Prize before you, how can
you do otherwise than use all your strength, and this with all the speed
imaginable, for the obtaining of it?

Expostulation, III. If you felt your selves in the pangs of Death, what would
be your Dying Sentiments? How will the Salvation of the Soul appear unto you,
in your Dying Sentiments? Whatever you may think while you have the Amusements
and Enchantments of the World befooling of you, will not the Thoughts of a
Dying Hour determine you to This? If a Dying Hour were at this Moment upon you,
would you not say, The Salvation of my Soul, Oh! There is nothing in this World
of so much Consequence unto me. Oh! I would give all this World, that I had it
assured unto me! Oh! That instead of throwing away so much of my Time in this
World, I had spent more in the assuring of it! So do the Dying Think; Oh! that
the Living would lay this to Heart; and not be misled by madness in their
Heart, while they live.

Expostulation, IV. What would you do if a Message from GOD should this Day
come unto you; like what He sent unto One of old; Set all in order, for thou
art now to Dye, and not to Live one Month longer upon the Earth? What if the
Angel of Death should appear onto you, and Swear by Him who lives for ever and
ever, Thy end is come; and no longer Time than one Month more shall be allowed
unto thee? What would you now do for the Salvation of a Soul, just passing into
the Eternal World? Would you not immediately Retire, and cry to the GOD of all
Grace, That He would Assist you to Return unto Him? Would you not recall and
bewail the Sins, which upon Examination you find you can be charged withal?
Would you not beg with Tears, that for the sake of the Blood of JESUS, your
Sins which are many may be forgiven to you? Would you not give your selves up
unto your SAVIOR, and entreat that His Holy Spirit may possess you, and heal
all that is amiss in you, and make you meet for the Inheritance of the Saints
in Light? Would you not be unpacified, until the Things that accompany
Salvation, were plainly to be seen upon you? Then, go do these Things without
any more ado. Behold, NOW is the Day of Salvation for them.

Expostulation, V. Suffer me a little, and I will show you that I have yet
Words for GOD, and for the Salvation of your SOULS. That Evangelical Ministry,
which does Preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring the Glad Tidings of Good
Things in the Great Salvation; ought not such a Ministry to be Beautiful in
your Eyes? Can any but the Enemy of your Salvation persuade you that the World
can do well enough without such a Ministry? Or, when it is Clothed with
Salvation, and there is nothing but the Care of Salvation to be seen upon it,
is not your Enemy at work in all the Contempt that shall be cast upon it? Are
any Men so much Maligned, Slandered, Reproached in the World, as they who do
most for the Salvation of SOULS, and who after all, triumph in the Reproach as
an Honor to them, and as a Revenge that Satan is taking on them? Will you
listen to Satan, and be his Agents? Or, Do they befriend the Salvation of
SOULS, who go to insinuate an opinion into you, That our Ministry is Invalid,
and can do nothing for your Salvation, because our Ordination is defective? A
most profane Insinuation! What! when the Scriptures have so evidently asserted,
the Validity of an Ordination by the Hands of the Presbytery; and informed us
of no Order in the Church Superior to it; but Presbyters are expressly called
Bishops there, [Acts XX. 17, 18.] When among the Faithful in all Ages from the
Days of the Primitive Church down to ours, there has been such a Cloud of
Witnesses unto it! And when it will be hard for you to find any Protestant
Churches on the whole Continent of Europe, which do not subsist upon an
Ordination, from an Order not Superior to that of our Pastors! O our
Evanglized People, It Is the Substantial PIETY of GOD Reigning in the SOUL, that
we Preach, for your Salvation. To Trouble you with Circumstantials in Religion,
will be of little use to your Salvation. I conclude with saying, 1 Cor. XII. 2.
You are Saved, if you keep in Remembrance what I have Preached unto you.

FINIS.

