Awakening Soul-Saving Truths, Plainly Delivered, IN Several Sermons.

In which is Showed, I. That Many are Called, who are not Effectually Called.
II. That Men may be of the Visible Church, and yet not be of the Lord's Chosen.
III. That the Chosen of God are comparatively but Few.


By Increase Mather. D.D.

Joh. 9.^. -- Night comes when no man can work.

Phil. 2.12. Work out your Salvation with fear and trembling.

BOSTON: Printed by S. Kneeland, for B. Gray, and J. Edwards, at their Shops on
the North and South side of the Townhouse. 1720.

THE PREFACE.
IT was the Earnest desire of some who heard these SERMONS Preached, and
thought they were Edifyed by them, that caused me to consent to their being
sent to the Press. One who has the Pen of ^ ready Writer, has Transcribed them,
viz. the same who Transcribed my Sermons on the Beatitudes, and those of
Salvation by Grace, both lately Published.

If God will graciously fulfill His blessed Promise, Psalm. 92.14. They shall
still bring forth fruit in Old Age, Let His Name alone have all the Glory. I
have reason to expect that every Sermon I Preach will be my L^st* And therefore
to ins^st on such Subjects

I hope may by the blessing of Christ be m^st effectual for the good of Souls,
and to promote the interest of His Kingdom. I have often said to my Friends,
that I done desire to live one Day longer in this sinful World. But I humbly
beg of God (with submission to His Will,) that while I am here, I may be
Serviceable, and at work for Christ. Let Him find me so doing.

Increase Mather.
Boston, April 12th. 1720.
Many are Called, who are not Effectually Called.
SERMON I.
MATTHEW. XXII.14. For many are Called, but few are Chosen.


IN the beginning of this Chapter we have a Parable or Similitude, uttered by
the sacred Mouth of our Lord Jesus Christ, in which we have first, the thing
compare^* namely, The Kingdom of Heaven by which we are to understand the
Visible Church, especially as under the Heavenly dispensation of the Gospel;
the Church of God is a Heavenly Kingdom. In a Kingdom there is a King, and
Laws, by which it is governed. So in the Church. Therefore Isaiah said, The
Lord is our King, The Lord is our Lawgiver, He shall save us. 2dly, Here is the
thing to which it is compared, namely, to a King making a Marriage for his Son,
and inviting Guests unto the Wedding; of those that were invited there were
some refusers, and some comers; by the refusers the Jews are meant, who refused
Christ, refused to submit unto Him as King, by the comers the calling of the
Gentiles is intended, and of these there are two sorts, some that came
worthily, others that were unworthy guests, intimating that in the Church of
God there are some that are sincere and godly. Others that a^e not so, only
externally and professedly Christians, no better than Hypocrites. The words
before us have respect not only to those immediately preceding but to the
whole Parable, and they afford to us Three Doctrines, all which are solemn and
awful Truths of God.

DOCT. I. That Men may enjoy the outward Calls of the Gospel and be in some
measure wrought on thereby, yet not be effectually and savingly Called.

DOCT. II. That Men may belong to the Visible Church of God, yet not be of His
Chosen.

DOCT. III. That the Lords Chosen are but Few. The number of them is
comparatively but a very small number.

At this time, only to the First of these Doctrines, Namely,

DOCT. I. That Men may enjoy the outward Calls of the Gospel, and be in some
measure wrought on thereby, yet not be effectually and savingly Called.

Two Propositions are before ^s for clearing the Truth.

PROP. I. That Men may be outwardly Called, yet not inwardly and savingly. This
is evident, in that the call of the Gospel is Universal, wherever it is
Preached, Mar. 16.15. Go says Christ, into all the world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature, that is to say, to every reasonable Creature, to every Man
and Woman, without excepting any, be they high or low, rich or poor, old or
young, let them have the Grace of the Gospel offered to them, Christ offered to
them. Rev. 22.17. Come whosoever will, and let him take the water of life
freely. Christ who is the water of life, is compared to a Fountain set open,
Zech. 13.1. Christ is that Fountain set open, that whosoever will may come, the
vilest Sinners may come to it, and if they will come and accept of Christ they
shall be cleansed and saved. Wherever the Gospel comes, God commands every
Man that hears it to repent. Act. 17.30. Now God commands all men every where
to repent. All Men are Sinners, and God in the Gospel calls upon them to
repent, and If they do so, the Gospel Promises their Sins shall be forgiven
them. Also the Gospel commands Men to believe as well as to repent, 1 John
3.23. This is his commandment, that we should believe on the name of his Son
Jesus Christ. Thus it is an universal offer, yet all Men that have it set
before them do not accept the offer. So it is said here, when they were invited
to come to Christ, they made light of it. Some that have the Word of God
dispensed to them, they despise it, and the despensers of it. So did the Jews
of old, 2 Chronicles. 3^.16. They mocked the M^ssengers of God, and despised His
words, and mis-used His Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against His
People, till there was no remedy. So did they deal with the Holy Apostles, nay
with Christ Himself; when Christ Himself Preached to them there were those that
derided Him, Luke 16.14. Christ preached an admirable Sermon, but it is said
the Pharasees who were covetous derided Him.

2. There are some that the Call of the Gospel has made some impression on
them, yet they have not been effectually and savingly wrought upon thereby. In
the Parable concerning the Sower, there are four sorts of Ground spoken of, but
only one of them did bring forth fruit, all the other had some effects wro't
upon them, only one brought forth fruit. So of those that hear the Gospel there
are but few that bring forth the fruits of Faith, of Repentance and Holiness.

1. The Word of God does sometimes cause knowledge and illumination in the
minds of Men, yet no through conversion. Balaam had the knowledge of the most
High, and saw visions of God. Some have had great illuminations on their minds
through the power the Word has had on them, yet no saving illuminations, but
after that they have proved total, final Apostates, and have become guilty of
the unpardonable Sin. Heb. 6.4. It is impossible for those who were once
enlightened and have tasted of the heavenly gift, what is that tasting of the
Heavenly gift, it follows, were made partakers of the Holy Ghost. Men may
partake of the Holy in respect of illuminations, common gifts of the Spirit,
yet have no saving illuminations. Writers tell us, Julian the Apostate had
great knowledge in the things of God, yet this Man afterward became an utter
enemy to the Christian Religion, and to the Lord Jesus Christ, always mocking
and deriding of Him; at last dyed blaspheming the name of our Holy Lord Jesus
Christ, notwithstanding he had been greatly illuminated in the knowledge of
Christ.

2. The Word of God may make great impressions on the affections of Men, yet
they not be savingly called. They may have good wishes sometimes, had not
Balaam so when he wished Oh that I may die the death of the righteous, He knew
that righteous Men would be happy when they dyed, therefore he desired to die
their Death, but cared not to live the life of the righteous. Men may have good
desires inkindled in them, yet all come to nothing. Christ preached an
admirable Sermon concerning the Bread of Life, said the Jews, Lord give us
evermore of this Bread, Joh. 6.31. Yet those very Men before Christ ended His
Sermon took up a prejudice against Him, and though they had been His Disciples
they went away from Him and walked no more with Him. Men may desire Grace for
carnal Ends, an Hypocrite does not desire Holiness as such, but he may desire
Grace to save him from Hell. Did not the foolish Virgins so, Matthew. 25.8. They
unto the wise, Give us of your oil for our lamps are going out. What is that
oil? thereby Grace is meant. Sinners when their Lamps are going out, when their
Souls are going out of their Bodies, then their cry is, Oh that we had Oil in
our Lamps, Grace in our Hearts. There are those that have a spirit of bondage
that do not attain to a spirit of adoption. Was it not so with Cain when he
cried out, My punishment is greater than I can bear, from the face of God I
shall be hid. Was it not so with Felix, Act. 24.25. when he heard Paul
Preaching concerning righteousness, temperance and judgment to come, it is
said, Felix trembled. Men may have good motions and purposes in their hearts,
yet not be savingly wrought upon. Hos. 6.4. Thy goodness is as the morning
cloud, and as the early dew it passes (...)* When they heard the Prophet
Preach an Awakening Serm^n, O how good would (...)? But this did not continue
long, but was like the morning cloud and the early dew. We have a notable
instance of this, Deuteronomy. 5.27. They said all that the Lord shall speak we will
do it: Was not that a good resolution? a good purpose? God said of them, they
have well spoken. Oh that there were such an heart in them, that they would
fear me and keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them
forever. Men may submit themselves to that Ordinance of Baptism, that implies a
promise, and intention, and resolution to repent, and serve God, it is called
Baptism to repentance, because Baptized Persons are bound to repent, they
oblige themselves to repent of their Sins, and to serve God, this many have
submitted unto yet have not been effectually called. Simon Mag^^, he was
wonderfully affected with Philips Preaching, it is said of him, (...) 8.13. He
believed and was baptized; (...) Word made an impression, but not a saving
impression upon him, he was still in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of
iniquity, his Faith was no more than a temporary Faith. Men may confess their
Sins and promise a reformation; so Pharaoh confessed his sins, he desired Moses
and Aaron that they would Pray for him, says he, Pray for me that my sin may be
forgiven: thus Saul confessed his sin to David, the wrong he had done to him,
and promises he would do so no more, yet he was Saul still. Thus we read of a
House swept and garnished, the Evil spirit gone out of it, yet afterward the
Evil spirit returns again, and seven Devils for one before. In the Primitive
times, Men who by the knowledge of Christ, that is by the Gospel, which alone
makes known Christ; by this knowledge of Christ they escaped the pollutions of
the world, afterward returned again, and their latter end was worse than their
beginning, 2 Pet. 2.20, 21. Have we not seen it in Young Men, who have been
very hopeful praying Young Men, yet those Young Men afterward have returned to
their former Sins and vain Companions, and been as wicked as ever before.

Quest. How comes it to pass that they who are not the Lords Chosen, yet have
the Gospel Preached to them.

For Answer,

1. Reprobate Sinners have the Gospel Preached to them for the sake of them
that are Chosen. They that are Chosen shall certainly be called. Whom he
predestined, them he also called, called them effectually. Romans 8.38. As many
as were ordained to eternal life believed. If there be an ordination to Eternal
life, there shall be an effectual calling. For their sakes the Gospel shall be
Preached; and it is Preached to others as well as to them. Sometimes in a great
City there are but a very few belongs to God, and for the sake of those few,
the whole City shall have the Gospel Preached to them. It was so in Corinth,
Act. 18.10. Moreover, some have great Gifts which are employed for the good of
God's Elect, some have been able to Preach notably, thereby some of the Elect
have been converted, and thereby many Edifyed, and yet they themselves
Reprobates and cast away forever; as in building the Ark a great many that had
a hand in building it were not saved in it, but perished in the Flood. So many
have a hand in building the Church of God, that shall perish Eternally: Many
shall say, Have we not prophesied in thy name, But Christ will say to them,
Depart from me I know you not you workers of iniquity.

2. It is that so obstinate Sinners may be left without excuse, therefore such
as do not belong to His Election shall have the Gospel Preached to them. It is
true that the Works of God leave Men without excuse if they don't glorify Him as
God, His works of Creation and Providence; but much more his Word, when they
have not only His Works to direct them to fear and serve God, but His Word;
Therefore Christ says, If I had not spoken to them they had not had sin, but
now they h^ve no cloak for their sin. God speaks to Men by His Gospel, by His
written Word which He puts into their hands, therefore their Sin will be the
more inexcusable if they continue in it. If a Man is going on in a dangerous
way, and he is told, he will meet with that which will destroy him, if he
continue in it, and he will go on therein, he is inexcusable, he will be guilty
of his own Death: Thus it is with Sinners, who are told, if they go on in the
way wherein they are, there are devourers that will destroy their Souls, and
yet they will go on therein, they are inexcusable. God sends His Messengers
which are His Watchmen, to give warning to Men, and if they will not take
warning, their Blood will be upon their own heads. Paul said unto the Jews, it
was necessary you should have the Gospel Preached unto you; it has been offered
unto you, and you have despised it, I will depart from you, but your blood
shall be upon your own heads, says the Apostle, Act. 18.6. Thus Men have the
Gospel that they may be left inexcusable before the Lord. God and His Servants
who have faithfully warned Sinners, will be guiltless forever, but they not
regarding the warning, are guilty of their own Death.

Thus we see the Truth cleared in the Particulars that have been mentioned.

USE. I. They that have not attained so much as this, that have not the things
mentioned wrought in them by the Gospel, are certainly very miserable. There
are many have no Gospel at all, and what a condition are they in? Thus it was
with the World generally for four Thousand Years together. There was but one
Nation that had the means of Grace, and that a small Nation too, namely Israel.
Amos 3.2. You only have I known, says God. Psalm. 147.19, 23. He shows his
word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto Israel, he has not dealt
so with any nation. What a woeful World was this we live in for a long time?
What a dark, dismal Place, before the Sun of Righteousness did arise and shine
upon it. After Christ came into the World the light of the Gospel did
wonderfully prevail, in the space of Forty Years, namely, from the Ascension of
our Savior before the destruction of Jerusalem, all Nations had the Gospel
brought to them, they had Christ and Salvation offered to them, Matthew. 24.14.
At this Day there are whole Nations, Kingdoms, mighty Kingdoms, that have no
light of the Gospel, what a case are they in? How then shall they believe in
Christ that they may be saved? How shall they believe on Him of whom they have
not heard? How shall they hear without a Preacher? Are they not then in a
perishing condition? Prove. 29.18. Where there is no vision the people perish.
Alas for this World! this is the condition of the greatest part of the Children
of Men; they have no vision, no light of the Gospel vouchsafed to them,
therefore in a perishing condition. The Apostle says, If the Gospel be hid, it
is hid from them that are lost. There are others have this Light, but what are
they the better for it? The Word is Preached to them, but it is as though it were
never Preached to them. How many are there like the stony ground, and like
those by the way side, of whom it is said, Mar. 4.4. When the Seed of the word
is sown, immediately the fowls of the air came and devoured it up. Who are
those Fowls of the air, but the Devils, He is the Prince of the power of the
air. Some the word they hear blinds their minds, and hardens their hearts. 2
Cor. 2.16. It is a savor of death unto death, unto some. Some that sit under
the powerful Preaching of the Gospel it is a savor of Death unto Death to
them; their Death will be the more dreadful, because they have lived unto the
Gospel, because they have had such lively, powerful Sermons Preached (...)
them, therefore their Death will be aggravated another Day; the damnation of
such will be more intolerable, than of those that never heard one Sermon
Preached to them in all their lives. Christ says of those that have had the
Gospel Preached to them and have not believed, Mat. 10.15. It shall be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, than for such
Sinners. Oh that all that hear me this day, that have lived under the Gospel
all their days, would consider. Sodom and Gomorrah will have an easier
damnation at that day, than those that have lived under the Gospel, and
continued in their unbelief.

USE. II. This should put us upon serious Examination whether we are
Effectually Called, yea or no. The knowledge of this is more worth than all
this World, yet it may be known. 2 Pet. 1.10. Give all diligence to make your
calling and election sure. God would not require Men to give all diligence
about it, if their calling could not be made sure of; but if a Man knows he is
effectually called he may know he is one of the Lord's Chosen, he may know his
Election, he may know he shall as certainly go to Heaven when he dies as if he
were there already. 2 Timothy 1.9. He has saved us an^ called us, that is, has
brought u^ into a state of Salvation by effectually calling of us. If a Man i^
effectually called, his Salvation is sure, and he may himself be sur^ of it.
How shall we know whether we are effectually called?

1. We should consider what we are called from, call out of. 1 Pet. 2.9* He
has called us out of darkness. What is that darkness? why, a state of Sin is
the most horrible darkness that possible can be thought of. If a Man is
effectually called, he is brought out of his Sins; there is no way of Sin that
he walks in. Isai. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way. A Sinner has a way of
Sin, but one effectually called has not so, he may fall into Sin, but has not a
way of Sin: as Sheep may fall into the mire but wont continue there: So it is
with those that are effectually called, there is no way of Sin that they allow
themselves in; that Man has utterly forsaken the way of Sin so as never to
return into it any more. Ephraim shall say, What have I any more to do with
Idols. Those Sins that were most dear to him, are become most abominable to
him; he turns not from some Sins only but from all, Ezekiel. 18.30. Repent (...)
turn your selves from all your transgressions (...) iniquity shall not be your
ruin. (...) Sin loved and lived in will prove the ruin of a Man's Soul. One leak
in a Ship may prove the destruction of it as well as many. That one Sin of
Uncleanness, a Sinner will as soon part with his right Hand as part with it,
but he must part with it or he cannot be saved* so that one Sin of Drunkenness,
a Sinner must part with it or he cannot be saved, either he must cut off that
right hand, or be cast into Hellfire.

2. If a man be effectually called, then he is become a new creature. Effectual
calling makes a wonderful change in a Man, he is quite another Man to what he
was before: he is turned from a Sinner into a Saint. If a Man is effectually
called he is become one of the holy Brethren: He is changed, he has a new
heart, a clean heart; He is changed ^s to his affections, those things which
once he loved, now he hates; those things of God, which once he did not love,
he now delights in them: He is changed as to his Company, the vain, the
ungodly, were they he took delight in, but when he is effectually called he has
done with those Companions, his delight is in such as fear God: He is changed
as to his Thoughts, Isai. 57.5. Let the unrighteous forsake his thoughts. His
Tho'ts are quite different from what they were; he thinks on God, and Christ,
on Death, and the Day of Judgment. Which Thoughts did seldom come into his
mind; those holy Practices he was estranged to, he now lives in the exercise
of; he is become a Praying Person as was said of Saul afterward Paul, Behold
he Prays. Consider whether it is so with you, whether you are thus called, thus
changed.

USE. III. Do not rest in any thing short of an Effectual Calling. All of us
have had the outward external Call of the Gospel; All the Sermons you have
heard will be a witness of it, the Bible you have in your Houses will be a
witness of it; well then make sure that you be effectually called. Consider,
the Man that is effectually called is the happiest Man in all this World* for
that Man nothing can do him hurt; no Affliction shall eve^ be able to do him
hurt: not but that after effectual calling, he may be afflicted as much as
before, it may be a great deal more; but those Afflictions shall do him no hurt
but good rather. Romans 8.28. All things work together for good, to them who are
called. Effectual calling is absolutely necessary; As the Apostle speaks
concerning his own Preaching of the Gospel, Necessity is laid upon me and woe
unto me if I do it not. Even so necessity is laid upon thee that thou should
obey the call of the Gospel, and woe to thee if thou do it not; This is the One
thing needful. Christ said unto Martha, there is One Thing needful. People are
generally taken up about many things, but this is the One Thing needful, to
make sure of Spiritual blessings, to make sure of the Salvation of thy Soul,
that is needful, to make sure of Christ that is needful, therefore to make sure
of true Faith, of Effectual Calling, that is needful, therefore to make sure it
shall go well with thee to Eternity, Oh* then consider of that. Sinners when
they are called upon put it off by saying, we cannot Convert our selves, we
cannot give Grace to our own Souls: It is true you cannot; yet Sinners will not
come to Christ. If a Man will come to Christ he must deny himself, he must deny
his own righteousness; that the Sinner will not do. Christ therefore says, Joh.
5.40. Ye will not come to me, that you might have life. So at another time he
says, I would have gathered you under my Wings but you would not. Therefore let
me say Two words and I will conclude.

1. Do not withstand the Call of the Gospel. Christ he knocks at thy door, the
King of Glory knocks at thy door. Rev. 3.20. Christ says, B^hold I stand at the
door and knock. And is there any one Sinner in this Assembly but this is true
of him. Christ has been standing and knocking at thy door, but consider awfully
there will be a last knock, and it may be this very Sermon is the last knock
that Christ will give to thy heart; O consider sadly of it, God says, My Spirit
shall not always strive* O do not withstand, do not resist the strivings, the
motions of the Spirit of God, least He be provoked to say, My Spirit shall
strive no more with that Sinner. Ah! it had been good for him then that he
never had been born. Take heed least God deal with thee as with Saul, the
Spirit of the Lord did strive with Saul, he resisted it, and it is said, the
Spirit of the Lord departed from him: Ah! wretched Saul. He resisted the
motions of the Holy Spirit, whereupon He departed. Sinner, if the Spirit of God
depart from thee thou art undone to all Eternity: Remember that awful
Scripture, Prove. 1.24. Because I called, and ye refused, says Christ, therefore
they shall call but I will not answer, they shall seek me early, but they shall
not find me. How can that be, Se^^ God early? Early, after the Day of Grace is
gone, after the Spirit of Grace has taken a doleful farewell of the Sinner,
then they will seek and cry, but God will not hear. I have sometimes put you in
mind of a Man that had many Motions, many strivings of the Spirit of God and
resisted all, at last fell into Despair, then all his cry was, t^o late, too
late; when any one said to him you must repent of your Sins, his cry was, too
late, too late; when any exhorted him, you must go to Christ, He can save you,
his cry was, too late, too late.

2. Wait upon God in the use of Means, that they may be effectual. Therefore
hearken to the Word of God, don't dare to set your selves to Sleep when God is
speaking to you by His Messengers. I shall never forget what a Young Man said
to me, that Dyed in this part of the Town, Forty Years ago, when on his Death
Bed, his cry to me was, Is it possible do you think that one that has sinned as
I have done should ever be forgiven; when you have been Preaching I have set my
self to Sleep on purpose, and is it possible that ever such an one should be
forgiven; thus he dyed in horrible anguish. Oh! then take heed of setting your
selves to Sleep when God from Heaven is calling upon you. Faith comes by
hearing, hearing by the Word of God; Hearken to the Word of God, don't slight
the Word spoken to you in the Name of the Lord; Cry to God, Pray to Him. Jam.
1.5. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God. Faith is Wisdom, It is
Wisdom to obey the call of the Gospel, then ask of God that you may obey the
Gospel, that He would give you Faith; though it is true, Sinners cannot Convert
themselves, yet I am persuaded, that there never was one Sinner in this World
that continued earnestly crying to God, to give him Grace, but God was pleased
to give it to him. O then pray and cry to God, as if thy Life, thy Soul, were
concerned in it, as indeed it is, that God would give thee Grace, make thee a
new Creature. I Conclude with that Scripture, Isai. 55.6. Seek ye the Lord
while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near. O Sirs, God may yet
be found if you call upon Him, therefore do it, do it without delay. Remember,
you cannot possibly seek God too soon, but you may think of it when it will be
too late.

Preached, Febr. 21. 1719, 20.
SERMON II.
WE now proceed to the Second Doctrine.

That Men may belong to the Visible Church of God, yet not be of the Lord's
Chosen.

If Men are of the Invisible Church* they will be of the Visible Church, they
will make profession of the Name of God, therefore it is said, Romans 10.10. With
the heart man believes, and with the mouth confession is made unto Salvation.
If there is true Faith in a Man's Heart he will ma^e a confession openly before
the World of his Faith, he will let all the World know, he believes there is a
God, that there is no God but He who made Heaven and Earth, that Jesus Christ
is the Son of God, that he trusts in Him only for Eternal Salvation: But a Man
may be of the Visible Church yet not be of the invisible Church. By the
Invisible Church we understand the Elect of God who are effectually called, or
true Believers on the Lord Jesus Christ; all who are of the Visible Church are
not such, which will appear from several Things, which are Demonstrations of
the Truth before us.

Demon. 1. Men may be externally in Covenant with God, yet not be of his
Chosen. They that are in Covenant with God belong to His Visible Church, though
it may be only externally so; as for those that are of the true Church of God,
they are not only Covenanters, but Covenant-keepers, keepers of their Covenant
with God. Psalm. 103.17, 18. The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to
everlasting, upon them that fear him, to such as keep his covenant, to those
that remember his commandments: yet there are many that have entered into
Covenan^ with God, that are Covenant-breaker^ Isai. 24.5. They have broken the
everlasting covenant. Men may sa^ the Lord is their God, yet be deceived when
they say so; they may think so, and only think so, as the Jews did; they were
not God's Children when they thought they were. Joh. 8.41. We have ^ne father
even God, said they, Christ replied to them, if God were your Father you would
love me, whereas you do not so, ye are the Children of the Devil, he is your
Father, and the lusts of your Father ye will do, My Father honors me of whom
you say that He is your God, they said so, thought so, but were deceived. Rev.
3.9. It is said of some, They say they are Jews, but are not so, they are of
the Synagogue ^f Satan. So are there those that call themselves Christians, but
are not so* Sin, Satan, and the World has still power and dominion over them*
thus are they deceived, not all that profess the name of Christ will appear to
be his at the last day. Mat. 7.21. Not every one that says unto ^e Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of Heaven, says Christ; Not every one that says I
am their Lord, and call themselves Christians, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, no, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven; thus we
see men may be visibly, externally in Covenant with God, yet not be of His
Chosen.

Demon. 2. Men may have the Seals of the Covenant applied unto them, yet not be
of the Lord's Chosen. Circumcision was once a Seal of the Covenant. Romans 4.11.
A seal of the righteousness of faith; it sealed this, that those that truly
believed on Jesus Christ that was to come into the World should be justified,
and saved; but how many had this Seal applied to them that were not of the
Lord's Chosen, a whole Nation of them; those that never were made partakers of
the Seal of the Covenant were as much accepted with God as they. Jer. 9.25, 26.
I will punish the circumcised with the uncircumcised, Edom, Amon, and Moab, are
uncircumcised in flesh, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart.
Baptism that succeeds Circumcision, the Jews had indeed a Typical Baptism when
they passed out of the Land of Egypt, 1 Cor. 10.^. They were all baptized unto
Moses in the Cloud, that is, they were obliged to observe the Religion that
Moses taught them. In the days of the New Testament there was John's Baptism
which was essentially the same with Christ's Baptism. Many had that applied to
them which were not of the Lord's Chosen. Mat. 3.5, 6. Then went out to him
Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan, and were
baptized of him; They were not all the Lord's Chosen, nay but few of them were
so; and it is said that Christ Baptized more Disciples than John, in the Fourth
Chapter of John's Gospel, yet there were great multitudes of those that did
partake of that Seal of the Covenant which were those God did not approve of.
The other Seal of the Covenant is that of the Lord's Supper; Men may have that
given to them yet not be of the Lord's Chosen, as in the Context, there was one
came to the Marriage Feast, and had not ^he Wedding Garment on, the Lord said
to him, How can (...) thou in hither. Many that partake of that Holy Ordinance,
what do they do, they profane the Name of Christ, they eat and drink Judgment
to themselves, they make themselves guilty of the Blood of Christ.

Demon. 3. There are Hypocrites as well as Sincere Professors of Religion which
belong to the Visible Church of God. They that are of the Visible Church are
Worshippers of God, now there are two sorts of Worshippers, some that are
sincere, spiritual Worshippers, others that are only external Worshippers, and
are not sincere in the sight of God. Joh. 4.^3. The true worshipper, worships
God in spirit and in truth. Some worship God but not in Spirit, they worship
God with their Bodies but not with their Souls, these are not the true
worshippers, the true worshippe^ worships God with his Spirit, as well as with
his Body. Now there a^e many of the Visible Church of which this cannot be
said, therefore they are a state of Hypocrisy. This is a weighty Truth,
therefore I shall enlarge upon it, And enquire first, how does it appear there
are Hypocrites in the Visible Church of God. 2. Whence does it come to pass?

1. How does it appear, there are Hypocrites in the Visible Church?

Answ. 1. The Scriptures plainly intimate this Truth unto us. 2 Timothy 2.20. In a
great house there are vessels not only of gold and silver, but also of wood and
of earth, Vessels to honor, and vessels to dishonor; what is that great
house, It is the Visible Church of God, therein, are not only Vessels of Gold,
sincere Professors of Religion are those Vessels of Gold, Vessels of Honor,
such as honor God and will be honored by Him, but there are also Vessels of
dishonor, that will be Subjects of Everlasting contempt in another World, yet
some such have belonged to the Church of God. John Baptist said, Mat. 3.11, 12.
I indeed baptize you with water, intimating, that was all he could do, and that
many he Baptized had no more than the external Baptism, but he that comes
after me, is mightier than I, he shall Baptize you with the Holy Ghost, whose
fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat
unto the garner, but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire. In the
Lord's Floor there is not only Wheat, but also Chaff; as for the Wheat they are
sincere Professors of Religion, the Lord will in His time gather them into His
Garner. What is that Garner? It is Heaven. As for th^se that are Hypocrites
they are Chaff, and that chaff must be burned with unquenchable Fire. Several
of the Parables uttered by our Lord Jesus Christ the design of them is to
intimate this holy Truth to us, as this wherein is my Text. The Marriage Supper
intimates when the Gentiles should be called there should be Hypocrites as well
as Godly Persons. And in the Parable of the Drag and Net, Mat. 13.47. The
Kingdom of Heaven is like a Net cast into the Sea, and Fishes are taken in it
both good and bad, that is to so say, in the Visible Church there would be not
only such as were sincere, but such as were no better than Hypocrites. The
Parable of the Ten Virgins intimates this to us, Matthew. 25. The Kingdom of
Heaven is likened unto Ten Virgins whereof Five were Wise, and Five were
Foolish; as for the Wise, they had Oil in their Lamps, ^s for the other, they
had Lamps lighted but no Oil in them, they made a great Profession of Religion
but had not a work of Grace wro't in their Souls, this is spoke of Church
Members, of what kind of Churches do you think? Virgin Churches, not Idolatrous
Churches, but such as made a great Profession of Holiness, in these there are
such Fools as content themselves with Lamps lighted but no Oil in their Lamps.

2. The Truth before us has been confirmed in all Ages of the World. Ever since
their was a Church on Earth there has been Hypocrites as well as Sincere
Professors therein, as now, when the Church was in Families a^ first it was, in
the first Family that was in the World there were godly and ungodly ones
therein, Abel was a godly Man, was said to be a true Believer in Christ, his
Mother Eve was a godly Woman, there is reason also to believe that his Father
Adam repented of his Sin and found Mercy with God, but the Eldest Son in that
Family was a Reprobate, he was not the Lord's chosen, namely Cain, therefore
the Scripture says of him, Cain was of the wicked one; he hated his Brother for
his Religion and murdered him, yet this Cain would worship God, he brought his
offering to God, he was a Tiller of the Ground, he brought of the fruit of the
Ground, an offering unto the Lord, he pretended to Religion, and had no true
Religion in him. In Abraham's Family there was a godly Isaac; and a mocking
Ishmael, that would mock at his Brother for his Piety; the Apostle says
concerning him, Gal. 4.9. He that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that
was born after the spirit. How did he persecute him but by scoffing and mocking
at him. In Isaac's Family there was not only a Jacob, but an Esau. And when the
Church became National, the Church of the Jews became National, the greatest
part of that National Church were Hypocrites. Isai. 10.6. It is said God would
send the Assyrian to punish them, that He would send him against an
Hypocritical Nation. It Is said in Ezekiel. 22.18. Concerning the house of Israel,
they are the ^ross of silver, they are brass and tin, iron and lead, not gold;
It was so generally in that Nation, but few comparatively that were the Lord's
chosen. Since in the days of the Gospel the Church is become Congregational,
particular Congregations are become Churches of God in all parts of the World.
Among those there have been Sincere Professors, so also those that have been
Hypocritical in their Profession. In the Primitive Christian Church in
Jerusalem, there were two notorious Hypocrites Ananias and Sapphira* Act. 5.
they dyed telling a lie, it was hardly out of their mouths before God struck
them dead for their wickedness; when a Church was gathered in Samaria, when
Philip gathered a Church there, there were Hypocrites in that Church, and one
notorious Hypocrite Simon Magus, who believed with a temporary Faith, and was
thereupon Baptized, yet was in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of
iniquity; and we find, (it is a sad truth I am going to speak to you,) we find
some particular Churches in the Primitive times, that the greatest part of them
were no better than Hypocrites; To the Church of Sardis it is said, Rev. 3.1.
Thou have a name to live, and art dead; thou have a few names which have not
defiled their garments. So those in the Church of Laodicea, what were they!
they were a Generation of Formalists, luke warm Christians, who provoked Christ
to spue them out of his mouth, they thought sure they were good Christians,
they if any Men in the World should be saved, they should: they thought they
were rich, and had need of nothing; Christ said to that Church, Thou art poor,
wretched, miserable, blind and naked, I counsel thee to buy of me eye salve
that thou may see. So that in particular Churches mentioned in Scripture
there have been those and many too, that have not been Sincere.

3. Men may be of the Visible Church, yet after that they may prove total final
Apostates. We see there may be such, and there has been such, 1 John 2.19. They
went out from us, but they were not of us, for if they had been of us without
doubt they would have continued with us. They were only of the Church by an
outward Profession, therefore went out never to return again. Such there were
in the Church of the Hebrews, Heb. 10.25. Not forsaking the assembling of your
selves together, (...) the manner of some is; the manner of some was to join
themselves to the Church, while they had a min^ to it, did hold communion with
the Church, afterward apostatized; thus it has been with some Christianized
Jews, they have proved Apostates; as to their Principles, so as to deny the
Truth, and Fundamental Truths also. 2 Pet. 2.1. There shall be Her^sies among
you; what is an Heresy? it is a Fundamental error in Religion, when a Man
denies any Article of Religion necessa^ry to be believed in order to Salvation;
Thus there were some that denied the only Lord God that bought them; there were
those in the Apostles days that denied Fundamental Truths in Religion, such
there were in particular Churches, as in the Church of Pergamus, there were
those that held the Doctrine of the Nicolaitanes, that was very Heretical, the
Nicolaitanes held, that God did not make this lower World, that it was made by
Angels, that Men might commit Idolatry, and not do amiss in their doing so,
beside other abominable Opinions they have maintained, which are not fit to be
mentioned, yet there were Church Members that did so Apostatize from the Truths
of God. Some taught the Doctrine of Balaam, did teach Men as Balaam taught the
Children of Israel, to eat things offered to Idols, and that Fornication was no
Sin. Thus in the ^rimitive Times, when the Apostles were yet living.
Nevertheless, such did arise in particular Churches. Moreover there have been
Apostates ^n practice; some have returned to their old Sins again. The Apostle
Peter compares them to Swine that have been washed, after return to wallowing
in the mi^e, and to the Dog tha^ returns to (...) they returned to those Sins
they for a time had forsaken. It is said of the old Church of Israel, Hos. 8.3*
Israel has cast off the thing that i^ good. Alas, many Christians have done so
too. Tell me, is not Prayer a thing that is good? Is it nor good for a Man to
Pray in his Closet every day? Yet some that have done so for a time, they have
cast off the thing that is good; instead of their Praying killing their Sins,
their Sins have killed their Praying* Is it not good for Men to Pray in their
Families? yet as to some their was a time they would Pray in their Families,
but they have cast off the thing that is good. By these things we see, that in
Churches there may be those that are not sincere in their Profession of
Religion.

Quest. 2. How or whence does this come to pass?

Ans. 1. It comes to pass sometimes through the infirmities which attends
Churches and Officers th^rein. Men what are they? poor weak creatures, they
cannot make an infallible judgment of others, whether they are sincere or no;
they judge by outward appearance. Samuel, what a charitable judgment made he of
Eliab, he thought Eliab was the Lord's Chosen, 1 Samuel 16.7. but the Lord said
unto him, Look not on his countenance* for the Lord sees not as Man sees, Man
looks on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart. God knows
whether there ^e any real work of Grace in the heart, if there be but so much
as a spark of true Grace in a sea of Corruption God sees it and knows it. He
knows whether the hearts of Men are set for God, for Christ, for Heaven, for
the things of Eternity, or for Sin and the World; God and He only knows what is
in the Heart. 1 Kin. 8.39. Thou only know the hearts of all the children of
men. Only God can pass an infallible judgment on Men, what they are, whether
they are sincere or no: Men must judge charitably, it is better to judge as
Hypocrite to be a Child of God, than to condemn a Child of God for an
Hypocrite, therefore they ought to judge charitably, because they are weak
creatures that cannot see into the Hearts of Men, therefore they may easily
admit those that are not fit to be among them. And Officers in Churches may be
to blame. There is a Scripture in Ezekiel that refers to Gospel times, E^ek.
44.^. it is spoken in way of reproof to those that were Officers, Ye have
brought into my sanctuary those that are uncircumcised in heart. The Church of
God is a Sanctuary, Officers in a Church may bring into God's Sanctuary those
that are not circumcised in heart, that are not regenerate, that have not
experienced a work of Grace changing of them, making them new Creatures, and
giving them new Hearts, Officers should be careful of bringing such as are not
so into the Lord's Sanctuary, but many times they are not so careful as they
should be; then Churches will be full of Hypocrites, as is said (...)
concerning the Tares, when Men slept, then the Tares sprang up; when the
Watchmen are not so watchful as they should be, then Tares ^pring up in
Churches.

2. There are some Hypocrites that in all outward appearance are the Children
of God. They do just like the Children of God; they resemble them very much, so
as that others are deceived by them; they come privily into Churches and
unawares, before Churches are aware of them they get in among them, it may be a
great number of them too. Gal. 2.4. it is said False Brethren crept in among
them; and who were those False Brethren do you think? Interpreters conceive
these False Brethren were Members of the Church in Jerusalem, who came to
Galat^ with a design to corrupt the Churches there with Judaism, Romans 1^.18. By
good words and fair speeches they deceive the hearts of the simple: and not
only the hearts of the simple, but many times the hearts of the wise are
deceived. The Hypocrite is no better than a Wolf, why will the Church receive
such among them? why the reason is this, they are in Sheeps clothing, Mat.
7.15. Hypocrites their inside their hearts are as black as Hell, yet they
appear very white and comely. Christ said to the Pharisees who were Hypocrites,
Mat. 23.27. Ye are like unto whited sepulchers which appear beautiful
outwardly, but within are full of dead men's bones, so ye appear righteous to
Men, but within are full of hypocrisy and iniquity. Thus Hypocrites have a name
to live, a form of Godliness, therefore they are thought to be Godly, they make
the same Profession as the truly Godly do, they w^ll also practice (...) much
as Godly Men do; a Godly Man will Pray every day, and sometimes add Fasting to
his Prayer, and some Hypocrites will do so too. Isai. 58.2. They seek me daily
as a nation that did righteousness, say they, we have fasted but thou regardest
not. What seek God daily? who would not think, but such were Godly Men, but
they were not so, a Godly Man repents of Sin, an Hypocrite seems to do so too,
a Godly Man believes on Christ, an Hypocrite seems to do so too; this
appearance deceives others, that they think such are indeed Godly. Tares are
very like the Wheat* Naturalists observe, Lolia est spuria tricici species,
Tares are a bastard kind of Wheat. In the Eastern Nations it was a hard matter
to discern the one from the other, so it is an hard matter to discern an
Hypocrite from a true Child of God.

3. Satan also has a hand in this matter. Mat. 13.27. The servants of the
householder said unto him, did not thou sow good seed in thy field, whence
has it Tares, he said unto them an enemy has done this. And who was that
Enemy? Satan was that Enemy, it is he that sows Tares in the Visible Church;
the Devil would not have Churches to be of good Seed only if he could help it,
he knows sometimes two or three Hypocrites in a Church will prove the ruin
thereof. It often does so; nay one bad Member in a Church may hinder the
prosperity of the whole Church; as Solomon says, One Sinner destroys much good:
Therefore does the Apostle give that solemn caution to the Church of the
Hebrews, Look diligently to it, lest there be any root of bitterness among you,
and thereby many be defiled. If one Hypocrite get into the Church it may be
many will be defiled by it; nay more than so, a Church that is a great
Congregation may be exposed to the wrathful Judgments of God by reason of one
Hypocrite among them. I will give you an instance of it, and give the Man's
name, it was Achan, a great Congregation was exposed to judgments for his sake,
Josh. 22.20. Did not Achan commit a trespass in the accursed thing, and wrath
fell on all the congregation, and that man perished not alone in his iniquity.
Likewise the Devil knows if Men come into the Church in their Hypocrisy it will
be the worse for themselves at the last, their misery will be the greater,
their condemnation the heavier because they were Church Members, therefore the
Devil puts them on to get into the Church while they are in a sinful state. We
see the Doctrine cleared in the Particulars mentioned. Let me make some awful
Application of it.

USE. I. It is certainly a vain and foolish thing for Men to build their hopes
of Salvation on their Church Membership. They are builders on the Sand; the
foolish Builder built on the Sand, his House fell and great was the ruin of it.
They that build their hopes of Salvation on their Church Membership build on
the Sand, their house will fall, their hopes will fail, great will be the fall
thereof. Men may have the door of the Church set open to them, yet the door of
Heaven shut against them for evermore, O that you would consider of it: and I
will prove what I say with the Word of God in my hand. Mat. 25.11, 12. The
foolish Virgins who came into the Church and had not Grace in their hearts,
when the door was shut they came and cried Lord, Lord, open to us; but the Lord
would not open to them, but sent them away. Thus it will be with many an
Hypocrite, that will cry Lord, Lord, let me go to Heaven, but the Lord will not
open the door of Heaven to them, when it may be Men have opened the door of the
Church to them. Thus it is a foolish thing to build on such a Foundation, but
foolish Men are exceeding apt to do so. The children of Israel when in danger
of ^estruction by the Philistines, sent for the Ark, when the Ark came among
them they gave a Shout, saying, the Ark shall save us. Ah deluded Souls, it did
not save them, it could not save them. So in Ier. 7. They cried the Temple of
the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, aye said they, we
need not fear, we have the Temple of the Lord among us, we shall certainly do
well, they were haughty because of the Lord's holy mountain, they trusted to
lying words. Men may have this privilege of Church Membership as they are the
Children of Godly Parents, being born of such they have a right to the
Privileges of the Visible Church, but that is not enough. John the Baptist
when Preaching said, Joh. ^ Think not to say within your selve^ we have Abraham
(...) our Father. (...) said they we are descended from Abraham therefore it
will go well with us to be sure. If a Man should have for his Father as godly a
Man as Abraham was he may go to Hell for all that. We read of one that did so:
Luke 16.24. being in Hell and in torments there, he cried out, Father Abraham
have mercy on me, I am tormented in this flame, but what said his Father
Abraham, he puts him in remembrance of what he had in his life time. So the
Child of a Godly Man in Hell if he could speak to his Father in Heaven, Father
have Mercy on me, his Father would say to him, remember in thy life time I
instructed thee, told thee what would become of thee, if thou did not repent
of thy Sins, and believe in Christ, and lead a holy Life, now I cannot help
thee, there is a gulf fixed, thou art in Eternity, none in Heaven or Earth can
help thee. Well then, it is great folly for Men to build their hopes of
Salvation on such things as these are, on their Church Membership, on their
Baptism; as some think if they can be Baptized, then they shall do well, Ah
poor deluded Creatures! what does the Scripture say, Gal. 6.15. Neither
circumcision avails any thing nor uncircumcision* but a new creature.
Therefore it is a vain thing for Men to depend on their Baptism, or for them to
depend upon their coming to the Lord's Table Many that have come to the Lord's
Table, what will Christ say to them at the Last Day. They will say, Lord, Lord,
we have eat and drank in thy presence* Christ will say to them, you are wo^kers
of Iniquity therefore depart from me, I know you not.

USE. II. This Doctrine speaks woe to Hypocrites. Christ did so Eight times over
in one Sermon, Mat. 23. Eight times over he says, Woe to you Hypocrites. Who are
Hypocrites, how shall we know them? For Answer, There are some refined
Hypocrites that is a hard matter to know them, it is impossible for Men to know
them, they are looked upon as the precious Servants of God, the dear Servants of
God, those acquainted with them, take them to be so; without doubt Judas was
such an one, the Apostles were not jealous of him; when Christ told them to
their amazement that one of them should betray him, they cried out, one and
another, Lord is it I? Peter said, Lord is it I? John said, Lord is it I? not
one of them said, Lord is it Judas? they looked upon Judas as an eminent Servant
of God. There are also gross Hypocrites, Men may know them to be so. Shall I
mention to you a character or two of such; Known Hypocrites by a pretense of
Religion will cover their Sins; so the Pharisees, Mat. 23.14. Ye devour widows
houses, and for ^ pretense make long prayers. They would get the Estates of
Widows into their hands, how could that be? why did Widows that had Estates
trust them? they thought they were honest Men, that they might trust them, for
they would Pray and ^a^e long Prayers. Thus Absal^m discovered himself to be an
Hypocrite, he pretended to Religion, when it was not so really, he comes to his
Father, says he, when I was in Hebron I made a Vow to God, that if he would
bring me again to Jerusalem, I would serve Him, therefore let me go that I may
perform my Vow, his good Father bids him go in peace, whereas Absalom's design
was not to perform his Vow, but to rebel and make himself King. Thus Ahab, that
he might possess Naboths Vineyard, hired Men to Swear, that Naboth had
blasphemed God and the King, an abominable lie, Naboth never did any suc^
thing, that was a capital Crime for which his life would be taken away, then
his Estate forfeited to the King; this must be covered with a mock Fast, to
Pray, that Sin might not be imputed to the Land. So Herod, (says he,) send me
word where the young Child is, that I may come and worship him, whereas he
intended not to worship but to kill him: So when Men will be mighty zealous
about Ceremonies, yet make no Conscience in Moralities, that is a sad sign of
an Hypocrite. Mat. 23.23. Ye pay tithe of mint and cummin, and have omitted the
weightier matters of the law, judgment, mercy and faith. O how conscientious
will some seem to be, it may be, about some little triffle that the greatest,
the wisest, in the World, are not agreed in, but in the mean time those Men
will neglect the great, the weightier matters of the Law, especially Faith,
that is faithfulness in their word; they will promise but never perform. They
that indulge themselves in any Sin are no better than Hypocrites, yet there
have been such in Churches, Ah and in Churches in New England too, Men that
have been thought to be very pious Men, yet afterward appeared to have lived in
Adultery or in Fornication. If any Man indulge a Sin against his Conscience* he
cannot be a godly Man. God says, forsake that Sin or thou shall perish for
ever. Cut off that right hand, pluck out that right eye Sin, or thy Body and
Soul shall be cast into ^ell, where the Worm dies not, where the Fire never
shall be quenched.

USE. III. We should make sure we have that attainment which no Hypocrite in
the World has. The rather because an Hypocrite may go very far, yet fall short
of Heaven at last, O remember then that awful word and warning of Christ, Mat.
5.20. Except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes
and pharisees ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven. Why? the
Scribes and Pharisees went very far, they would abstain from many Sins, they
would practice many duties, they would Pray, and Fast as well as Pray, they
would keep the Sabbath very strictly, but Christ says, except your
righteousness exceed theirs you shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, How may a Man know he has what never any Hypocrite attained? He may
know it by this, If he observes all the Commandments of God. O that there were
such an heart in them that they would keep all my Commandments, says God, that
it may go well with them forever, Deuteronomy. 5.29. Christ says, Ioh. 15.14. Ye are
my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. Christ will own you as His
Friends if you do whatsoever he commands you; let a Man do so, then let him
hope for Heaven as much as he will, he shall not be disappointed. Psalm. 119.6.
When I have respect to all thy commandments, then I shall not be ashamed; by
this the Godly discover their sincerity. It is said of Zacharias and Elizabeth,
Luke 1.2. They were righteous before God, walking in all the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord; now observe a Hypocrite will pick and choose among the
commandments of God, some he will keep, some he will not keep. Iehu a great
Professor of Religion, a great Reformer too, ^^em'd to be zealous, he said to
Iehonadab, Come see my zeal for the Lord, but how did his Hypocrisy appear,
Jehu did not take heed to walk in all the Law of the Lord, the Sins of Jeroboam
he would not depart from them, that proved he was not sincere in the sight of
God. So Herod, heard John Baptist gladly, and he reform^d some Sins, and
practiced many Duties John Baptist exhorted him to, but there was one Sin he
would not part with when John Baptist told him it was unlawful to keep his
Herodias, yet he would do it, therefore he was no better than an Hypocrite. You
may know whether you are sincere, whether you go beyond a Hypocrite, by your
Love to the Lord Jesus Christ, if you love the Lord Jesus Christ, more than any
thing whatsoever, more than any Friend, any Relation whatsoev^^* yea than Li^e
it self. The true Believer desires Life only, or chiefly, that so he may
glorify the Lord Jesus Christ in this World; says the Apostle for me to live
(...) Christ, why was Paul willing to live a day longer, he knew certainly if
he should die that day, he should go to Heaven, and he knew Heaven was
infinitely more desirable than this World, why then would he be willing to live
a day longer, why for me to live is Christ, that I may serve Christ, by that
you may know wheth^r you belong to the Lord Jesus Christ.

USE. IV. Lastly, Let me give you the Exhortation, Christ gave his Disciples,
Luke 12.1. Beware of Hypocricy. You are generally the Disciples of Christ, in
respect of Outward Profession, generally of the Visible Church of God, you make
Profession of the Name of God, therefore you are of the Visible Church; let me
say to all, especially to those that belong to this Church, O beware of
Hypocrisy, I solem^ly profess to you this Day, I should be glad if I might die
before I stir out of this Pulpit, if I might be an instrument to save your
Souls from Eternal Death; Therefore I set before you the evil of Hypocrisy, O
take heed of being of that number. Some of you that are Members of this
particular Church walk disorderly, live in breach of the Covenant they have
made before the Lord, and with this Church; by virtue of the Authority Christ
has given me, I charge this Church to prosecute the Discipline of Christ
against such Covenant breakers, if you will not do it you make their Sin your
own, then let me solemnly declare to you some Judgment will come upon this
particular Church, when it is come you will know that a Servant of God warned
you of it. Consider Men may be Hypocrites and not know it. There is a way seems
right to a man, but the end thereof is death. Many a Man thinks he is going to
Heaven when he is going to Hell every day. Iam. 1.26. If any man seem to be
religious and brid^leth not his his tongue, he deceives his own heart, his
Religion is vai^. When a Man cares not what he says in a passion, he bridleth
not his tongue, his Religion is vain, O take heed it be not so with you,
Remember this one thing, if you die in Hypocrisy you shall be of all Men in the
World the most miserable. Mat. 8.12. The children of the kingdom shall be cast
into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Joh. 36.13.
The hypocrites in heart heap up wrath, heaps of wrath will come upon him for
all the Sermons he has heard, Sacraments he has profaned, the profanation of
the Blood of Christ he has been guilty of, heaps of wrath are reserved for him
if he die in Hypocrisy, God forbid any of you should be of that number; be able
to say I have set the Lord always before me, Remember the Eye of God is always
upon you, study to approve your heart to Him, Pray earnestly for sincerity,
Pray David's Prayer, Psalm. 119.80. Let my heart be sound in thy statutes. Amen
O Lord.

Preached, March 1^ th. 1719,20.
SERMON III.
WE proceed to the Third Doctrine that has been mentioned.

That the Lord's Chosen are but Few.

For clearing the Truth Two Things are to be attended. First, To show how this
is to be understood, that the Lord's Chosen are but few. Secondly, To mention
some Things which are Demonstrations of the Truth before us. And,

1. How is this to be understood, that the Lord's Chosen are but few. For
Answer, It is to be understood not in an absolute but in a comparative sense,
for it is a Truth that the Lord has chosen many, many Hundreds, many Thousands,
many Ten Thousands, to be the Objects of His Love, and of His Salvation. Our
Savior Christ when He did institute that Ordinance of the Lord's Supper, He
declared that His Blood was shed for many, Mat. 26.28. therefore the Lord's
Chosen are many. It is said of Abraham, that his Children should be as the
Stars of Heaven that could not be numbered, which is to be understood especially
concerning his spiritual Children, namely Believers, who are said to be his
Children, He is said to be the Father of the Faithful. The like promise is made
concerning David, Ier. 33.22. that God would multiply his Seed, that they
should be even as the Stars of Heaven. Christ is the David there intended, so
that Believers shall ^e as the Stars of Heaven, yea as the Sand on the Sea
shore, a great number in themselves considered. Rev. 7.9. it is said, There was
a great multitude which no man could number of all Nations, and People, and
Tongues, that had white Robes given to them: So then it is in a comparative
sense, that the Lord's Chosen are but few, namely,

1. Compared with the rest of the World, so they are but Few. Romans 11.^7. The
Election has obtained, and the rest were blinded. The whole World is divided
into the Election, and the rest. Now the Election are but few compared with the
rest of the World, therefore they are said to be but a Remnant, ver. 5. A
remnant according to Election.

2. They are but Few compared with those that have the Gospel offered unto
them, that have the Call of the Gospel, the Word of God vouchsafed to them, few
compared with them that enjoy the Means of Grace; thus has it been all along in
all Ages of the World, it was thus in the Old World, there were many had the
Word of God dispensed to them, who yet were not of the Lord's Chosen; thus for
the Sinners of the Old World, it is said of them, 1 Pet. 3.19. that Christ did
Preach to them, the Spirits that are in prison, that is to say, the damned
Souls of the Sinners of the Old World: There was a time Christ Preached to them
by His Holy Spirit in the Ministry of Noah who was a Preacher of Righteousness;
they had the Word of Go^* vouchsafed to them, they were called upon to repent
and turn to God, yet they did it not. Thus it was in Moses's time, for Moses
Preached not the Law only but the Gospel also, he Preached the Covenant of
Grace among that People, Deuteronomy. 29.10. he said to them, Ye stand this day all of
you before the Lord your God, that thou should enter into Covenant with the
Lord thy God: yet many of them that did enter into the Lord's Covenant were not
the Lord's peculiar Chosen ones that shall inherit Eternal Life. Thus it was in
the days of the holy Prophets, the Prophets Preached the Word of God to all the
Children of Israel, to the whole Nation of Israel, yet they were not many of
them Chosen, Jer. 6.30. Reprobate silver shall men call them because the Lord
has rejcted them. Thus it was in the days of the Apostles, they Preached the
Gospel to the Jewish N^^ion, yet they made light of it, did not accept it. Thus
it was when our Savior Himself appeared in the World, He Preached the Gospel
to many who were not the Lord's Ch^sen, but did reject and refuse the Grace
which was offered to them by Christ. Joh. 8.47. You hear not my words says
Christ, because ye are not of God, he that is of God hears God's words.
Christ said to them, ye believe not because ye are not of my Sheep. Christ
Preached the Word to them, they had the best Means ever People in this World
had, for all that they were not Sheep, they were not the Lord's Chosen. So we
see the Lord's Chosen are but few comparatively, compared with the rest of the
World, and compared with those that have the outward Means of Grace vouchsafed
to them; Who has believed our report, says the Prophet. There are but few true
Believers, so but few Chosen among those that have the report of the Gospel
brought unto them. But how does this appear?

Answ. We shall mention some Demonstrations of it.

Demon. 1. It is evident in that those that enjoy the Means of Grace are but
few ^ompared with the rest of the World. For many Generations only one Nation
on the face of the Earth had the Word of God vouchsafed to them; so the
Israelitish Nation, Psalm. 147.19, 20. He showed his word unto Jacob, his
statutes and his judgments unto Israel, he has not dealt so with any nation.
He did not send Prophets, Ministers to Prea^^ the Word of God to them, so as
(...) that People. Amos. 3.2. You only have I known of all the families of the
Earth. No other Nation had the Gospel sent to them, and to them God did write
the great things of His Law, they only had the Scriptures the written Word of
God among them. Romans 3.1, 2. What advantage has the Jew above the Gentile,
much every way, says the Apostle, chiefly because that unto them were committed
the oracles of God. Therefore Christ said to the Woman of Samari^ Joh. 4.22.
Salvation is of the Jews, that is, only they that had the true worship of God
among them; all other Nations had not the Means of Salvation. Men must have
been either Jews by birth, or proselyted to that Religion, or they could not be
saved. Salvation is of the Jews; so then if there be but few comparatively have
the Means of Salvation, and among these very great multitudes that are no^ the
Lord's Chosen, we must hence conclude there are but few that are the Lord's
Chosen.

2. The Scripture does plainly intimate this Truth. In the Scripture there are
two ways spoken of, and every Man that hears me this day, nay every Man in the
whole World at this day, is in one of those two ways, either in the broad way,
or the narrow way, there is a broad way, there are great multitudes going in
that way, that way leads to destruction; as for the narrow way there are but
few in that, Few there be that find it. Therefore also does the Scripture say,
Luke 12.32. that the Lord's Chosen are a little Flock, Fear not little Flock,
it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom; that is to say, you
are Chosen of God, Ah but you are a Little Flock. The Original Word is Micron
Poimnion, A Little, Little Flock indeed; so are the Lord's Chosen. The
Israelitish Nation was a Type of the Elect of God, therefore are they called by
the name of Israel, Gal. 6.16. Peace be upon the Israel of God. The Lord's
Chosen are the Israel of God; now they were but a small Nation comparatively.
Deuteronomy. 7.7. The Lord did not choose you because ye were more in number than any
people, for ye were the fewest of all people; so they were a Type of the Lord's
Chosen in that respect.

Demon. 3. Such Things are to be affirmed of the Lord's Chosen as cannot be
said of many. First, it is said of those that are the Lord's Chosen that they
are or shall be Believers on the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Pet. 2.7.
Unto you that believe he is precious. ver. 9. Ye are a chosen generation. They
that are the Chosen Generation are or shall be Believers on the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ. The Scripture speaks of the faith of God's Elect, Tit. 1.1.
So that the Elect of God either have or shall have Faith. Many of them have
Faith already; there are many also of the Elect that have not Faith now but
they shall have Faith in God's time, Joh. 10.16. I have other ^heep which are
not of this fold, and they shall hear my voice; they that are Sheep, that are
the Lord's Chosen they shall hear the voice of Christ, they shall be made
Believers on His Name, Act. 13.48. As many as were ordained to eternal life,
believed, if there is an ordination to Eternal Life, if there is a choosing*
there shall be a believing; the Apostle says, whom he predestined, them he
also called, if there is a predestination there will follow an effectual
calling, which is the same with believing in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ*
now there are but few in the World that do, or that ever will believe in the
Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, but perish in their unbelie^* even those Christ
Himself did Preach to and wrought Miracles among them, though he wrought such
Miracles they did not believe, Isai. 5^.^* (...) has believed our report, and
to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed: and it is said, Luke 18.8. When
the son of man comes, shall he find faith on the earth. If Christ should come
to judge the World this very Week He would find but little Faith on the Earth,
He would find comparatively but few Believers on the face of the Earth, so it
is like to be as long as this World shall last. Secondly, The Lord's Chosen
shall have Repentance given to them, they shall be humbled for their Sins, the
House of Israel shall have a new Heart given to them. Ephraim was a Type of the
Lord's Chosen, and the Lord says, Jer. 31.18. I have heard Ephraim bem^aning
himself, turn thou me and I shall be turned; he was become a Penitent, mourned
for his Sins, not only so but did forsake his Sins with an utter detestation.
Hos. 14.8. Ephraim shall say, what have I to do any more with Idols, no more,
never any thing more to do with Idols; so they that are the Lord's Chosen shall
be true Penitents, this is true but of a few comparatively; look over the World
there are but few such to be found, it is, as was in Ieremiahs time, I
hearkened and heard, no man repented saying, what have I done; no man, that is
very few comparatively. Thirdly, As for the Lord's Chosen they shall be holy.
Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us that we should be holy. If the Lord has chosen,
there will certainly holiness follow. Heb. 3.1. Holy brethren partakers of the
heavenly calling; they that are partakers of the Heavenly Calling, are Holy
Brethren; there are but few comparatively* that are holy ones. Psalm. 12.1. The
godly man^ cease from among the children of men. Prove. 20.6. A faithful man
who can find. A Man that is faithful to God, and to His Interest who can find,
there are but few such to be found in the whole World comparatively; then we
must conclude the Lord's Chosen are but few. The World generally is an ungodly
World, as the Old World is styled the World of the ungodly: and truly the same
Epithet belongs to it still as to the generallity of it. 2 Cor. 4.4. The God of
this World has blinded the minds of them which believe not. Who is the God of
this World? The Devil the destroyer of Souls is the God of this World. Then we
must conclude there are but few that are the Lord's Chosen. Lastly, The Lord's
Chosen shall have Eternal Life given to them. Rev. 21.27. There Names are
written in the Lambs Book of Life; they then shall have Life given to them:
Those God has chosen he has a Book of Life and every one of their Names are
written there, therefore they shall have Eternal Life given to them. 2 These.
2.13. God has from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through
sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth. Observe (...) that
Scripture, First, That the (...) of the Lord have been chosen from (...)
beginning, from Eternity, that choice stands, it shall never be altered.
Secondly, Observe they shall certainly have Salvation* Eternal Salvation, He
has chosen them to Salvation. Thirdly, That they shall be Sanctified, fitted to
enjoy that Eternal Salvation, therefore they shall be Believers, for it is by
Faith they come to be sanctified: But now this is true but of Few
comparatively, but they shall have these things conferred on them. There was a
Man that proposed that Question to our Lord Jesus Christ, Are there few that
shall be saved, Luke 13.23. Observe now what Christ's answer was, ver. 24.
Strait is the gate that leads to life, and many will seek to enter, and shall
not be able. Then, how few are like to be saved; if the Gate be strait, and
many seekers shall not enter in* Certainly there are but a few* that will enter
into the Gate of Life, of Salvation. We see from these Particulars the Doctrine
cleared. For the Improvement of it.

USE. I. We may here see the Erroneousness of several Opinions that some have
taken up: As now that opposition of Universal Redemption, that Christ has died
to save all Men whatsoever, if that were true, my Doctrine would not be true,
that few are Chosen, for Christ's Redemption, and the Election of God run
Parallel, Christ died to redeem only those, and all those God has given to Him,
and they are the Objects of His special Love. Christ says, Joh. 15.13. Greater
love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friend. Those
Christ has laid down his life for, are the objects of His special peculiar
love. Can any one think that Christ loved Judas as much as He loved Peter? Yet
it must be so ^f he died for Judas's Salvation as much as He did for Peter's.
If this be so, then Christ's Death has been in vain as to a great part of those
whom he died for, which may not ^e imagined. Gal. 2.21. says the Apostle, If
righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain, which may not be
imagined. Thus if Christ dyed for all Men, for those whom the Lord has not
chosen, then He died in vain for a very great part of the World, but we must
not imagine this. We find in Scripture Christ would not so much as Pray for the
Reprobate World. Joh. 17.9. I pray for them which thou have given me, says
Christ, I pray not for the world: But has Christ died for that World, which He
would not so much as once Pray and plead with God for the Salvation of? Not but
that there is a sufficiency of Merit in the Death, in the Blood of Christ, to
save all the World, nay Merit enough to save ten thousand Worlds, the Blood of
Christ has infinite Merit in it, it must needs be so, because it is the Blood
of God, the Scripture so calls it, Acts. 20.28. God has purchased his Church
with his ow^ Blood; the Blood of God must needs have infinite Virtue and Value
in it. The Life of God was given for the Redemption of those that were given to
Christ. 1 John 3.16. God has laid down hi^ life for us. Hence there is an
infinite Value in the Blood of Christ, but all Men whatsoever are not the
Objects of His Redemption, He did not design His Blood should be shed for to
make Atonement for the Sins of every one, but only for the Elect of God, His
Chosen that He has given to Him.

2. There is another ^^ror falls under confutation here, That Men may be saved
in any Religion, if they be but true to the Principles of their own Religion.
But this cannot be, for the greatest part of the World what is their Religion?
Their Religion is Idolatry, that is a Religion that will nev^^ save any Man
that shall embrace it. Psalm. 97.7. Confounded be all they that serve grave
(...) images, that boast themselves of idols. Not Salvation but Confusion is
pronounced to such as are worshippers of Idols, and the greatest part of the
World have been, and inde^d are so at this day* What shall be said of
Mahometans and of their Religion; the best Interpreters conceive that Scripture
is meant of them, Rev. 9.11. They had a King over them which is the Angel of
the bottomless pit, whose name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, but in the
Greek Apollyon. Abaddon signifies destruction, so does Apollyon. Those
miserable wretches that fill a very great part of the World at this day, the
King over them is the Angel of the bottomless Pit, are they like to be saved
then? What shall we say of those that embrace the Jewish Religion, a Man cannot
be saved if he is of that Religion, Christ Himself declares it, Joh. 8.24. If
ye believe not that I am ^e ye shall die in your sins: If ye believe not that I
am the true Messiah that God promised to send into the World, you shall die in
your Sins, that is to say you shall certainly be Damned, yet the miserable Jews
do not believe this, so far are they from believing it, that they blaspheme
Christ in their Synagogues, they curse the blessed Name of Jesus, they wish
that Name may be rooted out of the World. What shall we say of a great number
of those that call themselves Christians. Papists, are they in the way to
Salvation? they are Idolaters: indeed they don't worship Jupiter, and Diana,
but they worship Peter, and the Virgin Mary, which is as great Idolatry as if
they worshipped Jupiter, and Diana. That Judicious Divine Famous Mr. Perkins,
wrote a Treatise ma^y Years since in which he proves, That a Papist living up
to the Principles of his Religion cannot possibly go beyond a Reprobate.
Doubtless the Apostle Paul Prophesied of them, 2 These. ^.10, 11. That there
would come Men into the world, who would prove apostates, and would provoke God
by not believing the Truth, that He would give them up to strong delusions,
that they should believe a lie, that they might be damned, who believed not the
truth.

USE. II. It is not safe always to follow the Multitude, to do as many do, or
as the most do. It is said, Rev. 13.3. All the world wondered after the beast.
So then we must not do as the greatest part of the World do. Men are exceeding
apt to do so. If there be many do this or that, if there is a proud foolish
fashion, if many take it up, others take it up, and think they do well, Why?
every Body does it; But what says the Scripture, Exodus 23.2. Thou shall not
follow a multitude to do evil, What though a multitude practice it, if the
thing is evil it may not be followed, the Scripture says, Conform not your
selves to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind.
Christians must be singular Persons, it becomes them to have an holy
singularity, they may not do as others do. 1 These. 5.6. Let us not sleep as do
others, but let us watch and be sober; They were to be singular, to go beyond
others. Christ therefore said to His Disciples, What do ye more than others? It
is said to the Church of Sardis, Rev. 3.4. Thou have a few names which have not
defiled their garments. Well then, Christians should be and do even as a few,
and not follow a multitude. We find the Eminent Servants of God have been
singular. Noah in his time, Genesis 7.1. God says to him, I have seen thee
righteous before me in this Generation. He differed from the whole Generation
he lived in, he served God faithfully, did as but few did, so God did for him
as He did but for few. The Prophet Elijah, was a singular Man, 1 Kin. 19.10.
says he, The children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine
Altars, they have worshipped Baal, and I only am left. Indeed there were seven
thousand which he did not know of, Godly ones, that had not bowed their knee to
Baal; but that was but a very small number comparatively among that People, who
could loose Five Hundred Thousands in one Battle. Lot, he also was a singular
Man, he was vexed with the ungodly conversation of the wicked. It was a fore
grief and trouble to him, there was not such a Man as (...) to be found, in
Five whole Cities there were not Ten such Men to be found; if there had, those
Cities would not have been destroyed. Joshua the Priest was a singular Man.
Zech. 3.8. The Lord said unto him, Thou and thy Fellows are Men wondered at.
What were they wondered at for? For their Piety, for their Courage and Zeal,
that they would venture to build the Temple of God, when all the World was set
against them. Then it becomes Christians not to follow the Multitude, but to be
and do as but very few in the World do.

USE. III. If there be but few that are the Lord's Chosen, they that are of
those few what cause have they to be thankful, to be blessing and praising of
God. If we see marks and signs of Election in others, we ought to bless God for
them, as the Apostle did for his Thessalonians, 1 These. 1.2, 4. We give thanks
to God for you, knowing Brethren your Election of God. They knew it only by a
judgment of charity, they saw that in them that was a sign of their being God's
Chosen. Much more they that have a judgment of infallability concerning their
own being the Chosen of God, ought to be exceedingly thankful, in that this
Choice proceeds purely from the Grace of God. Deuteronomy. 7.8. God has loved you,
because he l^ved you: so he chooses them, because he chooses them, without any
work of theirs, without regard to any desert of theirs, He chooses them from
His Sovereign Grace, therefore they ought to be the more thankful. As for the
Elect of God themselves, they are by Nature no better than the vilest
Reprobates that lives on the face of the Earth, they are Children of Wrath even
as others, they are guilty of Adam's Sin, guilty of Original Sin, they bring
Original Sin into the World with them, and they are guilty of Actual Sins, We
were sometimes disobedient, says the Apostle, even as others. It may be more
guilty, guilty of many more Actual Sins than others. Some of them have been so;
as now, Paul what a Sinner had he been, he confesses that he had been the chief
of Sinners, he persecuted the Saints of God, he consented to the Blood of the
Martyr Stephen, and when God bid Ananias go to him and comfort him when in the
pangs of the New Birth, says Ananias, Lord, I have heard of this man how much
evil he has done to thy Saints at Jerusalem, but the Lord said to him, go thy
way for he is a chosen Vessel unto me. It is then from Grace that God is
pleased to choose any of the Children of Men: Then they that are Chosen ought
to bless God. There is no cause of it but the free Sovereign Grace of God.
Indeed Christ is the cause of Salvation, the meritorious cause, but we cannot
say Christ Himself is the cause of Election, for Christ Himself is an Elect
Vessel, the Head of the Elect World. So then there is no cause of Election but
only the free love of God, who will be gracious because he will be gracious,
and will show mercy to whom he will show mercy. Therefore the Elect of God
ought to be exceeding thankful unto Him. If there is Election most certainly
Salvation will follow, no Elect Soul shall ever miscarry, it is said of some
they shall deceive if it were possible, the very Elect, but that is impossible
that an Elect Vessel should be deceived so as to become an Apostate from God,
though others may that have made a great Profession, and the People they lived
among did think surely they were Good Men, they may fall away, become
Apostates, but those that belong to Election it is impossible any such should
miscarry as to their Eternal Salvation, this you ought to be thankful for; Yes,
you will say, If we knew we were of that Number. The Scripture tells you how
you may know it, it is known by one thing, and but by one thing, viz. your
Effectual Calling. 2 Pet. 1.10. Give diligence to make your calling and
election sure. Would you be sure of your Election, then make sure you are
Effectually Called, and my Life for thine, thou shall go to Heaven when thou
die; make sure of true Faith in Christ. Says Christ, My Sheep, that is to
say, the Lord's Chosen, they hear my voice and follow me, Joh. 10.17. Shepherds
among us they drive their Sheep before them, but it was not so in the Eastern
Nations, their Sheep followed them, they knew the Voice of their Shepherds and
followed them. Do you hear the Voice of Christ and follow Him? Do you follow
the Lamb whithersoever He goes? Then you may be sure of it, you are Christ's
Sheep, that Christ has died for you, that you are of the Chosen of God. Then
there is another Use, I am loath to mention it, it is a dreadful one, but I must
do it, God has commanded me to do it, and that I should this Day do it, in this
Congregation.

USE. IV. Hence then it is certain that the greatest part of the Children of
Men will perish Eternally. And how dismal is that to think of, yet so it is. I
remember I have heard of a Man that was possessed of a Devil, and he uttered such
words as these, I know said the Devil in that Man, I know that in the Day of
Judgment I shall have more to be with me than Christ will have to be with Him.
How awfully does the Scripture speak, Joel. 3.14. Multitudes, where are they,
Lord, where are they? O they are in the valley of decision, in the valley of
slaughter, there they are. Psalm. 9.17. The wicked, and all the nations that
forget God, shall be turned into Hell; is not that a terri^le Scripture, all
the Nations that forget God, whole Nations are at once going down into Hell.
There are whole Nations that have no means of Grace, they sit in darkness and
see no light. Not only shall such as have the means of Grace and reject them,
perish at the Last Day, but such as have had no means of Grace shall perish
too. The Day is coming, when every Man in the World will believe* what I am now
speaking to you, when Christ Himself shall come down from Heaven. 2 These. 1.7,
8. He shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming fire, taking vengeance, on whom?
(...) them that obey not the Gospel. What on them only? No! but on such as
never had the Gospel; Such as know not God, Poor dark ignorant Souls, it may
make a Man's heart to ache at it. Multitudes of them that never knew any thing of
the true God, but have served Devils, Idols, all their days, when Christ comes
to Judge the World He will take Vengeance on those as well as on them that obey
not the Gospel, O it is sad to think of. We should cry to God to send His
Gospel all the World over. Some have observed that if this whole World should
be divided into One and Thirty Parts, that only Five of the One Thirty, is so
much as Christian in Name, and among those that have the Name of Christians,
how ma^y are there that are Idolaters, how many even whole Countries that are
filled with Heretics.

Look among Protestants among whom only true Religion is to be found, how many
are there that are wicked and profane. Well then, if these things are so,
there are but few that shall be saved, and there are very many that shall
perish.

USE. V. This Doctrine does give us cause to think on the Apostles Exhortation,
Phil. 2.12. Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling. O fear and
tremble seeing there are so very few that shall be saved, and such Multitudes
that shall perish to Eternity. O fear and tremble least you be found among the
many, and not among the few. When Christ said to His Disciples that one of them
should betray Him, how concerned were they, saying one and another, Lord, is it
(...)? Lord, is it I?

Christ says to us, the greatest part of those that call themselves Christians,
and pretend to be my Disciples, they will miss of Heaven and but few
comparatively shall get to Heaven at last. O then how should (...) fear and
tremble and (...) about our ow^ (...) It is our greatest (...) to think of it
(...) late. One (...), and but (...) the World* (...) in (...) ^ou to (...)
that all (...) you can do, (...) you. Well then, make sure of an Interest in
Christ by Faith in His Name. I Conclude with that Scripture, 1 John 5.12. He
that has the Son has Life, and he that has not the Son of God, has not Life.

Preached March 20 th. 1719,20.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for and Sold by Benjamin Gray, and John Edwards, Booksellers in
Boston.
THe Duty of Parents to Pray for their Children. By Increase Mather, D. D. To
which is added the Duty of Children whose Parents have Prayed for them. By
Cotton Mather, D. D. MEat out of the Eater. By Michael Wigglesworth.
Palterium-Americanum, The Book of PSALMS in Blank ^^rse. With Illustrations on
each Psalm. CHRIST's Certain and Sudden Appearance to Judgment. By Thomas
Vincent.

