THE Deplorable State OF New England, By Reason of a Covetous and Treacherous
GOVERNOR, AND Pusillanimous COUNSELORS WITH A VINDICATION of the Honorable
Mr. HIGGINSON, Mr. MASON, and several other Gentlemen, from the Scandalous and
Wicked Accusation of the VOTES ordered by Them to be Published in their BOTSON
New Letter.

To which is added, An ACCOUNT of the Shameful Miscarriage of the Late
EXPEDITION against PORT ROYAL.

LONDON: Printed in the Year 1708. Reprinted 1721.

TO THE READER.
IF the New England Counselors (as well as their Governor) are publicly
exposed in a Land a Thousand Leagues distant from them, they have no reason to
complain of bard Dealing, Lex Talionis requires that it should be so; for it is
nothing but what they themselves have done, by Gentlemen who are on several
Accounts superior to them. We wish they may be sensible of the great Hurt their
Co^ is like to suffer by their Means. They have (...)uraged their Friends from
(...) appearing aga^ in their Behalf, when if they should, they, to please
their Governor, will in Print, brand them for Scand^lous and Wicked Accusers.

Their Fault is the more aggravated, in that after they saw an Invoice which
mentions an Hundred Thousand Nails, sent to the Queen's Enemies at Port Royal,
allowed by the Governor under his own Hand, they caused their abusive Vote to
be printed. Only we Hear that their Secretary, who is a Prudent Man, and one of
their Counselors, was against the Publication of their Scandalous Vote.

But we likewise hear, that some of them moved that several Affidavits, which
had been laid before Her Majesty in Council, and were after (...) Printed here
in London, might be burnt, because they Complained of their Governor's
Notorious Briberies, and other Male Administrations. Probably the same Persons
will make the like Proposal again, if a New Governor does not Negative them
out of his Council, which we suppose he will, unless the Representatives of the
Province (as in Duty they are Bound) shall save him the Trouble.

The Reader may depend upon it, that as to Matter of Fact, there is nothing in
this Narrative but Exact Truth; what is therein Related, is not only affirmed
by Gentlemen worthy of Credit lately come from Boston, but by Letters from as
Eminent Persons as any in New England.

The Deplorable STATE OF New England.
SECTION. I.
SOME Late Votes passed in the General Assembly at Boston, and Printed in the
Boston News-Letter, Cause us to Reflect with some Wonder on the Deplorable
State of the Plantations.

They that are sent over as Governors thither, appear as Persons of Suitable
Abilities, and approved Loyalty. They are in Favor with some Ministers of
State, who Recommend them to the King or Queen for the Time being; and are in
Fee with their Clarks, by whose Means their Business is done the more
Effectually. When they arrive with their Commissions, they Express themselves
in Obliging Terms; and the Ravished People, who are quite Giddy with Joy, if
they have Governors, which they may hope, will not Cut their Throats, make
them Noble Presents, and send home an Address of Thanks for such Admirable
Governors.

Their Next Work is, by all possible Artifices, to get into all Offices about
the Country, such as are, or they know, will be, mere Creatures to them; or at
least, su^ as are not f^rnished either with Courage or Conduct. to make any
Complaints Home against them, in Case of any Maladministration.

After this, let the Governor do what he will, either there will be no Body
Strong enough to Repair unto the Cro^ with due Remonstrances; or if any Body
do, the Governor has many Ways to molest him and his, and to Defeat all his
Undertakings. Yea, it is Ten Thousand to One, but at the very Time, when an
oppressed Person is Soliciting his own, and an oppressed People's Cause, the
Governor may have so modeled the General Assembly, that they shall pass
wretched Votes to his Advantage, and Kiss the Hand, which all the open Eyes in
the Country see Stabbing of them.

One would have thought, the People of N. England should have been Sensible of
their Good Fortune in it; that when they are betrayed in Miserable
Circumstances by an Hungry Governor, who has been willing to Enrich himself
and his Family, on the Ruins of his Country, some Gentlemen of Note, have
interposed with Humble Addresses to her Majesty on their Behalf. They have no
Agent here, but what is entirely in the Interest of their Governor. When the
whole House of Representatives sent over hither, an Address to the Queen,
relating to matter of the greatest Importance, the Agent whom they had I^oy'd
and Rewarded with some Hundreds of Pounds ^fused to Present the Address,
because it would not suit with the Governor's Interest, and wrote them word,
That no Address. must be presented, except Signed by the Governor. And yet
after this, the same Gentleman could present Adresses for the continuance of
the Governor which were signed by Private Hands, and procured by Ways and
Means little to the Honor of those Concerned. Some Gentlemen here, knowing the
Opress'd and Betrayed Condition of that poor People, have Addressed on their
Behalf; and have said nothing in their Address, but what they had the Oaths of
several Good Men, to support the Truth of what was Asserted: But, lo! to their
Surprise, they find themselves in the Boston News Letter Exposed, as having
been the Authors of Seandalous and wicked Accusations! The Counselors of N.
England, have done as much as lies in them for ever to discourage all Gentlemen
here from appearing for the Country, let never such Difficult Circumstances be
(...) upon it; but we will pity them, as Trapann'd into they know not what
themselves! However, if they will allow no body here to speak for their
Country, they cannot forbid us to Speak for Ourselves, which they have now made
but too Necessary for us.

Letters from New England Inform us, That the Great and only Reason, why some
of the Council there will strmly Believe more Charitably of their Governor
Dudley, than many others do, is, Because his Family and Interest is there, and
therefore it is unreasonable to Believe, that he would do any thing that should
hurt the Country.

But, Was not his Family and Interest there in Sir Edmund Andross's time? And
yet a Book Published here, by the Agents of New England, after the Revolution,
Entitled, The Revolution in New England Justified, has given the World a sad
Story of what a Colonel Dudley may do toward the Ruining a Country which has
his Family and Interests in it. Read that History and you will find, that after
Col. Dudley had been an Agent for the Country, he tacked about, and joined with
the Instruments that overthrew their Charter, and accepted an Illegal and
Arbitrary Commission from King James, by which he held the Government, until
the Arrival of Sir Edmund Andross, and then was, as President of the Council,
and Chief Judge of the Territory, a Chief Tool of all the ensuing barbarous and
infamous Administration. They governed without an Assembly, when the Laws were
proposed in the Council, though the major Part of the Council should happen to
dissent, yet if the Governor was positive, there was a President at the Board,
by whose Allowance the Laws were immediately Engrossed, Published, and
Executed: And Judge Dudley did not contradict it when some of the Principal
Gentlemen in the Country were told at the Council Board, You have no more
Privileges left you but this, that you are not Bought and Sold for Slaves. By
the Sequel we shall see not this neither. A Juncto, (wherein how often this
Chief Judge, was of the Quorum, is now forgotten) made a World of Laws, which
Pillaged that poor People Desperately. They Levied a Tax on the whole People
without any Assembly; and when the Principal Persons, and some others in Ips^
on that Occasion, with all possible Modesty moved, that the King should be
Humbly Petitioned for the Liberty of an Assembly, they were Committed to Prison
for an High Misdemeanour, and were Denied an Habeas Corpus, and Dragged many
Miles out of their own County to Answer it at a Court in Boston, where Jurors
were picked for the Turn, that were neither Freeholders, nor so much as
Inhabitants. They were all Fined severely, and laid under great Bonds for their
Good Behavior; besides which, the Hungry Officers Extorted Fees of near Two
Hundred Pounds, where they would not have risen to Ten Pounds, had any Law of
England, or Justice been Observed. The Townsmen of many other Places were
served in the like Fashion; and our Judge Dudley was a Principal Actor in all
this Wickedness. It was now denied that any Man was owner of a Foot of Land in
all the Colony. Judge Dudley gave it as his Judgment under his Hand. Writs of
Intrusion were presently served upon the Chief Gentlemen in the Country, to
Compel them, and others by the Terror of their Example, to take Patents for the
Lands which they had quietly possessed for Fifty or Sixty Years together. For
these Patents there were such Exorbitant Prices demanded, that Fifty Pounds
would not purchase for its owner, an Estate not worth Two Hundred; nor could
all the Money and Movables in the Territory, have defrayed the Charges of
Pattenting the Lands.

If the Harpies were at any Time a little out of Money, they Invented Pretenses
to Imprison the Best Men in the Country, and though there Appeared not the least
Information of any Crime against them, yet they were put unto intolerable
Expenses, and the Benefit of the Habeas Corpus was denied unto them. Judge
Dudley knows this, and we suppose he has not forgotten either Colonel
Saltonstal, or Major Appleton. Picked Juries were commonly used, for the Trouble
of Honest and Worthy Men, and they were hurried out of their own Counties to be
tried, where Juries for their Turn were not likely to be found there. Judge
Dudley knows this; and we suppose he remembers the famous Mr. Morton.

In short, all things were going to Wreck, but yet Col. Dudley was like to
enrich himself and his Family in the general Ship-wreck. There lies the Mystery!

These things, and many more such things, are asserted in the Book aforesaid,
not only by the Oaths of many honest Gentlemen, but also by a Declaratian
Signed by the Honorable Hands of Judge Stoughton, and Major General Winthrop,
and Colonel Shrimpton, and other Members of the Council.

The World has heard how narrowly Col. Dudley escaped a De-Witting for these
his Follies, from the enraged People in the Revolution. Being then sent over a
Prisouer to England, he with the rest, were here set at Liberty. He returned,
with a Commission for the Place of Chief Judge in the Province of New York,
where his first Work, after his Arrival was, to Condemn to Death, the
Lieutenant Governor of the Province, and another Gentleman, for not
surrendering the Government before Governor Slaughter arrived with his
Commission. The Condemnation and Execution of these two Gentlemen, was a Bloody
Business: It was afterward Examined in Parliament, where Colonel Dudley
underwent a Confusion which will never be worn off; and Mr. Constantine Phips,
Prosecuted the Matter with so much Demonstration, that Eminent Persons in both
Houses, declared it, A Barbarous Murder; King, Lords, and Commons, did as good
as declare it so, and by an Act of Parliament Revoked the Attainder of the
Murdered Gentlemen. On this Occasion, Judge Stoughton, (who was yet always
known to be as Partial to Col. Dudley and his Interest, as any Man in New
England) said to some of his Friends, what he had formerly been heard to say
unto others, Alas, to get a little Money, he would make his own Father hold ^p
his hand at the Bar. There, Gentlemen, you have again the Key to explain the
Matter; which because you cant see through, you Firmly Believe as you do!

After many Years Absence from his Family, my Lord Bellamont, the Governor of
New England Dies. Col. Dudley by many fair Promises, both to Gentlemen here,
and at his own Home, obtains Recommendations for a Succession in the
Government. He had not been long in the Government, before the following
MEMORIAL was sent over to London.

A MEMORIAL On the Behalf of the Province of the Massachusett's Bay, in
NEW ENGLAND; Relating to the Administration of their present Governor,
Colonel Dudley.
I. ONE Principal Grievance, which Comprehends many under it, is, The Course of
Bribery, which runs through the Governors Administration, whereby the Queen's
Government is greatly Exposed in a Country where Bribery has rarely, if ever
before this, been known to be Practiced. The Governor having brought in his
Son to be Attorney General, this Corruption is the more effectually carried on
between them, unto the great Oppression of the People.

Only two Instances, among many, shall be reported in this Memorial.

1. Certain People having purchased Land at a New Plantation called Nashoba,
and wanting a Confirmation of their Title, by an Act of the General Assembly,
as is Usual in such Cases) they could not have the Governor's Assent unto the
Act, without a Bribe of a Thousand Acres of the best Land, and in the Center of
the Plantation, and to the Ruin of the rest.

2. Also, a Tract of Land at Nipmuck, belonging to Nine or Ten Partners, when
both Houses in the General Assembly had passed the Bill, to Allow their Title,
(as was Requisite by an Old Law of the Country) the Governor would not Sign
the Act, until he had a Bribe of Twenty Pounds, and one whole Share of the
Land, which was valued at One Hundred and Fifty Pounds more.

But, if a Commission of Enquiry could be Obtained, there would be such
Practices of this Nature Discovered as are hardly to be P^rrallel'd.

II. The Governor, merely to gratify his own Arbitrary Will and Pleasure did
for some while Refuse to fill up the necessary Number of Judges; by which
Means, the Courts dropped, and the Course of Justice was Obstructed; and the
oppressed People were Defeated in their Suits, to the Damage of many Hundreds
of Pounds.

III. There have been odd Collusions with the Pirates of Quelch's Company, of
which one Instance is, That there was extorted the Sum of about Thirty Pounds
from some of the Crew, for Liberty to walk at certain times in the Prison Yard;
and this Liberty having been allowed for Two or Three Days unto them, they were
again confined to their former wretched Circumstances.

IV. An Army of Volunteers went out, and did Good Service upon the French and
Indian Enemy at Acady. They were encouraged by an Act of the Governor and
General Assembly, which promised the Soldiers a certain Share of the Plunder.
When the Soldiers returned, some Officers, without their Consent or Knowledge,
and before the Division of the Plunder, made the Governor a considerable
Present out of it; whereupon he so managed the Matter with the said Officers,
as to cheat and cut on the Soldiers of near one Half that the Act (...) the
Assembly had promised them! When the House of Representatives applied
themselves to the Governor on this Occasion, they could get nothing from him.
By this means, no more Volunteers are like to appear in her Majesty's Service.

The Governor's manner is, to trample on the Assembly with gross Indignities;
and such as they have never received from former Governors. Nor can they have
any Redress of Grievances, though many have been from time to time represented.

And when Bills for the Payment of the just Debts of the Province, are
presented to him to be signed, he has declared, he would not sign them, except
he were himself gratified with Sums demanded of them.

On these, and many more such Accounts, it is humbly conceived that it would be
much for her Majesty's In terest, if a more acceptable Governor were placed
over that Province.

This was the Memorial, but because there was no Body to prosecute it, it fell
to the Ground.

Much about the same time, there came to Light a little more of Col. Dudley's
Designs upon the New Charter of the Province. It seems, he was as willing to do
the same Kindness for this, that he did for the Old One; and that he was at
this very time doing for the Colony of Connecticut; which, if it were
accomplished, would lay the Country open to an Innundation of Calamities. His
Son Paul, (the great Instrument of his Oppressions) writes over to his Friend
in London, a Letter, wherein are these following Words.

Boston, 12th Jan. 1703, 4. Dear KINSMAN,
I Confess, I am ashamed almost to think, I should be at Home so long, and not
let you know of it till now. Though after all, a New England Correspondence is
scarce worth your having. -- I reser you to See P. Dudley's Original Letter to
Mr. W. Wharton, Printed at London, with somo Necessary Queries.
Mr. -- for an Account of every thing, especially about the Government, and the
College, both which are discoursed of here, in Chimney Corners, and Private
Meetings, as confidently as can be. If there should be any Occasion, you must
be sure to stir your self and Friends, and show your Affection and Respect to
my Father who Loves you well, and bid me Tell you so. -- This Country will
never be worth living in for Lawyers and Gentlemen, till the CHARTER IS TAKEN
AWAY. My Father and I sometimes talk of the Queen's establishing a COURT OF
CHANCERY in this Country; I have writ about it to Mr. Blathwayt: If the Matter
should succeed, you might get some Place worth your Return, of which I should
be very glad. If I can any ways serve you or your Friend:, pra^ signify it to
(Dear SIR,)

Your Affectionate Friend, And Humble Servant, Paul Dudley.


This Apocryphal Epistle of Paul, [not a Saint Paul, we can assure ye!] needs
no Commentary! -- But,

These are Old Stories, we must now come to some New Ones.

SECT. II.
BY Letters from New England, we are informed how Matters past in the last
Sessions of their General Assembly, which was in October and November 1707. One
would have imagined, that the Mast-Fleet, which brings us our Letters of
Intelligence, had been the Gousolidager, coming back with Intelligence from the
World in the Moon: For such things could never have happened but among a People
very Lunatic -- And. First let us begin, as in good Manners bound, with the
Upper House.

Their Governor Dudley, produced to the Council, the Copy of an Address to the
Queen's Majesty, signed by above Twenty Gentlemen in London, in which, out of
the Respect to a Country for which they were more generously concerned, than
some that were under greater Obligations, they Petitioned for Dudley's Removal
from his Government; alleging, among other weighty Reasons, That he had
Countenanced a private Trade and Correspondence with Her Majesty's Enemies, the
French, and the Indians which are in their Interests. He required his
Counselors immediately to clear him from these Imputations. He came upon them
with his Demand, on the Saturday next, when they were, (as they usually then
are) in the Hurry of breaking up. It Is the time when the Governor commonly
makes any thing to pass, that either House must be either Tricked or Tired
into. Three or Four of the Council, particularly Brown, Sewall, and Pain,
prayed, That since the thing was both New and Weighty, it might be put off till
Monday. The Governor, with a boisterous Fury required them to do it
immediately; and they did it immediately: At once they rushed into a Vote,
wherein they say,

Upon reading the Address offered Her Majesty, against his Excellency our
present Governor, Signed, Nath. Higginson, etc. We firmly Believe, and are of
Opinion, the Allegations therein, of the Governors Trading, or allowing a
Trade with Her Majesty's Enemies, the French, and Indians in their Interests,
is a Scandalous and Wicked Accusation. Passed Unanimously.

Isaac Addington, Secr.

The Council being Brow-beaten into such a Vote, one of that Board, namely, Mr.
Samuel Sewall, who is also a Judge of the Superior Court; but a Person of
unspotted Integrity, thought himself bound in Conscience to exhibit a
Remonstrance against this Rash Vote: His Relation as a Brother in Law to the
Governor, did not get the Upper-hand of his Conscience; but he Presented his
Remonstrance to the Board, and had it entered on File; from whence one of our
Correspondents has obiained a Copy. It Is as follows.

Tuesday, November 25. 1707.
THE Reasons of my withdrawing my Vote, from what was Passed in Council upon
Saturday, Nov. the first, relating to an Address offered to her Majesty,
Signed, Nath. Higginson, etc.

I. Because my Motion, for leaving the Consideration of it till the Monday
following, was not admitted; and it was entered upon, and passed about Noon, in
a very short time; being a Matter of great Concernment to our Liege Lady, Queen
ANNE, to the Province, to his Excellency our Governor, and to the Council and
Representatives.

II. The Governor's Personal Interest was much in it, and therefore I humbly
conceive, the Vote ought to have been Debated and Framed by the Members of the
Council apart by themselves, in the Absence of the Governor.

III. The Words [ firmly Believe,] and [ always Apparent,] were never pleasing
to me. And now, I do not firmly Believe, that the Governor did no way allow
Mr. Borland, and Capt. Vetch, their Trading Voyage to Her Majesty's Enemies the
French.

Qui^non vetat Peccare, cum possit, Jubet.

Not that I suspect, the Governor designed to hurt the Province; but to
Gratify Grateful Merchants. And I readily and thankfully acknowledge the
Governors Orders for the Defense of the Frontiers, to be truly Excellent; The
Gentleman, with his usual Goodness, is willing to make the best of any Good
Thing. His Meaning is, that when the New-Englanders had the good Fortune to be
advised of an Approach of the Enemy, the Governor would (which was a wonderful
Piece of Sagacity) order a Number of Soldiers to repair to the Frontiers.
both respecting the suitableness of the Orders themselves, and the Quickness
of their Dispatch: And Ibless God for the Success that has attended them.

IV. I have been Acquainted with Mr. Nathanael Higginson these Forty Years;
and I cannot judge, the offering this Address to Her Majesty, to be in him a
Scandalous and Wicked Accusation, unless I know his Inducements. And I fear,
this Censure may be of ill Consequence to the Province in time to come, by
discouraging Persons of Worth and Interest, to venture in appearing for them,
though the Necessity should be never so great.

Samuel Sewall.


Though this Gentleman has thus recalled his Vote, (and another Gentleman present
in the Council, never had a Vote put to him) and he insisted on it, as we are
informed, that it would be a Direct Falsehood in Matter of Fact. Now to call
this an Unanimous Vote, yet we find it was after this ordered to be printed in
the Boston News Letter, with a PASSED UNANIMOUSLY. We cannot conceive how the
Council could order a Direct Falsehood to be Printed, if their Souls were their
own. Or, if they would so misrepresent Judge Sewall and Col. Higginson,
(Brother to Mr. Nathanael Higginson) it may be they did also misrepresent
themselves, in saying, they firmly Believe, when it is strange if they do
really Believe it.

Notwithstanding their News-Letter says, their Vote was passed Unanimously,
Worthy Gentlemen in New England have given us such a Character of their
Winthrop, their Hutchinson, their Foster, and some others of them, as that we
cannot Firmly Believe, that they ever consented to have the Hon Mr. Higginson
so stigmatized in the Boston Infamous News Letter. Nor is it to be imagined
that they are all so Parado^ical, as we hear some of them are; for you cannot
with a Beetle beat it into some of them, but that if a Vote obtain a Majority,
it is to be called an Unanimous Vote. We have been told, and we thought so by
hearing those talk who came from thence) that they Speak as good English at
Boston, as they do in London: But we perceive, in the Council Chamber there,
they begin to forget the English Tongue, and they have lost the Sense of the
Word Unanimous.

One may guess at the Politic Reason, which drew too many of them into that
undeliberate, inconfiderate Vote aforesaid; by what one of them (a principal
Stickler for Majority being Unanimity) uttered in a Barber's Shop, with so much
Openness, that the Noise of it has reached over hither to London, That it was
best for us, to keep this Governor, (though he had done very Bad things) for he
had sufficiently spunged upon the People, and had now got Money enough; he was
now satisfied. [No, Sir, by your Leave, it is the Thirst of a Dropsy!] And had
pri^ately promised the Council, he would do so no more. Whereas, if another
Governor come, he will come hungry, and we must be squeezed over again.

Had the Gentlemen of the Council caused their Vote to run in some softer
Terms; as, That they were sorry such Eminent Persons, as Mr. Higginson; and Mr.
Mason, etc. had been imposed upon by such Informations, as produced their
Address to Her Majesty. This had been somewhat like Gentlemen, though not like
Councellers: For some of them own, they had never seen any of the Affidavits
made before the Queen and Council, nor any of those other things a^on to be
produced, when they passed their Hasty Vote. But for them now to run upon these
Eminent Persons, with a Clamor of Scandalous and Wicked Accusations; yea,
Publicly to Stigmatize them in their Infamous News Letter, as being Scandalous
and Wicked Accusers! Truly therein they have not Honored themselves. The
Higginson they vilify, is a Person every way much Superior to the Best of them:
The Honor and Figure he has obtained by his good Conduct in the East Indies,
will not be impaired by any Affronts from the West Indies. The Mason whom they
throw Dirt upon, was a Member of their Council, before a great part of them
were so; and served their Agents with no small Assistances.

It Is unintelligible! Why will the Massachuset Counselors permit themselves to
be made the Tools of their Governor's particular Desigus? Why will Counselors
that are chosen by the People, be less concerned for, less faithful to the
People, than the Counselors in the other Plantations, who are not by the
Choice of the People brought unto the Board; where yet we see, they often prove
Thorns in the Sides of Evil Governors? Will you give your Friends at a
Thousand Leagues distance from you, leave to advise you? We make no doubt,
there are wise and good Men at your Board. We make no doubt, you are often
over-voted by some of your Brethren, coming from your Country Towns, who are
not overstockt with more than One of those Qualities. But where is your
Courage? In Truth, it is ths least of your Talents; you must get a little more
of it. You should be ready to say before the Governor's Face, what you talk so
freely behind his Back, that the Report of it reaches over the Atlantic.

You know, That when the Governor will have any thing pass among you, all your
humble Entreaties to have a few Hours Time to think upon it, signify nothing;
he will have it go Just Now, and you let it go. So you are ever now and then
pushed into you know not what your selves, and you durst not Lisp your
Dissatisfaction. You know, that when Officers are to be Elected, the Governor
must issue out a Notification for a Gen^ral Council, to come together at the
Day; but on the Day the thing is rarely done; it is put off two or three Days
till you are dispersed, and a Nick of Time is taken, in which Elections are
carried on, which we hear, much disoblige the Public; and Justices are created
which have brought the Queen's Commissions under such Disparagement, that we
hear many of the best Gentlemen among you, scorn to accept of them.

You know that things are managed with Tricks. Frauds and Juggles, without
Numbers; and yet, you durst not Open your Mouths. You cannot but know, That
your Governor ever now and then, will violently assert a thing, and you assent
to it: Anon, in the very same Sessions of the Court, he will as violently
assert a thing Diametrically Opposite unto it, (as the Service of some ill
Cause may drive him to) and you durst not say, that you don't Assent to that
also.

We understand that your former Governor, the Ear^ of Bellamont, did not use
to Treat you so; and was it for this, that you offered such an Indignity unto
that Noble Person, as to vote, The Taking off his Speech from the File, as soon
as Colon^ ^udley (being one of Tory Principles, which my Lord was not) at his
first coming moved you to it, and made you the Tools of his Malice against the
Earl of Bellamont, for sticking so close to him in the Parliament, upon the
BARBAROUS MURDER (as he would always call it) of Leister and Milburn? Your
Governor with a Torrent of Language, and Mixture of Coaksing and Bouncing, and
Coundent Assertions of Things (True or False, it is all one, yon cannot Disprove
them) has been too many for you. We advise you to Unite more together, a
sufficient Number of you, and present strong Remonstrances on such Occasions,
if the Successor (which we are satisfied he will not,) should go on in the late
Methods. And we advise you, That you would not be so monstrously afraid of the
Governor's putting his Negative upon you, the last Wednesday of May. Should
you be Negativ'd out of the Council, for your Fidelity to your Country, it
would be a much greater Honor to you than to be there, and no great Honor to
them that are left behind: But you are already chosen, and sworn to serve till
others are chosen; if the Representatives are not satisfied in the Reasons of
the Governor's Negative, they will declare, That they will not proceed unto
another Choice. We would beg their Pardon, that they presume to give them this
Advice. Then do you pluck up your Spirits: Nothing but an Act of the Assembly
can remove a chosen Counselor. You may appear, and assert your Seat at the
Council Board. And you may do it with such apparent Evidences of being acted by
nothing but a Zeal for the Public, that you may do it without any
Dishonorable Charge of being Immodest, or Intruders. Without consulting the
Stars, we can foretell to ye, That if you resolve to keep always in the
obsequious Strain, you will at last rowse the Representatives both to remove
several of you, and to dispute several Powers which you pretend unto; and
especially (...) that of being able to Sit by your selves in the Time of the
General Assembly; and by your Vote (without the Governor's) to hamper the
People with a Third Negative, (besides the Queen's and the Governor's) which
your Agent here says, Your Charter never intended for you.

SECT. III.
WE have seen how the Blanching Business went on in the Council; Shall we now
see how it Proceeded among the Representatives? We have been told a very odd
thing, That the Counselors will sometimes Outwardly Comply with a V^e, which
they Inwardly approve not, in hopes that it will never be Carried in the Lower
House. But, if this were an Honest, yet it is no Prudent Experiment: There is
more than a little Danger in it. The Story of the Upper House, has the Truth of
it enough confirmed by Judge Sewall's Instrument of Revocation, if we had (...)
had the more Ample Relation, both from Packets and Passengers newly arrived
here. For the Story of the Lower House, we have it with a Confirmation (if it
be possible) more Authentic. For here are come over Letters from a great Part
of the House, unto that Honorable Friend of New England, and of all Good Men,
Sir Henry Asbhurst; one signed by Seven, and afterward another signed by about
Thrice that Number; both to the same Effect. By these we understand how
Notoriously the World is imposed upon.

On the Fifth of November the Plot begun to operate. A Message was brought by
sundry Counselors, from their Board, to incite the House, that they would
concur with Their Vote for the Governor's Vindication. But the House for
diverse Days declined to meddle with it; and then the like Message was brought
again to the House, by a greater Number of Counselors. The House being thus at
length drawn in, to consider this Dirty Matter, there appeared Mr. John Nelson,
who having sent unto Port Royal, one Hogshe^d of Dry Goods, a Parcel of Iron
Pots and Scythes, etc. by a Flag of Truce, whereof Capt. Rouse was Commander,
now declared. That he had the Governor's Allowance for it, and Capt. Rouse
being examined, made the same Declaration.

But this was a Trifle to the next: The Gentlemen aforesaid, we believe had no
Traitorous Design of supplying the Queen's Enemies. But, when the Fort at
Port Royal had no dry Lodgings for the Soldiers; nothing but few Thatched
things, that also rendered it more combustible to the Fire of the Besiegers;
Now, to supply the Fort with Nails to Shingle and Board their Barecks! There
appeared Mr Samuel Baker, who produced unto the House the Original Invoice, of
things which he Shipped for the Governor and the Commissary at Port Royal; with
an Allowance for them, under Governor ^dley's own Hand. There is no need of
Transcribing all the Articles, these are enough.

Eighty Thousand of Shingle (...) Twenty Thousand, Ditto, Board. One Dozen of
Black-Hafted Table Knives. One Hundred Weight of good Butter. Two Barrels of
Mackerel. One Piece of good Searge. One Cask of Passado-Wine. Some Rice, etc.
I Know no Inconvenience in the Particulars above, and therefore Allow it.

J. DUDLEY.

These things were Shipped on Board a French Vessel, called, A Flag of Truce
(Anglice, of Trade) Capt. D^ Chafeau Commander. It was done at the very time,
when the Governor and Assembly, were Fining Vetck and Company, for a Trade as
little Criminal; and when an Act of the Massachuset Province had made it
Capital. Some of the Council would feign have persuaded the House, that there
was a Cipher (their own Namesake In the Council,) added unto the 8, and the 2,
of the Nails. But Baker's Confession had spoilt that idle Whim. The Governor's
Friends, his Majors, Captains, Justices, and Feather-Caps in the House, and the
meaner Slaves of the Trencher, used all imaginable Artifices to Vindicate him:
And yet, when it came to a Vote on November the Ninteenth, Whether, after
strict Enquiry, the House could clear his Excellency of Managing, or
Countenancing a Private Trade with the French and Indian Enemies, The Vote
passed in the Negative, with a very great Majority. About Forty Five Members,
more than Two to One, Voted, That they could not clear him. He had, according
to the New Massachuset Sense of the Word, An Unanimous Condemnation.

On the Day following, there was a long Conference of Two Hours, held between
the Two House, and chiests managed by the Governor. At this Conference there
occurred several pretty little Things, which might be (...) at the Coffee-House,
but se^^e worthy to be (...) in a more a more serious Narrative. We'll mention
only two of them,

A Counselor who had been a mighty decrier of the Governor while he was under
his Negative, upon his Readmission, becomes an Espouser of his Interest. This
Gentleman greatly Exposed himself, by saying to the Assembly, There is no Trade
but there is some Returns: I pray, What Return were there? How can you say,
this was a Trade carried on? This became a Byword in the Town. They say, the
Merchants of Boston often to their Sorrow, Trade without Returns: And we could
wi^h, that every body here in London, who has Traded for Boston, could say,
There had always been Returns.

Again, The Governor in his Flourishes, tells the Assembly, To support the
Queens Enemies with an Unlawful Trade, is to fond them your Beef and your Pork,
and not such things as are in this Invoyce. An Unlucky Old Man in the (...)
(they say from a Town called Woburn^ Replied, It Is very True, an't like your
Excellency, and your Butter, and your May-krill! -- Which gave such a Sting,
That the Assembly saw, that if he be an Happy Man who catches a Mackrel, yet an
Unhappy Man may be catched with a Mackrel.

The next Day after this Conference, and after (...) Governor's Violent
Protestations of his own Innocence, (as the Letters of the Representatives
assure us) the following Vote was again Pressed upon the House, That we firmly
Believe, and are of Opinion, that the Allegations in the Address (to which the
Council referred) of the Governor's Trading, or allowing a Trade with Her
Majesty's Enemies the French, and the Indians in their Interests, it a
Scandalous and Wicked Accusation. Still the Vore passed as formerly, in the
Negative. The Squeamish Representatives, it seems, had not such Stomachs of
Ostriches, as to Digest an Hundred Thousand Iron Nails at once; not would they
Believe (no, though Counselors told them so^) that Nails were not Iron, The
Governor's Friends were (...) at their Wit's Ends; -- And in Humble wi^e
besought the House, That they would confine their Vo^^ unto the Particular
Trade of Vetch, Borland and Lawson. And it was urged, that Borland and Lawson
had cleared the Governor; (the Sham of the Grateful Merchants you shall hear
anon.) Hereupon the Flexible Honest Men, perfectly Worried, and Wearied our of
their Lives, by Three Weeks Alterations, did so many go over, as to make a sort
of a Vote of it. But the Conclusion of their Letters to Sir Henry Ashburst, (a
Gentleman whom New England can never sufficiently Requite) is, Your self, and
all Persons may Judge; how far the Vote of this House does extend to the
Vindicating his Excellency from being a Countenancer of Trade with the Queen's
Enemies.

We have already intimated, how the Governor comes to have so many Friends in
the House; that are so set upon doing him Justice, right or wrong. Besides the
Caresses of the Table, which are enough to dazzle an Honest Countryman, who
thinks every Body Means what he Speaks; the Influence which Preferments and
Commissions have upon little Men, is innexpressible. It must needs be a Mortal
Sin, to disoblidge a Governor, that has enabled a Man to command a whole
Country Town, and to strut among his Neighbors, with the Illustrious Titles
of, Our Major, and The Captain, or His Worship. Such magnificent Grandeurs make
many to stagger Egregiously! If it be but proposed in the Assembly, that any
Mismanagements of the Governor be Enquired into, we are informed, that some of
those Officers have been so insolent, as to move, That he who made the Proposal
should be set in the Pillory. We perceive, the well-affected part of the
Assembly take much Notice of this. And it seems, there was in this Assembly,
one Occasion Odder than the rest, to take Notice of it.

There was a Pepresentative of Ipswich, who formerly failing in with the
Interests of the Country, so provoked Col. Dudley, that in a Printed Pamphlet,
published by him, (or the Person who wrote for him, so as to make it He) he
reproached the Country, That such a Figure should be made in the Assembly, by
one who was then a practicing Sow-Gelder. This practicing Sow-Gelder, (as Mr.
Dudley calls him) was a Member of this Assembly, and unto the Surprise of the
whole House, tacked about, and went over to Col. Dudley's Interests; though it is
not many Months ago, that we have (now in London) his Hand with others, unto an
Honest Letter to that Honorable Person, Sir Henry Ashburst, to solicit his
Endeavors to deliver the Country from a Plot against the Charter, and all the
Courts of Justice in it, with a Sham Court of Chancery, (or rather of Bribery)
which Gov. Dudley was then pursuing. We are told, he has (for we know not what
Reasons) a Number in the House* who resign themselves up to him, for him to do
almost what he will with them; they follow his Dictates. The main things that
have been carried in the late Assembly at Boston, otherwise than they should
have been, are owing to his Dexterous Operations. Every Body said, This Man has
in his Eye a Bribe, as the Reward of his Apostasy. He Will certainly be made a
Justice, as soon as his Drudgery in gaining the Vote aforesaid, is over! It
came to pass; -- As soon as the Sham Vote, which has abused the World in your
Foolish News Letter yonder, was Gained, the Governor draws the Council in, to
Consent, unto their own Immortal Honor, that this Gentleman Sow-Gelder should
be made a Justice of the Peace! Fie Gentlemen, What do you do? -- And so the
Worshipful of the County of Essex, have the practicing Sow-Gelder aforesaid,
(it was Mr. Dudley who taught us to call him so!) sit on the Bench with them.
Whether the Cattle are in less Danger, or the People in more, since this
Promotion, we who are Strangers to the Man, except by hearsay, know not; we
suppose there never was a Sow-Gelder made a Justice, except in New England, and
that not till Dudley was their Governor.

But, it were good Advice for the People of Ne^ England, in choosing
Representatives, to beware of choosing any, who have their Obligations to their
Governors, for their Preferments and Employments. The fewer you have in your
Assemblies under such Temptations, the more Faithfully are your Affairs like to
be carried on. You will Pardon Strangers, if their Good Will to you, make them
so far Medlers, as to offer you their Opinion.

SECT. IV.
THE House of Representatives then Firmly Believe, and are of Opinion, That
their Governor was not Concerned in Trading with Vetch, Borland, and Lawson.
Others do Firmly Believe the contrary. Because, diverse Traders have owned, and
said before many Witnesses, that their Governor did know, and allow of what
they did; Vetch does himself Confess it, in his Petition to the Queen. And when
one of them swears in the Governor's Vindication, he only means, that the Gov.
was not concerned as a Merchant or Partner with them. He Shipped nothing; there
was nothing Shipped on his Account. All this is nothing to the Purpose. And though
Col. Dudley should be Clear of having any thing to do with these Three Grateful
Merchants, yet there is another who is able to make discoveries.

In the same Condemnation with the Three aforesaid, there was at this Time,
under Imprisonment, by Virtue of the Sentence which the General Assembly had
illegally, (and it now appears Oppressively) passed upon him, for a part in an
unlawful Trade, one Captain Rouse. The last General Assembly growing sensible
of his Condition, Voted his being let out upon Bail, that he might enjoy his
Liberty. But for a Reason, which he will tell in due Time, the Vote was in a
great Measure Eluded.

It is Reported by some now in London. That the Assembly's Vote to set Rouse at
Liberty, was made very Insignificant, by the means of one said ^o be a Tory
Judge, one Leveret. And they say that Dudley has made that Tory Lawyer to be
President of their College. No Question but the Lawyer will bring up Hopeful
Young Divines, to be sent hither for my Lord of London to Ordain them. We hear
that they have sung the Gloria Patri in their Colledge-Hall already, and that
several of their Clergy stood up at it. An Auspicious beginning under their
Lawyer President, who, we also hear, was Chosen a Lieutenant of their Artillery
Company at Boston, the last Summer. Such Reports as these, make their Friends
here, think that the People in New England are running Mad.

But to proceed with Capt. Rouse. Several of his Letters are come to London, by
which we Understand, That he having been sent unto Port Royal, on a Service for
the Public, in which he did Good Service, returned Home under a Languishing
Sickness. A way being by this first Voyage opened for a Private Trade between
Port Royal and Boston, he was Invited into a new Trading Voyage; being told, He
had Eaten the Sour, he should now eat the Sweet. Governor Dudley told him,
His main Business was to Steer clear of the Officers of the Custom-House. And
the matter was proposed so Advantageously, that some Body pressed him to make
the Governor a Present of an Hundred Pounds, for the Liberty and Advantage
which was to be allowed him. Because he lay Sick, he had nothing, and saw
nothing aboard, but what had been Shipped by others Concerned in the Voyage. He
went and made the best of his Goods; and for this, and nothing but this, he
underwent a Fine of Twelve Hundred Pounds.

Diverse Persons, and especially a certain Lady, came to him several times in
the Prison, before his Trial; and this as from the Governor, to persuade him
and the rest, to Petition the Assembly to take the Trial into their own Hands;
(which the Governor had himself proposed unto the Assembly) with many fair
Promises, that in a Week's time, or very quickly, the Governor would so manage
the Assembly, as to bring them abroad again, without any further Trouble.
Continual Communications passed between Roxbury and the Prison; and those good
Offices were done, for which Paul Dudley, the Governor's Son, received of
Borland and Lawson (as they have affirmed) at one time, a Present of Eighteen
Pounds. They came with frequent Messages, to keep Captain Rouse in a good,
pliant, silent Humor, and prevent his telling of Tales. Just before his Trial,
a Messenger came from the Governor to him, to Desire him, That if the
Governor should say any Sharp Things to him, he would not Retort any thing, or
Misconstrue it; for he might assure himself he was his hearty Friend. He would
carry on the General Assembly as far as was Convenient, but then, at last,
bring off the Matter, and prevent their doing any Harm. Capt. Rouse accordingly
kept Counsel; the Trial went on, and the Fine anon, proves as we told ye,
Twelve Hundred Pounds. The Governor's Son, could not demand of Rouse, as he
did of Cauphin, a Present of Twenty Pounds to the Governor, for bringing his
Fine so low.

After this, Capt. Rouse is frequently Solicited to make the Governor a
Present of Five or Six Hundred Pounds; with Assurances, that the Governor
would find a way for his Liberty, though he were now Imprisoned by an Act of the
Assembly. He still Refused it; resolving to wait for Her Majesty's
Dissallowance of that Illegal Act. He wrote Letters to the Governor,
Entreating him to procure a Mittigation of his Hard Circumstances, because he
had done nothing, but with Countenance from his Excellency. The Governor told
the Messenger, that Rouse must Write another Sort of Letter to him; which the
Messenger Explained, with telling him, that he must Write, That the Governor
had no Concern with what was done. But this he would never do. We hear that he
continues Waiting for an Opportunity, to bring more fully to Light, many other
things, besides those that have been Mentioned.

These being the main Strokes of what Captain Rouse has thought sit as yet to
Declare of his Case; we don't Wonder that the Practicing Sow-Gelder thought fit
to Castrate the Vindicating Vote of Rouse's Name: But we may well Wonder, that
the House would be drawn into a Vote, that was designed for a Blind, and a
Sham, to Impose on People at a Distance; and yet, at such a Distance as we are,
we can see through it! At the same time, the Counselors and Representavies,
even the most Ancient Blanchers among them, would (as we are assured) freely
say to the Expostulators of their Conduct, which they every where met withal,
That if the Governor had put them upon clearing him from gross Briberies and
Corruptions, they could not have cleared him. Well, but why don't they search
into those things? For they have a Tendency to Debauch and Ruin the Country,
and make it a vile, and a Forlorn Country. We are told, their Answer is, It Is
too Big a Thing for them to Manage: They Wish the Queen would grant a
Commission of Enquiry. And People have been afraid to tell what they know; for
the Governor and his Son, between them, have (thought they) Numberless Ways to
come up with 'em, and, it may be, they will Press their Sons to the Castle, or
elsewhere; from whence they shall be sold unto Merchant Ships, and sent out of
the Country. Or, they may shortly have some Cause in Court, where the Queen's
Attorney (the Governor's Son) Reigns Lord and King; and will take Effectual
Care that the Cause go against them. Others go on, That these are little
things; they do so in England; such things must be born with! Which is indeed,
a Cruel Reproach to the Queens Government. And lastly, the Sharpest of all will
tell ye, Oh! the Governor is our Father; we must not be such Sons of Cham, as
to uncover the nakedness of our Father. And thus until the New Governor
arrive, who being a Man of Integrity, will Honor himself by a Strict Enquiry
into such things, there is like to be no Distinct Account brought in to Infor^
the World.

What wicked Bribes, by a Juggling Management between the Governor and his
Son, [for, as we Told you before, You must go to my Son!] are Extorted on all
the Occasions in the World!

(...) have been let out of Prison for a (...).

(...) Men in the Officers Hands, upon a Judgment for (...) have by the
Governor's Arbitrary Command been (...) Liberty!

(...) Criminals in the Hands of Justice, being frighted (...) Prospect of
their Punishment, into a Willingness (...) Sea, the Governor sends an Order to
the Keep(...) sell them for Tea Pounds; and so they are sent (...) to Sea!

What a wicked Trade is earried on of Selling Men from (...) Castle, etc. to
Merchantmen; by which, poor Men (...) their Sons Kidnapp'd into the Indies,
where the (...) catch them, and they perish in their Prisons! And what
intolerable Pensions are paid by Officers for their Places; (by which, and the
like means, the War, which Impoverishes the whole Country, has Enriched the
Governor) which introduces a World of Mismanager (...)! And, Whether a
Lieutenant, whose Salary is but Sixty Pounds a Year, must not pay Thirty Pounds
a Year Pension to Son Paul, or be turned out! Cummultes atlis.

What would have been the Punishment of such Things in old King Alfred's Days?
These things make a (...) Cry, than can be stifled by the Noise of all your
silly (...).

We don't wonder to see the Addresses for such a Governor's Continuance, come
over hither, signed by his Commission Officers. They are but Addresses for
their own Continuance. The Royal Wisdom is not so to be Imposed on. But we
cannot but smile to see the Cl^gy of New England so easily drawn in to Sign
Addresses of this (...). We are glad, that we cannot see the Hands of the most
eminent Ministers to these Addresses. By which we gather, that the Governor
has sent his Emissaries (...) and there into Country Towns, and surprises their
(...) Ministers alone, and so many Arts of Insinuation (...), that they have
not Presence of Mind enough, to refuse a Subscription unto any thing that is
offered them. W^ do (...) see the Ministers of Boston, nor the Judicious Minist
of Ronbury, your Governours's Past^ to any of those (...) which you have been
wheedled into, not at all to your Credit here.

Certainly, when ^ese Honest Gentlemen come to see the Practices of their
Governor discovered, they will with Grief and Sh^ne reflect upon the
Addresses, by which they have too far made themselves Parties to such a
Governor. Some of them will consider, Whether they had not best follow the
Noble Pattern which their Judge Sewall has given them Gentlemen, Such things as
by common Fame, you know to be in the Conduct of your Governor, are not things
which must needs render a Man acceptable to (...), and to all Good Men. -- That
Expression were fitter for Pens of Roman Catholics, than of New England
Ministers. You ought, with some Remorse to make a Retractation of such a
Passage as that, which we hear (by Letters, for we have not seen it) is in one
of your Addresses. We hope you Teach your People better things!

You are generally, so fa^ as we hear, Good, Pious, Faithful Men, and Blessings
to your People. But if we may be worthy to advise you, we think, you would do
well to resolve, that you will never Sign Addresses of this Nature, till you
have had Opportunity in some Convention (if you have such Things, for we are
Strangers to your Methods) to Discourse with one another, how far it may be
Convenient.

We have heard, that of old Time, there were some Oxen, who had the Wisdom to
Resolve, that they would no, one of them, have any Talk with Monsieur the Lion,
apart: Allow us to tell you, if you go on Signing such Addresses, you will
strangely undermine your own Authority among your People, and Sacrifice your
own Reputation to your Governors. You Will tempt them to say, That you will set
your Hands to any thing. Your Predecessors would not have done as you have
done. And, what a Sword do such Addresses put into your Resolute Governors
Hands? He may now Oppress you, or any of yours, to the last Degree, and you
have Tied your yourselves up from ever Complaining of him. Were not GOD
merciful to you in removing such a Governor, you had Inslaved your Country
before you are aware of it. If you will permit such as are no Clergymen to
address you with Stories out of old Councils, we could tell you, That the First
Council of Orleans, A. C. 52. made a strange Decree, That if a Bishop Ordain a
Slave, to be a Priest, knowing him to be a Slave, he shall pay double the Price
of him to his Master. We know not well, what sort of a World it was when this
Decree was made. All that we move you to, Gentlemen, is, That at your next
General Council, you would make a Decree, That none of you shall be Slaves, or
do any thing that shall fasten the Fetters of Slavery upon your People. We
believe, that if you had known your Addresses would ha^ come too late, (as some
of them have) and exposed you to be Laughed at, you would have had more Wit,
than to have done as you have. We suppose you have heard what befell the Lord
Verulam, for permitting his Servant to take a Bribe, and what was lately done
to Sir J. T. because he did like your Governor, take a Bribe to promote the
passing a Bill. Certainly, if you had known your Governor had been guilty of
such Briberies, and other Male-Administrations, as not only Christian, but
Heathen Princes have punished with the greatest Severity, you would not have
signed your Ignorant Addresses.

Before we we proceed to give an Account of the late Shameful Expedition of the
New-Englanders against Port Royal, we shall take some farther Notice of what
Gentlemen worthy of Credit do assure us. One writes, that a Gentleman in
New England, when he first heard, that Col. Dudley had obtained a Commission to
be Governor there, said, That he could not believe, that a Man who had been a
Traitor to his Country; and an Apostate from the Religion in which he had been
Educated, and had Murdered two Men at New York, better, and more Righteous than
himself, would prove a good Governor.

Another Letter says, That the Misery of that People of late, has been in their
Counselors, as well (though not so much) as in their Governor. The Privileges
which they enjoy by their present Charter, are Great and Singular: For, no Man,
but such as the People shall nominate by their Representatives, can be of the
Governor's Council. Nor, may there be any Judge, or Justice of the Peace, but
what the Council thus chosen by the Representatives of the People shall Consent
unto. So that they may, and ought to be Shields unto the People, by keeping ill
Men from being in Places of Power. Yet we hear, that their Governor has made a
Number of very unfit Men to be their Justices; and this with the Consent of his
Council, without which he could make none. So that it seems, these Great
Privileges signify but very little, through the Busillanimity, and
Unfaithfulness of their Governor's Counselors, who will, too many of them,
consent to almost any thing that he would have them. Witness, besides the
things already mentioned, among other innumerable Instances, so many of them
consenting to have a Fort built at Pemaquid, and a stated Salary settled upon
the Governor, and other Officers, by which they had like to have enslaved
their Country at once.

The Representatives are also to be blamed, in that they do not Change their
Counselors. We know that they want Men fit for Government. Nevertheless, we
doubt not but in the large Province of Massachusett's, there may be found an
Hundred Men, as fit for Counselors, as S. S. or J. C. or P. T. [we deal more
tenderly with them, in giving but the First Letters of their Names, than they
have dealt with the Honorable Nathanael Higginson, whom they have, by Name at
large vilified, as a Scandalous and Wicked Accuser.] And others, who by their
Obsequiousness to Dudley have justly forfeited the Love of the People.

Had their Representative the Wisdom frequently to Change their Counselors, it
would make them more Careful to study the Interest of their People, and not
that so they may please their Governor, and Stigmatize better Men than
themselves, in their Boston News Letter, only because they Slandered Dudley in
a Matter of Truth.

We are also advised from New England, That Dudley has Exposed himself to the
whole Colony of Connecticut. They Dislike him there more Universally than in
the Massachuset's. For he is not in a Capacity to Bribe Men there with his
Commissions, Civil or Military. But he has joined a Hellish Malice with the
worst of Men, and greatest Enemies of the Charter belonging to that Colony, in
seeking to disturb them in the quiet Possession of their Lands. A Commission
was obtained, in which Dudley was Chief, but others, who pretended to have a
Right to great Tracts of Land, were put into the Commission, with Power to be
Judges of their own Pretensions; the like to this has been seldom known. But
when that Honorable Gentleman, who has Condescended to be their Agent,
discovered the Fraud of this Affair before the Queen in Council, Praying that
Her Majesty would pu^ some Remarkable Discountenance on said Dudley, that
Commission was soon Vacated, to his no little Confusion.

SECT. V.
THAT Honorable Person beforementioned, who is here Appearing on the Behalf
of one of the New-English Colonies, which Col. Dudley has been seeking to
Enslave, saw cause to Conclude his Petition, with a Complaint against him in
these Terms; Your Majesty's Name and Authority is abused to serve some Dark
Designs of his own. It seems he has been used to Dark Designs; but if ever Dark
Designs were to be suspected, it has been in the Business of that Late
Expedition to Port Royal; an Expedition, that besides the everlasting Disgrace
of it, has entirely Ruined the Country, and made it highly Necessary for
another Governor to be sent thither, to rescue that poor People, if it be
possible, from Extirpation. We have pretty Broad Hints of an Unlawful Trade
carried on with the Fort at Port Royal. And besides the things already
mentioned, it is well known, that Flags of Truce passed between Port Royal and
Boston, the Officers of the Custom-House at Boston, were Obstructed from going
aboard those Flags of Truce, that so the Trade carried on with the Enemy, might
be Concealed. And when Goods have been Siezed on Board the Flags of Truce, they
have been again taken out of the Hands of the Officers. But we must now proceed
to a Sadder Story. The Short of the Story is this. But the Dark Designs must be
left for another Judgment.

When the War first broke out, the People of New England, especially the
Trading part of the Country, and those that were more immediately concerned in
the Fishery, were very Uneasy to see Port Royal, which was then of no
considerable Strength, advancing into a Capacity of Distressing, if not ruining
the Province. It is so near, and so seated, as to have all immaginable
Advantage to Annimate, and Supply the Indians, by Land; and by Sea, with
Privateers, to Destroy their Fishery, and Ruin all their other Trade, by
intercepting, and taking their Vessels, both Outward and Inward Bound. Their
Fort was but an Embryo, and it was thought they might have been easily
Suppressed.

The New-Englanders understood by a Port-Royaller faling into their Hands, that
at Port Royal they had not yet Heard of the War broken out. Whereupon Governor
Dudley was earnestly Solicited, and his Leave Entreated by some, to go and
Destroy that Nest of Hornets, which was like to be so grievous a growing Plague
to the Country; with Offers to raise Volunteers sufficient for that Purpose;
But the Proposal was rejected; which made People suspect some Dark Designs, and
that Port Royal was reserved for some special Advantages not Obvious to the
Vulgar.

Afterward, when the Governor could no longer withstand the Cry of the
Country, Col. Church was allowed to go. The Assembly procured a Mortar Piece,
and provided Bombs, and other things convenient, and had some Eye upon the
Fort, which was then finished. Yet the said Church not only had the Taking of
the Fort left out of his Orders, but was positively Forbidden to Meddlewith it.
And he has since affirmed to many Gentlemen, that he could with all the Ease
imaginable have Taken the Fort, but that he had been so strictly and menacingly
Forbidden to meddle with it, that he durst not; but only ravaged the Naked
Country. Church's Soldiers were all Volunteers, and an Ast of the Assembly had
promised them a certain Share of the Plunder: But the Chief Commanders first
made a large Present out of it to the Governor; and then Hs, joining with
them, cut off the Army of Half that the Public Faith had Engaged them; which
it was feared, would have proved a lasting Discouragement to all Volunteers for
the Service of the Crown and the Country: And the House of Representatives
Remonstrated unto the Governor, this among other Grievances; but were rejected
with Obstinate Contempt.

The Reason pretended by the Governor, for prohibiting Church's meddling with
the Fort, was, That he had laid the Matter before the Queen, and had yet
received no Orders about it. Though the same Objection still continued, yet the
People being extremely desirous that a Period might be put to their Miseries
from Port Royal, and a way opened for the Deliverance of so many Scores of poor
English Captives, likely to Languish for ever in the Indian Wigwams, moved for
another Expedition above a Year ago. The Governor now gives a Commission for
Taking the Fort; but whether with any Dark Designs, we are yet in the Dark.
After the Instructions were drawn up, there was a Clause Tacked at the End of
them, which gave the Army leave to come off when they would, if they should
imagine, they could not presently Finish their Business to their Minds. It was
the Tacking this unobserved Clause at last, that confounded all, and brought on
a Story, which all the Letters from New England we have yet seen, say, They
Blush to Write it. And that is the Reason why we can give but a Short Account
of it. In short, there was an Army of as likely Men as can be imagined, the
best part of Two Thousand of them; and as well provided with Ammunition,
Provision, and all things Necessary, as a Willing Country could afford. But,
when it comes to Execution, quite Contrary to the best Advice of them who knew
the Place, the landed several Mil^^ off the Fort, when they might have Landed
close by, and probably at once have taken it. However, Land they did; and Drove
the Enemy before them, and Chased them into the Fort with much Courage, and all
the Encouragement that could be. The Men, to (...) them Justice, Fought like
Men, and would have d^ any thing in the World. -- But, lo, the Issue! The
Deptford-Man of War, which was Commodore of the Fleet, had Express Orders from
the Governor, That he should not Expose the Queen's Ship. Which Orders he
afterward Exposed in the Coffee-Houses. An Engineer was fetched from New York,
where the People from the beginning foretold what would be the Conclusion.

The Governor's Youngest Son, William Dudley, was there too, in the Quality of
a Secretary of War; and though he were little more than a Boy, yet he was a Son,
and the Army soon Cried out of being Boy-ridden. The General, a Man of no
Conduct, having Signalized something of a Belluine Courage in some Indian
Encounters, the Mob ('it is said) was set upon having him to be a Commander. They
landed as we said; but then they never made a Formal Demand of the Fort; they
never carried ashore a Mortar or a Field Piece; they never threw up a Shovelful
of Earth. The Business was so managed, between certain Persons, that although at
a Council of War, one Day it was Voted. That the Fort should be attacked, it
was by'nd by, Unvoted again. The Engineer had wrought upon sundry Captains, to
make 'em Believe, That the taking of the Fort was Impracticable. They most of
them gave it under their Hands to their Wise General, That it was their
Opinion, it was best for them to Draw off. The Soldiers began also to be
Dispirited, for some had Blabb'd among them a Secret, which, when it came to be
known, made them out of their Wits. Though it was known and Published here in
London, before the Fleet was Returned from Port Royal. The General Assembly had
Agreed and Engaged, That if the Fort were taken, it should immediately be
Demolished; and without this Assurance the Army would never have proceeded. But
some Body now, Indiscreetly let them Understand, that the Governor had some Dark
Designs, to put a Trick upon them, and had given him Orders not to demolish the
Fort: Whereupon the Enraged Army said, They had now nothing to do, but Fight
themselves into a Prison! They were mostly Good Livers at Home, and could not
bear the Thoughts on it, that half the Army, (no Man knowing whether it might
not be his own share) should be Confined there one long Winter i^ remote
Garrison, and perhaps, Two Winters after that; or until they should Buy
themselves a Release upon as hard Terms, as the poor Country Soldiers have, to
get out of the Castle at Boston. Well: A Packet is Dispatched unto the
Governor of Boston, to Signify their Opinion, and to Pray his Excellency's
further Pleasure. But in three or Four Days after the sailing of the Packet,
and before it was Possible for them to hear from Boston, they drew off in great
Confusion, and Weighed Anchor, and came away. But as they were in the midst of
their Dispersion, there came Orders to stop as many of them, as were together
at Casco-Bay. From thence they sent three Persons to acquaint the Governor
with the Miserable Affair; whereof one was the Engineer aforesaid. They had a
very melancholy, and almost a tumultuous Reception by the People; and when
they were, at their first Landing upbraided with Cowardice, their Answer still
was, That the Fault was at Home; and they had gone as far as their Orders would
bear them out; with sundry such Reflections, which bore hard upon the
Government. The Council were informed of this Discourse; But there was no
Notice taken of it. And though they were Chidden by the Governor, in the Council
Chamber, yet we understand, they were Hugged and Caressed by him below Stairs,
to the great Scandal of the People. The People were now in a mighty Ferment. It
was the Universal Opinion, that if the Army had only staid, and Played at Coits
in their Camp (far enough from the Fort) at Port Royal, the Fort would have
been within a few Days surrendered to them. The Soldiers within were Mutinous to
the last Degree; Deserters daily came over. Provisions would have grown Scanty
in a little Time. [Tho' the Lodgings of their Men were not now thatched; (the
Reason why we told you before) yet a red-hot Bullet or two slung into the Fort,
might have set them all on Fire.] Ten thousand things might have happened. But,
like Men afraid of having the Fort fall into their Hands, they ran back to
New England as fast as their Canyas Sails could carry them.

The Good Women in Boston, could not forbear their Outcries, when they met in
the Streets, on this Occasion. Says one of them, Why, our Cowards imagined the
Fort at Port Royal would fall before them, like the Walls of Jericho. Another
Answers, Why did not the Block heads then stay out Seven Days to see? What
a^l'd the Traitors to come away in Five Days Time after they got there? The Cry
of the People must be Satisfved. Another Ship of War was fitted our, and
Recruits of Soldiers were sent unto the Fleer, which now lay at Casco Bay.
Which after Tedious and Expensive Delays of many Weeks, set Sail from thence
again to P^t-Royal, but with the greatest Aversion that ever was in the Hearts
of Men; and not until they had been further weaken^ by many and numerous
Desertions. While they were on the^ Voyage to Port Royal, a Man of War arrived
from Portugal; the brave Commander (a New Englander) was ready to venture his
Ship and Life too on this Occasion; and cheerfully complied with Orders which
were with some ado obtained, for him to go to Port Royal after them. Our Fleet
arriving there a Second Time, found that in the time of their withdraw to
Casco, the Port-Royallers had much Recruited themselves; and had Taken and
carried in some English Vessels, laden with Provision; and had also Dispatched
away their Galley for France.

Therefore, after a little Skirmish on the opposite Shore, and some Follies not
to be mentioned, away they come for Boston, without Orders, and before Capt.
Paddon could have Opportunity to come up with them. So that the Second
Expedition was as Bad, or Worse than the First. After the Expedition was thus
Shamefully Finished, there was another Difficult Card to Play; that was, to
Satisfy the General Assembly, which was then quickly to sit. The Way pitched
upon was, to make a Pretended Court Martial, to Enquire into the Cause of the
Mismanagements at Port Royal. This Court was the Ridicule of Town and Country.
No Body was Tried at it, or so much as Accused. All was carried on in
Hugger-Mugger. We can Hear of Nothing done; but the Presenting of the Secretary
of War, Will. Dudley, with all the Plunder that was taken, and amounted to
between One and Two Hundred Pounds, and then leave to go Home! It is plain, the
General was not to be Impeached there; it is well, if it has not Ruined the
Governor, as well as the Distressed Country, yet we hear the Governor, before
the Sitting of the said Court, gave him an Order for an Advantageous Post at
the Eastward, to Build a Fort at Saco, because he would not Take one at
Port Royal; as High and rich a Post, as he was ever capable of.

And so much for Port Royal, until the Dark Designs come into further Light.
And then it will be known whether Governor Dudley when he saw the Country was
Violently set upon going, and so Interrupting his Trade with the French, had
not a Secret Design, that the Fort at Port Royal should have been made (as the
Fort at Pemaquid would have been) a Convenient Place for the Fur-Trade with the
Indians, whereby himself, and some Friends of his here, in Britain, would have
got no little Riches. In the mean time, under his Admirable Conduct, an
Impoverished Country has, (as we are credibly informed) been put to above Two
and Twenty Thousand Pounds Charge, only to be Laughed at by their Enemies, and
Pitied by their Friends.

To the QUEEN's most Excellent Majesty.

The Humble Petitition of Your Majesty's most Loyal Sub^ Inhabitants in your
Majesty's Dominions in America, or T^ ding thither. Shows,

THAT Colonel Joseph Dudley, whose Arbitrary and Ty^ nical Proceedings had
Exposed him to the just Resentments of his Countrymen, before the Happy
Revolution, has been nevertheless so Fortunate, as to obtain the Government of
the Massachusett's Colony in New England.

That your Petitioners are certainly Informed^ of diverse Grievous Corruptions
and Oppressions, and unjust and ^^rtial Practices of the said. Dudley, on which
they might Ground many Complaints against him, but they are so sensible of the
imminent Danger which Threatens Your Majesty's Subjects in that and the
Neighboring Colonies, through his Male Administrations, that they at this time
Beg Leave Humbly and Singly to represent to your Majesty,

That the said Dudley has Countenanced a private Trade and Correspondence with
Your Majesty's Enemies, the French at Canada, and the Indians which are in
their Interest, Furnishing them with Ammunition and Provision.

That the Persons managing the said Correspondence, pretended a Voyage to
Newfoundland, and being accused of High Treason by the General Assembly of
New England, the said Governor by his Interest and Power, delayed their
Prosecution, till the Ammution with which he had furnished the Enemy was used
by them, to the Destruction of Your Majesty's good Subjects, and that Colony,
thereby put to Three and Thirty Thousand Pounds Charge.

That many of the best, and most prudent Members of the Lower House of
Representatives, being tired with his Delays, and necessitated to go home and
defend their Plantations from the Enemy, he prevailed with those that remained,
who were scarce a House, that the Accusations against his Agents, should be
changed from Treason to Misdemeanour; and they being Convicted, he labored to
Mitigate their Fines. All which was so Apparent to the People of New England,
that they threatened to pull down his House.

That he had the Confidence nevertheless to apply to the General Assembly for
an Address to Your Majesty in his Favor, but his Application was received with
a General Murmur and Contempt, and nothing done therein.

And although he has since Endeavored to obtain Your Majesty's Good Opinion by
Collecting a Number of Names of Persons under his command and Influence to give
him a Character,

Your Majesty's Petitioners, who Apprehend their Wives, Fa^iltes and Estates to
be in Imminent danger under such a Governor, do therefore Humbly Pray, that
this matter may be speedily Enquired into, and that Your Majesty would please
to give such Directions thereupon, as to Your Majesty's Great Wisdom shall seem
meet. And your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc.

Wm. Parridge. Thomas New on. Nath. Higginson. Tho. Allen. Alex Holmes. John
Calley. etc. etc. etc.


