A LETTER From one in the Country, to his Friend in the City: In Relation to
their Distresses occasioned by the doubtful and prevailing Practice of the
Inocculation OF THE SMALLPOX.

Printed for, and Sold by Nicholas Boon, at the BIBLE in Cornhill, Boston. And
John Edwards, at the Corner of Kings-street. 1721

To my Friend in the City.
SIR,
IN Answer to your Request, I have spent some thoughts upon the Subject of our
last Conversation, viz: Inocculation, which has caused so many idle words, and
angry Discourses; to say no more of 'em. And first, as to the practice in it
self considered. I must confess, I am not Master of Philosophy enough to enable
me to determine for or against the use of it, upon natural reasons: But as
fools use to do, must wait till experience does more fully instruct me. But
then Secondly, as to the Manner of introducing, and carrying on the practice
here in this Country; if I have the truth of the fact, (which I confess it is
difficult to come at in this day, to our shame it will be spoken) I can but
condemn it upon the following reasons; which I offer by way of Query, and
submit them to you and the Worlds Consideration and Censure. The fact I take to
be this: A certain Clergyman (by the way of Europe) received Advice of the
Practice among the Massel-men, and faithful people of the prophet Mahomet; also
more immediately and viva voce from some of the scattered Members of the good
people in Guinea, who communicated to the Physicians in your Town; one of whom
(without consent of his Brethren) introduces the Practice here in the midst of
a populous Town, soon after, (if not before) the Guards which were placed by
Authority at the doors of Infected Houses, (to prevent the carrying out any
Infection) were taken off; when there was at least a possibility that the
spreading of the Distemper might be prevented. Now against this, I offer to
your Consideration.

1. Whether this Practice was not an offense against the Civil Government, and
contrary to the Peace and Quiet of His Majesty's Liege People?

How daringly bold this Practice? for one single Apothecary, without consent of
his Brethren, without asking the Civil Power, without consent of the
Neighbors; yea, against their Fears, their Cries and Clamours, to infect his
Family, with a Disease very Mortal and very Contagious! The late riotous wicked
disturbance, shows the dangerous consequence of such rash practices. I mention
not this in the least to excuse that horrid fact; No, I detest it as much as
any man, and pray God deliver us from such a Spirit. But I think that
Inocculation as it was firstly practiced, carried in it as much threatening and
danger; yet being done with a good and charitable intention, and without design
of mischief to any man, did not render the Actor so criminal. To spread a
mortal Contagion, What is it but to cast abroad Arrows and Death? If a man
should wilfully throw a Bomb into a Town, burn a House, or kill a man, ought he
not to die? so if a man should wilfully bring Infection from a person sick of a
deadly and contagious Disease, into a place of Health; is not the mischief as
great? Suppose that Inocculation is to all those that use it very safe and
beneficial, that it answers all the desired ends upon them; yet how can they
answer it, to hazard the destruction of their Neighbors, who are not of their
opinion, and dare not practice it! Suppose then again (as we reasonably may)
that of those many who are lately slain by the Smallpox, some few have taken
it by their Inocculated Neighbors, who might otherwise have escaped it. How
shall we excuse our Mohammedan Missionaries, from being truly, though not
designedly the cause of their death? If any persons are satisfied, that this
Practice is a good method to save them from the dangers of a mortal Disease
which threatens them; I do not say they ought not to use it, but they ought to
use it in such a manner, as may be with Surety to their Neighbors as well as
themselves. If men therefore will have such practices, must they not make them
lawful, and withdraw from the Community into such places where there can be no
danger to their Neighbors, or else obtain a common consent

2. Whether as the Practice has been carried on, there has not been offered
horrid Impiety against Almighty God?

I do not see how we can be excused from great Impiety herein, (although the
Doctors bold practice was consecrated by the Authority of five or six Reverend
Subscribers to a certain Writing, devised for that purpose at the time) when
Ministers and People, with loud and strong Cries made Supplications to Almighty
God, to avert the Judgment of the Smallpox (professing their faith in his
Power and Goodness) that though in the ordinary view of men it must spread, yet
that it would please him (if it might be agreeable to the ends of his Holiness)
to Exert his Almighty Power, and be better to us than our fears, in preventing
the further spreading of the Distemper, as in his Mercies he had heretofore
done. And at the same time, some have been carrying about instruments of
Inocculation and bottles of the poisonous Humor to Infect all those who were
willing to submit to it, whereby we might as naturally expect the Infection to
spread, as a man to break his bones, by casting himself headlong from the
highest Pinnacle. Can any man infect a Family in a Town in the Morning, and pray
to God in the Evening, that the Distemper may not spread? No, it is a
Temptation from the Devil: for it is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God. No more can any man that have promoted it make this prayer without sin.
Now then suppose that to avoid Sin, they have omitted this prayer; is it a
right thing to omit it? Is not the Smallpox a sore Judgment of God? and should
we not then pray, Deliver us from Evil? Yes, but then it may be said, that though
the Smallpox as God sends it in the common course of his Providence be a sore
Judgment, yet by this invention of Inocculation, it becomes much lighter; and
though we don't pray that it may not spread, yet by praying for a blessing on
this practice, we pray against the Judgment. This is indeed the best face that
can be put upon it, in my opinion; and in this dress if we view it well, it has
an horrible aspect; and I wish it don't in the end prove a Fighting as well as
praying against the Judgments of God. Are we not all one Church of Christ, and
People of God? and shall we divide in our Supplications to God, and think to be
heard of him? One part praying and confessing, Lord we have Sinned, and are
afraid of thy Judgments which are out against us; say unto thy destroying
Angel, it is enough, stay now thine hand; and Lord, if it be thy holy Will, let
not this sore Disease spread further among us! And another part praying, Lord,
we have Sinned, and thy Judgments are upon us in sore Sickness; but we have (by
thy Providence) found out a way to lighten it, give us thy blessing upon it,
and then it spread, the faster the better; no danger of death this way, and but
little sickness; and let us have the benefit of this Invention, though others of
thy people that are so blind they will not see the benefit of it, are ever so
much endangered by it. These last words sound a little harsh, but is it not the
true language of the practice? Thus we are brought into a state of War, Sin and
Contention in our very prayers, by carrying on this practice in such a lawless,
unguarded manner; and did the Gentlemen that promoted it ever think of any
regulation? I am sure they never effected it, which ought to have been the very
first step in a matter of such concernment to a people. Now as these things
have an evil aspect in themselves, is it not evident, that they have so in
their effects and consequences? Instead of being humbled under the holy hand of
God in this Judgment upon us, and treating one another with meekness and
charity, are we not filled with contentions, and every wicked work? I pray God
grant us Repentance, lest despising the Chastenings of the Almighty, we provoke
him to bring yet sorer Plagues upon us.

Sir.

You see that at present I am neither Inocculator nor Anti-inocculator,
considering it only in a Physical sense: But I must condemn upon the foregoing
reasons, such a rash managing a matter of so great concern, without advice or
Caution which in my opinion is a great Contempt to God and Man. That which
moved me to Answer you just at this time is, the fear that I and my Neighbors
are in, for our selves and Families. We are advised that the Practice of
Inocculation is carrying on in our Country Towns, which (if it proceed) will
undoubtedly infect and endanger the Lives of vast numbers more than otherwise
would be: I mean of such as are not to be Inocculation. The Smallpox through
Gods Goodness has not been wont to spread generally in our Country Towns; but a
Family here and there has been visited. But now, if this Practice obtain among
us, suppose but a few, say a Twentieth part of a Town take up with it, living
in the several Quarters of the Town: It will undoubtedly infect the whole. I
know some will say, they may all be Inocculated, its an Excllent way; They will
be safe in the use of it, and ever after out of Danger. But generally People
are not persuaded of either the expediency or Lawfulness of the Practice; and
if some are, shall they in this manner force it upon others? Is it so pleasant
and beneficial, that it is better to undergo it than not, where we may by the
blessing of God upon a proper care be in little danger? For my part, when I see
this Sword of the Almighty in the Angels hand, I tremble, and am afraid of his
Judgments? But let him wield his own weapons; and if he slay me, yet will I
trust in him. But when I hear of Quacks boldly meddling with these edged tools,
in such a rash and lawless manner; (though the hand of God is to be seen in this
also,) yet it raises other resentments in me. And it is amazing to me, that the
worthy Members of our General Assembly, my Country Neighbors (who start from
their businest, looking pale with fear by the danger of this Distemper) should
not spend one thought upon this practice, which will render their danger a
thousand to one greater. And now after all, to their Consideration we must
leave it, hoping in their care and wisdom this matter may be brought under some
regulation; That if they allow it, there may be proper Pest Houses in solitary
places, to receive those that have a mind thus voluntarily to infect
themselves, with severe penalties on those that shall dare to do otherwise, to
the endangering the lives of their honest Neighbors; or else to banish the
Practice to the Turks and Pagans* whence it came; and if ever they allow it in
such an unguarded manner as we have done, I dare to be bound to be Inocculated.

Dear Francis, I bid thee heartily Farewell.
FINIS.

