New NEWS from Robinson Cruso's ISLAND, IN A Letter to a Gentleman at
Portsmouth.
SIR,
HAving some time since resolved to do my self the Honor of writing to You, I
at length through great difficulty, retired an hour from Noise and Clamor, the
smoke of Coffee-houses, and the suffocating Stench of Court-flattery, (a
wonderful Engine in this Pedantick age,) whereby Men of small fortune and
smaller merit, easily climb to a considerable pitch of Honor and Greatness;
and Preferments are conferred on none but such as will comply and conform to
another's Passion. And without passing the fulsom Compliments of Incomparable,
and Extensive Blessing, I shall hint to you some Transactions of Moment, in
this part of the Globe, since the last printed News from our Island, and (...)
-- (...) commencing Jail-bird.

The DISTRESSED STATE of our Island, is I confess a Theme as melancholy as
it is common. And if we take but a general Survey of our present Difficulties in
their various unhappy Circumstances, we shall find too much reason to conclude
them the beginning of Sorrows, and the dreadful prologue of more Complicated
Miseries.

The Extreme want of that, the love whereof is the root of all Evil, is the
universal Complaint among us: So that there is hot talk that our Salary-Men,
who (particularly the Ecclesiastics) have hitherto had an Honorable Support
and suitable to their Character, must lower their Topsails, and be Content to
take their pay in the produce of the Island. The blood and vital Spirits of the
Body-politick, (I mean the Medium of Exchange) is so near exhausted as portends
a Certain, and Speedy dissolution.

The greatest part of the paper Credit, which is yet out-standing, is fallen
into the hands of a few wretched Misers, (whose desires are Enlarged as Hell,)
who li^^ Pharaoh's fat beasts, stand gaping to devour their Indigent but honest
Neighbors, and with hearts more unrelenting by far than his, make their
Necessitous Circumstances their cursed opportunity to Enrich themselves: and
having wrested their Estates from them for half the Value, they boast (like
those Sinners Solomon Cautions to beware of,) that they have found precious
Substance, and filled their houses with spoil.

In what prodigious Shoals do Men flock to Userers to hire! and perhaps when
they have waited at their Gates as long as King John did at the Pope's Legat's,
they may obtain admittance; and those who possess Estates in Lands worth 500l.
may pawn them for 94 for the Interest must be paid before they receive the
Principal; and besides that, there must be a gratuity proportionable to the
urgency of their wants, before they can come off so well.

Among the innumerable exorbitant Mischiefs which arise from the want of of
some proper Medium of Exchange, these are not the least: The Trade, by which
our Island chiefly subsists, is woefully embarass'd; and many a noble Project
(and profitable to the Public) sadly retarded; a Multiplicity of Lawsuits, to
the enriching a few luxuriant Cutthroats, and reducing many honest, frugal,
industrious Familys to Beggary, and many more to the very precipice of Ruin,
unless speedy Relief intervene. Are not Oppression, Injustice and Cruelty (like
an Innundation) making a rapid Progress among us? And have we not great reason
to fear a more tragic Scene will open before we are aware? But on whom must we
Father all this Catalogue of Mischiefs (to which a multitude more might be
added) when the black Master-roll comes to be made up? Is it not an Argument,
that those who reject, and hiss at all proposals (even the most fair and
promising) which are made by others, and propose nothing at all themselves,
would have nothing at all DONE that might conduce to our Relief and advantage?

Our Expectations of Redress the last Session (the Expense and Damage whereof
has not been much less than that of broken Conventions, with which we were
threatened, if the former were not managed according to some men's minds) have
been greatly raised, and the Representative Body of the Island carried on
things with great Prudence, as far as possible; and I need not tell you where
their Conclusions met with a resolute Repulse.

The Opposition which the Emission of more Paper Credit has met with, has
afforded various matter of Speculation among us; and many have been the
Conjectures about it, it being something unnaccountable what Men should be
driving at, who (like Watermen) look one way, while at the same time they now
the contrary; insomuch that many (who are willing to think the best) are apt to
fix them with the Carcass of Mahomet, between Heaven and Earth; or with
Bellarmine, the Atlas of the Papal Cause, to whom the Catholics (because he
wrote so much like a Heretic) assign a Perhaps it is (...)
place, between Heaven and Hell.

The Great D^n of the County of E -- x, (who shakes his Rod terribly over the
whole County, and makes his Minions cringe at his Feet) was seized with
Belshazzar's fit of trembling (though doubtless from an Infernal Impression) lest
the Bill should pass the B -- d, and his Deify'd Mammon cease to bring in such
a griping Usury as is calculated to the Meridian of his Conscience.

There were also terrible Alarms among the whole C -- s Clan in this great
Crisis, for fear the result should not please their Masters; but since good
Projections have been crushed in the Birth, they begin to hecter and bullie
with abundance of Confidence, as if they had gained the Point to all Intents
and Purposes; though several of them want Cash as much as their Neighbors.

However, some of the most Judicious and Intelligent among us, have ventured to
Query, whether the following things be not the Spring and Source of the
forementioned Opposition.

1. Covetousness: Which consists in an eager and insatiable Thirst after
Riches, which hurries Men on in the Acquisition of Worldly Goods, though in the
most unjust, injurious and clandestine ways. It Is a Gangrene in the Soul, that
with a pay so(...) Heat, consumes the Natural Affections, to supply their room
with the most virulent Humors. This furious Desire precipitates Men on to
Oppression, Violence and Deceit; so that they will not stick to betray and sell
their Country, if thereby they can enrich themselves, and promote their private
Interests; for when this caused Lust has once gained the Ascendant in the Soul,
is it any wonder if men prostitute the Gifts of Nature and Providence, to the
most base and servile Ends? Nature, in the production of Gold (as one
ingeniously observes) seems to have presaged the Misery of her Lovers, by
making the place where it grows barren of Herbs, Plants, etc. intimating
thereby that in the Minds where the Desire of this Metal shall take Birth, no
Sparks of Honor or Virtue shall remain.

2. Envy: Which is a Diabolical Passion, that renders those in whom it is
predominant Emphatically the Children of the Devil. It stirs up in Men a pining
at the good of others, and gnaws their Hearts with continual Torment. How do
some vex and frett themselves, at the prosperity and good of Others? And how
would they (if they could) Ahab-like, hook in their fair Estates? that they may
join House to House, and lay Field to Field, etc. though there is a terrible W O
denounced against them, Isai. 5. 8.

3. Pride. Pride and Envy are Sisters of the same Complexion and Shape, and
equally pernicious in their Effects. Ambition is a ravishing Passion, that
easily glides into the Soul, but makes an unwilling Retreat. It Is a furious
Desire, that knows no bounds, but absolute Lordship and Empire for it is self,
and Beggary and Slavery for all others; which Age does not mature, nor lesser
Dignities satisfy. It Is a Gulf without Bottom or Shore; the Vacuum in Nature,
which Philosophers have not found out, nor ever will.

4. Hypocrisy. And of all the foregoing evils, this is not to be esteemed the
least. For hereby (as a most Reverend Divine observes) Religion is made a
Stalking-Horse whereby some Men serve the most vile and unworthy Ends; cloaking
their Designs of Covetousness, Ambition, or Revenge, with pretense of
Conscience and Zeal; and under the specious Umbrage hereof, the most execrable
Villainies have been acted. This lurking Evil has slain it is Ten Thousands, and
done more mischief in he World than open Impiety and Infidelity.

These are supposed to be the four main Springs, from whence the Opposition to
more Bills, (though emitted on never so good a Foundation) proceeds. And is it
any wonder, that a few Muck-worms, who have monopoliz'd vast Hoards of Bills
should oppose it; seeing they have so fair a prospect (as they think) of
raising their Estates, and building up their Names on the Ruins of their
Country? Though hereby their Memory will be a Stench in the Nostrils of
Posterity. For what else can we suppose them so furiously driving at (unless we
are bound to believe their Words, against the Course and Tenor of their
Actions) but to engross all the Estates in the Island; and themselves being
Lords, the rest by Consequence their Slaves?

But will our Islanders, who have ever enjoyed the Sweets of Liberty and
Freedom, be easily drove to Slavery by some whose Fathers many of them would
have disdained to sit with the Dogs of their Flock? Certainly no. And it is
greatly to be hoped, that on the 31 st of May next, when the Convention comes
together, they will be inspired with a Spirit of true discerning to distinguish
between them who are Lovers of their Country and them who are not. Wisdom 2.
12. They are not for our turn, but are quite Contrary to us.

There has been a great Bustle and Whispering of late about our Constitution;
and raised Expectations among many, (whose Endeavors have not been wanting)
that those glorious Days for Lawyers and Gentlemen, which were prophesied of
and wished for, January 12. 1703, 4, were making a near approach to us. But as
hitherto the united attempts of Earth and Hell which have been formed against
it have proved unsuccessful; so we hope that He who rules in the Kingdom of
Providence, will deride their secret Counsels, defeat their Designs (though laid
as deep as Hell) and cloth them with Shame and Confusion.

Sir, It is no News to you (I presume) that the great DON-DAGO, the
Primate-wou'd-be of our Island, (like the famous Dr. S -- l has long ago burst
his Orb, and become Eccentrick. And as for the Old Itch of Scribbling, (though
plunged in the profound Atlantic) it is not yet extinguished.

Some time since we saw the Meteor called Aurora-Borealis; which is a
forerunner of News from the North, and not long after we heard of a venomous
Epistle, that has been sent to your Parts, (with which the World may be
favored, if it can find a place among Tom Brown's Letters, the next
Impression) wherein the Writer (as he has formerly convinced the World of his
exquisite Knack at daubing with untempered Mortar) has given us to understand,
that he is Master of the Art of enviously detracting from the worth of good
Men, ( Gentlemen of known Integrity) by throwing dirt, to sully their
Reputation, and blacken their Character. Moreover, he has represented a loyal
and peaceable People, as Factious, Turbulent, and worse than the Savage
Monsters of Africa.

Some of our Ecclesiastics of late, (for want of Discretion, without which
Learning is Pedantry, and Wit, Impertinence,) have been guilty of too officious
a meddling with State Affairs. The great substantial Duties of Faith,
Repentance, and a good Life, are what they may and ought, with utmost Warmth
and Energy to Inculcate; but whatever is not comprised in these, is beside the
Text, foreign to their Province, and another Gospel.

To see a Clergyman ( Commedian-like) stand belabouring his Cushion and
intermixing his Harrangue with THUNDERBOLTS, while he is entertaining his
peaceable Congregation with things whereof he is almost as Ignorant, as I am of
the Saddle Balaam rode on when his Ass spoke, and exhorting them to beware of a
mutinons, mobbish Spirit, of siding with this or that Party and Interest; How
ridiculous is the Sight and the Sound? How nauceous, and like a Parable in the
Mouth of Fools? An empty noise, like sounding Brass, or a tinkling Cymbal.

How do such Degrade their Sacred Function, and expose themselves to Contempt
and Mimickry, and to be Burlisqu'd by every Pamphleteer? And how highly
meritorous is this of a Staff and Pair of Shoes.

But, is not the Crime exceedingly aggravated, when any of that Order side with
Parties, and foment Differences THEMSELVES? When in their private Visits and at
Gentlemen's Tables, they take the License to revile, backbite and slander,
endeavoring to widen the Differences between Men of high Station and
Character, whose Influence is likely to affect the whole Island? Does not this
render them vile, and minister just Occasion to ungodly Men to despise their
Offerings? Does not this tend to harden Men in Atheism, Impiety and Infidelity,
and to deem all Religion as a piece of Priestcraft and State Policy, to keep
the World in Awe? And is it not the most certain and expeditious way to effect
their own Ruin?

But I must not be further tedious to you, because I hope in a short time to
send you a more particular Account of things: In the mean time, recommending
you and yours to the Care of the Divine Providence,

I am, SIR, Your Affectionate Friend, and Humble Servant.
From the Metropolis of Robinson Cruso's Island. December. 19. 1720.
Cruso's Island: Printed in the Year 1720.


