REMARKS upon Mr. Gales Reflections on Mr. Walls HISTORY OF Infant Baptism.

In a Letter to a Friend.

Prove. 18, 17, He that is first in his own Cause Seems Just; but his
Neighbor comes, and searches Him.

2. These. 2, 15. Therefore Brethren Stand fast and hold the Traditions which ye
have been Taught.

Printed for and Sold by T. Wood,

ERRATA.
The absence of the Author from the Press may be some apology for so many
Errors in the Press Work of so small a Treatise. The most Considerable whereof
are here Remarkt. P. stands for Page, and l. for line, etc.

Page 14 line 12 for Leaving Read Bearing, p. 16 l. 22 f. on r. in, p. 19 l. 2
f. many't r. may not, p. 10 (...) not r no, p. 20 l. 32 f. We r. He, p 23 l. 14
^. Water r Heart, p. 32 l. 6 Dele This matter, p. 34 l. 5 f ^ecamenon r.
Bebammenon, p. 34 l 25 f. 101 r. 110, p. 39 l. 15 f. Dipped r Dips, p 43 l. 24 f
Defect r. Detect, p. 46 l. 3 f. 2dly r. Q. Dt. p. 72 l. 28 f. Mathezeuontos r.
Matheteuontes, p. 75 l. 7 f. Sece r Sense, p. 76 l. 28 after Salvation add, The
Sense I have here given. p. 76 l. 30 f. Bultivating r Cultivating, p 78 l. 2 f.
Hezam r Hexam, p. 82 l. 31 f. Infants r Infans, p 82 l. 28 f. pecatoribus r.
pecanti^us p. 83 for the Greek quotation in the 5, 6 and 7 th lines read Ti de
an cipos peri ton eti nepion, Kai mete tes Z^mias E^a sihan^m^non, mete tes
Karitos He Ka^ tauta Bapti^^men, panuge, eiper it is Ep^igo^ Kindunos. p. 83 l 22
f. Ve^maculus r. Vernaculus, p. 86. l. 27 f. orrare r. ornare.

To the READER.
HAving read what Mr. Gale against Wall's History of Infant Baptism, has
advanced, I was too easily imposed upon by the Ingenuity of so Learned a Pen;
and his plausible way of writing prevailed upon me too credulously to take in
what was there offered; However for my further satisfaction I applied my self
to the Author of the ensuing Discourse, and desired his Remarks on the most
Material Passages in Mr. Gales Treatise; as also to essay the Vindication of
Infant Baptism, with the usual mode of administering that Sacrament by Affusion.
In answer to which the following Composure was written, without any view to its
being published.

As I am privileged with a peculiar interest in the Friendship of the Author, I
shall not hazard his Displeasure, by offending his Modesty. Only thus much I
would crave liberty to say, That although he shuns Praises, He cannot miss a just
esteem: from the Judicious. As this small Tract has yielded me great
satisfaction, and been approved by Persons of a more Considerable Character,
who have seen it in Manuscript; I was encouraged to give it a Birth in Print,
in hopes it might be serviceable to promote the Truth, which if attended with
Success, will abundantly compensate for the Censure of Vanity, or what ever
else may be thrown on him who may (at least) justly claim the Character of
being A Well-wisher to Truth.

T. W.

Remarks upon Mr. Gales Reflections on Mr. Wall's History of Infant Baptism.
To his Friend Mr. T. W.
Sir
YOur Acquaintance with my Circumstances makes you sensible of the little
Leisure I have, from my multifarious Encumbrances, to answer your Desires; you
must therefore not Expect from me, a particular Answer, to all that is
Exceptionable, in Mr. Gales Reflections, on Mr. Walls History of Infant
Baptism; But must be Content with having matter of Conviction Briefly offerred,
that his Arguments are not Unanswerable; and that a small degree of learning
and Ingenuity, is sufficient to Undermine and Raze to the ground this admired
Structure; which he has with such Elaborate pains and study Erected.

His two first Letters do principally consist of Reflections on Mr. Walls
un-fair dealing, in his Book, (which not having seen, I am not able to
vindicate.) These therefore not affecting the Controversy, I shall pass over in
Silence.

Mr Gale begins his third Letter; by showing wherein the Controversy between
them and the Pado-baptists, Consists, viz. (1) In the Mode of Baptism, whether
its to be administered only by Dipping? (2) Who are the true Subjects of it,
whether Adult Persons only, or Infants also? Page 91, 92.
Th^se Things he supposes so clear as to admit of no Dispute, and Even Dares to
call in question the Legislato^s Conduct; if otherwise. Nay, he Even ventures
to affirm, That our Enemies allow, that as far as the Scriptures are clear in
the present Case, our practice Exactly agrees with them; and they must confess
too, that their own is very different from what the Text declares to have been
done, in the Ancient Times.

This his Harrangue labors of two considerable Infirmities; Profaneness and
Fals-hood.

1. Profaneness. Must poor Dust and Ashes call in question the Conduct of
Infinite Wisdom, if any points in Religion disagree with their Sentiments? What
though the case seemed clear to him, must he arraign the Conduct of the most High
before the Tribunal of his frail Reason? surely this is insufferable
Presumption.

2. Falsehood. What Po^dobaptist. Author did Ever acknowledge, that their
Practice Exactly agrees with the Scriptures, and that our Practice is very
different, from what the Text declares to have been done in the ancient Times?
I challenge him in the words of King (...) ( Prove. 30.4.
) What is that Man's Name, or what is his Sons Name, if he can tell? And as we
are very far from acknowledging, so I much suspect he will be as far from
proving Those Allegations; We'll however hear what he has to say.

His first Argument is thus laid down. ( page 94)
The Word Baptize necessarily includes Dipping in its signification, and that
Christ in Commanding to Baptize, has Commanded to Dip only. And subjoyns, I may
Challenge any man to show a single Instance, of its signifying any thing Else (
than to Dip) Except in some Ecclesiastical writers of the Later Corrupt Times.

I accept his Challenge; For although I freely acknowledge, that the word very
frequently signifies to Dip, yet not always, which when made appear, will
overthrow his whole Argument, from the word Baptizo.

All his Quotations from profane Authors, (if pertinent) will do him but very
little service; for his highest Pretense from them must be that the word is
sometimes used in the sense he pleads for, and particularly in the places
Cited; But this notwithstanding, it may carry a different meaning in Thousands
of Instances, for ought he knows. But what will become of his Argumentation
upon this Topic, if some of his own cited Instances, should have the ill
manners to Contradict him? which I am pretty Confident they will.

He brings an Instance from Homers Batrachomyomichia, who says, when one of
the Champions was slain, by the side of a Lake, he breathless fell, and The
Lake was Ebapteto, (which he translates ( Tinged with Blood.) Can he persuade a
Gentleman of your Reason to believe, that the Lake was Dipped in Blood, or that
the Poet so intended? Especially when you Remember, that this mighty Hero
Crambophagus, from whose slaughter was this Deluge of Blood, was but a Frog
Dying by the Hands of his victorious Enemies, the Mice. I am sure that it would
be a more natural, and genuine Translation, to Read it, The Lake was sprinkled,
or stayn'd with Blood, This would (if we look upon these Champions as this
ingenuous Ludicrous Poem Represents them, to be famous Martial Chevaliers) make
the Poets words both Truth and sense; But his Translation neither the one or
the other; For he himself is forced to acknowledge, it Page 107.
very Ridiculous, to speak of Dipping or Plunging a Lake, in the Blood of a
slain Champion.

Previous to a particular Consideration of his Crafty attempt, to make the word
a Nose of wax, to bend to his purpose, I shall observe to you, that we are not
to put a Metaphorical Construction upon any Authors words, unless the Sense of
the Phrase Ne^essarily Require it, For this Practice would render all Writings,
sacred and Profane, wholly Unintelligible, without any constant steady meaning,
and liable to subversion, according to the Capricious Fancy of every humorsome
Wrangler; This would ^ender the sacred Scriptures themselves but a Bone of
Contention, and give a handle to the most Enthusiastical Sectaries, to bring in
the Scriptures as Espousing their Extravagant sentiments.

How Mr. Gale, in the Case before us, and frequently in the following pages,
has (without any occasion from the sense of the words) forced upon them a
Metaphorical meaning, with the greatest violence imaginable, you will,
notwithstanding his plausible Discourse, be easily Convinced.

Page. 96.
This Phrase (says he) we must Consider, is borrowed from the art of Dyers, who
color things by Dipping them in their Dye.

But then here is a Comparison without any similitude, for I cannot devise where
lies the parity between Dipping things in Dye, and the Running of Blood into a
Lake; It is therefore but a wheadling of all Mankind out of their Reason, To
persuade them to accept of this Translation, or this Metaphor, as you will be
convinced, when you consider, (1.) That if the words are litteral Translated,
so as to be made sense of, they must be rendered as above The Lake was sprinkled
or stained with Blood. (2) If you choose the Latter of these Terms, and will
have it Metaphorical, why it may not allude to the ^^aining, in Common use, by
Affusion or Aspersion, Mr. Gale neither has, nor can offer any satisfactory
Reason; And if any can Doubt of the Practice of staining without Dipping, every
Limn^r, and House Painter can convince him by occ^lar Demonstration. Moreover,
the Nature or the thing spoken of, ( viz. The Lakes being stayn'd by the blood
that was shed by the side of it) much better answers the Metaphor of this Sort
of painting, than of Dying by Immersion.

By this time you are (I Am persuaded) convinced, that the word in Controversy,
cannot, without utmost violence, be translated to Dip or Plu^g^; and therefore
That his Challenge is already answered, and thereby his Argument enervated.

But I Will proceed to a second Instance.

He brings in Aristophanes saying, That magnes an old Comic of Athens, used
the Lydian Music s^^ved the face; and smeared it over (Baptomenos) with Tawn^y
Washes. This he acknowledges, was not ( Page 104
) by Dipping their Faces in the Color; but by smearing the Color on their
Faces. Here we have then, by our Authors own acknowledgment, an Instance where
the word does not signify Dipping or (...) And what becomes then of his
Arguments from the word Baptizo? But he will tell us, That there is a ( Page 105.
) manifest allusion to the art of Dying, in these, and all such passages. But
how does this appear? The true Primitive Meaning is only still Refered to and
Employed. And again* If we suppose the Sense of the word to be altered; there
will be the greatest Confusion, ( ibi^.)
Languages imaginable, and He first brings this Instance to clear up his Sense
of the word, Next, pleads from the Sense he gives the word, to the necessary
Meaning of it in this place. A fine Round! I need not tell you, that this is a
most barefaced Begging the Question. But he tells us, That none can be so
hardy as to deny, that the word is Borrowed from the Art of Dying. I confess, I
have such a brazen forehead, as to Peremptorily deny it* for I see no Metaphor
in the words; and if any, it cannot allude to Dipping in Dye, wherewith it has
not the least simillitude, but to the staining or Painting, before mentioned,
with which it bears a lively and Exact Resemblance. Nay, M^ Gale himself is
forced to acknowledge, That ( Page 107.
) Nothing can be more Ridiculous, than for a man seriously to talk of Dipping a
Lake or River in Blood, or of a Ladies D^pping her Face in Vermillion, when she
adorns it with artificial Colors, which on the contrary, its known, must be
more artfully Laid on. But I Am sure its no ways Ridiculous for a man seriously
to talk of a Ladies Painting her Face with Vermillion, after the above said
manner; And what need then of this Far-fetcht and Incongruous Metaphor? Again.

We need not go above a Dozen Lines further, before we meet with the word
Baptei, which I think no man of Learning but Mr. Gale, would have translated as
he does. The words he quotes from Aristo^ Hyst. Animal. Lib. 5. Page 645. which
I Will transcribe in English Character, and Construe verbatim, Thlibomenos de
Baptei, kai anthizei teen keira. Thlibomenos de, When It Is pressed, Baptei it
Wets, kai; and, anthizei, it makes of a florid Color, (floridu^ Reddit) teen
keira the hand. Thus Sir I think it must be translated, If we make the
Philosopher to speak sense. That it may be yet more clea^ let us Construe the
words in our Authors Sense. Thlibomenos de, if it is pressed, Baptei, it Dies
or Colors, kai, and anthizei, it Colors, or makes of a florid Color, teen
Keira, the hands. There is no need to make Remarks upon the Tautology of this
Translation, or the Authors Unfairness in this Instance; But I must tell you,
that if the word here be taken for Dying, it has no Reference at all to
Dipping, nor can signify to Dip or Plunge, unless he can persuade us to
believe, that squeezing a Lock of wet Wool in our hands, is to Dip or Plunge
them. How far then the word is here from properly, signifying to Dip, (as Mr.
Gale, would persuade us it always does) I submit to your Censure. Again,

He brings in Strabo saying, That the Soldiers marched a Day through the
water, ( Baptizomenon, which he Renders) Dipped up to the waste But would it not
be better sense to Read it, Wet up to the Waste? Unless Mr. Gale can persuade
us, that there is no difference between Wading and Plunging.

I Will add but once or twice more; and no longer tire your patience, in this
wild Goose-Chase. Page 125.
Mr. Gale promises us an Instance from Plutarch, which shall be Evident enough;
and so it is, that the word in Debate does not always signify to Dip, or Plunge.

He finds Plutarch speaking of a Roman General, who, a little before he Dyed of
his Wounds, set up a Trophy, on which having (Baptis^, Which he Translates Dipped
his Hand in Blood, he wrote this Inscription etc. You must understand, that
this Genera^ received the Blood running out of his Wound; But how this was
Dipping his hand in his Blood, or how he was capable so to do, Mr. Gale should
have better Illustrated. Its plain, his hand was Baptized by Affusion, and no
otherwise.

He Proceeds to quote the Meditations of that Renowned Pious Emperor Mareus
Antoninus, who says such as the Thoughts are, that you are most Possessed with,
such will your Mind be; for the thoughts. (Baptetai, which he Reads) Dip the
Mind. It would make a man smile, were he Never so serious, to hear of the
Mind's being Dipped or Plunged in the Thoughts. The meaning of the words plainly
are, that the Thoughts leave a fixed impression on the Mind, and that according
to the Thoughts we Entertain with our Disposions and Affections be. Once more,

He finds the same Royal Author saying, Don't make the former Emperors the
pattern of your actions, lest (Baphe^) you are infected with their Vices* He
indeed here again (Ridculously Enough Reads it Dipped; but you see how far the
sense of the Phrase is from leaving him out in it.

There is no need of further Reply to his constant Refuge, (when he finds an
Instance plainly against him) a Metaphorical Meaning: for there can be no
allusion, (if it be Metaphorical) so Dipping or Plunging.

Thus [Sir] you see that out of those very Instances that he has, with so much
Toil, collected to confirm his Hypothesis, we have found seven, that Cannot With
any modesty be Translated to Dip or Plunge.

I might have taken Notice of other Passages, that further enlighten the Case
before us; but I Have already wearied my own patience, and I Am afraid yours.

'In the Close of his Third Letter, and beginning of the Fourth, he would
persuade us, that the Lexicographers and Critics, constantly affirm, That the
proper and genuine sense of Baptizo, is Immergo, Mergo, etc. to Plunge or Dip.
We'll then take the pains to peruse a few of them, and see what they say about
it.

Schrivelius in his Lexicon (a Book of general Use; and best account throughout
Europe) Renders the word ( Baptizo) by mergo, Lavo, to Dip and Wash. The word (
Baptismos) by Lotio, Washing only.

Passor, a generally approved Lexicographer, Renders the word Just as the
former, Baptizo, Mergo, Lavo, To Immerse or wash; and Baptismos, by Lotio,
washing only:

Martin, in his Lexicon, Renders the word Bapto, by Mergo, Lavo, To Dip or Wash.

Martin Rulandus, a very compent Judge, in his Synonomya, gives us, among other
Terms, (synonomous to the word Baptismois,) Loutr^n palingenesias, The washing
of Regeneration, and Photismos, Brightness, Clearness light, the Effects and
fruits of Washing.

We'll next look into Esquire Leigh, in his Celebrated Critica sacra, who tells us,
That though Baptizo be taken from Bapto, Tingo, To Dip or Plunge, yet it is
taken more largely, for any kind of Washing, Rinsing, or Cleansing, Even where
there is no Dipping at all. Again, the same Author tells us, That the word (as
Hesycius stephanus scapula and Budeus, the great Masters of the Greek Tongue,
make good by very many Instances out of Classic Writers) imports no more than
Ablution or washing* What can be plainer?

Beza on Mark. 7.4. Renders the word Baptizontai) Loti fuerint, they were
washed.

Zepperus de Sacram, si vocis Notationem, etc. i. e. If we would attend the
Notation of the word, it signifyes the Act of Immersion and Washi^g.

Bucan Says, Baptismos is para to Baptein, which is Tingere, Madefacere: et
Lavare, To Tinge, to make Wet; and to Wash.

Danaus Isaq. Christ, Lib. 5. De sacram, cap. 21. Idcirco Baptismos pro Lotione
and mundatione, in Sacra Scriptura fere accipitur; i. e. Baptism is frequently
a^cepted in the scripture, for Washing, and making ^^ean.

I have no Critic by me that may seem to speak so much in favor of our
Authors bold assertion, as Matthew. Flac. in his Clavis Scripture and yet Even he
Contradicts him, his words are these, Baptismus vox greca est in Ecclesia
notissima, proprie intinctionem significat, Ducta autem est a Bapto, Intingo,
et a Baptizo, Immergo, porro per Metalepsin significat abluo, Lavo i. e.
Baptism (says he) is a Greek word, in the Church well known, which properly
signifyes Intinction, and is taken from Bapto, to Tinge, and Baptizo, To
Immerse; nevertheless by a Metalepsis, it signifyes to Cleanse or Wash.

Ioh. Binch. in his Mel. Theol. Loc 26. Page. 155. Baptizo, viz. en aquam
immergendo, vel aqua aspergendo. Baptizo (says he) viz Immersing into water, or
Sprinkling with Water.

The Renowned Wendeline in his Mel. Theol. Lib. 1. Page 838. Renders Baptizo by
Conspergo, and ahluo, To Sprinkle or Wash.

I find by me one Celebrated Critic more it is Joseph Lang. his Polyanthea
Nova in verb Baptismus, says Greece Baptismos et est ablutio, etc. Baptism. in
Greek, Baptismos, and is a Washing etc.

Thus, Sir, I have perused all the Lexicographers and C^i^ick, I have by me,
and have shown you, how much Truth there is in Mr. Gales bold assertion, That
Page 132 The genuine Sens^ of Baptizo, the Critic Constantly affirm is Mergo,
In m^rgo, etc. To Dip and Plunge.

If he i^tends by this Paragraph, that C^iticks const^ntly affirm, That it
signifyes nothing Else but to Dip and Plunge, it is utterly False, as you see
in the above cited Instances, and he must be a Man of a Brazen Front, so
confidently to assert it: But if he intends that Cri^i^ks constantly
acknowledge; that it has the meaning he pleads for, it is true, but then it
Labors of a small Imperfection, viz. it is nothing to his purpose; and he
might have spared the pains of his following Quotations; for we all acknowledge
it: But we also find, that it signifyes to Wash, and Even to Sprinkle, as well
as to Dip.

You see, by what has been said, how little Mr. Gale is to be Relied on, he
having been very much out of the way in this Instance, we have great Reason to
suspect him, in every thing Else, that Depends upon his Authority.

I am persuaded, that not only these Authors that I have cited, but Even all
other Critics in general* will assign the meaning I plead for, to the word.
Baptizo; but I have none Else by me, nor advantages to obtain any in this
obscure part of the world.

The next thing that lies before us, is to consider the use of the word in
Scripture, and see* whether it always, as Mr. Gale pretends, signifyes Dipping
there;

I shall offer you but one Instance out of the Seventy's Translation of the Old
Testament, and one out of the Apocrypha; for the former being (...) a
Translation, and the Latter not Canonical Writ, the use of the Word in them is
not so much to be depended upon, as in the New Testament, where the original
Text (in which the Phrase, as well as sense, was Dictated by the spirit of God)
will fall under our Consideration.

That of the Septuagine, is in Dan. 4.33. The same hour was the thing fulfilled
upon Nebuchadnezzar, and he was Driven from men, and did Eat Grass as Oxen, and
his Body was wet; (Ebaph^) with the Dew of Heaven.

One would have thought this Instance so c^ear, that there would have been left
no Room o^ Cavil; for can there be a greater Solecism, than to speak of being
Dipped or Plunged in the Dew?

But Mr. Gale tells us, page 141. That the Chaldee word Tahang, and the Hebrew
Word Taha^, the former of which is the original word in this place; Necessarily
Imply to Dip, and every Body must own signify nothing but to Dip. Esquire Leigh is
as worthy to be depended upon in this case, as our Author, who in ^is Critica
sacra Renders the word Taba^, by ^^axit ^ntenxit* etc. to which heads, Ita L^vi
(...) Res ^^n mundetur sed tantum attinga^ humore, vel tota vel ex part. It so
washes that the thing many't be cleansed, etc, And Tabang, (the word under
dispute) he Renders Immersus, Infixus, Affixus, Impressus suit, Immersed,
Infixed, Affixed, Impressed. And I Am sure that the Latter of these
Constructions, that the Dew was Impressed, or fell upon him, is better sense
than that he was Dipped in the Dew.

That the words may be sometimes used in the sense He assigns them, I don't
Deny, but not always.

Our Author is again driven to his usual subterfuge, a Metaphorical meaning;
and says Page 142. Its Evident that Daniel and his Translators, designed to
Express the great Dew, Nebuchadnezzar should be Exposed to, more Emphatically,
by saying, that he should lie in Dew, and be Covered with it all over, as if he
had been Dipped. This Metaphorical sense, he endeavors to vindicate by
alleging, That the Dews in the East are generally very large; which he
Confirms by the Instance of Gideons Fleece (which being miraculous, is very
Improperly urged in this Case) But all this Harrangue is very impertinent; for
it is plain that the Scope and Drift of the words, was not to show the quantity
of the Dew he was wet with (he was Exposed to no Dew but what was ordinary;
there needed therefore not Emphasis upon the words) But the Brutal sort of
Life, that so great a Monarch was brought unto, by the Just (the amazing)
Judgment of God; How he was turned out from Humane society, and instead of his
magnificent Palace, which he with so much Haughtiness gloried in, had no Roof
but the Sky, to Cover him, and to shelter him, from the Injuries of the
Weather, and the Dew of Heaven. This is evidently the Scope of the Story, and
therefore it stands in no need of (but has apparent violence offerred by) such
metaphorical Constructions, as he puts upon it.

The next place I shall mention; is, That Eccles 34* 29^ He that washes (
Baptizomenos) because of a Dead Body, and touches it again, what avails his
washing? That the Washing here spoken of, was by Sprinkling is most certain,
and will appear Evident (notwithstanding all (...) says to the Contrary) If
the Institution of this Rite be duly Considered, you will find it in Numb. 19.
throughout v. 13. Whosoever touches the Dead Body of any man that is Dead, and
purifyeth not himself, Defiles the Tabernacle of the Lord, and that Soul shall
be cut off from Israel, because the water of separation was not Sprinkled upon
him. verse. 18. And a clean Person shall take Hyssop, and Dip it in the water,
and Sprinkle it upon the Tent; and upon all the Vessels, and upon the Persons
that were there, and upon him that touched a Bone, or one slain, or one Dead,
or a Grave. verse. 19. And the Clean Person shall Sprinkle upon the Unclean, on
the third Day, and on the Seventh Day; And on the Seventh Day we shall purify
himself, and wash his Clothes, and Bathe himself in Water, and shall be Clean
at Even. From this last Cited verse our Author tells us, Page 146. That the
Defiled Person was to be sprinkled with Holy Water, on the third, and on the
Seventh Day, praeparatory to the great Purification, that was to be by Washing
the Body, and Clothes on the Seventh Day. This is a gross mistake, for it was
the Clean Person officiating, not the Unclean by touching the Dead, that was to
wash his Clothes, and Bathe himself in Water. This appears, 1. By the two
following verses, 14.20. But the man that shall be Unclean; and shall not
purify himself, shall be Cut off from the Congregation; Because he has Defiled
the Sanctuary of the Lord; the water of Separation has not been Sprinkled upon
him, he is unclean. He is Unclean, not because he has not Bathed himself; But
because he has not been Sprinkled with the Water of Separation. But the next
Verse puts it out of all Doubt, who was to Bathe himself in Water, verse. 21. It
shall be a perpetual Statute to them, that he that sprinkles the Water of
Separation; shall wash his Clothes, etc. This also further appears from the 7
th verse, which you may be pleased to turn to.

2. This is Evident also, if you Consider, that it was the Water to be
Sprinkl^d, and not the Bathe, that is all along called, The Water of
Separation, and of Cleansing, and of Purification, as in verse. 12, 1^, 1^, 20,
21, (...) which it will be too tedious to transcribe again; and I desire you
therefore to turn to them.

Page 147 Mr. Gale subjoyns, That it cannot be Reasonably Imagined, that the
Priest by barely purifying the Unclean, should need so much greater Washing and
Purification, than the Unclean himself. Here he is out again; for the Bathe was
the far lesser Cleansing. This will appear if you take notice of Lev. 11.31,
32. and forward, where it is ordained, That whosoever touches the Dead Body of a
Beast, was to Wash his Clothes, and to be Unclean until the Evening; and so
the Priest, in the Case before us; but he that touched the Dead, Body of a Man,
had contracted a greater Pollution, and therefore was Unclean seven Days; nor
was the ordinary methods of Purification, sufficient for his Cleansing, but
there must be all this ado of Burning a Heifer, mingling her Ashes with Water,
etc.

But after all, if it be granted, that the washing for a Dead Body, was not
perfect without the Bathe, the word in the quoted Text, nevertheless Includes
Sprinkling (for that was certainly at least a part of the Washing spoken of)
and Therefore does signify to Sprinkle, as well as to Dip.

We'll next look into the New Testament and see whether it always there,
necessarily signifyes to Dip, and if we find it there of a differrent
signification, though but in one Instance, I Am sure we have gained the Cause.

The first Place I Will, turn to is Luk 3.16. shall Baptize (BAPTISEI) you, with
the Holy Ghost, and with Fire. You are sensible how Ridiculous it would be, to
Translate the words, he shall Dip or Plunge you with the Holy Ghost and with
Fire. Mr. Gale indeed Insinuates, That the Page 182. "Metophorical use of the
word, must be" on his side. But you must Consider ( Sir) that we are to
Interpret Metaphorical Speeches, by taking notice of what is primarily alluded
to in them, which in the Case before us, is the Cleansing or Purifying the
subject. The office of the Holy Ghost is to Sanctify, or Purify, (not to Dip)
the (...) and their being Baptized by the Holy Ghost, intends no other, than to
be sanctified, or Renewed, by the Regenerating Efficacy of Gods Holy Spirit.
There is here no manner of allusion to Dipping; but to Washing or Cleansing in
general, or rather to Affusion, for those that are Baptized or sanctfyed by the
Holy Ghost, are said to have it Come, or be poured upon them. Thus Mat. 3.16.
And he saw the Spirit of God, descending l^ke a Dove, and lighting upon him.
And Isa. 44.3. I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed. So also Joel. 2.28.

The next place I take notice of, is Mark. 7.4. And when they come from the
market, Except they wash (BAPTISONTA^) they Eat not, and many other things
there be, which they have Received to hold, as the Washing. (BAPTISMOIS) of
Cups and Pots, Brazen Vessels, and of Tables. But I must put you in mind, that
though it be here Translated Tables, the original word [Kli^on] is Beds, and
never signifyes otherwise, nor do I ever find it otherwise Translated, our
English version only Excepted.

It may be worthy of Remark, that Beza and Er^sinus Translate the word
BAPTISON^AI, ^o^^^u^rint* They were Washed; and Baptismois, ^otio^es, Washings;
and so also our English version, which I think much better answers he meaning
of the Text, than the sense Mr. Gale pleads for.

Our Authors long Discourse upon this Text, will hardly persuade any man to
believe, that it was the Custom of these Hemerobap^ists, to Dip or Plunge
themselves under water, every time they eat Meat, and every time they came from
the Market; They must be Persons of hardy Constitutions, to bear Immersion
under water three times every Day, especially in Cold Weather, besides their
occasional Baptisms when they came from the Market: But I Am sure your opinion
for Mr. Gale cannot so put out the Eyes of your Reason, as to render it
credible to you, that they plunged their B^ds under Water every time they Lay
upon them; for if so, they would find but little comfort in them, especially in
the Winter.

I shall not Contend with Mr. Gale about his novel Construction of the former part
of this verse; But he may, for me, embrace his opinion, that they were not
personally Baptized, when they came from the market, but only Baptized what
they bought there, These Consequences must be improved against him, if this
Sense be allowed him.

1. That many things bought at the Market were utterly Ruined, and Rendered
useless, if Dipe under Water, as Meal, Bread, and numberless other things.

2. That this Baptizing was usual with them before they went to Meat, whether
they came from the Market or not, as is evident from the Text, and from their
being Scandalized at our Saviors omission of it.

3 Their Baptizing their Beds, by Dipping, will (this Construction granted) be
nevertheless Incredible, and Unintelligible.

4 If they had water enough in Jerusalem to Baptize themselves (by Dipping)
every time they went to Meat, and to Dip their Beds under Water, every time
they Lay on 'em. Then,

1. Jerusalem abounded with Water, that so many Thousands could be Plunged,
three times every Day, which will not be easily Received, by those acquainted with
the sacred story, where we find such pains Taken for, and such an Estimate put
upon their Wells of Water. And,

2. If Water was plenty enough for the above mentioned purposes, then John had
no need to Baptize at Enon near to Sali^, for the sake of Water to Dip in,
there being a daily practical evidence, that there was water enough at
Jerusalem, and Elsewhere.

These things Considered, I think it falls but little short of Demonstration,
that the Bapti^ing, in the quoted Text, was not by Immersion. But I pass on.

To take Notice of 1 Cor. 10.1, 2. [ Moreover Brethren I would not that ye
should be Ignorant, how that all our Fathers were under the Cloud, and all
passed through the Sea; -- and were all Baptized (EBAPTISANTO) unto Moses in
the Cloud.

This Baptism was Evidently by Sprinkling, and no otherwise; For would it not
be a Trifling, unworthy of our Notice, to say, That their being wet, and
Refreshed by Rain from a Cloud, was Dipping them under Water? And that the
Baptism here spoken of, was by Rain from the Cloud, (under which the Apostle
here says they were Baptized) will not remain Doubtful, when you have Read
Psalm. 68, 7, 8, 9. O God, when thou wentest forth before thy People, when thou
marchedst through the Wildernes^, the Earth Shook, the Heavens Dropped, at the
presence of God, etc. Thou, O God, did send a plentiful Rain, whereby thou
did Confirm (or Refresh) thine Inheritance, when it was weary. We find the
Heavens Dropped, the Clouds Rained, etc. which was undoubtedly, the Baptism
referred to by the Apostle. And I Am sure I need not say much to convince you,
that they were not Dipped in the Cloud, nor Plunged in the Rain.

We'll next look into Heb. 9, 10. Which stood only in Meats and Drinks, and
Diverse Washings [BAPTISMOIS] and Carnal Ordinances.

This is a Home-Thrust, and therefore puts our Author into a Sweat to turn it
aside; which by all his Elaborate Pains he is not able to Effect. The Substance
of what he Says, and upon which all his tedious Harrangue is founded, is page
169. That the Words, for ought he knows to the contrary, may speak of those
Washings only, which were by Bathing or Dipping into Water. This I shall
therefore consider,

1 We shall first observe the End and Scope of of these words, which was to
show, that all the Legal Cleansings under the Mosaic Paedogogy, were Typical
of our being sa^ingly Cleansed from the Pollution and Defilement of Sin, by the
Lavar of Christ's Blood; and therefore not Sufficient, to make him that did the
Service perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience. And does it look at all
likely, that the Apostle in showing the Deficiency of all the Jewish Washings
should Referr them only to the Bathings, which were by far the Least part of
the Washings in use amongst them.

2. The words are not true in fact, if our Authors construction be allowed; it
did not stand ONLY in diverse Bathings and Dippings, there was diverse
Sprin^lings also used for their Purgations, and that even in Cases of the
greatest Defilement; But I Charitably Hope he was not aware of this
Consequence: But to make all clear.

3. We'll allow the Apostle Liberty to Explain himself what Washings it was he
refer^s to, and that he has done in the following verses. v. 13.14. If the
Blood of Bulls, and of Goats and the Ashes of an Heifer, Sprinkling the
unclean, Sancty^ies to the purifying of the flesh, How much more shall the
Blood of Christ? etc.

This makes it clear, beyond doubt, that the Washings Spoken of, were
principally the Sprinklings used among the Jews; for these, and these only, he
Instanceth in, and referrs to, Number. 8, 7, and 19. per totum, upon which I have
particularly discoursed above.

By this time you cannot but see, that the word in Debate, signifyes something
Else beside Dipping, and Plunging.

I am already (and I Am persuaded you also) grown weary of this word
Controversy, you will therefore Excuse me from further searching after, the
meaning of the word in Scripture, when I Have only Remark't,

That the word in Debate is frequently used in Scripture; where (if the Sense
Mr. Gale pleads for, be allowed, and it does signify to Dip) it will be far
from Justifying the Antipoedobaptists in their Method of administering the
Ordinance, for it don't necessarily (where it does signify to Dip) Imply, the
Immersion of the whole Body, which is Clear,

1 From Luke 16.24. And send Lazarus, that he may Dip (Bapse) the Tip of his
Finger in Water, and cool my Tongue.

2. From Luke 11.38. And when the Pharisee saw it, he marvailed that he had not
first washed, (EBAPTISTHE) before Dinner. This compared with Mark. 7, 5 makes
it Evident, that the washing of the Hand, is the Baptism of the man. Whether
the hands were washed by Dipping* or Affusion, is not what I am now Enquiring;
but what I observe is, that the Pharisee admired that he was not first Baptized
(for so are the words Literally to be translated) before Dinner, when the
Washing of the Hand only, was what he Referred to. -- And also to the same
purpose.

3. From Mat 26.23. He that Dippeth (EMBAPSAS) his Hand, with me in the Dish.
Hence then I argue, If Dipping the Tip of the Finger in Water be ( Ba^tizing;
If Washing the Hands be Baptizing the man; If Dipping the Fingers into a Sop,
be Baptizing the hand, Then the word Bap^ize, does not necessarily signify to
Dip the whole Body, nor has our Savior in requiring us to Baptize, required us
to Plunge the Body under Water. So that if we allow them all they plead for,
(and which none of them can ever prove) that the word Baptizo does signify to
Dip, and only to Dip, yet it does not vindicate their practice, of a total
Immersion; for Dipping the Face, the Hand, Foot, Nay, the Finger, is a Baptism.

I have here indeed used the words Bapto and Baptizo, as Synonomous, with which
our Author can find no fault, since he has assured us, that they are; page 217.
Exactly the same, as to their signification.

But if there be (as many have Learnedly argued) any difference in these words,
it is altogether on our side: for if Bapto does not necessarily include
Dipping, in its signification, all Mankind will acknowledge it certain, that
Baptizo cannot be limited to that sense only.

Mr. Gale next endeavors to prove his mode of Baptism, by Citations from the
Fathers of the Church, To all which its Answer sufficient,

1. That the most that he quotes are too late to determine the matter, This
matter; This Mr. Gale supposes sufficient answer to Mr. Wall, when he quotes
Arrian of Nicomedia Page 355. That he lived not, until an Hundred and Fifty
Years after Christ; whereas these he Cites, are much later.

2. Where he does make a show of having primitive Antiquity on his side, he
does but abuse his Reader. For Instance,

1. He brings in St. Barnabas saying, That we descend into the Water, full of
Sins and Defilement, etc. If he had done fairly by his Reader, he would have
told him, that St. Barnabas Words might as truly have been translated, We go
unto the Water and come from the Water; for so the prepositions he renders
into, and Out Of, are very frequently used, as you will see at Large hereafter.
And

2. He quotes the Apostolic Constitutions, which he knows are Universally (by
all learned men) acknowledged, to be spurious, and of a later date; He should
therefore, have disabused his Reader, by giving him that account. All other his
Citations, fall under the former Exception. To which I may add,

3. That the Fathers of the Church (as he knows, and is forced to acknowledge)
do some of them approve, and argue for Sprinkling in Baptism;

And this seems to have been the only Mode of administering the Ordinance in the
early Ages of the Church, by that Story of Clemens Alewand* Related by Eusebius
Hist. Eccles. Lib. 3. cap. 10. of an apostate youth, who after he had made a
profession of Christianity, and enjoyed the Ordinance of Baptism; forsook the
ways and fear of God, pursued all manner of Dissolute Courses; Headed a
Company of Thieves, and Banditti, gave himself up to Slaughter, Murder, and
Extreme Cruelty. This being made known to the Apostle John (who before had
committed him to the Care of a Godly Bishop, for Education and Instruction in
the Faith) He pursues him into the Wilderness, and finding him, brings him unto
such a Sense of, and Repentance for his past course of Extravagance, that
embracing the Apostle, he answered him as well as he could, for weeping; So
that again (says the Hystorian) he seemed to be Baptized with Tears, The
Shaking the Hand only omitted.

Whether this Story be true or Fabulous, makes nothing to the purpose, but what
I observe is, that this Ordinance was, in those Early Centuries, administered by
Shaking the Hand, consequently not by Dipping or Plunging: (he could not be
dipped in his Tears) but by Affusion, or Aspersion; unto which that gesture is
necessary.

I shall not weary your patience with the many other Authorities of the
Ancients, that might here be Introduced; but only observe to you, That our
Author himself brings in Origin, one of the most capable Judges among them all)
rendering the word (BEBAMMENON) Baptized, in Rev. 19.13. By ERANTISMENON,
Sprinkled, But rather than vail to the Authority of this Father, and of the
Syriac and Ethiopic Versions, which also render it so, He would fain believe
Page 181. That the Text it self is wrong, and that the word there has been
altered. But why so? is there any Copy of the New Testament in the World, to be
found, that has any other Reading, different from the vulgar? no! But how is it
possible for Origin* and those Early Versions to understand the word otherwise,
than he does, or of any Larger signification?

You see, Sir, what strange Refuges a Disperate Cause must have, that Men will
rather suppose a Mistake in the Scripture, than in themselves.

Our Author must think that all Mankind has laid aside the use of their Reason,
and that no body could read but himself, when with such an Air he ventures to
say, P. 109 101. That he is inclined to believe, That in general is a mistake,
that Words have more than one Signification. And for this to quote Mr Lock in
the third Book of his Essay of Human Understanding. Let us Look into him and
see what he says. Book 3 Chap. 9 S. 4 That then (says he) that makes
Doubtful^ess, and uncertainty in the Signification of some more than other
Words, is the difference of Ideas, they stand for. He tells us again Book 3.
Chap 7. S 4. In the Hebrew Tongue there is a Particle consisting of but one
single Letter, of which there are reackoned up, as I remember, Seventy, I Am
sure above Fifty Several Significations. He goes on to Instance in our English
Word BUT, of which he finds Five (and doubts not but he could if it were his
Business to examine it, find a great many more) Significations.

I might also observe to you, That we have some words, even in our Language, of
a quite Contrary Signification, to Instance in the word Let, Sometimes used to
permit, as Let me go, sometimes to hinder, as I have met with many Lets in my
way.

You may see by this how much his Assertions and how much his Quotations, are
to be depended upon.

I shall now Conclude the first Controversy about the mode of Baptizing, when I
have shown you that we don't want sufficient Reason for our Mode of
administering the Ordinance.

1. Then what is Signified by, Represented and Sealed to us, in this Ordinance,
is (in Scripture) expressed by Sprinkling, and Affusion, but never by Dipping
or Plunging, that I Remember. To Instance.

1. Baptism signifies the Washing away our Sins by the Blood of Christ, as in
Acts 22, 16. Arise be Baptized and wash away thy Sins. Now the washing away our
Sins by Christ's Blood is frequently represented by Sprinkling, as 1 Pet. 1, 2.
Through Sanctification of the Spirit unto Obedience, and Sprinkling of the
Blood of Jesus Christ Isa. 52, 15. So shall he Sprinkle many Nations Ezekiel. 36
25 I will Sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean Heb. 12, 24. And
to the Blood of Sprinkling, which speaks better than the Blood of Abel.

2. The signification of Baptism is the Answer of a good Conscience, as the
Apostle tells us, 1 Pet. 3 21. and this is also represented by Sprinkling; Heb.
10, 22. Having our Hearts Sprinkled from an Evil Conscience.

3. Baptism Represents unto us our Sanctification and Cleansing by, and the
Gifts of the Holy Ghost. Hence these Metaphorical Expressions of being Baptized
with the Holy Ghost, before spoken of, and this is Set forth in Scripture by
Affusion; as in the forecited Isai. 43, 4^ I will Pour my Spirit upon thy
Seed. And Joel 2, 28. I will pour out my Spirit upon all Flesh.

2. It cannot be proved from Scripture, that the Ordinance was ever administered
by Dipping or Plunging* there are indeed Expressions that seem to favor this
mode of Baptis* but if Examined, will not prove so unanswerable as Mr. Gale.
pretends. I shall distinctly consider the Texts, that he Cites for that purpose.

The first is Joh. 3.23. And John also was Baptizing in Enon, near to Salim,
because there was much Water there. Here note,

1 That the words in the original are, because there was (hudata polla) Many
Waters there. And Travelers assure us, that it is a place of many Springs, and
therefore not likely to Dip those Multitudes in, that came there to be Baptized.

2. John being in the Wilderness, there was occasion for much Water, that the
multitudes which attended his Baptism might have Water for themselves, and
Horses, or other Creatures (on which its probable many of them Rid thither) to
Drink, Many springs of Water seem much more suitable to this purpose, than for
Dipping or Plunging men.

3. While the Rites of Purification were continued among the Jews, it would
have been thought a Scandal, for the same Vessel of Water to have been used for
the Baptizing of many Persons, and therefore there needed much Water for this
Administration, though it had been by Affusion or Aspersion.

4. If all that John Baptized had been Dipped, he must have stood whole Days
togather in the Water, and therefore could not have survived that Employment
but by Miracle.

5 If Three Thousand were Baptized at Jerusalem in one afternoon, ( Acts.
2.41,) Either they were Baptized by Sprinkl^ng or pou^ing on the Water, Else
there was no need of going to Enon, near to Salim, for the sake of much Water
to D^p in.

As for their being Baptized of John in the River Jordan, it does not as Ex^m
^ort. D^sp. Mr. Morgan has Ingeniously R^mark't; any more prove their being
plung^d all over in it, than the man's Washing his Eyes in the Pool of Siloam
John. 9.7. proves his being Dipped all over. Mr. Gale Demands, Which is most
natural to Suppose, that the River was poured or Sprinkled on them, or they
Dipped in the River? I assume the former, Its most natural to Suppose, that the
River (by a Synechdoche of a part for the whole) was poured or Sprinkled on
them, as in the above Example, of the man's washing his Eyes in the Pool of
Siloam.

The next Text he brings to prove this Mode of Baptism, is That Acts 8.38. And
they went both into the Water, both Phillip, and the Eunuch, and he Baptized
him. In answer to which; its sufficient to Say, That the Preposition ( Eis)
here rendered into, might as properly be Read Unto the Water, and so it is very
often used in the Scriptures; It does not therefore necessarily argue, that he
was Baptized by Dipping. Mr. Morgan has (in the above cited Book) collected
Sundry Instances, wherein this Preposition necessarily signifyes unto, and
against, whom for your satisfaction I Will transcribe Ioh. 13.2. Eis Telos, unto
that End, Joh. 7. often Eis teen Eo^t^n, unto the Feast Acts 25. often unto
Jerusalem. Mat. 18.15. Ean Amartese Eis se ad^lphos, If thy Brother trespass
Against thee; John. 12.17. Eis teen Hemeran; Against the Day, (not Into it) for
she Spent her Ointment before the Day came. Thus he. To which I may add an
Instance wholly Unexceptionable; It is Ioh. 20.4 So they Ran both togather, and
the other Dis^iple did out run Peter and came first To (Eis) the Sepulcher,
Here its most certain, that it does not signify into; for in the Next Verse,
the H. Ghost assures That he Went not into the sepulcher, no further than Just
to Look in; v. 5. And he Stooping Down, and looking in, saw the Linning
Clothes lying; Yet went he not in. Many more Instances might be Produced, to
show that this Preposition. [ EIS] may properly be translated unto; from this
Text therefore is nothing Evident, but that they went unto the water Our
Adversaries often urge our Saviors coming Out Of the Water, after his Baptism,
Mat. 3.16. But this is far from being to their purpose; for the Words truly
translated are, he went straightway From the Water, for thus I think the
Preposition ( Apo) is always to be understood; it answers the Latin
Prepositions A, Ab, Abs, and the English from. Thus, Mat. 1.17. It is used no
less than three times going, so all the generations from [Apo] Abraham to David
are Fourteen generations; and from (Apo) David until the carrying away into
Babylon, are Fourteen generations; an^ from (Apo) the Carrying away into
Babylon, unto Christ, are Fourteen generations. Thus also, Mat. 19.8. Ap'
Arches, From the Beginning. Thus Mat. 4.25. Apo tes Gallilaias, from Gallilee.
And thus Acts 10.17. Behold the men which were sent From (Apo) Cornelius, etc.
But I need not add Instances; for this is the native and Constant meaning of
the Word.

Though Mr. Gale urges these Texts With Earnestness enough, yet when he finds
this Preposition Construed to his disadvantage, he Learnedly, and indeed truly
argues, that Page 440, 441. Apo signifyes From, in propriety of speech. So that
all Arguments from Christ's, and the Eunuchs coming Out of the Water, are by his
own Pleas wholly out of Doors.

It is further worthy of Remark that we never Read any thing of going To the
Water, or From the Water, in Baptism, Except in the Wilderness, or places
distant from Inhabitants, where in all likelihood they wanted Vessels, to take
up Water in.

But after all, were it granted that they actually went into the Water, its no
Evidence that they were Dipped or Plunged into it; they might go into the Water,
and not be wet up to their Ankles.

The next Text he brings is Col. 2.12. and Rom 6, 4. Which are both of the same
Import; and therefore may be Considered togather. That upon which, he Lays The
Stress of his Argument, is our being Buried with Christ in Baptism. When he
argues, That as Christ was Buried under the Earth, so should we be Buried under
Water. In Answer to which, it is sufficient to tell you,

1. That the whole Scope of the Text is to show us that we are Baptized to a
Conformity unto Christ's Death, by our Dying to Sin; and to his Rising again in
our living to God: Here is not (...) Intimation that our Bodies should (...)
Water; and I cannot but wonder that ^ Gentleman of Mr. Gales Ingenuity should
urge it.

2. Our manner of Administering the Ordinance, more Imitates a Burial than
theirs; the throwing Water on the Baptized, is more like throwing Earth on the
Dead. Dead men don't use to be Dipped, or plunged into the ground.

3. Our Author gives an answer to this himself, If he will be tied to the same
meat as he would limit us Page 180. All Metaphorical Passages (says he) are out
of Doors, Because of their Ambiguousness, and Obscurity. I Will only add,

4. Our Adversaries themselves do practically deny their Commentary upon this
Text, for the Administrator of this ordinance (among them) never Dipped but a
part of the Body, nor are they but partly Buried under Water in Baptism. The
Person to be Baptized goes into the Water himself above the Waste, and
therefore either partly Baptizes himself, or else nothing but his upper parts
are Baptized at all.

The Antipoedobaptists call for Express Proof, that Infants are to be Baptized;
Let them therefore produce Express Proof, that this Ordinance is to be
administered by Dipping.

3 We have Instances in the Scriptures of the Administration of this Ordinance,
that we cannot Reasonably suppose was by Dipping. It is Scarce possible the
^hree Thousand Baptized a^ Jerusalem (most certain^y toward the (...) of the
Day) Acts. 2.41. were all Dipped. The Jaylors whole Household were Baptized in the
Dead of the night, Acts 1^.33. And was Baptized, he, and all his straightway.
There is not the least probability, that they went out unto any Debth of Water
for it. Nor any more probability, that Paul was Dipped, as you will see if you will
Read Acts. 9.9. And the very Text it self seems to Contradict the Dipping of
Cornelius and his Household, Acts. 10.47. Can any man forbid Water, that these
should not be Baptized? He does not say, who shall forbid them going to the
Water, in order to be Baptized, But; Who shall forbid Water, (that is the
bringing of Water) for that purpose. Finally, the Degree of the Washing is not
any thing Essential to the Right administration of the Ordinance, any more than
the quantity of the Bread and Wine, in the Lords Supper. Which may be
Illustrated by transcribing Ioh. 13.8, 9, 10. Peter said unto him, Thou shall
never wash my Feet; Jesus answered him. If I wash thee not, thou have no part
with me, Simon Peter says unto him, Lord, not my Feet only, but also my Hands
and my Head; Jesus says unto him, He that is washed, needs not Save to wash
his Feet, but is clean Every whit. Though our Savior did not Institute this
Ceremony of Washing their Feet; as a standing Sacrament, yet he did thereby put
them in mind of the necessity of their being washed in his Blood, from the
Pollution of Sin, as is evident from his saying, They had Else no part with
him. And we see that washing but a part of the Body, did sufficiently signify
the Sanctification of the whole Man; and why then washing a part of the Body in
Baptism, does not sufficiently Signify the Cleansing of the whole Man, our
Adversaries are accountable.

Thus I have, as briefly as the Task you Imposed upon me, would allow,
dispatched the first part of the Controversy.

HAving finished my Remarks (I hope to your Satisfaction) on the First, it is
time to Consider the second, and principal Article in Dispute; which, Refers to
the subject of Baptism.

Mr Gale is forced, Page 220. To Take breath a while, before he Enters upon
this, that he might Regain his Vigor, and strength to Encounter his Adversary,
in this new Combat; but as he Toiled himself out of Breath, to but very little
purpose, in his former Attempt, so (you will find, Sir,) that his new Accession
of Spirits and strength, will be but little Service to him, in this fresh
Encounter.

He promises, Page 220. To avoid all he can the Celebrated Arguments, from
Original Sin, and Circumcision, which have been (as he says) so often, and
fairly Baffled. In this Indeed was his prudence very Considerable, for as often
Baffled as they have been they Remain yet too powerful for him to abide in the
field.

He proceeds to Lay the Foundation of a long, and triumphant Harrangue, by
telling us, Page 221. That Mr. Wall very freely allows, that it cannot be made
appear from the Scriptures, that Infants are to be Baptized. Were this true,
Mr. Wall had indeed given up the Cause, and made a voluntary offer of the
Laurels of Victory, to his Adversary: But though he does most seriously, and
frequently affirm, it, ^ han't so Extensive a Charity, as to believe it; But
conclude, That in this (as frequently elsewhere) he watches all opportunities,
Right or wrong, to make, Candida de nigris, et de candentibus ^^tra i. e. Our
opinion Black, and his White^

I dare not, indeed, affirm, That there is no such passage in Mr. Walls Book,
(I not having seen it) But am sure that the Passages quoted, fall so very far
short of any such Concession, that there cannot be modestly any such
Construction (unless by a far fetched Innuendo) put upon them; And I am ready
to Conclude, that if Mr. Wall had said it, our Author would not have been so
tender of him, as not to transcribe it.

He indeed brings in Mr. Wall saying, That there is no particular Direction
given, what to do, with Reference to the Children of those that Received the
faith. And that among all the Persons, that are Recorded as Baptized by the
Apostles, there is no Express mention made of any Infant, etc. But what is this
like acknowledgeing that it cannot be made appear from the Scriptures, that
Infants are to he Baptized? Much may be made appear from Scripture, that is not
Expressly mentioned there, as the Admission of Women unto the Lords Supper, the
Change of the Sabbath, and the Baptism even of the Apostles themselves, etc.

It is a Ruled Case, That good Consequences drawn from Scripture, are as much
to be Relied on, as the Express words of it.

Did not our Lord prove the Resurrection, by Consequences from Scripture? Mat.
22.31. Did not the Apostle use Consequential Reasoning, when he argues from
Deuteronomy. 25.4. ( Thou shall not muzzle the Mouth of the Ox that treads forth the
Corn) to the maintenance of the Gospel Ministers, 1 Cor. 9.9? And does he not
use Consequential Arguments, when he argues from the Priesthood of Melchizedec,
to the Priesthood of Christ, Heb 7. per totum? Cum multis aliis you hence see,
that what is not Expressly mentioned in the Scriptures, may be evidently enough
proved from them. And though Mr. Wall grants, that there is no Express mention of
Infants, he may be far enough from acknowledging that it cannot be proved from
Scripture, that Infants should be Baptized. I insist more particularly here, to
show you the disingenuity of Mr. Gale in this Case, and how little he is to be
depended upon, that will thus venture to say any thing; as well as to defect
the vanity of their common Outcry, Let there be Express Scripture produced,
that Infants should be Baptized.

But it is not so material whether Mr. Wall allows, or dissallows this
Allegation, as whether it is true in fact; which if it appears to be, (as our
Author would persuade us it is) our Cause, I must confess, is Expiring, and
must quickly give up the Ghost. But I find so little grounds of Dependence upon
Mr. Gales Word, that (...) rather Examine the Cause, than strike to his bold
Ipse Dixit; And if upon a fair Examination, it does appear from Scripture, that
Infants ought to be Baptized, He may Order a Deleatur upon his whole 6 th
Letter, for the Laurels he so hastily Snatches up will appear to be withered,
and his whole Triumphant Cant, but a vain Boast. But its time to come into the
Enquiry.

Arg. 1. If Infants have Faith, they are qualifyed for, and ought to enjoy the
Ordinance of Baptism. That Faith qualifyes for Baptism, is what I think no
Antipoedobaptist will deny. The Consequence is Clear, and unexceptionable, see
Mark. 16.16. Acts. 16.31.33. It only Remains to prove from Scripture, that
Infants have Faith; which you shall now see done, I hope, to your Satisfaction.

I freely own, that the Acts, and Exercises of Faith they are no more capable
of, than the Acts, and Exercises of Reason; but as all men will allow them the
Habits of Reason; I cannot see why they should deny them the Habits of Faith.
I Am sure there is the same Cause to Deny their being Rational Creatures, as
Believers. And our Adversaries will hardly be able to tell us why they may not,
(the want of the Exercise of Reason notwithstanding) as well be Believers, as
Covenant-Breakers; as Uncircumcised Infants are styled, Genesis 17.14. But this
will not Remain Doubtful, when you Consider,

1. That they are Expressly styled Believers in Christ, by him whose Authority
must not be called in question. Mat. 18.2, 6. And Jesus called a little Child
unto him, and set him in the midst of them, and said, Whosoever shall offend one of
these ^ittle Ones, which believe in me, etc. This is plain and full Testimony;
and the Objections commonly thrown in the way; to evade the force hereof, are
but light, and trivial.

Its O^jected that our Lord by Little One here may only me^n those that are
little in their own Eyes, those that are humble, etc. But this mistake is
Evident enough, only by comparing the Consequent with the Antecedent. One of
these Little Ones, which believe in me. What little ones? See verse 2 d. It was
one of those little Ones, which Christ took in his Hands, and set in the midst
of them, which was a Little Child. It does not any thing strength the
Objection, that our Lord in the 3 d and 4 th verses, urged the necessity of
becoming as little Children, and as this Child, preparatory to our Entering the
Kingdom of Heaven. This indeed refers to the Meekness, Humility, etc. necessary
to all his Disciples; But observe, that in the 3 d and 4 th verses, he does not
tell them that they must become such little Children or such a Child as this,
(as the Antipoedabaptists in Germany Dreamed, and therefore went playing about
the streets with Rattles, etc. But as little Children and as this Child.

The Disciples had been Contending among themselves, who should be the
greatest, as you will see in the parallel Text, Mark 9.34. He therefore takes a
little Child in his arms, as a fit pattern to teach them Humility; and tells
them, they must become as this little Child, etc.

2 dly, As little Children affect not Dominion, nor Contend for Prerogative or
Priority; As they are not given to Boast and Glory, nor prefer themselves to
others; As they are not Haughty and Proud; As they are Meek, not Angry,
Malicious, Vindictive; As they wholly depend upon their Fathers care and
providence, etc. So must you be like them, etc. Whereas in the Text Insisted
on, there is no comparison taken from the Child, the Occasion of the Discourse,
as in the other Verses; But an Immediate Reference to that, and such like
little Children: One of These little Children. Moreover,

The Scope and drift of our Lords Discourse in the 5 th and 6 th Verses, will
help to Enlighten this. Our Lord is there showing how much he values, and how
highly R^^ents Indignities done unto his Mystical Members, that he will well
Reward the kindness shown, and Revenge the Injuries done, to any of them, though
but one of his Believing Infants, for his sake.

It is also objected, That this Child, though little, might be grown to some
Years, and so be capable of Actual Faith. To which I answer,

1. He took the Child in his Arms, as Mark. assures us, Cap. 9 v. 35. and it is
therefore most Reasonable to conclude, that it was but in its Infancy.

2. The End of our Saviors presenting them with that Emblem of Humility,
Meekness, etc. was lost, if it was a Child arrived to an age capable of the
Acts of Reason and Faith; for you are not so unacquainted with such little
Children, as to be Ignorant, how Proud, Pievish, Contentious, etc. they are,
more I think at such an age, than any other.

If it be objected, That he called him, therefore he was not an Infant. I
answer, He might call him in his nurses Arms, and it seems most probable that
he did, by the forecited parrallel Text, Mark. 9.35. Where its said he took him
in his Arms. But if otherwise, an Infant in Understanding, may be capable to go
alone, and come when called.

As to the Objection, That Infants cannot be Offended, Its too trivial to be
taken notice of. Cannot they be Reproached. Vilify'd, Scandalized, (as the
Original Greek Word Scandalize, properly signif^es)? Did Hazael offer no
offense, or Injury to the Infants that he dashed to pieces, as was prophesyed
of him, in 2 Kings 8.12.

Our Adversaries Practice indeed makes evident their belief, that Infants cannot
be offended. This threatening of our Lord against those that do offend these
little Ones, would Else make them tremble, when they deny them the Ordinances
of the Gospel, a Station in the Church, and Faith in Christ, and Rank them
among the Heathen.

2 dly. Infants Either have Faith (habitual at least) or they cannot be Saved,
He that Believes not shall be damned, Mark 16, 16. Ioh. 3.18, 36. It would be
most Uncharitable Cruelty, as well as Express Contradiction to the Scriptures,
to Deny Salvation unto all Infants, and to Damn them by wholesale. And if they
are saved without Faith, it must be in some way that the Gospel has never
proposed; Nay, it must be in away directly Repugnant to the terms of Salvation,
proposed in the Gospels. Can we any where find Salvation Exhibited to Graceless
Infidels? And such are all Infants and such to be Esteemed, if without Faith.

Are they Sanctified and made Gracious, or do they all continue under the
Pollution and Defilement of Original sin? If the former, they must have Faith,
the Sanctifying Grace and Root of all other Graces. If the Latter, they cannot
be Saved, for no Unclean thing shall Enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. They
must inevitably fall within the Reach of this Dilemma, Let then consult what
Answer they will; For Infants must be Either Clean or Unclean, Sanctified or
Polluted; If Sanctified, it must be by the Infusion of Grace, and Consequently
of Faith; If Unsanctifyed, they cannot be saved. I might yet prosecute this
Argument, by showing you,

3. That if they have not the Spirit of Christ they are none of his, Romans 8.9.
And if they have the Spirit of Christ, Their Hearts are certainly purifyed by
Faith, for the H^l^ Ghost will not take up his Dwelling, in an Impure and
Unsanctify'd Mansion. But I believe what has been said will yield you
Satisfaction.

What though we cannot understand the Unsearcheable Methods of the Holy Spirit, in
begetting this Grace in them, He that calls them Believers, and says, of such
are the Kingdom of Heaven, knows how to give them Faith, and a Title to his
Kingdom. But I proceed to*

Argument 2. They that are in the Covenant of ^race, have a Right to have the
Covenant Sealed to them by Baptism. But Infants of Believers are in the
Covenant of Grace. This whole Argument receives sufficient Confirmation, from
that Acts 2.38, 39. Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be Baptized, every
one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ; for the Remission of Sins, etc. For
the Promise is unto you, and to your Children. The Major of this Argument is
plain from the Words, The Tittle they had to Baptism, and the Grounds of their
being exhorted to it, was their Interest in the Covenant Promises; Be Baptized;
for the Promise is unto you. And that Infants are in the Covenant of Grace, is
no less Evident, For the Promise is unto you, and your Children: What can be
plainer? And by the way, you may observe, That Infants have the same Claim to
Baptism, as the Adult. By the Apostles argument in this Text, they are Exhorted
to Be Baptized, in Order to receive Remission of Sins, and the Holy Ghost,
which Exhortation is pressed upon them, from their Interest in the Promise, as
an Enforcing Motive and Encouragemen^, and as a Reason why they ought to be
Baptized Infants have the like Interest in the Promise ( The Promise is to you,
and to your Children) and therefore by Irresistible Consequence, the like Claim
to Baptism.

It cannot be Reasonably objected, That their Interest in the Promise was urged,
only as an Encouragement unto them, that they should Receive Remission of Sins,
and the Gift of the Holy Ghost; and not as a motive to their Being Baptized;
For the Argument of the Apostle must have the next and most Immediate
Referrence, to their being Baptized; Because it was their Interest in the
Promise, upon which their Right to Baptism, is founded. Their being Children of
the Covenant, entitles them to the Seals of it. The Argument is very apt and
applicable; Be Baptized, Got the Covenant Sealed, (in order to your Enjoying
the Blessings and benefits thereof, viz. Pardon and Sanctification) For you
have a Covenant Right, and therefore ought to enjoy Covenant Privileges* But
the Argument is not so applicable, as an Encouragement to their Receiving the
Gifts of the Holy Ghost; For there are many that have a visible Covenant Right,
who never Receive the Gifts of the Holy Ghost.

But after all, If this Text does not Sati^factorily strengthen the Argument,
what follows (as you will be Convinced) will fall nothing short of Demonstration.

That the Abrahamitical Covenant did include, and was Sealed unto Infants, as
well as the Adult, none can doubt, that will Read the 17 Chap. of Genesis and that
it Extends in the same Latitude to Believers under the Gospel, is Evident, in
that Abraham was made the Father of many Nations, Genesis 17.5. of Gentiles, as
well as Jews, and therefore the Covenant with him and his seed, Extended in the
same Latitude to his Gentile seed, as to his seed after the flesh. A^ the
Covenant was made with, and sealed to his natural Progeny, and their Infant
seed, Even so to the Believing Gentiles, and their Infant seed. The Apostle
Confirms this, in Gal. 3.14. The blessing of Abraham comes on the Gentiles
through Jesus Christ.

The Objection, That this Covenant which was Sealed by Circumcision, was only a
Promise of the Land of Canaan, is almost too Trifling to be taken notice of.
For,

1. There was not a fourth part of Abraham's Posterity, (none but the Progeny of
his Grandson Jacob) that were to Expect, or ever did Enjoy a portion in the
Land of Canaan.

2. There is much more employed in the very words of the Covenant, as in the 7
th Verse of the forecited Chap. of Genesis And I will Establish my Covenant
between me and thee, and thy seed after thee in their Generations, for an
Everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and thy seed after thee. The
Covenant was an Everlasting Covenant, but the Land of Canaan was not their
everlasting Portion. The Tenor of the Covenant was That he would be a God unto
Abrah. and his seed. The promise of the Land of Canaan was but a Subjoined
Article of Divine favor to, and Care of him and his. This is further
Illustrated from Deuteronomy. 29.10, 11.13. (where God Renews this Covenant with the
Posterity of Abraham, and their little Ones) Ye stand this Day all of you,
before the Lord your God, your Captains of your Tribes, your Elders and your
Officers, with all the men of Israel, your Little Ones, etc. that he may
establish thee to Day, for a people unto himself; and that he may be unto thee
a God, as he has said unto thee, and as he has sworn unto thy Fathers, to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.

It may be here Remark't, that God takes their Little Ones into Covenant with
him, as well as themselves; and that the Blessings of the Covenant made with
them, and their Fathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, were no less than the
enjoying God himself, as their Portion. This was the Covenant, whereof
Circumcision was a Seal.

3. This Covenant could not be a Promise only of the Land of Canaan, in that
the Blessings thereof Extend to believing Gentiles, as well as Jews, who are
the seed of Abraham after the Spirit, and Heirs of this very Promise, or
Covenant, that was made with him, as was before noted, and is very plain from
Gal. 3.29. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according
to the Promise. Heirs of what? Of the Land of Canaan? No Surely! we have no
Interest there; But there are Richer Blessings in store, for those that are
Members of Christ, viz. their having God himself, their Portion for Ever.

If I have been too long in answering this Trifling Objection, you know where
to Lay the fault, I Will conclude this Argument by only adding,

1. That either Infants are yet Included in the Covenant made with Abraham, and
his Spiritual seed, both Jews and Gentiles, and ought to have it Sealed unto
them, as formerly, or else it lies at our Adversaries Doors, to show us from
Scripture, How, Why, and When they were cut off from the Covenant, and the
annexed Privileges.

2. That either Infants have an Interest in the Covenant, and a just claim to
have it Sealed unto them, or else the Blessings and Privileges of the New
Testament Dispensation, are far less than the Old. That the Covenant of Grace,
and the Seals thereof are Blessings and Privileges, none can be so hardy as to
Deny: nor dare any Christian suppose, that the Evangelical Dispensation, has
Lessened the Privileges of the Faithful, Therefore the Covenant of Grace must
Extend, and be Sealed to Believers, and their Infant seed. Arg. 3. And now Sir,
I shall venture (not withstanding Mr. Gale would even Laugh us out of it) to
argue from Circumcision, and it will appear, that this so often Baffled Plea
(as he calls it) will yet be able to bear the Shock. of their fiercest
Opposition. I thus argue;

If Baptism comes in the Room and stead of Circumcision, It ought to be
administered to Infants, as Circumcision was. This is a Clear Consequence, and
admits of no Debate. To say, that this is not Commanded, as that was, is a
begging the Question; for if it succeeds in the Room of Circumcision, it must
be used in the Room thereof, and then certainly be administered to the same
Subjects. It only therefore lies before us to prove that Baptism does succed
unto, and come in the Room and stead of Circumcision, which will receive clear
evidence from these Scriptures.

I shall first turn to Col. 2.11, 12. In whom also they are Circumcised, with
the Circumcision made without hands, in putting off the Body of the Sins of the
Flesh, By the Circumcision of Christ; Buried with him in Baptism. The Apostle
in the foregoing verse, tells them, That they were complete in Christ; But it
might something plausibly be objected, That they could not be complete, that
wanted Circumcision, the Seal of the Covenant, and Symbol of their Covenant
Right. He therefore as a Sufficient matter of Satisfaction to 'em in that
point, tells them, That they had (1.) the thing signified by Circumcision, viz.
the Circumcision of the Heart. (2) That they had the Covenant Sealed by another
Ordinance, that (since the abrogation of Circumcision) succeeded to, and was in
the Room and Place of, the former. They had not only the Circumcision made
without Hands; but were also Buried with Christ in Baptism. This is (I think)
the plain and natural meaning of the words.

Let us next look into Gal. 3.27.29. For as many of you as have been Baptized
into Christ, have put on Christ, and if they be Christ's than are they Abraham's
Sued and Heirs according to the Promise. Hence I argue

If Baptism be now a Sign and Seal of the very same thing whereof Circumcision
was appointed a Sign and Seal, under the Old Testament Dispensation; Then
Baptism comes in the Room and stead of Circumcision; The Consequence is c^ear*
and cannot be Opposed And that Baptism is a Sign and Seal of the same thing, is
express in the Text, where we find Baptism to be a Sign and Symbol of our
belonging to Christ, and thereby of being Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to
the promise, as Circumcision also was; See Genesis 17. This is also Evident from

Acts 2 41. Then they that gladly Received his Word were Baptized, and the same
Day were added unto them about Three Thousand Souls. From whence I argue.

If Baptism be a Note and Symbol of our being Received into, and being Members
of the Church, then it Succeeds in the Room and stead of Circumcision. The
Consequence is clear, in that Circumcision was a Symbol thereof, see Exodus*
12.43.44. There shall no stranger Eat thereof, but every Man Servant that is
bought for Money, when thou have Circumcised him, then shall he eat thereof; So
v. 14 And when a Stranger shall sojourn with thee and will keep the Passover
unto the Lord, let all his Males be Ci^cumcised, and then let him come near and
keep it, and he shall be as one born in the land. None but the Church (which
was then National) were to eat of the Passover, and we find every one that was
Circumcised was a meet Subject of this Ordinance, and to be looked upon as
Members of this National Church; without Circumcision they were strangers,
being Circumcised they were Israelites.

It now remains to consider, Whether Ba^tism now is (as Circumcision then was)
a Symbol of Church Membership; this is plain from the quoted Text, where we
find Three Thousand Souls added to them (that is the Church) by being Baptized.
I Will and once more,

If the same Covenant and Promise, whereof Circumcision was a Seal, be the
Grounds of Baptism, then Baptism comes in the Stead of Circumcision; The
Consequence is Clear, and needs no Proof. And that the same Covenant and
promise is the grounds of Baptism appears from that forecited Acts 2.38.39.
which has been particularly explicated above.

The Objections raised against this Doctrine, are very light and trivial, as,

1. They Object, That Circumcision was always performed on the Eighth Day, and
therefore Baptism, if Successive thereto, must also be Administered then.

Ans. That the Ordinances differ in Circumstances, is no Argument that this
does not succeed, and supply, the p^ace of that. The Lords Supper diff^rs much
in Circumstances from the Passover, and yet none can doubt its Succeeding it.
That was to be (...) in haste, with their Loins girded, Shoes on their Feet,
and Staff in their Hand, and upon a set Time, bu^ once in a Year; This to be
taken in a Tab^e gesture, more frequen^ly, and upon no prefixed Day in the Year.

They Object, That if Baptism Succeeds Circumcision; Than Females are not to be
Baptized, they not being Circumci^^^.

Ans The Seal of Circumcision could not be administered to Females, they were
not capable Subjects, but it is not so with Respect to Baptism. Moreover,

Circumcision Sealed and Confirmed the Blessings of the Covenant, to all the
seed of Abraham, whether they were Male or Female, though the Males only bare the
sign in the flesh. This appears from the Institution, Genesis 17.7. An^ I will
establish my Covenant between me and thee* and thy seed (Indefinitely) after
thee, to be a GOD unto thee, and thy seed (Indefinitely, Female as well as
Male) after thee. Although none but the Males bare the Seal of this Covenant in
the flesh: But the Dispensation now, is vastly different; they were then but
one Family, the Posterity of one Man; But now the Gospel and Covenant ^f Grace,
is promulgated unto all the Families of the Earth: Circumcision sealed the
Covenant unto the seed of Abraham after the flesh, and assured both Male and
Female; that God would be their God, and Portion; upon their accepting of him,
and living to him; But Bapt^sm now, Seals that Covenant to none, But the ^eed
of Abraham after the Spirit, who have a visible Covenant Right; and therefore
to be administered to such, and none but such, whether Male or Female.

I'nt afraid you will Charge me with prolixity, I will therefore pass by all that
might be further said, upon this head; and pass to,

Arg. 4 They that have the Holy Spirit, ought to be Baptized. Acts. 10.47. Who
can forbid Water, that these should not be Baptized, who have Received the Holy
Ghost as well as we?

But some Infants have the Holy Spirit, or Else all Infants are Christless, and
in an Estate of Condemnation, Romans 8.9. which the greatest Uncharitableness
cannot suppose, therefore some Infants ought to be Baptized.

Arg. 5. The visible Children of God, ought to be Baptized, But Infants of
Believers are such. Our Adversaries don't deny, that Baptism. belongs to all
the visible Children of God; If they did, they would Soon be a ground; for
whence have they their Orders to make a differrence in Gods Visible Household,
to withold, from some, and allow to others, their Portion of meat? And that
Infants are the Children of God, I thus prove,

1. They are Either the Children of God, or the Children of the Devil. This is
an awful Distribution, which divides all the Children of Men 1. Ioh. 3.10. And
I am sure none can be so uncharitable* as to Rank the Infants of Believers,
among the Children of the Devil; and therefore they are visibly, in the Eyes of
Charity, the Children of God.

2. God himself calls the Children of his Covenant People his Children, Ezekiel.
16.20. Moreover, thou have taken my Sons and my Daughters, which thou have born
unto me, etc. which in Verse. 21. he calls my Children.

3. Mr. Gale with an Extensive Charity, acknowledges this, when he Says, Page
421. If there be any Mercy in God, in him who is goodness it self, which the
greatest Impiety dares not doubt of, Then all Infants that could never offend
him, shall assuredly be saved. I shall not now take time to Examine this bold
Assertion, but only observe, That if they shall assuredly be Saved, they are as
assuredly the Children of God.

Arg. 6. To whom belong the Kingdom of Heaven, to them belongs Baptism; For if
they have a Title to the Kingdom, why ma^n't their Title be Sealed unto them,
in Baptism, which every body acknowledges, the Seal of our Regeneration, and
Title to the Kingdom of Heaven?

And that Infants have a Title to the Kingdom of Heaven, is plain from Luke 18
16. Suffer l^ttle Children to come unto me, and forbid them not, for of suth is
the Kingdom of Heaven. Whether the Church Militant or Triumphant, is here
intended, by the Kingdom of Heaven, no ways affects the Arguments; for if they
have a Title to Either, it ought to be Sealed in Baptism.

If any Object, That these little Children might not be Infants, but grown to
some years of Understanding. The foregoing Verse Confutes them; for they are
there called Infants [ Brephe] Which necessarily signifies very young Infants,
and is well Rendered, 1 Pet. 2.2. New born Babes. We have the same Word also
Acts. 7.19. Rendered Young Children, and young they were; For it Refers to the
bloody decree of Pharaoh, who ordered all the male Children of the Hebrews to
be cast out, and Slain from the womb.

Mr. Gale has a long Discant upon this Text, but says nothing that affects our
Argument, unless it be, that Page 434. It may Equally be urged, that Infants
may be Communicated (as he words it) too. But he discovers his inadvertency;
For who-ever supposed the other Sacrament* a Seal of our Regeneration, and
Title to the Kingdom, as Baptism is?

Arg. 7. If infants of Believing Parents have a Foederal, or Covenant Holiness,
they may be Baptized. This (I think) must be granted by all men; For if they
have a Covenant Holiness, they have an Undoubted claim to Covenant privileges;
And that they have a Covenant Holiness, the Apostle assures us, in 1 Cor. 7.14.
Else were your Children ^^^lean, but now are they Holy.

This by the joint Suffrage of Expositors, is allowed to be a Foederal
Holiness, the Antipedobaptists only Excepted, and they have but a desperate
Shift to Evade it by so Ridiculous, that one would have thought Mr. Gales
Ingenuity would not have Suffered him to have Espoused it: But he must say
something

Their Evasion is, That the Holiness here spoken of is Legitimacy, and that if
the unbelieving Parent is not Sanctified by the Parent, that is a Believer, the
Children are Bastards. Mr. Gales Gloss upon this Text, is, That the Apostle is
here Correcting a mistake among these primitive Christians, who were ready to
suppose, that their Proselytism dissolved all natural Ties, and made it
unlawful for a man any longer to Co-habit with his former Wife, she being no
longer accounted his Wife. What can be more proper and natural (says he) than
to Suppose, St. Paul is Endeavoring to put better thoughts into his Conv^r^s,
and to persuade them, that their Proselytism did not dissolve natural Bonds,
and Co^s^nguinity, and that it was not only Lawful, but advisable and a Duty,
for the Wife to Dwell with her Husband? For he is still her Legitimate true
Husband, otherwise indeed (says he) your Children would be Unclean, as Bastards
were accounted, but the Husband being Legitimate the Children are so too. Thus
he. To which I Answer.

1. That he must have a strange art of Persuasion, to gain Credit in this, that
Children was looked upon as Bastards, only through the unequal match of their
Parents, especially by those primitive Christians, who had learned from the
Apostle, that the Marriage bed was undefiled. Could they think their marriage
with Unbelievers annulled, because such were not capable of, nor qualifyed for,
so Holy a Relation? If so, the greatest part of the World must be Esteemed,
Fornicators and Adulterers. But I Am weary of this unintelligible Jargon. And
will therefore only add,

2. The word Holy is not applicable to Legitimacy, no^ ever used in Scripture
in a Lower Sense, than for a Covenant Holiness. I Am Sure, it ^ooks odd Enough
to call Every Legitimate Child a Holy Person; For by that means, the far
greatest part of the world, might be called Holy.

Arg. 8 If under the Gospel Dispensation the Children of Gods People are to be
as aforetime, They should Enjoy the benefits of the Covenant, and have it
sealed unto them; for so it was with them before time.

But it is Expressly promised, Ier. 30.20. Their Children shall be as before time.

If any question, whether this refers to Gospel Dispensations, Let him Read the
9 and 21 Verses, and be satisfied.

And that under Gospel Dispensations we are Invested with the same Substantial
priviledg^s that the Jews have Lost by Unbelief, Receives a Meridian Luster,
from that Romans 11.17. And (...) some of the branches be broken off, and thou
being a wild Olive Tree, we^e grafted in amongst them and with them, partakest
of the Root and Fatness of the Olive Tree, etc.

We have not only the Joint suffrage of Commentators; but the clearest Evidence
of the Text and Context to assure us, that by the Olive Tree is meant the
Church of Christ; By the Root and fatness of the Olive Tree, all the Promise,
and Privileges, the Graces and Ordinances, the Spiritual Blessings and
Benefits, which belonged to Abraham and his seed, or unto the Church of God
under Legal Administrations.

This Argument must therefore be Forcible and Unanswerable,

I^ the Gentile Church are graffed into the same privileges, Graces,
Ordinances and Spiritual Blessings, which the Jews did Enjoy, and are by
Unbelief cut off from, They Have a claim to have the Covenant sealed, not only to
themselves, but to their Infant seed; For this was one of the most glorious
privileges Enjoy by the natural Blanches of this Olive Tree.

But the former is most clear from the Text, therefore the L^t^er.

I believe, Sir, you are by this time Satisfied, th^^ the Scripture is not so
silent in this Case, as Mr. Gale would ^ain persuade us, and that Infant
Baptism can be made appear from Scripture; I shall therefore pass over much
that might have been offered for the clearing of this Cause, and only Consider
the Commission of our Lord unto his Apostles, in Mat. 28.19, 20. which Mr. Gale
tells us Page. 247. Is the main Ground and Foundation of the Ordinance. And
though he would persuade us that Page 258. There is nothing in the Commission,
that can be tolerably urged, to prove that Infants are included in it. I cannot
Depend upon his Word, So as to take it for granted without some further Enquiry.

The Commission Runs t^^s, Go ye therefore, and Disciple (Matheteusat^) (...)
Nations Baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost, Teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded
you, and Lo I am with you always, even unto the End of the World.

I have here indeed taken liberty to differ from our English Translation, by
Rendering the Word Matheteusate, by Disciple, instead of Teach, and the genuine
natural sense; and meaning of the word bears me out in it.

Mr. Gale indeed (as was his Interest) stands up for our Translation, and
something plausibly attempts to prove, that The Word always signifyes to Teach,
But his Reasonings will prove Superficial Enough, when they come to be Scanned,

In the mean time, let us take it for granted, that the word does signify to
make Disciples, as I have Rendered it, and then I cannot see why the words may not
be thus understood, Go make Disciples of all Nations, by Baptizing them, and by
Teaching of them to observe all things, that I have Commanded you. They are
first ordered to make Disciples, next Directed how to do i^, viz. by Baptizing
and Teaching; Baptism is the Ceremony, or Symbol of their being Received into
Discipleship, and the badge of their Christianity, as Circumcision was among
the Jews, and Teaching a necessary previous Qualification to Discipleship, in
all Capable Subjects.

If it be thus Understood, the Case is plain, That if Infants be a part of all
Nations, to whom they were sent out upon this Errand, (Capable of being made
Disciples by Baptism) they ought to Enjoy this Ordinance, for that End.

And this Sense of the Words will appear very natural and Reasonable, when we
consider, That Infants were acknowledged Disciples under the Old Testament
Dispensation, and made such by Circumcision, in the Room whereof, Baptism is
now Instituted; as has been made evident above. And it is Considerable, that I
have the most of Learned Interpreters on my side, Justifying this Sense of the
Words: And I don't find our Adversaries capable to offer any thing against this
Interpretation, unless that the Word Ma^he^^usate signifies to Teach, which I
design particularly to Consider, and am therefore loath to Anticipate it, in
this place.

But whatever is the true meaning of that Word, Infant Baptism may be proved
from the Commission, as you will be sensible, If you will take notice of the
Subjoyned promise, Lo I am with you always, Even unto the End of the World.
Christ is here promising his gracious Spiritual Presence unto, and his Blessing
upon his Faithful Ministers, in the Administration of this Ordinance of
Baptism, and preaching the Gospel, unto the End of the world; This Ordinance
therefore shall not Cease, until the World Ceases to be. But if Infant Baptism
be not of Divine Institution, I cannot see how this Promise has been fulfilled.
For,

1. Being supposed that Infant Baptism is no Ordinance of christ, it must be an
inevitable Consequence that for many Centuries there was no B^p^ism at all. Mr.
Gale acknowledges that Infant Ba^tism was used in the Early Centuries of the
Church, Pag^. 528. as Early as St Cyprians time, who flourished Anno 240. By
which Adult Baptism (if Constantly used before) was Shuffled out of Doors, and
so the world from that time without Baptism, and Consequently with^^^ a Church
(contrary to the Promise; Mat 16.28) Until N. Stock, and his O^^^re^erous
followers in Germany Restored it; nor did they Restore it neither. For

2. From this Doctrine it follows, that the World being so long without
Baptism, there was none qualifyed for the Administration of the Ordinance; It
must therefore Inevitably and Eternally Fall to the Ground, unless some with a
new and Immediate Commission from Heaven Revive it. For how can they Baptize
others, that are not Baptized themselves?

Thus you see that our Lords Promise to uphold this Ordinance, and his
Ministers in the Administration thereof, (unless Infant Baptism be his
Institution) is Inevitably Violated.

Mr. Gale in his 7 th Letter, Entertains us with a very Large* and tedious
Discourse, wherein he undertakes to make it Evident, that the Commission does
directly Exclude Infants from Baptism; The Sum of all his Argumentation upon
that Topic, I find thus proposed, Page 258. Infants are such a part of the
Nations as are not capable of being Taught, and so not to be Baptized, because
the Commission does as much command to Teach, as to Baptize all Nations. The
whole Stress of his argument has its dependence upon the Greek Word
Matheteusate, which he translates Teach; this he acknowledges, and fairly tells
us, that Page 259. If the Greek Word does signify barely to Disciple, by
Baptizing suppose, or any other way, without Including to Teach, all our
Argument from this Place, unavoidably falls to the Ground. That now lies before
us to Examine, and if upon the Stric^est Trial, it appears that the Word does
signify barely to Disciple, he must acknowledge that he is fairly beat out of
the field, with his own Weapon.

The Methods he proposes, are very fair, and such as (Duly observed) will
Infallibly bring us to the Sense of the Word. Let us therefore follow him in
his own Track.

He first Searches into the Origination of the Word, to see if he can find any
thing to his purposes from thence; and I am of Opinion, that there is no way
more sure to find out the true sense of a Word, than this; This shows its
native meaning, and therefore is more to be depended upon, than the figurative
use Words often obtain among Authors.

Let us Seek therefore into the Etymology of the Word, and we shall find this
Renowned Critic, Chargeable with the Greatest vanity Imaginable in venturing
to say, Page 263. it makes it necessary to understand the Word, to signify to
Teach, Instruct, or the like.

No Man doubts but Manthano, the Theme Signifies Disco, to Learn, and all the
Derivatives, and Compounds bear an agreement in Signification; thus Math^sis,
the act of Learning: Amathes, unlearned; Op^^mathes, one that began late to
Learn; Prilomathes, desirous of Learning. And thus in the Instances Mr Gale
himself has assigned, Mathema, that which is Learned; Mathetos, apt to Learn,
Mathetian, I desire to Learn; Artimathes, one that lately began to Learn;
Automathes, one that Learned of him self without the help of a Master;
Olig^mathes, one that Learned but little; Pollumathes, one that has Learned
much; Anamanthano, I Learn again; Kata^antheno, I learn thoroughly, or exactly;
Sum^an^han^in, To Learn together, from whence, S^mmathales, a fellow Learner,
or School fellow; and so in like manner the Words in Controversy, do Retain
some marks of the same Signification, with the Theme from whence they are
derived; as Mathetes, a Disciple, or Learner; from whence Mathe^euo, to
Constitute a Learner, or that which signifyes the very same to Disciple, the
sense we contend for. But you will say perhaps, how can Infants be Constituted
Learners? I answer, by Baptism, whereby they are Laid under awful Obligations
to Learn (as soon as capable) both the Doctrines and Practice of Christianity;
And whereby their Parents do Solemnly Dedicate them to Christ, and oblige
themselves to bring them up in his School.

And now ( Sir) would not even a School Boy, but newly initiated in the
Rudiments of the Greek Tongue, Laugh to Scorn Mr. Gales attempt to prove that
Matheteuo, signifies to Teach? Could he not tell him, That the Theme from
whence it comes, signifyes to Learn, and that all its Derivatives bear a like
Sgnification? Could he not Instruct him in the difference, between Teaching and
Learning?

And yet how seriously does he proceed to say, Page 263 Since then the
Primitive Signifies to Learn, and all its Derivatives and Compounds Retain the
like sense, why must Mathetes and Matheteuo be Excepted? I say, why Indeed? But
who is it that does Except them? Is it not they that thus Industriously attempt
to Change their True Native sense; and argue (though Ridiculously enough) that
Manthano and its Derivatives signifies to Learn, Therefore Matheteuo, one of
its Derivatives must signify to Teach?

One would think that this Gentleman designed his Book for the Veiw of None but
Illiterate men, or Dunces, that could not distinguish between Teaching and
Learning, why Else did he take such Elaborate pains to Expose both himself, and
his Cause?

But as though he had not Effectually Bantered his Cause, he gravely undertakes
to Show the meaning of the Word Disciple among our selves, and likewise the use
of it, among the Latin Authors, from whom we have borrowed it. Page 297. Now
its plain (says he) that Discipulus is formed from Disc^re, to Learn, etc. If
this be true, (as he has made it appear to be by many quotations from Ancient
Latin Authors) to make Disciples is (as the Greek Word Matheteuo, signifies) to
Constitute them Learners, and not to Teach.

Thus you See [ Sir] how unhappy his Arguments have been from the Origination
of the Word, that instead of Clearing the Cause he undertakes to Defend, they
have abundantly Confirmed ours.

He next proceeds to Show how the word is used in Greek Authors, which he says,
Page 266. "will perhaps be thought less liable to Exception, than arguing from
Etymologyes.

But I would Entreat Mr. Gales Pardon, if I am forced to believe, that this is
much more liable to Exception, than arguing from Etymologies; For (as a
Gentleman of your Reading cannot be Ignorant) Words often times in Authors,
Suffer a violent Catechresis, as; vir gr^^is, ipse Caper, deerraverit. Vi^g.
Eclog. 7 i. e. The man of the Flock, even the He Goat himself, went astray. But
no man will argue from thence, that V^r, a Man, properly signifies the Leading
Goat of a Flock. And nothing is more common, than the Change of Words from
their Native Sense; as you may find an Instance in our Author, out of Pindar,
Page. 280. Who says Sa^amis ca^ produce a b^^ve Soldiers as any in the World.
H^ct^r Learned [Akousen] the truth of this, before the Walls of Troy. Will any
man of Sense argue from hence, that the Greek Word Akouo, To hear, signifies to
Learn, by the feats of Martial Chevalry? But I Am sure I need not multiply
Instances of this Kind to you.

So that if Mr Gale by Unwearied application, can Collect some passages from
Authors, where the Word in Debate is used in the Sense he pleads for, (and yet
I even despair of finding that done) it will not determine the Sense of the
Word, inasmuch as they may (and in this Case certainly must) have taken the
common liber^y of Authors, in using the Word in a Sense different from its
native and true Signification.

And therefore if you can find in any of his Quotations, the Word so used, as
may seem to make to his purpose, I desire you to ^rray this Consideration along
with you, which will st^p the mouth of all Argument from thence; I don^t speak
this, because I Am afraid to Join Issue with him, upon this Plea; but to show
you, that ^he use of the word in some si^^le Instances, is not sufficient to
Determine the sense of it, This being premised,

There are two things the Subject of our present Enquiry.

1. Whether the Word in Debate, as it is Commonly used by Authors, signifyes to
Teach; it not, all Mr. Gales Argument falls to the Ground; for that is the
Construction, he assigns and pleads for; But in all his numerous Quotations,
he does not find it once used in that Sense, or Indeed so much as look that
way, Except in a passage taken from Ignatius, where he says; I would also that
these things should be (...) by your Practice, which you have prescrib^d;
[Mathet^uon^es, which he translates] in Teaching But why in this Instance
(which is the only one, that in the least seems to favor his Construction) it
may not as naturally be translated in the sense we plead for, there can be no
Reason assigned. This Father is desiring the Roman Church, to whom he writes,
not to use any Es^ayes to hinder him of a Crown of Martyrdom, which he then had
in near Veiw, and uses this as am Argument; That what they had praescribed in
Discipling [Matheteuontos] others, and both prosely^ing them unto, and
Confirming Them in, the Christian Faith, was to stand to the Cause of Christ
unto the Death, and in that way to Expect a Crown of Li^e* He would therefore
have them confirm this by their Practice, and not hinder him of his Crown.

Now this Duty is prescribed to Proselytes, as well by bapt^sm, as by Teaching;
they are thereby listed under the banner of Christ, and awfully obliged to
s^^nd the shock of ner^est opposition, and even to say down their lives for his
sake, when called to it The Word therefore does not necessarily signify
Teaching, even in this Place; But i^ it di^, it does no way determine it to be
the constant, steady meaning of the word, since in all his Exquisite Search he
cannot find it any where else to be so understood. He does indeed (disingenously
enough) sometimes so translate the word as Pluta^on vi^ December. Rhetor page
1539. Math^teusas de to Patri, which he translates, Was Taught by his Fat^e^;
but this Instance (and all other where he so uses the Word) is apparently on
our side, and ought to be construed, He Learned of his Father, or which is the
same thing, was his Fathers Disciple.

We are next to consider whether the word in Debate, as it is commonly used by
Authers, does signify To Disciple, or Constitute Learners, and if we find that
it does* Even by Mr Gales own Collection from Greek Authors, I Am sure you will
acknowledge that he is fairly ^affled upon this head.

I shall not mis-spend so much time in this word War, as to take particular
Notice of all his Citations, but only consider four or five of the first of
them, in the same order as he has placed them, by which you may judge of all
the rest.

The first Instance is from Pl^tarch vit. December Rhetor. page 1539. where he
finds Isocrates saying (to those that not being able to pay for the whole of
his Art, were willing to Learn a part of it) We don't use to divide our Art,
but if you would be Learners of it, I^ll instruct you in the whole Art. This
word is here used with an application to such as already were not, but were yet
to be Constituted Learners of this famous Orator, which is the very same sense
we contend for in the Commission.

And now let us see how well it suits the Construction, Mr. Gale pleads for
(while he says, it necessarily and always signifies To Teach) by translating it
in his Sense, We don't use to divide our Art, but if you would Teach, I Will
instruct you I need not tell you that this construction (which it must have, or
be wholly impertinent to his purpose) is Ridiculous Nonsense.

But I find he would render it passively, If you would be Taught, I Will Instruct
you; But the Word is Active, and he therefore must account for this passive
construction, or by looking back into his Accedence, be learned to Correct it.

His 2 d Instance is from Ignatius, who in his Epistle to the Ephesians, says,
Though I am bound for his name, I am not yet perfect in Christ Jesus; nay, I am
as it were but as now beginning [Matheteuesthai] to be a Learner, or to be
Discipled. The word here is so clear in our favor, that nothing could have
been plainer; For the Martyr here Represents himself to be, but an Initiated
Learner, or newly constituted a Learner of Christ; which is the very sense we
c^ntend for; But how the most Luxuriant Fancy, can understand the word here, in
Mr Gales Sense, or suppose that it signfiies to Teach, is far beyond my
Conception. Let us see what a monstrous Solecism it would be, to Translate the
Words in this sece. They must be thus Read, I am not yet perfect in Christ,
nay, I am but yet beginning to Teach him. To be taught of him, it cannot be
rendered, for the Word as in the former instance is Active, and therefore it
cannot be passively understood

His Third Instance is as clear as the Meridian Sun to our Purpose, it is from
that some Epistle of Ignatius to the Ephesians, where he directs them how to
behave themselves toward unbelievers and strangers to the Faith; and advises
them to Pray for all Men; For (says he) there is some hope that they may
Repent, and obtain the Mercy of God, Let the^ be Discipled, or won to the Faith
[Matheteuthenai] by your good works. Here I think every body must allow me this
Sense of the Word, if it be considered that the Heathen could not be Taught the
Doctrines of Christiani^y, by their conversation and good works; but they might
be Discipled, i. e. So won by their watchful walk, and Charitable,
Christian-like Spirit, etc. as to be brought to declare for Christ, and bring
themselves into his School, or (as you find the word properly Signifies) to be
constituted Learners of him.

His fourth Instance I have considered already, and therefore now pass it over.

In his Fifth Instance, the Word is a little altered from Its native sense, and
yet makes clearly against him. It is taken from Clemens Alexand. Strom. Lib. 1.
Page 320, Where he says, If they are Learners (Matheteuontes) of any thing,
from the Hebrew Philosophy, let them acknowledge it. If they Teach any thing
from the Hebrew Philosophy, it must be Rendered, in order to be made any thing
Serviceable to Mr. Gales Undertaking, which is to prove, that the Word
signifies to Teach; But this is an Absurdity, even too great for him to espouse.

Here the Word indeed does not properly signify to make, or Constitute
Learners, but it Signifies being Disciples, or Learners, which is but little
different.

His 6 th Instance is taken from the same Clemens Strom. Lib. 6. Page. 691. Who
there says, To Converse not only with the Greeks, but with the Barbarians too,
and by these common ways of Improving their knowledge, they are brought to the
Faith; And then having laid the Foundation of the Truth, they are better
enabled to go on in the Search after it; and hence it is that they delight in
being, Discipled, (Matheteusamenoi) to Christ, and by pursuing after knowledge,
they Vigorously pursue Salvation. The Word is necessary, if you Consider, (1)
The purport of the Argument here Improved, which is to show, that the
Cultivating our Faculties by all Sorts of knowledge, will Render the Profession
of Christianity desirable, in our first entering upon it, or beginning to be
Learners, or Disciples; and make us willing to pursue further Degrees of
knowledge. (2.) The Word here Respects the Laying the Foundation of the Truth,
as the foregoing, and following Paragraphs make evident; And is not the
Foundation of the Faith laid by our being made Disciples of Christ?

Thus [ Sir] I have gone through Mr. Gales first Six Instances, (and might, with
the like advantage, take notice of the Rest) and we find him as unhappy in this
Undertaking, as in the former from the Origination of the Word.

He next brings in Sundry of our Modern Authors accepting the Word in his
Sense; to which it is sufficient answer, That numberless others, as great men,
and as much to be Relied on as they, Justly Contradict 'em.

He proceeds to justify his Sense of the Word, from the various Translations of
the New Testament: But here also he fails of Success; for though some of them do
make for, yet others against him, and therefore all Argument from that head,
must fall to the ground.

The Hebrew Translation renders it by Lamad, which properly signifyes to Learn
(as Jer. 10.2. Learn not of the Heathen) and in Pi^el Dicere fec it, he has
made to Learn, says Buxt^rf and Leigh.

The Ethiopick, and Arabic Versions, use Words which Mr. Gale acknowledges
signify to Learn, and was Learned.

The Dutch, Read it Leert, which signifies to Learn, or be Learners, as you may
see in Hezam's Dutch Dictionary.

The Danish Read it La^rer, and the Saxon, Lanas, both which signify Learne^s.

The French Render it Endoctrinez, which signifyes, To Endo^trinate, or bring
into the Profession and Knowledge of Christianity.

I have by me two Latin Versions, the one of which indeed renders it D^ce^e,
but the other Disc^pulos facite, make Disci^les.

Some of those Versions he mentions, I know nothing of, and am not therefore
capable to Examine.

He next proceeds to tell us, that the Fathers of the Primitive Church,
Understood the Word in this Sense; but this is all of a piece with the R^st:
For where he Cites the Greek Fathers, as Understanding the Word to signfy To
Teach, they use the very same Word ( Mathete^^) which is in the Commission; but
whether it signifyes to Teach, or not, is what we have been all this while
Debating; For Instance, he quotes Origens Comment in Mat. Page 225. where he
says, The Apostles obeyed our Saviors Command. (Matheteusate, which he Renders
Teach, But we) Disciple all nations. And again, Origin Contra Celsum. Lib 2.
Page 84. The Disciples going forth should (Mathetas, which he here Transla^es)
Preach the Word to all Nations. Thus also he deals by O^igen Contra Celsum Lib.
2. P 79. By, Justin Expos Fides. P. 376. And his Dialogue with Tripho, Page.
272. By, the Apostolical Constitutions, Lib 7 Chap. 40. By Clement, Hom 17 Cap.
7. And by, Epiphan. Advers. Her f. Lib 1. Cap. 50. His Argument upon this head,
should be thus formed, The Greek Father Unde^stood the Word ( Matheteuo) in the
Commissi^n to signify to Teach, because they use the same Word, in their
Comments upon the Text.

There Is indeed several Passages he quotes, that make it plain, that they did
understand the Word to enjoin Teaching, in Order to Baptism; but its Evident
(as you will be sensible, if you will Read his Quotations) that they had a peculiar
Reference to the Adult only; and that such are to be made Disciples by
Teaching, every body owns, though Infants may be Discipled otherwise.

He next undertakes to prove from Scripture, that the Word does signify to
Teach; and if his performance had been any thing answerable to his undertaking,
we must have been forever Silent upon this head.

He first from Acts 8.37 Argues, That Phillip, previous to his Baptizing the
Eunuch, Instructed him. Bravely performed! But who questions this a necessary
Pre-requisite, to the Baptism of the Adult?

He next argues from Acts. 14.21. They had preached the Gospel in that City,
and had Taught many. This Word (says he) is the same with that in the
Commission, and is here Rendered Taught; But why may we not Read it, had made
many Disciples; for so I find it rendered in the Old Latin Version, and also in
the Marg^n of our Bibles: and so I Am sure the Sense best Carries it.

He next argues from the parrallel Place, Mark. 16.15. Preach the Gospel to
Ev^ry Creature: But that is also Required in the Co^m^ssion, Mat 28.20 ^eaching
them to observe all things, whatsoe^^r I have Commanded you Unto which the
quoted Text is parrallel, whatever be the Signification o^ Mathet^usa^e

He again tell us, That St L^ke, with a particular R^ferrence unto these W^rds,
says, that Repentan^e, and Remission o^ si^s, should be preached in his Name,
among all Nati^ns Luk 24 47. And That St. Peter, who Immediately received the
C^mmission from the Mouth of our Lord, ^ssures us, I ha^ this was his sacred
meaning, Acts ^0.42. He Commanded us to preach to the People. To both which its
answer sufficient, That our Lord Required their preaching to all Nations, in
the above cited Clause of the Commission, Teaching them to observe all things,
etc. whatever be the meaning of the Word in Debate.

Thus, Sir, we have heard all he has to say in this Case, and it therefore now
belongs to you to Judge, what grounds he has, with such a Dogmatical Air to
say, Page 262. If any one can make the Experiment, and afte^ Examination, and
deny it S^gnifyes to T^ach; he may as well, if he plea^e, open (...) Eyes, and
turning to the Sun when it shines out, deny there is any Sun at all, or affirm
its midnight.

What put Mr. Gale upon this Attempt, I Will not undertake to Determine; If it
was an affectation of Esteem for his Schollarship, his End is answered; but if
what he pretends, he is miserably disappointed.

You Will now (Sir) I Am sure, Excuse me from any further Remarks on Mr. Gales
Book, when you consider, that his 9 th and 10 th Letters, are taken up about
the Customs among the Jews, and their manner of admitting their Proselytes,
which I think cannot have so much stress laid upon it, as to be worthy our
present Enquiry; And that all the Rest of his Book, is an Examination of Mr.
Walls Arguments from Antiquity.

Had Mr. Gale found any authority to Confirm his bold Assertion, that Page.
541. There is abundant grounds to Deny, that it (Infant Baptism) was used above
two hundred years after Christ, There would have been something Considerable,
in the Argument: But since he lays it down praecariously, without one single
Author saying a Word in his favor, we have found so very little grounds to
depend upon his bare Word, that we may fairly Reject it. I should indeed have
been willing to make some Enquiry into the truth hereof, if I had by me, or
could in this Dark Corner of the World, come at the Ecclesiastical Writers of
the first Centuries; But yet I must tell you, that I cannot help but Conclude,
that the writings of the Earliest and purest Times, are not so silent in this
Case, as Mr. Gale pretends; for I find Clemens Romanus, Ireneus, Justin Martyr,
etc. quoted to this purpose, by those, whose Learning and Faithfulness I shall
not question, Until I see it disproved; And I Am pretty well assured, that
there is nothing in the primitive Fathers against Infant Baptism; if there had,
Mr. Gale would not have scrupled to let us know it. What Ecclesiastical writers
I can come at are very full and plain in this Case.

Origin, who flourished Anno 220. brings in full Testimony to Infant Baptism;
as in Lib. 5. ad Romans cap 6 E^clesia Traditionem ab Apostolis suscepit, Etiam
pa^vulis dare Baptismum, i. e. The Church has Received a Tradition from the
Apostles to Baptize Infants.

Its true; that his Greek Copy is not Extant, and we have only a La^in
Translation to depend upon, but its not very likely, that any Interpolation
should be attempted, with a Reference to the Baptism of Infants, There being no
Debate about that Subject, until of Late Years.

Cyprian, who wrote Anno 240 is as plain as can be, in many passages that might
be cited; take one, in Epist ad Fid. Lib. 3. Epist 8. Si Etiam gravissimus
^el^ctoribus, and in Deum multum ante p^c^arotib^s, cum postea Credidorint
Remissa, peccatorum Datur, et a Baptismo, a^que a gratia, nemo prohib^tur;
quanto magi, prohiberi non debet Infant^, etc. If (says he) to the most
grievous offenders, and those that were before great Sinners, is given, after
they Believe, Remi^sion of Sins, and no man Denies them Baptism, and Grace; by
how much the Rather, ought not in a (...) to be pro^ibited.

Gregory Nazienzen, who wrote about the year 370. Orat. 40. p. 658. Si ^e
ei^o^s peri ^on eti n^pion K^i m^te tes zemias Epa^^inem panuge? ^iperp it is
Epeigoi Kindunos, i. e. But what ^o you say, (quoth he) of thos^ that a^e yet
in their Tend^r age, they understand neith^r C^ime nor grace; Should we Baptize
these also? Yes tr^l^, If Danger Vrges. This Father indeed had a singul^r Whim,
that Unless danger urges, it were better to defer their Bapt^sm, until they are
three years old; But as this was h^s singular Opinion; It Is no Evidence of the
Faith and Pr^ctice of those Times; Besides, this makes nothing for our
Adversaries; for he affirms, and argues for their Right to Baptism, even in
their Earlyest Infancy.

Ambrose, who wrote Anno 376. De Abraham. Patriarch, Lib. 2 Chap. 12. says, Nec
Senex prosel^tus, nec Infans vermaculus exipitur, quia omnis aetas peccato
obnoxia, et Ide^ omnis aetas Sacramento Idonia. i. e. Neither an Old Proselyte,
nor a Domestic Infant is excepted; every Age is liable to Sin, and t^erefore
every age is fit for the Sacra^ent.

Augustine, who lived Anno 400, or 420, is very plain* full* and large up ^n
this head, in his Controversy with Pelagius, as Lib. 1. De Peccat. Mer. et
Remiss. cap. 26. Parvulos Baptizandos Esse concedunt, qu^ contra autorita tem
universae Ecclesiae, procul Dubio per Dominum, et Apostolis traditam, venire
non possunt. i. e. That Infants are to be Baptized (says he) They (the
Pelagians) grant, who cannot go Contrary to the Authority of the Universal
Church, which, without doubt, was Delivered by the Lord, and his Apostles. And
Sermon. 10 De verb. Apostel. speaking of Infants Baptism, he says Nemo vobi
sussuret Doctrinas alienas, Hoc Ecclesia semper habu^t, semper tenuit, Hoc a
majorum Fide accepit, Hoc usque in finem perseveranter Custodit, i. e. Let no
man whisper any other Doctrine to you; this the Church has always had, always
held; this she Receives from the Faith of our Ancestors; this she
perseveringly keeps to the End.

These Testimonies are as full and plain as can be written, and though Mr. Gale
intimates, that they are too late to determine the matter; I think not so; for
can it be supposed, that in an affair of this Nature, the Church should be thus
Imposed upon a Foundation laid for turning the true Baptism out of Doors, and
even Unchurching the World (the necessary Consequence of bringing in Infant
Baptism Contrary to Christ's Institution, as I observed before) And this be
received as the Ordinance of Christ, and the Constant Faith of the Church, in
all Quarters of the World; And yet all Footsteps of this Innovation be
oblitterated, and the Remembrance and Knowledge of it utterly Effaced, in two
or three Hundred Years? It does not look possible.

Many Errors indeed did creep into the Church in these Centuries, but as they
generally met with opposition, so we have for the most part an account, by what
means they were brought in. But this Doctrine (though of such great moment) must
at once creep into all parts of the Earth, and without any opposition, like an
Irresistible Charm, gain universal Credit; and all Circumstances of this
Change, be hid from the knowledge of Next Ages: And thus the true Ordinance of
Christ, (which by his Promise was to continue to the End of the Worl) must fall
a Sacrifice to this Innovation, and not one Tongue or Pen stand up in its
defense.

Its Strange (if this were an Innovation) that there can be no account when it
was Introduced. Mr. Gale is Ready, Page 528. to account it probable, that it
was Introduced in Africa, at or near St. Cyprians Time; But then, its Strange
that Augustine in so little a time after, should know nothing of this, and
boldly affirm, That the Church had always had, and held Infant Baptism.

Mr. Gale frequently tells us, that the Mode of administering this Ordinance in
England, was Changed about Queen Elizabeth's time; but would he not take it as
an Affront, if we should tell him, He is too late to determine this matter, we
cannot depend upon what he says in that respect; he speaks of an Affair of too
ancient a date for him to know any thing about.

If it should be enquired, what Religion was Established in England, before
King Henry 8 th, Could not even every Plowman (almost) tell us, it was Papery?
How then should these Fa^^ers in less time, be perfect strangers to the
Practice of the Church about Baptism?

I might add much more upon this head, and bring in Ierom and other of the
Ancients, with several of the Primitive Councils, Confirming our Cause; but
I Have already out gone the bounds of my intended Brevity; therefore Iam tempus
Eq^um Spumantia solvere Colla. Its time to have done with this Controversy,
which I shall wind up, with this needful Apology,

You will not find many of the Arguments so largely handled, and so clearly
Explicated, as you may desire; For I have carefully avoided Prolixity, and was
willing to be as brief as I could, without obscurity

Though you may be capable to Read the Oriental Languages, yet your Friends to
whom you seemed Inclinable to show this Letter, may not, and therefore what
from them has occurred, I have written in English Character, You Will be Ready to
Dis-relish the harshness of the Style; I am no Orator, nor do affect a
Harrangue instead of Argument.

Ornare res ipsa Negat, Contenta Doceri. You may find some Arguments herein,
that others have handled before me; but (though I don't love to Transcribe) I see
no Reason, to neglect the mentioning of 'em, because they occur in others; And
I would also put you in mind of that Saying, Non quicquid cum antiquis Convenit
Ex antiquis Sumptum.

The many other Defects, I Submit to your Censure, Depending upon your Usual
Candor.

If this hasty Scribble yield matter of Satisfaction to you, it will also more
abundantly, to

Your Humble Servant, J. Dickinson.
Elizabeth Town in New-Iersey, March 25. 1716.
FINIS

