Some ACCOUNT Of what is said of Innoculating or Transplanting THE Small Pox.

By the Learned Dr. Emanuel Timonius, AND Jacobus Pylarinus.

With some Remarks thereon.

To which are added, A Few Quaeries (...) to the Scruples of many about the
(...) of this Method.

Published By Dr. ZABDIEL BOYLSTON.

BOSTON: Sold by S. GERRISH, at his Shop in Cornhill. 1721.

Some Account of Inoculating or Transplanting the Small Pox; And of the Benefit
and Safety of the Practice.
THE Public having been lately entertained with a very dark and partial
Account of this New Method of receiving the Small Pox; and this Account being
given as is pretended, from the very Letters of Dr. Timonius and Pylarinus; it
is thought reasonable and fitting to lay before the Public this following
Abstract of what those Learned Gentlemen have said of this Practice. But
because the Gentleman who only has these Letters by him, refuses now to lend
them; the Account here following is chiefly taken from a known Letter written
by a Learned Gentleman of Boston to the Worthy Physicians of the Town.

A Faithful Abridgment of Two Accounts in the Philosophical Transactions.
I. OUR first Communication comes from Dr. Emanuel Timonius, a Renowned Fellow
of the Royal Society at London, (well known to some in Boston, who also
actually knew the Truth of the matter of Fact now going to be related,) who
writes from Constantinople in December 1713. And he informs to this Effect; The
practice of procuring the Small Pox by a sort of Inoculation, has been
introduced among the Constantinopolitans by the Circassians, and Georgians, and
other Asiaticks for about Forty Years. At the first the People were cautious
and afraid; but the Happy Success on Thousands of Persons for Eight Years now
past has put it out of all suspicion. The Operation has been performed on
Persons of all Ages, both Sexes, differing Temperaments, and even in the worst
Constitution of the Air; and none that have used it ever died of the Small Pox,
though at the same time, it were so malignant, that at least half the People
died, that were infected with it in the Common way.

They that have this Inoculation practiced on them (he says) are subject unto
very Slight Symptoms, and hardly sensible of any Sickness, nor do what Small
Pox they have, ever leave any Scars or Pits behind them.

They make choice of as Healthy a Young Person as they can find, that has the
Small Pox of the best sort upon him, on the Twelfth or Thirteenth Day of his
Decumbiture. With a Needle they prick some of the larger Pustules, and press
out the Matter coming from them into some convenient Vessel of Glass (or the
like) to receive it, which ought first of all to be washed very clean with warm
Water. A convenient quantity of this Matter being thus collected, is to be
stopped close, and kept warm in the bosom of the Person that carries it (who
ought rather to be some other Person, than what visited the Sick Chamber for
it, lest the Infection of the Small Pox be conveyed in the Garment, as well as
in the Bottle, and the intended Operation be hurt by the Infection being first
conveyed another way, and so it should be conveyed as soon as may be to the
Person that is waiting to be the Patient.

The Patient being in a warm Chamber, is to have several small Wounds made with
a Surgeon's Three edged Needle, or with a Lancet, in two or more Places of the
Skin (the best Places are in the Muscles of the Arm) till some drops of Blood
follow: And Immediately let there be dropped out a drop of the Matter in the
Glass, on each of the Places; and mixed well with the Blood that is issuing
out. The Wound should be covered with half a Walnut shell, or any such concave
Vessel, and bound over that the matter may not be rubbed off by the Garments for
a few Hours; And now let the Patient (having Fillets on the Wounds,) keep
House, and keep warm, and be careful of his Diet; The Custom at Constantinople
is to abstain from Flesh and Broth for Twenty Days or more. They choose to
perform the Operation either in the beginning of Winter or Spring.

The Small Pox begins sooner in some than others, and with lesser Symptoms in
some than others; but with happy Success in all. Commonly Ten or Twenty
Pustules break out; here and there One has no more than two or three; Few have
a Hundred. There are some, in whom no Pustules rise, but in the Places where
the Incision was made: And here the Tubercles will be purulent: Yet even These
have never had the Small Pox afterward, though they have Cohabited with Persons
having of it. No small Quantity of Matter will run for several Days from the
Places of the Inscision. The Pocks arising from this Operation are dried up in
a short time; and fall off, partly in thin Skins, and partly vanishing by an
insensible wasting.

The Matter is hardly so thick a Pus as in the common Small Pox, but a thinner
kind of Sanies, whence it rarely Pitts, except at the Place of the Inscision,
where the Cicrtrices are never worn out, and where the matter is more of the
common sort.

If an Apostem should break out in any (which is more frequent in Infants) yet
there is no fear, for it is healed safely by Suppuration.

They scarce ever use the matter of the Inscitious Small Pox to serve the
Designs of a new Inscition. The Inoculation being tried on such as have had the
Small Pox before, it had no effect at all on them. Dr. Timonius affirms, that
he never yet observed any bad Consequence of the Practice, which now so many do
come into.

II. SINCE this Communication from Dr. Timonius, there came to the ROYAL
SOCIETY a further, from an Eminent Person whose Name is Jacobus Pylarinus; the
Venetian Consul at Smyrna; and who appears to have had no knowledge, of what
had been written by the former. It is Entitled, A New and Safe Method of
Exciting the Smallpox by Transplantation.

This Gentleman observes, That this Wonderful Invention was first found out,
not by the Learned Sons of Erudition, but by a Mean, Coarse, Rude sort of
People, for the Succor of Mankind under and against one of the most Cruel
Diseases in the World. It was rarely if ever used among People of Quality,
until after the beginning of the present Century. A Noble Groecian then in
distress for his Four little Sons, lest the Small Pox might bereave him of
them, consulted with him about using the Inoculation upon them. At first, his
Ignorance of the Matter, made him decline giving any Advice upon it; But a
Groecian Woman who was a notable Inoculatrix, happening to come in, while they
were discoursing of the Matter, told them so much about it, that the Experiment
was resolved on. The Woman managed in her way, upon all the Four Sons. The
Three Younger, all of which were under Seven Years of Age, felt a very gentle
Illness, had very few Pustules, and in about a Week all Fever and Hazard was
over with them. The Eldest, about Eight Years old, was taken with a malignant
Fever: and (though he had not many Pustules) narrowly escaped with his Life.
Pylarinus imputes this, to an Atrabiliarious, and otherwise Humourous and
Unhealthy Constitution of the Lad, and a neglect of using such Preparatory
Expiation of his Body, as they had been advised unto. But upon this Happy
Success, it was wonderful to see, what a Multitude of People of Fashion
presently followed the Example. So that at this Day every one does without any
Hesitation, and with all the security imaginable, practice the Transplantation;
except here and there a few Cowards that are afraid of their Shadows. Indeed,
the Turks whose Faith in Fate, is as we know, and who are a more Indocible sort
of Animals, do not yet much come into it.

Pylarinus, instructed by his Greek Operatrix, directs to take, a Proper Season
for the Inscition. She would use it only in the Winter, but he thinks the
Spring may do as well.

The Fermenting Pus must be taken from the mature Pustules of a good Sort, in a
Young Person of a good Constitution, kept Warm in a close Vial, and hastened
unto the Application.

The Air of the Chamber must be kept very Temperate. The Greek Operatrix,
pricked more places, and less fleshy ones than Pylarinus approved of; with an
oblique stroke pricking the Places, with an Iron, or Golden Needle dropping,
and thrusting the Pus into the Wound; and so binding all with Fillets. Her way
was thus to prick the Forehead, the Chin, both Cheeks, both Wrists, both
Insteps. This was doubtless overdoing. Pylarinus affirms that some have done
the Business, with no more than One little Inscision in the Arm, and it has
done very well. [So it has been with such Africans, as have shown us the Marks
of their Inoculation.]

They must not keep their Beds more than is necessary. Wine, Flesh and Broth
must be laid aside.

The Ferment comes into Action in some sooner than in others. Usually the
Smallpox (as far as it may be called so,) appears on the Seventh-Day;
sometimes on the very First.

The Symptoms prove Remiss or Intense according to the various Constitutions of
the Bodies. The Small Pox proves of the Distinct Sort; and there will be but
few of them; it may be Ten, or Twenty; rarely a Hundred.

In some few the Inscision has produced no Small Pox at all; but the Persons
have afterward in the common way been taken and handled with it like other
People. The Wounds made for the Inscision, prove often very sore. And with some
they degenerate into Apostems. Yea, These do swell sometimes, and rise, and
fall, and rise again* There has also happened on this Occasion an Abscess with
Suppuration, in some Emunctory of the Body: But this is a very rare Occurrence.

In Fin^, Pylarinus affirms; It was hardly ever known, that there was any Ill
Consequence of this Transplantation, But the Business being well and wisely
managed, and the Body being by a skilful Physician Well-prepared, you may
depend upon it (he says) in ^n ordinary way, there can be nothing but a Good
Issue of it.

REMARKS.
I. LET it be considered, That these Communications come from Great Men, and
Persons of Great Erudition and Reputation, and are addressed unto very Eminent
Persons. Let it be also considered, that with the Approbation of the ROYAL
SOCIETY (as Illustrious a Body as are in the World) their Secretary the
celebrated Dr. Halley, has published these things, as worthy to come into the
notice of Mankind.

II. There is at this Time a considerable Number of Africans in this Town, who
can have no Conspiracy or Combination to cheat us. No body has instructed them
to tell their Story. The more plainly, brokenly, and blunderingly, and like
Idiots, they tell their Story, it will be with reasonable Men, but the much
more credible. For that these all agree in one Story; That abundance of poor
Negro's die of the Small Pox, till they learn this Way; that People take the
Juice of the Small Pox, and Cut the Skin, and put in a drop; then by'nd by a
little Sick, then few Small Pox; and no body dye of it: no body have Small Pox
any more.

Here we have a clear Evidence, that in Africa, where the Poor Creatures dye of
the Small Pox in the common way like Rotten Sheep, a Merciful GOD has taught
them a wonderful Preservative.

It is a Common Practice, and is is attended with Success. I have as full
Evidence of this, as I have that there are Lions in Africa. And I don't know
why it is more unlawful to learn of Africans, how to help against the Poison of
the Small Pox, than it is to learn of our Indians, how to help against the
Poison of a Rattle-Snake.

III. Is it possible to conceive, that this Practice should continue among
People Forty Years together, and grow more and more into repute, and at last be
put out of all Suspicion, and yet that there should be any Truth in the Reports
of People's dying under the Operation, or being liable to the Small Pox after
it? Had Peoples Limbs perished, or had they been liable to the Small Pox after
it, we may be sure, a few Examples would have put an end to the Practice Forty
Years ago. Good Readers, Judge calmly, and like reasonable Men.

IV. The Author of these Abridgments addressed them unto those, who had the
Originals in their Hands; and therefore it cannot be thought, that it was not
as Faithful a Report as he could make of the matter; But it having been
insinuated, that there might be a more full and perfect Relation, The Author
desires it, and I desire it my self, That the Accounts given in the
Philosophical Transactions be permitted by the Owner to come abroad, and be
publish^d Word for Word, that impartial Men may see with their own Eyes, the
true state of the Case.

V. It might be easy for me to make Answers to the Scurrilous things lately
Published against me, and satisfy the Public of the Falsehood and Basen^ss in
them. But I think it rather becomes a considerate Man to decline foolish
Contentions; especially at a time, when there is a grievous Calamity upon us,
that calls us (instead of railing at one another) to Unite in Prayers to
Almighty GOD, for His Mercies to us. And therefore if any think to go on with
their Calumnies and Fooleries, I shall not think fit to take any Notice of
them. What I do (I hope as it has hitherto done) will vindicate it self with
People of Thought and Probity.

VI. I have made my Experiments with all the Disadvantages that can be
imagined, on Old and Young, on Strong and Weak, on Male and Female, on White
and Black, and in the worst Season of the Year; and on greater Numbers, than I
judge proper (considering the unaccountable Rage of unadvised People) to
mention; But more than twice Seven, I can assure you; and it has succeeded well
in all, even beyond Expectation.

VII. We are yet but Learners; and hope through Experience to grow more expert
in our Practice. In some of my Experiments hitherto, I have found the Fever
somewhat more intense for a few Hours before the Eruption, and the Number of
the Pustles to be somewhat more than usual in the Levant. Whether this be from
the Season of the Year, or our Different Climate, or our high way of Living, or
our want of more Experience I cannot say, till I see further. But Experience
declares things to fall out for the main, just as the Renowned TIMONIUS and
PYLARINUS have related. And I have hitherto by the Blessing of GOD been able
with ease to manage what Fever my Patients have had, and have never done any
thing, but what every body knows is done in other common Fevers. Upon the first
Eruption this Fever abates and goes off, the Patients grow so easy, that one
has much ado to keep them in the condition of Patients. They have not the least
Touch of that Second Fever, which People generally dye of in the common way.
The Pustules are very few in some; in others, they are two or three Hundred,
but at the worst, nothing to what is usual in the ordinary way of Infection.
They quickly dry away. The Patients are abroad again, sooner than they who are
infected in the common way; and they are on all accounts as well as they were
before.

The Sores of the Incision digest and heal as well as any other common Sores
do, and if they should grow angry or troublesome, a very little Skill and
Medicine will serve to cure them. From all I have hitherto seen, there can be
no more ill consequence of them, than from a sore Finger neglected.

We are informed that there is now and then, but very rarely, a little Abscess
in some Emunctory of the Body: but we have met with no such thing in our
Practice, and we think when such did, or may happen, that it was, or may be
from neglect or want of Skill in the Practitioner: nor have our Patients
hitherto had the Boils or other Swellings which are common in the ordinary
Small Pox, so much less is the Blood and other Juices corrupt in this, than the
ordinary way. Now to form a Cry of the Plague on this occasion, as if the
Practi^e would bring the Plague: This is so excessively ridiculous, that it is
a wonder any People can think, much less, talk ^o. Are there not a Thousand
People in Town and Country, that have had such Swellings and Sores as Timonius
and Pylarinus mention, that come from Colds, ill Habits of Body, or other
causes as well as from the Plague? And was it ever known that the Plague was
produced in this way of Practice? They that have hitherto been under the
Operation among us, agree in declaring, that they have suffered in a manner
nothing; and that they would rather undergo it several times, tha^ so much as
once undergo the Small Pox is it is generally suffered in the common way (...)
they should be sure of surviving it. And (...) them (who are very religious
People) (...) published to the World, their Thanks to Almighty GOD for showing
them th^^ w^^ (...) escape Death and Misery. Indeed (...) any thing that yet
appears, here is a Discovery, that is a great Blessing to Mankind, and should
be thankfully received: A way to defend our selves against a dreadful and a
deadly Disease, by over ruling the way of it is coming at us, when we see it is
coming. Many Lives might be saved, some Time also, and some Charge, (which some
it may be, consider) and the Health of the Town much sooner restored; if the
Practitioners and the People in the Town would come more into this Practice.

The other Clamours and Bugbears having been conquered, all that now remains is
this: The People will have the Small Pox again. The only Answer that need be
given is this; we have never yet credibly heard any Instance thereof. And
those, who have passed under the Inoculation or Transplantation, are every Day
visiting, and attending the Sick; with all the assurance and safety that can
be. Some will confidently affirm, that to their Knowledge a Man may have the
Small Pox a Second Time in the common way. And yet this hinders not the
Encouragement of them who have had it once to be no more afraid of catching it.

The Case of Conscience distresses many worthy Good People. The Case in short
we take to be this. Almighty GOD in His great Mercy to Mankind, has taught us a
Remedy, to be used when the dangers of the Small Pox distress us; upon the use
of which Medicine, they shall in an ordinary way be sure not to have it so
severely as in the other way, and consequently not to be in such danger from
this dreadful Distemper, and also to be delivered from the terrible
Circumstances which many of them who recover of the Distemper do suffer for it.

Whether a Christian may not employ this Medicine (let the matter of it be what
it will) and humbly give Thanks to God for His good Providence in discovering
of it to a miserable World; and humbly look up to His Good Providence (as
wedoin the use of any other Medicine) for the success of it? It may seem
strange, that any wise Christian cannot answer it.

And how strangely do Men that call themselves Physicians betray their Anatomy,
and their Philosophy, as well as their Divinity in their invectives against
this Practice? For in the First place, they make a mighty bustle about
Malignant filth infused into the Mass of Blood, etc. as if there were no
Difference between injecting a quantity of some poisonous Matter in some large
Blood Vessel, and that of applying a Drop outwardly to the Scarified Skin,
which when we consider appears to be only a drop of that which our Skins are
filled with when we are full of the Small Pox, and a considerable part of which
is returned into the Blood again, and yet the Sick does very well. And further,
when this Drop is applied to a Person who has had the Small Pox before, and
although it enters, and is received by Nature in such, as well as others, as I
have experienced, yet nature is able to cast it off without the Physicians
help; and that agrees with what our Author Timonius tells us; that when it has
been tried on such as have had it before, it has had no effect. Secondly, And
as to their Philosophy, that the People will have it again, this is a wonder to
me; when I see the Fever produced as is necessary to separate and cast out the
Pocky matter, and that they have a fair Pock or Pustule, and this capable of
Infecting and producing the Small Pox in the ordinary way on others, and to the
same Degree, this renders it with me beyond all doubt, that they who have had
it once thus in this way, are as well secured from having it again, as those
who have had it favorably in the other way, which has been proved by those
that have had but one or two Pustules. Constant Experience has also confirmed
it in many thousands of Instances. But what makes this Practice so valuable to
us, in my Opinion is, that we shall escape the Violence, Rage and Hazard that
we are exposed to in the common way; except we are infected before, as we are
certain poor Mrs. Esther Webb was -- And even there we may hope that the Sores
of the Inscisions may help to carry off the Morbifick matter, and save the
Patient; for this Person is recovered, although she had one of the worst Sort
that ever was known. And much more on this Head might be said, why this way of
Infection is more safe and easy, than that of the Common way, but this may
suffice for the present.

And as to the Divinity, they would limit God in His Blessing of some one or
other particular part, or particle of His lower Creation, used by the Physician
or Surgeon to prevent, moderate, alter, or cure a Disease in their Patient; the
which I never yet heard was denied the Physician or Surgeon to use as aforesaid
by God or Man.

But for this I refer my self to the following Quaeries.

N. B. As to the spiteful and scurrilous things written against me and this
Practice, at present I shall take no further Notice of them, but remind the
Writers of the ill natured Dog in the Fable, that would neither eat the Oats
himself, nor let the Horse eat them: So neither will these use a true and
certain way to save the Peoples Lives, nor are they willing to let any one else
use it to save them.

A Few Quaeries humbly Offered.
I. IF it should be so that the Compassion of GOD to His Creatures, should
Enlighten us with the Knowledge of a Sweat or a Purge, that would Certainly, or
but Probably secure us from ever taking the Small Pox, I Enquire, Whether any
People would be so very foolish, as to judge it Unlawful to take such a Remedy.
Or, would not every Wise Man think, that all the Days of a whole Year, were too
few to be turned into Days of Thanksgiving, for the Discovery of such a
Blessing to a Miserable World? Let the matter of the Sweat or Purge be what
they will; It Is all one ^or that. Suppose it the Powder of Trade, or the Powder
that Johannes Anglicus cured Agues with; or let it be a Succus (...): It Is all
one for that!

II. Physicians have very often given their Patients (...) Salivation, to
remove, yea, and sometimes to Prevent grievous Diseases. Thousands have Died in
and from that Operation; yet because Thousands have got Good by it, the
Operation is every Day repeated. There is no ^^^y so Impertinent as to call
this, a Tempting of Providence. I Enquire, Why a Despumation, or, An Operation
that will, we must not say, Salivate, but we may say, Despumate, the matter
that would be fuel for the Small Pox, at proper Orifices, can be more liable to
Exceptions; Especially, when it was never yet known, that One Person has died
under it or by it? Or, why may not the Succus Variolatus be used, as well as
Mercury?

III. It is Objected, That you Presume upon Providence in this Essay for the
Prevention of the Small Pox; for you don't know whether you shall ever have the
Small Pox, or no. I Answer, But what if it be as likely that I shall have it,
as it is that my House will take Fire, when my Neighbors an Inch and half off,
is in Flames. Pray, sit still, my Neighbor, your House is not yet on Fire: The
Almighty can preserve it. But I Enquire, whether this Objection will not lie
against all the Preventive Physic in the World? I don't Infallibly know, that
I shall ever suffer the Disease I am going to prevent.

IV. The Objection here is, I make my self Sick, when I am Well. But I again
say, Will any Man decry all Preventing Physic, as Unlawful? Why do our
Physicians encourage People every Spring and Fall to take it? Don't People take
the Poison of a Vomit into their very Stomachs, to prevent a Sickness a
thousand times less to be feared, than the Small Pox? Why may not I as well
take a Poison into my Arm, or my Leg, to prevent such a Malady. Many have Died
of a Vomit. It is not yet known, that any one ever Died of the Operation, that
is now so cavil'd at. To say that our Savior's words, The whole need not a
Physician, forbid all preventing Physic, is a gross abuse of them. Besides, I
am not whole, while I have the Fuel of the Small Pox lodging in me.

V. Merely to prevent a little Headache, or some such slight Malady, may not I
apply such a Poison, as an Epispastic of Spanish Flies to my Arm; A Poison
which will set the Humors of my Body all a working, and penetrate unto the
very Bladder, and produce even a Bloody Urine there?

VI. But an Anxious Fear of the Small Pox; is not this an Evil Disease?
Especially when I have it so near me, that it is next to a Miracle if I escape
it? If I take Physic only to Remove and Prevent this Fear, it cannot be said,
that I make my self Sick before I have any Disease.

VII. The Celebrated Sydenham advises, That Purges be used, before the
Infection of the Small Pox be taken, which hopefully prepare the Body, to feel
(...) of the Small Pox, and of the better (...)* Will any be so Ridiculous as
to count this Unlawful, under a frivilous pretense that they (...) know whether
they shall have the Small Pox or no.

VIII. I humbly Enquire, whether the Sixth Commandment has not required us to
use Means that may be Lawfully used for the Preservation of our (...) and
others? And what is there Unlawful in what is nowproposed?

IX. There is a silly Cavil; We pray that the Small Pox may not spread; and yet
we do our selves by ^^ansplantation spread it. But I Enquire whether People
know what they Pray for? Our Pr^yers are that a ^an^^rous and Destructive Small
Pox may not Spread. We do not Pray, that the use of an Effectual means to save
our Lives from the Danger of Destruction by the Small Pox, may not be Revealed,
Practiced and Prospered.

X. It is Cavilled for to say Objected, would be too easy a w^rd for such
Impertinence) that this Now Way comes to us from the Heathen, and we Christians
must not Learn the Way of the Heathen I Enquire, whether our Hippocrates were
not an Heathen? And whether our Galen were not an Heathen? And whether we have
not our Mithradate from the Heathen? And whether the first Inventer of our
Tr^a^l^ were not Nero's Physician? And whether we have not learnt some of our
very Good Medicines from our Indians? But this New Way has been used by many
Thousands of Christ^^ns; And it is from Christians we have the Communications
of this New Way which we most rely upon. But are there none who pass for
Cour^^^ Chris^^ns* that are worse th^n I^^ide^s And, Gentlemen Smoakers, I pray
w^^m did you learn to Smoke of?

XI. If it should be so, that a Despumation of the Blood made by applying the
Succus Variolatus, would (by the Blessing of GOD) generally save the Lives of
them that come under it, I Enquire, What they will have to Answer for, that by
their Menaces and Outrages put a stop to such a General benefit? And I Enquire
whether a Physician, who makes the Experiment upon Himself, that so many
Thousands of precious Lives may (if it succeed well) be brought into a likely
way of being preserved, and prolonged, shall deserve to be treated as a
Murderer; or not rather esteemed a General Benefactor.

XII. Were not the Physicians a Great Body of them, up in Arms, against the use
of the Cold Bath? But since it has cured a vast Variety of Diseases, and saved
Thousands of Lives, has not the use of it now obtained, whither they will or
no? And now they also recommend it.

When the use of the Jesuits Bark was first introduced, was there not as loud a
Cry against it, as can be imagined? Yea, Do not many to this Day ruin
themselves by the use of it, with an indiscreet and preposterous management?
But since Hundreds of Thousands of Lives have been saved by it, are not they
generally counted very odd Physicians, who do not use it, as often as they have
occasion!

I Enquire, whether any sort of Practice in the whole Art of Physic ever came
to us with a stronger Recommendation than this of Inoculation or
Transplantation.

FINIS.

