A Choice Dialogue Between JOHN FAUSTUS A Conjurer, AND JACK TORY His Friend.

Occasioned by some Choice Dialogues lately Published, concerning
Praedestination and Election.

Together with Animadversions upon the Praeface to the Choice Dialogues. And an
Appendix concerning the true Doctrine of Praedestination, as held by the Church
of England, and the Absurdities and Inconsistency of the Choice Dialogues.

By a Young Strippling.

Boston, Printed for N. Boon, at the Sign of the Bible in Cornhill: B. Gray,
and J. Edwards at their Shops in King Street. 1720.

A PREFACE
Containing some Animadversions upon the Praeface to the Choice Dialogues.

I Was the other Day very much surprised to meet with a small Pamphlet, wearing
this specious and very promising Title; Choice Dialogues, between a Godly
Minister, and an honest Countryman, concerning Election and Predestination,
etc. Both the Sublimity of the Subject, no less than the Secret and Eternal
Decrees of the Deity, a very abstruse Theme; as also the Choiceness of the
promised Dialogues, raised my Expectations to a very great Pitch. But upon the
Perusal of them; I soon found the Author laid himself open to the Censures
which Horace tells us they are liable to fall under, who promise more than they
can perform, and fill the Reader up with vain Hopes, only to tantalize and
baulk him in his Expectations.

Amphora caepit Institui; currente Rota, cur Urceus exit? Quid dignum tanto
seret hicPromissor Hiatu? Parturiunt Montes, nascetur ridiculus Mus.

Which suffer me to English after this manner.
Since you began with so much Pomp and Show
How is it, Man, the End's so vile and low?
Prithee, what will thou bring worth all this Rout and Touse?
The Mountain groans in Travail, and brings forth a Mouse.
In the first place, as is natural to every Reader, who desires to be informed
of the Occasion, Design, and Scope of any Work, I dipped into the Preface to
the Reader, hoping there to find some special and weighty Reasons, which urged
the Editor to publish these Controversial and Li^igious Dialogues. Editor, I
say; for it is hard to know whether he, or his Aged Divine wrote them, or
rather by a Juggle they brought forth the Mungril between them. He says, it was
written by a Reverend and Laborious Pastor in Christ's Flock, by one who has
been for almost twice thirty years, a faithful and painful Labourer in Christ's
Vineyard. I believe I know the Reverend and Laborious Pastor he means, viz. a
certain Jacobite Clergyman, who, I dare vouch has Served the Pretender ten
years, where he has the Flock of Christ one.

But to return, I could not for my Life find any weighty Reason for his
Publishing these Choice Dialogues. I began to think, It might be, that some of
the Young Stripplings had roared Predestination out of the Pulpits; but with
all my inquisitive Searches could not find it so. I then began to recollect my
self, and as my Young Logic taught me, began to compare, compound and divide
Ideas, but could not with all my Wits see the Connection of the Ideas of [Young
Stripling] and [Predestination] or imagine how a Discourse upon the awful and
secret Decrees of God naturally led a Man to rail at a Young Presbyterian. And
really I never met with such an Oddity and Inconsistency, as to fill a Book
with Calumnies and Reproaches, which is written out of Charity to the Souls of
Men. Full of Charity, brim full of it! and yet throughout the whole Book
transgressing the Rules of that excellent Grace, which the Apostle says, 1 Cor.
13.4, 5, 6, 7. Charity suffers long, and is kind; Charity envieth not;
Charity vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up; does not behave it self
unseemly, seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil;
rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth; bears all things,
believes all Things, hops all Things, endures all Things. But his
high-flying bitter Spirit savours of too much Rancor, to let the World think,
that Love to Soul^, and not Hatred to the Churches of New England was the
Spring and Motive of his undertaking this scurrilous Work.

As for the Dialogues themselves, says he, they contain a rich and precious
store of Spiritual Knowledge, and Godly Comfort. So the Prefacer thinks. But
others are not of his Mind. Why are you angry, Sir? Will Not you suffer us
conscientiously to dissent from you?

Nay, but stop Young Stripling! they speak to the Hearts of Men in a very easy
and familiar Manner, so that the meanest Plough-man, the very meanest of God's
People may understand them. Right, my Friend, no Body disputes but the meanest
Plough-man may dive to the profound Bottom of them The Dialogues we give in the
amplest Testimony you can desire, they are plain enough; but is the Subject you
write of made as plain? No Body despairs that ever I heard of, of penetrating
into your deepest Recesses, by a single Glance. That ever the Man should be
afraid, the World will deny reading his Book, for fear it should be too deep
for them! No, Sir, your Dialogues are easy and ^hallow enough; but
Predestination is as great a Mystery as ever: and I never thought that which
the great Doctor of the Gentiles, the Apostle Paul, adores as unsearchable,
could be brought down level with the Capacity of a Plough man; or that a
Plough-Man can so easily comprehend and understand the Decrees, and ascend in a
few Hours, those eternal Mountains of Brass, which have always been
inaccessible by the most towering and exalted Genius's. To hear Paul with an [O
Altitudo] in his Mouth; and a Plough-Man calling out, here St. Paul, I Will let
you into the Mystery; there is no Difficulty in the Matter. Lesly shall explain
it you in a Minute. Paul! Lesley will set you to rights, and bring you to
understand your own Mysterious Writings.

They treat of that deep, but comfortable Doctrine, I mean the Doctrine of
Election and Predestination. But then the Author limits his Meaning in a long
Parenthesis, (that Soul-piercing Doctrine to the Wicked and Unregenerate, but
Soul-refreshing, and Heart-comforting Doctrine to the Saints, to all righteous
and godly Folk.) Then it seems, it is a Soul-piercing Doctrine to the wicked
and unregenerate. It would be too Satirical and hard to argue the Author's
Spiritual State and Character, from its being such a Soul-piercing Doctrire to
him, that he cannot so much as endure the Sound of Fore-ordaining,
Fore-kowledge, Pre-destination; must have substituted in the Room of these
Heart-piercing Words, Destination, Knowledge, Ordaining. O what a killing
syllable is [Pre] A Man had much better be destined to Hell, than predestined,
and had rather be known of God an Heir of Damnation, than be foreknown to be so.

Now as to the Occasion of the Publication of these Dialogue^; Alas, Christian!
I fear there is too too great Occasion for ^^em. The many pernicious (and I
fear al^s!) Soul destroying Books, etc. Here I must ask the Author's Pardon,
when I said I could not find any Reason of his for the Publication of these
Dialogues. No, here is a Reason, our Author perceives there are pernicious and
Soul-destroying Books handed up and down the Country. But he mentions none of
them, either by their Titles or in a way of Quotation; nor do I think any
Number of Tractates of Predestination (which is what the Author must mean when
he calls them pernicious and Soul-destroying Books) have been handed up and
down. Upon all the Enquiries I have purposely made even since these CHOICE
Dialogues came out, I can hear of no such Thing. Which makes me believe, the
Prefacer had a mind to rail, and could find no way to introduce himself upon
the Stage, but raking up an old Story of Predestination. I am sure, I never
found but the Country was as silent, and as disengaged from any such Talk, as
they are of the Millennium, or the next blazing Star, that is to appear. And I
am so much the more confirmed in my Opinion, in that the Prefacer without any
Distinction, falls foul of the Presbyterian Clergy, especially the younger
Sort, charging them home with Calumny and Slander. Instead of entreating and
inviting us to the Truth; what vile Reproaches and malicious Invectives is his
Preface filled with against those, who never did him any wrong in the World.
Under the Vmbrage of Predestination, he takes Liberty to be as unmannerly and
reproachful as he pleases, till at lengeth one is almost stunned with the Noise
and Din of his clamorous, ungenteel and scurrilous Rhapsodies.

But it were endless as well as needless to take Notice of all his Cant and
Jargon. He says, these Dialogues will rightly instruct Men concerning the true
Scripture Doctrines of Election and Predestination. So the Author thinks,
because it is done ad Captum; else it might be too laborious a Research for us.
But we'll leave him in a good Conceit of his Piece, until we have gotten to the
End of his learned Preface.

Yes, but they are Heart-enlightning Dialogues. How is the Bible then the Best
of Books, since these Dialogues may lay claim to that incommunicable Character
of that Blessed Book, viz. Heart-enlightning? See Psalm 19.7, 8. Psalm 119.50.
What is the Difference between a converting, quickening, etc. and an
Heart-enlightening Dialogue? Strange Dialogues! that above all Objective
Illumination of the Understanding, have a Power to reach the very Heart. A very
powerful Word indeed: -- But I forbear to fix any Consequences upon the Author,
which he it may be never intended himself, when he asserted these Dialogues to
be Heart-enlightening; and shall only observe he is more charmed with them than
others are, to think them so Divine, when humane Frailty betrays it self
throughout almost the whole Composure. But should I fix such Consequences upon
him, it would never equal his Impudence in insinuating that we worship the
Devil. Vid. Page 2. Dial.

Our Praefacer launches still further and deeper into the Elogies and Praises
of these Heartenlightening Dialogues; says he, They will show thee, what was
the Opinion of the holy Martyrs of the Church in the first and purest Ages of
Christianity, concerning these Doctrines. And O I am sure we ought to follow
them, them, I say, who were taught the Faith of Christ from the Mouths of the
Apostles or Apostolic Men, etc. rather than hearken to -- that great
Antichrist, etc. Were these brave Men he talks of Martyrs for opposing Calvin's
Doctrine of Praedestination ^ Was the Doctrine contained in his Choice
Dialogues, the Truths for which they Dyed Martyrs, and Sealed with their Blood?
Nay can he prove that these Ancient Fathers were of other Sentiment; than we
upon the Head of Election? I am sure the Dialogues don't prove it. No, Mr.
Lesly says, this is the ancient Apostolic Doctrine, but not one ancient Father
quoted to his Purpose. But since our Praefacer has none of their Proofs on his
side, we will by and by give him a few.

These great and glorious Martyrs, the Quintessence of whose Faith in the
Article of Election, our Author supposes couched in his Choice Dialogues, were
(if we may believe our Praefacer) taught the Faith of Christ from the Mouths of
the Apostles or Apostolic Men. Now, Gentlemen, we are come to the Rectilineal,
and Uninterrupted Succession of Episcopacy, from the Apostles. Ay, and this
Doctrine of the Choice Dialogues has been in the same uninterrupted Manner, by
oral Tradition handed down by the Clergy to this Day. By Oral Tradition, I say,
for this our Author, quotes none of the Writings of these Apostolic Men, or
their Successors. But why need our Praefacer run us up to the Doctrine which he
supposes these ancient Fathers received from the Apostles, and Apostolic Men?
Does he think what Paul and Peter, etc. told to Ignatius, Hermas the Pastor,
etc. more true, or more intelligible, than what for the Benefit of the Church
in all Ages, he left in Writing? Does he think Paul, or Peter, etc. could speak
their Minds better to those Men, than they could Write in their Epistles? We
have Paul by us, the sure Word of Prophesy, which is enough to inform us what
he thought, when he met with a Mystery, and when he did not. We know Paul wrote
to the Romans Things unsearchable and past finding out by any Mortal, not what
is level with the Capacity of every Plough-Man; I mean as to this Doctrine of
Praedestination. And here let me tell our Author, Paul's Writings are as
valuable with me, nay more, since I am sure he wrote under the Conduct and
Inspiration of the Holy Spirit, than a personal Interview with him. But I wish
nevertheless, the Praefacer would Publish to the World what these brave Men
were taught from the Mouths of the Apostles, relating to Praedestination. The
World will own in their thankful Acknowledgements their Obligations unto him.

As for the Uninterrupted Succession of the Clergy from the Apostles, I mean of
Bishops Diocesan, I never could see the Catalogue of them yet. It has hitherto
been much such a Secret in Ecclesiastic State as is the Philosophers Stone in
the Kingdom of Nature; of which it is often asserted there is such a Thing in
Rerum Natura; but we never can be certain any Body has been so sagacious and
sharp as to find it. But I drop the Chimera, and let it vanish among the Shades.

But who is the Whore of Babylon, and the great Antichrist, etc. It cannot be
the Church of Rome, for that spoils the uninterrupted Succession in Part, and I
know it is the Mind of the Praefacer, that Rome is a great Arm of the Catholic
Church. Who is Antichrist then which he means? Why, they are Presbyterians,
whom our Author joins with the Quakers, who are a small Body, which I know the
Praefacer thinks to be mainly intended in the Apocaypse. And yet in a few Lines
after he calls us Fellow Christians. They are Fellow Christians, and yet have
they followed blindly, for some scores of Years, blind Guides; nay, as in
Conversation he will not scruple to call them false Brethren, and aver that
they are no more Ministers of Christ, than every Carter and Dray-man that
passes the Street. How then can the Flocks of such false Brethren, be any
other than false Churches, and degenerate Wolves; and are they then his Fellow
Christians?

But it would tire Job to recount all the Contradictions, and Absurdities in
his Praeface. I shall therefore animadvert but upon some of the Multitude. Let
us follow the Example of the Primitive Church, and give Ear to those pious and
godly Fathers of the Church, who will teach us the Truth in Sincerity. To omit
so small a Criticism as that, what is the Difference between [Pious] and
[Godly,] as he styles the Fathers of the Church? for I always was such a
Novice, as to understand the same Thing b^ Piety and Godliness: I say, to omit
that, let me observe how industrious the Praefacer is, t^ pin his Faith upon
the Church, which h^ seems to suppose infallible. Why could be no^ lead us as
well to the Fountain of all, the holy Scriptures? Especially, when he will not
(...) us know the Names of these pious and godly Fathers. The Epistle to the
Romans may serve our Turn as well.

Now the Praefacer puts on an Air of Gravity, and takes up a Lamentation. Here
I cannot but take Notice of the sad and deplorable Degeneracy of Mankind, etc.
Our Praefacer is not at all guilty of this, when in the next Page, he
insinuates there is scarce a Book written by the Dissenters, which has common
Sense in it, and they are not worth a Reading. And if wise Men refuse to cast
their Eyes upon his Choice Dialogues, he may conclude it is upon the same
Suspicion, that they deny them the Honor of a Perusal.

Indeed, says the Praefacer, I have heard People say, that there is scarce one
in Twenty of the Books written by Dissenters, that have common Sense in them.
He has heard so, but who told him? And what then? I have heard likewise many
People say, that he writes like a Quaker. But whether this be true or not, let
the World judge. Only cast your Eye, Reader, upon his Dialogue (I call (...)
his, for he must father the Bratt, since his own Stuff is blended so much with
(Lesleys) that no one can tell which is which) Look, I ^ay upon Five of his
first Lines in the Dialogue; where the Minister answers Friend. Countryman,
in these words. I thank Thee honest Country Man; a good Morning to Thee
likewise, and I pray God bless Thee: But I would know what has brought Thee to
my house so early. And now, good Reader, what do Thee think of it? Thee must
think he is quakerishly inclined.

There is another Sentence in his Praeface, which is so well Worded, I dare not
attack it. It is a Specimen of the true Sublime, I shall only transcribe it,
and leave it with the Reader as a considerable Piece of Rhetoric, and the Style
of one, who has read Longinus. It is this. Be it true or not true, this I am
sure is a true saying, viz. Wisdom is justified of her Children. Here is Truth
upon Truth!

Our Praefacer goes on to give Reasons why the Writings of Nonconformists of
all Denominations be not quite so polite as the Works of some others. It is,
says he, Because they write so much. Here, Reader, not the Presbyterians only,
but Nonconformists of all Denominations are attacked. What then, all the famous
Writings of Learned Men abroad, who are Presbyterians, are not Polite, that
because the Writers of them are such as Bail, Witsius, Voet, Basnage, etc.
Nay, and of some, what were Owen, Bates, Charnock, Gale, Clarkson, etc. and
among the more Modern, what are Calamy, Watts, etc, aye and Pierce too; for
allowing him to be an Heretic, he cannot be called a Clumsy Writer. I might
mention many more, but I forbear. I only add, were not Stillingfleet,
Tillotson, Bishop Hopkins, Burnet, and others Polite, until they conformed to
the Church; and then (I warrant you) as it were by the Touch of the Lapis
Aurificus of Episcopacy, all of a sudden they were turned into Gold.

Is Writing so much the Cause of our unpolisned Way of Writing; let our learned
Prefacer take Care of himself, who sets up for an Author of two or three Books,
while in his Nonage. And to set the World a Gig after his Rhapsodies, is
forced to insinuate stily that he is an aged Labourer in Christ's Vineyard. Ay,
and in the End of his Preface, helps the Gentlemen (viz. Junior Presbyterian
Clergymen) to an Argument against Praedestination, because they are but Young

As for what follows of Giddiness arising from ^ circular Method of Reasoning,
and a Mo^on exceeding quick and rapid; I leave the Reader to apply it to the
Author himself, who has fairly revolved through the Circle of Arminianism,
Pelagianism, and Calvinism; and has so slipped from one Inconsistency to another,
that to use an old Latin Scrap, I learned at School, citius Anguillam Canda
teneas.

Now stand clear, the Prefacer has took a Voyage over to Holland. Huzzah! The
Dutch are routed! Jack has broke down their Dikes, and drowned them. The Water
has ruined all their Paper. What a Pity it is, our General Court did not
apprise our Agent in England of it, to inform the Dutch our Christian Brethren,
what Danger their States were in from a very potent American Invasion.

But was our Prefacer ever in Holland, that he has taken the Distemper, the
Learned Call, Lust of Writing? Happy, that he has made trial of our Charity,
which forces us to buy up his painful and laborious Searches and Researches
after the true Meaning of Praedestination and Foreknowledge, viz. to throw
aside those two dire Particles [Prae] and [Fore]

Recumbency and Regeneration are Mysterious Tractates all! So thought Nicodemus
before his Conversion. Let the Prefacer read Joh. 3. -- But that ever a man
should have so little Grace as to laugh at, and banter that wondrous Change
wrought in the Soul of a Man, by the supernatural Operations of the Holy Spirit
of Grace, of such absolute necessity in order to our Entrance into the Kingdom
of Heaven! Read 2 Cor. 2.14.

This Regeneration is something more than Episcopal Baptism, let him think what
he pleases, notwithstanding his great Dodwell attributes to the Efficacy
thereof, the Immortality of the Soul.

But where is the Impropriety of the Word Recumbency? Bishop Beveridge uses as
had an one, when he tells us of Rolling our selves on the Mercy of God. And why
does not that Word very aptly express our Reliance upon the Great Savior Jesus
Christ by faith. Did you never read, Psalm. 55 2. Cast thy Burden upon the Lord.
And Cant. 8.5. Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness leaning upon her
Beloved? which is meant of the Church in their Faith and Reliance in the
Messiah.

As for his Ridicules upon Extempory Prayer, a man is very apt (as the Fox in
the Fable) to call it sour stuff, because it is out of his Reach. So we find
such Men, as the Prefacer, are of the Mind, that by the Gift, and Spirit of
Prayer, together with the holy Ghost's helping our Infirmities, etc. is meant
no more than an ability to read over half a dozen Forms. The Apostle says, We
know not WHAT to Pray for, and the Spirit helps our INFIRMITIES. I warrant
you the Meaning of the Apostle was; Your Form tells you what to Pray for, and
the Spirit helps you to recite. But I don't design a Controversy upon this
Matter. Let every Christian use what his Conscience tells him is best. Nor have
I the arrogance to attack the Church of England; but I hope it is no Arrogance
to attack our Prefacer; for I know wise and good Men of his own Communion are
ashamed of his Performance. And this the Prefacer seems to be well aware of,
when he says afterward, I expect there will be many things objected against
the following Papers, for there are many who call themselves Church of England
Men, who will not like what these Papers contain. And so I believe; a Man need not
to have been a Conjurer to have foretold that, (or to leave out [fore] have
told that.

As for three Sermons a day, I have nothing to answer to the Heinous Charge,
but a Passags out of Dr. Wild's Poems, entitled, The Loyal Nonconformist.

That Peter was a Prelate they aver;
But I Will not swear't when all is said and done:
But I dare swear, and I hope I shall not err,
He preached an Hundred Sermons to their One.
Or else what a Clergyman once said, who was very busy always at Court, and
never had Leisure to exercise his Gifts in Preaching, or never much inclined
that Way, viz. that a Preaching Bishop was a Preaching Coxcomb.

Our Praefacer proceeds to banter the Young Stripplings, upon a Passage which a
celebrated Writer at a certain Ordination (if he will allow the Expression) made
use of to the Commendation of the Younger Clergy in New England. Well, Sir, and
so they are able to understand the Learned Languages. And, Sir, in the Name of
my Young Brethren, I do my self challenge you to write in any of them, and your
own Clergy Men shall be judges between us. Not so fast, Friend, Learning is a
Commodity which su^fers no Monopoly. It is (...) the Sun in the Firmament,
shining upon all (...); one Man receives nothing less of his (...) and Light,
and Influences, because ano(...) lies ba^king in his Rays. No, no, P^aebus has
not confined his Bounty to so narrow Limits, as your Learned Head.

Let me (I beseech ye) advise Gainsayers to take heed how they oppose them, for
here is nothing but convince and confound; Stand clear, here is no Quarter to
be given. And I pray, why not convince, and confound, as well as prove to a
Demonstration, as you pretend your terrible Syllogism over-leaf amounts unto.
Demonstration, a favorite Word among you, as every Body observes, and you
scorn to measure your Syllogisms with any (...) Gauge. Demonstration! Were
^E^lid alive he would run mad, to see what (...) so sacred to him, and the
Prerogative of the Geometricians so prostituted. Indeed our P^^^^acer had need
sacrifice every year an Hecatomb of his Choice Dialogues to his Manes, to
appease the angry Ghost. But if the Profacer calls the Dialogues Demonstration,
My Word for it we'll allow him the Effects [convince] and [confound.] And then
let him hang out his Sign, inscribed, Within are to be had Demonstrations of
all sorts and sizes; stand clear. --

What a strong Foundation are the Dialogues (...) upon? Two absolute
Contradictions cannot be true at once. How terrifying must this be to the
Reader, when he thinks that to hold Predestination, is to offer Vio^^^ce to his
Understanding equal to the Assertion of the Existence and Non-existenceof a
Thing at the same time. O the amazing Power and Force of Logic! And yet whole
Churches have been so sotrish as to acquiesce in so absurd a Tenet. What a
(...) thing is it to be born in the Ends of the World, when Things formerly
disputable, and much controversed, are now proved to a Demonstration; and now
to persist in our former Doctrine, is equally absurd as the Denial of that
eternal incontestible Maxim of the Metaphysicians, Res non potest Esse et non
Esse eodem Tempore. -- I am crop sick of Demonstrations. Depend upon it,
Demonstrations will soon grow out of Credit, and be but a Drugg in the Market
of Literature, if his Choice Dialogues may be enrolled among the Apodictices of
the Age.

But now the mighty Syllogism! Stand clear here is no Quarter! Here Is nothing
^ut Demonstration!

Two absolute Contradictions, etc.

Now our Champion is taking leave of us in his Praeface, but yet with the
Civility of begging upon his Knees; it is to beg to give a little advice to
those Persons into whose Hands his Papers shall fall, that they would not, if
they happen to find ^^y thing displeasing to them, immediately throw them out
of their Hands. This Aged Gentleman who had just now been sup^lying some Young
Men with an Argument; has no better Advice left to give to all Old or Young,
but to read diligently his Dialogues. What Nonsense is this, if they scorn the
Dialogues themselves, his Advice will not succeed a whit better. If the Work
will not recommend it self; his Advice, as Old as he is, will never move any to a
Perusal of it.

But why would he have us read them? Why, he says, they will rightly instruct
^s concerning some of those Things in Paul's Epistles, which Peter says, are
hard ^o be understood, which the unlearned and unstable wrest to their own
Destruction. Hard to be understood, and yet as he says to be apprehended by the
meanest Plough-man! But whether it be so or not, that they do so rarely
instruct us, I leave, until we come to the Dialogues themselves.

I cannot take leave of the Reader, without observing the religious Benediction
and Doxology, and the [Amen] at the End of it, with which he concludes his
uncharitable and unmannerly Preface. I add only this, Can Blessing and Cursing
proceed from the same Mouth!

I am the Reade'rs Humble Servant, Christopher Whigg.

Advertisement.
THere is now in the Press, and will shortly be Published, a Book Entitled, An
Hue and Cry after Conscience: Or, The Pilgrims Progress by Candlelight, in
search after Honesty and Plain-Dealing. Represented under the Similitude of a
DREAM. Where. in is discovered the pretty manner of his Setting out. His
Pleasant Humors on his Journey. The Disappointment he met with after all his
search. Together with his flight at last into another Country, where he is
still on his Rambles. Written by John Dunton Author of the Pilgrims Guide, from
the Cradle to his Deathbed. Sold by Nicholas Boon, at the Sign of the Bible
in Cornhill. 1720.

A Choice Dialogue Between JOHN FAUSTUS AND JACK TORY.
John Faustus YOU Namesake, prithee step hither; I have something to say to ye.


Jack Tory. Dear Namesake; if you could but convey your lucky Surname to me
too; but what is it you have to say?


J. Faust. Our Master, Satan, has diverse things to tell you. He expects e're
long to se^ you in Person; but this he desers to the time appointed, when he
who has set you to work will pay you your Wages. He would have had himself a
Dialog ue with you, if he could have had the famous Danson present; but he
being long since gone to a better place, it may do, if an old fellow servants of
yours (one old enough to be your great Grandfather, and one who has been much
ab ove twice thirty years, a faithful, and painful Labourer for him) now bring
you a few Messages, he has to send you.


J. Tory. It becomes a Servant readily to hear, what his Master has to say to
him; and that I have served him faithfully and painfully, Troth, he knows it
very well; but whether my Time will not be out before twice thirty Years come to a
period, perhaps he knows no more than 1. For I scorn Praedestination even from
the Mouth of my Master. But what then, friend Faustus, I am uneasy, Dear
Namesake, till you tell me.


J. Faust. Why then, friend John, I Will tell thee what; first, thy M^ster
thinks, he has Thanks to Con thee for the Honor and Service you have so
faithfully endeavored for him, in maintaining, that the Dutch and Scotch
Presbyterians, and all the Churches of New England, and all their Pastors
worship the Devil. The Devil's (...) old Blasphemer; Blasphemies he loves (...)
his Life, they are Melodies to him. The very first Leaf of your Choice
Dialogues repeats these Choice Blasphemies. That is in plain Terms, if Men
worship a GOD, who ^as fore-ondained whatsoever comes (...) pass; and if in
their Prayers Men own that without the help of Special Grace from him, they
shall never convert unto him; you say, they Worship the Devil under the Name of
God. I confess it four as a little hideous to me, as bad as People take me to
be. But you had a Mind it may be, Jack, to have something more of the Hero in
you, than your great Brother She phard himself.

Your Master has given Demonstration enough of his affecting the Throne of the
most high God. But really, friend John, you have done something even beyond his
Expectation, to claim it for him. Formerly he used to value himself upon being
the Object of all Worship from the Japanese, the Hottentots, and American
Salvages. He never imagined that all the Calvinists in the World, which amount
to several Millions, and a very distinguished and superior part of Mankind, are
also his Worshippers. I protest John, I am so well acquainted with our Master,
that I know he trembles before the God, whom the Calvinists pray to.

But avast! I remember now King William was a Calvinist. But sure, it is not
upon his account that you so horribly blaspheme the God he prayed to? For I
remember, you never much liked him. O hungry and hardly bestead, that you cannot
content your self with cursing the King, whose immortal Memory, you and our
Master abominate; but you must look upward and curse his God too!

Look you, John, hitherto your Master pleased himself with being the God of
this World. But there is a Set of People Called out of this World, who are
continually lifting up their Cries to the God of all Grace, that he would
quicken them to repent and believe; and who ascribe to Sovereign Grace, the
whole Glory of every good Thing performed by them in a Way of Living unto God.
Now, John, these were the People of all the World, which your Master and mine
gave over as lost; he has hue-in-cried them as Runaways, and has taken all
Opportunities to blacken them with such Pens as yours (that writes all his
Advertisements for him) for Brutes and Brute-Makers; But it seems by you, that
these also are they, who fall down and worship him. This is beyond what your
Master himself ever imagined. He was in you, John, all the time you were a
Scribbling for him, though perhaps you were not aware of it. But how comes it,
John, you're gone beyond his Inspiration? You have pleased him wonderfully; For
though he be a Spirit full of Envy, yet he is not so envious, as to be displeased
when he sees himself outdone in Devilism. You must not wonder at it, that when
you say, the God of the Calvinists is more cruel than the Devil, the Devil
should applaud himself, for having a Man John, who bids so hopefully to outdo
his Master.


J. Tory. What then does Master think, I have out Devil'd the De'll himself! I
hope then, though the Stripplings, in which the Churches of N. E. forsooth, think
themselves highly favored, are a parcel of little senseless Creatures; yet the
Country may be able to show one Jacobite Strippling, that can do something to
the Purpose. Ay, a Strippling that in his Blasphemies against God, can (Oh
dear!) say even what he pleases.


J. Eaust. And yet, John, that thou may not be too vain upon this glorious
Performance. I may tell thee, thy Master complains of thee.


J. Tory. I am surprised at that! pray why so!


John Faust. Why, I Will tell you. He says, he is more unhappy in Servants, than
any other Master in the World. All of them serve him willingly; many serve him
industriously, and some serve him very successfully. But still he says, they
are generally block heads, and the Rascals do him as much Mischief, as they do
him Service; They spoil many a good cause by such a blockedly Management, as
would vex the heart of any Master in the lower Regions to look upon.


Jack Tory. -- O alas, I hope I have not mismanaged a Cause, which my heart was
so set upon, that all my friends by all their Persuasions (...) not divert me
from Scrib^ bling. Satan, knows I had the same Distemper with the Dutch; ( that
confounded Itch of Scribbling, and Lust of Writing) and it was all purely out
of Good Will to Master and his Cause. But I was so cunning -- I told them, I
had a Commission from God, and I must obey God rather than Man. I know my
friends foretold (according to a good old Proverb more than twice thirty years
old,) that I must needs go, etc.


John Faust. Yes, but you have mismanaged most confoundedly I will show you
several Points before I part with you. For I cannot tarry all Night with you, to
show you them all. But I protest, I will have the Patience to tell you a few of
them -- Why then, what a folly, what a Madness was it in you to begin your
Leslean Transcripts with such a shocking Blasphemy, which I my self don't care
to repeat, as bad as People take me to be, I have more Grace then that comes
to. O, alas, that a man should ever be such a Numbskull! could it ever enter
into your addle Pate, that your Pamphlet could ever find the least Reception in
the Country; when one of the first Things they meet with is your more than
Diabolical Censure of them as Worshippers of the Devil. That the God they pray
to is the Devil; yea, more cruel than the Devil. Troth Jack, ^ very first Page,
to represent a Congregation of Dissenters, as a Congregation of Devils. But, I
profess, you set me a trembling, when you make their God a Devil too; and
represent him as the great Beelzebub, the chief of all the rest of the
Congregation. Horresco referens! I tell you, this over Devilish Passage has
quite ruined your whole Design. Every Body will treat you and your Pamphlet
with abhorrence, and wonder a Christian Government has not condemned it to be
thrown into the Flames, etc. ( John Faustus bids you beware of such a Doom your
self) which without the least Infringement upon Liberty of Conscience, might be
justly ordered for it. Methinks I hear the People, before they have read out
the first Leaf of your fine Rhapsody, exclaiming, -- Lord, what is it this
fellow means? Does the Fool think to persuade the good People of the Country,
that the God whom their pious Fathers prayed to, was the Devil, and that they
are by Consequence gone to him? Does he persuade us, that all the Prayers
offered up in the Churches, and in the Houses throughout the Country, are but
so many Invocations of the Prince of Darkness! Let me tell thee friend Jack, he
that would proselite the People of New England unto the Pelagian Opinions must
go more soberly to work. You have managed the Cause like a Tinker. You (...),
in Mending one. Look ye, thy fondness for this Blasphemy has undone thy
Dialogues, and rendered them utterly ineffectual to all Intents and Purposes. I
have been thought a Conjurer (though I dare protest thou art none;) But without
any Conjuring for it, I can foretell, that if any People receive any
Impressions from thy Pamphlet, they must be only such as have not so much
Brains as a Mouse-Squirrel in them. Jack, thou know what a Rattle Snake is;
and thou know he carries his Rattle in his Tail, and gives Men warning to
Stand clear; but thou carriest thine in thy head; how unhappy art thou, that
all this Blasphemy might not come in at the Tail of thy Dialogues. Thy very
first Leaf must be the Seat of the Curiosity. Why, the very Tobacconists will
be afraid of your Pamphlets to use them as waste Paper, for fear the strong
scent of Brimstone (for they know from whence it came) worse then Mandungus,
should corrupt the Tobacco.


Jack Tory. Did I say the Dissenters worshipped the Devil? and does Master
fault me for over-doing?


John Faustus. Ay, you say they worship the Devil, or one more cruel than the
Devil. And your Master is very angry at it. I will say this for thee, Jack,
thou have been a very diligent Slave of his, and have laid thy self out with
all thy Might and Craft to debauch the Young Stripplings of New England in
their Principles, and bring them to forsake the God and Hope of their Fathers;
but thy Game is now over. This rash and amazing Salley of thine has quite
confounded it. But I forbear to chew any more upon this Apple of Sodom, for
fear of being choked with the Devils-Bit in it.


Jack Tory. But stop, Friend Faustus; It was not I, but the famous Lesley, the
Jacobite Irish man, that was the Author of my Choice Dialogues.


John Faustus. Oh! And so you think to come off with the sham in your
Title Page of a Reverend who -- knows -- who, and one who has been for above
twice thirty years a Labourer. Every Body knows what Reverence is due to you.
What have you been so long a Labourer? It was pretty cunning, I profess under
such a Disguise to draw on the Readers of the Title Page, to peruse your
unmannerly Preface and Mungril Dialogues, begotten by a juggle between thee and
Lesley. It has caused undiscerning People, upon an apprehension that it was
written by a certain Aged Gentleman in New England, whom you and our Master
hate to give it the honor of a Perusal. I profess, Jack, I am ashamed of such
a little mean Artifice. But to return, you have so blended your own Stuff with
Lesley's, that scarce any Body can tell which is which: But a man that can see
but an Inch may be sure of this, that it appears like an old Garment patched
with New Cloth, and the Rents and Tatters appear horrid and rueful. Nay, more
than this, you have hurt poor Lesley too, if it be possible. Were he here he would
flogg you; while he applied that of the Poet to you. -- Male dum recitas,
incipit esse tuum. For indeed your Way of Recitation has made it yours. And you
have the honor of it. Good Jack, who will believe, think ye, that the Aged and
Laborious Lesley ever troubled his head with the Stripplings in the Churches of
New England; and are there not an hundred Things in the latter part of your
Dialogues, referring to things never known to him, and never transacted till
since his Writing. Dear Jack, could thou call thy self a Reverend and
Laborious Pastor; or do thou claim the latter part of the Character, viz.
One who has been for twice thirty years, a faithful and painful Labourer in the
Vineyard. The double [By] in thy Title Page very handsomely insinuates two
Authors of thy Pamphlet. Thou claimest at least one of these two Encomiums for
thy self Say in a Minuete, Spark, which of them. Speak!


Jack Tory. O hone, O hone! But prithee Dear Joy, what if I should after all
find no honor in it at all?


John Faustus. What! have you learnt Irish of your God Father? However, Child,
don't be too much discouraged neither; for I can tell you of several Things
still, which your Master does very much commend you for.


Jack Tory. Ay, what! Prithee tell me! The Truth is, if he don't commend me, I
don't know who will. For really to my great Grief, I find sober People of my
own Church do very much dislike and despise my Performance.


John Faust. Your Master commends you for the Pains you have been at, to
release People from Prayers to God, for the quickening Influences of his Grace,
to turn them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God. And
by Consequence from all Praises to him for his Grace, if they have received it.
Though to dissuade the Effectually Called from the Praises of God for Converting
them to himself, will be an impossible Undertaking. For let me tell thee,
Child, no Body will be such a Numb skull as to think the Grace of God never did
any more for Peter, than for our Brother Judas; it is a much easier Thing to
dissuade the ungodly from serious Prayers to God for their Conversion. Now,
what Occasion for Prayers, if the Sinner has it entirely in his own Power to
turn himself. What would his Petitions be in this Case but empty, needless,
useless Complements to Almighty God, if he can do it without him. He can come
out of the Burning Prison, whereof you make such a Plausible Simile, without
any Special Help of him that calls him out. What need he beg, Lord, bring my
Soul out of Prison. This Contempt which you would have People to cast upon the
Aids of Grace, is a notable Way to forfeit them, and Sin them away, and confirm
our Fellow-Slaves in their Servitude.


Jack Tory. Nay, I don't say so.


John Faust. But our Master hopes you mean so. For if you allow Special Grace
to be wholly needless, and that there is nothing needs to be superadded to that
Common Grace, which you suppose to be an universal Bequest from God, extending
to the whole Race of fallen Adam; you must grant also, that it is entirely
unnecessary to ask for any such thing of God. You would not ask for what you
can do well enough without.


Jack Tory. But what, have not I allowed for it, and owned that the Special
Help of Grace is needful, according to one of the Articles of the Church, of
which I pretend to be a Member, [ Article 10.] The Condition of Man, after the
Fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn and prepare himself by his own
natural Strength, and good Works to Faith, and Calling upon God: Wherefore we
have no Power to do good Works, pleasant and acceptable to God, without the
Grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we may have a good Will, and working
with us when we have that good Will.


John Faust. But here, my poor Child, thou involvest thy self in
irreconcilable Contradictions. If you once own, that none do turn to God,
without the Special Help of his Grace; you must also say, that there is a
Special Knowledge (and so a Special Purpose) which he has of them to whom he
gives it. And then you spoil all your Talk. Only say, that we need Special
Grace, and you spoil all.


Jack Tory. I should be loath to do that.


John Faust. And yet, thou have done so, by owning that we have no Power of
ourselves to help our selves; and that the Assistence of the Grace of Christ
is, that, Without which we can neither do a good Deed, nor think a good
Thought. No Calvinist upon Earth ever said more.


Jack Tory. Well, but I say there, that in vain do the wicked plead their own
Want of Strength as an Excuse, while they resist that Grace, which is offered
them for an Help.


John Faust. Prithee, Noddy, thy Brain is whirled into a Disorder by thy
Circular Argumentations; Why I tell you again, this is what every Calvinist is
always insisting upon. But your Motion from one Point of the Circle to another
is so exceeding quick and rapid, (poor Man) that you cannot help being giddy.
You have whirled your self out of Arminianism and Pelagianism, into the Faith
of John Calvin. Stand still a Minute or two, until your Giddiness is over! You
are a Calvinist, and don't know it! Well, how do you feel? What do you think of
your self!


Jack Tory. Think of my self! Why, this is very fine inded! I did not know my
self to be a Calvanist before.


John Faust. And I question whether our Master knows what you are Only this we
all know, that you are an Enemy to every Thing that the Country is happy in.
And so far your Good Will to our Kingdom of Darkness may excuse to your Master
the Blunders you commit in your Endeavors to serve it. But up with your Head!
I am further to tell you, that your Master is extremely taken with your scoffs
at Regeneration, in your Preface. He entertains great Hopes concerning you,
when he finds you have outdone Nicodemus before his Conversion, in his
Ignorance of this great Mystery. [Read John 3.] And hopes that your Eyes will
never be opened to understand such Mysterious Tractates, which if you felt the
power of what they teach, he would for ever despair of having any more of your
assistance, in advancing his Interest. He says, it is a very proper Preface to
a Book, which all along tends to indispose the Readers for that New Birth,
without which (...) the Kingdoms of God.


Jack Tory. But I am very much afraid, that the Books written by Dissenters,
which fills this Country, and our Nation, will be of great Influence (by the
Blessing of Heaven) toward the regenerating more than we could wish for.


John Faust. And here again I must tell you, that our Master is intollerably
vexed at you, for another of your Absurdities. You say, that there is scarce
one in Twenty of the Books written by the Dissenters, that have common sense in
them. Now because you must be unfortunate in every Thing you go upon, there is
hardly one Word of Common. Sense in your Choice Dialogues, but what you have
Stole from the Dissenter's Writings. The most sensible Passage in them, is in
the Fifteenth Page, where [ whip scratch ye] you have such a pious Qualm comes
upon you, as compels you to say, I have the Promise of Christ, etc. Except what
is in these few Lines, there is hardly one Word worth a straw in all your
Dialogues, in the Esteem of wise and good Men. Yes, now I think on it, there is
one Word more in your Eleventh Page. The Covenant God has made with us in
CHRIST, is impossible to be frustrated. How unhappy you are, Friend Jack! that
one Word overthrows all your Dialogues. Now, where did you get all this
Divinity? It Is a Heap of Calvinistical Stuff. You either Stole these Passages
from the Books of Dissenters, or from the Divines of the Established Church,
who so favor them, as to be abhorred by you as much as the Dissenters
themselves. Your Master will claw you off, for this confounded Inconsistence in
establishing Calvinism, while you are prttending to confute it. He is much
disturbed at your Treachery.


Jack Tory. I hope in the Merits of the Venom, I have expressed against the
Calvinists on all Oacasions.


John Faust. I confess, in this Jack, thou art meritorious enough. But you have
charged the Calvinists with asserting that, which you and all the World knows
they for ever abhor and disclaim; You know they for ever maintain, that the
Glorious God is not the Author of Sin, nor can be the Author of Sin. And that
his Decrees are all righteous, and holy. And that that Sin is to be wholly
charged upon the Sinner; his own proper Fault, proceeding from the vitiosity of
his own Will. If you had not foreswore reading of them (under a pretense there
is scarce common sense in any one of them) you might have seen their Books
abound with such like Assertions. You were very fit, upon my word, to manage a
Controversy with Calvinists, when you your self never read what their Tenets
are. Ay, never read! What, are not your Brains settled yet! Sometimes through
your want of Reading, and of a true Knowledge of what a Dissenter and a
Calvinist is, you turn Calvinist your self, and don't know of it; then you tack
about, and protest they assert what they never held in the World. I am amazed
at it; why, you neither know what is Calvinism, nor what is not.

Did you never read or hear of a famous English Parliament of Calvinists, who
when a certain Writer [one Mr. Archer] had written a Book, that seemed a little
to approach toward making God the Author of Sin, ordered the Book to be burnt
(if you will allow the Expression of your Friend Faustus) as a Sacrifice to the
Scotch and Dutch Presbyterians, whom you so much hate.


Jack Tory. I don't know; I talk as my Ireland Tutor tells me. But I beg Pardon
for my Inadvertencies: but especially for them you were aware of, and I was
not, that I am my self tainted with this confounded Calvinism. I profess, I can
hardly endure my self, I am so poisoned. I doubt there is something in the Air
of the Country. You can tell, for you are a Conjurer.


John Faust. Air of the Country! Nay, you are gone beyond any Calvinist in the
World, you have sucked in a larger Draught of the Infection, than any of them.
You have outdone them in the Stoicism you falsely charge upon them. You assert
not merely the Decree to be alterable, but the Things decreed to be
unavoidable, and a fatal necessity to be upon all Events.


Jack Tory. Why, you scare me! Or^ to preserve the Style of my Dialogues, Now I
am frighted to think it!


John Faust. Yes, People used to be frighted with John Faustus. But I Will show
thee thy Transgressions. You find, that if God infallibly foreknow all Events,
then he does infallibly decree all Events. No Lestey, nor Armini^n, nor Jesuit
in the World, can stand before so self evident a Proposition. Foreknowledge
necessarily argues Fore-ordaining. For a bare Foreknowledge without
Fore-ordaining, is the Right Doctrine of the Stoics. For what is Fate (I pray)
in the true Stoical sense of the Word, but a necessary Chain and Succession of
Events, which Jupiter himself had no Hand in ordaining them. Jupiter himself
may by Inspection of the Book of Fate know what shall come to pass hereafter,
but he never ordained the Events; Fate is something above and beside him.
Unless then, you will be a Stoic too, you must allow Foreknowledge to be the
same with Fore-ordaining. Now, you will find it impossible to get clear of this
Encumbrance upon you; but by absolutely denying any Foreknowledge in God at
all; though the Scripture does so often in express Terms assign it unto him. Here
you fall into unmerciful Blunders, which a New England Strippling would be
asha^med of, and scorn to be guilty of. You have (...) upon a learned
Invention, which possitively you ought to have a Patter for. It is a Wonder,
that you did no like the great Mathematician in old Tim run out with a
Sacrifice upon the Invention. Jack, thou have found it, thou ha^ found it! Do
but leave out the Praeposition, that Calvinistical Praeposition [FORE] and the
Business is done Well-hinted, profess! Alas, who would have imagined that such
a poor, little, sorry Praeposition could have done so much Mischief in the
World! All the prodigious Mischiefs o^ Calvinism are owing to it. Come then let
us get [FORE] out of the Way, and [to pawn thee, Jack] let us throw it behind
us. You say, All Things are present with God; and he has not foreordained but
ordained what comes to pass. Now profound Sir, see what you have brought it to!
Every Thing must be as it is in the Divine Mind. Unless you will suppose a
possibility of Error in the Divine Mind You say, it is present with God; you
say it cannot be otherwise than he ordains You say, he ordains, but not
fore-ordains as if a present Ordaining would not as much affect the Free Will
of Man, as an Ordaining for numberless Ages before the Thing is actually
accomplished. You are so far from doing any Hurt unto our Enemies the
Calvinists, that you only make Sport for them.


Jack Tory. Why, What would you have me do? I was in confounded Perplexities;
and I must say something.


John Faust. Must say something! No, you had better a minded your Shop than
have took upon you to be an Author. They are not only Dissenters, who think so,
but some of your own Church, or rather the Church you pretend to be of. You
must say something, though indeed nothing to the Purpose. Had you advised with
me, I could have put you into a much better Way.


Jack Tory. Ay, What, I pray!


John Faust. Why, you are cruelly oppressed with the Epistles of one Paul, a
famous Writer with the Calvinists. They learnt their Calvinism from his
Epistles. Until these Epistles are gone, there will be no Extirpating
Calvinism. Now with what an Air of Pride, and with the Strutt of a Coxcomb. Do
you brag in your Preface, that your Dialogues will instruct People concerning
some things in Paul's Epistles, which Peter says are hard to be understood.
[And why not St. Paul and St. Peter, you unmannerly Presbyterian, you? You can
say, St. Ignatius!] What, have they encouraged Calvinism so much as to unsaint
them? But then in your Tenth Page of your Dialogues (Ay, friend Tory, the Tenth
Page) you say expressly in so many Words, There it nothing hard to be understood
in it. This Circular Way of Arguing has made you confounded Giddy. Now in the
Pauline Epistles, there are such cruel Passages, and so directly establishing
of Calvinism, that your Dialogues are all but so many plain Contradictions to
the inspired Oracles of God, except you can by any means and methods,
disencumber your selves of these unhappy Epistles. And there is but one Way for
you to do it; the Way taken by a brave Pelagian Gentleman, who being pressed
with some of those Passages; replied unto Colonel Norton: Indeed St. Paul was,
I confess, much of a Gentleman, and I am very much his humble Servant; but
begging his Pardon, I must say, I think he had much better have spared those
Passages. You should have said so, or have said, as lately some of your Tribe
have begun to say, The Christian Religion is not to be taken out of Paul's
Epistles.


Jack Tory. But I doubt the Calvinists might meet with some Countenance from
some other Parts of the Bible. There is the Sixth Chapter of John, is an hard
Chapter for us. But what do you think Friend Faustus? Will any of the Calvinist's
answer my Choice Dialogues?


John Faust. Answer ye? Truly, I am afraid the Twenty Sixth of the Proverbs,
and the Fourth did not stand in the Way. It is enough to them, that there is a
full answer already published, written by a famous Author, and one whom you
admire above all the Men in the World.


Jack Tory. Who Is that, I beseech you?


John Faust. One John Toyman, alias Jack Tory.


Jack Tory. Good now, explain your self.


John Faust. You, even you, your own dear sweet wise self. You have answered
your self in one Word, in the twenty-fourth Page of your Dialogues, We teach
the Concurrence, and even the NECESSITY of GRACE to enable us to bring forth
Fruit unto God. Now this one Word is a full answer unto all that you and your
Father Teague have in your Choice Dialogues blessed the World withal. All that
any Answerer has now to do, is to show that one whose proper Business is to
sell small Wares, rather than to write Books, is an inconsistent Creature, and
sins condemned of himself, and understands not what he says, nor whereof he
affirms. And the Young Stripplings must be full of Chanity to the Paper-Mills
in Holland, if they should be at the Cost of the coarsest Paper, to write you
an Answer.


Jeck Tory. But if any of them do write a Word against my Choice Dialogues,
I Will say, they write against the established Church; and there I Will shelter my
self.


John Faust. Now again, you make me mad. I think you must give me leave to call
you rather a Bastard, than a true Son of the Church of England. You take a
course, that the Church will never see any more Proselytes among the sober
People. You and your Club are but a spurious Crew. Your Mother will never own
you; your Choice Dialogues are as directly contrary to the Articles and Homiles
of the Church of England, as Darkness to Light. Let us but recite the Words of
them, in a few Instances.

Article 17. Predestination to Life, is the Everlasting Purpose of God, whereby
(before the Foundation of the World were laid) He has constantly Decreed by
his Counsel, Secret to us, to deliver from Curse and Dimnation, those whom He
has Chosen in Christ, out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to
Everlasting Salvation, as Vessels made unto Honor.

They that are endued with so Excellent a Benefit of God. [as Predestination to
Life; are Called according to God's Purpose, by His Spirit, working in due
Season; and th^^ Grace Obey the Calling: They are Justified freely, and are made
the Sons of God by Adoption, and made like the Image of His only begotten Son
Jesus Christ; They walk Religiously in Good Works, and at length by God's
Mercy, they attain to Everlasting Felicity.

Article 10. The Condition of Man after the Fall of Adam is such, that he
cannot Turn and Prepare himself, by his own Natural Strength and Good Works, to
Faith and Calling upon God: Wherefore, We have no Power to do Good Works,
Pleasant and Acceptable to God, without the Grace of God by Christ preventing
us, that we may have a Good Will, and Working with us, when we have that Good
Will.

Your Whiston, who professes his abhorrence of Calvinism, yet confesses, that
the Articles of the Church are entirely Calvinistical; and that the People of
your Persuasion, who call themselves, The Church, and subcribe those Articles,
are guilty of a gross Prevarication.


Jack Tory. What do you tell me of Whiston for? He is an Arian.


John Faust. But then what a shameless Wretch art thou, Jack, to exclaim
against the Disent^rs for the Faults of thy own Churchmen. What you say, That
many of the Disenting (...) have publicly professed themselves (...), This a
notorious Falsehood. If any few of them have lately Avianized, we are beholding
to your Whiston and Clark for it; Men, that are no Dissenters. And the
Dissenters have been as Zealous, and (...) (...) of them, (...) any they have
(...) withal.


Jack Tory. Well, but in my Preface, I show, that if People don't mind my
Heart-enlightning Dialogues, they will hearken to the Delusions of the great
Whore, the Scarlet Whore, the Whore of Babylon, that great Antichrist.


John Faust. Ha, Ha, Ha! When every one knows, that the Jesuits and the worst
Sects of the Roman Catholics are the most earnest Abettors, and Propagators of
the Palagian Principles, which your muddy Dialogues design to infect the Young
People of the Country with. I Will quote you two Passages, which I find in two
Writers of the Church of England, and so for the present I Will have done with
you. The one is from Dr Edwards (whom when thou, Jack, encountrest withal,
methinks it looks like a little Frog leaping in the Face of a Lion.) He says in
his Pre^cher. Part. II. Page. 177.

HOW can we blame the Dissenters for disgusting, the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church, when we our selves disrelish its Articles? Yea, when we know that
they outdo many of us in Purity of Doctrine, and that they are very careful in
Asserting and Maintaining it. Let it seem strange that a Member and a Minister
of the Church of England, calls upon you to take Notice of the Good Hand of God
and His Wife Providence in this very Matter. If we would open our Eyes, we
should see that we are beholding to the Sober and Moderate Dissenters for the
Continuance of a Considerable Part of our Theological Principles among us, even
those which the Church of England and her Reformers had left us. If there had
been none of that Party, the Church of England had been long since ruined; for
if the High Churchmen had had no Check, they would have brought in Popery
before this Time, by a Side-wind of Arminianism, and by their over valuing of
Ceremony and Pomp in Divine Worship.

The other is from the Author of Reflections on Mahometanism, and Socinianism.
The most Formidable Stuff to Orthodoxy, and that upon which most People have
made Shipwreck, is Pelagianism, an Error so natural to corrupt Man, that though
there is none more powerfully withstood and opposed in Scripture, yet it has
been commonly the most universal of all Heresies. By this the first Advances
are made, that lead directly to the Doctrine of the Unitarians. So soon as Man
is enamoured with himself, and puts himself in the Place of God, he perverts
all the Truths of Christianity.


Jack Tory. These are odd Passages. I will not be of the Church that owns them.
I Will go on to do my Part in gathering a Church of Jacobites, of pure Jacobites,
and we'll be the only true Church of England.


John Faust. Well, go on, Jack, and prosper! I told you, for the present I have
done with you. Only I must ask your Pardon for one Word, I let fall just now,
when I said our Master was in you. Look ye, Jack, it makes me think of the
Story of a Quaker, who pretended to be sent by the Lord. An unlucky Boy
replied, Nay, that cannot be; for thou have spoken Things contrary to what we
have in the known Word of the Lord. But the Strippling went on, Yet, I profess,
(says he) it puzzles one to think, who should send thee. For I cannot but think,
the Devil would have more wit than to have sent such a Tinker as thou, art upon
his Messages. And so I must leave you in the Limbo of Purgatory, which is
between Heaven and Hell, for your Commission. You have been very much of a
Quaker, in following the Impulses, which pushed forth your Dialogues. All that
I can conclude from your [ Thou] and [ Thee,] must be, either that you f^ll a
Praying to your Clergyman (who I suppose you don't intend for the God of the
Calvinists; for you have Converted your Countryman, who makes a notable Figure
in your Dialogues, from Calvinism, as easy a Convert as ever I saw in my
Life!) or else your [ Thou] and [ Thee] to him looks as if [ Thou] were growing
a little Quakerish, Friend John, and the Spirit of Quakerism were beginning
some of its Breezes upon Thee. But I admire at it, that when this Spirit has
been in you, by an uninterrupted Inspiration, he has at last left you to bring
so much Confusion upon our Cause, by your self-Destroying Dialogues.

But, perhaps, the Style of Prayer, in which your Countryman addresses ^our
Clergy man (Ten times more like a Prayer, that the Dedication of the Bible to
King James, which was re^d by a poor Savlor in a Storm for such) is used the
better to keep touch with a Passage in your pretended Epis^^e to the
Magnesians, immediately following it, (whereof Dr. Stillingfleet has said
enough to prove it an Imposture) which directs the People to yield all
Reverence unto the Bishop (who was not more than the Pastor of a Congregational
Church; yea, and but a Strippling too! the latter part of which Character is
evident from the third Paragraph in the Epistle) I say, which directs the
People to yield all Reverence unto the Bishop, according to the POWER OF GOD
the FATHER.

But I have done with thee, Jack, I doubt I shall be chid for staying so long.
But one word more before we part; I hear thou art under invincible Difficulties
about taking the Oaths of Allegiance to King George. Jack, it came part into my
Mind about your Burning Pit, which flames and scorches so in your Dialogues:
Methinks you are so in the Limbo's, environed about with such a terrible
Prison, the Court standing without calling thee to come out of the Fire, and
that upon more rational Considerations than you suppose the God of the
Calvinists treats with his important Devotees. You can come out, exercise,
Jack, your Free Will, (Pray, O Liberum arbitrium, miserere mei! leap forth from
the Flames. To use the Words of your Dialogues, Page 27, 28. The Application is
this, the Condemnation lies wholly at thy own Door, because thou would not
accept of Liberty; something is left to the Prisoner to do, viz. to choose
whether he would come out or stay in. The Court will not Save you against your
Will. This is no Burlesqueing of the Deity, though his Name be there found, but
in these passages of the burning Prison, thou have blasphemed the plain Oracles
of God.

And so now all I have to say to Thee, Friend Jack, is in our own Quaker
Dialect ^ Fare thee well, my Friend; I wish thee we^^; and hope that thee will
write something more to the Purpose next Time.


Jack Tory. Actually, I Will try for it, now am I such a Coward as to give out
for one^ bad Bout. The next Touch shall be a Vindication of Jacobus Tertius et
Octavus, together with the Adjustment of the Monarchies of Europe, a
Resurrection of the King of Sweden, and a formal Invitation of the Czar of
Muscovy, to make a Visit to the British Dominions; an Essay to put the King of
Spain upon his Legs again, and either Rout or Drown the Dutch. These are great
and noble Subjects much upon my heart; I have been broken of many a Nights Rest
by uneasy Thoughts of this Nature. Nay, I Will invite Lesly over to New England;
and send out an hue-in-Cry after Mar, Oxford, Ormond and Bullingbroke, and
we'll set the World to Rights. Until when fare thee well, John Faustus, and
pray give my Duty to my Master, and make my Services as acceptable to him as
you can.


APPENDIX.
BEfore I conclude this small Book, I flatter my self, it will not be
disagreeable, nor unprofitable to such Readers, who have not Time and Leisure
to enquire into the Merits of the Cause in this Controversy of Predestination,
if I finish my Answer to the Choice Dialogues, with the Consideration of the
following Heads.

I. That the primitive Doctrine of the Church of England, relating to the
Article of Predestination was Calvinistical; and in this sense of the
Calvinists, the first English Reformers held that Article. I am not at present
about to prove the Truth, and the agreeableness of these Articles to the holy
Scriptures; but only in Opposition to our Dialogist, to show that he either
does not know, or else falsifies, the true Tenets of the Church of England. The
Church of England, (I say) for it matters not what the Church at present holds,
but what the first Reformers, and Founders thereof declared to be their Faith.
That is the true Doctrine of the Church of England, which was first maintained,
and not at all the less for their having in a great Measure fallen from it. And
here I might have made the World believe (as my Antagonist has done) that my
own laborious Research^ had helped me to what I am going to set down as the
Doctrine of the Church of England. And it had been indeed no hard Task; but I
choose rather to transcribe a Part of a Letter of Mr. Francis Mackemie, in a
Pastoral Letter to the Reformed Protestants in Barbados, as a Vindication of
the Dissenters. It is in the Postcript to his Letter. The Words are as follow.

I must confess I have often heard, how some upon all occasions, have bitterly
run at the Doctrine of Predestination, as if none maintained such a Doctrine
but we; And a Minister of your Island, called it, A damnable Doctrine: and I
now justly wonder to receive such a Character of Predestination from some, that
it is contrary to the Word of God, and a great discouragement to Piety.
Therefore I am now to produce the received and approved Doctrine of the Church
of England, concerning Predestination, since the Reformation to this Day; and
shall begin with the 35 Articles agreed upon in a Convocation held at London
1552. in the Reign of Edw. 6. and frequently renewed and ratifyed in the
following Reigns, and continued the established Doctrine of the Church to this
day, which Dissenters with some ^lowed exceptions subscribe as their own
Doctrine, as a legal qu^lification for our Liberty. I wish you would read and
consider again the 17th Article. Viz. Predestination to life is the everlasting
purpose of God, whereby before the foundations of the World were laid, he has
constantly decreed by his Counsel, secret to us, to deliver from curse and
damnation, those, whom he has chosen in Christ Jesus out of mankind, and to
bring them by Christ to everlasting Salvation, as vessels made to honor;
wherefore they that be endued with so Excellent a benefit of God, be called
according to Gods purpose, by his Spirit working in due season, they through
Grace obey the calling, they be Justified freely, they be made Sons of God by
Adoption, they be made like the Image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ,
they walk religiously in good works, and at length by Gods mercy they attain to
everlasting felicity. As the Godly consideration of Predestination, and our
Electiin Christ, is full of sweet, pleasant and unspeakable comfort to Godly
persons, and such as feel in themselves the workings of the Spirit of Christ,
mortifying the works of the flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing up
their mind to high and heavenly things, as well because it does establish and
confirm their Faith of eternal Salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as
because it does frequently kindle their Love toward God, so for curious and
carnal persons, lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their
eyes, the sentence of Gods Predestination, is a most dangerous downfall,
whereby the Devil does thrust them either to desperation, or into
wretchlessness of most unclean living, no less perilous than desperation.
Furthermore we must receive Gods promises in such wise, as they be generally
set forth to us in the holy Scriptures, and in our doing that will of God is to
be followed, which we have expres^ declared to us in the Word of God. And as to
the sense of this Article, take it from the Learned of the Church of England,
Dr. Whitaker, in his Cygnia Cantio, page 16, 17. (Dr. Bridges styles this, The
chiefest Article of the Church in Doctrine.) Mr. Thomas Rogers in his Analysis,
bound up formerly with the Articles. Dr. Toysins in his Commentary on Lambeth
Articles, fully explain this Article, and raise conclusions from it. 1 That
there is a Predestination of certain, men to eternal Life; a preterition,
predestination, or Reprobation of certain men unto Death. 2. That this
Predestination is no manifest, no open Decree, into the grounds and causes of
which every mean capacity may dive, but a hidden purpose, counsel or decree of
God, which is kept secret from us. 3. That this Predestination to life is from
Eternity. 4. That is altogether immutable and unchangeable as God himself This
is the established Doctrine which all the Clergy of the Church of England,
subscribe or assent unto at Ordination.

The next demonstration and discovery of the Church in this point, is from the
Lambeth Articles, agreed upon at Lambeth House, by John Archbishop of
Canterbury, Richard Bishop of Bangor, Dr. Tindall Dean of Elie, Dr. Whitaker,
professor of Divinity at Cambridge, with several learned Divines of the Church;
with the approbation of Matthew, Archbishop of York, composed at first in
Latin, and sent to the University at Cambridge, to prevent and crush some
Arminian Controversies that were beginning to be raised there; yet I shall give
you in English Four of Nine, that relate to Predestination, never yet impeached
or rejected by the Church, as inconsistent with the 39 Articles, but inserted
in the Ireland Articles, and allowed of in the conference at Hampton Court. 1.
God from Eternity has Predestined certain men unto Life, certain men he has
Predestined, or reprobated unto Death: 2. The moving and efficient cause of
Predestination unto Life, is not the foresight of Faith or Perseverance, or
good works, or of any thing in the persons Predestined, but only in the good
will and pleasure of God. 3. There is a Predestinate number of Predestinate,
which can neither be augmented nor diminished. 4. Those who are not
Predestined unto Salvation are necessarily damned for their Sins. This is
more plain and particular, than any thing I have heard taught by Presbyterians,
and yet it is the Doctrine of the Church of England.

The next Testimony from that Church for Predestination, is the Articles of
Ireland, agreed upon by the Archbishops, Bishops, and the Clergy of that
Kingdom, in a Convocation held at Dublin, 1615. And seeing they were English
Divines, and a part of the English Church, under one King, they were received,
approved and licensed by the Government, as agreeable to the 39 Articles, and
also those of Lambeth; therefore I shall record out of them what concerns
Predestination, or the Decrees of God.

Art. 11. God from all eternity, did by his unchangeable Counsel, ordain
whatsoever in time should come to pass, yet so as thereby no violence is
offered to the wills of the reasonable Creatures, and neither the Liberty nor
Contingency of Second causes is taken away, but established rather.

Art. 12. By the same eternal Counsel, God has Predestined some unto Life,
and Reprobated some unto Death, of both which there is a certain number known
only to God, which can neither be increased nor diminished.

13. Predestination unto Life, is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby
before the foundations of the World were laid, he has constantly decreed in
his Secret Counsel, to deliver from curse and damnation, those whom he has
chosen in Christ, out of mankind, and to bring them by Christ, to everlasting
Salvation, as vessels made unto honor.

14. The cause moving God to Predestinate, is not the foreseeing of Faith, or
Perseverance, or Good Works, or of any thing in the persons Predestined, but
only the good pleasure of God himself, for all things being ordained for the
manifestation of his Glory, and his Glory being to appear, both in the works of
his Mercy and Justice, it seemed good unto his heavenly wisdom, to choose out a
certain number toward whom he would extend his undeserved Mercy, leaving the
rest to be Spectacles of his Justice.

15. Such as are Predestined unto Life, be called according to Gods purpose,
his Spirit working in due season, and through Grace they obey the calling, they
be Justified freely, they be made Sons of God by Adoption, they be made like
the Image of his only begotten Son Jesus Christ, they walk religiously in good
Works, and at length by God's Mercy they attain to everlasting felicity; but
such as are not Predestined to Salvation, shall finally be condemned for
their Sins.

16. The Godly consideration of Predestination, and our Election in Christ,
(...) full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to Godly persons, and
such a^ feel in themselves the workings of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the
works of the flesh, and their earthly members, and drawing up their minds to
high and heavenly things, as well because it does greatly confirm and establish
their faith, of eternal Salvation, to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it
does fervently kindle their Love toward God; and on the contrary side for
curious and carnal persons, lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually
before their Eyes, the Sentence of Gods Predestination, is very dangerous. This
is the Doctrine of the Church of Ireland, and so exactly agreeable to the 39
Articles, and those of Lambeth, that I need say no more of them.

Another discovery of the Doctrine of Predestination, is from the Suffrages of
the five Representatives of the Church of England, at the Synod of Dort, Dr.
Carleton Bishop of Chichester, Dr. Samuel Ward, public Divinity professor at
Cambridge, Dr. Davenant Bishop of Salisbury, Dr. Balcanquel Dean of Rochester,
and Dr. Thomas Goad, who were called and assembled to nip Arminianism in the
bud: and they being Commissionated and sent by the Supreme Authority in the
Nation; their Suffrages as recorded in the public Acts of that Synod, and by
Dr. Ward, in his Suffragium Britannorum, are to be found, and were then
received and approved, as the Doctrine of the Church of England. And should it
not appear a wonder, and be a surprise to the hearers, though the Preachers
cannot be Ignorant of it, that the Common Prayer Book, the ordinary and
universal Book of their Devotion should give its Suffrage, and bear its
testimony for Predestination, or Election, which upon a more strict observation
all shall find? In the Collect for All Saints Day, it begins, Almighty God, who
have knit together thine Elect in one communion, and fellowship in the mystical
Body of Christ Jesus our Lord. If God has an Elected people, there must some be
left out, and passed by, otherwise there can be no Election, or Choice. In the
Catechism generally taught unto Children, in Answer to Q 6. It is replied in
the third place, In God the Holy Ghost, who Sanctified me, and all the Elect,
people of God; which plainly instructs us, that God chooses to Sanctification,
and holiness as well as to Salvation, and that all Elect ones shall be
Sanctified, and consequently Saved. In the burial of the Dead, in the first
prayer after the Lords Prayer; Beseeching thee, that it may please thee of thy
gracious Goodness, shortly to accomplish the number of thine Elect. Here is not
only an Elect, but a definite and certain Number determined with God, which are
not yet accomplished, and the number of such as are left out and passed by, is
also certain and determined. In a Godly prayer at all times, which is added to
some old Bibles, there is this passage; In that it has pleased thee freely,
and of thine own accord, to Elect and choose us to Salvation before the
beginning of the World. This is plain language, and in the Books of Devotion,
and even those who little thought Common Prayer favored Predestination, which
they often called a Damnable Doctrine, and is so particular, for a Doctrine some
of your Neighbors have asserted, contrary to the Word of God, and a great
discouragement to Piety; so that I wonder how the Oxford Oath of Assent and
Consent shall relish for the future, wherein men Swear, That nothing is
contained in the Book of Cannons, Ordination of Bishops, and Common Prayer,
contrary to the word of God, seeing Predestination is found in one of them.

We call in also to witness for us, the Homilies of the Church, which appear to
be principally the established Doctrine thereof, for the most part composed by
the Archbishop Cranmer, who sealed among many more, this and other truths,
with his Blood. It were too tedious to transcribe all here, but I shall give a
passage or two, to engage Readers to be more attentive and observant for the
future. Therefore in the 2d part about p. 160. God of his mercy, and special
favor, toward them whom he has appointed to everlasting Salvation, has so
offered his Grace especially, and they have so received it fruitfully, that
although, by reason of their sinful living outwardly, they seemed before to have
been the children of wrath and perdition, yet now the Spirit of God mightily
working in them unto the obedience of Gods will, that they are the undoubted
Children of God, appointed unto everlasting Life: for the Good fruit is not the
cause the tree is good: for the tree must first be made good, before it can
bring forth good fruit. This and much more may be found in both parts for
confirmation of this Doctrine of Predestination.

I refer you also to a Church of England Catechism, enjoined by King Edw. 6. to
all Schoolmasters, for instruction of Children throughout the Kingdom, wherein
it is asserted, That the faithful were sore chosen, Predestined, and
appointed to everlasting life, before the World was made, and that the cause of
our Justification, and Salvation, is the goodness and love of God, whereby he
chose us, before he made the World.

I cannot omit certain Questions and Answers concerning Predestination,
published by Robert Parker, and continued to be bound (...) with your Bibles,
until the Year 1615. I shall give you a hint thereof, in two or three
Questions, relating to Predestination. Q. Are not all ordained to Eternal Life.
A. Some are Vessels of Wrath, ordained to Destruction, as others are Vessels of
Mercy, prepared for Glory. Q. How stands it with God's Justice, that some are
appointed to Damnation? A. Very well, because all men have in themselves Sin,
which deserves no less, and therefore the mercy of God is wonderful, in that
he Vouched to save some of that sinful race, and to bring them to the knowledge
of the Truth. Q. But how shall I know I am ordained to Eternal Life?

A. By the motions of Spiritual Life, which belongs only to the Children of
God. I might enlarge with varieties of Testimonies in favor of this Doctrine,
from the Learned and Godly in all the past Reigns, from the Reformation
downward; and shall conclude with that honorable, and venerable Suffrage of
Primate Usher, in his Sum and Substance of Christian Religion, which for the
Satisfaction of all, I shall deliver in his own words. Q. What are the parts of
Predestination? A. Election and Reprobation. Q. What is Election? A. It Is the
everlasting Predestination, or fore-appointment of certain Angels and men unto
everlasting life and blessedness, for the praise of Gods glorious Grace and
Goodness Q. What is Reprobation? A. It is the eternal fore-appointment of
certain Angels and men unto everlasting Dishonor and Destruction, God of his
own free will determining to pass them by, refuse and cast them off, and for
sin condemn and punish them, with eternal Death. And to these you may add most
Church of England Books common among us; as also that common Book almost in
every Family, The Practice of Piety. So it is to be hoped you will not
adventure to say, the Church of Scotland holds any other Predestination, than
what is the Doctrine of the Church of England; or that it is contrary to the
Word of God, and a great discouragement to Piety.

Now who will believe him, when he tells us, with all the assurance in the
World, that his Gant and Gibberish is the true Doctrine of the Church?

2 Declare the Sentiments of the ancient Fathers in this Matter, and give a
short History of the Propagation of this Doctrine. To show the Ignorance of the
Author, in Voting it out for a Noval Doctrine. And here again, I shall freely
own my self beholden to Monsieur Pictet, Professor of Divinity in the Academy
of Geneva (if our Author can bear the Mention of that hated Republic.) For the
short History of Predestination, which I now present to the Reader, as also for
many of the Quotations from Ancient Writers, which I take from him, except some
which I collected from the Writers themselves. -- Says Monsieur Pictet.

C'est fort bien, remarque que dans les Disputes touchant la Grace, la
Election, and la Predestination, etc. Which I shall for the Benefit of English
Readers translate.

We must note, that less Regard is to be paid to the Ancient Fathers, who
preceeded Austin, and lived before the Time of the Rise of the Heresy of
Pelagius; I say, less Regard is to be paid to them in our Disputes of
Predestination, and Free Grace, than to those who lived afterward; because
that these latter have searched the Matter with more Care and Exactness. Every
new Sect of Heretics (says St. Austin) which spring up in the Church, by the
Disputes, which they are the unhappy Instruments of raising in the Church, have
given Occasion to others to illustrate and confirm, with a greater
particularity, those Truths of Scripture, which they find thus attacked The
Fathers, when they had it in Hand to dispute with the Manichees, were too apt
in Opposition to them, to extol the Powers of Free Will; nevertheless, most of
them favored the Truths which we defend; and they have said many Things in
opposition to the Error which we oppose.

But without being at the pains to consult the Sentiments of the Fathers, who
lived before Pelagius; we shall make a search after that which the Church held
and maintained, when that Heretic first arose to infest the Churches, and what
was the Belief of those who followed them.

It appears from the Works of St. Austin, that there were three distinct
Systems of Predestination, in the Time of that ancient Doctor of the Church.

The first was that of St. Austin and the Church, which gives all to God. The
Second is that of Pelagius, who attributes all to Man. The Third is that of the
Semi-Pelagians, who divided it between God and Man, attributing Part to God,
and Part to Man; but attributing more to Man than to God. The Pelagians founded
the Predestination, or rather the Election of God upon the Foresight of the
Merit of Man. The Semi-Pelagians, upon the Consideration that Grace is
necessary to all the actions of Piety, they attributed it to the Free Will of
Man, only the beginning and first Essays toward Faith; and they believed that
Predestination was founded upon the Foresight of this first Beginning of
Faith, which according to them appertained only to Man; yea, they even
asserted, that Children dying in their Infancy, were Predestined according as
God had foreseen they would have lived, in Case they had lived a longer Time
in the World.

They distinguished also the Decrees of God into two sorts, the one a general
and conditional Decree of Saving all men; the other a particular and absolute
Decree, of Saving those whose Faith he foresaw from Eternity. But St. Austin
with the Church not admitting any good Disposition in Man which is not the Gift
of God, even from the least beginning of Faith to the End of our Perseverance,
and a Gift purely gratuitous, or of mere Grace, because it is not done with a
view to any Merit; but on the contrary it is a Gift to Sinners who are unworthy
thereof, held that Predestination is wholly of Grace.

The Church highly approved the Doctrine of St. Austin, and thundered her
Anathema's against Pelagius, and the Semi-Pelagians in many of their Councils,
and particularly those which were held at Carthage and at Milevi. Anno 416,
417, 418. against Pelagius and Celestius.

The Popes Celestinus and Innocent declared themselves against these Heretics,
and maintained the Doctrine of St. Austin.

St. Prosper largely defended the same amongst the Gauls.

No less strenuous was Pope Leo in the Defense hereof, as may be seen by one of
his Letters; and he authorized all that had been said and done against the
Pelagians, by the African Councils and others; and he made choice of St.
Prosper himself for his Secretary in this Affair.

Pope Gelasius signalized himself in the Defense of this Doctor of the Church,
and made evident how much he esteemed the Book of the Call of the Gentiles,
placing all the Works of Cassian and Faustus among the Apocryphal. Books, viz.
those which were not received by the Church.

In the sixth Century, Pope Hormisda fell into the same Sentiments, and the
Doctrine of St. Austin was defended by John Maxentius, a Monk and Priest of
Antioch, by St. Fulgentius, by the Bishop of Arles, by Primasius a Bishop, by
Ferrandus, Deacon at Carthage, by the illustrious Bishops and Confessors,
banished for their Faith into Sardinia, by the second Synod at Orange, held in
Anno 529, and by Cassidorus, by Gregory the Great, etc.

In the ninth Century, there were many who maintained the Doctrine of St.
Austin; and among others, the famous Godeschal, who suffered greatly by the
Persecutions of Hincmarus.

Ra^ram a Monk taught the Doctrine of the Predestination of the Elect from free
Grace, in those two Books of the Predestination of God, dedicated to the
Emperor Charles, surnamed Calvus.

St. Prudentius, Bishop of Troy, defended the same Truth, and declared in his
Letter to Hincmarus, and Pardulius, that none of the ancient Doctors had
studied with more Exactness and Accuracy than had St. Austin, the most hidden
Secrets and Mysteries of the Scripture, nor that had examined into them with so
much Application, nor had more happily litt upon the Truth, nor had explained
them with more Sincerity, nor had more nicely disentangled the Doctrine of
Predestination of its Difficulties; nor that had set himself to unfold them
with more Fidelity than he, nor that had defended them with greater strength
and force of Reasoning, etc.

This same Prelate not being in a Capacity to attend himself at the Ordination
of Encas, chosen Bishop of Paris, dispatched away one of his Priests as a
Delegate to represent him, with a Letter importing his Consent unto the
Ordination of that Bishop; but upon Condition that he should declare by his
Subscription, that he held entirely to the Doctrine of the holy Fathers
touching Grace; and to that of the Four Chapters (as they are called) and in
one of these Four Chapters, we have these remarkable Words; That we believe and
acknowledge, that by a deep and unsearchable Counsel of Almighty God, there are
some who are predestined unto Life before all Time by the entirely free Mercy
of God; and that there are others, who by an incomprehensible Justice, are
predestined to Torments.

Lupus Abbot at Ferrara in the Diocese of Seus writing to Hincmarus Archbishop
of Rheims, speaks thus The Opinion which seems most conformable to the Truth is
this; Namely, that with respect to the Good, Predestination is nothing else,
according to the Mind of the most learned Austin, than the Preparation of
Grace; and with Regard to the Wicked, Predestination, as well as I can conceive
and judge of it, is the substraction of Grace. It is from these last
Principles, that this Author very solidly explains the Matter thus; God does
not afford the succors of his Grace, to those to whom he is not pleased to
grant them, according to his Decree of Predestination; but yet in such sort,
that the Equity of the Creator appears equally in his Conduct toward either,
while he gives to some his Grace out of mere Mercy, and does not give it to
others, by a Judgment as righteous as it is hidden. As then we are all equally
fallen into a State of Condemnation; God shows Mercy to whom of us he pleases,
and he hardneth also whom he pleases; that is, he leaves them under the Power
of their own native hardness. It is through infinite Goodness that he shows
Mercy; but it is without any Unrighteousness, that he reprobates and hardens
any, viz. that he denies them his Special Grace.

Lupus Servatus, Priest at Mentz, composed a Work upon the three famous
Questions, where he teaches the same Doctrine touching Predestination by Free
Grace.

Florus, Deacon of the Church at Lions, maintained the same Truth in a Book of
his. And so did the Archishop of the same Place defend it with a great deal of
Courage and Light.

The Council of Valentia assembled, Anno 855. by Order of the Emperor
Lotharius, clearly established it. We confess, says he, without Hesitation or
Doubt, the Predestination of the Elect to Life, and the Predestination of the
Ungodly to Death; always acknowledging and allowing, that in the Election of
those that are to be Saved, the Mercy of God precedes all Good Merit; and that
on the contrary in the Damnation of those that perish, their Evil Demerit does
precede the just Judgment of God; that God has not by his eternal
Predestination determined with himself to do any Thing, which is not the Effect
either of mere gratuitous Mercy, or most righteous Judgment.

Another Council held at Langres, Anno 859. in the Presence of King Charles,
the younger Brother of Lotharius, confirmed the Canons of the Council of
Valentia. Fifteen Days afterward they were read over again, and confirmed in a
Third Council, held at another Place.

Pope Nicholas the first, confirmed these Canons, as Prudentius Bishop of Troy
informs us in his Annals.

Hincmarus himself in his Work of Predestination, approves that of St.
Augustine; upon the same Point; and does not blame Godeschalcus, only that he
supposes, Hincmarus had departed therefrom.

In the Eleventh Century Anselm, Arch. Bi^ho^ of Canterbury was a great
Disciple of St. Austin; as also Ildebert, Arch Bishop of Tours.

St. Bernard above all that have been mentioned in the XII Centu^^, made it
appear, that he entirely fell in with the Sentiments of that famous Bishop of
Hippo; and the Abbot Gilbert the Disciple of St. Bernard, maintained the same
Opinions.

An Abbot in Great Britain, defended the Doctrine of Predestination, by mere
free Grace, in a Work of his, entitled, The Mirror of Charity; and makes it
appear, that it is a particular especial Love, that God had from Eternity for
some which he had not for others which makes that Difference between them. They
are all equally condemned; but he has abandoned the greatest Number of them
unto his Justice; and it has pleased him to show Favor to others; and no one
can find Fault with his Will, and accuse it of Injustice.

Thomas Aquinas, the great Angelick Doctor of the Roman Church, in the
Thirteenth Century, signalized himself in the Defense of this Doctrine. In his
Commentary upon the Epistle to the Romans he speaks after this manner. As to
the Order of Prescience and Predestination, there are some who say that the
Foresight of Good and Bad Works, or Merits is the Reason and Cause of
Predestination, and Reprobation; In such sort, that we are to conceive and
think that God has Predestined some because he foresaw they would do good
Works, and would believe in Carist; and according to that Opinion, the sense of
Text of the Apostle is this; Those whom God foresaw were to be conformed to the
Image of his Son, they were the Persons whom he Predestined. And it would be
reasonable so to phrase it, if Predestination had regard to nothing else but to
Life Eternal bestowed upon us as the Reward of our Works. But Predestination
involves and implies in it all those Gifts and Benefits which are profitable in
order to Salvation, which God has prepared for Men from all Eternity. Wherefore
all that Grace which he distributes to Men, as preparatives to eternal Glory,
in Time, he had prepared for them from Eternity. To establish them, and
presuppose upon our Part any Merit, the Foreknowledge of which is the Cause
and Foundation of Predestination, is the same thing as to say, that Grace is
given to us for the sake of our Merits; and that the Principle of our good
Works is from our selves, and only the consummating and perfecting of our Grace
is from God.

His whole Commentary upon the Eighth, Ninth and Tenth Chapters of the Epistle
to the Romans, is full of such Reflections.

Nay further, take the Words of Cardinal Bellarmin himself, in his Book of
Grace and Free Will.

Not only says he, have the holy and enlightened Fathers of the Church
established this Doctrine, but the most ancient and learned among them assure
us, that it was a part of the Faith of the Catholic Church, and rejected the
contrary Opinion, as b^ing the Sentiments of the Pelagians. To this says he, we
must add the public approbation of the Church. Lastly adds he, it is no^ once
nor twice, nor three times only, that the holy Apostolic Chair has pronounced
its Judgment in Favor of the Defenders of Grace and Predestination against the
rest of the Pelagians; so that the Opinions of St Augustine cannot any more be
s^iled the Opinion of some Doctors, but the Faith of the Catholic Church.

In fine, after the Council of Trent, which would not decide that Question,
there were great Contests between the Cordeliers or Franciscans, and the
Dominicans These latter maintain the Cause of St. Austin; and had Dominicus a
Soto for their Head. The others maintained the contrary Sentiment, and had for
their Head Andreas Vega. The Jesuits struck in of the Franciscan side; but not
all of them; for Bellarmine, Pererius, etc. defended St. Austin and Thomas
Aquinas; Jansenius too maintained strongly the same Truths, which St. Austin
had taught.

Thus much may suffice to show, that these Doctrines of Election, Grace, etc.
are no Noveltias; and our Author proves himself a bold Novice to assert such a
Thing with so much Confidence, and so little Reason and Proof. He is not enough
acquainted either with the Fathers or Church History to know what is Ancient,
and what is Novel. I shall therefore for his Information, set down what the
learned Dr. Edwards says upon this Head in his Veritas Redux, which I am to
suspect our Friend had never seen, when he published his Choice Dialogues. It
is very common to such vast Literators as he is, to read Answers to and
Censures upon Au^hors, and pass their wise Judgment, before they have seen the
Authors themselves.

Says Dr. Edwards, [ Veritas Redux.] Page 499. to 506.

But still further to stifle this Calumny, ( viz. Of the pretended Novelty of
this Doctrine) and utterly to coufound it, I will more particularly and
professedly consider that part of the Cavil which respects the, Ancient Fathers
and Writers of the Church and which represents them as of a different Judgment
from the Followers of Calvin in those Doctrins that we have insisted upon. As
to what those Ancients say concerning these Points, I will give the Reader
satisfaction in these Two Propositions, 1. Many of the Fathers are not to be
relied upon when they speak of these Doctrines. 2. Several of them, who are the
most competent Judges of these Points, do plainly assert and defend them.


First, I will make it evident, That many of the Fathers are not to be relied
upon in what they deliver concerning these Articles of Religion. For, First, It
is difficult to know their true Sense and Judgment when they speak of these
Matters: And again, when we have found it out, and know what their designed
meaning is, we cannot rest and confide in it. The former of these is very clear,
because in the Times of those who were the most Ancient Fathers of the Church,
these Controversies were scarcely started, much less purposely handled, at
least but by a few, and so they had not occasion to deliver their Judgments
fully concerning these Points. They did not so take them into Consideration as
to treat of them distinctly and exactly. They did not discourse of them with an
Intention to settle Men's Judgments about them. How then can it be expected that
they should speak home to the Point, when they speak only by the Bye, and as it
were Accidentally, and did not make it their Design and Business to treat of
those Things? It is observable, that before some of the chief Heresies arose,
these Writers were not so express and punctual about those Articles of Religion
as they were afterward. St. Jerome confesses that before Arius's Time the
Fathers delivered some Things unadvisedly, and with little heed to what they
said; yea, they said such things as can hardly escape the Cavils of perverse
M^n. And what was thus observed by this learned Father concerning the Arian
Controversy, is observed likewise concerning the Pelagian, by ather Father of
the same Character, and particularly he remarks concerning Chrysostom, That
before Pelagius appeared, he was negligent and careless in his Words, when he
discoursed of Free Will and Grace. And what he says of this Father, may be
said of the rest, they did not speak so warily and heedfully as afterward; and
accordingly several Points were in those Times unsettled, and not fully
determined such as those that I have been handling, and therefore to quote the
generality of the Fathers upon this occasion is impossible, and to expect it to
be done is idle and impertinent.

There are other Reasons why we should not look upon some of the Fathers as
good Judges here. For it was usual with them to set down other Men's Sayings and
Opinions as their own. Jerome observes of Origin, Eusebius, and others, that
they sometimes write not their own Sentiments, but speak what others had
delivered. Yea, sometimes they said not what they thought, but what the present
Occasion compelled them to say, with respect to the diversity of Times or
Persons they had to do with. With regard to which latter, they delivered not
the same Notions and Sentiments to the Vulgar and to the Learned. Sometimes the
Fathers rhetoricate and declame, and then we must not expect that things will
be spoken exactly according to Truth. Jerome acknowledges concerning himself,
that in some parts of his Writings he speaks only Probably, and like a
Retorician or Orator, for Argument sake; and at other times he is Dogmatical
and Serious, and close to the purpose. But it is hard to tell when he delivers
things one way, and when the other. Basil says of Gregory of Neocaesarea, that
he spoke sometimes not dogmatically, but as in the heat of Dispute. It is usual
with some of the Fathers, especially Chrysostom and his Imitator Theophylact,
to assert such and such an Opinion, to give such an Interpretation of a Text in
Scripture, and then in another place to forget what they had said, and to
assert and Interpret in an other way, yea, sometimes a quite contrary one. So
that it is difficult to know what is the Sense of the Fathers.

And when we know it, we cannot rely on it. For some of the Ancient Writers of
the Church were Novices, and being but lately admitted into the Christian
Communion, were but meanly instructed in the Principles of it. Others of them,
though of longer standing, were sometimes very extravagant in their expounding of
Scripture. They strain and wrest the Text, and venture to add to the Words, or
to conceal part of them, to prove the business they have undertaken, and to
back the Opinions they have espoused So that no impartial Searcher of Truth
will swallow there groundless Interpretations. Nor is it to be forgot that some
of the Fathers had been professed Philosophers, and thence bro't into Divinity
several undue Notions and Principles. Thus it is known that they we^re great
Patrons of Free Will, which they call (...), and (...), and other Names are
given it by the Writers of the Church, the same which the Gentile Mora^ists
make use of. Some of them intend only that Freedom of Will which I have
asserted, that is a voluntary acting without Co-action. And of this parhaps
Justin Martyr is to be understood in his Apology to Antonius Pius, where he
asserts Free Will against Fa^e, and uses several Arguments for it. And so does
Irenaeus in his Fourth Book against Herisies, Chapters 71, 72, 76, 77. Eusebius
in his 6th Book of the Evengelical Preparation, proves from sundry Topics,
that Man is a Free-Agent, and argues against Fatal Necessity. And sometimes the
Christian Fathers speak of Free Will as to common Acts of the Mind, and natural
Results of Religion, which no man of Reason will deny. And it is likely that
sometimes they understand it of a Free Will to Good only. But it is too
apparent, that some of them assert, that all Persons have an ability to will
either good or ill in Spirituals: They hold, that there is a Natural Power in
every Man to will and to do what is acceptable to God. Therefore it is observed
by the Centuriators of Magdeburg, that no Point of Doctrine began so soon to be
obscured and corrupted, as this of the Nature of Free Will; and they quote some
of the Fathers of the Second Century as chargeable with this. So it is
acknowledged by Calvin, that the Greek Fathers are not of his side in this
Point; for they generally held, that all Men by Nature have a Free Will to
choose Good in Spiritual and Divine Things. And we may certainly gather this
from a passage in Irenaeus, viz. That it was part of the Heresy of Saturninus,
that some Persons are born without freedom to do Good; and this Writer argues
against it, unless we shall say (as was suggested before) that he speaks of
Free Will only, as it denotes acting without compulsion.

In short, we cannot depend upon the Fathers, for they have erred in many
things, and it is endless to particularize. I have done something toward his in
an other place. So that if we should grant (as perhaps we safely may) that most
of the Greek Fathers had other Notions of God's Decrees, Free Will, Grace, etc.
than I have offered, yet this is no Rule to us, unless we could prove that
their Writings are void of Mistakes and Errors. This cannot be done, and no
Wise Man expects it. Yea, we know that many Points in Religion have been taught
heretofore by the Fathers, and generally received and applauded, which
after-Ages though it it no immodesty to lay aside and condemn. Wherefore let not
the Fathers and Antiquity be pleaded in defense of the Doctrines which I have
rejected.

My Second Proposition, is this, That these Points which I have been treating
of, are plainly asserted and defended by several of the Fathers, even by those
of them who were the most competent Judges of them. The Absolute Predestination
of a cortain number of Persons, which is though it by some to be a novel Doctrine,
was asserted and defended by St. Augustine. Yea, he tells us, that some of the
Fathers before him, as well as some that were contemporary with him held the
same (though they had not occasion to speak of it so directly and plainly) and he
quotes Passages out of Cyprian, Ambrose, Na^ianzen, for this. Election without
the foresight of good Works, is asserted by St. Jerome. And as for Prosper,
Fulgenrius, Isidore of Sevil, Gregory the Great, learned Writers in the
succeeding Centuries, it is well known that they went this way: Particularly
Prosper reckons it as the Doctrine of the favorers of Pelagius, that Election
was upon foreseen Faith. And in the same place he mentions it as another Error
of theirs, that they held the number of the Elect to be uncertain and
undetermined. And Isidore expressly asserts a twofold Predestination, of the
Elect unto Rest, of the Reprobate unto Death.

So the Opinion of several of the Fathers concerning Man's Free Will and God's
Grace, is the very same that I have maintained. St. Basil in many places of his
Writings does clearly and plainly assert, the absolute Necessity of the Grace
of the holy Spirit, in order to the performance of good Works, acceptable to
God, and he depresses the power of Free Will. Gregory Nazianzen does in some
part imitate him in one of his Poems, the 58th. And as these were the only Men
of the Greek Fathers; so Cyprian is the first of all the Latin ones, that
speaks out concerning the Degeneracy and Infirmity of Man, and the Necessity of
Divine and Supernatural Grace. Lactantius is the next that plainly owns these,
and St. Augustine is the next after him, who fully and largely insists upon
these Points, and taught others afterward to do so.

This learned Prelate was as much for Free Will as any Father, as his Books
against the Manichees testify; for these Heretics denying all freedom of
humane Actions, and holding that all Sin was by Necessity, this good Father,
who wrote against them, professedly asserts and defends the liberty of the
Will, and perhaps somewhat too immoderately in some places, particularly in his
Book De Ecclesiacticis Dogmatibus. But when he wrote against the Pelagians,
part of whose Here fie was, that the Free Will of Man, is not impaired by the
Fall, but is as sound and perfect as in Innocence, he judiciously settled the
Controversy about the Will of Man, maintaining that there is in the Regenerate
a Free Will to Good, and this is supernaturally given them; and in the wicked
there is a Free Will to Evil, and this is naturally in them. He frequently
proves and inculcates, that this Faculty in every Man is by nature weak,
disabled and enslaved, and that it cannot be healed, strengthened, and freed, but
by Divine Grace. What good can lost Man do, says he, but only so far as he is
delivered from his Perdition? Again, The Will of Man so far free, as it is
Freed. Those words of his in another place contain a great part of what he
says on this Head in the rest of his Works, The Catholic Faith neither denies
Free Will, nor ascribes so much to it, that it can do any thing without the
Grace of God. But the sum of all is comprised in these words of the same
Author, The Free Will of Man, as it is now corrupted and captivated, has power
only to Sin; but when it is set at liberty by God, and assisted by Divine
Grace, it has ability to execute acts of Righteousness. It is true, (and has
been observed already) that this Father has in some parts of his Writings,
some Passages that favor the contrary Doctrine; but he changed his judgment,
when he had better considered of the matter, and in his riper years he was
resolute and peremptory on the other side, as his Book of Retractations plainly
shows And it is probable that most of the Fathers, who too much favored
Free Will, would have delivered their minds differently from what they did, if
they had writ their Retractations.

Not only St. Augustine, but St. Jerome, was a great and hearty Opposer of the
Doctrine of Free Will, as it imports a natural Ability in all Men to choose
good, without the assistance of supernatural Grace In many places of his
Writings, he lowers the Repute, he depresses the Power o^ Free Will, and
magnifies the Power o^ God in the converting of Sinners. H^ contends that Man
is a free Agent, bu^ denies that any thing is done to purpose in Religion,
without the special Assistance of the Spirit. On those words of Christ, No man
can come unto me, except the Father which has sent me draw him; he thus
Comments, [When he thus speaks, he breaks and destroys the proud Liberty of
Man's Will; which if it would go to Christ, it desires it in vain, and
endeavors it to no purpose, unless that be done which follows, except my
heavenly Father draw him. And here likewise this is to be taken notice of That
he who is drawn does not run of his own accord, but is brought on with
reluctance, and is slow and unwilling] Thus he.

Prosper of Aquitain, who writ of Grace and Free Will, though he owns the latter,
yet requires the former, as absolutely necessary to the producing of any good
Work. (...) Fathers, but great numbers of them, assembled in Councils and
Synods (on purpose to condemn the Pelagian Errors) assert the natural Impotency
of all Mankind, and the Necessity of Supernatural Grace; and hold, that we
cannot by the Power of Free Will do aany good. The substance of all that was
said in those Assemblies on this Head, is summed up in the second Council of
Milevi in Africa, wherein the Bishops heartily concurred against the whole Body
of Pelagianism, having now an opportunity to declare their Judgments. Whence we
may partly guess, that even before Pelagius, the Fathers were against the
Doctrine maintained by him, though they had not occasion to show their Sentiments.

Thus have we shown what is the True Doctrine of the Church of England
respecting Predestination. Let Calvin's System be true or false, we are not
disputing that Point at present with our Choice Dialogist; but only we assert
and prove, that Calvin's Doctrine is the true ancient and primitive Doctrine of
the Church of England. Mr. Whiston is therefore much more sincere (though an
Heretic) then are many of the Church of England, when he condemns the Articles
of Predestination, etc. as Heterodox and would have the Church put in others in
their Room; while others of that Church damn the Opinions of John Calvin, and
yet subcribe to them in their own Articles. I will venture to say, that no
Articles can be more Calvinistical than some of the Thirtynine. They are
expressed in strong, good, and clear Language, without the least Shadow of an
Equivocation; and are pure Calvinism. They cannot have any other Construction
put upon them without affixing new Ideas to the Words in which they are set
down, different from the received Signification of them amongst all Englishmen.
If they are not Calvinistical, let us throw our Language aside, and agree upon
new Words and Syllables! Nay, I dare affirm it, had it happened that those
Aricles had been otherwise worded; and had it happened that John Calvin had let
drop the Expressions of their Tenth, Thirteenth, and Seventeenth Articles, as
they now stand, they would have voted them a gross Heterodoxy. For observe,
these Men do notoriously abuse the 17th Article of Predestination. The Article
says plainly, Predestination to Life is the eternal Purpose, whereby (before
the Foundations of the World) he has constantly decreed by his Counsel, secret
to (...) to deliver from Curse and Damnation, these whom he has chosen in
Christ out of Mankind. Oberve here (1) The Deccree is Eternal. (2) It is
immutable, and impossibly of a Fruitration. He has [constantly] (...) by his
Counsel. That is, not only are the Blessings laid up in the Decree of Election,
but the Persons who are chosen to this Blessedness, are constantly and
immutably designed and set apart in the Decree. No, but say they, God has
elected the whole Race of Adam, the whole Species. I answer to this, if it be
so, then the Saints are not elected from the Number of Mankind, if all Mankind
be elected; But Men are said to be elected with respect to the Apostate Angels;
That is, out of all Rational and Intelligent Beings God elected the blessed
Angels, and the whole Species of Mankind and passed by or reprobated the
Devil's. But this is not so; the Articles says plain (3) he has constantly
decreed by his Counsel, secreet to us, to deliver from Curse and Damnation,
those whom he has chosen in Christ OUT OF MANKIND. They are from all Eternity
elected out of Mankind. Which plainly intimates a certain definite Number of
Persons, and not the whole Race of Adam. To say, that God chose all Mankind out
of Mankind, is Nonsense. Again (4) They are chose in Christ. Now if all the
Race of Adam were chose in Christ, in and by whom they are to be saved
according to the constant Counsel of God, then all Men must be saved. Else
(...) Decre^ is fruitr^ted, and some that are (...) Christ, may fall from their
Election in Christ. viz. God chose them in Christ, and yet they are in the
Event damned out of Christ.

We may now pass to enumerate some of the many Absurdities and Inconsistances
in the Choice Dialogues. And here it were a Task too great for an Hercules to
cleanse this more then Augean Stable, of the Rubbish of Nonsense. Inconsistent
Absurdities, and foul Mistakes. But a few may suffice, and we will conclude
this Appendix.

First. The Author is not at all acquainted with the true Doctrine of the
Stoics concerning Fate, when he calls the Calvinisticl Doctrine of
Predestination, a Stoical and Fatal Scheme. The Divine Pre-ordinaion of all
Events from the beginning to the End of Time, is entirely inconsistent with
Stoical Fate. Yea the very notions of Divine Pre-ordination is one of its
principal Differences from Fate. And will appear, if we consider what is Fate.
Now although, according to Cicero in his Book [ De Fato] and according to Justus
Lipsius in his [ Physiologia Stoicorum] and according to Monsieur Danet in his
[ Dictionary of the Greek and Roman Antiquities, compiled for the use of the
Dauphin] and others do mention several different Opinions of the Stoics as to
the true Doctrine of Fate, yet the most received Notion thereof was to this
Purpose; viz Fate is a certain blind and inevitable, inviolable and necessary
Chain of Causes and effects whereby all Things and Events of Necessity come to
pass, and which Jupiter himself the great God of all cannot alter. So that
Jupiter himself did not fore-ordain all Things and Events. It is a blind Fate,
consisting in the Eternal Necessity of the Things themselves; and not dependent
upon the Will of Jove. Jupiter indeed may foreknow all Events, but then it is
by Reason of his Knowledge in examining and inspecting those Eternal Rolls of
Destiny. The Fates are sure and firm, and determinate antecedent to any
Preordination of Jupiter. For there is a Difference between a bare Theorical
Science, or Prescience, and a Pre-ordination. Thus I know there will be a Day
of Judgment; but it will not arrive any whit the more for my knowing of it.
Thus Jove foreknows all Events (according to the Stoics) but has not appointed
them. Jove foreknows all Events because they will come to pass; but they do not
come to pass because he foreknows them. For had there been no Jupiter the
Fates, which are founded upon the Necessity of the Things in their various
necessary Combinations, would have been, and Events have followed. I shall
quote a few Authorities and dismiss the Subject. Herodotus says, (...), etc.
Destinatam sortem nee D^o effugere fas est. Philemon the Poet, (...), Sunt
Reg^bus Servi, Rex Servus est Deo, Deus N^cessitati. And that Jupiter is not
the Ordainer of the Fates appears from these Words of Ovid in his Metamorphosis
Lib. 15.

Invenies illic incisa Adamante perenni Fata tui Generis: Legi ipse animoque
notavi.

Jupiter is there introduced speaking to Venus telling her it is to no Purpose
to attempt to break the Decrees of the Three Parcae. And then he adds, I have
observed and read their Decrees. Jupiter had no Hand in Ordaining them, but
comes to the Knowledge of them by Inspection into the Rolls of Destiny.

But I conclude this with a Passage out of that great Poet our English Virgil,
Mr. John Dryden. It is in his Dedication, of the Eneis to the Marquess of
Normandy, who was also a great Poet. Speaking of Jupiter's Power to defer the
Blow, that is to defer the Death of those, for whose Continuance in Life he had
received strong Petitions, and ardent Supplications, He says, I once
occasionally discoursed with that Excellent Person Sr. Robert Howard, who is
better conversant than any Man I know, in the Doctrine of the Stoics, and he
set me right, from this concurrent Testimony of Philosophers and Poets, that
Jupiter could not retard the Effects of Fate, even for a Moment. For when I
cited Virgil, as favoring the Contrary Opinion in that Verse, Toll fuga
Turnum atque instantibus cripe Fatis. He replied, and I think with exact
Judgment, that when Jupiter gave Juno leave to withdraw Turnus from the present
Danger, it was because he foreknew, that his Fatal Hour was not come; That it
was in Destiny, for Juno at that Time to save him; And that Himself, viz.
Juptter, obeyed Destiny, in giving her, tha leave.

Thus we see that Blind Fate, and Calvinnistical Predestination are entirely
opposite; inasmuch as the former is not subject to God himself; but this latter
supposes an holy, and righteous, wise, and Powerful Providence of God, who did
himself ordain these Events. So much for Fate.

Another Blunder of the Dialogist is, that uis Notion of the Presentiation of
all Things in the Divine Mind, destroys and overthrows all the rest of his
Talk. For (...) all Things, which shall be done to the End of all Time, are
present in Idea with God, no Fate can be surer and more necessary. Every Motion
of Man, and every act of Volition, and every Sin, and every good Act is now
present in the Divine Mind. And might not we reply a greeable to his Answers to
Calvin^ (...) what I will, I do no more than is already present with God; My
Will is ^^^^sitated to this or that Thing, for it is all with God, as much as
if I had already done it.

Once more, he blunders prodigiously in confounding the Ideas of Things decreed
in the Divine Mind, with the Things themselves in their actual or eventual
Existence. All Things are present with God, there is no Fore and After with
God. We all acknowledge, that God Exists in the most perfect and
incomprehensible Manner, he is Being it self [ I am, that I am] and so endures
no succession properly speaking, viz. no Succession which implies any Thing of
Frailty or Change, which is to us inconceivable. Though Dr. Tillotson professes
he cannot understand the meaning of an Eternal Nunc Stans, (as the Schoolmen
phrase it.) But we allow all Things present with God; yet we know they are
successive with us. And how does this knock off the Fetters of Necessity from
Free will? If they be all present with God, and he beholds them with one
intuitive View, what help is that to me? What God knows of me will prove true
in the Event. And though all Things are present with God, they are so only in
Idea. For what I shall do on the morrow, God knows; but God does not know (to
speak with humble Reverence) what I shall do to morrow under the Notion of a
Thing actually accomplished. God therefore knows, this and that will be; but he
does not know it as Matter of Fact, until it be done. I am sure, the Actions to
be performed by John or James next Week, are not as yet performed. Unless
you will break through your own gloririous Maxim, a Thing cannot he, and not be at
the same Time. God did not in, or from Eternity, know all Mankind actually
born, but he knew they should be born. Thus we see this acute Metaphysician is
so clumsy as to confound the Idea's of Things Decreed with the Things
themselves, actually Existing.

But I must not Tire the Reader to observe all the Inconsistences, of one, who
is himself giddy, by reason of a rapid Motion of his Brains; and is sometimes
an Arminian, sometimes a Pelagian, and sometimes a Calvinist. His Motion is
very much like that of the Planets, sometimes Direct, and then Retrograde; and
sometimes, I profess he is Stationary. And this last is, when he speaks nothing
of Predestination at all, as may be observed in some Paragraphs of his
Dralogues.

I shall conclude with these two Remarks.

First, He accurately and nicely observes, that the Church of England mentions
not a word of Reprobation in all the 17th Article of Predestination, nothing of
God's having Fore-decreed any to Misery, but it speaks only of those, whom he
has Elected to Salvation. What an unmerciful Piece of Nonsense is this! The
Article says plainly, as we remarked before, that there are some Chosen out of
Mankind. And so our Author would argue, there are none, which are not Chosen.

Poor Friend, should I tell thee, there are Twenty Men now before me, and I
choose Ten of them to Work for me; it follows (does it not?) that all the
Twenty labor for me, because I make no Mention of the Ten, I pass by in my
Election, whom I don't choose for the Employ. Election and Reprobation are
Relative Terms; if a Person chooses out of any Number of Things, he likewise
refuses some of that Number.

Secondly. He is extremely ignorant of the Calvinistical Tenets. Says he,
Election is with them a Secret Decree, without any Respect to our Works. Do but
observe either the Ignorance, or the Fallacy of our Dialogist. He would
insinuate, that we throw our selves upon the Decree of God, and let what will
come of Good Works. No, Sir, Election is without any Prevision, or antecedent
Respect to Good Works; yet no Man shall be S^ved without good Works. For he
that ordained us to Life, ordained us to all the Preparatives hereof, one of
which a continuance in the Way of Well doing. In the Decree of God we must not
separate the End from the Means. Both are equally parts of the Decree. God did
not choose us because he foresaw we should be holy, but chose us that we might
be holy. Holiness is not the procuring Cause, but the Effect of the Decree.
Ephesians. 1.4. According as he has chosen us in him; before the Foundation of the
World, that we should be holy and without Blame before him. So that Election is
not as he says, a Secret Decree without any Respect to our Works, if we have
respect to what we are Elected, even to holiness, as well as in the End to
Eternal Life. And now I may tell Friend Casuist, what the Apostle means when he
bids us make our Calling and Election sure. Says Friend with an haughty Air.
What! Is not the Decree of God sure without us! Yes, Sir, it is. But perhaps, I
are felicitou^ to know, If I am in this Decree. The Apostle gives ^s the Chain
of Salvation, Whom he foreknew, them he predestined, whom he predestined,
them he also called; whom he called, (...) also ^e justified, and whom he
justified, (...) also glorified. If a man can by self-(...)mination of his own
Heart, and Life, charitably judge himself a Faithful Servant of God, called out
of the World, he may conclude he is of the Election of Grace. He may search and
try himself, according to the Apostles Advice. And there are the Things which
do accompany Salvation, as the Apostle tells us in another place. We don't
therefore in our Examinations begin with the Decree of God; but we begin with
our own Souls. We know the Decree of God is sure; but we are allowed to try our
own Case; yea, commanded in Scripture hereunto, and hereupon conclude of our
Spiritual Estate. If we make our Calling sure (that is, if we by Examination
find the Kingdom of Grace is established in our Souls, and that we are
effectually called into the Fold of Jesus Christ) our Election is sure. For
whom he predestinates, them he also calls. Not but that many make a very bad
use of God's Decrees, and neglect their Salvation; and of this the 17 Article
makes mention, and well cautions against such a Destructive Practice. For though
God has decreed us to Holiness, yet we are to observe his revealed Will, which
strictly enjoins Holiness and Obedience, to strive after it. We are not Brutes
or Machines, what God has ordained us to, we shall by his Grace savingly
incline thereunto. And no Man perishes miserably merely because of his
Impotence to good; but his natural Aversation and Enmity to good. There is no
Unconverted Sinner but what hates a Life of Religion, let him in Words profess
what he will. He chooses the Path of the Destroyer, and though he may do some good
Works, yet secretly wishes he had a License to Sin, and yet might be Saved. So
suppose an Impotence to good only, and not this Enmity to God and Holiness, is
to beg the Question. For to snppose an impotent Penitent crying out, Lord, I
bebelieve, help my Unbelief! and God refusing his Grace to him, is more than
any Calvinist will affirm. Christ will not break the bruised Reed, nor quench
the smoking Flax, but will bring forth Judgment to Victory. But then this
sincere and truly Spiritual Desire, is the blessed Effect of Special Grace upon
the Soul of the Sinner. Which Special Influences, that our Dialogist may be
favored with large Eff^sions of them from the God of all Grace, is heartily
wished, by him that wrote this Appendix.

FINIS.
THE Author having never Corrected any part, but the first half Sheet of this
Work, the Remainder has been very full of Errata, which the Reader may Correct.
ERRATA.
PReface page 11. line 8. for Apocaypse read Apocalypse. l. 12. for a^ read as.
p. 13. l. 27, 28, 29, 30. for, are not polite, that because the Writers of them
are such as Bail, Witsius, Voet, Basnage, and nay of some, what were Owen,
etc. read, are not polite, and that because the Writers of them are
Presbyterians, such as Bail, Witsius, Voet, Basnage, etc. nay, and some of our
own Nation, what were Owen, etc. p. 14. l. 29 f. Canda read Cauda. p. 17. l.
14. r. Passage. l. 18. d^le [I] before [hope] p. 19. l. penult. read Apodictics.

In the Dialogue. p. 3. l. 7. read affecting. l. 12. r. Japonese. p. 4. l. 14.
read write. p. 7. line 2 for, very first, read Thirty-first, page 9. line 28.
read Perusal. page 10. line 27. read Minute. page 11. line 13. read quickening,
page 15. line 21. let the Reader be pleased to read over page fifteenth of
L^sly's Choice Dialogues, the Quotation being here omitted. page 16. line 20.
dele that. page 17. line ult. read unalterable. page 19. line 19. read punn.
page 20. line 2. after far read from. line 9. after better read have. line 26.
after Coxcomb, dele [.] page 21. line 12. for selves read self. page 23. line
10. r. Homilies p. 24. l. 17. read gross. p. 25. l. 9 r. Pelagian. p. 26. l.
11. after of write the. p. 28. l. 9. for that r. than. line penult. for Pit
read Prison. p. 29. l. 6. for important Devoters, r. impotent Devotees. r. 30.
l. 3. after either, r. to.

Appendix. p. 32. l. 9, 10. dele the Words [ in a Pastoral Letter] p 34. l. 19.
for Cygnia, read Cygnea. line 20. read Article. line 22. read explains. page
49. line 7. for Seus. read Sens. page 53 line 2. for them r. then. page 54 line
24. after am read apt. page 59 line 26 read Antoninus. line 12. for there read
their. line 24. read perhaps. page 60. line 1 read Heresies. line 3 read
Evangelical.

THere is now in the Press, and will shortly be Published a Book, Entitled,
Awakening Soul Saving Truths, Plainly Delivered, in Several Sermons.

In which is showed,

1. That many are Called, who are not Effectually Called. 2. That Men may be of
the Visible Church, and yet not be the Lords Chosen. 3. That the Chosen of God
are Comparatively few.
By INCREASE M.A THERE. D. D.

To be Sold by Benjamin Gray and John Edwards, in Kingstreet BOSTON.


