THE CHARTER And the Several Laws, Orders and Ordinances Established by the
Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants OF THE City of New York Convened in
Common Council, For the good Rule and Government of the Inhabitants of the said
City.

Published this first Day of December, in the Mayoralty of Jacobus van
Cortland, Esquire Annoque Domini 1719.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford in the City of New York, 1719.

THE CHARTER OF THE City of New York.
Thomas Dongan Lieutenant Governor and Vice Admiral of New York and its
Dependencies, under his Majesty James the second, by the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defendor of the Faith, supreme
Lord and Proprietor of the Colony and Province of N ew-York, and its
Dependencies in America, etc. To all to whom this shall come, sends Greeting.
WHEREAS the City of New York is an ancient City within the said Province, and
the Citizens of the said City have anciently been a Body Politic and
Corporate. And the Citizens of the said City have held, used and enjoyed, as
well within the same, as elsewhere within the said Province, diverse and sundry
Rights, Liberties, Privileges, Franchises, Free Customs, Preheminencies,
Advantages, Jurisdictions, Emoluments and Immunities, as well by Prescription,
as by Charter, Letters Patents, Grants and Confirmations, not only of diverse
Governors and Commanders in Chief in the said Province, but also of several
Governors, Directors, Generals and Commanders in Chief of the
Nether-DutchNation, whilst the same was or has been under their Power and
Subjection. And whereas diverse Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
Jurisdictions, Liberties, Immunities and Privileges have heretofore been given
and granted, or mentioned to be given and granted to the Citizens and
Inhabitants of the said City, sometimes by the name of Shout Purger masters and
Shepers of the City of New-Amsterdam, and sometimes by the Name of Mayor,
Aldermen and Commonalty of the city of N ew-Y ork; sometimes by the Name of the
Mayor, Alderman and Sheriff of the City of N ew-Y ork; sometimes by the Name of
the Mayori and Aldermen of the City of N ew-Y ork, and by diverse other Names,
as by their several Letters Patents, Charters, Grants, Writings, Records and
Minuments amongst other things, may more fully appear. And whereas the Citizens
and Inhabitants of the said City have erected, built and appropriated, at their
own proper Costs and Charges, several public Buildings, Accommodations and
Conveniences for the said City, That is to say, the City-Hall or State-house,
with the Ground thereunto belonging, Two Market-houses, the Bridge into the
Dock, the Wharffs or Dock, with their appurtenances and Conveniences, and the N
ew Burial-place without the Gate of this City, and have established and settled
one Ferry from the said City of N ew-Y ork to Long Island, for the
accommodation and convenience of Passengers, the said Citizens and Travelers.

And whereas several the Inhabitants of the said City and of Manhattans Island,
do Hold from and under his most Sacred Majesty respectively, as well by several
respective Letters Patents, Grants, Charters and Conveyances, made and granted
by the late Leiutenants, Governors or Commanders in Chief of the said
Province, as otherwise, several and respective Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments upon Manhattans Island, and in the City of N ew-Y ork aforesaid,
and that as well the said Mayor and Aldermen, and Commonalty of the said City,
and their Successors, as also the Inhabitants of Manhattans Island and City of
N ew-Y ork aforesaid, as their Heirs and Assigns respectively, may hold,
exercise and enjoy such and the same Liberties, Privileges and Franchises,
Rights, Royalties, free Customs, Jurisdictions and Immunities, as they have
anciently had, used, held and enjoyed, but also such public Buildings,
Accommodations, Conveniences, Messuages, Tenements, Lands and Hereditaments in
the said City of N ew-Y ork, and upon Manhattans Island aforesaid, which as
abovesaid, have been by the Citizens and Inhabitants erected and built, or
which have, as aforesaid, been held, enjoyed, granted and conveyed unto them,
or any of them respectively.

Know Y e therefore, That I the said Thomas Dongan, by virtue of the commission
and Authority to me given, and Power in me residing, at the humble Petition of
the now Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City of N ew-Y ork, and for
diverse other good Causes and Considerations me there unto moving, Have Given,
Granted Ratified and Confirmed, and by these Presents, for and on the behalf of
his most sacred Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs, Successors and Assigns, Do Give,
Grant, Ratify and Confirm unto the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the
said City, All and every such, and the same Liberties, Privileges, Franchises,
Rights, Royalties, Free Customs, Jurisdictions and Immunities, which they by
the Name of the Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty, or otherwise, have anciently
had, held, used or enjoyed. Provided always, That none of the said Liberties,
Privileges, Franchises, Rights, Free Customs, Jurisdictions or Immunities be
inconsistent with, or Repugnant to the Laws of his Majesty's Kingdom of
England, or any other the Laws of the General Assembly of this Province. And
the aforesaid public Buildings, Accommodations and Conveniences in the said
City, that is to say, the aforesaid City-Hall or State-House, with the ground
thereunto belonging, two Market-Houses, the Bridge into the Dock, the Wharffs
or Dock, the said N ew Burial-Place, and the aforementioned Ferry, with their,
and every of their Rights, Members and Appurtenances, together with all the
Profits, Benefits and advantages, which shall or may accrue or arise at all
Times hereafter, for Dockage or Wharffage within the said Dock, with all and
singular the Rents, Issues, Profits, Gains and Advantages, which shall or may
arise, grow or accrue, by the said City-Hall or State-House, and ground
there-unto belonging, Market Houses, Bridge, Dock and Burying place, Ferry, and
other the abovementioned Premises or any of them. And also, all and every the
Streets, Lanes, Highways and Allies within the said City of N ew-Y ork and
Manhattans Island aforesaid, for the public use and service of the said Mayor,
Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City, the Inhabitants of Manhattans Island
aforesaid, and Travelers there; Together with full Power, Lisence and
Authority to the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty, and their Successors
forever, To establish, appoint, order and direct the establishing making,
ordering, amending, repairing and laying out of all Streets, Lanes, Alleys,
Highways, Watercourse, Ferry and Bridges in and throughout the said City of
N ew-Y ork and Manhattans Island aforesaid, necessary, needful and convenient
for the Inhabitants of the said City and Manhattans Island, and for all
Travelers and Passengers there. Provided always, that this said Lisence, so
as above granted for the establishing, making and laying out of Streets, Lanes,
Alleys, Highways, Ferry and Bridges, be not extended, or be construed to
extend to the taking away of any Person or Persons Right or Property, without
his, her or their Consent, or by some known Law of the said Province.

And for the Considerations aforesaid, I do likewise Give, Grant, Ratify and
Confirm unto all and every the respective Inhabitants of the said City of N
ew-Y ork, and of Manhattans Island aforesaid, and their several respective
Heirs and Assigns, All and every the several and respective Messuages,
Tenements, Lands and Hereditaments situate, lying and being in the said City
and Manhattans Island aforesaid, to them severally and respectively granted,
conveyed and Confirmed by any of the late Governors, Lieutenants, or
Commanders in Chief of the said Province, or by any of the former Mayors or
Deputy Mayor and Aldermen of the said City of N ew-Y ork, by Deed, Grant,
Conveyance, or otherwise howsoever, To hold to their several and Respective
Heirs and Assigns forever.

And I do by these Presents Give and Grant unto the said Mayor, Aldermen and
Commonalty of the said City of N ew-Y ork, All the Waste, Vacent, Unpatented
and Unappropriated Lands, lying and being within the said City of N ew-Y ork
and on Manhattans Island, as aforesaid, extending and reaching to the
Low-WaterMark, in, by and through all Parts of the said City of N ew-Y ork and
Manhattans Island, as aforesaid; Together with all Rivers, Rivolets, Coves,
Creeks, Ponds, Water, Watercourse in the said City and Island, or either of
them, not heretofore given or granted by any of the former Governors,
Lieutenants or Commanders in Chief, under some of their Hands and Seals, or
Seal of the Province, or by any of the former Mayors or Deputy Mayors and
Aldermen of the said City of N ew-Y ork, to some respective Person or Persons,
late Inhabitants of the said City of N ew-Y ork, or Manhattans Island, or other
parts of the said Province. And I do by these presents Give, Grant and Confirm
unto the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City of N ew-york, and
their Successors forever, the Royalties of Fishing, Fowling, Hunting, Hawking,
Mineral and other Royalties and Privileges belonging or Appertaining to the
City of N ew- york, and Manhattans Island, aforesaid (Gold and Silver Mines
only excepted) To Have, Hold, and Enjoy all and singular the Premises to the
said Mayor, Alder-men and Commonalty of the said City of N ew- york, and their
Successors forever, Rendering and paying therefore unto his Most sacred
Majesty, his Heirs, Successors or Assigns, or to such Officer or Officers, as
shall be appointed to receive the same yearly forever hereafter, the annual
Quit-Rent or Acknowledgement of one Beaver Skin, or the value thereof in
Current Money of this Province, in the said City of N ew- york, on the 25th day
of March yearly forever. And moreover, I will, and by these presents do grant,
appoint and declare, that the said City of N ew- york and the Compass,
Precincts and Limits thereof, and the Jurisdiction of the same, shall from
henceforth extend to reach it self, and may and shall be able to reach forth
and extend it self, as well in length and in breadth, as in Circuit, to the
furthest extent of and in and throughout all the said Island Manhattan, and in
and upon all the Rivers, Rivolets, Coves, Creeks, Water and Water Courses,
belonging to the said Island, as far as low-watermark.

And I Do also for and on the behalf of His most sacred Majesty aforesaid, his
Heirs and Successors, firmly enjoin and Command, That the aforesaid Mayor,
Aldermen and Commonalty of the City aforesaid, and their successors, shall and
may freely and quietly Have, Hold, Use and enjoy the aforesaid Liberties,
Authorities, Jurisdictions, Franchises, Rights, Royalties, Privileges,
Exemptions, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments and Premises aforesaid, in manner
and form aforesaid, according to the tenor and effect of the aforesaid Grants,
Patents, Customs and Letters Patents of Grants and Confirmation, without the
Let, Hinderance or Impediment of me or any of my Successors, Governors,
Lieutenants, or other Officers whatsoever.

And also, I do for and on the behalf of his Most Sacred Majesty aforesaid, his
Heirs and Successors, Grant to the Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said
City of N ew- york and their Successors, by these presents, That for the better
Government of the said City, liberties and precincts thereof, there shall be
forever hereafter, within the said City, A M ayor and Recorder, Town Clerk, and
six Aldermen, and six Assistants, to be appointed, nominated, elected, chosen
and Sworn, as herein after is particularly and respectively mentioned, who
shall be forever hereafter called, The M ayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the
City of N ew- york. And that there shall be forever One Chamberlain or
Treasurer, One Sheriff, one Coroner, One Clerk of the M arket, One
High-Constable, Seven Sub-Constables, and One M arshal or Sergeant at Mace, To
be appointed, chosen and Sworn in manner hereafter mentioned. And I do by these
presents, for and on the behalf of his Most Sacred Majesty aforesaid, his
Heirs, Successors and Assigns, Declare, Constitute, Grant and Appoint, That the
Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the said City of N ew- york for the
time being, and they which hereafter shall be the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen
and Assistants of the said City of N ew- york for the time being, and their
Successors forever hereafter, be and shall be, by force of these Presents, one
Body Corporate and Politic, in deed, fact and name, by the name of The M ayor,
Aldermen and C ommonalty of the City of N ew- york; and them by the name of The
M ayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the City of N ew- york one Body Corporate
and Politic, in deed, fact and name, I do really and fully create, ordain,
make, Constitute and Confirm by these presents. And that by the Name of the
Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City of N ew- york they may have
perpetual succession, and that they and their Successors forever, by the mame
of Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the City of N ew- york, be and shall be
forever hereafter Persons able, and in Law capable to have, get, receive and
possess Lands, Tenements, Rents, Liberties, Jurisdictions, Franchises and
Hereditaments to them and their Successors in fee-simple or for term of Life,
Lives or Years, or otherwise; and also Goods and Chattels, and also other
things of what nature, kind or quality soever, and also to give grant, let, set
and assign the same Lands, Tenements, Hereditamants, Goods and Chattles, and to
do and execute all other things about the same by the name aforesaid. And also,
that they be, and forever shall be hereafter, Persons able in Law, capable to
plead and be Impleaded, answer and be answered unto, defend and be defended, in
all or any the Courts of his said Majesty, and other places whatsoever, and
before any Judges, Justices and other person or Persons whatsoever, in all
manner of actions, suits, complaints, demands, pleas, causes and matters
whatsoever, of what nature, kind or quality soever, in the same, and in the
like manner and form as other People of the said Province, being Persons able,
and in Law capable, may plead and be impleaded, answer and be answered unto,
defend and be defended by any lawful ways and means whatsoever. And that the
said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City of N ew-Y ork, and their
Successors shall and may forever hereafter, have one common Seal to serve for
sealing of all and singular their affairs and businesses, touching and
concerning the said Corporation. And It shall and may be lawful to and for the
said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City of N ew-Y ork, and their
Successors, as they shall see cause to break, change, alter and New make their
said Common Seal when and as often as to them it shall seem convenient.

And further, Know Y e, That I have Assigned Named, Ordained and Constituted,
and by these presents do assign, name, ordain and constitute Nicholas Bayard
now Mayor of the said City of N ew-Y ork to be present Mayor of the said City,
and that the said N icholas Bayard shall Remain and continue in the Office of
Mayor there, until another fit Person shall be appointed and sworn in the said
Office, according to the usage and Custom of the said City, as in and by these
Presents is hereafter mentioned and directed. And I have assigned, named,
ordained and constituted and by these presents do assign, name, ordain and
Constitute, Create and Declare James Graham, Esquire to be the present Recorder of
the said City, To do and execute all things which unto the office of Recorder
of the said city does or may in any wise appertain or belong. And I have
assigned, named, ordained and constituted, and by these presents do assign,
name, ordain, constitute, create and declare John West, Esquire Town Clerk of the
said City, To do and execute all things which unto the Office of Town Clerk may
any wise appertain or belong. And I have named, assigned, constituted and made,
and by these presents do Assign, Name, constitute and make Andrew Bown, John
Robinson, William Beekman, John Delavall, Abraham Depyster and Johannis Kipp,
Citizens and Inhabitants of the said City of N ew-Y ork, to be the present
Aldermen of the said City. And also, I have made, assigned, named and
constituted, and by these Presents do assign, name, constitute and make
Nicholas Demeyer, Johannes van Brugh, John de Brown, Thennis de Key, Abraham
Corbit and Wolfers Wobber, Citizens and Inhabitants of the said City, to be the
present Assistants of the said City. And also, I have assigned, chosen, Named
and Constituted, and by these presents do Assign, Choose, Name and Constitute
Peter Delanoy, Citizen and Inhabitant of the said City to be the present
Chamberlain or Treasurer of the City aforesaid. And I have Assigned, Named,
Constituted and Appointed, and by these presents do assign, name, constitute
and appoint John Knight, Esquire another of the said Citizens there, to be present
Sheriff of the said City. And have assigned, named and appointed, and by these
presents do assign, Name, Constitute and appoint Jarvis Marshall, another of
the said Citizens there, to be present Marshall of the said City.

And I do by these presents Grant to the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of
the said City of N ew- York, and their Successors, That the Mayor, Recorder,
Aldermen and Assistants of the said City, for the time being, or the Mayor,
Recorder, or any three or more of the Aldermen, and any three or more of the
Assistants for the time being, Be and shall be called, The Common Council of
the said City; And that they, or the greater part of them, shall and may have
full power and authority, by Virtue of these presents, from time to time, To
call and hold Common Council within the Common Council house, or City Hall of
the said City, and there, as occasion shall be, to make Laws, Orders,
Ordinances and Constitutions in writing, and to add, alter, diminish or reform
them, from time to time, as to them shall seem necessary and Convenient, not
repugnant to the Prerogative of his most Sacred Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs
and Successors, or to any of the Laws of the Kingdom of England, or other the
Laws of the General Assembly of the Province of N ew-Y ork, for the good Rule,
Oversight, Correction and Government of the said City and Liberties of the
same, and of all the Officers thereof; And for the several Tradesmen,
Victuallers, Artificers, and of all other the People and Inhabitants of the
said City, Liberties and Precincts aforesaid; And for the better preservation
of Government, and disposal of all the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
Goods and Chattels of the said Corporation; which Laws, Orders, Ordinances and
Constitutions shall be binding to all the Inhabitants of the said City,
Liberties and Precincts aforesaid; And which Laws, Orders Ordinances and
Constitutions, so by them made as aforesaid, shall be and remain in force for
the space of three Months, and no longer, unless they shall be allowed of and
confirmed by the Governor and Council for the time being. And I do further, on
the behalf of his Sacred Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, appoint
and grant, that the said Common Council of the said City for the time being, as
often as they make, ordain and establish such Laws, Orders, Ordinances and
Constitutions, as aforesaid, shall or may make, ordain, limit, provide, set,
impose and tax reasonable Fines and Amercements against and upon all persons
offending against such Laws, Orders, Ordinances and Constitutions, as
aforesaid, or any of them to be made, ordained and established, as aforesaid;
and the same Fines and Amercements, shall and may require, demand, levy, take
and receive, by Warrant under the Common seal, To and for the use and behoof of
the Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City, and their Successors,
either by distress and sale of the Goods and Chattels of the Offenders therein,
if such Goods and Chattels may be found within the said City, Liberties, and
Precincts thereof, Rendering to such offender and offenders the overplus, or by
any other lawful ways or means whatsoever.

And I do by these presents, Appoint and Ordain the Assigning, Naming and
Appointment of the Mayor and Sheriff of the said City, that it shall be as
follows, viz. Upon the Feast day of St. Michael, the Archangel, yearly, the
Lieutenant Governor or Commander in Chief, for the time being, by and with the
advice of the Council, shall nominate and appoint such Person as he shall think
fit, to be Mayor of the said city, for the year next ensuing. And one other
Person, of sufficient Ability and Estate, and of good Capacity in
understanding, to be Sheriff of the said City of N ew-Y ork, for the year next
ensuing. And that such persons as shall be named, assigned and appointed Mayor,
And such Person as shall be named, assigned and appointed Sheriff of the said
city, as aforesaid, shall on the fourteenth day of October, then next
following, take their several and respective Corporal Oaths before the
Governor and Council for the time being, for the due Execution of their
respective Offices, as aforesaid. And that the said Mayor and Sheriff, so to be
nominated, assigned and appointed, as aforesaid, shall remain and continue in
their said respective Offices until another fit Person shall be nominated,
appointed and sworn in the place of Mayor, and another person shall be
nominated and appointed in the place of Sheriff of the said City, in manner
aforesaid. And further, that according to the now usage and Custom of the said
City, the Recorder, Town Clerk and Clerk of the Market of the said City, shall
be persons of good Capacity and Understanding, and such persons as his most
Sacred Majesty aforesaid, his heirs and successors shall in the said respective
Offices of Recorder, Town Clerk and Clerk of the Market, appoint and
commissionate; and for defect of such appointments and commissionating by his
Most Sacred Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, To be such Persons as
the Lieutenant Governors or Commanders in Chief of the said Province, for the
time being, shall appoint and commissionate; which Persons, so Commissionated
to the said Offices of Recorder, Town Clerk and Clerk of the Market, shall
have, hold and enjoy the said Offices according to the tenor and effect of
their said Commissions, and not otherwise. And further, that the Recorder, Town
Clerk and Clerk of the Market, Aldermen, Assistants, Chamberlain,
High-Constables, petty Constables, and all other Officers of the said City,
before they, or any of them shall be admitted to enter upon and execute their
respective Offices, shall be sworn, faithfully to Execute the same, before the
Mayor, or any three, or more, of the Aldermen for the time being. And I do by
these presents, for and on the behalf of his Most sacred Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, grant and give Power and Authority to the Mayor and Recorder of the
said City, for the time being, to administer the same respective Oaths to them
accordingly. And further, I do by these Presents, grant, for and on the behalf
of his Most Sacred Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, that the Mayor
and Recorder of the said City for the time being, and three or more of the
Aldermen of the said City, not exceeding five, shall be justices and Keepers of
the Peace of his Most Sacred Majesty, his Heirs and Successors; and Justices to
hear and determine matters or Causes within the said City, and Liberties, and
Precincts thereof; and that they, or any three or more of them, whereof the
Mayor and Recorder, or one of them, for the time being, to be there, shall and
may forever hereafter, have Power and Authority, by virtue of these presents,
to hear and determine All and all manner of Petty Larcenies, Riots, Routs,
Oppressions, Extortions and other Trespasses and Offenses whatsoever, within
the said City of N ew- York, and the Liberties and Precincts aforesaid, from
time to time arising and happening, and which arise or happen, and any ways
belong to the Offices of the Justices of the Peace, and the Correction and
Punishment of the Offenses aforesaid, and every of them, according to the Laws
of England, and the Laws of the said Province; and to do and to execute all
other things in the said City, Liberties and Precincts aforesaid, so fully and
in ample manner, as to the Commission assigned, and to be assigned, for the
keeping of the Peace, in the said county of N ew- York, does or may belong. And
moreover, I do by these Presents, for and in behalf of his Most Sacred Majesty
aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, appoint, that the Aldermen, Assistants,
high-Constables and Petty Constables, within the said City, be yearly chosen on
the Feast day of St Michael, the Archangel, forever, viz. one Alderman, one
Assistant and one Constable for each respective Ward, and one Constable for
each Division in the outWard, in such Public place in the said respective
Wards, as the Aldermen, for the time being, for each Ward, shall direct and
appoint. And that the Aldermen, Assistants and petty Constables be chosen by
the Majority of Voices of the Inhabitants of each Ward. And that the
High-Constable be appointed by the Mayor of the said City, for the time being.
And that the Chamberlian shall be yearly Chosen on the said Feast day, in the
said City-Hall in the said City, by the Mayor, Aldermen and Assistants, or by
the Mayor, or three or more of the Aldermen, and three or more of the
Assistants of the said City for the time being. And I do by these presents
Constitute and appoint the said John West to be the present Town Clerk, Clerk
of the said Peace, and Clerk of the Court of Pleas, To be holden before the
Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen within the said City, and Liberties, and Precincts
thereof. And further, I do by these Presents, for and on the behalf of his Most
Sacred Majesty aforesaid his Heirs and Successors, require, strictly charge and
Command, That the Sheriff, Town Clerk, Clerk of the Peace, High-Constable,
Petty Constables, and all other Subordinate Officers in the said City, for the
time being, and every of them respectively, jointly and severally, as cause
shall require, shall attend upon the said Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of the
said City for the time being, and every and any of them, according to the Duty
of the respective places, in and about the execution of such the Commands,
Precepts, Warrants and Processes of them, and every of them, as belongs and
appertains to be done or executed. And that the aforesaid Mayor, Recorder,
and Aldermen, and every of them, as Justices of the Peace, for the time being,
by their or any of their Warrants, all and every Person or Persons, for High
Treason or Petty Treason, or for Suspicion thereof, or for other Fellonies
whatsoever, and all Malefactors and Disturbers of the Peace, and other
Offenders, for other Misdemeanors, who shall be apprehended within the said
City or Liberties thereof, shall and may send and commit, or cause to be sent
and committed to the Common Goal of the said City, There to remain and be kept
in fate Custody, by the Keepers of the said Goal, or his Deputy for the time
being, until such Offender and Offenders shall Lawfully be delivered thence.
And I do by these presents, for and on the behalf of his Most Sacred Majesty
aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, Charge and Require the keeper and keepers
of the said Goal, for the time being, and his and their Deputy and Deputies to
receive, take and in safe Custody keep all and Singular such Person and
Persons, so apprehended, or to be apprehended, sent and committed to the said
Goal, by Warrant of the said Justices, or any of them, as aforesaid, until he
and they so sent and committed to the said Goal, from thence shall be delivered
by due course of Law.

And further, I do Grant and Confirm, for and on the behalf of his Most Sacred
Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, That the said Mayor of the said
City, for the time being, and no other, according to the usage and practice
accustomed in the said city of New- York, in the time of my Predecessors, the
several Lieutenants, Governors and Commanders in chief of this Province, shall
have Power and Authority to give and grant Lisences, annually, under the
Public Seal of the said city, to all Tavern-keepers, Innkeepers,
Ordinary-keepers, Victualers, and all Public Sellers of Wine, Strong Water,
Syder, Beer, or any other sort of Liquors, by Retail within the city aforesaid,
Manhattans Island, or their Liberties and Precincts thereof. And it shall and
may be lawful to and for the said Mayor of the said city, for the time being to
ask, demand and receive for such Lisence, by him to be given and granted, as
aforesaid, such Sum or Sums of Money, as he and the Person to whom such Lisence
shall be given and granted, shall agree for, not exceeding the Sum of Thirty
Shillings for each Lisence. All which Money, as by the said Mayor, shall be so
received, shall be used and applied to the public use of the said Mayor,
Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City of N ew- york, and their Successors,
without any account thereof to be rendered, made or done to any of the
Lieutenants or Governors of this Province, for the time being, or any of their
Deputies.

And know ye, that for the better Government of the said City, and for the
welfare of the said Citizens, Tradesmen and Inhabitants thereof, I do by
these Presents, for and in the behalf of his Most Sacred Majesty, his Heirs and
Successors, Give and Grant to the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the
said City, and their successors, That the Mayor, Recorder, and Aldermen, or the
Mayor and any three or more of the Aldermen for the time being, shall from time
to time, and at all times hereafter, have full Power and Authority, under the
common Seal, make Free Citizens of the said City and Liberties thereof, and no
Person or Persons, whatsoever, other then such free Citizens, shall hereafter
use any Art, Trade, Mystery, or manual Occupation, within the said City,
Libertys and Precincts thereof, saving in the time of Fairs only. And in case
any Person or Persons whatsoever, not being free Citizens of the said City, as
aforesaid, shall at any time hereafter, use or Exercise any Art, Trade,
Mystery or manual Occupation, or shall by himself, themselves or others, sell
or expose to sale any manner of Merchandise or Wares whatsoever by Retail in
any House, Shop, Place or Places, or Standing within the said City, or the
Liberties or Precincts thereof, no Fair being then kept in the said City, and
shall persist therein, after warning to him or them given or left by the
appointment of the Mayor of the said City, for the time being at the place or
places where such Person or Persons shall so use or exercise any Art, Trade or
Mystery, or manual Occupation, or shall fell, or expose to sale any Wares or
Merchandise, as aforesaid, by Retail, then it shall be lawful for the said
Mayor of the said City, for the time being, to cause such Shop Windows to be
shut up, and also to impose such reasonable Fine, for such Offense, not
exceeding five Pounds for every respective Offense; and the same Fine and
Fines, so imposed, to levy, and take, by Warrant under the common seal of the
said City, for the time being, by distress and sale of the Goods and Chattels
of the Person or Persons so offending in the Premises, found within the
Liberties or Precincts of the said City, rendering to the Party or Parties the
overplus, or by any other lawful ways or means whatsoever, to the only use of
the said Mayor, Alder-men and Commonalty of the said City of N ew- york, and
their Successors, without any Account to be rented, made or done to the
Lieutenants, Governors or Commaners in Chief of this Province, for the same.
Provided, That no Person or Persons shall be made free, as aforesaid, but such
as are his Majesty's Natural born Subjects, or such as shall first be
naturalized by Acts of General Assembly, or shall have obtained Letters of
Denization, under the hand of the Lieutenant Governor or Commander in Chief
for the time being, and Seal of the Province. And that all Persons to be made
free, as aforesaid, shall and do pay for the Public Use of the said Mayor,
Aldermen, and Commonalty of the said City, such Sum and Sums of Money as
heretofore has been used and accustomed to be paid and received, on their
being admitted Freemen, as aforesaid, provided it is not exceeding the Sum of
five Pounds.

And further, I do by these Presents, for and on the behalf of his most sacred
Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, Grant to the Mayor, Aldermen and
Commonalty of the said City, That they and their Successors be forever Persons
able and capable, and shall have power to purchase, have, take and possess in
fee simple, Lands, Tenements, Rents, and other Possessions within or without
the same City, to them and their Successors forever, so as the same exceed not
the yearly value of One Thousand Pound per annum, the Statute of Mortmain, or
any other Law to the contrary notwithstanding Land the same Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments and Premises, or any part thereof to demise, grant, lease, set
over, assign and dispose at their own will and pleasure, and to make, seal and
accomplish any Deed or Deeds, Lease or Leases. Evidences or Writings, for or
concerning the same, or any part thereof, which shall happen to be made and
granted by the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City, for the
time being.

And further, I do by these presents, for and on the behalf of his most sacred
Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, grant to the said Mayor, Aldermen
and Commonalty of the said City, That they and their Successors, shall and may
forever hereafter, hold and keep within the said City, in every Week of the
Year, Three Market days, the one upon Tuesday, the other upon Thursday, and the
other upon Saturday, weekly forever.

And also I do by these Presents, for and on the behalf of his most sacred
Majesty, aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, grant to the Mayor, Aldermen and
Commonalty of the said City, That they, and their Successors and Assigns, shall
and may at any time or times hereafter, when it to them shall seem fit and
convenient, take in, fill and make up, and Lay out all and singular the Lands
and Ground in and about the said City and Island Manhattans, and the same to
build upon, or make use of, in any other manner or way, as to them shall seem
fit, as far into the Rivers (...) and that encompass the same, as
Low-water-mark aforesaid.

And I do by these Presents, for and on the behalf of his most Sacred Majesty,
aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, give and grant unto the aforesaid Mayor,
Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City of N ew-Y ork, and their Successors,
That they and their Successors shall and may have, hold and keep within the
said City, and Liberties and Precincts thereof, in every Week, in every Year,
forever, upon Tuesday. One Court of Common Pleas, for all Actions of Debt,
Trespass, and Tresspasses upon the Case, Detinue, E^^ctment, and other Personal
Actions, and the same to be held before the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen, or
any three of them whereof the Mayor or Recorder to be one, who shall have Power
to hear and determine the same Pleas and Actions, according to the Rules of the
common Law, and Acts of General Assembly of the said Province.

And I do by these Presents, for and on behalf of his most sacred Majesty
aforesaid, his Heirs and Successors, grant to the said Mayor, Alder-men and
Commonalty of the said City of N ew-Y ork, and their Successors, That the said
Mayor, Aldermen and Commonalty of the said City, and their Successors, shall
have and enjoy all the Privileges, Franchises and Powers that they have and
use attrohany of their Predecessors at any time within the space of twenty
Years last past, had, took and enjoyed, or ought to have had by reason, or
under any pretense of any former Charter Grant, Prescription, or any other
Right. Custom or Usage, although the same have been so seited, lost, or have
been ill used, or not used, or abused, or discontinued albeit they be not
particularly mentioned. And that no Officer shall disturb them therein, under
any pretense whatsoever, not only for their future, but their present enjoyment
thereof. Provided always, That the said Privileges, Franchises and Powers be
not inconsistent with or repugnant to the Laws of his Majesty's Kingdom of
England, or other the Laws of the General Assembly of this Province, as
aforesaid. And saving to his most sacred Majesty aforesaid, his Heirs,
Successors and Assigns, and the Lieutenants, Governors and Commanders in
Chief, and other Officers under him and them in Fort James, in or by the City
of NewYork, and in all the Liberties, Boundaries, Extents and Privileges
thereof, for the maintenance of the said Fort and Garrison there, all the
Rights, Use, Title and Authority which they, or any of them have had, used or
exercised there, and also one Message or Tenement next the City Hall, and one
Message by the Fort, now in the Possession of Thomas Coker, Gent the piece of
ground by the Gate, called, The Governors Garden, and the Land without the
Gate, called, the Kings Farm, with the Swamp next to the same Land, by the
fresh Water. And saving the several Rents and Quit-Rents reserved and due, and
payable from several Persons inhabiting within the said City and Island
Manhattans, by virtue of former Grants to them made and given. And saving to
all other Persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate, their Heirs, Successors and
Assigns, all such Right, Title and Claim, Possessions, Rents, Services, common
Emoluments and Interest in and to any thing which is theirs, save only the
Franchises aforesaid, in as ample manner as if this Charter had not been made.

And further, I do appoint and declare, That the Incorporation to be founded by
this Charter, shall not at any time hereafter do or suffer to be done any
thing, by means whereof the Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, Stock, Goods or
Chattles thereof, or in the hands, custody or possession of any the Citizens of
the said City, such as have been set, let, given, granted or collected to and
for Pious and Charitable Uses, shall be wasted or mis-imployed, contrary to the
Trust or Intent of the Founder or Giver thereof, and that such, and no other
Construction shall be made thereof, than that which may tend most to advantage
Religion, Justice and the public Good, and to suppress all Acts and
Contrivances to be invented or put in use, contrary thereunto. IN WITNESS
whereof I have caused these Presents to be entered in the Secretary's Office,
and the Seal of the said Province to be hereto affixed this 27th day of April,
in the second Year of the Reign of his most sacred Majesty aforesaid, and in
the year of our Lord God, 1686.

Thomas Dongan.
May it please your Honor;
THE attorney General has perused this Patent, and finds nothing contained
therein prejudicial to his Majesty's Interest.

Ja. Graham.
Examined, April 27.1686. Recorded in the Secretary's Office for the Province
of New York, in Lib. No. 1. Book of Patents, began 1684. from page 278. 309. J.
Spragge, Secry.


City of New York, ss.
On the first Day of December, in the sixth year of the Reign of our Sovereign
Lord George, by the Grace of God, of Great Britain, France and Ireland, King,
Defender of the Faith, etc. The Mayor, Recorder, Alder-men and Assistants of
the City of New York, convened in CommonCouncil at the City-Hall of the said
City, for the good Rule and Government thereof, did make, ordain, establish and
publish these following Laws, Orders and Ordinances, and ordered the same to be
Printed.
For the Observation of the Lords Day.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Alder-men and Assistants of the City
of New York, convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the
Authority of the same, That no manner of Servile Work be done on the Lords Day
(Works of Piety, Charity or Necessity excepted) nor any Goods bought or Sold on
that Day within the said City or Liberties thereof, under the Penalty of Ten
Shillings for the first Offense, and for every Offense after, double that Sum.

No Children, etc. to play on the Sabbath.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Children,
Youth, Maids, or other Persons whatsoever, do meet together on the Lords Day in
any the Streets or Places within this City or Liberties thereof, and there
sport play, make noise or disturbance, under the penalty of One Shilling for
each Offense, to be paid by the Parents of all under Age.

Public Houses not to sell Drink on Sundays.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Publick-Houses,
Tap-Houses or Ordinaries within this City and Liberties thereof, do suffer
their Doors to be kept open, or do entertain or receive any Company into their
Houses, and to them sell any kind of Wine or other Liquors on the Lords Day in
time of Divine Service or Preaching (unless to Strangers, Travelers, or those
that lodge in such houses, for their necessary refreshment.) And no keeper of
such publickhouse, Tap-house or Ordinary is at any time to suffer any excessive
drinking, or Persons to be drank in their houses, under the penalty of Ten
Shillings for each offense.

Negro and Indian Slaves not above three to meet together.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Negro or
Indian-Slaves above the number of three do assemble or meet together on the
LordsDay, or at any other time, at any place from their Masters Service, within
this City and the Liberties thereof; and that no such Slave do go armed at any
time with Gun, Sword, Club, or any other kind of Weapon whatsoever, under the
penalty of being Whipped at the public Whipping-post fifteen Lashes, unless the
Master or Owner of such Slave will pay six Shillings to excuse the same.

Constables to take care the Sabbath be not broke.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That one of the
Constables of the five Wards, on the South Side of Fresh Water, do by turns
succesively, on each Lords Day, in time of Divine Service and Preaching, walk
through the Several Streets and Lanes of this City, with his Staff, and see the
Orders beforewritten be duly observed and kept, and to that end he is like wise
to enter into all or any publick-houses, Tap-houses or Ordinarys, and if any
Company or Persons shall be found therein, or drink sold, contrary to the
Orders aforesaid, he is to make complaint and presentment thereof, that the
penalty may be inflicted accordingly.

Concerning Strangers.
Constables to enquire after Inmates and Strangers.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Alder-men and Assistants of the City
of New York, convened in Common Council, and it is hereby ordained by the
Authority of the same, That the Constables of each Ward and Division of the
said City and Liberties thereof, do from time to time make a strict Search and
enquiry, within their several Wards and Divisions, after all Strangers that
shall come, reside or inhabit within their said Wards or Divisions, and give a
List or account of their Names to the Mayor, or in his absence to the eldest
Alder-man, that further examination may be made and order taken therein, to
save the City from Charge.

Fine upon Constables that do not give an account of Strangers.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Stranger or
Strangers whatsoever shall at any time hereafter come into any the Wards or
Divisions of this City and Liberties thereof, and shall there reside and
inhabit by the space of Forty Days, and a List or account or their Names shall
not before that time be given to the Mayor or eldest Alder-man, as aforesaid,
by the Constable of such Ward or Division, and any charge do fall on this City
thereby, the Constable for his neglect shall forfeit and pay the sum of twenty
Shillings.

Fine on Housekeepers who entertain Strangers.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
Housekeepers and Inhabitants within this City or Liberties thereof, that shall
receive any Person or Persons to lodge or sojourn in their Houses above two
days, shall, before the third day after his or their coming thither, give
knowledge to the Constable of the Ward or Division where such Person or Persons
shall be so received, of the Name, Surname, Dewlling Place and Trade of life,
or place of Service of all such Person or Persons, and for what cause he or
they came to reside there, under the penalty of twenty shillings for each
Offense.

None to keep Publick-House without Lisence.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That none but such as
are lisenced do presume to keep Public Houses, or sell any Wine, Beer, or
other strong Liquors by Re-tail, or a less quantity at one time than five
Gallons, within this City and the Liberties thereof, under the penalty of five
Pounds.

Surveyors of the City.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby ordained by the Authority
of the same, That there be sworn Surveyors appointed for this City, by whose
advice and directions the ground within this City shall be built, and that none
do build before the front of their ground be viewed and laid out by them, as
they shall direct, that a regular Order and Uniformity may be kept and observed
in the Streets and Buildings; and that none pave before their houses but in
such manner as appointed by the said Surveyors, with the consent of the
Aldermen and Assistants of each Ward, under the penalty of six shillings; and
that for the laying out of each House, Lot, and giving Certificate thereof, the
said Surveyors shall have and receive from the owner thereof, the Sum of six
Shillings.

To prevent Fire.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder and Assistants of the City ofNew-York,
convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the Authority of the
same, That the Aldermen and Assistants of each respective Ward within this City
do appoint two sufficient Persons in every Ward within the said City, to be
Viewers of the Chimneys and Hearths, who shall view the same once in every
Fourteen Days, and where they find any Defective, to give notice, that the same
may be swept or Mended, at such time as, in their discretion, they shall think
fit; And if any Person shall neglect or refuse their Direction herein, they
shall Forfeit for each Offense the Sum of Three Shillings, one half to the
City, and the other half to the said Viewers of the respective Wards. And that
if any Chimney shall be on fire, after Notice given by the said Viewers for the
cleaning of the same, the Dweller in such House, to whom Notice thereof shall
be so given, shall Forfeit for every Chimney that shall be so on fire, the Sum
of Forty Shillings, for the use of this City. And if the said Viewers shall
Neglect or Refuse to execute the Duty hereby required, shall, for each Offense,
forfeit the Sum of Six Shillings, and that another be appointed in his place.

No Hay to be within ten Foot of a Chimney.
And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person or
Persons whatsoever within the said City or Liberties thereof, do lay any Hay,
Straw, or other Combustible matter within their dwelling Houses in this City or
Places adjoining to the same, within ten Foot of a Chimney, under the penalty
of ten Shillings for each offense.

Provision for Hooks and Ladders.
And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That Provision be made
for Hooks, Ladders and Buckets to be kept in convenient Places within this
City, for avoiding the peril of Fire.

Buckets to be in every House.
And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Inhabitants or
Owner of every House within this City, that has three fire Places, provide two
leather Buckets, and every House of fewer fire-Places, one leather Bucket;
every Brewer six, and every Baker three, to be ready in their houses, and the
same to be found by the Persons inhabiting the said Houses, and to be allowed
by the Landlord out of their Rent and the said Buckets to be marked with the
Letters of the Landlords Name, upon the forfeiture of six shillings for the use
of this City, to be paid by the Tenant, if not provided as aforesaid.

Regulations for the Market.
What Places to be public Markets.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby ordained by the Authority
of the same, That the old Marketplace in the Broad-way, the MarketPlaces at
the Great and Little Bridges, the Slip at the east end of the Dock, the
Market-house at Burgers-path, Wall-Street Slip, the Market-house at (...) and
the North End of the Broad-Street between the City Hall of this City, and the
CrossStreet which leads from the Broad-way to the Dutch-Church, be and are
hereby appointed the Pulick Market Places of this City, and that all Flesh,
Poultry, Eggs, Butter, Cheese, Roots, etc. that shall be exposed to sale in any
other places within this City than the public Marketplaces aforesaid, shall
be forfeited to the Poor of the said City; and that it shall and may be lawful
for the Clerk of the Market, the Sheriff, or any Magistrates of the said City
to seize the same, and dispose thereof to the Poor aforesaid.

No Hucksters to buy till after two Hours in the Market.
And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Hucksters, or
Person to sell again, shall buy any Flesh, Fish, Fowl, Eggs, Butter or Cheese,
or any other sort of Provision, (...), till it has been two Hours in the
Market, upon forfeiture of six Shillings, and also of what shall be bought or
sold.

No Person to buy or cheapen any thing coming to the Market.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person buy
or cheapen any Flesh, Fish, Fowls, Butter, Cheese, Herbs, Fruit, Roots, etc.
coming to the Market, shall forfeit Six Shillings.

None to fore-stall the Market.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person shall
forestall any Provisions or Victuals coming to the Market, as to buy in any
private or other Place than the Market, under pain of forfeiture of the same,
whether it be found in the Hands of the Buyer or of the seller.

None to Engross.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Person shall
engross any Provisions or Victuals which is in the Market, or buy in the Market
to retail there again, especially such as be known to be Hucksters, Butchers,
or other People occupying their living by such Provision or Victuals as they
would so engross, under the pains and forfeiture of such Provision and Victuals
so engrossed. And that no Huckster shall engross any Poultry, Eggs or fresh
Butter coming to the Market, under the pain of Forty Shillings.

No unwholesome Victuals to be sold.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no unwholsom or
stale Victuals shall be sold in the Market, under pain of Forty Shillings.

No blown Meat or leprous Swine.
Leprous Swine shall be sold in the Market, under the pain of forfeiting the
same, and Forty Shillings.

Clerk of the Market's Fees.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Clerk of the
Market receive for all Cattle killed for the Market, for each head, one
Shilling. For every Hog or shoat bought or cut out for sale in the
Market-house, three Peace. And for every Sheep, Calf and Lamb, two Pence. And
that the Country shall pay nothing for what they shall bring ready killed.

Weights and Measures to be Sealed.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all the Weights
and Measures within this City be forthwith sealed, and that the Clerk of the
Market have for the same one Penny a Piece, both great and small, and that the
Marks of the Weights and Measures of this City, be according to the directions
of the Act of General Assembly of this Province in that case made and provided.

A Law for Increasing the Market.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York, convened in Common Council, and it is hereby ordained by the
Authority of the same, That from henceforth the Country People, who frequent
the Market of this Corporation, have Liberty to Expose their Meat to Sale in
the public Market by the Joint, or otherwise, as they shall see convenient,
first paying the Fees of the Clerk of the Market for the same; and that if any
Flesh be exposed to sale by the Joint, by any Country People, before the Fees
of the Clerk of the Market are paid, the same shall be forfeited to the use of
the Poor of this City, any former Law of this Corporation to the contrary
hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

A Law for Marking of Bread.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York, convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the
Authority of the same, That from henceforth every Baker Within this City shall
put a Mark, with the two Letters of his Name, upon all the Lost Bread he shall
expose to sale within the said City, upon pain of Forfeiting all such Bread as
shall be made and exposed to sale unmarked, as aforesaid, to be distributed to
the Poor of the said City, by Order of the Mayor, Recorder, or any one of the
Aldermen of the said City, who are hereby authorized to hear and determine the
same.

A Law Prohibiting the sale of Meal by Measure.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City
ofNew-York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby ordained by the
Authority of the same, That no Meal Whatsoever be hereafter sold in the Market
of this City, by Measure, but that all Meal to be sold in the said Market shall
be sold by Weight, and not otherwise, upon penalty of the Forfeiture of all
such Meal as shall be sold by Measure, and the said Penalty to be paid by the
Seller of such Meal, in the value of the Meal so sold by Measure, One half to
the Informer, and the other half to the Use of the Poor of this City, to be
Recovered before the Mayor, Recorder, or any one of the Aldermen of said City.

A Law for Regulating the sale of Beer and Cider by Retail.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby ordained by the Authority
of the same, That no Retailer or Retailers of Strong Liquors within this
Corporation do hereafter sell any Beer or Cider by Retail within this City, but
by Wine Measure, duly sealed according to Law, under the Penalty of six
Shillings for every Offense, one half to the informer, and the other half to
the Use of this Corporation, to be Recovered before the Mayor or Recorder, or
any of the Alderman of this City.

A Law Appointing a Place for the more convenient hiring of Slaves.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York, convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the
Authority of the Same, That all Negro and Indian Slaves that are let out to
hire within this City, do take up their standing in Order to be hired, at the
Market-house at the Wall-street-Slip, until such time as they are hired,
whereby all Persons may know where to hire Slaves, as their Occasions shall
Require, and also Masters discover when their Slaves are so hired; and all the
Inhabitants of this City are to take Notice hereof accordingly.

A Law for Regulating Negro and Indian Slaves in the Night time.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the Authority
of the Same, That from henceforth no Negro or Indian Slave, above the age of
Fourteen Years, do Presume to be or appear in any of the Streets of this City
on the South side of the Fresh Water, in the Night time, above an Hour after
Sun Set. And that if any such Negro or Indian Slave or Slaves, as aforesaid,
shall be found in any of the Streets of this City within the Stockadoes or
Fortifications, or in any other Place on the South side of the Fresh Water in
the Night time, above one Hour after Sunset, without a Lanthorn and lighted
Candle in it, so as the Light thereof may be plainly seen, that then and in
such case it shall and may be lawful for any of his Majesty's Subjects within
the said City, to apprehend such Slave or Slaves not having such Lanthorn and
Candle, and forthwith carry him, her or them before the Mayor or Recorder, or
any one of the Aldermen of the said City, who are hereby authorized, upon Proof
of the Offense, to commit such Slave or Slaves to the Common Gaol, for such
his, her or their Contempt, and there to remain until the Master, Mistress or
Owner of every such Slave or Slaves shall pay to the Person or Persons who
apprehended and convicted such Slave or Slaves, the Sum of Eight Shillings
current Money of New York for his or their pains or trouble therein, with
Reasonable Charges of Prosecution.

And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That every Slave or
Slaves That shall be Convicted of the Offense aforesaid, before he or they be
discharged, shall be whipped at the public Whipping-Post Forty Lashes, save
one, if desired by the Master or Owner of such Slave or Slaves, any thing
before in this Law contained to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

A Law prohibiting Burning Lime on part of the Commons.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the Authority
of the Same, That no Oyster-shells or Lime be burnt on the Commons of this
City, or on any vacant Ground on the South side of the Windmill, commonly
called Jasper's Mill, under the Penalty of Forty Shillings for every Offense,
to be paid by the Owner of such Shells or Line, one half to the Informer and
the other half to this Corporation, to be Recovered before the Mayor or
Recorder, or any one of the Aldermen of this City.

A Law against Trading with Soldiers for their Clothes, Arms or Accoutrements.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the Authority
of the same, That from henceforth no Person or Persons whatsoever within this
City do presume to buy of any Soldier or Soldiers of his Majesty's Garrison
within this City, any of their Arms, Accoutrements, or Clothes of the Kings
Livery upon any score or Pretense whatsoever, upon pain of forfeiting the Sum
of Twenty Shillings for every Offense, one half to the Informer, and the other
half to the Treasurer of this City for the Use of this Corporation, to be
Recovered before the Mayor or Recorder, or any one of the Aldermen of this City.

A Law for Regulating and Establishing of Fees for the Inviters to Funerals.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York, convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the
authority of the same, That the Fees of the Persons who are Inviters to
Funerals be, and are hereby Regulated and Estabished in Manner following (
viz.) for Inviting to the Funeral of every Person of Twenty Years of Age, and
upwards, Eighteen Shillings; For every Person above Twelve years of Age, and
under Twenty years, Twelve Shillings; And for every Person under Twelve years
of Age, Eight Shillings current Money of New York, and no more. And that the
said inviters take Notice hereof, and conform themselves accordingly.

Assize of Bread.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York, convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the
Authority of the same, That the Mayor and Aldermen of the said City for the
time being, do once every three Months, or oftener, if they see cause,
ascertain and establish the value and assize of Bread to be sold by the Bakers
in this City, and cause the same to be publicly fixed on the City-Hall, that
so all Persons may take notice thereof; and likewise to appoint fit Persons to
be viewers of Bread, to inspect the goodness thereof, and see that the same be
of full and due Assize; and all Bakers are to make their Bread good, and
according to the Assize so established, under the Penalty of the forfeiture of
all such Bread as shall be found not to be good, want of the due assize, as
aforesaid, and Twenty Shillings Fine for each offense.

Regulations for Car-Men.
None to be Car-Men without Lisence.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York, convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the
Authority of the same, That there be thirty Car-men appointed and allowed, for
the service of this City, by the Mayor and Aldermen of the same, and so many
more as they shall think fit to appoint; and that no Person do serve in that
capacity for hire or wages, but who shall be so appointed and allowed, under
the Penalty of Twenty Shillings, one half to the Informer, and the other half
to the City.

Car-men to mend the Streets and Highways, gratis.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Car-men
appointed for this City shall and do fill up, amend and repair the breaches in
the Streets and Highways in and about this City, when required by the Mayor,
gratis, upon penalty of being turned out of their places.

Size of Carts.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That each Cart employed
for the carrying of any Goods, Merchandise, Firewood, etc. within this City,
shall be two foot eight Inches wide, and three Foot high, under the Penalty of
Three Shillings, one half to the Informer, the other to the City.

No Cart to drive in the Night.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Car-man ride of
drive his Cart in this City after daylight, without special Lisence from the
Mayor, or in his absence, of any Alderman, under the Penalty of Twenty
Shillings, one half to the Informer, the other half to the City.

No Car-man to ride in his Cart.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Car-man ride in
the Streets, in his Cart, within this City, under the forfeiture of six
Shillings, one half to the Informer, the other half to the use of the City.

Car-men to observe the Orders of their Fore-men.
And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Several
Car-men shall be observent to their Fore-men, and their Orders, from time to
time, upon penalty of Three Shillings (or loosing their place) half thereof to
the Informer, the other half to the City.

Car-men to divide themselves
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Car-men shall
daily divide themselves, one half to attend at the Waterside, and the other
half in the City, and take the same by turns, upon forfeiture of Three
Shillings for each Car-men, one half to the Informer, the other half to the
City.

No Boys or Negroes to be Car-Men.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Boys or Negroes
do drive Carts, for wages, upon penalty of Three Shillings, half to the
Informer, the other half to the City, without Lisence from the Mayor, to be
paid, by the Owner of such Horse and Cart.

Penalty on Car-men that refuse to ride when required.
And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Car-man
shall neglect or refuse to ride for any Person when required (when he is not
otherwise employed with his Horse and Cart) shall for every such offense
forfeit the Sum of Six Shillings, with such costs and charges as shall accrue
in the recovery thereof.

Car-men to drive their own Carts.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Car-man is to
let out his Cart, but drive it himself, without first making address to the
Mayor, upon penalty of Three Shillings, half thereof to the Informer, the other
half to the City.

Car-men to ride Goods to the right Owner.
And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That every Car-man
shall be obliged to ride to the right Owners their Goods, upon penalty of Forty
Shillings to the City, besides the penalty of the Law.

Car-men to ride Goods subject to damage before any others.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all the Car-men of
this City shall be obliged to leave all employments to attend the riding up of
Wheat, Flower or any other Merchandise subject to damage, upon penalty of
Twenty Shillings for each default, for the Use of the City.

Car-men not to engross Firewood.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Car-man within
this City do engross or buy any Firewood within the same, to sell again, under
the penalty of Forty Shillings for each offense.

Car-mens Wages for Carting.
And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Car-men
are to have and receive no more, for a load to any place within the Stockadoes
of this City than Four Pence half Penny, unless for Wines, Lime, Pantiles,
Bricks, (when plied in their Cart) and great Cables, requiring long time and
care to load and unload, for which they are to have Six Pence for each load;
and for carting Coard-wood from the Boat to the Place of coarding, and after
coarded to the Owners House, One Shilling and Six Pence the Coard; and from the
Boat to the Owners house directly, (if not desired to be coarded) One Shilling
and Six Pence for each, Coard, and so proportionably. And for each load as they
shall carry to any other place without the Stockadoes of this City, double that
Rate; and each Coard of Wood the like.

That the said Car-men have for Carting each load of Hay, One Shilling and Six
Pence, and no more. And for carting each Pipe of Wine, Hogshead of Rum or
Hogshead of Malosses, Nine Pence.

Car-men to ride good Loads.
And be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Carmen
shall carry good and sufficient Loads (that is to say) as much as can be
conveniently stowed on their Carts, and is reasonable for a Horse to draw, upon
penalty of Three Shillings, one half to the informer, the other half to the
City.

Car-men immediately to unload the Ferry-boat.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That when any Corn or
other Goods is brought in the Ferry-boat to this City, the Car-men are
immediately to unload and dispatch the same, under the penalty of Six
Shillings, one half to the Informer, the other half to the City.

Car-men not to drive over the common Sewer.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That for the future no
Car-man within this City do presume to drive his Cart over the common Sewer at
the lower end of the Broad-Sreet of this City, upon penalty of Three Shillings
for every such Offense, to be disposed of to such Person or Persons who shall
give information and prosecute for the same before the Mayor, Recorder, or any
one of the Aldermen of this City.

Car-men to behave themselves civilly, and to make Damages good.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all the said
Car-men shall behave themselves civilly to all Persons, and be careful of all
goods they are employed to carry; and if any hurt or damage happen to any Goods
or Merchandise whatsoever, while under their charge, through their fault or
want of care, they are to make satisfaction for the same.

Masters of Vessels to give account of their Passengers.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the Authority
of the Same, That if the Master of any Vessel or Boat shall transport any
Strangers or Passengers into this City, and do not in the space of twenty four
Hours, after his arrival, give an account of their Names to the Mayor, such
Master shall forfeit Forty Shillings for the said default.

Common Council to appear upon Summons.
AN d be it further Ordained, by the Authority aforesaid, That the Gentlemen
belonging to the Court of Common Council of this City, do attend the same upon
Summons, precisely half an hour after the ringing of the Bell, upon penalty of
Three Shillings for each default, unless hindered by sickness or some other
reasonable cause: And also, That if any of the Members thereof shall rise from
their places after the Court is set, without leave, to forfeit One Shilling and
Six Pence, to be disposed of for the benefit of the Common Council, as they
shall think fit.

Guagers, Packers and Cullers.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That there be four
Guagers, Packers and Cullers of this City: That the Mayor do accordingly
administer an Oath to them, and also grant them Lisences for the said Office,
they paying for the same, each, the Sum of Eighteen Shillings for the Use the
City, with usual Fees, and to be renewed yearly.

No Beef or Pork to be shipped off till repacked.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Beef or Pork be
shipped from this Port, but what shall be repacked by the sworn Packers of this
City; and that they put their Mark to no Beef or Pork but what shall be good
and wholesome Meat, fit for Transportation. under the penalty of five Pounds for
each Offense, one half to the Informer, the other half to the City.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the sworn Packers
of this City shall not put the Packers Mark upon any Barrels of Pork, Beef or
Fish, but what shall contain Thirty Gallons or more.

Packers and Cullers Fees, and what Beef, Pork, Staves and Heading shall be
deemed Merchantable.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That from henceforth no
Beef or Pork, Pipe-Staves, Hogshead-Staves or Heading for Cask be shipped off
from this City for foreign Markets, but such as shall be Repacked and Culled
by the sworn Packers and Cullers of this City; and that the said Packers and
Cullers have for Packing and Marking each Barrel of Beef or Pork Nine Pence,
and for Pickling every Barrel Four Pence half Penny. For Culling every Thousand
of Pipe Staves and every Thousand Pieces of Heading, for each Thousand Two
Shillings, and for every Thousand of Hothead-Staves or Barrel Staves One
Shilling and Six Pence; and that no Pipe-Staves be allowed Merchantable but
Such as are four Foot and a half long, and three Inches and a half broad,
without sap. And a heart Stave three Inches broad, and three quarters of an
Inch thick. Hogshead Staves to be three Foot and half long, three Inches and a
half broad, without sap, and half an Inch thick; and that all Beef and Pork
that is Merchannable and Repacked by the sworn Packers be by them Marked with a
Brand Mark N.Y.

Freemen and Apprentices.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby ordained by the Authority
of the Same, That no Person or Persons whatsoever within this City and
Liberties thereof do keep Shop or sell any Goods or Wares by Retail, or
exercise any Hand-craft Trade or Occupation, but such as are Freemen thereof,
or so admitted by the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen, or by the Mayor or any
three or more of the Aldermen (after legal warning given) under the penalty of
Five Pounds for each offense. And all Persons hereafter to be made free shall
pay as follows, Every Merchant, Trader or Shopkeeper the Sum of Twenty
Shillings, and every Handy-craft Tradesman six Shillings current Money of
New York, with customary Fees on being made Free, as aforesaid, for the Use of
this City. And that such as are not able to pay for the same, shall be made
Free gratis.

Who to be deemed Freemen.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all the
inhabitants of this City, that are natural born, naturalized or Denizons, their
Apprentices and Children that were in the said City at the time the Charter was
granted, be allowed and deemed Freemen of this City, they Registering their
Names in the TownClerks Office, for which each Person so registered shall pay
Nine Pence.

A Law for Regulating Indentures of Apprenticeship.
For as much as great inconveniences have arisen by Apprentices serving but
four years, by reason whereof they are soldom Masters of their Trades; For
Remedy whereof, Be it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Alderman and Assistants
of the City of New York, convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained
by the Authority of the same, That from henceforth no Merchant, Shopkeeper or
Handy craft Trades man shall take any Apprentice, to teach or instruct them in
their Trade or Calling, without being bound by Indenture before the Mayor,
Recorder, or any one of the Aldermen of the said City, and Registered in the
Town-Clerks Office, and not for a less term than seven years, and at the
expiration of the said Indentures, the said Apprentice shall be made free of
the said City by the Master, if he have well and truly served him; and the
Clerk shall have for registering each Indenture of Apprenticeship, the Sum of
Three Shillings, to be paid by the Master of such Apprentice bound as
aforesaid. And that all Indentures of Apprenticeship hereafter to be made
within this City contrary to the true intent and meaning hereof, shall be void
and of none effect, any former Law of this Corporation to the Contrary hereof
in any wise notwithstanding.

Laws and Orders for the Government of the Dock and Slips of this City.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the Authority
of the Same. That all Vessels belonging to this Port do pay yearly for lying in
the Dock and Slips of this City, that is to say, on the 25th day of March,
according to Regulation made and confirmed by the Common Council.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all Vessels not
belonging to this Port, that come within the Mould, Dock or Slips of this City
shall pay for every Voyage, according to Regulation.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Vessel
whatsoever do lie in the Mouth of the Dock or near the Bridge in inconvenient
Places, nor longer than a convenient time for loading and unloading, except in
Winter time, or occasioned by stress of Weather. And if by accident any Vessel
be run a ground in the Mouth of the Dock, they are immediately to remove as
soon as a float, under the penalty of six Shillings each Tide.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Vessels lying
within the Dock or Slips, or near the same, do make or keep fire on board at
any other time than from Daylight in the Morning till the Ringing of the Bell
in the evening, under the Penalty of Twenty Shillings, besides what Damages may
ensue.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That none do cast any
Anchor, Grapling or Killick within or near the Mould, Dock or Slips, under the
Penalty of ten shillings, besides paying all Damages

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That none do cast any
Dung, Draught, Dirt, or any thing to fill up or annoy the Mould, Dock or Slips,
or the Neighborhood there-abouts, or near the same, under the Penalty of
Twenty Shillings.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Vessel
whatsoever do lie at the outside of the Dock or Mould, unless in fair weather,
and then not longer than one Tide, except with leave of the Haven-Master, under
Penalty of Ten Shillings, besides all Damages.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Timber,
Pipe-Staves, Wood or other Lumber be landed upon the Mould or Wharff, nor Carts
to ride there without consent of the Haven-Master, under the penalty of Six
Shillings.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Stones, Earth
or Timber be taken or thrown off the Wharffs, under the Penalty of Ten
Shillings, besides paying all Damages done to the said Wharffs.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all Persons be
directed by the Haven-Master to fit and convenient Births for their lying or
fastening within or at the Mould, Slips and Wharffs belonging to the same,
under the Penalty of ten Shillings, for being refractory, besides all Damages.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Haven-Master
do take care to see the above Orders duly kept and observed, and do receive and
collect all Penalties arising therefrom, the one half of which he is to pay to
the Treasurer for the Use of the City, and the other half to himself.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Ships, Sloops,
Boats or other Vessels do lie in the Dock, or any of the Slips of this City, a
longer time than for convenient loading and unloading, upon the Penalty of six
Shillings for every Tide they shall lie longer than such convenient time.

Regulations for paying Dock-Money.
A Nd be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all Vessels,
Sloops and open Boats belonging to this City, do pay for lying within the Dock
or Mould, or any of the Slips of this City yearly, that is to say,

A Vessel or Boat of one Tun, to five Tuns, Six Shillings. If above five Tuns,
to ten Tuns, Nine Shillings. From ten to fifteen Tuns, Twelve Shillings. From
fifteen to twenty five Tuns, Twenty Shillings. From twenty five to fifty Tuns,
Thirty Shillings. All above fifty Tuns, Two Pound Ten Shilling.
And that all Ships or Vessels not belonging to this Port, and that come within
the Mould or Dock, etc. shall pay for every Voyage, they lying there not longer
than one Month, that is to say,

A Vessel of ten Tuns, or under, Six Shillings. If above ten Tuns, to twenty
Tuns, Twelve Shillings. If above twenty Tuns, to thirty Tuns, Eighteen
Shillings. If above thirty Tuns, to fifty Tuns, Four and Twenty Shillings. If
above fifty, to one hundred Tuns, and upwards, Thirty Shillings.
And if they lie above one Month, to pay proportionably, and so for every Month.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all Vessels
belonging to any other parts of this Government, East-Jersey and Connectieut,
as far as the East end of Fishers-Island, shall pay no more Dockage but yearly
as the Ships or Vessels belonging to this Port pay.

A Law for Preserving the Bridge and Common Sewer in the Dock of this City.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby ordained by the Authority
of the same, That from and after the Publication hereof, no Ship, Barque, Sloop
or other Vessel whatsoever do make fast unto or haul down by or Careen by the
Bridge, in the Great Dock of this City (after Notice given to the Contrary by
the Dock-Master) nor unload any Ballast or other Lumber on the same Bridge,
under the Penalty of Ten shillings for every Offense, to be paid by the Master
or Owner of such Vessel, one half to the Informer, and the other half to the
Treasurer of this City, for the Use of this Corporation, and to be Recovered
before the Mayor, Recorder, or any one of the Aldermen of this City.

Law against firing Guns in the Streets, etc.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York Convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the Authority
of the same, That if any Children, Youth or other Persons do fire any Gun or
Pistol at any Mark, or at Random, against any Fence, Pale or within any
Orchard, Garden, or other Enclosure, or in any place where persons frequent to
walk, on the South Side of the Fresh Water of this City, shall for every such
offense forfeit the Sum of Twenty Shillings current Money of New York, to be
recovered before the Mayor, Recorder, of any one or more of the Aldermen of the
said City, one half thereof to the informer, the other half to the City.

Against killing Cattle any where but at the Slaughter-houses.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Butcher or
other person do slaughter any Meat Cattle (...) City, but at the public
Slaughterhouses by the Waterside, under the penalty of ten Shillings for each
offense, one half to the Informer, and the other half to the City, to be
recovered before the Mayor or Recorder, or one of the Aldermen of this City;
and that no Cattle be landed but at the nearest convenient place to the
Slaughter-Houses, under the penalty of Three Shillings for each Offense, for
the Uses aforesaid, and to be recovered in manner aforesaid.

A Law imposing a Fine on such as refuse to Watch.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all such Persons
as shall hereafter be summoned to do their Duty on the Constables Watch of this
City, and shall refuse or neglect to do the same, shall for every such Offense
forfeit the Sum of six Shillings current Money of New York, to be recovered
before the Mayor, Recorder, or any one of the Justices of the Peace of the said
City, and to be levied by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of any one of them,
by distress and sale of the Goods and Chattles of the Person who shall make
such default; and that the said Forfeiture be for the Use of the said Constable
and Watch.

Law for cleaning the Streets, Lanes and Allies of the said City.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the Authority
of the same. That all and every the Citizens, Freeholders, Housekeepers and
inhabitants living within the five Wards on the South Side of the Fresh Water,
shall on every Friday, weekly, either by themselves or Servants, Rake and sweep
all the Dirt, Filth and Soil before their respective Houses, upon heaps, and on
the same day, or on the Saturday following, shall cause the same to be carried
away, and thrown into the River, or some other convenient Place, under the
penalty of six shillings for each neglect, refusal or default.

No Guts, Garbidge, Dung, etc. to be laid in the Streets.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any person or
Persons whatsoever shall at any time hereafter throw or lay in any of the
Streets, Lanes and Allies of this City any Carrian, Guts, Garbidge,
Oyster-shells, Ashes, Dung, Rubbish, Grains, or any other kind of Filth or Dirt
whatsoever, that may be noisome to any of the Inhabitants of this City, such
Person or Persons so offending shall forfeit and pay for every such Offense the
Sum of six Shillings current Money of New York. And in case any such Offense
shall be committed by any Servant or Slave, the Master of Owner of such Servant
or Slave shall pay the said Forfeiture.

Car-mens Wages for carting Dirt out of the Streets.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the respective
Car-men within this City shall have, take and receive for carting every load of
Dirt, Rubbish, Filth or Soil out of the Streets of this City, the Sum of Four
Pence half Penny current Money of New York. And if the said Car-men shall load
their Carts themselves with the said Dirt, Rubbish, Filth or Soil, and carry
the same away, that then the said Car-men shall have, take and receive the Sum
of Seven Pence half Penny current Money of New York, for each Cart load of
Dirt, Rubbish, Filth or Soil which they shall fill and carry away, as
aforesaid, to be paid them by the Person or Persons who shall employ them to
fill and carry away the same.

Penalty on Car-men who refuse to carry Dirt out of the Streets.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Car-man
within this City shall neglect or refuse to carry away out of any of the
Streets, Lanes or Allies of this City on the south side of the Fresh Water, any
Carrian, Guts, Garbidge, Oyster-shell, Dunghills, Ashes, Dirt, Soil and Filth,
being thereunto required by any of the Inhabitants of this City, shall for
every such offense forfeit and pay the Sum of Ten Shillings current Money
aforesaid.

Disposal of the Fines, and how to be Recovered.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That all the Pains,
penalties and Forfeitures abovementioned shall be recovered before the Mayor,
Recorder or any of the Aldermen of the said City, and levied by distress upon
the Goods and Chattels of the Defaulters, and disposed of and paid to him or
them who shall give Information of the Defaults aforesaid, any former Law or
Usage of this Corporation to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

No, Timber, etc. to lie in the Street.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That no Timber, Beams,
Planks, Stones, Bricks or any other Lumber be pyled or left in any of the
Streets or Highways within this City, without leave from the Mayor of the same
City, for the time being, under the penalty of six Shillings for each offense,
one half to the Informer, the other half to the City.

No Ordures or Nestinses to be emptied in the Streets.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons within this City do throw or empty any Tubs, Close-stools or Pots of
Ordure or Nastiness in any of the Streets of this City, the Inhabitants of such
House from whence the same is brought, shall be fined for the same at the
discretion of the Mayor of the said City, not exceeding Forty Shillings for
each offense, one half to the Informer, and the other half to the City. And
that all Persons within this City do empty their Ordures into the River, and no
where else, on the penalty aforesaid.

A Law Prohibiting Sweeping the Streets in time of Rain.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York Convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the Authority
of the same, That if any Person or Persons within this City shall hereafter, in
the time of Rain or Floods, sweep the soil or Dirt of the Streets into or near
the Channel of any of the Streets of this City, so as the same may be carried
away by the stream thereof, such Person or Persons so Offending, shall, for
every such Offense, forfeit and pay the sum of Six Shillings current Money of
New York; and if such Offense Shall be committed by any Servant or Slave, such
Forfeiture shall be paid by the Owner, Master or Mistress of such Servant or
Slave, One half to the Informer, and the other half to the City, and to be
Recovered before the Mayor, Recorder, or any of the Aldermen of the Said City.

A Law for Paving the Streets, Lanes and Alleys within the City of New York.
FOr as much as the former Laws of this City, made for Paving the Streets
within the same have been much neglected, whereby the Citizens and Sojourners
within the said City are much annoyed, and the Intercourse of Trade among the
Inhabitants thereby much Lessened; for Regulating whereof, Be it Ordained by
the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of New York Convened
in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the Authority of the same,:
That all and every the Citizens, Freeholders and Inhabitants that live in the
Respective Streets, lanes and Alleys of this City, shall, from and after the
Publication hereof (at the Charge of the Landlord) well and sufficiently pave
or cause to be well and sufficiently paved, with good and sufficient Pibble
Stones, suitable for Paving, all, or so much of the Streets, Lanes and Allies
within the said City, as shall front the Respective Buildings and Lots of
Ground that belong to them, Respectively, as aforesaid, at such time or times,
and in such Manner and Form, and according to such Dimensions, Quantity and
Proportion as shall, from time to time, be unto them Respectively directed and
appointed by the Alderman of each respective Ward aforesaid.

And for the more Effectual Paving of the Respective Streets, Lanes and Allies
aforesaid, it is hereby further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if
any Citizen, Inhabitant or Freeholder, as aforesaid, shall refuse, delay or
neglect to make his or their Proportionable Pavement before their respective
Buildings and Lots of Ground, as aforesaid, in Manner and Form aforesaid, shall
for such, his, her or their default forfeit the Sum of Twenty Shillings current
Money of New York, to be recovered before the Mayor, Recorder, or any one or
more of the Aldermen of the said City, and to be Levied by Distress and Sale of
the goods and Chattels of such Defaulter, the one half to the Informer, and the
other half of the Treasurer of this City, for the Use of the Corporation. And
all the respective Citizens, Inhabitants and Freeholders of the said City of
New York, are hereby required to render an entire Compliance accordingly.

A Law Prohibiting Swine to run at large.
B E it ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York, convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the
Authority of the same, That from and after the Publication hereof, it shall and
may be lawful for any Person or Persons whatsoever to kill any Swine that shall
be found running at large in the Commons of this City, in the Out-ward of the
same City, on the West side of the Sawkill-Bridge, or in any of the Streets or
Commons of this City, on the South Side of the Fresh Water, and Convert the
same to his or their own Use, any former Law of this City to the contrary
notwithstanding.

A Law for Regulating the Office of Chamberlain or Treasurer of the City of
New York.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen, and Assistants of the City
of New York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the
Authority of the same, That the Person hereafter to be Elected Chamberlain or
Treasurer of the said City, shall be a Person of good Ability and Reputation,
Inhabiting and Residing within the said City of New York, and a Freeman of the
said Corporation, who has taken the Oath of a Freeman thereof; and that such
Person so Elected, before he shall Enter upon or Officiate in the said Office
of Chamberlain or Treasurer, shall give Bond to the Mayor, Aldermen and
Commonality of the City of New York, and their Successors, with sufficient
Surety or sureties, to the liking of the said Corporation, in the Sum of One
Thousand Pounds current Money of New York, with Condition to the Effect or in
the Form as herein after follows (to wit)

WHereas the above Bounden A B. is now Elected into the Office and Place of
Chamberlain or Treasurer of the said City, for the Year ensuing. Now the
Condition of this Obligation is such, That if the said A.B. shall and do well,
faithfully and truly perform, execute and do all things whatsoever which any
ways touch or concern his said Office, and well and faithfully in all things
behave himself in the Execution of the said Office of Chamberlain or Treasurer
of the said City of New York, and shall in due Order and Method, in proper
Books for that purpose, keep a true, exact and just Account of the several
Branches of the Revenue, Rents and Incomes of the said Corporation; and in the
like Orderly Manner discharge the same by due and Orderly Payments; and also,
shall and do every three Months, or oftener (if he shall be thereunto requested)
Render to the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonality, their Successors and
Assigns, a true and just Account of all his Receipts and Payments, Regularly
stated in such proper Books for that purpose, and shall and do Observe all such
Orders, Rules and Directions in the making of his Payments, as he from time to
time, shall receive from the Common Council of the said City. And also, if the
said A B his Executors and Administrators shall and do within the space and
time of Fourteen Days next after the Determination or End of his said Office as
Chamberlain or Treasurer, as aforesaid, be it by Death of the said A.B. or
otherwise, well and truly render a true and just Account, fairly entered in
Books for that purpose, at aforesaid, of all his Receipts and Payments, unto
the said Mayor, Aldermen and Commonality of the said City, their Successors and
Assigns, and well and truly pay or cause to be paid unto the said Mayor,
Aldermen and Commonality of the said City, their Successors and Assigns, all
such Sum and Sums of Money as shall be then in his or their Hands, or which he
or they shall, upon such Account, be found to be in arrear. And also, shall and
do, upon a sufficient Discharge in Law, to him to be given by the said Mayor,
Aldermen, and Commonality, and their Successors, within the time aforesaid,
well and truly surrender and deliver up unto the said Mayor, Aldermen and
Commonality, their Successors and Assigns, all and singular the Books of
Accounts belonging to the said Office, with all Warrants, Vouchers and
Memorandums belonging to the same; and also, all and singular Bills, Bonds,
Specialties, Leases, Grants, Deeds, Patents, and all other Papers and Writings
whatsoever in any wise belonging to the said Corporation, without any
Concealment, Imbezelment or fraud, That then this Obligation to bevoid,
otherwise to be and Remain in full force and virtae.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person
hereafter to be elected Chamberlain or Treasurer of the said City, shall
neglect or Refuse to enter into such Security, as aforesaid, within the space
of Fourteen Days next after his being so elected, such Election shall be, and
is hereby declared to be null and void, to all intents and purposes whatsoever.
And that the said Corporation may and is hereby Empowered to proceed to Elect
another Person into the said Office, as it such Person so formerly Elected had
never been Elected Chamberlain or Treasurer as aforesaid, and (...), when any
Person so Elected shall neglect or Refuse to give such security as is aforesaid
directed, any former Usage or Law of the said Corporation to the Contrary
hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person
hereafter to be Elected Chamberlain or Treasurer of the said City shall at any
time after such Election take upon him the Execution of the said Office, or
Officiate or do any Act, thing or things belonging to the same, before he has
taken the usual Oath for the due Execution of his Office, and given such
Security as is herein before required, such Person so Offending in the Premises
shall forfeit the Sum of Ten Pounds, to be Recovered before the Mayor,
Recorder, or any one of the Aldermen of the said City, who are hereby Empowered
to Levy the same upon the Goods and Chattels of such Offender, by Warrant under
his Hand and Seal, and the same to be paid into the Treasury of this City, to
and for the use of the Mayor, Aldermen and Commonality of the said City, and
their successors; and that all such Act and Acts, Thing and Things so by such
Person performed and done before such Oath taken, and such Security given, as
aforesaid, shall be and is hereby declared to be Null and void to all latents
and purposes whatsoever, any Usage of any former Chamberlain or Treasurer, or
of the Corporation aforesaid, to the Contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

Law Prohibiting Hawkers and Pedlers.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby ordained by the Authority
of the same, That no Goods or Merchandise shall be sold by Retail or in Parcel
within this City, but in Shops, Warehouses, or in public Market on
Market-days. And that no Hawkers or Pedlars do carry any Goods or Merchandise
up and down the Streets of this City to be sold, on penalty of Twenty Shillings
for each offense, to be recovered before the Mayor, Recorder, or any one of the
Aldermen of the said City, one half thereof to the Informer, and the other half
to the Poor of this City.

A Law to Prohibit Digging holes and cutting Sods on the Commons.
A Nd be it further ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons whatsoever within this City or Liberties thereof, shall at any time
hereafter dig any holes in the Commons of this City, on the south side of the
Fresh Water, or take or carry away any Earth or Mould, or shall cut, take or
carry away any Sods or Turff off any part of the said Commons, shall, for every
such Offense, forfeit and pay the Sum of Forty Shillings current Money of
New York, the one half to the Informer, and other half to the use of this
Corporation; To be recovered before the Mayor or any one of the Aldermen of the
said City, upon the Testimony of one or more sufficient Witnesses.

For preventing Frands in Firewood.
FOr as much as great Frands and Abuses have of late and still are daily
committed in bringing to this City, and exposing here to sale great Quantities
of Firewood, commonly called Cord-Wood, not more than three Foot long (whereas
the same ought to be four Foot long at the least) to the great oppression of
the Poor of the said City, and the defrauding all others inhabiting the same,
For Remedy whereof, and for preventing the like abuses for the future, Be it
Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York, convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the
Authority of the same, That if any Firewood, commonly called Coard-Wood, shall
hereafter be brought into this City or Liberties thereof in any Sloop, Boat or
other Vessel, which shall be less in length than Four Foot, English measure,
the Master of such Boat, Sloop or other Vessel, or the Person who shall have
the charge of such Sloop, Boat, Vessel and Firewood, shall for every such
Offense forfeit and pay the Sum of Forty Shillings current Money of New York,
one half thereof to the use of him or them who shall give information of the
default aforesaid, and the other half to the use of this Corporation; to be
recovered by Plaint before the Mayor, Recorder or any two of the Aldermen of
the said City.

For Supplying the Vacancy of Such Public elective Magistrates and Officers as
may dye, remove or refuse to Serve, etc.
B E it ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York, convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the
Authority of the same, That for the future, upon the Death, Removal out of the
said City, Refusal to Serve, or other Disability happening to any Magistrates,
or other public elective Officers of the said City of New York, That the
Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the same convened in
Common Council, shall order and appoint such convenient time as they shall
think proper, throughout the whole year, for the Inhabitants of the said City,
in such respective Ward or Wards where such vacancy shall happen, to meet
together and make election of others to supply his or their room until the
usual time of the annual Election appointed by the Charter of this Corporation;
which Inhabitants are hereby authorized to make such Election in manner and
form as is used in the anniversary Election, and which Magistrates and
Officers, so chosen and elected, shall be sworn and have power to execute their
respective Offices, as fully and in like manner as if they had been elected and
sworn at the said anniversary Election.

Fine of Magistrates and Officers that refuse to serve.
And be it further Ordained, by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Person
shall hereafter be elected to serve in any of the Offices hereafter mentioned,
and shall neglect or refuse to take upon him the execution thereof, or serve in
the same, shall pay the Fine hereafter mentioned and expressed, that is to say,
Every Person elected an Alderman, the Sum of Ten Pounds; 'an Assistant, Seven
Pound ten shillings; an Assessor, Three Pounds; and a petty Constable, Fifteen
Pounds, to be levied by Distress on the Goods and Chattels of the Person so
neglecting or refusing to serve, by Warrant of the Mayor, under the common Seal
of this City, directed to the Constable of the Ward Wherein such Person shall
be so elected; which Fines shall be paid to the Treasurer of this City, for the
public use of the same.

A Law for Regulating of Fences in the Bowry Division of the Out-Ward.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the Authority
of the same, That all the Fences in the Bowry Division of the Out Ward of this
City, be made and uphold in Manner following ( viz.) The Outside Fences to be
of Four Rails, and Four Foot and a half high, and the Partition Fences to be of
three Rails and Four Foot high, and not otherwise; and that all the Fences
without the Stockadoes of this City be according to the said Regulation.

A Law for Regulating Midwifes within the City of New York.
B E it Ordained by the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of
New York convened in Common Council, and it is hereby Ordained by the Authority
of the same, That no Woman whatsoever within this Corporation of the City of
New York, shall be Capable of or in any Manner whatsoever Use or Exercise the
Office or Employ of a Midwife, within the said Corporation, until she shall,
before the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of the said Corporation, for the time
being, or any one of them, take the Oath of a Midwife hereafter Mentioned,
which Oath, they, or any One of them, have hereby power to Administer, in the
Words following, ( viz.)

YOu shall Swear, first, That you shall be diligent and faithful, and ready to
help every Woman laboring of Child, as well the Poor as the Rich; and that in
time of Necessity you shall not forsake or leave the Poor Woman to go to the
Rich.

Item, You shall neither cause nor suffer any Woman to Name or put any other
Father to the Child, but only him which is the very true Father thereof indeed,
according to the utmost of your power.

Item, You shall not suffer any Woman to pretend, feign or surmize her self to
be delivered of a Child, who is not Indeed; neither to Claim any other Woman's
Child for her own.

Item, You shall not suffer any Woman's Child to be Murdered, Maimed or
otherwise hurt, as much as you may; and so often as you shall perceive any
Peril or Jeapordy, either in the Women or in the Child, in any such wise as you
shall be in doubt what shall Chance thereof, you shall thenceforth, in due
time, send for other Midwifes, and expert Women in that Faculty, and use their
Advice, Counsel and Assistance in that behalf.

Item, You shall not give any Counsel, or Administer any Herb, Medicine or
Potion, or any other thing to any Woman being with Child, whereby she should
destroy or miscarry of that she goes withal, before her time.

Item, You shall not enforce any Woman, being with Child, by any Pain, or by
any Ungodly Ways or means, to give you any more for your pains or Labor in
bringing her a bed, than they would otherwise do.

Item, You shall not consent, agree, give or keep Counsel, that any Woman be
delivered secretly of that which she goes with, but in the Presence of two or
three Witnesses ready.

Item, You shall be secret, and not open any Mystery appertaining to your
Office, in the Presence of any Man, unless necessity or great urgent Cause do
constrain you so to do.

Item, If You shall know any Midwife using or doing any thing contrary to any
of the Premises, or in any otherwise then shall be seemly or Convenient, you
shall forthwith detect and openly show the same to the Mayor, Recorder and
Aldermen of the City of New York, for the time being or one of them.

Item, You shall use your self in honest Behavior unto the Women being
Lawfully admitted to the Room and Office of a Midwife, in all things
accordingly.

Item, You shall not make or assign any Deputy or Deputies to exercise or
Occupy under you, in your absence, the Office or Room of a Midwife, but such as
you shall perfectly know to be of Right Honest and Discreet Behavior, as also
apt, able, and having sufficient Knowledge and Experience to Exercise the said
Room and Office.

Item, If any Woman in Labor under your Core shall desire the advice or
Assistance of any other Midwife or Midwifes, you shall readily Consent to the
same, and use their Advise, Counsel and Assistance in that behalf, if in your
Conscience you think it for the Benefit of such Woman in Labor.

Item, You shall not Conceal the Birth of any Bastard Child within the
Corporation of the City of New York, but shall forthwith, upon understanding
thereof, give knowledge of the same to the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of the
City of New York, for the time being, or one of them, or to the Alderman or
Chief Magistrate of the Ward where such Bastard Child shall be born. All which
Articles and Charge, you shall faithfully observe and keep. So help you GOD.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor,
Recorder and Aldermen of the City of New York, for the time being, or any one
of them, before whom such Oath shall be taken, shall Certify the taking of
such Oath to the Mayors next Court, there to be Recorded.

And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Woman
within the said Corporation of the City of New York, shall after the
Publication hereof, use, Occupy or Exercise the Office of a Midwife within the
said Corporation of the City of New York, before the Oath, before mentioned
has been duly Administered unto her, by the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of
the said Cityof New York, for the time being, or one of them, that then and in
such case such Woman, so Using, Occupying or Exercising the Office of a Midwife
within the said Corporation of the City of New York for every Default shall
Forfeit and pay the Sum of Forty Shillings of lawful Money of the Province of
New York, to be Recovered before the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of the said
City of New York, for the time being, or any one of them, by a sumary
Proceeding; which Forfeiture shall be levied by Distress and Sale of the Goods
and Chattels of such Offender against the Tenor of this Law, by Warrant under
the Hand and Seal of the said Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of the City of
New York, for the time being, or any one of them, and shall be disposed of in
Manner following, that is to say, One half of the said Forfeiture to the
Treasurer of the City of New York, for the time being, for the use of the
Corporation of the said City of New York, and the other half to the Person or
Persons who shall sue for or prosecute the same And in case such Offender
against the Tenor of this Law shall not have sufficient Goods and Chattels to
be found within the said Corporation, to satisfy the said Forfeiture, then and
in such case it shall and may be lawful for the Mayor, Recorder and Aldermen of
the City of New York, for the time being, or any One of them, by Warrant under
Hand and Seal, to commit such Offender to the Common Gaol of the said City,
there to remain without Bail or Mainprize for the space of Thirty Days after
the date of such Warrant; Unless the said Forfeiture be in the Mean time paid
and satisfied.

Aldermen authorized to put the Laws in Execution.
A Nd be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor,
Recorder or any of the Aldermen of this City are hereby authorized and
empowered to put the aforesaid Laws in Execution.

Officers to be Observent in the Execution of these Laws.
And be it further Ordained by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sheriff,
Constables and other Officers of this City, do take care and look after the due
Observance and Execution of all the aforesaid Laws, Orders and Ordinances, and
make Complaint and Presentment of the Breach thereof. And that all the Fines,
Penalties and Forfeitures arising thereby (not expressly disposed of or
appropriated, shall be disposed of in manner following, that is to say, One
half to be paid to the Treasurer for the Use of the City, and the other half to
the said Sheriff, Constables, or other Officers or Persons that shall complain
of or present the same.

The Oath of a Freemen of the City of New York.
YE shall Swear, That ye shall be good and true to our Sovereign Lord King
George, and to the Heirs of our said Sovereign Lord the King. Obeysont and
Obedient shall ye be to the Mayor and Ministers of this City, the Franchises
and Customs thereof. Ye shall maintain, and this City keep harmless, in that
which in you is. Ye shall be contributing to all manner of Charges within this
City, as Summons, Watches, Contributions, Taxes, Tallages, Lot and Scot, and
all other Charges, bearing your part as a Freeman ought to do. Ye shall know
no Forreigner to buy or sell any Merchandise with any other Foreigners within
this City or Franchize thereof, but ye shall warn the Mayor thereof, or some
Minister of the Mayors. Ye shall implead or sue no Freeman out of this City,
whilst ye may have Right and Law within the same. Ye shall take no Apprentice,
but if he be freeborn, (that is to say) no Bond-mans Son, nor the Son of an
Alien, and for no less term than for Seven years, without fraud or deceit; and
within the first year ye shall cause him to be enrolled, or else pay such Fine
as shall be reasonably imposed upon you for omitting the same; and after his
term ends, within convenient time, being required, ye shall make him free of
this City, if he have well and truly served you. Ye shall also keep the Kings
Peace in your own Person. Ye shall know of no Gatherings, Conventicles or
Conspiracies made against the Kings Peace, but you shall warn the Mayor
thereof, or let it, to your Power. All these Points and Articles ye shall well
and truly keep, according to the Laws and Customs of this City. So help you GOD.

Page 13. Line 7. after the word ( more) add And half Barrels Fifteen or more.


