Some Observations ON THE New Method Of Receiving the Smallpox BY Ingrafting
or Inoculating.

By Mr. Colman.

Containing also The REASONS, which first induced him to, and have since
confirmed him in, his favorable Opinion of it.

BOSTON, Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish, at his Shop near the Brick
Meeting House in Cornhill. 1721.

TO THE Reverend and Learned, Mr. John Leverett, President of Harvard College
in Cambridge, in New England.
SIR,
I Humbly present You with the following Observations which I have made in my
Visits among the Sick, in in the late Months of Distress and Mortality, that
have passed over us, whereby I have been determined (so far as I am) in favor
of the New Method, so much spoken against by many, soil the receiving the
Smallpox by Ingrafting or Inoculating.

IF You judge the Publishing them may be a Service to other Towns, and
particularly unto Cambridge, which is so much Your Care, whither this sore
Distemper seems to be so fast spreading it self, I pray You to permit them to
appear under the Protection of your Honored Name; for honest and harmless as
they are, they may need the best which the Country can afford.

WHAT GOD has so much owned among us by his Blessing, and so many of his
Servants, the Fathers of their Country, see reason daily to adore and praise
Him for, should be reverently regarded by every one, and shall be by

SIR Your most Humble and Obedient Servant, Benjamin Colman.
Boston, N. E. November. 23. 1721.
Some Observations On Receiving the SMALLPOX BY Ingrafting or Inoculating.
WHEN I first had the Account of this common Practice in the Levant, and of the
wonderful Success of it there, given by Gentlemen of Learning to such a Body as
that of the Royal Society in London, I could not but give Credit to their
Testimony, in a Matter of fact whereof they were Eyewitnesses. Immediately the
little Philosophy I am Master of led me into the apparent Reasons of the thing.
The more readily and easily these occurred to me, the more I was affected with
the Goodness of GOD Almighty therein to a Miserable World. I immediately though it
with myself, and said to some Superior Persons in the Town, (who possibly may
remember it) What an astonishing Mercy to Us in this Land, this Discovery of a
Gracious Providence might prove. The more I mused upon the thing, and
discoursed upon it, the more light I had, or seemed to my self to have. It
appeared to me as rational as it was surprising, and gave me great pleasure in
the prospect of so great a Benefit to Mankind. For I had not forgot the terrors
of the Smallpox when it was here the two last times, Nineteen and near Thirty
Years since; though it was nothing so Mortal either time as it had been before,
(1678.) and has been now again. Besides it being now nineteen Years since the
Smallpox had been in the Town, it gave us a very dreadful prospect of Distress
and Deaths, whenever it should come among us; all the Children and all the
Young People born in the Town, or come into it from the Country, within that
long term of time having it before them. Now in proportion to the distress fore
seen and expected by us, my Joy naturally rose upon the Discovery of such a Way
of Relief as seemed Opening before us, by the favor of GOD to us. In this
simplicity of heart (I speak before GOD who searches it) I gave into a kind
Opinion of this New Method; My Affection to my Country and the saving the Lives
of my People being the Sole Motive to me, under the Glory that should thence
redound unto the Name of GOD. I freely spoke my Tho'ts in Company and on
Occasions as it seemed proper to me, and when some publicly demanded of us, "
Whether People could trust in GOD in using this Means of self-preservation? I
openly answered (among my Brethren) in the Affirmative, that I judged they
might. This was after that Dr. Boylstone had begun the practice, which I never
put him upon, nor had I light to dissuade him from it. According to my hope and
Expectation it succeeded; although the first Experiment was the most
discouraging; for Mrs. Boylstone being in the Country and the Doctor taken up
abroad among his Patients, the Children were too much exposed and neglected,
and from my house (which faces into the Doctors yard) One of them was seen
three or four days after their being Inoculated dabling in the cold water under
the Pump. This or the like disorders in the first Inoculated Child threw him,
as well they might, into a high and threatening fever. The cause was apparent to
the Dr. and so did not discourage him, nor at all disgrace the practice with us
that saw it. It was a pleasure however to see that the Smallpox might be
communicated, as the Gentlemen from the Levant had informed us. The next
Experiments were made with more care, and accordingly more answered the
Accounts which they had given us of a very light fever and few pustles. By this
time the Town was full of the Sickness, and the Deaths that began to multiply
led a few more into this Means of safety; as they hoped by the favor of GOD to
find it. The Blessing of GOD went along with it; they found ease and sweetness,
and lay praising GOD on their Beds, or rather sat up in their Chairs doing so.
Their friends stood smiling about them. Their tongues were filled with
laughter, and ours with Thanksgiving on their account when we went to see 'em.
We saw them recover fast; the communicated Distemper working uniformly upon
them, and as one would desire. We saw this with wonder and Joy at what GOD had
wro't for us. We saw Scores thus recover, even as many as went into the happy
practice, and it appeared to us more and more to be the Lord's Doing and
mavelous in our eyes. They were as discreet and religious a number of People,
and Persons of as good sense and understanding, and of as much caution and fear
as their Nei'bours, who made these Experiments; and they did it with meekness
and humility, patience and silence, and many prayers, under much provocation
from too many. Only one Gentlewoman has yet died out of an hundred, who have
now passed through the Operation. But as you must needs suppose in a Town so full
of Infection as this has been, some ten or twelve of this number appeared to
have taken the Infection in the common way; (among whom the Person deceased was
evidently one) and accordingly they had it of the Confluent Kind, or in a
fullness of the distinct sort, not known among the Inoculated in the Levant.
This will be so far from seeming strange to you, that indeed it would be next
to a Miracle had it been otherwise. At the same time it must be allowed, that a
good number of those that passed so favorably through the Inoculation, would
probably have had it very favorably in the common way. But that so many should
pass so favorably and easily, as well as safely, through the Inoculation; while
their Nei'bours had so many in every hundred that suffered so much, as well as
died, is a sufficient Distinction put by Providence on the Method which we
praise GOD for; and commend unto others, as GOD has commended it unto us.

FOR my own part I would not willingly, (at least unnecessarily) say a word
that should grieve, much less offend any one, in this present Essay, which I
honestly mean to serve my Country, and not provoke my Nei'bours. I have no
Interest to serve by appearing for this Practice; but the contrary. If I knew
any thing in prejudice against it, which might justly be said, GOD knows I
would offer it. Boston can now little be served by it, to what it might have
been a few Months past, and I may seem to have been too long silent. But what I
have seen of this dreadful Visitation, from one Sick and Dying Chamber to
another, (and it may be scarce any one has seen more) awakens me now to write
for the sake of other Towns, where the Sickness is prevailing, or whither it
may come; that they may not put from them the Mercy of GOD in this particular,
as it seems to me that we have done. I can call upon my Brethren, the Ministers
of Boston, who the most of them have at times passed from the many sad
Spectacles of Woe, Corruption, Anguish and Distraction, to the Chambers of the
Inoculated, to say in what ease and sweetness and serenity these have lay. As
the passing out of darkness into light, or from a tempestuous Sea into a Calm
Haven, or from a place of horror, into a a Garden of pleasure, so it has been
to us. A thousand Comparisons here offer themselves to mind, which I suppress
because they would seem odious to some, however just in themselves.

I come now to say, What I have seen in the Chambers of the Inoculated; for I
have made it my Business to visit some of them, and to observe the Work of GOD
to his praise; And what I blame in others is, that they have not visited them,
and without prejudice or passion, or regard to any private Interest or pique,
informed themselves as they might easily have done of this great Thing which
GOD has brought to light in our Day; and if I may serve to set it in any true
light before others, I shall account my self honored of GOD therein.

KNOW then, That the Incision which the Dr. makes in the Arm or Leg, are the
least you can well imagine, and but Skin deep; the quantity of the variolous
matter which I have seen him use to good effect, has been but a single and very
small drop upon a bit of Lint. After twenty four hours we threw it entirely
away and put on a dressing of Cabbage leaf from day to day: for six and
sometimes eight days the Patient continues perfectly well; then a gentle Fever
rises, accompanied with all the Symptoms of the Smallpox, but in a low degree,
an aching head and back, and pains in in the bones, etc. This makes him dull
and heavy for a Day or two, and presently he finds himself well and the Pock
appears, rises, turns, and goes off without any more illness or pain, save what
the burning and soreness of the Pock may occasion to him, or some external
Fever in the Flesh without any inward one. For the first six days I have found
the Issues opened very little; and seemed to vent but little; yet in some
bodies more than in others; but as the Fever comes on and the Pock begins to
appear in the Skin, the Incisions of their own accord begin to open and
discharge, and as the Pock fills and ripens the Issues every Day widen and run
more and more, till at the turning of the Pock the sixth or seventh Day, they
come to their fullest flowing; and after two Days more they gradually decrease
and abate and quickly heal of themselves under the same dressing of
Cabbage-leaf, which had before drawn them. So gentle and perfect is Nature in
this its own Work, without the Assistance of Medicine ordinarily, and almost
any need of Nursing. Neither is there need scarce of a Watcher by night, no
more than of a Nurse by Day, the Patient feels and eats so well by Day, and
sleeps so well by night. He rarely complains of any pain in his Head,
oppression at his Breast, sore Throat, or Thirst; and is seldom offended with
his own smell.

BUT that which is the greatest Benefit by Inoculation, and indeed the apparent
Cause of all the ease and sweetness experienced under it, is this, That as it
moderates the first Fever and the Symptoms before the Eruption of the Pock, so
it seems totally to prevent the second Fever at the turning of it, which is the
fatal thing and time unto so many: The evident reason whereof is, because the
Oil or putid matter that should be the Fuel within the Body for the flame or
fever keeps running out from Day to Day at the Incisions: And besides, the Body
not being covered with the Pock, and consequently not with scabs (and
corruption under the same) when the Pock turns; as it has enjoyed a free
perspiration by the Pores, so there is no foul mass upon it to return in, and
mix with the juices and blood; by which it is that in the confluent and fluxy
sort, the Body is tainted a second time, as well as the perspiring (so
necessary unto Life) is prevented. The Consequence of this again is exceeding
happy to the Inoculated, which is, That they have no After-blains and boils
upon their bodies, which are so frequent and terrible after the suffering of
the Smallpox in the confluent kind: the reason whereof is apparent, Namely,
Because the (...) keep open and running at and after the turning of the Pock,
and so discharge freely and fully all the Ill ferment or humor, which if it
where in part retained in the body would cause swellings and boils. So that
whereas there is in the other way very often a return in of some of the ejected
poisons, which taints the blood again; so here is an easy gentle perpetual flow
out, with a continued perspiration of the body, which prevents after boils, as
well as the kindling any present consuming flame within the patient.

IT is now some Months, four or five, since many of the Inoculated are come
abroad, and they find neither boil nor sore upon them; but are in as good a
state of health as ever they enjoyed in their Life: Nay some have found a much
better Complexion and Stomach than ever they had before; and particularly my
own Child has found so through the favor of GOD.

I can tell too of a Woman in the weakness of Childbed, who eight days after
her Delivery came under the Inoculation to avoid the Smallpox the common-way,
GOD sending it then into the house where she was; and though she had many more
pustles than is usual in this Method, yet she went cheerfully through the
Visitation, and even gained strength while the Pock rose to as fine and large a
head, of the distinct kind, as I ever saw.

WHEN the Patient in the common way of Infection would have but few pustles, he
has to be sure fewer, under the Inoculation: When he would else be exceeding
full it greatly abates and lessens the number of the Pock; and when it would be
the confluent and fluxy kind we have all the reason in the World to think that
it prevents the same, and brings on a distinct sort; which sort has but little
danger attending it in the common way of Infection, and which only are proper
to the Inoculation according to the Account given by the Gentlemen from the
Levant. Sometimes the Inoculated whom I have seen have had a large and angry
Pock and a good number of 'em too; sometimes when there have not been many I
have observed some of those that have appeared and risen for two or three days
to sink away and disappear; yet have they created no feverish disorder when
they have done so, which looks as if they discharged and vented themselves by
the Incisions. Once I found a Young Man under the Inoculation full eno' to have
given distress and danger as I apprehended, but his cheerful eye and smiles
immediately put me out of pain; professing to me that he felt himself so well
within, that were it safe or proper he though it he could go about his worldly
business as well as ever in his Life. In others their fever has been high and
burning in the (...) when inwardly they have found no disorder; neither in head
nor breast, but could breathe and sleep even as if in health, or next to it.

I boldly profess concerning as many as I have seen under the Inoculation, even
when their Pock came to the height, scarce the smell of sickness has passed on
them, in comparison of what others undergo in the common way. In some the
Issues scarce smell at all, so much as to them that dress 'em. It has seemed to
me nothing more than what a Cabbage-leaf upon a common Issue must needs cause
at the end of 24 hours. Where the Patient would have many Pock in the common
way, and consequently have the more under the Inoculation, there the Issues
must be supposed to run the more. Where the Patient is fullest under the
Inoculation I affirm I could never smell their Issues at their Bedside; no not
when I have leaned over their Bed on purpose to do it. Yet certainly the Issues
do smell more or less as the degree of the Distemper is upon the Patient. And
where the Infection is taken the common way, and the Confluent kind comes in
the Eruption, there the Issues you may well think find much more to vent, and
the Discharge is more noisome, like the running of the fluxy kind. But at the
worst, even in this case, the hours excepted wherein kidneys have been
sometimes applied to neck or feet, it is nothing, that I could ever find or
hear, in comparison of that prodigious stench which is so common for many days
together under the fluxy sort, wherein one can hardly bear the Rooms.

IT therefore appears to me one of the boldest Impositions on our Senses and
Reason, that has been attempted since the Day wherein Transubstantiation was
obtruded and forced upon the Christian World, to bear us down as some would, "
That the Inoculation has caused the dreadful Malignity and Infection which has
been in the Town. To say this to Us who have been called from day to day to the
many noxious Chambers, each of which have had poison eno' in 'em to have spread
the Town over, and which have been continually by day and night filling the Air
with Infection by the Chimneys and doors, till at last the Windows have been
thrown open too upon the Souls leaving the corrupted Body, -- requires an
Assurance indeed. Our Nei'bours must forgive us if we contemn it as a most
foolish Opinion, and ridiculous Imputation. We must call it so, if not worse;
or we must forego our sense, and the common understanding which GOD has given
us. On the contrary, I must constantly think that the Inoculation has been an
Abatement, and Prevention of the greater Malignity that would have been by more
of the confluent and fluxy sort. Besides, In fact, the Malignity and Mortality
has not been now so great, in proportion to our present numbers, as it was
three and forty Year ago, when in about fourteen Months we are told Eight
hundred People died of it; which I suppose was a greater Mortality than if
Eighteen hundred had died of it now. Some who were then Adult tell me what
great numbers were then buried in a Week: Families were then desolated and
broken up, and the very flesh rotted off the bones of some. And we at last find
too by sad experience, that They understood as well the managing the Distemper
then as we do now: For when the Malignity comes to a Height, we find that we
know very little or nothing what to do.

NOR does it appear to me at all reasonable to think, that what the Issues of
the Inoculated do discharge, is at all Malignant like what is vented by a fluxy
Maturated Pock, and after it turns and lies stinking on the body: It is not
filthy and putid, that ever I saw, like the running Pock: It has not the time
to come to the venom of that before it is thrown out, and then it is
immediately taken away; and consequently as it arrives to no such Malignity and
Infection, so it can communicate none such.

MUCH has been said too, and dark hints given at times, about the Purple Spots
in the skin, or bluish stains which have been upon many and commonly are the
sure and fatal signs of their approaching death. But as these are spoken of by
them that have wrote of the Smallpox before our days; so I very much question
whether the Bodies which I have seen so stained do yield any Malignant
Infection equal to the corrupted and noisome Bodies of others that ly and
putrify under the fluxy kind. I am sure to my senses they have not at all
seemed equally noxious. And when I reason upon the Cause of these stains in the
skin, it seems generally to be the suppression of the Pock under it, which
wants to come freely forth, but being obstructed by the Stagnation of the Blood
it rises no higher than to discolor the skin; which though it may well argue
more Malignity within and may give a more poisonous breath to the Patient while
he lives; yet Methinks the Pores of the Body do by no means breathe out the
like Malignity as if the Pock rises and breaks and stinks. How the case may be
in Spotted Fevers I know not, and whether I am right in what I have here
advanced I submit to the Physicians, and am ready to stand corrected by their
Judgment.

THERE yet remains three or four things which have occurred to me, which I
think meet to observe or relate,

ONE is, That I am at present strong in the Opinion, that those Persons who had
taken the Infection before they were Inoculated, yet were greatly served in
their Sickness by the running of their Issues, which vented much of the
Inflamatory matter that would have increased their Fevers. Some who have
recovered have though it so themselves, and so have all about them. And as to the
Gentlewoman that died, her Husband has told me that in his opinion the
Incisions did much toward the preserving his Wife so long, and so far as she
was preserved through her sore Visitation.

NEXTLY, I would observe, That in case the Infection be taken the common way,
and the Eruption would not have been in some Weeks; As we certainly know that
it will ly in the Body sometimes a Month before it breaks out; yet the infected
Person coming under the Inoculation, it will bring on the Distemper at the
usual time of seven or eight days. Not only the reason but the necessity of
this seems very plain; and it accounts for a Difficulty with some, which is,
Why the Sickness comes at the period proper to the Inoculation, and yet it
proves the confluent kind which is not proper to it.

I lately met with a Treatise on the Smallpox wherein the Author advances this
Rule or Maxim, That all venomous Particles do first enter the Body through the
Pores of the skin, and so ^roud into the Humors and juices, and thence into
the sanguin Parts. From hence he accounts why the face and hands and feet are
usually fullest of Pocks, because those parts of the body are more open and
exposed for the admission or entrance of those venomous Particles.

I carried on the Hypothesis in my own mind a little further, by that Modern
Observation which has been made of a Multitude of Animalcula on every Pustle of
the Smallpox: These they tell us their Glasses have discovered; and that our
common Infection is by swarms of these. If so, Metho't these living Minute
Particles, these Animated Atoms if I might so speak, may much more easily find
their way into our Pores and so into our bodies, than if they were Inanimate.

BUT if one Hypothesis or other may be at all admitted, with this further and
most reasonable though it upon them, that these venomous Particles or Animalcules
do also flow into our nostrils, throat and blood by our breath; then may they
not give us a Reason why the Smallpox communicated by Incisions in the way of
Inoculation, does not produce so many Pock, and such a flame and corruption in
the body, as in the common way of Infection it ordinarily does? Because in this
way not so many enter* ^or immediately into such parts of hazard and ^i^t^ess,
as in the nostrils, throat and inwards? -- But I pretend not to argue, on
Principles or Premises, which are themselves uncertain; and ly open to many
Objections which I could never answer.

I will only add upon all a plain, but to me pleasing and informing discourse I
lately had with a poor Negro, whom I found at work where I made a visit, and
the Gentleman of the House told me the Fellow had been Inoculated in his own
Country. Whereupon I put several questions to him, in answer to which he told
me, That he lived in a great Town in his own Country, and when the Smallpox
came into it they did what they could to prevent the spreading of it; that the
Families that were first visited usually died among them; but when the Sickness
got into five or six houses, so that the People began to despair of being able
to stop it, then all who had not had it went presently and received it in the
way of Inoculation, (as we call it) and that not one more died of it through the
whole Town.

WE do not stay therefore (said he) till the Town be infected, and People have
many of them got the Sickness within them, and then go and take it; but a whole
place takes it in a Week and are well in a Week. (I use but some of his words
here, giving the true sense of what he said to me.)

HE went on in answer to the questions I put to him, and told me, "That he
never knew of any blains or boils following this practice in his Country; that
as to himself none had troubled him, any more than what others are subject to;
and that He never heard of any bodies having it again in his Country; but to
prove that his Country men think themselves as secure from it as any of us may
do, he told me, That sometimes when Young men among them wanted to go a trading
two or three hundred Miles off, but were afraid because they had not yet had
the Smallpox, it was common for them to enquire where it was, and go to the
place and be Inoculated, and then go and trade any where without fear. When I
asked him (what I did not at all suppose he could imform me in) How his
Countrymen came into the knowledge of this way of giving the Smallpox? and
how long it had been among them? he told me he knew nothing of those things; he
supposed it was long before he was born; and no doubt" but GOD told it to poor
Negroes to save their lives; for they had not knowledge and skill as we have.

I believe I shall be scoffed at for telling this Simple story, but I think it
very pertinent and much to the purpose here; and whosoever seeks the Truth and
desires to be informed will not despise it. And he that has learnt any thing as
he ought, has this -- to be willing to learn of the poorest Slave in the Town.

UPON the whole, I do not think that I at all go out of my Line in the present
Essay. The plain intent of it is to serve unto the preserving of Life, and to
minister unto the comfort of Families. This is a Care beseeming me, or any one
else, if it be managed with modesty and decency. My care to do it so, is I
think visible eno' in the present writing. I have avoided any appearance of
seeming learned in Physic. I am not: Nor shall I matter it at all, if I have
betrayed my Ignorance therein. I write with another design, and if that be
answered I have all my desire; or if it be rejected with scorn and reviled I
shall be satisfied in this, That I have again endeavored the Good of this
People.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 3. line 11. for Pump (...).


