THE BOOK OF THE REVELATION of Jesus Christ, Which GOD gave unto him, to show
unto his Servants things which were to come to pass; and Jesus Christ sent and
signified it by his Angel to his Servant John.

And now by Revelation, has opened the Mystery contained in said Book unto his
Servant JOHN ROGERS, Who has explained the same for the Edification and
Comfort of His Church and People, after a long and dark Night of Apostasy; the
Explanation being made so plain, that the eye of every Spiritual Reader may see
how exactly things have come to pass, as they were foretold of by the Prophecy
of this Book: And may see by it all things which are yet to come, not only to
the end of this World, but to the finishing of the World to come.

BOSTON: Printed for the Author. 1720.

AN EXPOSITION Upon the Book of the REVELATIONS.
CHAP. I.
Verse 1.

THE Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to show unto his
servants things which must shortly come to pass: and he sent and signified it
by his angel to his servant John,

Who was required to write them in a Book and to send it to the seven Churches
of Asia, as in v. 11. Accordingly John attended his order, as appears v. 4.

Verse 2. Who bear record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus
Christ, and of all things that he saw.

Verse 3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein, for the time is at
hand.

In this third verse there is a blessed Promise, both to the reader and hearer
of the prophecy of this Book, when they take heed to keep those things which
are written therein; which Verse shows it is not a sealed Book but may be read
and understood by God's Church, though fast sealed up and not to be understood by
the false Church, as appears, Isai. 29.11, etc. And the vision of all is become
unto you as the words of a Book that is sealed, which men deliver unto one that
is learned, saying, read this I pray thee, and he says, I cannot for it is
sealed: and (...) is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, read this I
pray thee, and he says, I am not learned. And the Reason why neither the
learned nor unlearned in the Church can read the Book, is showed in the 13th
and 14th Verses. Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this People draw near me
with their Mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their
Heart far from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men,
Therefore I will add to do a mavelous work among this people, even a
mavelous work and a wonder, for the wisdom of their Wisemen shall perish, and
the understanding of the prudent shall be hid. But the prophecy of this Book
is not sealed up from God's Church, as is to be seen by the Book it self, chap
22.10. And he says unto me, Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this Book.

Verse 4. John to the seven Churches which are in Asia.

This is the Superscription of his Book by intimating to whom he directs it to;

Grace be unto you, and peace from him which is, and which was, and which is to
come.

Thus he Salutes them in that grace and mercy which they were made partakers of
from God the Father under these terms, to wit, from him which is, and which
was, and which is to come, etc.

Quest. Why does John declare God the Father in these terms?

Answ. Because he declared himself so to John before, as appears in v. 8. of
this Chap. I am Alpha and O mega, says the Lord, which is, and which was, and
which is to come, the Almighty.

2dly. Quest. Why does John say

And from the seven spirits which are before his throne

Seeing the spirit of God is but one?

Answ. He expresses it as in the vision he saw it before the throne of God, as
it appears in the 4th Chap. of this book, 5th Verse. And there was seven lamps
of fire burning before the throne, which are the seven spirits of God; thus
John follows the Vision and writes things as they were revealed to him,
calling the holy Spirit of God as he saw it, by the number SEVEN, though it be
but one eternal Spirit in it self; yet as it is distributed by measure to seven
Churches, it bears the name Seven. But I purpose to speak more fully to this in
the following part of the Chapter, when I come to speak of the seven Stars, and
the seven golden Candle-sticks.

Verse 5. And from Jesus Christ who is the faithful witness, and the first
begotten of the dead, etc.

Thus it appears, that grace and mercy was extended from these Three to the
seven Churches, to wit, from God the Father, and from the Spirit, and from
Jesus Christ the son of the Father, who is the faithful witness of these things
contained in this book of the revelation; and the first begotten of the dead to
life again, by the resurrection of his body which was crucified on the cross:
And though these are three discoveries of God, yet they are in union but one God.
And this Jesus Christ is the Prince of the Kings of the earth, who has loved
us and washed us from our sins in his own Blood, this is to be understood
through the sanctification of the Spirit which purifies the heart and inward
parts of a sinner, according to David's words, Wash me and I shall be whiter
than snow. Psalm. 51.7.

Verse 6. And has made us Kings and Priests unto God and his Father, to him be
glory and dominion for ever and ever, Amen.

Verse 7. Behold he comes with clouds, and every eye shall see him, and they
also which pierced him, and all the kindreds of the earth shall wail because of
him, even so, Amen.

Verse, 8. I am Alpha and Omega the beginning and the ending says the Lord,
which is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty.

Yea he is both God and man, as appears Romans 9.5. And of whom as concerning the
flesh Christ came, who is over all God blessed forever. Amen.

Verse 9. I John, who also am your brother and companion in tribulation, etc.

This is an evidence that God's faithful children (while in this world) are
companions with John in tribulation, and in the kingdom and patience of Jesus
Christ; and John's patience is a president for us who are in the kingdom of
Jesus Christ and in this troublesome world, to be patient in tribulation, that
thereby we may gain experience.

I was (says he) in the Isle that is called Patmos.

Here he gives us an account where he was when he had this vision revealed to
him, it was upon an Island, no doubt but where he was retire for the word of
God, and for the testimony of Jesus Christ. Here it appears that this book of
the Revelation is a record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus
Christ to his servant John.

Verse 10. I was in the spirit on the Lords day.

This was the Lords day of the Revelation of the things contained in this Book,
and John was the person that was to tarry till Christ did come and make them
known to him, as appears by what the Lord Jesus hinted to Peter long before the
time was come, even when he gave Peter that solemn charge to feed his lambs and
sheep, bidding Peter follow him; upon which charge given to Peter, and Peter
seeing John following, he queries of Jesus concerning John, what was for him to
do, as is to be seen, Joh. 21.20. etc. Then Peter turning about, sees the
disciple whom Jesus loved following; Peter seeing him, says to Jesus, Lord,
and what shall this man do? Jesus says unto him, If I will that he tarry till
I come, what is that to thee, follow thou me: Then went this saying abroad
among the brethren, that this disciple should not die; yet Jesus said not unto
him, no shall not die, but if I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to
thee. From hence we may observe that the Lord Jesus hinted to Peter that he had
a work also for his servant John to do, though then not understood by the
brethren who thought he should not die, but now the Lords day of the Revelation
of what is contained in this book is come, for John has now tarried till the
Lord is come, as appears, in the 18th and 19th verses, I am he that lives and
was dead, etc. Write the things which thou have seen, and the things which are,
and the things which shall be hereafter.

Some have groundlesly and scripturelesly imagined this revelation to be on a
first day of the Week, but seeing no such thing is revealed in the book,
neither is it a material thing to the opening of the history it self, it is
altogether fruitless; for reason it self will tell us, that it contained some
considerable time more than one day, for John wrote those visions as he saw and
heard them, as throughout the book it self appears; as for instance, Chap.
10.4. And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to
write, and I heard a voice from heaven, saying to me, seal up those things
which the seven thunders uttered, and write them not. Thus the Lords day of
revelations and visions which John saw, continued till he had accomplished the
writing of them.

Verse 11. Saying I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, and, What thou
see write in a book, and send it to the seven churches which are in Asia, etc.

This is the voice of the Authority of the Majesty of God, requiring and
commanding John to write in a Book this vision which should be set before his
eyes, and to send it to the aforesaid Churches.

Verse 12. And I turned to see the voice that spoke with me.

This great voice speaking behind the Apostle caused him to turn about,

And being turned, I saw seven golden candlesticks;

These seven golden candlesticks, represented to him the seven churches of
Asia, to whom he was to write to. Now the reason why they are represented to
him by candlesticks, is, because candlesticks hold up the light, to give light
to all that are in the house, and God's Church are the light of the world, Mat.
5.14, 15. Ye are the light of the world; a city that is set on a hill cannot be
hid, neither do men light a candle and put it under a bushel; but on a
candlestick, and it gives light to all that are in the house. It is said of
John the Baptist, that he was a burning and a shining light, Joh. 5.35. And the
golden candlestick in the temple, with the seven lamps, did represent the
mystical or spiritual church of Christ in union with the spirit of God, under
the ministration of the law for the whole nation of Israel was adopted of God
as a figure, under the old testament or ministration of the law written on
stone: Yet they were not all Israel that were of Israel, for he only was
esteemed to be of the Church of Christ, who was A Jew inwardly, and that only
to be the circumcision which i^ inwardly in the heart, by the spirit of God,
and not outwardly in the flesh. And therefore the golden candlestick in the
temple with the seven lamps, did represent the spiritual Israel under that
ministration, which was only in union with the spirit of God, and was then the
light of the world; for the seven lamps then burning in the temple, did
represent the seven spirits of God, for though it was but one candlestick yet it
had a shaft and six branches which made seven, equal with the number of the
lamps; so that that candlestick only held the light of the world, through the
oil of God's spirit, which caused the lamps over, or upon the candlestick, to
give light to the world; and this figure in the temple did represent the whole
spiritual church of Christ in that nation under the old testament; who was the
light of the world. And this number seven in this book is mystical, and
comprehends the whole of every thing it measures: As for instance, the seven
golden candlesticks which is the seven churches, comprehends all the churches
of Christ in the world; and the seven stars comprehends not only the seven
angels or ministers of the seven churches of Asia, but all the ministers of
Christ's churches throughout the whole world. And the seven spirits of God,
though it is but one spirit in its self, and is unmeasurable, yet it being given
by measure to the seven churches, it bears the name seven, to comprehend the
full distribution of it bestowe^ on all churches

Verse 13. And in the midst of the seven candlesticks, one like unto the Son of
man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a
golden girdle.

This Vision which John saw like the Son of man in the midst of the seven
golden candlesticks, is a representation of the divine presence of God with his
Churches, in union with his beloved Son Jesus Christ, whose delight is to be
with the sons of men, Prove. 8.31. 2 Cor. 6.16. I will dwell in them, and walk
in them, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And whereas he saw
him clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a
golden girdle of strength and truth, as is written of him. Psalm. 93.1. The Lord
reigns, he is clothed with majesty, the Lord is clothed with strength,
wherewith he has girded himself.

Verse 14. His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow.

Thus John saw him in the vision, as he is the Ancient of days, the father and
creator of all things, the whiteness of his hair was to set forth his fatherly
age, according to the vision of Daniel, 7.9. The hair of his head was like the
pure wool, And in this place it is said to be as white as snow, which is to
set forth his grave, fatherly Majesty in the Person of Jesus Christ.

And his eyes were as a flame of fire;

Quick to discern all Things, the sight of whose eyes pierces through all
things, Heb. 4.13. Neither is their any creature that is not manifest in his
sight, but all things are naked and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have
to do.

Verse 15. And his feet like unto fine brass as if they burned in a furnace;
and his voice as the sound of many waters.

Thus did John in the vision behold the terrible Majesty of the Lord Jesus
Christ, who treads all his enemies under his feet, as was showed to John in
Chap. 10.2. And he set his right foot on the sea, and his left foot on the
earth. And his voice was most terrible even as the sound of many waters: Psalm.
93.4. The Lord on high is mightier thon the noise of many waters, yea, than the
waves of the Sea.

Verse 16. And he has in his right hand seven stars.

This number seven stars comprehends all his Ministers, and how they are all
upheld and supported by the right hand of his power.

And out of his mouth went a sharp two edged sword.

This is to represent the word of his power, to show how terrible that Sentence
is that proceeds out of his mouth, even as a sharp two edged Sword, to execute
judgment upon his enemies. Heb. 4.12. For the word of God is quick and
powerful, and sharper than any two edged sword.

His countenance was as the sun shining in his strength.

Thus terrible was the Majesty of his countenance to behold, 1 Timothy 6.16. Who
only has immortality, dwelling in that light which no wan can approach unto,
whom no man has seen, nor can see; to whom be honor and power everlasting.
Amen.

Verse 17. And when I saw him I fell at his feet as dead; and he la^ his right
hand upon me, saying unto me, fear not, I am the first and the last.

Thus glorious and terrible was the Majesty of the Lord Jesus, too terrible for
John to behold, who fell at his feet as dead; but the Lord Jesus laid his right
hand upon him, speaking comfortably to him, saying fear not, I am the first and
the last, says he: He is the first in his divine Nature, for he is the
everlasting Father before all things; but in his humane nature he is the seed
and offspring of David, and called the last Adam, 1 Cor. 15.45. The last Adam
was made (...) quickening Spirit.

Verse 18. I a^ he that lives and was dead.

This is to be understood in our nature; as he was Man he laid down his Life,
for he had power to lay it down and to take it up again, as he was the last
Adam a quickening Spirit: for he is the Resurrection and the Life; and says he
to John.

I was dead, and behold, I am alive for ever more. Amen.

This is a clear Testimony of the Resurrection of the same Body that was dead,
but changed into a most glorious Bo^ after the Resurrection.

And he has the Keys of Hell and of Death;

And in the last day will open the Graves of Death and Hell, that the dead may
come forth unto his Judgment Seat.

Verse 19. Write the things which thou have seen, and the things which are, and
the things which shall be hereafter.

The things which he had seen was the seven golden Candlesticks, and the
glorious Majesty of our Lord Jesus Christ in the midst of them, with the seven
Stars in his right hand: And the things which were was the present State of the
seven Churches: And the things which were to be hereafter, does not only
contain the things of this world to the end thereof, but to the finishing of
the world which is to come.

Verse 20. The Mystery of the seven stars which thou saw in my right hand,
and the seven golden candlesticks; the seven stars are the Angels of the seven
Churches, and the seven candlesticks which thou saw are the seven Churches.

This is the opening of the Mystery of the seven Stars, and of the seven golden
Candlesticks.

CHAP. II.
The first CHURCH.
Verse 1.

UNto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write these things, says he that
holds the seven Stars in his right hand, who walks in the midst of the
Seven golden Candlesticks.

John directs this his first Epistle to the Angel or Minister of the Church of
Ephesus, according to the requirement of the Lord, as appears in the first
Sentence of this Verse, who is one of the seven Stars in the right hand of the
Lord Jesus who walks in the midst of the seven Churches, who knows the State
both of the Minister and Church, having the one in his right hand, and walking
in the open view of the other.

Verse 2. I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy patience, and how thou
can not bear them which are evil; and thou have tried them which say they are
Apostles and are not, and have found them Liars.

The Lord signifies unto the Angel of this Church, how he takes notice of all
his virtues, his works and his labor, and patience and how that he could not
bear with them that were evil, and had tried them which said they were Apostles
and were not, and had found them liars.

Verse 3. And have born, and have patience, and for my names sake have labored
and have not fainted.

Thus God takes notice as well of the good things done as he does of the evil,
commending them for the one, and threatening them for the other, if not repented
of in time: To this end, that they may be encouraged to hold fast that which is
good, and to be forewarned of the danger of that which is evil, these good
things found in the elders of this Church, are those very things which Paul
left in Charge with them the last time that ever they saw his face, as may be
seen Acts 20.17. to the end of the Chapter. He there charged them to take heed
to themselves, and to all the flock over the which the Holy Ghost had made them
overseers. He forewarns them of wolves entering in among them, which caused
them to try them which said they were Apostles but were not, he sets before
them his diligent labor on a spiritual and temporal Account, how his hands had
ministered not only for his own necessities but for the relief of others also,
showing them that so they ought to labor, and that it was the doctrine of
Christ, that settled Elders should rather be given than receivers, tho Apostles
had Power to forbear work, because of their differing State from settled
Elders, being a traveling Ministry, 2 These. 3.8, 9. The Apostle thus
forewarning them to labor with their hands as he had done for an example unto
them. They were at this time found praise worthy in this matter also, I know
thy works and thy labor, etc. and for my names sake have labored and have not
fainted.

Verse 4. Nevertheless, I have somewhat against thee, because thou have left
thy first love.

Yet notwithstanding the Lord saw all these good things before mentioned in
this Church, yet he had somewhat against them for that they had left their
first love; for this decay in love was a very dangerous thing in this Church;
for love is the golden oil which causes the lamps to burn and give light.

Verse 5. Remember therefore from whencethon art fallen and repent, and do the
first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will remove thy
candlestick out of his place, except thou repent.

The Lord puts this church in remembrance how they had fallen from their first
love, and exhorts them to repent of their fall, and to do their first works,
threatening them with speedy judgment if they did not repent of this their decay
in love. Showing them what would be the woeful effects of this their fall, if
their were not timely repentance. The use of the candlestick is to hold the
light, but if the light go out, the candlestick is of no use, but to be removed
o^ (...) of its place, and God's church is the light of the World, and that
divine love that dwells in them is the golden oil that causes the light to
burn, or shine in his temple or house which is his church, Zech. 4.12. and a
decay in love causes the light to burn dim, and a total fall from love is a
star fallen from heaven to the ea^, and a lamp that gave a glorious light is
now gone out, and this love that once gave them a clear light to see that they
were translated from death unto life; they falling totally from it, their lamp
is gone out, and they are left in total darkness; and their candlestick is
removed out of its place, which once held a glorious light, and they know not
whether they go because darkness has blinded their eyes: this is the state of
all that retain not the love of God in their hearts, for God is love, and he
that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him; yea God is light also
and in him is no darkness at all, and if we have fellowshi^ with him we shall
abide in the light as he is in the light.

Verse 6. But this thou have that thou hate the deeds of the Nicholaitans,
which I also hate.

This Church is commended in that they had a principle (...) hatred against the
deeds of these Nicholaitans, what their deeds were was well known to this
church, they being i^ their day and time; and they were such deeds as God di^
hate also: it is probable the name Nicholaitans did arise from the broacher of
that corrupt doctrine whatsoever it was in the 14th verse of this chapter, it
is compared to the doctrine of Baalam, who taught Balack to cast a stumbling
block before the children of Israel, to sacrifice unto Idols, and to commit
fornication, this was such like corrupt doctrine to stumble the church of God.

Verse 7. He that has an ear, let him hear what the spirit says unto the
churches,

This is the first voice of the Spirit of God to the first church calling to
every ear to hear what the spirit says to the churches according to Christ's
words, Mar. 13.37. What I say unto you say unto all, watch.

To him that overcomes will I give to eat o^ the Tree of life which is in the
midst of the Paradise of God.

This is a promise which is made to such as shall overcome through faith, by
the obedience of the gospel of Jesus Christ But we see the angel of this church
was in danger of being overcome and not of overcoming, by reason of a decay in
lo^ except speedy repentance did follow this admonition: A promise is made to
him that shall overcome, that he shall eat of the tree of life which is in the
midst of the paradise of God which tree did figure the ministration of the
gospel of Jes^ Christ, or the glad tidings of salvation to the sinner through
faith in him. So also the tree of Knowledge in the midst (...) paradise, or the
garden of God, did represent the ministration of the righteous law of God to us
by the first Adam; under the ministration of the law, our justification is only
and (...) one by our own perfect obedience thereunto: for when Adam transgrest,
he received the sentence of death by the ^w, and the tree of life was guarded
with a flaming sword that the justice of the law might be executed upon him for
^is sin. But the ministration of the gospel is to justify the ^ngodly, that
they may come at the tree of life only through ^he free grace and voluntary
mercy of God by Jesus Christ: ^ut sins committed after God has extended his
grace and merry to the sinner, by his free pardon, and after sanctification,
^uch fins are dangerous sins, especially if they becommitted against the law of
faith, for they are a denial of God, and against his free grace in Christ, that
man is happy, that pas^eth out of a sinful state into a righteous state, but if
after ^e passes out of his righteous state into a sinful state a second time,
he is twice unhappy, for he is become a tree twice dead and plucked up by the
roots; his last state is worse than the first, for it had been better for him
not to have known the way of righteousness, than after he has known ^t to turn
again as the sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire, he thus falling
away from the grace of God, there is no renewing him again to repentance. The
ministration of the law is to magnify God in his justice upon the sinner, And
the ministration of the gospel is to magnify God in his free grace and mercy,
for his forbearance of the sinner, in acquitting him.

The second CHURCH.
Verse 8. And unto the angel of the church in Smyrna write these things says
the first and the last, which was dead and is alive.

This second Epistle John is ordered to write to the angel of the church of
Smyrna, by order from Jesus Christ, mentioning both his natures under the name
of the first and the last; the first is, as he was God from all eternity, the
last as he was the second or last Adam in our nature, which was dead, and is
alive, he expresses himself thus to them, in a way of comfort, they being
unreproveable, and in a blameless state; he sets before them the great love of
God to mankind, who took not hold of angels, but took hold of the seed of Adam,
and so became one in union with Christ and in token of love to mankind suffered
death for finners, and was raised to life again for our justification, and thus
was he dead and is alive, and this church feeling in themselves the virtuous
effects of those things operating in them, which made them a living and
faithful church, for by his virtuous death and resurrection, they became dead
to sin, and were now a living Church, as he said to them, I was dead but am
alive, so could they co-ecch^ and say, we were dead in sin, but we are now
alive with thee, and are partakers of thy divine nature which was the first,
even from all eternity, by which nature we have escaped the corruption which is
in the world through lust, and shall live and reign with thee for ever.

Verse 9. I know thy works and tribulation and poverty, but thou art rich, and
I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews and are not but are of the
synagogue of Satan;

I know thy works says Christ, this is a comfortable word when it is spoken in
way of commendation as it is to this Church, who labored under great
tribulation for Christ's sake, who did answer to Christ's sufferings, who
suffered for their sakes, Yea and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution. 2 Timothy 3.12. We may see here that the eyes of the
Lord are upon the righteous, for says he, I know thy works and tribulation and
poverty, they were brought into this poverty by affliction for Christ's sake;
who though he was rich, yet for their sakes became poor, and was obedient to
the death of the cross: yet this their poverty in tribulation was their gain,
for their poverty was such as is spoken of Mat. 5.3. Blessed are the poor in
spirit for theirs is the kingdom of heaven; and therefore says Christ to them
but tho^ art rich, for they indeed were heirs of the kingdom of heaven and it
is he that gives us richly all things to enjoy, and so had he enriched this
church in faith, love, and righteousness; and as Christ says unto them, I know
thy works and tribulation, so likewise says he to them, I know the blasphemy
of then which say they are Jews and are not, but are the synagogue of Satan,
thus he intimates to them, as he has the knowledge of their state and
condition, their uprightness and integrity, and will reward them according to
their works: So likewise he has the knowledge of the state and condition of
hypocritical Professors, who pretend to be that which indeed they are not; they
pretend to be Jews, to be my Church, when indeed they are not inwardly as they
outwardly pretend: I am he that searches the heart and reins, and will reward
them according to their works; they indeed make clean the outside of the cup
and platter by outward pretenses of holiness, but he is a Jew which is so
inwardly; they say they are Jews, that is, my Church, but they are not, but are
the synagogue of Satan, a church of hypocrites.

Verse 10. Fear none of those things which thou ^halt suffer: behold the Devil
shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be tried, and ye shall have
tribulation ten days: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown
of life.

Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer, says Christ: This is a
word of encouragement not only to this Church, but to every one that has an
ear to hear, as in the end of this Epistle will evidence: For these seven
Churches comprehend all Churches, and every Christians state and condition
whatsoever. Behold (says Christ) the devil shall cast some of you into prison,
that ye may be tried: God is wont thus to try his children by their accuser;
thus was Job tried in the furnace of affliction; thus God purifies his church,
as in the seventh Chapter of this Book 14th Verse, These are they which came
out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes and made them white in
the Blood of the Lamb. And says Job, When he has tried me, I shall come forth
as gold: And Job did not miss of his expectation, as is written of him, ^am.
5.11. We count them happy which endure: Ye have heard of the patience of Job,
and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender
mercy.

And ye shall have tribulation ten days: Thus Christ comforts his Church by
showing them that their Adversary the Devil that casts them into Prison shall
be limited, that they may possess their Souls in patience, seeing their
tribulations are bounded, and their Adversary limited.

Ye shall have tribulation ten days: Here is a certain Number of days mentioned
to measure a certain limited time of their Tribulation known to God; though the
measured time by ten days is not known to the Church.

Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life: Here the
Lord exhorts them to continue faithful i^ their tribulation to the death,
making them an absolute promise to reward them with an everlasting crown of
life.

Verse 11. He that has an ear let him hea^ what the spirit says unto the
Churches, he that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death.

This is the second voice of the Spirit of God to the second Church calling to
every ear to hear what the Spirit says to the Churches. He that overcomes
shall not be hu^ of the second death, says the Lord: As here is a promise made
to those that overcome, that they shall not be hurt o^ the second death, so
implicitly it carries in it a threatening against them that shall be overcome of
being hurt by the second death; there cannot be a second death but there mu^ be
a resurrection between the first death and the second: the first death is the
punishment of original Sin, which sin ca^ by the woman, 1 Timothy 2.14. And Adam
was not deceived, b^ the Woman being deceived was in the transgression. The
punishment of this original Sin is the death of the Body, as (...) written,
Dust thou art, and to dust shall thou return; this i^ the first death and is
executed on man in this life for the offense of one, Romans 5.12. By one man Sin
entered into the Wor^ and Death by Sin, and so death passed upon all men. Si^
death came thus by one man over all men, so there will be^ resurrection by one
man, 1 Cor. 15.22. For as in Adam all (...) even so in Christ shall all be made
alive. And after this resurrection shall every man be judged according to their
own works. Re^ 20.13, 14. And the sea gave up the dead, which were in i^ and
death and Hell delivered up the dead which were in the^ and they were judged
every man according to their works, (...) Death and Hell were cast into the
lake of fire; this is the second death.

The third CHURCH.
Verse 12. And unto the angel of the Church in ^argamus write these things,
says he which has ^he sharp sword with two edges.

John is ordered to write the third Epistle to the Angel of the church in
Pargamus, in the name of him who has the sharp word with two edges; which
sword proceeds out of his ^outh, and is a token of his displeasure, and a
threatening of ^dgment by war against the Nicholaitans.

Verse 13. I know thy works, and where thou wellest, even where Satan's seat
is, and thou oldest fast my name, and have not denied my ^ith even in those
days wherein Antipas was my ^ithful Martyr, who was slain among you where ^atan
dwells.

I know thy works, and where thou dwell, even where Satan's ^at is. The Lord
signifies to this Church, that he knows that their works are, and considers
their whole State and ^ndition upon all accounts; how their dwelling is where
^tans seat is. By Satan's seat we are to understand that ^ower which Satan
makes use of against God's Church; as (...) Instance, Chap. 13.2. And the
Dragon gave him his power, ^d his seat, and great Authority. Satan is the great
Adver^ry of God's Church, and is wont to make use of that power which God has
set up to execute judgment and justice a^ong the inhabitants of the earth, to
act in matter of wor^ip, so as to turn their sword against Christ's Church for
^t attending their Superstitious worship, established by the ^ragon under
color of worshipping the true God. And the welling of this Church was where
Satan had gotten into ^e seat of judgment, and by reason of the blindness of
the ^wer which God had set up as temporal judges, they tur^d their sword
against this Church, for not attending their ^perstitious worship. God gives
this Church to know that ^e considers their works, and how their dwelling was
where the sear of persecution was, and how they had held fast his Name, and had
not denied his faith, in those days wherein Antipas a faithful Martyr of his
was slain. This was a remarkable time of persecution well known to this Church
which was some considerable time before this epistle w^ sent to them, for says
the Lord, in those days wherein Antipa^ was my faithful Martyr.

Verse 14. But I have a few things against thee, because thou have there them
that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balack to cast a stumbling block
before the children of Israel, to ea^ things sacrificed unto Idols, and to
commit fornication.

In the former verse the Lord took notice of those commendable things in this
Church, which was praise worthy so in this verse he shows his dislike against
those thing which he sees to be evil. In this verse the Lord shows the this
Churches State is para^el with Isreal's of old; for wh^ Balack was out of hopes
of prevailing against Israel (...) the sword, through the counsel of Balaam he
caused Israel to offend God, by eating things sacrificed unto Idols, (...) by
committing fornication; so likewise when Satan sa^ that he could not overcome
this Church, by the sword (...) persecution, he then endeavors to make
entrance in upon them by false teachers, as in the next verse.

Verse 15. So have thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicholaitans,
which thing hate.

What this doctrine was, was well known by this Church they being corrupted by
it, what histories say it was is uncertain, and therefore would be superfluous
to mention, and not likely to arise by Nicholas one of the seven Deacons who by
the Church was a man of good report; but rather by some other Nicholas, and
fathered upon Nicholas the De^con for the better transport of it, to deceive
the Church (...) Satan's advantage: But as Satan did prevail against Israel b^
that Wile, to procure God's wrath against themselves b^ bringing Destruction
upon their own heads, so did he the like to some of this Church, who had
embraced this corrupt doctrine hateful in the sight of God: But God does here
^in his tender mercy forewarn and threaten, but gives them time of repentance
as in the next verse appears.

Verse 16. Repent or else I will come unto thee quickly, and will fight against
them with the sword of my mouth.

Verse 17. He that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches.

This is the third voice of the Spirit of God to the third Church, calling to
every one that has an ear to hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches.

To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden Manna.

This hidden Manna is the true bread of life, by which our spiritual life is
nourished and fed, represented by the outward Manna that Israel was nourished
with in the Wilderness. Joh. 6.48, 49. I am the bread of Life; your Fathers did
^at Manna in the wilderness, and are dead. This is Gods faithful promise to
those that overcome, that they shall be so fed from Heaven with this hidden
Manna, that they shall not starve and die, but their spiritual Life shall be so
nourished that they shall hunger no more.

And I will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name written, which
no man knows saving he that receives it.

This white Stone is given to him that overcomes, and is a token of his
justification in respect of his Warfare, as a valiant Soldier of Jesus Christ,
who in faithfulness to his Kings Interest, has hazarded his own Life, and
having overcome, has in the Stone a new name which before he could not have,
because it is the name of one that has overcome in the Battle, or the name of
him that ^hath gotten the Victory, which name he could not have before he had
overcome, and it is a present bestowed upon him by his King, and his new name
which is the name of him that overcomes, he had it not before he had overcame
and it is a new name not written on the Stone, but in the Stone, so that no man
knows the name saving he the receives it by his conquest.

The fourth CHURCH
Verse 18. And unto the Angel of the Church in Thiatira write these things
says the Son o^ God, who has his Eyes like a flame of Fi^ and his Feet are
like fine Brass.

John is ordered to write this fourth Epistle to the Church in Thiatira, by
order of the Son of God, in the Majesty of his terrible looks, whose Eyes are
as a flame^ Fire, beholding all things, and his Feet are as fine Brass, (...)
if they burned in a Furnace; who treads all his Enemies (...) der his Feet.

Verse 19. I know thy works and charity and service, and faith, and thy
patience, a^ thy works, and the last to be more than t^ first.

The Son of God declares to this Church, that he know and takes Notice of
those excellent Virtues, which (...) sees in them, to wit, their charity and
service, their fai^ and patience, and their increase in these graces, so the
the last is more than the first. These things wherein the were worthy of
praise, he first mentions to them, the they may be encouraged in the way of
well doing; a^ though he sees all these good things in them which are
commendable, yet says he in the following Verse,

Verse 20. Notwithstanding, I have a fe^ things against thee, because thou
suffer the woman Jezabel, which calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and
to seduce my servants commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto
Idols.

Thus the Son of God blames this Church, as being faulty for suffering false
teachers among them, to teach and seduce his servants to commit fornication,
and to eat things sacrificed unto Idols; comparing them to Jezabel, who taught
the Children of Israel to go a whoring from God, and to eat of the sacrifices
offered to her Idols, which became a great snare to Israel, and brought sore
Judgments upon them: The Lord parallels this Churches State to be like theirs,
and in the same danger of destruction.

Verse 21. And I gave her space to repent of her fornication, and she repented
not.

Thus the Son of God, whose Eyes are as a flame of Fire and beholds all things,
makes use of the State of Jezabel as a president to forewarn this Church, to
take heed and repent in time, considering what was the issue and effect of her
wickedness, after she had a space of time afforded her to repent, and repented
not of her whoredoms; the Lord therefore anointed Jeh^ to execute Judgment upon
her in a terrible manner, who trod her under foot, and the Dogs eat her: This
president is set before them to move them to repentance in time, and not to
delay the same, lest he whose feet are as fine brass, execute the same Judgment
upon them, by treading them under his feet.

Verse 22. Behold I will cast her into a bed, and they that commit Adultery
with her into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds.

Thus the Son of God carries on the relation of the corruption that was gotten
into this Church, paralelling it with the state of Jezabel, under the
similitude of a married wife committing Adultery, for the Church of Christ is
married to him, Romans 7.4. Ye also are become dead to the law by the body of
Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from
the dead; and therefore the Apostle James calls such Adulterers and
Adulteresses: So that this Church of Thiatira that was married to Christ, and
breaking Covenant with him by whoredom. It is termed Adultery; I will cast her
into a bed, says he^ this is a figurative speech, like to a temptation by the
similitude of an Adulteress upon a bed, to tempt and invite to whoredom with
her; and therefore he sets before thi^ Church the eminent danger they were in,
by reason of this corrupt Doctrine crept in among them by the wile of the
Devil, to ensnare them and others. And says he, Behold I will cast her into a
bed. This Her is the subverted part of this Church, which is compared to
Jezabel, by reason of he^ false Doctrine, and they that commit Adultery with
her into great tribulation. This is God's threatenings against them, except they
repent of their deeds in time.

Verse 23. And I will kill her children with death.

That is, the children begotten by this Adulteress, compared to Jezabel; that
is to say, the subverted part of this Church, which is gone a whoring from God:
And thus he speaks after the similitude of the seduced Israelites of old who
were begotten by the whoredom of Jezabel and were killed by Jehu in the house
of Baal, which we^ children begotten in Adultery, and were such as the Prophet
Isaiah speaks of, Isa. 57.3. But draw near hither ye sons of the Sorceress and
the seed of the Adulterer and whore: and as Jehu says, 2 Kin. 9.22. When Joram
saw Jehu, he said, (...) it peace, and Jehu answered, What peace, so long as
the whoredoms of thy mother Jezabel, and her Witchcrafts are so many This Jehu
was the minister of God to execute judgment upon those children begotten in
Adultery; who were seduc^ by Jezebel's prophets, whom Elijah slew. And here the
So^ of God threatens the whoredom that was committed in this Church with the
like Judgment, except they repent in time forewarning them of their danger, by
setting before them what came upon their predecessors in the like case: and
says he whose eyes are as a flame of Fire

And all the Churches shall know that I am he which searches the reins and
hearts, and I will give unto every one of you according to your works.

This is the voice of the Son of God to all the Churches in general; how he
will give to every one of them according to their works.

Verse 24. But unto you I say.

This is spoken to the Six Churches, and unto the rest in Thyatira, that is, to
that part of this Church also, which is not corrupted with this Doctrine, as in
the following words appears; to wit,

As many as have not this doctrine, and which have not known the depth of
Satan, as they speak:

That is, as these Seducers speak, but the Son of God has such piercing eyes,
that he sees the whole depth of Satan in his wily working to deceive the
Churches by this doctrine, which no doubt was carried on under fair pretenses
to beguile the Churches, as he had beguiled Eve, and therefore said the Son of
God to the six Churches, and to so many of this Church which had not drank in
this Doctrine,

I will put upon you none other burden.

Verse 25. But that which ye have already, hold fast till I come.

This coming is his coming in Judgment, against these Seducers and their
bastard children begotten in Adultery, which he will kill with death, as he
killed those false Prophets by Jehu; and Ahabs seventy sons, and all the house
of Ahab, with all Jezabel's bastard children in the Spiritual Whoredom in the
Church of God, under the first Covenant, so that this is a general Exhortation
to all the faithful Children of God, to hold fast their integrity till he come,
and execute his Judgment upon such as profess his name in words, and outward
pretenses of holiness; and so deceive the Churches of God: But the Son of God
whose eyes are as a flame of fire, sees ^into their reius and hearts, and will
give unto every one according to their works.

Verse 26. And he that overcomes and keeps my works unto the end, to him
will give power over the nations.

Verse 27. And he shall rule them with a ro^ of iron.

The Son of God makes a promise to those that thro^ Faith and Patience
overcomeeth, and keeps his works unto the end, that he will give them power
over the nations; this is to be understood a spiritual power through a victory
obtained by Faith in the Son of God, in the Gospel of Jesus Christ so that
there shall be no gainsaying against their doctrine they having overcome through
their testimony, and patient suffering, so as that there is nothing that has
been hide but what shall be revealed; so that all their adversaried are forced
to subject and yield to them in their testimony on the behalf of the son of
God; and thus they rule the^ with a rod of iron, which they are not able to
resist, having broken all their bands asunder, and cast away all their cord^
and will now rule with this rod of iron;

And as the vessels of a Potter shall they (...) broken to shivers,

By the power given to them by the Son of God, wh^ received it from his Father;
and this breaking to piece shall be the breaking of the union, which the
nations a^ united to in false worship, according to Christ's words, Lu^ 12.51.
Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on the earth? I tell you nay, but
rather division.

Verse 28. And I will give him the morning star.

That is, he shall be the gloriousest of all the seven stars i^ my right hand,
so that he shall excel in glory and brightness and shall be as a token of the
day dawning, after a lo^ dark night of Apostasy in the Church,

Verse 29. He that has an ear let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches.

This is the fourth voice of the Spirit of God, calling (...) every one that
has an ear, to hear what the Spirit of God says to the Churches.

CHAP. III.
The fifth CHURCH.
Verse 1.

ANd unto the Angel of the Church in Sardis write these things, says he that
has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven Stars, I know thy works, that thou
have a name that thou live and art dead.

This is the fifth Epistle which John is ordered to write unto the Church of
Sardis, by order from him who has the seven Spirits of God and the seven
Stars, and therefore most absolutely has a perfect knowledge of the State of
the Angel of this Church, seeing he has the seven Stars in his right hand; so
that this Minister, or Angel, must of necessity be upheld by him, or of
necessity must fall, and what a man has in his right hand he has a perfect
view of it; and the state of this Church must needs be known by him whether it
be living or dead; for he has the seven Spirits of God, that is, he has the
fullness of the spirit without measure; and it is he that gives it, and he that
takes it away: It is a talent given by him to his own servants to improve, as
appears, 1 Cor. 12.7. The manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to
profit withal: But if they to whom it is given make no profitable improvement,
he is wont to take it from them; Mat. 25.28. Take therefore the talent from
him; that is, from him that made no improvement of it. That which made this
Church a living Church, was a measure of these seven spirits of God bestowed
upon them to profit withal; and he that has the seven Spirits of God, knows to
whom he bestows it upon, and from whom he takes it a way; and he testifies,
that this Church has a name to live and is dead, and his testimony is true; it
is the Spirit that quickens or makes a living Church or Member: And if the
Spirit of God be taken away, the Church or Member from whom it is taken away is
dead: And this was the state o^ this Church, thou have a name that thou live
and are dead.

Verse 2. Be watchful, and strengthen the things that remain that are ready to
die.

And in the 4th verse it appears, that there was but a fe^ names in this
Church, but what had defiled their garments so that the greatest number had a
name to live but was dead; they had sinned that sin unto death. which the
Apostle John speaks of, 1 John 5.16. He that has the seven Spirit^ of God,
exhorts that remnant to watch, and to strengthen the things which were
remaining that were ready to die: for says he,

For I have not found thy works perfect before God.

This testimony of this imperfection, is a sad character o^ such as make an
outside show and great pretenses of holiness and thereby get a name in this
world of being a living Church, when indeed they are dead; for this was the
state of this Church.

Verse 3. Remember therefore how thou ha^ received and heard.

Thus the Lord puts them in mind, how they had hea^ the glad tidings of their
Salvation, and received the spirit of Adoption from him who has the seven
Spirits of God and exhorts them to hold fast their own Salvation, and not to
let it go; for says Christ in another place, What would it advantage a man if
he should gain the whole world, and lost his own soul; or what shall a man give
in exchange for hi^ soul: And therefore exhorts them to repent of their
imperfections; for in the foregoing verse says he, For I have no^ found thy
works perfect before God. Thus he accuses the^ with hypocrisy, and that they
had thereby got a name to live, when indeed they were dead, and therefore
exhorts them to repent in time, and to be upon their watch; for says he,

If therefore thou shall not watch; I will come on thee as a chief, and thou
shall not know what hour I will come upon thee.

This is a threatening of sudden and unlooked for Judgment that should be
executed upon them when they least think of it. Luke 21.35. For as a snare
shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of the whole earth; watch ye
therefore, and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these
things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the son of man. Thus the
Lord forewarneth them what would be the event of their woeful state, except they
repent of their works and watch; for these that have a name to live and are
dead, are the evil servant which shall say in his heart, my Lord delayeth his
coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow servants; yea, they are those
foolish virgins that have not kept oil in their vessels, and their Lord coming
suddenly finds them sleeping; and therefore says Christ to this Church and
to all others in their state, Watch ye therefore; for ye know neither the day
nor hour wherein the son of man ^ometh. And he that does not repent and watch,
the Lord of that servant shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and
in an hour that he is not ware of; and shall ^ut him off, and appoint him his
portion with hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

Verse 4. Thou have a few Names even in Sardis, which have not defiled their
garments.

This verse shows that there was but a few Names in this Church but what had
defiled their garments; and this few he promises them, that

They shall walk with him in white, for they are worthy.

What is intended by these white garments is opened in the 19th Chapter, 7th
and 8th verses. For the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made
her self ready. By the Lamb is intended he that has the seven Spirits of God,
chap. 5, 6. and by his wife is intended his Church; and having made her self
ready, is, she has put on her wedding garment which is granted to her, that
she should be arrayed in fine linen clean and white; and by this fine linen is
intended the righteousness of the Saints, which is granted them through the Faith
of the Son of God. And there was but a few names in Sardis but what had defiled
their garments, and these few says Christ, shall walk with me in white, for
they are worthy: But the other and the greater part of this Church had been
arrayed in the like raiment, clean and white before they had defiled them; but
not having kept their garments clean, they are not counted worthy, but shall be
esteemed as he that had not on his wedding garment. When the king came in to
see his sons marriage, and beheld one of the guests which had not on his
wedding garment, he said unto his servants, bind him hand and foot, and take
him away, and cast him into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth, Mat. 22.11, etc.

Verse 5. He that overcomes (says the Lord) the same shall be clothed in
white raiment.

This victory by overcoming is by Faith in him that has the seven Spirits of
God, and the seven Stars in his right hand, who always gives the victory to the
men of Faith 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, I have kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness. This crown of righteousness is the white garment which those
that overcome are arrayed in; and none but them that overcome can keep their
garments clean, Chap. 7.14. These are they which came out of great tribulation,
and have washed their robes, and have made the^ white in the blood of the lamb.
Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. These light afflictions which are but for a moment, is as the
furnace to separate the dross from the metal; and those that thus overcome in
tribulation, the same shall be thus clothed in this white raiment of
righteousness.

And I will not blot out his name out of the book of life.

This is spoken as a Captain, that has a list of the names of his soldiers:
So, Christ here speaks as if he had a list of the names of his soldiers
enrolled in heaven; and those that prove cowards in his warfare, he blots out
their names out of his book of life; and those that overcome he will not blot
out their names, but he will confess them before his Father and before his holy
Angels: And those whose names are blotted out of the Book of Life, are those
which have a name to live and are dead; for if they have no name in the Book of
Life, they must of necessity be dead; and those that see their names in the
Book of Life are living warriors, listed in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain
from the foundation of the world.

Verse 6. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the
Churches.

This is the fifth voice of the Spirit of God, calling to every one that has
an ear, to hear what the spirit says into the Churches.

The sixth CHURCH.
Verse 7. And to the angel of the Church is Philadelphia, write these things,
says he that (...) holy he that is true, he that has the Key of David, he
that opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens,

John is ordered to write this sixth Epistle to the Church of Philadelphia, by
him that is holy and true.

Quest. Who is this that is holy and true, that orders John to write this
Epistle?

Answ. It is God and our Lord Jesus Christ, who says ^e shall be holy for I
the Lord your God am holy, Lev. 19.2. John 18.37. To this end was I born, and
for this cause came I unto the World, that I should hear witness unto the
truth, every ^ne that is of the truth hears my voice. And the Reason why the
Lord Jesus Christ expresses himself under these terms, is, because it is an
Epistle directed to a Church which was holy and true, being made partakers of
his holiness, (...) the Spirit of truth. And he that has the Key of David that
opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no m^ opens, is the Son of God,
who has the Key of his heavenly Fathers House, and treasure, and this was fore
prophes^ of him, by Isaiah in the days of Hezekiah King of Judah, t^ prophet
who prophesied figuratively of Christ's Glory in his Fathers house, by the
turning out of Shebna (who was tr^^^surer: Isai. 22.15. compared with the
20.21. etc.) And p^^^ting in Eliakim into his place. And says the prophet
(...) shall be a father to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to (...) house of
Judah, and the Key of the House of David will I (...) upon his shoulder, so he
shall open and none shall shut, and shall shut and none shall open: But Jesus
Christ who is the Son and Offspring of David, has all the glory of h^ Fathers
house, which was figured out under this figure p^phetically: But he being now
come, and entered into (...) glory of his heavenly Fathers house, has the key
of all (...) heavenly treasure; and he opens and no man shutte^ and shuts
and no man opens; for he has the (...) where the treasure is, which eye has
not seen, nor ear hear neither has it entered into the heart of man, the
things wh^ God has prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. 2.9.

Verse 8, I know thy works, behold I have before thee an open door.

He that is holy, and he that is true, testifies to (...) Church, that he
knows their Works, and he justifies t^ in their Works, saying,

For thou have a little strength, and have k^ my word, and have not denied my
name. Behold I have set before thee an open door, and no (...) can shut it.

This Church being holy and true, he that is holy and (...) has opened to them
the door wherein his Father's trease is to be seen by them, and no man can shut
it from them.

Verse 9. Behold I will make them of the syn^ gogue of Satan, which say they
are Jews and are not, but do lie.

And therefore says he that is holy, in the foregoing verse, signifying to
this Church his knowledge of their good works and how that he had set before
them an open door, that they might have a view of the glory of his Fathers
house, ^s a token of his reward of their good works, he tells them ^n this
verse what he would do to hypocritical Professors, that pretended to be Jews,
that is to say his Church, when indeed says he, they are not, but the
synagogue of Satan, and therefore he threatens to unvail them, and to let it be
known that they are liars to their open shame and confusion:

Behold ( says he) I will make them (...) come and to worship before thy feet,
and to know that have loved thee.

Verse 10. Because thou have kept the word of any patience, I also will keep
thee from the hour ^f temptation which shall come upon all the world to try
them that dwell upon the earth.

This verse contains a promise and a threatening, a promise (...) this Church,
because they had kept the word of his patience to keep them from the hour of
Temptation, that should ^me upon all the world, and this hour of Temptation is
a ^reatning to all the World to try them that dwell on the ^th: which is a
certain judgment which God threatens ^em with, and promises to keep this
Church from being ^rmed by it, this seems to be a time like the destruction of
^e old world or Sodom, but Noah and Lot was preserved, (...) like that judgment
which God threatened by the Apostle ^ter, 2 Pet. 2.1. etc. Here God tells of
false teachers, that ^ould arise and through Covetousness with feigned words
^ey shall make Merchandise of you; this must needs be ^e synagogue of Satan. By
reason of whom the way of ^uth shall be evil spoken of says he, whose judgment
now ^f a long time lingreth not says the Apostle. This seems to be like that
temptation which was to come upon (...) the world to try them that dwell upon
the earth; and then (...) compares it to the destruction of the old world, and
(...) deliverance of Noah, and to the destruction of Sodom, (...) the
deliverance of Lot; intimating, how at such a Judgment God knows how to deliver
the righteous, and to pu^ the wicked.

Verse 11. Behold I come quickly; hold the fast which thou have, that no man
take t^ crown.

This verse contains a promise of speedy coming; that to execute the Judgment
(spoken of in the foregoing ve^ upon all the world, and to the great comfort of
his Chur^ by keeping them from that hour of temptation. And sa^ he, Hold that
fast which thou have; that is, my word (...) my name, spoken of in the 8th
verse. That no man take (...) crown, says he; that is, if thou hold fast my
word (...) my name patiently, until this hour of temptation co^ thou shall be
crowned with victory.

Verse 12. Him that overcomes will I m^ a pillar in the temple of my God.

The Temple is the Church or House of God, 1 Timothy 15. Heb. 3.6.2 Cor. 6.16. And
those that overcome (...) pillars in this House or Temple of God.

And he shall go no more out.

That is, he shall be a perpetual pillar of the Church.

And I will write upon him the name of (...) God, and the name of the city of
my God, whi^ is the new Jerusalem.

This name of God written upon him, is to signify t^ he is God's servant, and
the name of the city of God being written upon him, is to signify he is a
citizen of the (...) Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from (...) God;
which name alludeth from the earthly Jerusalem which was called the city of God.

And I will write upon him my new name.

This new name is the name of him that overcomes.

Verse 13. He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the
Churches.

This is the sixth voice of the Spirit of God, calling to every one that has
an ear, to hear what the Spirit says to the Churches.

The seventh CHURCH.
Verse 14. And unto the Angel of the Church of the Laodiceans, write these
things says the Amen, the faithful and true Witness, the beginning of the
Creation of God.

This is the 7th and last Epistle, to the seventh and last Church which John is
ordered to write unto. Says the Amen. This is a conclusive word (from him who
orders John to write) and carries in it, So be it. The Son of God is the
faithful and true Witness, chap. 1.5. The beginning of the creation of God;
Joh. 1.1. compared with the 14th verse. Col. 1.15. etc.

Verse 15. I know thy works that thou art neither cold nor hot.

This is the testimony that is testified to this Church, by him who is the
faithful and true Witness, who knows their works, and gives them a faithful
and true testimony what state they are in; that is, neither cold nor hot, which
is very unsavory, and like to be spued out of his mouth.

I would ( says he) thou wast either cold or hot.

Verse 16. So then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I will
spue thee out of my mouth.

Verse 17. Because thou say, I am rich and increased with goods, and have
need of nothing.

In this verse he gives them the reason why he will spue them out of his mouth;
for they are in such an unsavory state, that they are no ways teachable,
because they think they are that which indeed they are not; they are such as
Christ in his doctrine says, Woe unto you that are rich; that is, so in their
conceit, but in reality it is not so. But says the faithful and true Witness,

But thou know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked.

Thus was this Church deceived in themselves, and was got into a most wretched
and miserable condition; for they were poor, but thought themselves to be rich;
they were blind, but conceited they saw; naked, but thought they were clothed;
they had no faith to enrich them, and knew it not; they gloried in their own
wisdom, but were unacquainted with the state of wisdom's children; they were
not clothed with the righteousness of the saints, but knew it not; they
conceited they saw, but had not the eye of Faith, but was spiritually blind.

Verse 18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold ^ryed in the fire that thou may
be rich.

This gold is that precious Faith that the Apostle Peter speaks of, 1 Pet. 1.7.
That the trial of your faith, being much more precious than of gold that
perishes, though it (...) tried with fire.

I counsel thee to buy of me gold that thou may be rich. They are indeed
happy that take this counsel, that they may be rich in that faith which works
by love.

And buy of me white raiment that thou may be clothed, and that the shame
of thy nakedness do not appear.

This white raiment is the righteousness of the saints, chap. 19.18.

And anoint thine eyes with eye salve that thou may see.

This eye salve is the Spirit of God, that enlightens the eyes of the
understanding. I counsel thee, says the Lord Jesus, to buy of me these things;
yea, he alone is the heavenly Merchant who is able to supply this Church, and
all others with this heavenly treasure; for he has all his heavenly fathers
treasure in his own hand, and if we will be supplied with these things, we must
sell all that we have of our own, to purchase these things to fit us for his
kingdom.

Verse 19. As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten; be zealous therefore and
repent.

The Lord acquaints this Church, that his rebukes and chastising of them was in
love and mercy, and not in judgment; and therefore he exhorts them to repent.

Verse 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock.

This is at the door of the heart, by the voice of his chastisements, that the
King of Glory may come in: And it is spoken by the similitude of a man knocking
at the door of his house desiring it may be opened unto him, that he may enter
in. And the saints Bodies is the House or Temple of God, and Christ stands
knocking and calling many times at his Temple or House door, saying, Behold I
stand at the door and knock:

If any man hear my voice and open to me, I will come in and will sup with him,
and he with me.

He that opens the door for him to come in, will have a joyful house, and a
merry supper, for he is a blessed companion, and will make a merry heart when
he comes into his Temple. 1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the temple of
God.

Verse 21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my throne,
even as I also overcame, and am sit down with my father in his throne.

This is a wonderful and gracious promise made unto this Church by the Son of
God, to encourage them and all others to fight the good sight of Faith, that we
may be counted worthy to sit down with him in his throne, (...) he has
overcome and is set down with his father in h^ throne, in the kingdom and the
greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given unto the people
of the saints of the most high, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and
all dominions shall obey him.

Verse 22. He that has an ear, let him hea^ what the Spirit says unto the
Churches.

This is the seventh voice of the Spirit of God, to eve^ one that has an ear,
to hear what the Spirit says unto t^ Churches: This is the voice of the seven
Spirits of God speaking to the seven Angels of the seven Churches, a^ to the
seven Churches.

And the Lamb of God has seven horns, and seven eye which are the seven
Spirits of God sent forth into all the earth chap. 5.6. His seven horns
shows, that he has all power both in heaven and earth. And his seven eyes
shows that he has the Spirit of God without measure in the fullness thereof,
and sees all things. And the seven State in his right hand comprehends all his
Ministers. A^ the seven golden Candlesticks which he walks in the of,
comprehends the full and complete number of all ^ Churches that ever was or
ever shall be.

CHAP. IV.
The first Vision of the seven Churches being ended, a second Vision of future
things is made known to John as follows.

Verse 1.

AFter this I looked, and behold a door was opened in heaven, and the first
voice which heard was as it were of a trumpet talking with me, which said, come
up hither, and will show thee things which must be hereafter.

This verse shows us, that after John's first Vision was ^nded, he looked and
behold a door was opened in heaven, and the first voice which he heard was as
it were of a trum^et talking with him, inviting him to go up into heaven,
promising him to show unto him things that was afterward ^o come to pass.

Verse 2. And immediately I was in the Spirit ( says he.)

That is, in such a spiritual frame, being prepared of God ^o behold, and to
make a report of what was to be made known to him. And says he,

Behold a throne was set in heaven.

This was the throne of God Almighty, Isai. 66.1. Acts ^7.49.

And one sat on the throne.

He that sits on this throne is God Almighty, even Jesus Christ the Creator of
all things, Romans 9.5. 1 Timothy 6.15. Which in his times, he shall show who is the
blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords.

Verse 3. And he that sat, was to look upon like a jasper and a sardine stone;
and the^ was a rainbow round about the throne, in sigh^ like unto an emerald.

Thus John beheld him on his Throne, in his king^ Majesty and Glory, shining
like precious stones.

Verse 4. And round about the throne we^ twenty four seats, and upon the seats
I sa^ twenty four elders sitting, clothed in whi^ raiment; and they had on
their heads crown of gold.

These twenty four Elders do represent the twelve Elde^ of the twelve Tribes of
Israel, and measures the whol^ Church of the Jews. And the twelve Apostles
measure the whole Church of the Gentiles, for the saints s^ll judg^ the world,
1 Cor. 6.2. These twenty four Elders ha^ crowns of gold on their heads, to show
they sit with Chr^ in Judgment. These twenty four Elders are represented t^
John by the twelve gates of the city of the new Jerusale^ and the twelve
foundations thereof. Chap. 21.12, 13, 14. At the gates twelve Angels, and names
written thereon, whi^ are the names of the twelve tribes of the children of
Isra^ and the twelve foundations in them, the names of the twel^ Apostles of
the Lamb, which comprehend the twenty foo^ Elders. And their being clothed in
white, does repres^ their righteous state in Judgment. Chap. 19.8. And to (...)
was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen, cle^ and white, for the
fine linen is the righteousness of saints.

Verse 5. And out of the throne proceed^ lightenings, and thunderings, and
voices.

These lightenings, thunderings and voices, are to set forth the fearful and
dreadful Sentences of God's Judgments pro^ ceeding from the throne of his
Justice against this wick^ world, by sword, famine, pestilence, and wild
beasts; (...) wall be seen in opening the Seals.

And there were seven lamps of fire burning before the throne, which are the
seven Spirits ^f God.

These seven burning lamps, were figured by the seven ^mps in the Temple, upon
the golden candlestick, which ^ve light in the Temple; for it is the seven
Spirits of ^od that causes the seven burning lamps, or that is the ^ght of
this Church, and causes them to be the light of ^e world, Mat. 5.14.

Verse 6, 7, 8. And before the throne there ^as a sea of glass, like unto
crystal.

This vision of the sea of glass before the throne, is to ^t forth the place
that those saints got into, when they ^me out of their wilderness state, as is
to be seen, Chap. 15.^3. And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with fire:
^d them that had gotten the victory over the beast, and over ^s image, and over
his mark, and over the number of his name, and on the sea of glass, having the
harps of God; and they ^g the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of
^e Lamb* saying, Great and mavelous are thy works Lord ^od Almighty, just and
true are thy ways, thou King of saints. ^hus they stand before the throne on
the sea of glass, prai^ng the King of Saints, who sits on the throne of God
^mighty, as Israel did when they had obtained deliverance ^ut of Egypt, through
the mighty power of God by the and of Moses.

And in the midst of the throne, and round about the throne, were four beasts
full of eyes before and behind.

These are the cherubims or Angels of God, who are ^is Ministers, attending in
and about his throne, ready to ^xecute his Judgments; being showed to John in
the Vision ^ke four living creatures according to the number of the our winds
of the heavens, and in number according to ^he four sore Judgments of God,
which they are executi^ners of; seeing every ways both before and behind, and
within; and they were represented to John in the Vision.

The first like a Hon, the second like a cal^ and the third had a face like a
man, and the fourth like a flying eagle.

Like a Lion, who is the fiercest among wild beasts; (...) a Calf or Ox, who is
servicable for the use of man; and (...) third had a face like a man, who is
wiser than the be^ of the field; and the 4th like a flying Eagle, who is sw^ in
motion, every way fit for the service of God, attend^ about his throne like
faithful Ministers. And they h^ no rest day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy
Lord God (...) mighty, which was, and is, and is to come.

And they had each of them six wings.

These holy Angels were not always represented alike, (...) in the sixth chap.
of Isai. 2, 3. They are represented to hi^ with six wings, as they are here,

One crying to another, Holy, holy, holy the Lord God of hosts.

And in the first chap. of Ezekiel. 6. and 10. verses, they (...) represented to
him having four wings, and their faces w^ in the same similitude as is
mentioned in this book; to w^ the face of a man and the face of a lion on the
right (...) and they four had the face of an ox on the left side, and (...)
face of an eagle. And the Cherubims in the Temple (...) each of them but two
wings, 2 Chronicles. 3.11. And as (...) twenty four Elders does represent both the
Church of (...) Jews and the Church of the Gentiles, so does the num^ four
beasts, represent in this place all the innumerable (...) titude of Angels.

Verse 9, 10, 11. And when those beasts gi^ glory, and honor, and thanks, to
him the sat on the throne who lives for ever and ev^ the twenty four elders
fall down before hi^ that sat on the throne, and worship him the lives for
ever and ever, and cast their crown before the throne, saying, Thou art worthy
^rd, to receive glory, and honor, and power; (...) thou have created all
things, and for thy ^easure they are and were created.

Here John saw in this vision, both Angels and Men wor^pping him that sat on
the throne, ascribing glory, and ho^ur, and power, to him who had created all
things, and (...) whose pleasure they are and were created; beholding ^e twenty
four Elders falling down before him, and cast^g their crowns before the throne.

CHAP. V.
Verse 1.

ANd I saw in the right hand of him that sat upon the throne, a book written
^ithin.

This Book which John saw in the right hand of him ^at sits upon the throne,
contains the history of the things ^vealed to John in this book of the
Revelation; and that is contained in the book will be seen in going over ^e
book.

And on the back side sealed with seven seals.

This book being sealed on the back side with seven seals, (...) to signify
that what was written therein, was God's se^et knowledge of all those things
therein contained; for ^he number seven measures a perfection of whatsoever it
^xpresseth; even the whole of every thing it measures; and ^n this place
measures a perfect secresy of all things written ^n this book, it not being
known what was therein con^ained by any man in heaven, nor on the earth,
neither un^er the earth.

Verse 2. And I saw a strong Angel, pro^laiming with a loud voice, Who is
worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof.

Verse 3. And no man in heaven, nor earth, neither under the earth, was able
open the book, neither to look thereon.

Verse 4. And I wept much because no (...) was found worthy to open, and to
read the b^ neither to look thereon.

Here is three things to be taken notice of. The fi^ how John saw a strong
Angel proclaiming with a (...) voice by way of enquiry, Who (says he) is
worthy to the book, and to loose the seals thereof. Secondly, we^ no man in
heaven nor in earth, neither under the earth, able to open the book, neither to
look thereon. And this John's great lamentation, because no man was found w^ to
open and to read the book, neither to look thereon

Verse 5. And one of the elders says (...) me, weep not, behold, the lion of
the tribe Judah, the root of David, has prevailed open the book, and to loose
the seven (...) thereof.

This verse does show, that one of the Elders did (...) comfortably to John,
saying to him, Weep not, beho^ lion of the Tribe of Judah, the root of David,
has pr^^ed to open the book: and to loose the seven seals the This root of
David is Jesus Christ in his Divine Na^ Chap. 22.16. I am the root and the
offspring of David this verse Jesus Christ is compared to a lion in his Di^
Nature.

Verse 6. And I behold, and lo in the (...) of the throne, and of the four
beasts, and the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb as it^ been slain, having
seven horns, and seven e^ which are the seven Spirits of God sent for into all
the earth.

In this verse Jesus Christ is represented to John, as he the Lamb of God, and
that only Sacrifice for Sin, even nature. Having seven horns: These seven horns
measures to him all power, both in heaven and in earth. And ^n eyes which are
the seven Spirits of God, measures out ^im a perfect sight of all things, by
the Spirit of God, (...) present, and to come; for the seven eyes are the seven
^its of God, which shows he has not the Spirit by mea^^ but the fullness
thereof. Sent forth into all the earth, (...) he; that is, out of his fullness,
his church is made par^^ of a measure of the same spirit, John 1.16. And of
fullness have all we received, and grace for grace, Col. 1.(...) For it pleased
the Father, that in him should all fullness (...), Joh. 3.34.

Verse 7, 8, 9, 10. And he came and took (...) book out of the right hand of
him that sat ^n the throne.

and when he had taken the book, the four ^sts and twenty four elders fell down
before (...) lamb, having every one of them harps, and ^den viols full of
odours, which are the prayof saints.

and they sung a new song, saying, thou art ^thy to take the book, and to open
the ^s thereof; for thou wast slain, and have remed us to God by thy blood, out
of eve^^^ kindred and tongue, and people, and na^:

And have made us unto our God, kings, (...) priests, and we shall reign on the
earth.

(...) these foregoing verses, there is several observable ^gs to be taken
notice of. The first is, that though ^man in heaven nor in the earth, nor under
the earth, (...) able to open the Book, yet the Lamb of God came (...) took the
book out of the right hand of him that (...) on the throne. And secondly, when
he had taken the ^k, the four Beasts and four and twenty Elders fell down
before the Lamb; as is written, Heb. 1.6. let all the Angels of God worship
him. Phil. 2.9, etc. thirdly, we may observe, that these that fell down b^ him,
had every one of them harps, which were to forth his praises, in setting forth
his worthiness to take book, and to open the seals thereof; and how there given
to every one of them viols full of odours, which the prayers of Saints; and
this was figured out under law, Lev. 16.17. Luke 1.10. And the whole multitude
of people were praying without at the time of incense. For^ the prayers, and
praises of the wicked, are an abomi^ to the Lord, yet the prayers and praises
of the righ^ are as sweet incense offered before him. And fourthly may observe,
that the golden viols that was given to (...) one of them full of incense, as
in the 8th verse, (...) prayers of saints, which did contain the song sung is
9th verse, praising God for their redemption, by the (...) of the Lamb. And
fifthly, we may observe, it was (...) song that they sung, ascribing worthiness
unto the (...) of God, who was slain, and has redeemed us with blood to God;
and not only so, but has made us (...) our God kings, and priests, and we
shall reign on the ear^

Verse 11, 12. And I beheld, and heard voice of many Angels round about the
thr^ and the Beasts, and the Elders, and the (...) ber of them was ten thousand
times ten t^ sand, and thousands of thousands.

Saying with a loud voice, worthy is the L^ that was slain, to receive power,
and riches, (...) wisdom, and strength, and honor, and g^ and blessing.

We may observe in these two foregoing Verses, that (...) in this Vision beheld
and heard, the voices of many (...) about the throne, and the Beasts, and the
Elders, no (...) but it was the numberless multitudes of Angels, f^ expresses
them after the manner as Daniel does, D^ 10. Thousand Thousands ministered unto
him, and ten tho^ ^mes ten thousand stood before him. Thus John beheld and
^eard the innumerable multitude of Angels ascribing all ^orthiness to the Lamb
that was slain, to receive power, riches, ^isdom, strength, and glory and
blessing.

Verse 13, 14. And every creature which is ^n heaven and on the earth, and
under the ^arth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are ^n them; heard I
saying, blessing, and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that fitteth on
^he throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever and ever.

And the four Beasts said Amen, and the four and twenty Elders fell down and
worshipped ^im that lives for ever and ever.

Here we may observe, that God has exalted his Son, and ^ade him equal with
himself, according to what is writ^n, Phil. 2.10, 11. That at the name of
Jesus, every kne^ ^ould how, of things in heaven, and things on earth, and
things under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that Je^s Christ
is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

CHAP. VI.
Verse 1.

ANd I saw when the Lamb opened one of the Seals, and I heard as it were the
noise ^f thunder, one of the four beasts saying, come and see.

Here we are informed, that John saw when the Lamb ^pened one of the seals; and
how that he was invited by ^id beast to come and see.

Verse 2. And I saw, and behold a wh^ horse, and he that sat on him had a bow,
(...) a crown was given unto him.

This bow and crown is to show that he is going for

Conquering and to conquer:

And that he shall have the victory. And who (...) warrior is, is showed in
the 19th Chapter of this book. (...) his white horse, and many crowns, after he
had gotten (...) victory, this 6th Chapter 2d verse, etc. does set forth (...)
preparation, and the beginning of his war, and after (...) manner he carries it
on to conquer and subdue the nation to wit, by sword, by famine, pestilence and
wild beasts, wh^ are his four sore Judgments, sentences to be executed him
that sits upon the throne: And in the 19th Chapter is set forth in his
victorious acts, by having the conqu^ as in verse 11, 12, 13. And I saw heaven
opened, and be^ a white horse, and he that sat upon him was called faith and
true, and in righteousness he does judge and make w^ His eyes were as a flame
of fire, and on his head were m^ crowns: And he had a name written, that no man
knew (...) he himself: And he was clothed in a vesture dipped in blo^ and his
name is called the Word of God.

Here are three observable things. First, his many cro^ does show his great
conquest, as being King of kings; in the 16th verse. And Secondly, his vesture
being di^ in the blood of his enemies. And Thirdly, he is call by his name, to
show who he is; to wit, his name is (...) led the Word of God, which word was
made flesh, Joh. 1.(...) And the great conquest which he had, is showed in the
17^ verse, and 18th verse, where the fouls of the heaven (...) invited to come
and to eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh captains, and the flesh of mighty
men, and the flesh of hors^ and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all
men both free (...) bond both small and great.

Verse 5. And when he had opened the seco^ seal, I heard the second Beast say,
Come a^ see.

Here John is invited by the second Beast to come and ^ee.

Verse 4. And there went out another Horse that was red.

This red Horse does represent a Sentence from the throne ^f God, that there
shall be Wars among the Inhabitants of ^e earth, as a Judgment executed upon
them for their ^ickedness, and therefore it is said in the verse,

And power was given to him that sat there^n, to take peace from the earth, and
that they should kill one another, and there was given un^o him a great Sword.

This is the beginning of Sorrows among the Inhabitants of ^is wicked World;
according to the testimony of our lord, Matt. 24.6, 7, 8. For Nation shall rise
against nati^a, and Kingdom against Kingdom, and there shall be Eamines, ^d
Pest^lences, and Earthquakes in diverse places, all these are ^e beginning of
Sorrows.

Verse 5. And when he had opened the third ^eal, I heard the third Beast say,
Come and ^e, and I beheld, and lo a black Horse and he that sat on him had a
pair of Balances in his ^and.

Verse 6. And I heard a voice in the midst of the ^ur Beasts, saying, A measure
of wheat for a ^eny, and three measures of Barley for a penny, and see thou hurt
not the Oil and the Wine.

We may observe, that at the opening of the third seal, ^e third beast invited
John to come and see, and then ^e beheld a black horse, and he that sat on him
had (...) pair of bal^ances in his hand. This is to represent a ^ntence of
famine from the throne of God; as if corn ^as so scarce that they weighed it
with balances. And (...) heard a voice in the midst of the four beasts say, A
mea^ure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley for (...) penny.

This is to show the great scarcity of corn, by re^ whereof the famine is great.

And see thou hurt not the oil and the wine. This imp^ a great scarcity, by
reason whereof no damage or i^ ought to be done to the oil or to the wine; or
no f^ or deceit in the measure of it, whereby any may be w^ ed or defrauded
thereby.

Verse 7, 8. And when he had opened (...) fourth seal, I heard the voice of the
for beast say, come and see.

And I looked, and behold a pale horse, (...) his name that sat on him was
death, and (...) followed with him; and power was given (...) them over the
fourth part of the earth, to (...) with sword, and with hunger, and with de^
and with the beasts of the earth.

Here we have an account, that at the opening of fourth seal, the 4th beast
invited John to come and (...) and how he beheld a pale horse, and how that his
name (...) sat on him was death, and hell followed with him.

This is to represent the sentence of death from (...) that sat on the throne,
which was executed by pest^ diseases or plagues, by sickness, to cut off the
inhabit^ of the earth by death for their wickedness.

Thus we may see in the opening of these four sea^ the Lamb of God, how God is
wont to punish the w^ ed world by his four sore judgments, when they go in sin,
by oppression and persecution, as will appear in opening of the next seal. Here
we have an account (...) that power was given to them, that is to the four be^
over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with (...) sword and with hunger,
and with death, and with (...) beasts of the earth, even with God's four sore
Judgme^

Verse 9. And when he had opened the (...) seal, I saw under the altar the
souls of the that were slain for the word of God, and (...) the testimony which
they held.

In the opening of this fifth seal, we may see what the ^orld had been doing
which provoked the Lord to exe^te those judgments upon them: For when the Lamb
^ened the 5th seal, John saw under the altar the souls of them ^ich were slain
for the word of God, and for the testi^ony which they held.

The Altar was the place where they were wont to offer ^ean beasts a sacrifice
to the Lord; but these were those ^t offered up their lives a sacrifice to the
Lord; for they ^ere slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they
held. For says John, I saw under the Altar (...) souls of them that were
slain. The Soul is many times ^ken for the Body, as in the 16th chapter of this
Book ^ird verse, And every living soul died in the sea; as also ^cts 2.31. He
seeing this besore, speak of the resurrection (...) Christ, that his soul was
not left in hell, that is, in the ^ave, as David's was, who saw corruption.

Verse 10. And they cried with a loud voice, ^ying, how long, O Lord, holy and
true, do ^ou not judge and avenge our blood on them ^at dwell on the earth.

This shows that the blood of Gods saints cries for ^ngeance; and though God's
patience is extended for a time wards sinners, yet they shall not escape his
hand.

Verse 11. And white robes were given to ^ery one of them.

All Gods persecuted and suffering Saints are here represented John in this
vision, as slain and lying under the Altar, and they came out of great
tribulation, and thereby were ^rifyed by the fire of affliction.

It is said, white robes were given to every one of them, ^is written, Chap.
7.14. These are they that came out of ^at tribulation, and have washed their
robes, and made them ^ite in the blood of the Lamb. And it was said unto ^em,
that they should rest yet for a little season. This is an ^wer to their cries
who cried and said, how long, O Lord, ^ly and true, do thou not judge and
avenge our blood on ^em that dwell on the earth. The Answer of God to ^em is,

That they should rest yet for a little sea^ until their fellow servants also,
and their (...) thren that should be killed as they were, sho^ be fulfilled,

This is an exhortation to God's suffering servants u^ their persecution, to be
in the exercise of patience u^ their sufferings, until the Iniquity of their
persecuton fully ripe: For he that lets will let, until he be taken^ of the
way, and then shall that wicked be revealed, who^ Lord shall consume with the
spirit of his mouth, and (...) destroy with the brightness of his coming, 2
These. 2.7, 8.

In the opening of the four Seals past, is showed how (...) God's four sore
Judgments had been executed upon the (...) for their wickedness. And in the
opening of the fifth (...) shows the cries of God's suffering Saints under
their per^ tions; whose cries came up to heaven, they crying and (...) ing, How
long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not ju^ and avenge our blood on them
that dwell on the earth. (...) though God's hand had been visiting the world, yet
they wo^ not see nor learn instruction, according to what is wri^ Isai. 26.11.
Lord when thy band is lifted up, they will not but they shall see, and be
ashamed, for their envy to^ thy people. In the opening of the next Seal will
appe^ great and dreadful day of the Lord upon the wi^ world.

Verse 12. And I beheld when he had open the sixth Seal, and lo there was a
great ean^ quake.

This is to express the great and dreadfulness of this day.

And the Sun became black as sackcloth of h^ and the Moon became as blood.

Verse 13. And the Stars of Heaven fell u^ the earth even as a figtree casts
her untim^ figs when she is shaken of a mighty Wind.

All this is to set forth God's dreadful and terrible Ju^ ments upon the
enemies of his church. In this great (...) dreadful day of the Lord, all light
and joy being taken (...) (...) wicked, it is set forth by the Sun being black
as Sack^oth of hair, and by the Moon's being turned into blood, ^d falling of
the Stars, all which is to set forth this black ^d dark day of destruction and
desolation; as if all the ^ight lights of heaven were darkened over them. Such a
day (...) this was threatened against Babylon of old, by the prophet ^aiah,
which came upon her at her destruction, Isai. 13.9, (...), 11. Behold the day
of the Lord comes cruel, both with ^ath and fierce anger, to lay the land
deso^ate, and he shall ^stroy the sinners thereof out of it: for the stars of
heaven and ^e constellations thereof shall not give their light, the Sun ^all
be darkened in his going forth, and the moon shall not cause ^er light to shine:
And I will punish the World for their evil, and the wicked for their iniquity,
and I will cause the arrogan^y of the proud to cease, and I will lay low the
haughtiness of ^he terrible.

The like destruction was prophesied of by Ezekiel, and after ^ame upon Fgypt;
Ezekiel. 32.7, 8. And when I shall extinguish ^hee, or put thee out, I will cover
the heaven, and make the ^ars thereof dark; and I will cover the sun with a
cloud, and ^e moon shall not give her light; and all the bright Lights ^f
heaven will I make dark over thee, and set darkness upon thy and, says the
Lord God.

The like Great Day of God's Wrath was before prophesied of by our Savior upon
Jerusalem and Judeath; which was executed upon them at the destruction thereof
by the Romans. Luke 21.24, 25, 25. And they shall fall by the edge of the
sword, and shall be led away captive into all natons, and Jerusalem shall be
trodden down of the Gentiles, and there shall b^ signs in the sun, and in the
moon, and in the stars, and upon the earth distress of nations, with
perplexity, the sea, and the wave, ^oaring, men's hearts failing them for fear,
and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth.

Verse 14. And the heaven departed as a Scroll when it is rolled together, and
every Mountain, and Island were moved out of their places.

This is to set forth their dreadful confusion, as if the whole frame of heaven
and earth were out of its frame of order, by measuring their confusion by the
heavens, as if it were like a Scroll when it is rolled together, and by (...)
earth as if every mountain and Island were ^ved out their places.

Verse 15. And the kings of the earth, and (...) great men, and the rich men,
and the chief c^ tains, and the mighty men, and every bon^ m^ and every free
man, hid themselves in the d^ and in the rocks of the mountains.

Verse 16. And said to the mountains (...) rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from
the face (...) him that fitteth on the throne, and from (...) wrath of the Lamb.

Hos. 10.8. And they shall say to the mountains, cover us^ to the hills, fall
on us. This was foretold what should (...) at the destruction of Samaria, Luke
23.30. This place for told what should be at the destruction of Jerusalem.

Verse 17. For the great Day of his wrath come, and who shall be able to stand?

The opening of this 6th seal expresses a period of time w^ iniquity was fully
ripe, even such a time spoken of, Joel 3.14, 15. Put ye in the sickle, for the
harvest is ripe; co^ you down for the press is full, the fats overflow, for
their (...) edness is great, multitudes, multitudes in the valey of de^ the Sun
and the Moon shall be darkened, and the Stars shall (...) draw their shining.

In the opening of the Seals all things revealed in this b^ of the Revelation
is opened, and made known by Ch^ to his church, and yet these judgments spoken
of in the pening of these six Seals is oftentimes fulfilled, as Christ sa^ Mat.
24.34. Verily I say unto you, this generation shall (...) pass till all these
things be fulfilled: For as there is a time (...) Christ says, Mat. 24.6.
compared with the 8th verse, A^ ye shall hear of wars, and rumors of wars; see
that ye be (...) troubled, for all these things must come to pass, but the
(...) is not yet: all these are the beginning of sorrows.

Thus Christ shows there is a beginning of sorrows and that the end of them is
not yet, for they shall co^ ^nue for some time before the end of them comes,
which is ^me great overthrow of the wicked, by a tenible de^ruction, such as
was the destruction of the Jews by (...) ^mans, or such a destruction as was
upon the Roman Empire (...) Constantine the great, which were great and
dreadful ^ays of God's Judgments upon the wicked, to their utter ^verthrow.
Thus it is always at the opening of the sixth Seal; for the great Day of God's
wrath always comes at ^e opening of this sixth Seal, and who then is able to
stand before his wrath, and the wrath of the Lamb. Now by ^is great everthrow
of the wicked, God's wrath is appeased, ^d his Spirit is quieted, and now stops
his hand, having ^unished the wicked; as will appear in the following ^hapter.

CHAP. VII.
Verse 1.

ANd after these things I saw four Angels standing on the four corners of the
earth, olding the four winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow on the
earth, nor on the sea, ^or on any tree.

Here we have an Account what followed after those things ^poken of in the
foregoing Chapter. These four Angels ^ere the executioners of God's Judgments,
and were now ^opt from any further execution, 'till the servants of God ^ere
sealed in their foreheads, as will appear in the two ^ollowing Verses; for John
saw them holding the four winds of the earth, that the wind should not blow on
the earth, ^or on the sea, nor on any tree.

What is intended by the blowing of the wind, is to be seen in these following
Scriptures; Jer. 39.46. And upon Elam will I bring the four winds from the four
quarters of the ^heaven, and will scatter them toward all those winds, and
there shall be no nation whither the outcasts of Elam shall (...) come. Jer.
18.17. I will scatter them as with an east wi^ before the enemy. Jer. 51.1, 2.
Behold I will raise up again Babylon, and against them that dwell in the midst
of them the rise up against me, a destroying wind, etc. for in the day (...)
^rouble they shall be against her round about. Dan. 7.2. (...) saw in my vision
by night, and behold the four winds of the heaven: strove on the great sea. So
that by the blowing o^ the winds is represented wars and commotions, and the
holding of the winds a stop of those commotions and trouble And these four
Angels are the four spirits of the heaven which go forth from standing before
the God of the whole earth Zach. 6.5, 6. and are the executioners of God's
Judgments.

Verse 2, 3. And I saw another Angel ascending from the east.

This is the Son of Righteousness, who arises with healings in his wings,
having the seal of the living God; for i^ is he alone that seals us unto the
day of Redemption with his holy Spirit.

And he cried with a loud voice to the fou^ Angels, to whom it was given to
hurt the earth and the sea, to stop their hand, till the se^ vants of God were
sealed.

And by the earth and sea, and the trees, is intended the inhabitants of this
world, chap. 12.12. Woe to the inhabite^ of the earth, and of the sea. Chap.
17.15. The waters wh^ thou saw where the whore sits, are peoples, and
multitudes, and nations, and tongues. Ezekiel. 20.46. compar^ with the 47th verse,
Son of man, etc. prophecy against the forest of the south field, etc. I will
kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and every
dry tree, etc. And all faces from the south to the north shall be burnt therein.

And as the Storms of wind is wont to do hurt at sea by the destruction of
Ships, and on the earth by blowing down houses and trees, so the Storm of War
is destructive to Mankind.

Now after the wrath of him that sits on the throne, and the wrath of the
Lamb had been executed, to the great ^rrour and amazement of the enemies of the
Church of christ, by a great overthrow, the servants of God are sealed ^ their
foreheads, that the Church of God may be exalted bove the top of the mountains:
But before the opening of ^he sixth seal, they were under great sufferings by
persecution, as appears by John's seeing their souls under the Altar sain for
the word of God, and for the testimony which they held; but now judgment is
executed upon their perse^utors, even a full cup of God's wrath is powered out
upon them, and now he exalts his Church under the denomination ^f sealing a
select number, as in the 4th verse, John in his Vision.

Verse 4. Heard the Number of them which ^re sealed, and there were sealed an
hundred and forty and four thousand, of all the tribes ^f the children of
Israel; ( that is) twelve thou^and of every tribe,

Mentioned in this Chapter. Under the sealing of this num^er of a hundred and
forty and four thousand of all the ^ibes of the Children of Israel, is
comprehended all the ^aled ones, as may be seen in Chap. 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And
I ^oked, and ^o a Lamb stood on Mount Sion, and with him an undred forty and
four thousand, having their fathers ^ame written on their foreheads, etc. And
they sung as it ^ere a new song before the throne, and before the four beasts,
and the elders; and no man could learn that song but the hun^red and forty and
four thousand, which were redeemed from ^e earth: These are they which were not
defiled with women, or they are virgins: These are they which follow the Lamb
^hithersoever he goes: These were redeemed from among men, ^eing the first
fruits unto God, and in their mouth was found ^o guile; for they are without
fault before the throne of God, Chap. 9.4.

Verse 9. After this I beheld, and lo a great ^ultitude which no man could
number, of all nations, and kindreds, and peoples, and tongues stood before the
throne and before the Lam^ clothed with white robes, and palms in the^ hands.

The white robes was to represent their righteous state, an^ palms in their
hands to show their Victory.

Verse 10. And cried with a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God which
sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.

Thus they ascribe their Salvation and Victory to him the sits on the throne
and to the Lamb.

Verse 11, 12. And all the Angels stood round about the Throne, and about the
Elders, and the four beasts, and fell before the throne on the^ faces and
worshipped God, saying, Amen, blessing and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving,
and honor, and power, and might, be unto our Go^ for ever and ever, amen.

And thus all the Angels that stood round about the thro^ fell before the
throne on their faces and worshipped God, a^ cribing blessing, and glory, and
Wisdom, and thanksgiving and honor, and power, and might to God for ever and
ev^ Amen.

Verse 13. And one of the Elders answered saying unto me, what are these which
are arrayed in white robes, and whence came they.

Verse 14. And I said unto him, Sir, the know. And he said unto me, These
are they which came out of great tribulation, and ha^ washed their robes, and
made them whi^ in the blood of the Lamb.

Thus the Church of Christ is represented to John in ^ state of purity and
holiness, after their great tribulation, which was showed in the opening of the
fifth Seal, how they saying, how long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not
judge and a venge our Blood on them that dwell on the earth: But ^ow the day of
their deliverance is come, and the destruction ^f their Enemies, by a dreadful
overthrow from the throne of God.

Verse 15. Therefore they are before the throne of God, and serve him day and
night in his temple: and he that sits on the throne shall dwell among them.

These are they that serve him in his temple, that is in their inward man in
Spirit and in truth. for their bodies is the ^emple of God, and he dwells in
them. 2 Cor. 6.16.

Verse 16, 17. They shall hunger no more, neithes thirst any more, neither
shall the sun light on them nor any heat,

For the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, and shall
lead them unto living fountains of waters: and God shall wipe (...) way all
tears from their eyes.

Thus Gods Church is comforted with their everlasting ^oy and happiness to all
Eternity.

Thus it appears that at the opening of the sixth Seal, the ^utter destruction
of the enemies of God's Church comes upon them, and is the period of their
glory and happiness, who before sat as a queen, saying in her heart, I am a
queen and ^am no Widow, and shall see no sorrow, chap. 18.7. Thou say, I
shall be a lady for ever, I shall not sit as a widow, neither shall I know the
loss of children, Isai. 47.8. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day,
death and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for
strong is the Lord God who judges her, chap. 18.8. But these two things shall
come to thee, in a moment, in one day the loss of children and widowhood, they
shall come upon thee in their perfection, Isai. 47.9.

But on the contrary, as at the opening of the sixth Seal comes the
destruction of the wicked; so comes the Salvation and happiness of the
righteous, for they shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither
shall the Sun light on them nor any heat. For as they under their persecutions
and sufferings, were hungering and thirsting after righteousness, now they are
filled, they are safe under the shad^ of the almighty, from the burning heat of
the Sun, now the shall feed in the ways, and their pasture shall be in all high
p^ces, they shall not hunger not thirst, neither shall the beat (...) Sun smite
them: for he that has mercy on them shall lead the even to springs of water
shall be guide them. Isai. 49.9, (...) Yea this is the day spoken of, The Lord
is thy keeper the L^ is thy shade, the Sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the
M^ by night, the Lord shall preserve thee from evil, for the (...) which is in
the midst of the throne shall feed them, (...) shall lead them unto living
fountains of waters, and God (...) wipe away all tears from their eyes. This
shows that (...) Lamb shall feed them by his own pastures, and lead them
living fountains of Waters, even such fountains as the which are spiritually
thirsting after; Yea, the Lamb w^ give them such water as is spoken of in John
4.13, 14. Jes^ answered and said unto her, whosoever drinks of this w^ shall
thirst again, but whosoever shall drink of the water t^ I shall give him, shall
never thirst, but the water that I (...) give him shall be in him a well of
water springing up into (...) lasting life. This is such water which is spoken
of in J^ 7.37, 38, 39. If any man thirst let him come unto me and dr^ be that
believes on me as the scripture has said, out of his (...) ly shall flow
rivers of living water; but this spoke he of the (...) rit which they that
believe on him should receive.

What is discovered in the opening of these six Seals, is (...) complished
often times in the world, and they measure (...) as six working days, and after
the opening of the seven Seal it will be as a new week begins, and as it is
here exp^ how at the opening of the sixth Seal was the finishing (...) or
period of time, that is the utter overthrow of the ene^ of Gods Church, and a
time of her deliverance, she being (...) in a flourishing State; a state of
purity and holiness, havi^ some respite for a time, by reason of the
destruction of the enemies, until there shall be an apostatizing or falling
aw^ in the Church, and so Antichrist get a head again, little (...) little,
till she come to be so numerous as to join in un^ with the powers of this
world, which God has set up (...) ^o justice and Judgment among the
inhabitants of the earth but they being deluded by Antichrist or the
Apostatized Church, taking her to be the true, because the god of this world
has blinded their eyes, they joining in with her, and she prescribing laws and
ordinances to the powers of this world, pretending to them how God ought to be
worshipped, and by these laws and ordinances they persecute the true Church for
the false, and take the false for the true, as we shall see in the following
part of this book. And so I shall proceed to the next Chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse 1.

ANd when he had opened the seventh Seal there was silence in heaven about the
space of half an hour.

In the opening of all the six Seals, there was a discovery made to John of
extraordinary things that immediately appeared, but upon the opening of this
seal, only silence in the court of heaven, because in the opening of the six
seals, the judgments of God were executed upon the wicked, and before the
opening of the seventh Seal, the church has her deliverance, and is in a
flourishing state, so that at the opening of the seventh Seal, there is only
silence, it being a period of time, and matters ended in the court of heaven.

In the foregoing chapter, we have an account of those that were sealed out of
every tribe there mentioned, and after that a great multitude which no man
could number, out of all nations, and kindreds, and tongues, and people stood
before the the one, and before the Lamb.

This vision shows the state of the church in the primitive time, even its
flourishing state; and the first verse of t^ Chap. is the conclusion of that
history of opening the S^ and another history begins, more particularly about
the (...) of the church of Christ, beginning at its flourishing state, (...) so
continuing till it is apostatized and wholly degenera^ from God. The Lamb of
God having thus loosed the se^ Seals, we have now an open book to read and what
is con^ ned therein, will be proclaimed by the found or the trumpet.

Verse 2. And I saw the seven Angels whi^ stood before God, and to them were
given seve^ trumpets.

John does not say he saw seven Angels standing befo^ God, as if this was the
first right of them, but that he sa^ the seven Angels which stood before God,
as speaking (...) Angels spoken of before, in this book of the revelation and
that now in this present vision, he saw seven trumpet given to the seven angels
which he had before seen standing before God: So that these seven angels appear
to be the seven Angels or seven stars in the right hand of him that always
(...) walking in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks; a^ does comprehend
all his faithful ministers of this flourish ing church, and the seven trumpets
given to them, do^ show that they are they that founds God's judgments, and
other things, before the, come to pass, or proclaim the^ before the execution
of them, and is no other thing, t^ what the prophets were wont to do under the
old testament, as for instance, Amos. 3.6, 7. Shall a trumpet be blown in the
city and the people not be afraid, surely the Lord God will b^ nothing but he
reveals his secret unto his servants the p^ phets. Ezekiel. 32.2. and third
verses compared with the (...) venth verse. If the people of the land, take a
man of their coast and set him for their watchman, if when he sees the sword
or ming upon the land he blow the trumpet and warn the people: ^o thou son of
man, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel, therefore thou shall
bear the word at my mouth, and warn them from me. Hos. 8.1. Set the trumpet to
thy mouth, he shall come as an eagle against the house of the Lord, because
they have transgressed my Covenant. And the seven priests that went before the
ark of God, with seven trumpets, which did sound the downfall of Jericho, which
is an evident figure of what is here spoken of, of these seven Angels with
their seven trumpets. In going over this book we shall (...) what they did
proclaim by the found of the trumpet, by what followed the found of them.

Verse 3. And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden
censer, and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with
the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar, which was before the throne.

This was the service of the High Priest only, under the law, to offer incense
upon the golden Altar which was before the mercy Seat. And does show that this
Angel was the Lord Jesus Christ himself, who makes intercession for us, in
that it is said, and there was given unto him much incense, that he should
offer it with the Prayers of all Saints. This was figured out under the Law, as
is spoken of Zechariah the High Priest, Luke 1.10. And the whole multitude of
the people were praying without at the time of intense. And here it is spoken
of Christ our great High Priest.

Verse 4. And the smoke of the incense which came with the prayers of the
saints, ascended up before God, out of the angels hands.

This shows, that Jesus Christ our Intercessor or Advocate, causes the cries
and prayers of God's Servants to come up before him as sweet Incense.

Verse 5. And the Angel took the Censer, and filled it with fire of the altar,
and cast it into the earth:

This verse shows that as the prayers and cries of the Saints, mentioned in
the foregoing verse came up before God, through the intercession of Jesus
Christ, which intercession is signified by his offering the incense with their
prayers. And his filling the Censer with fire of the altar, and casting it into
the earth, is to show his executing Gods fiery judgments upon the Inhabitants
of the earth, for the Injury (...) to his church, whose cries and prayers was
heard, and ju^ meant executed upon their oppressors.

A^ there were voices, and thunderings, (...) lightenings, and an earthquake:

The casting of the fire of the altar into the earth, does (...) present God's
angry judgments executed upon the wick^ and the voices does show their
outcries, that they were frigh^ ed thereby; and his judgments are compared to
thund^ and lightnings, and the earthquake, is to setforth their (...) bling at
the said Judgments, Isai. 29.6. Thou shall be vi^ of the Lord of Hosts, with
thunder and with earthquake. T^ time when these judgments were executed,
sounded by (...) two first trumpets, was in the time of the persecuting (...)
thenish Empires of Rome: for the trumpets sounded w^ was written in the sealed
book: and therefore the seals (...) be opened before the seven Angels could
sound what (...) written therein.

Verse 6. And the seven angels which had (...) seven trumpets prepared
themselves to sound.

Thus God is wont to forewarn before he executes his ju^ ments, as he did to
Nineveh, and to Pharaoh, to Samaria^ Jerusalem.

Verse 7. The first angel sounded, and there (...) lowed hail and fire mingled
with blood, and they w^ cast upon the earth, and the third part of the tr^ was
burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.

This first trumpet sounds those judgments discovered the opening of the first
four Seals, and they are here represented by hail and fire mingled with blood,
and cast upon (...) earth, aluding from the fire taken from the altar, spoken
(...) in the 5th verse, And the Angel took the censer, and filled (...) with
fire of the Altar, and cast it into the earth: This fire (...) the Altar being
cast into the earth, does represent God's (...) gry judgments inflicted upon
the enemies of his Church as may be seen in the opening of the 5th Seal, chap.
6.9, (...) And when he had opened the fifth Seal, I saw under the altar (...)
Souls of them that were slain for the word of God and for (...) testimony which
they held, and they cried with a loud voice, saying how long O Lord holy and
true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth.
Compare this with the third, fourth, and fifth verses, of this Chapter, and ^t
appears that Jesus Christ their Advocate and Intercessor, appeared to make
intercession for them, by offering much incense with the prayers of all Saints;
and then filled the censer with fire of the Altar, and cast it into the earth,
which represented the execution of those Judgments, opened in the (...) first
Seals, and in the sixth Seal, and proclaimed by the two first trumpets, and
executed in the time of the reign of the Heathenish persecuting Emperors of
Rome, till their utter destruction came upon them, as by the next trumpet will
appear.

Verse 8. And the second Angel sounded, and as ^s it were a great mountain
burning with fire was ^ast into the sea, and the third part of the sea became
blood.

Verse 9. And the third part of the creatures which were in the sea and had
life died; and ^he third part of the Ships were destroyed.

The effects which followed both these trumpets, does new very great judgments
were executed on the earth, and ^a, by great effusion of blood, both upon the
earth, and sea, which denotes the Inhabitants thereof. And by a great mountain
which was cast into the sea, does set forth some treat destruction of some
dominion; which must needs be ^he overthrow of the heathenish Empire of Rome by
Constantine the great: for it is a six seal, opening or finishing judgment, for
it was discovered in the opening of the sixth ^al, as by these following
scriptures appear, by the burning mountain. Babylon was of old called a great
mountain, ^ech. 4.7. Who art thou O great mountain before Zerubbabel. ^er.
51.25. Behold I am against thee O destroying mountain, ^ith the Lord, which
destroyest all the earth, and I will stretch ^ut mine hand upon thee, and roll
thee down from the rocks, and make thee a burnt mountain. Isai. 13.2. List ye
up the ^anner upon the high mountain. Thus old Babylon was ter^ed a mountain,
because she was exalted very high; her dominion was very great. But at this
second trumpet, (...) were a great mountain burning with fire was cast into
(...) sea; and the third part of the sea became blood. (...) shows, that in
these great Storms and Commotions, (...) great Dominion was destroyed, being
cast down in her do^ nion; for the sea does represent dominion, yea great m^
tudes of people, chap. 17.15. compared with chap. 13. Which beast is the Roman
Empire, rising out of the (...) tuds of peoples; which shows the casting down
and (...) destruction of some great dominion, and great effusion (...) blood in
her dominion.

Now the four Angels who in the former Chapter (...) forbidden to hurt the
earth or the sea, or any tree, till (...) servants of God were sealed in their
forehead, has (...) executed those judgments upon the earth, and upon the^ and
upon the trees.

This second trumpet founded the great day of Go^ Wrath; such a day as was
prophesied against Babylon, Jer^ 25. Behold I am against thee, O destroying
mountain, says ^ Lord, etc. and I will stretch out mine hand upon thee, and
(...) the down from the rocks, and will make thee a burnt mount^ And the
trumpet founded her overthrow by the Pro^ Jeremiah, as in the 27th verse, Blow
the trumpet among (...) nations, prepare the nations against her. So here upon
found of this second trumpet, a great mountain bu^ with fire was cast into the
sea, which is the utter (...) throw of the heathenish Empire of Rome by
Constant^ even as God overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the red (...) And her
overthrow is expressed in the opening of the (...) seal, as Babylon's and Egypt's
was, as may be seen by t^ Scriptures, Isai. 13.10, 13. Ezekiel. 32.7, 8. compared
(...) Rev. 6.12, 13, 14.

Verse 10, 11. And the third Angel founde^ and there fell a great star from
heaven, bu^ ^ing as it were a lamp; and it fell upon the thi^ part of the
rivers, and upon the fountains (...) waters, and the name of the star is called
wormwood; and the third part of the waters became wormwood, and many men died
of the waters because they were made bitter.

By a great star, we are to understand Ministers of the Gospel, that had been
in a great light. And by falling from heaven does note to us, that they did not
keep their station in heaven. And burning as it were a lamp, does note to us,
the li^ they were in, before it was quenched, after the similitud^ (...)
falling star, which causes a light stream with it (...) ^lling upon the waters
was soon quenched. And (...) ^ing upon the third part of the rivers, and upon
the fountains of waters; these rivers, and fountains of waters, are those
fountains spoken of in the seventh chap. verse 17. The Lamb which is in the
midst of the throve shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains
of waters.

And the name of the star is called wormwood.

This shows it was a bitter star, and defiled the third part of these rivers
and fountains of waters; that is, they corrupted the wholesome doctrine of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, by which his church had been nourished, fed and
quickened: And upon their fall from heaven taught heretical doctrine, which was
as bitter waters, and they that drank in their corrupt doctrine, died from that
spiritual life which before they lived in, when they were nourished by those
living waters; but now this bitter star falling upon the third part of the
rivers, and fountains of waters, they became bitter; and many men died of the
waters because they were made bitter.

The author to the Hebrews cautioneth that Church with this danger, Heb. 12.15.
Looking diligently, lest any man fall from the grace of God; lest any root of
bitterness springing up trouble you, and thereby many be defiled. This bitter
star falling from heaven upon the third part of the rivers, and fountains of
living waters, by which the Church before was nourished; but now being made
bitter by the fall of this star, many in the Church decay and die, by drinking
in these bitter waters, or corrupt doctrine. Now that flourishing Church which
we read of in the for (...) Chapter, after the opening of the sixth seal, and
before the opening of the seventh seal, begins to fall away and apost^ tize
from it is first purity, by drinking in this corrup^ doctrine.

Thus was it of old, when the Shepherds of Israel di^ backslide; Ezekiel. 34.19.
And as for my flock, they eat the which ye have trodden with your feet, and
they drink the which ye have fouled with your feet.

Verse 12. And the four (...) Angel founded and the third part of the (...)
smitten, an^ the third part of the moon, and (...) third part (...) the stars,
so as the third part of them wa^ darkened, and the day shone not for a third
part of it, and the night likewise.

In the two foregoing Verses, we had an account (...) the bitter waters, by
reason of a great star falling from heaven, which star fell upon the third part
of the river^ and fountains of waters, and the third part (...) them became
wormwood, and many men died of the w^ zers because they were made bitter. Thus
many in t^ Church drinking in heretical doctrine from such Minister as fell
away from their heavenly state, and so come (...) decay, wither and die.

And thus darkness followed and began to come upon the Church, which is
represented to John by the thi^ part of the sun being smitten, and the third
part of the moon, and the third part of the stars; so as that a thi^ part of
them were darkened, and the day shone not for (...) third part of it, and the
night likewise.

Thus John is showed after what manner the church di^ decay and wither, and
fall from it is first state, even (...) wandering stars, to whom is reserved the
blackness and dar^ ness for ever, Jude 13. Thus it appears, that as a thi^ part
of the waters were made bitter, which measures corruption in doctrine, and a
decay in the church, so equally did darkness follow or come upon the church;
that is a thi^ part of the waters were made bitter, so likewise a third part
(...) the lights of heaven were darkened, and when a total falling a wa^ ^mes,
then total darkness will follow and come upon the Church Mic. 3.6. Therefore
night shall be unto you, that ye shall not have a vision; and it shall be dark
over you that ye shall not divine; and the sun shall go down over the prophets,
and the day shall be dark over them. Amos 8.9. And it shall come to pass in
that day, says the Lord God, that I will cause the sun to go down at noon, and
I will darken the earth in the clear day.

Verse 13. And I beheld, and heard an Angel fly through the midst of heaven,
saying with a loud voice, Woe, woe, woe to the inhabiters of the earth, by reason
of the other voices of the trumpet of the three Angels which are yet to sound.

These three trumpets which are yet to sound, were proclaimed by an Angel
flying through the midst of heaven with a loud voice, to the three woe trumpets,
to the inhabitants of the earth. This Angel was a minister of Jesus Christ,
ordered by him to make proclamation, before the founding of these trumpets, to
show woeful things would follow the found of every one of them upon the
inhabitants of the earth. And what those woes be will be seen when we come to
the sound of those trumpets, and see what followed them.

CHAP. IX.
Verse 1.

ANd the fifth Angel founded, and I saw a star fall from heaven unto the earth.

This star does represent the ministers of the Churches, and its falling from
heaven unto the earth, does show their falling away from a heavenly state, to
an earthly and carnal state, even a total apostatizing.

And to him was given the key of the bottomless pit.

The giver of this key is the Angel of this pit, spoken of in the 11th verse of
this Chapter; And they had a king over them, which is the angel of the
bottomless pit, and his (...) is Apollion; that is, a destroyer.

Verse 2. And he opened the bottomless pit.

In the 20th Chapter of this book, second and third verses, we read of the
Devil's being cast into the botomless pit, and shut up in it, that he should
deceive the nations no more. But I am now treating of the opening of this
bottomless pit, by that old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, to the end he
may deceive the nations; and upon his opening of it.

Arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great furnace.

This smoke is to blind the eyes of the understanding and to cast a vail of
darkness upon the hearts of all people.

And the sun and the air were darkened, by reason of the smoke of the pit.

This is to show, that by reason of this great smoke of delusion and heresy,
coming out of this pit, the very sunshine of the Gospel is now darkened, and
heresy, superstition and darkness has now got the upper hand.

Verse 3. And there came out of the smoke locusts upon the earth.

These locusts does represent the false antichristian ministry, coming out of
the smoke that comes out of the bottomless pit upon the earth. These locusts
are a mischievous creature both to men and beasts, in that they devour the
fruits of the earth, and the grass, and so bring famine both upon man and
beast, they being such a mischievous creature, are the most suitablest beast to
set forth the false prophets by, who are very hurtful and injurious, both to
men's souls and bodies.

And unto them was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power.

As Christ says, Does men gather grapes of thorns, or ^gs of thistles? This
power was given them by their king Apollion, a destroyer, who goes about like a
roaring lion seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8.

Verse 4. And it was commanded them, that they should not hurt the grass of the
earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree, but only those men which have
not the seal of God in their foreheads.

This shows to us, that they were not locusts in sex or kind, for it is the
nature of those beasts to hurt the grass of the earth, and every green thing,
and the trees; but the Spirit of God makes use of this sort of vermin, to
represent to John the numberless multitude, and mischievous nature of
Antichrist, locusts being the fittest sort of creature to set them forth by in
the two forementioned respects; for this book says, the Devil deceives the
whole world, and it is these only that they hurt on a spiritual account, that
have not the seal of God in their forehead; them they can deceive and delude to
their utter destruction; and the Apostle John faith, The false prophets are of
the world, and the world bears them. These locusts are false prophets that
come out of this smoke on the earth, and draws multitudes after them like bands
of locusts; and the scriptures has foretold us that they shall make
merchandise of the people, and that they have an heart exercised with covetous
practices; cursed children, having forsaken the right way, and have gone
astray, following the way of Balaam, who loved the wages of unrighteousness.
And Christ faith, Beware of false Prophets, that come to you in sheeps
clothing, but inwardly they are ravenning wolves. And the Prophet Isaiah
compares them to greedy dogs, which can never have enough; shepherds that
cannot understand, every one seeks for his gain from his quarter, Isai. 56.11.
And faith Ezekiel. 34.2, 3. Woe be to the shepherds of Israel, that do seed
themselves; ye eat the fat, and ye cloth you ^th the w^o!.

Well may this be called a woe trumpet, and all this (...) chief follow the
found of it.

Thus these locusts are both numerous and hurtful, the they hurt not the grass,
neither any green thing, nor the trees, as locusts in their kind do; but these
hurt only those (...) which have not the Seal of God in their foreheads, that
is, the delude and oppress the world; they delude them with their fal^
doctrine, and oppress them in eating the fruits of other mensl^ bours as the
locusts do. yea, they would deceive the (...) elect, if it were possible; but
it is impossible to decei^ those which have the seal of God in their foreheads
It is these that procure God's Judgment by their locusts like oppression) upon
themselves, and upon the rest of the world whom they deceive, who have not the
seal of God in their foreheads; but as for God's Elect, they are in safety in
the time of his judgments, when they are abroad (...) the earth, as appears in
the seventh Chap. verse 3. H^ not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees,
till we have s^ the servants of our God in their foreheads. And in the verse it
is said they were to hurt only those men whi^ have not the seal of God in their
foreheads. These (...) those in whom the god of this world has blinded the mi^
of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ
should shine unto them, 2 Cor. 4.4.

Verse 5 And to them it was given, that they should not kill them, but that
they should (...) tormented five months.

Here we see that they were not to kill them which h^ not the Seal of God in
their foreheads, but only hurt, an^ torment them, that is with their false
doctrine, which lead^ them into no true peace, nor rest, and with their
oppression. But they come to that head in process of time, that they killed the
two witnesses, as in the 11th chap. 7. verse. And when they shall have finished
their testimony, the beast that useendeth out of the bottomless pit, shall make
war against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them. But these that have
not the Seal of God, they only torment them five months; these five months does
measure all the time of these locusts continuance: for five months is the time
of the continuance of locusts, and does measure the whole time of these locusts
that does come out of the smoke of the bottomless pit, and torment these men
which have not the Seal of God in their foreheads: whom they torment, not only
by their ex ^ortion, violence and oppression, and in devouring of the fruits of
men's labors, by laying heavy rates and payments upon them and easing
themselves, by laying them thus on other ^ens shoulders, but they themselves
will not move them with one of their fingers, Mat. 23.4. but also they torment
them with their false doctrine, and false worship, as appears, chap. 14.11. And
they have no rest day nor night, who worship the beast and his image. Thus they
torment them that they have no rest ^ay nor night, for their false doctrine can
lead to no true peace of conscience: for they neither know, nor can teach any
freedom from sin, or how men shall attain to a blameless estate before God, as
those which are sealed have attained to, Chap. 14.5. And in their mouth was
found no guile; for they are without fault before the throne of God. Rom
6.(...). Being then made free from sin, we became the servants ^f
righteousness. verse 22. But now being made free from sin, and become servants
of God. But this innocent state of ^ighteousness, they know nothing of.

And their torment was as the torment of a sorpion when he strikes a man.

Thus the oppressions of these false teachers or locusts, ^orment men as when a
scorpion strikes a man, which ^oth import, they are grievous tormentors all
the time of their continuance; yea, they bring men into a miserable state and
condition of perplexity, as we see by the testimony ^f the scriptures; when the
apostatized Church and the ^arthly powers come into a union together, they soon
bring themselves into great distress and calamity, as is to ^e seen, Mic. 3.11,
12. The heads thereof judge for reward, and the priests thereof teach for hire,
and the prophets thereof divine for money; and therefore shall Zion for your
sake be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem become heaps. Thus they bring
themselves into destruction and great distress, through their covetousness and
greediness of gain. Jer. 8.3. Death shall rather be chosen than life, by the
residue of all that remain of this evil family.

Verse 6. And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and
shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them.

Thus their wickedness brings such terrible Judgments (...) them, that they are
weary of their own life, and wait f^ death but it comes not; for they cannot
die to sin under t^ doctrine, which teaches them that there is no freed^ from
Sin on this side the grave; so that they are terrif^ and tormented with the
fear of God's wrath and ete^ Judgment.

Thus are they distressed with fears and torments, with perplexity, that death
is chosen rather than life in the days of apostasy: When the fruit of their
vain labors (...) meth upon them, even distress and anguish, then (...) they
call to the mountains and rocks to fall upon the^ to hide them for fear of the
Lord, and for the glo^ of his Majesty, when he arises to shake terribly the
earth.

Verse 7. And the shapes of the locusts, a^ like unto horses prepared unto
battle.

This is to show that they are warriors under the ba^ of their king Apollion,
that is, a destroyer.

And on their heads were as it were cro^ like gold.

But not really gold, for they are but counterseits; (...) those twenty four
elders spoken of in Chap. 4.4. (...) real crowns of gold on their heads, being
made kings (...) priests unto God by Jesus Christ, who loved them, (...) washed
them from their fins in his own blood: But the were but counterfeits, being but
pretended Elders of (...) Church of Jesus Christ, when indeed they were Elders
(...) ly of the false Church, spoken of in Chapter 17. Arr^ in purple and
scarlet color, gilded with gold and preci^ stone, and upon her forchead was a
name written, My^ Babylon the great, the mother of harlots, and ahominations
(...) the earth. And says John, I saw her drunken with the bl^ of saints, and
with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus. (...) John saw these locusts to have
crowns on their heads li^ gold: They were crowned with these crowns by the g^
of this world, who has blinded them with the smoke the came out of the
bottomless pit, opened by his Angels with his key delivered unto them. They
were indeed Stars (...) ^ven, but he drew them down from thence with his (...),
and cast them down to the earth, Chap. 12.4. And ^w he has made them kings and
priests, under his ban^, to fight against the saints of Jesus, by persecution;
^d their kingdom and glory is only of this world, for ^e false church faith, I
am a queen, and snall see no sor^w.

And the faces of these locusts were as the ^ces of men.

For indeed they were men, and not really locusts in kind (...), but
comparatively.

Verse 8. And they had hair as the hair of ^omen.

This is to show their deformity from the state of Christ's ^nisters; for it is
a shame for a man to wear long hair like woman, for her hair is given her for a
vail. 1 Cor. 11.14, (...). Does not even nature it self teach you, that if a
man have ^g hair it is a shame unto him? But they had hair as the ^ir of women;

And their teeth were as the teeth of lions.

This is to thew that they were prepared with teeth to ^our like lions. 2 Timothy
4.17. And I was delivered out the mouth of the lion. Thus they devour Christ's
^ock.

Verse 9. And they had breast-plates, as it ^re breast-plates of iron.

Which is to show that they were substantially harnessed (...) the battle
against the saints, by the powers of this world.

And the sound of the wings of these locusts, ^as as the found of chariors, and
many horses ^nning to battle.

This is to show they are numberless like locusts, having ^eat power on their
side, even like an army well prepared ^ith chariots and many horses, that are
running to the ^ttel with great boldness and considence of victory.

Verse 10. And they had tails like unto ^corpions, and there were stings in
their tails.

So that it was dangerous going after or following them; (...) does show how
they were armed and prepared for (...) battle, so that they were prepared to
fight both before (...) behind, under their king Apollion;

And their power was to hurt men (...) months.

This five months measures the whole time of the mystical locusts, by the time
of real locusts in kind; which we may see Antichrist has a limited time of
the continuance.

Verse 11. And they had a king over the^ which is the angel of the bottomless
pit, (...) name in the Hebrew tongue is Abaddon, (...) the greek tongue has
his name Apollyon.

And in Chap. 12.9. he is said to be a Dragon, that (...) Serpent called the
Devil and Satan, who deceives (...) whole world.

Thus we have an account of the falling away of (...) true Church, and the
rising of the false Church, and (...) going on till they were come to great
power and str^ being prepared for the battle under their king Apolly^ This
Church is called, Mystery Babylon, the mother of (...) lots, Chap. 17.5. It is
this Church which is called, (...) man, and the great city, v. 18. And the
woman which (...) saw, is that great city which reigns over the king^ the
earth. This is she that it is said of in Chap. 18.^ And in her was found the
blood of the prophets, and of (...) and of all that were slain upon the earth.

In the foregoing Verses of this Chapter, we have a (...) on of Apollyon a
destroyer, and his kingdom; begin^ the great Apostasy of the Gentile Church,
which ap^ cy might possibly begin soon after the time of Const^ the great, and
so continued till Antichrist came to (...) great power and strength in the
world, even to a great (...) and dominion; and the true Church of Christ gone
(...) captivity, into this Mystical Babylon, even into a wilder^ of sorrow and
affliction, where she is nourished from (...) (these mystical five months of
the locusts time) cloth ^ in sackcloth; which five months measures the whole
(...) of Antichrist's reign.

^ere follows the second Woe trumpet, with the Account of what followed it.

Verse 12. One woe is past, and behold there ^ome two woes more hereafter.

These are the three woes spoken of in chap. 8.13. Woe, (...), woe to the
inhabiters of the earth, by reason of the three ^ices of the trumpet of the
three Angels which are yet to found. ^he first of these three was the
proclamation of the open^g of the bottomless pit, out of which pit there arose
a ^eat smoke, and out of the smoke came the locusts, or A^llyons Army like
innumerable locusts, and became a great ^ngdom, and in battle did overcome the
saints, and did kill ^em as appears in the following part of this book, chap.
11. And when they shall have finished their (...) ^ony, the beast that a^ndeth
out of the bettomless pit, shall (...) war against them, ^d shall overcome
them, and kill them, chap. 13.7. ^d it was given unto him to make war with the
saints, and ^overcome them. And now follows the second woe trumpet.

Verse 13. And the sixth Angel founded, and ^heard a voice from the four horns
of the golden ^tar which is before God.

The sixth angel sounded his trumpet in the time that mis^al Babylon is in her
great glory, and has gotten great ^minion, and sa^ in her heart, I am a queen
and shall see (...) sorrow; but a second woe is coming speedily upon the ^und of
this trumpet, for a great Army is a preparing ^ough the atonement made by Jesus
Christ, for to slay ^hird part of Apollyons Army.

And I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden altar which before God.
We read of this golden Altar in chap. 8.3. And ^other Angel came and stood at
the altar, having a golden cen^^^, and there was given unto him much incense,
that he should offer with the prayers of all saints upon the golden altar which
was before the throne, this is an allusion from the golden A^ which we read of
in Exodus 30.10. And Aaron shall make (...) atonement upon the horns of it once
in a year, with the blood the sin offering of atonement, once in a year shall
be make (...) tonement upon it, throughout your generations. So that (...)
voice which spoke to the angel which had the sixth trum^ came from the four
horns of this golden altar, and upon (...) four horns of this altar the
atonement was wont to be m^ by the blood of the sin-offering, so that this was
the (...) of atonement and came from the Lord Jesus Christ our (...) high
priest; for no man was to be in the temple when (...) high priest was within
making atonement, as is to be (...) Lev. 16.17, 18. And there shall be no man
in the tabernacle the congregation, when he goes in to make an atonement,
(...) and be shall go out unto the altar and make an atonement (...) it, and
shall take the blood of the bullock and of the Goat, (...) put it upon the
horns of the altar round about. So that (...) voice came from the place of
atonement, which atonement was made by Jesus Christ the great high priest of
our (...) fession: for it came from the four horns of the Golden A^ which was
before God: and it was directed to the A^ which sounded the sixth trumpet.

Verse 14. Saying to the sixth angel which had the trumpet, Loose the four
Angels whi^ are bound in the great river Euphrates.

Here are several things to be observed from this verse; (...) first is, the
voice came from the four horns of the golden altar. And secondly, it was
directed to the angel which (...) ^ht sixth trumpet. And thirdly, the voice
commanded (...) required him to loose the four angels that was bound in the
great River Euphrates.

First, We are to consider, the four horns of the Altar from whence the voice
came, pointed every ways, both north, (...) south, east, and west.

Secondly, We shall find that the voice that (...) directed to the angel which
had founded the sixth trumpet, did command him to loose the four Angels that
was bound in the great river Euphrates. And,

Thirdly, That these four angels did represent to John, how tha^ every quarter
they were bound in the great River Euphrates. And

Fourthly, It is necessary to know what is intended by their being bound in the
great River Euphrates. Euphrates was a river that did belong to old Babylon, as
may be seen, Jer. 51.60. etc. And their being bound in said River, does show
that they were bound under the power and Dominion of Mystical Babylon, even
under Apollyons doctrine and delusions: but after that this angel had sounded
the sixth trumpet, which was to give notice what was to follow, and that which
followed was a command to him that had sounded that is the sixth Angel, to
loose the four Angels, that they might be prepared at an hour, and a Day, and a
month, and, (...) year thus to be ready at all times to make war, against such
as worship Devils, and Idols of Gold and Silver, etc. as appears in the two
last verses of this chap. but that which followed the found of the foregoing
trumpet, that is the fifth trumpet, was the coming forth of the locusts, and
became a kingdom, whose king was Apollion, but that which followed this sixth
trumpet, is an army prepared to engage war against Apollyon's army, and to
destroy a third part of them. Possibly here is mentioned a certain number for
an uncertain; and this army were such as were bound in the great river
Euphrates before the sixth Angel sounded; but upon his sounding, they are
loosed in every quarter, and prepared to be in a readiness, at the pouring out
of the sixth viol; for then the great river Euphrates will be dried up, as may
be seen in Chap. 16.12. And the sixth Angel powered out his viol upon the great
river Euphrates, and the waters thereof were dried up; that the way of the
kings of the east night be prepared.

This alludes from the destruction of old Babylon, by the Meads and Persians,
who came out of the east, and by trenches dried up the great river Euphrates,
by which means her destruction came; for by that means they entered the city,
and so took it. And her power and great dominion is expressed by the similitude
of many waters, Jer. 51.13. O thou that dwell upon many waters, abundant in
treasures, thy end is come, and the measure of thy coverousness. Thus the
greatness of her dominion, and power, is expressed by (...) similitude of many
waters; and her destruction is set (...) by drying them up, as in the 36th and
37th verses of (...) same Chapter, Therefore thus says the Lord, behold I
(...) plead thy cause, and take vengeance for thee; and I will ^ up her sea,
and make her springs dry, and Babylon shall (...) heaps. And Chap. 50.38. A
drought is upon her waters, (...) they shall be dried up: for it is the land of
graven (...) and they are mad upon their idols.

But this Chapter I am treating upon, is not speaking (...) the utter
destruction of mystical Babylon, but loosing select army, which before was
bound under her power (...) dominion; but now is prepared to be in a readiness
for (...) make war against her, or Apollyons army or kingdom, (...) the next
verse.

Verse 15. And the four Angels were loose^ which were prepared for an hour, and
a (...) and a month, and a year, for to slay the this part of men.

Here we may observe, that this army is prepared to (...) in a readiness at
every occasion; and that they were (...) as were before bound in the great
river Euphrates, (...) are now loosed from that bondage, by a voice that (...)
from the four horns of the golden altar, which is (...) God; and that the four
horns of the golden altar was (...) place where atonement was wont to be made
by (...) blood of the sin offering, has already been proved (...) scripture
testimony; and that the river they were bound (...) was the river Euphrates,
which was a river that did (...) long to old Babylon, and that it alludes from
that rives^ evident, and that waters in scripture does hold forth (...) minion
and great power is evident; as may be seen, Is^ 7, etc. Now therefore behold
the Lord brings upon (...) the waters of the rivers strong and many, even the
king (...) Assyria, and all his glory, etc. As also in this book, (...) 17.15.
The water: which thou saw where she where (...) are peoples, and multitudes,
and nations, and tong^. (...) whore is the false Church, which has all (...)
power (...) Men and Devils on her side, so that she fitteth upon many waters,
and her name is Mystery Babylon the great. And this select army is prepared to
be in a readiness at an hour, and a day, and a month, and a year, who were
before bound under her power, and kept in subjection under her dominion, still
this voice of deliverance, from the place of atonement, or from the four horns
of the Golden Altar which was before God, where our great High Priest Jesus
Christ makes atonement for us; by whose commandment they were set at liberty,
and prepared for the destruction of a third part of mysti^al Babylon, being an
army mustered up by the Lord Jesus for to sight a spiritual battle, or bear a
testimony against her worshipping of Devils, and Idols of Gold, and of Sil^er,
etc. and against her murders, and sorceries, and forni^ations, and thefts; and
to denounce Gods Judgments against ^uch things. And thus this army is mustered
and prepared ^y our Lord Jesus Christ, as he prepared an army against old
Babylon, in order to her destruction; as may be seen, ^ai. 13.3, 4. I have
commanded my sanctified ones, etc. The Lord of hosts mustereth the hosts of the
battle. Verse 17. Be^old, I will ^ir up the Medes against them. And in verse
^9, says he, And behold the glory of the kingdoms, the ^eauty of the Chaldeans
excellency, shall be as when God ^vorthrew S^dom. Isai. 44.27, 28. That says
to the deep be ^ried, and I will dry up thy rivers that says of Cyrus, he ^s
my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure. Thus the Lord of old dried up
the deep waters of Babylon, and made way for Cyrus whom he had anointed to
subdue nations, and to deliver his Church and People out of their ^aptivity, as
appears, Isai. 45.1, 2, 3. and 13. v. For the ^ledes and Persians were bound
under the Power of old Babylon, till God loosed them from under her power, and
prepared them for her destruction, and for the delive^ance of his people by the
hand of Cyrus, whom he pre^ared, sanctified and girded for that work and
service; from which figure this loosing, and preparing, for an hour, and a day,
and a month, and a year, alludes from.

And thus the Prophets did sound the trumpet of Israel's ^eliverance, and their
enemies destruction; as this Angel which had the sixth trumpet did.

Verse 16. And the number of the army (...) the horsemen were two hundred
thousand thousand; and I heard the number of them.

From hence we may observe, that this select army (...) listed under Christ's
banner, who had prepared them (...) the battle; for John heard the list or
number of the ho^ men; but as for the lift or number of Apollions army, (...)
have no account of them, for they were enemies to Chri^ and his army, as
appears by the last battle they fought where both armies may be seen, Chap.
19.13. etc. And saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse, and he the sat
upon him was called faithful and true, and in righteous^ he does judge and make
war: his eyes were as a flame of (...) and on his head were many crowns, and he
had a na^ written that no man knew but he himself; and he (...) clothed in a
vesture dipped in blood, and his name is cal^ the Word of God. And the armies
which were in been followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen,
(...) and clean. These armies comprehend this select army I am now treating
upon, and the 19th verse of the same Chaptreats of Apollyon's army spoken of in
the foregoing (...) of this Chapter I am treating upon; and is thus expre^
Chap. 19.19. And I saw the beast and the kings of the earth and their armies
gathered together to make war against (...) that sat on the horse, and against
his army.

These be the two armies this Chapter is setting forth but it is treating only
of the preparation or first beginning of the war.

Verse 17. And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and them that sat on them,
having breast-plates of fire, and of jacinct, and bring stone; and the heads of
the horses were (...) the heads of lions, and out of their mouth issued fire,
and smoke, and brimstone.

In this vision John gives us an account, after what manner the horses appeared
unto him in the vision, and the that sat on them; they had breast-plates of
fire, and (...) jacinet, and b^mstone. Fire and brimstone is an unwonted
armor, and according to reason will not defend the shot; but when we shall
come to show how the battles were fought by these two armies, it will appear
the only armor. Jacinct is a precious stone, as may be seen, Chap. 21.20. And
as it is described by writers it is of a waterish or smokey color. The
precious stone does represent to us, that they had on the breast plate of
righteousness.

And the heads of the horses were as the heads of lions. This is to show their
courage and boldness.

And out of their mouths issued fire, and smoke, and brimstone, These are
terrible destructive things; and she weth, that the destruction of their
enemies was by that which came out of their mouths; and that their
breast-plates, and that which came out of their mouths by which their enemies
were killed was the same, excepting the jacinct (which is a precious stone)
which is put in the place of the smoke, it being of a waterish smokey color,
and is to represent them to have the breast plate of faith and right teousness;
and the fire and brimstone is to show, that God was a wall of fire round about
them, as he was of old to them that had deliverance out of old Babylon, as
these had deliverance out of mystical Babylon, Zech. 2.5, etc. For I says the
Lord, will be unto her a wall of fire round about, etc. Deliver thy self, O
Zion, that dwell with the daughter of Babylon. So that this breast plate of
fire and brimstone did represent that God who is a consuming fire was their
defense.

Verse 18. By these three was the third part of men killed, by the fire, and by
the smoke, and by the brimstone, which issued out of their mouths.

This destruction of the enemies of God, and of his Church, which was by the
fire, and by the smoke, and by the brimstone which issued out of their mouths,
shows that they were like a hearth of fire among the wood, and like a torch of
fire in a sheaff, and they shall devour all the people round about, on the
right hand and on the left, Zech. 12.6. For they are God's battle an and
weapons of war; for with them will be break in pieces the nations, and with
them will he destroy kingdoms, and with them will he break in pieces the horse
and his rider, and with them will he break in (...) the chariot and his rider,
Jer. 51.20, 21, etc.

Verse 19. For their power is in their mouth, and in their tails; for their
tails were like unto serpents, and had heads and with them they do hurt.

Here it is said their power is in their mouth, which shows as before was said,
the destruction of their enemies was by the fire, smoke and brimstone, which
issued out of their mouths; all which shows they were mystical things, and are
not to be understood after a carnal manner; for her is two Armies mentioned in
this Chapter; the Angel of the bottomless pit, whose name is a destroyer is
king of the one; and the other army was those that were bound in the great
river Euphrates, which does allude from the river of old Babylon, but are now
upon the sounding (...) the sixth trumpet delivered from under her power and
deminion, as Israel of old was from under the power and dominion of old
Babylon, and prepared for the destruction of the wicked. And the execution they
did, proceeded out of their mouths: So that they are two mystical armies, and
are prepared to fight a mystical battle, such a battle as such ^riers are wont
to fight; for this army of Apollyons which ascended out of the bottomless pit,
was prepared against the Saints, as may be seen Chap. 11.7. The beast that
ascea^eth out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, that is,
against the two witnesses; and this army is prepared against Apollyons, to be
in a readiness, at an hour, and at a day, etc. And their testimony that issues
out of their mouth, is compared to fire, smoke and brimstone; for it is a
mystical battle, such a battle as Christ's soldiers were wont to fight; as for
instance, 1 Cor. 15.32. If after the manner of men I have fought with beasts at
Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not at all. These beasts were
such Locusts as these which are here spoken of, and the war is such a mystical
war, as the Apostle says in another place, I have fought a good sight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith, 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. Thou therefore endure
hardness as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. No man that warmth entangleth
himself with the affairs of this life, that he may please him who has chosen
him to be a soldier. He that overcomes in such a battle as this is, is a good
soldier of Jesus Christ; Mat. 10.34, 35. Think not that I am come to send peace
on earth, I came not to send peace but a sword; for I am come to set a man at
variance against his father, and the daughter against her mother. Thus temporal
relations are divided in this battle; when the father is one of this select
army, and the son one of the destroyers army, the father is against the son,
and the son against the father, and the daughter against her mother, and the
mother against her daughter.

This Apollion and his army in this warfare, warreth against the saints by
persecution, there being out few such counselors among them as Gamaliel was,
Acts. 5.38, 39. And now I say unto you, refrain from these men, and let them
alone; for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to naught, but
if it be of God ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found even to fight
against God.

And whereas it is said of this select army, that their power is in their
mouth; this is no new thing; but that which has always appeared in this
warfare; that is, that the enemies of God's Church has ever been destroyed by
that which came out of the mouths of the saints, who warred against their
enemies and oppressors. As for instance, all those Judgments which came upon
Egypt, were denounced by the mouth of Moses, before they were executed on the
Egyptians; for God was always wont (as appears by the testimony of the
Scriptures) to denounce his Judgments by the mouth of this select army, before
the execution of them, as appears throughout the books of the old testament,
Hosea 6.5. Therefore I have hewed them by the Prophets, I have stain them by
the words of my mouth. Jer. 51.20, 21. Thou art my battle ax, and weapons of
war, for with thee will I break in pieces the nations, and with thee will I
destroy kingdoms, and with thee will I break in pieces the horse and his rider,
and with thee will I break in pieces the chariot and his rider. 2 King. 1.10.
And Elijah answered and said to the captain of fifty, If I he a man of God, let
five come down from heaven and consume thee and thy fifty; and there came down
fire from heaven and consumed him (...) his fifty.

Thus the destruction of the enemies of God, came (...) of the mouths of his
Servants the Prophets, before the were executed; Chap. 11.5. And if any man
will hurt then fire proceeds out of their mouth and devoureth their enemies^.
It is by the word of their testimony that they overcome in this battle, not
loving their lives unto the death, and by denouncing God's Judgments before
they are executed, as appears, Jer. 5.14. Behold, I will make my words in the
mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them. Thus they always
warred against Apollyons army, and the Judgments followed as the tail which
comes after, for it is said their tails had heads like Serpents, and with them
they do hurt; that is, they hurt their enemies by giving them a mortal wound,
like a serpent, which always follows the word of their testimony; for it is
said, out of their mouths issued fire, and smoke, and brimstone, that by these
there was the third part of men killed, so that it was a serpentine wound that
they gave them, being mortal; and this killing or destruction came upon
Apollyons army, as is to be seen in the two following verses.

Verse 20. And the the rest of the men which were not killed by these plagues,
yet repented not of the works of their hands, that they should not worship
Devils, and Idols of gold, and silver, and brass, and stone, and of wood, which
neither can see nor hear, nor walk.

Here we have an account in this verse, that although testimony was born against
Idolaters, by the mouth of God's servants, and the Judgments of God executed
upon them for their Idolatry and Persecution which always accompany it; yet
they repented not of their Idolatry; that is to say, those that remained and
were not killed with those forementioned plagues; as is said, Isai. 26.11.
Lord, when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see and be
ashamed for their (...) toward thy people.

Verse 21. Neither repented they of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor
of their fornication, nor of their thefts.

This verse shows us, as they repented not of their Idolatries; so likewise
they repented not of their murders, that is, their persecution, or murdering
the saints; for it is said of this false Church, Chap. 18.24. For in her was
found the blood of the prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon
the earth. This last sentence, to wit, all that were slain upon the earth, is
to be understood, all that were slain by persecution, were murdered by this
Church.

Neither repented they of their sorceries; that is, of their false doctrine, by
which they bewitched the people, as Paul says, Who has bewitched you, that ye
should not obey the truth, Gal. 3.1. Chap. 18.23. For by thy sorceries were all
nations deceived; that is to be understood by her false doctrine, she deceived
all nations.

Neither repented they of their fornication: That is to be understood of their
spiritual whoredom; for this Church which this Chapter is treating upon, was
not only the Synagogue of Satan, coming out of the bottomless pit, but the
mother of harlots or fornications; as is to be seen, Chap. 17.5.

Neither repented they of their thefts: For though the saints took joyfully the
spoiling of their goods, Heb. 10.34. yet that did not excuse these Apollyons of
their thefts in taking their goods from them, Joh. 7.7. In the first part of
this Chapter we have an account what followed the sound of the fifth trumpet,
to wit, the apostatizing of the true Church, and the rising out of the smoke of
the bottomless pit the false Church, and becoming a great and a strong army
under their King Apollyon. And in the latter part of this Chapter we have an
account what followed the sound of the sixth trumpet, to wit, a voice came from
the four horns of the golden altar, which was from the place of atonement, to
the Angel which had the sixth trumpet saying to him, loose the four Angels
which are bound in the great river Euphrates; the loosing of these four Angels,
does represent the loosing of God's Elect from under the b^dage and darkness of
mystical Babylon in every Quarter (...) that they might be prepared to war
against her, by that word of their testimony, which testimony of theirs against
her did cause great persecution. I do suppose that this Chapter which gives us
an account of the great and g^neral apostasy of the Church, to the rising up of
many witnesses against her Apostasy, may measure time, beginning some
considerable time after Constantine the great, to the time of her persecution
against the first Reformers.

CHAP. X.
Verse 1.

ANd I saw another mighty Angel come down from heaven.

This word another, is to inform us that he saw another Angel besides that
Angel which sounded the sixth trumpet, and besides the four Angels which
represented God's Elect, which was loosed by order from a voice that came from
the 4 horns of the golden altar which was before God: for this golden altar was
before the throne, Chap. 8.3. And the throne of God was in heaven. Chap. 4.2.
And behold a throne was set in heaven: So that this mighty Angel having done
the office of the high Priest in making atonement, he now comes down from
heaven in great majesty and glory: for he was

Clothed with a cloud, and a rainbow was upon his head.

This rainbow on his head, did show that he was the messenger of the Covenant
of Grace made with God's Church, by whom we have atonement; for the rainbow was
the token of the Covenant of Gods grace made with Noah and all the earth, after
the destruction of the old world, Genesis 9.13. I do set my bow in the cloud, and
it shall ^e for a token of a covenant between me and the earth. This Covenant
does represent the Covenant of Grace which God makes with his Church, through
the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, by whom God's wrath is appeased, and
his everlasting kindness is extended to them, as may be seen, Isai. 54.8, 9 In
a little wrath did I hide my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting
kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy redeemer; for this is as
the waters of Noah unto me, for I have sworn that the waters of Noah should no
more go over the earth, so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee,
nor rebuke thee.

And his face was as it were the sun.

Thus his majestical Countenance was as terrible to behold ^s the sun,

And his feet as pillars of fire,

Who is now coming down from heaven to tread all the enemies of his Church
under his fiery feet.

When he opened the seven seals, he appeared as a lamb, and as if it had been
slain; but now he appears in majesty and in great glory, like a consuming
fire, or like a roaring lion, who makes all the beasts of the field to tremble.

Verse 2. And he had in his hand a little book open.

This little book was opened in the opening of the seven ^eals, (...) the
number seven is a perfect number, and measures the whole of every thing it
expresses by this number seven. And this little book contains a very short
prophetical hystory of the state of the Church, from the time of the sounding
of the sixth trumpet, to the utter overthrow of Antichrist, and happy state of
the true Church; or from the time that the false Church sat as a queen in
glory, to the sounding of the seventh trumpet, which is the third and last two
trumpet to the inhabiters of the earth, and the most joyful trumpet to the
Church of Christ,

And he set his right foot upon the sea, (...) his left foot on the earth.

This does show plainly who he is, who has put all (...) under his feet, 1
Cor. 15.25. For he must reign till be (...) put all enemies under his feet.
Thus it appears that (...) mighty Angel is the Lord Jesus Christ, who opened
(...) seals, and comes with an open book in his hand to J^ after he had made
an atonement for his Church, (...) ing their oppressions and great sorrows
under spirits Egypt, or Apollyons Kingdom; he now comes down from heaven in his
great Majesty and Glory, with an open (...) in his hand; which contains a sad
history of the (...) state of his Church: And he sets his right foot upon (...)
sea, and his left foot on the earth, to thew his great (...) jestical power and
dominion, who has all things (...) his feet, and is come down from heaven to
deliver (...) Church as he did of old, Exodus 3.7, 8. I have surely (...)
affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard (...) and am come
down to deliver then out of the hand of the Egyth^

Verse 3. And cried with a loud voice, (...) when a lion roareth.

Thus the Lord did of old, when he had a con^^^^^ with the nations, Jer. 25.30.
The Lord shall your from (...) and writer his voice from his holy habitation;
he shall (...) tily roar upon his habitation, he shall give a shout (...) that
tread the grapes, against all the inhabitants of the (...) Joel. 3.16. The Lord
also shall roar out of Zion, and (...) his voice from Jerusalem, and the
heavens and the earth ^^ shake, but the Lord will be the hope of his people.
(...) 8. The lion has roared, who will not fear? the Lord God (...) spoken,
who can but prophecy?

These were things which followed the second we tr^^ pet against the
inhabitants of the earth.

And when he had cried, seven thunders ^tered their voices.

Seven is a number which measures the whole of (...) thing that it measures.
And God's Judgments are set (...) by thunder frequently in Scripture, 2 Samuel
22.14, 15. (...) Lord thundered from heaven, and the most high uttered (...)
^oice, and he sent out arrows and scattered them. Isai. 29. (...) Thou shall be
visited of the Lord of hosts, with thunder and ^th earthquake. Chap. 8.5. And
the angst took the censes and filled at with fire of the altar, and cast it
into the earth, and there were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, and
(...) great earthquake. From he (...) we may observe, that God is wont to
express the execution of his Judgments ^ader the name of thunder, and that his
angry voice is compared to the roaring of a lion.

And when he had cried, seven thunders uttered their voices.

These seven thunders measures the complete Judgments of God, executed upon the
enemies of his Church, which followed the loud cry of their (...), who ever
lives to make intercession for them.

Verse 4. And when the seven thunders had attered their voices I was about to
write, and I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Seal up those things
which the seven thunders uttered, and write them not.

What these seven thunders uttered, was not contained in the little book which
was open, but uttered other things, which were not to be opened, but to be
sealed up; for they uttered the severe Judgments of God upon the enemies of his
Church, and these Judgments are always reserved and kept secret in Gods own
breast, they are fast sealed up from the knowledge of Men and Angels, and not
known till the execution of them come, so that they uttered only secret things
that John was not to write, Mat. 24.50. The lord of that servant shall come in
a day when he looks not for him, and in an hour when he is not ware of, and
shall cut him asunder. 1 These. 5.1, 2, 3. But of the times and seasens,
brethren, ye have no need that I write unto you; for your selves know
perfectly, that the ^ay of the Lord comes as a thief in the night; for when
they (...) peace and safety, then sudden destruction someth upon (...)

And God's Judgments are measured by seven as (...) other things, Lev. 26.18.
If ye will not for all this he^ unto me, then I will punish you seven times
more for your (...) verse 24, And I will punish you yet seven times for your
(...) 27.28. verses, And if ye will not for all this hearken unto (...) but
walk contrary to me; then I will walk contrary to you (...) so, in fury, and
I, even I, will chastize you even seven time for your Sins. Those Judgments
that came upon the (...) world, and upon Sodom, was so fast sealed up, and o^
known by God, that they knew nothing of them, but we^ eating and drinking,
buying and selling, building and plan^ing, until the time of the execution of
them to their (...) destruction. Thus God's judgments are wont to come up^ the
wicked as a theif in the night, as is abundantly decla^ in scripture: his
judgments are known by none but himself, till they are executed, they are
secret things, not to be known, chap. 16.15. Behold I come as a thief. And God
says unto the wicked in chap. 3.3. I will come on thee as a the and thou shall
not know what hour I will come upon thee; the^ judgments are fast sealed up
from the knowledge of the Wicked, Luke 21.35. For as a Snare shall it come on
all the^ that dwell on the face of the whole earth. God has give man the
knowledge of his law; that is not sealed from him but is revealed to us and to
our children to know; but the times and Seasons of the execution of the breach
of the law, is fast sealed up, and known only by God, Deuteronomy. 29.2^ The secret
thing: belong unto the Lord our God: but they things which are revealed (that
is the Law of God) bel^ unto us, and to our children for ever, that we may do
all (...) words of this law.

Verse 5, 6, 7. And the Angel which I saw stand upon the sea, and upon the
earth, lifted up his hand to heaven,

And swear by him that lives for ever an^ over, who created heaven and the
things the therein are, and the earth and the things the therein are, and the
sea and the things which are therein, that there should be time (...) longer.

But in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he shall begin to
sound, the ^aystery of God should be finished, as he ^ath declared to his
servants the prophets.

In the foregoing verse John gives us a relation of what ^e saw and heard, he
saw the forementioned mighty angel, which stood upon the Sea, and upon the
earth, and how he ^^fted up his hand to heaven, and swear by the creator of all
things, that there should be time no longer, than till the seventh Angel shall
begin to sound: for the seventh Angel (...) the last and finishing prophesy,
and sounds the third and ^aft woe trumpet, to the inhabiters of the earth; as is
to ^e seen, Chap. 8.13. Woe, woe, woe, to the Inhabiters of the earth, ^y reason
of the other voices of the trumpet of the three angels which are yet to sound.
So that time shall be no more to the ^nemies of the Church, when the seventh
Angel shall begin to sound, for then comes the utter destruction and period of
their time, and the end of all their glory. So that then the mystery of God
must needs be finished, as he has declared to his servants the prophets. This
seventh angel which ^ath the seventh trumpet is the finishing or last prophecy
of all things; as is to be seen, chap. 11.15. For the seventh Angel sounded;
and there were great voices in heaven, saying, the kingdoms of this world are
become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever
and ever.

Verse 8. And the voice which I heard from heaven spoke unto me again.

The first speaking of this voice from heaven to John, was in the 4th verse;
saying to him, Seal up those things which the seven thunders uttered, and write
them not: but (...) says to him now speaking a second time from heaven.

Go and take the little Book which was open in the hand of the angel which
stands upon the Sea, and upon the earth.

This little book is an open revelation to John, and contains a history of the
future state of the Church, which John is to publish and make known, but not
the thing uttered by the seven thunders, for them were the sec^ judgments of
God executed upon the enemies of his Chur^ at such times as they are promising
themselves peace and safety.

Verse 9. And I went unto the Angel, and said unto him, give me the little
book, and he said unto me take it, and eat it up, and (...) shall make thy
belly bitter, but shall be (...) thy mouth sweet as honey.

The voice that came from heaven and said to John (...) take the book, was the
voice of God the Father, it bei^ handed to John by the Son of God, who had
received (...) from God the Father, and opened the Seal of it, and de^vered it
to John, and bid him eat it, and told him what should be the effect of eating
of it, to wit, bitter in his belly, but sweet in his mouth as honey.

Verse 10. And I took the little book out of the Angels hand, and eat it up,
and it wa^ in my mouth sweet as honey, and as soon a^ I had eaten it, my belly
was bitter.

Thus John found it as the Angel had told him: it was very defirable to John to
know what was contained in the little book; but when John had eaten it, that
is, had the revelation of it by Jesus Christ, and come to understand by it, the
sad, miserable and afflicted state of the Church it was bitter in his belly; he
having now a new revelant on of future things, made known to him by Jesus
Christ he is in a capacity to prophecy again.

Verse 11. And he said unto me, thou must prophecy again, before many peoples,
and nations, and tongues, and kings.

The next Chapter contains the whole prophecy of the little book. And the time
when it began, was when (...) false Church was in her highest and greatest
glory, (...) the Church of Christ in a poor, afflicted, and bewildered State,
and the Prophecy continues to the end of the world, even to the finishing of
all things, which the last two trumpets sound.

CHAP. XI.
In the foregoing Chapter we have an account, how that a mighty Angel came down
from Heaven, and he had in his hand a little book open; and how that John took
the book out of the Angels hand, and eat it up; which was to signify, that John
was inspired by the Spirit of God, to write a prophetical history of the
Church, or of what was contained in the little book, from that time forward.

Verse 1.

ANd there was given me a reed like unto a rod.

This measuring Reed given to John, does represent to us, that John was called
to measure something that he was capacicated to do: and is now called to go
about the work is follows; and the Angel stood, saying, Rise. This angel was
Christ as in the former chap. did appear, and now calls John

To rise and to measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship
therein.

This is intended the real temple or house of God, that Solomon's temple was a
Figure of, that John is here called to measure, and the Antitype of that Altar
which Solomon built, and the true worshippers of God, he is here required to
measure, who worshippeth him in his holy temple; and therefore it is needful to
know, what is intended by this temple, and this altar, and who are the true
worshippe^ therein: for all this John is required to measure, and (...) more.
The type of this temple Solomon built, which was but a figure of the temple
that John is to measure, Acts (...) 47, 48. But Solomon built him an house, how
best, the most big dwells not in temples made with hands. Thus it appears
that the most high dwells not in a house or temple mad with hands: for the
true tabernacle is that which the Lod has pitched, and not man; and this
temple, tabernacle, or house, is his church which John is to measure: as
appears by scripture testimony, Heb. 3.6. But Christ as a (...) over his own
house, whose house are we, 1 Timothy 3.15. If (...) tarry long that thou may
know how thou ought to beh^^^ thy self in the house of God, which is his
church. 2 Cor. 6.16. Ye are the Temple of the living God, as God has said, I
will dwell in them, 1 Cor. 6.19. 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 2.22. Thus it appears that it
is the saints bodies that is here intended to be the temple that is to be
measured by John. And secondly, the after was to be measured with the temple,
and having thus showed what temple he was to measure, the next i the altar upon
which they offered all their Sacrificed by which atonement was made, this was
a type of Christ upon whom we offer all our Sacrifices by faith, this Altar was
also to be measured with the temple, and thirdly these that worshipped therein,
that is in the temple of God, thus he was to measure the temple of God, and the
Altar, (...) them that worship therein, and no more, and all this alludes from
those figures under the law, and points from them to the things signified by
them under the Gospel, and under this denomination all the true worship, and
true worshippers of God are comprehended; and measured with the sai^ measuring
reed, being in the line of the true worship of God and no more, in the next
place, here arises a question, Wh^ are we to understand by worshipping in the
temple, seeing (...) other worship is to be measured within the line of true
worship? To which I answer, it is the saints bodies that is the temple of God,
as before has been proved, and not a body of sin, as may be seen, 1 Cor. 3.16,
17, 18. Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the spirit of God
dwells in you: if any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy,
for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are; let no man deceive himself,
says the Apostle; that is, to think that God may be worshipped in a body of
sin, for a body of fin is not God's temple; for the temple of God is holy, and
God is only to be worshipped in his temple (...) For God is a spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth, Joh. 4.24. Phil.
3.3. For we are the circumcision which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice
in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the ^lesh;

Verse 2. But the court which is without the temple cast out, and measure it
not, for it is given unto the Gentiles.

For as in the foregoing verse John was required to measure them that worshipped
in the temple, so likewise in this verse, he is forbidden to measure the court
which is without the temple, for it (says he) is given to the Gentiles. In
this book the name Jews carries in it the true worshipers of God, and the name
Gentiles the false; as thus appears, Chap. 2.9. I know the blasphemy of them
which say they are Jews and are not, but are of the synagogue of satan. Chap.
3.9. Behold I will make them of the synagogue of satan, which say they are Jews
and are not, but do lie.

Thus the name of the true worshipers are derived from the Jews, because they
were God's people under the first Covenant: And the name of the false
worshipers who wor^^^p in the outward court, is derived from the name Gen^^es,
to distinguish the true from the false; and therefore ^^ith he, But the court
which is without the temple east: ^t, and measure it not, for it is given unto
the Gentiles. When John was thus required according to the vision, to measure
the true Church, and the true worship of God, and the true worshipers, it was
in the time when the false Church was in her greatest glory, where with she
glorified her self, under great pretenses of worshipping God, wh^ it was all
but a form of godliness, in observing days, assembling themselves together, and
multiplying prayers with the mouth and lips; and all done in the outward court,
not being done in spirit and in truth in the inner man, (...) be cast out, and
not to be measured within the line of (...) worship, for this name Gentiles
does imply the false Church, which persecutes the true, as appears in the
following words,

And the holy city shall they tread under foot;

Alluding from old Babylon, who trod Jerusalem under foot, they being Gentiles.

By the holy City we are to understand the true Church alluding from Jerusalem
the city of David so called, to w^ the holy city, Mat. 4.5. Neh. 11.8. Isai.
48.2. Isai. 32.1. which the Gentiles or false Church treads under foot; for
both temple, altar and city, here spoken of, (...) from the temple, altar and
city where David dwelt; (...) that city Jerusalem, was a figure of the Church;
and the Church of Christ frequently (...) the name Jerusalem, alluding from
that city, as appears by Scripture testimony Chap. 21.9, 10. And there came
unto me one of the (...) Angels, saying, Come hither, I will show thee the
bride the lambs wife; and he showed me that great city, the holy (...) salem.
Chap. 21.2. And John saw the holy city, the (...) Jerusalem coming down from
God out of heaven, prepared (...) a bride adorned for her husband.

Thus it appears, that the holy city is the true Church and the Gentiles the
false, which treads the true under foot; and the time of their treading the
holy city under foot, is forty and two months, being measured by the (...)
which rules the night, because the Gentiles are children of the night, and of
darkness. But more may be said a this hereafter.

Verse 3. And I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy
a thousand two hundred and sixty days, clothed (...) sackcloth.

Here are several things to be observed from this verse: The first is God's
promise to give power to his two witnesses, to prophecy; and secondly, What are
we to understand by prophecy? I answer, it is the gift of God, as in the
foregoing words, I will give power unto my two witnesses, or I will give unto
my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy. So that it appears, none can
prophecy but by the gift of God, that is, by the gift of his spirit, for
prophecy comes by the revelation of God's spirit; for no man can say that Jesus
is the Lord but by the holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 12.3. for it is the spirit of God
that reveals him to us to be the Lord; for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit
of prophecy, Chap. 19.10. And thirdly, the time here spoken of their prophecy,
is a thousand two hundred and sixty days, which time, reckoning thirty days to
a month, makes just forty and two months, which measures the same time that the
Gentiles tread the holy city under foot, spoken of in the foregoing verse; for
the time of these witnesses prophecy is measured by the day which is ruled by
the sun, because they are children of light and of the day; but the Gentiles
are children of the night and of darkness, and their time is measured by months
or moons. And the fourth thing is their sad and mournful state in the time of
this prophecy, which is signified by their being clothed in sackcloth. And
fifthly, let us inquire, Who these witnesses be, and why they are called two?
Why they are called two, is showed in the fourth verse; these are the two olive
trees, and the two candlesticks standing before the God of the earth. The
Church of Christ is called an olive tree under the first testament, as plainly
appears in Jer. 11. comparing the 15th verse with the 16th. What has my
beloved to do in mine house, seeing she has committed lewdness with many, etc.
The Lord called thy name a green olive tree, fair and of goodly fruit. Thus it
appears the olive tree did figure the Church, as is to be seen also in Romans
11.24. For if thou were cut out of the olive tree which is mild by nature, and
were graffed in contrary to nature into a good olive tree; how much more shall
these which be the natural branches, be graffed into their own olive tree. Thus
both the Church of the Jews under the first testament, and the Church of the
Gentiles under the new testament, are compared to an olive tree; so that it
appears evidently, that the Church of Christ is intended by shore witnesses not
only by the two olive trees, but also by the two candlesticks; for the Church
of Christ under the old te tament was represented to Zechariah by a golden
candlestick, Zech 4.2. And he said unto me what see thou? And I said, I have
looked, and behold a candlestick all of gold. And also the seven Churches of
Asia were represented to John by the seven golden candlesticks, Chap. 1.20. The
seven golden candlesticks are the seven Churches.

Thus it appears that these witnesses are the Church of Christ; for the olive
tree and the candlestick figured nothing else in the Scripture but the Church;
so that they are very plainly described to be the Church of Christ And sixthly,
why are they called two witnesses? I answer, in several respects; for under the
law of Moses, two witnesses or three was to establish the matter, Deuteronomy. 19 15.
At the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses shall the
matter be established. And though the Church be many witnesses, yet for several
reasons they are expressed by the number two, that being a sufficient proof
under the law; and for several other reasons as herein.

Verse 4. These are the two olive trees and the two candlesticks standing
before the God of the earth.

They are called two olive trees and two candlesticks standing before the God
of the earth. They are two in respect of the two natures in union. The oil does
figure the Spirit of God which is divine; and the stock and branches does
figure the humane nature of Christ, and his Church: And thus in their testimony
they are two joint witnesses in every thing they witness to; and therefore
their witness is called a prophecy; as for instance, Romans 8.16. The spirit it
self in us is one, and its bearing witness with our spirit, makes two joint
witnesses, to confirm to us that we are the children of God. And it is said
they are two prophets and the two candlesticks, in respect of the two
restaments they did testify under, measuring the Church of the Jews under the
first testament to be one olive tree, and one candlestick; and the Church under
the new testament to be the other olive tree and candlestick, which makes two
live trees and two candlesticks, standing before the God of the earth, Zech.
4.2. I have looked, and behold a candlestick all of Gold, with a bowl upon the
top of it, and his seven lamps thereon, and seven pipes to the seven lamps.
This candlestick with the seven lamps upon it, did reprepresent the Church
under the old testament: Compare this with the 11th and 12th verses, What are
these two olive trees upon the right side of the candlestick, and upon the left
side thereof? And I answered again and said unto him, What he these two olive
branches, which through the two golden pipes empty the golden oil out of
themselves. Verse 14. Then said he, these are the two anointed ones, that stand
by the God of the whole earth. And these two anointed ones that stood before
the God of the whole earth, was Zerubbabel the Governor, and Joshua the high
Priest, who were types of Christ, and were two witnesses under that
ministration, who stood before the God of the whole earth, and did represent
that union that is between Christ and his Church, they being compared to two
olive trees, and two branches, which through the two golden pipes empty the
golden oil out of themselves; that is, they were feeders and nourishers of the
Church, and types of Christ, who is the chief and great Shepherd, the one of
his kingly office, the other of his priestly office; but the two anointed ones
in the my stery that stands before the God of the earth, is Christ and his
Church, who are the two anointed ones. Heb. 1.9. Therefore God, even thy God,
has amo^nted thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. 2 Cor. 1 21. Now
he which stablished us with you in Christ, and has anointed us, is God. Thus
Christ and his Church are the two anointed ones, and the two witnesses which
stand before the God of the earth.

But the Church under the old testament was called but one candlestick: the use
of the candlestick is to hold the light; and the candlestick that holds the
seven lamps, if there be no oil they can give no light, therefore the olive
tree that yields the oil standing by the candlestick, which candlestick holds
up the seven lamps, which has seven pipes to feed the seven lamps; thus it
causes the lamps to give a continual light; thus the mystery of the two
natures of Christ is held forth by this figure: The candlestick with its seven
lamps holds forth the Church; and the olive tree holds forth Christ's humane
nature with his Church, and the golden oil his divine nature; so that as the
oil that flows from the olive tree, and feeds the lamps, and causes them to
give a continual light; so the Spirit of Christ that flows from himself into
his Church, or members, feed and nourish them, so that they become the light of
the world: So that Jesus Christ the true olive tree, and his Church in union
with him, are the two witnesses that always stand before the God of the earth,
and bear witness to the truth: Thus the Spirit and the Bride are called two
olive trees, and two candlesticks, because under two ministrations, to wit,
under the old testament and under the new: And thus they stand before the God
of the earth, and are the light of the world, bearing witness to the truth
which is revealed in them by the Spirit of truth; and therefore their witness
is by prophecy, so that Christ and his Church thus in union are called two
prophets, and two witnesses; Joh. 18.37. For this end was I born, and for this
cause came I into the world, that I should bear witness unto the truth. Chap.
1.5. And from Jesus Christ who is the faithful witness. Acts 1.8. But ye shall
receive power after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you; and ye shall be
witnesses unto me, both in Jerusalem and in Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the
uttermost parts of the earth. Thus God gives power unto his witnesses; as also
in Acts 5.32. And we are his witnesses of these things, and so is also the holy
Ghost whom God has given to them that obey him: Here are the two witnesses
spoken of in union, to wit, they with the holy Ghost which is in them; for the
witness of the holy Ghost which is in them, is the witness of Jesus Christ with
his Church; and that which they witness to is that which God has revealed to
them by his Spirit, so that their testimony is by the Spirit of prophecy, 1
Job. 2.20. compared with the 26th and 27th verses, bearing witness to the
truth, against all false worship set up in the world by the institution, laws
and appointments of men, the darkness and ignorance that is in them, through
the blindness of their hearts; as appears Mat. 10.18. And ye shall be brought
before kings and governors for my sake, for a testimony against them and the
Gentiles.

Verse 5. And if any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouth,
and devoureth their enemies.

This is to set forth (...) of God against (...) that hurt his ele^e, alluding
from what was done by blijah, when the king of Israel sent a captain of fifty
with his fifty for Elijan; and when he came to him he said unto him, Thou man
of God, the king has said, come down; and Elijah answered and said unto the
captain of fifty, If I be a man of God, then let fire come down from heaven and
consume thee and thy fifty; and there came down fire from heaven, and consumed
him and his fifty, 2 King. 1.9 10.

And if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed.

That is, by the fire that comes out of their mouth; for God is wont always to
denounce his Judgments by the mouth of these witnesses, before he executes
them, as he did by the mouth of Elijah. And such warriers as Elijah was, is
showed in the 9th Chap. 18. verse. By these three was the third part of men
killed, by the fire, and by the smoke, and by the breast ne which issued out of
their mouths.

Verse 6. These have power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of
their prophecy.

This is an allusion from the prayer of Elijah, who prayed earnestly that it
might not rain, and it rained not on the earth by the space of three years and
six months. And this judgment of famine came upon Israel for the hurt done to
the servants of God, in the reign of Ahab king of Israel; and not only this
famine, but the utter destruction of Ahab and all his house, and all Baals
Priests, and worshippers of Baal, were utterly destroyed in a just judgmen for
the hurt done to the servants of God: And this was done in such a time as this
was; for then the two witnesses did prophecy in sackcloth, and the true Church
was trodden under foot by Jezabel, who had the same measure after measured to
her, who was after trodden under foot her self, and eaten up of dogs. But these
having power to shut up heaven that it rain not, does hold forth a mystery in
it, although it be an allusion from that judgment executed from the mouth of
Elijah (1 King. 17.1. And Elijah said unto Ahab, as the Lord Lord God of Israel
lives, there shall not be dew nor rain these years but according to my word,)
in that God thus shut heaven at his request, that it rained not for three years
and six months in that time of false and fruitless doctrine; for there can be
no heavenly showers to cause the earth to yield her increase, under the
teaching of a false ministry; for in such a time there is a drought, for a
false ministry are clouds without water, Jude 12. Amos 8.11, 12, 13. Behold the
days come faith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the land, not a
famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing of the words of the
Lord; and they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the
east, they shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not
find it; in that day shall the fair virgins and young men faint for thirst. For
all the heavenly showers of fruitfulness is by the prophecy that comes by the
Spirit of God, and not by a vision of the immagination of a man's own heart, but
by the prophecy of the two witnesses, which is the Spirit and the Bride, out of
whose belly flows rivers of living waters, and waters the earth; for they
only are the light of the world. And faith the Apostle,

These have power over water to turn them to blood, and to smite the earth with
all plagues as often as they will.

This is an allusion from what Moses and Aaron did in Egypt, who turned the
waters of Egypt into blood, and smote the Egyptians with all those great
plagues, in a just judgment for the oppression and cruelty done to the
disraelites: And this prophecy is to show, that God is the same God, ready to
execute his judgments on them that hurt his witnesses, as if it were done at
their will. And whereas it is said they have power over waters to turn them to
blood, it does speak a mystery; for as the doctrine of the two witnesses, which
is the word of their prophecy, does teach love, patience, and self denial, to
love ^ur enemies, and to do good to them that have us: So the doctrine of the
teachers of the false Church, which they pretend to be to the glory of God, is
to shed the blood of all those that will not conform to their laws of worship,
and prescribed rules of the same, under pretense of punishing heretics, and
thus to destroy all those that will not drink of the waters of the fountain of
their doctrine; which waters shall be turned into blood, and they themselves
made to drink of it; as in Chap. 16.5, 6. And I heard the Angels of the waters
say. Thou art righteous, O Lord, which art, and which wast, and shall be,
because thou have thus judged, for they have shed the blood of saints. and
Prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink for they are worthy.

Verse 7. And when they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that
ascends out of the bottomless pit, shall make war against them, and shall
overcome them and kill them.

In the third verse of this chapter the Lord promised to give power unto these
two witnesses in their sad and afflicted state, and that they should prophecy
under their mournful and sackcloth attire, a thousand two hundred and sixty
days. Now in this verse is showed what will be the effect of their testimony,
to wit, When they shall have finished their testimony, the beast that ascends
out of the bottomless pit shall make war against them. This beast is Antichrist
(...) the false Church: Mention is made of the rising of this ^east out of the
bottomless pit in the fore part of the ^nth Chapter, under the name of locusts,
having a king over them whose name is Apollyon, that is, a destroyer. And here
in this verse we have an account of the aforesaid beast making war against
these two witnesses upon the finishing of their testimony: These two witnesses
were described who they were, by plain descriptions in the fourth verse, to
wit, Christ and his Church in union, who bear a true and faithful testimony
before the God of the earth the beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit,
(...)ing their testimony, make war against them. This beast coming out of the
bottomless pit, is to describe the rising of Antichrist, or the false Church,
and making war against the true Church, which is in union with Christ: Up^
hearing the witnesses faithful testimony against their false doctrine, they
make war against the witnesses and overcome them, and kill them; thus the war
began upon the faithful and true testimony given by Christ and his Church
against the doctrine and practice of the false Church. To like example we find
under the old testament, that su^ an unjust war began upon the like testimony
against Apollyons Ministry, as is to be seen, Mic 3.5. Thus faith the Lord
concerning the prophets that make my people err, that bite with their teeth,
and cry peace; and he that puts (...) into their mouth, they even prepare
war against him.

Verse 8. And their dead bodies shall lie is the street of the great city, which
spiritually is called Sodom, and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified.

As the the true and faithful Church and Spouse (...) Christ, was called the
hoty City in the second verse (...) the false Church which ascended out of the
bottomless pit is come to be so great and numerous, that she (...) called the
great City; and in the street of this great city which is spiritually called
Sodom, and Egypt, and where all our Lord was crucified, is the dead bodies of
the (...) seen to lie, when they by persecution had killed them because of
their testimony against their pride Sodom like and against her oppression Egypt
like, and against her persecution like, where also our Lord was crucified. Thus
the Gentiles tread the holy city under foot, or the (...) Church the true. The
reason why the false Church is spirits ally called Sodom, and Egypt, and where
also our Lord (...) crucified, is to show her unholy state: And the (...)
Church called the holy City trodden under foot, is to (...) her holy and
afflicted state.

Verse 9. And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues and nations, shall
see their ^ead bodies three days and a half, and shall not suffer their dead
bodies to be put in ^raves.

In the foregoing verse it is said their dead bodies shall ^e in the street of
the great city: And in this verse it is ^id, And they of the people, and
kindreds, and tongues, and nations, shall see their dead bodies three days and
an ^alf, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in ^raves. This
shows plainly the great City here spoken ^f, does not intend a city builded
with hands, in some par^^cular country or place; but does intend simply the
false church, wherever she is; for though it is said, the dead bodies shall lie in
the street of the great city, yet it is said, they of the people, and kindreds
and tongues, and ^tions, shall see their dead bodies, and shall not suffer
their dead bodies to be put in graves; so that this city (...) so large, that it
comprehends the situation of all the Gentiles, which tread the holy City under
foot, and all those locusts that came out of the bottomless pit; for it is
said, the beast that ascended out of the bottomless pit killed them. And in the
last verse of the foregoing Chapter, the Angel told John after he had eaten the
little book, that he must prophecy again before many peoples, and nations, and
tongues and kings: Accordingly John is now upon the work of prophecy, and
showing by his prophecy how that they of the peoples, and kindreds, and
tongues, and nations, shall see their dead bodies three days and an half.

This prophecy contains a great mystery; for the three ^ays and an half
measures the same time of the forty and two months, or the thousand two
hundred and sixty days; all measures one and the same time, and does comprehend
the whole time of the Gentiles treading the holy City under foot, or the
thousand two hundred and sixty days that the two witnesses prophecy in
sackcloth, and the three days and half that their dead bodies is seen to lie
(...) the street of the great city or mystical Babylon, does measure one and
the same time; for the forty and two most reckoning 30 days to a month, contain
just one thous^^^ two hundred and sixty days; and says our Savior, (...)
there not twelve hours in a day? Joh. 11.9. So that three days and an half
contain forty and two hours, which (...) the same number with the months, and
the months (...) the same number of days, and the days make the same (...) ber
of months; and all measures the same time in (...) mystery; and in Chap. 12.6.
And the woman fled into (...) wilderness, where she has a place prepared of
God, (...) they should feed her there a thousand, two hundred, and (...) days.
This also is the same time of the prophecy of (...) witnesses in sackcloth; for
this woman in her wilderness state, measures the same time with the witnesses,
for (...) witnesses are Christ and his Church in Uni^^^ or the Spirit and Bride
in union, which makes two witnesses and the holy city is the Church, and the
woman is the church as also, chap. 12.14. And unto the woman wore give two
wings of a great Eagle, that she might flee into the wild^^ness, unto her place
where she is nourished for a time, (...) times, and half a time. This is
likewise the same time with the other aforementioned, for a time is a thousand,
(...) times is two hundred, and half a time is sixty, as also in Chap. (...).5,
6. etc. And there was given him a mouth speaking gr^^^ things and blasphemys,
and power was given him to contin^ forty and two months. This is the same forty
and (...) months spoken of in the second verse of this chapter, all the^
numbers measures the self same time, for the holy city b^trod under foot of the
Gentiles, forty and two months alludes from Jerusalem of old being trod under
Foot of the Gentiles, wh^ Israel was in Captivity in old Babylon. And whereas
it (...) said of the Beast. And power was given him to make war (...) the
Saints forty and two months. This was the rulers and Government of this world,
that was in union with the false Church and persecuted the true; and it was the
same forty and tw^ months, that the Gentiles trod under foot the holy city both
measured one and the same time.

Verse 10. And they that dwell upon the earth shall rejoice over them, and
shall ma^^ merry, and shall send gi^^^ one to another, because these two
prophets tormented them that well on the earth.

In the foregoing verses we have an account, how the ^d bodies of the witnesses
did lie in the streets of the ^at city, spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, and
where ^r Lord was crucified, that is, in the territories of the false church;
for as the true Church is called the holy city, (...) the false Church is here
measured by Sodom and Egypt, ^d where our Lord was crucified: This is to
describe ^er to be in a contrary state than the state of holiness, ^en where
all uncleanness and pride is committed, and ^e place where all oppression is,
and where all persecution is, under the donomination of the place where our
Lord ^as crucified; and how that the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and
nations, which comprehend all sorts of ^he inhabitants of the earth, should see
their dead bodies, ^ut shall not suffer them to be put in graves; and the ^son
why will appear in this verse, which shows it was to insult over them, by
keeping them under their feet, and triumphing over them (as is said) and they
that dwell upon the earth; this is to be understood earthly carnal ^en shall
rejoice over them; this is something like what the Philistines did when they
had overcome Sampson, they brought him forth in the open view to make
themselves sport; so it is said of these earthly dwellers, And they shall
rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another; as is
written of such a generation, Heb. 11.36. And others had trial of cruel
mockings. All this is to set forth their great joy and gladness over their
conquest, and the victory they have gotten, by overcoming the two witnesses of
the God of the earth, which is Christ (...) union with his Church, because
these two prophets tor^ented them that dwell upon the earth; that is, the
testimony of the spirit of Christ in and with his Church, (...) a tormenting
doctrine to them that dwell upon the earth. Thus Christ and his Church being
two witnesses, they are described by the number two; as two olive trees, two
candlesticks, and two prophets, alluding from God's dealing with his Church
under the first testament by two prophets, namely, Elijah and Elisha, who were
restorm (...) the true worship of God in the Jewish Church, and the ^^struction
of the enemies of God's Church; and as Zern^babel and Joshua, who were compared
to two olive (...) who were nourishers of God's Church under the Babylons
captivity; and as Moses and Aaron who were deliv^^ of God's Church by the good
hand of God, out of the (...) of the Egyptian bondage.

Thus these under the first testament were two v^^^^ prophets, as it were three
pair of them, who were type of these witnesses under the new testament.

In this book under the denomination of them that d^^^^ on the earth, is
intended the false Church, or Gentiles, (...) earthly carnal men; and they that
dwell in Heaven, is intended the true Church, as appears in Chap. 12.12. R^^^^
ye heavens and ye that dwell in them: woe to the inhabiters of the earth and the
sea, for the Devil is come down (...) you.

It is needful before entry be made on the next verse, (...) take a summary
account what has been the state of the true Church and the false, since that
great apostatizi^^ mentioned in this book; beginning at the sound of the third
trumpet, a star was seen to fall from heaven, and (...) feil upon the third
part of the rivers and upon the fountain of water. By these waters we are to
understand wholso^^ doctrine, by which the Church was nourished: And the star
falling from heaven, does denote a falling of the ministry from their heavenly
station; and thereby imbi^^ing in a great measure these living fountains by
which the Church was before nourished; so that now there is a ^^^^^ing and
dying from that spiritual life which before (...) lived in; and thereupon the
glorious light of the G^ was much eclipsed, which was proclaimed by the soun^
of the next or fourth trumpet, and measured by the (...) moon and stars being
in part darkened: And upon the so^^ing of the fifth trumpet, a total falling
away was represent^ by a star falling from heaven to the earth; and that the^
upon the bottomless pit was opened, and that the sun^ air was darkened with the
smoke that came out of it: A^ which shows, that by this great apostasy, the
glorio^ ^light of the Gospel was quite (...) or put out, and tha^ darkness did
overspead the (...) of inquity aid so work at that time, that the false Church
^lid so increase to be so numerods, that they are represented to be like
locusts.

And thus the true Church was consumed in a wilderness state, being mixed with
the false; so that we have ^o account that any testimony was born against the
false Church, or those locusts, till after the sound of the sixth trumper, and
the^ we have an account of a (...) number that was loosed from under the
doctrine and dominion of mystical Babylon, by atonement made by Jesus Christ
the High Priest, a voice calling to the Angel which had the sixth trumpet to
loose the four Angels bound in the great river Euphrases; and upon this voice
from the place of atonement they were loosed, and prepared to be (...) a
^eadiners for war by the testimony of their mouths as is said of them; after,
if any man will hurt thom, (...) proceeds our of their mouth, and dev^ureth
their enemies; they being also called the holy city, and two witnesses, as they
are in union with Christ, prophesying in sackcloth. And the false Church is
called the beast that a^ out of the bottomiess pit, that made war against them,
and the great city spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, and where our Lord was
crucified.

Thus the true Church is described to be in a poor, low, miserable, and
perishing state, and the false Church in great pomp, and very numerous making
war against he witnesses, and overcoming them, and killing them; thus wasting
and consuming them, so that there is nothing to be seen in the street of
mystical Babylon or the false Church, after they have killed the witnesses, but
dead bodies; there is to life of Godliness to be seen in her street, all her
pretended worship is external things; it is all dead service and vain worship,
works of their own hands. But the Lord is coming upon them speedily as a thief
in the night, while they are rejoicing and making merry themselves over the
dead bodies of the witnesses, which stood before the God of the earth, and are
the golden candlesticks which hold up the light to the world; but now being
killed by the false Church, their dead bodies lie in her street, not being put
in graves, the earth being now covered with darknes^ and the people with gross
darkness.

But the last foregoing verses, to wit, the 7th, 8th, (...) and 10th, does
contain a great mystery; for upon (...) apostasy, or falling away of the true
Church, and the (...) sing up of the false out of the bottomless pit, the fa^
did so multiplp and increase, that they became a gr^ kingdom in the world; and
the true Church went into the wilderness, being bewildered with the
superstition, here^ and hypocrisy of the false Church; so that she (...) her
testimony, and then the false Church got the (...) hand in war against her; and
thus was she overcome and killed mystically in her testimony, being despised,
undervalued, and trodden under foot, v. 2. The false Church thus warring
against her testimony, did overcome her and did kill her, for the testimony of
the true Church ever was, and is, and will be, by the revelation of the Spirit
of Christ; and her ministers preaching is all by the revelation of the spirit
of Christ which dewlleth in them ( G^ 1.11.12.2 Cor. 14.29, 30.) and opens
their understanding to understand the Scriptures. But the ministers of the
fall^ Church, preach only feigned words which they study 2 Pet. 2.3. Even the
magination of their own heart, and (...) by the revelation of Gods spirit, Jer.
23.21. Jer. 14.14. Ezekiel. 13.2, 3.

And thus the false Church got the upper hand, by overcoming the true Church;
and thus was she killed in the mystery. And by their dead bodies lying in the
street of the great city, is to show, that as the true Church did de^ and die,
and the false Church did rise up in her room, there was no life nor spirit of
truth in her; so that nothing was to be seen in her street but the dead bodies
of the witnesses; for there remained only a form of godliness which she upheld
and carried on, being only an outwa^ show of worshipping God, the worshipers
being all dead in sin, and in a polluted state of uncleanness; and all that the
do is only an imitation of the saints, of what they saw externally with their
carnal eyes, and heard with their carnal ears; so that in the street of this
great city, or territories of the false Church, is to be seen nothing but the
dead bodies of the saints, for there is no spirit nor life of righteousness in
them; for as the body is dead without the spirit, so all their works of worship
is done without the works of faith, so that it is all only like the dead bodies
of the saints, when the life and spirit is gone out of them; for could the
inside of this Church be seen, it would appear like Sodom and Egypt, and as bad
as the Jews which crucified our Lord, and therefore her name is derived from
them, and Babylon; and when her fall shall come, then it will be seen what was
in her inside when he was in her pomp and glory; to wit, her body was then the
habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul spirit; as may be seen in
Chap. 18.2. for all that she does is to be ^en of men externally, as preaching,
praying, singing holy men's psalms, and practicing the ordinances of Christ
after one fashion or other, and observing of Sabaths and holy days, Col. 2.16.
Gal. 4.10, 11. And all this proceeding from a sinful and polluted inside; so
that in the street or territories of the false Church is only dead bodies,
finely arrayed outwardly; being decked with silver, and gold, and procious
stone, Chap. 17. (...) So that she is become a glorious Church in the sight of
the world, great and beautiful, alluring both kings and all the inhabitants of
the earth to join in with her; as may be seen, Chap. 17.2. So that she has
both rulers and judges to support and uphold her in whatsoever kingdom or
country she is in, as may be seen, Chap, ^7.3.

And whereas it says, And they of the people, and kindreds, and nations, shall
see their dead bodies, and shall not suffer their dead bodies to be put in
graves. By seeing their dead bodies, is intended that dead form of godliness
before mentioned, which they behold and see with their carnal eyes, which is
here represented by the dead bodies of the saints, they having killed the
living saints: For ^he false Church always glories in the outward form of
Godliness; for that is that which they will not have butied, which was
represented to John by their not suffering the dead bodies to be put in graves:
For it is only the spirit and life of Christianity that the old serpent called
the Devil and Satan strikes at, who decerves the whole world, Chap. 12.9. but
he is blinding the eyes of the kings and judges of the earth, by suggesting
into them, to maintain and uphold the form, or dead body, without the life; for
he knows that that is all that judges can do; and (...) this means he knows he
can war against the life and spi^ of Christianity, and bring all the world to
attend, and (...) worship the form without the life: And thus it is the dear
body only that the false Church rejoices over, and make them selves merry with,
and this is the course of life that both the mother of harlots and her
daughters leads, even to this day; for it was, and is the spirit of life in the
saints that dot^ always torment them that dwell upon the earth, and not the
bodies of the saints without the spirit; for the saints testimony was always
against the false Churches form without the spirit of life in it; and the false
Church is wont always to persecute the true Church, for refusing to attend her
form, or image of Godliness; for the judges of the earth can bring all the
inhabitants of the earth is their territories to attend their form of
Godliness, or (...) worship the image of Godliness which they set up, as none
but the true Church refuses, or suffers under them a^ evil doers: for the world
will hear the false prophets the scripture says, but they will not hear the
true says the scripture; and therefore by this says the scripture we know^
the false from the true: And by this direction, the scripture tells us, we may
know what spirit the prophet is in, whether in the Spirit of God, or in the
Spirit of the World, for if he comes in the Spirit of the world, then the world
will hear him, but if he comes not in the Spirit of the world, (...) the world
will not hear him, for the world knows him not says the scripture, 1 John
3.1. Therefore the world knows (...) not, because it knew not him. 1 John 4.
comparing the fir^ verse with the fifth and sixth verses. Beloved, believe
(...) every spirit, but try the spirits whether they be of God. Beca^ many
false prophets are gone out into the world, they are of (...) world, therefore
speak they of the world, and the world bears them; We are of God, he that
knows God hears us, he that is not of God, hears not us, hereby know we
the spirit of truth and the spirit of error.

Thus we have an account of the sad afflicted state of the Church of Christ,
under her great sufferings and of long continuance.

Verse 11. And after three days and an half the spirit of life from God entered
into them, and they stood upon their feet and great fear fell upon them which
saw them.

This time here expressed by three days and an half, does measure the whole
time of the Churches sorrowful and afflicted state, and the time of the false
Churches insulting and triumphing over them; the state of the true Church being
like the state of Israel of old, when Jerusalem was trodden under foot of the
Gentiles, and Israel under the power and dominion of old Babylon; and the City,
Temple, and Altar being all trodden under foot, and Israel that was in
captivity compared unto the valley of dry bones, Ezekiel. 37, which dry bones was
said to be the whole house of Israel; as in the 11th verse.

Thus the spiritual Israel of God is expressed to be under the same
circumstances, to wit, killed, and their dead bodies to ly in the street of the
great city, and after three days and an half the spirit of life entered into
them, and they stood upon their feet. Thus it was said of Israel of old in
captivity, in the 5th verse, Thus says the Lord God unto these bones, behold,
I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live. And thus it is
expressed of the true and faithful Church of God, how that the spirit of life
from God entered into them, and they stood upon their ^eet: This is the day of
their salvation and deliverance. This is the time of putting off their
sackcloth garments. Now they that have been long trod under foot stand on their
feet, and it is said great fear fell on them that saw them; and well it might,
for the effect of their fear will be speedy destruction that is coming upon
them.

Verse 12. And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, come up
hither.

Thus their comforts increase, they are not only set up^ their feet by the
spirit of life from God entering into them but they are now invited into heaven
out of the reach (...) their Enemies: This is to set forth their advancement
(...) dignity from one degree of exaltation to another.

And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud and their enemies beheld them.

This was a very solemn and awful sight for their enemie^ to behold, to see
those whom they had been persecuting and accusing for heretics, pestilent
fellows, sowers of sedition troublers of the common wealth; yea, esteemed of
them to b^ the filth and offscouring of all things, pretending themselves to be
the true Church; and now to behold and see them whom they had thus despised to
be favorites of heaven, and to be advanced into such great glory; this is a
dreadful day for them to behold.

Verse 13. And the same hour was there are great earthquake.

And well might this great earthquake be upon these enemies of Gods Church, to
see them whom they had been treading under their feet, now ascend up into
heaven in (...) cloud in their open sight; but it is a joyful day to God elect,
and a day of trembling to their enemies, to behold their advancement. And the
same hour was there a gre^^ earthquake,

And the tenth part of the city fell.

Thus we see that when the time comes that the tru^ church shall rise and stand
up on her feet, and be advanced into a higher degree of glory, then the false
Church most fall.

In the 8th verse this city was called spiritual Sodom and Egypt, and where our
Lord was crucified, and in the 17th Chapter, comparing the 6th verse with the
18th, and the will show this city to be intended the false Church; Verse And I
saw the woman drunken with the blood of the the saint and with the blood of the
martyrs of Jesus. Verse 18, A^ the woman which thou saw is that great city;
and this great city is the mother of harlots; as in the 5th verse. And her
daughters have their habitation in the same city, for the city is so great that
it contains all the inhabitants of the earth and of the sea, Chap. 12.12. for
in this city or territories of the false Church, was found the blood of
prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth, Chap. 18.24.

And in the earthquake were slain names of men seven thousand.

By names of men, we are to understand those names of titles that was put upon
the heads and leaders of this false Church, which were names of dignity, in
naming themselves with those names which the Spirit of God had put upon his
ministers and officers of his Church. And the number seven we are to
understand, measures the whole of every thing that it expresses by that
number; so that whereas it says, And in the earthquake were slain names of men
seven thousand, is not to be understood their persons were slain, but is to be
understood all those names of titles, which was falsely imposed upon her
ministers and Church officers, which did properly belong only to the true
Church; for before this time, the mountain of the false Church was exalted
above the mountain of the true Church, but now the mountain of the true Church
is exalted above the mountain of the false; so that all those names which men
imposed upon the false Church, while they were under a delusion taking the
false for the true, and the true for the false; but now the mountain of the
house of the Lord being exalted above the top of the mountains, it now appears
that the false Church had only the names of men, and was not the true Church,
but was a cheat; so that all those names of honor and dignity, put upon her by
men, who took her for the true Church, are now, upon the rising of the true
Church and ascending into dignity, all those names of men are slain at once,
and she discovered to be a cheat, that was so renowned for the true, and
exalted with names of dignity, piety, virtue, learning, and whatsoever else was
ascribed unto her in way of praise or commendation, it being all only names of
men imposed upon her; for it is not him whom men commends that is approved, but
whom the Lord commends; but now all those names of men are slain at once, to
her utter shame and confusion, who were adorned with those titles that did
belong only to the Church of Christ; and so by imitation of the true Church,
they deceived the world.

And the remnant were affrighted, and gave glory to the God of heaven.

Thus we are now come to the period of the false Church, and to the glory and
advancement of the true: Now we are come to the end of the sixth trumpet, which
was the second woe trumpet.

Verse 14. The second woe is past and behold the third woe comes quickly.

Verse 15. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in heaven.

In the 12th verse we had an account, how God did visit his Church in her low
state, their bodies lying dead in the street of the great city, or within the
territories of the false Church, he not only breathing into them the spirit of
life, and setting them on their feet, but also advanced them into a high state
of dignity, inviting them up into heaven; and now we hear their voices in
heaven,

Saying, the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever.

Thus they render praise and thanks unto God, in that he had subdued the
kingdoms of this world, and brought them into subjection to himself, and unto
his Christ, that is, his anointed, whom he has anointed to be King of kings
and Lord of lords, who shall reign for ever and ever.

Verse 16. And the twenty four elders which sat before God on their seats, fell
upon their faces and worshipped God.

These twenty four elders do represent the state of all saints who shall sit in
judgment with God, to judge the world. And they are twenty four in number,
because twelve of them does represent the twelve gates of the holy city, being
the twelve heads of the twelve tribes of Israel, or twelve sons of Jacob, and
the twelve Apostles who are the twelve foundations of the said city, which make
twenty four Elders, which comprehend both the Elders of the primitive Church of
the Jews, and the Elders of the primitive Church of the Gentiles.

And the twenty four elders fell upon their faces and worshipped God, in
consideration that he had taken to himself his great power and reigned.

Verse 17. Saying, We give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty, which art, and
wast, and art to come, because thou have taken to thee thy great power, and
have reigned.

Verse 18. And the nations were angry.

That is, with God's Church.

And thy wrath is come.

That is, by their anger against thy Church they have angered thee, and thy
wrath is come.

And the time of the dead that they should be judged.

This comprehends the end of the world, and the resurrection of the body, and
answers to the cry of those that were slain for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they held; Chap. 6.10. How long, O Lord, holy, and true, do
thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth.

Thus the witnesses cry, who were slain for the testimony which they held: And
now the time is come that they should be judged, and that thou should give
reward unto thy servants the prophets, and to the saints, and to them that fear
thy name, both small and great, and should destroy them which destroy the
earth. These that destroy the earth, are the locusts that came out of the ^moke
of the bottomless pit, whose king in the Hebrew ^ngue is called Abaddon, but in
the Greek tongue has ^is hame Apollyon, and in our tongue, a Destroyer.

Verse 19. And the temple of God was opened in heaven.

This temple of God is his Church, 2 Cor. 6.16. For ye are the temple of the
living God; as God has said, I will dwell in them. And in the 12th verse of
this Chapter it is said, And they ascended up to heaven in a cl^. This
ascending up into heaven, is into a higher degree^ glory; and by this temple
being opened in heaven, (...) to discover what was to be seen in it, which was
(...) in the false Church, that is, the Ark of God's testament which is the
spirit of Christ dwelling in his Church o^ Temple; Romans 8.10. And if Christ be
in you; for it is the indwelling of Christ that makes the body God's temp^e^
and the testament of God here spoken of, is a writing written on the fleshly
tables of the hearts of those that are members of his Church, 2 Cor. 3.3.
Written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in tables of
stone, but in fleshly tables of the heart. This temple, and this ask of the
testament, and the testament itself, was figured out by that pattern which was
made by Moses in the wilderness; and the figure of this New Testament, written
upon the heart by the Spirit of God; the sigure of it was written on two tables
of stone by the finger of God, and before the Church of God was advanced into
an higher degree of Glory, which is said ascending up to heaven; this ark of
the testament was not known to be in her, till now the temple is opened in
heaven, that the ark might be seen to be in it, the Church of God being now
raised, and advanced into heaven, being the temple of God; this temple is
opened, and the ark of God's testament is seen in this temple. God having the
discovered his Covenant with his Church, he now thunders down his judgments
upon their enemies, which is expect by lightening, and voices, and thundrings,
and an earthquake, and great hail. These judgments follow the seventh and last
trumpet, which is the finishing prophecy; as may be seen, Chap. 10.7. But in
the days of the voice of the seven^^ Angel, when he shall begin to sound, the
mystery of God should be finished, (...) servants the prophets. Compare this
with the 15th verse of this Chapter, And the seventh Angel sounded, and there
were great voices in heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this world are become the
kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and be shall reign for ever and ever.
This is the finishing of all things foretold of by the Prophets.

CHAP. XII.
This Chapter consists of two Visions that the Apostle John saw, one of the
Church, beginning at the primitive Jewish Church of Christ, and continued until
the Church went into the wilderness; As also a vision of the great red dragon
from his first being such a one, and his great dominion over the whole world,
which he got by usurpation; and his continual enmity against the woman, or
Church of Christ, and her seed.

Verse 1.

ANd there appeared a great wonder in heaven, a woman clothed with the sun,
and the moon under her feet.

This woman is the Church of God; and her being clothed with the sun, does
show that she is the light of the world, Mat. 5.14. And she being thus adorned
with the glorious light of the sun, which rules the day, and swallows up the
light of the moon; (...) so much more excellent in brigh^^^^, that the moon is
said to be under her feet as useless.

And upon her head a crown of twelve stars.

The crown of twelve stars does represent the twelve sons of Jacob, which that
Church was crowned withal, Jacob was represented to Joseph by the Sun, and his
mother who was under subjection to Jacob by the Mo^, and Joseph with his eleven
brethren to Twelve Stars, Genesis 37.9. For these twelve stars are twelve Angels,
or the heads of the twelve tribes of Israel, Chap. 21.12. And at the gates
twelve Angels, and names written there^, which are the names of the twelve
tribes of Israel.

Verse 2. And she being with child, cried, travailing in birth, and pained to
be delivered.

This woman was with child by her covenanted husband, as is written. Isai.
54.5. For thy maker is thy husband, the Lord of hosts is his name. Jer. 2.2.
Thus says the Lord, I remember the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine
espossals. Ezekiel. 16.8. Now when I passed by thee and looked upon thee, behold
thy time was the time of love, and I spread my skirt over thee; and covered thy
nakedness; yea. I swore unto thee, and entered into a covenant with thee, says
the Lord, and thou becamest mine.

Thus was the woman with child, and her Maker (...) her husband that begat this
child that this woman trava^ed withal, and pained to be delivered; and when her
time was fully come, as appears, Gal. 4.4. And when the fullness of the time was
come, God sent forth his son (...) of a woman, made under the law.

Verse 3. And there appeared another wonder in heaven, and behold a great red
dragon.

It is said both these wonders was seen in heaven. The w^mans heavenly station
was seen by her excellency in lighted glory, as the sun is seen in the open
firmament of heaven, her conversation being in heaven. And the Dragons ^e^venly
station was his usurped power and dignity which he by usurp^ion had advanced
himself into, having g^^ all the glory and dominion of this world: Thus he had
^vanc'd himself into heaven, as was said of old Babylon, Isai. 14.13, 14. For
thou have said in thine heart, I will ^scond^ into heaven, I will exalt my
throne above the stars of God, I will ascend above the height of the clouds, I
will ^e like the most high. And he appeared to John in his bloody color in the
vision, a great red dragon. His red color was to show him to be a murderer
from the beginning: John 8.44. He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode
not in the truth. 1 John 3.8. For the devil sins from the beginning. And he
appeared

Having seven heads, and ten horns, and seven crowns on his heads.

His seven heads and seven crowns on his seven heads, does show him to be
crowned with all the dominion of this world; for the seven heads does measure
the whole dominion of this world, and the seven crowns does show that he is
crowned therewith, and the ten horns does show that he has many persecuting
powers arising out of these heads, Luke 4.5, 6.

Verse 4. And his tail drew the third part of the stars of heaven, and did cast
them to the earth.

By his tail drawing a third part of the stars of heaven, is his allurements
and (...), after riches, honor, and pleasures of this world^ and by the third
part of the stars of heaven being (...) down to the earth is ministers and
professors of Chri^anity who was in a heavenly ^arion, but by those
forementioned allurements and drawing temptations, did apostati^e and fall away
from their heavenly state to an ea^hly and carnal state; for the Devil goes
about like ^ roaring Hon, seeking whom he may de^our.

And the dragon stood before the woman, which was ready (...) for to devour her
child as (...).

This dragon having had such success, in overcoming our first parents, and
since casting down so many of the stars of heaven unto the earth, he now stands
ready to devour that promised seed of the woman (which was to bruise his head)
as soon as it should be born, destroying the male Children in ^gypt, and by
Herod the king, and at all other opportunities.

Verse 5. And she brought forth a man child, who was to rule all nations with a
rod of iron and her child was caught up unto God and to h^s throne.

(...) child is the son of God, as in the figure by David is showed, in the
second Psalm, 7th, 8th, and 9th verses, Thou a^t my son, this day have I
begotten th^e; ask of (...) and I will give thee the heathen for ^hine ^tance,
and the utt^st parts of he earth for thy possession, thou s^alt break them with
a rod of iron, thou sha^ (...) them in pr^, like a po^ vess^l. Compare this
with the 13th Chapter of the Acts, ver^e 33. As it is written in the second
Psals, Thou ^rt my son, (...) day ^ve I begotten thee.

And her child was caught up unto God and to his throne. This was after his
resurrection and ascension into Glory, who ov^ him that had the power of death,
that is, the devil, (...). 2.14. for he is the Son of God, and heir of his
Fathers Kingd^n, H^b. 1.2. compared with the 8th verse, But unto the son he
says, Thy throne O God is for ever and ever, a seepter of rightcous^ss is the
seepter of thy kingdom. Compare this with Chap. 19.15, 16. And he s^all rule
the^ with a red of iron, and he treads the wine press of the fier^ness and
w^h of aimighty God; and he has on his (...) and on his th^gh a name written,
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

Verse 6. And the woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place
prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand two hundred and
sixty days.

This woman having brought forth the man child, and his father having taken him
up to heaven, and exalted him by setting him on his own throne, in great
dig^ity and honor, we have hear also an account what did after become of the
woman that brought him forth, how that she fled into the wilderness, even as
the Church did of old, and how the has a place prepared of God, that they
should feed her there. As God fed his Church with Angels food in the
wilderness; so he also feeds this his Church in her wilderness state, with the
true manna from heaven. Her wilderness state is here measured by days, which
are ruled by the sun which she is clothed with, and measured mystically by a
thousand two hundred and threescore days. This verse which speaks of the
woman's flight into the wilderness, is to show her future state, after her
child was caught up unto God and to his throne, and is spoken by a
foreknowledge of her future state, and not in the proper place as it i^poken of
in the 14th verse of this Chapter, but is in this place foretold of before the
time of her going into the wilderness. And this thousand two hu^ed and
threescore days, here spoken of, is the same time spoken of in Chap. 11.^. And
I will give power unto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousand two
hundred and threescore days clo^thed in sackcloth.

Verse 7. And there was war in heaven; Michael and his angels fought against
the dragon, and the dragon fought and his angels.

This war was carried on by Christ and his soldiers, against the Devil and his
soldiers, and did immediately follow upon the child's ^cention into heaven, and
contiaued until the glorious light of the gospel did so shine in the world,
that it gave such a blow to satan's kingdom of darkness, that it was much
weakened; the dragon and his angels fought by cruel persecution, the dragon
having all the kingdoms and powers of this world on his side, both Jew and
Gentile, even all the Roman Empire, thus be fought in heaven, even in great
dignity and power. And Michaels army fought by the word of their testimony, and
by the blood of the lamb, and loved not their lives unto the death, as in the
11th verse. This war continued until the sound of the second trumpet, or until
the overthrow of the heathenish Empire of Rome.

Verse 8. And prevailed not, neither w^ there place found any more in heaven.

But the dragon did not prevail but lost his heavenly ^tion by the glorious
light of the Gospel, and by t^ sword of Constantine under Christ's banner; so
that t^ dragon lost his heavenly dignity, which he had in the heathenish Roman
power; as appears in the following verse.

Verse 9. And the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent called the Devil
and Satan, which deceives the whole world, he was cast into the earth, and his
angels were cast out with him.

By the great dragon being cast out, was by the overthrow of the heatheninsh
Empire, which that old ser^ called the Devil and Satan gave power, unto, to
make was against the saints by persecution; but he was cast out (...) to the
earth, and his angels were cast out with him, (...) losing his heavenly station
by the sword of God in the han^ of Constantine; which overthrow was sounded by
the soun^ of the second trumpet.

Verse 10. And I heard a loud voice saying i^ heaven, Now is come salvation and
strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the pow^ of his Christ.

This loud voice in heaven, was the voice of the Chur^ of God, saying in
heaven, Salvation and strength is co^ and the kingdom of our God and his
Christ. By his Christ we are to understand is intended that man child that the
woman brought forth, being the son of God, who (...) anointed to be king in his
Fathers throne; And (...) having showed salvation to his Church, by his great
strength and kingly power, in giving the dragon and his kingdom such a great
overthrow by the sword of Con^antine, so that one of his seven heads was
wounded unto death; for until this time the dragon was in hearen, having the
heathenish Roman Empire under his do^ninion and delusions, by whom he
persecuted the woman until the time of said Constantine; for say they,

The accuser of our brethren is cast down, which accused them before our God
day and ^ight.

This was the joy and consolation of Gods Church and People, to see their
adversary the devil cast down (by their anointed king and savior, now brought
forth by the woman, and crowned in his fathers throne^ who before was wont to
accuse them before their God day and night, as he did Job, who was a perfect
and upright man, one that feared God and ascewed evil, yet was accused of the
Devil to serve God for his own advantage and profit, for the sake of worldly
gain, Job 1.9, 10, 11.

Verse 11. And they overcame him by the blood of the lamb.

That is, they were redeemed from their bondage and slavery unto fin and satan,
by the precious blood of the (...) of God; and thus they overcame him by the
blood (...) ^he Lamb, having redemption thereby from sin and satan, who before
had the dominion over them, but now having redemption by the blood of Jesus
Christ, they war against him,

By the word of their testimony

Against his false doctrine, by which he deceives the whole world, as in the
9th verse.

And they loved not their lives unto the ^eath.

That is, they bore a testimony against his false doctrine to the loss of their
own lives, for the sake of him that redeemed them with his precious blood, and
thus they suffered under the kingdom of satan, from the time that the man child
was taken up into heaven, and into God's throne, to the time that the Lord
Jesus Christ overthrew the kingdom of satan in the heathenish Empire of Rome by
the sword of Constantine; so that the great dragon and, his kingdom fell at
once, like Pharoh and his host in the red sea. Thus was satan cast down from
heaven, and his angels with him, unto the earth; as in the following verse.

Verse 12. Therefore rejoice ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them.

This is to express the great joy of the Church now triumphing in heaven, over
their adversary the devil, who has been so long insulting over them by cruel
and unmerciful persecutions and tortures.

Woe to the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea:

By the inhabiters of the earth and of the sea, is intended the ungodly and
wicked world.

For the devil is come down unto you, having great wrath, because he knows
that he has but a short time.

Thus the dragon seeing and considering, that though he could deceive and
overcome the whole world, yet he could neither deceive nor overcome the man
child tha^ was ascended into heaven into his fathers throne, and that he was
son and heir to all that his father had, and had overcome him in battle; upon
consideration of these things his wrath was great, knowing his time was but
short.

And now what follows is upon the sound of the third trumpet, and reaches to
the sound of the sixth trumpet.

Verse 13. And when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth,

By the kingdom of God, and by the power of hi^ Christ.

He persecuted the woman which brought forth he man child.

This is by a new assault; and the manner how he ma^geth this persecution will
be seen in the following part of this chapter.

Verse 14. And to the woman were given ^wo wings of a great eagle, that she
might ^lee into the wilderness.

This is a spiritual wilderness here intended. This place mentions the woman's
flight into the wilderness in it is proper place, after her long warfare and
great sufferings by pers^cution under the Roman heathenish Empire, but now
takes her flight into the wilderness from the face of the ^erpent, as Israel
did of old from the face of Pharaoh, as is here spoken by an allusion, Exodus
19.4. Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I have you on eagles
^ings, and brought you unto my self, Deuteronomy. 32.11. As an ^ugle stirs up her
nest, fluttereth over her young, spread^h abroad her wings, takes them,
bears them on her wings, ^o the Lord alone did lead him.

As the Lord was present to comfort his Church in her great sufferings under
those persecutions unjustly inflicted ^n her by the dragon, under the
heathenish Empire of ^ome, so likewise the Lord is a present help to his Church
in her wilderness state, there to prepare a place for her, where she is
nourished as Israel was of old, in the time of her abode in the wilderness; so
is this Churches time before determined as Isreal's was, and is here measured by
a time, and times, and half a time. By a time is a thousand, and times is two
hundred, and half a time is sixty: This is a very sorrowful time with the true
Church, as Isreal's was in the wilderness: This is the time of the two witnesses
prophesying in sackcloth: This is the time of her great Apostasy, and a mixture
with the false Church ^ho is always in a wilderness state, Chap. 17.3. So he
^ried me away in the spirit into the wilderness and I saw a ^oman sit upon a
scarlet colored beast. This woman is the ^lse Church, with whom the true is
mixed and bewildered ^s appears in the 18th Chapter, verse 4. Come out of her ^y
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye ^ceive not of her
plagues.

Thus there is a mixture in this wilderness state, between the false Church and
the true; and thus it was with Israel in the wilderness, Numb. 11.4. And the
^xt multitude that was among them, fell a lusting, and the children of Israel
also wept again and said, Who shall give (...) flesh to ^at? And why it comes
to be so will be seen by what follows.

Verse 15. And the serpent cast out of his mouth water as a flood after the
woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood.

Thus he begins with new stratagems (having gottes a wounded head) to carry
away the woman by craft and deceit, with his poisonable serpentine heresies and
false doctrine to deceive, as a flood of waters to carry away the woman
therewith, by reproaching the way of truth and sound doctrine, and reviling
those that profess the same, accusing them with all manner of evil falsely to
make them odious, and to be hated of all men. Thus by these stratagems he
persecutes the Church in the wilderness, and by feigning flatteries, to entice
her to worldly pleasures an^ carnal delights, after riches, honors, and
pleasures of thi^ world. All these things he casts out of his mouth as (...)
flood of water, to carry her away therewith, thinking (...) drown her thereby
with destruction and perdition.

Verse 16. And the earth helped the woman

By the earth is intended the earthly minded, or t^ children of this world; not
that they did it designedly (...) help the woman for they know her not, 1 John
3.1. but (...) is spoken here by the similitude of a flood of water, the breaks
forth and is like to carry away much people; (...) the dryness of the earth
drinking it in so fast that it (...) their help, by which means they escaped
the destruction (...) otherwise would have happened to them. Thus it happened
in the mystery; for the water which the serpe^ cast out of his mouth as a
flood, are pleasant waters (...) the worldly minded, who would willingly enjoy
heav^ and eternal happiness, so that they might but enjoy t^ pleasures and
delights of this present world the mean time; so that the serpents doctrine of
heresy and delusion, which came out of his mouth to carry away the woman, was
all drank in by earthly minded men, and she thereby escaped, not being carried
away by it.

And thus the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the
serpent cast out of his mouth,

To carry away the woman therewith; which said water as a flood cast out of his
mouth, was false doctrine, heresy and lies, which the earthly minded people of
the world readily opened their mouth and drank it in: And thus were they
deceived therewith even the whole world, as in the 9th verse of this Chapter;
but the woman escaped it.

Verse 17. And the dragon was wrath with the woman.

When he saw that those forementioned stratagems would not prevail, then he

Went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the commandments of
God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ.

This remnant of her seed which he persecutes, are those which are most
circumspect in keeping the commandments of God, and maintaining the testimony
of Jesus Christ. And in the following Chapter we shall have an account how he
carries on this war of persecution against the remnant of the woman's faithful
seed; the manchild having escaped his hands, by being taken up to God and to
his throne, he now makes war against the remnant of her faithful seed, as is
written 2 Timothy 3.12. Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall
suff^ persecution.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse 1.

ANd I stood upon the sand of the sea.

Thus it appeared unto John in his vision, as if he stood on the sand of the
sea; so that he had a fair prospect to behold the face of the waters.

And I saw a beast rise out of the sea.

This beast is the kingdoms of this world, and more particularly the Roman
kingdom, who had rule at that time. And by the waters is meant peoples and
multitudes, and nations and tongues, as appears Chap. 17.15. Jer. 51.53. And by
the heads of the boast is meant the dominion of this world: And the number
seven measures the whole dominion or government of this world: And the ten
horns is to express many kingly powers that arises out of the seven heads; for
it is said in Chap. 17.9, 10. The seven heads are seven mountains, and the
seven mountains represent all the dominion and dignity of this world: And there
are seven kings, and the seven kings measures all the visible dominion of this
world; and in the 12th verse of the 17th Chapter it is said, the ten horns are
ten kings, that is, there are many kings that arises out of the seven heak,
and where a king is there is power; for whereas it is said, and upon his horns
ten crowns, which is to show the ten kings or horns are crowned with power. And
upon his heads the names of blasphemy; and this was to show that the powers of
this world in heathenism and antichristianism, has been wont to reproach both
God and his tabernacle, or Church, as in the 6th verse.

Verse 2. And the beast which I saw was like a leopard, and his feet as the
feet of a bear, and his mouth as the mouth of a lion.

Thus God represents the kingly powers of this world by the most fiercest wild
beasts, who are fierce and strong, and able thereby to destroy and overcome the
beasts of the earth. And the Prophet Daniel Chap. 7. saw the like vision of the
four Monarchs, represented to him by the like fierce beasts; but Daniel
prophesied in the first Monarch, and John in the time of the last. Now these
kings and powers were set up by God to do justice and judgment among the
inhabitants of the earth. And this beast here spoken of is not yet represented
to John of a scarlet color, because its power is of God, according to Paul's
testimony, Romans 13.1, etc. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; for
there is no power but of God, the powers that are ordained of God. This Apostle
is speaking of the same power that John is prophesying of, to wit, the Roman
kingdom then ruling.

And the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority.

The beast receiving his power from the dragon, and ex^cising it, becomes a
scarlet colored beast, as does appear in Chap. 17.3. for we read of this
dragon and his power in Chap. 12.3. And behold a great red dragon, having seven
heads and ten horns, and seven crowns on his heads. This dragon is that old
serpent called the devil and satan, Chap. 12.9. Yea, he is the God of this
world, 2 Cor. 4.4. Joh. 14.30. And was a murderer from the beginning, Joh.
8.44. and therefore may well be called the red dragon. This dragon offered to
give to our Savior all his dominion and glory here spoken of, upon condition
that he would fall ^ewn and worship him, Luke 4.5, 6, 7. but he refuses to
purchase it upon those terms; but the beast receives it of him: And the dragon
thus giving to the beast his power, and his seat, and great authority, he now
becomes a persecuting power, by this power derived from the dragon, and thereby
establishes false worship.

Verse 3. And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death.

This was one of the seven heads of the dragon which he gave to the beast; for
that power which is derived from God is not to be wounded, but is to continue
to the worlds end: Now if the dragon had not the dominion of this world, he
could not be the god of it. 2 Cor. ^.4. And this wound was given him by the
glorious light of the Gospel, after the resurrection of Jesus Christ, being
spread among the Gentiles, and by the sword of God put into the hand of
Constantine, to the overthrow of that persecuting power, derived from the
dragon, and i^ the hand of the Romish heathenish power, who stood to mai^tain
the worshipping of idols, and b^asphemed God and his tabernacle, and them that
dwell in heaven under whose power the ten first persecutions was ca^ on. And
this overthrow was upon the sound of the second t^mpet.

And his deadly wound was healed.

And the healing of this wound was by the ^lling away of the true Church, and
by the rising up of the false, by which antichrist got a head, and by this
means the deadly wound was healed, for now the false Church was taken for the
true, and the true for the false; and thus the dragons power was revived and
his head healed, and all the world wondered after the beast; for now all the
world concluded it was a Christian power that ruled, for the dragon d^veth the
whole world, Chap. 12.9.

Verse 4. And they worshipped the dragon which gave power to the beast, and
they worshipped the beast.

This is to be understood thus: The power which the dragon gives the beast is
given under pretennce of setting up the true worship of God, and requiring all
people to attend it: The children of this world being in darkness, take the
ordinances, institutions, doctrines and commandments of men, to be the true
worship of God, Mat. 15.(...). But in vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men. Is^^. 29.13. And their fear toward (...) is
taught by the precepts of men. Thus they worship the dragon that gives power to
the beast, by setting up forms of worship to whom God has given no such power,
for he has made them only ministers of the Law. And thus they come to worship
the beast, in obeying him in his institutions of worship, when as it is not in
the power of kings or governors of this world, to set up the true worship of
God, for they cannot regenerate one man by making him a new creature: For unto
the wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou
should take my covenant in thy mouth, Psalm. 50.16. When ye come to be seen
before me, Who has required this at your hand to tread my courts? Isai. 1.12.
compared with the 15th verse, And when ye spread forth your hands, I will ^de
mine eyes from you; yea, when ye multiply prayer I will not hear; your hands
are full of blood: For it is only those that are regenerated, and so become new
creatures by being born of God, that can worship him; Joh. 4.24. God is a
Spirit, and they they that worship him must worship (...) in spirit and in
truth, Phil. 3.3. For we are the cir^^^sion which worship God in the spirit. So
that no man under the power of sin can worship God in spirit and in truth; so
that all unregenerate men, worship they know not what, Joh. 4.22. Romans 14.17,
18. For the kingdom of God is righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost; for he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and
approved of men. So that whatsoever is set up by man in way of worship,
pretending to worship God is from the power of the dragon, and is but a
del^ding form or image of worship; by which the inhabitants of the earth are
deluded by the dragon, and by this wile. He persecutes the true worshippers of
God, that worship him through the gift of his own Spirit, which he has given
them to worship him with, in faith and love; which faith and love is his own
gift, given to us by his own Spirit to worship him with; according to what is
written, 2 Cor. 4.13. We having the same spirit of faith: For it is the Spirit
that gives us faith, and without faith it is impossible to please God (Heb.
11.6.) or to worship him: So that all pretended worship to God set up by man,
is only worshipping the dragon and the beast, and no true worship to God, but a
provocation to him; for it is done only with the mouth and lips, and acts of
the creatures own acting, and not done in the spirit of truth but in obedience
to the commandments and doctrines of men; saying, who is li^ unto the beast? as
if they should say, who can withstand the commandments of a king? who is able
to make (...) with him?

Thus the dragon and the beast can keep in subjection the whole world under
false worship, they not seeing the invisible God, who only is to be worshipped
and feared above all: So that it looks to them who are the worshipers of the
dragon and the beast, who is able to withstand the whole world, when as this is
the victory that ^^^meth the world, even our faith, 1 John 5.4.

Verse 5. And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things, and
blasphemies.

This gift was given him by the dragon, to speak great threatenings to all that
would not subject to his ordinances, commandments and institutions of worship,
reproaching or blaspheming the saints for refusing subjection thereunto; for
though the saints are few in number, yet they (...) the light of the world, Mat.
5.14. For their fear toward God, is not taught by the commandments of men.

And power was given unto him, to continue forty and two months.

This time of persecution is measured by the moon, (...) months, because
antichrist rules in the night, and in da^ness, they being children of the
night, and of darkness and this power which was given unto him to make war with
the saints, was a limited time to him by God, and (...) pressed by forty two
months, but it does not belong to us to know the times and seasons, which the
father has p^ into his own power, Acts 1.7. But it is a limited time to him,
to make war with the saints, which time is expre^ by 42 Months, this is the 42
months spoken of in chap. 11.2. it is said the Gentiles shall tread the holy
city under foot, that is these Antichrists, in conjunction with the
Magistratical powers of this world: for the holy city is God's Church, which
the Gentiles, or these Antichristians tread under foot, chap. 21.9.10. And
there came unto me one of the seven Angels, and talked with me saying, come
hither, I will show thee the Bride the Lambs wife, and he showed me that great
city the ^ty Jerusalem.

Verse 6. And he opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his
name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.

By blaspheming his tabernacle is his Church, which is the true tabernacle of
God, which he has pitched and not man. Heb. 8.2. for in this tabernacle is
God's habitation and dwelling place, which was figured out by that tabernacle
pitched in the wilderness. And by them that dwell in heaven, is the Saints,
whose conversation is in heaven, Phil. 3.20.

Verse 7. And it was given unto him to make war with the saints.

This power was given him by the dragon.

And to overcome them.

This speaks of such a time when Antichrist rules in great pomp and glory and
did overcome the saints, for this was the time when the false Church said in
her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow, at this
time the true Church was trodden under foot of the Gentiles. And this beast that
did ascend out of the earth,

Did overcome them, and kill them; and power was given unto him over all
kindreds and tongues and nations.

This also speaks of the power that the Roman kingdom had given him by the
dragon, in the times of Antichristianism, as will appear in the following verse.

Verse 8. And all that dwell on the earth shall worship him.

By the dwellers upon the earth is meant earthly, worldly and carnal men; for
such shall worship him:

Whose names are not written in the book of life, of the lamb slain from the
foundation of the world.

This is to distinguish the worshippers of the beast from the children of God,
whose names are enrolled in the lambs book of life, being redeemed by his
precious blood* And these are they which worship God in spirit and ^ truth, and
follow the lamb whithersoever he goes, Chap. 14.^ These were bought from among
men.

And whereas it says, the lamb slain from the foundation of the world; this is
spoken of Gods fore-ordination, which he purposed in himself before the
foundation of the world, that he should be slain at that time when he was
slain, as is written, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20. Ye know that ye were not redeemed
with corruptible things, but with the prec^o^s blood of Jesus Christ, as of a
lamb without blemish, and without spot, who verily was foreordained before the
foundation of the world, but was manifest in these last times for you.

Verse 9. If any man have an ear, (...) him hear.

This voice is calling for attention, both to what has been spoken already,
and to that which follows.

Verse 10. He that leads into Captivity.

This is meant the persecuting power, that makes wa^ against the Saints, and
did overcome them; as in the seventh verse, and so leading them into captivity,
the themselves shall be overcome, and

Go into Captivity; he that kills with the sword, must be killed with the
sword.

This is to be understood, that as persecutors kill the Saints with the sword
of persecution, so likewise the^ themselves shall be killed with the sword of
God Justice.

Here is the pa^ence and faith of the Saints That is they are killed with the
sword, but patiently ^ough faith endure it, Jam. 5 6. Ye have condemned and ^ed
the just, and he does not resist you.

The following part of this Chapter will give us an ac^unt after what manner
antichrist did act, and after what ^nner it came to get its head healed, and
how the mystery (...) iniquity did work and overspread the world, and how ^d
after what manner false worship was set up, and how is yet carried on, and not
yet purged by the dissenters from ^e Church of Rome, because they cannot yet
count ^e number of the beast and therefore cannot yet get the ^ctory over the
number of his name, but remain yet with ^im in the wilderness, Chap. 17.3. So
he carried me away in ^e Spirit into the wilderness, and I saw a woman sit upon
^scarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy, having ^en heads and ten
horns. But those that have gotten ^e victory over the beast, are come out of a
wilderness ^te, and stand on a sea of glass, singing praises to God ^r their
victory, Chap. 15.2. And I saw as it were a sea ^f glass, and them that had
gotten the victory over the ^ast, and over his image, and over his mark, and
over the ^mber of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the (...) of God.
These only sing the song of victory.

Verse 11. And I beheld another beast coming ^p out of the earth.

The former beast rose out of the sea, but this out of ^he earth; for this is
the same beast that we read of in the 9th Chapter, which rose out of the
bottomless pit, ^d also in Chap. 11.7. And when they shall have finished their
^estimony, the beast that ascends out of the bottomless pit all make war
against them, and shall overcome them and kill ^em. This is the same
antichrist, though it is represented (...) John by rising out of the earth in a
more honorable ^ppearance than ^ocusts, that are a mischievous beast both ^o
men and cattle, by devouring the fruits of the earth; out this latter part of
this Chapter, shows the wily working of the dragon to heal his wounded head.

The first beast as it rose out of the s^, or out of the multitude of the
people, was the powers which we^ ordained of God to govern the inhabitants of
the earth, by justice and equity, and this power was given them of God only to
be ministers of the Law, to punish evil doers; but the dragon giving him power,
they became persecutors of God's Church. But this beast came up (...) of the
earth,

And he had two horns like a lamb.

And acts wilely in and by the dragons power, ne^ having had any power from
God; for it is a descripti^ of the first rising of antichrist and false
prophets to (...) a head, that they got into an union and conjunc^ with the
powers which God set up, appearing and (...) sheeps clothing, pretending to
come in a lamb like spirit, for though antichrist and false prophets did multiply
and (...) like multitudes of locust, as in Chap. 9th, yet they could not
presently get to such a head as to rule the Church and common wealth, which
here the two horns does represent to us, as being Christ's Vicar on earth,
appearing as the lamb of God; but rising out o^ ^he earth, as by the vi^on does
appear to us, it is a ^nterfeit lamb, and n^ from heaven, but earthly and
carn^, rising out of the earth and his two horns is to set forth his usurped
power ove^ Church and Common wealth.

And he spoke as a dragon.

For this beast was the dragons mouth to deceive both Church and and common
wealth, by pretending to be (...) lamb, though a counterfeit false prophet;
yea, such (...) one as comes under this curse which Christ pronounces against
the false prophets, Luke 6.26. Woe unto you w^ all men shall speak well of you;
for so did their fathers to the false prophets.

Thus these come to be in such credit and honor is the world, and to come to
such a head and power as the first beast was in, under whom the ten first
persecutions was carried on. The rising up of this beast was upon the sound of
the fifth trumpet.

Verse 1^. And he exercises all the power of the first beast before him, and
causes the ^arth, and them that dwell therein, to wor^ip the first beast whose
deadly wound was ^ealed.

Thus the false Church and the worldly government co^ing into an union and
conjunction together, by this ^eans the dragons power that was wounded to death
is ^ow healed by the dragons persecuting power being now received again by the
powers which God has set up to be ministers of the law, thus the false church
makes use of the wor^lly powers to be their foundation, to uphold them in
wealth (...) honor, and in prosperity, and to turn their sword against ^he
true Church; and all this is done by the wily working ^f the dragon in his
ministers, as if they were ministers ^f Christ. And thus they come to exercise
all the power of the first beast before him; for the false prophets are of the
world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world hear^th them, 1 John
4.5. And thus they come to deceive the powers which God has set up to govern
the world, and thus they become persecutors.

And causes the earth and them that dwell therein to wor^ip the first beast,
whose deadly wound was healed; for now the false Church and the false prophets
appearing to the worldly judges to be the true Church and true prophets, they
now become Anticrists vassals, having the honor to judge on their behalf, who
prescribes a form of worship, or makes an image of Godliness to the worldly
Judges; and they make laws to maintain the same, and thus they cause the earth,
and them that dwell therein, to worship the first beast, and so consequently
the dragon, from whom they derive their power, whose deadly wound is thus
^healed.

Verse 13. And he does great wonders, so that he makes fire come down from
heaven ^n the earth in the sight of men.

Thus this impostor is set forth as if he does great wonders to deceive, for he
is called the false prophet, Chap. 19.20. And the beast was taken, and with him
the false prophet, that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceives
them.

Thus this beast came up out of the earth like a lamb ^ven in sheeps clothing.
And it is said, he makes fir^ come down from heaven on the earth i^ the sight
of (...) This is spoken alluding from what was done under ^h^ law, from the
fire that came down from heaven upon the prayer of Aaron, Elijah, and Solomon,
( Lev. 9.24.1 King 18.38.2 Chron. 7.1.) and devoured the sacrifices; and so i^
spoken of this false prophet, who by imitation of the saints, deceive the
inhabitants of the earth, by his lying miracles which he does in the sight of
the beast, or the powers of this world; whenas he only offers strange f^ before
the Lord, by which he deceives them that dw^ on the earth, as Nadab and Abihu
did, which the Lord commanded them not; our Lord also foretold of the^ things,
Mat. 24.24. For there shall arise false Christ's, (...) false prophets, and
shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that if it were possible, they
shall deceive the very elect. And what greater signs and wonders can there b^
done to deceive, than to stand or kneel in public assemblies, and under a
pretense make long prayers, with seeming earnestness, under pretense of
worshipping God, M^ 23.14. Mat. 6.5. Isai. 57.7. And by preaching feig^ words to
deceive. 2 Pet. 2.3. And through covetousness (...) they with feigned words
make merchandise of you; for the^ are the things that satan's ministers are wo^t
to do (...) deceive the world with, that they may follow them.

Verse 14. And deceives them that dwe^ on the earth.

That is earthly men.

By means of those miracles which he ha^ power to do in the sight of the beast.

That is to say in the sight of the first beast, or the Rulers of this world
which God set up for his minister of justice, to govern the world by justice
and equity.

Saying to them that dwell on the earth, tha^ they should make an image to the
beast whi^ had a wound by a sword, and did live.

And thus was the image to be made as follows, to ^it, by them that dwell on
the earth; that is, by the children of this world, being counterfeit
Christians; and the ^mage which they make is a prescribed form of Godline^s
(...) as is written, 2 Timothy 3.5. Having a form of Godliness, ^ut denying the
power thereof; from such turn away) prescribing to kings and rulers, what
ministers shall teach, and how ordinances shall be attended, and what ministers
shall administer them, and what holy days shall be kept, and what forms of
prayer shall be used, and a prescription to said rulers in all things else, how
and after what manner God shall be worshipped; and this the Spirit of God calls
an image, it being attended by the doctrines and command^ts of men, and imposed
upon the world by kings governors, and rulers, who are now become vassals to
the false Church and false ministers, to support them, and turn their sword
against the flock of Christ.

Verse 15. And he had power to give life to the image of the beast, that the
image of the beast should both speak, and cause that as many as would not
worship the image of the beast should be killed.

This image of the beast did excel all the former images that were under the
Romish heathenish Empire; for then they worshipped dead images, which could not
speak; but this image could both speak, and cause that as many as would not
worship it should be killed: For here was the image of Christ's Church,
Ordinances and Ministers, though they were not so really, which could both speak,
and cause that as many as would not worship this image of the beast should be
killed; the same punishment that Nebuchad^ezzers was, Dan. 3.6.

Verse 16. And he caused all both small and great, rich and poor, free and
bond, to give a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads.

This is to show a general act of requirement to all sorts and degrees of
persons whatsoever to yield obediencce, and to worship said image; which image
is a prescribed form of Godliness. And to give a mark in their right hand or
foreheads, is an evident token of a manifestation of their subjection to be
seen openly by which they may be known to be worshipers of the said Image.

Verse 17. And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the mark, o^ the
name of the beast, or the number of his name.

This verse does show that judgment without mercy was to be executed on them
that had not one of these three characters, to wit, the mark or the name of the
beast, or the number of his name; for such an one was neither to buy nor to
sell, that is, he was not to have any concern in religious matters, contrary to
that prescribed form, either to teach, or to hear, or to administer any of the
ordinances of Christ, or to do any thing contrary to that prescribed form of
worship or image of the beast; yea, it is said in the 15th verse, That as many
as would not worship the image (...) the beast should be killed. By the mark
may be intended h^ sworn servants; and having the name of the beast, is such^
one, that is so by his profession, professing himself to be on^ of his
worshipers, and so bears his name by profession, bearing the name of one that
worshipeth the beast and hi^ image. And he that has the number of his name, is
(...) observer of all his institutions and forms of worship whatsoever, in the
whole number of them.

Verse 18. Here is wisdom

(Says the Apostle John,) yea, it is wisdom indeed for he that has this
wisdom here spoken of, has understanding

To count the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man.

And none but by the wisdom of God can count it; for (...) is able to
distinguish and to number the beast's wors^ from the true worship of God; for
the worshipping of (...) ^east is the number of a man; for it is all taught by
the commandments and precepts of men; and therefore it is ^he number of the
beast, being an image to be worshipped, ^et up by him in his name; and therefore
it is called, the number of his name, or the number of the beast: For says the
^postle, it is the number of a man, and therefore not of God. Now those that
attain to this wisdom, to count the num^er of the beasts worship, and thereby
to come out of their wilderness state, where this beast is, and the false
Church. Chap. 17.3. So he carried me away in the Spirit into the wilderness,
and I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet colored ^east full of names of blasphemy,
having seven heads and ten ^orns. Such I say as come out of this wilderness
state, and stand before the throne of God, come to get the victory Chap. 15.2.
And I saw as it were a sea of glass mingled with. (...), and them that had
gotten the victory over the beast, and ^r his image, and over the number of his
name, stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of God; and they sing the
^ong of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb. Thus as Moses got
the victory over the Egyptians, and the Lamb of God over all these his enemies;
so these likewise through him, got the victory over the beast, and over this
image, and over his name, and over the number of his name; and it appears that
this sea of glass which they ^tood upon, was before the throne of God. Chap.
4.6. And before the throne there was a sea of glass like unto crystal. And the
throne of God and of the Lamb is in the holy ^ity, the new Jerusalem, Chap.
22.3. And there is the ^ea of glass, as is to be seen Chap. 21.18. And this
city (...) pure gold like unto clear glass, Chap. 21.21. and so is ^he street
of it, Chap. 21.21. And every one that is born ^f God, and has gotten the
victory over the beast, and ^ver his image, and over his mark, and over the
number (...) his name, is come out of the wilderness, and is come ^o this holy
city, where the throne of God and of the ^amb is, and shall see his face. Heb.
12.22. But ye are ^ne unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, ^e
heavenly Jerusalem. Chap. 22.4. And they shall see his ^ce, and his name shall
be in their foreheads.

And his number is 666.

And by this number is all his false worship numbered by; for the worshipers
thereof never come to any rest; for it is like the six days labor without a
Sabbath and therefore it is the most suitablest number to number him by. Chap.
14.11. And they have no rest day nor night who worship the be^st and his image,
and whosoever receives the mark of his n^.

Thus it appears that no number is so suitable to number the image of the beast
by; for the worshipers thereof never come to keep a sabbath of roast; so that
his number must be numbered by sixes; and no other number will number the
number of this beast right, according to his state and condition; for if it be
hundreds it is six, and if it be tens it is six, and if it be unites it is six;
for they never come to the number seven, which measures rest and perfection, so
that it cannot exceed sixes; but the saints who worship God, shall rest with
him; Chap. 14.12, 13. Here is the patience of the saints, here are they that
keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus, that they may rest from
their labor, and their works do follow them.

The Apostle John does here express the number of the beast by a certain number
himself, yet exhorts him tha^ has understanding to count the number of the
beast, showing that it is the number of a man; and it is a very necessary thing
to have wisdom to number it, or else how shall we know how to shun it; for
knowing the number of it we can count it by a mystical knowledge of it; for it
con^ all the visible pretended worship in the world, set up b^ antichrist; so
that it is a very uncertain and imperfect number. And though John numbers it by a
certain number suitable to the nature of it, yet he exhorts us to count it,
(...) we may know it, for it contains all acts, precepts, laws, edicts,
doctrines, ordinances and institutions, made by the inhabitants of the earth,
relating to matters of worship under pretense of worshipping God. This is the
number o^ the beast for it is the number of a man; and sometime they are more
in number, and sometimes less, as man (...) them up and put them down; yet they
are numbered by the number which is most suitable to their nature, which 566,
for it cannot exceed sixes; for it is altogether imperfect, and therefore
cannot be measured by seven.

Now we are come to the end of the fifth trumpet, and ^ntering upon the sound
of the sixth trumpet.

CHAP. XIV.
We have had an account in the former part of this book, that after the great
spreading of the Gospel, that was by the Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
their successors among the Gentiles, that there followed a very great apostasy
and degenerating from the truth, and a rising of antichrist and false prophets,
and overspreading the world; so that by them the true Church was trodden under
foot; and the false taken for the true, and the true for the false; so that the
true Church bath prophesied in a sad and mournful state all this time of
antichrists reign, even whilst the false Church has been arrayed in purple, and
scarlet color, and decked with gold, and precious stone, and pearls; even all
this time has the true Church prophesied in a mournful and sad state, clothed
in sackcloth, and trodden under foot by the false Church: But it is certain,
that the time is coming, that the false Church shall go into perdition and
destruction, and that the true Church shall arise and stand upon her feet, to
the great terror of her enemies; a relation whereof will begin in this Chapter
of her rising and standing, and of the false Churches falling to her utter
ruination and destruction.

Verse 1.

ANd I looked, and lo a Lamb stood on the mount Sion, and with him an hundred
and forty and four thousand, having his father^ name written in their foreheads.

This lamb does set forth Jesus Christ, to be the redeemer, or lamb of God
which takes away the sin of the world, and this company with him, does
represent all his redeemed ones, as appears in Chap. 22.4. Chap. 9.4. And his
standing on mount Sion with the hundred and forty and four thousand, is to show
and set forth their unmovable standing; even on the mountain of God, it
alluding from the mount upon which the city of David stood, who was a type of
Christ; and the Spirit of God in the Scripture does sometimes set forth the
unmovable standing of such as stand by faith, by expressing their standing by
this unmovable mountain, as in Psalm. 125.1. They that trust in the Lord shall
be as mount Sion which cannot be moved, but abides for ever; and so the author
to the Hebrews, Heb. 12.2^. But ye are come unto mount Sion, and to the city of
the living God.

Thus he speaks because they were come to God (...) faith, and so stood upon
the mountain of God's strength being citizens of the heavenly Jerusalem, which
stands (...) the spiritual mount Sion; and the' here is a certain number named,
yet these do represent all God's faithful saints; and as we have an account in
the former Chapter of the beasts vassals, that had his mark on their right hand
or on their foreheads, to show whose they were, and whom they worship, so these
have the lambs fathers name written i^ their foreheads, to show whose they are,
and whom the worship.

This book does frequently allude from those temporal figures under the first
testament, to express spiritual things by which they figured, for they were not
all Israel that were of Israel; so that this number is expressed to be those that
were sealed in the seventh Chap. of this book, verse 4. And I heard the number
of them which were sealed, and there were sealed a hundred and forty and four
thousand. This number does measure the whole number of God's elect, standing on
mount Sion with the lamb, being sealed in their foreheads, or his fathers name
written there, to show whose they are, and whom they worship, standing on the
mount of God Almighty; but the false Church stands on the seven mountains or
dominion of this world, Chap. 17.9. The seven heads are seven mountains on
which the woman sits.

Verse 2. And I heard a voice from heaven, as the voice of many waters, and as
the voice of a great thunder; and I heard the voice of harpers harping with
their harps.

This is to set forth the praises of this heavenly host, praising God with
innumerable voices, like the noise of many waters, and as the voice of great
thunder. This is to set forth their great joy and consolation after their great
sufferings, who now shine forth in the world as lights, though they had been long
trod under foot of the Gentiles.

Verse 3. And they sung as it were a new song before the throne; and before the
four beasts and the elders, and no man could learn that song but the hundred
and forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the earth.

This new song was the song of victory, they having obtained deliverance from
the power of their enemies. And now standing on mount Sion with the Lamb of
God, and being sealed with his holy Spirit, they thus sing before his throne,
and before the four beasts, or holy Angels, and the elders which are twenty
four in number, whose names may be read, being written on the twelve gates of
the new Jerusalem, and the twelve foundations of that city: And no man could
learn that song, says he, but the hundred a^ forty and four thousand which
were redeemed from t^ earth. This is to be understood by the precious blood of
the Lamb, which stands with them on mount Sion; see it is the song of their
redemption from sin, and from the wrath of God, and from the power of their
persecut^; and therefore not to be learned by any out of that state, which they
are in.

Verse 4. These are they which are not defiled with women, for they are virgins.

Yea, such as are fit to be espoused to Christ, for they have not defiled
themselves with whoredom with the beast, but have kept their virginity.

And follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

For they are his redeemed ones, being redeemed from among men by his precious
blood from their vain conversation; and these being those that first separated
from worshipping the beast and his image, and it being upon the rising and
standing up of the true Church, after so long a time of apostasy, they are said
to be the first fruit unto God, and to the Lamb.

Verse 5. And in their mouth was found no guile, for they are without fault
before the throne of God,

Thus it appears that in their mouth was found no guile, that is, no
hypocritical paryers, by flattery pretending to honor God with their mouth and
lips, as hypocrites do when their heart is far from God. But in these were fou^
no guile, for they are without fault before the throne of God. This is in the
time of the sixth trumpet.

This fore part of the Chapter now gone through, speaks particularly of a
vision that John had of the appearing of the Lamb of God, and his company, and
standing upon the mount Sion; these are the two witnesses which stand before
the God of the earth, and two prophets, and is their mouth was found no guile,
for they are without ^uit before the throne of God. And now the Apostle is
^tering upon the discovery of another vision which he had which followed the
above said vision.

Verse 6. And I saw another Angel fly in the ^nidst of heaven, having the
everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth.

He calls this another angel, in respect that it represents the first preaching
of the everlasting Gospel, after so long a time of apostasy, and upon the true
Churches first rising and coming out of her wilderness strate; for before this
time, even in the time of the false Churches glory, there was only false and
fruitless doctrine preached, by the beast that came out of the earth with two
horns like a lamb, which did represent the rising up of the false prophets. But
now there did appear ministers that did preach the gospel of God openly, as by
the vision is held forth, ^ying in the midst of heaven, that is, by open,
public proclamation, as says Christ, Mat. 10.27. And what ye hear in the
(...) that preach ye upon the house tops. The vision of this Angel preaching
the everlasting Gospel, unto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation,
and kindred, and tongue, and people, does hold forth, that as there was a time
when the dragon did deceive the whole world, by bringing them to worship the
image of the beast, even all both small and great, rich and poor, free and
bond; so now the time is come, that the everlasting Gospel is now begun to be
preached to all nations, and the mystery of iniquity is now (...) discovery,
and by preaching the gospel to them that dwell on the earth, is meant to
earthly men, even to such as worship the beast and his image. This was in the
time of the first reformers.

Verse 7. Saying with a loud voice, fear God and give glory to him, for the
hour of his judgment is come, and worship him that made heaven and earth, and
the sea, and the fountains of waters.

This verse contains the matter of the Gospel which said Angel did preach,
saying with a loud voice to the worshipers of the beast and his image, fear God
and give glory to him; signifying to them, that the hour of his judgment is
come, and therefore exhorts them to worship him that made heaven and earth, and
the sea, and the fountains of waters.

Verse 8. And there followed another Angel saying, Babylon is fallen is fallen,
that great city, because she made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of
her fornication.

This verse is to show what followed the preaching of the everlasting Gospel,
to wit, the fall of Babylon; and by Babylon's fall we are not to understand any
visible city to fall, but the false Church; for her situation is among all
nations, kindreds, tongues and people, where the gospel was preached, as in the
foregoing verse. To every nation, kindred and tongue; for as the name of the
true Church of Christ is derived from Jerusalem where the temple and alta^ was
erected; so the false Churches name is derived from old Babylon, who took
Jerusalem and led them into Captivity; so that both the true Church and the
false bear the name of a woman, and a city, but it is the members of each
Church that is intended. And the reason of her fall is rendered, because she
made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication. By the wine
of her fornication which she made all nations to drink of, is intended her
beguiling them by her false worship, they drinking in her false doctrine, and
so joining in with her fornication. And thus by her enticing allurements to her
false worship, brought all nations under the wrath of God; for both the king^
and the inhabitants of the earth have been always wont to be deceived by the
false Church; and so to join in with her in her fornication, as appears Chap.
17.2. With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the
inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her fornication.

Verse 9. And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loud voice if any
(...) the beast and his ^mage, and receive his mark in his forehead or hand,

Verse 10. The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is
poured out without mixture, into the cup of his indignation; and he shall be
tormented with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the holy Angels, and in
the presence of the Lamb.

From hence we may note, how God threatens his severe judgments with a loud
voice, since his Church begins to arise and stand upon her feet, saying, If any
man worship the beast and his image, and receive his mark in his forehead or in
his hand, the same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured
out without mixture, into the Cup of his indignation; and he shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone, in the presence of his holy Angels, and in the
presence of the Lamb. This is to express his fiery anger against them, and to
set forth their perpetual torment, in the presence of those holy angeis and of
that Lamb which we before read of standing on mount Sion; and he expresses
their torment to be as if it were with burning fire and brimstone.

Verse 11. And the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever; and
they have no rest day nor night who worship the beast and his image, and
whosoever receives the mark of his name.

Thus God makes open proclamation beforehand, of the ^ternal punishment which
he has before determined to ^flict upon false worshipers to all eternity; so
that they shall have no rest day nor night, for the smoke of their torment
ascends up for ever and ever, says he. Thus all false worshippers are
threatened, who flatter God with their mouth and lips by customary prayers, to
be seen of men; and solemn meetings attended with dead services, and
observations of Sabbaths, all being done only by an outside show, while the
inside is defiled with sin; all this is but worshipping the beast and his image,
making clean only the outside of the cup and platter, being all but dead
service, and a provocation and aggravation to God's anger, by which those
forementioned torments and everlasting punishments of a restless state are
procured, and yet done under pretense of worshipping God.

Verse 12. Here is the patience of the saints, here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.

The apostle having in the foregoing verse showed what terrible judgments he
had denounced against the worshipe^ of the beast and his image, is now come, as
will appe^ in the two following verses, to set forth the great reward that
shall be given to the saints.

Here is the patience of the saints, says he, here are they that keep the
commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus: As if he should say, here I will
give you an account what will be the effect and fruit of the patient suffering
of the saints, and of them that keep the commandments of God and the faith of
Jesus; for I heard what their reward shall be by a voice from heaven.

Verse 13. And I heard a voice from heaven saying unto me, Write, blessed are
the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth, yea^ says the spirit, that
they may rest from their labor, and their works do follow them.

We may note from hence, that as the saints labo^ under great persecution and
sufferings, patiently, in the exercise of faith, even unto death; they thus
dying in the Lord, from henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they may rest
from their labors, and their works do follow them.

The following part of this Chapter shows the execution of Gods judgments
upon the enemies of his Church by the similitude of a vintage, which follows
the harvest (...) as the true Church is now rising, so the false Church (...)
now falling.

Verse 14. And I looked and behold a white ^loud, and upon the cloud one sat
like unto ^he son of man.

This is Jesus Christ: And

Having on his head a golden crown,

Is to set him forth in his kingly power: And

Having a sharp sickle in his hand,

Is to show he was prepared to reap; Luke 21.27. And ^hen shall they see the
son of man coming in the clouds, with ^er and great glory. This place of
scripture, with ma^y other like places, has no relation to the great and last
day of ^gment, but has relation to great times of judgments (...) ^ers are
come to be ripe in sio, and the Lord Jesus arises to plead the cause of his
suffering saints, after his great patience has been exercised toward their
perse^utors; and at such a time as this he is coming to plead their cause, and
to execute judgment upon their enemies; ^s for instance, the Apostle Peter
speaks of such a time as this prophetically, 2 Pet. 2.1. But there were false
prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among
you, etc. Verse 3. And through covetousness shall they with feigned words make
merchandise of you, whose judgment now of a long time lingereth not, etc.
showing in his following words, how God spared not the old world, but saved
Noah, and turned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes, and delivered
just Lot: And by this president he goes on to show, the Lord knows how to
^eliver the godly, and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be
punished; that is, as the old world ^as punished, and likewise Sodom.

Verse 15. And another Angel came out of the temple, crying with a loud voice
to him that sat on the cloud, Thrust in thy sickle and ^eap; for the time is
come for thee to reap, for the harvest of the earth is ripe.

By the temple we are to understand the Church. And his crying with a loud
voice to him that sat on the cloud, to thrust in his sickle and reap, for says
he, the time is come for thee to reap, for the harvest of the earth is ripe:
This was a prevailing cry, that came from the Angel that came out of the Temple
or Church to the Lord Jesus Christ, to execute this judgment on the behalf of
his suffering saints, seeing the time of judgment was now come.

Verse 16. And he that sat on the cloud thrust in his fickle on the earth, and
the earth was reaped.

The next will be the vintage that will follow.

Verse 17. And another Angel came out of the temple, which is in heaven, he
also having a sharp sickle.

This angel is said to come out of the temple, which is in heaven. This
alludeth from the inner Court, which is called the holiest of all, which was
the place of God (...) habitation between the Cherubims, where the high Priest
was only to enter, so that this denotes to us, that this Angel was Jesus Christ
also, and his sharp sickle is to gather the clusters of the vine of the earth,
as will appear in the following verse; for the Angel that came out of the
temple, does show that the first sickle wa^ to reap the earth, and the angel
that came out from the altar, does show that the other was a sharp sickle to
gather the clusters of the vine of the earth.

Verse 18. And another Angel came out from the altar, which had power over
fire, and cried to him that had the sharp sickle, saying, Thrust in thy sharp
sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, for her grapes are
fully ripe.

His coming out of the altar may denote that he w^ one that did minister about
the altar, and that the altar was the same altar spoken of in Chap. 6.9, 10. I
sa^ under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the lord of God, and
for the testimony which they held: And ^hey cried with a loud voice, saying,
How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth. He thus hearing the loud cries of them that
suffered martyrdom, he now on their behalf cries with a ^oud cry to him that
had the sharp sickle, saying, thrust in thy ^harpsickle and gather the clusters
of the vine of the earth, for ^her grapes are fully ripe, and according to his
intercession it was done. And whereas it is said, he had power over fire, that
is, the fire of the altar where he ministered, which represented God's wrath. It
might be so said in respect of his prevailing intercession, so that God's fiery
indignation was executed on them, under the denomination of his thrusting in
his sickle into the earth, and gathering the ^vine of the earth, and casting it
into the great wine press of the wrath of God; as also in the former part of
this book, the execution of God's wrath is held forth by the Angels filling the
censer with fire from the altar, as is to be seen Chap 8.5. And the Angel took
the censer, and filled it with fire from the altar, and cast it into the earth.
The casting this fire into the earth, does denote the execution of Gods
judgments as well as reaping the earth, and gathering the clusters of the vine
of the earth.

Verse 19, 20. And the Angel thrust in his sickle into the earth, and gathered
the vine of the earth, and cast it into the great wine press of the wrath of
God.

And the wine press was trodden without the city, and blood came out of the
wine press even to the horse bridles, by the space of a thousand and six
hundred furlongs.

And whereas it is said, And the angel thrust in his sickle ^to the earth, and
gathered the vine of the earth, is to show the execution of God's judgments
upon the inhabitants of the earth, by cutting them ^own, they being ripe in
sin: And casting it into the great wine press of the wrath of God, is to set
forth the execution of his fiery indignation upon them. And the wine press was
trodden without the city, says the Apostle. Thus the Spirit of God makes use
of these similitudes; for they were wont to tread the wine press without the
city, and this agrees with the destruction of the Canaanites whose great
overthrow was without their cities: And also when the nations gathered
themselves against ^hoshaphat, their great overthrow was without their cities:
And the prophet Joel alludes from the destruction of these heathen, to set
forth a great day of destruction that was to come upon the enemies of God's
Church, Joel 3.12. Let the heathen be wakened and come up to the valley of
Jehoshaphat, for there will I sit to judge the heathen round about.

This valley of Jehoshaphat was the place where Jehoshaphat and Judah assembled
to bless the Lord, for their great deliverance by the destruction of their
enemies, 2 Chronicles. 20.26. And this prophet Joel in the next verse expresses
this destruction upon the heathen, which he prophetically fortells of, after
the same manner as is spoken of in this Chapter of the Revelations. Verse 13.
Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe; come get ye down, for the press
is full, the fats overflow, for their wickedness is great.

And blood came out of the wine press even to the hors^ bridles. This is to set
forth the great effusion of blood by reason of the great and wonderful
slaughter, by the similitude of the red wine that comes out of the wine press,
even to the horse bridles. This seems to speak as if this treading was by the
trea^ing of horses even in a warlike posture, and that the blood did come up to
the horse bridles, for a thousand and six hundred furlongs. This contains two
hundred English miles, to set forth the great and wonderful destruction that
God made upon the enemies of his Church, even to the utter overthrow of them,
according to the prophecy of the prophet, Isai. 63.1, etc. Who is this that
comes from Edom with dyed garments, from Bozra, etc. Edom and Bozra is
expressed as enemi^ of God's Church. Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel
and (...) thy garments like him that treads the wine fat? I have ^roden the
wine press alone, and of the people there was none ^ith me; for I will tread
them in mine anger, and trample them in my fury, and their blood shall be
sprinkled on my ^arments, and I will stain all my raiment; for the day of
^engeance is in mine heart, and the year of my redeemed is ^come.

All this is under, and follows the sixth trumpet, and was discovered in the
opening of the sixth seal. And as in this Chapter has been discovered the
destruction of the false Church by a harvest, and vintage, so in the sixteenth
Chapter it will be represented by the pouring out of the seven viols of God's
wrath; and in the 18th Chapter by the burning of a great City, and in the
nineteenth Chapter by open war, to her utter destruction, and final end.

CHAP. XV.
In the former Chapter we bad an account of the Lamb and his virgin company,
standing on mount Sion; and also the first preaching of the everlasting Gospel,
after her great apostasy; and so the advancement of the true Church will go on,
to her everlasting glory.

Verse 1.

ANd I saw another sign in heaven great and mavelous, seven angels having the
seven last plagues; for in them is filled up the wrath of God.

By another sign is to fignify besides those going before; and this sign being
seen in ^eaven, is to show it was where Gods throne is. And whereas it is said,
great and mavelous, it is showed wherein it was great and mavelous in the
following words, to wit, seven^gels having the seven last plagues, for in their
is filled up the wrath of God. In Chap. 8.2. it is said, And I (...) the seven
angels which stood before God, and to them were given seven trumpets. These
seven angels which founded the seven trumpets of God, was to give notice of
what was to follow, as has already been showed in the (...) part of this book;
and they were the ministers that were in the time of the primitive Church, that
by the found of the trumpet it was foretold what was to come to pass; but these
seven Angels which has the seven vi^ols of the seven last plagues, are the
ministers of the Church after she comes out of her wilderness state, and
stands on mount Sion with the Lamb; and the number seven measures all the
faithful ministers, and the work of these ministers is to pour out the wrath of
God against the false Churchandfalse ministers, and against the power that
stands up to defend and maintain the said false Church and ministers by this
means to persecute the true Church, and this persecuting power is called the
power of the beast, received from the dragon, which is the devil. And these
seve^ Angels denounce all God's Judgments to the utter ruinatr^tion and
destruction of the false Church, as Moses and Asron did upon the Egyptians; and
therefore these plague^ denounced by these seven Angels are said to be the
seven last plagues, for in them is filled up the wrath of God.

Verse 2. And I saw as it were a sea of glas^ mingled with fire, and them that
had gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark,
and over the number of his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the harps of
God.

This sea of glass is to show the place of the standing (...) God's Church,
after they come out of their wilderness start^ ^o snow that they stand where
they have a fair prospect to behold God fitting on his throne of majesty, over
all powers and dominions whatsoever: This standing is on the spiritual mount
Sion, where the spiritual city of the spiritual David is, or in the street of
the spiritual Jerusalem, where the throne of God is, and the lamb is, Chap.
21.21. And the street of the city was pure gold, as if it were transparent
glass. Compare this with Chap. 4.6. And before the throne there was a sea of
glass like unto crystal. And this throne which this sea of glass was before,
was in the spiritual mount Sion, where the throne of the spiritual David sits,
and them that had gotten the victiory over the beast. This is to be understood
over the persecuting powers of this world, and over his image. By this image we
are to understand that form of Godliness which is set up by this persecuting
power; and over his mark, which imports that we bear no such Character as his
worshipers do; but are of the number that comes under this following blessing
of Christ's, Mat. 5.11, 12. Blessed are ye when men shall revils you and
persecute you, and shall say all man^^^ of evil against you falsely for my
sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven, for so
persecuted they the prophets which were before you. These here spoken of which
Christ blesses, has not the mark of the beast; for all men speak well of
them, says Christ, Luke 6.26. But these are such as are spoken of Chap. 22.4.
And they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their forehead. And
whereas it faith, over the number of his name, it intends all the institutions
and forms of worship, and all things of that nature set up by man, in the whole
number of them. Thus John saw those that had gotten the victory over all false
worship set up by humane invention, stand on the sea of glass having the harps
of God. This is to show their joy and victory over all that power that sets up
false worship, which is set up by the dragon and the beast, that is, by the
devil and men, which is not of God, but set up by him that deceives the whole
world.

Verse 3. And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of
the lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, O Lon^ God Almighty, just
and true are thy ways, tho^ king of saints.

Thus as Moses got the victory over the Egyptians, (...) 15.1, etc. Then sang
Moses and the children of Israel this (...) unto the Lord, and spoke saying, We
will sing unto the (...) for be has triumphed gloriously; the horse and his
(...) has he thrown into the sea; the Lord is my strength and (...) and he is
become my salvation; he is my God and I will pre^ him an habitation, my fathers
God, and I will exalt him; (...) Lord is a man of war, the Lord is his name.
And thus a Moses and Israel got the victory over their enemies (...) Egyptians,
so here is set forth the victory that the Lamb (...) God and his Church has
gotten over their enemies standing on the sea of glass, or on mount ^Sion which
cannot be moved, rejoicing in victory, and saying in the following verse,

Verse 4. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord and glorify thy name, for thou only
art holy, f^ all nations shall come and worship before the for thy judgments
are made manifest.

Thus they sing the song of the Lambs victory over the Churches enemies;
saying, All nations shall come (...) worship before thee, for thy Judgments are
made man^ Thus upon the consideration of those forementioned j^ments executed
upon the enemies of his Church, even (...) those which worshipped the beast and
his image, whose j^ments were set forth in the foregoing Chapter, by re^ the
earth, and gathering in the vintage of the vine of (...) earth, and casting it
into the great wine press of the wr^ God, so that blood came out of the wine
press even un^ horse bridles, for the space of two hundred miles.

Verse 5. And after that I looked, and be^ the temple of the testimony in
heaven w^ opened.

And whereas he faith, After that (that is, after the (...) going vision
contained in the fore part of this Chap^ I loo^ked; says he, and behold the
temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was ^pened. The opening of
the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven, does show it had been
shut in the time of Antichrist's reign (...) for then false worship was
advanced, but now the temple is opened: This is the true tabernacle of witness,
yea, the temple of God's habitation; for all other temples are the temples of
Idols, and are but a lie; but Christ and his Church bear a true testimony
before the God of the whole earth; and now that prophecy of Isaiah is like to
be fulfilled, which says, Isai. 2.2. And it shall come to pass in the last
days, that the mountain of the Lord's House shall be established in the top of
the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow
unto it (...) For here the Spirit of the Lord alludes from the temple,
tabernacle and testimony, which were but figures under the first testament or
ten commandments; for the outward temple or tabernacle were but figures of the
Church; and the figurative testimony was that writing which was written on the
tables of stone, Exodus 40.20. And he took and put the testimony into the ark.
Exodus 31.18. Two tables of testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger
of God. Now this writing written on the two tables of stone, which did contain
the ten commandments, was the sigurative part, as it was the testimony: But the
testimony here spoken of, is the testimony of Jesus Christ, immediately from
heaven in his Church or temple; and this is the temple or tabernacle here
spoken of, now opened in heaven, as by these Scriptures appear, 1 Cor. 6.19.
What, know ye not that your body is the temple of the holy Ghost. 1 Cor. 3.16.
Know ye not that ye are the temple of God. Heb. 9.11. But Christ being come, an
high Priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle,
not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building. Heb. 8.2. A minister
of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle which God has pitched, and not
man. And behold, faith John the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in
heaven was opened: So that these things here spoken; are the heavenly things
themselves; and this testimony is the testimony of God from heaven, spoken by
his own Son, in the heavenly temple or tabernacle, which is his Church, but the
figurative testimony was a testimony spoken on earth, and was by the
ministration of Angels, and written on stone, and put into a tabernacle made
with hands, as by these Scriptures appears Heb. 12.25. For if they escaped not
who refused him the spoke on earth (to wit, on mount Sinai.) Heb. 2.2. For i^
the word spoken by Angels was steadfast. Acts. 7.53. Who have received the Law
by the disposition of Angels. Gal. 3.19. Wherefore then serves the law? it was
added because of transgression, 'till the seed should come; and it was ordained
by Angels. And after this written on stone, and put into a tabernacle made with
hands, called the tabernacle of the test^mony, because this testimony written
on stone was put intoit^ and theark made with hands was called the ark of the
testimony (...) because the testimony written on stone was put into it, Exodus
38.21. Exodus 25.16. Exodus 31.7. All these things being but a body of figures,
or a pattern of heavenly things; but the things figured out by them, are spoken
of in this boo^ of Revelation, to wit, the heavenly things themselves; f^ this
testimony is the testimony of God from heaven, sp^ ken by his Son in the
heavenly temple or tabernacle, whi^ is his Church. Heb. 8.8, etc. to the end of
the Chapte^ 1 John 2.27.

Verse 6. And the seven Angels came out (...) the temple, having the seven
plagues, clothed in pure and white linen, and having the^ breasts girded with
golden girdles.

These are the seven Angels which John saw in the fir^ verse of this Chapter in
heaven; but here we have a m^ particular account how they came out of the
temple in heaven after it was opened, that is, out of the Church of Christ
these are the ministers of the Church after she comes ou^ of her wilderness
state, and the number seven measures the^ all: These have the seven last
plagues, and will be the (...) ter ruination and overthrow of antichrist, by
whom (...) ^ill pour out the seven vials of his wrath, and fiery in^ignation
upon the enemies of his Church, even upon all ^alse worshipers: And their being
clothed in pure and white linen, is to show their priestly garments of
righte^usness; Chap. 7.14, 15. These are they that came out of great
^ribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of
the lamb, therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and
night in his temple. Chap. 19.8. For the white linen is the righteousness of
the saints. They are the ministers of God appointed to execute his righteous
judgments. And having their breasts girded with golden gir^les of truth,
fittingly becoming their ministration; for these ^re the antitype of those
Priests which did minister in the temple made with hands, and are girt about
the paps with a golded girdle, like unto their high Priest Christ ^jesus; Chap.
1.13. And in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks, one like unto the Son
of Man, clothed with a garment down to the foot, and girt about the paps with
a golden girdle. Ephesians. 6.14. Stand therefore, having your (...) girt about with
truth. Thus they are every ways fitted for their ministration.

Verse 7. And one of the four beasts gave unto the seven Angels, seven vials
full of the wrath of God, who lives for ever and ever.

These four beasts do represent the holy Angels, and are mentioned in Chap.
4.6, 7. And round about the throne were four beasts. They are said to be round
about the throne, because they are compared to the four winds, or spirits of
the heavens; Zech. 6.5. And the Angel answered and said unto me, these are the
four spirits of the heavens, which go forth from standing before the Lord of
all the earth.

And one of the four beasts gave unto the seven Angels, seven golden vials full
of the wrath of God. Thus this beast delivers the vials into the hands of the
seven Angels; and the seven vials are said to be full of the wrath of God, who
lives for ever and ever; this is to set forth the execution of the wrath of
God Almighty, by pouring out a full cup of his wrath upon false worshippers, or
the false church, who has a golden cup in her hand, full of abominations and
filthiness of her fornication; but now seven golden cups full of the wrath of
God, is to be poured out upon her, in which is the wrath and indignation of God
Almighty. After this manner God was wont of old to threaten his Judgments, as
may be seen, Jer. 25.15. Take the wine cup of this fury at my hand, and cause
all the nations to whom I send thee to drink it, Psalm. 75.8. Isai. 51.17. Job.
21 21.

Verse 8. And the temple was filled with smoke, from the glory of God, and from
his power; and no man was able to enter into the temple, till the seven plagues
of these seven Angels were fulfilled.

This seems to be an evident allusion from what followed the setting up of the
tabernacle and temple, which were patterns of heavenly things; Exodus 40.34, 35.
Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation, and the glory of the Lord
filled the tabernacle, and Moses was not able to enter into the tens of the
congregation, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the Lord filled
the tabernacle. 1 King. 8.10, 11. And it came to pass when the priests were
come out of the holy place, that the cloud filled the house of the Lord, so
that the priests could not stand to minister, because of the cloud, for the
glory of the Lord had filled the house of the Lord. Now that seems to be an
evident allusion from this vision, that appeared in the figurative tabernacle
or temple, for the smoke or cloud is the same; for it arises from the burning
incense, as may be seen, Lev 16.13. And he shall put the incense upon the fire
before the Lord, that the cloud of the incense may cover the mercy seat, that
is, upon the the testimony; and this testimony was the ten commandments written
on stone.

The temple being thus filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his
power, was a token of God's merciful presence with his Church; as appears in
the figure here above mentioned; for it is said at the dedication of the temple
which Solomon built, when the priests were come out of the holy place, the
cloud filled the house of the Lord so that the priests could not stand to
minister because of the cloud for the glory of Lord had filled the house: And
the same is said at the ^ring up of the tabernacle that Moses set up, which was
token of Gods presence with Israel his Church, though ^ey were but the patterns
of heavenly things; and it is ^e said of the heavenly things themselves, that
the tem(...) was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and ^om his power,
and no man was able to enter into the ^mple, till the seven plagues of the
seven Angels were ^lfilled, which is just the same with the figures; and it ^as
God's promise to Israel to manifest his presence in ^he cloud, or smoke, it
being both one thing intended, it being caused by the burning incense, Lev.
16.13. And he ^all put the incense upon the fire before the Lord, that the ^oud
of the incense may cover the mercy seat. Compare this with the second verse of
this Chapter, For I will appear in be cloud upon the mercy seat: So that this
was a token of God's merciful presence with his Church, while the seven Angels
was pouring out the vials of his wrath upon their enemies; for these seven
Angels were the ministers or messengers of God's Churches, and the antitype of
those Priest's that ministered in the temple that Solomon built; and none was to
enter into the temple to minister there but the priests; so that whereas it is
said, And no man was able to outer into the temple till the seven plagues of
the seven Angels were fulfilled; for none was to enter in but these seven that
came out, that were the priests, that ministered in the temple. This is the true
temple of the tabernacle of testimony, even the antitype of that testimony
written on stone, to wit, the testimony of the Son of God in his Church, by his
holy Spirit, as is written, 2 Cor. 3.3. Not in tables of stone, but in fleshly
tables of the heart, with the spirit of the living God.

From hence we may observe, that the Apostle John had the true temple of the
tabernacle of the testimony set before him, by the figures that was under the
first testament; for Gods Church is the true temple of the tabernacle of
testimony, figured by those patterns made by Moses and Solomon's order, by the
directions they had from God; and upon the rising up of the true Church, after
so long a time of her being trod under foot of the Gentiles, as in Chap. 11.2.
^od is now raising her up, according as was before prophesied of her, Amos
9.11. In that day will I raise up the tabernaele of David that is fallen, and
close up the breaches thereof, and I will raise up his ruins, and will build it
as in the days of old. And as it is showed in this Chapter the opening of Gods
temple, and the ministers of his Church coming forth out of his temple with the
vials of his wrath, to be poured out upon the false Church, to her utter
ruination and destruction, as will appear in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse 1.

ANd I heard a great voice out of the temple, saying to the seven Angels, Go
your ways, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.

In the last verse of the foregoing Chapter, we have an account how that the
temple was filled with smoke, from the glory of God and from his power; and
that no man was able to enter into his temple till the seven plagues were
fulfilled. Now faith John in this verse, And I heard a great voice out of the
temple. This voice therefore must needs be the voice of God, seeing no man was
able to enter in: And the voice was a command, saying to the seven Angels, go
your way, and pour out the vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.

Verse 2. And the first went and poured out his vial upon the earth.

By the earth and sea in this book is intended the children of this world, who
are the worshipers of the beast ^d his image, and the effect of this vial of
God's wrath ^s as follows.

And there fell a noysom and grievous fore upon the men which had the mark of
the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image.

This plague seems to be an allusion from one of Egypts ^agues. Exodus 9.10. And
they took ashes of the furnace, and ^ey stood before Pharaoh, and Moses
sprinkled it up toward ^aven; and it became a boil, breaking forth with blains
upon ^un and beast. And though the pouring out of this vial of God's wrath be
expressed only by a noisome and grievous ^re upon the worshipers of the beast
and his image, yet (...) may comprehend many sore judgments inflicted on them,
^eing expressed after the manner of Isai. 1.6. From the sole (...) the foot
even unto the head, there is no foundness in it, (...) wounds, and bruises, and
putrefying sores. But these expressions are to set forth the many Judgments of
God in^licted one upon the back of another.

It may be needful in the going over the pouring out of these seven last vials,
which tends to the utter overthrow of all false worship, set up by humane
invention, under the name of worshipping the beast and his image, to show after
what manner there is a Concurrence in the ^ounding of the seven trumpets, and
the execution of the seven vials. But we are to consider, that the Angels that
^ounded the trumpets, were the ministers of the primitive Churches; and these
that pour out the vials, are the ministers of the Churches that were separated
from mystical Babylon, the mother of harlots, or from some of her daughters
since, and for this separation have suffered persecution from those Judges
which have committed forni^ation, either with the mother, or with some of her
daughters; for both mother and daughters bears one and ^he same name, to wit,
mystery Babylon; for both mother and daughters are one body, and one spirit,
and differ only in their outward form of Godliness: And so does the true
Church, both mother and daughters bear one and the same name, to wit,
Jerusalem, as appears Isai. 66.10, 11, 12. Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, etc. that
ye may suck and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolation, etc. ye shall
be born upon her sides, and be dandled upon her knees. Gal. 4.26. But Jerusalem
which is above is free, which is the mother of us all. Chap. 21.2. compared
with the 9th and 10th verses. That which followed the sound of the first
trumpet, is to be seen in Chap. 8.7. The first Angel sounded, and there
followed hail and fire mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the earth,
and the third part of the trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.
This comprehends the great Judgments that was inflicted on the heathenish
persecutors of the Church, before the reign of Constantine the great. And the
pouring forth of this vial of God's wrath is upon the Antichristian Churches,
being poured out upon the earth, as the other was cast upon the earth; and the
reason why the word cast upon the earth is used in the sounding of the
trumpets, is because those Judgments was represented by filling the censer with
fire of the altar, and casting it into the earth; as is to be seen, Chap. 8.5.
And the reason why the word pouring out is used in the execution of the seven
last vials, is because the execution of those judgments was represented, by
pouring out a full cup, or vial of God's wrath, upon the enemies of his Church.
Chap. 15.7. compared with Chap. 16.1.

Verse 3. And the second Angel poured out his vial upon the sea, and it became
as the blood of a dead man, and every living soul died in the sea.

The first vial carried in it a torture and torment of the body, with noisome
and grievous sores, but at the pouring out of this vial upon the sea, or upon
the multitude of the people that are worthipers of the beast and his image,
seems to be set forth in a more terrible manner, to wit, And the second Angel
poured out his vial upon the sea, and it became as the blood of a dead man.
This seems to set forth great mortality, comparing the ^a to the blood of a
dead man. This seems to set forth great effusion of blood, and says he Every
living soul died in the sea. This seems to be an allu^ from one of Egypts
plagues; Exodus 7.20. Moses and ^on did so, as the Lord commanded, and be lift
up the rod (...) smote the waters that were in the river, in the fight of
^rao^, and in the sight of his servants, and all the waters ^t were in the
river were turned into blood, and the fish that ^re in the river dyed, and the
river stank. Thus their wa^s being turned into blood, did foreshew the great
mor^lity that should follow, even as this vial does, set forth ^eat mortality
and destruction, by the sea becoming like ^e blood of a dead man, let us
compare this vial with ^e second trumpet, Chap. 8.8. And the second Angel
sound(...), and as it were a great mountain burning with fire, was ^t into the
sea, and the third part of the sea became blood. This mountain burning with
fire being cast into the sea, ^as the great overthrow of the Romish Heathenish
Empire, ^y Constantine the great.

Verse 4. And the third Angel poured out ^is vial upon the rivers, and
fountains of waters, and they became blood.

By these rivers, and fountains of waters, is intended Antichists^ body
doctrine whose doctrine was, that as many as would not worship the image of the
beast should be killed, that is, that so many as would not subject to that form
of godlyness, set up by human invention and prescription; should neither buy
nor sell, that is, not to be suffered to have any concern in religious matters:
This has been the doctrine and practice of Antichrist; but now God has
commanded the third Angel, to pour out a vial of his wrath upon these rivers
and fountains of waters, and to make the false Church her self drink of them,
to wit, the effect and fruit of their bloody doctrine, according to what is
written, he that kills with the sword, must be killed by the sword, and again
it is said, and (...) saw her drunken with the blood of the saints and martyrs
of Jesus, but now the third Angel pouring out his vial upon the rivers and
fountains of waters, they are become blood, prepared for her to drink, as
appears in the three following verses.

Verse 5, 6, 7. And I heard the Angel of the waters say, thou art righteous O
Lord, which art, and wast, and shall be, because thou have judged thus:

For they have shed the blood of the saints, and prophets, and thou have given
them blood to drink: for they are worthy.

And I heard another out of the (...) say, even so Lord God almighty, true and
righteous are thy judgments.

And well might this angel out of the altar acknowledge God's righteous
Judgments, in this matter; who had been seeing, and hearing, what is written
chap. 6.9, 10. And I saw under the altar, the souls of them that were slain,
for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held, and they cried with
a loud voice saying, how long O Lord holy and true, do thou not judge and
avenge our blood on then that dwell on the earth. In the primitive time of the
churches purity, they were nourished with good and wholesome doctrine; even with
fountains of living waters, such as Christ speaks of, Joh. 7.38. He that
believes on me as the scripture has said out of his belly shall flow rivers
of living water. And as the prophet Isaiah says, Isai. 49.10 For be that has
merci^ on them, shall lead them, even by the springs of water shall he guide
them. But this false church shall be made to drink of the fruit of her own
bloody doctrine, as is written, Isai. 49.26. And I will feed them that oppress
thee, with their own flesh, and they shall be drunken with their own blood, as
with new wine. In the next place let us compare the third trumpet, with this
third vial, chap. 8.10, 11. And the third Angel sounded, and their fell a great
star from heaven, burning as it were a lamp, and it fell upon the third part of
the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters, and the name of the star is
called wormwood: and the third part of the waters became wormwood, and many men
died of the waters because they were made bitter. This Angel sounded what
followed in the church, after Constantines time, how that after the Church came
to enjoy peace, and great tranquilli^y, there was a falling away from their
heavenly station, (...) a great measure; so that, that good and wholesome
doctrine, which in her purity was rivers and fountains of living waters, to
nourish the church with; but is now in a great measure imbittered, by the fall
of this star from Heaven, or by the fail of ministers from their Heavenly
Station in a great measure, so that there is a mixture of false doctrine, by
reason of which a third part of those rivers and fountains of living waters is
become wormwood, by the fall of this bitter Star; so that many in the church
come to die, (by drinking in this bitter and corrupt doctrine) from that
spiritual life which before they lived in, so that the sound of this trumpet is
to give notice that there was an apostatizing, or falling away in the church,
by reason of false doctrine, but at the pouring out of this vial, the rivers
and fountains of waters are become altogether corrupt, and bloody doctrine, by
a total apostasy.

Verse 8. And the fourth angel poured out his vial upon the sun, and power was
given unto him to scorch men with fire.

Whereas it is here said, And the fourth Angel poured out his vial on the sun;
the sun being the very element of fire, it is said, and power was given unto
him to scorch men with fire, this is to be understood, those that worship the
beast, and his image, shall have this vial of God's siery indignation executed
upon them, according to what is written, Mal. 4.1. For behold the day comes,
that shall burn as an oven, and all the proud, yea and all that do wickedly
shall be stubble, and the day that comes shall burn them up, says the Lord of
hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch. The sun being the most
glorious light in the firmament of heaven, the scripture is wont to make use of
it to express spiritual light by, Mal. 4.2. But unto you that fear my name,
shall the sun of righteousness arise with healing in his wings. And to compare
this fourth vial, with the fourth trumpet, chap. 8.12. And the fourth angel
sounded, and a third part of the sun was smitten, and the third part of the
moon, and the third part of the stars, so as that the third part of them was
darkened. Thus by the third part the lights of heaven being darkened, is to set
forth how the spiritual darkness was growing, and increasing upon t^ Church,
after corrupt and unsound doctrine was drank (...) as appears by what followed
the third trumpet, and at t^ sound of the fifth trumpet, all spiritual light
was darkne^ being held forth by the smoke that came out of the bo^ less pit, by
which the Sun and air was darkened, chap. 9.1. A^ thus as spiritual light is set
forth by the visible light of the Sun, at the sound of the fourth and fifth
trumpet, the (...) and the air was darkened, which did represent that spirit
light was darkened, so that darkness overspread the chur^ so here it is expressed
and set forth how that the fourth A^ gel poured out his viol on the Sun, so
that the Sun (...) ning forth clearly discovered their darkness to their g^
shame, by which means the worshippers of the beast w^ scorched with fire, from
that which the spirit of God man use of, to set forth that spiritual light and
comfort of his (...) ople, promising them protection, from any such judgment
chap 7.16. They shall hunger no more neither third any (...) neither shall the
Sun light on them nor any heat, Isai. 49.10. The shall not hunger nor thirst,
neither shall the heat nor (...) smite them, Psalm: 121.6, 7. The Sun shall not
smite the day nor the moon by night, the Lord shall preserve thee from (...).

Verse 9. And men were scorched with gre^ heat, and blasphemed the name of God
whi^ has power over these plagues, and they (...) pented not to give him glory.

And whereas it is said, and men were scorched (...) great heat, is to set
forth the effect of the punishment (...) this vial, by reason of the clear
light of the sua-(...) of the glorious gospel breaking forth upon them to the^
utter shame and confusion. Thus all these four vials (...) to set forth the
many judgments of Gods wrath in^ upon false worshipers, by what means soever
they are in flicted. And whereas it is said, And they blasphemed the name of
God which has power over these plagues; (...) that does not walk with God by a
good conversat^ may be said to blasphome, or reproach the name of G^ And they
repented not to give him glory, that is, these plagues and sore Judgments of
the vials of Gods wrath, did not bring them to repentance.

Verse 10. And the fifth Angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast,
and his kingdom was full of darkness, and they knawed their tongues for pain

This Angel pouring out his vial upon the seat of the beast, is to be
understood upon the seat or place of Judgment, where the Antichristian power
sits to judge, whick power is derived from the dragon, spoken of in chap. 13.2.
And, he dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority, and says
the text his kingdom was full of darkness, this is to be understood, that
kingly power derived from the dragon, from whence all persecution arises, or
any Judgments by a secular power, about religious matters, which belongs only
to Christ and his church to judge of. This vial of God's wrath being poured out
upon the seat or kingdom of antichrist, did discover to them to their great
shame and confusion; how they had usurped a power to judge in religious
matters, which did belong only to Christ, and his Church, and not to them, for
their lawful power from God empowered them only to be ministers of the law for
these things are wont to be hid from the wise and prudent etc. Mat. 11.25. For
the kingdom of the dragon is full of darkness, and it cannot judge in religious
and spiritual matters. And to set forth the great judgments that was inflicted
upon them, by this vial, it is said and they gnawed their tongues for pain.

Verse 11. And blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their
sores, and repented not of their deeds.

This word blasphemy, is properly reproach, for they reproached the God of
heaven in going on in their evil courses, notwithstanding the many judgments
inflicted upon them, as a witness against them, from heaven, and yet they
repented not.

And now let us compare the fifth trumpet, with this fifth vial, poured out
upon the seat of the beast; chap. 9. And the fifth Angel sounded and I saw a
Star fall from hear unto the earth. This does represent unto us a total fa^ and
a general Apostasy in the church, and Antichrists (...) sing out of the smoke
of the bottomless pit, so that (...) fifth trumpet sounding, was to foreshew
the rising of (...) beast, or antichrist. And this fifth vial is poured out
(...) the seat of the same beast, for its destruction.

Verse 12. And the sixth Angel poured (...) his vial upon the great river
Euphates, and (...) water thereof was dried up, that the way (...) the kings of
the east might be prepared.

This is an evident allusion from the destruction of (...) Babylon by the Meads
and Persians, who came out of (...) east, and dried up her waters, as appears
by Script^ restimony, Jer. 51.28. Prepare against her the nations, (...) the
kings of the meads, the captains thereof, and all the (...) lers thereof, and
all the land of his dominion. Isai. 45.(...) Thus says the Lord to his
anointed, to Cirus whose right be I have holden to subdue nations before him.
Isai. 46.11. (...) ling a ravenous bird from the cast, the man that executes
(...) counsel, Isai. 13.17. Behold I will stir up the Medes aga^ them. Isai.
44.27, 28. That says to the deep be dry, an^ will dry up thy rivers, that
says of Cirus, he is my sheph^ and shall perform all my pleasure. Jer. 50.38.
A drought upon her waters, and they shall be dried up. Jer. 51.36. (...) I will
dry up her sea, and make her springs dry. All the threatenings of destruction
was against old Babylon; (...) Euphrates was a river in Babylon, as may be
seen, Jer. (...) 61, etc. And Jeremiah said to Serajah, when thou come^
Babylon, and shall see and shall read all these words, (...) And it shall be
when thou have made an end of reading (...) Book, that thou shall bind a stone
to it, and cast it into (...) midst of Euphrates; and thou shall say, And thus
shall Ba^ lon sink, and shall not rise from the evil that I will bri^ upon her.
Thus God threatens mystical Babylons destru^ on, by an allusion from old
Babylons destruction, wh^ was accomplished by drying up of the river Euphra^

And thus it is said of mystical Babylon, And the sixth Angel poured out his
vial upon the great river Euphrates, and the water thereof was dried up. By the
drying up ^f her water, is intended her power is gone, alluding from what was
done of old, by the drying up of the river Euphrates, by which means old
Babylons defense was gone; ^o that the kings of the east had entrance into the
city suddenly, and took it. And as the Lord did thus prepare (...) army before
hand for the destruction of old Babylon, ^s all those forementioned prophecies
did before testify: So shall we here find, in the prophecy of this book, that
upon the ^ound of the sixth trumpet, there was an army prepared for the
destruction of this mystical Babylon, to be in a readiness upon (...) pouring
out of the sixth viol upon Euphrates, that upon the drying up of her waters,
they may enter in upon her as a thief in the night, as they entered into old
Babylon, Dan. 5.30, 31. In that night was Belshazer the ^ing of the Chaldeans
slain, and Darius the Median took ^e kingdom. Chap. 9.13. And the sixth angel
sounded, and I heard a voice from the four horns of the golden altar which is
before God, saying to the sixth Angel which ba^ ^e trumpet, loose the four
angels which are bound (...) the treat river Euphrates: And the four angels
were loosed ^ich (...) prepared for an hour, and a day, and a month, and a
year, (...) to slay the third part of men, and the number of the ^y of the
horsemen were two hundred thousand thousand, and I heard the number of them.

And what is here spoken of concerning what followed the sound of the sixth
trumpet, is parallel with the ^ircumstances of old Babylon; for in all quarters
of the world, they were for a time bound under her power, and ^ominion, till
the kings of the east were loosed from under her ^ower and dominion, and were
prepared for her destruction: So here these four Angels, which represented all
people in every quarter, was bound in the great river Euphra^s, that is, under
her power, and dominion till they were ^oosed, by the Angel that had the sixth
trumpet, and was thus prepared for her destruction, as the kings of the eas^
were prepared and mustered up by God, as these are.

Verse 13. And I saw three unclean spirits like frogs, come out of the mouth of
the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the
false prophet.

By this vision of three unclean spirits coming out of the mouth of the dragon,
that is, out of the mouth of the devil; and out of the mouth of the beast, that
is, out of the mouth of the anticristian power, and out of the mouth of the
false prophet, that is, out of the mouth of all false prophets. This is to show
what is in their inside, notwithstanding all their fair pretenses (to the
world) of holiness; for the false Church makes clean the outside of the cup and
platter, for she is arrayed outwardly in purple, and scarlet color, and decked
with gold and precious stone, and pearls; she is thus garnished outwardly with
external things of pretended Godliness, honoring God with their mouths and
lips, while their hearts are after their covetousness: And thus they are
outwardly beautifyed and garnished; but notwithstanding these outward pretenses
that they cover themselves with it is a covering, but not with God's Spirit,
for John saw an unclean spirit come out of every one of them, lik^ frogs; for
in a vision a man must see some likeness; for though the devil is a spirit, yet
John saw him in his vision to be a dragon: And these three unclean spirits like
frogs in the next verse they are showed to be the spirits of Devils and they
are represented to John like frogs, upon the drying up of the great river
Euphrates, for then these the frogs appeared to show what was in the inside of
the dragon, and what was in the inside of the beast, and wh^ was in the inside
of the false prophet; for all the world worshipped the dragon, thinking him to
be God, and the beast or power of antichrist to be the magistratical power set
up by God, to establish his worship, when as it was set up only by the dragons
power, and the world taken the false prophet to be the true, and faithful
ministers (...) Christ, as appears Joh. 4.5, 6. They are of the world, them
^fore speak they of the world, and the world hears the We are of God; be that
knows God hears us, he tha^ is not of God hears not us; hereby know we
the spirit of truth and the spirit of error. And thus the dragon has deceived
the whole world: Chap. 12.9. And the great dragon was cast out, that old
serpent, called the Devil and Satan, which deceives the whole world.

But now the waters or power of mystical Babylon, being dried up and gone,
these three frogs appear, or rather three unclean spirits: for they are the
spirits of devils: And now at the destruction of these three Impostors, it
appears what was in them all this time of their fair pretenses of holiness, by
which all the world was deceived by a cheat; for their inside was only the
habitation of devils and unclean spirits; and now her downfall comes, it appears
what she was, and it will be believed for ever after; for this is mystery
Babylon the great city or false Church, which rules over the kings of the
earth, Chap. 18.2. And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon
the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the
hold of every foul spirit, and a sage of every unclean, and hateful bird. Thus
at her fail she appears what she was inwardly.

Verse 14. For they are the spirits of devils working miracles, which go forth
unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the
battle of the great day of God Almighty.

For they are the spirits of devils working miracles, says the Apostle; that
is, lying miracles to deceive, being a cheat, under pretense of holiness; and
this mystery of iniquity did work in that beast arising out of the earth with
two horns like a lamb, which we read of in Chap. 13.14. And he deceives them
that dwell on the earth, by the means of those miracles which he had power to
do in the sight of the beast. And these miracles were done by the instigation
of the unclean spirit that was in him, to deceive the beast or the kings of the
earth: And these three unclean spirits, are but the spirit of the (...) casted
three in respect of the 3 operations of its working in the dragon, and in the
beast, and in the false prophets and these are the spirits that go forth unto
the kings of the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them ^o the battle of
the great Day of their own dest^tion and overthrow, by engaging war against him
that sat on the white horse, and against his army, to wit, the saints, Chap. 19
19. A^ I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their arm^, gathered
together to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against his army.

Here we may see, that this battle was stirred up by the spirits of devils,
working miracles to deceive, and so going forth unto the kings of the earth,
and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of the Great Day of God
Almighty, who will come upon them as a thief, as appears in the next verse.

Verse 15. Behold I come as a thief, blessed is he that watches, and keeps
his garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.

Here is a good watch word to all that are wise hearted, Behold I come as a
thief, says he; as much as if the Lord should say, I shall come unlooked for,
unexpected, when least thought of; blessed is he that watches, and keeps his
garment. This is the garment of righteousness; for those that will not be found
clothed with this garment, will be found naked, and his shame will appear.

And this coming of our Lord as a thief, follows (...) apostasy, as the apostle
says, 2 These. 2.3. For that (...) shall no^ come, except there come a falling
away first; forse it was with the Church of Sardis, before the Lord threat^el
to come upon them as a thief.

Verse 16. And he gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew
tongue, Armageddon;

Which is in our tongue, This the place of the battle.

Verse 17. And the seventh Angel poured out his ^ail into the air, and there
came a great v^ce out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is
done.

(...) seventh and last vial of God's wrath, poured out (...) the air, and is
the utter overth^ of antichrist, even his (...) breathing in the air.

A^ there came a great voice out of the temple of (...) from the throne, saying
it is done. This voice was the (...) of God speaking out of the temple, which
is his Church, who was the Judge which sentenced these Judgments, and ordered
the execution of them, and now (...) from his throne, saying, It is done; and
in the next verse is showed the fearful Judgments that followed.

Verse 18. An there were voices.

This imports fearful Outcries.

And thunders and lightenings.

This imports the execution of fearful and dreadful judgments, that followed
this vial, poured out into the air, for thunderings and lightenings is seen and
heard in the air.

And there was a great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon the
earth, so mighty an earthquake and so great.

This is to set forth the great fear and trembling that these Judgments put the
inhabitants of the earth into, so that the like had not been since men were
upon the earth. That is since those men that saw it were upon the earth, for at
the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans there was such great tribulation, as
never was before, since the world began to that time, no nor never will be, for
it followed the sheding of the blood of the son of God. Mat. 24.21. And was at
the opening of the sixth seal, as this and all such like judgments always come
at for it is a faithing judgment as the old worlds was and Sodo^.

Verse 19. And the great city was divided into three parts.

This great city is the mother of Harlots.

And the cities of the nations fell.

These cities of the nations are her daughters, which are national Churches,
succeeding the church of Rome.

And great Babylon came into remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup
of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.

Upon the execution of these Judgments, the great city comes to be divided into
three parts. And a city divided against it self cannot stand. And the cities of
the nations that were stirred up by the spirits of Devils, to engage in this
war against the Lamb, and against his army fell. And great Babylon came in
remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the fierceness
of his wrath, and she is made to drink it.

Verse 20. And every Island fled away, and the mountains were not found.

By the Islands being fled away, and the mountains not found, does show the
utter overthrow of the antichristian power and dominion, for as the Islands was
exalted above the waters, and the mountains above the lower parts of the earth;
so antichrist's power given him by the dragon, was exalted over the inha^itants
of the world, both by sea and land, until this great overthrow has put it down.

Verse 21. And there fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone
about the weight of a talent.

This is to set forth the greatness and terribleness of God's Judgments,
inflicted or executed upon them, by this great hail, even as God did of old
upon the Canaanites, Josh. 10.11. And it came to pass as they fled from before
Israel and were in the going down to Bethhoron, that the Lord cast down great
(...) from heaven upon them, unto Azekah, and they died, they were (...) which
died with h^il stones, then they which the (...) of Israel slew with the sword.

And men blasphemed God because of the ^lague of the hail.

This shows that these Judgments did not reform them, ^ho' it did destroy them.

What the seventh trumpet sounded was the finishing of prophecy, which extended
to the end of this world, Chap. 11.5. And the seventh Angel sounded, and there
were great voices in heaven, saying, the kingdoms of this world (...) become
the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and
ever.

The pouring out of these seven vials, is in the time of the sixth trumpet.

And as to the pouring out the seven last vials of God's wrath, they do extend
to the utter destruction of the beast and the false prophet, and to the binding
of satan and ^utting him up in the bottomless pit; and therefore what we shall
further read in this book of the beast and of the false prophet, and mystery
Babylon, relating to their destruction, is the effects of this execution done
upon them, by the pouring out of the seven last vials of God's wrath; for then
God made mystery Babylon the great drink the cup of the wine of the fierceness
of his wrath, to her utter overthrow.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse 1.

ANd there came one of the seven Angels, which had the seven vials, and talked
with me, saying unto me, Come hither, I will show unto thee the judgment of the
great whore.

This was one of the seven Angels which we read of in the foregoing Chapter,
which poured out the seven last vials of God's wrath, which came to John and
talked with him, saying, Come hither: As much as if he should say, Come, go
along with me, I will show unto thee the judgment of the great whore; by this
judgment is intended her condemnation and destruction, and by the great Whore
is intended the false Church which is not Christ's Spouse but a harlot, and by
her

Sitting upon many waters,

Is to show she is supported and upheld by the body of the people, or by the
children of this world, as is opened in the 15th verse, And be ^ith unto me,
the waters which thou sawe^ where the whore s^tteth, are peoples, and
multitudes, and nations, and tongues.

Thus as the true Church is reviled, reproached, and persecuted by the world,
so the false Church is spoken well of, and supported, and upheld by the world;
and thus they have the glory and praise of the world, according to what is
written in 1 Job. 4. and the first verse; compared with the 5th and 6th verses.
Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God,
because many false prophets are gone out into the world; they are of the world
therefore speak they of the world, and the wor^ ^eareth them. We are of God; he
that knows God hear^ (...), hereby know we the spirit of truth and the spirit
of error, says the Apostle John; so that the character he gives us to know
the false prophets by, is the worlds hearing them. And the character to know
the Spirit of the true Prophets by is the world's refusing to hear them.

Verse 2. With whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication.

Thus it appears, that as the kings of the earth is wont to persecute the true
Church; so here it appears that they join in union with the false Church, by
combination, so that it is said they commit fornication with her.

And the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the wine of her
fornication.

(...) the wine of her fornication is her false doctrine^ (...) the inhabitants
of the earth have drunk is, and (...) have been made drunk, as says the
prophet Isai. 29.9. ^pared with the 13th and 14th verses. They are drunk, (...)
with wine, they stagger but not with strong drink: (...) this people draw near
me with their mouth, (...) do honor me, but have removed their (...) from me,
and their fear toward me is taught by (...) of men; there ^ I will add to do a
mar^ellous (...) this people, even a mavelous work and a (...); for the
wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and (...) understanding of their prudent
men shall be bid.

Thus by drinking in the doctrine of false prophets, (...) are like dru^ken
men, that think to worship God by (...) of Godliness, according to what was
before writ^^^, 2 Timothy 3. first and second verses compared with the (...)
verse. In the last days perilous times shall come; for (...) lovers of their
own selves, etc. having a form (...), but denying the power thereof, from such
turn (...). They not knowing that inward powerful operati^^ of the working of
the spirit of God, which works (...) in the saints, by strengthening them
with might (...) the (...) man, against the power of sin. Ephesians. 3.16, 20, (...)
would grant you according to the riches of his glo^^ to be (...) with might by
his spirit in the (...) man. N^w unto him that is able to do exceeding (...),
above all that we ask or think, according to the (...) that works in us.

Verse 3. So he carried me away in the Spirit into the wilderness.

From hence we may note, that the false Church is in a wil^erness state.

And I saw a woman sit upon a scarlet colored beast.

This woman is the false Church; and the scarlet colored beast (...) she sits
upon, is the rulers of this world, as they (...) received power from the
dragon, Chap. 13.2. And the dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great
authority. And by this means he comes to be a persecuting power, and to be
stained with the blood of the saints and martyrs of Jesus. And it is being

Full of names of Blasphemy,

Is to show it is setting up of Idolatry and false worship in its heathenish
state, by which the name of God is reproached or blasphemed in its so doing.
And it is

Having seven heads, and ten horns,

Does show it to be the same beast that rose out of the sea; Chap. 13.1. And I
saw a beast rise out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns, and upon his
horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the names of blasphemy. This beast
represented the Romish kingdom, with all the succeeding persecuting powers, as
will appear by comparing this with the prophecy of Daniel, Chap. 7.7, etc. who
prophesied of the four monarchs of the world, by a vision which he had of four
beasts rising out of the sea, and the fourth which was the Roman Empire or
Monarch, had ten horns, even as John here expresses the Roman kingdom, which
was in being in his time, the ten horns being the last kingdom of antichrist,
as will appear in the following part of this Chapter; and the number ten is to
express many persecuting powers, that shall arise out of these seven heads of
the Dragons dominion or jurisdiction, and is expressed by ten, to set foth many;
as for instance, Job. 19.2. These ten times have ye reproached me. Genesis 31.7.
And your father has deceived me, and changed my wages ten times. Number. 14.22.
And have tempted me now these ten times. Neh. 4.12. And they said unto us ten
times. Thus it appears to be a Scripture phrase to set forth many.

Verse 4. And the woman was arrayed in purple and Scarlet color.

She came to be of this color by reason that her garments was stained with the
blood of Saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus, as in the sixth
verse, chap. 18.24. And in her was found the blood of the prophets and of
saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth.

And she was decked with gold, and precious stone and pearls.

(...) thus was she decked harlot like, to allure her Lovers, (...) yet this is
to show her outward pretenses of holi^^^^, in garnishing her outside, by making
clean the out^^^^ of the cup and platter, she is fairly gilded outward^^^^ with
fair pretenses of worshipping God, after the (...) manner as the false Church
did of old, Isai. 1.11. By ^erving her Sabbaths, and her solemn meetings, and
in ^ing many prayers in public assembly's, attending pre^ded Gospel
Ordinances. And thus gloriously she appears ^wardly with her golden cup in her
hand full of her abominations and filthiness of her fornication. This golden
Cup in (...) hand full of Abominations and filthiness of her fornication, is to
allure the inhabitants of the Earth (...) drink in her false doctrine, by which
she beguiles (...) whole world to commit fornication with her, for (...)
prophets are of the world, and they speak of the world (...) the world hears
them, 1 John 4.5. Thus she has the (...) world on her side, in what kingdom or
country (...) she is in, and so has her daughters also, both (...), governors
and people to assist her in her form of ^^^ship.

Verse 5. And upon her forehead was a ^ame written, MYSTERY BABYLON THE ^REAT.

This her name Mystery Babylon, is derived from Old Babylon, who trod Jerusalem
of old under her foot, and de^^^oyed the temple and altar, and laid all
desolate. And (...) this Mystery Babylon or false church is wont to tread (...)
new Jerusalem, or holy city, to wit, the church of Christ ^^der her feet, chap.
11.2. For it is given unto the Gentiles (...) the holy city shall they tread
under foot. Which said (...) city is the bride the lambs wife, as may be seen
(...) 21.2. And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming (...) from God
out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned (...) her husband. And as the Church
of Christ is com^red to a holy city, so this mystery Babylon the great is
compared to an unholy city, Chap. 11.8. And the dead bodies shall lie in the
street of the great city, whi^ spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, and where
also (...) Lord was crucified. Compare this with the last verse (...) this 17th
Chapter, And the woman which thou saw is the great city, which reigns over
the kings of the earth. The this great whore is

The mother of harlots and abominations o^ the earth.

This mother of harlots is the Church of Rome; and he^ daughters are the
persecuting powers that arise afte^ her, which are supported by the dragons ten
horns which did arise out of his seven heads, Chap. 12.3. compa^ with Chap.
13.2. And behold a great red dragon, havi^ seven heads and ten horns. And the
dragon gave him (...) power, and his seat, and great authority.

Thus the false Church has the dragons power to (...) her, in persecuting the
true Church, and spouse of Chr^ under pretense of being the false. And thus
has (...) made herself drunk with the blood of the saints; as (...) the
following verse.

Verse 6. And I saw the woman drunken wit^ the blood of the saints and martyrs
of Jesus; a^ when I saw her, I wondered with great admiration.

Sometimes this false Church is called by the name (...) a woman, and sometimes
by the name of a city, yet (...) intends the false Church; and as it is here
said, I saw (...) woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with (...)
blood of the martyrs of Jesus, so it is said in Chap. (...) 24. And in her was
found the blood of the prophets, (...) of saints; and of all that were slain
upon the earth. (...) comprehends both mother and daughters; for they are (...)
of one generation, and their Judgment shall be alike, Chap^ 16.6. For they have
shed the blood of saints and prophets and thou have given them blood to drink,
for they are worth And when I saw her I wondered with great adm^nat^^^. Here we
have an account of John's wonderful (...), when he beheld this woman, who was so
fine^ arrayed outwardly with pretenses of worshipping God, (...) to see her
drunken with the blood of the saints and ^tyrs of Jesus.

Verse 7. And the Angel said unto me, therefore did thou marvel, I will tell
thee ^e mystery of the woman, and of the beast ^at carries her, which has
seven heads and ^n horns.

The forepart of this verse contains a question, which ^e Angel did ask John,
which question is, wherefore (...) thou marvel? and the other part of the
verse, con^^ins a promise that the angel made to John, to tell him ^e mystery
of what he saw in the vision of the woman, ^d of the beast that carries her,
which has seven ^ads and ten horns, but the angel does not enter upon the
opening of the said mysterys in the following ^erse, but gives John an account
of the beast that rose ^t of the bottomless pit, in the first place, and its
going into perdition, which was the rising and fall of ^ichrist; the rising
thereof is spoken of in the 9th ^apter, like locusts, and in the 13 chapter, 11
verse, ^ke a lamb with two horns, but spoke like a dragon, but ^e beast that
carries the woman, rose out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns,
which was the world^^ governors set up by God, which Antichrist or this Whore
got into conjunction and union with; as will appear in ^e following part of
this chapter, they being deceived by her, and thereby taking her to be the true
church, and so joy^ing in with her.

Verse 8. The beast that thou saw, was, and is not, and shall ascend out of
the bot^omless pit, and go into perdition.

Thus far this verse shows the rising and fall of antichrist, or the false
church, which rose out of the bottomless pit, and got into a union with the
kingly, or Magistratical powers of this world, which was set up of God,
represented to John in the vision to rise out the sea, (that is out of the
multitude of people, as verse 15.) having seven heads, and ten horns; but the
^^ther that rose out of the bottomless pit, the angel t^ John of it is going
into perdition, that is upon the pour out of the seven last vials of God's
wrath, upon the ^^^mies of his Church, to the utter destruction of the (...)
church, as in the foregoing chapter is showed, and they (...) dwell on the
earth shall wonder whose names were not (...) ten in the book of life, from the
foundation of world. By them that dwell on the earth is intended children of
this world, who are in an unregenerated (...) and therefore have not their
names written in the (...) of life, they not being those that were chosen in
(...) from the foundation of the world: for they are the that did worship the
beast spoken of in chap. 13.8. And that dwell upon the earth, shall worship
him, whose (...) not written in the book of life of the lamb slain from the
f^^^dation of the world. By the lamb being slain from the fo^^dation of the
world, is intended God's fore-ordination the lamb's being slain, as is written,
1 Pet. 1.20. Who (...) was fore ordained before the foundation of the world,
but (...) manifest in these last times for you. These were the (...) that were
not redeemed by Christ, that did wonder (...) they did behold the beast that
was and is not; for they (...) Antichrist and the false prophets, which were in
union (...) the secular powers of this world, to be the true (...) of Christ.
And yet is, (says he,) that is, the beast (...) after it rose out of the
earth, chap. 13.11. And I held another beast rise out of the earth. This is
(...) besides that, that rose out of the sea, and is after^ led the false
prophet, chap. 19.20. compared with (...) 13.13, 14. and in chap. 13.12. it is
said, And he exerc^ all the power of the first beast before him. The first
beast be^ him was the Romish Empire under heathenism, as it recei^ power from
the dragon, to maintain the heathenish (...) shipping of Idols; but this beast
that rises out of earth with two horns like a lamb, is the rising of
Antichrist, and false prophets, and getting to such a (...) ^f power given them
from the dragon, as to rule both ^vil, and Ecclesiastical affairs, which his
two horns does present, and so coming into conjunction and union with ^he
civil, magistratical, or kingly powers of this world, ^ough the subtilty of the
serpent, who deceives the whole world, by causing this beast that rose out of
the ^rth, to make an image, or prescribe a form of Godli^ess to the first
beast, or kingly power, who causes all the world to worship said image, or
attend said form of Godliness; and so persecutes the saints (who worship God in
spirit in truth) for refusing to worship said image, or for refusing to attend
said form of Godliness, as appears in Chapter 13.1., etc. the 11th verse, shows
his rising out of the earth; and the 12th verse shows his exercising all the
power of the first beast before him, which was the Romish power ^der
Heathenism, by which his deadly wound was healed which God had given him by the
hand of Constantine, who before that wound maintained heathenish Idols, and
^elly persecuted the Church of Christ; but through the ^ilty of the serpent,
who raised up antichrist and false prophets, the wound was healed; for said
antichrist and false prophets, by lying signs and wonders of pretended
Godliness deceives them that dwell on the earth, that is, the whole world, as
ap^pars Chap. 13.13, 14: Saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they
should make an image to the beast, which had the wound by a sword and did live.
Thus this image was made to the kingly powers, which was the Romish Empire; and
this image was a prescription of worship, or form of Godliness, to said beast,
or to the magistratical powers of this world, to maintain and defend, according
to what was before ^ten, 2 Timothy 3.5. Having 1 form of Godliness, but de^ying
the power thereof: from such turn away. and in chap. 13.15, shows that all
that would not worship the said image, or attend the said form of Godliness,
should be ^illed.

Thus the wound was healed, by the rising up of Antichrist in the Room of
Heathenism, and so raising and earring on persecution, against the church of
God, as the heathens had done before,; for this Antichristian power that rose
out of the earth, joined in with the Magistratical or Kingly powers of the
world, both (...) from the dragon, and so both becoming (...) power in union
together, until the pouring (...) vials of God's wrath, to the utter
destruction of Antichrist and then it may truly be said, the beast that (...)
out of the bottomless pit, is gone into perditions and therefore is not. But
the civil or Magistratical power is yet remaining, only deprived of the
Dragon's power, so that it may be said, and yet is, for though the persecuting
power is not, yet the kingly power is yet remaining, for they both in union
were but one persecuting power: for this persecuting power became a persecuting
power, by reason of Antichrist or the false Church joining in union with the
kingly power, or rather the kingly power joining i^ with them, taking them for
the true Church, and thus is reckoned in with the kingly power as it is in
union with it, to be of the seven kings, though it is really eight because its
power is wholly derived from the dragon; and nothing from God, as appears verse
11. and the beast that was, and is not, even he is the 8th, and is of the
seven, and goes into perdition. And in the next verse the Angel will begin to
open to John the mystery of the woman and of the beast that carries her,
according to his promise, in the seventh verse.

Verse 9. And here is the mind which has wisdom, the seven heads are seven
mountains on which the woman sits.

In this verse the Angel begins to tell the mystery of the beast and of the
woman to John, according to his promise is the seventh verse, And here is the
mind that back wisdom says the Angel: that is, the mind which has wisdom to
understand this mystery, of the beast, and of the woman, (...) I am now
entering upon to tell thee. The seven heads are seven mountains, by this number
seven is measured the whole of every thing that is expressed by this number; so
that these seven heads of this beast, is said to be seven mountains: these
heads or mountains, measures the whole dominion of the dragons usurped power
over the whole world ^d it also measures the whole dominion of the powers ^f
this world, set up by God. And this woman or false Church, is upheld and
supported wholly by that power derived from the dragon, in the hands of the
kings and judg^ (...) of the earth, who have power given them by God, to ^e
ministers of the Law, and thereby to punish evil doers, (...) 13.1, etc. And
they have also received Power from the dragon, as appears, Rev. 13.2. And the
dragon gave (...) his power, and his seat, and great authority. Thus they (...)
by two Powers, to wit, the same persons; and thus the woman or false Church
here spoken of, sits on the seven mountains, or is supported by the dragons
seven heads, Chap. 12.3. And behold a great red dragon, having seven heads.
Luke 4.5, 6, 7.

Verse 10. And there are seven kings.

These seven kings measures all the kingly powers of this world, for it is a
perfect number, and measures the whole of every thing it expresses by the
number seven.

Five are fallen ( says he.)

This is to measure the time past, in which a certain number of the seven are
come to their end; so that there is but two more;

And one ( of the two says he) is, and the other is not yet come.

That which was then in being, was the Roman heathenish kingdom, which did
uphold Idolatry, and persecuted the true Church of Christ, and after the
anichristian power did overcome (...), and killed (...) (...) Chap. 73.7 (...)
(...) come, that (...)

Continue but a short space.

For the seventh and (...) king here spoken of is the last persecuting power;
for every one of these seven kings measures the dragons whole power, in that
time and age of the world that the said king does reign in, they being his
ministers so far as they act under his power; for every king here mentioned,
measures all the persecuting powers in the world, in the time of that kings
continuance: As for instance, one king measures the whole kingdom of Egypt; and
secondly, one king measures the whole kingdom of Assiria; and thirdly, one king
measures the whole kingdom of the Chaldeans; and fourthly, one king measures
the whole kingdom of the Medes and Persians; and fifthly, one king measures the
whole kingdom of G^cia; and sixthly, one king measures the whole kingdom of the
Romans; and seventhly and lastly, one king measures the many persecuting powers
that shall arise after the Romish kingdom, spoken of in the 14th verse of the
Chapter, These shall make war with the lamb, and the le^ shall overcome them.
This is the seventh and last persecuting king, which is expressed by ten horns,
which is said (...) be ten kings as in verse 12.

Verse 11. And the beast that was, and i^ not, even he is the eighth, and is of
the seven and goes into perdition.

This is the beast that rose out of the bottomless p^ or out of the earth, with
two horns like a lamb, spoken (...) in the 8th verse of this Chapter, compared
with Chap. 1^ 7. and with Chap. 13.11. This is antichrist, and false prophets,
that comes in sheeps clothing like a lamb with ^ horns; and is reckoned to be
the eighth king, to distingu^ it from the other seven kings, because they were
power set up by God, and after received power from the d^ to persecute the
Church of Christ; but this beast that (...) ascend out of the bottomless pit,
is an Impostor, a Ch^ whose power is wholly and alone derive from the dragon,
to deceive and persecute the true and faithful Church of Christ by it is usurped
power, or (...) horns: But this beast shall go into perdition; and it (...)
reckoned to be of the seven kings, only because of it is (...) junction and
union which it got into with the secu^ power, to aid and support it, and
thereby to persecute t^ true Church.

Verse 12. And the ten horns which the saw, are ten kings, which have
received (...) kingdom as yet, but receive power as kings of hour with the
beast.

These ten horns is the seventh and last king, or persecuting powers. And this
number ten is a scripture ^hrase used to express many, that is, to express an
uncer^ain number by a certain; as for instance, Neh. 4 12. They ^ud unto us ten
times from all places. Dan. 1.20. He found them ten times better. Job. 19.2.
These ten times have ye reproached me. Numb. 14.22. Because all these men --
^ve tempted me now these ten times. Rev. 2.10. Ye shall ^ve tribulation ten
days. Zech. 8.23. Ten men shall take ^old, etc. Lev. 26.26. Ten women shall
bake your bread etc. Rev. 11.13. The tenth part of the city fell, etc.

These kings, represented to John in the vision by ten (...), have received no
kingdom as yet, says the Angel to John; that is, had received no kingdom in
his time, but receive power as kings one hour with the beast says he; that is,
they receive power from the dragon with the persecuting beast, that rose out of
the earth with two (...) like a lamb, or with antichrist the false Church; and
the one hour is to show its continuance is but a short time.

Verse 13. These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto
the beast.

These have one mind, says he; that is to aid and support the false Church, or
antichrist; and therefore are but (...) king as it were, under the dragon; for
they have one wind, and therefore are but one united power, for the defense of
his interest.

And shall give their power and strength to the beast, says he. This is to the
beast that rose out of the bottomless ^it, or out of the earth, to aid and
assist the said beast, or false Church against the Church of Christ by
persecution, taking antichrist or the false Church for the true, and the ^ve
for the false. Thus the dragon deceives the magistratical or secular powers,
set up by God to be ministers ^ly of the law.

Verse 14. These shall make war with the Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome
them; for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings; and they that are with him
are called, and chosen, and faithful.

Here it appears, that this is the last kingdom of antichrist, and that it is
kingdom is but short, though it (...) war with the lamb, it is reign with the
beast is meas^ but by one hour, to show the shortness of it is time of (...)
with the lamb, for the lamb shall overcome, faith (...) angel to John.

Verse 15. And he says unto me, the water which thou saw where the whore
sits, (...) peoples, and multitudes, and nations. a^ tongues.

This is to show that the false Church has the whole world on her side; for
the multitudes of the people and compared to waters, that she sits upon, so
that she ha^ not only the magistratical powers to support her, they being
deceived by her, and thereby committing fornication with her, and so
persecuting the true Church, but after the inhabitants of the earth are made
drunk with the (...) of her fornication.

Verse 16. And the ten horns which thou saw upon the beast, these shall hate
the whore and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and
burn her with fire.

These are the ten horns which gave their power (...) the beast, and made war
with the lamb, whose kingdom is joined in with the beast or antichrist; but it
is but for a short time, being expressed but by one hour, to stew the shortness
of the time. These ten kings are in this (...) day, and time, that hate the
great whore, the church of Rome, the mother of harlots, and will at last make
her desola^ naked, and will eat her flesh and burn her with fire. The
expressions are to set forth their enmity again^ her, and how they shall be her
destruction. Yet not notwithstanding, they are for a little time warring
against the lamb and his army, which is his church, who are h^ chosen and
faithful ones, who are separated both from ^e mother of harlots and from her
daughters: for^th the mother of harlots and her daughters, are always supported
by the powers of this world, for they ^ways become national churches: when they
go a who^g from God, so that the kings of the earth commit ^ication with such a
church, and the Inhabitants of the earth are made drunk with the wine of her
fornication; and at such a time as this, God calls his church and people to
come out of her, and to be separated from her, as appears, chap. 18.4. Come out
of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive ^it
of her plagues.

Verse 17. For God has put it in their hearts, to fulfill his will.

That is to execute judgment upon the great whore the mother of harlots.

And to agree and give their kingdom unto the beast.

That is, God will let or suffer them to agree, and to give their power and
strength to the beast, that is to antichrist, or to support the false church.

Until the words of God shall be fulfilled.

And then judgment shall be executed by them, both against the mother of
harlots, and against her daughters and until that time, these powers or ten
horns have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the beast, or
to antichrist the false church, the whores daughters, and shall make war
against the lamb and his church, by persecuting them, as the Jewish powers did
of old (in fellowship with the false church) persecute the true prophets as
appears by Stephen's testimony, Acts 7.52. which of the prophets have not your
fathers persecuted, and they have stain them which showed before of the coming
of the just one of whom ye have keen now the betrayers and murderers. Yet these
Jews said, Mat. 23.30. If we had been in the days of our fathers, (...) would
not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets. But these were
their mothers daughters, whose Mother had been put away for her whoredom, as
appears, Isai. 5c.1. Where is the bill of your mothers divorcement whom I have
put away? Thus it appears that the whores daughters are as much deceived as
their mother, and did put the Lord of life and glory to death, but had they
known it, 1 Cor. 2.8. They would not have crucified the Lord of glory. The like
we see in this chap. that these ten horns hate the whore spoken of in the 5th
verse and yet make war with the Lamb, and they that are with him as appears in
the 14th verse, but the lamb and his army shall get the victory, as appears in
the 13 and 14 verses of this chapter.

Verse 18. And the woman which tho^ saw, is that great city, which reigns
over the kings of the earth.

This great city was spoken of in chap. 11.8. And their dead bodies shall he in
the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt,
where also our Lord (...) crucified, thus as the true Church of Christ, is
called the bride the lambs wife, chap. 21.9, 10. So the false church is called
a harlot, and as the true church of Christ is compared to a holy city even the
new Jerusalem, the city of the (...) wing God, where the throne of God and of
the lamb is, a^ where no unclean thing can enter into said city. So the false
church is compared to a city likewise, which is spiritually called Sodom, that
is for it is uncleanness, and Egypt, that is because of her oppressions, and
where our Lord was crucified, that is, because of her persecutions. And she is
said to reign over the kings of the earth, because they are deceived by her,
and thereby ruled by her, to persecute the true Church, in shedding the blood
of the saints, and martyrs of Jesus, under her power, and in her territories,
as appears in Chap. 11.8, 9. compared with Chap. 18.24. And then dead bodies
shall lie in the street of the great city, etc And in her was found the blood
of prophets, and of saints, and of all that are slain upon the earth.

CHAP. XVIII.
In the first verse of the foregoing Chapter, we have an account, that one of
the seven Angels which had the seven viols, came to John and talked with him,
saying unto him, Come hither, I will show unto thee the judgment of the great
Whore. But we are to note, that her Judgment is not showed to John, till we
come to view this Eighteenth Chapter, which sets forth her judgment under the
denomination of the destruction of a great city, in a most fearful and dreadful
manner; for this Eighteenth Chapter gives us a relation, after what manner John
saw her Judgment in the vision which he saw concerning her destruction.

Verse 1.

ANd after these things.

These are the things spoken of in the foregoing Chapter.

I saw another Angel.

This is another Angel, and not that Angel which showed the things contained in
the foregoing Chapter.

Come down from heaven ( says he.)

This gives us an account from whence this Ange^ came.

Having great power.

This shows us, that his great power was from heaven.

And the earth was lightened with his glory.

This shows that he was an Angel of light, and that the inhabitants of the
earth were enlightened with his glorious light.

Verse 2. And he cried mightily with a strong voice, saying, Babylon the great
is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold of
every foul Spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.

We may observe, that the foregoing verse, shows that a glorious Angel of
light came down from heaven with great power; and that the earth was lightened
with his gl^, and this verse ^forms us, that he made a mighty Proclamation with
a strong voice, of the fall of mystical Babylon, and that this glorious light
which did lighten the earth, ^ow discovers or makes manifest that this m^stery
Babylon the great, that was so arrayed outwardly in purple and ^ca^le^ color,
and decked with gold and preciou^ stone, and pearls. Now by the light of this
(...) Angel she appears inwardly to be the habitation of devils, and the hold
of every unclean spirit, and to be a ^age of every unclean and hateful bird.

Verse 3. For all nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her
fornication; and the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and
the merchants of the earth are waxed rich through the abundance of her
delicacies.

This verse gives us the reason of her destruction.

Verse 4. And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, come out of her my
people, ^at ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ^e receive not of her
plagues.

This verse gives us an account of God's call to his people to come out of her,
and not to partake of her sins, that thereby they may not receive of her
plagues. This (...) like the Angels call to Lot, that he might not perish (...)
the (...) of the city of Sodom; for this city is (...) or like the call of
Israel out of (...), for this city is spiritually called Egypt, and where also
our Lord was crucified; for this city is Sodom-like for uncleanness, and Egypt
like for oppression, and like the persecuting Jews (who crucified our Lord) for
persecution. There are the si^s that God's people are here exhorted not to
partake with her, lest they partake with her in her plagues.

Verse 5. For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God has remembered her
iniquities.

This ^rse expresses the greatness of her sins, and how God remembers her
iniquities, that is, her injustice and ^vant of equity.

Verse 6. Reward her even as she rewarded you.

This is spoken as if it were in the hands of God's people, to reward her for
her iniquities, who had so greatly oppressed them.

And double unto her double, according to her works, in the cup which she has
filled, fill to her double.

This is spoken of the cup of her fury of injustice and oppression, which she
filled and made the saints to drink of; but now that they shall fill the cup
double to her, that is, give her a double reward.

Verse 7. How much she has glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much
torment and sorrow give her.

This shows that her glory wherewith she glorified herself is now remembered,
and sorrow is given in the room thereof, and in the room of her living
deliciously, tor^ment is her portion.

For she says in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and shall see no
sorrow.

Thus in her prosperity she glorified her self like a queen, and was not in
sorrow like a widow, and the^ did not think of her coming to see sorrow.

Verse 8. Therefore shall her plagues come in one day.

Thus it happens to her, that when she cries pea^ and safety, then sudden
destruction comes upon her;

Death, and mourning, and famine; and she shall be utterly burnt with fire; for
strong is the Lord God who judges her.

Verse 9. And the kings of the earth who have committed fornication, and lived
deliciously with her, shall bewail her, and lament for her, when they shall see
the smoke of her burning.

This verse sets forth the lamentation of the kings of the earth, who were
guilty of committing whordom, and living deliciously with her, showing how they
shall bewail and lament her.

Verse 10. Standing afar off, for the fear of her torment, saying, Alas, alas,
that great city Babylon, that mighty city; for in one hour is thy judgment come.

This verse sets forth the fearfulness and suddenness of her destruction; so
that the kings of the earth stood afar off for fear of her torment, saying, for
in one hour is her judgment come.

Verse 11. And the merchants of the earth shall weep, and mourn over her; for
no man buyeth her merchandise any more.

As in the foregoing verses, it is said, the kings of the ^th did bewail and
lament for her; so in this verse it (...) said, the merchants of the earth
shall weep and mourn ^er her. By the kings of the earth, and merchants of ^e
earth is intended earthly men, that glorified themselves, and lived deliciously
with her. Thus her mer^hants bewail the loss of their profits, which they had
by her, set forth by the similitude of temporal merchandising.

Verse 12. The merchandise of gold and sil^er, and precious stones, and of
pearls, and ^ne linen, and purple; and silk, and scarlet, and all thine wood,
and all manner vessels of ^ory, and all manner vessels of most precious ^ood,
and of brass, and iron, and marble.

Verse 13. And cinnamon, and odours, and ^ointments, and frankincense, and
wine, and oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and beasts, and sheep, and horses,
and charets, and slaves, and souls of men.

Verse 14. And the fruits that thy soul lusted after, are departed from thee,
and all things which were dainty and goodly, are departed from thee, and thou
shall find them no more at all.

These three verses, treats on the ware of their merchandise, to set forth
their Spiritual Merchandising by temporal similitudes, for as the woman
contains a mystery, as appears in the foregoing chapter and seventh verse, so
does this city, and the merchandising here spoken of; for the woman and city is
one, as appears in the foregoing Chapter and last verse. And the woman which
thou saw, is that great city, which reigns over the Kings of the earth.
And this city has a spiritual name, Chap. 11.8. Which spiritually is called
Sodom and Egypt, where (...) Lord also was crucified. And the woman and the
city is called great Babylon. Thus the false Church is set forth by the same
similitude that the true Church is only the true Church is set forth by a
woman, that is a wife, living in wedlock. But the false Church is set forth by
a woman, that is a harlot, living in fornication. The true Church is called the
holy city but the false Church by a city of uncleanness; the one to be the city
of God, where his throne is, the other to be the habitation of Devils, and the
hold of every foul spirit, so that the inhabitants of this great city,
comprehends t^ whole body of sin. As the Church of Christ which is h^ body is a
sanctified body, being clea^ from sin; so that righteousness dwells in the body
of Christ, which is his Church; but sin dwells (...) the body of sin, for there
is but two bodies and two sp^rits; so that the territories of this city is so
large, that it contains the whole body of sin; so that every unfaithful soul,
or unsanctifyed soul, is an inhabitant of this city for it is the situation of
the people that make the city; and these merchants here spoken of, are such
merchants spoken of in the 2 Pet. 2.3. And through coveto^sness with feigned
words shall they make merchandise of you.

Verse 15. The Merchants of these things which were made rich by her,

This Her is Mystery Babylon, or this great city, that did enrich these
Merchants, that so much bew^ her destruction by reason of the loss of their
merchandising; these

Shall stand afar off for fear of her torment weeping and wailing.

Verse 16. And saying alas, alas, that great city, that was clothed in fine
linen, and i^ purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold, and precious stones,
and pearls.

This is the same clothing, and decking, which the woman had, mentioned in the
4th verse of the foregoing chapter.

Verse 17. For in one hour so great riches is ^ome to naught.

This is to set forth her sudden destruction as in a mo^ent being measured by
an hour,

And every Ship Master, and all the compa^y in ships, and sailors, and as many
as traded by se^ stood afar off.

Verse 18. And cried when they saw the ^oke of her burning, saying, what city
is ^ike unto this great city.

Verse 19. And they cast dust on their heads, and cried weeping and wailing,
saying, ^as, alas, that great city, wherein were made ^ich all that had ships
in the sea, by reason of her costliness; for in one hour is she made desolate.

These foregoing verses sets forth the great lamentation of leasaring men, that
were enriched by her, they were such as ^he allowed to buy and sell in her
territories, they being the Inhabitants of the earth and of the sea, and not
dwellers in heaven, thus we have an account of the great lamentation and sorrow
of the kings of the earth, and the merchants of the earth, and as many as
traded by sea, to behold the destruction of this great city, even by all such
who were enriched by her, and these were such only who were inhabiters of the
earth and the sea.

Verse 20. Rejoice over her thou heaven.

By the heaven is meant the church of God.

And ye holy Apostles and prophets, for God has avenged you on her.

This is a day of great joy and rejoicing, to the dwellers in heaven, and to
the holy apostles and prophets, ^a the angel calls to the heaven to rejoice
over her judgment, and overthrow, upon the consideration that God has avenged
you on her says the angel, the like joy was to the dwellers in heaven, when
the great Dragon was cast out of his heavenly station, and the man-child that
was to rule all nations with a rod of lion, was caught up to God and to his
throne, as may be seen, chap. 12.12. Therefore rejoice ye heavens, and ye tha^
dwell in them, woe to the Inhabiters of the earth and of the sea. Thus we see
there is great joy in the church of God, whose dwelling is in heaven, at the
fall of mistical Babylon; but great sorrow, weeping and wailing, and lamenting,
by the inhabiters of the earth, and of the sea, even by the kings of the earth,
who committed fornication with her, and by the merchants of the earth, and
seafaring men, that were enriched by the abundance of her delicacies: for they
were such as were allowed to buy and sell, they being such as had the mark, or
name of the beast, or the number of his name; but such as were dwellers in
heaven, were not allowed to buy or to sell, for these were such as had no^
given a mark in their hand, or in their forehead, the truth of which may be
seen, chap. 13.17. And no man might buy or sell save he that had the mark, or
the name of the beast or the number of his name.

Verse 21. And a mighty Angel took a stone, like a great millstone, and cast it
into the sea, saying, thus with violence shall that great city Babylon be
thrown down, and shall be found no more at all.

This verse gives us an account of the Action of a mighty angel, in the
presence of John, to set forth the Judgment and destruction of the great city
Babylon, the false church, the mother of harlots, by casting a stone like a
great millstone into the sea, and withal saying, thus with violence shall that
great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all.

Verse 22, 23. And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pipers, and
trumpeters, ^all be heard no more at all in thee: and ^o crafts man, of
whatsoever craft he be, shall be found any more all in thee; and the ^ound of a
millstone shall be heard no more ^at all in thee;

And the light of a Candle shall shine no more at all in thee; and the voice of
the ^bridegroom and of the bride, shall be heard no more at all in thee.

Thus far of these two verses, are to set forth her ^utter destruction and
desolation, so that there shall never be heard in her any more joy or mirth,
neither shall there ever any more be found any crafts men in her of any craft
whatsoever, neither shall the sound of a millstone be heard in her any more,
neither shall the light of a candle ever shine in her any more, neither shall
the voice of the bridegroom, and of the bride be heard any more at all in her.

For thy merchants were the great men of the earth, for by thy sorceries were
all nations deceived.

Here is two reasons given why all these Calamities came upon her, the one is,
For thy merchants were the great men of the earth. These great men of the
earth, were great oppressors in their Merchandising, being such merchants as
the apostle foretold of 2 Pet. 2.2. comparing the first verse with the third,
But there were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be
false teach^s among you. and through coveteousness shall they with feigned
words make merchandise of you: whose judgments now of a long time lingereth
not, so these merchants that merchandized in the same manner, as the Apostle
Peter here prophetically foretold of, saying, whose judgment now of a long time
lingereth not, accordingly this 18th chap. is showing the Judgment according to
his Prophecy for Peter in the 5th verse and 6th verse of the same chapter
measures the Judgment of those false teachers, which he foretold of, that
should make merchandise of the people, b^ by the overthrow of the old world and
by the overthrow of Sodom, the old world sunk like the g^ea^ stone tha^ the
angel threw into the sea, and said thus shall Baby^o^ sink and rise no more at
all; and as Ab^aham stood and did behold the smoke of Sodom and Gomon^a, as the
smoke of a great furnace, so it is said the kings of the earth shall wail and
lament when they see the smoke of her burning. And the second thing is, for by
thy sorceries were all nations deceived. Let sorceries is her false doctrine,
by which all nations have been deceived for says our Savior, they shall
deceive the very Ele^ of God if it were possible: for she appeared to John with
her golden cup in her hand, full of the abomination^ and filthiness of her
fornication, so that the inhabitants of the earth have been made drunk with the
wine of her fornication, and thus has she bewitched the nations, and poisoned
them, that they should not obey the truth but believe lies.

Verse 24. And in her was found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and of
all that were slain upon the earth.

Thus it appears not to be the outward city of Rome, for in that city was not
found all that were slain upon the earth, but in this mystical city all were
slain that were slain upon the earth: for the territories of this city is so
large, that every unsanctified soul is an inhabitant, either in that part of it
which is called Sodom, or else in that part which is called Egypt, or else of
the persecuting part of it: for it is divided into these three parts, so that
in the persecuting part of it, was found the blood of the prophets, and of
saints, and of all that were slain upon the earth, for there is but two
situations that comprehends the dwelling of the whole race of mankind; Ephesians.
2.19. Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow
citizens with the saints and of the household of God. This is the holy city
that all sanctified souls dwell in with God and the Lamb; and the great city
which we have been treating upon comprehends all the rest of all mankind, and
is the habitation of Devils and the hold of every foul spirit, verse 2. with
whom they have their dwelling.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse 1.

ANd after these things.

To wit, after the things spoken of in the foregoing chapter, concerning the
judgment, condemnation and overthrow of mystical Babylon the great whore, or
false church.

I heard a great voice of much people in heaven.

This voice was the voice of the church of Christ, whose dwelling is in heaven,

Saying, Allelujah,

That is, praise the Lord.

Salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God.

Verse 2. For true and righteous are his judgments; for he has judged the
great whore, which did corrupt the whole earth with her fornication, and has
avenged the blood of his servants at her hand.

Verse 3. And again they said, Allelujah.

This again is the second time that they said Allelujah, that is, praise the
Lord.

And her smoke rose up for ever and ever.

This is the smoke of the burning of the great whore or false Church, set forth
by the burning of a great city And the words for ever and ever, is to set forth
her perpetual torment, and in the 20th verse it is said, And the beast was
taken, and with him the false prophet, and that these both were cast alive into
a lake of fire, burning with brimstone. And in Chap. 20.10. it is said, And the
devil the deceives them, was cast into the lake of fire and brimston^ where
the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be tormented for ever and ever.
This will be the punishment o^ the false Church, and of the beast, which are
the persecuting powers of this world, and the false prophets portion with the
devil.

Verse 4. And the four and twenty Elde^ and the four beasts, fell down and
worshipe^ God that sat on the throne, saying, Amen, Allelujah.

The names of these four and twenty elders, are written on the twelve gates,
and on the twelve foundations o^ the holy city, new Jerusalem, and where the
throne (...) God, and the throne of the lamb is; as may be seen (...) Chapter
22. comparing the first and second verses with the third, And there shall be no
more curse, but the thro^ (...) God and of the lamb shall be in it. Thus it
appears, the the throne of God and of the Lamb is in the midst (...) this city,
which is his bride or Church. And these fou^ and twenty elders were spoken of
in Chap. 4.4. And rou^ about the throne were four and twenty seats, and upon
(...) seats I saw four and twenty Elders, ^itting clothed in whi^ raiment, and
they had on their heads crowns of gold. A^ the names of these elders and after
what manner they fit rou^ about the throne, is to be seen and read in Chap.
21.12, 1^ And at the gates twelve Angels, and names written ther^ which are the
names of the twelve tribes of the childr^ of Israel. Here is the names of
twelve, of these elder^ which are the twelve Sons of Jacob. These are the twel^
stars, that the Jewish Church, or Woman, that brough forth the man child was
crowned withal, here called twel^ ^agels, verse 14. And the wall of the city
had twelve ^undations, and in them the names of the twe^ve Apostles (...) the
lamb. Here are the names of the other twelve ^ders, upon whose foundation is
built the Gentile Churches, ^h. 2.20. And are built upon the foundations of the
Apo^s, which make the four and twenty. And thus their ^ts are round about the
throne; for the throne of God (...) in the midst of the city, and the doors,
and the foun^ations are round about the city.

And the four beasts. These four beasts represent the ^ur spirits of the
heavens, Zech, 6.5. They are the An^els of God. Thus the four and twenty
elders, and the ^our beasts, who represent all the saints, and all the holy
Angels, falling down and worshipping God, that sits on the ^rone, saying, Amen,
that is, verily so let it be, this ^as ascribing to God his Justice for judging
the great Whore ^llelujah, or praise the Lord. This is to ascribe praise ^o God
for his Justice upon the great whore.

Verse 5. And avoice came out of the throne, saying, Praise our God all ye his
servants, and ^e that fear him, both small and great.

This verse shows us, that upon the four and twenty eders, and the four
beasts falling down, and worshipping God that sat on the throne, a voice came
out of the throne, saying, Praise our God all ye his servants, and ye that fear
him both small and great.

Verse 6. And I heard as it were the voice of a great multitude, and as the
voice of many waters, and as the the voice of mighty thunderings, saying,
Allelujah, for the Lord God Om^ipotent ( or Almighty) reigns.

The voice of this great multitude like many waters, and like mighty
thunderings, was in answer and obedience to that voice, that came out of the
throne, saying, praise ^ur God all ye his servants, and ye that fear him both
^all and great. Accordi^ly all his ervants, and them that feared him, both
small and great lift up their voices, saying, Allelujah, that is, praise the
Lord: For the Lord God omnipotent reigns; that is, the Lord God Almighty
reigns, who had now by his kingly power subdued the enemies and persecutors
of his Church and people, in that he had judged the great whore, who was
drunken wi^ the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus.

Verse 7. Let us be glad, and rejoice, and give honor to him, for the marriage
of the lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready.

This was the joy and voice of that great multitude spoken of in the foregoing
verse as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings;
saying one to another, let us be glad, and rejoice, yea it wa^ the voice of all
the servants of the lord, and of the^ that feared him, both small and great,
saying, also for the marriage of the lamb is come, and his wife hath^ made her
self ready, all these things are prophetically foretold of, and will surely
come to pass upon the overthrow of the great whore, or false Church, which does
corrupt the whole earth with her fornication. This prophecy does foretell of
her judgment, and how it will be when God shall avenge the blood of his
servants at her hand, and what a glorious state the Church of Christ will then
be in, prepared even as a bride to meet her husband; and till this time come,
the true Church and faithful spouse of Christ, who separate themselves from
this harlot, will be persecuted by the secular powers, who are in union with
this harlot, or false Church; either with the mother or with the daughters,
taking the false for the true Church. And many of the people of God will be
mixed, and bewildered with this false Church till her judgment come, as appears
in the 4th verse of the foregoing Chapter; and these that separate from her,
and lead a godly life, shall suffer persecution, (^ Tim. 3.12.) by this false
Church; as appears all along throughout this book, and by the testimony of all
the holy Scriptures; for the false Church ever keeps in union with the secula^
powers, as appears by the testimony of this book.

Verse 8. And to her was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine linen,
clean and white. for the fine linen is the righteousness of the saints.

And to her was granted. This Her is the Wife, or Church of Christ the Lamb of
God; As appears in the foregoing verse, That she should be arrayed in fine
linen, clean and ^ite; for the fine linen is the righteousness of saints. This
her white garment is to set forth her righteous ^ate; as is here expressed in
the last sentence of the verse, ^o wit, the fine linen clean and white is the
righteousness ^f the saints. Thus the Church or Wife of Christ, is pre^tred and
presented to him, as he is the lamb of God, who gave himself for it, as is
written, Ephesians. 5.25, 26, 27. Husbands love your wives, even as Christ also loved
the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and ^eanse it with
the washing of water by the word, that he night present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having ^ot or wrinkle or any such thing; but that it
should be ^ly and without blemish.

Verse 9. And he said unto me, blessed are they which are called unto the
marriage supper of the lamb; and he says unto me, these are the true saying of
God.

The four part of this verse pronounces a blessing to them that are invited to
this marriage supper of the Lamb; and the later part of the verse contains
the Angels evidence to John that these are the true sayings of God.

Verse 10. And I fell at his feet to worship him, and he said unto me, see thou
do it not, I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that have the ^estimony
of Jesus; worship God, for the testi^ony of Jesus, is the spirit of prophecy.

In this verse the Apostle John gives us an account, how he fell down at the
Angels feet to worship him, but was ^buked by the Angel for so doing in these
words, saying, see thou do it not, signifying also to John, that he w^ his
fellow servant, and of his brethren that had the test^mony of Jesus, advising
him to worship God, and also g^ving John an account, that the testimony of
Jesus (...) the spirit of prophecy. This Scripture evidenceth, the no man can
truly testify that Jesus is the Christ, as a^ peareth also in the first of the
Cor. 12.3. No man (...) say, that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost; the
is, he cannot say so in truth, knowingly, that he is the Lord, but by the
revelation of the holy Ghost; Mat. 1^ 15, 16, 17. He says unto them, But whom
say ye that I am And S^mon peter answered and said, thou art the Christ, (...)
son of the living God, and Jesus answered and said (...) him, Flesh and blood
has not revealed it unto thee, (...) my father which is in heaven.

The following Verse is the beginning of a new Vision.

Verse 11. And I saw heaven opened.

This opening of heaven is, that John may see wha^ is going forward in heaven.

And behold a white horse, and he that sa^ on him was called faithful and true.

By his sitting on the white ^orse, is to show that (...) is both a judge and a
warrior, Judge. 5.10. Speak ye the ride on white Asses, ye that sit in Judgment.

And in righteousness he does judge and make war.

John does give us an an account that in this heave^ly vision he say a white
horse, and he that sat u^ on him was called faithful and true; and that in
rigteousness he does judge and make war. Here is tw^ things to be observed;

The first is, He that sat upon the white horse is called ^ithful and true;
this shows us that he is faithful and ^ue.

And secondly, That in righteousness he does judge and make war; this shows
us that he is both a judge and (...) warrior, and that he judges in
righteousness, and has ^st grounds to make war.

Verse 12. His eyes were as a flame of ^ire.

This is to set forth his majestical looks, and piercing ^es, terrible to
behold.

And on his head were many crowns.

This shows that he is King of kings, and Lord of ^rds, as in the 16th verse.

And had a name written, that no man knew but he himself.

This written name of his, is a secret mysterious name, that is known to no man
but he himself, whose name is written in the following verse.

Verse 13. And he was clothed with a vesture dipped it blood.

This is to represent to us his victorious acts, as if his resture were dipped
in the blood of his enemies.

And his name is called the word of God.

This is the written name that no man knows but he himself; for it is the name
of the Son of God in his divine nature, even that word which made the world,
and after was made flesh, Joh. 1.14. And yet the world knew him not, Joh. 1.10.
Yea, it is the invisible God, which no man has seen at any time, Joh 1.38.1
Tim. 6.16. Whom no man has seen, nor can see, but to whom the Son shall reveal
him. This is the same warrior spoken of in Isai. 63.1, etc. Who is this that
comes from Edom with died garments, from Bozra; this that is glorious in his
apparel, traveling in the greatness of his strength? I that speak in
righteousness, mighty to save. Wherefore art thou ^red in thine apparel, and
thy garments like him that treads the wine fat? I have trodden the wine press
alone, and of the people there was none with me; for I will tread them in my
anger, and trample them in my fury, and their blood shall be sprinkled upon my
garments, and I will stain all my raiment.

Thus was God represented to the prophet, like a warrior coming from Edom; that
is from the slaughter of the enemies of his Church, as a victorious man of war,
whose garment is stained with the blood of his enemies; for the day of
vengeance is in my heart, says the Lord, and the year of my redeemed is come.
And answerable to this, it is said in the second verse of this Chapter, for
true and righteous are his Judgments, for he has judged the great whore, which
did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of his
servants at her hand.

Verse 14. And the armies which were in heaven followed him upon white horses,
clothed in fine linen, white and clean.

By heaven is intended the dwelling place of the saints; and the armies is
intended the saints and servants of the Lord; and by following him is to be
understood, that they followed the Word of God, that unknown name to the
children of this world; and their sitting upon white horses, is to show that
they sit in judgment with the judge that rode on the white horse, and are
warriors with him; and their being clothed in fine linen, white and clean, is
to set forth their righteous, holy, and sanctified state.

Verse 15. And out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it he should
smite the nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; and he treads
the wine press of the fierceness and wrath of almighty God.

This sharp sword is the word of his power; for his name is called the word of
God, Heb. 4.12. For the word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than any
two ^ed sword. Chap. 2.16. Repent, or else I will come unto (...) quickly, and
will fight against them with the sword of (...) mouth. Chap, 1.16. And out of
his mouth went a sharp (...) edged sword, that with it he should smite the
nations. ^his sword is to show, that by the spirit of his mouth, ^d by the
brightness of his coming, he shall consume ^e man of sin, spoken of in the
following part of this Chap^er, as also in 2 These. 2.8, 9. And then shall that
wicked be wealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of ^it mouth, and
shall destroy with the brightness of his coming, ^en him whose coming is after
the working of Satan, with ^ll power, and signs, and lying wonders. And he
shall rule them with a rod of iron. This is to set forth the strength of the
Scepter of his kingdom, a rod of strength, that cannot be broken, Psalm. 2.9.
Thou shall rule them with a ^od of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a
potters ^essel. This is spoken of David's Scepter, under the type of Christ who
subdued the nations, and ruled them with a strong rod of government.

And he treads the wine press of the fierceness of almighty God. This is to
show, as the treader of the grape treads them under his feet, so this warrior
treads his ene^ies under his feet, he executes the fierceness and wrath of
Almighty God upon the enemies of his Church, Isai. 63.3. I have trodden the wine
press alone, and of the people there was none with me; for I will tread them in
mine anger, and trample them in my fury.

Verse 16. And he has on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, King of
kings, and Lord of Lords.

Thus it appears, as mystery Babylon the great, the mother of fornications and
abominations of the earth, who ruled over the kings of the earth, who has
committed fornication with her: Her name was written on her forehead, that it
might be known who she was; so this king and great warrior has his name
written on his vesture, and on his thigh, that it may be read and known who he
is, to wit, king of kings, and Lord of lords, the Supreme over all kings, and
Lord over all lords, whose name in his divine nature is the Word of God; Rom^
9.5. And of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, wh^ is over all, God
blessed for ever, Amen. 1 Timothy 6.15. Which in his times he shall show, who is
the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings and Lord of lords. Chap.
17.14. These shall make war with the lamb. and the lamb shall overcome them;
for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings; and they that are with him are
called and chosen, and faithful.

Verse 17. And I saw an Angel standing in the sun.

This imports in open view; even in the open firmament of heaven.

And he cried with a loud voice, saying to all the fowls that fly in the midst
of heaven, come and gather your selves together, unto the supper of the great
God.

Thus John in his vision saw an Angel standing in the open view of all the
fowls of heaven, inviting them to a supper which the great God prepared for
them. This is to set forth the great slaughter that this king and warrior had
made upon his enemies.

Verse 18. That ye may eat the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of captains and
the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sat on them;
and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both small and great.

The foregoing verse having showed the invitation of the fowls of heaven to a
supper prepared for them by the great God. This verse shows what they were to
sup^ upon, to wit, upon the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the
flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sat on them; and
the flesh of all men both free and bond, both small and great. This is to show
the great slaughter that was made by him whose name is called the Word of God;
a name that to man knew but he himself: And he has on his vesture (...) on his
thigh a name written to express his king^^ and lordly domimon over all kings,
and to set forth ^is great victory and conquest in battle; he is not only ^iled
king of kings, and Lord of lords; but also his victorious acts are set forth by
^he great slaughter that he has given his enemies in slaying their kings, and
their captains, and their mighty men, and their horses, and them that sat on
them; yea, a great slaughter upon ^ll men, both free and bond, both small and
great.

Verse 19. And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth and their armies
gathered together, to make war against him that sat on the horse, and against
his army.

This verse declaies who were his enemies that engaged war against him, to wit,
the beast that mystery Babylon rode upon, that great whore the false Church:
And this beast was the persecuting powers of this world, that supported and
upheld said false Church, but persecuted the trae. And these kings of the earth
are the kings of this world, that have committed fornication with this false
Church in joining in with her, being deceived by her; and these armies are the
inhabitants of the earth, that are drunken with the wine of her fornication;
these are they that are gathered together to make war against him whose name is
called the Word of God; for these are they that worship the beast and his
image, and have given a mark in their right hand or in their forehead; that is,
they yielded obedience to the image, or form of worship, set up by the kingly
or magistratical powers of this world. And the armies in heaven that followed
the word of God, are the saints and servants of God, that will not worship the
beast nor his image; that is, they are they that follow the Lamb whithersoever
he goes, and worshipeth the God that made heaven and earth, in spirit and in
truth; and will not observe that form of Godliness set up by the kings and
judges of this world, and carried on by them under the name of worshipping God,
when as it is only the commandments and doctrines of men, being the invention
of that old se^ pent called the devil and satan, Chap. 12.9. And the great
dragon was cast out, that old serpent called the devil and satan, which
deceives the whole world.

Thus the whole world is deceived with this form o^ Godliness, or image of the
beast; but they that dwel^ in heaven refuse to attend it, by reason of which,
pers^cution arises against them, sometimes to the loss of their lives,
sometimes to imprisonment, and taking away the goods, with other punishments,
under pretense of making disturbance and giving offense; and this it is that
occasioneth this war and great battle.

Verse 20. And the beast was taken, and with him the false prophet that wrought
miracle^ before him, with which he deceives them tha^ had received the mark of
the beast, and them that worshipped his image, these both were cast alive into
a lake of fire burning with brimstone.

The foregoing verse shows that the battle was set in array by him that sat
on the horse, whose name is called the Word of God, with his heavenly army And
the beast, and the kings of the earth also, set the battle in array, with their
armies, being the inhabitants of the earth, and this verse gives us an account,
that the beast was taken, that is in a snare, and with him the false prophet,
that wrought miracles before him, with which he deceives them that had
received the mark of the beast, and them that worshipped his Image, and also
that both the beast and the false prophet were cast alive into a lake of fire
burning with brimstone: By the beast is intended the persecuting powers of this
world, or those that support the whore or ralse church, who received their
power to persecute from the dragon, and by their armies is intended those that
stood on his side, to assist him in this battle, to wit the kings of the earth,
with their armies, these were they that stood to assist the beast, or the
persecuting powers, against him that sat on the ^se, as appears also in chap.
17.12, 13, 14. And the (...) horns, which thou saw, are ten kings, these
have one and, and shall give their power and strength unto the beast, these all
make war with the lamb, and the lamb shall overcome them, (...) he is Lord of
lords and king of Kings. And by the false prophet ^at is taken or ensnared with
the beast, is that beast that ^se out of the earth with two horns like a lamb
and he ^ke as a dragon, this beast represents the false prophets, that comes in
sheeps clothing like a lamb with two ^s; which two horns sets forth his
antichristian po^er both his ecclesiastical power, and his magistratical ^wer,
which he has in the hands of the kings of the ^th, to assist him, both powers
proceeding from the ^agon, this is the false prophet here spoken of, which ^th
represent all false prophets, and thus it appears that the false prophets in
union with the kings of the earth who engage war against the Lamb, and against
his army for the defense of the false church, and false worship, taking it for
the true, and persecuting the true, taking it for the false, for it is said
that this false prophet ^ought miracles before the beast, by which he deceived
^em that had received the mark of the beast, and them ^at worshipped his image.
These miracles that the false ^ophet or false prophets did, or do, to deceive
earthly men with, is by their lying signs and wonders to deceive; inso^uch as
if it were possible they would deceive the very ^dect. And these signs and
wonders, or lying miracles to deceive, are their pretenses of Godliness, to
wit, their long prayers, Matthew. 23.14. For ye devour widows houses, and for a
pretense make long prayers, therefore ye shall receive the greater damnation.
This is one lying sign and wonder that hypocrites are wont to act and do, in
public assemblies ^d in the open view of men, as appears Matt. 6.5. contrary
to the Doctrine of Christ taught to his disciples in the first part of said
verse, and in the following verse. ^his is one lying sign and wonder to
deceive, by drawing ^igh to God with their mouths, and honoring him ^ith their
lips, while their hearts is far from him, and thus they make clean the outside
of the cup and platter as appears, Mat. 23.25. But within they are full of
extort^ on and excess, compare this with the 28th verse, even so y^ also
outwardly appear righteous to men; but within ye ar^ full of hypocrysie and
iniquity, This is another lying sign^ and wonder to deceive, as appears 2 Timothy
3.5. Having (...) form of Godlyness but denying the power thereof, from such
turn away. This form of Godliness is the image of the bea^ and this form of
Godliness is another lying sign and wonder to deceive, and does comprehend the
whole frame o^ the image of the beast: for these that the apostle her^
prophetically foretold of, denies the power of Godliness, for the Power of
Godliness is that power that strengthens the saints with might in their inner
man, against the power of sin, it being the spirit of God, by which the
children of God are made free from sin, Ephesians. 3.16. compared with Romans 6.18, 20.
That he would grant you according to the riches of his glory, to be strengthened
with might by hi^ Spirit in the inner man; being then made free from Si^, ye
became servants of righteousness, but now being made fre^ from sin, and become
servants to God ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end everlasting life.
Joh. 8.34, 36. Whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin, if the son
therefore shall make you free ye shall be free indeed, 1 John 5.18. We know
that whosoever is born of God sins not, but he that is begotten of God
keeps himself and that wicked one touchet^ him not. This power of God
manifested in the saints, in destroying the works of the devil, and setting
them free from sin, they deny. And these false prophets are those teachers
spoken of in the 2 Pet. 2. comparing the first verse with the third, But there
were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false
teachers among you, and through coveteousness shall they with feigned wonds
make merchandise of you. This is another lying sign and wonder, o^ a miracle
wrought before the beast, in teaching feigned words of Godliness, by which they
make a gain, or merchandise of the people, And thus they make fire come down
from heaven in the sight of men, by which they deceive them that dwell on the
earth, or earthly minded men, by ^ason of those miracles, and lying signs and
wonders, of ^etended Godliness, which they do in a formal way to ^ceive,
according to what is written, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14, 15. (...) such are false
apostles, deceitful workers, transforming ^emselves into the apostles of
Christ, and no marvel for Satan ^emself is transformed into an angel of light;
therefore it is a great thing if his ministers also be transformed as the
mini^ers of righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works. These
are the characters given us by Christ, and his ^oly apostles to know false
prophets by, which measures ^ll false prophets. These both (says he) by these
both is intended the beast and the false prophet, and by the beast is intended
that power that supports the great whore, or ^lse church, which are the
persecuting powers of this world, and by the false prophet is intended all
false prophets, for all is spoken in the singular number, as thus appears, the
great red dragon measures all devils, the beast measures all ^ersecuting
powers, that upholds the false church, the false ^ophet measures all false
prophets mystery Babylon the great the mother of harlots, measures all false
churches in that one ^me, as Jerusalem which is above measures all the true
churches of christ under that name, chap. 21.9, 10. Come lither I will show
thee the bride the lambs wife, and he ^ewed me the great city the new
Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God, compare this with Gal. 4.26. But
Jerusalem which is above is the mother of us all. These both were cast alive
says he, that is the beast, and the false prophet, were taken as in a snare
captives by him that sat on the white horse, these both were cast alive into a
lake of fire burning with brimstone, this is to set forth their eternal
punishment, into which lake of fire, after them the devil shall be cast into,
for he has a longer time in this world than they have, as may be seen in the
following chapter, verse 10. And the devil that deceives them was cast into
the lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and
shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever. And until this time come,
the earthly powers and false church will continue in a union and engage war
against Christ and his church by persecution.

Verse 21. And the remnant were slain wi^ the sword of him that sat upon the
hor^ which sword proceeded out of his mouth, and a^ the fouls were filled with
their flesh.

The foregoing verse gave us an account, that the be^ was taken, and with him
the false prophet, that wrou^ miracles before him; and that those both were
taken, a^ caft alive into a lake of fire burning with brimsto^ for these are
the leaders of the people that cause the^ err, Isai. 9.16.

Thus it appears that these were taken captives, a tormented in a lake of fire
burning with brimstone, wh^ they shall be tormented day and night for ever and
ev^ Chap. 20.10. It is to be noted, that it does not say, the these were slain
with the sword that proceeded out (...) the mouth of him that sat on the horse,
but that the were both cast alive into the lake of fire burning wi^ brimstone:
But this verse gives us an account that t^ remnant were slain with the sword of
him that sat on t^ horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth, and a^ the
fouls were filled with their flesh. And whereas it sait^ And the remnant were
slain with the sword of him the sat on the horse, which sword proceeded out of
h^ mouth; that is, mystically slain by the word of his pow^ they were so slain
that there was no remainder left ally^ all was now utterly slain and vanquished,
so that now the beast and false prophet is gone into perdition, and destruction
a their aid and armies are mystically slain, and consum^ by the sword or spirit
of his mouth, who sat upon t^ white horse, to the utter destruction and
ruination of t^ enemies of Gods Church; so that now we are come ^ the end of
the beast or persecuting powers, and to the overthrow of the false prophet; so
that there is no no more false prophets left to deceive any more; and the great
whore or false Church is utterly burnt up and co^ ^med by this great conquest
and slaughter; so that the is nothing left but their dead carcases for the
fouls ^ heaven to feed and sup upon; for he that sat on the whi^ ^rse has with
the rod of his mouth smitten the kings ^ the earth, and their armies, that
stood to aid and assist ^e persecuting powers and false prophets, against him
those name is called the word of God, but unknown (...) them; but he with the
breath of his lips has slain ^em, and given rest and quietness unto his Church
and Peo^ from all their enemies; and now having come to the ^th and utter
destruction of mystery Babylon the great ^hore, or false Church we shall in the
next place come (...) the resurrection and glorious flourishing state of the
^ue Church, and married Wife, or Spouse of Christ. And (...) next will be the
devils chaining up.

CHAP. XX.
Verse 1.

And I saw an Angel come down from heaven having the key of the bottom^ess pit,
and a great chain in his hand.

In the latter part of the foregoing Chapter, we had an ^ount of the utter
overthrow of Antichrist, and all his ^erents; and now are entering upon an
account that is ^en us concerning the dragon that old serpent which is ^e devil
and satan.

And I saw an Angel come down from heaven, ( says he.)

An Angel is a messenger, and heaven is God's throne, ^i. 66.1. Thus says the
Lord, the heaven is my throne. ^us it appears, that this messenger or Angel
came from ^e throne of God, having the key of the bottomless pit, ^d a great
chain in his hand. The next verse will show us the use of the great chain, and
after the use of t^ key, and the bottomless pit.

Verse 2. And he laid hold on the dragon that old serpent, which is the devil
and (...) tan, and bound him a thousand years.

Thus it appears that the chain was to chain up the devil for a limited time;
and he is described to be the old serpent, because he beguiled Eve, and so gave
o^ first parents a mortal wound, they being stung by hi^ that had the power of
death.

Verse 3. And cast him into the bottomle^ pit, and shut him up, and set a seal
upon him.

Thus we see the key was to lock him up in the bottomle^ pit: And as to this
bottomless pit, we have an account of ^ in Chap. 9.1.2. And I saw a star fall
from heaven unto the eart and to him was given the key of the bottomless pit,
and he opene^ the bottomless pit, and there arose a smoke out of the pit, (...)
the smoke of a great furnace; and the sun and the air were darkened by reason
of the smoke. This star falling from heaven to the earth, does set forth the
apostatizing (...) the true Church, who fell from her heavenly station (...) an
earthly and carnal state. And to this star that fe^ from heaven to the earth,
was given the key of the bo^ tomless pit; for this falling star was a fit
instrument for the devil to open this bottomless pit of heresy and de^lusion,
to deceive the whole world; so that the smok^ that arose out of it, darkened
the sun and the air. By the sun and the air being darkened by the smoke that
rose ou^ of the bottomless pit, is to signify, that by reason of the apostasy,
the glorious light of the Gospel, which before did shine gloriously, was now
quite darkened, and ant^ christ arose or came out of the smoke like locusts,
the was the beast that ascended out of the bottomless pit^ And the beast with
two horns like a lamb that rose ou^ of the earth, did represent the false
prophets, and antichrist getting head and power.

And set a seal upon him. Thus was his thousand years sentence sealed, speaking
after the manner of men, Dan. 6.7. Mat. 27.66.

That he should deceive the nations no more.

That is, in the time of this thousand years of the saints ^igning with Christ,
as he had before done by opening this bottomless pit of heresy and delusion,
by which ^e had deceived the nations, till now he himself is shut up in it a
prisoner from deceiving the nations, where he ^ust be kept,

Till the thousand years be fulfilled, and after that he must be loosed for a
little season.

As in the seventh, eighth, and ninth verses of this Chapter, And shall go out
to deceive the nations, etc. But it will be by another kind of stratagem.

Verse 4. And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given
unto them.

John here declares three things which (...) saw in his ^ifion. The first is,
he saw thrones; and secondly says he, ^d they sat on them, not declaring who
they were that ^t on them; neither could he till the vision had made (...)
known to him who they were; and thirdly, Judgment (...) given unto them, says
he, for judgment belongs to them that sit upon thrones.

And I saw the souls of them that were be^eaded for the witness of Jesus, and
for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image,
neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands.

This is a plain description that they were the saints ^d servants of God, that
were be headed for the wit^ess of Jesus, and for the word of God, and his
faithful Church, in that they had not worshipped the beast, neither his image,
neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands. And a
second thing is,

And they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years.

So that it appears it was the Church of Christ, that sat upon them thrones;
and that now judgment was given unto them. And this thousand years reign with
Christ is the thousand years that the devil is chained and locked up in the
bottomless pit a prisoner; and this thousand years begins when the beast or the
antichristian powers and the false prophet, which represents all false
prophets) are said to be taken, that is in a snare, and cast alive into a lake
of fire, burning with brimstone, and all their adherents slain with the sword
of him that sat upon the white horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth
whose name is called the Word of God, as in the two last verses of the
foregoing Chapter: And the very next thing in the first second and third verses
of this Chapter, is showed the chaining up of the devil in the bottomless pit.
This is the time of this thousand years of the Churches reigning with Christ.

Verse 5. But the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years are
finished. This is the first resurrection.

By the rest of the dead is intended, those that were bodily dead shall not
live again until the thousand years be finished; for it will be after these
thousand years that the resurrection of the body will be; and the truth of this
will appear toward the end of this Chapter: This is the first resurrection
says the Apostle; this first resurrection (...) is interested in but only the
Church of Christ, for says the Apostle, but the rest of the dead lived not
again until the thousand years were finished; which imports it is such a
resurrection, that only those that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and
for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the beast neither his image,
neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands, that
shall come to this happy enjoyment, to ^ive and reign with Christ in the time
of this thousand years; and that the rest of the dead lived not until the
thousand years shall be finished; and it is called the first resurrection, in
respect that the saints are partakers of a twofold resurrection, that is to
say, a resurrection out of a state of sin, into a state of holiness; and this
is a resurrection that goes before the resurrection of the body, spoken of by
our savior, Joh. 5.25. Verily, verily I say unto you, the hour is coming and
now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of God, and they that
hear shall live. Ephesians. 2. comparing the first verse with the sixth, And you has
he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins. And has raised us up
together, and made us to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. This
is the first resurrection, which all saints have a part in. But this prophecy
has relation to a time of a general resurrection of the Church of Christ,
after a long time of their death and sorrow; and of their flourishing state
that shall follow for the space of a thousand years in this world. As to their
death, it may be thus considered: The Church of Sardis did so decay and dye
from that spiritual life that they were once in, that they had a name to live
when in truth they were dead, Chap. 3.1. And after this we read of a star that
fell from heaven, which the third trumpet gave notice of, and it fell upon the
third part of the rivers, and upon the fountains of waters, and so imbittered
them, that many men died of the waters, because they were made bitter; this was
by drinking in corrupt doctrine, which this falling star brought into the
Church, by reason of which many in the Church decayed and dyed from that
spiritual life which before they lived in, when they were nourished with living
fountains of water, which was good and wholesome doctrine. Thus death and
darkness came upon the Church, and great miseries and afflictions followed; so
that she came to be trodden under foot, and prophesied a long time clothed in
sackloth; and their dead bodies was seen to lie in the street of the great city,
which was spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, and where also our Lord was
crucified; and her enemies did rejoice over her, and did overcome her, and did
kill her: This was her death. But we are now come to such a time and age of the
world, that all her enemies are now subdued, and the day of her rising, living,
and reigning with Christ is come, and will continue a long time, that is for
the space of a thousand years. The prophet Ezekiel did prophecy of the very
resurrection of the church under the type of the Jews captivity in Babylon, and
their return into their own land, Ezekiel. 37. comparing the fore part of the
chapter with the 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. (...), So I pr^phesiea as he c^mmanded me,
and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood upon their feet, an
exceeding great army, then he said unto me, Son of (...) these bones are the
whole house of Israel, behold they say our bones are dried, and our hope is
lost, we are cut off for our part, prophesy therefore and say unto them, thus
says the Lord God, behold O my people I will open your graves, and cause you
to come out of your graves, and bring you into the land of Israel, and ye shall
know that I am the Lord, when I have opened your graves, O my people, and
brought you up out of your graves, and shall put my spirit in you, and ye shall
live, and I shall place you in your land. This propnesie speaks of the churches
coming out of her captivity, oppressions, and sorrows, and of this first and
general resurrection, into this happy and holy state which John here saw in his
vision.

Verse 6. Blessed and holy is he, that has part in the first resurrection.

^ere is two things to be noted, the first is, they are in a blessed state of
holiness that have part in the first re(...) and therefore

On such the second death has no power.

Herein their blessedness consists, in respect that the second death has no
power. And they cannot have part in the first resurrection, till they are
delivered, and risen out of a state of sin, and are come into a state of
holiness and all this must be on this side the grave, for the second death is
inflicted after the resurrection of the body, as may be seen in the 13 and 14
verses of this chapter.

But they shall be priests of God and of ^rist^

All that are risen with Christ have a part in this (...) resurrection, and so
are become a royal priesthood, ^d an holy nation, 1 Pet. 2.9. But ye are a
chosen gene^tion, a royal priesthood, an holy nation. Chap. 5.10. And (...)
made us unto our God Kings and priests, and we shall (...) on earth.

And shall reign with him a thousand years.

This relates particularly to this prophecy, speaking to ^em that shall see,
and be in the enjoyment of that ^essed day of the Churches reigning with
Christ; a ^ousand years, by enjoying his divine presence and pro^ction, from
all their enemies, as he appeared in his di^ine presence, as a warrior riding
on a white horse, those name was called the word of God, to conquer ^d subdue
all their enemies, and by faith they warred un(...) him till they became
conquerers, and got the victo^y over all their enemies by faith.

Verse 7. And when the thousand years are expired, satan shall be loosed out of
his ^rison.

By this verse it appears that the devils thousand ^rs imprisonment, and the
churches thousand years reign with Christ is one and the same time.

Verse 8. And shall go out to deceive the ^ations, which are in the four
quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog.

Thus it appears that the devil is no sooner let loose, but is immediately in
mischief, contriving to destroy the church of God, by deceiving the nations
that a^ in the four quarters of the earth, (...) stirring them up to battle,
against the church of God, which did happen to their utter destruction,. And
the spirit of the Lord in this ^ace, seems to allude from the stock of Japheth
the ^on of Noah, by these two names Gog and Magog, both ^in this proph^e, and
also by the prophet Ezekiel, who prophesied of this first general resurrection
of the church and also of this battle against the church, Gog was the chief
prince of Meseck, and Tubal, who were two of Ja^pheth's sons, Genesis 10.2.
compared with Ezekiel. 38.3. A^ also Ezekiel 39.1. And Magog was one of Japheth's
sons. Genesis 10.2. and the 5th verse ^heweth that by the sons o^ Japheth, were
the Isles of the Gentiles divided in their lands, every one after their tongue,
and Gog was the chie^ prince of Meseck, and Tubal, the Sons of Japheth, and
Magog was one of Japheth's sons, and the title of the land was put upon him,
Ezekiel. 38.2. Thus Gog was the chie^ prince, and Magog had the title of the land;
and Gomer was another of Japheth's sons, who was the Father of Togar^mah as
appears, Genesis 10.3. compared with Exek. 38.6, By these the isles of the
Gentiles divided in their lands every one after his tongue, after their
families in their nations, as in the 5th verse. The earth being thus
replenished by the stock of Japheth, so that the isles of the Gentiles was
divided in their lands. This may be the reason why the spirit of the Lord
alludes from them, to express this great army by, which the devil stirs up
against the church of God, under the name of Gog and Magog, to express and set
forth this great army by which the devil here deceives, and gathers together,
to cut off the church of God. Thus we see the devil is no sooner out of his
prison, but goes out to deceive all the nations, which are in the four quarters
of the earth,

To gather them to battle.

Against the church of God, even a numberless army as the sand of the sea.

Verse 9. And they went upon the breadth of the earth.

This sets forth the numberless army, by their going upon the breadth of the
earth.

And compassing the camp of the saints about and the beloved city.

To wit, the new Jerusalem, the city of the living God; but they met with a
hurtful success, for

Fire came down from God out of heaven ^d devoured them.

Thus as the old world was destroyed by water, so has ^od determined to
destroy this wicked world by fire, Pet. 3.5, 6, 7. For this they willingly are
ignorant of, that (...) the word of God the heavens were of old, and the earth
^ding out of the water, and in the water, whereby the ^orld that then was,
being overflowed with water perished, ^t the heavens and the earth which are
now, by the same and are kept in store, res^rved unto fire, against the day of
^dgment and Perdition of ungodly men. This is the last ^struction in this life
of mankind.

Verse 10. And the devil that deceived them ^as cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be tormented
day and night for ever and ^ever.

This Them that the devil deceived, was the nations, (...) wit, Gog and Magog,
in stirring them up to cut off ^e camp of the saints, the city of God; and this
was ^he devils last enterprise; for now the time of his torment ^s come, and he
is cast into the lake that burns with ^re and brimstone, where the beast and
the false prophet ^re; and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever.
By the beast and false prophet, is intended the per^cuting powers, and the
false prophets, which are in uni(...) together. And the devils time in this
world, is to ^be above a thousand years longer, then theirs, as by this
prophecy does appear.

Verse 11. And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose
face the ^arth and the heaven fled away, and there was ^ound no place for them.

And I saw a great white throne. Here is two things to ^e observed: The first
is, this throne which was great ^oth set forth the greatness of him that sat
upon it: And the second is, it was a white throne; this is t^ set forth the
glorious Majesty of him that sat on it.

And he that sat on it, from whose face the earth an^ the heaven fled away, and
there was found no place for them. Here is three observable things: The first
is, the majesty of him that sat on the throne was most terrible yea, it is set
forth to be so terrible, that the earth an^ heaven fled away from before his
face: And secondly what are we to understand by the earth and heaven flying
away; we are to understand the dissolution of the earth and the heaven which
are now in being, as the scripture does plentifully show us, 2 Pet. 3.10, 11,
12. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise^ and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein, shall be burnt up.
Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved, what manne^ of persons
ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godliness, looking for and
bastening unto, the coming of the day of God, wherein the heavens being on fire
shall be dissolved and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, Heb. 1.10,
11, 12.

And there was found no place for them. This shows to us, the nulliating both
the earth and the heavens that now are in being. And there was found no place
for them. This shows that then this world will be come to its end, and be no
more.

Verse 12. And I saw the dead small and great, stand before God.

This shows us that it is God Almighty, that sits on this great throne; and
that we are now come to the vision of the great and last day of judgment, where
all must appear before the judgment seat of God Almighty, both small and great,
to give an account of the deeds done in the body, according to that he has
done, whether it be good or bad. This is a very awful and dreadful day, to be
considered by all the sons and daughters of Adam, that are yet on this side the
grave; to consider the at terror of the Lord, this mighty Judge, that will ^s a
most doleful and dreadful sentence of eternal dam^ion to every guilty soul,
that shall at that day stand ^ore his great and glorious majesty, sitting on
the throne (...) his judgment seat; for this will be their sentence, De^t from
me ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the (...) and his angels.

And the books were opened.

These books are the books of Conscience, that shall be witness against the
guilty; the accuser will be a man's (...) thoughts, the witness will be his own
conscience, (...) accordingly the Judge will pass sentence.

And another book was opened, which is the ^ok of life.

This is a book of Justification, through faith in the blood (...) the Lamb of
God, for where remission of sins is, there ^ains no longer any guilt upon the
conscience. And ^ch as these that have obtained remission of sins, their ^es
are written in this book of life; and to these, the ^ng and judge will say,
Come ye blessed of my father, in^it the kingdom prepared for you, etc. And
these shall (...) into everlasting life and happiness, yea, into endless (...)
and glory.

And the dead were judged out of those ^ings which were written in the books,
ac^ding to their works.

This is to set forth the justice and equity that shall be (...) in this court
of heaven, to every man according to is works, here expressed under the
similitude of a true ^cord of things, being written in a book, that a true ^d
just account may appear at the day of reckoning.

Verse 13. And the sea gave up the dead ^ich were in it, and death and the
grave ^livered up the dead which were in them.

This is to set forth the certainty of the resurrection the body; so that all
that were buried in the sea, the (...) now gave them up; and all that death had
taken away out of the land of the living, and those that (...) graves had
received, they now deliver them up to (...) Judge.

And they were judged every man accordi^ to their works.

This is to set forth the equal justice done to every (...) according to his
works.

Verse 14. And death and hell were c^ into the lake of fire. This is the seco^
death.

By death and hell, is intended such as were dead in the sins, at the same time
when they died bodily, they (...) having a part in the first resurrection; so
that death a^ hell intends all those whose names were not written (...) the
book of life; these are cast into a lake of fire; t^ is the second death. Thus
it appears, that the death (...) the body is the first death; and that eternal
punishm^ set forth by the lake of fire, is the second death.

Verse 15. And whosoever was not fou^ written in the book of life, was cast
into t^ lake of fire.

By not being found written in the book of life, is (...) vended such as were
not dead to sin, and so had not rec^ ved the quickening spirit of God to
quicken them (...) life before they departed this life; and so had no part
(...) the first resurrection, they not having been risen with Ch^ out of a
state of sin, before the first death, or death (...) the body; so that all such
as these shall be cast into the la^ of fire.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse 1.

ANd I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first
earth ^ere passed away, and there was no more (...).

In the 11th verse of the foregoing chapter, John in his ^on saw the earth, and
the heaven, that now is in be(...), when it fled away; and there was found no
place for ^m, now in this verse he declares how that he saw a new ^ven, and a
new earth, for says he, the first heaven and (...) first earth were passed
away; that is, this visible hea(...) and earth that is now in being, then will
be dissolved (...) cease to be any more. And a new world will then be^ted, and
this is plentifully declared (...) other places of ^ipture, as these following
places of scripture may suf(...) to evidence the truth of it, Isai. 65.17. For
behold I ^ate new heavens and a new earth, and the former shall (...) not be
remembered, neither come into mind. Isai. 56.22, (...) as the new heavens, and
the new earth, which I will ^ke, shall remain before me says the Lord, so
shall your and and your name remain. 2 Pet. 3.13. Nevertheless we according to
his promise look for new heavens, and a new ^arth. Heb. 2.5. For unto the
angels has he not put in ^ubjection the world to come, whereof we speak. Ephesians.
1.20. (...). Which he wrought in Christ Jesus, when he vaised him from the
dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly ^aces, far above all
principality, and power, and might and every name that is named, not only in
this world, but also in that which is to come. Mat. 12.32. But whoso^ speaks
against the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiv^ him, neither in this world,
neither in the world to come. The scriptures with many more, evidenceth, that
the who^ creation shall be delivered from the bondage of corrupt on, into the
glorious liberty of the children of God.

And there was no more sea, says the apostle John, all the I shall say to this
is, 2 Pet. 1.20. Knowing this first, the no prophecy of the scripture is of
any private interpretation from this evidence of scripture, I take the apostle
John words, to intend nothing else, but as they are spoken, to w^ and there was
no more sea, that is, after this world sha^be ended.

Verse 2. And I John saw the holy city new Jerusalem coming down from God out
o^ heaven, prepared as a Brid^ adorned for he^ husband.

In the foregoing verse John saw a new heaven and new earth, after the heaven
and the earth that now (...) was passed away, and in this verse he saw the holy
ci^ ty new Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven prepared as a bride
adorned to meet her husband; this i^ to show that the church of Christ is come
from God, t^ enter into the enjoyment of her inheritance, to enjoy the works of
God's hand, which is prepared for her; for the new creation is made to be the
inheritance of the saint^ under Christ, who is the second Adam, and is the heir
o^ God, being his only begotten son, and his first born, an^ is the head and
husband of this bride coming from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride
adorned to meet he^ husband. As to his being God's first born son, appear^ Romans
8.29. That he might be the first born among many brethren. And as he is the
first born son of God. So he i^ heir of God, to wit, of this new creation, Heb.
1.1, 2. G^ has in th^e last days spoken to us by his son, whom (...) has
appointed heir of all things. Heb. 2.5. For unto the Angels, has he not put
into subjection the world to com^ whereof we speak. But unto his son he has
determined (...) put into subjection the world which is to come; and ^e is now
the heir of it. And the children of God, are ^int heirs with him, of this new
creation, Romans 8.17. And (...) children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint
heirs with Christ. And for the proof that he is the bridegroom of ^his bride
that came from God out of heaven, to live (...) the possession of this new
creation with the Lord Je^us (who is her head and husband) does appear in the
^iath verse of this Chapter; for the Angel said to John, Come hither, I will
show thee the bride the lambs wife. And (...) name new Jerusalem is derived
from Jerusalem of old, which was a figure of her; for this new Jerusalem is the
city of the living God, as appears, Heb. 12.22. But ye are (...) unto mount
Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; for in this
holy city is the throne of God, and of the lamb, chap. 22.3. But the throne of
God ^d of the lamb shall be in it.

Verse 3. And I heard a great voice out of ^eaven, saying, behold the
tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be
his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.

The foreg^ang verse shows us, that the holy city new ^usalem, came from God
out of heaven, prepared as a ^ide adorned for her husband, after the new
creation was prepared for her to be her inheritance, now in this verse John
declares how he heard a great voice out of heaven ^ying, behold the tabernacle
of God is with men, and he will dwell with them. A tabernacle is a tent to
dwell in, ^ed this tabernacle of God, that is to say the name of it, is derived
from the tabernacle which Moses pitched in the wilderness, where God's presence
was seen with his people in that figure, but this is the true tabernacle which
God ^ath pitched and not man, he having prepared himself ^n house, an
habitation in this new creation, that he may ^well with them, declaring that
they shall be his people, and that God himself will dwell with them, and be
their God, for this is the true tabernacle and an antity^e of that tabernacle
which Moses pitched in the wilderness, but the tabernacle which God has
pitched, and not man, is t^ saints bodies, which is God's tabernacle to dwell
in, 2 C^ 6.16. For ye are the temple of the living God, as God (...) said I
will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will their God, and they shall be
my people. Thus God pro^ seth how that they shall enjoy his presence in this
new c^ ation.

Verse 4. And God shall wipe away a^ tears from their eyes, and there shall be
(...) more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neithe^ shall there be any more
pain, for the form^ things are passed away.

This verse contains five gracious promises which G^ makes to his people, the
first is, that God will wipe aw^ all tears from their eyes, the second is in
this new creation there shall be no more death, and thirdly neither sorrow, an^
fourthly nor crying; and fifthly a promise is here made that there shall be no
more pain, and lastly God declaret^ to them, how that the former things are
passed away; the is the things of this world, will then be all past an^ gone.

Verse 5. And he that sat upon the thron^ said, Behold I make all things new:
And h^ said unto me, write; for these words are tru^ and faithful.

This He that says to John, Behold I make all things ne^ is he that John spoke
of in the 11th verse of the foregoing Chapter, saying, And I saw a great white
throue, and (...) that sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven
(...) away: That is, this visible heaven and earth that is now in being. But
now he that sat on the throne, says, Behold I make all things new; and also
gives John (...) charge to write these things, testifying to him, that these
words are true and faithful. And this charge to John, to Write these things,
and God's testimony to the truth o^ them, i^ that we should give the more heed
to them.

Verse 6. And he said unto me, It is done^ (...) am Alpha and Omega.

This is a confirmation of the truth of God's purpose concerning these things,
as if they were already done; for ^th John, he says unto me it is done; that
is, God ^t sat upon the throne said so; and further says, I am ^pha and Omega,

The Beginning and the end.

Thus God signifies to John, that he is both first and (...), so that none can
hinder or stop God's purpose con^ing these things, relating to the saints
ever^ing inheritance, according to Paul's testimony, Ephesians. 1.(...). In him also
we have obtained an inheritance, being ^destinated according to the purpose of
him, who works (...) things after the counsel of his own will. This working
(...) things after the counsel of his won will, relates to ^ese things in
particular, concerning his own works, and ^dates to nothing acted or done by
the creature.

I will give unto him that is athirst, of the ^untain of the water of life
freely.

This is God's free and voluntary promise to encourage (...) sons and daughters
of men to come and be partak(...) of this blessed promise; making an absolute
promise (...) every one that thirsts, to give unto him the fountain (...) the
water of life, and that freely.

Verse 7. He that overcomes shall inherit (...) things; and I will be his God,
and he ^all be my son.

That is, my heir; for the son is the fathers heir. Here (...) another gracious
promise which God makes to every (...) that overcomes; that is that he shall
inherit all ^ings; that is, all things that are here spoken of and promised by
God.

Verse 8. But the fearful and unbelieving, ^d the abominable, and murderers,
and whore^ongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all liars, shall have their
part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone; which is the second
death.

As in the foregoing verse God makes gracious promise to those that overcome,
that they shall inherit all the happy things before promised, so on the
contrary (...) this verse he threatens the fearful (that is the guilty and
unbelievers, and the abominable, and murderers, a^ whoremongers, and sorcerers,
and idolaters, and all ly^ that they shall have their part in the lake which
burn^ with fire and brimstone, which is the second death; (...) this second
death is an eternal Judgment. And thus (...) are come to the end of the
prophecy of this world, a^ to the finishing of the new creation, or the world
to co^ which will be the everlasting inheritance of the sai^ with gracious
promises made to those that shall overcom^ and also threatenings made to the
wicked that presume (...) live in sin.

And now follows another Vision relating to t^ state of the Church of Christ,
concerning i^ flourishing state in this world, after its long o^ pression and
distresses.

Verse 9. And there came unto me one of the seven Angels, which had the seven
vials full (...) the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying Come hither
I will show thee the bride the lambs wife.

From hence we may observe, that this Angel was o^ of the seven Angels which
had the seven vials full of t^ seven last plagues. These plagues were the
judgments (...) God executed upon the great whore or false Church, a^ this
Angel was one of them that executed the last ju^ ments that were executed. And
when the work was ov^ so that her destruction was come, one of the execution^
comes now to show John the happy state of the t^ church and Spouse of Christ,
and what glorious time^ ^ould now follow the downfall of Antichrist, and the
^ing and advancement of the true Church. So in like ^anner one of the seven
Angels that had the seven vials ^me to John and showed him the pomp and glory
that the ^eat whore the false Church was in, and withal showed ^m her utter
destruction and overthrow. And his coming (...) John was in like manner as this
Angel does, as is (...) be seen Chap. 17.1, etc. There came one of the seven
^gels, which had the seven vials, and talked with me, say^ (...), Come hither,
I will show unto thee the Judgment of the ^eat whore, etc. So he carried me
away in the spirit into (...) wilderness, etc. But into a great and high
mountain, ^ew him the true Church, as in the next verse ap^reth.

Verse 10 And he carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high mountain,
and showed ^e that great city, the the holy Jerusalem, de^ending out of heaven
from God.

In the like manner did the Angel to John, in showing him (...) false Church,
as may be seen Chap. 17.3. So he carried (...) away in the spirit into the
wilderness, and I saw a woman (...) upon a scarlet colored beast, full of
names of blasphe(...), having seven heads and ten horns. From hence we may
^serve, that the Angel carried John to a great and high ^untain to show him the
true Church: This mountain ^the mountain of God's strength, that this city
stands upon, (...) Christ says, A city that is set on an hill cannot be hid,
^at. 5.14. And secondly, we may observe that the Angel (...) John into the
wilderness to see the false Church, (...) saw her sitting upon a scarlet
colored beast, full of ^es of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten hor^ ^m
hence we may observe, that the false Church is in the ^ilderness; that is, she
is in a bewildered state. Secondly, (...) saw her sitting upon a scarlet
colored beast: The scar(...) colored beast is the persecuting powers of this
world, which supports and upholds her. And we may ^ther con^er, that John saw
the true Church, descending from God out of heaven. But John saw the false
Church coming out of the smoke of the bottomless pit, Chap. 9.3. and out (...)
the earth, Chap. 13.11. Thus it appears, that the tr^ Church was born of God,
and so came from God; and the the false Church came out of the earth, and
therefore (...) earthly. The true Church is compared to a great city under the
name of new Jerusalem, which name is derive^ from Jerusalem the city of David,
so the false church is also compare^ to a great city under the name of great
Babylon, which name isderiv^ from old Babylon, the oppressor of God's Church,
Chap. 17.18, compared with Chap. 18.21. And the woman whi^ thou saw is that
great city, which reigns over the kings (...) the earth. And a mighty Angel
took up a stove, like a great (...) stone, and cast it in to the sea, saying,
Thus with violence shall the great city Babylon be thrown down, and shall be
found no mo^ Now we are come to see the utter destruction of the fal^ Church:
And in the next place we shall come to see the glo^ and everlasting happiness
of the true Church.

Verse 11. Having the glory of God, and he^ light was like unto a stone most
precious, eve^ like a jasper stone, clear as crystal.

Having the glory of God, says the Apostle; that is, Go^ has glorified her
with his own glory. And her light (...) like unto a stone most precious, even
like a Jasper stone, cl^ as crystal. Thus the true Church arises after the
fall (...) the great whore and her daughters, in great splendour an^ brightness,
her light being set forth like a precious sto^ as clear as crystal, as Christ
says to his Church, Ye (...) the light of the world, Mat. 5.14.

Verse 12. And had a wall great and high.

This wall great and high is to set forth the Salvati^ of God, by which she is
secured, preserved, protected, a^ defended, by the strength and power of God
Almighty, Is^ 26.1, 2. In that day shall this song be sung, In the land (...)
Judah we have a strong city, Salvation will God appoint f^ walls and bulwarks.
Open ye the gates that the righteo^ nation which keeps the truths may enter
in.

And had twelve gates.

These twelve gates are to set forth the first entrance in^ the city.

And at the twelve gates twelve Angels, and ^mes written thereon, which are the
names of ^e twelve tribes of the children of Israel.

These twelve Angels are the twelve sons of Jacob, which ^ere the Elders of the
twelve tribes of Israel, who had the (...) entrance into the city. And
therefore the 12 gates re^sented the twelve tribes of Israel.

Verse 13. On the east three gates, on the forth three gates, and on the south
three gates, ^d on the west three gates.

These twelve gates represented the twelve tribes of Israel, (...) appears in
the foregoing verse, by their names written ^on.

Verse 14. And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them the
names of the twelve Apostles of the lamb.

These twelve foundations that the wall stands upon, are (...) the twelve
Apostles of the Lamb; as appears by their ^es written therein, Ephesians. 2.19, 20.
Now therefore ye are (...) more strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens
with the ^ts, and of the household of God; and are built upon the foundation of
the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself ^ing the chief corner stone.
This was Paul's writing to the relieving Gentiles, signifying to them, that now
upon their conciliation to God by Jesus Christ, they are no longer ^angers nor
foreigners, but fellow citizens with the saints; (...) are now come to be of
the household and family of God ^th Israel, and are built upon the foundations
of this city.

Verse 15. And he that talked with me, had (...) golden Reed to measure the
city, and the gates thereof, and the walls thereof.

The golden reed which is to measure the city, is the spirit of God, which only
can measure these spiritual ^ings; and the golden reed was to measure the city,
and the ^ates thereof, and the wall thereof, even the whole, and every part of
it.

Verse 16. And the city lies fore square, an^ the length is as large as the
breadth, and the me^ sured the city with the reed, twelve thousa^ furlongs the
length, and the breadth, and the height of it are equal.

The latter part of this verse as it is here translated, do^ not seem to agree
with the mystery it holds forth, for as (...) had twelve gates, so at the
twelve gates were twelve angel which was the twelve elders of the twelve tribes
of Isra^ which the gates did represent, and the twelve foundation did represent
the twelve Apostles which were twelve elde^ more. And the whole measure of the
city, in all dimension does represent the hundred and forty four thousand seal^
ones, spoken of in the 7th chapter. Twelve thousand being sealed out of every
tribe for they are the jasper precio^ stones that the city are built with. And
I have seen t^ latter part of the verse thus translated as some copies rea^ And
he measured the city with the reed, a hundred forty for thousand furlongs, the
length, and the breadth, and the heig^ of it are equal, this is in all
dimensions, which does agr^ with the mystery it does hold forth, for the city
is the se^ led ones, for these sealed ones measures the whole church (...) city
here spoken of, as in chap. 14.1. compared with chap. 22.4. And I looked and lo
a lamb stood on the mount Sion, a^ with him an hundred and forty four thousand,
having (...) fathers name written on their foreheads. And they shall (...) his
face and his name shall he in their forehead: for twelve thousand out of every
tribe, makes this number, and by the number is the whole city measured, for on
this mount Si^ does this city stand, for its name is derived from mou^ Sion,
the city of David, and upon this mount Sion stood a^ the sealed ones with the
lamb, chap. 14.1. compared with Heb 12.22. But ye are come unto mount Sion, and
unto t^ city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; For it is the visible
things under the first covenant, or national Church of the Jews, that were the
types and figures of these spiritual things and therefore their names are taken
from those things under the fi^ Co^enant or national Church of the Jews; as for
instance the inward Jew, Romans 2.29. The Israel of God, Gal. (...) (...) The
circumcision of the heart, Romans 2.29. If ye be Christ's (...) are ye Abraham's
seed, Gal. 3.20. The true tabernacle, ^b. 8.2. Ye are the temple of God, 1 Cor.
3.16. The holy (...) the new Jerusalem, Rev. 21.2. Thefree woman, Gal. 4.30.
(...) are lively stones, 1 Pet. 2.5. And there was seen in his temple the (...)
of his testament, Rev. 11.19. Ministers of the new Coven(...), 2 Cor. 3.6.
Written on the fleshly tables of the heart, 2 Cor. (...) 3. Our passover is
sacrificed for us, 1 Cor. 5.7. Thus these ^mes with many more, are derived from
the original figures (...) types of spiritual things, held forth under the
national ^urch of Israel.

Verse 17. And he measured the wall thereof, (...) hundred and forty four
cubits, according to ^he measure of a man, that is of the Angel.

And he measured the wall (that is, the thickness or breadth (...) the wall) an
hundred and forty and four cubits. This ^all standing upon twelve foundations,
which are the twelve Apostles, the breadth of the wall is expressed to be
twelve ^es twelve, which makes just an hundred and forty four, twelve to every
foundation; so that the whole measure of ^is holy city runs upon the number
twelve; for it is the inha^tants that makes this city; and it is the city of
the great king.

Verse 18. And the building of the wall of (...) was of jasper.

This jasper was a precious stone that this city was ^ilt with; yea, of living
jasper stones, which measures ^d represents the hundred and forty and four
thousand sealed ^es, twelve thousand out of every tribe, which represents (...)
the citizens, even the whole city; for the building of God's city or temple
must be with that which is most ^ecious, 1 Pet. 2.5. Ye also as lively stones
are built up a ^itual house. (...) Cor. 3.12. Now if any man build upon this
foundation, gold, silver, precious stones. These scriptures al^udes from the
temple built by Solomon, which was a type of God's house.

And the city was pure gold, like unto clear glass.

Which imports not drossy, but pure gold. This is to set forth the purity,
glory and splendour of God's Church or city, with its perfections, virtue and
purity. When the Church did apostatize, and fall from her state of purity the
Spirit of God did express her state by contrary things as may be seeen by these
Scriptures, Isai. 1.21. How is the faithful city become an harlot, etc. Thy
silver is become dros^ thy wine mixed with water. Jer. 6.28, etc. They are all
grievous revolters, walking with slanders; they are brass and iron they are all
corrupters, etc. reprobate silver shall men ca^ them. Ezekiel. 22.18. Son of man,
the house of Israel is (...) me become dross, all they are brass and tin, and
iron, and lead in the midst of the furnace, they are even the drosses (...)
silver.

Verse 19, 20. And the foundation of the wall of the city was garnished with
all manner of precious stones, etc.

In these two verses is mentioned twelve precious ston^ which the foundations
of this city is garnished with, i^ having twelve foundations, and every
foundation garnished with a several sort of precious stone. By these precious
stones is intended the twelve Apostles of the lamb.

Verse 21. And the twelve gates were twelve pearls, every several gate was of
one pearl.

These gates or pearls were the twelve elders of the tribes of Israel, every
one of them set forth by a several pearl.

And the street of the city was pure gold, as it were transparent glass.

This is to set forth how glorious the Church or city of God is within, ( Psalm.
45.13.) where God's throne is, and the throne of the Lamb, before whose throne
there is a sea of glass, as may be seen Chap. 4.6. And before the throne, there
is a sea of glass, like unto crystal. And upon the destruction of that great
city called mystery Babylon, and the repairing of this holy city, which was
trodden under foot, as appears Chap. 11.2. These that had gotten the victory
over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of
his name, John saw standing on this sea of glass, having the harps of God, and
singing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying,
Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy
ways, thou king of saints, Chap. 15.1, 2.

Verse 22. And I saw no temple therein, for the Lord God Almighty, and the lamb
are the temple of it.

Thus the Church has its dwelling in God, for God and the lamb are the temple
of it. Thus God's people dwell in God, and God in them: They are the city of
God, so that God dwells in them; and God Almighty and the lamb is their
temple; so that their dwelling is also in God, according to Christ's word's,
Joh. 14.20. At that day ye shall know, that I am in my father, and you in me,
and I in you. This is the blessed union that is between Christ and his Church,
God in his people.

Verse 23. And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine
in it; for the glory of the Lord did lighten it, and the lamb is the light
thereof.

This verse does set forth that excellent light that the Church of Christ
enjoys, and is in, when she is in a state of purity and holiness; for then she
lives in the enjoyment of that light, which does so much excel the light of the
sun and moon, so as that they are spoken of as altogether useless. After this
manner does the prophet Isaiah set forth the glorious light of the Lord so much
to excel the light of the sun and moon, as to shame and confound them, when he
shines forth in his Church, Isai. 24.23. Then the noon shall be confounded, and
the sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Sion, and in
Jerusalem, and before his ancients gloriously. This is the Jerusalem, the city
which this prophet speaks of, alluding from the figure, Isai. 60.1, 2, 3.
compared with the 19th and 20th verses. Arise, shine, for thy light is come,
and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee; for behold darkness shall cover
the earth, and gross darkness the people, but the Lord shall arise upon thee,
and his glory shall be seen upon thee; and the Gentiles shall come to thy
light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising; the sun shall be no more thy
light by day, neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto thee, but
the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory; the
sun shall no more go down, neither thy moon withdraw it self, for the Lord
shall be thine everlasting light. All these Scriptures are to set forth the
great glory of the Church, when she shall arise in the beauty of holiness, then
will the Lord arise and shine upon her, far more excellently than all the
bright lights of heaven.

Verse 24. And the nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of
it, and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honor into it.

This verse shows how that through the glorious state of the church shining
so excellently, by reason of her virtues, beauty, and holiness, so that the
nations which are saved shall walk in the light of this city, and her glory
shall be so seen that the kings of the earth shall set so light by their h^nour
and glory that this world does afford them, that they shall bring it into this
city, esteeming the honor and glory of it so far to excel the fading and
perishing honor and glory of this world, so that they shall bring their glory
and honor to this city.

Verse 25. And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day, for there shall
be no night there.

By the gates not being shut at all by day there being no night there, is to
show that the gates stand open continually; as a token of God's rich mercy and
grace, as if he stood with open arms to embrace, and to receive all into this
holy city, that will come, out of their sins, and come into a state of
holiness, that thereby they may have free entrance into his love and favor.

Verse 26. And they shall bring the glory and honor of the nations into it.

This is to set forth the excellent state and glory of this city, above all the
glory and honor of this world, so that the nations of the earth shall see it,
and bring their glory and honor to it, to honor it therewithal, which is to
show the unvaluable glory and honor of it, above the honor and glory of this
world, which they shall set light by.

Verse 27. And there shall in no wise enter into it, any thing that defiles,
neither whosoever works abomination, or makes a lie, but they which are
written in the lamb's book of life.

Here is two things to be observed, the first is, though the gates of this city
stand open, north south, east, and west, as ^token of God's mercy and rich
grace to the world, yet nothing is suffered to enter in, that defiles, neither
whosoever works abomination, or makes a lie. And secondly, It must be only
such as have liberty from the lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the
world, for they must obtain favor from the lamb of God, to have entrance in,
by having their names written in his book of life; so that by the lamb of God
that takes away the sin of the world, they may have free entrance into this
city of the living God, the great king, which city is the bride the lambs wife,
which he has purchased with his own blood, Ephesians. 5.26, 27. That (...) might
sanctify and cleanse it, with the washing of water by the word, that he might
present it to himself, a glorious church, ^ot having spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing but that it should (...) holy and without blemish.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse 1.

ANd he showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding
out of the throne of God and of the lamb.

This pure river of water of life, is the spirit of the living God, proceeding
out of the throne of God, and of the lamb, the throne of God and of the lamb is
but one throne, chap. 12.5. And her child was caught up unto God and to his
throne. chap. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my
throne, even as I also overcame and am set down with my father in his throne,
and this throne of God and of the lamb, is in this holy city, spoken of in the
foregoing chapter, as may be seen in the 3d verse of this chapter, And there
shall be n^ more curse, but the throne of God, and of the lamb shall be in it.
And this city is the church of God.

Verse 2. In the midst of the street of it.

Thus the angel showed John this pure river of water of life which proceeded
from the throne of God, and of the lamb, which is in the midst of the street of
this city. From hence we may note, that God's throne is in his church, and that
his pure living and quickening spirit is no where to be seen but in the midst
of the street of this city, which is in his church, for if any man have not the
spirit of Christ he is none of his. Romans 8.9.

And of either side of the river was there the tree of life.

Our Lord Jesus is this tree of life, and was first figured by the tree of
life, which was in the midst of paradise, or the garden of eden. Genesis 2.9. And
Christ makes a promise to him that overcomes to give him to eat of the tree of
life, which is in the midst of the paradise of God, chap. 2.7. This promise
alludes from this figurative tree of life, in the midst of the garden of eden,
Genesis 2.9. unto Christ himself, who was figured out by it, it is the water of
life that causes this tree of life to spring up, and grow out of the earth,
for as this water of life does set forth the spirit of God, so does the tree of
life set forth the second Adam, to be a quickening spirit, the lord from heaven
originally, and those that eat of the fruit of it, are quickened by it, through
the life and sap of it, which is the spirit of the living God, even as the
fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil did yield the knowledge of good
and evil to Adam, and to all his posterity who are the tree of knowledge of
good and evil in the Antitype of it, which shows the work of the law written on
their hearts, by which they shall be judged, and rewarded according to their
own works, whether good or evil, so on the other hand if he had taken and eat
of the tree of life, it would have afforded unto him the quickening spirit of
life, to have lived for ever, Genesis 3.22, 23. but the tree of the knowledge, of
the righteous law of God, ministered t^ ^im death and condemnation, but

The tree of life which bears twelve man^er of fruits, and yields her fruit
every month.

In the Antitype is Jesus Christ, and believers are branches ^grafted into him
by faith, who receive life and nourishment from him, who is the root and stock;
whose roots wants no moisture, being watered with the fullness of this pure
river of water of life, clear as crystal, for he has the ^ness of the spirit
without measure, Joh. 3.34. Coll. 1.19. And this tree bears twelve manner of
fruits, and yields her fruit every month, this sets forth the excellency of
the ^ee, above all other trees, in that it not only bears variety of fruit,
but also yields its fruit every month; what wonderful invitation is here to
the hungry, and to the thirsty soul, for here is a city whose street is
plentifully furnished with meat and with drink; whose gates stand open, north,
south, east, and west, inviting the hungry and the thirsty soul, to come and to
eat and drink; the inhabitants also crying and calling, and saying, H^ every
one that thirsts come ye to the waters, and he that has no money, come ye buy
^d eat, yea come, buy wine and milk without money and without price; wherefore
do ye spend money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which
satisfies not, hearken diligently unto me and eat ye that which is good, and
let your soul delight it self in fatness, incline your ear and come unto me,
hear and your soul shall live, Isai. 55.1. etc. Jesus stood and cried saying,
if any man thirst let him come unto me and drink, he that ^e^eveth on me as the
scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living waters, Joh.
7.37, 38. And Jesus said unto them, I am the bread of life; he that comes to
me shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst. Joh.
6.35. Whosoever shall drink of the water that I shall give him, shall never
thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water
springing up into everlasting life. Joh. 4.14. And the Spirit and the bride say
come, and let him that hears say come, and let him that is athirst come, and
whosoever will let him take of the water of life freely.

Thus excellent is the tree of life, for it will afford us the bread of life;
and this pure river of water of life will afford us such drink, that we shall
never thirst more, for those that eat of the fruit of the tree of life shall
never hunger; and those that drink of this pure river of water of lif^ (which
is clear as cristal) shall never thirst any more. For the fruit of this tree is
the fruit of righteousness, and the water of this pure river of life is the
water of holiness and sanctification, for the purification from sin; and
blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness; for here is that
meat and drink that will satisfy their souls.

And the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations,

Both temporally and spiritually. Thus it appears, all that this tree bears is
virtuous, for it grows on either fide of the river of the water of life, so
that it wants no moisture, therefore its leaves shall not wither, but be green
and virtuous, for the healing of the nations; for the leaves are the leaves of
the tree of life, and nothing proceeding from it can wither or ^e, for it is
altogether virtuous; so that the leaves are for the healing of the wounded
soul, both temporally and spiritually, yea, the wounds of the broken hearted
shall it heal, for the tree of life is Jesus Christ, and the leaves of the tree
have the virtue of the tree; and whosoever touches but the border of his
garment, with the finger of faith shall be healed. Luke 8.43. etc. A woman
having an issue of blood twelve years, which had spent all her living on the
physicians, neither could be healed of any, came behind him and touched the
border of his garment, and immediately her issue of blood stanched: And Jesus
says unto her, be of good comfort, thy faith has made thee whole. Romans 15.4.
Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the scriptures, might have hope. Jesus Christ
the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13.8. Nevertheless, when the Son
of Man comes shall he find faith on the earth, Luke 18.8. This wanting faith
in us is all the danger of wanting present help in time of need, and our
wanting of faith, is because we do not keep a good conscience, by which the
mystery of faith is kept, 1 Timothy 3.9.

Verse 3. And there shall be no more Curse.

That is, as was executed upon Adam for his transgressi^, while he was in the
garden of God, where the tree of life was, but did not eat of it; but all the
inhabitants of this city have eaten of it, and therefore there shall be no more
curse.

But the throne of God and of the lamb shall ^e in it.

That is, in this city; so that by his kingly power he will keep it, and alone
rule in it,

And his servants shall serve him.

Verse 4. And they shall see his face and his name shall be in their foreheads.

Here is two things to be observed in this verse: The first is, the inhabitants
of this city, who are the servants of God, shall see his face; for his throne
is in it, for thus it is written, that the pure in heart shall see God, Mat.
5.8. and no impure thing can have admittance into this city, as appears in the
last verse of the foregoing chapter; secondly, his name shall be in their
foreheads, that is in the foreheads of the citizens of the new Jerusalem, the
city of God, and the ^ame of God being in their foreheads, is to characterism
them, that it may be known whose servants they are, this promise is made to all
that shall overcome, chap. 3.12. Him that over^eth will I make a pillar in the
temple of my God, thus he that overcomes shall be a support and strengthener
to his church, and he shall go no more out, for a pillar stands always in the
church to support it. And I will write upon him the name of my God. This name
is to describe whose servant he is. And the name of the city of my God, says
he, that is thus written upon him. This is a citizen of the new Jerusalem,
which said Jerusalem comes down out of heaven from my God. Thus God's servants
have his name in their foreheads, that it may be known whose servants they are,
as well as the worshipers of the beast was known by their having the mark of
the beast in their right hand, or in their foreheads, that it might be known
whose servants they were and whom they worshipped.

Verse 4. And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, neither
light of the su^ for the Lord God gives them light.

This is the happy state of God's church in its purity, f^ for they enjoy that
light which does far excel either sun (...) moon, or any other created light,
for God is to them a f^ more excellent light, 1 John 1.5, 6, 7. This then is
the me^sage which we have heard of him and declare unto you, tha^ God is light,
and in him is no darkness at all: if we say we have fellowship with him, and
walk in darkness we lie, and do no^ the truth, but if we walk in the light as
he is in the light, w^ have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus
Chri^ his son cleanses us from all sin. Joh. 8.12. Then spoke Jesus again unto
them saying, I am the light of the world, he tha^ follows me, shall not walk
in darkness but shall have the ligh^ of life.

And they shall reign for ever and ever.

This is a promise of the duration and happiness of their kingdom.

Verse 6. And he said unto me, these sayings are faithful and true.

This is an affirmation to confirm the faithfulness and truth of these things,
for that end that they may be the better credited.

And the Lord God of the holy prophets, sent^ his angel to show unto his
servants, the things which must shortly be done.

The Apostle John here restifieth to us, how that the Lord God of the holy
prophets, sent his angel to show unto his servants, the things which shortly
must be done. We are to understand, it has not relation to the accomplishing
of the whole matter of this book; but to such things which were to be done, in
every age, for this book of prophecy, speaks of things to be done from the
time of the writing of the book of this prophecy, to the end of the world, so
that there are things to be done in every generation, and these words. The
things which must shortly be done, speaks to God's children in every age, that
they may be watchful, and prepared, looking for the accomplishing of those
things which ^re to be done in their age and time, and therefore may be ^id
shortly to be done, and yet speak to God's people in every age; as for
instance, Mark. 13.30. Verily I say unto you, that this generation shall not
pass till all these ^ings be done. So that it might be said to that genera^on,
these were the things shortly to be done; and so might (...) be intimated
concerning the state of every Church in Asia, ^o whom this book was sent, that
there were things shortly (...) be done that did belong to the state of every
one of those Churches, and from that time to the end of the world; for things
are always shortly to be done to them, that are in ^ing a little before they
are done.

Verse 7. Behold I come quickly.

This is not intended Christ's coming at the great and last ^ay of Judgment,
but his speedy coming for the help of ^is elect in their distresses; as for
instance, Psalm. 40.1, 2. I ^ited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto
me, and ^d my cry; he brought me up also out of an horrible pit. Thus the Lord
came quickly and helped David by bringing ^m out of some great difficulty that
he was in. Heb. 10. (...) 38. For yet a little while and he that shall come,
will come, ^d will not tarry. Now the just shall live by faith; but if ^y man
draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him. ^ese to whom the author
writes were at the time of his ^ting under persecution; as appears in the
foregoing verses, ^d his writing to them is for that end, that they might ^t
faint under their present tribulation, encouraging them (...) be in the
exercise of patience, as in the foregoing verse; ^nifying to them, that it
would be but a little while be^re the Lord Jesus would come to relieve them out
of their ^sent distresses. And we may see how the Lord Jesus ^reatened the
Church of ^phesus, that if they did not re^ent he would come quickly, and
remove their candlestick out ^f his place, Chap. 2.5. And in verse 16, he
threatens ^me of the Church of Pargamus, that if they did not re^nt, he would
come unto them quickly, and fight against them with the sword of his mouth; and
also threatens the Chuch of Sardis, if they did not watch, he would come on
them as a thief. And he promises the Church of Philade^ Phia to come quickly,
exhorting them to hold that fast whi^ they had, Chap. 3.11. Thus this coming
quickly relates (...) the present time of Christ's coming, either in judgment
(...) mercy, according to the state he finds his servants in.

Blessed is he that keeps the sayings of the prophecy of this book ( says
the Apostle;)

For they that keep the prophecy of this book, will patiently wait for the
coming of the Lord, according to wh^ is written, Luke 12.43. compared with
verse 45, 46. Bless^ is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes shall find
so d^ing. But if that evil servant shall say in his heart, my lo^ delayeth his
coming, the lord of that servant will come in a d^ when he looks not for him,
and at an hour when he is n^ ware, and will cut him in sunder.

Verse 8. And I John saw these things, an^ heard them; and when I had heard and
seen, fell down to worship before the feet of the A^gel which showed me these
things.

Here is two things to be observed in this Verse: The fi^ is, John's
affirmation of the truth of these things, in the words, saying, And I John saw
these things, and heard the^ And the second is, the account that John here
gives of himself, how that when he had heard and seen these thing he fell down
to worship before the feet of the Angel which showed him these things.

Verse 9. Then says he unto me, See thou d^ it not, for I am thy fellow
servant, and of the brethren the prophets; and of them which kee^ the sayings
of this book; worship God.

Here is four things to be observed in this verse: The first is, the Angels
reproving of John for falling down t^ worship before his feet, in these words,
saying, See thou d^ it not: And secondly, the reason he gives John why h^ ought
not to do it, is given in these words, For I am (sait^ he) one of thy fellow
servants, and of thy brethren the prophets; this is the reason he gives John,
signifying to him ^at he is but his equal, that is to say his fellow servant
and one of his brethren the prophets: And the third thing ^o be observed is,
how this servant and prophet of the Lord ^ives John an account that he is one
of them that does keep the sayings of this book: And fourthly, exhorts John to
worship God, which does import, he only ought to be worshipped, who is God the
Creator, and not the creature.

Verse 10. And he says unto me, seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this
book; for the time is at hand.

Here is two things to be observed from this verse: The first is, the charge
that the Angel gives John (when he had made known these things to John) not to
seal them, in these words, saying, Seal not the sayings of the prophecy of this
book. Thus it appears, that John was required to disclose these things upon his
knowledge of them. And the second thing is, the reason which is given him why
he should not seal them, for says the Angel, The time is at hand. Thus it
appears, that John was required forth with to make publication of them upon the
consideration that the time was at hand; so that the seven churches of Asia, to
whom they did concern, might be warned to prepare themselves for those things
which were then at hand.

Verse 11. He that is unjust let him be unjust still, and he which is filthy
let him be filthy still, and he that is righteous let him be righteous still,
and he that is holy let him be holy still.

By the following verse the reason will be seen why the Angel says thus
concerning the state of the unjust and unholy, and concerning the state of the
righteous and holy.

Verse 12. And behold I come quickly, and my reward is with me, to give every
man according as his work shall be.

And behold I come quickly, says the Lord. Here he gives warning of his speedy
coming, to the unjust, and to the filthy, and to the righteous, and to the
holy; and that he will bring his reward with him to give unto every one of them
according as his work shall be. And thus at his coming, he will reward the
unjust and unholy according as their work shall be: And to the righteous and
holy according to their work. This coming quickly is in judgment to the wicked,
and with a good reward to the righteous; so that the Lord here speaks unto the
unjust, after this manner, when I come with my reward, let him be unjust still,
for the day of his grace is now past, and so let it be with the unholy, for he
likewise has outgone the day of his grace, and therefore if the unjust and the
filthy, will run the hazard of such an unjust and filthy state, I will come
quickly upon them with my reward; and this is to forewarn the unjust and filthy
of the great Hazard they stand in, while in that hazardable state. And to
encourage the righteous and holy so to continue that they might not lose their
reward. But to take this saying in short it carries with it implicitly, as if
the Lord should say to the unjust and filthy, to the righteous and holy, even
to them all, Behold I come quickly to reward every one of you according to your
work and as I find you, so I will reward you, and so you shall ever remain, in
that state I find you in at my coming; so your reward shall be, and in that
state shall you remain, that is, the unjust under the reward of the unjust, and
the filthy under the reward of the filthy, and the righteous under the reward
of the righteous, and the holy under the reward of the holy. And this coming
quickly is such a coming as he foretold of to several of the churches of Asia,
Chap. 2.5.16. Repent or else I will come unto you quickly. 25. v. But that
which ye have already hold fast till I come. chap. 3.3. If therefore thou shall
not watch, I will come on thee as a thief and thou shall not know what hour I
will come on thee. chap. 3.11. Behold I come quickly, hold that fast which thou
have. Mat. 24.50, 51. The Lord of that servant shall come in a day, when he
looks not for him, and in a hour that he is not ware of, and shall cut him
asunder, and appoint him his portion with the Hypocrites, there shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth Matt. 25.6. And at midnight there was a cry
made, behold the. bridegroom comes.

Thus the Lord is wont to forewarn, and to tell of his ^oming before he comes,
that the unjust and the filthy may ^e forewarned of the danger they are in
while in that state ^at they may repent before it be too late, and that the
righteous and the holy may be sensible of their righteous (...) holy reward, by
being put in mind of it, that thereby ^y may be encouraged to continue so in
well doing, un(...) this sudden and quick coming of the Lord, to execute
judgment on the one, and to deliver the other.

Verse 13. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the
last.

This is to back the foregoing verse, by showing that there was none before
him, neither shall there be any that shall ^ome after him, to hinder him in his
purpose of rewarding ^oth the Just and unjust according to their works.

Verse 14. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that they may have right
to the ^ee of life, and may enter in through the gates ^to the city.

^this verse he pronounces a blessing to them that do his commandments, and in
the next place he shows wherein the ^essing consists, for in so doing they
may have right to the ^ee of life, and may have entrance in through the gates
in^o the city, for these are the just and holy, that do his commandments; for
it appears in the foregoing chapter and (...) verse, that there shall in no
wise enter into it any thing ^t defiles, neither whosoever works abomination
or ^keth a lie.

Verse 15. For without are dogs, and sorcerers, ^d whoremongers, and murderers,
and Idolaters, ^d whosoever loves and makes a lie.

From this verse we may understand, that all that are without the holy city,
are in a polluted and defiled state; and all ^at are within the holy city, are
in a sanctified and holy ^ate. From hence we may understand, that all mankind
are in one of these two states; that is, either in a state o^ sin, or in a
state of righteousness; and that by being in the holy city, does measure the
whole Church of God, and by being without, does measure the whole world.

Verse 16. I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify unto you these things in the
Churches: I am the root and offspring of David, and the bright and morning star.

This verse contains the testimony of Jesus Christ to three things: His first
testimony is, that he sent his Angel to testify these things in the Churches.
Thus it appears that this book was signed to (at the end of it) by Jesus Christ
himself, to confirm the truth of it. And secondly, he testify that he is both
the root and offspring of David: Thus he declares himself to be God and Man;
for if he be the roo^ and offspring of David, David must be a branch of of his
root. And if he be the offspring of David, then of necessity David must be the
root of him. Thus it appears that he is both David's Lord, and David's Son. And
thirdly, he declares himself to be the bright and morning Star; this relates to
his ministerial office, for the ministers of the seven Churches are represented
in the likeness of stars; but the Lord Jesus is the most excellent and
brightest star of all the ministers; and promises in Chap. 2.28. To him that
overcomes and keeps his works to the end, to give him the morning star; That
is, he shall be the brightest star in all the Churches.

Verse 17. And the spirit and the bride say come, and let him that hears say
come, and let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will let him take of the
water of life freely.

This verse consists of most gracious invitations, both by the spirit and by
the bride, who are one in union, that is Christ and his church, expresses a
full and free invitation to all to come into the holy city, to drink of the
water of life, and that freely. And secondly withal bids him that hears this
invitation to invite others to come. And ^ly declares that it is left to the
free liberty, to whosoever will come, and take of the water of life freely.

Verse 18. For I testify unto every man that hears the words of the prophesy
of this book, if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him
the plagues that are written in this book.

This verse contains a severe threatening, to every man that hears the prophesy
of this book, that if any man shall add unto the things therein contained, God
shall add unto him the plagues that are written in this book.

Verse 19. And if any man shall take away from the words of the book of this
prophecy, God shall take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the
holy city, and from the things which are written in this book.

This verse likewise contains a severe threatening against any that shall take
away from the words of the book of this prophecy, how that God shall take away
his part out of the book of life, and also out of the holy city, and from the
things which are written in this book.

Verse 20. He that testifyeth these things says, Surely I come quickly. Amen.

This is a gracious promise to all those that are looking and waiting for his
coming for their help, when they are in trouble and distress for his sake; but
it will be a destructive coming to the wicked that are not ware of it: This
coming is a mystical coming, and not a personal and visible coming, (as will be
at the great and last day of Judgment when every eye shall see him) but such a
coming as is proved by Scripture testimony in the seventh verse of this
Chapter. And to this gracious promise to all that are looking and waiting for
his coming, according to his promise, John makes reply by way (...) request, in
these words,

Even so come Lord Jesus.

Verse 21. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

This is the Authors conclusive salutation to the Churches, to whom he writes
these things. Amen: Or, Even (...) be it.

FINIS.

