Dr. Cotton Mather's Accomplished SINGER.

AN ATTESTATION From the very Reverend, Dr. Increase Mather.
HAving been Solicited several Times, to Declare my judgment, concerning the
Endeavors of Some, to recover our Psalmody, unto that Regular Singing, which
is reported now to be somewhat lost in many Places; I take this Opportunity to
Signify, That I have perused the Book Entitled, The Accomplished Singer; and I
Entirely Concur to the Sentiments, and Proposals, which are offered in that
Essay; and I would Encourage, especially our Younger People, to Learn the
Skill, by which they may Sing Regularly; that so this Part of Divine Worship
may be more beautifully carried on, and more generally delighted in; But above
all, to be most careful of the more Spiritual Part, that with Grace in their
Hearts, they may always make Melody to the LORD.

INCREASE MATHER.

The Accomplished SINGER.

INSTRUCTIONS FIRST, HOW the PIETY of SINGING WITH A True DEVOTION, may be
obtained and expressed; the Glorious GOD after an uncommon manner Glorified in
it, and His PEOPLE Edified.

AND THEN, HOW the MELODY of REGULAR SINGING, and the SKILL of doing it,
according to the RULES of it, may be easily arrived unto.

DEI Lauds Cancre et Audire Jucundum sit, Haec est Voluptas vera; quae comes
et Socia Virtutis est. Lactant. Instit. Lib. 6. C. 21. BOSTON: Printed by B.
Green, for S. Gerrish at his Shop in Cornhill. 1721.

A PROPOSAL.
IT is Proposed, That the PASTORS of the Churches, would frequently use, a
short Expository Preface (which need not extend beyond Four or Five Minutes)
upon that Paragraph of a PSALM which is going to be Sung in the Congregation: A
short Exposition, expressing the Lessons of PIETY to be found in the Verses now
to be Sung, and the Tempers or Wishes of PIETY which they are to be Sung
withal. What a mavelous Improvement in PIETY; Yea, what a Consort with the
Multitude of the Heavenly Host, would there follow upon such a Proposal duly
Prosecuted!

The Accomplished SINGER.

Instructions How the PIETY OF SINGING WITH A True DEVOTION, may be obtained
and expressed; the Glorious GOD after an uncommon manner Glorified in it, and
His PEOPLE Edified.

Intended for the Assistance of all that would Sing PSALMS with Grace in their
Hearts; But more particularly to accompany the Laudable Endeavors of those who
are Learning to Sing by Rule, and seeking to preserve a Regular Singing in the
Assemblies of the Faithful.

DEI Lauds Canere et Audire Jucundum sit, Haec est Voluptas vera; quae comes
et Socia Virtutis est. Lactant. Instit. Lib. 6. C. 21. BOSTON: Printed by B.
Green, for S. Gerrish, at his Shop in Cornhill. 1721.

The Accomplished SINGER.
1. IT is the Concern of every one that would enjoy Tranquillity in this World,
or obtain Felicity in the World to come, to follow that Holy Direction of
Heaven, Exercise thy self in PIETY. And there is no Exercise of PIETY more
unexceptionable than that of making a Joyful Noise of SINGING in the Praises of
our GOD; That of signifying our Delight in Divine Truths by SINGING of them;
That of Uttering the Sentiments of Devotion, with the Voice, and such a
Modulation of the Voice, as will naturally express the Satisfaction and
Elevation of the Mind, which a Grave SONG shall be expressive of. It Is indeed a
very Ancient Way of Glorifying the Blessed GOD; As Ancient as the Day when the
Foundations of the Earth were fastened, and the Cornerstone thereof was laid.
The Morning-Stars then Sang together. And it is as Extensive an one; For it is
Remarkable, That All Nations make SINGING to be one part of the Worship which
they pay unto their GOD. Those Few Untuned Souls, who affect upon Principle to
distinguish themselves from the rest of Mankind, by the Character of
Non-Singers, do seem too much to divest themselves of an Humanity, whereof it
may be said unto them, Does not Nature it self teach it you? Be sure, they
sufficiently differ from the Primitive Christians; For, though the Eastern
Churches were at first Superior to the Western, for the Zeal of the House of
GOD in this matter, yet both betimes Concurred in it. Not only Justin the
Martyr, and Clemens of Alexandria, as well as Tertullian, and several others of
the Primitive Writers, but also Governor Pliny himself will tell us, what
Singers to their GOD, the Faithful were then known to be; and how much they
Worshipped Him in these Beauties of Holiness.

2. BUT this piece of Natural Worship is further Confirmed by a positive
Institution of GOD our SAVIOR for it. The Sacred Scriptures with which the
Holy SPIRIT of GOD has Enriched us, have directed us unto this Way of
Worshipping. In our Old Testament we there find it as a Command of GOD; but
Calculated particularly for Times under the New Testament: Psalm. LXVIII. 32.
Sing Praises unto GOD, ye Kingdoms of the Earth, O Sing Praises unto the Lord.
And Psalm. C. 1, 2. Make a Joyful Noise unto the Lord, All ye Lands; Come into
his Presence with Singing. The Ninety-fifth Psalm in our Psalter, does
according to the Interpretation of our Apostle Paul, an Interpreter, One of a
Thousand, certainly to be relied upon! -- Prescribe the Duties of a Sabbath in
the Days of the Gospel. But what is the First of those Duties? O come, Let us
Sing unto the Lord, Let us with Psalms make a Joyful Noise unto Him. In our
New Testament it self it is a Thing so positively enjoined, that it must be a
wonder, if any Christian can make any Question of it. How plainly is it
commanded? Jam. V. 13. Is any cheerful among you, Let him sing Psalms. Yea, In
the Pauline Epistles, we have it; how frequently, how earnestly inculcated!
This Exercise is none of those Intrusions into our Worship, which the
Worshippers in the Inner-Court, would see a Quo Warranto served upon, It Is
Warranted with a most Incontestible Institution.

3. THE Sacred Scriptures, which have Directed us to Sing unto the Lord, and
Bless His Name; have also supplied us with an admirable and sufficient Matter
for our Songs.

WE have a PSALTER, whereof the biggest part is of PSALMS, that were Composed
by David, the sweet Singer of Israel; A David, who being the Last of the
Limitations which the Glorious GOD made of the Line, wherein the First Promise
was to be accomplished, GOD for the sake of that REDEEMER, distinguished him,
with doing of amazing Things for him, and by him; whereof This was one, that he
was made the greatest Instrument for assisting the Devotions of the Church,
that ever was in the World. The rest were Composed by other Holy Men of GOD,
who wrote as they were moved by the Holy SPIRIT.

IN both Testaments, we have Composures under a Poetical Dress, fitted unto
Tunes, that were then known in the Church of GOD. The most Ancient Song that is
now extant in the World is That in the Fifteenth Chapter of Exodus: In which
there is a surprising Prophecy of what is to be Sung upon the Perdition of
Antichrist. Except the Book of Job, which (all but the Two first Chapters, and
the Last,) is a Poem writ in Verse, might (perhaps by Moses, making a present
of it unto his Countrymen under their Egyptian Captivity) be written before
it.

THE astonishing Song, in the Thirty second Chapter of Deuteronomy, was
prepared in the Heavenly World, and sent from thence by Moses, to be a
perpetual Witness for GOD, among the Sons of Israel.

THE Song of Deborah is a Rare Poem, and one that it seems the Wicked Homer was
no more a Stranger to, than he was to our Eighteenth Psalm, when he formed the
cursed Iliad, with which he brought in upon the World, a Flood of Debaucheries
and Impieties.

IN the Song of Hannah, we have the Name of The MESSIAH, first mentioned.

IN the Song of Songs penned by Solomon, we have the promised MESSIAH, whom his
Father had Sung in our Forty fifth Psalm, appearing in the Habit of a Royal
High Priest, and the Espousal between Him and His Church, (the Tipheret and the
Maleuth) celebrated, with Metaphors, wherein he spoke of Trees, and produced a
Noble Pastoral.

THE Book of Proverbs (except the Nine first Chapters,) gives us, as it was the
Custom of Antiquity, the Maxims of Wisdom, in such a way as to be Sung among
the People.

IN the Volumn of Isaiah, there are more than One or Two Songs, (besides that
of, The Vineyard,) which are of a lofty strain, and full of Evangelical
Mysteries. That of Hezekiah is transcendently worthy to be Printed in a Book;
to be graven with an Iron pen and Lead in the Rock forever.

THE Book of Lamentations, has Two Chapters, wherein the Tears given in great
Measure, to the People of GOD, are Poetically measured.

THE Book of Habakkuk has in it, a Song, than which, can any thing be more
Sublime or Seraphic?

THE Song of Mary, and the Song of Zacharias, have more than a little of, The
Wonderful, in them.

IT IS not long, before the Multitude of the Heavenly Host, invite us to a
Consort with them, in One of the Songs which will enable us to speak (and sing)
with the Tongue of Men and Angels. The Expiring Simeon mounting up to Heaven,
Sings as he Mounts.

ANON, in the Apocalypse, we have more Songs in which we over hear the Holy
Ones in the Heavenly World, Glorifying our GOD and SAVIOR; And, O lifted up to
Heaven we, in these Communications!

HERE is our PSALTER! And were we enriched with no more Treasures than These,
wherein the Holy SPIRIT of GOD has thus provided for the Songs of His People,
what a precious Article in, The Unsearchable Riches of CHRIST, have we therein
to be exceedingly Thankful for?

BUT supposing that we have no other Portions of the Inspired Writings
exhibited in the Tuneable Poetry of the Ancients, must we thence conclude, that
we are forbidden to put any other Portions of them into such a Meter, as may
render them capable of being Song among the People of GOD? Surely, the Servants
or GOD may take other Paragraphs of our BIBLE, especially such as have the most
Illustrious Mystecies of the Gospel, so plainly Contained and Revealed in them,
that in Singing thereof, we shall show forth the Salvation of GOD, and they may
with the Singing thereof, Give Thanks unto the Lord, as it becomes the Redeemed
of the Lord. Yea, The Great and Good Voetius does not scruple to say, Nihil
alrenum ab usu Scripturae fe^erint, qui symbolum, quod vocant, Apostolicum, et
Decalogum, ad Numeros et Modulos redegerunt.

4. THE Songs which are prepared for us by the Holy SPIRIT of GOD, in the
Inspired Writings, that shine in this Dark Place, ought certainly to be
preferred with us, before any mere Human Composures, in the Public Worship of
the Faithful. Those which for their Original are peculiarly the Songs of Zion,
are the most proper to be used in its Assemblies. It Is true, Devout Hymns
Composed by the Good Men of our own Time, affected with the Truths of GOD, and
able to Handle the Pen of the Writer, for soaring Poetry, may be used, and
found good for the Use of Edifying. From Tertullian we Learn, that in his early
Days, the Christians used even such Hymns as were conceived by themselves, de
proprio Ingenio. Socrates mentions the Psalms written by Chrysostom, and
Eusebius mentions the Psalms written by Nepos. The Arians made many Hymns to be
Sung, for the Propagation of their Heresies: And the Orthodox willing to be
made wise from their Enemies, made Hymns for the Preservation of the Faith once
delivered to the Saints. Yea, Great was the Army of them, who followed Ambrose
in the Publishing of Hymns for the use of the Latin Church. The Te Deum
ascribed unto Ambrose, makes to this Day a mighty Noise in the World. The
German Psalter has in it Hymns of Luthers Composing. And in the Bohemian
Churches of the later Days, they had a Cantional in which there were seven
hundred and forty Sacred Songs besides the Davidical Psalms. But certainly, the
Hymns of Uninspired Men, cannot be so Profitable for all Instruction in
Righteousness, and may not have so much Respect paid unto them, as those that
are given by Inspiration of GOD. Austin did well to blame the Donatists, for
leaving the Psalms of David, and Singing Hymns of their own Invention. Yea, if
the Limitations ordered by a Synod at Bracara, were perhaps a little too
strict, Extra Psalmos veteris Testamenti, nihil Poetice Compositum, in Ecclesia
Psallatur, yet it was a Wise order passed in a Synod at Laodicea, that forbad
(...), Private Psalms to be used in the Church. The French Churches, have
wisely confined themselves unto the Scriptural Songs; and the Dutch have
Harmonized with them, in passing that Order, In Ecclesiis cantabuntur Psalmi
Davidis, Omissiscanticis quae in S. Scriptura nou reperiuntur. Can any thing be
so Rich, so Full, so sublime, as what the Holy SPIRIT of GOD has declared?
Every Line will weigh against a Golden Wedge of Ophir; Every Word is a Pearl,
and has a sense and worth in it, that is Invaluable. The Psalms of David were
Sung in Jehoshaphats time, as well as in Solomon's, and in Hezekiah's time, we
read, He commanded the Levites to sing praise unto the Lord, with the Words of
David and of Asaph. Words of an Excellency and an Efficacy, which are not found
but where the Spirit of the Lord speaks by Men, and His Word is in their
Tongue. Yea, Even the Song of the Lamb, in the Fifteenth of the Revelation,
seems to be fetched out of our Eighty sixth Psalm; and the Song of the Angels
in the second of Luke seems to be fetched out of our Eighty fifth. And our
Blessed SAVIOR Himself, a Greater than David, and his Antitype, no doubt, at
the Passover, as often as it recurred, Sung at least part of what they called,
The Great Hallel, which was the Hundred and thirteenth Psalm, with the Five
that followed it. In a word, we are so directed, Ephesians. V. 19 Speak to your
selves in Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs. In this Direction, there appears
an evident Reference, unto the Distinction of the Poems in our Hebrew Psalter.
The Poems there are distinguished by Three Terms, exactly answering unto These.
It seems to be said, Let your Psalter supply you with the Songs, wherein the
Admonitions of Piety are to be received, and preserved, and applied among you!

IT would follow from hence, that such a Version of the PSALMS, as keeps most
Close to the Original, were most of all to be wished for. Of about Three Times
seven Translations of the Psalms, which we have seen fitted for the Tunes of
our Sacred Songs there is not one, but what for the sake of a needless Rhyme,
does Leave out very much of what the Holy SPIRIT has inserted in the Original,
and put in as much of what is not there to be met withal. Of these
Translations, there are some Nearer to the Original than others, and have more
of That in it, with least of Diversion from it, or Addition to it: And the
Nearest are certainly the most worthy to have our Meditations employed upon
them. After all, of what Consequence is (the Similis Definentia of) Rhyme, to
our Psalmody, when even to Poetry it self, it is not Essential? The Psalms
might easily be so turned into Blank Verse, that there should be ALL, and ONLY,
what it has pleased the Holy One to give us in the Original. And no doubt there
will a Time come, when Myriads of Christians will choose to Serve GOD with such
a Pure Offering, and present unto Him what is purely His own, rather than have
their Devotions in Danger of being palled, by the sense of Humane Debasements,
upon what they Address unto Him. An Honorable Counselor in the Low Countries,
Mynheer Bruyne, published in Dutch, the PSALMS in such Blank Verse. But because
his Translation differed, as it must, from what was in the Common Bible,
another who was a Master of Music, fitted a variety of Tunes to the Psalter,
without changing a word in the Common Bible. However the Tunes were so various,
and the necessary Repetition of the same Word so frequent, that this did not
much mend the matter. Some will think it a pity that the Design of the
Excellent Bruyne, should not proceed, as the Great Voetius expresses it, Absque
aliqua Commotione ple^is Ecclesiasticae. Or, without some Discord among the
People.

5. IN the Provision which our Psalter has made of Spiritual Songs for us, we
find all the Intentions of PIETY, how admirably provided for!

WOULD we be well Instructed in the Mysteries which belong to the Kingdom of
GOD, or well acquainted with the Prophecies that refer to the Delay or the
Coming of the Kingdom? In our Spiritual Songs we shall find our selves Taught
of GOD.

WHEN the Pardoning Mercy of our GOD is to be implored, how pathetically, how
effectually may we with the cries of our Spiritual Songs pierce the Heavens,
till our Hearts are melted with some Assurance of our Pardon?

WHEN we are Panting after the Dispositions of a Sanctified Soul, as the Heart
after the Waterbrooks, our Spiritual Songs will be found, how sanctifying
ones; and how likely to bring us into the very Feeling of what we are Asking
for?

WHEN we are Afflicted very much, be the occasions what they will, what
Consolations of GOD, which are not small, may we find in our Spiritual Songs,
which GOD our Maker has given us for the Night, of those Dark Hours, which our
Afflictions may bring upon us?

WOULD we know our Duty in every condition? Our Spiritual Songs will soon bring
us to the Knowledge of it, yea, spur us to the Practice of it.

WHAT point of our spiritual, or even our Temporal Prosperity, is there, that
in the Language of our Spiritual Songs we may not Petition for; and with a
Faith so exercised therein, that we shall have the grant of our Petition?

WHATEVER Temptations we are assaulted withal, the Harp of David being with our
Spiritual Songs well played upon, the Tempter will ere long depart; Serpents
will burst and break upon the Singing of such Verses as these.

WE may have Adversaries, of whose Influences to hurt us, we may have some
Terror upon us. By our Spiritual Songs we fly away to a Munition of Rocks.
There was a Time, when the Israel of GOD had like to have been overwhelmed with
Adversaries; but when the Singers began to Sing, the Providence of GOD with
strange Dispensations defeated them. Only, when Imprecations upon Enemies occur
in our Psalms, let us never dart any of them against any of our Neighbors; be
they never so malevolent, never so injurious When we Sing, Upon mine Enemies my
Eyes their Wish shall see. Let it be remembered, Their Wish is not in the
Original. Thy Word of supply, O charitable Christian will rather be, What
comes: For thou will Wish for them nothing but Good. The Imprecations may
indeed be hurled against Public Enemies, and those without whose Confusion the
People of GOD cannot be in safety. But rather, Let the Singer make his
Interior Adversaries, the Objects of all these Impreprecations. And as in the
Primitive Times, the Devils in Energumens discovered a singular Horror, at the
Singing of that Verse, May GOD arise; His Enemies, may they be scattered; and
such as are Haters of Him, fly from before His Face: Thus, O Singer, Let Satan
be the Enemy against whom thou will sing the Songs of the Lord. And let thy
Original sin, be the Enemy in like manner stabbed by those Javelins of the
Divine Armoury, and let thy Lusts be those Foes, against which thou will with
thy Songs as with slings cast forth what shall mortify them? One of the
Arnobius's has very particularly informed us, how the Primitive Christians did
with such an Application of the Psalms, carry on, The Wars of the Lord.

AND now, What shall be said? Surely, By our spiritual Songs we may now after
some sort begin Heaven upon Earth. It was very justly said by Chrysostom unto
the Devout Singer, (...). Thou art in a Consort with the Angels of Heaven, in
what thou art now a doing. For which cause, as the Devils undergo a peculiar
vexation from our spiritual Songs; None of our Devotions more Odious or more
Tedious to them; So the Angels take a more singular and special Delight in
doing of Good Offices for those who by spiritual songs are much associated with
them; always on the Wing to be their Guardians. And Oh! how much of Heaven have
hundreds of thousands found coming down into their Souls, while they have
attempted thus to come into a Consort with the Angels there! Souls no strangers
to the Experience of what Austin reports of himself. Quantum ^evimus in Hymnis
Suavisonantis Ecclesiae! The Tears which the Songs of the Church sweetly
dissolved into! All that Bafil has written in his First Homily on the Psalms;
All that Chrysostom in his Twenty-eighth Homily on the Romans; All that
Athanasius in his whole Epistle to Marcellinus, in commendation of this
Heavenly Exercise, it is all too little; all short of the Merit of the Cause.
It Is a good thing to celebrate with praise, the Eternal GOD; and to sing praise
unto thy Name, O Thou that art most High. How Good! It is beyond what any
Tongue may utter, or any Heart conceive.

6. BUT it is a CASE which very much wants to be considered, How shall our
spiritual Songs come to be so sung, that they may have their Glorious
Intentions answered? It is Required of us; Ephesians. V. 19. Singing and making
Melody in your Hearts unto the Lord. And, Col. III. 16. Singing with Grace in
your Hearts unto the Lord. Be sure, It Is not a mere Noise in the Throat, that
will be a Singing acceptable unto GOD; No, Though it be never so finely,
artifically, regularly managed, yet the Singing may be but an Howling, before
His Holy Majesty. It has been a famous Distich.

NON Vox, fed Votum; non Musica chordula, fed Cor;
Non Clamans, fed Amans; Psallit in Aure DEI.
IT IS not the Voice, but the Desire;
Not Noise, but Hearty Love:
Not Loud Cries, but a Soul on Fire;
That GOD's Ear will approve.
MOST certainly, Grace at Work in the Heart of the Singer, will make Melody in
the Heart unto the Lord. The Bodily Exercise without it, will Profit but a
little. We Sing to little Purpose, if we cannot say, O thou Eternal GOD, I do
lift up my Soul to thee; And, My Heart is well prepared, O GOD; my Heart is
well prepared. But, how shall this be attained unto?

WE will not content ourselves with the Rules given by Dionysius Carthusianus,
Cum Domino Psallis, Psallendo, his Tria serves;

WHEREOF the Frst Three are,

Dirige Cor sursum; profer been; respice sensum.

TO GOD above direct thy Heart;
He for thy Heart does call.
With thy Voice duly bear thy part;
And mind the Sense of all.
BUT let this be one of the First Things prescribed. Study and Labor for such
Impressions of PIETY on our Minds, as we may easily discover to have been upon
the Minds of the Inspired Writers, at the Time when they wrote the spiritual
Songs, which we are now Singing unto the Lord. An Exultation of PIETY in
Singing unto GOD, has an Infinite Recommendation of it, from This; That the
Prophetic SPIRIT, falling according to the Good Pleasure of GOD, upon the
Children of Men, and His Good Angels possessing of them, one of the Gifts with
which they were endowed, and one of the Acts to which they were excited, was
that of Singing unto GOD. They could not but break forth into songs, wherein
the Great Things of GOD were celebrated: When they came together, every one
(whom Heaven Inspired for it) had a Psalus. Those Extraordinary Operations have
been witheld from the Church, during the Three Years and an half (that is to
say, Twelve hundred and sixty) wherein it must not Rain. And whether they will
be revived, when that Period shall be Expired, and there will be a sound of
abundance of Rain, it is known only to our Ascended Lord, who has the bestowing
of them. In the mean time, This is what we have to do, that according to the
Dispensation of the Day, we may Sing with the Spirit, and Sing also with
Understanding. The Writers of our spiritual Songs were Holy Men of GOD; and had
a Principle of PIETY Sanctifying of them. There can be no doubt of it, but that
when the Holy SPIRIT with His Afflations, disposed them to write what we have
in our Hands, He produced in their Hearts those Motions of Piety, which were
agreeable and answerable to the Matter then flowing from their Pens. In what
they have written, there is very Legible, and a very ordinary Capacity may see,
A Confession of Holy Truths, with an Heart Believing of them, Consenting to
them; A Desire of Promised Blessings, with a Value for them; a Love to GOD,
(and Man;) and a Zeal for His Kingdom; and His Word and Ordinances; a Faith in
GOD, and our SAVIOR, and His Promises; with a Joy in Him; and a Rapturous
Admiration of Him; An horror of sin, and a sorrow for it; and a Fear of the
Judgments threatened unto it; a Resolution for the Service of GOD; and a Retreat
unto Him: with a Despair to find Relief in Creatures; with other Motions of
Piety, which belong to the Life of GOD in the Soul. In Singing our spiritual
Songs, let us be Inquisitive after those Motions of Piety, which are
discernible in the Verse now before us; and let us with a Soul flying away to
GOD, for them, try whether we cannot fly with them; and strive to come at the
like; and give not over the struggle, till we feel our selves come into an Holy
Symphony with the Saints who had their Hearts burning within them, when they
Sang these things unto the Lord. Christian, Behold a lovely Method of getting
into those Heavenly Frames and strains which will assure thee of thy arriving
one Day, to the same state of Blessedness, and those Everlasting Habitations,
which these Favorites and Amanuenses of Heaven, through whom our spiritual Songs
were conveyed unto us, have been renewed into. Yea, Thou art already Caught up
to Paradise in them. Nor is there a Nobler Method, among all our Hermeneutic
Instruments, to come at the True sense of our spiritual Songs, than Affectum
scriptorum Sacrorum Observare, Eumque assumere, as Dr. spener advises, or an
Experimental Taste, of the PIETY which was working in the Hearts of the Writers
at the Time of their Inspiration. Even an Illiterate Christian, that Lives unto
GOD, and is no Stranger to the Sentiments of Piety, may in that way reach the
True sense of the Lively Oracles, and (a Luther, a Gerhard, a Franckius, and
all the Sons of the Orthodox and Genuine Pietism will tell us) he will have
within him, an Exposition far more Valuable, than any of the Commentators,
(truly Commentators!) who are Alienated from the Life of GOD, can help him to.

WE read, Rev. XIV. 3. Of, A song which no man could Learn, but they which were
Redeemed from the Earth. We have now described a Way of Singing, which none can
Learn, but such as GOD Redeems from the Earth. And, O Earthly-minded Man, If
upon a Trial for it, thou find thy self Enabled unto this Way of Singing, This
will fetch thee, and raise thee up from the Earth in which thy Soul has been
buried; It will be a Token for Good upon thee, GOD has Redeemed thee from the
Earth; and the Heaven which thou art Anticipating shall be thy Portion.

. 7. AS in the Reading of the sacred Scriptures in general, so particularly for
the Singing of our Spiritual Songs, (by all of which we are to be Admonished)
the Porismatic way is a very Notable One, to pay our Homage unto our GOD. That
is, To fetch LESSONS out of every Verse, and then turn them into PRAYERS; to
form a Note and a Wish upon every Clause before us: For which the Time of
Dilatation which we take in our Singing affords usually a sufficient
Opportunity. While we do by the Action of Singing, put our Minds into a due
Posture for it. We should first Hear what the Glorious GOD speaks unto us, and
then with fit Echo's of Devotion give our Consent and Answer unto it; and
perform what the Psalmist so Exemplified: seek ye my Face; On hearing this, My
Heart did speak to thee; Thy Face, O thou Eternal GOD, Thy Face now will I will
seek. An Alternation, preferrible to those Antiphona's, which are now generally
dropped in the most Reformed Churches. To do This, requires a Skilful and Intense
Thinking, it is true; It is requisite that our Faculties be roused for it, with
an, O my awakned Soul, Do thou Bless the Eternal GOD; and all my Inward Powers
the Name of His pure Holiness. But what we are now doing before the Ark, ought
always to be done with all our might. And such is the Pleasure as well as the
profit, of Conversing with the Oracles of GOD, in this way of Proceeding, that
those who are used unto it, will give Thanks to a Gracious GOD for Instructing
them in this way of coming at all Precious and Pleasant Riches, more than if
all the Vain Riches of this World had been thrown in upon them; They Rejoice in
this Way of Living on the Testimonies of GOD, as much as in all Riches. And the
treating of our spiritual Songs in such a manner, does not only Satisfy the
Good Men, who might else complain of the Jewish Dress, which appears upon many
of them, and propose to see David stripped of his Harp, and all his Musical
Instruments; a Psalter without any Air of the Old Testament in it: -- Syrs, The
Things and the Terms Originally pertaining to the Church of Israel will do us
no Damage; There is a Sweet Gospel in them, if we give Attention to it; Yea, we
lose too much of the Beauty to be discovered in our Gospel, if we lay them
wholly aside! -- Is there not a Zion of the Gospel, which you are
well-acquainted withal? May not the Ark of GOD lead you to His CHRIST? The
House of GOD, and the Courts thereof lead you into His Church; and into its
Assemblies here below, and into the Heavenly World above? The Sacrifices of the
Law, lead you to a sacrificed JESUS, and unto the Devotions and Benignities,
which are the spiritual Sacrifices of the Gospel; acceptable to GOD, only through
that Great Propitiation! The Musical Instruments be answered in an Heart that
is to be a well-tuned Harp, and in the Opportunities and Advantages to Glorify
GOD, with which He has furnished you! But it also removes a weak Objection,
which the Non-Singers make against our uttering the Language of those who had
the Holy SPIRIT of GOD filling of them. It has been weakly cavilled by some
Sectaries, that it would be Nonsense or Falsehood, in many Persons, to speak
the Words of David after him. The End of our Psalmody is not considered by
these Cavillers. It may be, O Man, thou can not say, I have set the Eternal
GOD before me evermore. But upon Singing of this, thou may make that
Observation, That it is a great mark of and help to a godly Man, to have the
Great GOD always in his View. And thou can send up this Ejaculation to Heaven
upon it; My GOD, Let me hive my Eye upon thee contimually. Thou can not say,
O thou Eternal GOD, my heart it is not haughty grown. But upon Singing of this,
thou may make that Observation, An humble Heart will be the Companion and the
Discovery of a Godly Mind. And thou can send up this Ejaculation to Heaven
upon it; My GOD, cloth me with Humility. The CXIX Psalm will have in it
Affections and Seize which thou can not pretend unto: But it will
Inform thee of what thou should Aspire unto, and should be Sung with
Aspirations. Thus, Dicas attente, Dic totum Supplice mente.

8. SEARCH the Scriptures, for they testify of me, says our SAVIOR. When we
are Digging in these deep and vast Mines of Truth, it will not be long before the
Pearl of great Price will occur unto us. To Sing PSALMS is a Duty not only
Commended but also Commanded unto us, in the Example which our SAVIOR has
given us of it, saying, Do as I have done. It Is what we find our Blessed JESUS
used unto; and one Time above the rest, we Read, Mat. 26. 30. He Sung an Hymn.
And Oh! what a Time was it? It was the Night before His Crucifixion! It was at
the Time when He was just going to Encounter Things tremendous, beyond all
Imagination: Sufferings and Anguishes that were to make Expiation for the
Iniquities of us all, which GOD laid upon Him. At such a Time! one would have
thought, that Now, if ever, Singing had been unseasonable, unpracticable. Yet
Now, we hear Him Singing to His Father. When we are Tuning our Hearts for a
Song of GOD, how much may it animate us to think, I am going to Imitate my
Admirable SAVIOR! But, O thou Follower of the Good One, what a further
Animation of thy spiritual Songs, may it be to think, That in Him who is thy
Pattern for them, thou have also the Matter of them! It Is of thy SAVIOR; they
are on that Score, The Songs of the Lamb, that thou art now to Sing unto Him.
There having been promised, at the beginning, One to be born of a Woman, by
whom the Grand Enemy of Mankind should be destroyed, and Mankind be delivered
from the Miseries which our Fall from GOD has brought upon us: Upon the the
Faith of this Promised REDEEMER our whole Bible turns, more than any one thing
in the World; and this Faith, more than any one thing in the World, explains
numberless Passages in this Book of the MESSIAH where many Great Things, would
else appear strange Things unto us. The People of GOD in the elder Times, had a
stronger Idea of the First Promise than is commonly imagined in (...); their
Thoughts, their Hopes, their Aims, ran very much on the Promised Redeemer; And
the Holy SPIRIT of GOD gratified them with various and growing Discoveries of
Him. David saw more of the Promised Redeemer than any that had gone before him;
who yet saw His Day, and were glad. Yes, as David passed through many
Circumstances which were Typical of the Promised Redeemer, so the Holy SPIRIT
of GOD inclined him to write many things, in which the Circumstances of the
Promised Redeemer were much more exhibited than his own. Christian, In thy
spiritual Songs, which are Fat things full of Marrow, be still Inquisitive,
What is there of a Glorious CHRIST, which I am now led unto the Contemplation
of? Getting a Taste of That, thou have the very Marrow of them. Not only the
II, the VI, the VIII, the XVI, the XVIII, the XXII, the XXXIV, the XXXV, the
XXXVIII, the XL, the XLI, the XLV, the XLVII, the L, the LV, the LVI, the LVII,
the LXI, the LXIII, the LXVI, the LXVIII, the LXIX, the LXXI, the LXXII, the
LXXV, the LXXXV, the LXXXVI, the LXXXVIII, the LXXXIX, the XCI, the XCVI, the
XCVII, the XCVIII, the CI, the CIX, the CX, the CXVI, the CXVIII, the CXXXII,
the CXXXIX, the CXL, the CXLI, the CXLII, the CXLIII, the CXLV, the CXLIX
Psalms, have a CHRIST sensibly filling of them; a CHRIST Evidently in them, set
before our Eyes: But a Folengius was right in saying, Totius Voluminis
Psalmorum Argumentum CHRISTUS; A Glorious CHRIST is the Sum and Soul of them
all; The Person, the Natures, the Virtues, the Humiliation, the Exaltation, the
Extensive Kingdom, and the Admirable Glories of our SAVIOR, are in the Psalms,
every where sparkling, like the Stones of Fire, with which the Rock is
brightned. It has been the Conjecture of some Learned Men, that some of the
Songs among the Ancient Grecians, did in reality celebrate the Achievements of
Joshua, with Traditions which Cadmus the Pluenician, left among them. It Is very
sure, That our spiritual Songs do every where celebrate the Perfections and the
Performances of our wonderful JESUS; and when we find HIM in them, we have then
found the very Kernel of them: We are then Fed with the Finest of the Wheat,
and satisfied with Honey out of the Rock. O Believer, Sing the Graces, the
Actions, the Sufferings and the Grandeurs of thy Incomparable SAVIOR; Yea, get
as far as thou can into the Sentiments, that may somewhat resemble those,
which the Prophetic Spirit here assigns unto thy SAVIOR, in the Time of His
Working out thy Salvation for thee; And then, become able, with an Holy Triumph
of Soul, to say, O my SAVIOR, Thou know all things, Thou know that I
Love thee; and that I love to Sing thy Praises. The CHRIST in thy PSALMS, may
be called The Key of David, which lets thee into inestimable Treasures, and
indeed shows the Things, which the Angels desire to look into. Yea, In feeding
on this Manna, thou do Eat the Food of Angels!

9. TO give a finishing stroke, unto the Directions, How to Sing the songs of
the Lord, in the Land of a Stranger? Here shall be transcribed a Paragraph of
an Introduction, to a well-known Edition of the Psalter in Blank Verse, with
Illustrations upon it.

THERE is a wonderful Thing to be observed concerning our PSALMS, which has
hitherto been too much over looked, by all the Uninspired Interpreters; But it
is a Thing, which our SAVIOR, and His Apostles, who have quoted the PSALMS
near Fifty times, have led us into the Apprehension of. This is, That they are
full of Prophecies; and our Psalter is indeed the most Prophetical Book in the
World.

IT is more particularly, but not without holy Astonishments! -- to be
observed, That the Design of the Prophetic Spirit in the Psalms all along, has
been to describe the Sufferings of the Jewish Nation, and of the Christian
Surrogate, under the Tyranny of Antichrist; and foretell the Characters and
Confusions of that Wicked one, and of his Followers; and Predict the Recovery
of the Jewish Nation from their long Dispersions; and a long Felicity for them,
and the Converted Gentiles associated with them, under the succeeding Reign of
the MESSIAH; and the Happy State of the New Earth, in which, under the
Influences of the New Heaven, there shall Dwell Righteousness, and the
Tabernacle of GOD, shall be with Men, and He shall dwell with them, and they
shall be His People, and GOD Himself shall be with them, and be their GOD.

IT may be the Word which we render, To the Chief Musician, but which may be
rendered (and was of old so,) For the End, may be to intimate, that the Psalms
are calculated eminently with an Eye to the Things that are to be done, at that
which the Bible calls, The time of the End. Indeed, Jerome long ago found
Antichrist in the Psalms: And Austin affirmed, That the Psalms ought all to be
understood of CHRIST and His Church, and many of them refer to AfterAges. But
we now Improve in our Discoveries.

ACCORDINGLY, The Devout Singer like the Beloved Disciple, shall be carried
away in the Spirit into the Wilderness, and be shown the Judgment of the Great
Whore, that sits upon many Waters. He shall also in these Visions of GOD,
See the Holy City, New Jerusalem, coming down from GOD out of Heaven, prepared
as a Bride for her Husband. Very depraved must be that Soul, that has not, a
Relish for such Contemplations, more than for any Earthly Entertainments; and
that will not heartily say, They Are more desirable than Gold, yea, than much
solid Gold; than Honey also sweeter much, or dropping Honeycomb.

10. BEHOLD, A Sweet Exercise of PIETY, to a share wherein All People are
invited: A call to Make the Joyful Shouts of a Jubliee, is what the Tune of,
All People, is to be set unto. If the Demand be, Do it O all Kings of the
Earth; and (which will soon follow) All the People too; Do it, O Princes and
all you, the Judges of the Earth: These shall have a Constantine and a
Theodosius as well as a David, going before them. Do it, O you that Young Men
are, Yea, and Young Women too: Do it, O you that Old Men are, with Babes in
Infancy. Even they who are Forbidden to speak in the Church, are Commanded
nevertheless to Sing there. The Handmaids of the Lord, forget Miriam, and All
the Women that went out after her, if they decline their part in Singing the
Praises of GOD; since diverse of our spiritual Songs were composed by Persons
of the Female Sex, it is but Reasonable that the Female Sex bear their part in
Singing of these, and all the rest. A Gorgenia the Renowned Sister of
Nazianzen, is commemorated for it. And as no Persons are to be exempted, so no
Places are to be excluded from the Reasonable Service; but we are to Sing every
where, Lifting up an Holy Voice, unto the Lord. Not only should we with all our
Heart Praise the Eternal GOD, where the Upright meet Privately, and where more
Publicly; But also the Christian Householder should make this one of his
Family-Sacrifices. Yea, how comfortably may the Family go to Rest, when the
last Verse of the Fourth Psalm has concluded all? This truly is one of the
Excellent Methods, wherein the Word of CHRIST is to Dwell Richly with us, and
be a constant and welcome Lodger in our Dwellings. Yea, Theodoret reports, That
the Faithful in the Primitive Times, had the Psalms by heart, so that they
would Recreate themselves with Singing them in the Streets and in the Fields,
as well as in their Dwellings. A Paul and Silas, turn a Dungeon into a Palace,
by Singing there. One says, The Earth Danced unto their Music.

IT is Remarkable, That when the Kingdom of GOD has been making any New
Appearance, a mighty Zeal for the Singing of PSALMS, has attended it, and
assisted it. And may we see our People grow more Zealous of this Good Work,
what an hopeful Sign of the Times would be seen in it, That the Time of Singing
is come, and the Voice of the Turtle is to be heard in the Land?

BUT in the pursuance of this Holy Intention, it would be very desirable, that
people, (and especially our YOUNG PEOPLE, who are most in the Years of
Discipline,) would more generally Learn to SING and become able to Sing by
RULE, and keep to the NOTES of the TUNES, which our spiritual Songs are set
unto; which would be to Sing, as Origin expresses it, (...); Agreeably and
Meledionsly. In Early Days a famous Council condemned it; in that there were
(...), Disorderly Clamours, with which the Psalmody was then sometimes
disturbed. In later Days, Cassander upbraided it, Ad feritatem quandum
barbaricum composito sono, Boant, Latrant, mugiunt, frendunt, rudunt, et
quidvis potius quam canunt. -- Tarttaricos quosdam clamores Exprimunt. In plain
English, They made sad and wild Work on it. It has been found accordingly in
some of our Congregations, that in length of Time, their Singing has
degenerated, into an Odd Noise, that has had more of what we want a Name for,
than any Regular Singing in it; whereby the Celestial Exercise is dishonored;
and indeed the Third Commandment is trespassed on. To take notice of the
Ridiculous Pleas, wherewith some very weak People, go to confirm this
Degeneracy, would indeed be to pay too much Respect unto them. And they must
have strange Notions of the Divine SPIRIT, and of His Operations, who shall
imagine, that the Delight which their Untuned Ears take in an Uncouth Noise,
more than in a Regular Singing, is any Communion with Him. The Skill of Regular
Singing, is among the Gifts of GOD unto the Children of Men, and by no means
unthankfully to be Neglected or Despised. For the Congregations, wherein it is
wanting, to recover a Regular Singing, would be really a Reformation, and a
Recovery out of an Apostasy, and what we may judge that Heaven would be pleased
withal. We ought certainly to Serve our GOD with our Best, and Regular Singing
must needs be Better than the confused Noise of a Wilderness. GOD is not for
Confusion in the Churches of the Saints; but requires, Let all things be done
decently. It Is a Great Mistake of some weak People, That the Tunes regulated
with the Notes used in the Regular Singing of our Churches are the same that
are used in the Church of Rome. And what if they were? Our Psalms too are used
there. But the Tunes used in the French Psalmody, and from Them in the Dutch
also, were set by a famous Martyr of JESUS CHRIST; And when Sternhold and
Hopkins illuminated England, with their Version of the Psalms, the Tunes have
been set by such as a Good Protestant may be willing to hold Communion withal.
The Tunes commonly used in our Churches, are Few; It Were well if there were
more. But they are also Grave, and such as well become the Oracles of GOD, and
such as do Steer clear of the Two Shelves, which Austin was afraid of; when he
did, In cantu Sacro strictuare, inter Periculum Voluptatis, et Experimentum
Salubritatis; in danger of too much Delicacy on the one side, and Asperity on
the other.

THE Music of the Ancient Hebrews, an Adjustment whereto seems to be all the
Measure of their Poetry, (after all the Attempts of Gomarus, and other Learned
Men otherwise to Measure it,) being utterly Lost; and as Aben. Exra observes,
of the Musical Instruments in the Hundred and Fifteth Psalm, wholly It
recoverable; we have no way Left us now, but with Tunes composed by the Chief
Musicians for us, to do as well as we can.

IT is to be desired, that we may see in the Rising Generation, a fresh and
Strong Disposition to Learn the proper Tunes; that GOD may be Glorified, and
Religion beautified, with a Regular Singing among us; And that, To them that
are His Servants, He may let His work be seen; His Glory also unto those that
are their Children here: And that the Lovely Brightness of the Lord who is our
GOD, may with Conspicuous Luster be seen shining upon us.

FINIS.

