Mr. Stone's Election SERMON On Wednesday, May 25th. 1720.

Massachusetts. At a Council held in the Council Chamber in Boston, upon
Monday, May 30th. 1720.
Ordered, THAT John Otis and Paul Dudley Esqrs give the Thanks of the Board to
the Reverend Mr. Nathanael Stone, for his SERMON Preached before the GENERAL
ASSEMBLY, and desire a Copy thereof in order to its being Printed.

J. Willard Secr.

RULERS Are a Terror, Not to good, but Evil-workers.

A SERMON Preached before His Excellency Samuel Shute Esquire His Majesty's
COUNCIL, and the Representatives of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, on May 25, 1720.

On the Day of ELECTION of His Majesty's COUNCIL there.

By NATHANAEL STONE, Pastor of a Congregation in Harwich.

BOSTON in N. E.

Printed by B. Green, Printer to His Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL 1720.

An Election SERMON.
ROMANS XIII.3. For Rulers are not a terror to Good Works, but to the Evil.
THAT this Epistle was written to a Number of Christians in Rome is
unquestionable. Whither it was written to a Church there seems not evident.

THE former part of the Epistle is Doctrinal; and it treats of the most
important Doctrines of the Gospel; as GOD'S eternal Purpose, Foreknowledge,
Predestination, Vocation of Sinners into a State of Grace, their Justification
there-upon, etc. The Doctrine of Justification is here very particularly and
clearly handled, by the Apostle.

THE latter part of the Epistle is Practical, Instructive of us as to variety
of Duties to be done by us. Within this part falls this Chapter, and
particularly this Text; For Rulers are not a terror to good works; but to the
Evil.

IN v. 1. We have a Divine Command given by the Mouth of an Apostle, viz. Let
every Soul be subject unto the higher Powers. The Soul is here put for the
Person, as frequently other-where in Scripture. Every Soul, includes Persons of
all Ranks and Distinctions. Powers, are here intended of Civil Rulers; for the
Apostle is not here treating of Churchgovernment.

OBEDIENCE to this Precept is here urged by weighty Reasons. GOD made Man a
Rational Being; and as such He deals with him. He expects he should be swayed
by Reason; and accordingly he is hereby pressed to his Duty.

AND He tells us,

1. THAT the Powers are of GOD. They are Ordained by Him, are Constituted by
His Authority. And this should certainly be of weight with Rational Beings,
with every Man that owns a GOD, and himself to be His Creature, sustained by
Him every Moment, and deriving from Him every thing, every good thing that is
enjoyed by him.

2. THAT whosoever resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of GOD. He does not
ultimately resist a Creature, but GOD Himself, while he resists, or opposes
himself against His Ordinance. He wages War with GOD Himself. And what daring
Madness is this in the Creature! Who is, as we read, in Jer. 18.6. In GOD'S
Hand as the clay is in the Potters hand.

3. THAT they that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation. A dreadful
doom indeed! A strong Motive it is to be subject to Government. Its the same
word both in the Translation and Original, which we read, in 1 Cor. 11. 29.
respecting Persons Unworthily receiving the Lords Supper. And though it be true
that the word might be translated, Judgment; its also true, That either of
these Sins, with all others that Men are guilty of, or any particular Sin
whatsoever; without Repentance, will issue in Damnation.

4.(WHICH brings me to my Text) he tells us, That Rulers are not a terror to
good works, but to the evil. q. d. Obey them, Cheerfully submit to their
Authority and Rule; for though they be Men armed with the Sword of Civil Justice;
they are only evil workers, vicious Persons, to whom they are a terror. They
will not hurt the good: No, their Power is, as is the Law, in 1 Timothy 1.9. Not
against a Righteous Man, but against the Lawless, Disobedient, Ungodly, Unholy,
etc.

IN the Words of the Text we have,

1. THE subject spoken of, viz. Rulers; Such to whom the Civil Government is by
GOD committed; they are Rulers, Ruling in the Fear of GOD; Rulers in Scripture
denominated gods. Psalm. 82.1. GOD judges among the gods: they are gods, as
being clothed with His Authority; gods, as bearing the lively Image of His own
Impartiality, Equity, Justice, etc. mixed with Lenity and Mercy.

2. WHAT is Predicated or Affirmed of them. They are a Terror. Their
Countenances, Deportments, and Administrations carry a terror in them.

3. TO whom they are thus, or the objects of this Terror of theirs. And they
are thus, (1) Negatively, Not to good works. Here works are put for Persons
working. Rulers are no terror to them that be honest and good; that do good and
work righteousness. (2) Positively, They are a terror to evil works. i. e. To
evil workers. Evil workers, Vicious Persons, are they to whom they are a
terror. Against these it is that the Point, of their Sword of Civil Justice is
set. Immoral Men, Men of evil Practices, of wicked Lives, are the objects of
their terror. Thus are Rulers a terror not to good works, but to the evil,

DOCTRINE. THEY are Evil Workers, Vicious Persons, to whom Rulers are a Terror.

TO these and only these, according to their Character in my Text, they are so.
They are Evil Workers against whom their faces are set, and the edge of their
Authority turned. They will not hurt the good: No, Romans 13.3. Do good, and thou
shall have praise of them. They will not discoutenance, but encourage the doing
of Good. This you may expect; for we read in Romans 13.4. The Civil Ruler is the
Minister of GOD unto thee for good.

FOR further Illustration of this Truth, I shall first lay down the following
Positions; then Answer the Inquiry, viz. How, or in what way are Rulers a
terror to Evil Workers, to Vicious Livers?

POSITIONS.

Position, 1. That RULE Originally belongs to GOD Only. The right of Rule is
Primarily alone in the Hand of the High and Lofty ONE, who inhabiteth Eternity.
Even a proud and lofty spirited Heathen seems to have been convinced of this,
in Dan. 4.34 -- I praised and honored Him that lives for ever, whose Dominion
is an everlasting Dominion, and his Kingdom from Generation to Generation. And
it will come to that again, that all Rule shall be entirely in the Hand of the
Great JEHOVAH. We read, in 1 Cor. 15.24. That the Great Mediator shall put down
all Rule, Authority, and Power; and then shall deliver up the Kingdom to GOD.
And v. 28. When all things shall be subdued unto the Son; the Son Himself shall
be subject to Him that put all things under Him; that GOD may be all in all.

Position, 2. RULE being a Communicable Property of GOD, it may be derived unto
His Creatures. Creatures may by participation be invested with Rule and
Government, which be Originally in GOD alone. As Holiness, Justice, Goodness,
etc. are communicable Properties of GOD: so is Dominion also.

Position, 3. IT was accordingly communicated to Adam in Innocence. To him was
given Dominion over every Sublunary Being. GOD clothed him in a degree with
His own Authority. Genesis 1.28. -- Have Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, the
Fowl of the Air, and over every living thing that moves on the Earth. And in
this Dominion seems the Image of GOD on Adam, in part to have consisted. It was
indeed Righteousness and Holiness in which it principally did consist; but not
exclusive of Rule and Government, with which he was betrusted.

Position, 4. A forfeiture was made by the fall of this as well as of all other
good. Man by this Apostasy forfeited all his favors. He retained no title to
any good at all; no right to any thing either profitable, pleasurable, or
honorable. To that deadly complicated death only, now he had a title: Genesis
2.17. -- Thou shall surely die. He was now not only stripped of his right to
Rule, as well as other benefits: but his condition was much worse than that of
cursed Canaan, Genesis 9.25. A Servant of Servants shall he be unto his Brethren.

Position, 5. GOD by common favor, on the Revelation of the Gospel, restored
Rule in some degree to fallen Man. This is undeniably evident from Scripture.
Not only Rule, but Rule by Divine appointment, now belongs to fallen Man; to
some in one kind, to others in another; to some in one degree, to others in
another. And this is among GODS common favors: it belongs to bad as well as
good Men. Its no distinguishing Character of gracious Persons from others of
Mankind. No, Dominion is not founded in Grace. Even wicked Saul was the LORD'S
Anointed: He had right to Rule in Israel, though he was totally, devoid of any
saving good.

Position, 6. RULE is either common to Mankind in general; or appropriated more
particularly unto Some of them. Common Rule belongs to Men as Men respited from
present Ruin, and allowed to continue for a time in the World; to an^^^r the
Ends that Infinite Wisdom has de^ig^^d, with respect to them. This every Man is
in some degree a sharer in. The restoration of this to Apostate Man, we have
the account of, in Gen, 9.2. And the fear of you, and the dread of you, shall
be upon every beast of the earth, etc. Into your hand are they delivered. That
Rule which is more Special, is either, (1) Natural, as that of Parents
respecting Children. They have a Natural, though a limited right of dominion
over them; and Children are accordingly under a Natural tie to yield Obedience.
(2) Civil Rule, including in it that which is Military also. (3)
Ecclesiastical, which is settled in and over the visible Church by CHRIST, as
the King and Head of it. Ecclesiastical Rulers before the Mosaic Law, were the
Firstborn of the Families. Under the Law the Stated Rulers of the Church were
the Priests and Levites Since the Law, they are Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors
and Teachers.

BUT the Civil Rulers are they of whom my Text speaks, and concerning whom it
is affirmed; They are a Terror, not to good works, etc. They are evil workers,
vicious persons, to be a terror unto whom these are constituted by GOD. This by
Divine appointment is their Office: And on this very thing they are to attend,
Romans 13.6.

QUESTION. BUT how, or whereby do Rulers become a Terror to Evil Workers, to
Persons of Vicious Lives, and Practices?

ANSWER. THEY are and appear to be a Terror to evil workers.

1. BY their very Countenances and Grave deportments. Persons of ill Manners
and base Practices may read in the very Countenances of Rulers, their
ill-resentment of them. Even therein may be read their hatred of them that work
iniquity. We read, in Prove. 25.23. The North wind drives away rain, so does an
angry countenance, a backbiting Tongue. Backbiting Tongues, and other base
Practices, have the countenances of Rulers set against them. Nor are their
Grave deportments, in their daily Conversation, without use and service this
way.

2. BY their manifest Aversion from Persons of ill fame, and dissolute Lives.
They loath the practices of Vicious Persons. As the Ruler in Israel: Psalm.
26.5. They hate the Congregation of evildoers, and will not sit with the
wicked. They loath the works of them that turn aside to Vicious Courses. They
are the faithful of the Land on whom they set their eyes; toward whom they
manifest their countenances favorable. Psalm. 101.3, 6. Nor will they know,
with approbation, any wicked Person.

3. BY Enacting Laws suited to the Suppression of Immorality and Vice, and the
encouragement of Equity and Virtue. The Laws of the Land shall be adapted by
them to the great ends of encouraging them that do well, and the suppression of
evil Men, and evil Manners.

4. BY looking diligently to the Execution of them. Rulers will carefully see
to it that the Laws answer their proper end; that they be not wrested by evil
men, to serve base designs, nor the use of them frustrated by such as Study how
to evade their force.

5. BY Rejecting with abhorrence, those Men that would obtain, with Money,
Places of Honor and Trust. They will without any further inquiry determine
such Men unfit for any Public Place or Station. Rulers know that its not
Bribery but Virtue that makes Men sit to represent, as Rulers do, the Person of
the Son of GOD. Accordingly they will carefully avoid preferring Men to Public
Places, of base, fordid, selfish Spirits.

6. BY throwing out of Place Officers that be evidently Unfaithful to their
Trust. They will hear their testimony against Immorality, by displacing
Unfaithful Officers. The Public shall know that they are not Abetters of any
such Men. In this way they will make it known that their Practice is agreeable
to their Character in my Text. Immoral Persons shall be divested of their
Offices, and dismissed from their Places of Public Trust.

7. BY appointing Persons to keep Public Houses, who are themselves a terror
to sensual, sloathful, vile and base Men. They will pick our Men in Towns for
that Place, that be Men of Honesty and Courage; Men that hate gain by the Sins
of other Men; Men that will carefully observe the Laws respecting Taverns; that
will discountenance Towndwellers, and reserve their Public Houses for such for
whom they are by Law designed, Men that regard the Interest of Religion, and
prefer the Public Weal above their Private Interest, shall be the Men for
these betrustments. Indeed there are few Men in the Province, that have greater
advantages, either to prevent, or promote the Ruin of this People, than
Tavern-keepers have.

8. Lastly, BY giving proper Encouragement, and suitable Support to the
Gospel Ministry. The direct end of that is not only to terrify Evil-workers;
but to eradicate Original Sin it self, from whence all evil works proceed. Its
direct tendency is to beat down the Devils Kingdom, and raze the very root of
Actual Sin. Accordingly we read, as in Act. 26.18. -- I send thee to open men's
eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to GOD.
Thus runs the Commission given to the Gospel Ministry. So in 2 Cor. 10.4. The
weapons of our Warfare are not carnal, but mighty through GOD, for the pulling
down of strong holds. These strong holds are the obstinate Wills of deeply
depraved Men: and for the breaking down of these, to a submission to GOD's
righteousness, is the Gospel Ministry appointed.

THE great end of Civil Government is, to restrain Men's Corruptions, to prevent
Sin from breaking out to that degree to deluge the World; to damm up its
Streams, that they may not as a mighty Torrent, carry all before them. This is
the great end of Civil Laws, Penalties annexed to them, Punishments inflicted
on Malefactors, etc. These things are appointed of GOD as means to restrain
Men's exorbitant Lusts.

BUT the tendency of the Gospel Ministry is, to kill the very root of Sin; to
heal the depraved Natures of Men that be tainted and poisoned with it. It tends
indeed to curb their Lusts, and keep them from being so Vicious and Profane,
as otherwise they would; but its also appointed as a Means to heal their
wretched Natures, and cure them of their Heart-plagues.

RULERS will accordingly see to the Encouragement and Support of the
Gospel Ministry. This surely they will do, as knowing that in this way they are
a Terror to evil workers.

AND they will do it,

1. BY promoting Learning in the Tongues and Arts. They know that such Learning
is highly needful to qualify Persons for the Ministry; and that our Fathers
that settled this Country, even in the Infancy and Poverty of it, were
accordingly at charge to erect a College for Education, beyond what was to be
had in Grammar Schools.

2. BY discountenancing the folly of People in Choosing Ministers according to
their vain Fancies, without regard either to the Civil Law, or
Scripture-qualifications.

3. BY taking care that Ministers be not Necessitated to leave their Studies,
to prevent the Starving of their Families. And on this I may presume, as
concluding it well known to our Rulers. (1) That the Gospel Ministry ought to
be Maintained, and that honorably by the People. The Lord has ordained that
they that Preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14. He wills,
that while People partake of their Spiritual Things, they should partake of
their Carnal things, 1 Cor. 9.11. And declares it reasonable from the very
light of Nature, and usage of Nations, 1 Cor. 9.7. (2) Consequently, that
People ordinarily, are able to Maintain the Ministry among them. Being
commanded so to do, they have ability there-unto. Were it not thus, certainly
such a Precept had never been given them of GOD. It is true, that respecting
some Spiritual duties required of Men, we cannot argue from the Command, an
ability to obey: but respecting any external acts of Obedience, the argument
seems to be strong, from GOD's Precept, to argue ability in People to yield
Obedience. Accordingly, People ordinarily are able to Maintain and that
decently and honorably, the Gospel Ministry among them. (3) That People do not
ordinarily thus Maintain it. I speak not this to reflect on any Place or
People: but I take it to be evident to Judicious Rulers, that thus it is. (4)
That GOD has authorized them to see that Justice be herein done to the
Ministry. And, (5) That it will be for the Interest of People themselves, that
their Ministers have just dealing in this regard from them. Rulers know that
this will tend not to their Poverty, but their Prosperity. Sure I am that the
Scripture thus affirms. Prove. 3.9, 10. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and
with the first fruits of all thy increase. So shall thy barns be filled with
plenty, etc. Mal. 3.10. Bring ye all the tithes in to the Storehouse, that
there may be Meat in mine house; and prove me now herewith, says the Lord of
Hosts, if I will not open you the windows of Heaven, and pour you out a
blessing, etc.

I pass now to the Improvement of the Doctrine.

USE, I. Is by way of Caution.

THAT absolute perfection be not expected from any Order of Men whatsoever. We
are not in the State of Innocence, with Adam before the fall. Nor do we live
among the Stars, where the proper Orbs are kept, and all the Motions regular.
We live in a Cursed, and a Wicked World. Sin and Corruption, darkness and error
have infested every Society of Men. Rulers, whither Civil or Ecclesiastical;
People, whither in the State or Church, labor under the deadly fruits of the
first Apostasy. There is not a Person among us, but often wanders out of his
way. Jam. 3.2. In many things we all offend. Absolute Perfection then, is not
to be expected among us. Nor ought it to be a stumbling block to any, that it
is not found.

THERE was not unmixed Equity in the Civil State, no, not in Solomon's time.
Eccl. 3.16. I saw under the Sun the place of Judgment, that wickedness was
there, and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was there. Nor are all
things right in the Ecclesiastic Polity in any Age; whither among Pastors, or
People; Rulers, or Ruled. Nor may it be expected while the word holds good, in
Jer. 17.9. The heart of man is deceitful above all things, and desperately
wicked. Indeed that word, if duly thought of, will stain the Pride of all
humane glory; and lay every Man, from the King on the Throne, to the Beggar in
the Street, in the dust, before GOD.

AGAIN, People, through Ignorance and want of Judgment, may think that amiss in
Rulers, which indeed is not so. Acts of Rulers may be sometimes ill resented,
for want of knowing the true ground and reason of them.

AND again, Errors in Government may often proceed from the Iniquities of People,
as the moral cause thereof. If that be sometimes true, Delirant Reges,
plectuntur Ach^^i; that is infallibly true, in Prove. 28.2. For the
transgression of a Land, many are the Princes thereof. And so as to other
afflictive evils relating to Government.

USE, II. Is of Instruction and Exhortation.

ARE Rulers a Terror to evil Workers: Then,

1. WHAT will GOD Himself, the Governor of the World be? He is the Judge of
all the Earth, Genesis 18.25. Justice and Judgment are the habitation of his
Throne. And what will become of wicked-workers then, when they fall into His
Hand? That will be found a solemn Truth, in Heb. 10.31. It is a fearful thing
to fall into the hands of the living GOD. It were much better for wicked men
never to have been born, than thus to fall into the Hands of this GOD.

2. RULERS then are a great blessing to a wretched World. Were not evil-workers
terrified by Rulers, the World would soon be Uninhabitable. Men would not be
able to live one among another. They would be in an higher degree than now they
are, as described in Hab. 1.14. As the Fishes of the Sea, devouring one
another. Tyranny its self is less bad than Anarchy. But Rulers ruling in the
fear of GOD, are indeed great blessings. Unto their Rule, under GOD, is the
Peace and Tranquillity of a People very much owing.

3. OUR Rulers then, will mind their Character, given in my Text. Its the
inspired Apostle that says, Rulers are a Terror to evil works. A great part of
this Assembly are Rulers. Will each One ever bear in Mind, ever make proper and
beneficial reflections on this their Character; Rulers are a Terror, not to
good, but to evil works.

4. THANK we GOD for Rulers. Let them be accounted among the rich, though but
common blessings of a Land. Rulers ruling in the fear of G0D; doing Justice and
Judgment; seeking the wealth of their People, are a great and a rich blessing.
These are the Shields of the Earth, Psalm. 47.9. They bear up the Pillars of a
Land, as in Psalm. 75.3. What a Chaos of confusion, and field of blood would the
World presently be, were it not for Government. Let Rulers then be acknowledged
as great blessings to our Land.

5. LET all Pray for them, that they may ever be a Terror to evil-workers. This
is the Preceptive Will of GOD, in 1 Timothy 2.2. Let Prayer be made for Kings, and
for all that be in Authority. Hitherto few if any People in the World have been
favored by GOD, in respect of Government, as New England has been. Let GOD be
sought, for the continuance of this Favor. And let none contribute by their
ingratitude, to the forfeiture of it.

I conclude only with two words, which have evidently much of awe and solemnity
in them. And they are directed to the two constituent parts of this great
Assembly, viz. Rulers, and Ruled, And,

1. WILL our Rulers think how they represent the very Person of the Incarnate
SON of GOD. That Sacred Person is verily represented by You. Its His Authority
you are invested with; for He is not only the Head of the Church, but the head
over all things to the Church, Ephesians. 1.22. All Power is given to Him as
Mediator. And with His Kingly Power, by Participation, Civil Rulers are
invested. On this account they are called gods, in Psalm. 82.6.

ITS true, it is so, and more than barely so, respecting Ecclesiastical Rulers:
They also represent His very Person, and that not in one only, but in all His
Offices, Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly. I do not say, That they represent
His person in all Parts of all His Offices, but in all His Offices. His
Prophetical Office, they represent, in Speaking from GOD unto the People; His
Priestly Office, in Praying for them; and His Kingly, in Ruling of them.
Accordingly we read, as in Joh.20. 21. -- As my Father has sent me, so send I
you. Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule ever you. Mat. 28.19. Go and
teach all Nations. James 5. 14. Let the Elders of the Church Pray for him. Thus
do they represent the Person of CHRIST. Nor are their Commissions less
Authentic, but less Mediate from Sovereign Power, than those of Them in Civil
Government. And it may accordingly seem strange, that any that be acquainted
with the Bible, should either in their Prints, or Practice, assign them their
Place at the Peoples feet.

But when Rulers, whither Civil or Ecclesiastic, think, whose glorious Person
is represented by them, How solemn will be the thought! What awful impressions
will it make on their Spirits! What manner of Persons will they think
themselves obliged to be in an holy unblamable Conversation! None in the World
are under such solemn and strong ties, as these, to regard and obey that
Precept, in Ephesians. 5.15. See then that ye walk circumspectly. Beware of so much
as a wry Step, left the infinite Person represented by you, be thereby
reflected on, and dishonored; least His Great Name be blasphemed by your means.

2. LET People, who make the other constituent Part of this Assembly, regard
you, Civil Rulers, as being of this Character. Know, that they represent the
Person, and are clothed with the Authority of GOD the SON. They are on this
account termed, as in Psai. 82.6. The Children of the Most High. Thus then
regard them, and deport your selves accordingly toward them. And,

1. DO not conclude their acts in Government to be necessarily amiss, because
you cannot presently see the ground and reason of them. Things done may be
reasonable, just and equal, though every eye cannot presently discern the
reasonableness, equality, and justice of them.

2. Withold not the respect and honor from them, which is their due, in
regard of their Character. Honor them, as representing the Person, and
clothed with the Authority above mentioned. Honor is their due, and
accordingly they should have it, Deuteronomy. 5.16.

3. CHEERFULLY Pay them their Tribute what is owing to them, on the account of
the continual Service they do for you. Unto this Justice it self obliges you:
and the ground to enforce to the doing Justly in this regard the Apostle has
given us, in Romans 13.6. having said that Tribute was paid to Civil Rulers, he
gives the ground of it, viz. For they are God's Ministers, attending
continually on this very thing.

FINIS.
SINCE the Composing the Discourse above, having heard the Melancholy News
from Home, of the DEATH of Sir WILLIAM ASHHURST, a Lover of, and Benefactor to
our Country; Yea, to the British Kingdom, where he had his Residence: I take
this Occasion, on behalf I of this Obliged People, to express our sad
Resentment of, and Lamentations for so great a Public Loss: And earnest
desires of a continued Succession of his NAME, in his Family of Worthy
Patriots; whose fragrant Names shall be famous in our Israel, for their Worthy
Deeds, as His has been, till Time shall be no more.

N. S.


