A LETTER From a Gentleman, Containing some Remarks upon the Several Answers
given unto Mr. Colman's, Entitled, The Distressed State of the Town of Boston.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, for NICHOLAS BOON, BENJAMIN GRAY, and JOHN
EDWARDS, and Sold at their Shops. 1720.

SIR,
I Have perused your Letter, Entitled, The Distressed State of the Town of
Boston, and think the Title does answer the Matters of Fact therein contained;
which are too obvious to every Man to be denied, and therefore I believe all
Men will be of Opinion that it was high time some body did begin, and show the
Poverty and Oppression which is breaking in like a Flood upon us. I have lately
Traveled into livers parts of the Country, and conversed with many Principle
Men there, and find them all to be very different in Opinion from those who
have pretended to give Answer to yours in the News-Letter, the 18th of April,
and since in a Pamphlet dated 23d. of same Month, Entitled, Some Remarks on
yours, and indeed I think the Author did well to put in the Word, Some: for
those Things which there was most need of clearing up, he has not thought
proper to touch upon, perhaps he saw he was not able to give any satisfactory
Answer thereto, and so thought (as any wise Man would) that it would be most
prudent to pass them over in silence, and indeed no Man of common
understanding, who compares your Letter with the pretended Answers will say,
that the Answers any way clear up the Difficulties you complain of. So that
your Letter stands good, and will do so in the Opinion of every Judicious
Reader, until a clearer and fuller Answer appear. I have also seen a piece of
sulled paper, Entitled, The Postcript, which I hastily ran over, but thought
it not worth while to give it a second reading, being sensible that none but
some very mean wretch could be so simple to think the Cause (of which he would
be thought a Patron) could receive any benefit by the railing of such a
Rabshica. However, I put it in my Pocket, thinking it might serve (as dirty as
it was,) for a necessary occasion; but Sir, I can assure you, you will suffer
nothing by such Scurrility, for I find you are justified by Men of every Rank
and Order, and it is the cry of (by far the greatest part) both of Town and
Country, that your Letter was a word in season, and that you have done well in
appearing in this critical Juncture.

I think it no Difficult matter to Answer the Answer's, but it will take up too
much of my Time, and indeed what they have written, are mostly Evasions,
Misrepresentations and Amusements, and perhaps some Mistakes, to which the
Gentleman owns he is as liable as you are. He says you have represented Things
in a smart and moving manner, by which I perceive he thought that the Town felt
the Truth of what you have written, and therefore would readily fall in with
it; This seems to be his great fear and perplexity through the whole Epistle, and
therefore he says your heart waxed hot within you, and inliven'd and sharpened
your Expression: Though I confess I don't see you have exceeded that way any
more than the nature of the Thing required; for it being so Melancholy a Theme
you were upon, I think it looked well enough to show your Resentments against
some Evils you complain of by a suitable warmth of Expression.

As to the ill use which have been made of our Province Bills, and the unhappy
Consequences resulting therefrom, I shall not run into the Argument, it being
nothing to the present Case, but I cannot but observe that it is the Opinion of
every Body I hear discourse on that Subject, that the Province Bills received
their deadly wound the Day they were first invented, but had they been then
made a lawful Tender, or had there been then a Law made that no Man should have
been Imprisoned who tendered the Province Bills for satisfaction, the Poor Men
who received 'em for Wages in the Canada Expedition would not have lost Fifty
per Cent, by them: And indeed I am of Opinion if Merchants had then made a
Bank, and given out their Bills, these Poor Men would have fared much better
then they did with the Province Bills, for the Merchants would have been for
supporting the Credit of their own Bills, whereas it was their Interest to run
down the value of the Public Bills, in order to get Money by them; and this
has always been the great Argument with me why a Private Bank must be better
than a Public; A Private Bank would be in the hands of a multitude of Men
whose Interest it would be to support the Credit of there Bills, whereas it is
and always will be the interest of every private Man to undervalue the Public
Bills, by selling his Silver to the highest bidder: And it is this in a great
measure that has raised the price of Silver to Twelve Shillings per Ounce.

I am fully of the Gentleman's mind, that the Distressed State of the Trade of
Boston is not owing to the want of Province Bills, for I say it was an unhappy
Day wherein they were first invented, but the distressed State of the Town of
Boston, which is what you talk of, is owing to the want of some better Medium
of Exchange, and I am sure you are right in saying, that it is impossible the
Town or Country can subsist without some Medium or other, And Two Hundred
Thousand Pounds in this large Country is but as a sprat in a Whales Belly; One
would think there could not be less that that in the Countrymans Chests to buy
Land with.

The Gentleman don't wonder the Trade of Boston declines, and expects it will
yet do so, And I am of his Opinion. He says several other Places in this and
other Provinces are got into a foreign Trade of late; But he don't tells us that
our Burthening Trade with heavy Duties, has been in a great measure the cause
of it, whilst our Neighbors court Trade, and endeavor to encourage the
Trader, and find their Account therein, for by under-selling us they supply
those Places who formerly depended on us, so that we have lost the advantage we
formerly reaped by supplying our Neighbors, and those also who they now supply.

But the Gentleman makes a great noise about our giving Twelve Shillings per
Ounce for Silver, and says we have Province Bills to buy up all the produce of
the Country and all the Silver and Gold besides; By which I find he knows
little of Trade of this Country. As to the Silver and Gold, I suppose a small
Sum of Money will buy up all that comes in; I don't believe there is Three
Thousand Pounds per Annum, comes into the Province, so that could it all be
kept and not a Penny Shipped off again, unless it came in faster then it does
now, we should not have Silver enough for a Medium to manage our Trade, in less
then Two or Three Hundred Years. But further I must tell that Gentleman, that
if the Fish which is made in the Country in one Year lay in one Pile, and all
our Province Bills in another, I am of opinion that the Bills would not be
sufficient to pay for that one Article, so vastly short is the Gentleman in his
Computation.

The Gentleman seems very much concerned at your touching upon the Law made to
shorten Credit. I find it is a tender point by the Treatment you have lately
met with on that account; and therefore I shall wave it, and only say, That in
my apprehension no Man could have justified the good intentions of the
Government more than you have done; you only show the Advantages some People
have taken therefrom to oppress their Neighbors, and your Answerer don't deny
the Truth of what you assert. I hope none will blame you for comparing it with
the Scriptures, that being the Eternal Rule of Righteousness, by which we must
all be justified or condemned.

The Gentleman seems afraid that every Bodies Belly is not full of the Public
Bank, but I am fully of your Opinion that it is so; And join also with your
Answerer that it never did no good; and add further, nor never will do any: For
which Reason I hope if ever we have any more Bills, they will be on another
foot, and as that Gentleman says, they imagine a vain Thing who think the Loan
Money they have Borrowed will be paid by the Province. I think it very unjust
for any to desire it, and very idle for 'em to expect it.

The Gentleman tells us, That the Silver and Gold will always be Bought up and
Shipped off while we have such plenty of Bills. As if the plenty of Bills were
the cause thereof, no my Friend, it is the scarcity of Returns is the cause. He
does not consider we have lost our Bay Trade, which was a great Article in our
Returns. Our Newfoundland Trade and other Branches are in a great measure cut
off by the high Prizes our Provisions bare here of late, and this has run up
the Prizes of Returns, and the reason European Goods are so high of late, is
(1) Because there is not near so many Imported as formerly, though the Country
is growing daily, and Expends vastly, and (2) The Scarcity of Returns help also
to keep up their Prizes, and what Silver comes in is accounted as Merchandise,
and Bought up as other Returns are, and so has been for a long time. We all
know that there has not been any Silver passing in Pay (...) these many Years.

The Gentleman tells us, That there is a Cry made of hoarding up the Bills at
some Convenient Seasons, but don't say what Seasons those are, so that we are
left in the dark as to that matter. But he goes on and talks of the Merchants
hoarding up the Bills to buy Silver, and putting off there Tradesmen with
Goods, and keeping 'em out of their Money part with this Excuse, that the Bills
are hoarded up; as if it were the Men who employed the Poor who hoard up the
Bills, But I must tell the Gentleman, it is not those who are concerned in
Shipping and employ the greatest part of the Town that drive this Trade; it is
a Set of Men among us who live only by Buying up Bills of Exchange, and Silver
and Gold, and bid upon one another, and so advance the Exchange, and the Price
of Silver and Gold also, and these are the Men who Import the fineries and gue
gaus he speaks of, who indeed serve more to hurt us than to help us.

Well, I find the only Project the Gentleman can contrive for a Medium of
Exchange to pass amongst us is, To leave of trusting, That he tells us will do
the Business; But I can put him in a way which will do our Business much
sooner, and a way as likely to take Effect and that is to leave off Eating,
Drinking, and Wearing, and then there will be an end of Buying and Selling, and
this is as likely for such a Place as this, or indeed any other Place who lives
by Trade, to live without Trusting. Perhaps the Gentleman is a Sallary Man, and
so don't know much about Trusting: But if so I believe I may venture to tell
him, if we have not some Medium or other contrived, Sallary Men will feel it as
much as others very quickly.

(...) to the Reasons the Gentleman gives against a (...) think they are not
unanswerable. How^^^^ (...) enter upon the Argument least I should be thought
to drive that matter too far: I only far, That I always was and still am of
your Opinion, that a Private Bank under the Inspection of the Government would
have been much better than the way we have been in, and so you say in your
Letter; you there propose that the Government should Encourage and Support it
by suitable Laws, whith takes off the Force of the Answerers great Objection
against it, Viz. That it will be in the Power of the Bankers to accomplish any
of their own private Designs, without the Governments being able to restrain
'em.

But I find the Gentleman mistakes your Proposal of Fortifying our Exposed
Settlements, and says, Peoples going into New Plantations where they could not
raise their own Provisions has raised the Price with us, and so far he is
right: But you only proposed securing what are Settled from the Insults of the
Heathen who are ready to devour them. But though it may have been some
inconveniency that there have been so many New Settlements of late I hope we
shall soon find the good Effect thereof, and doubt not but that they will now
feed themselves and help feed us also.

I must own with the Gentleman in the News-Letter, that we have been too
Extravagant in our Buildings, Clothing, Furniture, and Tables, and I confess
it is a fault to exceed in these Things; But Solomon tells us, That there is
nothing better under the Sun then for a Man to Eat and Drink, and Enjoy the
good of his Labor: So that I believe we ought not to be sordidly Covetous, and
deny our selves the Comfort of what we Work for, but Eat and Drink as our
Circumstances will afford, so as not to abuse the Favor of Heaven to
Voluptuousness. But this wretched Trade of Half Money and Half Goods has
insensibly run People into this Extravagancy, and still keep 'em in it; for
what shall they do with their Notes to Shops, they cannot Eat or Drink them,
they must improve 'em in such ways as I have before mentioned or utterly lose
'em: And the Country will by and by feel as great, if not greater mischiefs
from this want of a Medium then we have felt, and in matters of greater
Consequence, for when the Bills are all in (which will not be long first) they
must sell their Produce for Shop Goods, or keep 'em and eat 'em all themselves;
and that we cannot allow of neither, for then we must starve, and rather than do
so, we shall be so wicked as to Borrow of our Country Friends and never Pay.
And if they Sell them for Goods they must wear 'em, they cannot Merchandise with
'em because there will be no Money to Buy with: What then will be the
Consequences but Sloth and Idleness, they will have no Use for their Wool or
their Flax, their Shop Notes will be more than they will Expend. Their Children
will be viciated for want of Business, and in another Generation will loose all
that Spirit and Life which distinguishes Free Men from Slaves, and will be
brought to that sordidness and meanness of Soul, which appears in Ireland, and
some other Places, where the Poor couch like an Assunder his Burden at the
sigh of one of there Landlords, though the Man (set his Estate aside) is no
better than the meanest of them And these I fear will be the miserable
Consequence resulting from the want of a Medium.

I must join with the Gentleman in this that it was or the pressing Importunity
of the Trading part, that the General Assembly consented to the Public Loan or
Bank and therefore I suppose it was them you allude to when you talk of there
being short sighted. But I presume the Gentleman will acknowledge, that the
Reason of there urging that matter was because the saw they should be ruined in
their Trade if they had no Medium, and the Government had crushed the Private
Bank, and therefore their Case being almost Desperate they were glad to lay
hold of any thing to save themselves from Drowning.

Again that Gentleman tells us, That at a Town Meeting in Boston, the Private
Bank was rejected by a great Majority of the Voters; I well remember I was
there but I could not see such a mighty disproportion in the Votes; had it came
to a written Pole, I am of Opinion they would have proved pretty equal. Put if
the People did not see so clearly into the Difference then, I am well satisfied
they have felt it since by an unhappy Experience that there Understanding was
then in the dark.

The Gentleman goes on and says, That the Private Bank has been Burried a
great many Years; and I make no doubt but it has so been with himself and some
others, and they have so far Burried the Public Bank also that both Town and
Country are half ruined, and if a Private Bank or some other Medium be not
Brought on to support us, we shall ere we are aware, be plunged into the most
direful Circumstances that ever poor People were in. He talks of endless
mischiefs and confusions the Private Bank would have involved us in, but gives
us no one Instance wherein: I find they are all for General Terms when they
come upon that Head and don't care to descend to Particulars.

The Gentleman seems sorry for our Distressed Circumstances, But don't project
any thing for our Relief; This is only saying to us, Be ye warmed and be ye
clothed; But where is the charitable Samaritan that Binds up our Wounds, and
takes Compassion on us. I am sure I am fond of no Bank of one sort or other, if
any thing else can be projected which may Effectually Relieve us, but I am not
for Lying down and Dying in these Circumstances. We are Bare and must be Fed,
and if one Project will not do, we must try another, and then another, as the
Physician does with his Languishing Patient; and not neglect until Death seize
us and we be past Remedy, which will soon be our Case.

But what could the Gentleman mean by saying, That by your Projecting the
Building Bridges, Fortifications, etc. one would not think our Circumstances so
distressed as you pretend: Could he think any Man of common sense could read
that part of your Letter and not charge him with triffling; is not your
Proposal all along to bring out a Medium of Exchange, that the Poor may be
employed and their Families kept from starving, which they must do if there be
not some Medium to Buy Necessaries withal. I am as uneasy as others at the
thoughts of Intailing a Debt on my Posterity, but better be in Debt than Dye,
Skin for Skin, all that a Man has will he give for his Life: But I confess I
don't see such a mighty Inconveniency neither, in leaving my Son an Hundred
Pounds to pay if I leave him so much the more to discharge it. I acknowledge it
is just to pay our Debts, and wise and prudent to pay the Old Score, but I
think it as prudent to look forward and consider how we shall Live when the
Bills are all in. There will not be then a Farthing of Money to Buy a morsel of
Bread for this great Multitude.

Well, the Gentleman joins with you in Opinion in one Article, he tells you he
is for encouraging Manufactures But I am sorry to see his mean contracted
Spirit; he tells you he hopes they shall Raise their own Provisions, and Wear
their own Clothing, and so live out of Debt, so that I find he is for having
the Town and Country independent of each other; for he don't pretend they shall
raise more than they use, and as for us we may go naked and starve.

The Gentleman says, That the main Spring and Design of your Letter was to
Influence in the Choice of Representatives in the Country; I rather think it
was to set the sad Condition the Town and Country is in for want of a Medium of
Exchange, in a true Light, and the Poverty, Misery and Oppression which is
breaking in upon us; and indeed the Country groans under it almost as much as
the Town, and say they cannot improve their Lands for want of Laborers, and
they can neither Buy nor Hire, because they cannot get Money; whereas if Money
were plenty they could improve much more of their Lands, and consequently raise
abundantly more, and their Lands would grow more valuable, and so could afford
to Sell cheaper to the Merchants, and yet be gainers by the Bargain; but for
want of this Medium we can expect no other but that shortly their Fields will
be as the Field of the Sluggard overgrown with Tares.

The Gentleman tells you the Governor and Council will give you no Thanks for
your Sugar Plumbs, as he is pleased to call them. I hope and believe you were
Sincere in your Protestations, I never knew you were any Party Man; and I wish
from my heart that some Method may be found for our relief to prevent
Party-making amongst us; it grieves me to see our Divisions which are daily
increasing, and which tend only to our ruin; whereas if we would but Unite, and
bare with one another in our different Apprehension of Things, debate Matters
fairly, and lay aside all private designs, and Animosities, and believe that
every Man's particular Interest is comprised in the General, and study
sincerely the Public Good, I am fully persuaded we might contrive ways to
Extricate our selves out of these Difficulties, and be as flourishing a People
as ever.

I hope with your Country Friends, that the several Towns will choose to
Represent 'em in the General Court, Men of a Public Spirit; and farther I hope
when they come together, that they will choose such, and none but such, for
Counselors, Men not only of Parts and Probity, but of Integrity and down
right Honesty; Lovers of King GEORGE, and of their Country also; such as will
sincerely seek our Peace and Prosperity: and I hope that the GOVERNOR will of
His Great Goodness to the People, consider our Malancholy Circumstances as set
forth in your Letter, which I have not as yet heard any Man deny the Truth of;
and which he cannot but be confirmed in the belief of, on perusing your Letter
and the triffling Answerers, who have not in the least confuted the Matters of
Fact therein contained. And I pray GOD to direct the Governor and General
Court in some proper Measures for our Relief; for most certainly something must
be done or the Place will soon sink and the Trade come to nothing.

On the whole, I perceive all the Gentleman drives at in his pretended Answer
is only to draw in the few Bills which are yet abroad; he tells us this is the
way to raise the value of 'em, so then I find he and you agree in that point,
for you say in your Letter that the reason some give why those who Explode what
others Project for our Relief is that they may get their Neighbors Lands at
half Value, and the Gentleman I find is for drawing in all the Bills that then
a Man who has Mortgaged an House for Two Hundred Pounds which cost him a
Thousand, must be forced to let it go for the Two Hundred, because when the
Bills are all sunk, he will not be able to get wherewith to redeem it: And now
let any Man judge whether this be the way to keep the Estates in many Men's
Hands which the Gentleman says, (and indeed every Body else thinks) is the
Strength, Safety and Interest of the Land, or whether it does not rather look
like a design to inslave a People and make a few Lord's, and the rest Beggars.
But no more of this at present, we all know one another, and what the best of
us were Twenty or Thirty Years ago. I cannot forbear repeating a Flight of one
of our English Poets, We boast of Families and make a mighty do,
Of Lord's whose Fathers were, the Lord knows who.


I wish your Friend's well, and that when they Write again, they may give you a
more pertinent Answer. I am Sir, etc.
Boston, May 16 th. 1720.

