THE Sovereignty and Goodness of GOD, Together with the Faithfulness of His
Promises Displayed*

BEING A NARRATIVE Of the Captivity and Restoration of Mrs. Mary Rowlandson.

Commended by her, to all that desir^ (...) know the Lords Doings to, and
Dealings with her; especially to her dear Children and Relations.

Written by her own Hand, for her private Use, and now made Public at the
earnest Desire of some Friends, and for the Benefit of the Afflic^^^.

The Second Edition.

Carefully Corrected, and Purged from (...) of Errors which escaped in the
former (...).

BOSTON: Printed by I. Fleet, for (...) at the Three Bibles and (...) in (...),
1720.

A NARRATIVE Of the Captivity and Restoration (...) Mrs. Mary Rowlandson.
ON the tenth of February came the Indians with great Numbers upon Lancaster:
Their first coming was about Sunrising; hearing the noise of some Guns, we
looked out; several ^ouses were burning, and the Smoke ascending to Heaven.
There were five Persons taken in one House, the Father, and the Mother, (...)
sucking Child they knocked on the head; the other two they took and carried away
alive. There were two others, who being out o^ their Garrison upon some
Occasion, were set upon: one was knocked on the head, the other (...). Another
there was who running along was (...) and woun^ed, and fell down; be beg^^^ of
th^^^ his (...), promising them Money, (as they told me) (...) they would not
hearken to him, (...) head, (...), and split open his Bowels. Another seeing
many of the Indians about his Barn, ventured and went out, but was quickly shot
down. There were three others belonging to the same Garrison who were killed;
the Indians getting up upon the Roof of the Barn, had advantage to shoot down
upon them over their Fortification. Thus these murtherous wretches went on
burning and destroying before them.

At length they came and beset our own house, and quickly it was the
dolefullest Day that ever mine eyes saw. The House stood upon the edge of a
Hill; some of the Indians got behind the Hill, others into the Barn, and others
behind any thing that would shelter them; from all which places they shot
against the House, so that the B^llets seemed to fly like Hail; and quickly
they wounded one man among us, then another, and then a third. About two hours
(according to my Observation in that amazing time) they had been about the
House before they prevailed to fire it, (which they did with Flax and H^m^
which they brought out of the Barn, and there being no Defense about the House,
only 2 (...) at two opposite Corners, and one of them not finished) they fired
it once, and one v^^tured out and quenc^^d it, but they (...) fired it again,
and that took. N^w (...) that dreadful hour come, that I have often (...) of
(in the time of the War, as it was the (...) others) but now mine Eyes see it.
Some in our House were fighting for their Lives, others wallowing in their
Blood, the House on fire over our heads, and the bloody Heathen ready to knock
us on the head if we stirred out. Now might we hear Mothers and Children crying
out for themselves, and one another, Lord what shall we do! Then I took my
Children (and one of my Sisters hers) to go forth and leave the House: but as
soon as we came to the door, and appeared, the Indians shot so thick, that the
bullets rattled against the House, as if one had taken an handful of Stones and
threw them, so that we were forced to g^ve ^ack. We had six stout Dogs
belonging to ^ur Garrison, but none of them would stir, though another time, if
an Indian had come to the Door, they were ready to fly upon him and tear him
down. (...) Lord hereby would make us the more to acknowledge his Hand, and to
see that our Help is always in him. But out we must go, the fire increa^^^g,
and coming along behind us, ro^^ing, and the Indians gaping before us with
their Guns, Spears, and Hatchets to devou^ us. No (...) were we out of the
House, but (...)-in-Law (being before Wounded in (...) the (...) in or near the
Throat) fell (...) the Indians scornfully (...) and were presently upon (...)
Clothes. The Bullets flying thick, (...) went thorough my side, and the same
(as would seem) thorough the Bowels and Hand of my poor Child in my Arms. One
of my elder Sisters Children (named William) had then his Leg broke, which the
Indians perceiving, they knocked him on head. Thus were we butchered by those
merciless Heathen, standing amazed, with the Blood running down to our heels.
My elder Sister being yet in the House, and seeing those woeful sights, the
Infidels haling Mothers one way, and Children another, and some wallowing in
their Blood: And her eldest Son telling her that her Son William was dead, and
my self was wounded, she said, And Lord, let ^e dye with them: which was no
sooner said, but she was struck with a Bullet, and fell down dead over the
Threshold. I hope she is reaping the fruit of her good Labors, being faithful
to the Service of God in her place. In her younger Years she lay under much
trouble upon spiritu^^* Accounts, till it pleased God to make that precious
Scripture take hold of her Heart, 2 Cor. 12. 9. And he said unto me, My Grace
is sufficient for th^^. More than twenty Years after, I have heard ^er tell how
sweet and comfortable that place (...) to her. But to return; The Indians laid
hold of us, pulling me one way, and the Chi^^ren another, and said, Come, go
along with 2^. 1 I told them they would kill me; they (...), If I were willing
to go along with (...), they would not hurt me.

Oh! the doleful sight that now was to be^old at this House! Come, behold the
Works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the Earth. Of thirty seven
Persons who were in this one House, none escaped either present Death, or ^
bitter Captivity, save only one, who might say as he, Job 1. 15. And I only am
escaped alone to tell the News. There were twelve killed, some shot, some
stabbed with their Spears, some knocked down with their Hatchets. When we are in
Prosperity, Oh the little that we think of such dreadful Sights, to see our
dear Friends and Relations lie bleeding out their Hearts-blood upon the Ground.
There was one who was chopped into the head with a Hatchet, and ^tript naked, and
yet was crawling up and down. It is a solemn Sight to see so many Christians
lying in the^^ Blood, some here and some there, like a ^omp^ny of Sheep torn by
Wolves. All of them (...) naked by a company of Hell Hounds, (...) singing,
ra^ting and insulting, (...) if they (...) have torn our very Hearts out; ye^
the Lord by his Almighty Power, preserv^^ a number of (...) from Death, for
there were twenty (...) of (...) taken alive and carried Captive.

I had often before this said, that if the (...) should come, I should choose
rather to (...) killed by them, than taken alive: but when (...) to the trial,
my Mind changed; their (...) Weapons so daunted my Spirit, that I chose (...)
to go along with those (as I may say) rav^nous Bears, than that moment to end
my days. And that I may the better declare what happened to me during that
grievous Captivity, I shall particularly speak of the several Removes we had up
and down the Wilderness.

The First Remove.
Now away we must go with those Barbarous Creatures, with our Bodies wounded
and bleeding, and our Hearts no less than our Bodies. About a mile we went that
night, up upon a hill within sight of the Town, where they intended to lodge.
There was hard by a vacant House, (deserted by the English before, for fear of
the Indians) I ask^d them whether I might not lodge in the House that night? to
which they answered, What will you love Englishmen still? This was the
dolefullest night that ever my eyes saw. Oh the roaring, and singing, and
dancing, and yelling of those black creatures in the night, which made (...)
place a lively resemblance of Hell: And as (...) was the waste that was there
made, of Horses, Cattle, Sheep, Swine, Calves, Lambs, Roasting-Pigs, and Fowls,
(which they had plundered in the Town) some Roasting, some lying and ^^rning,
and some Boiling, to feed (...) Enemies; who were joyful enough though (...)
were Disconsolate. To add to the ^^lefulness of the former Day, and the
dismalness of the present Night, my thoughts ran upon my Losses and sad
bereaved Condition. All was gone, my Husband gone, (at least separated from me,
he being in the Bay; and to add to my Grief, the Indians told me they would
kill him as he came homeward) my Children gone, my Relations and Friends gone,
our House and Home, and all our Comforts within Door and without, all was gone,
(except my Life) and I knew not but the next Moment that might go too.

There remained nothing to me but one poor wounded Babe, and it seemed at
present worse than Death, that it was in such a pitiful Condition, bespeaking
Compassion, and I had no Refreshing for it, nor suitable things to Revive it.
Little do many think, what is the S^vageness and Bruitishness of this barbarou^
E^^my, even those that seem to profess more th^^ others among them, when the
English h^ve fallen into their Hands.

Those seven that were killed at Lancast^r (...) Summer before upon a Sabbath
Day, and the (...) that was afterward killed upon a week Day^ were slain and
mangled in a barbarous ma^^er, by one-ey'd John, and (...), which Capt. Mosely
bro^^^t to (...), as the Indians told me.

The Second Remove.
But now (the next morning) I must turn my back upon the Town, and travel with
them into the vast and desolate Wilderness, I know not whither. It is not my
Tongue or Pen can express the sorrows of my Heart, and bitterness of my Spirit,
that I had at this departure: But God was with me in a wonderful manner,
carrying me along, and bearing up my Spirit, that it did not quite fail. One of
the Indians carried my poor wounded Babe upon a Horse; it went moaning all
along, I shall die, I shall die. I went on foot after it, with Sorrow that
cannot be expressed. At length I took it off the Horse, and carried it in my
arms, till my strength failed, and I fell down with it. Then they set me upon a
Horse, with ^y wounded Child in my Lap, and there being no Furniture upon the
Horse back, as we were going down a steep Hill, we both fell over the Horses
head, at which they like inhumane Crea^ures laughed, and rejoiced to see it,
though I thought we should there have ended our Days, as overcome with so many
Difficulties. But the Lord renewed my strength still, and carried me along,
that I might see more of his Power, yea, so much that I could never have
thought of, had I not experienced it.

After this it quickly began to Snow, and when night came on ^hey stopped: and
now down I must sit in the Snow, by a little fire, and a few boughs behind me,
with my sick Child in my lap, and calling much for Water, being now (thorough
the Wound) fallen into a violent Fever. My own Wound also growing so stiff,
that I could scarce sit down or rise up, yet so it must be, that I must sit all
this cold Winter Night, upon the cold snowy Ground, with my sick Child in my
arms, looking that every Hour would be the last of its Life; and having no
Christian Friend near me, either to comfort or help me. Oh I may see the
wonderful Power of God, that my Spirit did not utterly sink under my
Affliction* still the Lord upheld me with his gracious and merciful Spirit, and
we were both alive to see the Light of the next Morning.

The Third Remove.
The Morning being ^ome, they prepared to go on their way: one of the Indians
got up upon a Horse, and they set me up behind him, with my* poor sick Babe in
my Lap. A very (...) and tedious day I had of it; what with (...) Wound, and my
Child being so exceedin^ (...), and in a lamentable condition with ^e^ (...),
it may easily be judged what (...) ^dition we were in, there being not the
least (...) of Refreshing that came within either of ou^ Mouths from Wednesday
Night to Saturday Night, except only a little cold Water. This Day in the
Afternoon, about an Hour by Sun, we came to the Place where they intended, viz.
an Indian Town called We^imesset, Northward of Quabaug. When we were come, Oh
the number of Pagans (now merciless Enemies) that there came about me, that I
may say as David, Psalm. 27. 13. I had fainted, unless I had b^lieved, etc. The
next Day was the Sabbath: I then remembered how careless I had been of God's
holy Time: how many Sabbaths I had lost and misspent, and how evily I had walked
in God's sight; which lay so c^ose upon my Spirit, that it was easy for me to
see how Righteous it was with God to cut off the thread of my Life, and cast me
out of his presence for ever. Yet the Lord still showed Mercy to me, and helped
me; and as he wounded me with one Hand, so he healed me with the other. This
Day there came to me one Robert Pepper, (a Man belonging to Roxbury,) who was
taken at Capt. Beers his Fight; and had been now a considerable time with the
Indians, and up with them almost as far as Albany (...) ^ee King Philip, as he
told me, and was now very la^ely come with them into these parts. (...) I say,
that I was in this Indian Town, he ^^^ained leave to come and see me. He told
me he himself was wounded in the Leg at Capt. Beers his Fight; and was not able
sometime to go but as they carried him, and that (...) took Oak Leaves and laid
to his Wound, and by the Blessing of God, he was able to Travel again. Then I
took Oak Leaves and laid to my Side, and with the Blessing of God, it cured me
also; yet before the Cure was wrought, I may say as it is in Psalm. 38. 5, 6. My
Wounds Stink and are Corrupt, I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go
Mourning all the day long. I sat much alone with my poor wounded Child in my
Lap, which moaned Night and Day, having nothing to revive the Body, or cheer
the Spirits of her; but instead of that, one Indian would come and tell me one
hour, your Master will knock your Child on the head, and then a second, and
then a third, your Master will quickly knock your Child on the head.

This was the Comfort I had from them; Miserable Comforters were they all. Thus
nine Days I sat upon my Knees, with my Babe in my Lap, till my Flesh was raw
again. My Child being even ready to depart this sorrowful World, they bid me
carry it out to another Wigwam; (I suppose because they would not be troubled
with such Spectacles) Whither I wen^ with a very heavy Heart, and down I sat
with (...) picture of Death in my Lap. About two (...) in the Night, my sweet
Babe like a Lamb departed this Life, on Feb. 18. 1675. it being about six Year^
and five Months old. It was nine Days from the first wounding* in this
miserable Condition, without any Refreshing of one nature or other, except a
little cold Water. I cannot but take notice, how at another time I could not
bear to be in the room where any dead Person was, but now the case is changed;
I must, and could lie down by my dead Babe all the Night after. I have thought
since of the wonderful Goodness of God to me, in preserving me so in the use of
my Reason and Senses, in that distressed time, that I did not use wicked and
violent Means to end my own miserable Life. In the Morning, when they
understood that my Child was dead, they sent for me home to my Masters Wigwam:
(By my Master in this Writing, must be understood Quannopin, who was a
Saggamore, and married K. Philip's Wives Sister; not that he first took me, but
I was sold to him by a Narraganset Indian, who took me when I first came out of
the Garrison) I went to take up my dead Child in my Arms to carry it with me,
but they bid me let it alone: There was no resisting, but go I must and leave
it. When I had been a while at ^^y Masters Wigwam, I took the first opportunity
^ could get, to go look after my dead Child When I came, I asked them what
they had ^^ne with it? they told me it was upon the Hill; then they went and
showed me where it was, where I saw the Ground was newly ^igged, and where they
told me they had buried it; there I left that Child in the Wilderness, and
(...) ^^it it and my self also in this wilderness Condition, to him who is
above all. God having taken away this dear Child, I went to see my Daughter
Mary, who was at this same Indian Town, at a Wigwam not very far off, though we
had little liberty or opportunity to see one another: She was about ten Years
old, and taken from the Door at first by a Praying Indian, and afterward sold
for a Gun. When I came in ^ight, she would fall a Weeping, at which they were
provoked, and would not let me come near her, but bid me be gone; which was a
Heart cutting Word to me. I had one Child dead, another in the Wilderness, I
knew not where, the third they would not let me come near to; Me (as he said)
have ye bereaved of my Children, Ios^ph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will
take Benjamin also, (...) these things are against me. I could not sit still in
this Condition, but kept walking from one place to another. And as I was going
along, my ^^eart was even overwhelmed with the though^^ of my Condition, and
that I should have Children, and a Nation that I knew not ruled ove^ them.
Whereupon I earnestly entreated the Lord that he would consider my low Estate,
and show ^^e a Token for Good, and if it were his blessed Will, some sign and
hope of some Relief. And ^ndeed quickly the Lord answered, in some ^easure, my
poor Prayer: For as I was going up and down mourning and lamenting my
Condition, my Son came to me, and asked me how I did? I had not seen him
before, since the destruction of the Town; and I knew not where he was, till I
was informed by himself, that he was amongst a smaller parcel of Indians, whose
place was about six Miles off, with tears in his eyes, he asked me whether his
Sister Sarah was dead? and told me he had seen his Sister Mary; and prayed me,
that I would not be troubled in reference to himself. The occasion of his
coming to see me at this time was this: There was, as I said, about six Miles
from us, a small Plantation of Indians, where it seems he had been during his
Captivity; and at this time, there were some Forces of the Indians gathered out
of our Company, and some also from them, (amongst whom was my Sons Master) to
go to assault and burn Medfield: In this time of his Masters Absence, his Dame
brought him to see me. I took this to be some gracious Answer to my earnest and
unfeigned Desire. The next Day the India^^ returned from Medfield: (all the
Company, for those that belonged to the other smaller Company, came through the
Town that now we were at) But before they came to us, Oh the outrageous Roaring
and Hooping that there was! They began their din about a Mile before they came
to us. By their Noise and H^^ping they signified how many they had destroyed:
(which was at that time twenty three) Thos^ that were with us at home, were
gathered together as soon as they heard the Hooping, and every time that the
other went over their number, these at home gave a shout, that the very Earth
rang again. And thus they continued till those that had been upon the
Expedition w^r^ come up to the Saggamor's Wigwam; and then Oh the hideous
Insulting and Triumphing that there was over some English Men's Scalps, that
they had taken (as their manner is) and brought with them. I cannot but take
notice of the wonderful Mercy of God to me in those Afflictions, in sending me
a Bible: One of the Indians that came from Medfield Fight, and had brought some
Plunder, came to me, and asked me if I would have a Bible, he had got one in
his Basket. I was glad of it, and asked him if he thou^^^ the Indians would let
me Read? he answered yes; so I took the Bible, and in that melancholy Time, it
came into my Mind to Read first the 28th Chap. of Deuteronomy, which I did* and
when I had read it, my dark Heart wrought on this manner, That there was no
Mercy for (...) that the Blessings were gone, and the (...) came in their room,
and that I had lost my opportunity. But the Lord helped me still to go o^
reading, till I came to Chap. 30. the Seven (...); where I found there was
Mercy (...) again, if we would r^^^rn to him, by (...); and though we were
sca^tered from one end of the Earth to the other, yet the Lord would gather us
together, and turn all those Curses upon our Enemies. I do not desire to live
to forget this Scripture, and what comfort it was to me.

Now the Indians began to talk of Removing from this place, some one way, and
some another. There were now besides my self nine English Captives in this
place, (all of them Children except one Woman) I go^ an opportunity to go and
take my leave of them; they being to go one way, and I another. I asked them
whether they were earnest with God for Deliverence, they all told me they did
as they were able, and it was some Comfort to me, that the Lord stir^ed up
Children to look to him. The Woman, (...). Good-wife Ios^in told me, she should
never see me again, and that she could find in her heart to run away: I desired
her not to run away by any means, for we were near thirty (...) from any
English Town, and she very big (...) Child, having but one Week to reckon; and
another Child in her Arms two Years old, and bad Rivers there were to go over,
and we were feeble with our poor and course Entertainment. I had my Bible with
me, I pulled it out, and asked her whether she would Read; we opened the Bible,
and lighted on ^sal. (...) in which Psalm we especially took (...) of that
verse, Wait on the Lord, (...) of go^^ (...) and he shall strengthen thine
Heart, wait I say on the Lord.

The Fourth Remove.
And now must I part with that little Company that I had. Here^^ parted from my
Daughter Mary, (whom I never saw again till I saw her in Dorchester, returned
from Captivity) and from four little Cou^ns and Neighbors, some of which I
never saw afterward, the Lord only knows the end of them. Among them also was
that poor Woman before mentioned, who came to a sad end, as some of the Company
told me in my Travel: She having much Grief upon her Spirits, about her
miserable Condition, being so near her Time, she would be often asking the
Indians to let her go home; they not being willing to that, and yet vexed with
her Importunity, gathered a great Company together about her, and stripped her
naked, and set her in the midst of them; and when they had Sung and Danced
about her (in their hellish manner) as long as they pleased, they knocked her on
the head, and the Child in her Arms with her: When they had done that, they
made a Fire and (...) them both into it, and told the other Child^^n that were
with them, that if they attempted to go home, they would serve them in like
^^nner. The Children said she did not shed one Tear, but prayed all the while.
But to return to my own Journey: We traveled about half a Day or a little
more, and came to a desolate Place in the Wilderness, where there were no
Wigwams or Inhabitants before: We came about the middle of the Afternoon to
this place; cold and wet, and snowy, and hungry, and weary, and no Refreshing
(for Man) but the cold Ground to sit on, and our poor Indian Cheer.

Heart-aking Thoughts here I had about my poor Children, who were scattered up
and down among the wild Beasts of the Forest: My Head was Light and Dissy,
(either through Hunger or hard Lodging, or Trouble, or altogether) my Knees
Feeble, my Body Raw by sitting double Night and Day, that I cannot express to
Man, the Affliction that lay upon my Spirit, but the Lord helped me at that
time to express it to himself. I opened my Bible to Read, and the Lord brought
that precious Scripture to me, Ier. 31. 16. Thus says the Lord, Refrain thy
Voice from Weeping, and thine Eyes from Tears, for they Work shall be Rewared,
and they shall come again from the Land of the Enemy. This was a sweet Cordial
to me, when I was ready to Faint, many and many a time, have I sat down, and
wept sweetly over this Scripture. At* this place we continued about four Days.

The Fifth Remove.
The occasion (as I thought) of their moving at this time, was the English
Army's being near and following them: For they went as if they had gone for
their Lives, for some considerable way; and then they made a stop, and chose
out some of their stoutest Men, and sent them back to hold the English Army in
play whilst the rest escaped; and then like Iehu they marched on furiously,
with their old and young: Some carried their old decriped Mothers, some carried
one, and some another. Four of them carried a great Indian upon a Bier; but
going through a thick Wood with him, they were hindered, and could make no
haste; whereupon they took him upon their backs, and carried him one at a time,
till we came to Bacquag River. Upon a Friday a little Afternoon we came to this
River: When all the Company was come up, and were gathered together, I thought
to count the number of them, but they were so ma^y, and being somewhat ^n
Motion, it was beyond my skill. In this Travel, because of my Wound, I was
somewhat favored in my Load: I carried only my Knitting-work, and two quarts
of parched Meal: Being very faint, I asked my Mistress to give me one Spoonful
of the Meal, but she would not give me a taste. They quickly fell to cutting
dry Tre^s, to make Rafts to carry them over the River, and soon my turn came to
go over. By the advantage of some Brush which they had laid upon the Raft to
sit on, I did not wet my Foot, (which many of themselves at the other end were
mid-leg deep) which cannot but be acknowledged as a favor of God to my
weakened Body, it being a very cold time. I was not before acquainted with such
kind of doings, or dangers. When thou passest thorough the Waters I will be
with thee, and thorough the Rivers they shall not overflow thee. Isai. 43. 2. A
certain Number of us got over the River that Night, but it was the Night after
the Sabbath before all the Company was got over. On the Saturday they boiled an
old Horse's Leg (which they had got) and so we drank of the Broth, as soon as
they thought it was ready, and when it was almost all gone, they filled it up
again.

The first Week of my being among them, I hardly ate any thing: The second Week
I found my Stomach grow very Faint for want of something; and yet 'twas very
hard to get down their filthy Trash; but the third Week (though I could think
how formerly my Stomach would turn against this or that, and I could starve and
die before I could eat such things, yet) they were pleasant and savoury to my
taste. I was at this time Knitting a pair of white Cotton Stockings for my
Mistress, and I had not yet wrought upon the Sabbath Day: When the Sabbath
came, they bid me go to work; I told them it was Sabbath Day, and desired them
to let me rest, and told them I would do as much more to morro^; to which they
answered me, they would break my Face. And here I cannot but take notice of the
strange Providence of God in preserving the Heathen: They were many Hundreds,
old and young, some Sick and some Lame, many had P^pooses at their Backs, the
greatest number (at this time with us) were Squ^^^s, and they traveled with
all they had, Bag and Baggage, and yet they got over this River aforesaid; and
on Monday they set their Wig^ams on Fire, and away they went; On that very Day
came the English Army after them to this Rive^, and saw the Smoke of their
Wigwams, and yet this River put a stop to them. God did not give them Courage
or Activity to go over after us; We were not ready for so great a Mercy as
Victory and Deliverance; if we had been, God would have found out a way for the
English to have passed this River, as well as for the Indians with their Squaws
and Children, and all their Luggage. Oh that my People had hearkened to me, and
Israel had walked in my ways, I should soon have subdued their Enemies, and
turned my (...) against their Adversaries. Psalm. 81. 13, 14. ^

The Sixth Remove.
On Monday (as I said) they set their Wigwams on Fire, and went away. It was a
Cold Morning, and before us there was a great Brook with Ice on it: Some waded
through it, up to the Knees and higher, but others went till they came to a
Beaver-Dam, and I amongst them, where thorough the good providence of God, I
did not wet my Foot. I went along that day, Mourning and Lamenting (leaving
farther my own Country, and Traveling farther into the vast and howling
Wilderness) and I understood something of L^t's Wife's Temptation, when she
looked back: We came that Day to a great Swamp, by the side of which we took up
our Lodging that Night. When we came to the brow of the Hill that looked toward
the Swamp, I thought we had been come to a great Indian Town. (Though there
were none but our own Company) The Indians were as thick as the Trees; it
seemed as if there had been a thousand Hatchets going at once* If one looked
before one, there was nothing ^ut Indians, and behind one, nothing but Indians;
and so on either hand: And I my self in the midst, and (...) Christian Soul
near me, and yet how (...) Lord preserved me in Safety! Oh the (...) ^ that I
have had of the goodness of (...) me and mine!

The Seventh Remove.
After a restless and hungry Night there, we had a wearisome time of it the
next Day. The Swamp by which we lay, was as it were a deep Dungeon, and an
exceeding high and steep Hill before it. Before I got to the top of the Hill, I
thought my Heart and Legs and all would have broken, and failed me. What
through faintness and foreness of Body, it was a grievous Day of Travel to me.
As we went along, I saw a place where English Cattle had been, that was Comfort
to me, such as it was ^ Quickly after that we came to an English Path, which so
took with me, that I thought I could there have freely lien down and died. That
Day, a little after Noon, we came to Squ^n^eag, where the Indians quickly
spread themselves over the deserted English Fields, gleaning what they could
find; some picked up Ears of Wheat, that were crickled down, some found Ears of
Indian Corn, some found Ground-Nuts, and others Sheaves of Wheat that were
Frozen together in the Shock, and went to threshing of them out. My self got
two Ears of Indian Corn, and whilst I did but turn my back, one of them (...)
stolen from me, which much troubled (...) came an Indian to them at that time,
with a Basket of Horse-Liver; I asked him to give me a pi^ce: What (says he)
can you eat Horse-Liver? I told him I would try, if he would give me a piece,
which he did; and I laid it on the Coals to Roast, but before it was half
ready, they got half of it away from me; so that I was forced to take the rest
and eat it as it was, with the Blood about my Mouth, and yet a savoury bit it
was to m^; for to the hungry Soul every bitter thing is sweet. A solemn Sight
me-thought it was, to see whole Fields of Wheat and Indian Corn forsaken and
spoiled, and the remainders of them to be Food for our merciless Enemies. That
Night we had a mess of Wheat for our Supper.

The Eighth Remove.
On the morrow Morning we must go over Connecticut River to meet with King
Philip: Two Canoes full they had carried over, the next turn my self was to go;
but as my Foot was upon the Canoo to step in, there was a sudden outcry among
them, and I must step back; and instead of going up the River, I must go four
or five Miles up the River farther Northward. Some of the Indians ran one way,
and some another. The cause of this Rout was, as I thought, their espying some
English (...)* who were thereabouts. In this Travel up (...) River, about Noon
the Company made a (...) and sat down, some to eat, and others to rest them. As
I fat amongst them, musing on things past, my Son Joseph unexpectedly came to
me: We asked of each others Welfare, bemoaning our doleful Condition, and the
Change that had come upon us: We had Husband, and Father, and Children, and
Sisters, and Friends, and Relations, and House, and Home, and many Comforts of
this Life; but now we might say as Job, Naked came I out of my Mothers Wo^^^,
and naked shall I return: The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed
be the Name of the Lord. I asked him whither he would Read? he told me, he
earnestly desired it. I gave him my Bible, and he lighted upon that comfortable
Scriprure, Psalm. 118. 17, 18. I shall not die, but live, and declare the Works
of the Lord: The Lord has chastened me sore, yet ^e has not given me ^ver to
Death. Look here Mother, (says he) did you Read this? And here I may take
occasion to mention one principal Ground of my setting forth these few Lines,
o^en as the Psalmist says, To declare the Works of the Lord, and his wonderful
Power in carrying us along, preserving us in the Wilderness, while under the
Enemy's Hand, and Returning of us in Safety again; and his Goodness in bringing
to my Hand so many comfortable and suitable Scriptures in my Distress.

But to Return: We traveled on till Night, and in the Morning we must go over
the River to Philip's Crew. When I was in the Canoo, I could not but be amazed
at the numerous crew of Pagans that were on the Bank on the other side. When I
came ashore, they gathered all about me, I sitting alone in the midst: I
observed they asked one another Questions, and laughed, and rejoiced over their
Gains and Victories. Then my Heart began to fail, and I fell a weeping; which
was the first time, to my Remembrance, that I wept before them; although I had
met with so much Affliction, and my Heart was many times ready to break, yet
could I not sh^d one Tear in their ^ight, but rather had been all this while in
a maze, and like one astonished; but now I may say as Psalm. 137. 1. By the
Rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when we remembered Zion.
There one of them asked me, why I wept? I could hardly tell what to say; yet I
answered, they would kill me: No, said he, none will hurt you. Then came one of
them, and gave me two Spoonfulls of Meal, (to comfort me) and another gave me
half a Pint of Pease, which was more worth than many Bushels at another time.
Then I went to see King Philip; he bid me come in, and sit down; and asked me
whither I would smoke it? (a usual Complement nowadays, among Saints and
Sinners) But this no way suit^^ m^* For though I had formerly used Tobaco^, yet
I had left it ever since I was first taken. It seems to be a Bait, the Devil
lays to make Men lose their precious Time. I remember with Shame, how formerly,
when I had taken two or three Pipes, I was presently ready for another; such a
bewitching thing it is: But I thank God, he has now given me power over it;
surely there are many who may be better employed, than to sit sucking a
stinking Tobacco-pipe.

Now the Indians gather their Forces to go against North-Hampton: Over Night
one went about yelling and hooting to give Notice of the Design. Whereupon they
went to Boiling of Ground-Nuts, and parching of Corn, (as many as had it) for
their Provision; and in the Morning away they went. During my abode in this
place, Philip spoke to me to make a Shirt for his Boy, which I did; for which
he gave me a Shilling; I offered the Money to my Master, but he bi^ me keep it,
and with it I bought a piece of Horseflesh. Afterward he asked me to make a
Cap for his Boy, for which he invited me to Dinner: I went, and he gave me a
Pan-cake, about as big as two Fingers; it was made of parched Wheat, beaten,
and fried in Bears-grease, but I thought I never tasted pleasanter Meat in my
Life. There was a Squaw who spoke to me to make a Shirt for her Sannup; for
which she gave me a piece of Bear. Another asked me to Knit a pair of
Stockings, for which she gave me a quart of Pease. I boiled my Pease and Bear
together, and invited my Master and Mistress to Dinner; but the proud Gossip,
because I served them both in one Dish, would eat nothing, except one bit that
he gave her upon the point of his Knife. Hearing that my Son was come to this
place, I went to see him, and found him lying flat upon the Ground; I asked him
how he could Sleep so? he answered me, that he was not asleep, but at Prayer;
and that he lay so, that they might not observe what he was doing. I pray God
he may remember these things now he is returned in safety. At this place, (the
Sun now getting higher) what with the beams and heat of the Sun, and the smoke
of the Wigwams, I thought I should have been blind. I could scarce discern one
Wigwam from another. There was here one Mary Thurston of Medfield, who seeing
how it was with me, lent me a Hat to wear; but as soon as I was gone, the Squaw
who owned that Mary Thurston, came running after me, and got it away again.
Here was a Squaw who gave me a Spoon-full of Meal, I put it in my Pocket to
keep it safe, yet notwithstanding some body stole it, but put five Indian Corns
in the room of it; which Corns were the greatest Provision I had in my Travel
for one Day.

The Indians returning from North-Hampton, brought with them some Horses, and
Sheep, and other things which they had taken; I desired them that they would
carry me to Albany upon one of those Horses, and sell me for Powder; for so
they had some times discoursed. I was utterly hopeless of getting home on Foot,
the way that I came. I could hardly bear to think of the many weary Steps I had
taken, to come to this place.

The Ninth Remove.
But instead of going either to Albany or homeward, we must go five Miles up
the River, and then go over it. Here we abode a while. Her^ lived a sorry
Indian, who spoke to me to make him a Shirt, when I had done it, he would pay
me nothing for it. But he living by the River side, where I often went to fetch
Water, I would often be putting of him in mind, and calling for my pay; at last
he told me, if I would make another Shirt for a Papoos not yet born, he would
give me a Knife, which he did, when I had done it. I carried the Knife in, and
my Master asked me to give it him, and I wa^ not a little glad that I had any
thing that they would accept of, and be pleased with. When we were at this
place, my Masters Maid came home; she had been gone three Weeks into the
Narraganset Country to fetch Corn, where they had stored up some in the Ground:
She brought home about a peck and half of Corn. This was about the time that
their great Captain ( Naananto) was killed in the Narraganset Country.

My Son being now about a Mile from me, I asked liberty to go and see him, they
bid me go, and away I went; but quickly lost my self, traveling over Hills and
thorough Swamps, and could not find the way to him. And I cannot but admire at
the wonderful Power and Goodness of God to me, in that though I was gone from
home, and met with all sorts of Indians, and those I had no knowledge of, and
there being no Christian Soul near me, yet not one of them offered the least
imaginable Miscarriage to me. I turned homeward again, and met with my Master,
and he showed me the way to my Son. When I came to him, I found him not well;
and withal he had a Boil on his Side, which much troubled him: We bemoaned one
another a while, as the Lord helped us, and then I returned again. When I was
returned, I found my self as unsatisfied as I was before. I went up and down
Mourning and Lamenting, and my Spirit was ready to sink, with the thoughts of
my poor Children: My Son was ill, and I could not but think of his mournful
Looks, having no Christian Friend (...) him, to do any Office of Love for him,
either for Soul or Body. And my poor Girl, I knew not where she was, nor
whether she was sick, or well, or alive, or dead. I repaired under these
thoughts to my Bible, (my great Comforter in that time) and that Scripture came
to my hand, Cast thy Burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee, Psalm. 55.
22.

But I was fain to go look after something to satisfy my Hunger: And going
among the Wigwams, I went into one, and there found a Squaw who showed her self
very kind to me, and gave me a piece of Bear. I put it into my Pocket, and came
home; but could not find an opportunity to Broil it, for fear they should get
it from me; and there it lay all that Day and Night in my stinking Pocket. In
the Morning I went again to the same Squaw, who had a Kettle of Ground-Nuts
Boiling: I asked her to let me boil my piece of Bear in her Kettle, which she
did, and gave me some Ground-Nuts to eat with it, and I cannot but think how
pleasant it was to me. I have sometimes seen Bear baked handsomely amongst the
English, and some liked it, but the thoughts that it was Bear, made me tremble:
But now that was savoury to me that one would think was enough to turn the
Stomach of a Brute-Creature.

One bitter cold Day, I could find no room to sit dowr before the Fire: I went
out, and could not tell what to do, but I went into another Wigwam, where they
were also sitting round the Fire; but the Squaw laid a Skin for me, and bid me
sit down, and gave me some Ground-Nuts, and bid me come again; and told me they
would buy me, if they were able; and yet these were Strangers to me that I
never knew before.

The Tenth Remove.
That Day a small part of the Company removed about three quarters of a Mile,
intending farther the next Day. When they came to the place where they intended
to Lodge, and had pitched their Wigwams, being Hungry, I went again back to the
place we were before ^t, to get something to eat; being encouraged by the
Squaw's kindness, who bid me come again. When I was there, there came an Indian
to look after me; who when he had found me, kicked me all along. I went home and
found Venison Roasting that Night, but they would not give me one bit of it.
Sometimes I met with Favor, and sometimes with nothing but Frowns.

The Eleventh Remove.
The next Day in the Morning, they took their Travel, intending a days Journey
up the River; I took my Load at my Back, and quickly we came to wade over a
River, and p^ssed over tiresome and wearisome Hills. One Hill was so steep,
that I was fain to creep up upon my Knees, and to hold by the Twigs and Bushes
to keep my self from falling backward. My Head also was so Light, that I
usually reeled as I went: But I hope all those wearisome steps that I have
taken, are but a forwarding of me to the heavenly Rest. I know O Lord, that thy
Judgments are right, and that thou in faithfulness have afflicted me, Psalm.
119. 75.

The Twelfth Remove.
It was upon a Sabbath Day Morning, that they prepared for their Travel. This
Morning I asked my Master whether he would sell me to my Husband? he answered
Nux; which did much rejoice my Spirit. My Mistress, before we went, was gone to
the Burial of a Papoos, and returning, she found me sitting, and Reading in my
Bible: She snatched it hastily out of my Hand, and threw it out of doors; I ran
out and caught it up, and put it into my Pocket, and never let her see it
afterward. Then they packed up their things to be gone, and gave me my Load: I
complained it was too heavy, whereupon she gave me a slap on the Face, and bid
me be gone. I lifted up my H^^rt to God, hoping that Redemption was not far
off; and the rather because their Insolancy grew worse and worse.

But the thoughts of my going homeward, (for so we bent our course) much
cheared my my Spirit, and made my Burden seem Light, and almost nothing at all.
But (to my amazement and great perplexity) the Scale was soon turned; for when
we had gone a little way, on a sudden my Mistress gave out, she would go no
further, but turn back again, and said I must go back again with her, and she
called her Sannup, and would have had him go back also, but he would not; but
said, he would go on, and come to us again in three Days. My Spirit was upon
this (I confess) very Impatient, and almost Outrageous. I thought I could as
well have died as went back. I cannot declare the Trouble that I was in about
it; but yet back again I must go. As soon as I had an opportunity, I took my
Bible to Read, and that quieting Scripture came to my Hand, Psalm. 46. 10. Be
still, and know that I am God. Which stilled my Spirit for the present; but a
sore time of Trial I concluded I had to go thorough. My Master being gone, who
seemed to me the best Friend that I had of an Indian, both in Cold and Hunger,
and quickly so it proved. Down I sat, with my Heart as full as it could hold,
and yet so Hungry, that I could not sit neither: But going out to see what I
could find, and walking among the Trees, I found six Acrons and two Chestnuts,
which were some Refreshment to me. Toward Night I gathered me some Sticks for
my own Comfort, that I might not lie a Cold: But when we came to lie down, they
bid me go out, and lie somewhere else, for they had Company (they said) come in
more than their own: I told them I could not tell where to go, they bid me go
look: I told them, if I went to another Wigwam they would be angry, and send me
home again. Then one of the Company drew his Sword, and told me he would run me
thorough, if I did not go presently. Then was I fain to stoop to this rude
Fellow, and to go out in the Night I knew not whither. Mine eyes have seen that
Fellow afterward walking up and down in Boston, under the appearance of a
Friendly Indian, and several others of the like Cut. I went to one Wigwam, and
they told me they had no room. Then I went to another, and they said the same:
At last an old Indian bid m^ come to him, and his Squaw gave me some
Grou^^-Nuts; she gave me also something to ^ay or (...) my Head, and a good
Fire we had: And thorough the good Providence of God, I had a comfortable
Lodging that Night. I^ the ^^orning another Indian bid me come at Night, and he
would give me ^ix Ground-Nuts, which I did. We were at this place and time
about two Miles from Connecticut (...)* We went in the Morning (to gather
(...)) to the River, and went back again at Night. I went with a great Load at
my Back, (for they when they went, though but a little way, would carry all
their Trumpery with them) I told them the Skin was off my Back, but I had no
other comforting Answer from them than this, That it would be no matter if my
Head were off too.

The Thirteenth Remove.
Instead of going toward the Bay, (which was that I desired) I must go with
them five or six Miles down the River, into a mighty Thick^t of Brush; where we
abode almost a Fortnight. Here one asked me to make a Shirt for her Papoos, for
which she gave me a mess of Broth, which was thickened with Meal made of the
Bark of a Tree; and to make it the better, she had put into it about a handful
of Pease, and (...) roasted Ground-Nuts. I had not seen my Son ^ pretty while,
and here was an Indian of whom I made Enquiry after him, and asked him when he
saw him? He answered me, that such a time his Master roasted him, and that
himself did eat a piece of him as big as his two Fingers, and that he was very
good meat. But the Lord upheld my Spirit under this Discouragement; and I
considered their horrible addictedness to Lying, and that there is not one of
them (...) the least Conscience of speaking (...).

In this place, one cold Night as I lay by the Fire, I removed a Stick which
kept the Heat from me, a Squaw moved it down again, at which I looked up, and
she threw an handful of Ashes in my Eyes; I thought I should have been quite
blinded and never have seen more: But lying down, the Water ran out of my Eyes,
and carried the Dirt with it, that by the Morning I recovered my Sight again.
Yet upon this, and the like Occasions, I hope it is not too ^uch to say with
Job, Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my Friends, for the Hand of the
Lord has touched me. And here I cannot but remember how many times sitting in
their Wigwams, and musing on things past, I should suddenly leap up and run
out, as if I had been at home, forgetting where I was, and what my Condition
was: But when I was without, and saw nothing but Wilderness, and Woods, and a
company of Barbarous Heathen, my Mind quickly returned to me, which made me
think of that spoken concerning Sampson, who said, I will go out and shake my
self as at other times, but he wist not that the Lord was departed from him.

About this time, I began (...) think that all my hopes of Restoration would
come to nothing. I thought of the English Army, and hoped for their coming, and
being retaken by them, but that failed. I hoped to be carried to Albany, as the
Indians had discoursed, but that failed also. I thought of being Sold to my
Husband, as my Master spoke; but instead of that, my Master himself was gone,
and I left behind, so that my Spirit was now quite ready to sink. I asked them
to let my go out and pick up some Sticks, that I might get alone, and pour out
my Heart unto the Lord. Then also I took my Bible to Read, but I found no
Comfort here neither; yet I can say, that in all my Sorrows and Afflictions,
God did not leave me to have any Impatience work toward himself, as if his
ways were unrighteous; but I knew that he la^d upon me less than I deserved:
Afterward, before this doleful time ended with me, I was turning the leaves of
my Bible, and the Lord brought to me some Scriptures which did a little revive
me, as that, Isa. 55. 8. For my thoughts are not your: boughts, neither are
your ways my ways, says the Lord. And also that, Psalm. 37. 5. Commit thy way
unto the Lord, trust also in him, and he shall bring it to pass.

About this time they came yelping from Hadley, having there killed three
English Men, and brought one Captive with them, viz. Thomas Read. They all
gathered about the poor Man, asking him many Questions. I desired also to go
and see him; and when I came, he was crying bitterly, supposing they would
quickly Kill him. Whereupon I asked one of them, whether they intended to Kill
him, he answered me, they would not: He being a little cheared with that, I
asked him about the Welfare of my Husband, he told me he saw him such a time in
the Bay, and he was well, but very Melancholy. By which I certainly understood
(though I suspected it before) that whatsoever the In^ians told me respecting
him, was Vanity and Lies. Some of them told me he was Dead, and they had killed
him: Some said he was Married again, and that the Governor wished him to
Marry, and told him he should have his Choice, and that all persuaded him I was
dead. So like were these barbarous Creatures to him who was a Liar from the
beginning.

As I was sitting once in the Wigwam here, Philip's Maid came in with the Child
in her Arms, and asked me to give her a piece of my Apron, to make a Flap for
it; I told her I would not; then my Mistress bid me give it, but I still said
no. The Maid told me, if I would not give her a piece, she would tear a piece
off it: I told her I would tear her Coat then: With that my Mistress rises up,
and takes up a Stick big enough to have killed me, and struck at me with it,
but I stepped out and she struck the stick into the Mat of the Wigwam. But while
I was pulling of it out, I ran to the Maid and gave her all my Apron, and so
that Storm went over.

Hearing that my Son was come to this place, I went ^o see him, and told him
his Father was well, bu^ very Melancholy: He told me he was as much grieved
for his Father, as for himself; I wondered at his Speech, for I thought I had
enough upon my Spirit, in reference to my self, to make me mindless of my
Husband, and every one else, they being safe among their Friends. He told me
also, that a while before, his Master, (together with other Indians) were going
to the French for Powder, but by the way the Mo^aws met with them, and killed
four of their Company, which made the rest turn back again; for which I desire
that my self and he may bless the Lord; for it might have been worse with him,
had he been Sold to the French, than it proved to be in his remaining with the
Indians.

I went to see an English Youth in this place, one John Gilberd of Springfield.
I found him lying without doors upon the Ground; I asked him how he did? he
told me he was very sick of a Flux with eating so much Blood. They had turned
him out of the Wigwam, and with him an Indian Papoos, almost dead, (whose
Parents had been killed) in a bitter cold Day, without Fire or Clothes: The
young Man himself had nothing on but his Shirt and Wastcoat. This sight was
enough to melt a Heart of Flint. There they lay quivering in the Cold, the
Youth round like a Dog, the Papoos stretched out, with his Eyes and Nose, and
Mouth full of Dirt, and yet alive, and groaning. I advised John to go and get
to some Fire; he told me he could not stand, but I persuaded him still, lest he
should lie there and die. And with much ado I got him to a Fire, and went my
self home. As soon as I was got home, his Masters Daughter came after me, to
know what I had done with the English Man? I told her I had got him to a Fire
in such a place. Now had I need to pray Paul's Prayer, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. That we
may be delivered from unreasonable and wicked Men. for her Satisfaction I went
along with her, and brought her to him; but before I got home again, it was
noised about, that I was running away, and getting the English Youth along with
me: That as soon as I came in, they began to rant and domineer, asking me where
I had been, and what I had been doing? and saying they would knock me on the
head: I told them I had been seeing the English Youth, and that I would not run
away. They told me I lied, and getting up a Hatchet, they came to me, and said
they would knock me down if I stirred out again; and so confined me to the
Wigwam. Now may I say with David, (...): 24. 14. I am in a great strait. If I
keep in, I must dye with Hunger; and if I go out, I must be knocked on the head.
This distressed Condition held that Day, and half the next; and then the Lord
remembered me, whose Mercies are great. Then came an Indian to me with a pair of
Stockings which were too big for him, and he would have me ravel them out, and
knit them fit for him. I showed my self willing, and bid him ask my Mistress if
I might go along with him a little way? She said, yes, I might; but I wa^ not a
little refreshed with that News, that I had my Liberty again. Then I went along
with him, and he gave me some roasted Ground-Nuts, which did again revive my
feeble Stomach.

Being got out of her sight, I had time and liberty again to look into my
Bible, which was my Guide by Day, and my Pillow by Night. Now that comfortable
Scripture presente^ it self to me, Isai. 45. 7. For a small Moment have I
forsaken thee, but with great Mercies will I gather thee. Thus the Lord carried
me along from one time to another, and made good to me this precious Promise,
and many others. Then my Son came to see me, and I asked his Master to let him
stay a while with me, that I might comb his Head, and look over him, for he was
almost overcome with Lice. He told me when I had done, that he was very Hungry,
but I had nothing to relieve him, but bid him go into the Wigwams as he went
along, and see if he could get any thing among them. Which he did, and (it
seems) ^arried a little too long, for his Master was angry with him, and beat
him, and then sold him. Then he came running to tell me he had a new Master,
and that he had given him some Ground-Nuts already. Then I went along with him
to his new Master, who told me he loved him, and he should not want. So his
Master carried him away, and I never saw him afterward, till I saw him at
Piscataqua in Portsmouth.

That Night they bid me go out of the Wigwam again: My Mistress's Papoos was
Sick, and it died that Night; and there was one benefit in it, that there was
more room. I went to a Wigwam, and they bid me come in, and gave me a Skin to
lie upon, and a mess of Venson and Ground-Nuts, which was a choice Dish among
them. On the morrow they buried the Papoos; and afterward, both Morning and
Evening, there came a company to mourn and howl with her: though I confess I
could not much condole with them. Many sorrowful Eyes I had in this place;
often getting alone, like a Cra^e or a Swallow, so did I Chatter; I did Mourn
as a Dove, mine Eyes fail with looking upward. O Lord, I am oppr^ssed,
undertake for me, Isai. 38. 14. I could tell the Lord as Hezechiah, ver. 3.
Remember now O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth.
Now had I time to examine all my Ways: My Conscience did not a^cuse me of
Unrighteousness toward one or other; yet I saw how in my Walk with God, I had
been a careless creature. As David said, Against thee, thee only have I sinned.
And I might say with the poor Publican, God be merciful unto me a Sinner. Upon
the Sabbath Days I could look upon the Sun, and think how People were going to
the House of God, to have their Souls refresht, and then home, and their Bodies
also; but I was destitute of both, and might say as the poor Prodigal. He would
fain have filled his Belly with the Husks that the Swine did eat, and no man
gave unto him, Luke 15. 16. For I must say with him, Father, I have sinned
against Heaven, and in ^hy sight, ver. 21. I remembered how on the Night before
and after the Sabbath, when my Family was about me, and Relations and
Neighbors with us; we could Pray, and Sing, and refresh our Bodies with the
good Creatures of God, and then have a comfortable Bed to lie down on; But
instead of all this, I had only a little Swill for the Body, and then like a
Swine, must lie down on the Ground I cannot express to Man, the Sorrow that lay
upon my Spirit, the Lord knows it. Yet that comfortable Scripture would often
come to my mind, For a small Moment have I forsaken thee, but with great
Mercies will I gather thee.

The Fourteenth Remove.
Now must we pack up and be gone from this Thicket, bending our course toward
the Bay-Towns. I having nothing to eat by the way this Day, but a few crumbs of
Cake, that an Indian gave my Girl, the same Day we were taken. She gave it me,
and I put it into my Pocket: There it lay, till it was so moldy, (for want of
good Baking) that one could not tell what it was made of; it fell all to
crumbs, and grew so dry and hard, that it was like little Flints; and this
refreshed (...) many times, when I was ready to saint. It was in my thoughts
when I put it into my Mouth, that if ever I returned, I would tell the World,
what a Blessing the Lord gave to such mean Food. As we went along, they killed
a Deer, with a young one in her; they gave me a piece of the Fawn, and it was
so young and tender, that one might eat the Bones as well as the Flesh, and yet
I thought it very good. When Night came on, we sat down; it Rained, but they
quickly got up a Bark Wigwam, where I lay dry that Night. I looked out in the
Morning, and many of them had lien in the Rain all Night, I saw by their
Reaking. Thus the Lord dealt mercifully with me many times, and I fared better
than many of them. In the Morning they took the Blood of the Deer, and put it
into the Paunch, and so boiled it; I could at nothing of that, though they ate
it sweetly. And yet they were so nice in other things, that when I had fetched
Water, and had put the Dish I dipped the Water with, into the Kettle of Water
which I brought, they would say they would knock me down, for they said it was
a sluttish trick.

The Fifteenth Remove.
We went on our Travel. I having got one handful of Ground-Nuts, for my Support
that Day: they gave me my Load, and I went on cheerfully, (with the thoughts of
going homeward) having my Burden more on my Back than my Spirit. We came to
Baquaug River again that Day, near which we abode a few Days. Sometimes one of
them would give me a Pipe, another a little Tobacco, another a little Salt,
which I would change for a little Victuals. I cannot but think what a Wolvish
Appetite Persons have in a starving condition; for many times when they gave me
that which was Hot, I was so greedy, that I should burn my Mouth, that it would
trouble me hours after, and yet I should quickly do the same again. And after I
was thoroughly Hungry, I was never again satisfied. For though sometimes it
fell out that I got enough, and did eat till I could eat no more, ^et I was as
unsatisfied as I was when I began. And now could I see that Scripture
verified,) there being many Scriptures that we ^o not take notice of, or
understand till we are afflicted) Mic. 6. 14. Thou shall eat and not be
satisfied. Now might I see more than ever before, the Miseries that Sin has
brought upon us. Many times I should be ready to run out against the Heathen,
but that Scripture would quiet me again, Amos 3. 6. Shall there be evil in the
City, and the Lord has not done it? The Lord help me to make a right
improvement of his Word, and that I might learn that great Lesson. Mic. 6. 8,
9. He has showed thee, O Man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, and love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God? Hear ye
the Rod, and who has appointed it.

The Sixteenth Remove.
We began this Remove with wading over Baquaug River. The Water was up to the
Knee^* and the Stream very swift, and so cold, that I thought it would have cut
me in sunder. I was so weak and ^eeble, that I reeled as I went along, and
thought there I must end my Days at last, after my bearing and getting through
so many Difficulties. The Indians stood Laughing to se^ me staggering along,
but in my Distress, the Lord gave me Experience of the truth (...) goodness of
that Promise, Isa. 43. 2. When thou passest thorough the Waters I will be with
thee, and: thorough the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee. Then I sat down
to put on my Stockings and Shoes, with the Tears running down my Eyes, and many
sorrowful Thoughts in my Heart. But I got up to go along with them. Quickly
there came up to us an Indian, who informed them, that I must go to Wachuset to
my Master, for there was a Letter come from the Council to the Saggamores about
redeeming the Captives, and that there would be another in 14 Days, and that I
must be there ready. My Heart was so heavy before, that I could scarce speak,
or go in the Path; and yet now so light that I could run. My Strength seemed to
come again, and to recruit my feeble Knees, and a king Heart; yet it pleased
them to go but one mile that Night, and there we stayed two Days. In that time
^ame a company of Indians to us, near thirty, al^ on Horseback. My Heart skipt
within me, thinking they had been English Men at the first sight of them: for
they were dressed in English Apparel, with Hats, white Neckcloths, and Sashes
about their Wastes, and Ribbonds upon their Shoulders: But when they came near,
there was a vast difference between the lovely Faces of Christians, and the
^oul Looks of those Heathens, which much damped my Spirit again.

The Seventeenth Remove.
A comfortable Remove it was to me, because of my hopes. They gave me my pack,
and along we went cheerfully; but quickly my Will proved more than my Strength;
having little or no Refreshing, my Strength failed, and my Spirits were almost
quite gone. Now may I say as David, Psalm. 109. 22, 23, 24. I am poor and needy,
and my heart is wounded within me. I am gone like the shadow when it declineth:
I am tossed up and down like the Locust: my knees are weak through fasting, and
my flesh fails of fatness. ^t Night we came to an Indian Town, and the
Indians sat down by a Wigwam discoursing, but I was almost spent, and could
scarce speak. I laid down my Load, and went into the Wigwam, and there sat an
Indian boiling of Horses Feet; (they being wont to eat the Flesh first, and
when the Feet were old and dried, and they had nothing else, they would cut off
the Feet and use them) I asked him to give me a little of his Broth, or Water
they were boiling in: He took a Dish, and gave me one Spoonful of Sam^, and bid
me take as much of the Broth as I would. Then I put some of the (...) Water to
the Samp, and drank it up, and my Spirit came again. He gave me also a piece of
the Ruff or Ridding of the small Guts, and I broiled it on the Coals; and now
may I say with Jonathan, See I pray you, how mine eyes are enlightened, because
I tasted a little of this Honey. 1 Samuel 14. 29. Now is my spirit revived again;
though means be never so inconsiderable, yet if the Lord bestow his Blessing
upon them, they shall refresh both Soul and Body.

The Eighteenth Remove.
We took up our packs, and along we went. But a wearisome Day I had of it. As
we went along, I saw an English Man stripped naked, and lying dead upon the
Ground, but knew not who it was. Then we came to another Indian Town, where we
stayed all Night. In this Town there were four English Children, Captives, and
one of them my own Sister's. I went to see how she did, and she was well,
considering her Captive Condition. I would have ^arried that Night with her,
but they that owned her would not suffer it. Then I went to another Wigwam,
where they were boiling Corn and Beans, which was a lovely sight to see, but I
could not get a taste thereof. Then I went into another Wigwam, where there
were two of the English Children: The Squaw was boiling Horses Feet, she cut me
off a little piece, and gave one of the English Children a piece also. Being
very hungry, I had quickly eat up mine; but the Child could not bite it, it was
so tough and sinewy, but lay sucking, gnawing, chewing and ^abbering of it in
the Mouth and Hand, then I took it of the Child, and ate it my self, and
savoury it was to my taste. That I may say as Job, Chap. 6. 7. The things that
my Soul refused to touch, are as my sorrowful meat. Thus the Lord made that
Pleasant and Refreshing, which another time would have been an Abomination.
Then I went home to my Mistress's Wigwam, and they told me I disgraced my
Master with Begging, and if I did so any more, they would knock me on the head:
I told them, they had as good do that, as starve me to death.

The Nineteenth Remove.
They said, when we went out, that we must travel to Wachuset this Day. But a
bitter weary Day I had of it; traveling now three Days together, without
resting any Day between. At last, after many weary Steps, I saw Wachuset Hills,
but many miles off. Then we came to a great Swamp, through which we traveled
up to the Knees in Mud and Water, which was heavy going to one tired before.
Being almost spent, I thought I should have sunk down at last, and never get
out; but I may say as in Psalm. 94. 18. When m^ foot slipped, thy Mercy O Lord
held me up. Going along, having indeed my Life, but little Spirit, Philip (who
was in the Company) came up, and took me by the Hand, and said, Two Weeks more,
and you shall be Mistress again. I asked him if he spoke true? he answered,
Yes, and quickly you shall come to your Master again, who had been gone from us
three Weeks. After many weary Steps, we came to Wachuset, where he was, and
glad was I to see him. He asked me when I washed me? I told him not this Month;
then he fetched me some Water himself, and bid me wash, and gav^ me the Glass to
see how I looked, and bid his Squaw give me something to ^at. So she gave me a
mess of Beans and Meat, and a little Ground Nut Cake. I was wonderfully revived
with this Favor showed me. Psalm. 106. 46. He made them also to be pitied of
all those that carried them Captives.

My Master had three Squaws, living sometimes with one, and sometimes with
another. One, this old Squaw at whose Wigwam I was, and with whom my Master had
been those three Weeks Another was Wettimore, with whom I had lived and served
all this while. A severe and proud Dame she was; bestowing every day in
dressing her self near as much Time as any of the Gentry of the Land: Powdering
her Hair, and Painting her Face, going with her Necklaces, with Jewels in her
Ears, and Bracelets upon her Hands. When she had dressed her self, her Work was
to make Girdles of Wampom and and Beads. The third Squaw was a younger one, by
whom he had two Papooses. By that time I was refresht by the old Squaw,
Wettimore's Maid came to call me home, at which I fell a weeping. Then the old
Squaw told me to encourage me, that when I wanted Victuals, I should come to
her, and that I should l^ in her Wigwam. Then I went with the Maid, and quickly
I came back and lodged there. The Squaw laid a Matt under me, and a good Rugg
over me; the first time that I had any such kindness showed me. I understood
that We^^imore thought, that if she should let me go and serve with the old
Squaw, she should be in danger to lose (not only my Service) but the
Redemption-pay also. And I was not a little glad to hear this; being by it
raised in my hopes, that in Gods due time, there (...) be an end of this
sorrowful Hour. The^ ^^me an Indian and asked me to knit him three pair of
Stockings, for which I had a Hat, and a Silk Handkerchief. Then another asked
me to make her a Shift, for which she gave me an Apron.

Then came Tom and Peter with the second Letter from the Council, about the
Captives. Though they were Indians, I gat them by the Hand, and burst out into
Tears; my Heart was so full that I could not speak to them; but recovering my
self, I asked them how my Husband did? and all my Friends and Acquaintance?
they said they were well, but very Melancholy. They brought me two Biskets, and
a pound of Tobacco. The Tobacco I soon gave away: when it was all gone, one
asked me to give him a Pipe of Tobacco, I told him it was all gone; then began
he to rant and threaten; I told him when my Husband came, I would give him
some: Hang him, Rogue, (says he) I will knock out his Brains, if he comes here.
And then again in the same Breath, they would say, That if there should come an
Hundred without Guns, they would do them no hurt. So unstable and like mad Men
they were. So that fearing the worst, I durst not sent to my Husband, though
there were some thoughts of his coming to Redeem and fetch me, not knowing what
might follow; for there was little more trust to them, than to the Master they
served. When the Letter was come, the Saggamores met to consult about the
Captives, and called me to them, to enquire how much my Husband would give to
Redeem me: When I came, I sat down among them, as I was wont to do, as their
manner is; Then they bid me stand up, and said, They were the General Court.
They bid me speak what I thought he would give. Now knowing that all we had was
destroyed by the Indians, I was in a great strait. I thought if I should speak
of but a little, (...) would be slighted, and hinder the matter; if of a great
Sum, I knew not where it would be procured; yet at a venture, I sai^ Twenty
Pounds, yet desired them to take less; but they would not hear of that, but
sent that Message to Boston, That for Twenty Pounds I should be redeemed. It
was a Praying Indian that wrote their Letter for them. There was another
Praying Indian, who told me, that he had a Brother that would not eat Horse,
his Conscience was so Tender and Scrupulous, (though as large as Hell, for the
Destruction of poor Christians) Then he said, he read that Scripture to him, 2
King. 6. 25. There was a Famine in Samaria, and behold they besieged it, until
an Asses head was sold for fourscore pieces of Silver, and the fourth part of a
Kab of Doves Dung, for five pieces of Silver. He expounded this place to his
Brother, and showed him that it was lawful to eat that in a Famine, which is
not at another time. And now says he, he will eat Horse with any Indian of them
all. There was another Praying Indian, who when he had done all the Mischief
that he could, betrayed his own Father into the English's Hands, thereby to
purchase his own Life. Another Praying Indian was at Sudbury Fight, though as
he deserved, he was afterward hanged for it. There was another Praying Indian
so wicked and cruel, as to wear a String about his Neck, strung with Christian
Fingers. Another Praying Indian, when they went to Sudbury Fight, went with
them, and his Squaw also with him, with her Papoos at her back: Before they
went to that Fight, they got a company together to Powaw: The manner was as
follows.

There was one that kneeled upon a Deer-Skin, with the Company round him in a
Ring, who kneeled, striking upon the Ground with their Hands, and with Sticks,
and muttering or humming with their Mouths. Besides him who kneeled in the
Ring, there also stood one with a Gun in his hand: Then he on the Deer-Skin
made a Speech, and all manifested Assent to it, and so they did many times
together. Then they bid him with the Gun go out of the Ring, which he did; but
when he was out, they called him in again; but he seemed to make a stand: Then
they called the more earnestly, till he returned again. Then they all sang.
Then they gave him two Guns, in either Hand one. And so he on the Deer-Skin
began again; and at the end of every Sentence in his speaking, they all
assented, humming or muttering with their Mouths, and striking upon the Ground
with their Hands. Then they bid him with the two Guns, go out of the Ring
again; which he did a little way. Then they called him in again, but he made a
stand, so they called him with greater earnestness: But he stood reeling and
wavering, as if he knew not whether he should stand or fall, or which way to
go. Then they called him with exceeding great Vehemence, all of them, one and
another. After a little while he turned in, staggering as he went, with his
Arms stretched out, in either Hand a Gun. As soon as he came in, they all sang
and rejoiced exceedingly a while, and then he upon the Deer-Skin made another
Speech, unto which they all assented in a rejoicing manner; and so they ended
their Business, and forthwith went to Sudbury Fight.

To my thinking, they went without any scruple but that they should prosper,
and gain the Victory. And they went out not so rejoicing, but they came home
with as great a Victory. For they said they had killed two Captains, and almost
an hundred Men. One English Man they brought alive with them, and he said it
was too true, for they had made sad work at Sudbury; as indeed it proved. Yet
they came home without that Rejoicing and Triumphing over their Victory, which
they were wont to show at other times: But rather like Dogs, (as they say)
which have lost their Ears. Yet I could not perceive that it was for their own
loss of Men; they said they lost not above five or six; and I missed none,
except in one Wigwam. When they went, they acted as if the Devil had told them
that they should gain the Victory; and now they acted as if the Devil had told
them that they should have a Fall. Whither it were so or no, I cannot tell, but
so it proved: For quickly they began to fall, and so held on that Summer, till
they came to utter Ruin. They came home on a Sabbath day, and the Powaw that
kneeled upon the Deer-Skin, came home (I may say without any abuse) as black as
the Devil. When my Master came home, he came to me, and bid me make a Shirt for
his Papoos of a Holland laced Pillow-beer. About that time there came an Indian
to me, and bid me come to his Wigwam at Night, and he would give me some Pork
and Ground-Nuts. Which I did, and as I was eating, another Indian said to me,
He seems to be your good Friend, but he killed two English Men at Sudbury, and
there lie their Clothes behind you; I looked behind me, and there I saw bloody
Clothes, with bullet-holes in them; yet the Lord suffered not this wretch to do
me any hurt. Yea, instead of that, he many times refresht me: five or six times
did he and his Squaw refresh my feeble Carcass. If I went to their Wigwam at
any time, they would always give me something, and yet they were Strangers that
I never saw before. Another Squaw gave me a piece of fresh Pork, and a little
Salt with it, and lent me her Drying Pan to fry it; and I cannot but remember
what a sweet, pleasant and delightful Relish that bit had to me, to this day.
So little do we prize common Mercies, when we have them to the full.

The Twentieth Remove.
It was their usual manner to Remove, when they had done any Mischief, lest
they should be found out; and so they did at this time. We went about three or
four Miles, and there they built a great Wigwam, big enough to hold an hundred
Indians, which they did in preparation to a great day of Dancing. They would
now say amongst themselves, that the Governor would be so angry for his loss
at Sudbury, that he would send no more about the Captives, which made me grieve
and tremble. My Sister being not far from this place, and hearing that I was
here, desired her Master to let her come and see me, and he was willing to it,
and would go with her; but she being ready first, told him she would go before,
and was come within a Mile or two of the place: Then he overtook her, and began
to rant as if he had been mad, and made her go back again in the Rain; so that
I never saw her till I saw her in Charlestown. Bu^ the Lord requited many of
their ill doings, for this Indian, her Master, was hanged afterward at Boston.
They began now to come from all Quarters, against their merry dancing Day:
Amongst some of them came one Good-wife Kettle: I told her my Heart was so
heavy that it was ready to break: So is mine too, said she, but yet I hope we
shall hear some good News shortly. I could hear how earnestly my Sister desired
to see me, and I earnestly desired to see her; yet neither of us could get an
opportunity. My Daughter was now but about a mile off; and I had not seen her
in 9 or 10 Weeks, as I had not seen my Sister since our first taking. I desired
them to let me go and see them, yea, I entreated, begged and persuaded them to
let me see my Daughter; and yet so hard-hearted were they, that they would not
suffer it. They made use of their tyrannical Power whilst they had it, but
through the Lord's wonderful Mercy, their time was now but short.

On a Sabbath Day, the Sun being about an hour high in the afternoon, came Mr.
John Hoar, (the Council permitting him and his own forward Spirit inclining
him) together with the 2 forementioned Indians, Tom and Peter, with the third
Letter from the Council. When they came near, I was abroad; they presently
call me in, and bid me sit down, and not stir. Then they caught up their Guns
and away they ran, as if an enemy had been at hand, and the Guns went off
apace. I manifested some great trouble, and they asked me what was the matter?
I told them I thought they had killed the English Man, (for they had in the
mean time told me that an English Man was come) they said no; they shot over
his Horse, and under, and before his Horse; and they pusht him this way and
that way, at their pleasure, showing what they could do. Then they let them
come to their Wigwams. I begged of them to let me see the English Man, but they
would not; but there was I fain to sit their pleasure. When they had talked
their fill with him, they suffered me to go to him. We asked each other of o^r
welfare, and how my Husband did, and all my Friends? he told me they were all
well, and would be glad to see me. Among other things which my Husband sent me,
there came a pound of Tobacco, which I sold for 9 Shillings in Money: For many
of them for want of Tobacco, smoked Hemlock and Ground Ivy. It was a great
mistake in any who thought I sent for Tobacco, for through the favor of God,
that ^esire was overcome. I now asked them, whither I should go home with Mr.
Hoar? they answered no, one and another of them; and it being late, we lay down
with that Answer: In the Morning Mr Hoar invited the Saggamores to Dinner; but
when we went to get it ready, we found they had stolen the greatest part of the
Provision Mr. Hoar had brought. And we may see the wonderful Power of God* in
that one passage, in that when there was such a number of them together, and so
greedy of a little good ^ Food, and no English there but Mr. Hoar and my self,
that there they did not knock us on the head, and take what we had; there being
not only some Provision, but also Trading-Cloth, a part of the 20 Pounds agreed
upon: But instead of doing us any MisMischief, they seemed to be ashamed of the
fact, and said it was Matchit Indians that did it. Oh that we could believe
that there is nothing too hard for God! God showed his Power over the Heathen
in this, as he did over the hungry Lions, when Daniel was cast into the Den.
Mr. Hoar called them betime to Dinner, but they ate but little, they being so
busy in dressing themselves and getting ready for their Dance; which was
carried on by 8 of them, 4 Men and 4 Squaws; my Master and Mistress being two.
He was dressed in his Holland Shirt, with great Laces sewed at the tail of it,
he had his Silver Buttons, his white Stockings, his Garters hung round with
Shillings, and had Girdles of Wampom upon his head and shoulders. She had a
Kersey Coat, covered with Girdles of Wampom from the Loins upward. Her Arms
from her Elbows to her Hands, were covered with Bracelets, there were hand^uls
of Necklaces about her Neck, and several sorts of Jewels in her Ears. She had
fine red Stockings, and white Shoes, her Hair powdered and her Face painted
Red, that was always before Black. And all the Dancers were after the same
manner. There were two other singing and knocking on a Kettle for their Music.
They kept hopping up and down one after another, with a Kettle of Water in the
midst, standing warm upon some Embers, to drink of when they were dry. They
held on till it was almost Night, throwing out Wampom to the standers-by. At
Night I asked them again, if I should go home? they all as one said no, except
my Husband would come for me. When we were lain down, my Master went out of the
Wigwam, and by and by sent in an Indian, called James the Printer, who told Mr.
Hoar, that my Master would let me go home to morrow, if he would let him have
one pint of Liquors. The^ Mr. Hoar called his own Indians, Tom and Peter, and
bid them all go, and see if he would promise it before them three; and if he
would, he should have it, which he did, and had it. Philip smelling the
business, called me to him, and asked me what I would give him, to tell me some
good News, and to speak a good word for me, that I might go home to morrow? I
told him I could not tell what to give him, I would any thing I had, and asked
him what he would have? He said two Coats, and Twenty Shillings in Money, half
a bushel of Seed Corn, and some Tobacco. I thanked him for his love, but I knew
that good News as well as that crafty Fox. My Master after he had had his
Drink, quickly came ranting into the Wigwam again, and called for Mr. Hoar,
drinking to him, and saying he was a good Man, and then again he would say,
hang him Rogue. Being almost Drunk, he would drink to him, and yet presently
say he should be hanged. Then he called for me,; I trembled to hear him, and
yet I was fain to go to him; and he drank to me, showing no incivility. He was
the first Indian I saw Drunk, all the time I was among them. At last his Squaw
ran out, and he after her, round the Wigwam, with his Money jing^ing at his
knees, but she escaped him; but having an old Squaw he ran to her; and so
through the Lord's Mercy, we were no more troubled with him that Night. Yet I
had not a comfortable Nights rest; for I think I can say, I did not sleep for
three Nights together. The Night before the Letter came from the Council, I
could not rest, I was so full of fears and troubles; yea, at this time I could
not rest Night nor Day. The next Night I was overjoyed, Mr. Hoar being come,
and that with such good Tidings. The third Night I was even swallowed up with
the thoughts of going home again, and that I must leave my Children behind me
in the Wilderness; so that sleep was now almost departed from mine eyes.

On Tuesday Morning they called their General Cour^ (as they styled it) to
consult and determine, whether I should go home or no. And they all seemingly
consented that I should go, except Philip, who would not come among them.

But before I go any farther, I would take leave to mention a few remarkable
Passages of Providence, which I took special Notice of in my afflicted time.

1. Of the fair opportunity lost in th^^ long March, a little after the
Fort-fight, when our English Army was so numerous, and in pursuit of the Enemy,
and so near as to overtake several and destroy them; and the Enemy in such
distress for Food, that our Men might track them by their rooting in the Earth
for Ground-Nuts, whilst they were flying for their lives; I say that then our
Army should want Provision, and be forced to leave their pursuit, and return
homeward, and the very next week the enemy came upon our Town, like Bears
bereft of their Whelps, or so many Ravenous Wolves, rending us and our Lambs to
Death. But what shall I say? God seemed to leave his People to themselves, and
ordered all things for his own holy ends. Shall there be evil in the City and
the Lord has not done it? They are not grieved for the Affliction of Joseph,
therefore they shall go Captive, with the first that go Captive. It is the
Lords doing, and it should be mavelous in our eyes.

2. I cannot but remember, how the Indians derided the slowness and dullness of
the English Army in its setting out. For after the desolations at Lancaster and
Medfield, as I went along with them, they asked me when I thought the English
Army would come after them? I told them I could not tell. It may be they may
come in May, said they Thus did they scoff at us, as if the English would be a
quarter of a Year getting ready.

3 Which also I have hinted before, when the English Army with new Supplies
were sent forth to pursue after the Enemy, and they understanding it, fled
before them till they came to Baquaug River, where they forthwith went over
safely; that that River should be impassible to the English. I can but admire
to see the wonderful Providence of God in preserving the Heathen for farther
Affliction to our poor Country. They could go in great Numbers over, but the
English must stop: God had an overruling hand in all those things.

4. It was thought, If their Corn were cut down, they would starve and die with
Hunger; and all that could be found, was destroyed, and they driven from that
little they had in store, into the Woods, in the midst of Winter; and yet how
to admiration did the Lord preserve them for his holy ends, and the destruction
of many still among the English! strangely did the Lord provide for them, that
I did not see (all the time I was among them) one Man, Woman or Child dye with
Hunger. Though many times they would eat that that a Hog or a Dog would hardly
touch; yet by that God strengthened them to be a scourge to his People.

Their chief and commonest food was Ground-Nuts; they ate also Nuts, and
Acrons, Harty-choaks, Lilly-roots, Ground-beans, and several other Weeds and
Roots, that I know not.

They would pick up old Bones, and cut them in pieces at the joints, and if
they were full of Worms and Magots, they would scald them over the fire, to
m^ke the vermin come out, and then boil them, and drink up the Liquor, and
then beat the great ends of them in a Mortar, and so eat them. They would eat
Horses Guts, and Ears, (...) all sorts of wild Birds which they could catch:
Also Bear, Venson, Beavers, Tortois, Frogs, Squirrils, Dogs, Skunks,
Rattle-snakes: Yea, the very Bark of Trees; besides all sorts of Creatures, and
Provision which they plundered from the English. I can but stand in admiration
to see the wonderful power of God, in providing for such a vast number of our
Enemies in the Wilderness, where there was nothing to be seen, but from hand to
mouth. Many times in a morning, the generality of them, would eat up all they
had, and yet have some further supply against they wanted. It is said, Psalm.
81. 13, 14. Oh that my people had hearkened to, me, and Israel had walked in my
ways; I should soon have subdued their Enemies, and turned my hand against
their adversaries. But now our perverse and evil carriages in the sight of the
Lord, have so offended him, that instead of turning his hand against them, the
Lord feeds and nourishes the^ up to be a scourge to the whole Land.

5. Another thing that I would observe is, the strange providence of God in
turning things about when the Indians were at the highest, and the English at
the lo^est. I was with the Enemy 11 Weeks and 5 Days, and not one Week passed
without their fury, and some Desolation by Fire and Sword upon one place or
other. They mourned for their own Losses, yet triumphed and rejoiced in their
inhumane and devilish Cruelty to the English. They would boast much of their
Victories; saying, that in two hours time, they had destroyed such a Captain,
and his Company in such a place; and such a Captain and his Company in such a
place: And boast how many To^^s they had destroyed, and then scoff, and say,
They had done them a good turn, to send them to Heaven so soon. ^gain, they
would say, this Summer they would knock all the Rogues on the head, or drive
them into the Sea, or make them fly the Country; thinking surely, Agaglike, The
bitterness of Death is past. Now the Heathen begin to think all is their own;
and the poor Christians hopes to fail, (as to man) and now their Eyes are more
to God, and their Hearts sigh Heavenward, and to say in good earnest, Help
Lord, or we perish. When the Lord had brought his people to this, that they saw
no help in any thing but himself, then he takes the Quarrel into his own hand;
and though they had made a pit (in their own imaginations) as deep as Hell for
the Christians that Summer, yet the Lord hurled themselves into it. And the
Lord had not so many ways before to preserve them, but now he has as many to
destroy them.

But to return again to my going home; where we may see a remarkable change of
Providence: At first they were all against it, except my Husband would come for
me; but afterward they assented to it, and seemed to rejoice in it: some asking
me to send them some Bread, others some Tobacco, others shaking me by the hand,
offering me a Hood and Scarf to Ride in: not one moving Hand or Tong^e against
it. Thus has the Lord answered my poor desires, and the many earnest Requests
of others put up unto God for me. In my Travels an Indian came to me, and told
me, if I were willing, he and his Squaw would run away, and go home along with
me. I told them no; I was not willing to run away, but desired to wait Gods
time, that I might go home quietly, and without fear. And now God has gran^ed
me my desire. O the wonderful Power of God that I have seen, and the
Experiences that I have had: I have been in the midst of those Roaring Lions,
and Salvage Bears, that feared neither God, nor Man, nor the Devil, by Night
and Day, alone and in company; sleeping all sorts together, and yet not one of
them ever offered the least abuse of Unchastity to me, in Word or Action.
Though some are ready to say, I speak it for my own Credit; but I speak it in
the presence of God, and to his Glory. Gods Power is as great now, as it was to
save Daniel in the Lions Den, or the three Children in the fiery Furnace. I may
well say as he, Psalm. 170. 12. Oh give thanks unto the Lord for he is good, for
his merry endures for ever. Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he has
redeemed from the hand of the Enemy: Especially that I should come away in the
midst of so many hundreds of Enemies, and not a Dog move his Tongue. So I took
my leave of them, and in coming along, my Heart melted into Tears more than all
the while I was with them, and I was almost swallowed up with the thoughts that
ever I should go home again. About the Suns going down, Mr. Hoar, my self, and
the two Indians, came to Lancaster, and a solemn sight it was to me. There had
I lived many comfortable Years among my Relations and Neighbors; and now not
one Christian to be seen, nor one House left standing. We went on to a
Farm-house that was ye^ standing, where we lay all Night; and a comfortable
Lodging we had, though nothing but Straw to lie on. The Lord preserved us in
safety that Night, and raised us up again in the Morning, and carried us along,
that before Noon we came to Concord. Now was I full of joy, and yet not without
sorrow: Joy, to see such a lo^^ly sight, so many Christians, together, and some
of them my Neighbors: There I met with my Brother, and my Brother-in-law, who
asked me, if I knew where his Wife was? poor heart! he had helped to bury her,
and knew it not; she being shot down by the ^ouse, was partly burnt, so that
those who were at Boston at the Desolation of the Town, and came back afterward
and buried the Dead, did not know her. Yet I was not without Sorrow, to think
how many were looking and longing, and my own Children among the rest, to enjoy
that Deliverance that I had now received; and I did not know whither ever I
should see them again. Being recruited with Food and Raiment, we went to Boston
that Day; where I met with my dear Husband, but the thoughts of our dear
Children, one being dead, and the other we could not tell where, abated our
comfort each in other. I was not before so much hemmed in by the merciless and
cruel Heathen, but now as much with pitiful, tenderhearted and compassionate
Christians. In that poor and beggarly condition, I was received in, I was
kindly entertained in several Houses: So much Love I received from several,
(many of whom I knew not) that I am not capable to declare it. But the Lord
knows them all by name: The Lord reward them seven fold into their Bosoms of
his Spirituals, for their Temporals. The Twenty Pounds, the price of my
Redemption, was raised by some Boston Gentlewomen, and M. Usher, whose Bounty
and Charity, I would not forget to make mention of. Then Mr. Thomas Shepard of
Charlstown received us into his House, where we continued 11 Weeks; and a
Father and Mother they were unto us. And many more tenderhearted Friends we
met with in that place. We were now in the midst of Love, yet not without much
and frequent heaviness of Heart, for our poor Children, and other Relations,
who were still in Affliction. The Week following, after my coming in, the
Governor and Council sent to the Indians again, and that not without success;
for they brought in my Sister and good-wife Kettle. Their not knowing where our
Children were, was a sore Trial to us still; and yet we were not without secret
hopes of seeing them again. That which was dead lay* heavier upon my Spirit,
than those which were alive among the Heathen; thinking how it suffered with
its Wounds, and I was not able to relieve it; and how it was buried by the
Heathen in the Wilderness from among all Christians. We were hurried up and
down in our Thoughts, sometime we should hear a Report that they were gone this
way, and sometimes that; and that they were come in, in this place or that. We
kept inquiring and listening to hear concerning them, but no certain News as
yet. About this time the Council had ordered a Day of public Thanksgiving,
though I thought I had still cause of Mourning; and ^eing unset^led in our
Minds, we thought we would ride Eastward, to see if we could hear any thing
concerning our C^^ldren. As we were riding along between Ipswich and Rowly, we
met with William Hubbard, who told us our Son Joseph, and my Sisters Son, were
come in to Major Waldren's: I asked him how he knew it? he said the Major
himself told him so. So along we went till we came to Newbury; and their
Minister being absent, they desired my Husband to Preach the Thanksgiving for
them; but he was not willing to stay there that Night, but would go over to
Salisbury, to hear farther, and come again in the Morning, which he did, and
preached there that Day. At Night, when he had done, one came and told him that
his Daughter was come in at Providence: Here was Mercy on both hands. Now has
God fulfilled that precious Scripture, which was such a comfort to me in my
distressed condition. When my heart was ready to sink into the Earth, and my
knees trembling under me, and I was walking through the valley of the shadow of
Death: Then the Lord brought, and has now fulfilled that reviving Word unto me,
Thus says the Lord, Refrain thy Voice from Weeping, and thy Eyes from Tears,
for thy work shall be rewarded, says the Lord, and they shall come again from
the Land of the Enemy. Now we were between them, the one on the East, and the
other on the West; our Son being nearest, we went to him first, to Portsmouth,
where we met with him, and with the Major also; who told us, he had done what
he ^ould, but could not redeem him under Seven Pounds, which the good People
thereabouts were pleased to pay. The Lord reward the Major, and all the rest,
though unknown to me, for their labor of Love. My Sisters Son was redeemed for
four Pounds, which the Council gave order for the payment of. Having now
received one of our Children, we hastened toward the other: Going back through
Newbury, my Husband pr^^ched there on the Sabbath Day, for which they Rewarded
him manifold.

On Monday we came to Charlstown, where we heard that the Governor of
Rhoad-Island had sent over for our Daughter, to take care of her, being now
within his Jurisdiction; which should not pass without our acknowledgements.
But she being nearer Re^oboth than Rhoad-Island, Mr. Newman went over and took
care of her, and brought her to his own House. And the goodness of God was
admirable to us in our low estate, in that he raised up passionate Friends on
every side, when we had nothing to recompense any for their Love. The Indians
were now gone that way, that it was apprehended dangerous to go to her; but the
Carts which carried Provision to the English Army, being guarded, brought her
with them to Dorchester, where we received her safe; blessed be the Lord for
it, for great is his Power, and he can do whatsoever seems him good. Her
coming in was after this manner: She was traveling one day with the Indians,
with her Basket at her back; the company of Indians were got before her, and
gone out of fight, all except one Squaw* She followed the Squaw till night, and
then both of them lay down, having nothing over them but the Heavens, nor under
them but the Earth. Thus she traveled 3 days together, having nothing to eat
or drink but Water and green Hirtle-berries. At last they came into Providence,
where she was kindly entertained by several of that Town. The Indians often
said, that I should never have her under twenty Pounds, but now the Lord has
brought her in upon free-cost, and given her to me the second time. The Lord
make us a Blessing indeed, each to others. Now have I seen that Scripture also
fulfilled, Deuteronomy. 30. 4, 7. If any of thine be driven out to the utmost parts of
Heaven, from thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence will I
fetch thee. And the Lord thy God will put all these Curses upon thine enemies,
and on them which hate thee, which persecuted thee. Thus has the Lord brought
me and mine out of that horrible pit, and has set us in the midst of
tenderhearted and compassionate Christians. It Is the desire of my Soul, that
we may walk worthy of the mercies received, and which we are receiving.

Our Family being now gathered together, the South Church in Boston hired an
House for us: Then we removed from Mr. Shepard's (those cordial Friends) and
went to Boston, where we continued about three quarters of a Year. Still the
Lord went along with us, and provided graciously for us. I thought it somewhat
strange to set up Housekeeping with bare Walls, but as Solomon says, Money
answers all things: And that we had through the Benevolence of Christian
Friends, some in this Town, and some in that, and others; and some from
England, that in a little time we might look and see the House furnished with
Love. The Lord has been exceeding good to us in our low estate, in that when
we had neither house nor home, nor other necessaries, the Lord so moved the
Hearts of these and those toward us, that that we wanted neither Food nor
Raiment for our selves or ours, Prove. 18. 24. There is a Friend that sticks
closer than a Brother. And how many such Friends have we found, and now living
amongst! and truly such a Friend have we found him to be unto us, in whose
House we lived, viz. Mr. James Whitcomb, a Friend near hand, and afar of.

I can remember the time, when I used to sleep quietly without workings in my
thoughts, whole Nights together; but now it is otherwise with me. When all are
fast about me, and no eye open, but his who ever waketh, my thoughts are upon
things past, upon the awful dispensations of the Lord toward us; upon his
wonderful power and might in carrying of us through so many difficulties, in
returning us in safety, and suffering none to hurt us. I remember in the night
season, how the other day I was in the midst of thousands of enemies, and
nothing but Death before me: It was then hard work to persuade my self, that
ever I should be satisfied with Bread again. But now we are fed with the finest
of the Wheat, and (as I may say) with Honey out of the Rock: Instead of the
Husks, we had the Fatted Calf: The thoughts of these things in the particulars
of them, and of the love and goodness of God* toward us, make it true of me,
what David said of himself, Psalm. 6. 6. I water my Couch with my Tears. Oh the
wonderful power of God that mine eyes have seen, affording matter enough for my
thoughts to run in, that when others are sleeping mine eyes are weeping.

I have seen the extreme vanity of this World: One hour I have been in Health,
and Wealth, wanting nothing, but the next hour in Sickness, and Wounds, and
Death, having nothing but Sorrow and Affliction. Before I knew what Affliction
meant, I was ready sometimes to wish for it. When I lived in prosperity, having
the comforts of this World about me, my Relations by me, and my Heart cheerful,
and taking little care for any thing; and yet seeing many (whom I preferred
before my self) under many Trials and Afflictions, in sickness, weakness,
poverty, losses, crosses, and cares of the World, I should be sometimes jealous
lest I should have my portion in this Life; and that Scripture would come to my
mind, Heb. 12. 6 For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every
Son whom he receives. But now I see the Lord had his time to scourge and
chasten me. The portion of some is to have their Affliction by drops, but the
Wine of astonishm^nt, like a sweeping Rain, that leaves no Food, did the Lord
prepare to be my portion. Affliction I wanted, and Affliction I had, full
measure, pressed down and running over: Yet I see when God calls a person to
never so many Difficulties, yet he is able to carry them through, and make them
say, they have been gainers thereby. And I hope I can say in some measure, as
David, It is good for me that I have been afflicted. The Lord has showed me
the vanity of these outward things; that they are the Vanity of vanities, and
vexation of Spirit: That they are but a shadow, a blast, a bubble, and things
of no continuance. If trouble from smaller matters begin to arise in me, I have
something at hand to check my self with, and say, Why am I troubled? It was but
the other day, that if I had had the World, I would have given it for my
Freedom, or to have been a Servant to a Christian. I have learned to look
beyond present and smaller Troubles, and to be quieted under them, as Moses
said, Exodus 14. 13. Stand still, and see the Salvation of the Lord.

FINIS.

