REFLECTIONS On the Present State OF THE Province of Massachuset-Bay in
General, And Town of BOSTON in Particular;

Relating to Bills of Credit And the Support of TRADE by Them:

As the same has been lately represented in several PAMPHLETS.

New England: Printed for and Sold by Benjamin Eliot and Daniel Henchman, at
their Shops in Boston. 1720.

July 2, 1720. SIR,
I Have Read the Account you sent me of the State of your Town of Boston,
(which in many particulars, agrees to the whole Province, as well as to your
Town, and may indeed be considered as the State of New England in General.) The
late Pamphlets on that Subject discover plainly eno' the distressing
Circumstances we are fallen into, though I don't perceive they have been at all
Successful to relieve us in the great thing complained of, viz. The want of a
sufficient Medium to carry on the Trade, of the Town and Country; But on the
contrary, what was suggested in them for that end, has produced a quite
different Effect, and occasioned much Contention.

It is unhappy, when Persons who are concerned in one common Distress, cannot
consult their own Interest, and declare their Minds freely upon it, without
giving Offense to one another. And when men suffer themselves to be thus put
out of Temper, they are in no good Condition either to give or take Counsel.

The Gentlemen who have Printed their Thoughts on this Occasion, do (as far as
I can discern) desire to see their Country in a Flourishing Trade, and
Prosperous Condition, as they have seen it formerly; They differ indeed in
their Conjectures about the Measures proper to be taken at this Juncture for
this End; But its much to be Lamented, that Gentlemen who desire the good of
their Country, cannot declare their differing sentiments, about the best Means
to promote it, without falling under the Displeasure of those whom they study
to serve. This tends to Discourage our best Friends from lending us their
Assistance when we want it most. If a man that heartily speaks his Mind, and
declares what he Judges fittest to be done, under any Difficulty, which he
suffers in common with others, must for that reason be treated with Disrespect
and Anger, he will be tempted to conclude its much better for him, to sustain his
share of the Calamity, in Silence.

As far as I am able to observe, from what has been Published relating to the
Relief so much desired, the principal Controversy in this Matter, is, whether
the Emitting more Bills of Credit, or the calling in those that are Extant,
will best answer that end?

Some are of Opinion that the Emitting of more Bills, either by the Public, or
by Private Undertakers, would be the properest way to revive our Trade, and
recover us out of our present Languishing Circumstances:

Others, on the contrary, are of Opinion, that the Emitting of more Bills in
such manner, would certainly Augment our Distress; and they are therefore for
calling in those that are out, as soon as may be; and Emitting no more.

And each Pa^ty, tenaciously adhearing to their own Sentiments, and firmly
believing their own Method the Properest, to Extricate us out of our present
Difficulties, are under strong Temptations to look on all that oppose their
several Schemes, as Obstructions of the Public Good, and treat them
accordingly. While they themselves also, at the same time, are requited with
the same hard Measure.

But this Anger is I think Unreasonable, and without any just Occasion; for
although these Opinions seem Repugnant, yet if we could be persuaded to
consider them (and the reasons by which they are supported) calmly, and be cool
in our Reflections upon them, we might probably (...) a way to Reconcile them,
and show how they may be understood and improved to that Common Good, which
both parties aim at; and even persuade the Dissenting Gentlemen themselves to
be of one mind, in the manner of promoting it.

This is what I truly desire. Though I must confess I should be loath to write my
mind so freely on this Subject, if I were not well assured of your Candor. Who
ever undertakes the part of a Mediator, where the Contention between the
Parties is at all warm, may expect to be encountered with Prejudices from both
sides; But I fear nothing of such a Kind, from a Gentleman of Your Wisdom and
Temper. I am satisfied that whatever Favor You have for either of these
Opinions, it will not be unacceptable to You, ^o see that a good Use may be
made of them both;

And this is what I aim at; My Design is to avoid entirely, what may appear in
the form of Opposition, or tend to overset either of these differing Opinions,
and only to consider, Whether there are not certain Principles which both
Parties will agree to, and which may well be Improved to unite them firmly in
one and the same Measure, for promoting the Public Interest.

And if it should prove that I am mistaken in my Thoughts, or deceived in my
Hopes, yet to attempt what is so Desirable, as it cannot give any just ground
of Offense to any, so I am sure, it will never be taken so by You.

I shall therefore observe here a few things, which I take to be beyond Dispute
and serviceable to the end which I propose, and submit them to your better
Judgment.

In the first Place. It will easily be granted, that

Trade or Commerce is necessary to a peoples Prosperity, or Flourishing in the
World. This, some of your late W^^ters. lay much weight on; from hence they
urge the necessity of being provided with a Medium for carrying it on; And if
others seem to speak of Trade as a Disadvantage to us, it must be understood
only with respect to some Circumstances which attend ours in particular, as,
(for Instance) our carrying it to a degree beyond what we are able to manage;
Which is as I suppose, what they mean by our Overtrading; Or our giving to^
long a Credit, whereby people that are never like to Pay, are Tempted to run in
Debt: Or because its Managed mostly by a Credit which is not Supported as it
ought to be; and is therefore variable, and raised or depressed as Managers
happen to meet with Chapmen. But it would be unfair to understand them as real
Enemies to our Commerce.

No Country has within it self every thing Useful and conducive to the common
Flourishing and Prosperity of its Inhabitants. Many things will be wanting,
especially in new Settlements (as ours may in many Regards be considered) for
the Subsistence and Comfort of Persons, which things must be supplied from
other Places; and that supply must ordinarily be by Trade.

And the same holds true, of persons in the same Country, who by the means of
Commerce must supply each other, with what one wants and another has:
Providence has so Established the State of Mankind, that the World in General,
or any particular Country in special, cannot Flourish and be Prosperous, without
such a mutual Communication of Goods, or Useful Commodities.

Again,

To the carrying on this necessary Commerce, some proper Medium must be made
use of. It is not absolutely Impossible but that it may be done by Barter, or
exchanging of one Commodity for another; but since the Invention of Money, that
method has been much laid aside; and Money has been Universally Received and
Improved, as the (most suitable) Medium, for carrying on of Trade, between
Persons and Countries. This I think is a Point uncontroverted. That steady
value which the general esteem of Men has put upon Silver, (Intrinsecally
considered) and its aptness to be formed (as it has been by Authority,) into
suitable pieces, of greater and lesser Quantities, and those of a Determinate
Value, easy to be known, has rendered it the most agreeable Medium, by which to
rate the Value of all Merchandise, and to be made use of in purchasing the
same. And it is as unquestionable, that

The Trade of any Country must be Supported by the Produce of it. The only
solid Foundation which any Country has to erect a Trade upon, are such
Commodities as may be spared from their own Occasions, and exported to supply
the Wants of other Places. Whether those Commodities are of the Growth or
Produce of such Country, or imported from other Countries, at such a cheap
rate, that they may be exported again and Sold to Advantage.

But generally, The Trade of any Country is supported by its own proper
Produce, i. e. By such Effects as are raised, or Manufactures which are wrought
therein. And its no less certain,

That,

What ever Trade is Managed in any Country to Advantage, the Export must exceed
the Import. When the Produce of any Country is so considerable that the
Exportation of it, exceeds the Value of what Goods are Imported from other
Places, and consumed in it, such Country will have that Overplus, or Balance
of its Trade in Cash. When our G^ai^, Provision, Furr, Lumber, Fish, or any
kind of Manufacture, or what we can raise either on the Land, or out of the
Water, and can export to other Parts, exceeds in Value all the Goods from other
Places, which we have Occasion to Buy and Consume, the Balance of Trade will
be so much in Cash to our Advantage. On the contrary, when the Import is more
in Value than our Export, the Balance will be to our Disadvantage, so much as
that exceeds this; If we want European or any other Goods, in such a Degree,
that all the Produce of our Country, which we can spare, is not Equivalent to
it, we shall be so much more in Debt, than we can Pay with our Produce; And
this Balance must be Paid in Money.

I may here also Observe, That

The Medium of Trade, does Naturally follow Trade, and is Gained by it. Such
Countries as cannot Produce the matter of this Medium, viz. Silver, out of their
own Bowels, have ordinarily no way to supply themselves with it, but by their
own Produce. And when any Country can afford the Commodities, wanted in other
Places, at such a Rate, that those who Improve themselves in Trade, can
purchase them with Money and Export them to Advantage, their own Interest will
put them upon bringing Money into such a Country for that end.

And,

The Medium of Trade, or Money, thus brought into a Country, will remain there
in a Sufficient Plenty for its ordinary Occasions, so long as the Balance of
their Trade is in their Favor, i. e. So long as such Country does not Purchase
and Consume more foreign Goods, than it vends of its own.

And hence it follows, That

The Diligence and Frugality of a People, is Necessary to Preserve the Trade of
any Country, in such a State of Advantage to themselves. No Country can hope to
be in a Flourishing Condition, when the People of it are not Diligent in their
Business, or don't govern themselves as to their Expenses, so as not to exceed
their Produce or Income; for so much as they exceed that, they will be in Debt:
and that Debt may in time exceed the value even of their Real Estates, and
Reduce them to be worse than nothing. This shows, that the Discourse of those
Gentlemen, who are for retrenching our needless, Extravagant Expenses, as one
necessary part of the Project, to remedy our present Distress, is very
reasonable. Nothing can be more Obvious, than that those whose Expenses are
greater than their Gains must needs in time be Reduced to Penury; though the
best Medium of Trade be never so plenty among them. We ought therefore to
consider, what our diligent Labor, and good Husbandry will afford us, and be
sure to keep within those Bounds, in our Apparel. Buildings, Tables, Funerals,
and every Article of Expense. For if by any Methods we spend more than we Gain,
we are not like to escape the Distresses of Poverty.

It must be considered also, That

A Diligent and Frugal People may sometimes be in great want of Money. Their
Circumstances may be such, that their Interest and Preservation may demand on a
Sudden, a greater Sum, than they can possibly furnish themselves with at the
time. So it sometimes happens in War, when their all may ly at Stake, and they
must do their utmost to save themselves. Such a Defense may put them to so
great a Charge, that a Sum of Money sufficient to defray it, cannot be Collected
at the time, though their Estates are worth very much more and they are well able
in process of Time to produce a much greater Sum; And so it may happen on other
Occasions; as, for the carrying on of some great and useful Works, or
profitable Manufactures, or for purchasing some great Privileges which would
be of general Benefit to them for Generations to come.

And certainly

In such Cases as these, it may be very Prudent for such a People to make use
of their Credit. i. e. To supply such Urgent Occasions, with their BILLS or
BONDS, whereby they oblige themselves to raise and Pay the Sum of Money which
they want, in some Convenient time. This PUBLIC CREDIT, if it be good, ( i. e.
if there be no doubt but that such a People are well able to raise, and will
Honestly Pay the Money, by the time,) will supply the want of Money, and
furnish them with what they need as effectually, as the Money it self. It would
be the undoubted Interest of particular Persons, to furnish the Public with
Money, or any thing i^ they have Occasion for, on their Credit thus good and
undoubted.

Of this Nature some of our Public bills are esteemed to be, viz. Those that
have been Emitted for the Payment of Public Debts. (And for that reason I
suppose some Gentlemen speak of the Bills themselves, as a Medium of Trade,)
because they supply the Want of Money; though I think what they intend therein,
has been mistaken by many; as if they meant another Medium, clear and distinct
from Money; Whereas I don't take them to intend, that Money is not, properly
speaking, the Medium of Trade. For we still reckon the Value of every thing we
Trade in, by Pounds, Shillings, and Pence; Which Terms are Denominations, or
Names of several Pieces of Money; and these Names are constantly used in Trade
to express the worth of any Merchandise; Money therefore abides the standard,
by which the Prices of the Goods we Trade in, are computed and expressed. And
when we use our Public Bills in Payment, it is a Trading for Money ^^ill,
though that Money is not to be presently Paid, but by a certain time, for which
the Bill given in Payment is ( or ought to be) a good Security. And he that
takes the Bill in Payment, is assured, that if he has that Bill at the time set
for the Payment of it, he shall if he please have its Value in Money. Whence
its evident that these Public Bills, are really of the same Nature with the
Bill or Bond of a Private Person, of such undoubted Credit, that every one
would take his Bill for Twenty, or Forty Shillings, or any other Sum as soon as
so much Money. Because that Bill is such a Security for the Money, as he dares
rely upon; and which he is assured will not fail him.

But then we must always remember, That

When any Necessity or Consideration whatsoever, puts a Country on making use
of their Credit in want of Money, such Credit ought to be very punctually
Supported. And to the Support of this Credit, Two things must necessarily be
evident to all that shall have any Occasion to depend upon it.

As,

1. The Ability of such a Country, to answer by the time, all the Bills they
have given, if it be demanded of them.

2. The Integrity and Honesty of such a Country, that as They are well able, so
They will certainly be as good as their Word; and keep time punctually with all
that have trusted them, and taken their Bills, in payment.

If either of these be Suspected, their Credit will Sink; and if such a Country
don't remove all just grounds of such Suspicion, their Credit will lower as
that Suspicion rises, and when it has passed through many Degrees of Contempt,
will come to nothing.

Further,

The Supporting of such a Public Credit, is neither Impracticable, nor a
matter of mere Prudence only, or purely Arbitrary, which may be done or
neglected at Pleasure, but such Credit can and ought to be Supported. I say it
can, because its supposed in this case that such a Country has a Sufficient
Estate, and can fulfill all its Engagements. Now for such a Country to suffer
their Credit to be Diminished, or sink, so that perhaps Twenty Shillings in
their Credit, will be no better in Trade to those that have it, than Fourteen,
or Twelve, or Ten Shillings in Money, is not only to deal Falsely, and be worse
than their Word, but its also a great wrong to multitudes; For some persons,
must necessarily loose or suffer as much wrong, as the Public Credit becomes
worse than Money. Wherefore this Credit ought in Justice to be Supported; and
wilfully to suffer it to Sink, is to be guilty of great Unrighteousness, and
I^jury to many, and particularly to all Public Ministers and Creditors, as
also to Widows and Orphans, whose Interest and Protection ought to be Consulted.

To this I may add, That

When the Public Credit, so made use of, is well supported, it cannot be
Injurious. For if the Public Bills Emitted are kept up to their full Value
during the whole time of their Circulation, whoever takes them at the Value of
their Denomination, and gives for them, what he would Sell for so much Money,
may immediately make the same use of them himself; And so may every one who
successively receives them, till the time of their Circulation is up, and there
is Money to answer them, to all that desire it.

Let now the Public Bills of Credit be thus Supported, which They ought to be,
and will be, if we can but convince those that have occasion to receive them in
Trade, that we are not more in Debt than we are worth, and that we will
honestly pay our Debts, and I can see no harm in gratifying the Desire of those
Gentlemen, who are for Emitting more Bills, for present Use, if there should by
any means happen a scarcity of the Medium of Trade, or Money, among us; and
otherwise, They don't seem to desire it.

I will add this one Thing more.

If any particular Persons have occasion to take up Money on Use, I don't see
why the Public in such case may not supply them, by lending the Public
Credit, when Money is not to be had. And if during such Loan, the Public will
Support the Credit they lend, so that it may hold its value in Trade, and be as
good as Money, I don't see but They may justly receive the same Recompense for
the loan of this Credit, as they might for lending the like Sum in Money.

Those Gentlemen therefore, who declare against Emitting more Bills on Loan;
or, which i^ the same Thing, against the Country's lending their Credit, must
be understood, only, in Case the Public Credit should remain under its present
Disadvantages, and not be restored to its just Esteem as it may, and in
Justice, Ought. For in such Case, Every one may be sensible, that to increase
the Number of Bills of Credit, would be a great Mischief, and certainly
increase the Wrong which many suffer by their being already so greatly
disparaged.

But if the Public Credit as often as it is made Use of, either in paying of
Debts or in Loan, be Supported, and kept up to its just Value, so that it will
in Trade answer the End, and be as Useful as Money, I suppose no Gentlemen
would take Offense at a more Extensive Improvement of it; or think it an Injury
for the Country to make such a Loan of their Credit, to any persons that can
make a good Use of it. Especially considering that though the Persons that Borrow
it, design to improve it to their own particular Advantage, Yet if they succeed
in their design, as its to be hoped They may, it will at last redound to the
Public Advantage;

Upon these Considerations, I think those Gentlemen who have differed so much
in their Sentiments, about supplying at this Juncture the want or scarcity of
the Medium of Trade, may well be Reconciled.

For,

Whether we do, or do not, make any further Use of the Public Credit,
certainly it concerns us to hearken to what is so earnestly insisted on by many
Gentlemen; the retrenching Our Expenses, that They may not exceed our Gains; or
that our Import may not be greater than our Export; without which we must needs
be greatly distressed, and ^^en undone.

And, Those who are for calling in all the Bills of Credit emitted, by the time
set for it, may without any Danger be gratified, Provided the Public does but
supply, what want we may be in of Cash, by Emitting more Bills of Credit.

And, Those who think it very necessary at this Juncture, that the Government
should still make use of their Credit, both to Pay their Debts, and to serve
other Emergencies, may safely be gratifyed. Provided effectual care be taken to
support such Credit, the whole time it is made use of.

Nay even, Those that Favor a Private Bank or Credit, rather than a Public
one, may for ought I know be gratifyed without Danger, provided it be under
such a Public Regulation, as would satisfy all, that the Bills of such a
Private Bank should be upheld in Trade, and be made as useful as Money, during
the Convenient time set for their Circulation; and that when such time is
expired, those that have any such Bank Bills in their Possession, may if they
please exchange them for Money.

This therefore is the chief thing necessary, that whatever Credit there may be
Occasion to make use of, it should be supported in such an esteem and
Usefulness as it ought to have in Trade, that is to say (at least) equal to
Money during the whole time of its Circulation. That this is practicable
appears from what has been said already; against the Justice of it no man can
reasonably Object. And were this once done, we should soon see an end of the
Contention about Emitting more Bills. For, Then no man would have any just
reason to fear,

Either, That the Bills would be hoarded up, more than Cash.

Or, That our Credit would be extended too far;

Or, That our Bills would be Improved for any longer time, than till our
Ordinary Occasions of Trade and Expense, may well enough be Supplied, with such
a Stock of Money, as by our Diligence and Good Husbandry, we may procure.

Because, When such a Stock is attained, there will then be no necessary
Occasion for Improving Credit any longer in such a manner.

Wherefore those Gentlemen who have differed in their Sentiments, about
Emitting more Bills, and calling in those that are Emitted, would I am
persuaded find themselves well satisfied, in any fair and reasonable Project,
to restore and keep in good Credit the Bills Improved in Trade, so that they
should be of Value equal to Money; until such time as we might be furnished
with a Sufficiency of Money, to supply our Ordinary Occasions, and to carry on
a Trade, within the Compass of our Abilities, i. e. such an one as does not
exceed what we are able to spare out of our own produce, for the carrying of it
on;

Especially considering that when the Bills of Credit are restored to the Value
of Money; a much less Quantity of them would suffice for these Occasions.

And I cannot see but They must on both sides find themselves disappointed at
last, if there should be no care taken to revive the Credit of Our Bills, but
they are suffered to remain under the present disadvantage, and increasing
Discount.

For, Suppose No more Bills be emitted, and those that are out, be drawn in as
fast as may be, by Sueing the Mortgages on which the most of them are Lent,
then indeed the Mortgagers may many of them loose their Estates, but They that
happen to have the Bills in their keeping, may be as far as ever from receiving
either Money, or Money's worth, for them. For as there never was any Public
Provision made for the drawing in those loan Bills by a Common Rate; or having
Money in the Treasury to Balance against them; so neither can those that have
them, be sure of having any part of the Mortgaged Estates in Exchange for them.
When the Public has sued the Mortgages and recovered the Estates, who can tell
what they may think good to do with them? Some have thought that when the
Mortgagers have paid by Interest, the Value of the principal, the principal
will be Remitted to them; and if so, there may then be no Mortgaged Estates,
for these Gentlemen to take in Exchange for their Bills; or (which is the same
thing) to purchase with those Bills, if they reserve them for that end.

This project of Remission some may think unreasonable, but it may not seem so
to others, who may possibly have a great Influence in the ordering of that
Affair.

Or if it should, yet they may think it fair to lease those Estates to the
Mortgagers with Condition of Redemption in some convenient time; since it may
seem hard in such a case if no time of Redemption be allowed. Or

It may be thought necessary to Sell them for Money only. These are things
which may appear hereafter, in a quite different View, to the Government, both
at Home, and Here, than they do now to us. Upon all which accounts it may not
be so safe for any Gentlemen, who may reserve such Bills by them, to Flatter
themselves, that they shall ever be able to exchange them, for Moneys worth,
(or their Value in Money) unless the Credit of them be Restored and Established.

If it should be supposed, that when the Mortgaged Estates are Recovered, the
Government must then call in by Rate all the outstanding Bills, or Current
Money in stead of them; and that then there would be Money in the Treasury to
Exchange for them.

This Supposition is as Uncertain as any of the former. Those that may be then
in the Administration, may be of another Mind.

There is no Provision of such kind made by any Act of the Government, whereby
They stand engaged so to do; Which, If it had been designed at last, would
probably have been declared at first. Yea, The Contrary seems to be implied by
the Acts for the Loan of Bills; for it does not appear by those Acts, that
Those Bills were to have any Credit, but what the Mortgages gave them; Which
men might rely upon as They saw Good.

Its pretty remarkable, that many who please themselves with this Conceit, that
the Government must at last, (if Suing the Mortgages don't bring in the Bills)
take this Method, and provide that all the Outstanding Bills should within a
convenient time be drawn into the Treasury by Rate, or Money instead of them;
are nevertheless utterly against the same Project, when its proposed as a
present method to recover the Credit of our Bills even to the Value of Money.

But, How can such Gentlemen who are discouraged from making this Attempt now,
imagine, that Those who are in the Administration when the Mortgages are Sued
out, will be persuaded to do the same thing on a Push, which must needs be much
more difficult, and a far greater burden on the People. If there be any Reason
for it, Yet it does not seem so fair for Us to think, that those who come after
Us, if they can help it, will put themselves to greater Difficulties to pay the
Debts we have contracted, than ever We were willing to do our selves.

It seems therefore that though no more Bills should be Emitted, it is of great
Consequence that the Credit of those that are now Extant should be restored and
maintained during the whole time of their Circulation.

On the other Hand, if no Care be taken to revive the Credit of our Bills, what
Satisfaction can we take, in the Emission of More? When it is so manifest that
the Discount which is come on those that are already emitted, and which has
been the Occasion of so much Unrighteousness, and great wrong to many, will
thereby be increased!

I will make but one Remark more, which shall be

Upon the Case of those that have taken up Bills on Loan. Which many begin to
look upon with Concern. Their Estates are Mortgaged; And if the Bills that are
Extant, are (as some think) in Hands which reserve them, for some considerable
Advantage, so that the Mortgagers can by no means procure them, to Redeem their
Estates, They will in a little time be forfeited:

In (...) of a Mortgage given to a private person, it would be looked on as a
Hardship, if the Mortgagees should take Advantage of the Mortgagors, and eject
them out of their Land, as soon as the time set in their Mortgages is expired.
Nor is this ordinarily done. The Mortgagees don't think much (having good
Security for their Money) to allow many Years after the time is up, to the
Mortgagors, to procure the Money and save their Estates; and this is thought
but a reasonable Favor, provided the Mortgagors duly pay the Interest.

Whereas, as soon as the Mortgages made to the Public are forfeited, they must
its concluded, be Sued out immediately; this being the way proposed to bring
the Bills into the Treasury, and keep them from sinking into the last Contempt.

But if our Bills of Credit, were restored to be as good as Money, men would
soon unlock their Hoards, and make use of the Bills they keep by them. By which
means the Mortgagors might be able to procure what they want to redeem their
Estates; And if they should not be able to do it by the time set in the
Mortgages, the Public might, as well as any Private Person, allow them more
time for it, and not put them to the Extremity of Redeeming their Estates now
or never. For if during such time, the Credit of our Bills be kept up to a Par
with Money, as they may and ought to be, No Person could be Injured by such a
Favor to the Owners of the Mortgaged Estates, or have the least reason to be
troubled at it.

To me therefore, it seems, as if the restoring and upholding our Bills of
Credit to their just Value, would be an excellent means to put an End to these
Controversies, and give every one Content. Then, If a suitable Quantity of
Bills should be Emitted, They would be (...) as Money during the time of their
Circulator. And if we would be persuaded to (...) our Expenses and live within
our Income, We m^^ht probably be supplied with a sufficient stock (...) the
carrying on our Trade, Which every one d^^^es, Nor should we be necessitated to
put the Country or particular Persons to such a straight, as the immediate
calling in all our outstanding Bills, without emitting more, its feared would
do.

But, Its to be hoped that by this reviving the Credit of our Bills, We should
in a little time, and by easy Degrees, extricate our Selves out of those
Difficulties which at present bear so hard upon Us. Whereas if This ben't
considered as a necessary and principal Part of the method for our Relief, I
cannot but think, for the Reasons which I have given You, that other Measures
will not be Effectual to attain this desirable End.

I have thus, SIR, at Your Desire communicated to You my Thoughts, on the
Subjects you referred to Me. Whether They may, and in what manner They may be
best improved to the Public Benefit, I must refer to Your Prudence; and am,
SIR,

Your Humble Servant.


