A Letter from a Gentleman in Mount Hope, to his Friend in Treamount.
SIR,
I Cannot easily Express the Great Joy, and Universal Satisfaction the People
in our Parts manifested, when they heard some Gentlemen of Boston, purposed to
Meet, Advise, and Consult of proper Ways and Means, to Extricate you and us,
out of our almost Insupportable Difficulties and Oppressions, daily and
insensibly, increasing upon us, for want of a Sufficient Medium of Trade and
Commerce. -- And I freely confess, I was pleased at it, and almost persuaded to
believe, that some Good would come of it: But our hopes (being built on a sandy
Foundation) soon fell away; our Rejoicing ceased, and we were reduced to our
former Melancholy Views: and upon the arrival of your Last Weeks Gazette, we
were ( Even to a Man,) wonderfully surprised, and filled with just Indignation
and Scorn, upon the first Reading an Infamous Advertisement, crammed into that
Gazette, Published by Authority; in which the Shameless Author, takes upon him
an uncommon freedom (not to call it impudence,) to Ill-Treat Villify, a
Reverend and Worthy Gentleman, whom we ever deemed a true and faithful Friend
to his Country, and who showed himself to be such an One, some Years past, when
many Others (considering their Stations in Government,) were under stricter
Obligations to appear, were afraid to be Gap-men, and protest against the Gross
Injuries, Arbitrary and Illegal Actions of the then Government: and because he
stood up for the Laws and Rights of his Country, he was sent to Goal, and
Suspended from his Ministry, fined Fifty Pounds, paid Cost, and gave l. 1000.
Security for his Good Behavior, for one Year: and we still conceive the same
thoughts of him; and by what we have Read in his late Well Digested Treatise,
we presume, he endeavored after the Advancement of the Public Weal and
Prosperity of his Native Country, notwithstanding all the Disingenious Flurts,
and Invidious Scoffs, of the Castle-William Writer, who ( no doubt of it,)
raised and mustered, all the Force and Strength he could Command, at that
Fortress, (though to worse than no purpose,) to batter down, and raze the
well-grounded Arguments, and reasonable Propositions, so well laid down, and
properly Displayed by that Worthy Person, that his Thundering Cannon made no
Impression thereon: yet he Conceits in his own brains, that for his Undertaking
so desperate an Affair, he is highly worthy of some Extraordinary Reward; and
remarkable Distinction, to be put upon him: having fully demonstrated his high
Ambition, as all well Disciplined Soldiers do, to Serve his Superior Officer,
to the utmost of his Valor and Conduct: and if his Strong Efforts have not
attained those Noble Ends, they were so secretly Contrived for, it is a
Misfortune that sometimes attends the best of Designs, and therefore he is
satisfying himself, that his Good Will may meet with some Kind Acceptance.

But, if Men for Projecting Schemes, and finding out Expedients for the Ease of
the People, must be brought on the Stage, Maligned, and all that is naught laid
o^ them, and they know not by whom* I fear our Circumstances will mend, like
Sour Ale in Summer; so that if any of your Town should argue and say, Surely
if there were such a want of a further Supply, or Medium in the Country-Towns,
as some Men give out there is, there would have been several from thence, to
have made Known their Wants, at the Late Convention of Gentlemen in Order for
Redress: but none appearing at the time and place, is next to a Mathematical
Demonstration, that they have a sufficiency.

Sir, If you find such Arguments like to prevail, you may assure all you
Converse with, from me, that the main, if not the only reason, why you had not
a considerable Number of Men from, and about our parts, to attend Last Tuesday
Evening, furnished with Draughts, such as we were capable of framing, was,
least their weak Essays, if they did not please some few among you, and got
into their hands, (as Unavoidably they would,) that then, their plain, honest,
well-meaning Attempts would serve to fill up the next Gazette, with Opprobrious
Invectives against them: If not their Names and Persons handled, with the same
Scurrillity the late Gentleman was entertained with, upon the like Occasion:
for how can we Expect to fare better than he? When the most we are able to
offer, must needs come far short of what he put forth on that head.

Verily, should we Honest Rusticks be Condemned, and hung up without any Trial,
in such an Indecent, and Unmanly Way; I am prone to think Our English Stomachs,
would not Digest such Filthy Trash. And what very much aggravates this matter,
and carries with it Deep Resentments, is, (If we are rightly Informed) that
every one that belongs to, and resides at the Place where this NOBLE
achievement took its Birth, are maintained at the Charge of this Province;
daily receive, and Eat their Bread; and Twice a Year at Least, send in their
Muster Rolls, and Each Man paid his full Due, and some very Extravagant Muster
Rolls (to say no worse of them) from thence were found out and Detected by the
House of Representatives in the Last Session; as appears by their Votes and
Just Representation thereof. Now Good Sir, had you and I, and the Generality of
the Inhabitants within this Government, the same Opportunities and Ways, (and
would improve them,) of being furnished with Province Bills as the Officers and
Soldiers at Castle William have, we might then se^^^bly say, and truly Affirm,
that for our parts we have enough. But alas! you know, we nor the Generality of
the Good People, have no Salleries, Gratuities, or Wages to receive from Mr.
Treasurer, but are Obliged annually to pay into the Treasury, very Considerable
Rates and Taxes, to Support the Government: all which hitherto we have
cheerfully comported with; and no small part of what we pay in, goes out for
the Sole Use and Benefit of the Soldiers and Officers in the Governments pay:
So that for any of that Order of Men, to think to bring into Contempt any, for
their Free and Voluntary Enterprises, and Contrivances to find out proper
Expedients, to enable the Prudent and Laborious, the better to pay their
Public Dues, and ^^r^y (...) their necessary Affairs, for the Subsistence of
their Wives, and Children, is hardly tolerable: who instead of acknowledging
the Generosity of the People toward them, start up to pull down and ruin their
Benefactors; the Law of Gratitude is one of the Laws of Nature: The Ox knows
his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib. But these things we cannot account
for: nor ought they to be Countenanced in any Civilized Government, and are a
Reflection New England was never Tainted with before.

However, Let us amidst our heavy Pressures and Perplexities, Keep up our true
English Spirits and Fortitude, laying fast hold on our Rights and Liberties, as
being our best Refuge, and most effectual way, in due time to bring us to
rights again; for though some loss and damage may accrue to our Estates, by
reason of the decay of Business and Traffic, yet that may and will revive; but
if we once come to be depressed in our Spirits, it will prove far more fatal;
and tend to the ruin of our Country, and the loss of our Native Rights. And
should our Inconveniences continue growing still more and more upon us, and so
far get the Mastery over us, as to bring us into Dispondences, we should soon
Groan under the fatal Consequences of such a Calamity.

Let us therefore in no Wise, cherish or harbor such Pussill-animity within
our Breasts; but put far from us, all such despicable thoughts. And if there be
any among us, who would rejoice to see such days here, I hope they will be
Disappointed, and know of a Truth, that New-England-Men, cannot abide to be
drove; or long led by the Nose: and (methinks) if we but look back and
Recapitulate the many hardships (almost coming up to the Egyptian Bondage,)
which this People not many Years since were Grovelling under: and the Province
put under the Administration of a Governor and Council, who sought out so many
Intentions to plague and hamper the Inhabitants withal; raise upon us Taxes
without an Assembly, Declare our Good and Wholesome Laws, to be but a Nose of
Wax, to serve their Unrighteous turns: and the then Governor being abetted,
and assisted by the artful Contrivances, and Wicked Insinuations of some of his
Council, (and they this Country Men born too,) to fill his and their Co^^ers by
Filthy Lucre, gave out, that forsooth, we had no manner of Right or Pretense to
our Lands and Houses, for that they all belonged to the Crown; but yet in Pity
and Compassion, if they would take Pattents from Him, (which were not
attainable without considerable Sums of Money,) be would secure them, in their
Possessions; and the more plausibly to draw Men into this Gainful (though sordid)
Projection, some of our own Country Men, and Counselors, were the First that
took up of his Patents; which proved a great Snare to several, and prevailed
upon them to part with their Money, rather than have Writts of Intrusion
brought against them; which they were continually threatened with, and had just
reason to Conclude, if they lost not their Lands, they would be Sadled with
heavy Bills of Cost, which they must discharge or go to Goal.

The Oppressions, and Grievances that our Fathers lay under, during that
Government are too many and too Gross really (some of them,) to recount now:
and yet they held out, and surmounted those Innumerable Calamities: And shall
We of their Race and Posterity (even before some of them, have their Heads laid
in the Grave,) especially under such a happy Constitution as we now Live and
Breath in; shall we seem in the least to be dismayed for our petty Troubles
compared with theirs? Surely no. Have not the People, by our present
Constitution, the Sole Power and Liberty to Choose only such, to represent
them, as will on all fit Occasions, boldly assert, and maintain their Rights
and Immunities; and at all Times sincerely promote the Public Weal and
Tranquillity of their Constituants? And may they not avoid all, who for the sake
of Perferments, or fear of loosing a Place or Pension, will Change their former
Notes, and turn Courtiers? And if Public Spirited Men are Chosen to represent
the People, will it not be their principal Aim and Bent, that the Council Board
be filled up with such Gentlemen, who laying aside all Private Gain in their
Public Stations, and Administration, will join hand in hand with the
Representative Body, in serving and advancing the Good, and Prosperity of this
People? Though perhaps some of the Methods to attain that End, should not
Immediately advance their Private Interest, but in some measure rather Impede
and Obstruct it. Upon the whole, If this Province is brought under such
Streights and Difficulties, which if not quickly Removed will prove pernicious
to it, we must thank our selves, if an effectual Remedy be not found out and
applied, for the Removal of them.

Cannot we yet see, what Obstructions and Blocks are laid in our Way? Who are
the Actors and Managers of the Scene? They appear in as full, and Open view to
us, as the Stars in a clear Frosty Night, notwithstanding the Various and
Changeable Masks they Cover their Faces with, and pretty fashionable, plausible
Attire they appear of Late in: Therefore our Way is short and plain; and if we
Now set out in the right path; I hope before May next be wholly Expired, we
shall have got almost to our Journey's End, and shall then Once more have this
Province disengaged from its present Incumberances, and the Industrious well
minded Man freed from the Jaws of the Oppress^r. I shall add no more at
present, but Subscribe my self as really I am;

Sir, Your very much Obliged Friend and Humble Servant.
Mount Hope, Feb. 27, 1721,

