A Vindication OF The Remarks of One in the Country upon The Distressed State
of Boston, from some Exceptions made against 'em in a Letter to Mr. Colman.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, for D. HENCHMAN, and Sold at his Shop over
against the Brick Meeting House. 1720.

SIR,
SINCE I sent you my Remarks of the 23d of April, I have farther considered the
present State of the Country, and had some new Tho'ts upon it. I was then of
Opinion that Emitting more Province Bills, would but Increase and Prolong our
Miseries, and therefore could not choose but be against it. And I am sure still
that to Emit more according to any Public or Private Scheme that has been yet
Projected, will do so. I am sure also that to leave off Trusting as far as it
is practicable enough to do it, would in some time effectually set all things
to rights again. However I am sensible that in the mean time many People must
undergo considerable Straits and Difficulties. If therefore any way could be
contrived to Emit more Province Bills without running into those Fatal
Inconveniences which have attended former Projects of this Nature, or into
others as bad, I should rejoice in it as much as any Man in the Province. And
upon some Application of Thought to this Matter, I hope I have hit upon a
Project by which an Hundred Thousand Pounds of Bills may be Emitted, in such a
manner as to raise their Credit Equal to Silver, and to bring an Hundred
Thousand Pounds of Silver into the Country in a few Years. When I have had
Opportunity to draw my Tho'ts upon this matter into Form, I intend to submit
them to the Public Censure. In the mean time I have met with Some Remarks (of
the 16th. of May) upon my Remarks: These I think it may not be amiss to take
some Notice of.

My Controversy with Mr. Colman was not so much whither Boston in Fact labored
under great Distresses; As whither he had not assigned wrong Causes of these
Distresses? Because assigning wrong Causes of Real Evils, is the way to lead
into wrong Measures to Remedy them.

Whither the Gentleman has justly represented the Opinion of the Country; Or
whither the People are of one mind where he has Traveled, and of another where
I have Lived I suppose time will discover.

He says I have done well to add the word SOME to my Remarks. I believe he
speaks as he thinks, for he has imitated me in well doing in this matter. So
has he imitated the Wisdom also which he speaks of, by passing in silence
those things which I suppose he found it hard to answer. But I must confess I
am a Man so far short of a Common Understanding, that though I have carefully
reviewed Mr. Colman's Pamphlet, I cannot find what those Important Matters are,
which are not touched upon. I must therefore borrow our Author's Expression in
Page 11, I am sorry to find that he was for general Terms upon this head and
did not care to descend to Particulars.

I dislike the Personal Reflections in the Postcript as much as our Author
does; but whither he might not have put in the Word SOME between Justified by
and Men of every Rank and Order, as properly and with as much Truth as in his
Title Page I leave to others to say.

To Answer the Answers would take up too much time, etc. If the Gentleman
himself thinks his own Remarks to be no Answers, I suppose he will easily get
most other Men to be of his mind. But then why he should trouble the World with
his Remarks I cannot well imagine.

He says you have represented Things in a smart and moving manner, by which I
perceive he thought the Town felt the truth of what you have written, etc.

This also is beyond my Comprehension! Mr. Colman writ smartly, therefore what
he writ was true and felt by the Town. If there was danger of Mr. Colman's
Rhetoric, I think there is not much of this Gentleman's Logic. I suppose he
knows that sharp Writing sometimes irritates Men's Passions, and creates Heats
and Animosities where there is no just cause for them.

As to the ill uses which have been made of our Province Bills, and the unhappy
Consequences resulting therefrom, I shall not run into the Argument, it being
nothing to the present Case. I think Sir nothing can be more to the present
Case, than to let the Country know truly how we came into such a Case; for
unless we know what bro't us into our present Difficulties, I am sure we shall
not be like to see our way very clearly out again. But if the Gentleman thinks
it a sufficient excuse for not running into an Argument, which perhaps it might
not be very easy to clear himself of again, to say that it is nothing to the
present Case; at that rate he might have saved himself from much trouble, and
others from some expense, by only putting an Advertisement into the News-Letter
and Gazett, That my Remarks were all nothing to the present Case --.

The Province Bills received their deadly wound the Day they were first
invented, etc. I suppose our Author himself remembers when for many Days the
Merchants themselves would upon some occasions, give Silver for them without
receiving any advance, and thank ye too. It was sometime (though indeed not very
long) before they seemed to understand the Advantage put into their hands to
Export the Silver.

But how came the Province Bills to receive this deadly wound? Why, Because
they were not made a lawful Tender, Or because there was not a Law made that
they should Answer Specialties. If such a Law had been made, it would not have
signified much toward keeping up the Credit of them. Since the Importation of
Foreign Commodities has been greater than the Produce of the Country would
Answer for, there has been a necessity that Silver should go to help make the
Balance, and while there was a necessity of this, Province Bills must needs
have been improved to Buy it up. And this would unavoidably have made a
difference in a short time between Province Bills and Silver, notwithstanding
any Act for making them a Lawful Tender. Now if such an Act could not have kept
up the Credit of them, I am sure it would soon have been the occasion of much
Injustice and Oppression.

What he alludes to about the Canada Expedition, I cannot tell. But I suppose
the Poor Men spent their Wages quickly after they got home, and the Gentleman
knows that the Credit of our Bills was not then sunk near so low, as it has
been since the Post-poning the Taxes and the Emission of Loan Money.

IT IS THE INTEREST OF THE MERCHANTS TO RUN DOWN THE VALUE OF THE PUBLIC
BILLS, IN ORDER TO GET MONEY BY THEM. If this be the Case, then as Things stand
at present, nothing will cure this evil Practice but a Scarcity of the Bills.
When once Merchants really find the want of them, they will soon prize them
high enough.

The GREAT ARGUMENT with me for a Private Bank is, that it would be in the
Hands of A MULTITUDE of Men, whose Interest it would be to support the Credit
of their Bills, etc. I suppose the Province Bills are in the hands of at least
as great a Multitude. And I believe that every Man that owns a Province Bill
wishes it were as good to him as Silver, and is ready to use any means which he
thinks may conduce to make it so.

Whereas it is and always will be the Interest of every Private Man to
undervalue the Public Bills* by Selling his Silver to the highest Bidder, etc.
This again is quite out of my reach! One would imagine by this, that every
Private Man in the Country has, and always will have Silver to Sell. If every
Man Sells Silver, pray who are the Bidders for it, and who the highest Bidders?
The Gentleman says afterward, that perhaps I am a Sallary Man. I assure him I
am not; but I don't know but that some will suspect him, from this Passage, to
be a Seller of Silver.

I am fully of the Gentleman's mind, that it is impossible either the Town or
Country should subsist without some Medium or other. But (...) Bank Bills
according to any Scheme projected yet, will serve the turn better than Province
Bills, I am sure his Great Argument above don't prove.

What the Gentleman says about our Burthening Trade with heavy Duties, I will not
my self call Evasion, Misrepresentation and Amusement. Let the Reader call it
what he thinks fit. I gave Two Reasons for the decline of the Trade of Boston,
that so People might know that their Distresses were not owing wholly to the
want of Medium. He passes one in silence. As any wise Man would. The other he
would fain shift quite away to other Provinces, and lay blame on our own
Government. He don't tell us concerning Newbury, Ipswich, Cape-Ann, Marblehead,
Salem, (not to mention other Places;) all within our own Province, that none of
them carried on so large a Foreign Trade during the late French War as they do
now, and that some of them carried on no Foreign Trade at all: but he would
make us believe that by heavy Duties we have driven away Trade to our
Neighbors. What are these heavy Duties laid upon? I suppose he will not say upon
English Goods. Perhaps the Taverners and Retailers may remember for him, that
there is an heavy Excise upon Rum, Brandy, etc. But this is nothing to the
Importer, but to the Retailer of these Things.

The Gentlemen says, I make a great noise about giving Twelve Shillings an
Ounce for Silver. P. 6. When I am convinced that I have made more than there is
cause for, I shall be very sorry for it.

He don't believe Three Thousand Pounds of Silver per Annum, comes into the
Province, etc. I can tell him the Gentleman (of very considerable Trade) that
affirms upon his own knowledge that above l. 10000. came in last Year from one
Place. And there are enough in the Town that can tell him the single Ship which
not very long since carried l. 10000. at once away; but Providence frowned upon
the Cargo and sunk it in the Sea.

What Mystery there may be in laying Fish in one Pile and Province Bills in
another, I cannot tell. But the last Price Current in the Gazette tells me Fish
Merchantable 26. s. per Quintal and rising, and now it is 28 s. this looks as
if the Pile of Bills held out pretty well. I my self can tell the Men who paid
Thirty Pounds a Ton for Oil last Week, and are ready to do so again this Week.
If Tarr and Turpentine lie a little upon hand, it is only because our
Correspondents abroad write us that they will not answer there. In short my
Argument in the 17th Page of my former Letter is founded upon the matter of
Fact. I believe we have yet Province Bills enough to buy up all the Produce of
the Country fit for Exportation, and all the Silver and Gold besides, because
we have seen it done from Year to Year, and see it still a doing every Day.
However the Gentleman is of another Opinion, and must tell me so, though he gives
no reason for it. Now whither his Opinion without any Reason, or my Reason
founded on daily Observation will weigh most, I must leave to others to judge.
For my own part I am sensible enough that if there be no more Bills Emitted,
and if no way can be found to bring and keep Silver in the Country again, there
will really be a pinching Scarcity of Medium in Time: but as yet I have never
met with any good Reason to think but that we have Province Bills enough for
any thing but to pay Laborers in Boston, and Debts contracted by virtue of
long Credit.

The Gentleman seems much concerned at your touching upon the Law to shorten
Credit, etc. I am so because I have proved that the Welfare of the Country
depends upon shortening it yet more, and that doing this will remedy diverse
Evils which nothing else will.

I have no inclination to aggravate Mr. Colmans fault, nor to incense the
Government against his Vindicator, and so I shall make to Reflection on what
follows next (which it may be some will call Amusement) and several other
Passages that look the same way.

Not the Plenty of Bills, but the Scarcity of Returns is the cause of Silver
and Gold's being bought up and Shipped off, etc. A Strong Argument this if true,
for shortening Credit; for we see that though the Providence of God out our short
Returns, yet Traders if left to their own way will continue to Import as much
as ever. By this means the Silver and Gold is gone already, and if Trusting be
allowed our Lands will go too in a short time. But after all I must tell the
Gentleman, that if the Merchants had not Province Bills enough to spare, they
would not buy Silver and Gold with them. For he and every Body else know well
enough that what Men stand in real need of they value, and are loath to part
with, and therefore if the Merchants really wanted Province Bills to carry on
their Trade so much as he pretends, they would never be so Prodigal of them.

Again is our Scarcity of Returns Real or only Comparative? If only Comparative
I have told him already how that came to pass in the 2d. and 3d. Pages of my
former Letter. There I told him that when the Government first Emitted Province
Bills, the Traders quickly improved the Advantage put into their hands to
Import Foreign Commodities, in far greater quantities than the Produce of
Country would make Returns for, etc. Thus Returns became Comparatively Scarce,
and so Silver and Gold was bought up with the Province Bills, and Shipped off,
to make Returns with. But this is an Argument, which our Author ( like a Wise
Man) cared not to run into, and therefore though it it nothing to the present Case;
I shall not therefore pursue him further with it.

Our Author thinks the Scarcity of Returns to be Real, and tells me I don't
consider we have lost our Bay Trade. I confess I did not consider it, for I
knew we had had several Vessels from the Bay this Year already; and One of them
was in the Harbor but Last Week. But I considered that the Bay Trade was no
such mighty Article as he pretends. The Spaniards have always in time of Peace,
as well as War, given us all the Disturbance they could in it.

The failing of our Newfoundland Trade is owing in a great measure to the
failing of the Fishery there of late Years; upon which account the Number of
People is much diminisht, and consequently their Demands for Provisions. But if
our Trade thither be lessened by this means, yet the failure of the Fishery
there, has brought our Fish to a better Market.

Our Author goes on to tell me, That the Reason European Goods are so high of
late, is, (1.) Because there are not near so many Imported as formerly. (2.)
The Scarcity of Returns helps also to keep up their Prizes, etc. The putting
these Two Articles so near together has quite ruined all the Cause. I doubt
Men of but a common Understanding will be vain enough to imagine they see an
inconsistency. It will be very natural to enquire, if the Importation be so
small, how come Returns to be so scarce? One would think the Produce of the
Country might well enough answer a small Importation. What need then of buying
Gold and Silver too to help? In short let the Importation be greater or less,
if it be more than, the Produce of the Country alone will make Returns for, it
is too great still for the Welfare of the Country; and while it continues so,
all the fine Projects in the World will not bring us to see Good Days again; for
how is it possible if the Country in general spends more than it can pay for?

The Gentleman finds fault that I do not tell what these convenient Reasons
are, at which I say a Cry is made THAT THE BILLS ARE HOARDED, etc. I will tell
him now if he needs Information. When Measures have been well concerted to make
a vigorous Effort for a Private or a Public Bank, then some time before the
next Session of the General Assembly, special care has been taken from time to
time to make People sensible of all their Distresses. Though some of the
Distresses have been such as the Body of the People made no Complaint of, nor
though it any thing about, 'till more sensible Persons put them in mind of them.
Among other Artifices usual at such times, People have been told that the Bills
are hoarded.

If the Bills are indeed hoarded, I could not imagine any Men under so much
Temptation to unfair Dealing in this matter, as those that employ a great
Number of Laborers, for the Reason given in my former Letter, Page 18, 19.
However, I am far from charging them with it. I say there plainly, that I don't
know that any such Thing has been practiced. If our Author has found another
Set of Men, whom he knows to be guilty. I have nothing to plead in their
Excuse.

I shall only observe a Passage which to me (perhaps for want of
understanding,) seems to be an inconsistency. He tells us those who advance the
Price of Silver and Gold hurt us; and he says very true: but how came our
Author to be of this mind? In his Great Argument for a Private Bank, Page 5. He
tells us that it is and always will be the Interest of every Private Man to
undervalue the Public Bills by Selling his Silver to the highest Bidder. If
this be the Interest of Every Private Man, then it is the Interest of the
Country in General; for all the Private Persons contained in it, will make up
the whole Country; How then could our Author think Advancing the Price of
Silver hurts us? Now let the Reader say how well it becomes a Gentleman who
writes at this Extraordinary rate, to wish others to write pertinently, and to
charge them with Evasions, Misrepresentations, Amusements and Trifling.

In the next Place he makes himself merry with my Project to leave off
Trusting. In this place (like a wise Man) I shall forbear running into this
Argument, but I doubt I shall be playing the Fool again before I have done my
Letter.

The Reasons given against a Private Bank I think are not unanswerable. However
I shall not enter upon that Argument, etc. Wisely done! Arguments are dangerous
Things. When a Man don't Know but that they may prove unanswerable, it is much
safest to let them alone. But perhaps the Gentleman may wave this matter for
the present, hoping it will again be driven further, at a Convenient Season,
where (it may be) he thinks I shall not be present to defend my Reasons.

A Private Bank under the Inspection of the Government would not be liable to
that Objection, viz. That it will be in the power of the Bankers, to accomplish
any of their own Private Designs, etc. I believe any Man that duly considers
the power of Money to bias Men's Thot's, and pervert their Actions will be of
another mind.

I think I did not mis-understand the Proposal of Fortifying, etc. For where
People are Settled down already, it sounds pretty odd to me, to talk of
Encouraging them to sit down. Therefore I understood it of Settling Places as
yet Unsettled. But be that as it will; I heartily desire that what is already
Settled (under the direction of the Government) may be well protected. If any
great matters could be done at raising Provisions in the Eastern Country, it
would be a great Benefit to Boston, for Supplies may be brought in from thence,
at almost any time in Winter, which cannot be done from Connecticut. However I
hope special Care will be taken that no Settlements be made, without the
Allowance and Direction of the Government: for if People may go of their own
Heads, and Settle wherever they claim a Right, the Eastern Frontier will
quickly be so Enlarged, that several Thousand Men will not be enough to defend
it, in case we should have another Indian War.

The Gentleman has now almost done with me; However, I shall take notice of a
few Things more in him, as I turn him over. In the 10th. Page he reckons up a
terrible Catalogue of Evils, that will come upon us, when once the Bills are
all (...). To this I answer, Do but ^^^ve off Trusting, as far as it may be
left well enough, and Silver will come in, and stay among us, to succeed the
Province Bills as they are gradually called in. I shall tell how this may be
done presently.

In his 11th. Page he says the short Answer in the News-Letter, which did but
just hint at things, gives no Instances of the Mischiefs a Private Bank would
involve us in. I desire the Gentleman to look back to the 6th Page of my former
Letter, and read it carefully. Then let him turn to the 20th and 21st Pages,
and he will in those Three Pages (I hope) find mischiefs enough inst need in.
When he was at those Places, He wisely declined entering upon the Argument, yet
now He complains that we are all for general Terms upon this Head, and don't
care to descend to Particulars.

But what could the Gentleman mean, etc. Page 12. I suppose he meant that
Bridges, Fortifications, etc. are great and expensive Works. See Distressed
State, page 8.

In his 13th. Page, He tells us that Country People say that they cannot improve
their Lands for want of Money to hire Laborers, etc. I think he tells us
elsewhere that he has lately traveled in the Country. I also have traveled in
the Country, and lived in it too, but never heard this Complaint before. I have
often heard in many parts of the Country, from very intelligent Persons, that
it was an hard matter to find Laborers: and that Labor was so dear, that it
turned to little or no Account to improve their Lands, if they must hire
Labor. But I never heard before that they could not get Money to hire
Laborers with, if they would work at a reasonable rate. The Gentlemen of our
General Assembly will be the proper Judges of this matter.

I heartily join with the Gentleman in his wishes that all would sincerely
study the Public Good, and that Men of Wisdom, Fidelity and an Excellent
Spirit may be chosen Counselors; and that the Governor and General Assembly
may have the Guidance and Blessing of Heaven in their Consultations for our
Welfare.

Something must be done, or the Place will sink and the Trade come to nothing,
etc. I question not but the Case of Boston is really very bad, but how comes it
to be so? If the Gentleman can obtain an Act of the General Assembly to crush
the Foreign Trade of other Towns of this Province, which begins now to grow so
big; and it he can prevail to have Country People discouraged from making their
own Clothes so much as of late they begin to do; Boston will revive it is Trade,
without the help of either Private or Public Bank. But after all I hope and
believe the ruin of Boston is not so near, as the Gentleman seems to apprehend.
The Trade of Boston is lessened for the Reasons just hinted at. And I suppose
as the Town in General, so particular Gentlemen in it find their Business
contracted considerably. Now when Men find their Means to be growing less than
they have sometimes been (though they may be like to be sufficient still, to live
very well upon) yet (I say in such a Case) they are very apt to be in a Fright
and to think Poverty and Ruin are coming upon them like an Armed Man. And I
believe this is pretty much the present Case of Boston.

The Gentleman returns at length once more to me, and with great Sagacity
perceives that all I drive at is, only that by calling in the Bills some Men
may have an Opportunity to get their Neighbors hands at half Value, etc. I
have told him in my former Letter, page 18. that such a Thing will never be
effected. But I shall take this occasion to Explain that matter a little more.
If any Men set their Province Bills lie by them unimproved, in expectation that
the Scarcity of them, will in a while raise their Value equal to Silver, I dare
not charge them for it, with the Sin of Ahab in the matter of Naboths Vineyard,
because the Bills really ought to be in value equal to Silver, as the
Inscription of them tells us they shall be: and every Possessor of them is more
or less a sufferer in that in Fact they are not so. But who the Men are that
may be like to do thus by any great quantities of the Bills I cannot pretend to
guess. I can truly clear my self, and say that the few I have are employed in
Trade. And the Gentlemen in Trade I believe will Generally deny themselves to
be hoarders. As for the Gentlemen that Let their Money at Interest, I can see
no Policy in their Letting their Bills lie unimproved neither. For by Letting
them out they increase their number, and so will have more to make an Advantage
of, if an Opportunity should present. Thus because I could never see whose
Interest it was to hoard the Bills, I have taken the Cry about it, to be only a
Stratagem to create Discontent and Animosities among the People, and so promote
some Politic Designs.

But suppose I am mistaken in this, and some Men really do hoard Bills
expecting to make an Advantage of it, yet they will never get their Neighbors
Lands at half Value. A Scarcity of Bills may possibly raise their Value equal
to Silver, and no Body will be wronged by this, for this is the Value they
ought to go at. But if it once comes to this, the Man has a mind to think
hardly of the Government, who will not believe that it will admit Mortgages to be
redeemed and Taxes to be paid in the Produce of the Country or in Silver. In
Silver (I say) for I hope before that Day, it will begin to stay, and to pass
from Man to Man in the Country.

I return therefore according to promise to my proposal about the Limitation of
Credit, and indeed had it not been for for the sake of Explaining my though it
better about that matter, I should hardly have given my self or you the trouble
of this Second Letter. I understand that I have been mistaken to intend that no
Credit at all should be given, because I have expressed my self in too strong
terms in one or two places; though afterward I speak only of shortening it as
much as possible.

I am sensible that some Credit is absolutely necessary among Traders. And
indeed if it were practicable to make such a difference, it would answer all
the (...), if Credit were forbidden only to the Consumers of Foreign
Commodities. For if the Consumers are not Trusted, then none of them can spend
more than they can Earn. And if some of them wont spend so much, then all
things will follow of course (as is argued in the 10, 11, and 12. pages of my
former Letter) let the Traders carry on how they will among themselves. But to
make such a difference is impracticable, because Traders themselves are
generally some of the greatest Consumers, and because a Thousand Sh^f^s would
soon be found to Evade the Law, which no precautions could sufficiently provide
against.

As to the Time it might be proper to restrain Credit to, I am assured that
some Substantial Traders in the Town (who have as great Payments to make as
almost any Men in New England) think it might well enough be Limited to Six
Months, but supposing it were allowed to run to Nine, or even to Twelve, and
stop there, I believe it would have all the desired Effects. For as the Law
would not allow it is running beyond that time, so the general practice would
restrain it to something shorter Limits. And if it were restrained in the way I
shall propose presently, the natural operation or the thing would be such, that
Trusting would become daily more and more disused. And the less Trusting shall
be practiced, the better Circulation what Money we have will be put into, and
so there will be the less need or temptation to Trust.

I don't propose that an Act to shorten Credit should have regard to any thing
that is past, but only that it should look forward to such Debts as shall be
contracted after the passing such an Act. However, even so I know it will be a
very ungratefu Proposal to most Gentlemen that have already entangled their
Affairs, or that are going upon vast Undertakings, or that are Ambitious and
Resolved to Extend their Trade and Increase the Importation of Foreign
Commodities by all ways possible, whither their Country sinks or swims: but I
earnestly desire that all others, and even such as these* so far as they can
forego their present private Interest for the Public Good, in expectation of
prospering together with the Public hereafter, would consider deliberately the
certainty and safety of the Proposal.

For to see the certainty of the good Effects of shortening Credit, please to
look again on the 10, 11, 12, and 13. pages of my former Letter.

As to the safety of the Proposal I think no Man can doubt of this: whereas
both the Public and Private Projects which have hitherto been set on foot
(considering the dependent state of this Country) have always been thought by
many wise Men, liable to very dangerous Consequences. It were easy to instance
in Particulars: but I forbear, partly because it would swell this Letter too
much, but principally because I would not put an Argument against us for what
has been done already into any Man's mouth.

But how shall Trusting be restrained in a natural and easy way? Why, supposing
it be done Effectually it matters not much what safe way it is done in. However
till some better way be though it on, I humbly propose that after a Debt has been
contracted so long as the Law shall direct, Ten per Cent. Interest should be
allowed till it be paid.

I believe Sir, you start at the Proposal, and think it the most unhappy one I
could have hit on. But if you can have patience deliberately and calmly to read
and weigh what I have to say upon it, I flatter my self that before you have
done, you will not think it a thing so Unreasonable and Formidable, as very likely
it will appear to most Men at the first glance.

For first, it is no unreasonable Favor to the Trader, who had rather have his
Money to improve, than have it lying out, though at Ten per Cent Interest.

And secondly the intention of such a Law, is not to give Ten per Cent Interest
to the Seller, but to prevent the Buyer's running farther into Debt than he
sees any way of getting out again, in a reasonable time. Now why any wise and
honest Man should desire to do thus or should think himself wronged by being
discouraged from it I cannot well imagine.

Besides it is certain no Law is too severe and strict, that does but just
attain the Good End for which it was Enacted. Now if it be plain that
continuing to Trust one another as we have done for many Years past will
unavoidably ruin the Country in a short time (which may easily be demonstrated
if it be not sufficiently done already in my former Letter) thence it
necessarily follows, that if Ten per Cent. Interest will not put an Effectual stop
to this practice, then such a Law would really not be severe enough, but the
Interest ought to be increased (provided no better Remedy can be found) rather
than the Country should be ruined. But if upon Trial allowing such an Interest
for Book Debts be found Effectually to stop Trusting and Running into Debt;
then supposing even Fifty per Cent Interest were allowed no body would be hurt
by it, because every Body would keep clear of the danger of being obliged to
pay it.

But indeed the natural and necessary Operation of the Thing would be such,
that if Ten per Cent Interest were allowed by Law for Book Debts, it would
certainly put an effectual stop to Trusting among all Wise and Honest Men; and
so none but Knaves and Tools could possibly be in danger by it. And it is highly
probable that the former of these would be kept more Honest and the latter be
made wiser by the Terror of it.

For the Buyer that would lie in Debt at the loss of Ten per Cent Interest,
rather than borrow at Six per Cent to pay his Debt, such a Buyer (I say) would
by his Creditor immediately be though it a Pool or a Knave, or one that could not
obtain Credit enough to be Trusted with Money at Interest, therefore the
Creditor would never venture to let a Debt he in such a Man's hands but would
immediately Demands it of him, and force him to a Payment.

On the other hand if the Seller to encourage taking a large quantity of Goods
off his hands, should promise the Buyer, to Trust him a Year or two beyond the
time fixed by Law, without demanding any Interest, yet no wise Man would venture
to lie in Debt upon this encouragement. For though he may firmly believe his
Creditor, to be a Man of his Word, yet since he knows not how soon he may be
taken away by Death, therefore he cannot be safe after the time prescribed by
Law is expired; because if his Creditor should die suddenly, he has no
security that those who succed him, will not take the Advantage which the Law
gives them. For it cannot be supposed that a Creditor who has his Eyes in his
head, will ordinarily venture by an Instrument under his hand, to put it out of
his own and his Successors power, to demand a Debt, whatever necessity for it
may happen to arise, either from his own or his Debtors Circumstances. Now
unless it be put out of the Creditor's power to Demand it; the Debtor cannot be
secure, that the Advantage of the Law will not be taken.

Again the Merchant who Sells large quantities of Goods at once to the
Shopkeeper may very conveniently take the Benefit of the Law, and demand
Interest of the Shopkeeper, if he lies in his Debt after the Expiration of the
set time. But the Shopkeeper who Retails small parcels of Goods, at sundry
times, to many Persons, scattered up and down the Country, and some of them in
other Provinces too; will find so much vexation, perplexity, and
impracticableness in Demanding Interest of these Consumers for their petty
Debts, at sundry times contracted; that being himself so Obnoxious to the
Merchant (as is said before) he will certainly never dare to trust any Body,
but will fell only for ready Money. Now if the Shopkeeper takes ready Money for
all he sells, he can then as well pay the Merchant as not; unless he is so
foolish as to spend more in his Family than his Advance upon his Goods will
answer for. And if he does so, he will soon ruin himself, whither he pays
Interest or not.

From these Things it seems plain, that if a Law to allow such Interest were
Enacted, it would completely attain its end, to put an effectual stop to
Trusting, in such a natural and necessary way, that hardly any Body would ever
come to suffer the Penalty of it. And then certainly no Body has any reason to
fear it.

Upon the whole, Extravagant Importing and spending upon Foreign Commodities
has undone us, and would soon impoverish the best Country in the World.
Extravagant Trusting has made way for the practice of these Evils. The General
Court cannot take away the inclination of the People to such Extravagancies;
this is the work of God. But inasmuch as it is in their power to shorten
Credit, so as to put a stop to the practice of them, it is in their power to
save this People if they please.

I know that the Proposal of shortening Credit still more than it is already,
will be very ungrateful to many People: But yet I am so satisfied of the safety
of it above other Projects, and the good Effect it would quickly have upon us,
that I could not choose but communicate my tho'ts upon this matter, and wish
that they may take place. However as is intimated in the beginning of this
Letter, I have had some other tho'ts of another nature, which I know would he
abundantly more grateful to the Town, and I hope not Unsafe nor Impracticable:
These I intend in a short time (if nothing unexpected prevents me) to put into
Order, and if there be Occasion offer them to the Public View.

I am, etc.
May 24 th. 1720.
FINIS.

