India Christiana.

A Discourse, Delivered unto the Commissioners, FOR THE Propagation of the
GOSPEL among the AMERICAN Indians WHICH IS Accompanied with several INSTRUMENTS
relating to the Glorious DESIGN of Propagating our Holy RELIGION, in the
EASTERN as well as the WESTERN, Indies.

An Entertainment which they that are Waiting for the Kingdom of GOD will
receive as Good News from a far Country.

By COTTON MATHER, D.D. and F.R.S.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed by B. Green. 1721.

To the HONORABLE ROBERT ASHHURST, Esqr GOVERNOR of the CORPORATION for
Propagating the Gospel in New England, and Parts adjacent in America.
SIR,
IT is promised as a Felicity to the Church of GOD, Instead of thy Fathers
there shall be thy Children; And it is received among its Maxims, The Glory of
Children are their Fathers.

The People of NEW ENGLAND, may count it their Felicity, and the Aboriginal
Natives Christianized in that Country may very particularly do so, That when
the Benign Influences of your Incomparable FATHER, are withdrawn from us, we
have a SON of His to take, like Him, a kind cognizance of us. And You as well
as we, esteem it Your Glory, that you are a SON of such a Valuable and
Memorable FATHER.

The Honorable Persons, that compose a Society of the most Christian
Intention, whose CHARTER feels no Feebleness, though near the Age at which the
Natural Body is usually Enfeebled, have expressed for you the Reverse of what
Regards the Romans had for the Son of Scipio Africanus, in that they have
chosen you to Succeed your FATHER in the Quality of their GOVERNOR. And
indeed, when in a Succession of old there was Bonus a Bono, Pius a Pio, it was
a very Happy Government.

Unto YOU, and unto the Gentlemen of the Society with you, here is of Right now
humbly made a small Present, with a short Account of some Things which you have
a Relation to; whereto we add our Hearty Wishes and Prayers, that all the
Blessings of Goodness, and the Rewards of all the Good you do for a poor
People, may be Multiplied upon you.

But, as it has been, You know well, sometimes the custom of an Eminent Person,
to carry about him the Picture of an Excellent FATHER, and often look upon it
with Quickened Resolutions, To approve himself a Son worthy of such a Father,
So, we can Desire no more, than what we not only Expect, but also already Enjoy
in You; That you are the Worthy SON of a FATHER, had in Everlasting
Remembrance, in these American Regions, as well (...) in the City and Nation
whereof he was a Conspicuous Ornament: But with none more affectionately, than,
SIR,

Your most Sincere Servant, COTTON MATHER.

The Joyful Sound reaching to both the INDIA's.
A Discourse delivered unto the COMMISSIONERS, for Propagating the GOSPEL among
the INDIANS, On 18. d. XI. m. 1720. A Time Set apart for Supplications to
Heaven for a Blessing on their Intention, at the House of Judge SEWALL.
PSALM. LXXXIX. 15. Blessed is the People, that know the Joyful Sound.


THERE was a Direction given and taken in the Old Church of Israel, Numb. X. 2.
Make thee Two Trumpets of Silver, that thou may use them for the calling of
the Assembly. By the Sound of such Silver Trumpets, the People of GOD' were
called unto the Employments and Enjoyments of their Sacred Solemnities. And,
was this the Joyful Sound, which the People that heard it, are now Pronounced a
Blessed People? I deny not, the Reference here-unto, which may be here
supposed. But then, we will suppose a further Intent of the Holy Spirit, by
whom the Psalm was dictated. He may intend the Joyful Sound, which in the
Gospel, and the Institutions thereof, His People are Blessed withal. And
accordingly, It will be no wrong unto the Text, if we put it unto the use, of
Supporting this DOCTRINE.

Glorious is the Blessedness of the People, who truly Know the Joyful Sound,
which in and with the Glorious Gospel of the Blessed GOD, and the Institutions
thereof, arrives unto us.

In the Gospel, and the Ordinances of it, there is a Joyful Sound, which we are
made partakers of. A True Knowledge of this Joyful Sound, will render the
People that have it, a Blessed People.

Let us proceed more distinctly, in Three Propositions, to consider what we
have before us.

I. THERE is a Joyful Sound, which is to be heard among the Children of Men,
where the Gospel is Published, and where the Ordinances of it are Established.
The Sound of the Silver Trumpets which Entertained the Ancient Israelites, in
and for their Solemn Assemblies, was no less Typical than Musi^al. In these
Days of the New Testament, we have the Substance of the Instrumental Music,
which was of old used in the Worship of GOD; the Shadow is vanished away. The
Shadow was of old confined unto the Temple; But the Substance we have now in
every Synagogue. The usage of Instrumental Music in our Public Worship of
GOD, has been long since disrelished among His Faithful People. Justin Martyr
long ago exploded it. Yea, Aquinas, himself as late as less than Five hundred
Years ago decried it. Indeed, it was one of the Last Things which the Man of
Sin introduced, in the Worship of our SAVIOR, which he had already filled with
a Multitude of Superstitions. We will then for the present look on the Jewish
Trumpets, and Organs too, as a part of the Abrogated Pedagogy. Yea, but the
Trumpets of the Gospel, these we have still sounding in our Ears. But the Sound
has diverse properties assigned unto it, which it will be proper for us, now to
take notice of.

There is a Sound in the Gospel, and the Ordinances thereof; And it is, first,
A Great Sound. Oh! were we so much in the Spirit on the Lords Day, as to hear,
what is to be heard in the Gospel then brought unto us, we should be able to
say, I heard a Great Voice, as of a Trumpet. There is a famous Prophecy; Isai.
XXVII. 13. The Great Trumpet shall be blown, and they that were ready to
perish, shall come and worship the Lord. Whatever other Accomplishment this
Prophecy may have, it is very gloriously accomplished in the Proclamation which
our SAVIOR in His Gospel makes unto us. The Gospel, as with the Sound of a
Trumpet, invites the Sinners ready to perish, O come, and worship, and obey,
and enjoy the Lord. And when this Great Trumpet is blown, Great, Great is the
Sound thereof. The Sound of the Trumpet is Great in the Extent of it. We read,
Romans X. 18. The Sound goes into all the Earth. In less than Forty Years, it
reached unto the utmost Bounds of the vast Roman Empire; and though Satan Seduced
numbers of Miserables into America, that they might be out of its hearing, it
has now reached hither also. The Silver Trumpets were at first but a Couple,
for the Two Sons of Aaron; but afterward in Solomon's Time, we find an hundred
and twenty Silver Trumpets all Sounding together. Before the Incarnation of our
SAVIOR, His Gospel was heard but a little way. Afterward, it Sounded far and
near, and the Gospel was Preached unto every Creature: It might be said, It
Sounds in every Place. The Sound of the Trumpet is also Great in the Effect of
it. A Loud Sound indeed; so Loud, as to Awaken them that have a Dead Sleep upon
them! So Loud, as to convey Life unto them that Ly Dead in Trespasses and Sins!
Yea, Joh. V. 25. The Hour now is, when the Dead hear the Voice of the Son of
GOD, and Live. The Sound of this Trumpet fetches back the Lost Souls of all the
Elect, from the power of Satan unto GOD. They are not Silver Trumpets, that are
now Sounding unto us; But they are Saving Trumpets! Faith comes, the Love of
GOD comes, the Love of our Neighbor comes, and the Foretaste of Heaven comes,
by the Hearing of them. What are they, But the Power of GOD unto Salvation!

Secondly; It Is a Good Sound, as well as a Great one. No Trumpets can give so
Good, so Grateful, so Lovely, a Sound, as the Trumpets of the Gospel do. Fame
often in her Trumpet, has a Sound, which may not be relied upon; But every
Trumpet of the Gospel, gives a Sound, of none but Faithful Sayings, and worthy
of all Acceptance. We are told; Prove. XXV. 25. As cold water to a Thirsty
soul, so is Good News from a far Country. In the Trumpets of the Gospel, we
have the Sound of nothing but Good News from a far Country. The Sound which we
hear in the Trumpets of the Gospel, is what was once heard from the Mouth of an
Angel; Luke II. 10. Behold, I bring you Good Tidings of Great Joy, that unto
you there is born a SAVIOR. Wherever the Gospel comes, there is a ^ound of
this Tenor; Good News for you who by your Sins have the Face of GOD hidden
from you; There is a JESUS, who saves His People from their Sins. Good News for
you who have the wrath of GOD abiding on you. There is a JESUS, who delivers
from the wrath to come. The Joyful Sound, which here distinguishes a Blessed
People, may carry some Allusion to the Trumpets of Jubilee, heard once in Fifty
Years, among the Israelites. Once in Fifty Years, there was that custom
observed; Lev. XXV. 10. Then shall thou cause the Trumpet of the Jubilee to
sound, and ye shall proclaim liberty throughout the Land. Certainly, The
Trumpets of September, proclaiming the Acceptable Year of the Lord, made a very
Good Sound unto the Poor People that were now to see a Release from various
Miseries: A Good sound unto the Servants, who were now to call for and to take
up their ^dentures: A Good sound unto the Debtors, whose Mortgages were now
Expired and whose Tenements returned unto them. Thus where the Gospe^ arrives,
it brings a Jubilee with it. It proclaims a Liberty for the Captives; a
Redemption for the Miserable; a Recovery of what we have Sinned away. It Is the
Gospel of Peace; The Trumpets of the Gospel, are Trumpets of Peace. The Sound
of these Trumpets is, A Reconciliation with GOD obtained for Sinners; The Anger
of GOD now turned away from those, whom He was once Angry withal! The Trumpets
which gave the Law, had a Sound that was trembled at. The Guilty Sinner hearing
those Trumpets, may have it said of him, A Dreadful sound is in his Ears. The
Sound of those Trumpets is, Cursed is he that continues not in all things to do
them. The Gospel of our Salvation, this is a much more pleasant Sound than so.
The Sound of it is, Grace Grace! The Grace that will ^ard^ the Penitent! The
Grace that will Quicken the Impotent! The Grace that will heal them that
Languish under all sorts of Maladies!

No wonder then, if thirdly, it be a Glad sound, when we find it such a Good
One. A Joyful sound! The Souls that are Effectually Called by the Sound of the
Gospel, how Joyful does it render them! The Trumpets of the Gospel do to the
Soul, as the Harps of David unto Saul; They drive away the Evil Spirit of
Sorrow, of Sadness, of Despair. The Psalmist could say, Psalm. CXXII. 1. I was
glad, when they said unto me, Let us go into the House of the Lord. The
Trumpets which gave a Joyful sound unto the Blessed People, had this among
other Intentions of them, They were for the Calling of the Assembly. Glad, Glad
at Heart, was that Israelite indeed, when he heard the Trumpets give that call;
Come away to the Sacrifices! The Trumpets of the Gospel call us, to those
Appointments of GOD, wherein we are to Glorify Him with the Sacrifices of
Righteousness; And how glad will a sincere Christian be of such Invitations!
But then, in these Appointments of GOD, What is it we meet withal? Enough to
make us, Rejoice with Joy unspeakable, and full of Glory! The Tenders of a
SAVIOR, a Powerful, a Merciful, an only SAVIOR, are here made unto us. Oh,
the Joyful sound of such Tenders! The Promises of a most Gracious Covenant, are
here brought unto us. These very Great and Precious Promises, Oh, the Joyful
sound of them. The Sound of these Promises is, Rejoice, O thou saved Soul; GOD
the Father is thy Friend; GOD the Son is thy Surety for Good; GOD the Spirit is
thy Condu^r and ^omforter; Be of Good cheer, Thy (...) are forgiven thee. The
Angels are thy Gu^dians, T^ou art a Temple of GOD. GOD will make all things
work together for thy good. And were are the Spiritual Blessings of the
Heavenly Places reserved for thee! Oh! Joyful sound! How Reviving, how
Ravishing! When the Gospel was Preached with Success, we read, Act. VIII. 8.
There was great Joy in the City. Well might there be so, on such a Joyful
sound! How Joyful is the Soldier, when the Trumpets invite him, To the Spoil!
To the Spoil! The Joyful sound of the Gospel carries this in it: Else it had
not been said, I rejoice at thy Word, as one that finds great Spoil. The
Blessings which the Word of GOD leads us to, are Matchless Treasures. What a
Joyful sound must it be, that leads us to them!

II. In order to Blessedness, it is Requisite, not only that we Have, but also
that we Know, the Joyful Sound, which is brought unto us, in the Gospel, and in
the Ordinances of it. Indeed, in a larger sense, To Have the Joyful sound, is
to Know it. A People that Have the Gospel, and Know the Joyful sound, in the
External Enjoyment of it, these do Enjoy a Rich Favor of GOD. The Places which
Enjoy the Scriptures, and have the Church state, with the Faith and Order of
the Gospel, are therein highly Favored of the Lord. Gideons Fleece, wet with
the Dews of Heaven, when the Ground all about is Dry, has a singular Token for
Good upon it. The Sound of the Trumpets which proclaim the Kingdom of GOD, is
heard in some Happy Lands, while others are left unacquainted with it: Even so,
Righteous Father, Because it pleases thee! And so far they have a Singular
Happiness. It may be said unto them, as in Matthew. XIII. 16. Blessed are your
Eyes, for they see, and your Ears, for they hear. Such a People are in some
Degree the Favorites of Heaven. They have the Kingdom of Heaven in some Essay
of it among them. Where the Trumpets of the Gospel are Sounding, we may say,
The Lord is near. Yea, the Name of that City, that Country, is, JEHOVAH
SHAMMAH, The Lord is there. A People who so far Know the (...) sound, are after
a peculiar manner Known (...) the King of Heaven; He may say to such; Amos III.
2. You only have I known. But, alas, Many who so far Know the Joyful sound, may
after all come to ly down in Sorrow. They that are so far Lifted up to Heaven,
may be thrown down to Hell after all. In such a Knowledge of the Joyful sound,
as will render a People a Blessed People, there is more implied, than a mere
Hearing of it. To Know the Joyful sound, as it should be Known, is to Know the
Meaning of it, the Value of it, the Credit of it, and the Power of it.

First. There are People who Discern the Joyful sound. The Silver Trumpets of
old, were Distinct and Signal in the Sound thereof. The Marches, the Motions,
the Stands, of the Armies passing through the Wilderness, were directed by the
Sound. The Trumpets of the Gospel give Orders unto us; we are to take our
Measures from their Joyful sound. People Know the Joyful sound, when they
Understand the Gospel; and perceive the Mind of the Lord. There are those under
the Gospel, to whom our Lord says, as He once did unto His Disciples after
Sermon; Matt. XIII. 51. Have ye understood all these things? And they can
reply, Yea, Lord! We may say concerning the Trumpets of the Gospel as was of
old said concerning the Pauline Epistles; There are in them, some things hard
to be understood. But there are People who do competently Understand them. They
readily perceive the Language of the Trumpets, about the whole Mystery of
CHRIST, and the Homage that we owe unto Him; It Is not a Strange Language unto
them.

O Blessed People, who so Know the Joyful sound! We remember the Speech of the
Pharisees, about the People which know not the Law, -- How justly to be spoken
about the People, who Know not the Gospel! But then, Blessed the People, who do
know it! How it thunders, in Isai. XXVII. 11. It is a People of no
Understanding; Therefore He that made them will not have Mercy on them; He that
formed them, will show them no Favor. But then on the other side; A People
that Understand well the Joyful sound, are a People that GOD has much Mercy
for; much Favor for; A People greatly Blessed of the Lord.

Secondly. There are People who Esteem the Joyful sound. They so Know it, as to
Prize it; Set a vast Price upon it. In the Bible, Words of Knowledge do signify
sometimes Affection too. Some so Know the Joyful sound, as to be Well-affected
unto it; Yea, to Prefer it above their Chiefest Joy. There are People, who had
rather be with David, where they may hear what GOD the Lord shall say unto them
in the Silver Trumpets of the Gospel, than be with Belshazzar, at a Bout where
Golden Vessels are caroused in. They count no Melody like that which is to be
heard in the Courts of the Lord: And looking on the Silver Trumpets, they say,
as he, Psalm. XIX. 10. More to be desired are they, than much Fine Gold. They
will strive to have the Silver Trumpets with them, whatever Expense of Silver,
or anything else, it puts them to; They begrutch no cost for it; Are Patient,
though it cost them the Bread of Adversity, and the Water of Afflicton.

O Blessed People, who so Know the Joyful sound! We are told, Psalm. CXIX. 165.
Great Peace have they that Love thy Law. If the Trumpets of the Gospel have our
Love, they will then speak our Peace, cause our Peace. The Fruit of the Lips,
that blow in those Trumpets, is, Peace, Peace, and all the Blessings of
Goodness!

Thirdly. There are People who Believe the Joyful sound. We read of, the Good
Seed, falling into good and Honest Hearts; Thus there is the Good Sound coming
into Good and Honest Ears. There are some, that find no Jarrs in the Sound of
the Silver Trumpets; They raise no Disputes about it; they start no Cavils upon
it. It was a noble Confession of Faith; Act. XXIV. 14. I worship GOD, Believing
all things, which are written in the Law and the Prophets. Thus, There are
People who Live unto GOD, and Live by the Faith of the Son of GOD; And it is
because, they Believe all things that are Sounded in the Trumpets of the
Gospel. About the Trumpets that Sounded on Sinai, it was the persuasion of the
Godly People in all after ages; Lord, Thou spakest with them from Heaven, and
gave them Right Judgments. Truly, In the Trumpets that we have Sounding from
Zion, we have the Lord speaking from Heaven unto us, and we have Right
Judgments in them. This is the persuasion of the People that Know Right
Judgments. They embrace the Gospel, with Reason satisfied, and Faith
established.

O Blessed People, who so know the Joyful sound! The Unbeliever is always under
the Wrath of GOD. The portion of the Unbeliever is for ever to be deprecated.
But our Lord has assured us, Joh. XX. 29. Blessed are they that have Believed.

Fourthly. There are People that Obey the Joyful sound. We are informed. 1 John
II. 4. He that says, I know him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar.
There are some who so Know, as to Do: They know practically, Their Knowledge
has their Practice conformed unto it. They Hear the Trumpets of the Gospel, and
they are not the self deceivers, who are no Doers, but Hearers only. When the
Sound of the Silver-Trumpets, is, Repair among them who have listed themselves
under the Banner of their SAVIOR: Then these People come and put themselves
under the Conduct of the Lord, who is an Ensign for the People. If the Sound of
the Silver-Trumpets be, Arm, Arm your selves against the Adversaries that seek
to devour you: Then these People put on the whole Armor of GOD. If the Sound
of the Silver-Trumpets be, Fall on, Fall on, give no Quarter to the Lusts from
which you have your Wounds: Then these People Mortify their Members which are
upon the Earth. If the Sound of the Silver-Trumpets be, Retreat, Retreat out of
the the Reach of the Destroyers? Then these People Abstain from the Fleshly
Lusts which War against their Souls.

O Blessed People, who so Know the Joyful sound! It is one of the Notes in the
Silver-Trumpets, If ye Know these Things, Happy are ye, if ye Do them. And one
of the Divine Heralds that carried the Siver-Trumpets through the World, has
assured us, Jam. l. 2. The Doer of the Word, this Man shall be Ble^ed (...) his
Deed.

III. The Blessedness of the People who thus Know this Joyful sound, is a very
Glorious Blessedness.

A most considerable Article of the Blessedness attending a People who hear the
Silver-Trumpets of the Gospel, and pay due Regards unto them, it is this; They
shall walk, O Lord, in the Light of thy Countenance. A Gracious Pre^^nce of the
Blessed GOD among a People, accompanies the Joyful sound. The Silver Trumpets
are heard no where, but where the King of Heaven keeps His Court. There are
those whose Office it is, to blow in the Silver-Trumpets. Unto those our
SAVIOR has engaged Himself; Matthew. XXVIII. 20. Lo, I am with you always. Will
Health, and Wealth, and R^^^ among a People, make a Blessed People? It Is
commonly thought so: But, What will GOD among a People? Oh! Blessed that
People, whose GOD is the Lord; and who have a Gracious Presence of GOD among
them. Even such are the People, who Know the Joyful sound! Where the Gospel
with the Ordinances of it, are well settled, maintained, respected, and the
Silver-Trumpets well founded, among a People, it may be said as in Numb. XXIII.
21. The Lord their God is with them, and the shout of a King is among them. In
one Word, The Ordinances of the Gospel furnish us with Opportunities for
Communion with GOD. In them I will Commune with you, says the Lord. We may
herein Draw near to GOD; GOD will herein Draw near to us. The Voice of the
Silver-Trumpets is, Draw near to God, and He will Draw near to you! Can any
Blessedness be more Glorious?

BUT more particularly,

First, In the Joyful sound, we have the Guide to Blessedness. The
Silver-Trumpets put us into the way, unto the Rest that remains for the People
of God. We are ignorant of the way to Blessedness; and the way of Peace we have
not known. But where the Trumpets of the Gospel Sound, there is a fulfillment of
that Word; Isa. XXX. 21. Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This
is the way, walk in it. They reveal to us, what we are to Think, what we are to
Do, what we are to wish for; They lead us in the way, wherein we should go.

Secondly, In the Joyful sound we have the Cause of Blessedness. The
Silver-Trumpets are like the Golden-Pipes in Zech. IV. 12. Which convey the
Golden Oil of Grace into the Souls of Men. It Is by them, that GOD fetches Men
out of the Graves, in which they lie sinfully and woefully putrefying; and
infuses a Principle of Piety into them; and inclines them to the things that
are Holy, and Just, and Good. That Effectual Calling, which brings Men into
Blessedness, it is in the Trumpets of the Gospel, that the Spirit of GOD gives
it unto His Chosen ones; Men Hear the Word of the Gospel, and Believe.

APPLICATION.
BUT let us now make some Improvement of these Instructions.

I. Blessed the People, who Know the Joyful sound; Then Wretched the People,
Forlorn the People, Undone the People, who are Strangers to the Joyful sound.
Oh! The pity that is due unto them!

The Jewish Nation have now lost their Silver Trumpets for these many Ages. And
in their long Dispersion, how pathetical is their Cry unto us. Have pity on me,
O ye my Friends, have pity on me, for the Hand of the Lord has touched me.
Yea, And how many Protestant Churches, have in our Days, had their
Silver-Trumpets forced from them; and instead thereof heard the Enemies roaring
in the midst of the Congregations! Yea, How many Nations are there, that never
heard the Joyful sound! That lie buried in Paganising or in Mohammedan
infidelity! And is it not a lamentable thing, that so near unto our selves,
there should be so many Ungospellized Plantations! Our Pity for these, ought
certainly to put us upon Prayer for them; upon Study for them; Oh! What shall
be done for them who lie in Wickedness, and have this Epitaph upon them; If our
Gospel be hid, it is hid unto them that be Lost.

II. Blessed the People, who Know the Joyful sound; Then we are a Blessed
People: And at the same time we are to be taught how to continue so. My
Brethren, We have the Joyful sound at such a rate, that it may almost be said
of us, as in Deuteronomy. IV. 7. What Nation is there, who has God so nigh unto them?
For the Silver Trumpets to be heard sounding as they are in the American
Regions; Verily, It Is the Lords Doing, and mavelous in our eyes. May we ever
account these, Our Precious, and our Pleasant Things.

Oh! How Thankful ought we to be unto our GOD, for His Gospel, and the
Ordinances of it! When the Silver-Trumpets were of old going to Sound, the
Angels of GOD were heard making those Acclamations thereupon, Glory to GOD in
the Highest! And shall not we give Glory to the most High GOD, on the Occasion!
O Gospellized People, GOD has showed His Statutes and His Judgments unto us,
Praise ye the Lord. When the Trumpets of GOD are sounding, shall not our
Trumpets he sounding too? His Trumpets are in His Ordinances; our Trumpets are
in our Thanksgivings. We are so called upon, Psalm. XCVIII. 6. i^th Trumpets
make a Joyful Noise before the Lord.

Such a Blessed People should be a Thankful People. But verily, our GOD will
not look on us as a Thankful People, if we are not also a Fruitful People. A
Barren People, Oh! what a Fearful Doom are they threatened with! what a Fearful
Fate are they warned of? Heb. VI. 7. It is nigh unto Cursing. Sirs, Be Fruitful
in every good Work; Fruitful, and always abounding in the Work of the Lord.

In the midst of these cares, you will use all due Means, that you may see no
Intermission of the Joyful sound You will provide seasonably, for the
Succession that shall be needful, by all due Cares about the Means of Education
in our Land, without which the Land becomes a Scythian Desert. But when you
make this Provision, Oh! Look up to the Glorious Lord, that you may be Blessed
with truly Silver-Trumpets: Never have any but a Man of Worth; Such as will be
of Good Metal; and such as in the Cause of GOD will always Lift up their Voice
like a Trumpet.

BUT this is that which is most of all to be urged upon you. Hearken, Hearken,
to the Joyful sound. Hearken to it, and Comply with it. The Joyful sound is
that, Let the wicked forsake his way, and Return to the Lord, who will have
Mercy on him. Hearken to it, and with Echo's of Devotion Reply, My GOD, I
Return unto thee! The Joyful sound is that; Come to me, all ye that labor and
are heavy-laden, and I will give you Rest. Hearken to it, and with Echo's of
Devotion Reply, My SAVIOR, I come unto thee! That Grace of GOD which brings
Salvation, has the Joyful sound of the Silver Trumpets in it. Now, your Echo's
to the Trumpets must be those; Lord, I Desire, I Resolve, to lead a Godly, a
Saber, a Righteous Life before thee!

My Friends, The Last Trumpet that is to sound at the Appearance of the
Glorious Lord, who is to Judge the World, will er'e long Summon you, to give an
Account of your Compliance with the Silver Trumpets of GOD. You that now hear
the Joyful sound of these Trumpets, must er'e long hear the Awful sound of that
amazing Trumpet. A Loud, and a Shrill Trumpet will Sound, Arise, ye Dead, and
come to Judgment! Oh! May our Compliance with the Joyful sound of the Silver
Trumpets now be such, that we may find Mercy in that Day. So comply with it
now, that the Joyful sound of a, Come ye Blessed, may be heard by you, in the
Day, when the Times of Refreshing shall come from the Presence of the LORD.

WHAT has been hitherto spoken, is but an INTRODUCTION, unto the Expressions
which we are this Day to make, of our concern to have the JOYFUL SOUND of the
Glorious Gospel conveyed unto the Aboriginal Natives of the Good Land, which
the GOD, whose is the Earth and the Fullness thereof, has bestowed upon us; Our
Concern, that the Promise made unto our SAVIOR, I will give the Heathen for
thine Inheritance, and the Uttermost Parts of the Earth for thy Possession, may
have a very Illustrious and Conspicuous Accomplishment, in the Arrival of our
INDIANS unto the Knowledge and Service of our Great REDEEMER.

It is utterly Unknown unto us, How and When it was, that AMERICA came to be
first Peopled with the Inhabitants of that Olive Complexion, which, they say,
the Biggest Part of Mankind is Colored with. Be sure, They ^ho have
Entertained us, with Dissertations upon that Obscure Subject, have been
sufficiently Luxuriant in their Fancies; and have sometimes allowed a little
Resemblance in Sound, (as, for instance, Massagetae, and Massachusetts,) to be
a Sufficient Bottom for their most Confident Conjectures.

Let a foolish Paracelsus and Peyrerius pretend what they will, we are sure,
that the Americans are of the Noetic Original. And there is a great probability
of what is affirmed by Acosta and Brierwood, That Asia and America are
Contiguous. The Phoenicians also were great Sailors, and by them (though Bochart
in his Nice tracing of them allows it not,) either Intentionally or
Accidentally, People might be carried over the Atlantic into America. It Is
reported, That Christopher Colonus, (the Leader of all our American Colonies,
in the two last Centuries,) had some Advice of People, by a violent Storm
carried over into America, to lead him into his Noble Undertaking. A Learned
Helvetian, (the Incomparable Heidegger,) has well observed, That the Countries
which have Great and Wide Seas between them, yet generally meet some where with
an Isthmus, or some small passable Distance of Water between them; which
Conjunction of Countries, N^n sine Numine facta est. But I must refer you, to
the Lucubrations of them who have written, as diverse others besides Hornius,
have done, De Origin Gentium Americanarum, and especially an Essay in the
Introduction to the Itinerantium Bibliotheca, more lately Published, for the
Satisfaction of that Enquiry, Which way the Indians, and other wild Creatures
might come into America?

We are as much at a loss about the Time, as we are about the Way. For, though
we have Evidences as well as Traditions (confirming the ever-Triumphing
Sentiments of our Excellent Woodward) that the Flood reached unto America, yet
we have none, (except the Relics of Giants, like those at Albany should pass
for such) that America was Peopled before the Flood.

It is the Opinion of a Learned Englishman, who would fain make America to be
the Seat of them that shall Think an evil Thought, in a Thing that is yet above
a Thousand Years off; That when the Silver Trumpets of the Gospel, were going
to Sound in the other Hemisphere, upon the Ascension of our SAVIOR, the Devil
then seduced Numbers into these Remote Regions, in hopes that the Joyful sound
thereof, never would reach hither after them. The Deceiver of the Nations has
been Deceived, if this were his Expectation; and that he may be more so, is
that for which we now are Laboring.

Yea, The Sovereign Grace of Heaven in that for which we are now Laboring, is
yet more to be Adored, if the Opinion of a Learned German should be any better
than so; which is, That America was not Peopled until after the Preaching of
the Gospel in the other Hemisphere, when GOD for their Contempt of it, Ordered
their coming hither as into a Banishment, where they that would not be Saints,
do now almost cease to be Men: A Sentence of Transportation into America, was
by Heaven passed upon them. We may leave it unto a ^bius to Dispute it with
them.

However, We are not so much at a Loss, How and When the Gospel was first
Preached unto the Americans. We cannot be of the Persuasion, that it was done
by the Mouth, or near the Age of the Apostles; or that All the World
Evangelized by them, was much without the Bounds of the Roman Empire. Though
Justin Martyr tells us, That [(...),] there was no kind of Men though never so
Barbarous, among whom GOD the Father was not in the Name of a Crucified JESUS
then called upon: Though Irenaeus tells us, That [sicut Sol, Creatura Del in
Universo Mundo] the Gospel had like the Sun, shone upon all Nations. Though
Tertullian tells us, That [Loca abditarum multarum Gentium, and, Adspice
universas Nationes, and, In Provincijs omnibus quas Sol oriens atque Occidens
Lustrat,] the most hidden Nations, all of them, even all that the Rising or
Setting Sun shone upon, had the Name of CHRIST then adored among them. Though
Jerome tells us, That [Pellitorum turba Populorum, and, Scythiae frigora fervent
calore Fidel,] The Scythians and People that were clad with nothing but Skins,
were then warmed with the Light of the Gospel: And, though Chrysostom tells us,
That [(...)] in whatever Land the Sun looks upon, and even without the Bounds
of their World, a Worship was there paid unto our Crucified SAVIOR. And
Theodoret adds, That the Preachers of the Gospel had carried it [(...)] unto
all the Men in the World. These Flourishes, are to be understood with their
proper Limitations. Nor can we think, That because Nicephorus tells us, of
Matthew's carrying the Gospel unto the Man-eaters, he must therefore be a
Preacher to the Americans. Nor shall we believe the Legends we have had about
either the Apostle Thomas, or a Lord-Thomas, Eight hundred Years after him,
until we can see Malabar and Brosile holding a nearer Communication with one
another. But considering how imperfect and spurious a Gospel it is, that the
Spaniards have given to their Indians, and how the boa^ Conversion of the
Pagans (whereof sometimes one poor Friar, if we may believe Martinus de
Valentia, and others of the Fraternity, has Baptized some Hundreds of
Thousands) among them, has been little other than a Change of Idolaties: We may
truly say, The First Planters of NEW ENGLAND, are the First Preachers of the
PureGospel to the Americans, that we certainly know of. This Good Work, O
NEW ENGLAND, thou have the Honor of making the First, Right, Fair and Genuine
Beginning upon it.

What we have now to do, is to Prosecute this Good Work: A Good Work! whereto
our Obligations are not vacated by the Judgment entered against that former
Charter of the Colony, which declared, The winning and inciting of the Natives
of the Country unto the Knowledge and Obedience of the only True GOD, and
SAVIOR of Mankind, and the Christian Faith, to be a principal End of the
Plantation. A Good Work, whereto our Invitations are still as Forcible, as they
were, when the Seal of the Colony was, a Poor Indian having a Label from his
Lips, expressing this Cry,

COME OVER AND HELP US!

Upon this Good Work, there are Two or Three REMARKS, with which I am now
Briefly to Entertain you.

In the First Place, It is a matter of Humble Gratitude unto GOD our SAVIOR,
that so much of His Work in this matter, has appeared unto His weak Servants,
and of His Glory in it, unto their Children. The desolate Indians, that
survived the Mortal Contagion, which had newly and strangely swept away such
Multitudes, as to make some Room for the European VINE that was Transplanting
hither, were the most forlorn Ruins of Mankind, and very doleful Objects. Their
way of living was lamentably Barbarous. Beyond all Expression Dark were their
Notions of a God; and Chepian, or the Evil God, had as great a share as
Kautantowit, or the Good God, in their Adorations, The Manicheans (as great a
Tribe of Heretics as ever were in the World) may boast of these, as being
really Theirs. Though they saw a People Arrive among them, who were Clothed in
Habits of much more Comfort and Splendor, than what there was to be seen in
the Rough Skins with which they hardly covered themselves; and who had Houses
full of Good Things, vastly out-shining their squalid and dark Wigwams; And
they saw this People Replenishing their Fields, with Trees and with Grains, and
useful Animals, which until now they had been wholly Strangers to; yet they did
not seem touched in the least, with any Ambition to come at such Desirable
Circumstances, or with any Curiosity to enquire after the Religion that was
attended with them. To Humanize these Miserable Animals, and in any measure to
Cicurate them and Civilize them, were a work of no little Difficulty; and a
Performance little short of what One of our most famous Physicians esteemed the
Greatest Cure that ever himself had wrought in all his Practice; To bring an
Idiot unto the use of Reason. But then, to Raise these Miserables up, unto an
Acquaintance with, and an Experience of, the Christian Religion, and bring them
not only to Know something of their SAVIOR, but also to Live unto GOD by Him;
A Noble Work This; But every One must say, No very Easy One!

Two Decads of Years, from the Beginning of this Colony, had not rolled away,
before an Entrance was made upon this Work of PIETY; And our celebrated ELIOT,
having with a Labor that overcomes all things, made himself the Master of a
Language, wherein many of the Words are of Sesquipedalian, and Unaccountable
Dimensions (One of the words, I know, that has more than Fifty Letters in it,)
he Visited the Villages of these Indians, and with a very discrete Management
Preached the Word of Truth, and the Gospel of their Salvation, in their own
Language unto them. This Memorable Servant of GOD, was no sooner at work, but
in some other Parts of the Country, the Harvest had some other Laborers
appearing in it, who did virtuously; but no One is wronged, if it be confessed,
that our ELIOT shone as the Moon among the Lesser Stars, and Excelled them all.

This Good Man had the Hand of the Lord with him; and his Evangelical Attempts
were so blessed of GOD, that anon (beyond what any Xavier could pretend unto!)
Churches were formed among these Indians, and in an Holy Covenant they gave
themselves unto the LORD, and then unto one another, Engaging to Live in the
Service of GOD, and carry on together the Worship of our SAVIOR, according to
the Directions of the Gospel. This was done, after Synods of English Churches
had seen Strict Examinations passed upon their Improvements in Experimental
Piety, as well as their Knowledge in the Mystery of CHRIST. And an Eminent
Person present at these Examinations, did then Publish to the World this
Testimony concerning it. His words were these; There is so much of GOD's Work,
as that I cannot but count it a Great Evil, Yea, a Great Injury to GOD and His
Goodness, for any to make light of it. To see and hear Indians, opening their
Mouths, and lifting up their Hands and Eyes in Prayer to the Living GOD,
calling on Him by His Name JEHOVAH, in the Mediation of JESUS CHRIST, and this
for a good while together; to see and hear them Exhorting one another from the
Word of GOD; to see and hear them Confessing the Name of CHRIST JESUS, and
their own Sinfulness! Sure, this is more than usual! -- We that were present
that day, saw and heard them perform the Duties mentioned, with such Grave and
Sober Countenances, with such Comely Reverence, in their Gesture, and whole
Carriage, and with such Plenty of Tears, as did argue to us, that they spoke
with the Holy Fear of GOD, and it much affected our Hearts.

BUT then, the Early Care of SCHOOLS, having brought these Uncultivated
Salvages unto the skill of Reading and Writing, this indefatigable Doer of the
Work of an EVANGELIST, with an immense [ANAGR.] Toil, produced a Library of
Christian Piety for them. First, he Translated the whole BIBLE into their
Language; (And a Translation of the PSALMS into Meter, whereof the Indians are
Notable Singers, accompanied it:) which has been Twice Printed here; and is the
only BIBLE that ever was Printed on the Western side of the Atlantic. A work
for, Thy Land, O IMMANUEL!

This Great Light had several Satellits waiting on it; Primers, and Grammars,
and Catechisms, and The Practice of Piety, and, our BAXTERS Call to the
Unconverted, and some other Composures. Unto which Indian-Library, there have
been since added, The Confession of Faith; and, An Epistle giving the Indians
an Account of what the English desire them to Know and to Do, in order to their
Happiness: And, A Discourse concerning the Institution and the Observation of
the LORD'S DAY; And, Family-Religion Excited and Assisted; And, A Monitor for
Communicants. Doubtless there have been some Souls to be brought unto Life,
where the Living Waters from the Sanctuary were to run in such Streams as these.

It was an odd Ceremony and Superstition in some ancient Baptisms, that when
they Renounced Satan, they turned their Faces to the West, where the Sun sets
in Darkness; But Professing their Faith in our SAVIOR, they turned their Faces
to the East, the Region where Light arises. We now have seen the Sun Rising in
the West; A Forlo^n People in the Western World now said, Through the
Tender-Mercy of our GOD, the Dayspring from on high has Visited us.

AND now, though ELIOT, and those that followed him, in the First Essays, to
bring the Light unto the Nations, that were doomed unto Outward Darkness, be
Dead, yet there has been a Succession of worthy Englishmen, who have gone on
with the Essays; And there are Indians also, who are constant Preachers of the
Gospel unto their Countrymen; so that the Good Work having Obtained Help from
GOD, and having triumphed over the Plots of Ill-affected Men to divert from it
the European Waters that nourish it, it continues to this Day.

The Work is Glorious: But a Principal Glory of it, has been the Purity of the
CHRISTIANITY, which has been brought unto these Indians, in our Attempts to
Christianize them. The RELIGION wherein they have been instructed, has not been
the Religion of a Party; but the Pure Religion and Undefiled, which is
evidently contained in the Sacred Scriptures. The Main Things, which the
Instructions given to them have insisted on, have not been, either the Things
which Good Men may be and have been Divided in, or the Observations wherein the
Wickedest Men may act their Part as fairly as the Holiest, and with which the
Kingdom of GOD comes not. But the Pure MAXIMS of the Everlasting Gospel are
those that have been instilled into them; Even those which All Good Men are
United in, and which GOD will keep the Nations in Distress and Great
Perplexity, until He has compelled His Churches to Unite upon. What they have
been taught, has been, To Worship GOD in the Spirit, and Rejoice in CHRIST
JESUS, and Love one another, and shun every thing which the Light of GOD in
their Souls may condemn as an Evil Thing. If the Direction given them has been,
To Study their own Condition and acquaint themselves with the Oracles of GOD,
and make their own Prayers with the Assistances of His Holy SPIRIT; rather than
to cramp their Devotions with a Liturgy: To be content with such Officers, and
Managemen's of the Offices, in their Societies, as they find in the Word of
CHRIST an unquestionable Institution for: To Sabbatize on the LORD'S DAY, and
know no other Stated Holidays of Religion; but yet keep whole Days of
Humiliation, and of Thanksgiving, on the Occasions for them; It Is to be hoped,
That such as have a true Sense of Genuine and Primitive Christianity, will not
think the worse of them; nor any but the Mean Sons of Austin the Monk, think
that any more should be Judged Necessary for them. It Is indeed Mavelous to
see [And yet, My Brethren, Marvel not!] the Spite, with which this New-English
Work, has been treated in the Writings of some who differ from us, in some
Disputed Ways of Worship. I choose rather to Pity them than to Mention them;
and only Wish that the Allatrations may quicken the pace of our Piety.

We rejoice in what our Dutch Brethren have done in the East Indies, where the
Schoolmasters have taught some Hundreds of Thousands, to recite, The
Lords-Prayer, the Greed, the Ten Commandments, a Morning-Prayer, an
Evening-Prayer, a Blessing before Eating, and after. But in the West Indies, we
have aimed at a Vital Work, before we have Baptized them.

There were no less than Thirty Nations of Indians, which occupied the Land,
that is now covered by the New-English Colonies. A Great Part of these
Contemptuously and Obstinately Rejected the Repeated Offers of the Gospel,
which our Evangelists made unto them; which Impiety was very much owing unto
their TORY- Sachims, who were Jealous that Christianity would bring some
Abridgment upon their Arbitrary Government. The Devil, to whose Possession and
Slavery these Miserables thus Resigned themselves, quickly inspired them to a
Precipitation into foolish Wars with the English Colonies, which quickly
terminated in the utter Extirpation of them from off the face of the Earth.
After they had for a little while distressed us, they fell into Confusions,
into which as Men under an amazing Syderation, or like Beasts that are Stung
with an Hornet, they every where fell an easy Prey to the Sword of the
Wilderness; They Perished Wonderfully; and some of their Stoute^ Captains,
laying their Hands on their Breasts, were heard giving this Account of it, Here
the Englishmans GOD makes us afraid! In these Wars, the Christianized Indians
assisted the English, and were very Serviceable in subduing the Pagan Rebels.
And now I know not any Numbers of Indians in this Province, but what have
Embraced the Doctrine of GOD our SAVIOR; [Oh! were it more Adorned among
them!] Except those Destroyers of the East, whom the French Priests have
infatuated with the Poisons of their Popery; But for the Reclaiming of whom, we
are now using our late Endeavors; and this Day looking up to Heaven for a
Blessing upon them. In the Colony of Connecticut there is a small Nation of
Indians yet remaining in a Paganism sunk down almost as low as Atheism: Which
have refused Instruction, and cast behind them the Words of GOD, that some
worthy Men have heretofore made them a Tender of: But a Mission has been from
us lately made unto them, not without some encouragement; and the Government
and Ministry there, are laudably exerting themselves, to introduce a better
State of Things among them. The Rest of our Indians are generally become such
as we must call our Christian Brethren.

BUT then, I must proceed, in the second place, humbly to Confess and Bewail,
the Clouds which we see this Good Work encumbred withal, and bespeak the Tears
of a Bochim from us.

It is true, The last Account which we took not very long ago, informed us,
That at Marthas-Vineyard, and the little Adjacent-Island, there were Ten little
Congregations, wherein our Great SAVIOR is Worshipped; and which have Two
Englishmen, and Ten Indians, that in their own Language do Preach unto them.
At Nantucket, there were Three Cengregations, and as many Preachers. On the
Continent, there were between Twenty and Thirty Congregations of Christianized
Indians, whereto there belong some Thousands of Souls. These had then Ten
English Preachers, who gave them their Instructions and Assistances; and
between Twenty and Thirty Indian Teachers, by whom the Exercises of the Lords
Days are mostly managed. Some of these Congregations, are not yet advanced unto
all the Privileges of the Evangelical Church State. But a considerable Number
are so; and some New Churches were lately formed among them. I suppose, Things
are not very much altered, from what they were in this Account, which the last
Visitation brought unto us. Very many English Witnesses have been much affected
with the Devotion, that they have seen expressed by these Indians in their
Public Exercises of Religion; their Prayers formed with much of pertinency,
and uttered with as much solemnity; their Sermons, of Orthodox Divinity, at the
Hearing whereof, Children scarce a dozen Years old, readily turn to the Proofs;
their Psalmody, in which they outdo some of our English Assemblies; and the
Admonitions and Excommunications, with which they Censure Scandalous Offenders.
One that is at this time a Worthy English Minister, but a Preacher to the
Indians in their own Language also, has given in unto us, this Testimony. Their
Gravity, and diligent Attendance in the Time of Worship; with the Affectionate
Confessions of such as are admitted into the Church; make me hope, that many of
them may have the Work of the Spirit wrought in them, according to the working
of the Mighty Power of GOD. Their Method, respecting those that are admitted
into their Communion, is more according to the manner of the Churches in the
Primitive Times, than is now practiced in most parts. The Person to be
Admitted, stands forth in the midst of the Assembly; and first makes a
Declaration of his Knowledge, and sometimes desires Information in things most
arduous and doubtful. And then he makes a Confession of Sin; which they do, (as
I have seen,) with Tears and Trembling, like him in the Sixteenth Chapter of
the Acts. And then he gives an Account of Experiences he has had, of
Convictions, Awakenings and Comforts; in which they are large and particular.
After which (much Counsel and Exhortation to remain steadfast in the Faith and
Ways of the Lord, being given them by their Pastor and Elder,) they are
Admitted. I would, (and not ungroundedly) hope, That Additions are made unto
the Church daily of such as shall be saved. There are many, which maintain a
Christian Conversation, and are to be accounted, not Almost, but Altogether
Christians. And this does encourage the Preaching of the Gospel to them; when
we see, it pleases GOD to make it, His Power unto Salvation.

But notwithstanding all of this, we must humbly say, It Is a Day of Small
things. The Indians are not yet improved so far into English Civility, and
Industry, and Husbandry, as were to be desired, and as a due Improvement in
Christianity would oblige them to. Many of the English, instead of giving them
Assistences and Encouragements, have rather contrived Indirect Ways to keep
them under, and Entangle them in Debts unto them; and Vile Things have been
done upon their Insolvencies, Religion, it is to be feared, is under a Decay
among them: Their Good Order languishing: And the older and wiser Indians going
off, and English Neighbors too often hurting of the Survivors, much of that
little Glory in which has been among them, seems to have an Ichabod written
upon it.

But what has of all things the most Threatening Aspect upon them, is, The love
of Strong Drink, which strangely Captivates the Indians; insomuch that very few
are found Able wholly to resist and conquer the Temptation, when it is laid
before them; and which, notwithstanding the Prohibitions of the Law, finds ways
of coming at them, that seem almost Incurable; and which, where it has its
operation, does confound all Religion, and every Valuable Interest. Rhum; That
Branch of the River of Death; Alas, it threatens, more than any thing else,
that we can think upon, to drown the Good Work, for which we are this day
Signalizing our Solicitude. Men of Israel, Help! What, what shall be done for
the Help, of a Mischief, so formidable, so deplorable!

THIS is what I am in the Third Place arrived unto. I was going to Entreat your
Thoughts, your Cares, your Pains, that the Good Work may not be lost, but be
Revived in the midst of the Years, wherein we see so many Discouragements upon
it. But as touching this Brotherly Love, ye need not that I speak unto you!

I am not insensible, that there are clamours now and then made as if your
Small Revenue, were not always applied unto the best Advantage; and as if your
whole Affair were under a Defective Management. Yea, if the Glorious GOD had
not almost Miraculously appeared more than once to defeat the Plots of some
designing Men, who Envied the Small Revenue which Our work has been kept alive
withal, it had before now been diverted unto other purposes. But some of those
who are most clamorous, are Men whose ways are always grievous; and the Better
Men who sometimes receive Impressions from them, it may be, do not enough
consider, how common it is, for things to appear easy in Speculation, that are
found for to be encumbred with Innumerable and Insuperable Difficulties in the
Execution. I am well assured, That in the Discharge of the Trust reposed in
you, a Charity to the Pitiable case of the Subjects before you is ever working
in you; a Conscience of Duty to GOD continually acts you; and you have a
Religious concern to acquit your selves as they that must give an Account of
their Stewardship, when you are to appear before the glorious Judge of the
World: There will be found in you, all that belongs to a compassionate
Samaritan. Be not wearied nor faint in your Minds; but go on to Do the Best you
can, for the Supporting and the Promoting of a Good Work, which the Powers of
Darkness will do all they can, to Encumber with obstructions, that will require
an uncommon Prudence and Patience to Encounter them. The Ocean over which our
Predecessors passed hither, was by Antiquity revered as leading to Holy and
Blessed Seats, and something of a more than Humane Character. Let us Do the
Best we can, that it may be so; and if we cannot raise our Indians up unto all
the More than common Goodness that we are Striving for, yet let us come to it
Our selves, particularly in our Doing our Best for Them, that they may do so.
And whereas a Main Intention which you now have in your View, is, To bring the
Rising Generation of the Indians, unto a more general Understanding of the
English Language, and more into the English way of Living, You will employ your
frequent and earnest Consultations upon it, and Call in the Advice of as many
others, as may offer any Proper Methods, for the more Effectual Prosecution of
it.

But as a Testimony of your Zeal for this Good Work, and of the Sense which you
have, that without the Influences of GOD our SAVIOR we can do Nothing to
purpose, You are this Day pouring out your Prayers before Him. These Prayers
are doubtless a Token for Good, that there may be some Reserves of Mercy, for a
Remnant of the most Pitiable Ones, on whose behalf we are now concerned. If but
a Few of them, should be brought into a Sincere Love of GOD and of their
Neighbor, and a Living Faith on our only SAVIOR, it will be richly worth all
the Time and Cost that has been laid out upon them all. And the Acknowledgments
which we now make of our Entire Dependence on the GOD of all Grace for all the
Good that is to be done among them and unto them, are the most likely way for
our coming to see that Sweet Thing, Our Desire accomplished.

While our Supplications to OUR Father are thus Engaged, we shall Remember our
dear Brethren, of the Danish Mission as far off as Malabar; the Good News of
whose amiable Enterprises have been as cool waters to our Thirsty Souls.

I will recite a passage in One of their Letters, because we may make an
Application of it unto our own Affair. Whenever the Sun rises in these Eastern
Parts of the World, it is always Surrounded with Thick Glouds; the common
People of the Malabarians tell us, that these Clouds are huge overgrown Giants,
through which the Sun every Morning must fight his way, before ever it can appear
in its Complete Luster, and Brightness. This is a Fancy of the Vulgar Sort of
our Malabarians; But the Application we might make of it, will hold too True in
every Respect, The Sun of Righteousness would fain begin to Rise, in these
benighted parts of the World: But what Opposition, what Contradiction, does
this Sun meet with; even from those who should help to remove the Clouds and
obstacles, which hitherto have intercepted His Light and Appearance, and this
too, whilst this Light but just begins to break forth, and to appear in its
first Dawn and Morning Red? However, it is to be hoped, that the Light will
triumph at last over the Powers of Darkness, and spread its Rays over all the
Regions of Heathenism and Superstition.

Excellent Things are done by those Rare Men, in Laying a Foundation of True
Christianity among the Orientals, for the next Generation to build upon, and
Propagate a Religion which is not a mere External Thing that may render the
Proselytes to it no better than Tinkling Cymbals, but that which sets up the
Kingdom of GOD in the SOUL, and abolishes the Image of Satan, and introduces
the Image of our SAVIOR, there. This inexpressibly Endears those our Brethren
unto us, and commends them to our Prayers.

With so saying, I will add, That I would, if I had Opportunity, bespeak the
Prayers of the Faithful abroad in the World, for our own Affair, in such Terms,
as are used for Theirs, by the College of Great Men, whom the King of Denmark
has lately Incorporated, for the Propagation of the Gospel in the East Indies;
and who on the occasion thereof are also doing some New Things to Christianize
their own Finlanders. The words used by these Great Men, in the Instrument
lately Published by them, are such, as I would if I could address very many
People with. Say they, Private Persens, who make Conscience of daily addressing
their Heavenly Father in Secret, are Entreated to Remember this work, as a
proper Subject in their constant Prayers and Supplications. The more fervent
they are in their Addresses to GOD, the greater we trust will be the Blessings
of Almighty GOD upon the whole Undertaking.

Indeed, I despair of any very Great Matters to be done, for the Spreading of
the Gospel, through the World, until the Israelitish Nation be Returned unto
their Land, and Converted unto their GOD. The Camp in the Wilderness cannot get
much forward, until the Leprosy of Miriam shall be taken off, and the Rejected
Lady be Restored. Our Prayers for that Happy Revolution ought mightily to be
Excited and Enlarged. But yet, Let us be doing what we can!

And, Oh! if our Prayers may have any share, in obtaining a Zeal of the Lord of
Hosts to be Enkindled in more of His People, for the Propagating of a Religion
which Glorifies Him, and Recovers Mankind unto Felicity! Then should we see,
another face on the corners of England, the Highlands of Scotland, the boggy
Recesses of Ireland, than there is yet appearing. Then should we see the
Africans no longer so treated like mere Beasts of Burden, as they are in the
Plantations of cruel Americans: And the Great Revenues left unto the Charitable
Design of Christianizing the Negro's, would have some Good Account given of
them. Then should we see the Noble Essays to Save a Lost World, carried as far
as the Hunger of Trade, now makes Men run through Sea and Land, even to the
Indies. And Madagascar it self, where some think they see Fields ripe for the
Harvest, would not be left unvisited. But above all, Then should we see the
Veil taken off the Minds of the Jewish Nation, and GOD would Show wonders to
the Dead, and the Gentiles would walk in the Light of the New Jerusale^!

Yea, who can tell, but the Holy SPIRIT promised upon the Asking for it, would
make such a Descent, as to do Wondrously, and the Holy Arm of the Lord would be
made bare in the Eyes of all the Nations, and all the Ends of the Earth, should
see the Salvation of our GOD; and the Dove would so Return to us as to Tarry
with us, and the Flood of Ignorance and Wickedness, wherein the Earth is now
overwhelmed, shall be carried away.

Notitia Indiarum.
A Collection of Some Things worthy to be known, relating to the Work of
CHRISTIANITY among the INDIANS.

I. The Names of the present SOCIETY, and of their COMMISSIONERS.
IT may be some Satisfaction unto the Public, to have the Names of the
Persons, Entrusted with the concern of Evangelizing the INDIANS of New England,
and the parts adjacent.

THE present SOCIETY in London, have lately chosen ROBERT ASHHURST Esquire for
their Governor; in the room of his Honorable and Memorable Father, Sir
William Ashburst, lately Deceased. The rest of the Corporation, whose Names we
insert in the Order of their Election, are, Joseph Thompson Esquire Treasurer. Sir
Thomas Abney. Mr. John Gunston. Mr. Edward Richier. Mr. Samuel Read Sen. Earl
of Stamford. Sir John Scott. Sir Daniel Wray. Daniel Dollings Esquire William
Thompson Esquire John Lane Esquire Sir Justus Beck Baronet. Mr. John Bridges. Mr. John
Morton. Mr. Robert Atwood. Robert Clark Esquire Mr. James Halbert. Richard Chiswel
Esquire Mr. Thomas Gering. Sir Peter King, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas.
Mr. Thomas Knight. Mr. Arthur Martin. Richard Minshul Esquire Philip Papillon Esquire
Mr. Henry Palmer. Mr. Thomas Styles. Mr. James Townsend. Mr. John Jackson. Sir
Henry Ashburst Baronet. Mr. Joseph Thompson Jun. Mr. Samuel Read Jun. Mr.
Jeremiah Morden. Mr. Samuel Shease. Mr. Thomas Carpe^r. Mr. John Mitchel.


THE present Commissioners Empowered and Employed by the Governor and Company,
to act on the behalf of the Society, in New England, are, His Excellency SAMUEL
SHUTE Esquire Governor of New England. The Honorable, William Dummer Esquire
Lieutenant-Governour. Samuel Sewall Esquire Treasurer to the Honorable
Corporation. Penn Townsend Esquire Edward Bromfield Esquire Simeon Stoddard Esquire Thomas
Fitch Esquire Thomas Hutchinson Esquire Adam Winthrop Esquire Jonathan Belcher Esquire Daniel
Oliver Esquire Dr. Increase Mather Dr. Cotton Mather Mr. Neb. Walter.


II. Verus Christianismus. Or, The Sum of the Christianity, Taught unto the
INDIANS.
THAT Strangers may see the Nature, and Marrow, and Spirit of the RELIGION,
wherein our Indians are instructed; and that the more Curious may also have a
Taste of the Language wherein their Instructors give it unto them; We shall
here insert, the Ensuing Instrument.

WAME wunetooog WUSKETOMPAOG pasukqunnineaout ut yeunnag peantamweseongosh.

(1) NA ohtu Sohsumooe koohkootamwehteaonkash papaume peantamweseonkash uttuh
Missikenuk Koowadtchun oowaenin youmun wuttinau wamputtanun ummissininyoumog
uppamantamooonganoowoash kah wuttohkoowoash woh wunno^ womooash yeuut, ut woh
nakum woh nag attumunonau en wussohsumoonganit GOD.

Kah yeush wechaiittumooash wadchanittuonk, Neish pish miskomomukish
wuttinomiyeumut wame nag pish wadchanitcheg; Kah neish matta
wuttapehtunkooanash nanwe onkahtogig.

Yeush nanneeswe wittinniyeuongash kah usseongash papaume ne annomutteahue
wunneetuppantumooonk uttaiyeu nashpe wusketompog pamantamooog en Godut.

Nah ohta nahnaneyoue chipagish papaume peantamweseonkash neish
annoonukqueogis^ nashpe Koowadchanoowaenin youmum, onk woh sampwesue GOD noh
mosquontumwahhont nashpe numatcheseonganunonash woh Koowunohteahikqumun en
Godoh. Onk woh nutapinunkqussimunan onate wutche oowetomoowaonk Godut, ne
wunnetupantamoonganit, uttiyeu ne matta annanoog matta howae wosketomp woh
nauoook Godoh,

Na ohta nahnaneyeue chipagish papaume michemohtae wunnontcheemoohkaonk
uttiyeuash neanag pish woshwunumunkqueog nashpe mishontoowae
wuttauwottunkqussuonk onk woh Koowabsuwottumunaunononate Kah sosusumwahenate
GOD. Kah Kottume ukketassoottamooonk GOD, nekonne wapeemo ut nuttinoomiyoumonat
matta woh Kootatumunumoomunanonate en Kesukque Ketassoottamooonganit.

(2) Nah ohta nish wunash nahnaey oue anoowaonkash papaume peantamooonk ahsuh
wunetupantamooonk ne pish nussumpoantammumauonate kah menehkinumunate.

Yeu Negennae. Chipi Pasuk Qununkquesue GOD wutooshemau Wunnamoniin kah
wunetupantamwe Nashauunit, nakum pish webeyeue Numanittoom. Kah pish nuttiimun
mishe nupogodttumtumooong ut nuppamantamooonganit, kah mamusse
nukkodtantamooonk wussikitteahonate kah wuttinumuhkauonate nakum nashpe wame
wunnetupantamwe nooswehtamooonk, kah agwopehtumooonk, kah wabsuontumunate
papaume nish noh teag uttiyeu oowequaiayoom ut nukketeahogan^ unnoowomoo ne
machuk.

Nahoitoe. Sohsumooe CHRIST noh miche mapue wunomonuh GOD noh wusketomp^
onkanyounate, kah sohsumooe appuongunun^ ate ut ^ut Jesusumut noh wosketompo^
uppohquooh whussuwaenninnummoouk; Kah nashpe nehenwonche mishe wussephesuonk
pish nuttinauwamp uttumun tapineamooonk ut anaquabit GOD. Agwe wunnananuwaonk
pish nuttinauwampattamun wah weke wuniyeuonk wutch nukketeahogkau, kah
nuttinauwompatamun noh pish numppemumun nuhhog en ne wah weke wunniyeuonk
wussittumwae ne Kesukodut.

Nish Wetashshinyouk. Neanag ne nuttoowantamooong kah ne nuk quohtiantamooonk
en Godut, kah uk-Christeyeumoh pish sampwutteahae pish noowomun nehtohteamonk
kah nagwutteae unnehhenat nagum neane nussampoowonate ne sampwesu kah wunnissu
wutche nakum unnehhonate nuhhog.

(3) Kah Keteahogkau noh wame yeush pogohtantogish, ahsuh noh yeush
menchenumunash neish kah asseitchis ahsuh asseit wame wunnetupantamooonkash kah
yeush wuneseonkash. Wame neg yeu asecheeg kah matta onkohtogig, Qut webe give
woh mishkauantamwog ut wah wehke annoussuonganit papaume wussohsummoonganit GOD.

Qut ne unomuteahae qunnukqussue wunneetupantamooonk pish weechaittumoo wah
weke sampoowaonk papaume yeush wunnumukkuteyoukish, newutche wuttinniin, uttoh
neit yeuush matta wunumuhtamooanoasn ne, wanehke wunnetapantamooonk pish
nuppoomoo ut nuhhogkanonut kah wusketompog noonehkquttum wahittit pamantamooog
en Godut. Newag Kisnont kussampooantamunanonate wittinnoowaonk GOD ne webe give
kuhkeehheeg papaume wame neish pish noonanumuh humunanonate, Kah wame
peantamooe nuttiseonganunnononash.

Na ohta un niyouonk papaume peantamoonk ne pish miskomut ut
wuttinomiyouumoomut wame neg matta peenoowohteoooog wutch Manittoe
pamantumooonk Kuttumakusumpoounanonut qununkqussoot GOD, noh woh qut appuwape
wame kah womonate anue onk neit wame, Kuttuma Kussampooamunanonate JESUS
CHRIST, kah fohsumwahkon te nagum webe give wadchanoowae nummanittoomun, Kah
Kuttuma Kuppogketamunan wame Eskauanittuonk nukquayoug nuketohteamunkanumonog.
Kah Amaemunnanonate nisn noh teag uttuh Numuttahhanittoomun unnoowomuk ne
matchetoonk asuh numuttuhhanittoom annoowomoo ne matchtooonk, asuh nummittah
hanittoom, auohkompanomoo wutche Matchseonk, Matta pish kunaumoomun
papantamooonk, Qut Ummusquontamooonk GOD pish Kuttahpehtunkqununonat^. Wame
yeush Kuttumonteanitteaonkash kah Koohkootomwehteuonkash wunuhmuhkut
quenanchikoomukish onk woh Kuppomushomunanonate ut yeu wunnetupantamooonganit,
Kah yeush quenohtoonkush papaume wame wunumuhkuteyoue peant^nweseonkash, Kah
wame wunneetooog wusketumpog yeush nanauehtotounash: Kah yeush menchkinumunash
kah pomoshonate neanag wame yeusn.

The RELIGION, Which ALL Good Men are united in.
(1) THere are Glorious Maxims of PIETY, whereto our Great SAVIOR will have
the Hearts and Lives of His People conformed, that He may Receive them to the
Glory of GOD. There are the Things which accompany Salvation; The Things which
must be found in all that shall be Saved; and are no where found but in those
that shall be Saved; The Tempers and Actions of that Vital Piety wherein Men
Live unto GOD.

There are certain Methods of PIETY directed by our SAVIOR, that so a Just
GOD, offended by our Sins, may be Reconciled unto us, and that so we may be
Qualified for the Enjoyment of GOD in that Holiness, without which no man shall
see the Lord.

There are certain Points of the Everlasting Gospel, according to which, it
must be with a loud Voice proclaimed unto us, That we must so Fear GOD, and
give Glory unto Him; and Except the Kingdom of GOD, be therewithal first set up
in us, we cannot be Received into His Heavenly Kingdom.

(2) There are Especially THREE Grand MAXIMS of PIETY, which we must yield our
Assent and Consent unto.

The first is this.

The ONE most High GOD, who is the FATHER, and the SON, and the Holy SPIRIT,
must be my GOD; and I must make it the Main Intention of my Life, to please Him
with all Holy Obedience and Submission unto Him; and be afraid of Every Thing
which His Light in my Soul shall condemn as an Evil Thing.

The second is this.

A Glorious CHRIST, who is the Eternal Son of GOD, Incarnate and Enthroned in
our Blessed JESUS, is the Redeemer of Mankind; unto whose Great Sacrifice I
must repair for Acceptance with GOD; And under His Conduct, I am to Expect a
Complete Happiness for my Immortal Soul, to which He will Restore my Body, when
He shall come to Judge the World.

The Third is this;

Out of Respect unto GOD and His CHRIST, I must heartily Love my Neighbor, and
for ever do unto other Men, as I must own it Reasonable for them to do unto me.

(3) It Is a Soul Molded according to these Maxims of PIETY that may, and none
but such a Soul truly can, Rejoice in the Hope of the Glory of GOD.

But then, this Vital PIETY, must be accompanied, with an Acknowledgment of
those Truths, without the Fai^ whereof PIETY cannot be kept Alive, nor can Men
Live unto GOD. We must therefore Acknowledge the Sacred Scriptures, for the
Rule of what we are to Believe and Practice in Religion.

Briefly, There is a Degree of PIETY, which must be found in all that are not
^nated from the Life of GOD. Except the GOD who is Above all, be Loved above
all; Except our SAVIOR be adored as the GOD of our Salvation; Except we lay
aside all Malice toward our Neighbor, and avoid every Course, which our
Conscience Condemns as a way of Wickedness, we cannot See Life, but have the
Wrath of GOD abiding on us. All those Principles, which are Essential to the
Exercise of this PIETY, are Fundamentals of Religion. All Good Men do come unto
them: And all they are Good Men, who Live according to them.

III. Unto Fidelium. Communications between the Western and Eastern INDIA.
UNto many of the Faithful, the Matters now to be related, will be Good News
from a far Country. It will be a pleasure unto them who are Waiting for the
Kingdom of GOD, when they see some opening of it in the Eastern as well as the
Western INDIES. It will be an Addition unto the pleasure, to see the Harmony
which True, Right, Genuine PIETY will produce, in Persons that are in many
Sentiments as well as Regions, distant from one another. And if that Article of
our Creed, The Communion of Saints, be illustrated in this Correspondence, Of
this also we will say, How Good and how pleasant is it?

In the Latter End of the Year, 1714. the Illustrious Dr. Franckius, did me the
Honor of writing to me, from Hall in the Lower Saxony, a very large Letter,
which has been since Translated and Published (by that Man of an Excellent
Spirit, Mr. B^ehm) in London. And from that Letter, I will now transcribe one
Historical passage, which will Introduce those that are now going to be
divulged.

I cannot but Entertain you on this occasion with another Charitable work, but
of a very Singular Nature, and Extending it self as far as the Coast of
Coromandel in the East Indies. In the Year ^705. Two Young Candidates of
Divinity, Bartholomew Ziegenbalgh, and Henry Plutscho, Natives of Germany, were
sent by Frederick IV. the present King of Denmark, to the East Indies, to
attempt the Conversion of the Malabar-Heathens there. They arrived safely at
Tranquebar, in the Month of June, 1706. and immediately applied themselves to
Learn the Portuguese and Malabar Tongues. The Latter of these Languages, though
exceeding Hard and Intricate, was, within Eight Months time, so far Mastered by
Mr. Ziegenbalgh, that he began to Preach to the Malabar Heathen in it, and by
this Means, to Explain unto them the Method of Salvation.

In Effect, GOD left not their Endeavors without a Blessing: For soon after,
some of these Heathens being wrought upon by the Word of Salvation, did shake
off their Pagan Idolatry, and readily came over to Christianity. And this
hopeful Beginning proved a New Encouragement unto these Laborers, to go on
with the work so happily set on foot, though not without Toil and Difficulty.
However, after a Little while, they found so many Lets and Impediments in their
way, raised by Heathens and Christians, as seemed to break the very first
Efforts tending to the Conversion of the Heathen, to the Church of CHRIST.

The Pagans were generally possessed with an utter Aversion to the Christian
Religion; and this for no other Reason, but because they saw so much Impiety
and Profaneness abounding among those that Call themselves by This Name. This
was attended with many Consequences. For no sooner did an Heathen Embrace the
Christian Faith, but he was for ever banished from all his former Goods and
Possessions, and left to the wide World, to shift for himself. However, there
were some other Impediments thrown in their way, far more Obstructive to the
Propagation of the Gospel, than all what the Heathens could do to Oppose it.
Those Impediments were started on the part of the Christians themselves, whose
Duty it had been to aid and support so laudable an Undertaking.

But in the midst of these Various obstacles, raised Originally by the Common
Enemy of Souls, GOD was pleased to Excite many persons in Germany, to favor
the Labors of the Missionaries; Especially after they were Convinced, with
what Candor and Diligence they endeavored to manage the work Committed unto
their Trust. And truly, Considerable Sums of Money were required, for Settling
and improving, the several Branches of this Constitution. It was necessary,
that a Church should be built, and Charity-Schools should be set up, and all
manner of Malabarian and Christian Books transcribed, for the Improvement of
the whole Design.

About the Latter End of the Year, 1708, when the work increased under their
hands, Three Persons more, were sent over on the same Errand. -- They were
supplied with a Printing-Press, a Font of Latin Types, and other Necessaries,
at the Expense of the English Nation; the whole being accompanied with a
present of Fifty Pounds in Money, for carrying on the better the Design in
hand. -- And we in Germany did what we could, to prepare a Font of ^bar Types,
in order to Print off, such Books as were thought necessary for the Church and
Schools gathered on the Coast of Coromandel. -- A Printer come from Le^psick
freely offered himself to go over to the East-Ind^es, to manage the Printing
part for the use of the Mission. We readily Embraced this offer, and looked
upon it, as a Finger of Providence, thereby to settle this work on a Good and
Promising Foundation; since this Person was not only acquainted with the Art of
Printing, but had also a sufficient skill in Graving and Casting of the
necessary Letters. -- Having put themselves on board the English Fleet, they
pursued their Voyage to India; where they happily landed the June Ensuing.

The Methods and the Effects of the Mission, whereof this Great Man has given
this brief Account, have been wonderful.

It pleased the Excellent Ziegenbalgh to address his Letters unto a Mean
American: who happened (I scarce know, how) to be known unto him, under an
Undeserved Character; Expressing his Desires of an Epistolary Correspondence;
and that he might have our S^ntiments upon the ways of advancing the Kingdom of
GOD.

In answer to his Desires, there went from New England, the following Letter to
him.

Viro vere REVERENDO, Ubique Terrarum Nominatissimo ac Honoratissimo Evangelii
Ministro; D. Bartholomao Ziegenbalgh, Eccsesiae Ex Indis Collectae Praeposito;
Apud Malabarenses in India Orientali Mimonario Indefesso, Christique Servo
Integerrimo, ac Celeberrimo; Salutem in Christo Plurimam.
OPus ^d Evangelicum et vere Angelicum, in quo (Viri maxim Reverendi)
laborantes (...) atque desudantes, Laeti nos gratique spectamus, e^ Omnium sane
quae inter filios Hominum agu^ur vel agi possint, Nobilissim^. Sanctiffimo hoc
Opere, Nil magis Divi^m, Nil magis Benignum, Nil Hominis primario arque
pr^cipuo fini ac Summo Bono magis congruum excogitari queat; Nil Humano Generi
Utilius, aut ipsorum Angelorum aemulat^one magis Dignum.

Misericors ille Deus est, et aeternis Philanthropiae coruscans Rad^s, qui vos
Excitaverit, atque Excitatos adjuverit, pro Religione illius propaganda, quae
ubi praedicatur et agnoscitur, Mundum in Corruptione sua ac perditione vere
miseranda Sepu tum e Sepulchro revocat, et ad vitam AEtesnam, Apostasia
Protoplastarum nostraque amissam restituit.

Religio haec est, quae Electos Dei in illam foelicitatem adducit, ad quam Deus
ipsos e egit; ac Dei Regnum inter Gentes patefacit atque constituit. Religio
haec est, quae fideles Domino Exercituum Subditos ac Milites colligit, atque
viva pro Deo Templa, Omnibus Art Compositis et Inanimatis multo pretiosiora,
erigit. Religio haec est, quae Caelum in Terram invitat atque deducit; ac
Terrae Incolas reddit Idoneos, ut in Coeli recipiantur Mansiones Beatissimas.

Opus, quam Illustre, quam Caeleste, quam Sublime! O ^erque Quaterque Beati,
qui in hoc Opere Dei sunt Ministri! Faelices etiam labores inter, et Vigilias
aerumnasque perpetuas fatigati; Faelices nimium, sua se bona norint.

Hoc Ministerium, sit fane Onus Humeris Angelicis formadandum; Est revera tamen
Opus, cui Angelorum Alae summo cum volarn atque gaudio forent Applicandae: Imo
et Opus est in quo Ministri, qui Dei faciunt Placita atque Mandata, conati ut
Regnum ipsius omnibus dominetur, Angelos non tantum AEmulantur, verum etiam
Socios habent in his Conatibus et Comites, atque Coadjutores.

Grande atque Grave et nunquam satis lugendum in Eccesiis Reformatis datur
Scandalum, quum valde parum et fere nihil in illis agitur, pro propaganda Fide,
quae tota sapientiam Spirat, atque Bonitatem omni Exceptione majorem, et per
quam Dei Regnum venit in hunc Mundum: a Satana jam ubique regnante Vinculis
quam diris Oppressum atque Obsessum. Dum Ecclesia Romana improbo atque insano
labor pro Idololatria et Superstitione Antichristi propaganda, Satanaeque
imperio stabiliendo, contendat; Hujusque Meritricis Missionarii et Proxenetae,
sunt mill Hominum Species, et quos non una vehat Navis: Lenonum Istorum Zelus
quam ardens! Molimina quam Indefessa! Itinera quam difficilia! Et quanto cum
ardore coronam quae illis verum et pro veritate videtur Martyrium, ambiunt!

Benedictum vero Dei Nostri sit Nomen, quod Animos Illustrium quorumdam Virorum
ad amovendum hoc Scandalum inclinaverit, ^tque pro devolvendo hoc a nobis
Opprobrio Instigaverit. Et hos inter, si sint qui se strenue et praeclare
gesserunt, Vos Missionarii Malabarici, quod non ut vester Adulator, sed ut
Divinae quae vobis auxiliatur Gratiae Admirator, dico, Superastis omnes.

Missionis Vestrae, Diligentiaeque Fama ab Orientali ad Indiam Usque
Occidentalem resonuit; Et quae per Divinam Gratiam in Asu Christianam inter
Indus condere Gentem fecistis, in America summiscum Dei laudibus, et velut Aqua
frigida sitibundis, Nuncia Bone e Terra longinqua, inter Christianos Americanos
audiuntur.

Literis vestris, Humanitate et Christianitate plenis, Invitatus, atque summa
Erga vestra pro Ecclesiae dilatatione Incaeptu flagrans Benevolentia, quae fit
mea de Insigni Ingentique vestro negotio Sententia, paucis, et qua me decet,
Modestia, Explicare velim.

Atque Primo quidem, Ego Primis meis votis hoc desidero, neque quicquam Ego
magis quam hoc in votis habeo, aut fervidioribus opto desideriis; ut omnes illi
Dei Servi, qui in Evangelisatione mundi Multa ferunt faciuntque, pura Aeterni
Evangelii Axiomata toti terrarum orbi Exhiberent, atque Graviora Evangelii,
triticumque a palea, et a rebus minutioribus quae inter Bonos Disputari et
possunt et solent, been Purgatam, Gentibus Praedicarent.

Certissimum est, Quod Religio Christana, nil aliud sit, quam Doctrina Deo per
Christum vivendi, atque Practica potius quam Theor etica Scientia; cujus
Intentio sit, Realem, Solidam, Vividamque animare Pietatem, atque homines in
peccatis mortuos, ad piam, sobriam, justamque Vitam evocare.

Certissimum est, Quod in Religione Christiana, quae Pietatis est revera
Doctrina, sint Practici quidam Articuli, in quibus Omnes Dei Filii uniuntur, et
in hac Unione, qui serio ac sincere coalescunt, sunt inter Dei Filios Numerandi.

Certissimum est, Quod paucis hisce Practicoe Pietatis Articulis prius oblatis
ac probe Receptis, Men's jam Sanata rectius, ac before de rebus illis
Minutionibus, de quibus inter Bonos non fine mala multa miraque lite
disputatur, Judicabit. Amor enim Dei est Illuminatio Mentis, et qui
Controversias movent, hos Practicae Pietatis Articulos defendendi Zelum,
utrinque profitentur.

Hoc igitur, a vobis unice ac obnixe Peto, Quod Gentibus inter quos in Opere
Dei abundatis, Hos primae Magnitudinis Articulos, in quibus Verus
Christianismus primo consistit, primo Proponatis,

Imprimis, DEUS ille Unus, qui in Tribus Personis, nempe Patre ac Filio ac
Spiritu Sancta subsistit, Mundumque in principio Creavit, est pro Deo nostro
amplectendus atque adorandus; Praecipuus hic debet esse Vitae nostrae Scopus,
huic soli in Omnibus Obtempetare; Omniaque quae hujus Lumen in Anima nost^a
Lucens pro peccatis contra illum Condemnaverit, summa cum Animae cura evitate.

Deinde; CHRISTUS ille, quiest AEternus Dei Filius, in Beatissimo nostro JESU
Incarnatus, est Redemptor Noster, Unicus; qui pro nobis moriens sobtulit
gratissimum Divinae Justitiae Sacrificium, cui Fides Nostra innixa nos Deo
reddit Reconciliatos; et sub Hujus Institutione qui in coelos jam Receptus in
Dei Throno Regnat, Mirabilem et Inenerrabilem faelicitatem Animae nostrae
Immortalis, cui Conpus in Resurrectione gloria indutum, reunione fruetur, in
Die quo Mundum Judicaturus, ad nos redierit, Expectare debemus.

Denique; Amore Dei Christique quum simus repleti, Oportet nos et Preximos ex
Intimo Cord amare; Aureamque illam Regulam Quaecunque Volueritis ut vobis
Hominesfaciant, ita et vos eis faciatis, perpetuo observare.

Hic est ille Purus Christianismus, qui cum fuerit per Dei Tubas Gentibus
absque fraud ac fuco praedicatur, Deum habebunt Praedicatores absque dubio
propitium; Erit cum illis Manus Domini, Multique credent, et ad Eum
Convertentur.

Ast Manus Domini, quid aliud sit, quam ille Spiritus Dei, sinc cujus open,
frustra laborant qui Dei Domum aedificare velint?

Summo sane cum Animi Tremore, nec sine humillima Demissione, Hoc vobis
Innuere, vel saltem quasi cum Susurro Infinuare vellem. Censent hoc insigniter
Docti, et omni E^uditione Peritissimi Politissimique Viri et ab omni
Fanaticismo prorsus Immunes; Religionis Reformationem ac Propagationem, fore
per Extraordinariae Spiritus Frophetici Dona rursus concessa, quibus ille Dei
Spiritus Primitivam Ecclesiam Irrigavit et Religionem Christianam in mundo
propagavit et confirmavit.

Sanctissimus Dei Spiritus hac methodo ab ipsis mundi primordiis usus est; ut
lucem illam quae populum ejus in terris peregrinantem ad caelestem duceret
Sanctorum Requiem, communicaret. Angelos Bonos, qui Aeterni Spiritus in hac re
Aptissima paratissimaque semper fuerunt Instrumenta, in filios Hominum ex alto
immittere illi Visum est: Hominesquae Deo Grati sic ab Angelis Occupati, et
Inspirati, facti sunt illius Nuncii ac Praecones, per quos voluntatem suam et
Voce et Scripto Humano Generi revelavit. Variae atque Mirandae Angelorum
Operationes in his Dei Ministris fuerint; omnia ver^ haec agit Unus ille et
idem Spiritus, qui prout ipse voluerit singulit distribuit.

Angelica haec Spiritus Prophetici Possessio et Energia, Dei populo semper
fuerit, in obscure loco Splendens Lucerna: Loco, ah! quam obscuro sane,
tenebrisque obruto, si mundo nostro talis Lucernae Solatio Gaudere non datum
fuerit! Immensos Veritatis Thesauros, quos in sacris Scripturis habemus
reconditos, huic Spiritui Prophetico deberi fatemur; Imo et hujus afflatu,
Ecclesiam contra Extinctionis minas metusque tanquam Scintillam in Oceano
procelloso continuatam.

Per Quadringentos Annos ante Opt. Max. Sospitatoris nostri Incarnationem
cessavit ac siluit hic Spiritus Propheticus. Quum vero Rex ille summus in
Superna ascendens, ad celsissimi dextram sedit, Accipiens dona dedit hominibus;
Angelosque quos in suam jam habuit potestatem traditos, immisit in Evangelii
AEterni Praedicatores, et Liberalissimam Donorum Supernorum stillavit Pluviam,
qua Haereditatem suam desessam Instauravit.

Per Plusquam Ducentos Annos, Haec Spiritus Prophetici Dona ^cclesiam auxerunt
atque rexerunt; et Ecclesia Sponsi sui Dilectissimi fic secum sensit
Praesentiam, Quum vero Spinitus hujus Mundi carnalis, cum Epicureanae
Philosoph^ Veneno tumens: intravit in Ecclesiam, quae Salvatorem non amplius
agnoscare voluit Gubernatorem Vexa us recessit hi^ Paracletus, atque Successit
Regnum Spiritu Antichristi foedissimo animatum; et per Tres Annos at Sex
Menses, Pluvia terrae sub Indig natione Dei languenti, denegata fuerit.

Sed jam tandem, Quid si^post Elapsos Mill Ducentos et Sexaginta Antichristi
Annos, Pluviae multae sonus audiatur! Quid si Columba his egressa ac mox
reversa, tertia jam vice Egrediatur, idque sine animo revertendi; maneatque
nobiscum, usque dum Diluvium Ignorantiae atque Impietatis, quo Terra submersa
jam tota javet, Superficiem Terrae relinquat exsiccatam! Quid si Regnum Dei cum
Gaudio Spiritus Sancti promissis Donis Modisque, pro Evangelii tam Interna quam
Externa propagatione operantis, adveniat! Hoc, an sit Futurum; (...).

Certissimum est, Vaticinium illud Joeliticum, Effundam Spiritum meum Super
omnen carnem, ad huc esse adimplendum. Est etiam Verisimile, Effusionem
Spiritus, per quam Ecclesia Primitiva germinabat, fuisse tanquam Guttulas
quasdam, quas ultimis Temporibus Imbres Copiosi in hujus Vaticinii adimpletione
adhuc Expectanda, Sequentur.

Antichristium sceleratissimum Dominus et Spiritu sui oris confodiet; Et
illustri suo Ad^entu abolebit atque extirpabit. Quid si per Spiritum sui cris
talia sui Spiritus Dona intelligamus, qualia significavit quum are suo in
Discipulos olim flavit, ac dixit, Accipite Spiritum sanctum?

Fateer sane, Dona Spiritus Sancti Extraordinaria, in minori pretio esse
habenda, quam illa Gratia Vivifica, per quam Omnes in libro Vitae Conscripti
sunt ordinario Sanctificati, Deoque suo Vivunt. Libentissime Fateor, Animam
amore Dei et Christi et Proximi Sanctificatam, Spiritus Sancti Donis
Extraordinariis omnibus esse omnino Anteferendam. Lubentissime Fateor,
Extraordinaria Spiritus Sancti Dona hominibus collata, per Pietatis Regules
esse Examinanda, et si Operationes, quae videntur Miraculosae, ad quidquam
contra Pietatem ducant, has esse inter Principis Tenebrarum, se in lucis
Angelum transformantis Technas, prorsus rejiciendas. Concedo etiam et semper
censeo, Monito Franckiano nil quicquam salubrius unquam fuisse Inculcatum;
Minus tu^o Extraordinaria Dona affectari, quippe quae ingens periculum illis,
qui firmas altasque in Humilitate Radices non Egerint, (Quis autem Istud de se
spondeat?) creare, per accidens quidem possint.

Nihilominus, Quid obstat, quo minus, Pater noster coelestis, qui Spiritum
Sanctum dat ab Ipso Petentibus, annuere vestrae Petitioni possit, quum ut
Angelos illius habeatis in illius Opere vobis assistentes ac associatos, ab
ipso rogabitis? Est hoc sane non inter Impossibilie desperandum. Quod si
Precibus Jejuniisque Extraordinariis et quidem necessariis, ter et amplius,
Dominum rogaveritis, En, Spiritum Sanctum in vos descendentem sentietis, qui
vobis illa Antiqua, at in Venturo Saeculo Renovanda, forsan suppeditabit
Charismata atque Auxilia, quibus facilem et foelicem in opere vestro progressum
nacti fueritis.

An Tempus pro tali Spiritus Sancti Effusione Divinitus Praestitutum, Statim
sit Venturum, et (...). Nescio; sed appropinquare credo. An Vos qui Deo
Venerationem justam castamque persolvitis, et summa cum Charitate, propriaeque
Voluntatis et Utilitatis abnegatione, in Evangelii Negotio vestram guaviter
navatis operam, hujus Effusionis primitias (quod opto) percepturi sitis, me
nescire confiteor. Prosperos attamen vobis Deum successus largiturum, assidue
ac ardenter Precor, et non sine causa Spero.

Sed Manum de Tabula. Epistolam Scribere volui, non volumen. Haae Indigitare
satis est; Amplificare, nimium foret. De nobis plane jam cernit R. V. quales
revera simus; -- Animis juncti; Secernimur undis;
Unaque Men's, Tellus non habet una duos.
Mutuis apud Clementissimum nostrum Deum ac Patrem nos precibus adjuvate jam
Restat.

Salve, ac Vive, ac Vale; Semper Bonus, semper Foel^x, semperque Christo
Vivens; et non tantum dico Meum, sed et Christiani Orbis, imo et astantium
Angelorum, Delicium.

Sum Tuus ex Animo et in Domino, Cottonus Matherus, S.T.P. et V. D. M.
Bostonensis, Nov-Anglus, Americanus
Bostonae Nov. Anglor^^ Die Decembris XXXI. Annoque Domini M DCC XVII.
TO the REVEREND, and every where known and honored Minister of the Gospel,
Mr. Bartholomew Ziegenbalgh, Pastor of the Indian Church, And an Indefatigable
Missionary, and most faithful and famous Servant of CHRIST, among the
Malabarians in the East Indies; Much Happiness in the Lord.
THat Evangelical and indeed Angelical work, in which ( Reverend Sirs, You and
your Colleagues) We with a Joyful and Grateful Mind, see you Engaged with such a
toylsome Labor; It Is truly, the most Noble of all that are or ever can be
undertaken among the Children of Men. Than this most Holy Work, there can be
Invented, Nothing more Heavenly, Nothing more Gracious, Nothing more Agreeable
and Subservient unto the First and Main End, and Chief Good, of Men; There can
be nothing more Profitable to Mankind; or more worthy of Emulation even among
the very Angels of GOD.

It is a GOD full of Mercy, for ever darting out the Beams of His Love to
Mankind, who has first Excited you, and thereupon Assisted you, for the
Propagation of His Religion which wherever it is Preached and owned, it fetches
out of the Grave, a World buried in its truly Miserable Corruption and
Perdition, and Restores it unto that Life Eternal, which we have lost by the
Apostasy of our First Parents, and our own.

It Is the Religion which brings the chosen of GOD into the Blessedness unto
which He has Chosen them; and opens and sets up the Kingdom of GOD among the
Nations. It Is the Religion that brings in Faithful Subjects and Soldiers for
the Lord of Hosts, and builds up Living Tempels for GOD, which are far more
precious than any that are but Artificial and Inanimate. This Religion it is,
that Invites and fetches down Heaven to the Earth, and prepares the Inhabitants
of the Earth to be received into the most Blessed Mansions of Heaven.

A Work, How Illustrious! How Celestial! How Sublime! Oh! Thrice and four times
Happy they, who are Ministers of GOD in such a Work! Happy, though never so much
harassed with Labors, and Watchings, and Perpetual Troubles! Happy beyond all
Expression, did they but know their own Happiness!

This Ministry, Suppose it a Load which even the Backs of Angels may tremble
at; yet it is a work, which the Wings of Angels would be with the highest
Flights and Joys applied unto: Yea, and a work, in which the Ministers who
Execute the Pleasure and Command of GOD, with Essays to have His Kingdom ruling
over all; These not only are a sort of Competitors with the Angels, but also in
these Essays Enjoy them for their Companions and Coadjutors.

Great and Grievous and never enough to be bewailed, has been the Scandal given
in the Churches of the Reformation; in that so very little, yea, next to
nothing, has been done in them, for the Propagation of a Faith, which breathes
nothing but the most unexceptionable Wisdom and Goodness; and by which the
Kingdom of GOD comes down into a World, which Satan Reigning every where in it,
Possesses and Oppresses, with how direful Chains of his upon it! While at the
same time, the Church of Rome, strives with an Unwearied and Extravagant
Labor, to Propagate the Idolatry and Superstition of Antichrist, and advance
the Empire of Satan. And the Missionaries and Brokers of that Harlot, are
indeed more than can be numbered. The Zeal of those Panders, how Ardent is it!
Their Attempts, how never tired! Their Travels how very tedious! And with what
an Ardour are they Ambitious of a Crown, which appears to them a True
Martyrdom, and for the Truth.

But Blessed be the Name of our GOD, in that He has inclined the Minds of some
Eminent Persons, to take away such a Scandal, and instigated them to roll off
this Reproach from us. And among these, if any have done virtuously, You, O
Malabcrian Missionaries, (which I would Speak, not for the Flattering of you,
but as Admiring the Divine Grace which has assisted you!) You have excelled
them all.

The Report of your Mission and of your Diligence, has reached from the
Eastern even to the Western Indies. And what the Grace of Heaven has helped you
to do, toward the producing of a Christian People among the Indians, is heard
among the American Christians, with the highest Praises offered up to GOD on
the occasion, and as cool waters to our Thirsty Souls is the Good News from a
far Country.

Being Invited by your most Courteous and Christian Letters to me, and being a
most hearty well-wisher to your Enterprises for the Enlargement of the Church,
I am willing to declare, in a few words, and with the Modesty which becomes me,
what my Apprehensions are concerning the Glorious and Weighty Affair which you
have upon your hands.

And in the First Place, this is the very First born of my Wishes; nor is there
any thing that I more wish, or have more Earnest desires for, than this: That
all the Servants of GOD, who Do and Endure many Things for the Evangelizing of
the World may Exhibit unto the whole World the Pure Maxims of the Everlasting
Gospel, and would Preach unto the Nations, the Weightier Matters of the Gospel,
and the Wheat well cleansed from the Chaff, and from those Lesser Matters,
whereabout Good Men, may and often do, carry on their Disputations.

It Is most certain, That the Christian Religion is no other than the Doctrine
of Living to GOD by CHRIST; and is a Practical Thing rather than a mere Theory;
the Intention whereof is, to animate a Real, Solid, Vital PIETY, and Call forth
such as^y dead in their Sins, unto a Godly, and a Sober, and a Righteous Life.

It Is most certain, That in the Christian Religion, which is indeed a Doctrine
of PIETY, there are sundry Practical Articles, in which all the Children of GOD
are United; and they who seriously and sincerely Coalesce in this Union are to
be reckoned among the Children of GOD.

It is very certain, That these few Articles of Practical Piety, being first
offered and well Received, the Mind thus Healed, will now make a Righter and
^uller Judgment, of those Lesser Matters, upon which Good Men have many,
mischievous and mavelous Controversies. The love of GOD will Enlighten the
Mind that has it; And indeed they that manage Controversies, do on both sides
make a profession of Zeal to maintain these Articles of Practical Godliness.

This therefore is the One Thing, which I earnestly Request of you; That you
first of all propound unto the Nations among whom you abound in the work of the
Lord, these Articles of the First Magnitude, wherein True Christianity does
Firstly and Chiefly consist.

In the First Place; The One GOD, who Subsisteth in Three Persons, the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Spirit; and who in the Beginning did Create the
World; is to be Embraced and Adored for OUR GOD. It must be the Principal Aim
of our Life, in all things to yield Obedience unto Him. And it must be our most
hearty Care, to Avoid every Thing which His Light shining in our Soul shall
condemn as an Evil Thing.

In the Next Place; The CHRIST, who is the Eternal SON of GOD Incarnate in our
Blessed JESUS, is our only Redeemer; who Dying for us, has offered a most
Acceptable Sacrifice to the Divine Justice, on which relying by Faith we become
Reconciled unto GOD; and under the Conduct of Him who being received up into
the Heavens, now Reigns on the Throne of GOD, we are to expect a wonderful and
unspeakable Blessedness for our Immortal Soul, whereto our Body shall be
Reunited in a Glorious Resurrection, when He shall Return unto us to Judge the
World.

Lastly; Being filled with the Love of GOD and of CHRIST, we must most Heartily
Love our Neighbors; and for ever go by that Golden Rule, Whatsoever you would
have Men do unto you, do you even the same unto them.

THIS is that PURE CHRISTIANITY, which when it shall be by the Trumpets of GOD
purely and plainly Preached unto the Nations, the Preachers will doubtless have
GOD smiling upon them; The Hand of the Lord will be with them; and many will
Believe, and be turned unto the Lord.

But, The Hand of the Lord! What is it, but that SPIRIT of GOD, without whose
Aids, they that would Build the House of the Lord, will but Labor in Vain?

It Is indeed with a very Trembling Heart, and not without the most profound
Submission, that I would now hint a matter to you, or at least insinuate it
with a whisper hardly to be uttered. Some eminently Learned Men, Persons of the
most finished Erudition, and the farthest in the World from all Fanaticism, are
of this Persuasion; That the Reformation and Propagation of Religion, will be
accomplished, by Granting over again, those Extraordinary Gifts of the
Prophetic Spirit, by which the Holy Spirit watered the Primitive Church, and at
first spread and confirmed the Christian Religion in the World.

The most Holy SPIRIT of GOD has used this Method from the very beginning of
the World; that so He might communicate the Light, with which He would lead His
People traveling on the Earth, to the Rest which the Saints have in the
Heavens reserved for them. It has seemed Good unto Him, to send down from on
High, into the Children of Men, those Good Angels, who have always been the
most proper and ready Instruments of the Eternal Spirit for such a Purpose; and
the Favorites of GOD, who have been so managed and inspired by Angels, have
been the Messengers and Proclaimers, by whom He has revealed His Will both in
Word and Writing, to the Children of Men. Various a^ Wondrous have been the
Operations of the Angels in these Ministers of GOD; but all these things
works that one and self-same Spirit, who divides to every Man severally as He
pleases.

This Angelical Possession and Energy of the Prophetic Spirit, has ever been to
the People of GOD as a Light shining in a dark place; A Place, alas, how Dark,
how buried in Darkness, would it have been, if it had not been allowed unto
this our World; for to Rejoice in the Consolation of such a Light! The Immense
Treasures of Truth, which we have treasured up for us in the Sacred Scriptures,
we confess to be owing unto this Prophetic Spirit; yea, it is owing to the
Afflations thereof, that the Church is continued against all the Hazards and
Horrors of Extinction, though it be like a little spark in the midst of a
Tempestuous Ocean.

For Four Hundred Years before the Incarnation of our SAVIOR, there was a
Ceasing and Silence of this Prophetic Spirit. But when that Great KING
Ascending on High, Sat down on the Right Hand of the most High GOD, He received
Gifts, which He gave unto Men, and He sent down into the Preachers of the
Everlasting Gospel, the Angels, who were all made Subject unto Him; and He
Distilled a most Plentiful Shower of the Heavenly Gifts, with which He
Refreshed His weary Heritage.

For more than Two Hundred Years after this, the Church was Enlarged and
Governed by these Gifts of the Prophetic Spirit; and the Church enjoyed a
sensible presence of her Beloved with her. But when the Carnal Spirit of this
World, fermented with the Venom of the Epicurean Philosophy, entered into the
Church, and she would no more acknowledge her SAVIOR as her Governor, the
Grieved Par^let withdrew, and there Succeeded a Kingdom animated with the
Unclean Spirit of Antichrist; and for Three Years and Six Months, the Rain is
witheld, from a Land Languishing under the Indignation of GOD.

But now at last; what if after the Twelve Hundred and Sixty Years of
Anrichrist are Expired, there should be heard the Sound of Abundance of Rain!
What if the Dove sent forth Twice and Returning again, should go forth a Third
Time, never to Return any more; and Abide with us, until the Flood of Ignorance
and Wickedness in which the whole World at this day lies in a manner drowned,
shall go off wholly from the face of the Earth? What if the Kingdom of GOD
should come, with the Joy of the Holy SPIRIT, working with such Gifts and in
such Ways, as He has promised, for both the Internal and External Propagation
of His Gospel? Whether it shall be so or no; -- I know not, GOD knows!

It is very sure, That the Prophecy in Joel, I will pour cut my SPIF IT upon
all Flesh, yet remains to be accomplished. And it is not unlikely, That the
Effasion of the SPIRIT, by which the Primitive Church flourshed, might be but
as Drops, which will be followed with Mighty Showers, for the Accomplishment of
this Prophecy still to be Expected in the Latter Days.

The Lord will Consume the most wicked Antichrist, by the Breath of His Mouth,
and will Destroy him with the Brightness of His Coming. What if by the Breath
of His Mouth, we should understand such Gifts of the Holy SPIRIT, as He
signified unto His Disciples, when with His Mouth He breathed on them, and
said, Receive an Holy Spirit?

I Confess. That the Extraordinary Gifts of the Holy SPIRIT are to be less
esteemed of, than that Quickening Grave, by which all that have their Names
written in the Book of Life, are Ordinarily Sanctified, and Live unto their
GOD. I most willingly Confess, That a Soul Sanctified with the Love of GOD and
of CHRIST, and of our Neighbor, is altogether to be preferred before all the
Extradinary Gifts of the Holy SPIRIT. I most readily Confess, That the
Extraordinary Gifts of the Holy SPIRIT best (...) upon Men are Regules esse
Examinanda, et si Operationes, quae videntur Miraculosae, ad quidquam contra
Pietatem ducant, has esse inter Principis Tenebrarum, se in lucis Angelum
transformantis Technas, prorsus rejiciendas. Concedo etiam et semper censeo,
Monito Franckiano nil quicquam salubrius unquam fuisse Inculcatum; Minus tu^o
Extraordinaria Dona affectari, quippe quae ingens periculum illis, qui firmas
altasque in Humilitate Radices non Egerint, (Quis autem Istud de se spondeat?)
creare, per accidens quidem possint.

Nihilominus, Quid obstat, quo minus, Pater noster coelestis, qui Spiritum
Sanctum dat ab Ipso Petentibus, annuere vestrae Petitioni possit, quum ut
Angelos illius habeatis in illius Opere vobis assistentes ac associatos, ab
ipso rogabitis? Est hoc sane non inter Impossibilie desperandum. Quod si
Precibus Jejuniisque Extraordinariis et quidem necessariis, ter et amplius,
Dominum rogaveritis, En, Spiritum Sanctum in vos descendentem sentietis, qui
vobis illa Antiqua, at in Venturo Saeculo Renovanda, forsan suppeditabit
Charismata atque Auxilia, quibus facilem et foelicem in opere vestro progressum
nacti fueritis.

to be Examined by the Rules of PIETY, and if the Operations that look
Miraculous do lead us unto any thing that is contrary to PIETY, they are to be
rejected, among the Wiles of the Prince of Darkness transforming himself into
an Angel of Light. I also Grant, and always Think, that there can be nothing
more wholesome to be inculcated, than that Advice of our Franckius, It is not
safe to affect Extraordinary Gifts: For ^hey may be at least accidentially,
attended with Mighty Dangers to them that are not very deeply rooted in
Humility. But who dare engage for himself his being so?

Nevertheless, What is there to hinder, but that our Heavenly Father, who gives
His Holy Spirit unto them that ask Him, can grant your Petition, when you shall
ask it of Him, that in His work you may have His Angels for your Assistents and
Associates? Truly, It Is not utterly to be despaired of as a Thing Impossible.
But if by the Extraordinary Prayer with Fasting that shall be Necessary, and
beseeching the Lord Thrice, and oftener, you shall ask it of the Lord, Behold,
You may be sensible of His Holy Spirits descending on you, who perhaps will
supply you with such Gifts and Helps, as were conferred of old, and are to be
Renewed in the Age that is coming on, and will procure for you an easy and
speedy Progress in the Work before you.

Whether the Time appointed by GOD for such an Effusion of the Holy Spirit may
quickly come on, and the Kingdom of GOD be suddenly to appear? For my part, I
do not Know. But that it is not very far off, I do Believe. Whether You, who
are such Devout Worshippers of GOD, and who with so much of Charity and
Self-denial, industriously prosecute the work of the Gospel, may Enjoy (what I
wish for you) the First Fruits of this Effusion; I confess, it is what I know
not. But that GOD may favor you with Plentiful Successes, This is what I
constantly and fervently Pray for, and what upon some good Grounds I hope for.

But its time to have done. My desgin was to Write a Letter and not a Volumn;
It Is enough to Point at these things, without Amplifications upon them.
Reverend Sir, You plainly see, What we are; Joined in our Minds, though parted by
the Waters; One Soul, though not One Soil, Uniting of us. What remains is, that
by Mutual Prayers to our most Merciful GOD and Father, we be helpful to one
another.

Live and Prosper; Always what you are, and what you would be; always Living to
your SAVIOR; and not only very dear unto me, but also unto the whole Christian
World, yea, unto the Angels of GOD, unto whom you are a Spectacle. I am,

Yours in the Lord, most Heartily, Cotton Mather.
Boston, New England, Dec. 31. 1717.
TO this Epistle, the Reverend Mr. Grundler, made the following Return; which
was accompanied with a Present of the New Testament, and sundry small
Treatises, in the Damul^ck Language and Letter, which were lately Printed in
the East Indies, and are the First Things that ever were so brought forth by
the Press in those Parts of the World.

Viro plurimum REVERENDO, Doctissimo Ecclesiae in America Pastori, Fidelissimo
ac vigilantissimo, Fautori in CHRISTO dilectissimo, Salutem dico plurimam.
EX literis tuis, Vir plurimum Reverende, quas trigesimo primo Decembris Anni
1717. ad nos exarasti, id mihi Primum observare licuit, Te esse Virum mente
Jesu Christi exornatum atque in virture Ejusdem Spiritus probe incedentem, cui
certe curae cordique est, ut opus illud DEI circa Conversionem et Salutem
animarum non modo Tecum in India Occidentali fundetur ac in dies crescendo
magis erigatur, verum etiam, ut idem nobiscum in India Orientali majora
quotidie capiat incrementa, imo long lateque in omnium animas se vere
insinuet, quo gens astu Satanae delusa ab idololatria sua ad verum DEI cultum
brevi transferatur, atque desertis fanis, id unice curet, quomodo Sanctissimus
DEUS in pectoribus fide plenis tanquam in Templo suo habitare queat.

Quae cum res, licet sua adhuc infantia laboret, Tibi, Vir plurimum Reverende,
ex quo de iis quae DEUS hic molitur, audivisti, tantum gaudij, tantum
voluptatis atque beneplaciti excitare potuerit; non possumus non Gratias DEO
agere long maximas, quod nobis talem Virum in oris Americae conciliare
voluerit: imo prater Te etiam adhuc alios ejusdem mentis atque voluntatis,
quorum Pietas istis nobiscum initiis, quae semper graviora sunt, valde
laetatur, imo precibus atque consiliis progressui operis hujus Missionis
feliciorem facilioremque viam pandere satagit.

Direxisti, Vir plurimum Reverende, literas ^as imprimis ad B. D. Ziegenbalgium
ejusque Collegam. At DEO interim placuit illum ex vinea omnium Expectatione
citius hinc domum revocare, ita ut mihi nanc superstiti soli haec injungatur
cura onus illud Missionis subeundi, Tibique de morte ejus, quae accidit die 23.
Febr. Anni 1719. summa cummentis meae moestitia transscribendi. Gaudia eum
caelestia cingunt, nobis hic ^crymantibus. Sed quo fata trabunt, ille secutus,
DOMINUS Messis illum ex hoc labor Missionis satis gravi et oneroso avocavit,
dimisit, acceptavit; introduxit ac aeternis solaminibus iam refocillare
incoepit. Quae cum ita fint, meum iam est, tua tamen cum venia, ad literas,
quas ad B. Zieganbalgium dedisti, haec nunc loco responsionis Tibi inpraesens
significandi.

Vir ille beatae memoria in Opere Missionis imprimis desideratur.

(a) Ob singularem suam industriam ac vigilantiam, qua Operi huic Missionis
praeerat.

(b) Ob frequentissima illa colloquia, quae ille cum gentibus de salute in
Christo unico fundamento instituebat.

(c) Ob illam translationem verbi divini in lingua gentis hujus Damulicae:
utpote quem DOMINUS in hisce omnibus ad singularem usum Ecclefiae colligendae
tam bonis naturae quam gratiae vel optime exornaverat.

In memoriam hujus Viri, ut testis Veri^tis, Tibi, hic offero Novum illud
Testamentum in lingua Damulica, una cum aliis libellis de vero Christianismo
conscriptis, quae omnia aequi bonique consulas, atque instat munusculi a nobis
benevole admittas, obnixe velim; utpote qui pro tuis libris ad nos missis
gratias agimus maximas.

Dona illa aurea, quae a Juvenibus Tecum sunt oblata, ego hic juventati nostrae
Scholasticae distribu^. DEUS Remunerator omnium Optimus rependet unicuique
secundum opus suum, et ut DEUS Pectora horum juvenum aurea vest fidei magis
magisque exornet, illud est, quod in precibus habet spes nostrae juventutis,
gratias insuper Benefactoribus agendo maximas.

Interim dum haec geruntur, dum B. Ziegenbalgius Caelum cum terra commutat.
DEUS Misericors mediis hic inlangustiis, operis tamen sui nostrae hujus
Missionis recordatus est: Providentia enim ejus rectrice eodem tempore tres
Missionis Candidati ad nos ablegantur, qui, cum vera Pietate sint imbuti, omne
nunc tempus addiscendae linguae Damulicae sedulo impendunt. Et simulac
aliqualem hujus Malabaricae linguae habilitatem in dicendo adsecuti suerint,
quatuor nos sumus qui potissimum circa Conversionem gentium occupamur, eas ex
tenebris ad verum DEI cultum traducere contendentes. Verum enimvero cum Messis
DOMINI vere sit ampla, et quat uor Missionarij haud sufficiant, desideria
nostra circa quatuor adhuc alios Candidatos huc mittendos iam Curatoribus
Missionis in Europa ^odem hoc anno exposuimus; DEO humillime interim
Supplicantes, ut velit mox plures Operarios ad nos in messem suam extrudere
largissimam.

Illam Methodum, quam nobis suppeditare voluisti, summa cum voluptate
acceptavimus, ut Testimonio inde gaudentes, quod JESUS CHRISTUS in omni
Sinceritate Vobiscum annuncietur, et quidem quod jucundissimum est, eadem
prorsus methodo, qua nos hic utimur, cum hominibus de salute animarum agendi,
rejectis plane, quae Opiniones tantum sapiunt, in id unice incumbentes ut
CHRISTUS solus omni procul fuco sistatur arque exhibeatur. Methodus vero illa
nostra doctrinam gentibus Evangelicam proponendi in hisce, ut breviter dicam,
consistit.

(a) Annunciamus illis Ethnicis DEUM Unicum verum, qui semetipsum tribus in
Hypostasibus manifestavit, usque rite annotando, quid quaelibet Hypostasis
beneficiorum hominibus exhibuerit, collocaveritque.

(b) Agimus de Homine, eum considerantes juxta statum ejus quadruplicem: ubi
(a) Ostendimus, in qua beatitate fuerit, cum adhuc imagine DEI corruscaret
concreata. (b) Qua ratione et quonam modo illam imaginem DEI amiserit, et
larvam Satanae in duerit, pronusque in peccatum sua sponte ruerit.

(c) Quomodo autem DEUS filium suum dilectissimum unicum in hunc mundum miserit
ad nos ex statu Maledictionis, cui natura quilibet subest, in statum Gratiae
per veram poenitentiam vindicandos, ut translocati in statu gratiae iterum
imaginem DEI in pectoribus erigi patiamur, in CHRISTO solo nostram quaerentes
justitiam, per fidem quae per amorem efficax est in vita vitiis pura
exercitioquc Pietatis quotidiano cautius incedamus, et magis magisque ad
similitudinem et instar nostri Sospitatoris propius accedamus.

(d) Inculcamus, quod illi tantum, qui hac in vita per Christum in Gratiae
statum vera mentis immutatione transierunt, et ad fin^musque in fide permanent,
soli participes sint spe^ haereditatis illius fidelibus in luce olim
manifestandae, quae aeterna existit beatitas.

Hunc ordinem salutis ubique observamus, ita ut non modo in lingua Damul^ca,
quando ad Damulos loquimur, sed etiam in lingua Lusitanica, quando ex origin
Lusitanorum ortis, aut mancipiis Christianos Dominos habentibus, imo ipsis
Europaeis in lingua Germanico Verbum DEI proponimas, hano nobis legem ita
tractandi usque praescribamus. Quapropter quae nobiscum hic aguntur et in
praedicando, et in docendo, et in examinando et in colloquendo privatissime,
omnia eo prorsus collimant, ut homines ad veram paenitentiam, ad fidem vivam,
ad Pietatem haud fucatam admoneamus, excitemas atque exstimulemus: DEUM
ardentissimis invocantes precibus, ut tales Missionarios extrudere velit,
quorum haec cura sit maxima quomodo oves ad optimum pascuum JESU CHRISTI
deducantur, et ex font Israelis purissimo reficiantur unice.

Quotidiana experientia nos hactenus docuit, quod beneficio Catech^tarum non
modo apud ipsa Ecclesiae membra, sed etiam apud cos qui adhuc extra eam vivunt,
multum utilitatis efficere possimus. Ea propter hoc observantes, omni studio in
id incumbimus, ut per verbum Veritatis tales Catechetas nobis praeparemus, qui
in cognitione JESU CHRISTI been sint fundati et Spiritualem experientiam
nanciscantur, aptique hinc fiant iterum alios doctrinam JESU CHRISTI docendi
atque ad vivum damonstrandi. Ejusmodi Catechetas habemus septem, cum quibus
Collegium Biblicum, Exegeticum et Theologicum tractamus.

In Collegio Biblico sumitur liber aliquis totus, ^t quidem ex Novo-foedere, in
quo illis ostenditur, quot parts unicuique capitulo insint; postea per parts
itur, et ip^i Catechetae dogmata quaedam cum applicatione usque conjuncta, inde
eruunt. In proponendo autem ita procedunt, ut primo res exponant et contextum,
deinde, his pofitis, ad propriam animae aedificationem ea applicant, quae huic
potissimum inservire videntur. Qua Methodo autem eo imprimis collimatur, et
illi ipsi partim solidiorem firmioremque de veritate ex sacris literis
acquirant cognitionem, partim vero ut majorem inde habilitatem induant pro
concione, data occasion dicendi, imo inter gentes veritatem divinam aliquando
proponendi.

In Collegio Exegetico hactenus dicta tantum Biblica tractavimus, in quibus
expositionem juxta regulas hermeneuticas illis suppeditantes porismata quaedam
ad rem facientia eruimus, et quando ejusmodi dicta dispositione aliqua
enucleavimus, quam prius calamo excipiunt, Meditationi postea eorum in totum
committimus. Unde fieri solet, ut ea, quae secum sunt Meditati, die dominica
memoriter recitent, et loco Sermonis pro concione public proponant.

In Collegio Theologico illis ostenduntur primo Theses fundamentales secundum
omnes articulos fidei; deinde illae etiam ex Scripturae dictis probantur usque
firmissimis, et ut huic scopo melius inserviremus, compendium aliquod
Theologicum formae Octavae in lingua hnjus gentis Damulica conscripsimus.

Faxit DEUS ille Clementissimus, Pater omnium misericordiarum, ut hoc modo hi
Catechetae ita praeparentur, ut ex illis ipsis tales eligi queant, qui in
posterum loco Missionariorum operi hujus Missionis praeesse possint.

Omne nostrum studium eo vergit, ut numerus eorum magis atque magis crescat,
spem sic certissimam ingredientes, fore ut in ecclesia et inter gentes eorum
beneficio multum utilitatis, et larga messis sit olim nobis certe futura.

Ex illis unus iam loco Antistitis Ecclesiolae in Pago aliquo praeest, alios
vero Seniores, alios Exhortatores denominavimus, quorum officium in eo
consistit, ut membra Ecclesiae saepius ostiatim visitent, examinent, doceant,
admoneant, atque preces cum illis conjungant: aliis denique ratio ipsius little
Officij praescribit, ut convertendis et Catechumenis solidiora Christianismi
fundamenta Viva Voce inculcent, atque ad altiora, jactis primo fundamentis, cum
illis contendant.

Bono c^m DEO nobis qu^que men's est Dictionarium aliquod in lingua hac Damulica
conficiendi, quod et Europaeis et huic genti Malabaricae inservire posset.
Quamlibet paginam tres dividunt Sectiones: in prima area plantamus Verba
Damulica, primitivum cum ejus appendice: in secunda ^regione Malabaricorum
ordinamus Pronunciationem eorum Latinis Characteribus juxta appositam: in
tertia autem significationem Latino idiomate exprimimus.

In Scholis nostris, ubi omnia gratis exhibentur, octoginta liberi quotidie
aluntur, cibls et vastibus ad necessitatem gaudentes. Caeteris vero beneficium
informationis una cum libris, quorum indigent, fine omni pretio, lubentissime
conceditur.

Sub typographiae nostrae prelo quotidie sudat Vetus illud Testamentum in
lingua Damulica.

Mola haec nostra papyro conficiendo apta tantum chartae praebet, quanti ad
nostrum usum quotidie indigemus.

Quod attinet ad Missiones illas Papales in hac nostra India, opinione certe
numerosiores sunt, ita ut bis mill hinc illinc circumambulare dicantur: verum
proh dolor, gens ethnica delusa ex tenebris ad tenebras, et ab una ad
alteram-Idolatriam transfertar, nihil omnino utilitatis in CHRISTO verae
sentiens; ne dicam quod Gentilismus Papismo nefarie inseratur.

Verbum DEI omnino indicat, quod ultimis temporibus testes veritaris exsurgere
debeant, exornati donis illis miracusorum: et cum tritissimum illud Theologorum
in ecclesia! quod dona Miraculosa dentur propter Infideles, sua radier
veritate, haud inficias ibimus, DEUM opus suum, eo facilius reddendum ad
conversionem paganorum coronare posse hisce extraordinariis mediis,
Missionariosque suos tantis virtutibus instruere, et donis miraculorum
condonare. Quae vero Gratiae, Misericordiae ac Providentiae divinae in
universum remittimus, uti omnium optimae dispensatrici.

Id quod in votis habeo, est ut illud Literarum commercium, quod nobiscum
incepisti, benign in posterum continues, ita ut Oriens cum Occidente loquatur,
et Occidens Orienti sua desideria et opera DEI manifestet: imo ut alter alterum
in cursu Evangelij excitet, in precibus exstimulet, in via versus coclum
impellat, ad patientiam admoneat, et in spe, qua vivimus, confirmet.

Pater ille Coelestis, Tibi, Vir plurimum Reverende, ex copiosissima CHRISTI
pleni tudine et virtutem et lucern et Salutem largiatur, ut in omnibus; tuis
operibus benedictionem Domini sentire et admirari possis. Vivas, Valeas
rectissime in DOMINO. Commendo me tuo Paterno amori, precibusque,

Vir plurimum Reverende, Nomini Tuo Reverendo Devinctus Cooperator et
Conservus. Joh. Ernestus Grundler.
Tranquebariae Die 10. December. 1719.
To the most REVEREND, the most Learned, most Faithful, and most Vigilant
Pastor of a Church in America, the most beloved Helper in CHRIST, Most hearty
Salutations.
Most Reverend Sir,
FROM Your Letters, which you wrote on the Thirty-first of December, in the
Year 1717. I could not but observe in the first place, That You are a Person
adorned with a Mind agreeable to JESUS CHRIST, and suitably walking in the
power of His Spirit; And One the Care of whose Heart it is, that the work of
GOD for the Conversion and Salvation of Souls, may be well-founded, and
continually make Improvements, not only with you in the West Indies, but also
that the same work with us in the East Indies may be daily on the growing hand;
Yea, that it may get into the Minds of all far and near; whereby a People
deluded by the craft of Satan, may be soon brought from their Idolatry into the
True Worship of GOD; and forsaking their Pagods, may make it their Main
Intention, that their Hearts being full of Faith, the most Holy GOD may dwell
as in His Temple there.

That this affair, though it be yet struggling in its Infancy, should
nevertheless excite in you, most Reverend Sir, upon your hearing of what GOD is
doing here, so much of Joy, and of Delight, and of Good Will, We cannot but
render our Greatest Thanks unto GOD, who has been pleased to give us the
Friendship of such a Man; Yea and that besides you, there should be others of
the like Mind and Heart with you, whose Piety disposes them to rejoice with us,
in such Beginnings as are always attended with some Grievous Difficulties; and
more than this, with their Prayers and Counsils Labor to open a more happy and
easy way for the Progress of the work which the present Mission is concerned
for.

Most Reverend Sir, You directed your Letters in the first place to the Blessed
Mr. Ziegenbalgh, and his Colleague. But it has pleased GOD to recall him home
from the Vineyard sooner than any of us looked for; so that upon me who alone
survive the^ lie^ the whole Care and Load of this Mission, and of Writing to
you, which I do with deepest Sorrow, the Account of his Death; which happened on
the Twenty Third day of February, in the Year, 1719. Heavenly Joys encompass
him while we are here drowned in Tears. But going, whither the (...) of GOD
have carried him. The Lord of the Harvest has called him away from the Labor
of a Mission heavy and weighty enough; has dismissed him, has accepted him; has
introduced him into, and begun to refresh him with, Eternal Consolations. And
now since it is so, what remains as my Duty, is with your Leave, to impart unto
you such things as these at the present, by way of Answer to your Letters to
Mr. Ziegenbalgh.

That Man of Blessed Memory is much wanted in the Work of this Mission.

First, For his singular Diligence and Vigilance, with which he governed this
Work of the Mission.

Then, For the most frequent Conferences, which he maintained with the People,
upon Salvation to be expected from CHRIST alone.

Lastly, For the Translation of the Word of GOD into the Damulick Tongue of
this People; -- For indeed in all these things, the Lord adorned him very much
with the Gifts as well of Nature as of Grace, for the singular Service of
gathering a Church unto Him.

As a Remembrance of this Worthy Man, and as a Testimony to the Truth of what I
say, Sir, I here present you with the New Testament in the Damulick Tongue;
together with some little Books written concerning True Christianity; all which
you will take in good part; and I pray you kindly to accept them as a small
present from such as would render you very great Thanks for the Books which
were sent hither from you.

Those Presents of Gold from your young Gentlemen, I have Distributed unto the
Youth in our Charity Schools. GOD the best Rewarder, will render to every one
according to his Work. And, that GOD would more and more adorn the Souls of
these Young Gentlemen with a Clothing of wrought Gold; This is what is in the
Prayers and Hopes of our Youth for them; who also render very great Thanks unto
their Benefactors.

In the mean time, While these things are doing, and while Bartholomew
Ziegenbalgh leaves Earth for Heaven, a Merciful GOD has remembered His Work of
this Mission here in the midst of all its Troubles. For through His Governing
Providence at the same time three Candidates for the Mission are sent unto us;
who being endued with true Piety, industriously spend all their Time in
Learning the Damulick Tongue. And so, as soon as they have attained a Competent
Skill in this Malabarick Language, there will be Four of us who are principally
employed in the Conversion of the Nations, endeavoring to bring them out of
Darkness into the True Worship of GOD. But since the Harvestof the Lord here is
Great, and Four Missionaries are not enough, we have in this Year made known
our Desires to the Curators of the Mission in Europe, about sending over Four
Candidates more unto us; making in the mean time our most humble Supplication
unto our GOD, that He would please anon to send yet more Laborers to us in
this His so very large an Harvost.

That Method of proceeding which you have been pleased to supply us withal, we
have Entertained with the highest Satisfaction; Receiving in it, as a Testimony
that JESUS CHRIST is Preached among you with all Sincerity; and indeed, which
is to us the greatest pleasure that can be, in the very same Method, that we
our selves make use of here, in treating with Men about the Salvation of their
Souls; laying aside those things which are Matters of mere Opinion, and wholly
applying our selves to This, That CHRIST alone, without any manner of Disguise,
may be Propounded and Exhibited. That Method of ours in Proposing the Doctrine
of the Gospel unto the Nations, does, to tell in short, consist in these things.

First, We Declare to these Heathens, One only True GOD, who has manifested
Himself in Three Persons: Fairly Noting to them therewithal, what Blessings
each Person has given forth to Men, and will bestow upon them.

Next, We treat of Man, considering him according to his Fourfold State; while
we show, in how Blessed a State he was, while he yet shone with the Image of
GOD which was Concreated with him: Then, How, or in what way, he lost that
Image of GOD, and put on the Visage of Satan, and of his own Accord run
headlong into wickedness.

Next, How GOD sent His most Beloved and Only Son into the World, that he might
bring us by Repentance out of that Cursed State, unto which every one is by
Nature liable, into a State of Grace; that so being translated into a State of
Grace, we may be willing to have the Image of GOD recovered in our Souls;
seeking for our Righteousness in CHRIST alone, by Faith, which working by love,
we may carefully walk on in a life pure from Vices, and in the daily Exercise
of Godliness; and grow more and more into the Likeness and Resemblance of our
SAVIOR.

Lastly, We Inculcate this, That only they, who in this Life, do by CHRIST,
pass into a State of Grace, with a True Change of Mind upon them, and persevere
in Faith to the End; These only may partake in the Hope of the Inheritance of
the Saints in Light; which is our Eternal Blessedness.

We every where keep to this Order of Salvation; so that not only in the
Damulick Tongue, when we speak to the Damuleans, but also in the Portuguese
Tongue, when we tender the Word of GOD, unto such as are of a Portuguese
Original, or to Slaves that have Christian Masters, yea, or unto Europeans in
the High Dutch Tongue, we for ever oblige our selves in this manner to deliver
it. For which cause, whatever is done among us, in Preaching, or in Teaching,
or in Examining, or in our most private Conferences, All still is Entirely
Levelled at this Mark, that we may admonish and Excite and quicken Men, unto a
True Repentance, unto a Living Faith, unto an Undissembled Piety; At the same
time calling upon GOD with most ardent Prayers, that He would thrust forth such
Missionaries, whose chief concern it shall be, that the Sheep may be led unto
that best of Pastures, which is with JESUS CHRIST, and be refreshed from none
but the pure Fountain of Israel.

Daily Experience has hitherto taught us, that by the advantage of Catechists,
we may do very much Good, not only upon the Members of the Church themselves,
but also upon those that are without. Wherefore upon the Observation of This,
we do all we can, that by the Word of Truth we may prepare such Catechists for
us, who having a Good Foundation laid in the Knowledge of JESUS CHRIST, may
both arrive to a Spiritual Experience, and may be made fit from hence to teach
others in the Doctrine of JESUS CHRIST, and give them a Lively Demonstration of
it. We have Seven such Catechists, with whom we manage, a Biblical Exercise, an
Exegetical, and a Theological.

For the Biblical Exercise, we take some whole Book, of the New Testament;
wherein we show them, what Parts are in every Chapter; Afterward we go through
the Parts; and the Catechists themselves fetch out from thence, certain
Doctrines joined with some Application of them. But when they come to Declare
things, they proceed after this manner. First, they Expound the Matters, and
the Context. Then, This being done, they apply to the proper Edification of the
Soul, those things that appear to be most Subservient unto it. But by this
Method, that which is principally aimed at, is, partly that they may get a more
Solid, and a Stable Knowledge of the Truth, out of the Sacred Scriptures; and
partly that they may get into a greater Ability for Preaching when they shall
have Opportunity to Speak any where, yea, anon to propound the Truth of GOD
among the Nations.

In the Exegetical Exercise, we hitherto handle only particular Sentences of
the Bible; wherein supplying them with an Exposition according to the Rules of
Interpretation, we fetch out certain Positions which are to the point in hand;
and when we have in some orderly manner opened such a Sentence; they taking
Notes hereof in writing, we leave them to their own Meditations. Whence it
commonly comes to pass, that the Things which they have thus Meditated by
themselves, they recite by Heart on the Lordsday, and offer them as a Sermon
for the Public.

In the Theological Exercise, we show them first the Fundamental Theses, in all
the Articles of our Faith: And then we bring the strongest Proofs for them,
from Sentences of the Scripture. And that we may serve this End the better, we
have written a certain Compendium of Divinity, of an Octavo form, in the Tongue
of this Damulic Nation.

May our most Gracious GOD, the Father of Mercies, Grant that these Catechists
may in this way be so prepared, that even from These there may be chosen those,
who may hereafter in the quality of Missionaries, take the work of this Mission
into their management.

Our Main Study is of this Tendency; That the Number of these may increase more
and more; Upon which we enter into a most certain Hope, that in the Church, and
among the Nations, by their Means, we shall one day see much Advantage and a
mighty Harvest.

Of these, there is One already placed as a Ruler to a little Church in a
certain Village. To Others we have given the Denomination of Elders; to others
that of Exhorters; whose Office it is often to Visit the Members of the Church
from House to House; Instruct them, Advise them, and join in Prayers with them;
And finally, the Office of others, is, That upon such as are to be Converted,
and upon the Catechumens, they may Viva Voce, inculcate the most Substantial
Foundations of Christianity; and so, having first laid those Foundations, then
strive to get up higher with them.

If GOD please to Smile upon it, we have a Mind also, to make a Dictionary, in
the Damulick Tongue, which may be of use to the Europeans as well as to this
Nation. Every Page is to be divided into three Sections. In the first Plat, we
place the Damulick words; the Primitive, and what is to be appendiced unto
them. In the second, over against the Malabarian words, we place the
Pronunciation of them in Latin Characters close by their side. In the third, we
Express the signification thereof in Latin.

In our Schools, where all things are dispensed upon free-cost, there are
fourscore Children daily fed; Enjoying such Victuals and Garments as may be
necessary for them. Unto the rest, there is most willingly allowed the Benefit
of Instruction, and such Books as they may want, without their paying of any
thing for it.

Our Press is now every day at work upon the Old Testament in the Damulick
Tongue.

Our Paper-Mill here, yields us as much Paper as we have daily occasion for.

As to the Popish Missions in this our India, they are thought more Numerous
than ours; insomuch that they say, there are no less than Two Thousand who here
go to and fro in the Earth: But, alas, the deluded Heathen People, is
translated out of Darkness into Darkness, and from one Idolatry to another,
without the least sense of the Good that in a CHRIST is to be met withal: That
I may not say, Paganism is wickedly grafted into Popery.

The Word of GOD abundantly declares, That in the Latter Days there must arise
Witnesses of the Truth, endued with the Gifts of Miracles. And since that
threadbare saying of Divines in the Church, Dona Miraculosa dantur propter
Infideles, is a Truth shining with its own indisputable Rays; we do allow, That
to facilitate His work in the Conversion of the Pagans, our GOD may crown it
with these Extraordinary Helps to it; and may furnish His Missionaries with so
great Powers, and bestow the Gifts of Miracles upon them. However these things
we wholly leave with the Grace, and Mercy, and Providence of Heaven; the best
Dispenser of all.

That which I now desire, is, That the Correspondence by Letters, which you
have begun with us, may be still kindly continued; so that the East may talk
with the West, and the West may manifest unto the East, its Desires, and the
works of GOD. Yea, that they may stir up each other in the course of the
Gospel; quicken each other with their Prayers; push on each other in the way to
Heaven; give to each other the Admonitions of Patience; and Confirm each other
in the Hope that is our Life.

May our Heavenly Father, plentifully grant unto you, most Reverend Sir, from
the overflowing Fullness of His CHRIST, Strength, and Light, and Happiness; that
in all your works you may Perceive and Admire the Blessing of the Lord. Farewell
in the Lord. I commend my self to your Fatherly Love and Prayers; Being,

Most Reverend Sir, Your most obliged, Fellow Laborer, and Fellow Servants,
John Ernest Grundler.
At Tranquebar, the 10 day of December. 1719.
APPENDIX.
The present Condition of the Indians on Martha's Vineyard, Extracted from an
Account of Mr. Experience Mayhew, newly Published; From whence the present
Condition of the rest may be apprchended.

COncerning the Conversion of the Indians on these Islands, and places adjacent
on the Main, there was a brief Narrative written by Matthew Mayhew, Esquire Eldest
Son of the Rev. Mr. Thomas Mayhew, who first Preached the Gospel unto them;
which Narrative was Printed at Boston in the Year 1694. and Reprinted at London
the next Year, under the Title of, The Conquest and Triumphs of Grace, etc. The
same for Substance, being again Printed some Years after, in Dr. C. Mather's
History of New England.

I shall begin my Account of the State of the Indians from the time the said
Book was first Published, that being about the time that I first began to
Preach to them.

The Number of Indians on these Islands is very much diminished, since the
English first settled on Martha's Vineyard, which was in the Year 1642, there
being then as was supposed on that Island about 1500 Souls. At present there
are in the Vineyard six small Villages, containing in all of them, about 155
Families, and the Number of Souls may be about eight hundred.

Each of these Villages is provided with an Indian Preacher to dispense the
Word to them on the Lord's Days, when I am not with them. They meet for the
Worship of GOD twice a Day on the Sabbath, and after Prayer, sing a Psalm; then
there is a Sermon Preached on some Portion of Scripture, which being ended,
they sing again, while the Days be of a sufficient length; and then conclude
with Prayer.

There has, from time to time, been much care taken that the several Villages
might be provided with School Masters to teach the Children to Read and Write;
yet some of them have not been so constantly supplied, as is to be desired; and
generally when the Spring of the Year comes on, the Indians take their Children
from School, alleging they want them for Tillage of the Land; and so the
Schools fail till the Fall; and this has much hindered their Progress in
Learning: Nevertheless, I think the greatest number can Read, either in the
English or in the Indian Tongue; and some in both.

There is also care taken to Catechize the Youth: For besides what is done in
this kind, by the Indian Schoolmasters and Preachers, I frequently examine the
Young People my self, and have determined to attend this Service once a
Fortnight, in some or other of the forementioned Villages; and this Method
will, I hope, prove very advantageous: many grown People as well as Children,
attending these Exercises.

The Indian Church at Marth's- Vineyard, whereof Mr. Japhet Hannit an excellent
Indian Minister was formerly the Pastor, but died in the Year 1712, had after
his Death another Pastor, called Sowomog: but he being an Old Man when he was
first called unto that Office, lived but a very few Years.

The Name of the present Pastor of that Church is Joash Pann, who is a very
serious prudent and pious Man, of a good Conversation, and one who drinks no
strong drink, but is much grieved at those of his Countrymen who do err by
means of it. If it please GOD to continue his Life, he is like to prove a good
Instrument; but being lately fallen into a Languishing Distemper, I fear what
the issue of it may be.

The number of Communicants, both Men and Women, in this Church, is about 110.
The most of these are Inhabitants of Martha's-Vineyard, but not all; there
being a few that have joined themselves there unto, not only from Elsabeth's
Islands, but from the Main Land also, lying next unto the Vineyard.

The Lord's Supper is ordinarily Administredin that Church about 7 or 8 times
in a Year, and Discipline is in some measure kept up in it. Unto this End,
besides other Church Meetings, there is constantly on the Thursday or Friday
before that Sacrament is Administered, a Meeting of the Church, wherein such are
suspended from the Lord's Table as having been over-taken in any fault, have
not given due satisfaction. At this Meeting also there is ordinarily a Sermon
Preached suitable to the occasion.

It must be acknowledged, that as the Indians are many of them much addicted
unto strong drink; so some of the Members of the Indian Church have been
sometimes found very faulty, on this account; yet it is also true, that such as
these have generally appeared very Penitent. And though some have fallen quite
away, and so have been cut off by the Sword of Discipline; yet others through the
Grace of GOD, have been so far recovered out of the Sins into which they have
fallen, as that it may be hoped they will not again return to them; and there
have all along been, and still are, a considerable number, whose Conversation
is, so far as I can understand, very blameless, and who may be justly looked
upon as Exemplary Christians; what ever such English Men as are filled with
Prejudices against the Indians, may say to the contrary.

Some Years after I first began to Preach to the Indians, the Church on
Martha's Vineyard, did on a day of Fasting and Prayer appointed for that End,
solemnly renew their Covenant with GOD, engaging to endeavor to forsake those
Sins with which they confessed they were too easily beset; and there was after
this, for a Time, some Reformation: but I observed that two or three of the
Brethren that could not be persuaded to join in the Action, soon after fell
into Scandalous Misdemeanors.

I also observed, That after the Church had thus renewed their Covenant, the
Means of Grace offered unto the Indians, seemed for a time to be attended with
more of the Presence of GOD, and the Influences of His Spirit, than they were
before, or have been since.

It was then frequent to see Persons at the Hearing of Sermons, very much
affected, and some times as soon as Sermon was ended, there would stand up
several, one after another, and make very Penitential Confessions of their
Sins, with Promises to endeavor to Live new Lives: desiring also the Prayers
of the People of GOD for them.

About this time there joined in full Communion unto that small Church on the
Vineyard, in one Year, at least 30 Persons, the behavour of many of whom did
very much resemble that of the Jailor, at his Conversion, Acts 16. GOD showing
us herein that He can make the Indians as well as Others a willing People in
the Day of His Power.

There is an Increase of Knowledge among these Indians, though it must be
confessed that their progress herein is but slow, by reason of the want of a
Learned Ministry constantly to Instruct them. Their ordinary Preachers having
but little Learning, and are not so able to seed them with Knowledge and
Understanding as is to be desired; yet some of these have Gifts not to be
despised in a day of small things.

These Indian Ministers as they are Members in full Communion of the Church on
the Vineyard, so they do not engage in the work of the Ministry without the
Consent and Approbation of that Church, as well as of the English Ministers
that Preach unto the Indians, and have an Inspection over them.

Having now Preached to the Indians upward of 25 Years, I have never yet had
any special charge of any one single Congregation committed to me; but have
visited the several fore mentioned Assemblies alternately, as I have thought
most necessary; Preaching ordinarily, unto some or other of them every Lord's
Day, and on working days once a Fortnight; constantly also attending their
Church-Meetings, to assist and direct them.

The Indians when they are Sick, generally send for their Ministers, and
sometimes other Christians with them, to visit them, and Pray with, and for
them. I have some times been with them on such occasions, and heard them
profess a great concern about their Souls; declaring that they did not regard
any thing in this World, so they might obtain an Interest in GOD's Favor; and
I have known many of them who have professed a good hope through CHRIST in their
Death, and who have behaved themselves on all accounts as does become dying
Saints; nor have I any doubt, but that many of them have died in the Lord.

The Rev. Mr. Jo^ah Torrey, Pastor of the English Church in Tisbury on the
Vineyard, has also for many Years past Preached as a Lecturer unto the Indians
on that Island, having for that End learned their Language. He Preaches in
some or other of their Assemblies once a Fortnight, and goes frequently to
their Church-Meetings, to advise and assist them; so that the Indians have a
Sermon every Thursday Preached to them, either by Mr. Torrey, or my self: And
we strengthen the hands of one another, by going together to these Weekly
Exercises.

The Rev. Mr. Samuel Wiswall Pastor of the Church in Edgartown, has also now
almost learned the Indians Tongue, with a design to do what Service he can
among that People.

The Indians on Martha's-Vineyard and the adjacent Islands, do hitherto
understand the Indian Tongue much better than that of the English; and
therefore complain much for want of Indian BIBLES, having now but very few
among there. Nor are there any to be had; the last Edition being now gone.
These Indians are therefore very desirous of mother Impression of the BIBLE, if
it might be obtained; and diverse of hem have told me, as well as some of those
on Nantucket, (whom I have diverse times visited) that they should be willing
according to their capacity, to contribute to it.

But the disadvantage which the Indians are under through the Scarcity of BIBLES
is some what helped by the Care of the Honorable Commissioners to supply them
with other useful Books in their own Language, viz. The N. England Confession
of Faith; Several Catechisms; The Practice of Piety; Mr. Shepard's Sincere
Convert; Mr. Baxter's C^ll to the Unconverted. And several Sermons of Dr.
Mather's, etc. besides the Psalter, and the Gospel of JOHN, Printed in the Year
1709. And the Indian Primer Printed this Year, in Indian and English. All which
Books are now very useful unto them.

As to their Civil Government, the Indians in Dukes County, (as well as in
other Places) are wholly under the English; But because their State does yet
somewhat differ from that of their English Neighbors, there are several Laws
made by the General Court of this Province, with a particular regard to the
Indian Inhabitants of the same: And there are some English Justices especially
Commissionated to take care of the Indians Inhabiting the several Counties of
it: and these are directed to Nomainate and Appoint several Officers among the
Indians themselves, to assist under their regulation, in the Government of that
People.

There are yet but few Indians on Martha's. Vineyard that have Houses of the
English fashion, though the number of these is of late increased; but in respect
of their Apparel, they are generally Clothed as the English are, and they by
degrees learn the English way of Husbandry: Several of them have good Teams of
Oxen, with which they Plough and Cart, for themselves and Neighbors, as the
English do. Many of them have also Horses, Cows, Sheep and Swine. They have
also among them some that have learned Trades; as at Martha's-Vineyard there
are several Weavers, One or two House-Carpenters, One Wheel-wright, who is so
good a Workman, as to be frequently employed by his English Neighbors. There
are several Tailors, and one if not more Shoe-makers, and one Black smith, who
not only took his Trade himself, but also made his Bellows, and other Tools;
and one Cooper, viz. William Charles, who is a good Workman. And though some of
these may not be so accurate as our English Tradesmen, yet this shows that as
the Indians are capable of Learning such Callings as English Men follow; so
they begin to come to it.

June 2d. 1720.
FINIS.
Corrigenda.
PAge 33. line 11. read Outer. p. 65. l. 20. r Incaepta. p. 66. l. 10. r.
Purgatum. p. 67. l. 9. r. quas. p. 68. l. 16. r. praedicatus. p. 72. l. 9. r.
Antichristum. p. 74. l. 15. r. Haec. p. 76. l. 8. r. praeter. l. ult. r.
trahunt. p. 77. l. 19. r. donis. p. 78. l. 7. r. juventuti. p. 80. l. 20. r.
patientur. p. 81. l. 11. r. proponimus. l. 19. r. excitemus. p. 82. l. 10. r.
demon^di.


