A Vindication OF THE New-North- CHURCH in Boston.

From several Falsehoods spread IN A PAMPHLET Lately Published, Tending to their
Defamation, Entitled, An Account of the Reasons why a considerable Number
belonging to the New North Congregation in Boston, could no^ consent to Mr.
Peter Thacher 's Ordination there, etc.

With an INVITATION to the Dissatisfyed Brethren of the said Church to put an
End to their Controversy in a Christian Way.

By several of the MEMBERS of that Church

BOSTON: Printed by J. FRANKLIN, for D. HENCHMAN, and sold at his Shop ove^
against the Brick Meeting House. 1720.

A Vindication, etc.
WHEREAS there has lately been published in Boston a Pamphlet, Entitled, An
Account of the Reasons why a considerable Number of the New North Congregation
in Boston, could not consent to Mr. Peter Thacher's Ordination there, etc. In
which Pamphlet are contained several plain and, positive Falsehoods, as to
Matters of Fact therein related, and many Misrepresentations of the proceedings
of the said Church, in their bringing forward the choice of a Pastor to join
with the Reverend Mr. Webb, in the work of the Ministry, and in their Electing
the Reverend Mr. Peter Thacher to be their Pastor, and settling him in said
Office. The Falsehoods and Misrepresentations hereby spread concerning the
Weighty and important Managements of said Church, loudly calls upon us to make
our D^fence against those who make it evident to the World, that they are
endeavoring to hurt us in our best and most valuable interests.

In order to our Vindication, we shall recite some of the most material
passages mentioned in the said Pamphlet, relating to our Conduct, and set those
proceedings of ours in a true Light.

First then, We find them asserting, That a Number of the Members of our Church
did use underhand practices to Rob Weymouth, and Impose a Minister on Boston;
which thing has been much talked of, and we thought we had done enough to
prevent its being improved against us any more; for at a Church Meeting, where
most of the dissatisfyed Brethren were present, that matter was thoroughly
debated, and every one that could be in the least suspected, declared they
never were concerned, directly nor indirectly, by writing, or by any other
means whatsoever, to invite Mr. Thacher to leave Weymouth and come to us. After
these things were fairly and fully debated, it was proposed by our Reverend
Pastor, that if we were in Charity with each other on that account, we should
express it by lifting up our hands, which we concluded every one did; and we
challenge any person in the world to prove, that ever any of the Members of our
Church have been guilty of what they have charged them with in this Affair.

As to what they allege of their being fallaciously dealt with ( page 5, 6.)
and being cut off from the benefit of a Vore we passed the 13th of May in
favor of the Congregation; we say, that this one thing set in a due light, we
cannot but think silenceth one great clamor of our Opposers, viz. Oppression;
for this Vote was proposed and come into purely in indulgence to them, and to
make them sensible we would do our utmost we could to quiet them and make them
easy.

As to their being cut off from the Liberty given them in that Vote by an
Obligation, which they say was tacked to it; We reply, that the obligation so
much complained of is plainly employed in the Vote, for that is founded on the
Liberty given by the Province Law to the Congregations in the Country; and the
reason why the Vote was not fully completed at this Meeting was, we could not
determine the Bounds of the Congregation, and therefore deferred it till we had
consulted with some of the chief of the Congregation; and then it was
determined that all the constant Hearers and Contributers should be allowed the
privilege of a Vote, that would come under such an Obligation, which was no
more than only a promise, That they would do their part toward the Support of
the Ministry, so long as God in his Providence continued them in that place,
which was signed by a considerable Number who did actually Vote in the Choice,
and it was unreasonable and groundless Jealousies that hindered the
dissatisfied from coming into it.

As to a pretended promise made by the Rev. Mr. Webb, that they should see Mr.
Thacher's Dismission, signed by the major part of the Church of Weymouth before
we proceeded further; and that it was promised some of the Church should go to
Weymouth and bring it; We reply, that we remember it was moved by them, but Mr.
Webb answered to their proposal, that it was not reasonable nor practicable
according to Custom in such cases, but that they should see a Dismission in
usual Form, and such a Dismission we accordingly produced and offered, at the
time when they were called to concur with the Church in the Choice.

Again, we find asserted, ( page 12.) That we chose Mr. Thacher to be our
Minister when he was the Minister of Weymouth, which we declare to be a
positive Falsehood; and can prove, that Mr. Thacher had his Dismission from his
Pastoral Relation to the Church of Weymonth by a Vote of that Church the 23d of
February, 1718, 19, and that another Pastor, viz. Mr. Thomas Pain, was chosen
both by Church and Town, and had actually taken Charge of the Pulpit before Mr
Thacher left them, and was ordained in his room before we made choice of him to
be our Pastor which was on the 9th of September, 1719. And now the Church of
Weymouth being settled undersanother Pastor, they dismissed Mr. Thacher at his
desire, as a Member, and gave him a Letter of Recommendation, wherein they say,
That his Conversation with them had been as becomes the Gospel, and that they
parted with him in perfect Charity; for which there was a full Vote in the
Church, and not one Person objected against it, as some of us were assured by
the present Reverend Pastor of that Church; though we find it asserted ( page
36.) they can prove it was a lean Vote, and objections made against the
Recommendation.

Again, We find them by way of Query (page 28.) asking, Whether Mr. Thacher did
not send a Letter, and charge the Church not to consent to a Council, or desire
some Friend to do it for him, for such a Letter there was, and it had its
Influence. This we declare to be a positive Fashood; for our Church as a Body,
nor any single Member of it, as we know of, ever received any such Letter from
Mr. Thacher, or any other person in the World; nor ever had the least hint
there was such a Letter, 'till we found it asserted in the Pamplet.

There are many more Notorious Falsehoods in the forenamed Pamphlet, which we
think it not needful for us to answer, since we know not the Author; and those
Particulars which we have already answered are the foundation of the
Controversy; and we have no prospect of its being ended, though we should answer
every Particular.

And we hope no serious Christian will justify that Pamphlet, which appears to
be written with so much Heat and Anger; for it is evident, that the force and
strength of its Rage is levelled at our Ministers; and what can the design of
this be, but to render their Labors unsuccessful, and prejudice People against
them? If this be their design, and they should in the least obtain their end,
certainly without deep Repentance and Sorrow for such Sins, dreadful must be
the Account which such persons will have to give up another Day. Our Ministers
are very dear to us, and some of us can very truly, and we hope very feelingly
say that we have cause to bless God for them; and we trust there are great
Numbers in the Town that have a great affection for them, for the remarkable
Meekness and Moderation they have shown in this more than ordinary Difficulty
and Trial they have met withal.

And whereas we find them charged with an unbecoming Te^per and Carriage in the
forecited Pamphlet, in which they very particularly bid the Readers to enquire
with what a Temper Mr. Thacher acted upon his admission into the Church, to
whom (if any should enquire) we should be glad of the opportunity to relate;
Namely, That it was with great Meekness he addressed himself to the Church at
that time; and his Expressions were so Christian, and in so moving a manner, as
affected the greater part (we believe all, except those few who opposed him)
and they being the persons to whom he chiefly applied, it was very surprising
to all the the rest, that they were no more affected with it.

They charge the Reverend Mr. Webb with partiality in our Meetings in reproving
Sharply those who were not of his mind, and not reproving those who were, when
they spoke unbecomingly; we can truly say, we Never once observed it to be so;
but always to the contrary, Exhorting us all to a Christian Temper one toward
another; and when he saw any thing otherwise with a great deal of meekness and
moderation Administered a reproof to one as well as to another; and in all the
managements of our affairs carried it with the same temper to the dissatisfyed
as he did at the Meeting House when the Reverend Mr. Thacher was Installed; and
what his behavior toward them was at that time and their carriage toward
him, we leave to the many hundreds then present to judge. And both our Pastors
have always pressed it upon us to study the things that make for peace, and to
overlook whatever Ill treatment we met with from those who dissented from us;
and we hope we have endeavored to observe those directions, and still are
inclined so to do; and can truly say, it is and always has been a great grie^
to us, to have such a difference with any of our Brethren, and are willing to
do any thing that lies i^ our power to come to an agreement with them and to
live in love and peace as becomes Brethren.

Who were the Authors of said Pamphlet wekno^ not, but find the names of
several of our Brethren of the Church inserted in it, whether nhey ga^ their
consent that it should be so, we know no^ but since it is so, and we find in
the Preface a Cha^ lenge to answer any objection against it, either b^ fore the
Civil Authority or a Council of Churche^ we do now in the most open and Public
mann^ Declare, that we are freely willing to submit a^ our differences with our
said Brethren to a Coun^ of Churches as we publicly voted on the day (...) the
Reverend Mr. Thacher's Instalment; when bo^ our Pastors and the whole Church
openly expre^ their readiness to submit whatever concerned eith^ of them in the
management of their late Importa^ affair to the hearing of ^ouncil, and as the
next day^ offered 'em when Mr. Webb sent for all the dissatis^ Brethren of the
Church to give him a Meeting at (...) House to consult about the calling a
Council, seral of them then refused to come, and those who d^ refused to join
Issue with us. A Council is t^ which we have always been for and never refu^
except One which we were desired to call at a Juncture when the Church verily
concluded (all things considered) could have no tendency to establish Peace
among us, nor in the Town, and if we were out in our Judgment about it we
earnestly ^esire to be made sensible of our Error in it, and to make Christian
Satisfaction for it. But always before and ever since have been ready to leave
our whole controversy to the examination of a Council of Churches according to
our Constitution, and and do now heartily consent to joy^ issue with ^ur
Dissatisfyed Brethren in that way, excluding those Churches who have been
concerned in any ^f our late managements and those Persons who ^ave prejudged
the cause. And upon the first no^ice we have from our Brethren of their
Inclinati^n to join with us in calling such a Council we ^all heartily embrace
it, and rejoice at the very ^pearance of such a prospect of putting an end to
^r unhappy controversy in this Christian way.

And having openly and freely declared our selves, ^e hope it will be a
sufficient Vindication and ^fence against all the unjust Charges made against
(...) in said Pamphlet; though we have not given neither shall we pretend to
give) a particular ^swer to each one of them in this way; much ^s shall we
Recriminate upon our Brethren, and ^blish to the World in the way and manner
they ^ve done, what the just grounds of our Grievan^ at them are; for so to do
we judge would but ^ry the unhappy Controversy farther, and excite ^d confirm
greater Prejudices in each against over; and we suppose it is owned by all men
of ^servation and though it, that such a way of managing Controversys of this
Nature never ends them. And we have no Rule that we know of in Scripture to
proceed in such a way; and therefore must condemn the Practice as unchristian,
and the Treatment we have met withal in it as unfair and unjust. What we have
therefore to allege against our Brethren, we propose to do it in a more
Christian way, and if they see reason to accept the offer, we shall refer it
till we come to have a hearing before a Council of Churches regularly called,
from whom we may expect to have such direction and advice as by the blessing of
God will have an happy tendency to restore peace and unity among us. In the
mean time, and at all times we hope w^ shall study the the things that make for
Peace and are heartily willing to observe and conform t^ that Character which
our Blessed Savior ha^ given of his true Disciples, Joh. 13, 35. By thi^ shall
all men know ye are my disciples, if ye love on another. We earnestly desire to
love our Brethren and do now invite them to terms of Peace and unity, the
blessed effects whereof we have elegant^ expressed in Psalm. 133. And upon the
whole, w^ humbly entreat of all our Christian Brethren an^ Friends a Charitable
opinion of us and our manag^ments till we are regularly convicted of tho^
Crimes which we really think the Authors of t^ late Pamphlet have in a very
unjust and unchrist^an manner charged upon us.

Signed in the Presence of the Brethren of the Chur^ by their Order, By

CALEB LYMAN JOHN BARRE^ JOHN DIXWELL
In behalf of the rest.

POSTSCRIPT.
Whereas there is a an Attempt to prove me guilty of promise breaking and
falsehood, as to my staying and Administering Special Ordinances at Weymouth till
they had another Minister Ordained. I solemnly declare I have with the greatest
exactness and most impartial care recollected my own words and managements on
that Head, and cannot find that I made such a Promise, and therefore the charge
upon me in that Regard must needs arise (to speak with the utmost guard) from
mistake if not worse. This will appear to Presons at leisure to be informed, by
the Tenor of the Vote of Dismission, and some glances at Fact, the vote of
Dismission ran thus, That I had their Consent to remove whenever I saw it
con^enient and proper. This joined with some facts ^ust set me fair in this
Matter in the Conscien^es of all judicious and charitable Christians. The
reason why the Vote of Dismission ran in the ^entioned Tenor was this; One of
the principal Men of the Church, Deacon Edward Bates, in Con^e^sation with me
before the Church Meeting, ^id, their desire was, that I would assist them
(...) the settleing another Minister, and that if the ^ote was not worded
accordingly, I should have ^o Power after the Vote to administer special
^rdinances, while I stayed to help them in that ^ffair; whereupon I Worded the
Vote so as to ^e looked upon as their Pastor, but upon my Re^ove ceased to be
so.

Before this Vote was passed, I explained my self to the Church, and told them,
it was my defire to see them in a good way of Settlement before I left them,
and therefore proposed to stay with them some time, if they concurred to it, to
assist them in that great Work; and that I worded the Vote as I did, that while
I did stay I might ^e able without any ones Objection to administer special
Ordinances: Upon this Explication they concurred, with a Dissent but of Three
Men; and I did stay according to my own desire, till the Church had chose Mr.
Pain, and the Congregation had concurred to that Choice: But not on^ word as I
remember passed about Ordination and my staying till then,

Two Circumstances more I call to mind ver^ particularly: That the Committee to
invite M^ Pain, after they had done treating with him di^ by one of them, viz.
Mr. John Torrey, desire m^ to preach with them one Sabbath and the a^proaching
Fast, because by that time their Minister would return; which I promised and
pe^formed. I will not suspect the Readers Understanding so much as to argue upon
it, That this plai^ly signified, they did not look upon me under su^ an
Engagement.

And to conclude, just before my actual Remo^ several of the principal Men came
and took lea^ with all proper Love and Respect to me, and don't remember that
any of them signified to (...) that they so much as looked upon me Obliged
(...) promise either to stay or return to administer s^cial Ordinances. Neither
did the Church Weymouth ever send to me since my removal to co^ and Administer.

Having thus Declared my self I hope the persons who have been drawn in to
testify against me will Solemnly consider the Charge made, as they will Answer
it to their Great Judge another Day, and do Justice to my reputation, and not
ruin their own Souls to destroy my Character and Ministry. And I would promise
my self that the Church, whose Souls and welfare have always been, and now are
very dear to me; who have so often declared my faithfulness while among them,
and their great ^ffection, will not suffer me to be oppressed in so open and
approbrious a Manner for want of testifying to ^he truth of this Declaration,
as obliged by the clea^est and strongest bond of Justice and Charity.

PETER THACHER.

WHereas in a Pamphlet lately Printed and spread abroad, I am charged with
down^ght Breach of Promise to Mr. Lee, and several o^ers that were with him at
my House, on the Day ^pointed for the Instalment of the Reverend Mr. ^acher in
the New North Church, and am desired by ^me of my Brethren to give them a brief
and plain ^lation of this Fact. In compliance with their fire I do it: And to
the best of my remembrance, is as follows.

On the Day aforesaid about 5 or 6 of our ag^eved Brethren, some of the Church,
the Rest of (...) Congregation were at my House, and as they ^ate, desired a
hearing of their Case by the Reve^d Elders and Messengers before they should
pro^eed to the Public work and Business of the ^y. Their Request being
granted, they read seve^ Papers to the Ministers and Messengers, and, ^ke to
them as is affirmed in said Pamphlet; Upon this the Reverend Moderator desired
the Papers might be delivered and lodged with him as was usual in such Cases,
and after some short debate were delivered, and (as I understood) according to
the Moderator's desire, without any Promise from him in the least that they
should ever be returned. And before our Brethren went out of the Room, they
desired of the Ministers and Messengers present, that their Papers might be
further considered by them and they themselves called for again, adding (as
they say) that they had Witnesses from Weymouth to attest to the Things
relating to Mr. Thacher. To this the Reverend Ministers (if I remember aright)
replied, the one and the other of them to this effect, That they should
Consider what had been offered unto them, and act according to the best of
their Judgment upon it: And farther made this Conditional Promise to our
Brethren, viz. If they found upon Consideration any Occasion for them to speak
further to, or explain what they had offered, they would send for them And I
suppose there is at least 3 Persons that ar^ ready (if there should be occasion
for it) to Attes^ to the Truth of what is thus far related. An^ now as to what
more immediately concerns m^ ^self, The Case is this; When the Reverend
Gerntlemen aforesaid had made the abovementione^ Conditional Promise to my
Brethren, I being bette^ acquainted in the Neighborhood than any in the
Council were, I enquired of my Brethren when they would be, that I might send
my Lad for the in case the Council should see any necessity for ^ and desire me
so to do. The answer returned ^ me was, We shall be at Mr. Lee's house. And
make no question but the 3 Persons I referred to a^ are able to testify to the
Truth of this also. Up^ this o^ Brethren took their leave of us, and (...) went
to the door with them, and as they were (...)ing away Mr. Lee desired me to
send my Boy f^ them; agreeable (as I apprehended) to what (...) had said before
unto them in the House, i. e. i^ case the Reverend Elders and Messengers should
desire me so to do. And with this Apprehension I returned the Answer, Yes, unto
him: and so we parted.

This, to the best of my Remembrance, is a true Account of all that passed with
relation to the Ministers, and my Promise to the aggrieved Brethren, which we
have so often been charged with the breach of. And as the Charge in the printed
Pamphlet seems more especially to be levelled against me, I have this further
to offer in my own vindication, viz. The very Nature of the thing, is the
clearest and strongest Testimony in my Favor, were there no other Evidence,
(as I make no doubt there is plentiful) in the Case; for I was no more of the
Council, nor had any more to do than my aggrieved Brethren themselves had, to
send for any Persons ^o come to them, unless the Council desired it of me, and
there is no doubt to be made, but that ^he Reverend Ministers belonging unto
it, have such an entire Regard to Truth, that if they had apprehended
themselves in the least measure under ^y obligation by Promise to send for our
aggrieved Brethren after they had once dismissed them, they would have
fulfilled the engagement, and have desired me to send for them. And I solemnly
declare, if I had had the least hint from the Reverend Ministers so to do, or
the least apprehension that the said Brethren absolutely expected I should have
sent unto them, with or without any direction from ^e Council, I should
certainly have done so.

JOHN WEBB.
April 19. 1720.
FINIS.

