Two SERMONS Preached at the DEDICATION of the New Brick-meeting-house in
Middle-street BOSTON, the 10th of May 1721.

One by Dr. COTTON MATHER. And the other by Mr. BENJA. WADSWORTH.

A VISION in the TEMPLE. THE LORD of HOSTS, Adored; AND THE KING of GLORY
Proclaimed; On a DAY OF PRAYER kept [ May 10. 1721] at the Opening of the New
Brick Meeting House in the North part of Boston, by the MINISTERS of the City,
with the SOCIETY which Built it, and this Day Swarmed into it.

By Cotton Mather, D. D. and F. R. S.

Isa. VI.5. My Eyes have seen the King, the LORD of HOSTS.

Boston, Printed for Robert Starkey. And Sold at his Shop in Fleetstreet. 1721

The LORD of HOSTS Adored.
Psalm. XXIV.10. Who is this King of Glory! The LORD of HOST 's, He is the King
of Glory.


It Is probable that the Text now Read, may seem Remote from the Occasion upon
which we are now assembled. But before the Sermon is done, you will see that
the Preacher seeks out Agreeable Words, and the Occasion will be abundantly
suited in it. But I am first of all, to do the office of an Heral^ unto the
Lord of Hosts among you. Give Attention, O People of God, Give Attention. Your
Glorious KING is now to be Proclaimed among you; One of His most Illustrious
Titles, is to be more particularly Asserted and Published C* Congregation while
the Sermon is going on, The Lord thy God is with thee, and the shout of a King
is in the midst of thee.

For the PSALM that is now to yield us a Text for our Intention, may we not
find some Occasion in the Removal of the A^k, and its Translation up to Zion at
which the People appeared in a great Confluence, and with much Solemnity? The
People are Exhorted hereupon, to practice the most Substantial, ^gether with
their Ceremonial PIETY. But might not the Ascension of our SAVIOR into the
Heavenly World, be represented in that Solemnity, and be here described and
predicted? We are credibly informed, That the Psalm now before us, was that
which it was the ancient Custom of the Hebrews to Sing still on, The First Day
of the Week. Doubtless, Their Wise Men discerned here, a Prophecy of a CHRIST,
who on the First Day of the Week, began to Ascend the Throne of his Glory. Yea,
Why should not the Coming of our SAVIOR in His Kingdom, have the Spirit of
Prophecy here pointng at it? The Period, when the King of Glory, shall make His
Entry, and His Church here is to give him a Reception due to such a King of
Glory.

It is most certainly, our SAVIOR, who is here celebrated as the King of
Glory. That co^t^mptible creature, who lately assumed this Denomination, ought
forever to have his memory treated no otherwise than that of a Profane and
Wicked Prince, and the most Vain glorious worm in the World. No. It shall be
Thy Glory, O our SAVIOVR, to be, The King of Glory! A Glory it is, which Thou will not give to another.

Here is a Demand, Lift up your Heads, ye Gates, and be ye Lift up, ye Everla^g
Doors, and the King of Glory shall (...) in. The Gates of Zion, were dou^, of
the Portcullis fashion, and were to be opened by Lifting up. At the Execution
of this Demand, for the Entry of the A^k into Zion, there is a Dialogue. It is
both Enquired, and Answered Who is this King of Glory? It Was provided, I
suppose, to be Alternately Sung, by the Officers placed at the Gates. I allow a
Type of our SAVIOR 's being Received up to Glory, in this Transaction. But I
behold, a Repetition of the matter. This inclines me to an Apprehension; That
here is demanded for our SAVIOR, a Reception with his People: at His Two
several Comings into the World. Whatever may be meant, by the Gates and the
Everlasting Doors, which are to be Opened for His Reception, besure, O People
of God, our Hearts are intended; The Gates and the Everlasting Doors of our
Souls, are to be Opened unto Him. The Dialogue here managed on this Occasion,
Enquiring and Answering, Who is this King of Glory? between whomsoever it is
carried on, we may well apprehend, the Angels of God concerned in it; The
Angels who are the admiring Spectators of his Glory. It Is Remarkable, That in
the first Account of this Glorious King, He is mighty in Battle. In the Second,
there is nothing of any Battle. Because, at the Second Appearance o^ our
SAVIOR, the Conflicts about His Kingdom are over; nor do they Learn War any
more. However, in the Second Account of this Glorious King, He is called, The
Lord of Hosts: which is in a more Extensive Sense, than that wherein Hosts
Armed for War, are spoken of.

And of this, my DOCTRINE, is to introduce a brief Treatise for your
Entertainment.

Our SAVIOVR even the Blessed Jesus, is that Glorious King, whom the Glory of
being, the LORD of HOSTS, does belong unto. When we behold our SAVIOR, we
behold, The King of Glory: we Behold the King in His Beauty, and see the most
Glorious thing in the Land that is afar off. But with Souls full of
wonderments, we cannot but raise the Question, Who is this King of Glory? There
is but one part of the Reply to be made unto the Question, in this AcAccount,
that is now given of Him; The Lord of Hosts He is the King of Glory. When we
have had, The Lord of Hosts, in the best Veiw, that we can give or get of Him,
it may be said, How little a portion is heard of Him! This Title, The LORD of
HOSTS, I find many more then Threescore Times given to our SAVIOR in this Word
of CHRIST. What Precious Thoughts of Him will it afford unto us!

I. When our SAVIOR is called The LORD of Hosts, you are aware, that the Name
of JEHOVAH, is ascribed unto Him. The Denomination in the O^iginal is, JEHOVAH
Zabaoth. Yea, Even, in the Greek of our New Testament so much of the Hebrew
Appellation is retained, that we read J^m. V.4. concerning, The Lord of
Sabbath. It is most certain, That the Name, JEHOVAH, does belong unto our
SAVIOR. That Appellation, Which is, and which was, and which is to come, is
but the Translation of the Name JEHOVAH. The Prophet was an Eyewitness to the
Seraphim; Isa. VI.3. who Cried One to Another, and said, Holy, Holy, Holy, is
the Lord of Host; or JEHOVAH Sabbath. Now, a very sure Interpeter has assured
us; Joh. XII.41. These things said Esaias, when He saw His Glory, and spoke of
Him. Yea, Don't we find in the Ancient Prophecies, the crucifixion of the
Messiah foretold in those Terms, JEHOVAH Sais, They pierced me? And ^is not the
Messiah Styled, JEHOVAH our Righteousness! It is most certain, That JEHOVAH the
God of Israel, was the Supreme God, And it is most Certain, That our SAVIOR
was the very same with JEHOVAH, the God of Israel JEHOVAH is an Incommunicable
Name. The Name is peculiar to the most High God. It is among the Songs, which
God our Maker has given unto us; Psalm. VII.17. I will Sing praise unto the Name
of JEHOVAH, the most High. And Psalm. LXXXIII.18. Thou whose Name alone is
JEHOVAH, art the most High. It follows then, that our SAVIOR is not Inferior
to the most High God. I demand it, on the behalf of my Glorious King, that when
you Acknowledge Him to be, The Son of God, you consider Him as, Equal with GOD.
It is no Robbery, to make such a Claim for Him. Christians, Adore your SAVIOR,
as very JEHOVAH, the Same in substance, and Equal in Power, with His Eternal
Father. I cannot say, you are worthy to be called Christians, if you do not so.
But this I will say, you are Idolaters, and will Die in your Sins, if you do not
so.

II. How Worthy is He to be Adored as, The Lord of Hosts, who has under His
Command, the Whole World, and Every Creature in it? But so has our SAVIOR.
When our SAVIOR is called, The Lord of Hosts, it is the same that is asserted
of Him, and for Him; Acts X.36. He is the Lord of All. The Hosts, whereof our
SAVIOR is the LORD, are all the Works of GOD; Every One of which are under His
Command We read, Genesis II.1. The Heaven and the Earth were Finished, and all the
Hosts of them. These, These are the Hosts whereof our SAVIOR is the Lord; And
it may be said, Is there any Number of His Armies. Our SAVIOR is the Creator
of all Things; And shall He not be the Governor of them all? We have ^o
Learned Christ^* Col. I.16. All things were Created by Him, and for Him. As we
may from hence in^er His Eternal G^dhead, so may we His Power. If all things
were Created by Him, we may be sure, they are ^lso Governed by Him. Our
SAVIOR, as He is GOD, or a Person ^n the Essence of GOD, He has what we may
call, the Essential Government of all things. He is Essentially, Necess^rily,
Everlastingly Vested with the Government of the World. But then also, there is
a Glorious Mystery of the Gospel, which our Faith is to take a further Notice
of. The Son of GOD, assuming a Man into One Person with Himself, upon a
Mediatorial Design, this God-man becomes The Lord of Hosts with a sort of
Delegation from His Eternal Father. He has the Government of the World so
Committed into His Hands, that the Blessed Man, who he has Chosen to bring so
near unto Him, has his Influence upon the Administration. It is the Son of GOD,
Incarnate and Enthroned in our JESUS; Or shall I say? It Is our JESUS Personally
United unto the Son of GOD, who now ^s; Mat. XXVIII.18. All power is given unto
me, in Heaven and in Earth. In ou^ SAVIOR so Circumstanced, we now behold, The
Lord of Hosts, who is the Universal Monarch. This is, The Lord of Hosts, of
whom a poor Wo^ that pretended unto an Universal Monarchy, found himself
compelled once to Confess; Dan. IV.34, 35. His Dominion is an Everlasting
Dominion; And He does according to His Wall^ in the Armies of Heaven, and among
the Inhabitants of the Earth, and none can (...)* His Hand, or say unto Him,
what do Thou^ Shall our Lord of Hosts Challenge, ^ Dominion, Extending as
far as the Sun, whereof the Divine Poet Sings, There is nothing ^id from the
Heat thereof? Yea, the Sun it self is under His Dominion, and i^, and all the
Worlds, that move above it, and are not hid from the Heat thereof, are but a
little part of it. The Sun it self is under the Command of our JESUS. He
Commands the Sun and it rises not! What inexpressible Numbers are the Hosts of
those Various Creatures, which fill the Several Globes of our Solar System! The
Species cannot be Numbered: What then the Individuals? But if it should be so,
that Every Fixed Star in all the Host of Heaven be a Sun, and the Center of a
System not unequal to ours, to what Inconceivable Numbers do the Hosts arise?
Humane Understanding tires, faints, is even Swallowed up. Well, but our SAVIOR
is that Lord of Hosts, who has all there at His Disposal Of all these it must
be owned; Psalm. CXIX.91. They continue this day according to thine Ordinances;
for all are thy Servants. Oh! What Cause have we to fall down before our
SAVIOR, with the devoutest Adoration! How can they Expect any Blessings to
fall from Heaven upon them, who do not Worship the King, The Lord of Hos^? What
punishment may not be Expected, or can be Terrible enough to be inflicted on
them, who shall affront such a LORD of HOSTS; One of So Incomprehensible a
Dignity! At the Head of so many mighty Beings! What will become of them who
shall persist in Disobedience to ^uch a Lord of Hosts? One who has made all
things, and who does Rule them all? How does all Humane Greatness Vanish into
nothing before such a Lord of Hosts, and all the Grandeur of mere Creatures*
dwingle into Nothing and less than Nothing! O^! Don't Sin against such a
Glorious Lord. S^rs* Consider this; Least the Lord of Hosts do tear you in
pieces, and there be none to deliver you!

III. The Angels, of GOD, make a very Considerable Figure among the Hosts,
which our SAVIOR has under His Command* And well worthy to be called The Lord
of Hosts, must He be, w^ h^s These to attend upon Him. We are now coming into
Mic^jahs Vision; I saw the Lord Sitting on His Throne, and all the Host of
Heaven Standing by Him. The Lord of Hosts is He that is the Lord unto those who
are called, Luke II.13. The Multitude of the Heavenly Host. It is our SAVIOR
who is the Lord of These. Our SAVIOR is that Lord of Hosts, to whom we may
say, what is in Neh. IX.6. Thou have made the Heaven of Heavens, with all their
Host, and the Host of Heaven Worshipeth thee. There are Spiritual Substances,
whose Dwelling is not in such Flesh as our Spirits are. They are Spirits which
don't inhabit such gross Bodies as ours; and are E^dued with Faculties of
Reason and Wisdom, wherein we are made Lower than They. All these Noble
Spirits, what and whose are They! Are they not all ministering Spirits? And is
not our SAVIOR, He of whom we may Say unto them. O Bless the Lord, All Ye His
Hosts; Ye Ministers of His, who do His Pleasure? We read concerning our
SAVIOR, 1. Pet. I^I.22. He is on the Right Hand of God, and Angels are made
Subject unto Him. The Angels of the Heavenly World, are so often, so many
Hundreds of times, mentioned in the Book of God, and have so much of a share in
the Things done here below, that they deserve an High Rank amongst the Hosts of
GOD. Let us now com^ to Mah^naim, and En^o^ a Vision of A^s* Paying their
Homage unto our SAVIOR, According to the Injunction of His Father unto them,
All Ye Angels Worship Him. How Large, How ^rge, How beyond all Comprehension
Copious, are the Hosts of Angels which our Lord of Hosts is a Commander to! In
His Lowest Humiliation* He spoke of having, Twelve Legions of Angels, ready to
wait upon Him. He might speak of no more, because there were then only He and
His Eleven Disciples to be defended; And a Legion of such Succors afforded,
might be well thought Sufficient for their Defense, against the Roman Legions.
But ^hen, I find a Time, when there are not only Thousands of Thousands that
minister unto this Lord of Hosts, but there are also Ten Thousand times Ten
thousand, which amount unto at Least one hundred millions, that Stand before
Him. Yea, we read, Heb. XII.23. It is an Innumerable Company of Angels. Now all
of these Angels, Every one of which are mighty Angels, do all fall down before
our SAVIOR; And say, Thou art our Lord, and we worship Thee! Their Doxology
is, Worthy is the Lamb that was Slain, to receive Power and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing. The Glories of their Lord,
are what they Desire to Look into. Upon every fresh Discovery thereof, these
Morning Stars do Sing together, and the Sons of God shout for Joy: There is an
Hallelujah repeated, Hallelujah, Hallelujah! runs through the Hosts of GOD; The
Lord of Hosts has new Praises from them. With such Reverence, with such
Prostration, they keep waiting for Orders from this Lord of Hosts; And they are
upon the Wing to Execute them, to do as He shall Order them. They are
Intendants over Nations, and Provinces, and Cities; and when they are ordered
by our SAVIOR, Go and Relieve such a People! or, Go and Chasten such a People*
They do it Immediately, Irresistibl^. The particular Children of God, have them
for their Guardians, and our SAVIOR Ordering of them, Go and Supply the wants
of my Servant! or, Go and incline the Thoughts of my Servant! or, Go to Rescue
my Servant, out of such and such Distresses, and Strike those who seek to hurt
him! It Is done without any more ado. There are Wonderful Things done, which do
thus come to pass; Rev. XXII.16. I JESUS have sent mine Angel, for the doing of
them.

O the Magnificence of our SAVIOR! Was ever any Emperor so attended, as this
Lord of Hosts! The Least of whose Attendents is Greater than the greatest
Emperor or Tamerlane that ever was upon the Face of the Earth! And shall not
we become, the Obedient Servants of such a Lord? what? when in Serving that,
Lord of Hosts, we shall have such Fellow Servants! Verily, To Serve the Lord of
Hosts, it is to be a King, as well as a Priest unto GOD!

IV Our SAVIOR is, The Lord of Hosts, in regard of His Authority over those
Assemblies of His People, which are, The Hosts of the Lord. I remember, The
J^ws on this Name, The Lord of Hosts, reckon up Three Hosts wherein our GOD
eminently appears so. O^ is, ^zeb^ Le^almidin, or, The Hosts of Disciples.
And unto this they apply the words in Job, instead of, My Appointed Time,
saying, I will wait all the Days of my being a Disciple, till my Change come.
This I will now say, and my main Intention I now confess to you, has been to
^ay this, O you Disciples of our SAVIOR, Gathering together to Worship Him;
You are on some Singular Accounts, the Hosts, whom He is a Lord ^o It ^s ^en
the Opinion of some Learned Men, that our GOD has been called, The Lord of
Host^, with a Special E^e to ^e Office which He bore of a Captain General and
Governor in Chief, to the Armies of Israel. Our GOD established Theocracy over
His Peculiar People. When that People came out of Egypt, We read, Exo XII.41
The Hosts of the Lord went out from the Land of Egypt. While they were in the
Wilder^ess, they were distributed into Four Hosts, and though the Tradition we
have about their Four Banners be but a Fiction, ^e^ they Pitched and Marched,
in the Order of Regular Squadrons. It is Remarked, That no Prophet uses the
Name of, The Lord of Hosts, with such Frequency, as it is done in Zechariah's
Prophecies; And one Cause Conjectured for it, may be, because a Time like that
of the Coming out from the Captivity in Egypt, was now referred unto. The
Armies of Israel, were to have their Faith now strengthened, in, The Lord of
Hosts, to do for them, what He did for their Fathers in the Wilderness. Those
Hosts of the Lord are now all Scattered, all ruined; Through the Wrath of the
Lord of Hosts, there is a Darkness come upon them, and they are no more to be
seen in that Land. But now we have, we are, a Surrogate Israel. The Assemblies
of our Zion, are now the Hosts of the Lord. Particular Congregations which
Assemble for the Worship of GOD, these are the Hosts, for the sake of which,
very particularly, our SAVIOR is called, The Lord of Hosts. He is Their Lord,
and the^ Worship Him. We read, Psalm. LXXXIV.1. How amiable are thy Tabernacles,
O Lord of Hosts! It Is at the Tabernacles when ^ His People Assemble, that there
are the Hosts, which He is eminently a Lord unto.

Our SAVIOR is, The Lord of Hosts, in the Congregations of His People,
inasmuch as first He is the Lord that has Appointed them. It Is what our SAVIOR
has Appointed; as ^n J^el II.15.* Call a Solemn Assembly. Our SAVIOR speaks of
His Disciples, as Gathering together in His Name; It Is then His Will, that they
should gather together. Man is naturally Sociable. Our SAVIOR will be Owned in
and ^y Societies of His People. He issues ^ut His Edicts, for His People to
Associate, for the Carrying on of His Worship in the World.

Again, Our SAVIOR is, The Lord of Ho^ts, i^ the Congregations of His People,
inasmuch as He will have nothing to be Observed, but wh^t as a Lord, He has
Appointed in them. It Is that unto which we are Limited by our SAVIOR, Mat.
XXVIII.20. Observe all things* whatsoever I have commanded you. Our SAVIOR
will not allow us to introduce our own ^ries, Notions, Will Worship, into His
Religion. He will have to keep close to His Praescriptions. He will not have
His Worship to be taught or formed, by the Precepts of Men. He is a Jealous
Lord; And in His House, none but He is to be Owned as a Lord.

In the Book of Numbers, the same word, which we render, An Host, is used for
the Service to be performed at the Sanctuary. Our Translators are so pressed
with it, that in the Margin, they again render it a Warfare. Our Lord is, The
Lord of Hosts, in this regard, (...) He is the Lord of all the Services to be
performed among His People. There are no Services to be done, but what there
shall be His Order for. If there be any thing, of which you cannot find a, Thus
says- the Lord of Hosts, it must not be received here; A Quo Warranto, is to
be Served upon it. And if the Hebrew Ter^ used here, signify Times also; Truly,
Our Lord will be Owned as, Temporum Ordinator, Even, The Lord of Time: He not
only Orders the Times that are to pass over His People, but also Ordains the
Times in which His People shall bring their Services unto Him. One Day in
Seven, are the Times. If you impose any other Stated Times, the Lord of Hosts
is imposed upon.

Furthermore; Our SAVIOR, is, The Lord of Hosts, in the Congregations of His
People, inasmuch as His Providence is at Work about them; His Providence is
very conspicuous in disposing of them. Whatever happens in the Congregations,
it is the Lord of Hosts, who is the Doer of it. The Condition of our
Congregations it is what, The Lord of Host, has determined. One Congregation
shall be Bigger, another shall be Smaller. One Congregation shall be Growing,
another shall be Waning. One Congregation shall be Richer, another shall be
Poorer. It Is all, as the Lord of Hosts would have it; all as our SAVIOR
determines it. The Masters of the Assemblies, must Glorify the Lord of Hosts,
in the whole condition of the Auditories which tend upon them; and of the
Congregations which they are Servants to. They must have an Entire
Satisfaction, in the Congregations that are assigned unto them; and this Though It
is to Quiet their minds. All is just as my SAVIOR will have it; Just as my
dear, Wise, Kind, and Soveregin SAVIOVR has ordered it. There is none brought
into our Congregations, but it is our SAVIOR who brings them in. There are
none taken out of our Congregations, but it is our SAVIOR who takes them out.
What Instructors are bestowed on our Congregations, it is our SAVIOR who
bestows them* They are the Gifts of our Ascended SAVIOR. It Is the Lord of
Hosts, who does Commission them, Enable them, incline the People to affect them
and invite them. They are His Officers. When our Congregations are Bereaved of
the Men that Led them in the Paths of Righteousness, it is The Lord of Hosts who
Sends the Berevements; who deprives the Hosts of their worthy Leaders. This
gives me occasion, without any Digression, to say; The Masters of the
Assemblies, or, if you will, the Pastors of them, if they be Men full of a
CHRIST, when they see the Lord of H^sts, it may be Scattering their Flocks, and
bringing them to little or nothing; these can bravely and nobly and with an
easy mind, say upon it, O Glorious Lord of Hosts, Thy Will be done on Earth as
it is done in Heaven. I don't ask to minister unto one more, than thou shall
order for me. All my Opportunities to do Good, though they are the most precious
things I have in the World, yet I can Cheerfully Resign them all unto thee.
While I have a CHRIST for mine, and I can have the Comforter that Rieleves my
Soul near unto me, the withdraw of all Creatures, will give small Affliction to
me, will raise no Anxiety in me, So Sing the Birds of Paradise* These are Notes
for them that would indeed be, The Angels of the Churches.

Let us now make some Improvement of these Things.

But we will Improve them, ^st with Some DEMANDS upon the Conscience of every
Hearer in this Host of GOD.

Demand. I. An Interest in the great SAVIOR, and His Favor, how greatly
should it be Esteemed of? Surely, O Needy-Man, To have this Lord of Hosts for
thy Friend: This is the best Thing that can be wished for. Was not that a aerie
Reasonable Triumph? Ps. XLVI.2, 7. We will not fear though the Earth be Removed,
and the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea. The Lord of Hosts is
with us! My Friends, If the Lord of Hosts be your Friend, have you not the
Friendship of One, who can employ all the Creatures in the World, for your
Welfare at His pleasure? Have you not the Friendship of One, who can give His
Angels Charge concerning you, and send you such Helpers as can remove
Mountains? Have you not the Friendship of one who, if you had no created
Comforters, which of themselves are but miserable ones, is Able of Himself, by
His own Immediate Hand, sufficiently to relieve you? Can you ask for more than
The Lord of Hosts can do for you! Yea, cannot such a Friend as He, do for you,
far above all that you can Ask or Think? They that are assured of having the
Great GOD our SAVIOR, [for indeed, no less an one is or can be our SAVIOR!]
for their Friend, may not they well make their Boast in Him, and say, My Spirit
has Rejoiced in GOD my SAVIOVR! Were not they in the Right of it, who said, O
God of Hosts, Cause thy Face to Shine, and we shall be Saved. But then, Will
you not all now, with all possible Importunity, seek an Interest in the
Friendship of such a SAVIOR? Was there ever made, a Wiser, and Better Proposal
than that? Zech. VIII.21. Let us go speedily to Seek the Lord of Hosts. Will
you not make it your Prayer and your Cry unto your SAVIOR; O Lord, Look upon
me, and be Merciful unto me! Will Not you Mourn for that you have Offended Him,
and Beg for the Smiles and Shines of His Face upon you, and Entreat His Face
with your whole Heart, Saying, O be Merciful unto me, according to thy Word;
and most Heartily, Thankfully, Joyfully Embrace Him as your Offered SAVIOR;
and approve your selves His Friends, by doing what He has Commanded you?
Certainly Here is nothing proposed, but what is infinitely to be complied
withal.

Them. II. If you are the Despisers of the Great SAVIOR, and will go on in
Sinning against Him, What can remain for you, but a certain fearful Expectation
of the Fiery Indignation that is to Devour the Adversaries? ^s there no Terror
in that Word? Zech. VII.12. There came a Great Wrath from the Lord of Hosts.
Ought you not Effectually to be dissuaded from all Contempt of your SAVIOR,
and all Neglect of His Great Salvation, Knowing this Terror of the Lord? If the
Lord of Hosts be your Enemy, will not the Hosts of the Lord all be so too? But
will not the Least of all the Creatures be too hard for you, if they come
against you A^ed from their Lord? When you find such Little, Sorry, and scare
Visible Insects, inexpressibly Troublesome; a poor Moschito enough
insupportably to Trouble you; Nothing so small but what may be big enough to
plague an Egyptian! Is here not this Lesson from the Lord of Hosts unto you;
How easily could I ease my self of my Enemy* and Avenge me of my Adversaries!
Yea, It Is from Later Discoveries very much Conjectured, That the Mortal
Diseases which do the part of Destroyers on the Sinful Children of Men, are
commonly produced by amazing Hosts of Living Things, whereof many Myriads
together, would not Occupy the Space of a small Grain of Sand! Amazing Hosts of
these very Little Things, are sent among the Sinful Children of Men, and, Lo,
we cannot ^tand before them. Our Blood is verm^culated, and our Life
Extinguished! How then would (...) Stand before the Angels, that E^l in
Strength? One of whom ca^ at once thunderstrike to Death more than one hundred
and fourscore Assyrians? Don't you imagine that they stand ready, full of
burning Displeasure against those who are Disaffected unto their Lord, and
saying* Shall I Smite them, O Lord, Shall I Smite them! Yea, But then, What
will you do, When the Lord of Hosts Himself shall appear, and make b^e His Own
Arm, to take Vengeance on ^ou?

Will you go into the Clifts of the Rocks, and into the Tops of the Ragged
Rocks, for fear of the Lord, and for the Glory of His Majesty? Or can any thing
shelter you from the Lord of Hosts, when that Word shall be fulfilled; Zech.
XIV.17. A punishment for them that will not Worship the Lord of Hosts? Truly,
'Twill be a Fearful thing to fall into the Hands of that Living GOD, the Lord
of Hosts. O Sinners, Will you not humble your selves before Him, and say* O
Lord of Hosts, I will not offend any more?

Them. III. Since our SAVIOR is the Lord of Hosts, ought you not seriously to
consider the Providence of your SAVIOR, in all that befa^s you? Have you to do
with any Creatures, which don't belong to His Hosts? Or can Creatures do any
thing to you, but what is Commanded by the Lord of Hosts? Of a very common
Occurrence in Humane Life, we read; Isa. XXVIII 29. This also comes from the
Lord of Hosts. Would it be any thing but what ought to be, if upon whatever
Occurs, you may say, This also comes from the Lord of Hosts; These Creatures
come to me on Errands from my SAVIOVR.

Them. IV. Since our SAVIOR is the Lord of Hosts, ought you not presently to
give the best Entertainment that you can unto such a SAVIOR? It is required,
Lift up your Heads ye Gates, and be ye Lifted up, ye Everlasting Doors, that
the King of Glory may come in* When it is declared, This King of Glory is the
Lord of Hosts, it is taken for granted, that He will not be Refus^d; How can
such an one be Refused? O^ our Gospellized People, your SAVIOR would make you
Temples of GOD. For that purpose, He now s^^e, Rev. ^I.20. Behold, I Stand at
the Door, and Knock, if any one will open to me. He says, O Give me thy Heart.
Consent that thy SAVIOVR ^ake p^ssession of thee, and make thee feel all His
Gracious Influences. Well; O ye Gates, O ye Everlasting Doors, Will you remain
Shut upon your SAVIOR? What? Upon the Lord of Hosts? Oh! No, Say, Come in thou
Blessed Lord; why stand thou without? How justly may a Refusal bring this
upon you; that the Lord of Hosts will Shut His Heavenly Mansions on you? Yea,
Be it known unto you! Your SAVIOR now waits for an Admission into your Souls.
The Lord of Hosts would be Entertained there. If the Earth with its Bars about
you, make you deny Him an Entrance there, the Hour is not far off, when you
will with the Groans of a deadly wounded Man, Cry unto Him, Lord, Lord, Open to
me, Oh! Set open to me the Gates of the Righteous Nation. But by your Hard
Hearts you now bespeak from Him that Repulse; As I called and you would not
hear, so you shall now Cry, and I will not hearken to you.

D^m. V. If you con^i^ in Rebellion against your SAVIOR; I shall no^ Speak
unadvisedly, when I say unto you. Hear ye Rebels against the Lord of Hosts!
Whom will you have to bear you Company in it? Look round about you throughout
the Universe. You see nothing any where, but the Hosts of the Lord; Hosts ready
to Obey their Lord; Concerning the most Boisterous, and Irregular and
Exorbitant, and Ungovernable of them all, you are told, Psalm. CXLVIII.8. They
fulfill His Word, O you that Rebel against your SAVIOR, where, where will you
find any Companions in your Disobedience? Alas, you must go down to Hell for
them; you have none but the Devils for your Companions. What? Are you willing
to take your portion with the Devil and his Angels? O Children of Disobedience,
Come to a better Mind, Go not on still in your Trespasses. Come and Li^t under
the Banner of your SAVIOR.

But it is time for me to let you know, that I ^m ^w Armed with Considerations,
which will be of the greatest Importance to a New Host, that are this Da^
Marshalling with a Profession to be an Host of GOD. A Considerable Number of
our Neighbors, Even an Host of them, appear this Day in a Distinct Body,
Professing their Desire to be reckoned among those Hosts, which have a
Dependence on the Great GOD our SAVIOR, as their Lord, and their GOD. And some
Words of Command from the Lord of Hosts, are to be brought unto them.

We will not this Day Fast for, or with Strife and Debate: And therefore I will
make no Remarks on the Disputed Occasion of their Coalition: I will not go to
Dig up any Matters, that I wish, may be buried in perpetual Oblivion: buried
with an Hope of never having any Resurrection. I will only Remark This; That
they have been a People, not so well dealt withal as they might have been: And
how far they might themselves have dealt better in the Days of Massah, and of
Meribah, that have passed over them, I hope, they will th^s Day Search and
Judge themselves before the Lord. The sad and wrong Things that have Occurred
in the Clash that has produced what we now have before us, and in what
Introduced it, though Strangers, even they that are afar off, have been
Scandalized at them, yet they should not b^ construed as the Blemish of all our
Churches; in which the Order of the Gospel has generally been Maintained, with
some Decency and Cogency, from the Beginning to this Day. The Lord of Hosts has
Hitherto, even Hitherto, Stepped in for the Help of His Churches, and they have
generally Walked in the Fear of GOD, and Comfort of the Holy Spirit; and with a
due Regard unto mutual Edification and Satisfaction to this Day. One may say,
Generally, though there should be some Exception, It Is true, there appears now in
several parts of the Country, a fearful Tendency to break in upon the Order of
the Gospel, which has been Asserted and Enjoyed in these American Churches; And
it has a Melancholy Aspect upon us, that the Corrputions of Men are grown so
Headstrong, as to render it not Easy to propose a Method for Cur^, in which
the Remedy may not anon prove worse than the Malady. Alas, Through the Wrath of
the Lord of Hosts, how fast the Land is Darkning! However, if People will go on
to deal unjustly in what should be a Land of Vprightness, and will not behold,
or believe, the Majesty of the Lord, and the Churches are so little in Frame,
that they cannot or will not attend their Duty, it is not unlikely, that the
Glorious Lord of Hosts may Interpose with Immediate and Astonishing Operations
of His Providence, and be Terrible in His Holy Places, and make all the
Churches to know, that He takes notice of what is done among them* His Churches
will still be Terrible as Armies with Banners, when the Lord of Hosts, will
please to come down among them, and His Works, and the Operations of His Hands,
make them feel, that for their offenses, instead of Building them up, He will
Distress them, and Humble them, and multiply the Tokens of His Burning
Indignation upon them. Ah, my poor Neighborhood, what, what, will thou See the
Lord of Hosts do unto thee: what will thou see when the Day of thy Watchmen
comes upon thee! But from the Experience of this Unhappy Neighourhood, I am
Sure, there is one Thing, which they that have Ears to hear, should hear as a
Thing Spoken by the Spirit unto all the Churches. It Is this; A Day of Temptation
will prove a Day of Confusion to them that have it brought upon them. A Dark
and an Hot Strife, But, Oh! what will those Two Qualites make an Emblem of!
Such a Strife; with all the Cursed offspring of it, will cause the Sun to go
down at Noon in such a Day. Most Wisely our Glorious LORD has taught us to make
that Petition, O Our Father, Lead us not into Temptation. With much Wisdom has
He Charged us, Watch and Pray, that ye Enter not into Temptation. If you are so
Watchful as to discern a Day of Temptation begun, O Stop, Stay, make a Pause;
desist for a while from any further proceeding; and with a Prayerful Patience,
wait for an Issue which the Lord of Hosts, will Guide the Meek unto.

But, you my Neighbors, that are this da^ Coming into the Shape of an Host for
the GOD of Armies, are now to suffer a Word of Exhortation.

This Day will be a Testimony for the Ministers of the Gospel, who with heavy
Cares, and many Tears, and much Trembling are Laboring among you. Though the
Malignities and Indignities and Scurrilities with which the Tongues and Pens of
so many in the Town, are continually Mal-treating of them, are what they are,
and our God knows what they are! which it is well, if they do not help to ripen
the Town for a Wrath to the Uttermost: Yea, and though the highest Professors of
Religion, do Practically seem to cast off the Sense of much Relation to them:
Yet their Conduct, this Day, as well as at all times will testify for them,
that they have nothing at Heart So much as This nay, nothing But This! That
Religion may flourish among You, and the Lord of Hosts have His due
Acknowledgments. Though their Advice be never so Little Regarded, though their
Interest be never so much Impaired. Yet, they can Cheerfully over^ook all
Discouragements, and if a Glorious CHRIST may be duly adhe^r'd unto, this is
All that they are concerned for. Certainly, They deserve that their Exhortation
should have some Attention given to it. Or, if they do not, I am Sure, He that
Employs them, does; The Lord of Hosts, by whom they are Employed, is worthy to
have His Word, which they bring unto you, very Seriously attended unto.

I Remember a passage, in Psalm. CX.3. thus to ^e translated; In the Day of thy
Marshalling thy Forces for thy Work, thy People shall ^hen appear with
Free Will Offerings, in the Beauty, of Holiness. My Neighbors, This is the
Day, in which we See Marshalling those Forces, which make a Profession for the
Work, which the Lord of Hosts would have to be done in His Churches among us.
O^! may it be a Day, wherein you shall all prove your selves the willing People
of the Lord; a People wherein you shall present your selves, and your All, as
well as This House unto the Lord. All Free Will Offerings! And from this Day,
may the Beautie^ of Holiness always be found upon you. I Supose, there is not
in all the Land a more Beautiful House Built for the Worship of GOD, than
This, whereof you now appear to make a Dedication to the Lord. But what will it
Signify, if the Beauties of Holiness be wanting? The Holiness which become the
House of God forever* Oh! That all the Persons which are to meet here, and all
the Performances that are to be made here, may always have the Beauties of
Holiness adorning of them

Wherefore, From the Lord of Hosts, and in His Name, there are Some orders to
be more briefly Served upon you.

In the First Place, You cannot be Insensible, that the First thing you have to
Look to, i^, That you approve your selves, even your very Hearts as Upright
before the Lord of Hosts, in what you do, when you Say, That you are Building
for Him. Verily, The Lord of Hosts* He is ^ God of Knowledge, and by Him
Actions are Weighed; He walks in the midst of His Churches* His Eyes penetrate
Like the Lightning; and He will make all the Churches to know, that He Searches
the Hearts. Beware, Oh! Beware, of being acted by Corrupt Principles, when you
seem to have the Zeal of the House of God acting of you. You have Lived, where
you have heard those Maxims, Pride goes before Destruction; And, The wrath of
Man works not the Righteousness of God. Guard well against such and all Corrupt
Principles; For, if these are the Secret Springs of your Motions, Does not He
that ponders the Heart, Consider it? And He that preserves thy Soul, does He
not know it? And will not He render to every Man according to his works?

GOD has from a Flaming Mountain, with a Voice of Thunder declared, That He
will not hold them Guiltless who take His Name in vain. When His Name is put
upon Vain Undertakings, and is used merely to gratify Vanity, then do men
Egregiously take His Name in Vain. Wherefore I repeat the Counsel, Take heed
unto your Spirit. The Jews have a saying, Every Church that is built for the
Glory of GOD shall be Established* Christians may accept and improve the
Saying. Oh! See to it, that an Aim at the Glory of GOD, and the Service of His
CHRIST, and of His Kingdom, Ly at the Bottom of your Proceedings. This is a
Thing to be inculcated with the more of Solicitude, Because people must have a
Regenerating, Rectifying, Sanctifying Work of GOD upon their Minds, before they
will come really to act upon such Holy Principles. A Carnal Mind will not get
above Corrupt Principles! The Jet d'eau's of a Carnal Mind can rise no higher.
There is a Mavelous Reciprocation in the Matter. If the Glory of GOD be your
End, You Live to GOD. You will not make the Glory of GOD your End, until you
come into the Life of GOD. First come sincerely to say, The Lord* is my GOD;
Then you will come suitably to say, I will prepare Him an Habitation!
Wherefore, Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Consider your Ways.

As a further Expression of Godliness, and of Godly Sincerity, in your
Undertaking, you must always keep up a Lively Remembrance of This, That the
Lord of Hosts has his Eye upon you, in all that is done among you. The Awe of
that Glorious Eye, must keep a powerful and perpetual Restraint upon you, and
prevent all Disorders among you. The Lord of Hosts Looking on; This must cause
you to March Regularly, make every one keep his Rank, and Suppress all
Approaches to Mutinies.

But I cannot be a Faithful Messenger, if I do not put you in mind of This,
That the Lord of Hosts will Expect it from you, that you keep Close to His
Word, in all the Administrations of His House among you. If Humane Inventions,
or any parts or means of Worship not Instituted by the Lord of Hosts, are
brought in, to the prejudice of the Divine Institutions among you, the Temple
of GOD will be defiled. A Jealous GOD so provoked, will be gone, will go far
away, from the polluted Sanctuary. Upon your Loyalty to the Lord of Hosts in
this point, will turn your Enjoyment of His Gracious Presence among you. The
Second as well as the Third Commandment stands as a flaming Sword in the Hand
of the Lord of Hosts, to terrify you from all Sinful Deviations.

And while you pay just Regards to the Word of your SAVIOR, how comfortably
may you Look up to the Lord of Hosts, to give you such a Dispenser of His Word,
as may be a Pastor after His own Heart, that shall feed you with Knowledge and
Understanding. Such an one must be among the Gifts of that Ascended Lord, who
has the Chariots of GOD in His Holy Place about Him. And He will bestow Good
Gifts upon them that Ask Him for them: Yea, for the Rebellious also!

In fine; We can press nothing so much as This upon you, That you do all that
you can, to obtain it, and secure it, That the Lord of Hosts may afford you His
Gracious Presence, and that you Shun Every Thing that may forfeit it. Happy,
Happy are you, if you may have that Word from Heaven to you; Be Strong, and
Work; For I am with you, says the Lord of Hosts.

Now that you may be so, Think very much on that Word, 2 Chronicles. XV. 2. The Lord
is with you, while you are with Him

I have done, when I have said; When those Words were spoken by the Prophet of
GOD, it seems, he had his Father then Living and present in the Assembly with
Him. It Is ^y Faelicity, that you see Mine this Day in this Assembly. And now
inasmuch as your Society does very much consist of such as have Lived, Oh! that
we could say, Lived unto God! under our Ministry, and we are now so parting
with you, that we shall never have another Opportunity of speaking to you as we
have done, in the Name of our GOD; I will take this Opportunity on his behalf
as well as my own, to take a Final and a proper Farewell of you. When our dear
SAVIOR was within a Few Minutes of His Death, we read, Many of them, who
attended on His Ministry, Went away and walked no more with Him. A very Great
Withdraw from our Ministry many may think it will be a Trouble to us; and if we
were not used unto higher Sentiments, than the People who offer i^ (...) be so.
But we have Learn^d CHRIST better than tha^* I do assure you. My Friend^, I
hope you will find it more of a Triumph than of a Trouble to us It Is a
Circumstance, that carries a Strong and a Strange Consola^on in it; That our
(...) to the Royal Priesthood is just (...) in this Addi^ion to the many
Sacrifices, which our Lives have been filled withal* That we have now done with
a World, that has nothing in it worth Sta^ng for; That we are just Entering into
the Joy of our Lord, and are within a Few Weeks of seeing the Best Hour that
ever we saw; and a Glorious CHRIST will become All in All unto us But we Lay
hold on this Opportunity, To Call Heaven and Earth unto Record, that we have
Endeavored Faithfully to Discharge our Duty unto you in the Days when we have
Gone with you unto the House of GOD. Heaven and Earth are Witnesses, How
Studious we have been to Watch for your Souls, and to declare unto you the
Whole Counsel of GOD: How Careful we have been to describe unto you the Things
that accompany Salvation, and so invite you into them, that the Hearty Speaking
of One Word would have Saved you; How Earnest we have been, and in what an
Agony, when we have besought you to be Reconciled unto GOD. The lord of Hosts
has also in His Book of Remembrance kept a Catalogue of the Books, even those
many Hundreds, Yea, Thousands, which with no small Expense, we have Lodged in
your Houses, as Instruments of Piety, to Converse with you, out of our Visits,
as well as in them. For the Pardon of what has been Defective in our
Discharging of our Ministry, we fly to the Great SACRIFICE; But yet, O Glorious
Lord of Hosts, Thou know, for thou gave it! -- the Fidelity which we have
Endeavored. But, my Friends, If any of you have not, and I Freely tell you, We
see much cause to Fear, and we tell you weeping, that many have not, been all
this while brought home to GOD by our Ministry; If any of you are yet in your
Sins, and must be so miserable after all as to Die in your Sins; If any of you
must be dropped out of that Number, which will be our Crown of Rejoicing in the
presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at His Coming; We Call Heaven and Earth to
Record; It is ^ot because you have not been faithfully Warned by the Servants
of GOD, who are now parting with (...) Children, what could we have done more,
to have done you Good, and gat^ you under the Wings of our Lovely SAVIOR?
Certainly, We shall give up our Account with Joy.

Our Desire and Prayer shall be That you may do so too.

We Can Say no more!

THE LORD JESUS Walking in the midst of the CHURCHES. A SERMON Preached in the
New Brick Meeting House, in Middle-street, Boston, May 10. 1721. Which was kept
as a Day of Fasting and Prayer, (Being the first time of Public Worship there)
by the SOCIETY which Built the House; and is now Published at their Desire.

By Benjamin Wadsworth, A. M. Pastor of a Church of Christ in Boston, N. E.

Rev. 2.23. All the Churches shall know that I am he which searches the Reins
and Hearts; and I will give unto every one of you according to your Works.

Boston, Printed for Robert Starkey. 1721.

THE LORD JESUS Walking in the midst of the CHURCHES.
Rev. 2.1. Unto the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, write these things, says
he tha^ holds the Seven Stars in his Right Hand; who walks in the midst of
the Seven Golden Candlesticks.


THe First Man Adam was made Holy and Upright, but through the Instigation of the
Devil, (that Murderer and L^r from the Beginning. Joh. 8.44.) he soon Sinned
against GOD: He Apostatized from, and Rebelled against his Glorious Maker; and
thereby laid himself open to his Wrath; for the Wages of Sin is Death. Romans
6.23. Yea, all his Posterity were Involved in the sin and guilt of this first
and grand Apostasy. By one man's disobedience, many were made sinners. Romans
12.19. In Adam all die (1 Cor. 15.21) they are Children of wrath by Nature. Ephesians.
2.3. The only begotten eternal Son of God, our blessed Lord Jesus Christ, was
manifested to destroy the works of the Devil. 1 John 3.8. He came to Save his
people from their Sins; from all Iniquity, to purify 'em, and make 'em zealous
of good works, (Mat. 1.21. Tit. 2.14.) to redeem 'em from the Curse, (Gal. 3.3)
to deliver 'em from the wrath to come, (1 These. 1.10.) and to bring them to
God, (1 Pet. 3.18.) in whose presence is fullness of Joy, and Pleasures for
evermore. Psalm. 16.11. It is the will of this glorious Savior, (who is King in
Sion, and whom we should ^ear in all things (Ps. 2.6. Acts 3.22.) that his
Disciples, Subjects, Followers should be Baptized, and taught to observe all
things whatsoever he has commanded, Mat. 28.19, 20. And his will and command
is, that they should assemble together in a stated way, to worship God
according to the rules of his Word; walking in all the Ordinances and
Commandments of the Lord blameless. Heb. 10.35. Luke 1.6. By reason of the
greatness of their number, and distance of their Habitations, they cannot all
assemble for Religious Worship in one and the same place. It is necessary
therefore, that they should meet in many distinct Companies or Assemblies, to
attend that Religious Worship which is prescribed to them. Such distinct
Companies or Assemblies of Worshipping Christians, are sundry times in the New
Testament, called Churches. Thus we read of the Churches of Judea (Gal. 1.21.)
Galatia (1 Cor. 16.1.) and of the Churches throughout all Judea, Galilee, and
Samaria. Acts 9.31. There were Seven such Churches in Asia, they are mentioned
by name. Rev. 1.11. When the Apostle John was banished into the Isle of Patmos
for the Word of God, and Testimony of Jesus; he had a very glorious, dazzling,
amazing Vision of the Son of God, the Lord Christ, who directed him to write
his mind and will to those Seven Churches of Asia. An Account of this glorious
Vision, we have in the first Chapter of this Book, containing our Text. In this
Vision John saw seven Golden Candlesticks, and in the midst of them one like
the Son of M^n (chapter 1.v.12, 13.) it was the Lord Jesus, who thus appeared in
the midst of those Candlesticks, and those Candlesticks are Interpreted to mean
or signify, the Seven Churches. v. 20. The Lord Jesus is set forth in our
Text, as sending a Message to the Angel of the Church of Ephesus; and the Lord
is here described, 1 As holding the Seven Stars, (that is, the Angels or
M^nisters of the Churches, Rev. 1.20.) in his right hand. 2. As walking in the
midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks, that is, the several Churches: It is
the latter part of the description, that is to be the Subject of our present
Discourse, viz. Christ's walking in the midst of the Seven Golden Candlesticks.

DOCTRINE. The Lord Jesus Christ walks in the midst of his Churches, which are
compared to Golden Candlesticks.
Here are three PROPOSITIONS. viz. 1. The Churches of Christ are compared to
Candlesticks. 2. To Candlesticks of Gold. 3. The Lord Jesus walks in the midst
of them.

Prop. 1. The Churches of Christ are compared to Candlesticks. Their being
compared to Candlesticks, may probably be in allusion to the Seven Lamps or
Lights, that were in the Golden Candlestick in the Tabernacle of old. That
Golden Candlestick had seven Lamps to give light, Exodus 25.37. Numb. 8.2. The
Churches of Christ may be compared to Candlesticks.

1. From their receiving of Light. If we consider a Candlestick, as to the
substance and matter of which it is made; it has no inlightning quality or
efficacy, but it is, adapted or fitted to receive Light, to receive a lighted
Candle that is put into it: it has no light but what it receives. So all the
true Churches, the true Followers of Christ, they receive light from him. As
future Glory is called the Inheritance of the Saints in light, (Col. 1.12.) So
the Saints themselves while here on Earth, are called the Children of light;
they are enlightened ones. 1 These. 5.5. Ye are all the children of the light,
and the children of the day; we are not of the night, nor of darkness. And from
whence have the Saints and Churches of Christ their light, their knowledge and
understanding in Spiritual Divine Things? Why, they have it from Christ
himself! He is the true Light, which lights every man that comes into the
world, Joh. 1.9. Christ is the bright and morning Star, Rev. 22.16. The Day
spring from on high, Luke 1.7, 8. the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2. He is the
great Inlightener of the World, none teaches like him. He makes known saving
truths to his people, delivering them from that darkness, blindness, ignorance
that was in them. Ephesians. 5.8. For ye were sometimes darkness, but now are light
in the Lord; walk as Children of light. The Lord Jesus gives, or communicates
Light to his People.

1. By His written word. Of Old, God at Sundry times and in diverse manners,
made known his mind and will. Heb. 1.1. but the revelations of his will
concerning the Saving of Sinners, are now committed to Writing; and are
contained in that Book, which by way of eminency is called the Bible, and Holy
Scriptures. The Holy Scriptures are compared to a Light, and Lamp, Psalm.
119.105. To a Light shining in a Dark place. 2. Pet. 1.19^ Those who live in
this dark World, if they Believe, Profess, Practice as the Bible teaches and
directs them; they shall be Saved forever. For the Holy Scriptures are able to
make wise to Salvation through Faith in Christ Jesus 2. Tim. 3.15. Well, the
Scriptures as they testify of, or concerning Christ, Joh. 5.39. So they are
the word of Christ. Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly. Col. 3.16. All
Scripture is given by Inspiration of God; the Spirit of God, of Jesus Christ,
Infallibly guided those who wrote the Scripures, to show men the way to Heaven.
It Is therefore a great and distingushing favor, to have Gods Oracles, his
Word, Statutes, Judgments committed unto us. Psalm. 147.19, 20. Romans 3.2. to
have this gracious method taken, for the guiding our feet in the way of peace.

2. By his Ministers Preaching his Word. All true Ministers of the Gospel, are
the Ministers of Christ. Stewards of the mysteries of God. 1. Cor. 4.1. they
are Christ's Gift for the good of men, Ephesians. 4.11, 12. they are his Ambassadors,
2. Cor. 5.20. they go on his Errand, are to declare his mind by preaching his
Word. 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the word, be instant in season, out of season, rebuke,
reprove, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine. When Ministers faithfully
preach the Word, the Word of God; when they teach, exhort, rebuke, comfort,
agreeably to the Holy Scriptures; then by them Christ is giving and
communicating Light to those under their Ministration.

3. By his Holy Spirit. The third Person in the ever blessed Trinity, is the
Spirit of the Father and of the Son. All that shall be Saved, are efficaciously
Enlightened and renewed by this Spirit of Christ. They are not only taught
Externally by the Word, but Internally by the Spirit of Christ To them it is
given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven (that is, in a Saving
manner) but to others it is not given, Matt 13.11. Christ not only taught his
Disciples by word of mouth, or by Speaking to them, but he also opened their
understandings to understand the Scriptures, Luke 24.45. All true beleivers,
are Internally and efficaciously taught by the Spirit of Christ, so as savingly
to understand Divine revealed Truths; when Paul Preached, the Lord opened
Lydia's Heart rightly to entertain his Doctrine, Act. 16.16. There was Christ's
Minister teaching Externally, and his Spirit teaching Internally. Hence all
true Saints, are said to walk after the Spirit, and to be led by the Spirit,
Romans 8.1, 14. As the Churches of Christ may be compared to Candle-Candlestick,
for their receiving of Light. So they may,

2. For their holding or retaining it. A person may take a lighted Candle in
his Hand, and soon put it away again; but when it is put into a Candlestick, the
design commonly is, that it should there abide and continue giving Light. Well,
as the Churches of Christ receive light from him, so they should retain it,
hold it fast; They should Buy the Truth and Sell it not, also Wisdom, and
Instruction and Understanding, Prove. 23.23. They should get as much Spiritual
light and knowledge as they can; and keep it as a most precious Treasure* Hold
fast the form of sound words, which thou have heard of me in Faith and Love,
which is in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 1.13. They should not be Children tossed to
and fro by every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4.^4. Be not carried about with diverse
and strange Doctrines, Heb. 13.9. The Apostle Paul directed, that Ministers
should hold fast the faithful word as they had been taught, (that they might
the better teach others to do so too) Tit. 1.^. He himself ^d so, and said, 2 Timothy 4.7* I have kept the Faith. It was part of the commendation given by
Christ to the Angel of the Church in Pergamus, Rev. 2.13. Thou hold fast my
Name, and have not denied my Faith. Rev. 3.3. Remember therefore how thou have
received, and heard, and hold fast. The Churches of Christ, should retain, hold
fast, all those Truths and Doctrines which are contained in the Holy
Scriptures; they should not set them go, should not corrupt them, should not
change them for Errors, and Heresies; nor suffer them to be depraved by
mixtures thereof if they can help it. Act. 16.5. So were the Churches
established in the Faith. Again, Churches may be compared to Candlesticks,

3. On the account of their holding forth of light. Our Savior said Matt.
5.15. Neither do men light a Candle and put it under a ^ushel, but on a
Candlestick; and it gives light to all that are in the House. As the Churches
receive light from Christ, even the revealed truths of God; So they should hold
them forth by professing them, Endeavoring that others also may understand
them. With the mouth confession is made. Romans 10.10. they should confess Christ
and his truths before men. 1. Tim. 3.15. The Church of the living God, the
Pillar and ground of the truth. Edicts or Procalmations, are some times fastened
on Posts and Pillars, that they may be read by those that pass by; Churches
should be as ready to exhibit light, even the knowledge of the things of God,
This they should do.

1. By their Ministers (whom they have chosen) Preaching the truth^ of Christ.
These things command and teach. 1 Timothy 4.11. Ministers should be faithful men,
able to teach others. 2 Timothy 2.2. And they should teach or preach the Word,
viz. of Christ, as was said but now. 2. Timo. 4 2. Ministers in Churches are
called Stars, Rev. 1.20. They should Shine, should be burning and shining
lights; they should Inlighten others. Matt. 5.14. Ye are the light of the
World, a City set on an Hill, cannot be hid.

2. In their Conversation. They should exhibit light to others in the Examples
they set before them, even in conforming their behavior to the Word of Christ
which is a light. Phil. 2.15, 16. that ye may be blameless and harmless, the
Sons of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation,
among whom ye shine as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life,
Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glori^e your Father which is in heaven, 1 Pet. 2.12. Having your
conversation honest among the Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as
evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorify God
in the day of visitation. The Churches of Christ should shine in good works, in
all holy conversation and godliness.

3. In their Discipline. An holy Discipline should be upheld in the Churches of
Christ, they should put difference between the clean and unclean* Have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them, Ephesians.
5.11. If any man obey not our word by this Epistle, note that man, and have no
company with him, that he may be ashamed, 2 These. 3.14. It was the commendation
of the Angel of the Church of Ephesus, Rev. 2.2. Thou can not bear them that
are evil. Our Savior with a Scourge of small cords, drove several out of the
Temple, who practiced disorderly there, John 2.17. Therefore put away from
among your selves that wicked person, 1 Cor. 5.13. See also Romans 16.17. 1 Cor.
5.11. A man that is an heretic, after the first and second admonition reject,
Tit. 3.20. Those in Churches, that are heretical, or scandalous in life, if
they will not be reclaimed by proper means used with them, should be
Excommunicated, Mat. 18.17. Again,

4. Candlesticks are removable things, they may be taken from one place and set
in an other^, So the Church State and Privileges of this or that partiuclar
People or Society, may possibly be taken from them. Rev. 2 5. Repent and do
thy first works, or else I will come unto the quickly, and will remove thy
Candlestick out of it is place, except thou Repent. q. e. Repent and reform,
else I will soon unchurch you, you shall cease from being in a Church State,
and having the Privileges thereof. Those who wickedly pervert and abuse their
Church State and Privileges, are in danger of loseing them. What said our Lord
to the Jews, Matt. 21.41 The Kingdom of Heaven shall be taken from you, and
given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits thereof. Abused mercies are often
withdrawn* those lifted as it were to Heaven in Privileges, may be as
Remarkably cast down and punished for abusing them.

Having thus showed in a few hints, that Churches may be compared to
Candlesticks. We proceed to*

Prop. 2. They are compared to Candlesticks of Gold; they are, or should be,
Golden Candlesticks. Their being compared to Gold, may note their purity and
preciousness 1. Their purity. The Candlestick in the Tabernacle, was called the
pure Candlestick, Le. 24.4. It was made of pure Gold, Exo 25.31^ It was Gold
that had no base alloy or mixture in it. So, the Churches of Christ should be
pure. They should be pure in their Doctrine, their Faith; believing,
professing, and (by their Ministers) teaching agreeably to the Holy Scriptures.
They should not teach for doctrines the commandments of men. Mat 15.4. nor
corrupt the Word of God, 2 Cor. 2.17. They should be pure in their Worship;
Worshipping of God in spirit and in truth, John 4.24. and making Gods Word their
Rule, even in the whole external part of Worship. They should as far as
possible, do all things according to the Pattern in the Mount. They should
carefully avoid Humane Inventions, and Impositions in the Worship of God. If
men lift up their tool on Gods Altar, in fashioning of it, they pollute it,
Exo. 20.25. Churches should keep close to Scripture rule, Lev. 18.4. Ye shall
do my Judgments and keep mine Ordinances, to walk therein, I am the Lord your
God. Jer. 11.4. Obey my voice and do them, according to all that I command you;
so shall ye be my people, and I will be* your God. We should walk in all the
Ordinances and commandments of the Lord blameless, Luke 1.6. bu^ our fear
toward him, should not be taught by the precepts of men, Isa. 20.13. In
worshipping of God the holy Scriptures are a sufficient Rule, they ought not to
add to it, nor detract from it; they should to the law and to the testimony as
the Rule, Isa. 8.20 All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is
profitable for doctrine, for rep^oof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness; that the man of God man be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works. 2 Timothy 3.16 They should be pure in their Conversation; having clean
hands, pure hearts, cleansing themselves from all filthiness of flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. As he who has
called them is holy, so they should be holy in all manner of conversation, 1
Pet. 1.15. They should be pure also in their Discipline, as was hinted before.
Candlesticks often contract that filth, or those spots, which should be rubbed
off and done away. So, if any in the Churches of Christ, are a reproach and
scandal to their holy profession; those Churches should bear due testimony
against them. As the Churches of Christ should be pure in their doctrine,
worship, conversation, discipline; ^o (...) may be compared to Gold, with
resp^ct,

2. To their preciousness. We know, that Gold is commonly much set by, much
valued and esteemed, reckoned to be of great worth, very excellent and
precious. Hence we have those phrases Ezra. 8.27. precious as Gold. Isa. 13.12.
More precious than fine gold -- than the golden wedge of Ophir. Well, the
Churches of Christ, his People, his Saints, they are precious and valuable in
his sight, Isa. 43.4. Since thou wast^ precious in my sight, thou have been
honorable, and I have loved thee. Christ's people, are a peeuliar treasure to
him above all people. Exodus 19.5. The Lord has chosen Jacob to himself, and
Israel for his peculiar treasure. Psalm. 135.4. His people are his Jewels, M^l.
3.17 Yea, they are dear and precious to him as the Apple of his eye, Zech 2.8.
When his Churches, his People, his Saint walks in his Ways, observe his
Commandments to do them; then he is glorified in and by them, he takes pleasure
in them, and will be more choice and careful of them, than any man in the world
is of his treasures of Gold. The Lords People are precious in his sight, highly
valued, esteemed, and cared for by him. He is pleased with them, and with their
sincere Duties too. Their Faith is more precious than Gold. 1 Pet. 1.7. Their
faith is more pleasing to Christ, as well as more profitable to themselves,
than any gold could possibly be to any. So, he takes pleasure in them that fear
him, in them that hope in his mercy. Psalm. 147.11. A meek and quiet spirit, is
in God's sight of great price. 1. Pet. 3.4. The prayer of the Upright is his
delight, Prove. 15.8. Christ says to his Spouse, Cant. 2.14. Let me see thy
Countenance, let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance
is comely. Sincere Saints, and all their sincere Services, are precious,
desirable, delightful to the Lord Jesus; he is more pleased with them than men
are with their richest treasures, and will be more careful to preserve their
persons from destructive evils.

Having showed, that the Churches of Christ are compared to Candlesticks, yea,
to Golden Candlesticks, we may proceed to

Pro. 3. The Lord Jesus walks in the midst of them. The Lord Jesus is God as
well as man, and so is every where present; fills Heaven and Earth, (Jer.
23.24.) cannot be Included in any place, nor Excluded out of any. But his
walking in the midst of his Churches, the Golden Candlesticks; may Intimate to
us,

1. That he is wakeful and watchful, Walking, is not a posture of Sleepiness or
Drowziness, Psalm. 121.3, 4 He that keeps thee will not slumber. Behold he
that keeps Israel, shall neither slumber nor sleep.

2. That he critically observes his Churches, all of them, all Persons in then*
and all things that concern them. The Eyes of the Lord are in every place,
beholding the evil and the good, Prove. 15.3. He says unto the Churches, I know
thy works* He says, All the Churches shall know, that I am He which searches
the Reins and the Heart, Rev 2.19, 23. He knows the means they have, the
privileges and advantages they have for Spiritual Good* and observes how they
Improve them. He observes whether they are Ignorant or Knowing in the things of
God; whether they are sound or erroneous in their belief; whether they are
sincere or hypocritical in their Profession; whether they seek him in due
order; whether their external and internal Worship, be according to the Rules
of the Gospel; whether their Conversation be Loose and Irregular, or such ^s
becomes the Gospel of Christ. He observes, whether they keep the Faith and
Order of the Gospel; he observes the good they enjoy, the good they do, and
evils they do; also the evils and afflictions which they suffer. He walks among
them, and critically observes and views every thing (of one nature or another)
which concerns them.

3. His taking pleasure in them; if behave themselves well. Persons often walk
for pleasure and delight, in those places which are agreeable and desirable to
them. The Lord takes pleasure in his people, and in their graces; as was showed
under the head of their preciousness, being more precious than Gold. Cant. 4
16. Awake, O north wind, and come thou south, blow upon my Garden; that the
spices thereof may fl^w out: Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his
pleasant fruits. Never did any take so much pleasure in his Garden, and in
eating the best fruits of it; as the Lord does in his sincere Saints, and their
sincere duties.

4. His smiling or frowning on them, according as they do well or ill. He does
not walk among his Churches merely as an idle Spectator, that only observes
them, but does not concern himself any further about them. No, indeed, but he is
ready to help and relieve, or chastize and punish them according to what their
behavior is. 2 Chronicles. 15 2. The Lord is with you, while ye bewith him; and if
ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake
you. The more humbly and closely any Churches walk with Christ, diligently
conforming themselves to his holy Laws and Institutions: So much the more
reason they have to expect his gracious, protecting, supplying presence with
them. He said to the Church of Philadelphia, ver 3.10. Because thou have kept
the word of my patience, I also will kept thee from the hour of temptation,
which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth.
Psalm. 46.5. God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved; God shall help
her, and that right early. What says God of his Vineyard? Isa. 27.3. I the Lord
do keep it, I will water it every moment, lest any hurt it; I will keep it
night and day. Though it is true, that a Churches walking carefully in the ways of
Christ, does not altogether exempt them from sore afflictions and trials; no
fault was mentioned against the Church of Smyrna, yet they were to suffer, to
have tribulation ten days, some of them must be cast into prison, Rev. 2.8, 10.
Yet the more careful they are to please Christ, so much the more reason they
have to expect his protection and favor, as they are a Society; but considered
personally as sincere Saints (if such they are) it is certain, that all things
shall work together for their good. Romans 8.28. And if God be for them, who can
be against them? v. 31. Again, the Lord Jesus walks among his Churches, to
testify against, and to punish those things that are displeasing and provoking
to him. He says, Rev. 2.16.22, 23. Repent, or else I will come unto thee
quickly, and will fight against them with the sword of my mouth. Behold, I will
cast her into a bed, and them that commit Adultry with her into great
tribulation. -- I will give unto every one of you according to your works. The
Lord Jesus has his fan in his hand, he will thro'ly purge his floor: as he will
gather the wheat into his garners; so he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable
fire, Mat. 3.12. If Churches provoke their Holy and Jealous Lord and King, they
may expect ^is terrible Frowns and Judgments on them in this World; as well as
the wicked persons therein his eternal Vengeance in the next, unless true
faith, repentance and reformation prevent the same; for God will render to
every man according to his deeds. Ro^ 2.6. He will bring every work into
Judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
Eccl. 12.14. We must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every
one may receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done,
whether it good or bad. 2 Cor. 5.10.

We may now proceed to some Use of these things, and from what we have heard,
may Infer.

USE I.
That particular Churches are Societies distinct from on another. Though there is
but one Catholic Church, the Mystical Body of Christ; who is Head over all
things to the Church, which is his Body, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Yet particular Churches
which are parts of the Catholic, are Societies distinct from one another. They
are therefore truly called Churches, in the Plural Number; as being Several or
Many in Number. Christ will make the Churches to know, that he searches the
Reins, etc. In the Epistles sent to the Seven Churches of Asia, it is evident
that they were distinct Societies, or Bodies Politic; Some are commended and
no fault found with them, others are commended for some things and blamed for
others. Particular Churches therefore, should observe the Laws of Society
according to Scripture Rule. Though in general, all Christians and Ministers, as
they have opportunity should do good to all men (Gal. 6.10.) yet they are under
Special Ties and Obligations, to those particular Churches they are more
Immediately related to. Ministers should not without Substantial, Weighty and
manifest Reasons, quit those particular Churches they have taken the Pastoral
care and charge of; neither should particular Members of Churches, without the
like Reasons forsake the Church-Society they have voluntarily Joined themselves
to. If Persons don't look upon themselves as Ti'd and Bound by their own free
choice, and voluntary Ing^gements, then humane Societies may soon dissolve and
vanish into nothing. Some are too apt to say a Church is no Prison, therefore
though they have solemnly Covenanted to walk with God, and the Members of this or
that particular Church where they Joined, yet they are at Liberty to go when
and where they please. Indeed it is Senseless and Ridiculous to argue after such
a manner; will nothing but a Prison hold them? has Conscience no Influence to
bind them to their duty? what, because a Church is no Prison, shall they
therefore break their Bonds and Covenant, which of their own choice they freely
and voluntarily brought themselves under? This is for Persons to have no regard
to their word, to their own voluntary Engagements. Thus to Argue and Act in
these matters, I think is a vain trifling with God and Men.

2. Churches and the Members of them, should Walk and Act as knowing they are
under the Eye of Christ. This should restrain them from Sinning, and quicken
them to duty. Very often, the presence of some Serious, Grave man, will be an^w
and restraint to others. How much more should Christ's walking in the mi^^t of
the Churches, and critically Observing of them, restrain them from wickedness,
and quicken them to Holiness? For his Eyes are as a flame of fire. His Eyes
behold, his Eyelids try the Children of m^n. Pal. 11.4. And he ^s of purer Ey^
than to behold evil, and cannot look on Inniquity. H^b 1.13. And he looks not
only on the outward appearance, but also on the Heart, 1 Samuel 16.7. He searches
the Reins and the Hea^ and will give to every one according to his works. Rev.
2.23, ^er. 17.10. He observes every one, the Heart of every one, for this end,
(...) give to him according to ^s work. If among a considerable ^r, there b^ ^t
two or three Sincere S^nts, the Lord Knows, Loves, and will Save them: or if in
such a number ^re be but two or three Hypocrites, the Lord Sees, Abhors, and
will Punish them, it their Repentance prevent not. We should therefore
Endeavor so to order the Thoughts of our Hearts, and the Was of our Mouths,
the Actions of our Lives; as knowing they are under the All-seeing Eye of that
Holy and Glorious Judge, who cannot be deceived and wont be mocked.

3. Churches should Endeavor to be Golden Candlesticks. They should Receive
all the Light they can from Jesus Christ, by studiously and diligently Reading
his Holy Word; Hearing of it Preached, attending on all his Holy Ordinances,
Praying earnestly and constantly for the Influences of his Spirit, and Living
up to the Light they have. They should also Exhibit and hold forth Light to all
about them, by conforming themselves to the Rules of Christ's word. They should
Endeavor to have, maintain, and manifest Purity in Doctrine, Worship,
Conversation and Discipline, Shining as Ligh^s in the World. If you desired the
presence of some kind Friend, would you have those things in his veiw, which
you knew to be offensive to him? surely no, if therefore you would have the
presence of Christ as your Friend, Favourer, Protector; then put away Sin,
allow of nothing among you that is justly offensive to the pure Eyes of his
Glory. Churches should Endeavor to be Golden Candlesticks; and should be
Humble that they have been no more so. May we not here lament and say, as Lam.
4.1. How is the Gold become dim! How is the fine Gold changed! Alas, if
particular persons are considered, is there not much Darkness instead of Light,
in many? How Loose, Ungirt, Unguarded is the Conversation of many; instead of
that Purity, that Light and Holiness which should appear therein? We all have
need to look about our selves, to search and try our ways, to Repent and do the
works God requires of us; lest he come quickly and remove our Candlesticks out
of their places.

4. Those who are about Imbodying themselves into a Church state; should
Endeavor to approve themselves to Christ therein. If they are about to become
a Candlestick of the Lord, they should strive to be a Golden one; they should
approve themselves to the Lord Jesus in the business before them. So it behooves
you to do, w^o are the occasion of our thus Assembling at this time.

To you therefore who have Engaged in the Building of this House, for the
worship of God and administrations of his Holy Ordinances; and have in view,
the Imbodying into a Church state here, to you I would say, 1. Examine your
selves about, and be humble for what has been amiss in your proceedings. We are
but Stewrads of what we possess, we should Employ our Talents, our Estates, all
our Abilities as good Stewards of Gods manifold grace 1 Pet. 4.10. Whether we
eat or drink, or whatever we do, we should do all to the Glory of God. 1 Cor.
10.31. Well have you had Pure, Sincere aims at the Glory of God, in doing what
you have done, and expending the cost you have been at? What you have done in
this matter, has it been really a Sacrifice to God; alluding to that Heb.
13.16. Have you not been too much Swayed by resentments, and by motives which
should not have been so much hearkened to? Have you kept close to the Rules of
Gods Word in what you have done, acted from right principles, and with a
becoming Christian frame and temper? Surely it behooves you, seriously to
consider these things between God and your own Consciences; and so far as you
find you have done amiss in any thing, you ought deeply to humble your selves
before God for it; yea, on this Occasion of coming into a new House, and
setting up a New Congregation; it is very proper that you should as thoroughly as
you can, search into your own hearts and ways, through the whole time of your
past lives; and deeply humble your selves before God for what has been amiss in
them. Ezekiel. 36.31. Then shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings
that were not good; and shall loath your selves in your own sight, for your
Iniquities and for your Abominations. Do not boast of, nor triumph in, what you
have done; that you have Built your House, and brought it to the present
condition it is in; no, but be humble for what has been amiss, and be Thankful
for the Divine smiles that have been afforded.

2. Heartily trust in Christ Jesus for pardon. His Blood cleanses from all
Sin. 1 John 1.7. He that has the Son has Life, he that has not the Son of
God has not Life. 1 John 5.12. As you should heartily Repent of all your Sins,
so you should as heartily and steadfastly Trust in Christ for Pardon; you must
do this, or Perish. Your having a New Meeting House, New Seats, New Pews, can
never Entitle you to the New-Jerusalem, to Mansions in that House of God, not
made with hands, eternal in the heavens; unless you have true heart-purifying
Faith in Christ Jesus. For he that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.16.

3. Strive after the life and power of Godliness. Never content your selves,
with an outward Profession of Religion, nor with outward Performances of it;
such Profession and Performances are Duty, but they should be done in
Sincerity. Therefore see to it, that you get and keep your hearts right with
God. Possibly you will think and be concerned, about what may be thought or said
of you by these or those persons, even by men^; but your great care and*
solicitude should be so to act, not as pleasing men, but God, who tries your
hearts. 1 These. 2.4. Oh think, think most seriously with your selves; that you
have to do with the Holy heart-searching God; who cannot be deceived, and will not
be mocked.

Do as he did. Acts 24.16. Here i^ do I exercise my self to have a Conscience
void of offense toward God (...) toward men.

4. Do your utmost, to maintain and promote true Religion in your Family Be
Religious in your Houses, as well a^ in this House Built for Public Worship.
Don't be so wicked as to live without Secret Prayer any of you^ Mat. 6.6. Enter
into thy Closet, and when thou have shut the door, pray unto thy Father which
is in secret; and thy Father which sees in secret, shall reward thee openly.
Don't be so wicked any of you, as to Live without Family Prayer. The pouring*
out of Gods fury, may be expected on the Families that all not on his Name.
Jer. 10.25. Expose not your selves to such Divine Displeasure, but Worship God
by Family Prayer Morning and Evening; and say with him, Josh. 24.15. As for me
and my House, we will Serve the Lord. Instruct your Families, and Govern them
well; bring them up in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. Like
Abraham, Command ^our Children and Household after you, ^at they may keep the
way of the Lord, Genesis 18.19.

5. Orderly and Regularly seek to get a good Minister Settled among you On the
one hand, don't be hasty, rash, precipitant; on the other hand, don't be too
slow and dilatory in this Affair. Advise well in so important a Matter. Don't
seek for any Minister already Settled elsewhere; don't rob others to supply
your own wants; this is not to do as you would be done by. Pray to the Lord of
the Harvest, the great Shepherd and Bishop of Souls, that he would send forth a
Labourer into this part of his Harvest; that he would Set over you a Man of
Understanding, a Pastor after his own Heart, even such a Gospel Minister as is
described. 1 Timothy 3. cha. In your Secret Prayers, in your Family Prayers, Cry
unto God for so great a Blessing; and when you obtain one, carry it suitably to
him, as the Gospel directs.

6. Keep close to Scripture Rule in all your Managements. Do so, when you
Embody into a Church State; do so in seeking a Minister; do so in all your
following Managements. In your Belief, Profession, Worship, Discipline,
Conversation; even in the whole of your Conduct, strive to Conform to the Laws
of Christ, who is King in Sion, and who will soon Judge you according to your
works. Hide Gods Law in your heart, that you may not Sin against him; make his
Word the Lamp of your feet, and light of your paths, Psa 119.11, 105.

7. So act as not to give matter of just offense to Neighboring Churches. Keep
the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of peace. Don't act contrary to the
Scripture Rules of Communion of Churches: You know not how much need you may
have of their help, whatever prospect you may have of Matters (...) present 1
Cor. 10 32. Give none offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to
the Church of God.

8. Keep Peace among your selves. An House, City, or Kingdom divided against it
self, cannot stand. Mat 12.25 All the Law is fulfilled in one word, even in
this, thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. But if ye bite and devour one
another; take heed that ye be not consumed one of another. Gal. 5.14, 15. Don't
proudly and obstinat^ly set up your own wills, and humors, one against
another; for this would greatly weaken you, if not break you to pieces. Be of a
peaceable, quiet, condescending, forgiving Spirit to one another, and to all
men. What says the Apostle? Jam. 3.16, 17. Where envying and strife is, there
is confusion, and every evil work. But the wisdom that is from above, is first
Pure, then Peaceable, Gentle and easy to be Entreated, full of Mercy and good
Fruits, without Partiality and without Hypocrisy. 2 Cor. 13.11. Finally,
Brethren, farewell; be perfect, be of good ^fort, be of one mind, live in Peace,
and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you.

FINIS.
A Call to the Unconverted, to Turn and Live. And Accept of Mercy while Mercy
may be had, as ever they would find Mercy in the Day of their Extremity. From
the Living God. To which are Added, Forms of Prayer for Morning and Evening for
a Family, for a Penitent Sinner, and for the Lords Day. Written at the Request
of the late Reverend and Learned Archbishop Usher. By Richard Baxter. To be
Read in Families where any are Unconverted The Thirty First Edition. Printed*
for Robert Starkey in Fleetstreet.

MIlitary Discipline: The Newest Way and Method of Exercising H^rse and Foot.
With some Account of Field Officers. And a Description of the Arms of Horse and
Foot.

CHrist's Certain and Sudden Appearance to Judgment. By Thomas Vincent, some
time Minister of Maudlin's Milk-street, London. Heb. 10.37. For yo^ a little
while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. The Tenth
Edition. Licensed May 28. 1688.

Both Sold by Robert Starkey in Fleetstreet.


