HOOP-PETTICOATS Arraigned and Condemned, BY THE Light of Nature, AND Law of
God.
IT is just Matter of Lamentation, that Sin and Iniquity so much abounds
amongst us, in this Land, notwithstanding our great Profession and Privileges,
and the heavy Judgments of God upon us for our Sins: And it is especially sad,
that the Sin of Pride does so much abound under so many humbling Judgments. And
how many ways do we declare our Pride and manifest the same? But what I would
particularly insist upon is in our Apparel, in following vain and sinful
Fashions, and particularly. that vain, sinful, immodest one of Hoop-Petticoats,
Now, that I may make good this Charge against them, I shall show that they are
condemned by the Light of Nature, and Law of God: And this will be evident, if
we consider, that they answer not, but contradict the Ends of Apparel. We will
consider therefore what the Ends of Apparel are.

1. One End of Apparel is to hide Nakedness. Our first Parents indeed in the
State of Innocence, were naked and were not ashamed but Sin brought Shame, and
therefore after the Fall, they sewed Fig Leaves together to cover their
Nakedness: But God provided better Covering for them, viz. Coats of Skins for
this end. Now, whatever Fashions of Apparel don't answer, or are contrary to
this End, are sinful, Now, that Hoops in Petticoats don't answer this End, but
rather contradict it, is evident, in that instead of covering our Nakedness
they expose it; and upon some emergent Accidents, expose those Parts that Adam
and Eve seemed to take especial Care to cover, in the Aprons they provided; and
those Parts which the Apostle styles less honorable, yea, uncomely Part which
therefore have the more need of comely Covering. See 1 Cor. 12. 23, 24. So that
they voluntarily do that which was spoken of by way of Threatening, and Judgment
to a proud People, Isai. 47, 2, 3. They make bare the Leg, and uncover the
Thigh, so that their Nakedness is uncovered, yea, their shame is seen. So that
we see, they answer not, but cross this End of Apparel, and make those Parts
liable to be exposed, which God and Nature require to be covered.

2. Another End of Apparel is to defend the Body from the Injuries it is liable
to. Now, do these do it? or do they not rather expose it to these Injuries, as
particularly the Injuries of the Weather? I am apt to think, that our Hoop
Gallants find not sufficient Warmth under the Skreen of their foolish Proverb (
Pride feels no Cold) in some Seasons: But it may be some had rather part with
their Health than their Hoops. And that they are troublesome and uneasy to the
Body is evident. With what Difficulty do those that wear them of the large Size
walk, especially in narrow Passages? How are they forced to twist and turn
their Bodies? And can scarce enter in at the Doors of their Houses, or of the
House of God: So that there Seems a Necessity either of making our Doors
bigger, or their Hoops less. Methinks they would do well to consider, that
strait is the gate, and narrow the way that leads to Life; and whether their
extensive Hoops may not be some hinderance unto them in walking in this narrow
way, and entering in at the (...) Gate, especially since it is necessary in
order thereto, that we part with our right Hand or Eye, when they offend us;
Surely they ought to fear whether they shall have Entrance, who will not part
with that which they have not more need of than they have of a Cough. And as
they do not answer this end of Apparel to defend the Body, neither.

3. Do they answer the other End of Apparel, viz. the adorning the Body; although
in this most of our Hoop Gallants take Sanctuary: But how can that be an
Ornament, which is contrary to the other Ends of Apparel, especially that of
covering our nakedness? Can that be an Ornament which exposes those Parts which
God and Nature require to be covered, and which the most barbarous Nations by
the Light of Nature are taught to conceal? Is that an Ornament which is
contrary to Modesty, Humility, Gravity, and Sobriety, which are required in
Women profeiling Godliness? But alas! How has Pride and Impudence usurped the
Place of Humility and Modesty, since Women are almost naked, and are not at all
ashamed; for instead of being ashamed of their Pride, they are proud of their
Shame. Thus we see, that Hoop-Petticoats answer not, but contradict all the
(...) of Apparel, therefore are condemned by the Light of Nature and Law of
God. But I would show more particularly the Sin of them from the Scripture, in
Isai. 3. 16. There the Lord threatens his People, that he would bring heavy
Judgments upon them for the Sin of Pride, and this as manifest in Apparel:
Moreover the Lord says, because the Daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk
with stretched forth Necks, and wanton Eyes, walking and mincing as they go,
and making a tinkling with their Feet. A tinkling with their Feet: The Word
from whence this has its Original signifies a Fetter, as most render it: They
therefore render it, going as if they were fettered; and so understand it of
such a nice kind of affected Pace as was in the former Term intimated, and
there further described, by a Resemblance taken from Captives or Prisoners that
have Irons on their Legs, and so cannot go freely and readily, but in a slow
and stalking Manner, as their Irons give them leave: Or as others, from those
Cords or Fetters that Horse Breakers are wont to hamper young Colts withal, to
bring them to a Pace. How applicable is this to our Hoop Ladies? But it may be
some may say, this is too critical, and not solid Scripture Reasoning. Let such
consider that (...) They should express by their outward Garb the inward
Gravity of their Minds. Now I appeal to you; Do they do it that wear those
extensive Hoops? Does this manifest their Shamefacedness and Modesty? Moreover
the Apostle in Phil. 4. 8. says, Whatsoever things are honest, pure, lovely,
and of good report; if there be any Virtue, or any Praise, think on these
Things. Now, does this answer these Characters? I will not say there is none
honest that wear them but I may venture to say, without any Breach of Charity,
that this is no Sign of their Honesty or Purity, and I think there is little
Loveliness in them; and I am sure they are not of good Report among the most
judicious Persons: Therefore what Virtue or Praise I beseech you is there in
them: Are these then as becomes Women professing Godliness.

Consider further, whether this be suitable to the Day. Is it not a Day of
trouble, of Perplexity, and of treading down by the Lord of Hosts, in this
Valley of Vision? Yea, a Day of Darkness and Gloominess, a Day of Clouds and
thick Darkness, as the Morning spread upon the Mountains, in which the
Inhabitants of the Land should tremble, by reason of the heavy Judgments of God
upon us; a Day in which God is calling upon us, as in Joel 2. 12. and as in
Isai. 22. 12. 13. And in that Day did the Lord of Hosts call to weeping, to
b^ldness, and to sack cloth; but behold joy and gladness, etc. It is not so
with us at this Day; therefore we should consider what follows in the next
Verse, which is enough to make any but such as are hardened as we are, to
tremble: It was revealed in my Ears by the Lord of Hosts, surely this Iniquity
shall not be purged away till ye die, says the Lord of Hosts. Is not Pride of
Apparel an Evidence of a proud Heart, and that our uncircumcised Hearts are not
yet humbled? May we not therefore fear that the Lord will punish us yet seven
Times for our Sins?

Well then, since this is so great an Evil, we ought, as to avoid it our
selves, so to do all we can to suppress it in others; especially Persons vested
with Authority, should exert themselves therefore, whether it be Civil, Sacred,
or Domestic.

1. The Civil Magistrate should. And if the wearing of Hoop-Petticoats were the
Punishment of such as have proved themselves to be Whores, it might probably
suppress two great Sins at once: And what more significant Mark or Badge can be
given?

2. Ministers should exert themselves for this end, as they would not be
Partakers of the Sins of others, that so they may be (...) say with Job, chap.
13. v. 34. Did (...) a great Multitude? or did the Contempt of (...) terrify
me, that I kept silence? etc. (...) Husbands (unto whom the Wise should be in
subjection) should suppress it in the Wife.

4. Parents (whom Children should obey) instead of encouraging their Children
as soon as they can go alone to go with a Hoop, (as many shamefully do) should
exert their Parental Authority to prevent it.

I conclude all with what we have in Isai. 32. 9, 11. Rose up ye Women that are
at case, bear my voice ye careless Daughters, give car unto my speech. Tremble
ye Women that are at Fase, be troubled ye careless ones; strip ye and make ye
bare, and gird sackcloth on your Loins.

FINIS.
BOSTON Printed and sold by James Franklin in Queen Street. 1722.


