THE ABUSES and SCANDALS Of some late Pamphlets In Favor of Inoculation OF THE
SMALL POX, Modestly obviated, AND Inoculation further considered in a Letter to
A -- S -- M.D. and F.R.S. In LONDON.

Things good or ill by Circumstances be;
In you it is Virtue, what is Vice in me.
More haughty and severe in's Place,
Than Gregory or Boniface:
For all Men live and judge amiss,
Whose Talents jump not just with his.
Hudibras. BOSTON: Printed and sold by J. Franklin, at his Printing House in
Queen Street, over against Mr. S^^^f's School. 1722.

The INTRODUCTION.
NOTWITHSTANDING the most vile Personal Abuses, and unprecedented Calumnies
lately spewed out, it was resolved, to drop the Affair, that Contention might
cease, and leave the habitual Scriblers Masters of the Field of Scandal, they
having already (after little or no Opposition) given up their Titles to correct
Style, Justness of Thought, and Force of Argument. But finding them still
opposing the Endeavors used to caution the Town and Country against their rash
and thoughtless Procedure in a medical Experiment of Consequence, they
continuing on their bare Word only, to affirm it well vouched, prudently
managed, of uninterrupted Success, and that the Ministers Pretensions to
Physic is as good as that of the ablest Practitioners in the Land: To prevent
the Public here and elsewhere being thus imposed upon, and to maintain the
Practitioners in their Rights and Privileges, against the Invasion of some
vain self-conceited Men, is the Design of the following Pages.

The weak Artifice they use to drown all Argument from the other Side, is the
Clamor of Enemies to the Ministry of this Country, though these Men they
principally aim at are well known to be their constant Hearers, and generous
Contributors toward their Support. If a Stranger to the Affair were to read
their Writings, he could not think otherways than that all the Ministers of
Boston are Inoculators, all at Variance with the Practitioners in Physic, in
short, that they all are guilty of those Things alleged against a few. To
vindicate the Ministry of Boston from these Insinuations; all the Town knows,
that several of them have declared against Inoculation till further Light in
the Practice, and many of them do not in the least meddle; we have here among
our Ministers Viros Eruditione, Probitate est Rerum uste Spectabiles; that is,
not only inoffensive in their Life and Conversation, but also of shining active
Virtues. There are in Boston Sixteen Settled Ministers; and of them, Six only
are transiently said to have by Subscription insured the Inoculated, whereof
some, finding Contentions to spread among their Flocks, out of a Christian
Spirit of Meekness, forbear giving further Occasions for Animosities; only Two
or Three of the whole Number have exceeded their Bounds, and wrote practically
on a medical Subject, for which they were by the Practitioners called in
Question, not pretending to meddle with their Life and Conversation or
Ministry; presuming at least that a Parson out of his Office may be fallible.

Most of their vile Calumnys I impute rather to an unguarded Passion, than to
their Ignorance of the World and good Manners, or a Propensity and Inclination
to be malicious. The old venerable Dr. I. M. deservedly esteemed by all in this
Country, his Name and Character with me shall be sacred, no Provocation can
oblige me to show him any disrespect; but the Son, a Degener a Patre, the Hero
in this Farce of Calumny, is used with a Philosophical Freedom. The University
of Glasgow in Great Britain, from the Respect they bear to New England, used
him kindly, though to them nec de facie quidem notus, and gratified his Vanity
with a D. D.; he in requital calls a Native of Great Britain (besides many vile
Names) a mere Stranger, abuses their Country, ridicules their Family Names,
makes their Church Discipline ludicrous, as if they were guilty of stooping to
take Cognizance of little trivial Matters. Perhaps he may oblige this his Alma
Matter to disown him for a Son, as it seems the Royal Society have already done,
by omitting his Name in their yearly Lists.

In the following Letter, 1. Some harsh sounding Words in the Letter concerning
Inoculation to A. S. etc. which have been misrepresented and given some
Offense, are explained. 2. The late Calumnys of some Inoculators, particularly
in a little Book called, a Vindication of the Ministers, are modestly
considered. 3. The idea of a good Voucher in Natural History not consistent
with the Constitution of our principal Instrument of Inoculation, on whose Word
all did at first depend. 4. The Ministers Pretensions and Qualifications for
the Practice of Physic is enquired into. 5. Some Additional loose Remarks on
the Practice of Inoculation of the Small Pox in this Country.

A Letter, etc.
SIR,
OUR former Intimacy in our Travels and Study abroad is all Apology I shall
make for addressing you with this Letter, which contains an Affair local,
temporary, and relating only to private Persons. The Design of the last to you
published in this Place, was, that Inoculation might be suspended from being
carried into the Country Towns, before any Method or Contrivance was
endeavored, to make it more easy to the Patient and safe to the Neighborhood,
from the Hopes we had that the Severity of the Season in a natural and ordinary
Way might check its further Progress, or the after Season might be more
convenient for the Practice, or till their cautious Procedure in England might
be some Guide to (...). It contained, you may remember, a few harsh sounding
Words, not pronounced absolutely, but as pathetically flowing from the
Solutions advanced to some unnatural Arguments used on the other Side. As Guilt
is apt to fly into a Man's Face, so it was here; it put them in a Passion,
which is commonly said to be inconsistent with Reason, makes them drop all
Argument ( we will not enter into the Controversy says the Vindicator Page 11.)
and fall on with Calumny, Srurrility, flat (...) and Billingsgate, (a certain
Evidence of the Goodness of their Cause, or at least of their Ability to
maintain it) and sacrifice the Characters of several good Men, who endeavoring
the good of their Country did publicly advise two or three Ministers against
being too impetuous, without Method or Contrivance, to push Headlong a novel
and dubious Practice of Consequence in Physic; this, with a Clamor, they call
rendering the Ministry vain and ridiculous.

I. To obviate the Misrepresentation of some harsh sounding Words, in the
Letter concerning Inoculation to A. S. etc. Because it is reckoned very unfair
and unbecoming a Gentleman, to assign Names to Anonymous Books (where the
Author has not the Vanity to think that his Name can be any Recommendation to
the Book, or does not value himself on the Performance) no Man's Name was wrote
at Length, excepting Mr. Colman's, (his Name being prefixed to his little
Book,) and that only in this Passage, Mr. Colman's Fever in the Flesh; that he
might have the Honor of this new Species of Fever, which has hitherto been
overlooked by the eminent ancient and modern Physicians. The Words Judicious
Magistrates and Ministers are borrowed from Dr. I. M.'s Reasons for
Inoculation, and not by way of Ridicule: For as Society is maintained by the
Reverence of the Religion of the Country, and the Respect due to the Authority
of their Laws, to derogate from either is the Abhorrence of all good Men. The
Experiment was called a Humor, (Fancy or Trial) because we are not arrived to
that Degree of certainty therein, that may be requisite to denominate it an
established Practice.

In the Introduction, the Advice to change Subjects, that the older Man may
write Inoculation Cases of Conscience, and the younger Man the Theory of a
Phantom he does not understand, i^ not meant of the Drs. M -- rs, but of the
Authors of some Observations, and Cases of Conscience. As Tacitus was very
exact in describing the Characters of his Personages, supposing many Actions of
Consequence to proceed more from their Temperament, than from rational
Deductions: So there the principal Instrument (as the Vindicator calls him) was
transiently characterized in his Natural Philosophy Capacity, as is hereafter
more fully illustrated, without any Reflections on his Life or Ministry. Is it
not a Sort of Impiety to assert that a Man dies in the use of the Means, if he
dye in the voluntary Use of a Practice which by infecting the Neighborhood,
certainly occasions the Death of many, and is not without Risque to himself? To
compare the Difficulties they meet with in their Promoting of the spreading of
Infection, to those our Savior met with in the Propagation of the Gospel, is
not this an Abuse of the Scripture? These Assertions whether Lay or Clergy may
be contradicted, for in this Country we allow of no Infallibility from the
youngest Clerk to the Pope himself. To throw the Odium of Party on some
Gentlemen who abhor the vile Name of Faction, is deservedly called the hight of
Assurance.

The Vindicator of the Ministers calls a Letter published in Mr. Campbells News
Paper, July 24. 1721, a saucy Libel. I fancy he is beside himself; for there is
no Minister there so much as hinted at, excepting the Reverend Dr. C. M. who is
there used with Respect and good Manners, viz. A certain learned Gentleman of
this Place, who upon the first Appearance of the Small Pox here, out of a pious
and charitable Design of doing Good, applied to the Practitioners of the Place,
etc. Or perhaps, because that Letter advises the People to be cautious in the
Use of an Experiment novel and dubious, it is called a saucy Libel; Is it
possible a rational Man should be so impatient of Contradiction.

II. The late Calumnies of some Inoculators, particularly of a little Book
called, A Vindication of the Ministers, are modesty considered. A Devoto
disparages Religion by his unseasonable and indiscreet Introduction of
Scripture, Church, Ministers, etc: By culling, transposing, small alterations
of words, etc. the most honest and serious Piece may be made appear
Atheistical, Blasphemous, and Treasonable: This is the mean disingenuous
Artifice used by some of late. The words which sound harsh are obvious to every
Man, but Solid Argument and Matter of Fact, do not come within the Compass of
every Persons Capacity and Knowledge: This last part, though the main Point, they
neglect, and turn the Controversy on Calumny, of which they are very prodigal,
and are not to be answered in Specie, without breach of good Manners. Ministers
ought to show Men their Errors with the greatest Temper and Humanity; but the
reverse of this, to the great Grief of some of their own People, has too much
appeared on this occasion. A Roman Catholic writer says, It is no mortal Sin
to Calumniate safely to preserve ones Honor; another says, We may lawfully
Slander any Person, by charging him with Crimes that are utterly false, if
against his Testimony we cannot otherways defend our selves. This is a Popish
Practice and not to be encouraged.

The late Pamphlet called, A Vindication of the Ministers, is advisedly said to
be wrote by sundry Hands; for it is not possible to Imagine that one Person of
any Degree of good Memory and sound Judgment could so often contradict himself
and Matter of Fact; sometimes with one hand throwing the most fulsome
Flatteries on himself and Brethren, not animadverting to that noted saying, He
that commends himself, never purchases our Applause; and with the other Hand
the foulest Dirt, hit or miss, acted by this Principle, Calumniare audacter,
etc. To illustrate this. He says, we cannot but admire, the Moderation and
consummate Patience of our Pastors, amidst these outrageous and provoking
Abuses and Scandals. -- The Meekness of our Ministers, under these abuses,
imitating their glorious Master, who remained as dumb under the Shearers. -- We
are of Opinion that Persons may differ in their Sentiments, about this
Practice, without declaring themselves open Enemies to one another, and neglect
Christian and civil Conversaion, How well does this talley with their following
Scurrilities. Our Practitioners and late Libellers. Virulent endeavors of
wicked men. Impious and Satanick Custom. Daringly profane. Impudence brazen and
flagitious. Hellish Servitude. Impious Buffoons. Profane Sons of Corah.
Children of the old Serpent, and many other Billingsgate Terms of Art.

The Vindicator says, Dr. Mather disdains to draw his generous Pen for his own
Vindication, who changes not his Temper for all their invidious Calumnies; for
the Truth of this I refer to a little Pamphlet called Remarks, etc. in which he
meekly says, The Author (daringly presuming on a Family Name) of the Letter to
A. S. etc. has not the least Spark of Grace in his Heart. No Fear of GOD before
his Eyes. Impudent and malicious Lies. The Church ought to deliver him over to
Satan, for he deserves the highest Censure. Deserves to be Scourged out of the
Country. The Government ought to banish him. He should be pillor'd and
afterward Stoned by the People, with several more low Expressions of an angry
brutal Passion in the Manuscript, which the Printer was ashamed to publish; and
all this because the Nature and Thread of the Authors Discourse obliged him, to
represent Dr. C. M. as rash in his proceedings of Inoculation, and fallible in
his Natural Philosophy. What could he have said more against one that should
write vile things of our Charter and Government, of our Religion and Platform,
most no^^riously vicious and wicked, a Traitor and Blasphe^^^? Are there no
Degrees in this Man's Censure? Are these his Philosophical Arguments and mild
Christian Rebukes? A Man's Life and Conversation fall within the ken of his
Neighbor's Eye, these he might (and would) have faulted, if he had had any
handle; but a Man's Grace, the Fear of God in his heart, are only open to the
Omniscient.

In another Place the Vindicator of the Ministers says, Strangers or Abjects,
which inhances their Folly, and makes their Impudence the more brazen and
flagitious. Traveling removes National and Country Prejudices, and enlarges
the narrow selfish Soul; but to use by way of Odium the word STRANGER, and
couple it with ABJECT, shows this our Travelers vile, low, abject Spirit, and
that his Travel is lost. Was he so used when in England? O Shame! Was his
Father or Grandfather so used when they came to settle their abode in this
Country? Can any good Man thus throw dirt on his Fathers Memory? None but a
Terrafilius. Our Governors and other King's Officers from home, are they to be
branded with the Appellation STRANGER? O impudence, brazen and flagitious!

III. The Idea of a good voucher in Natural History, not consistent with the
Constitution of our principal Instrument of Inoculation, (...) whose word all
did at first depend. For this I might refer to a Folio called Magnalia, to be
found with John Williams and his Brother Tobacconists, here and elsewhere. A
good Voucher ought to be Sincere, candid, of solid Judgment, and not Credulous.
Let us then suppose, for Argument's Sake, 1. A Man of a Valetudinary
Friendship, sometimes the greatest Profession of kindness, and therefore to be
suspected; at other Times on the least disgust, the highest Malice and rancour,
and therefore to be avoided. 2. A Man void of candor, who promotes a Medical
Experiment, without the knowledge of, or taking any notice of him from whom he
had the Communication; who uses with his Pen in the most indiscreet unmannerly
way, a Friend of mine, whose M.D. is as good and more regularly acquired than
his own D.D., one not inferior to himself in Birth, Fortune, Education, and the
good Opinion of his Neighbors; who calls a Man that has resided several Years
in this Country, and constantly paid Taxes and other Rates, a new Comer, a mere
Stranger. 3. A Man of Whim, Credulity, and Vanity, who in his Letter to Dr.
Woodward, Nov. 18, 1712, ( vide Phil. Transact. Vol. 29.) has a particular
Fancy, that the wild Pigeons, when they leave New England at certain Seasons,
repair to some undiscovered Satellite, accompanying the Earth at a near
Distance. Though unacquainted with the first Principles of the Mathematics,
sends Home a Solution of Two the most abstruse Proplems or Desiderata in
Mathematics, viz. the SQUARING OF THE CIRCLE, which is only to be expressed by
Approximation, or an infinite AEquation, whose Nature is known, but whose Value
cannot be reduced to any determined Lines or Numbers; the other is the
LONGITUDE at Sea, the Discovery of which for many Years has been endeavored by
the best Mathematicians, encouraged by large Proemiums; and is generally
thought will continue a Secret, till some Comet or other Caelestial Body appear
within our System, and perform his Revolutions in a N. and S. Line, or some
great Circle not much declining from a Meridian, as at present we find the
Latitude, by the Suns Revolution in a Circle not much declining from the
AEquinoctial, or E. and W. Line, or till an Automaton (Clockwork) can be
contrived, which shall for some considerable Time move aequally or aequably,
without being affected by the Weather or external Motion; or till we find some
Contrivance, not withstanding the Motion of the Ship, to take the Altitudes of
the fixed Stars, and the Eclipses of Jupiter's Moons. A Man guilty of such
Absurdities, is no good Voucher for an Experiment of Consequence.

IV. The Ministers Pretensions and Qualifications for the Practice of Physic
enquired into. Some of ours here, like the Roman Catholic Clergy of old, would
have the People believe, that they are the only proper Judges in all Cases of
Literature. The Author of Some Observations, etc. says And we at last find too
by sad Experience, that they understood as well the managing the Distemper
(Small Pox) then (43 Years ago) as we do now. I could not possibly conceive the
Natural Cause of this Thought or Assertion, till a little Piece called a
Vindication, etc. was lately published, wherein he explains himself thus, ( p.
10.) 'Mr. Thomas Thatcher, a Ministers, Forty Three Years ago, wrote a Sheet of
Directions (which was certainly useful in the then Infancy of our Colony) and
perhaps since that Time no Minister has wrote on that Subject, till this Book
of Observations did appear, which is to make Amends for Forty three Years lost
Time in improving, and qualifies the Author to be such a one, as he says, the
best Physicians in the Land need not be ashamed to advise withal.

In some Circumstances a Layman (it is said) may perform several of the Offices
of a Clergyman, where learned and suitably qualified Clerks are not to be
found: and so some sarcastick Writers tell us, that in the Infancy of this and
some other Colonies, their Teachers, besides civil Polity and Physic, also
exercised some meaner and mechanic Callings. But now our Colony is of Age, and
for several Years past our Ministers have not been allowed to act in civil
Affairs, as Judges, Justices, Representatives, etc. there being choice of Men
sufficiently qualified to fill these Places: For the same Reason, the Ministers
(I mean those who have the Oversight of a Flock) in this great Town, should
cease pretending to Physic, there being Practitioners sufficient in Number and
Qualifications to supply the Place. Further, we find in great Towns, where
there is Variety and Multitude of Business, that the Practitioners may be the
better qualified for their particular Professions; Physic itself is divided
into distinct Branches, as Physicians, Surgeons, Apothecarys, Chemists, etc.
each keeping within his Bounds. How then can we suppose, a Man of a Vocation,
which requires all his Time conscientiously to discharge the same, should
pretend to a Business of so great Extent? Hypocrates, the Prince of Physicians,
in his Epistola ad Democritum, modestly says, Ego enim ad finem Medicinae non
pervent Etamsi jam senex sim. Et ego sane mihi videor, majorem reprehensionem
quam honorem artis me assequtum esse.

To be more or less Book learned, is not a sufficient Qualification for a
Physician; there must be Institutio a Puero; the candid Sydenham says, Haec ars
haud rectius perdiscenda est, quem ab ipsius artis excercitio et usu. A very
eminent modern Physician says, That many Gentlemen of universal Reading, and
old Women by long Nursing, know as much of Physic as to kill themselves and
Neighbors when sick, by the preposterous indiscreet Use of some noted
Medicines.

The Reformed Churches of France, in their 19th Canon of Discipline say, Mo
Minister, together with the holy Ministry, shall be Practitioner in Law or
Physic, unless in Time of Trouble and Persecution, and when he cannot exercise
his Calling in his Church, and cannot be maintained by it: And those who shall
thus employ themselves in Law or Physic, or any worldly distracting Business,
shall be exhorted wholly to forbear it, and totally to devote themselves to the
Duties of their Calling as Ministers, and to study the Scriptures, All
Colloques and Synods are admonished to proceed according to the Canon of our
Discipline, against the refractory, and such as be wilfully disobedient,

V. Some additional loose Remarks on the Practice of Inoculation in this Place.
Our Vindicator stands his ground to the last drop of Assurance: What the
ingenious Mr. Butler says of his Knight, may well be applied here, It Is strange
how some Men's Tempers suit
(Like Bawd and Brandy) with Dispute;
Who for their own Opinions stand fast;
Only to have them clawed and canvast.


Their Methods and procedure are acknowledged rash by many of their own
Inoculation Friends; this Man continues to affirm it a regular Procedure be
setting the Matter in a false Light. Is it not Fact, that Dr. C. M. after
dispersing his circular Letters, before the Practitioners could have time to
meet, consult, and make a Return; privately sets B -- n to work, without
acquainting the Townsmen and Practitioners. About this Time the Infection had
got into several Houses, so that Watche^ could not conveniently he obtained for
them all; be the Justices and Select-Men did not neglect the Preservation of
the Town (as this Man would insinuate) and allow Infection to spread at any
Rate. v.g. The Dead for some considerable time thereafter were not allowed to
be carried out till late in the Night, when People were retired. Upon the Noise
of Inoculation being attempted, the Justices and Select-Men appointed a Meeting
of all the Practitioners, who unanimously gave their Opinion against it till
further Light, which was accordingly published by the Select-Men, and the
Practice is forbidden; but by the Instigation of this Man and his Accomplices,
they proceed in Contempt of the Magistrates, and in Contradiction to the
Practitioners. Is this a regular Procedure?

If a Dr. C. M. in any other Country should meet with the Vindication, etc.
finding him in express Words asserting the uninterupted and remarkable Success
of this Method; -- the constant Success of this Experiment, etc. he would
directly publish, that not one ever died of Inoculation these Forty One Years,
always producing the most favorable Sort; -- a Practice well vouched, etc.
what fatal Errors may not Impartiality lead a credulous Man into? Such an
Account as this may do with some of their Correspondents abroad, till
contradicted by better Hands; but here it is ridiculous and silly, we all know
that several have died of the Practice, and that many have suffered much.

How trifling is it for us, who have had the Experience of Two or Three Hundred
Inoculated, to appeal to a Man who only conjectures it may be of Use, and has
not had the Opportunities of adducing more that Two Instances, and these of
Children, whose Age might contribute to their having them favorable either
Way; I mean Dr. Harris's Dissertation on the Inoculation of the Small Pox; the
Justness of the Abstract from it, I pass over, not having seen the Original.
From it we learn no more concerning Inoculation, than, v. g. may be learnt from
Dr. Lower's (the more eminent Man) Account of Transfusion, addressed to the
Honorable Mr. Boil, published by the Royal Society, and with more Earnestness
recommended, and consequently equally or better vouched, after this Man's weak
way of reasoning. Notwithstanding of this Dissertation, Timonius, Pylarinus,
and many more Accounts of the Affair that have not come to our Hands; we find
them so cautious at home, that it was some Time thereafter before any Trials
were made, and these by Permission of the Government on the Bodies of Persons
dead in Law. He advises Exactness in Regimen, which is absolutely requisite, to
know the Advantage of any new Experiment; we to our Shame boast and glory in
our not using any. The Consequences he does not so much as hint at, which are
Difficulties to be discussed. However, Dr. Harris abstracted has this good
Effect, it proves a temporary Cordial to some of the Inoculated.

Since my last to you, the Small Pox has made little or no progress in the
Country; Our News Papers tell us, that in some Towns it is entirely ceased, in
others much abated. Who then but Madmen, would have advised Inoculation in the
severest Season to those who are like forever to escape the Small Pox? In this
Town several Hundreds have escaped, and it is probable many more might have
escaped (as was the Case Nineteen Years ago) if Inoculation had not rendered the
Infection so universal and intense. Last Small Pox the Month of the greatest
Mortality ( December, a severe Winter Month) did not exceed 80 Persons; at this
Time the Month of the greatest Mortality ( October, a favorable Autumn Month)
exceeded Four Hundred burials, which is more than all that dyed of the Small
Pox Nineteen Years ago. For the three Months of September, October, and
November last, in which Inoculation prevailed, the Town was a mere Hospital,
and we buried Seven Hundred and Sixty Persons. The last Small Pox spread
gradually in the extent of ten or a dozen Months, and vast Numbers escape;
Inoculation of the Small Pox this Time set us all in a Flame, and in half the
Time leaves few People exempt from its rage. With what Face can any Man call
our Methods of Inoculation a regular procedure?

I heartily wish Success to this and all other Means designed to alleviate the
Epidemick Distempers incident to Mankind; whether casually discovered, or
ingeniously contrived by the Sons of AEsculapius: But rashness and headstrong
irregular procedure I shall for ever exclaim against, especially that
detestable Wickedness of spreading Infection.

That I may not incur the Censure of Scribbling, I promise to neglect and
despise, all that may come from the other Side by way of bare Affirmation,
Bombast, Calumny, Doggrel Dialogues, etc. but if Solid Reasoning, well vouched
Matter of Fact, and such like appear against any thing asserted, or conjectured
by the Practitioners in opposition to the rash procedure of the Inoculators; I
doubt not but they will take it Kindly and Friendly.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
Boston, New England, Feb. 15th, 1721, 22.

