INOCULATION OF THE Small POX As practiced in Boston, Considered in a Letter to
A -- S -- M.D. and F.R.S. In LONDON.

So learned Taliacotius from
The brawny Part of Porters Bum,
Cut supplemental Noses --
Hudibras. BOSTON: Printed and sold by I. Franklin, at his Printing House in
Queen Street, over against Mr. Shea^'s School. 1722.

THE INTRODUCTION.
A Copy of the following Letter casually coming to hand, I could not forbear
publishing it at this juncture, when Six Men (commonly called the Six
INOCULATION MINISTERS) without any weight of Argument, by mere importunity, and
reiterated Praying, Preaching, and Scribbling ( gutta cavit lapidem non vi sed
saep^ ^adendo) do endeavor that the infatuation of Self-procuring the Small
Pox, may become universal.

The Epistolary Manner, may excuse its not being nicely correct and well
digested, the freedom used in canvassing the matter, and the warmth with which
the Author in several incidents expresses himself; which perhaps the rigor of
a formal Discourse etc. would not allow.

The Country and Ministers are not reflected on, but rather vindicated, by
laying the reproach on ^^e particular Persons who alone have rendered themselves
obnoxious. It is every Good Man's principle and interest to wish w^ll and do
well for the Country he lives in; and as a Christian to respect the Good and
Pious Ministers of JESUS CHRIST, who as Husbands of one Wife abstracting
themselves from all worldly Contentions, are devoted solely to the Service of
GOD.

All Countries, or Bodies Politic, (our own Mother Country not excepted) have
been subject to Infatuations: These in this Country seem always to have
proceeded from some of those who call themselves Sons of Lev^. The Persecution
of the Quakers about the Year 1658* t^^ ^^^nging of those suspected of
Witchcraft, about the ^ear 1691, etc. and Inoculation, or Self-procuring the
Small Pox, in the Year 1721; and to speak like an Astronomer, or rather in the
manner of Dr. C. M. Infatuation seems to return to us after a Period of about
Thirty Years, viz. from the Massachusetts Bay being colonized Anno 1628, to the
Persecution of the Quakers, Thirty Years; and so from Infatuation to
Infatuation.

By the Indulgence of our Charter, the Ministers of all sorts are left sui
juris, which may be the natural Cause why some of them, abusing this
Privilege, do meddle in Matters not in the least appertaining to them. Though
they are not under such a wholesome Discipline as is that of the Church of
Holland, there is one good Expedient left to keep them within the Sphere of
their own proper Business, viz. Only one Inoculation Minister to a
Congregation. Thus the Congregation will be capable of sett^ing on him a better
Maintenance, the overplus Church Stock may be a fund for charitably relieving
their Poor, and the Minister, instead of scribbling some little Piece of
Contention once a Week, must more profitably employ that spare time in
composing a second Sermon for the Edification of his Hearers. I hope (to use
their own Words) I am not out of my Line, even though I should further give them
this natural Advice to change Tasks, let the older Man puzzle himself in
solving Cases of Conscience, and the young Man write some Observations or a
Physical Account of a Phantom he ^oes not comprehend.

This Letter, 1 st, gives some historical Account of the matter, as transacted
amongst our selves. 2 dly, The Arguments (if they may be so called) used by ^he
Inoculators, to persuade the People to give headlong into this novel Pra^tice.
3 dly. The Reasons against the use of it at this Time, and till further Light.
And lastly, Some Remarks on this Practice, and the manner of promoting (...)*

A Letter, etc.
SIR,
SOME time ago, I promised to send you some new Observations I have lately made
in some extraordinary Cases of the Small Pox, and its incident Symptoms. At
this time I entertain you with our most extraordinary Occurrence relating to
that Distemper, viz. The Communication commonly called, Inoculation of the
Small Pox, by applying some laudable variolous Pus, to a fresh cutaneous
Incision in a Person who never had the Small Pox; se^en or eight Days, sooner
or later after this Application* arises a Fe^e^* whose Crisis is a cutaneous
Eruption, something analagous to the Small Pox Pustules, and sometimes a true
genuine Small Pox; but with an uncertain Period of Eruption, Maturation and
Desquamation.

I. The Rise, Progress and Success of this novel Practice, or artificial Small
Pox, in Boston.

A Physician of th^s Place, lent to a certain Reverend Gentleman of the Town
the Philosophical Transactions, wherein he found the Letters of Timonius and
Pylarinus, from the Levant to the Royal Society in London, giving some Account
of the Method and Success of this Practice in those Countries; being a Man of
Whim and Credulity, thinks this Juncture a fit Opportunity to make Experiments
on his Neighbors, (which in Vanity he might judge acceptable to the Royal
Society,) takes the Hint, sends circular Letters to all the Practitioners of
the Place, (the owner of the Transactions excepted,) inviting them to come into
it. At first they all declined so rash and ill vouched a Practice: At length
one of them (more bold than wise or knowing in his Business) finding by his bad
Success in the cure of his first natural Small Pox Patients, that he should
make but a poor hand of it, embraces the Project; but being rash and unlucky in
his first Experiments, he was publicly exposed: Then he applys to the two
Ministers of the Congregation to which he belongs (being himself illiterate) to
vindicate his Character as an able Practitioner: They as his good and careful
Pastors, with three or four more Parsons whose Assistance were desired, take
him under their Protection, and in Print bestow on him Quackish Characters high
enough ^o make the most celebrated Physician in England blush. Thus these few
of the Clergy were drawn in to support the Inoculator, and consequently
Inoculation it self; and you know* many Clergymen think they give up their
Character of Ora^les, if they should retract though in matters the most absurd.
Several things were published in the Weekly News Papers by the Pra^^itioners
(as in Duty bound) to put a stop to this rash and dubious Practice; ( N B. at
this time those Ministers contrived to shut the Press against them) and much
has been since that wrote on the other side by the Inoculating Parsons, full of
Cant and (...)* The Smallpox being so universal for some time past, the
Practitioners could not find Time to pe^u^e their ^cri^l^s and give them
suitable Answers; upon this the Parsons b^came uppi^h, thinking they had gained
the Field of Battle; but now, GOD be thank^d, the Small Pox is over* and the
Practitioners are like to find leisure Time to amuse the Town and themselves in
driving them home within their own Lines.

In the first Trials, the Eruption P^^er of B -- n's Son and old Mr. W -- b,
startled the Inoculators; but as Persons scorning to give ou^, and in Contempt
of the Guardians or Select-Men of the Town who forbid the Practice, as also
contrary to the declared Opinion of the Practitioners in Physic, they make a
second Attempt on a few with indifferent good Success: At length many
inoculated suffer (...); Mrs. D -- l (and others whom Time may bring to light)
dye^ of it* Then they gave out, that the Infection was so universal, that it
was likely all the Inoculated had received the Infection in the common Way, and
the difference of Climate from that in the Levant was the reason of the
Eruptions being mo^e. They seem to intermit the Practice for some time; but
lest it should be taken for recanting, they rally once more, and with
Precaution inoculate those who could not be suspected of having received the
Infection in the natural Way, for some Days pretty lucky; but soon after
several of the Inoculated dye, and many suffer much. Now they say the Winter
Season will not do, though this is the only Season recommended by their Authors:
So that with various Success it has been practiced since the middle of June to
this Time on about Two Hundred Subjects. When the Confusion is over, I shall be
able to learn some Remarkables in their Cares, and transmit them to you.

II. The Motives and Methods used to induce People to this Practice.

First, Timodius an^ (...) Communications to the Royal Society, (falsely said
in a late Paper to be approved of by them.) If all that is published in the
Phylosophical Transactions, viz. Amusements, Projects, credulous Relations,
etc. ought to be put in Practice, the World would be soon turned upside down.
How ridiculous is it then to find fault with the owner of the Transactions,
because he does not comply with their WICKED DESIRES to reprint here those
Accounts of the Levant Gentlemen? He has more regard to the Lives and Health of
his Neighbors, than thus to bring them into a S^are. If his Conscience could
give way to such Things, he might transcribe and publish from the Philosophical
Transactions and other Authors, many Projects and Amusements, no less feizable
than this, but which might prove dangerous Edge-Tools in the Hands of Fools. I
shall instance but one, which if it were not for its bad Consequences, might be
of vastly more universal Benefit to Mankind.

The Transfusion of the Blood of a sound Person into the body of a Morbid
Subject, first projected and practiced by a very eminent Physician Dr. Richard
Lower: It is to be found in Phil. Transact. for Dec. 1666, being a Letter to
the Hon. Mr. Boil, dated Oxford 6th July, 1666. where he describes the whole
process of the Operation: It was afterward put in Practice in France, and
published there March 1667; and in Dr. Lower's Works since published, it is
farther recommended* saying, that though it is the disposition of some Men not to
be pleased, and not to allow of any new thing but what proceeds from
themselves, he doubts not but this Invention may be much for the benefit of
Mankind, if practiced by a well advised and discreet Person; then gives
instances of some on whom this had been practiced; afterward tells what
Subjects may allow of this Practice, and recommends it in the Gout and many
other chronical A^^s; and desires the Physicians all the World over to put it
in Practice, that by use and custom the Practice of it may become universal;
concludes, that as Harvey discovered the benefit of Circulation within the
proper vessels of an individual, he had found the way of transferring
Circulat^on without the Sphere of the Individual, for the benefit of a second
Person.

All our Inoculators (Dr. C. M. excepted) have these Levant or far fetched
Accounts only at third Hand (so strong is their faith) viz. from the partial
abstract of C. M. of the abstract of Dr. Woodward, from Timonius Original
Letter which is not published in the Transactions.

Timonius and Pylarinus in some things clash; the first says it came from Asia,
the other from Greece* Timonius says it had been practiced for about the space
of Forty Years among the Turks and others at Constantinople. Pylarinus (the
latest Author) says, That the Turks only would not come into it, because
repugnant to their doctrine of Predestination. Thus one would think they were
writing concerning a thing they had rather heard than seen much of, especially
if we take Pylarinus own words, Quamvis de omnibus, ut ingenue fatear ocula^us
testis ^sse non possum, meaning all the circumstances of this Operation or
Practice: and take their whole accounts, Phil. Transact. No. 339.347. you will
find they did not know half so much as we do at present in our short
inoculation Practice, v. g. The Operatrix says, The Pus of the Artificial Small
Pox is ineffectual for further transplantation; Pylarinus, its true,
conjectures (not having tried it) that it may be more benign and more
effectual; but we have put it in practice and suffered thereby. Pylarinus
forbids Flesh and Wine for forty days, because some who have erred in that
point have run great hazards by fresh eruptions; we confine them to no Regimen
only for a few Days about the eruption. Timonius says, None that ever used it,
dyed of the Small Pox; and in another place mentions two inoculated Children
who dyed, but says he it was of Cacochymy; we to our sad experience know, that
several have dyed. He says without reserve, They who have this Inoculation
practiced upon them are subject to very slight Symptoms, and in another place
of 50 who were Inoculated about the same time, four had the Symptoms worse, and
came near the confluent kind, as we have also learned in our experience;
several of the Inoculated in Boston, when I insinuated to them the danger of
having, after some time, the Small Pox in the common way, told me, it could not
possibly happen, because their eruption Fever was more violent than generally
in the common way.

As to the faithfulness of Dr. C. M's abstract, on which foundation all did at
first depend, take these few instances. Timonius says, at first the more
prudent were cautious. C. M. turns it, At first the People were cautious, being
unwilling to say it was prudence to be cautious. Pylarinus says, Turcae h^nc
negle^erant huc usque Our fidus interpres renders it, The Turks do not yet much
come into it; Pylarinus in English is, the Turks had not at all th^n come into
it. Pylarinus says, Nunquam fere ex transplantatione hac funesti (mortal) quid
accid^sse observatum fuit hactenus; our straining interpreter renders it, that
it was hardly ever known that there was any ill consequences of this
Transplantation; which is a very unfair and fatal Translation, designing that
his Readers should not think that Death or Fatality sometimes follow it, though
other bad consequences may. He partially omits every thing that seems not to
favor the Project; he does not tell us that Pylarinus advises it ( immaniter
grassa^te Varicl^^^^^ Epidemia) when the Small Pox was very malignant, and
Timonius in the time when it was so mortal that half the infected dyed; then
indeed (if the Law allow) an Anceps Remedium may be embraced, but not when it
is so favorable that not above one in 10 dye of it. He with no good design
omits that passage in Timonius, that of 50 who had this Inoculation practiced
upon them almost the same day, four had the eruptions too sudden, Tubercles
more, and Symptoms worse, and came near the confluent kind; and a little
farther a Boy 3 aet. of a bad habit of Body who was Inoculated, had the Small
Pox as is usual in that way, but about the fortieth day dies of a Marasmus. A
Girl 3 aet. of a bad habit and looseness of long standing, had as usual the
Small Pox by Inoculation, but dies the thirty second Day. To conclude our
Abstractor's PROBITY in the matter, he says, that the Author of these
Abridgments addressed them to those who had the Originals in their Hands, and
therefore it could not be thought that it was not as faithful a report as could
be made of the matter. The truth is, he sent his Abstract to all the noted
Practitioners in Town, but not to the owner of the Philosophical Transactions.
Proh. fides!

Their second Voucher is an Army of half a Dozen or half a Score Africans, by
others called Negroe Slaves, who tell us now (though never before) that it is
practiced in their own Country. The more blundering and Negroish they tell
their Story, it is the more credible says C. M; a paradox in Nature; for all
they say true or false is after the same manner. There is not a Race of Men on
Earth more False Liars, etc. Their Accounts of what was done in their Country
was never depended upon till now for Arguments sake. Many Negroes to my
knowledge have assured their Masters that they had the Small Pox in their own
Country or elsewhere, and have now had it in Boston. Some of Dr. M's Inoculated
Army have had the same Fate, which might serve as an Argument that the
Inoculated may have the Small Pox afterward in the common way; but such weak
Arguments our cause does not require. To confirm this you have at length in two
of their little Books a silly Story or familiar Interview and Conversation
between two black (Negroe) Gentlemen, and a couple of the Reverend Promoters,
concerning Inoculation. O Rare ^a^ce!

Their third Allegation in favor of it is, If it had been unsuccessful or
attended with bad consequences (since it has been practiced many Years in
Turkey) it must needs have been out of countenance and have ceased long ago. An
indifferent Person would more naturally reason thus* If it had not been
attended with bad consequences (since it has been known to several Physicicians
all over Europe for many Years) and being so safe for the time and of such a^
unparrallel'd usefulness, it must have been practiced all the World over long
ago, not so many Princes and great Statesmen have died of the Small Po^, and
all the Christian world continue so long in an obstinate breach of the sixth
Commandment.

The fourth sort of Motives comprehends all the wide and wild Comparisons they
have made in favor of it; few of them will bear repeating.

The comparison of their Neighbor's House being on fire, and the securing
their own without delay. They should have added, the saving their own, not by
an infal^ible method, and with the certain consequences o^ putting the Town in
Flames (infection spreading) in all corners* thus the conflagration being
universal, the few hands which might in a great measure keep the accidental
Fire under, or save much Substance, cannot be so serviceable in a calamity so
universal; besides the greater intensness of the Fire. This was the true state
of the case in September, October, and some part of November last. If my
Neighbor's House be on Fire, I mu^^ endeavor to stop its Progress, and order
Affairs so at home that my damage may be small by removal or otherways, but not
set fire to the Shell of my House ( Mr. Coleman 's Fever in the Flesh) that I
may get off my Effects by the light of it, though endangering the whole Town.

In an In^ndation a Man will naturally take to the first Plank, etc. that comes
in his way: where the danger of being drowned is certain, an anceps remedium
any thing may be embraced; but our Case is, Supposing a a neighboring Country
is inundate, and the Tide with the Storm in Course are likely in a few hours to
overflow the Country where I live, and perhaps one in ten perish. I with some
others ( PUBLIC SPIRITS) rather than secure the Banks, or fly up into the
inland Country, choose to put to Sea from a Lee Shore (where there is no looking
back after Inoculation it is too late to repent) in a Boat or uncertain craft
with provisions for some Days or Months, having no certainty how to steer my
Course to a Terra-firma ( or present state of Health:) By this Method, I am
sure of surviving a few Days or Months, Dangers of the Seas excepted, ( the
Hazard of Inoculation whereof several perish,) though liable to all the
Inconveniencys of being at Sea, ( chronical A^^s perhaps,) whereof at length I
dye, if in due time I do not get ashore. Or as it relates to Infection, take it
as follows. When an Inundation threatens us, as before, I with some others, (
ENDEAVORING THE GOOD OF THE PEOPLE,) take the first favorable Opportunity (
v. g. of a Lull) break down some Part of the Dike, float off our Vessels, and
put to Sea for our own Safety: Thus the Waters, instead of coming on gradually,
as they would in Course of Nature, do with a sudden Impetuosity lay all under
in a short Time.

Their indistinct, confused, superficial Notions of Things, makes their
Physical Comparisons so wild. They compare the taking of preventing Physic ^o
the Procuring a Contagious Distemper. They do not know how to distinguish
between a Disease simply Epidemick, and a Contagious Epidemical Distemper; many
Methods may be allowed of in the First, which are Dangerous and Destructive in
the other. Preventive Physic I think, is generally given to prevent Relapses,
but not the first onset of Diseases. I never heard of a Salivation given to
prevent a Pox, nor of Vesicatorys to one who never had the Head-ake to secure
him from it. If any Patient thought that one in Thirty, or Forty, or an
Hundred, died of a Vomit, or any other preventive Physic, it could not be
expected they would undergo it, especially if the Consequence must certainly be
some dubious Distemper.

The Comparison of the Cortex Peru, or Jesuits Powder, favors this Practice
most, being a true Specific in intermitting Fevers or Agues. We learnt it from
the Spanish Indians in the Southern Parts of America. It was found to prevent
totally, or for some considerable time the return of ^g^ish Fits. At its first
Entrance into Europe not having by Experience ( and to the Cost of the first
Tryers) learnt the dosing and timing of it, and what Constitutions would bear
it, instead of the intermitting Fever which it prevented, it left many
chronical and fatal Ails, which did not appear but in Process of time; So that
People were very shy of it, and chose rather the Ague should take its natural
Course, or usual Method of Cure, though a few did die of it; than be liable to
these After-claps, of which in Process of Time many died. I ask our Conscience
Directors, whether at that time, they who would not use the Cortex (for then
the salutary use o^ it was not known) were Breakers of the Sixth Commandment?
Even at this time, though the Use of the Cortex has been improved upon by the
most polite Nations some Scores of Years, some eminent Physicians, and a great
(...) Patients, choose rather to omit the Use of it, because of its suspected
Consequences; are they Breakers of the Sixth Commandment?

The Fifth Motive to induce People to come into this Method of Inoculation, is
the late Accounts from England, o^ its being last Summer practiced and approved
of there. The KING (says one of the Inoculators) Prince, and most eminent
Physicians in London and Dublin, have declared their Approbation of it, and it
is a successful Practice there. This is either a Dream, second Sight, or a
contrived Story, for the latest News from thence only tell us that after ^uch
Intercession of some Surgeons who were in the H^^our of making Experiments, and
the KING's advising with the learned at Law, the KING did condescend (...)
allow this to be tried on a few condemned Criminals. Some News-Writers,
according to Custom, without any good Authority, say it was likely to get into
private Familys, but mention no Particulars, and consequently wants
Confirmation; what the partial Accounts of the Success of this Practice in
Boston sent home, may do in the influencing some to give into it, I shall not
foretell. From this we may learn* that in England they did not venture on it
without Permission of the Government; our Inoculating Parsons do it in Spite of
the Government, or Select Men of the Town

Their Sixth Allegation in favor of it is, Although procuring Illness to a Man's
own Person without any further View, be certainly a Sin; yet if it be to
prevent a greater, (though uncertain) it becomes a Duty. From this Principle, the
greatest Abominations are allowable. v. g. The curing or preventing a
Chlorosis, (whereof many die) where in some Cases the best Authors advise
Matrimony, and Matrimony cannot be conveniently obtained. I have heard some
Rakes say, that a Gonorrhaea well managed, has made them more healthy than
before, and prevented the Return of some periodical Ails; with several other
such vile Cases (which I blush to mention) deducible from the same Principle
which is made here convertible with the Sixth Commandment, Thou shall not kill.

Their Seventh Reason, (which is the only Argument they ought to use and rely
on,) is its Success. I need not tell them that there is successful Wickedness
for a time; or as John Williams says, GOD permitted Pharaoh 's Magicians, to
imitate his own Judgments, even to the hardening of the People's Hearts.

Their History of its Success is shortly this. At first they gave out, That it
was a Method not infecting, procuring only a small quantity of Eruptions, but
never Death, nor any bad consequence, and was an infallible Security against
ever after having the Small Pox. This was attested ex verbo Sacerdotum; and who
would not have complied with it, if Prudence and Reason founded partly on the
Testimony of some who had been in the Levant, had not been stronger than our
Faith in these Parsons grati^dictum; and in process of Time our own Experience
concurred with these Testimonies: We soon found it infecting; many have died of
the Infection received from the Inoculated, whose Deaths in a great measure
lies at the Inoculators Doors. Then the Parsons gave up this Point, but
continued to maintain the rest, till they found some of the Inoculated wlth
immense Number of Pustules. This they attribute to the difference of Clmate;
and being but Learners, we hope in a little Time to be more Expert (says D^.
M.) but none ever died of it these forty Years, (vide Some Account P. 10. etc.)
then dies the Inoculated Mrs. D -- l, (besides several others who dye in the
crowd when the Distemper was universal and at the height; for they acknowledge
( P. 11. of some Account) that many more were inoculated than they judged
proper to mention, because of the clamor of the People: (some of the
Inoculators said she received the Infection in the common Way, though the most
cautious of Women, and every thing wrought as is usual in Inoculation; Others
of them say she died of Hysteric Fits, not considering that Hysteric Fits are
no mortal Distemper; and it be^^ays not so much their Ignorance as their
WICKEDNESS, thus to impose on the World; for they certainly must know that most
Persons agonizing, have Convulsions and Tremors, called the Agonies or Pangs of
Death. Their DARING PRACTICE on Women with Child who miscarried while under
Inoculation, they do not mention, as if procuring Abortion were a very innocent
Practice, I forbear the Names of some who are instances of this Wickedness. Now
at length the Distemper in its natural Course abating, several who dye under
Inoculation, can no longer be concealed; Some of them now say the Winter Season
will not do, though it be the only Season prescribed by their Authors; And in the
name of others, one of the Inoculators, a young Conscience keeper, says, I am
not at all shy to say, that some may miscarry under it, because God keeps us in
a dependence on himself in the use of means; and if a man dies under
Inoculation he dies in the use of means. O IMPIETY! If a Man may make free with
his own Body Natural, because in Conscience he thinks he ought to do so, this
not only countenances the old Roman Doctrine of Felo de se, but is also a
considerable Step toward the making free with the Body Politic. v. g. He
foresees something like to be amiss in the State, which in Conscience he is
obliged to prevent by a lesser Illness or Commotion; as has happened in several
Places in Europe in former times by the Instigation of some who call themselves
R^ligious. As for the Consequences, Time must clear up; some we know, whose
Inoculation Sores have been for a long Time, and still continue troublesome.

What has been said in favor of it by way of Cant, etc. does not deserve
mentioning; as the calling of it a discriminating Mark of the Good from the
Ungodly, the Saints from the Wicked; their throwing the Odium of Party on the
Anti-Inoculator^. They who continue in an even steedy Course, as before, are
said to form a Party; not they who are active, and endeavor to introduce new
and dubious Practices and Customs. O BRASS! If it be a Party Business, it is of
their own making; for we may generally observe, the Inoculated are generally
the Devotees of some Inoculating Parson: At first it was Congregational, being
almost confined to Mr. W -- b's Hearers; then it spread among the Devotees of
Dr. M. and Mr. C.; and lately many being buzzed in the Ea^ with the great
Losses sustained in the Natural Way, have as it were in Despair come into it.

III. Reasons against the Use of Inoculation at present, and until further
Light.

My humble Opinion of Inoculation is as of all bold Experiments of Consequence
in the Practice of Physic* That whatever the Success or Consequences may be,
(and the more Trials the more Light) they may be of a public Advantage, though
at the Risque of the first Patients. If it answer, after Generations will reap
the Benefit of it; if otherways, the miserable Sufferers will be recorded as
bold, rash, infatuated Fools, the Practice for ever after abhorred, and the
Promoters thereof stigmatized as Murderers.

All solid and sound Philosophy, that is Natural History, is founded on
Observations made, and Experiments taken of the various Actions and Influences
of Natural Bodies on one another. I was always fond of this kind of Knowledge,
especially as it related to Humane Bodies in a Healthy or Morbid State; and if
these two dear Characters of a Good Citizen and Good Christian could be
dispensed with, I should have been pleased to see some Thousands inoculated
with several other Distempers as well as the Small Pox; but for the following
Reasons I could not at present comply with this novel, rash, and dubious
Practice.

1. Poisoning and spreading infection, are by the penal Laws of England Felony.
Inoculation falls in with the first without any Contradiction; and if a Person
of so weak a Constitution, that any the least Illness may prove fatal to him,
should be inoculated, and suffer but the tenth Part of what several of the
Inoculated have done, he must unavoidably perish, and his Inoculator deemed
guilty of wilful Poisoning. This is the Reason I suppose, why the Practitioners
of Boston thought themselves not safe to venture on a Thing of such
Consequence. Supposing only One in a Thousand should die of this Method, it
cannot with Safety to the Inoculator be practiced, without an Act of
Parliam^^^* exempting Inoculation by a sworn Practitioner from the Penaltys of
poisoning and spreading Infection. I think B -- n's Friends should advise him
to take his Trial, while so many judicious Magistrates and Ministers are in the
Humor of Inoculation, lest any time hereafter, during his Natural Life, he be
brought on his Trial either on the KING's Account, or by the Relations.

2. The Personal Testimonies of several Gentlemen who have been in the Levant
(whereof some have been published in the Weekly News Letters) importing, that
some Inoculated have died under it (as we have lately seen several amongst
ourselves) others have thereafter been miserable by its dismal Effects and
Consequences; and some have had the Small Pox in the natural Way
notwithstanding, But their Testimonies says Dr. C. M. are not worth a Straw;
though in Case of any felonious Action against himself, they would be wor^h his
Neck in any Court of Justice.

3. It seems agreeable to Reason, and the Experience we have of Distempers
received by Contact, That by Inoculation, not only the Small Pox, but many
other chronical Distempers (hereditary or acquired) of the person from whom the
pocky Matter is received, are communicated to the person inoculated; for all
Constitution D^stempers have some Tincture or Idea in every Drop of our Juices.
The acute Distemper as such, from its Nature soon shows it self; but the
chronical Ails, according to their Nature, act slowly and imperceptibly on our
Bodies, and require some Time before they become manifest All the Town knows,
how little nice the Inoculator has been in procuring good wholesome Juice; not
having many Patients in the common Way, he was frequently obliged to have
recourse to the Pus of the Inoculated; thus complicating the Constitution
Distempers of Two or more Persons to be ingrafted on his Patients. I shall not
enquire, what becomes of the first Foeculency of several who have been
inoculated more than once.

As in all Contagious Distempers, so in this the Fomes or Levain of the
Disease, is something very fine and Subtle; What then becomes of the other
gross foeculent part of this foreign Pus or Corruption ingrafted? In Reason one
would be apt to think, that it may prove the Ferment or first Speck of some
chronical putria A^l; the case being much different from that of the Pus of
Impostumations and Ulcers proper, not malignant but accidental, which by daily
experience we know may safely be received back into the same Mass of Blood from
whence it did proceed, and afterward thrown o^ by some Emunctory.

Some of their Incisions (even in those who can scarce be said to have had the
Small Pox, the number of the Pusti^les or Eruptions were so few and without
Pus) run profusely, one, two, three or more Months after they go abroad; not in
the manner of Suppuration, Digestion or wasting of the Substance in the Part;
but by way ^ll Discharge, Evacua^^^n, or Artificial Secretion from the habit of
the Body, and that without the Interposition of any extraneous Body, as L^nt,
Tent, or Pea, to keep the Lips of the Incision from agglutinating, as in common
Issues is absolutely requisite, but merely by the Viciousness or Malignity of
the Humor discharged, these Inoculated Issues are continued. Suppose by any
In^^mpe^^es of Body (which the most healthy are liable to from the change of
Weather, Diet, or other Accidents) the Juices are put into a hurry; this
vicious S^^retion (as much as all other natural Secretions) is d^sturb'd for a
Time, and the Malignant Humor either retained in the Blood, to the spoiling of
the Habit; or in Valetudinary ^bjects (as do all other Fluxions) takes its
course to ^ome weak Part, v. g. to the Lungs of those whose Lungs are tender,
to the Kidneys of the Gravelly or Diabetical, to the Head of those afflicted
with Distempers of the Head, etc. and consequently by its Malignity produce in
those weak Parts either insensible Wastings or in due ^ime Exulcerations. This
seems to account for the Subsequent Ails of the Inoculated publicly declared
by some Gentlemen as above. As in some the Veneral Lues does not discover it
self till afte^ some Months or Years, so it may be with this LUES* I am apt to
think, that if this Practice be ever approved of, it may be advisable, to
convert these Incisions into the Form of common Issues, to continue for some
considerable Time. N. B. The Sores remaining after the worst Sore of natural
Small Pox, heal as kindly as any other accidental Sore or Exulceration not
malignant.

Moreover, whatever Ails and Diseases, especially chronical, the Inoculated in
the after Course of their Life may be subject to; many of their Neighbors, and
perhaps some of themselves, will be apt to lay the Blame on their former
Inoculation; and so live in continual Anxiety and Disquietude of Mind, being
for ever rendered incapable of enjoying that Perfection of Happiness in this
Life, Men's sana in corpore sano. This I say may be the Case of some.

4. The rash and mischievous Methods used in propagating this practice. Instead
of contriving Methods to secure the Inoculated from taking the Infection the
common Way, and their Neighbors from being infected by them, they inoculate
indifferently in all Corners, and set the Town all in a Flame in one Moment as
it were; many perish who had the Infection from the Inoculated, whose Deaths
perhaps in foro divino they may be found guilty of. Their Authors Timonius and
Pylarinus ^ell them, The Person who collects the Matter, ought not to apply it,
least a double Infection ensue; and that the Advantage of this Practice is,
that a suitable Season and a well prepared Body may be had to rencounter the
Infection; but these things, as trivial, they neglect, and run headlong as if
pushed on by some Fury.

How conscientiously do they tell us, that though it spread Infection, there may
be Methods easily taken to prevent its hazarding others that do not yet come
into it* at the same Time before these Methods are taken or in the least
endeavored after, they lay all down they can proselyte. They do all they can
to persuade the Country Towns to come into it, though they generally have escaped
in former Small Pox Times, and the Winter coming on with the hard continued
Frosts may stop its Progress. Suppose they compass their WICKED DESIRES, and
One in Ten, which is more than can be expected to give into it (not above one
in Fifty in Boston have been inoculated) in different Corners of the Town (for
in their Scribles they lay down no Method of separating those from others) are
inoculated, in a short time those infect all the Town, so as to have it the
natural Way; without any Spirit of Prophecy by what we have seen of Small Pox
Patients in the Country Towns one Third, perhaps one Half of the People will
perish to the depopulating of His Majesty's good Province. The Reasons
Authority may have to connive at this, I do not pretend to meddle with; but
desire to be thankful to GOD, who in his wise Providence, seems to put a Stop
to their Career, by the late Deaths of several Inoculated.

For Six Months past the Infection in Town has much kept off the Country from
supplying us: The Town is now almost clear, and in a few Weeks those who fled
might have returned in Safety; but by the Inoculators Machinations, Inoculation
or Infection is continued* and we are kept in Statu quo: Nay further, to add to
our Calamities, Roxbury the Thorough Fare to Boston, which hitherto had
escaped, is now under Inoculation, and the Town's Supply more hindered than
before.

One of the Mischiefs atending this Practice, is, Family Divisions and Heats.
When GOD is pleased to take to himself some Relation, Servant or Slave in the
natural Way, v. g. a Child; the Wife with Bitterness reflects on the Husbaad,
telling him, Parson -- says, Inoculation would have saved our dear Child. And
how many afflict themselves, since wrought upon by the Inoculating Ministers,
because of the Deaths of their near Relations? The late inoculated Deaths make
these People more easy in their Minds. If Contentions arise say they in their
Cases of Conscience, ( p. 9.) is no matter to them, because it was so in our
(...) time, Mat. 10.35. For I am come to set a (...) ^^r^ance against his
Father, and the Daughter against her M^^her, etc. Thus they excuse their
spreading Contention. O vile abuse of the Scriptures!

IV. A few Remarks on the Practice, and the manner of promoting it.

In a little vain Book, called Some Observations, etc. the Author says, The
Incisions moderate the first Fever (or Fever preceding the Eruption) though in
most the Incisio^s or Issues do not run till the Pock appear, and then but
inconsiderably; and they themselves during this Fever use Blisters more than we
do in the common Way: And prevents the second Fever at the Turning, not
considering that they whose Eruptions are few and favorable either way, can
have no putrid Fever; those who are fuller have this putrid or second Fever
from a return of so^e of the Pocky Matter into the Blood; it must then first
return into the Blood, before it can come to vent it self at those Issues; so
that at most it may moderate, but no^ prevent this second Fever; we find
Vesicatorys or Blist^^s answer the In^ention better, by reason of the Stimulus,
inclining the noxious Humors to the Places of Vent.

The same Inoculator in another Place says, certainly the Issues (Incisions)
smell, more or less, according to the Degree of the Distemper, and in the
confluent Kind this Discharge is more noisome, like the running of ^he fluxy
Kind, which he all along represents as the most putrid corrupted thing
imaginable. A little before this he says, When the Patient is fullest under the
Inoculation, I affirm I could never smell their issues, no not when I have
leaned over their Beds on purpose to do it. His Lucubrations or Night Labors
in favor of Inoculation occasioned his great Cold, or we must put a worse
Costruction on such Contradictions asserted almost with the same Breath.

It is commonly said, that the Inoculated smell stronger than those in the
natural Way and same degree; this I do not insist upon, though the additional
stench of their running Sores or Incisions and putrified Cabbage Leaf, one
would think, should (...) the Senses more.

To say, we understand no more of the Small Pox now than we did Forty Three
Years ago, is a saucy Imputation on the many noble and useful Improvements in
Physic since that time. Have Dr. Sydenham, Morton, and other late ingenious
practical Writers on the Small Pox, whose Writings we daily peruse, done
nothing to the Satisfa^tion of this learned and pious Gentleman* His many
physical Blunders are forgive^* because he matter^ not if he has b^tray'd his
Ignorance therein; he writes with another Design, viz. Per ^us et nefos, at any
Rate to persuade to Inoculation.

In the beginning of the Small Pox, they pray God may put a stop to its
spreading, and at the same time do all they can to propagate it by Inoculation,
which is equally infectious as in the natural Way; some say more contagious,
because after the Eruptions are dried up, the Inoculated walk about with their
Issues running a kind of variolus Matter. ( N. B. If any of them are found in
mixed Assemblies or in Country Towns, while in this Condition, the Law of Nature
and Self Preservation seems to require the Discipline for mad Dogs.) In one
part of Prayer to thank God for the Discovery, and a little after to pray
conditionally, that if it be not of God he may put a stop to it; with many
other such Expressions in their Prayers, which in my humble Opinion, seem to be
a mocking of God, and an Abuse on their Hearers, whereof the greatest Part are
against procuring of Self-Illness. What shall a Man do in such Cases? go to
worship where he cannot join in Prayer with the Minister? This has been a
stumbling Block to some, and is much to the discredit of extemporary Prayers,
where all is left to the Parson'^ Discr^tion.

If the Inoculators had designed a public Good, why did they run headlong unto
it, without observing the Circumstances and Cautions which might have made it
useful; to b^gin in the Heart of the Town, where was no Infection; to inoculate
all Ages and Constitutions from the very Beginning, without being first assured
of it is Success on the Young and Healthy. Why did ^hey not petition the
Government, that none should be inoculated ^ll his Name was recorded, that for
the public Good in times to come, it might be known who died, and what state
of Health they afterward enjoyed who survived; as also have contrived some
Method, that none might take the Infection from the Inoculated: This Neglect
has occasioned the Death of many.

I am sorry the World cannot reap that Benefit from this rash and ^old
Experiment that might have been expected; The chief Promoter, who sends
Accounts Home not always to be depended upon, is credulous and whimsical; the
Operator is rash and unthinking: Who knows but they who have dyed or suffered
much under Inoculation, if they had had better Management, might have had
better Fate.

We have learnt from our 5 or 6 Mo. Experience of Inoculation. 1. Th^^ the
Small Pox may sometimes be communicated by Inoculation. I cannot say always,
because some have been Inoculated more than once before it wrought; and many
have from thence had only a sort of eruptive Fever, but no genuine Small Pox,
so far as I am able to judge. 2. That the Small Pox so acquired, is frequently
more favorable than in the common way of Infection, and not altogether so
mortal: What the dismal Consequences may be, I shall not pretend to determine;
but Reason and the Testimonies of some Gentlemen from the Levant, give us
ground to suspect. 3. That not one of the inoculated during the space of five
or six Months has had the Small Pox in the natural way, so far as we know; for
the Inoculators in every thing that makes against them, by LIES and
EQUIVOCATIONS endeavor to keep us in the dark. It is then a palliative
Prevention of the Small Pox for some time, and not very mortal; and
consequently may be of great Use to the Guinea Traders, when the Small Pox gets
among their Slaves aboard to inoculate the whole Cargo, and patch them up for a
Market; as is already the Practice with them in the other Pox or Yaws, by some
slight, palliative Cure to fit them up for a quick Market, though to the great
Damage of the next Purchasers.

If the Dismal Consequences do not discourage us, by a vitiated Constitution of
the Inoculated and their Progeny; who knows but this may be so improved upon,
as to become a Specific Preventive of the Small Pox, but it must first be
allowed of by Act of the Legislature (the spreading of infection I am afraid
will notwithstanding render it odious) and prosecuted by abler hands, than
Greek old Women, Madmen and Fools. And further, supposing the Consequences be
such as our Declarants say, we may proceed to try, if a Salivation or
Antomonial, or Sulph^rine Course, etc. may not totally carry off the remnant
Foeculency: That is, Whether Inoculation, with a subsequent Salivation, etc.
may not be an adaequate Succedaneum to the genuine Small Pox.

As a Caution to a certain Gentleman, (who you know in times past has been
troublesome to the R. S. with his trivial credulous Stories) least by his
Communications home, he may Impose on our Mother Country, he is to be
advertised, That a true and faithful Account of this Experiment, so far as can
be learnt, shall in due Time be sent home, well vouched and signed by some,
whose proper Business is to make such Observations.

I impatiently wait for some further Account of its Progress in London, their
Cautions and Rules in the Procedure, I hope may be of Use to us. For my own
Part till after a few Years, I shall pass no positive Judgment of this bold
Practice.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
N. England, Boston, Dec. 20. 1721. P. S. If I have been too rough with any
Persons Character, and it afterward appear that he acted in mere Zeal (though
mistaken Zeal) for the Good of his Neighbors, I heartily ask his Pardon.



Errata* For Parson t^ Pasto^* for common Way^ Natural Way.


