A Friendly Debate; OR, A DIALOGUE, Between ACADEMICUS; And SAWNY and
MUNDUNGUS, Two Eminent PHYSICIANS, About some of their Late PERFORMANCES.

(...), we live in such a fulsome Age,
When Nonsense loads the Press, and choaks the Stage;
When Bl^ckhead, will claim Wit in Natures spite,
And every Dunce that Starves, presumes to write;
Exert your self -- OTWAY.
BOSTON: in N. E. Printed in the Year, MDCCXXII.

Advertisement.
WHereas Dr. W. D. has lately published a little vain Book, full of Cant and
impropriety; which yet in Vanity he may judge, would be acceptable to A. S. M.
D. and F. R. S. These are to inform the Reader, that the said W. D. is a
Credulous and Whimsical Blade, a Madman and a Fool; and his Account is full of
LIES and EQUIVOCATIONS. And as a Caution to him (who has been troublesome to
Dr. A. S. with his trivial Credulous stories) least by his Communications Home,
he may impose on our mother Country; he is to be advertised, that a true and
faithful account of this Experiment so far as can be learnt, shall in due time
be sent Home well voucht, and signed by some whose proper Business it is to
make such Observations. Together with a short History, of all the
EXTRAGROUNDLESS MACHINATIONS that have been devised against it; the ill
Language, and BRUTAL MANNERS it has been treated withal; together with the
Abuses and Scandals of some LATE PAMPHLETS modestly OBVIATED.

TO my very Worthy Physician, Mr. ZABDIEL BOYLSTON.
SIR,
I Know no Person so proper, to present the following Dialogue to as your Self.
Such has been your undaunted Resolution, and truly Heroic Courage, through the
whole Course of your dangerous Enterprise; and such your Conduct and Wisdom, as
merit our highest Regards, and most public Thanks. To You under the Auspicious
Providence of GOD, we are Indebted for the Blessing of INOCULATION; for you can
claim the undivided Honor of Introducing it among us. And had not thou began
it, perhaps, there would not have been found a Soul so truly great, as to have
undertaken it. For this, Sir, I am bold to say, your Name shall be mentioned
with Honor, whilst those Physicians, and others, who have signalized
themselves by their Malice and Opposition to you, shall be otherwise spoken of.

There is indeed little in this Debate, worthy of your Consideration: and I
must confess it a folly, to answer these Fools according to their folly; but,
because they are wise in their own conceit, and that those that are blind with
prejudice for their Writings, may (if possible) see the Vanity of them, and the
injustice they have done your Self, as well as many Eminent and Superior
Persons among us.

I am, Sir, Your most Obedient Servant, ACADEMICUS
Emus^o meo, Feb. 15. 1721, 2.
A Friendly Debate, etc.
AC. PRithee, Sawny, Come hither, I want a little talk with thee.


Sa. I'se some, Master, what plaiseye Sar?


AC. Good now, don't beat my Ears with such a course Dialect; I am not used to
such Gibberidge; speak English.


Sa. Master, ye ken vary weel, that I canno spak Englis?


AC. I see, thou will never leave thy old trade, Sawny.


Sa. Ye mean Leasing, Maiste^.


AC. Yes, I do mean in plain English, Lying.


Sa. Why, Mon, co'd I spak Englis, would I prent against EXTRAGROUDLESS
Machinations?


AC. I don't think, you can speak true English; But you have learnt broad
English; and in English you shall talk to me.


Sa. Indeed, Sar, I canno.


AC. Indeed, Sir, you can; for you have had a liberal Education at
Billingsgate; the only place in the World to learn Broad English at. You have
also just now published a Libel, which is all Broad English; Therefore speak
English to me; be it never so broad, I care not.


Sa. Well then, to please you, Master DEMICUS, I Will treat you in English as
well as I can; what would you have with me?


AC. I would debate with you, about the Libel you have lately printed in the
form of a Letter, I suppose, to Dr. ALEXANDER SANDILANDE; I pray, what did you
intend by that Letter?


Sa. I am a Man of Letters, and can write to my Friends and Betters, as well as
any Man; and of them, and against them too, when I please; and would you have
me wrap up my Talent in a Napkin? No, AC. to confess a Secret, I purpose to
make the People know, I am a Learned Man, and a Master of a good Style and
Sense, as well as Medicine: And you know, the Practitioners of the Town, are
Illiterate Numskulls, and depend upon their own Chimney Corner Improvements;
while, I traffic to the Metropolis of Literature, and receive ample
Communications from the very learned A. S. F. R. S. and M. D. -- Surely they will
think I Am somebody; And I shall run away with all the profit too. And if any
Man is so brazenly impudent, as to whisper a good word for any Physician but my
self, le shall not escape Scotfree: I Will be foul on him.


AC. Foul on 'em, Thou cannot be otherwise. And I Will say that for you, and a Fig
for you; thou art foul on 'em with a Witness. And I know also, thou art proud
and vain enough. But if it be possible for you once in your Life, to speak a
word of Truth, prithee, tell me, what you further designed by your Letter. It
cannot be to oppose the Inoculation of the Small Pox; for you expressly declare,
Till after a few Years you shall pass no judgment on this Practice. And indeed
this is the only Sentence that has so much as the least shadow of sense in it,
for Sawny, you suspect, that within a few Months, you shall find the Aldest
PHYSICIANS in England and all Europe, to approve the Practice, (which to your
Confusion, we can assure you of already,) and that Persons of Quality, and
great Numbers in the City and Suburbs, are saved by it; and then you hoped to
have an Hele to creep out of. But, Sawny, why must the World wait a few Years
for that profound Judgment of yours, by which you think all Mankind must be
determined. No; Sawny, there is not an AS in Europe, that thinks your Judgment
worth hearing, much more, worth waiting a moment for. I tell you therefore,
there was another Maggot in your addle pate, that gave you the Itch of
Scribbling; and though we can all see what it was, yet I must have you Confess it.


Sa. Well then, Mr. DEMICUS, my design was, to ridicule the Principal MINISTERS
of Religion in the Town, and render their Ministry ^di^us to the People: It is
a thing I am strongly resolved upon; and I thought I had now got a pretty kind
of an Handle for it.


AC. But why so, Sawny? Have these Good Men done you any Wrong? or has ^ot thy
Brother Mundungus sufficiently done it already?


Sa. Yes; but they have been such Villains as to speak respectfully of Dr.
BOYLSTON; a Man I can never endure; they have bestowed upon him, Qu^^^ish
Characters high enough to m^^^ the most Celebrated Physician in England Blush.
I vow to be revenged on them.


AC. Revenge may be sweet, Sawny, but it is not good; And had that Gentleman,
whom you so disdain as a Cutter for the Store, been also a Cutter for the
Simples; thou, Sawny, should have been his first, though I fear, an incurable
Patient. A Gentleman of so much Skill and Success, as Dr. BOYLSTON is, ought to
be Vindicated from your Abuses and Insults of him, in the News-Letter:
especially, when he deserved so much of the SIX MINISTERS, and was so well
known and so dear to them. But then, Sawny, you desired an Answer to a Case of
Conscience; without which, perhaps, they would never have troubled you. And on
this Occasion, they thought it highly became them, to rebuke your rude
treatment of him, in alleging that to his Dishonor, which is so much his
Glory and Recommendation; that nothing in You, can stand in Competition with
it. But still, Sawny, thou have not yet confessed all: Come, open thy pedling
Budget; let me see the Bottom of it. This will never be accounted a sufficient
reason, why you should treat our MINISTERS with so much Fury, disdain and
petulancy.


Sa. Why then, I tell you plainly, I hate and abhor that Set of Men --


AC. Come, Sawny, I see I must add the rest; There is a Number in this Town,
who are irreversibly resolved, to destroy the Religion of the Country; and the
most effectual way to accomplish their resolve, is, to disaffect the People to
their MINISTERS: and the Favorable Opinion they entertain of Inoculation, they
think may be improved, as a proper Engine, to entrap the Inconsiderate People.
And now nothing could put a better Gloss upon it, then to employ some of the
PHYSICIANS as Tools to their accursed purpose. And accordingly you, Sawny, and
your Brother, Mundungus, being Two Eminent PHYSICIANS, and having more
Impudence, and as ye think, more Learning, than the rest, appear in the Front,
to ridicule the PARSONS for their Praying, Preaching, and Scribbling, (as you
term it:) and to invite the People, (that will be so silly as to dance after
your Scotch Bagpipes) to contemn them; And so proud you seem of your Office,
that you cannot write six Lines, before you laugh, or grin at them. So the Fox
rides the Goose, the Goose the Ass. --


Sa. Pray, who do you take to be the Goose Mr. Demicus?


AC. A certain Soland Goose; thy own dear Self, Sawny; And though there be
Fifteen of you on the Board, and but one Mo^ocular Fox, yet he can make you
move as he pleases. But it will be presently evident, that Goose is too Good a
Name for you; I shall first show, what a Knave thou art; and then (which is an
usual Favor of Heaven) what a Fool thou art, in the prosecution of thy Knavery.


Sa. Knavery!


AC. Yes Knavery! If Lying, Impudence and Malice, etc. will make a Knave;
Sawny, of these (...) as full, as a what d'y'e call it, is of Poison. --


Sa. Why, what Lies have I told?


AC. Innumerable! I Will single out a few gross ones in matters of Fact; and
which Sawny, you very well knew, (or might do so) when you wrote them.


Sa. What Is one, I pray?


AC. You say, Dr. MATHER sent Circular Letters to ALL the Practitioners of the
Town, (the Owner of the Transactions excepted) inviting them to come into the
Practice of Inoculating the Smallpox. Here Is not only one, but two or three
complete Lies; a finished Sentence, which none but you could have spoke!


Sa. Why, you will not say so?


AC. Yes, Sawny, I say so, and will prove it too. As to the first part, h.e.
that Dr. MATHER sent Circular Letters to ALL the Practitioners of the Town (the
Owner of the Transactions* excepted.) Dr. MATHER did indeed send, A Letter to
the Physicians in the City of Boston, and directed it to One of them, a Worthy
Schoolmaster, (whom we did not reproach for going out of his Line for
practicing Physic.) This he desired to be communicated to them; and, Sawny,
your honorable Name was particularly inserted, and principally in the
Direction. But he never sent a particular or separate Epistle to Every One, as
you must mean, or otherwise exclude your self from the Number of Practitioners.
Indeed, he wrote a separate Note to one or two, but no more; with another Copy
of his Letter to you, for fear they should be overlooked among them. Besides,
Sawny, this General Letter it self was not directed to ALL, there was some he
had no thoughts of, as he told the Person by whom he desired it might be
Communicated.


Sa. Why, Mr. Demicus, you make of it, what we of the Learned call, a
Complicated Lie: -- You seem to discover two Lies in One. --


AC. But now for the other Sentence, ( The Owner of the Transactions excepted;)
Truth! it is somewhat hard, that the Dr. should affront your honor so much, as
to direct the Letter to any but your self, when you know there is not a
Physician in the Town, that ought to be named the same Day with you. But
however, Master Sawny, he inserted your Name in particular; and desired
expressly, that they would not forget YOU. And notwithstanding you are so given
over to Lying, and so brazen in it, as to say over again, that the DOCTORS
Probity in his Abrigment could not be concluded from his Addressing it to those
who had the Original in their Hands; For say you the Truth is, he sent his
Abstract to all the Noted Physicians in the Town, but not to the Owner of the
Philosophical Transactions, and then cry out Proh Fides! Ah Sawny, Proh Fides,
sure enough! But now for the other Passage; You say Dr. MATHER, invited them to
come into the Practice of Inoculating the Smallpox. And before this in the
News-Letter, He applied to the Practitioners of the Place, to put this far
fetched, and not well voucht Method into Practice. But to see how far all this
is true, I Will recite the Conclusion of his Address to the Physicians, wherein
the World may see his unspotted ^^^ocence, and uncommon Charity. I will only
say ( writes the DOCTOR) that inasmuch at the practice of suffering the
Smallpox in the way of Inoculation, has never yet, as far as I have heard,
been introduced into our Nation where there are so many that would give great
Sums to have their Lives ensured for an Escape from the Dangers of this
dreadful Distemper; nor has ever any one in America, ever yet made the trial of
it, (though we have several Africans among us, as I now find, who tried it in
their own Country,) I cannot but move, that it be WARILY proceeded in. I durst
not yet engage that, the Success of the Trial here will be the same that has
hitherto been in the other Hemisphere: But I am very confident, no Person would
miscarry in it, but what would most certainly have miscarried upon taking the
Contagion the Common Way: And I would humbly Advise, that it be never made but
under the management of a Skilful PHYSICIAN, who will wisely prepare the Body
for it, before he performs the Operation, Gentlemen, My request is, That you
would meet for a Consultation upon this Occasion, and so deliberate upon it,
that whoever first begins the practice, ( if you Approve it should be beg^n at
all) may have the countenance of his worthy Brethren to fortify him in it. June
6. 1721.

Now could any thing possibly be more candid and modest, than this Address?
with what Conscience then do you intimate that he urged you; when he desires it
should be warily proceeded in, and leaves it entirely to your Consultation,
whether it should be begun at all. And what is their in it could disturb you*
May not a DIVINE who has (it may be) read more in Physic than any of you,
suggest modestly to your Lordships, his Thoughts on a matter of Public Concern,
without being so superciliously treated, is this worthy Gentleman has been?


Sa. Why, D^mi^^, 'Twas a Scandalum magnatum; Such Ignoramus's as he must not
presume to Advise those of our Faculty; let such Bl^^khead^ as he, and the
Persons keep to their Text.


AC. It Is well Sawny, only to humble thee by the way, 'twould have been much
for thy Credit, if thou had been advising with several Good Old Women, we
have among us, how to manage the Smallpox in the Common Way, whilst thou
Opposed Inoculation; many a Life might have been saved if thou had. But what
was the Principle, do you think that acted the DOCTOR in his humbly Petitioning
of you to meet, and Consult about it? He could have no personal Gain in View.


Sa. Why I sometimes (...) be is a Learned Gentleman, and what he did was out
of a Pious and Charitable design to do Good; But now I saw he is a Man of Whim,
and Credulity; and he thinks this juncture a fit Opportunity, to make
Experiment, upon his Neighbors, which he in Vanity judges will be Acceptable
to the Royal Society.


AC. Why: he imposes Nothing upon his Neighbors: he has only given them an
Abstract of the Accounts of this Method of Transplanting the Smallpox, which
are in the Philosophical Transactions; and leaves them to their Liberty.


Sa. But his Abstract is unfaithful, and the Account being in Latin, which his
Neighbors don't understand, they must pin their Faith upon his Sle^ve.


AC. Yes, I know you Sawny, and your Brethren, are ready enough, to say it is
unfaithful; and to swear point Blank against it too, or any thing else that
makes for Inoculation. But I shall believe it is a most Faithful Abstract, till
you show me some instances to the Contrary.


Sa. Well, I Will give a notorious one. Dr. TIMONIUS reports; At first the more
prudent were Cautious; But Dr. MATHER says, At first the People were Cautious.
What a vile Falsity is this?


AC. Thou are mad, Sawny. You have forgot which side of the Hedge you are of;
for if the People were Cautious, most Indubitably the Prudent, which are
comprehended under the General Term ( People) were Cautious. Have thou no more
to say?


Sa. Yes; the words of PYLARINUS are, TURCAE HANC NEGLEXERUNT HUCUS QUE, which
he translates, The Turks do not much come into it; whereas it should be, the
Turks had not at all come into it.


AC. Then by the way, what shameless wretches are you, Sawny, and your Friends,
to insult us in print too, that it was first practiced by the Turks, and that
we fetched it from the Mussulmen? Besides, Sawny, In the Copy of the Letter,
which the DOCTOR sent your Unworthiship, his words are, The Turks do not yet
come into it: and how the word much came to be printed, I believe he cannot
tell.


Sa. But he is so wicked as to translate, nil funesti, no ill Consequence.


AC. O Abominable! But, Sawny, he was giving a Short Abstract, and did not
pretend a precise Translation. Yet, even here it is truer than yours. Though it is
very probable that a Gentleman, who has published so many things in the Latin
Tongue, wants a little of your Instruction: Especially since Mundungus too (a
Fellow who it is well known, could not spell a Common English word; (no not
Tobacco if it were to save his Life, though for the word Pilfer I will not say,)
has found out that, Dr. MATHER wants Grammar Learning. However, I hope, when
you have taught him Latin, and your Brother has taught him Grammar and
Syllogisms; (as he pretends to do) he may be something of a Scholar at last.
But go on.


Sa. He partially Omits every thing, that seems not to favor the project.


AC. Well done, Sawny! but produce an instance.


Sa. He does not tell us that, TIMONIUS mentions the Inoculation at a Time,
when it was so mortal, that half the Infected dyed.


AC. That Is a Lie, Sawny; he expressly tells us so.


Sa. You deal too sharply with me, Mr. Demicus.


AC. No. A Spade is a Spade; and a Lie is a Lie. And had thou read, and
studied the Bible, as much as Hudibras; perhaps thou would have remembered
that, Liars are to be sharply rebuked. However, Ly on. As for his omitting a
long story, which you say could be with no good Design: I believe, it could not
possibly be with any ill Design; for most certainly you would have discovered,
and published it: Nor is there the least Passage in the Story, that makes (as
you say) against Inoculation. The reason for which the DOCTOR omitted it was
only this, Sawny, he purposed only an Abstract, and was not such an Ideal, as
to think that every word of a long Original ought to be inserted in an
Abstract. But Lie on.


Sa. He says nothing of the two Children.


AC. Sawny, the Whetstone is now thine against the World; if he has said
nothing, thou have, I am sure, said something to your purpose; viz. Two
Children three Years Old died sometime after Eruption FROM INOCULATION. And
from thence insinuate that Dr. MATHERS Abstract is defective. But Sawny, if it
should be found that Dr. TIMONIUS never said any such thing, but expressly
declares the reverse, what would the World think of you? This is the real
Truth. That Great Man did indeed say, they reported such a thing, but they can
lie at Constantinople too, though perhaps not so well, nor fast as you can here;
and the DOCTOR took the pains (he says) to go to the Houses, and inform
himself, and he found the report absolutely false.


Sa. Then poor Sawny, must knock under.


AC. Well, this is matter of Fact. And Dr. BOYLSTON and his Friends therefore,
desired most importunately and in print too of you Sawny, to publish at large
the Account of TIMONIUS in the Phil. Trans. But you would not be prevailed
upon; suspecting that your Lying would be detected. And yet -- Ah! thou need
a good Memory, Sawny, now you your own good self, in your own Letter, do
expressly own that, TIMONIUS found them to dye of other Distempers; and in
another place, that Dr. TIMONIUS says, None that ever used it, died of the
Smallpox. Though you are not so honest, as to relate half he says, while you are
in the very midst of your Exclamations against Dr. MATHER for not inserting
All, as you know, every Abstracter ought to do.


Sa. I must acknowledge, my true reason for keeping my Transactions in hugger
mugger was an hope, that no other Copy would come into the Country, and so I
might past undetested; But I know how, (though I can laugh at Conscience keeping)
to pretend Conscience on an Occasion, and so I have expressly told you that, I
could not comply with their WICKED DESIRES (in Capitals for fear you should not
sufficiently regard it.) I had more regard to the Lives of my Neighbors, than
to bring them into a Snare. My CONCIENCE could never give way to such a thing.


AC. Sawny, take heed, Art thou aware of what thou say. Thou art the veriest
fool in the World, and those that have the least Wit, will choose thee for an
Officer of the first Rank and Dignity: For Sawny, If the desiring to have Dr
TIMONIUS's Account Reprinted be WICKED, then the first Printing of it, must
also be WICKED. But have thou no more Sense and Manners than to treat, the
Great Dr. HALLEY so impudently, and all the Royal Society, by whose Direction
and Allowance he publishes the Transactions, as to call them a Set of Wicked
Men. When you send a Second Letter to Dr. SANDILANDE, prithee, let it be in
such Terms as these.

Dear Sir,
I Apprehend my self Qualified to instruct the whole World; and I earnestly
desire of you, my Friend, at the next Meeting of the ROYAL SOCIETY, to complain
of that Whimsical and Credulous Man Dr. HALLEY, for publishing the
Communications of Dr. TIMONIUS and PYLARINUS; and remonstrate unto them that,
they are a Wicked Crew for doing it. I know there were lately among you, Two
Dukes, Six Earls, Ten Lords, Ten Knights, Nine Doctors of Divinity, One
Archbishop and Five Bishops: But it is no matter, they have countenanced a
Wicked Practice, to bring the Lives of People into a Snare. For my own part,
I Am bound in Conscience to Appear Against them. -- But Sir, when I send my True
and Faithful Account of this Experiment, I shall be fuller in my Sentiments on
these Points.

Yare awn Mon, MISAGATHOS.


But, Sawny, this Business must not go over so. Prithee tell me, whether the
Levant Communications encourage the Inoculation, or no; If they encourage it,
then Dr. MATHERS Abstract is blameless. And i^ you are between Hawk and
Buzzard, why were you so bold as to Assert that, if our Wicked Desires were
gratifyed, they would bring the Lives of People into a Snare: But if they
discourage it, what reigning Wickedness are you possessed withal, that you
refuse to keep the Lives of People out of a Snare, by publishing these
Writings? The Horns of this Dilemna are as bad as a Scotch-horning upon thee.
-- But Sawny, our Wicked Desires are answered; The Political State for the
Month of August, has given us Dr. TIMONIUS out of the Transactions, without
being beholden to you for them.


Sa. Well, I hope, you have no more to charge upon me.


AC. I Will take but a few more of thy Lies in the Order I find them in thy
confused rapsody. Why, Sawny, do you say that, the Winter Season is the only
Season recommended by their Authors; and Over again, the Winter Season is the
only Season prescribed by their Authors. Whereas they both of them expressly
commend and prescribe the Spring, and you your self knew it, for you declared
so in your July-Libel. O BRASS! How could you say that, Some of the Inoculated
Africans here, have had the Distemper in the Common way. Only you think you may
say any thing. O COPPER! Again you say, You have at length in two of their
Books, a silly story, or familiar interview, and conversation between two black
(Negro) Gentlemen, and a couple of the Reverend Promoters; and you add, Ob rare
farce* Now where are those two Books: you certainly see DOUBLE, Sawny. O Iron!
And then, that Lie of yours, that Many of the Inoculated have dyed Incognito:
You repeat this; and truly, Sawny; I observe you love a Lie so well, when you
make it, that if it be a Swinger, you will not fail to repeat it. This chewing
the Cud, why so sweet, Sawny? But then Sawny, what a graduated Liar art thou to
declare, That this Method had been among the Learned, universally known in
England above twenty Years, but being deemed wicked and felonious was never
practiced there; when the famous Dr. HARRIS, one whose Books you are not worthy
to carry after him, has declared that the first Communication of it unto the
Learned there, was from Dr. TIMONIUS about Six or Seven Years ago; surely thou
wast Lying for a Wager; and I protest, thou have won Sawny!


Sa. Indeed Mr. Ac, too much of one thing is good for nothing; I wish you would
have done.


AC. I perceive then, you are much of the Fellows mind, whose plea to his
Indictment was; My Lord, I perceive it is a dirty Business, and I desire to hear
no more on it. I declare also, I am weary too, and I know not when I should have
done, were I to detect thee in all thy fudging. -- But what has been said, is a
sufficient Specimen of thy Faculty; and enough to make thee proverbally a LIAR.
Thou have won K. JAMES Horse, mount, Sawny, and gang thy gate. -- But stay.I
cannot let you go yet.


Sa. More still?


AC. Yes; more still. I thought I had wholly done with your Veracity, but I
cannot pass by ^^e instance more, which has in it a Complication of such
baseness, and blackness that none but you, could have been guilty of it.


Sa. Phi^^^^ Its Impossible.


AC. An ^^u^y, one would have thought so, but yet so it is -- The Venerable Dr.
INCREASE MATHER having said, that Inoculation of the Small Pox began the last
Summer to be Approved and Practiced in England with Success, You fly out, this
is either a Dream, Second Sight, or a contrived Story; when the Public Prints
from London, do expressly speak of it as a SAFE and UNIVERSALLY USEFUL thing.
Thou have no Second Sight, Sawny, but art stark blind; and as for contrived
Stories thy own Brain is most pregnant; and in this, thou art so truly fertile
that thou can give us no other. Of the same Kidney are your Brethren, who
the other Day when that Passage in the London Mercury was reprinted; that Great
Numbers in the City and Suburbs are under the Inoculation of the Smallpox;
they were so hardy as to deny it, and assert it to be the Invention of some
busy Inoculator. And yet forced anon to come off with owning, we were Imposed
on. -- But this Lie of yours is so Impudent, I cannot pass it without some
reflection upon it. Thy face, Sawny, is trebly brass'd or you could never have
had the Countenance to deny so manifest a matter of fact; And now had you the
least grain of sense, and good breading in you, you would hang your Lugs, and
beg the Gentleman's Pardon. Sawny, have thou forgot, or did thou never read,
Lev. XIX. 32. Thou shall honor the face of the old Man, and fear thy GOD. This
Gentleman is a Venerable Servant of GOD; and for above threescore Years, has
preached the Gospel, and been Greatly and Justly admired: He has been received
with great respect into the Courts, and very Closets of Crowned heads: And has
also had great Esteem in the renowned Church of Scotland; which I suppose you
Sawny, who complain of the Worship where the Prayers are left to the Parsons
direction, do not much affect. And yet with what petulancy, do you treat him?
Sawny, 'Never did any body but you accuse him so publicly of Falsehood, and yet
it is impossible to forge a more unjust Accusation; and to conclude all, you
would have him to puzzle himself in Cases of Conscience, though you and your
Brother Mundungus too rail at him, for meddling with a Case of Conscience at
the same time. Thou Sawny, art a good Lad, and very finely brought up, I
profess.


Sa. But though you w^nt allow me to treat the Father as an old Fool, I hope, you
will permit me to play upon the Son as a Young one.


AC. Yes; By all means! Especially since he has been above Forty Years a
Celebrated Preacher,, and has been so acknowledged by Foreign Universities, as
no American ever was before him, and justly merited the Honor of being a
Member of the ROYAL SOCIETY; when thou, Sawny, cannot spell the Word Philosophy,
nor construe the word Hades signifies the Invisible World.
Hades, though thou have sent so many People thither.


Sa. I vow, I cannot but hate him for all!


AC. But, why Sawny? I doubt there is muckle Deel in the Business.


Sa. Think you so*


AC. I have known a Man, Sawny, that could not boast of more malice and spite
against this Gentleman, than your self; but when he lay upon his Deathbed, his
ghastly Countenance, and rolling Eyes spoke the Horror of his Conscience, and
he expressed an intolerable uneasiness, and most passionately desired to speak
with the DOCTOR: when the DOCTOR came, he declared with all the regret
imaginable that he had abused him, and spoke most maliciously of him, and he
ardently implored his pardon; Adding that, he had no other reason, but Because
he saw he did so much Good. --


Sa. But I cannot but hate him still, whatever it cost me; Why does he not
answer the things, which we are ever now and then printing against him?


AC. Sawny, he scorns it. You are but silly croaking reptiles; and it would be
loss of time to meddle with you, when now he employs his Pen upon things which
will be lasting Testimonies of his Ability and Piety, when you are rotten in a
silent Oblivion. Besides, in his ESSAY TO SHAKE OFF A VIPER, he has effectually
answered you. It will shake off a Thousand of you. -- But then Sawny? your
impudent and supercilious Treatment of your own Two Excellent Pastors, this is
without Parallel!


Sa. I don't like their whining Preaching, I cannot profit by their canting
Ministry.


AC. More shame for you, Sawny! You are lifted up to Heaven, in the enjoyment
of them; but whither art thou casting thy self down? All Men of Sense admire
their Administrations, and judge them to be Men of shining Abilities.


Sa. But, if they go to take Pen in hand, what they write is full of Cant,
Impropriety, and EXTRAGROUNDLESS Machinations.


AC. The Sense and Style with which they write, for ever charm all Competent
Judges.


Sa. But, Parson COLMAN does write silly Stories, and Contradictions; for which
his Lucubrations or Night-Labours occasioning him a great cold, must be some
Apology, or else we must put a worse construction upon it. -- It Is a little
vain Book that he has Written. --


AC. What do thou mean, Sawny, by thy Metaphisical Distinction between
Lucubrations, and Night Labors? -- But if that Valuable Gentleman was only
indisposed with a Cold, he would not venture himself into thy Hands for his
Cure; he had rather take all thy railing, than any Physic of thee I believe.


Sa. But Parson COLMAN is too Saucy; he has a saucy imputation on the useful
improvements in Physic, (to understand the Smallpox) within these Forty three
Years by Dr. SYDENHAM. He has committed many Physical Blunders, but it matters
not if he has betrayed his ignorance therein, he writes with another design per
fus et nefos at any rate, to persuade to Inoculation.


AC. As to his Physical Blunders, you cannot instance in one of them, except you
think to avoid any appearance to seem learned in Physic is a blunder: and that
he ought to have talked like an Apothecary as you do. But your Physical Blunders
are numberless; at present I Will only put you in mind, how you betray your
ignorance in the Chronoly of Physic; Every body but you, Sawny, knows that Dr.
SYDENHAM's Writings were published more than three and forty Years ago.


Sa. But there is Parson COLMANS Colleague, a Young Conscience keeper* he
declares his Judgment, that if a Man should use a remedy for the preservation
of his Life, which has been commonly successful, but it pleases GOD now to deny
his Blessing to it, and the Man miscarries, he may yet have the Comfort of
dying in his Duty. Have not I cause to cry out now in Capitals, O IMPIETY!


AC. No, Sawny, but I have to cry out, O STUPIDITY! Either all Common Sense is
banished the World, or thou must be hiss't out of all humane Conversation. None
but you ever questioned Mr. COOPER's Assertion What! if any of your Medicines
happen to prove unsuccessful, (and ah, Sawny, how few of them prove otherwise?)
would you charge your Patients with impiety for receiving of them, and your
self also for giving of them. Mr. COOPER tells you of some that have died by
taking a Vomit, and drawing a Tooth; now had these any reason to dye with the
horror of Self-Murtherers in their minds; or must only they dye so, that have
not the Happiness to dye under your unskilful Hands. You, Sawny, also commend a
Salivation as a proper Succedaneum to the genuine Small Pox; but how many have
dyed by a Salivation? -- And then your Insolent Fling of a YOUNG
Conscience-Keeper, Sawny, had thou any Conscience at work at all, thou
could not have been guilty of such a profanity. Thy Father Ishmael is a Saint
to thee.


Sa. But the Young Inoculating Parson ought to be charged with Impiety, and my
Brother Mundungus too, thinks he is defective in his Morals.


AC. A Sweet pair of Brethren are You! were you shaken in a Bag together,
Sawny, 'twould be hard to tell which would come out first. But methinks, you
are very unlucky in your Epithet. This Gentleman has been noted for his Piety,
and good Conscience from his Childhood; and I am confident besides you two,
there is not one thinks otherwise. And now Sawny, the staling of two such
skunks at him as ye are, leave no scent upon him. But, Sawny, thy malice
against him, and all other Good Men is wonderful!


Sa. Malice I trow! No, I have told you that I am one of a PUBLIC SPIRIT, and
ONE WHO ENDEAVORS THE GOOD OF THE PEOPLE, and for fear you should overlook it,
or question it, I have told it you in CAPITALS.


AC. Sawny, had thou thy Deserts, we should see something in Capitals on thy
Breast -- Thy own Pamphlet exposed as a Bib there, with an ENDEAVOR FOR THE
GOOD OF THE PEOPLE, were enough, -- So great and inveterate is thy Malice.
Besides the Passages already touched upon, I Will single out a few instances,
which are obvious to every Reader, as a Specimen. I pass by your Malice against
Dr. MATHER, and only remark, that You and a few more such as you are, have
almost made it a proverb among sober Persons, when they speak of that Gentleman
to say; The Devil has a great spite at that Good Man. Only I cannot but observe
one odd expression of your malice to him; you say (for that is the true state
of the Case) that if two or three Men should be deposed; that, they heard a man
say, that somebody told him, that he heard a Report, that Dr. MATHER had been
guilty of a Felonious Action; and then a French Brother of your Faculty, famous
for all -- should swear to it: you declare that it should be worth his Neck, in
any Court of Justice, where you should be Foreman of the Jury. --


Sa. Yea; marry do I say so. (aside.)


AC. But stay, Sawny, that Lark-time is not come yet; But thy Crew may use a
more Sulphurious way to dispatch him, for ought I know. In the mean time, art
not thou out of thy LINE, Sawny? To proceed; what but malice could inspire you
to move that, Dr. BOYLSTON should be brought upon his Trial for his Life, as
your Bloody Brother, and constant Friend Mundungus also does; whose Soul most
certainly, if ever one Soul acted two Bodies, has a full possession of yours.
You say, you would indite him for poisoning, and spreading Infection; which you
say is by the penal Laws of England, a Felony. And you add, Inoculation falls
in with the first without Contradiction. Now Sawny, be not angry, if we poor
Scholars, that must sit at the feet of such a Gamaliel, presume to Contradict
you. You know, Sawny, that in England it is a very common thing to carry
Children into the Infected Chambers, on purpose to give them the Smallpox;
because they judge their Childhood the best Time for them to have it in. But
was ever such a Spreading the Infection, prosecuted as a Felony? And is not
Inoculation less dangerous and poisoning than this?


Sa. Ay, but here is the giving of a poison Mr. Demicus!


AC. Then, Sawny, all Medicines that have Poison in them, if you give them, you
incur the Guilt of Felony. What! does a PHYSICIAN talk so? Ah! Sawny, if your
Doctrine were to be proceeded upon, how soon should we see thee within thy LINE?


Sa. But I say, Inoculation is a Felonious poisoning!


AC. Then what a Murderer are you, who have privately declared so often in
Favor of it; and publicly said you should pass no positive judgment on the
practice; though methinks, thou art pretty positive it is a Felony, and that the
Physicians ought to be hanged for it!


Sa. (...) ^ould not have any Body hanged, but Dr. BOYLSTON, and the
INOCULATING PARSONS, that have spoke respectfully of him.


AC. Nay, Sawny, thy malice goes a little further than so; for thou have an
Abominable Flout upon the JUDICIOUS MAGISTRATES, who you say are in the Humor
of Inoculation, i e. in a Felonious humor, of abetting and countenancing a
thing, they ought to be hanged for. Unparalled impudence! Pray, Sawny, let us
make a pause, and put a Case a Little: The same Case that was lately published
by him that you call, the Old Second-Sighted Parson. Suppose a Young Fellow
should go from New England to Scotland, to practice Physic; and being a mere
Stranger, the MINISTERS should cherish him, and bring him into Credit; And
then, suppose he should publish bitter, invectives, and scoffing Satyrs against
these Eminent MINISTERS, just such as you Sawny, have against our MINISTERS
here: And then laugh at the People, for thinking them worthy to be consulted in
Cases of Conscience, etc. as you have done ours, and propose their banishment,
or Indictment for Felony; and if the MAGISTRATES don't take Law of them, to
scoff at them as Judicious Coxcombs. I say, Sawny, in Scotland, which is a very
well governed Country, how would the poor New-Englander be dealt withal? I
don't ask, whither the Government would send him; ken ^^e a Tolbooth, Sawny?
But I ask, how would the (...) that love their MINISTERS treat him. -- But to
proceed with your Malice. You propose that it is best for the Inoculates to
convert their Incisions into Issues, and so continue them. This looks specious,
and at first one would think you were giving good Advice: But then you propose,
that if any of these be found in a Country Town, with their Issues running on
them (from whence by the way it was never yet known that any Infection was
communicated) the Discipline for MAD DOGS should be inflicted upon them. We
know, Sawny, what Discipline you are for: though we have no Dogs in this Country,
so mad as you are. I have not Malice enough in me to wish thee a Taste,
Perillus, of thy own Proposal. Our good People bear with the Impudence of
malepert Strangers, as no other People do; if they were not so very tame under
their Insults; Thou Sawny, would not pass the Streets, without the Boys crying
after thee, O BRASS! O BRASS!


Sa. Why, if the English People are angry, when a Sc -- n treats them so; I Will
charge them with High Treason, as well as Felony.


AC. Ha! ha! he. -- But Sawny, There comes a pang of Devotion upon thee, the
only one in all thy Letter; thou say, I desire to be thankful to GOD for the
late Death's of several Inoculated. Methinks! this sounds a little maliciously.


Sa. It Is because it seems to put a step to the Career.


AC. You mean the Career of saving the Lives of poor People. But, Sawny, of
those Six or Seven that have died after Inoculation, out of about near Three
Hundred that have been Inoculated, you cannot name one that died truly of it; if
the Circumstances, and Occasions of their Death were told, (too long to be
inserted here, but it will be done, Sawny) it would prove a real Service, to
the progress of the Career, you bestow your Curses on. As to two, which your
party Clamor about, an ordinary Course of such Physic as you would have
prescribed, would have had the same effect upon them, This method, Sawny, has
been so universally Successful, that none but such as are ignorant or malicious
as you are, have questioned it.


Sa. Ignorant, Mr. -- micus! I hope you will not charge me with Ignorance.


AC. Yes, Sawny, of all the Pretenders to Physic, that ever wrote, there has
none betrayed so much Ignorance. Thy Physical Blunders are innumerable!


Sa. Why; you will not say so!


AC. Yes, Sawny, I do; and though I am no Physician, I can convict you of them,
-- But I Will single out but two, or three of them to cut thy (...) for thee. In
your first Libel you rail at Dr. BOYLESTON, for propagating the Infection of
the Smallpox, and in a few lines after say, the Inoculation produces nothing
analogous to the Smallpox: here is ignorance and inconsistency too! And then
you learnedly Compare it, to the receiving the Oil of Tobacco into the mass of
Blood, which you say may be received by the Stomach or Lungs without any
prejudice. In your last Libel, you talk like an Apothecary, and learnedly tell
us that, all Constitution Distempers have some Idea, in every drop of our
Juices, and so other Chronical distempers from the Person from whom the pocky
matter is received are communicated unto the Person Inoculated. But Sawny, I
suppose it will convey the Toothach too. And if the Pus was taken from you,
Sawny, I fear the Person would be Inoculated which Lies, Malice, Ignorance; for
all thy juices are filled with the Idea's of them. And then, (for thou art a
mighty Self-consistent Spark Sawny) you afterward learnedly propose, that
Inoculation (which you have all along represented, as Infecting the whole Body
with all imaginable Venom) may be ordered by Act of Parliament as an Adaequate
Succedaneum to the Genuine Smallpox to purify the Blood from the remaining
faeculency. Was there ever such a Blockhead? But I Will supersede the other
Discoveries of your Skill, with the mention of but two more.

You say that, Whatever ails the Inoculated in the after course of their Lives,
may be subject to; the Blame will be laid on their former Inoculation. Here Is
ignorance and malice too. If they have ever taken any Physic of thee Sawny,
they would have a much better Cause to lay it to. How very Prodigal of their
lives must the People be, that will venture them in the hands of such a woeful
Physician!

And there is one Instance of thy Superlative skill, Sawny, that is very
notorious. I have often enough heard thee ridiculed for it. When the Patients
are in the utmost danger thou see nothing of it; nor say any thing to
prepare their Friends for it; yea, when they are actually dying and within two
or three hours of Death, thou bear their Friends in hand, that there is no
such matter. There are many can tell enough of thy performances this way. --


Sa. You cannot mean me, Mr. Demicus. For Dr. MATHER, and Parson COLMAN too,
have recommended me to the Esteem of the People.


AC. Yes, Sawny, you came recommended to them, and they were so Credulous (as
you call them) to hope well, and speak well of you. But you were so well known,
they could procure you little practice, and accordingly you took a Voyage, but
soon returned; where at last by their means you got a little Credit. However,
but little notice was taken of you, till your Opposition to Inoculation, made
you famous. And yet, you were one of the most unsuccessful PHYSICIANS in the
Town. When there dyed above 700 People in this Town within three Months, how
many were your unhappy Patients? Though at the same Time, GOD was pleased to
Succeed Dr. BOYLESTON to a wonderful degree, in his Patients that labored
under the Common Infection, besides those of Inoculation. And Sawny, are you
not ashamed now, to treat the Gentlemen that took such pains to introduce you
into all your practice, like a warmed Rattlesnake. I hope such a Monster of
Ingratitude, will warn them from being too Credulous in encouraging Strangers.


Sa. I hate to bear any more of this, I impatiently wait for some further
Accounts from London.


AC. But if the Accounts be not just as you would have them, You Will say they are
a a Contrived Story of some Inoculating Parson; A Dream; or Second Sight.
However, we have very full Accounts from London; especially in a Book of Dr.
HARRIS's, an Abstract from which has been lately published by Dr INCREASE
MATHER, what would you have more? If you were a Lump of Brass, Sawny, you must
blush what this great Man has written so directly contrary to you. But I am
weary with talking with you, except thy Brother Mundungus, I know not another
such conceited and lying Coxcomb in the World.


Sa. Nay; you have highly affronted me, in yoking me with such a sorry Fellow.


AC. Neither a barrel, a better herring: And you doubtless must have a peculiar
respect and veneration for him, or you would never have quoted him as you do.
Why, he is the only living Author you quote, Sawny.


Enter Mundungus. AC. As sure as can be, Sawny, our old Proverb -- Never nigher
than when you are talking of him. Hoh! Mundungus! we were just a talking of
you; prithee, sit down. But look ye, Mundungus, if you don't speak, as you
spell, I will not (...) you say.


Mun. Sur, I will due as we will as I kan.


AC. Well, what is it you come hither for?


Mun. I cum to thell my brethar Sonni, that he is afoule.


AC. Why so, Mundungus?


Mun. Becas he is so fouleche as to specke for h^omain Invenecions in Fisecke.


AC. Is that all?


Mun. And becas he dus not daddicat his Boucke to wurthy Selecket Men, for them
to be the Pattroones of his Abuseis on the Minesteres, and scakered Scripters.


AC. Nothing else?


Mun. And becas he dus not imponeselly shay, that the best plase to gat Grammur
Larning, and larn the Rols of Sclegesem, and studde Sempeti and Anthepeti, and
solfe qescions and rigte tretes on Inokelacion is a Thobacko ciiler.


AC. Do you hear, Sawny, you Brother says you are a Fool?


Sa. Ah! he can say any thing, and every Body knows his Tongue is no slander;
he may say and write what he pleases, and no body will stoop so low as to
answer him. But I suppose, he is come to ask my Interest, to promote him to be
a Master of a Writing School, and thinks this a good Specimen of his Capacity
and Orthography.


AC. Well, I Will leave you to your selves for the present, and would have you
call in a French Brother of your Faculty to your Assistance, and I fear you will
confirm an old and sad Satyr, ubi duo Medici, ibi tres Athei; And so Farewell.


APPENDIX.
Whereas since the DIALOGUE was in the Press, we have been favored with a MS.
in the Mundungian Language, and so have attained to greater Accuracy in it; we
thought we could not fill up the vacant Pages, more to the Satisfaction of the
ingenious Reader, than by annexing the following VOCABULARY.

Mundungian. English. Acket Act alowebell allowable ascke ask aliu^e alive
aloude allowed apoos oppose aqunt account berefet bereft bugerly beggarly
bastened bastinado'd baged begged cidnys kidneys coleg college crischens
christians ciping keeping deses disease death death destiguche distinguish
engleche english earth earth efeckets effects exequen execution equ^ti iniquity
eseigrrea assyria fouleche foolish fisecke physic farries pharisees fecicions
physicians giufe give Goge Judge Ingenes Indians imbasenger ambassador
instrocken instruction invenecions inventions jogment judgment inockelaten
inoculating inglechments englishmens loufe love lifven living liufes lives
moufe move myine mine medeson medicine might might mock much negochat
negotiate none known nw knew nom name obstekell obstacle o^^ht or o^te ought
objecken objection prates practice paregrafet paragraph predeges prejudices
quescion question querck quack resenes or reasaons reasons riches righteous
relegen religion (...) (...) solfe solve sockesesful successful saufed saved
scorese scores scakered sacred selecket men select men smocken smoking thailes
tails th^ols tools theche teach thytell title thoune town therebel terrible
thobacko tobacco ting thing vunity unity whar war wicke which wipet whipped wecke
week wecke weak youse use yers ears

THe Author of this language is one MUNDUNGUS; who though he moves in the dark,
and smoaky Sphere of a Tobacco-Cellar, has a very diffusive Light; and has
lately blessed the whole Country, with two Superlatively excellent, and
matchless Treatises; in which we may venture to say, he has set the Scriptures
in a very new Light: and discovered a profound knowledge in the Arts and
Sciences. This his Language is without controversy very nice and curious: And
we know none so proper to be declared, the Universal Language. And since he has
so honored this part of the World, as first to impart it to us; we humbly
conceive, some public marks of Honor ought to be conferred upon him: and we
propose, that he be preferred Prosessor of it, among the Sons of Harvard; his
Language be enrolled into the Number of the learned Tongues, and his Manuscript
be preserved as a Valuable Curiosity in the Library; though two or three pages of
it, we think ought to be exactly transcribed and sent to Petersburgh as a Key
to the 3 Volumes, lately carried there by the Muscovite Travelers. And
further, whither he should not be constituted Censor of the Age, and Imprimator
of the Press? And be desired, to write a Spelling-Book, for the use of the
Schools since he has rendered STRONG and WATTS, etc. altogether useless.

And since it is so Rhetorical and persuasive, we move that, he be the
Prolocutor in all public Assemblies, and Associations of the People. And now,
since we have entered his Praises, we cannot pass by his profound skill in
Logic, ^ be ordained Moderator of all disputes, controversies, and public
Acts. He is also very expert in Physic, and Medicine, and can by two principles
alone, i. e. Sempeti and Anthepeti explain the most abstruse secrets of Nature;
therefore we propose that an Infirmary be erected for him, that so he may Head
all the Invalids in the Country: though probably the new Brick Edifice in the
Common, may do for the present. He has also discovered so great a knowledge in
Divinity that we move he be elected CONSCIENCE-KEEPER-GENERAL of the Country;
and all Cases of difficulty be referred to him; and if any MINISTER shall
meddle without his Liberty, it shall be deemed a going out of his line, and he
shall be obliged to pay fourfold for the ^^^r'd Breeches. And whereas his Skill
in Politics is so very profound, as with one single glance to discover the
Origin of all State Differences, etc. we move that, his Bugget be hung up in
the State House, and consulted upon all difficult Emergencies.

FINIS.

