TREMENDA. THE Dreadful Sound WITH WHICH The WICKED are to be Thunderstruck. In
a SERMON Delivered unto a Great ASSEMBLY, in which was present, a Miserable
African, just going to be Executed for a most Inhumane and Uncommon MURDER. At
BOSTON, May 25. th 1721. To which is added, A CONFERENCE between a MINISTER and
the Prisoner, on the Day before his Execution.

Deuteronomy. xiii.11. All Israel shall Hear and Fear.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for B. Gray and J. Edwards, and Sold at their
Shops. 1721.

The Dreadful Sound. BOSTON Lecture, 25. D. III. M. 1721.
JOB, XV.21. A Dreadful Sound is in his Ears --.


AND if the Dreadful Sound be now repeated in our Ears, it is with such an
Accent as this upon it, Hear this, and know it for thy Good. The Dreadful Sound
shall not be made Audible unto us, upon any Design but this, That we may become
those whom it shall not belong unto; That we may Escape the Things contained in
it, That we may be Saved with Fear, and be Persuaded into the Methods of our
Salvation, Knowing the Terror of the Lord.

If it be Enquired, Who it is that has the Dreadful Sound in his Ears? The
Answer must be fetched out of the preceding Verse, It Is the Wicked Man. If you
can say with Job, Lord, Thou know I am not wicked; Then, all the while you
have the Dreadful Sound in your Ears, it will be drowned with the Joyful Sound
of your Deliverance from all these Terrible Things. But the same Job said, If I
be Wicked, Woe unto me! If any of you, my Neighbors, are conscious of your
coming under that Character, the Dreadful Sound in your Ears, it is fit you
should be made sensible of it, that so being moved with fear, you may do those
things which will prepare you for a more Joyful Sound. The Best Thing that can
be done for you is, That the Dreadful Sound in your Ears, may awaken you into
that cry, O wretched one that I am, who shall deliver me!

A Servant of GOD, here maintains this Assertion; That perpetual Pain is the
Portion of a Wicked Man. The Life of a Wicked Man is all spent in continual
Throws, to bring forth, nothing but that ugly Monster Sin; which when it is
Finished brings forth Death. We Lament the Condition of some who are several
Days in Travail: But Oh! how Lamentable the Condition of a Wicked Man, who
Travaileth in pain all his Days! Yea, the Pain of a Wicked Man, is in this
point, worse than the Pain of a Woman in Travail. For when she is Delivered,
she remembers her anguish no more, for the Joy of what is Born into the World.
But so far is the Pain of a Wicked Man from ending in Joy, that it has no End
at all. He Travaileth in Pain all his Days.

My Text is a Demonstration and an Illustration of what is thus asserted. A
Dreadful Sound, or a Sound of Terrors, is in his Ears. And this is the awful
DOCTRINE to be now insisted on, THERE are Things which make a Dreadful Sound in
the Ears of a Wicked Man.

A Wicked Man does not always hear the Dreadful Sound. There is a deep sleep
for the present prevailing on a Wicked Man. Though the Dreadful Sound be in his
Ears, yet he stops his Ears against it. But there will a Time come, when the
Dreadful Sound will force its way into his Ears; he will be no longer able to
stop his Ears. I was going to say, it shall now do so! It must be the Work of
them who manage the Public Exhortations, to make this Dreadful Sound become as
Articulate, as Intelligible, as Efficacious as may be, in the Ears of their
Auditors. It Is our Commission to utter the Dreadful Sound; We are to say that
thing, and Cry aloud, and lift up our voice like a Trumpet in saying of it,
Isa. I^I.2. We to the wicked, it shall be ill with him.

In pursuance of this Commission, we will first make this Enquiry,

WHO is the Wicked Man?

And surely, When it is asked, Who is the Wicked Man? It must needs be a
Dreadful Sound, in the Ears of the Man to whom it shall be with Conviction
said, Thou art the Men. For this to be spoken from the Word of GOD unto any
Man, Thou art a Wicked Man; verily There cannot be a more Dreadful Sound heard
among the Children of Men. I shall proceed upon it; Who is the Wicked Man?

It must be answered, First, More Negatively. It Is not merely to be a Sinner,
that will con^^^^^e a Wicked Man. Eliphaz does not say or every Man who may
fall into a Sin, A Dreadful Sound is in his Ears. For, There is not a Just Man
upon Earth, who does good and sins not. It has been truly observed, The
Best of Saints while here on Earth are Sinners; but the worst of Saints are not
Wicked. Indeed, There can be no Sin committed, but there issues from the Law of
GOD a Dreadful Sound unto the Sinner. No Man can Sin, but the Law of GOD will
upon it say unto him; Ezekiel. XVIII.4. The Soul that sins, it shall die. But
then, the Gospel quells the Dreadful Sound of the Law, by leading us to that
which speaks better Things. And though the Believer of the Gospel, is not
presently barred from all Falls into Sin, yet the Guilt of the Sin into which
he falls, is taken from him; and he is rescued from that Love of Sin* which
denominates a Wicked Man. When he falls into Sin, he falls into that which he
Loves not. He may say with him; Romans VII.15. It is what I allow not: It is what
I hate. And so he is not a Wicked Man: Bone vir, hoc nibil ad Te. The Dreadful
Sound is not for him.

Wherefore, Secondly; and more Positively. A Wicked Man is a Sinner, who Loves
to be a Sinner. It Is the Love of Sin that is the Mark which distinguishes a
Wicked Man. It Is that Wicked Love of Sin, which is inconsistent with the Love
of GOD, and with the dispositions of Piety, by which the true Fear of GOD is to
be distinguished. This will be discovered in several Properties of a Wicked Man.

First, A Wicked Man is one under the Reigning Power of Sin. We read, Romans
IV.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are under Grace. If Sin
have Dominion over a Man, he is not under Grace, or in good Terms with GOD; No,
but he is a Subject of that Wicked Kingdom, in which every Subject is a Vassal.
A Wicked Man has not the steps of his Life, Ordered by the Word of GOD: He
leads a disorderly Life, because Iniquity has Dominion over him. A Wicked Man
is one of those who are called, The Servants of Sin, and The Servants of
Corruption, and The Captives of the Devil. It may be said of him, He serves
diverse Lusts. His Lusts have an absolute Command over him. The Motions of His
Lusts have an irresistible Force upon him He cannot Resist his Criminal
Propensities. He cannot mortify his Carnal Appetites. His unmortified passions
for Vile Things are too Potent for him. His Vices lay Chains upon him; draw him
hither and hither to his Confusion. Though he knows it will confound him to Sin
in such and such things, yet he must needs go, when he feels himself driven
into it. He is entirely governed by vicious Inclinations.

Secondly, Sin has the Full Consent of a Wicked Man. We read, Hos. 5.11. He
willingly walked after the Commandment. That is to say, Commanded Idolatry.
When Sin is proposed, and a Man goes willingly into the proposal, this
Willingly is Wickedly. Indeed, there is no Sin without some degree of Consent.
There goes a Consent of the Will unto ever, Act of Sin. But then there is a
difference between the Consent which a Godly Man yields unto Sin, and the
Consent given by a Wicked Man. When a Godly Man Sins, his Fault rather lies in
this, that he does not Deny, than that he does Consent. As when a thing is put
unto the Vote, a Man who does not oppose, but only suspend his Vote, in some
sort, yields his Consent. As our Caryl expresses it; A Child of GOD, when a
Temptation comes, he does not give a direct, Yea, of Consent; but when he Sins,
he does not give his, No, so livelily as he ought to do. His Consent unto Sin
is a kind of a middle Act; it lies in his not Refusing to Sin, his not
Refusing, Rejecting, Repelling the offer with such Vigor as he ought to do.
But now, a Wicked Man Sins with a Full Consent: He is one who Chooses to Sin:
Yea, He is one who prefers a way of sin. The Will of a Wicked Man fully closes
with Sin. He has his Will when he does a sinful Thing. If his Understanding
remonstrate unto the Folly of what he is going to do, yet his Affection
thoroughly espouses it.

Thirdly, A Wicked Man does Resolve to Sin. We read, Eccl. VIII.11. The heart
of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. There are those who have an
Heart fully set, upon sinning; such Sons of Men are the Children of Wickedness.
A Wicked Man, if he make Prayers against Sin, yet he brings not hearty Desires
against Sin. A Resolved Sinner is a Wicked Man. His Resolutions are, To morrow
shall be as this day, and much more abundantly. A Godly Man is one who Cleaves
to GOD with a Full Purpose of Heart. The main purpose of his Heart is for
Godliness in all the Exercises of it. When he Sins it is beside his purpose; his
purpose was to have done otherwise. He is out of his way when he does amiss:
The well meaning Traveller has missed his way. As it has been Remarked, Peter
denied the Lord, it was not because he Resolved so to do; but rather because he
Resolved so much in his own strength to do otherwise. A Wicked Man is one who
Resolvedly sets himself in a way that is not Good. He can Sin on Deliberation,
and he does it with Resolution.

Fourthly, It Is the Delight of a Wicked Man to Sin. We read, Prove. X.23. It is
a sport unto a fool to do mischief. When Men can sport themselves in Sin, then
mischievous is their Wickedness; it is mischievous Madness. To a Virtuous Man,
Sin is the greatest sorrow: To a Wicked Man, Sin is the greatest pleasure. The
Man who pleases GOD, is one who takes pleasure in doing so. He Chooses the
things that please GOD. The Wicked Man is one who pleases himself rather than
GOD, and never more than in sinning against GOD. We have been told, That there
are such Things as, The pleasures of sin. It Is the guise of a Wicked Man to
count them so. A Wiser Man counts them Torments, Horrors, bitter Miseries. The
Rule is, Delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee the desires of
thy heart. A Wicked Man is one who does Delight in sinning against the Lord.
Therein he has the Desires of his Heart. It is a Grief unto a Good Man to Sin.
A Wicked Man is glad when he Sins; Glad when GOD is grieved.

Fifthly, Custom in Sin is the consummation of Wickedness; the finishing stroke
in a Wicked Man. He is, as I may now agreeably express it, an Ethiopian in
Wickedness. We read of some, Jer. XIII.23. Who are accustomed to do evil; and
can leave it off no more than the Ethiopian can Change his skin. They that are
Accustomed to do evil are Wicked Men. A Wicked Man is one who makes a Trade of
Sin. A Gracious Man may Sin and may Repeat the Sin. But then, he breaks off the
Custom, with begging and pleading for help against the Sin. He makes many a
complaint against the Sin. He never gives over complaining, till he has got the
Victory. A Wicked Man is Customarily so: He is one who is commonly overtaken
with such Things as he knows to be Abominable Things, hated by the Soul of GOD.
It is the Custom, the Course, the Way of a Wicked Man, to do those Things,
which he knows are Forbidden by GOD, and Offensive to Him. Though he knows that
he Trespasses in what he does, yet a Wicked Man will go on still in his
Trespasses; and make a Custom of doing the Things which he does not think to be
Right. When these Five Brands are set upon a Sinner he may be turned loose into
the Common, to graze among Wicked Men. This is a Lover of Sin, and must go in
the company of wicked Men; which is also what he Loves to do: It Is the Note of
such an one, That he Loves to do so; Loves to Flock with the Birds of his
Feather, though never such unclean and hateful ones. This, This is the Man,
that must have in his Ears, a Dreadful Sound. This before we go any further
must be spoken to him, than which there cannot be a more Dreadful Sound; Thou
art a Wicked Man; And the Portion of the Wicked belongs unto thee.

But we are now come to our second Inquiry,

WHAT are the Things which make a Dreadful Sound in the Ears of a Wicked Man?

In general, There is this Dreadful Sound in the Ears of a Wicked Man; Man,
Except what thou hear in the Tenders of the Gospel, there is nothing that
makes a Joyful Sound unto thee. A Wicked Man is one under the Curse of GOD.
Now, as it was of old said, How shall I curse, whom God has not cursed? So it
may be said, How can they be blessed, whom God has cursed? None can speak a
Comfortable thing unto the Cursed of GOD. There is this Dreadful Sound in the
Ears of the Wicked. Isa. LVII.21. There is no peace, says my God, unto the
wicked. Every Thing is a Micajah to a Wicked Man; it Prophecies nothing but
Evil unto him. All the Objects which surround a Wicked Man, say this unto him,
I am sent with heavy Tidings unto thee. All the Creatures are up in Arms
against them, who persist in Rebellion against the Glorious GOD. Hear ye
Rebels; were ye not very deaf, you might hear this Dreadful Sound from all the
Creatures unto GOD crying against you, Shall we smite them, O GOD, shall we
smite them! Yea, The whole Creation is groaning against you for the Abuses you
put upon it. There is a Dreadful Sound in the Groans of the whole Creation, to
be delivered from your Abuses.

But more particularly,

I. The Threatenings which are denounced in the Word of GOD against every Wicked
Man: Certainly, these must needs make a Dreadful Sound in the Ears of a Wicked
Man. When the Commandments of GOD were given from the Flaming Mountain, there
was a Dreadful Sound in the Ears of the People. We read, Exodus XIX.16. There
were Thundrings and Lightnings, and the voice of a Trumpet exceeding loud, so
that all the people that were in the camp trembled. The Commandments of GOD are
armed with Tremendous Threatenings against the Breaches of it. The Law has its
Penalties for the Breakers of it The Threatenings in the Word of GOD, against
the Wickedness, wherein the Law of GOD is violated, what are they but
Thundrings and Lightnings; and the Voice of a Trumpet exceeding Loud, making a
Dreadful Sound in the Ears of a Wicked man. O most Hard hearted one, why do
thou Tremble so little under the Fulminations? We read, Romans I.18. The wrath of
GOD is revealed from Heaven, against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of
men. It Is Revealed and Proclaimed, and Published in the Threatenings of His
Word. But, What a Dreadful Sound is made by these Threatenings in the Ears of
all Ungodly and Unrighteous men? Hearken to the Dreadful Sound, which the Word
of GOD makes, in the Threatenings of it. Hear attentively, the Noise of His
Voice, and the Sound that goes out of His Mouth. The Voice roareth; He
Thundreth with the Voice of His Excellency. He Thundreth marvellously with His
Voice; the Dreadful Things which He will do unto the Wicked: Things which we
cannot comprehend! Is there not a Dreadful Sound in that word of GOD! Eccl.
VIII.13. It shall not be well with the wicked. Is there not a Dreadful Sound in
that word of GOD! Psalm. XXXII.10. There shall be many Sorrows to the wicked. Is
there not a Dreadful Sound in that word of GOD! Prove. XIII.21. Evil pursues
sinners. In the Predictions of what was to befall a wicked World, we read of a
Treble Wo-Trumpet; whereon, Rev. VIII.13. An Angel flying through the midst of
Heaven, says with a loud Voice, Woe, woe, woe to the Inhabitants of the Earth.
Even so, The Threatenings in the Word of GOD, make this Dreadful Sound, Woe, woe,
woe to the wicked lovers of Sin. Some little Rumbling of the woeful Sound shall
be now heard among you.

First, There is in the Word of GOD, a Dreadful Sound of Temporal woes
threatened unto the Wicked. What a Dreadful Sound may the wicked hear in that
word! Deuteronomy. XXVIII.59 The Lord will Make thy Plagues wonderful. There are many
Woes which the word of GOD threatens unto the wicked, in the concerns of this
Life; and at length an Early Death, and a Grievous Death. As the Promises*
declare Godliness to be profitable unto all things, thus the Threatenings
declare Wickedness to be Detrimental unto all things. O wicked (...) Hear the
Dreadful Sound; It foretells (...) Devourers to sieze upon thy Harvest; foretells
GOD making thee Sick in smiting of thee; (...) foretells, a Reproach that shall
not be wiped away It foretells, tbe Raising up of Adversaries to m(...) lest
thee; It foretells, a Vexation with all Adversity; It foretells, a Life consumed
in the Anger of GOD; and Finished with a very Hastened and Unhappy Period.

But the Dreadful Sound of the Trumpet is to wax Louder and Louder.

Secondly, There is in the Word of GOD a Dreadful Sound of Spiritual woes
threatened unto the wicked What a Dreadful Sound may the wicked hear in that
word! Exodus IX.14. I will send all my plagues upon thy Heart. There are many
Woes which the word of GOD threatens unto the Spirits of the wicked, in a Blind
Heart, an Hard Heart, an Heart forsaken of GOD. The Threatenings assign for the
Souls of them who do wickedly, such Arrows from the Quiver of GOD, as carry
more horrid wounds with them, than any that can be shot into their Bodies. O
wicked man, Hear the Dreadful Sound. It is this, Thou art yet in thy Sins; and
unreconciled unto GOD. It is this; The world has laid its Enchantments on thee,
and thy only Food is the Dust of the Earth. It is this; Thou art a Slave unto
Satan, led captive by him, to do his will. It is this; Thy Lusts are thy lords,
and thou art always toiling to fulfill the Desires of thy Flesh and of thy
Mind. It is this; Thou have those chains of Darkness on thee, which will not
let thee know the way of Peace. It is this; Thy Soul has deplorable Distempers
in it, and thou art pining away in thy Iniquities!

But now, the Third Trumpet is to Sound. The Woes of that are to come quickly.
It Is to tell you of the Things, which the Last Trumpet will bring upon a wicked
World.

Thirdly. There is in the Word of GOD, a Dreadful Sound of Eternal Woes
threatened unto the wicked. What a Dreadful Sound may the wicked hear in that
word! Mat XXV.46. The wicked shall go away into Everlasting Punishment. The
Woes which the word of GOD threatens unto the wicked in this World, are
horrible enough: But Oh! what a Dreadful Sound may the wicked hear, in the
Threatenings of the Woes that are to be in Another World inflicted on them! Is
there not a Dreadful Sound in that word, The wicked shall be turned into Hell!
Is there not a Dreadful Sound in that word, The Rich man dies and is buried,
and in Hell he is in Torments! Do not the Threatenings of, A strange punishment
reserved for the workers of Iniquity, make a Dreadful Sound in thy Ears, O
wicked man? O lovers of Sin; When you are wandering from GOD; You may hear the
Dreadful Sound of His Threatenings, That you shall one Day be Banished from GOD.
When you are all on Fire, in Thirsting after unlawful Things, You may hear the
Dreadful Sound of His Threatenings, That a Devouring Fire and Everlasting
Burnings will be appointed for you. Oh! Dreadful Sound! Thus it is, that the
GOD of Glory Thunders! Thus it is, that the Voice of the Lord, divides the
Flames of Fire.

II. The Voice of a Guilty Conscience cannot but make a Dreadful Sound in the
Ears of a wicked men. We read, Prove. XX.2. The Fear of a King, is as the
Roaring of a Lion. A Guilty Conscience tells a wicked man what he has to fear
from the Vengeance of the Great King whose Name is Dreadful. And the Roaring of
a Lion makes not a more Dreadful Sound. When the Mind of Man is first created
by GOD, there is a Spirit in it, which has a principle of Reunion to the
Glorious Creator of it. The principle of Reunion to GOD, in that Spirit of Man
which is the Candle of the Lord, performs the Office of a Conscience, in
speaking from and for GOD unto Man. The Conscience may through the prevalence of
Impieties, and Impurities, and Carnalities be laid in a Slumber. But GOD will
in His time awaken the Conscience of a wicked man out of its dozing Slumber,
and then it will do like the Angel, of whom we read, He cried with a loud
Voice, as when a Lion roareth. The Conscience of a wicked man speaks thus unto
him, Thou have in thy sinning thousands of times denied the GOD that is Above;
and made thy self worthy of a Destruction from GOD. O Dreadful Sound! The
Conscience of a wicked man speaks this unto him; Thou art in ill Terms with
Heaven, and thou have the wrath of GOD abiding on thee. O Dreadful Sound! The
Conscience of a wicked man speaks this unto him; The wrath of GOD* unto which
thou art Obnoxious, is Intolerable, is Insuppartable; It Is a fearful thing to
fall into the Hands of the Living GOD! O Dreadful Sound! Surely, It Is a
Dreadful Sound which is in the Ears of a wicked man, when an Officer of the
Great GOD within him, tells him, That he lies under that Anger of GOD, before
which the Mountains Quake, the Hills Melt, the Rock fall, and there is no
standing before the Indignation! Tells him, That he must have a certain fearful
Expectation of Judgment, and of a fiery Indignation to devour him!

III. The Voice of Death Approaching can make no other than a Dreadful Sound in
(...) Ears of a wicked man. Of Death we read, (...) XVIII.14. It is the King of
Terrors. How can it be any other to a man, whom it strips (...) all he Enjoys,
and throws down unto a Place of Torment! The Messenger of Death, must needs
make a Dreadful Sound in the Ears of a man, who perceives himself ready to be
seized, and has no view of any but Endless Torments, after the seizure made
upon him. Should a Prophet of GOD, come and say, O man, Thy Time is come;
within a Week thou shall be called before thy Judge, and the Place that has
Known thee, shall Know thee no more: O Belshazzar, would not thy Countenance
change upon it, and thy Knees even smite against one another! A Man who has no
prospect of a Blessedness after Death, and indeed has made no Provision for it,
may yet apprehend* yea, cannot but apprehend, his Death Approaching. He sees
the Dispatch which Death makes upon all round about him, and he cannot but say,
What man shall live, so that he shall never see Death at all! He feels the
Advance which Death makes upon himself in his own Infirmities, and he cannot
but say, I know, that thou (...) bring me to Death. Nature and Reason speak
this to a wicked man; It is appointed for man (...) to Die; and thy Death, O
Man, is unavoidable. Thou may not, thou can not continue always (...). O
Dreadful Sound! Nature and Reason (...) this to a Wicked Man; Thou art in a
very (...) while to Die; the Day of thy Death, it is Near, it is Near, and it
hastes greatly. When a few years at most, are past, thou shall go whence thou
shall not return. O Dreadful Sound! Nature and Reason speak this unto a wicked
man, Thy time to Die may be Nearer than thou art aware of; Thou know not the
Day of thy Death. It may surprise thee suddenly presently, This very Day. Thou
know not what a Day may bring forth. O Dreadful Sound! Surely, It Is a
Dreadful Sound which is in the Ears of a wicked man, when he is in the Terrors
of the shadow of Death; when the Terrors of Death are fallen upon him; when the
Angel of Death is coming toward him, and Swearing by Him who Lives for ever
and ever, That his Time is just coming to an End!

IV. Hitherto the Dreadful Sound which may reach and fill the Ears of the
Wicked man in the present State, has been insisted on. But it must now be
added, That there is yet a more Dreadful Sound, which the Ears of a Wicked man
shall in the Future State be thunder struck withal. Yea, the Anticipation
thereof, why should it not now, make a Dreadful Sound in thine Ears, O Thou
Forgetter of GOD! One might wonder, if that should not now be a Dreadful Sound
in the Ears of a Wicked man; Eccl. XII.14. GOD will bring every work into
Judgment. The mention of a Judgment to come, in the Ears of Governor Foelix,
made such a Dreadful Sound, that we read, He trembled at it. But then, Oh! what
a Dreadful Sound will they that must awake unto shame and everlasting contempt,
have in their Ears, when the Trumpet of GOD shall be Sounded, Arise, ye Dead,
and come to Judgment! A Summons to appear before the Judgment Seat of GOD, O!
what a Dreadful Sound must it be in the Ears of the Wicked man, who can look
for nothing but a Discovery of all his wickedness in the Great Congregation,
and a Condemnation to such a Loss and such a Pain, as cannot be without Horror
thought upon! When the Glorious Judge of the Word proceeds to pass the Sentence
on the Wicked; Oh! the Dreadful Sound of it! You have the Dreadful Sound,
Matthew. XXV.41. Depart from me, ye cursed, into Everlasting Fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels. Unto them that are now wickedly saying to the
Almighty, Depart, I desire not the Knowledge of thy ways; What a Dreadful Sound
will there be in this Doom from the Glorious One, Depart from me, I know thee
not! Unto them that now wickedly decline to address the Son of GOD for His
Blessing, What a Dreadful Sound will there be in this Doom from the Glorious
One, Depart Thou Cursed! Unto them who are wickedly Hot upon the gratifying of
their Evil Desires; What a Dreadful Sound will there be in this Doom from the
Glorious One, Depart into the everlasting Fire, from whence the smoke of the
Torment shall ascend for ever and ever! Unto them who have wickedly despised
the pleasant Land, and trod under foof the (...) of Heaven* What a Dreadful
Sound will (...) be, in this Doom from the Glorious O (...) unto an Hell, where
shall be weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth for ever more. Unto them who
have wickedly hearkened unto the Devil more than unto their Savior, What a
Dreadful Sound will there be in this Doom from the Holy One; Depart, into a
Lodging with the Devil and his Angels*

O Dreadful Sound!

Truly, The whole Portion of the Wicked in Both Worlds, is that which makes a
Dreadful Sound, in the Exhibitions of it. The Roaring of the New Volcano among
the Western Islands, or the Noise made by all the rest of the Ignivomous
Mountains is nothing to the Dreadful Sound of GOD from Heaven declaring what
shall be done unto the Wicked. The Cataracts of Niagara make not such a
Dreadful Sound; The Dreadful Sound of the Waves that strike aganist the
Mountains of Angamannia, that not only Deafens but even Sickens the Approaching
Mariners, and frights them out of their Wits; I say unto you, It is not a
thousandth part so forminable.

But now the Intention of all these Exhibitions and Admonitions. This is, My
Friends, to Save you from the Dreadful Sound. We read, Psalm. LXXXIX.15. O
Blessed are the People who do know the Joyful sound! Verily* If you make a due
use of the Dreadful Sound, which terrifies you, it will soon make you partakers
of a Joyful Sound, which, O Blessed are the People, whom it pertains unto!

The Advice to you, is, Let none remain any longer among the Wicked. Souls,
Depart from the Tents of the Wicked men, lest ye be consumed in all their Sins.
It Is done* By Considering, by Acknowledging, by Bewailing of all your
Wickedness: O Bemoan your selves; I have Sinned, and I have done very
foolishly. It Is done, By Repairing to the Blood which will wash away your
Wickedness; O make this Plea, take this Hope; The Blood of JESUS CHRIST the Son
of GOD, cleanses from all Sin. It Is done, By abandoning every way of
Wickedness. O cease to do Evil, and learn to do Well; and Remember, It Is he who
Confesses and Forsakes, that shall find Mercy.

A Serious and Thorough Repentance, is the Thing, whereto all the Wicked are to
be Encouraged. But, Oh! what a Joyful Sound is there now to be in your Ears for
your Encouragement! Behold I bring you Good Tidings of Great Joy! There comes
from Heaven unto you this Joyful Sound; Be you never so Wicked, You may turn to
GOD, and upon your doing so, you shall find a Pardon. O the Joyful Sound of
that word; Isai. LV.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and Return unto the
Lord, who will have Mercy, and unto our GOD, for He will abundantly Pardon.
There comes from Heaven unto you this Joyful Sound; Be you never so Wicked,
there is a Great SAVIOR willing to Receive you, and Redeem you, if you come
unto Him. O the Joyful Sound of that word! Joh. VI.37. Him that comes unto me,
I will in no wise cast out. Let this Joyful Sound melt and break your very
Hearts within you. There is not one of you all that has yet fallen into the
Unpardonable Sin. If you had, you would not be here. There is not one of you
all, whose Day of Grace is yet over with them. If it were, you would not feel
such Motions in your Souls as you do. The worst of you all, may yet Return to
GOD, and in doing so, He will be Reconciled unto you; yea, He does Beseech you
to be Reconciled unto Him.

And now, O you, whom the Dreadful Sound has driven, and this Joyful Sound has
drawn, unto Repentance, and, ye Converts of Zion, who begin to Live unto GOD,
Hear, Hear the Joyful Sound, which you are now to be dismissed withal.

You are now to have in your Ears that Joyful Sound, Be of Good cheer, Thy Sins
are forgiven thee. That Joyful Sound is now for you, This is a dear Son, This
is a pleasant Child, I will surely have Mercy on him. That Joyful Sound is now
for you; All things shall work together for Good unto them that Love GOD. Yea,
To you there belongs that Joyful Sound, O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave,
where is thy victory?

And, O you that Live unto GOD, and hate every false way; After your passing
through the valley of Death, and again coming out of the Grave, you shall hear
this Joyful Sound from the Mouth of the Glorious Lord; Math. XXV.34. Come, ye
Blessed of my Father, Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation
of the World.

Oh! may the Sound thus heard from the Two Mountains of Ebal and of Gerizzim,
have a due Impression upon you!

BUT that the Designs of REPENTANCE may be the more Effectually prosecuted,
there must be made more Audible, a Dreadful Sound, which the Providence of the
Glorious GOD has lately produced among us, and which requires to be most
seriously attended to.

There is a Remarkable One, in the Condition of that Son of Death, who appears
in Chains this Day among us, and who is within these Two or Three Hours to flee
down to the Pit; there may be no staying of him.

A Dreadful Sound there is in the Ejulations of this poor Creature, upon the
View of what he has done, and of what he is now to Suffer for it. His Weeping
and Howling for the Miseries that Come upon him, do make this Dreadful Sound in
our Ears; Wickedness! What will it bring to! What will it End in! Oh! Let all
Israel Hear and Fear, and let none do any more so Wickedly!

No doubt, it makes a Dreadful Sound in the Ears of this Wicked Man, to be
told; Man, within a few Hours the Lamp of thy Life, is to be put out with
Shameful, Painful, Tragical Circumstances. Thy Soul, thy never dying Soul, must
within as Few Hours, appear before a Great and a Terrible GOD, who has been
infinitely Offended by thy Wickedness, and whose Anger, -- Who, Who knows the
Power of it?

The Ghost of his Murdered Wife; This too must needs make a Dreadful Sound in
his Ears. It cries, Vengeance, Vengeance upon the Murderer! All the Country
hears the Cry; and the Sword of GOD in the hand of His Ministers, is drawn upon
it.

It adds doleful Murmurs to the Dreadful Sound, That this Wretched Ethiopian
has been so distinguished from the most of his Complexion; and been admitted
unto such very Distinguishing Privileges. He was favored with a Religious
Education, which Enabled him to Read the Oracles of GOD, and learn the
Principles of Christianity; and then had an Emancipation into a Liberty, which
he has been too unthankful for. He made a Profession of Religion, and was
Baptized, and stood a Candidate for Communion in the Church; which indeed the
Faithful Pastors, fearing that Hypocrisy in him, which is now discovered,
wisely delayed unto him. Now, for One who so Knew the Will of our Glorious
Master, to do as he has done; for One under such Obligations, to be a Pattern
of all Goodness unto other Ethiopians, to prove of so Doubly and so Deeply
Black a Character; Oh! how Many and how severe Stripes, in the Infernal Prison
must such an One be worthy of! Ungrateful Wretch! What art thou worthy of!

Miserable Man; I hope, you take Notice of what I speak to the People of GOD
concerning you. But, Oh! Be astonished at what I must after all speak unto You
upon it. In the midst of all this Dreadful Sound, there is a Joyful Sound,
which you are to be advised and apprised of: That Joyful Sound; There is a
SAVIOR, in whose Blood there is, A Fountain set open for Sin and for
Uncleanness. You may come to that Open Fountain; and Plead the Blood of your
SAVIOR for your Pardon. The most Bloody Sinners may do so; They that have a
Blood-Guiltiness upon them, are Allowed, yea, Commanded, so to do. Even His own
Murderers did it, and found Mercy with Him! Do it; and Beg at the same time, O
my SAVIOR, Change my Heart; Bestow a New Heart, a Soft Heart, a Clean heart, a
Good and Honest Heart upon me! Thy Soul shall become as White as the Snow and
the Wool, upon thy doing of it. We read of, Ethiopia stretching out the Hand
unto GOD our SAVIOR. O Forlorn Ethiopian, yet Stretch out those Bloody Hands
of thine unto thy SAVIOR; Do it, Surprised, and Conquered by that Grace of
His, which now sends this call unto thee; Lay hold on me, Perishing Sinner, Lay
Hold on me, and thou shall yet come into the Peace of GOD. In so saying, I
speak the Last Words, that I shall ever speak unto you.

But there are especially Three Brief Remarks, which I shall make on the
Dreadful Sound, which our Ears are all now struck withal. There are indeed
especially Three Sorts of Persons, that are very notably concerned in it.

First. Relatives, and especially the Nearest Relatives, those that are in the
Conjugal Relation; Let Them hear the Dreadful Sound, and beware of all
Ill-carriage to one another. To see, A Man hanged for Murdering his Wife; It Is
a fearful Spectacle! The Ears Tingle at the Hearing of such a thing; the Blood
runs cold; a Shuddering Horor succeeds upon it. But more than Once, has this
Country now seen the Horrid Spectacle; seen it with Amazements! And Other
Places are no Strangers to it. Alas, That ever the Curse of GOD upon a Sinful
World, should come into so Extreem and Shocking an Operation! That they, who by
the Institution of GOD, should be Meet Helps to one another, and as the Apple
of their Eye to one another, should prove Geat Plagues, and such a continual
Eyesore to one another* That they who should be, to one another, the Desire of
their Eyes, come to hate the Sight, and seek the Death of one another! -- My
Friends, Take heed of all Discord, and watch against all Tendencies to any
Alienation of Affection from One another If once you Give place to the Devil,
You know not how it will terminate; what he may drag you to! Especially, Let
all Husbands Keep up a lively Remembrance, yea, and a lively Resemblance too,
of the Goodness which our dear SAVIOR treats His Church withal: His Church,
which that Good One, so Tenders, and Pitties, and Forgives, and Comforts, and
Provides for, and counts nothing too Good for, and calls, The dearly Beloved of
my Soul! Husbands, Love your Wives, as CHRIST has loved the Church, and given
Himself for it. If it had been possible for me to have spoken in Higher Terms,
I would have done it!

But, is the Black Thing that you have in Irons here before you, the only One
that may be charged with Murdering his Wife among us? No; Let all Base, and
Bitter, and Froward Husbands consider of it. Husbands that follow Courses which
Grieve, and even Kill their Wives; Husbands who like the Beast we read of,
Speak like Dragons, and whose Words are drawn Swords upon their Wives; Husbands
whose vile Carriage leaves to their Wives no comfort of their Lives; it may be,
they Starve them; however they break their Hearts for them; the poor Wives die
before their Time, and if their Broken Hearts might have the cause of their
Death Legible upon them, there would be found some such words as these; A Cruel
Husband has hastened it!

Ye Abominable Fellows; Leave off the Trade you are driving of; If Man do not,
the Glorious GOD will deal with you as the worst of Murderers; -- I am sure,
Your Family-Sacrifices must be very poorly managed. Your Prayers together will
hinder your Quarrels, if your Quarrels do not hinder your Prayers. But O
Prayerless ones, If you go on to cast off your Prayers, little can you foresee
what you may be left unto. The Man whose Dying Hour is now not many Minutes
off, tells me, That he usually kept up his Daily Prayers, but he had No
Prayers, No Prayers! -- on the Day before the Dark Night, wherein, you see what
GOD left him to. Consider this ye that forget GOD. -- For there are some
Husbands in this Town, I am afraid, I am afraid, what a provoked GOD may leave
them to!

Secondly. The Ethiopian, and Other Slaves among us, may hear a Dreadful Sound
in the Fate of their Unhappy Brother here before them; and they are to take
warning from it. There is a Fondness for Freedom in many of you, who live
Comfortably in a very easy Servitude; wherein you are not so Well-advised as
you should be. If you were Free, many of you would not Live near so well as you
do. Be your Servitude never so hard, yet Patience will be your Duty under it,
while GOD shall order it for you. Be sure, the Yoke will gall the less, for
your being Patient under, what GOD will have to be, The Thing Appointed for
you. But when your Servitude is Gentle, and you are treated, with more than
mere Humanity, and fed and clothed and lodged, as well as you can wish for, and
you have no Cares upon you, but only to Come when you are called, and to Do
what you are Bidden; certainly you should Glorify GOD with a sweet Contentment
of Mind, in the Lot which He has assigned you. Become the Servants of CHRIST,
and you are made Freemen immediately. Get the Knowledge of a Glorious CHRIST;
Give your selves unto Him; Let not a Day pass you without Secret Prayer before
Him; Don't venture to Sin against Him; or do any thing that you Know He has
forbiden you: Obey faithfully them that have the Rule over you, propounding to
yield Obedience unto Him in doing so; Study to please your Superiors, because
you shall please Him in doing of it. Then, though you are poor Slaves, yet you
will be Children of GOD, and Brethren to the Best of Men; and your Slavery will
very quickly, very quickly, Expire in a Glory wherein you shall walk with your
SAVIOR in White, and have a part in the Royal Priesthood. But what I would yet
more particularly and pertinently and powerfully inculcate upon you, is This; I
hope the most of you live with such as are so far from Envying you the Benefits
of Christian Knowledge, that they would be unspeakably Glad of seeing you
arrive to the Greatest Improvements in it; yea, Glad of Sitting down with you
at the Table of the Lord. Now, I lay the charges of GOD upon you, That the more
you Know, the more you be careful to Do according to what you Know: And afford
not the least shadow of any occasion, for that False complaint, That the worst
Servants are those that have had most Instruction bestowed upon them. And, That
if you should at length be so Lifted up to Heaven, as to be openly Received
among the Disciples of our SAVIOR, You be not Haughty, because of the Holy
Mountain, which you are brought unto: No, but be the more Humble, the more
Dutiful, the more Diligent, for what you have arrived unto. Pride goes before
Destruction. See what the Pride, of your Conceited, and Vain glorious and
Ostentatious Brother here, has gone before!

Thirdly. Oh! That all the Wicked doers, who [ Except they Repent!] must be cut
off from the City of GOD, were well aware of the Dreadful Sound, which their
perished Companions in Sin, send unto them. When you are alarmed with the
Dreadful Sound of One cut off in and for his Wickedness, Let the Dreadful Sound
from Others, who have in any sort been so, help to rowse you out of the
Slumbers, wherein you ly Obnoxious to a Damnation that Slumbers not. O All
People whose Transgression says, There is no Fear of GOD before their Eyes;
But Especially, O Young People, who are yet as foolish as the wild-Asses Colt,
which you will be, till you are Born again; Hearken, Hearken to the Dreadful
Sound, wherewith, Oh! That you were duly terrified! Have you not seen many of
your Companions in Sin, distressed, yea, destroyed by the Stupendous Judgments
of GOD, and brought unto Untimely Ends? But what? Have they not Mourned at the
Last, and cried out, How have I hated Instruction* and my Heart despised
Reproof? And have not Obeyed the Voice of my Teachers* nor inclined mine Ear to
them that instructed me! And will this Dreadful Sound make no Impression upon
you? Have not their Groans been* Oh! That I had not been led away with such
wicked Company! And, Oh! That I had nor put off my Conversion to GOD! And, Oh!
That I had not thrown away my Time, and my Soul, in those things whereof I am
now ashamed! And will this Dreadful Sound* make no Impression upon you? Young
Man, Then lay thine Ear to the Sides of the Pit; Listen to the Cries of them
who are in the Dismal Vault below, so Shut up that they cannot come forth. Is
there not a Dreadful Sound among them, who are ground between the Milstones of
Infinite Wrath, and crying out, The Almighty Troubles me! And will this
Dreadful Sound signify nothing with thee? If according to the Wish of the Rich
Man in the Parable there should One come unto thee from the Dead, that has it
may be accompanied thee in some of thy Lewdnesses and Madnesses; and thou
should hear him, crying out, Oh! The Torments which my Sins have brought me
to! Would the Dreadful Sound of such a Spectre be nothing to thee? What the
Prophets now speak unto thee, is as much, as if One came unto thee from the
Dead! And will thou pay no Regards unto it? -- I tremble, I tremble, to think,
how many stand in the way of that flaming Thunderbolt, which I will now throw
down among you, and you may then go away and Mock and Scoff at it, and have the
Bands of Death made Strong upon you, if you please! Prove. XXIX.1. He that being
often Reproved, hardens his Neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that
without Remedy.

But, Oh! What shall be done for the Children that have hitherto been so
Irreclameable? We must not yet give them over. -- Lord, We will yet Look up
unto thee for them.

THE Sum of a CONFERENCE between a MINISTER and the PRISONER, the Day before
his Execution.
Min. THE Report of your sad Condition, Joseph, has brought me to Visit you,
and Advise you. I know not how better to Express an Obedience and Conformity to
the Glorious CHRIST, who came down to Seek and to Save that which was Lost, and
who had a wonderful Compassion on us, when we were Shut up in Sin, and
Unbelief. That which yet more Encourages me, is the Encouragement which I have
to bring unto you; That is, That this Glorious CHRIST is a SAVIOR, whom
Negro's themselves, yea, the worst of Sinners among those poor Black Cutcasts,
may be welcome to. Ethiopians will be found by His Grace, in His fulfilling
that word; He shall Sprinkle many Nations.


Joseph Hanno. I thank you, Sir, I Am glad to see you, Sir.


Min In a very singular manner may I now tell you; not only, That your Days are
determined, but also, That you now do your self Know, which is determined for
the Last of your Days; yea, and how many Hours you have now to Live; and how
few times the Clock is to Strike, before your Lamp is to be put out, and you
must appear before GOD the Judge of all, and [ Except a Sincere and Serious
Repentance prevent it!] you will fall into Hands which it is a fearful thing to
fall into.


Jos I cast my self on the Mercies of GOD.


Min. My Endeavors must be, that you may do it Hopefully, and not Perish in
the Errors and Follies of a Deceived Heart, but have an Hope which will not
make ashamed.

You have been many Months in the Prison; I pray, how have you spent your Time
hitherto? I hope, they have not all been Months of Vanity.


Jos. In Reading and Praying, Sir.


Min. In Reading! -- Of what, I pray? I know that within these few Days, a
Gentleman, who heard you had no Bible with you, sent a Bible to you. You lived
many Months without Reading a word in that most Necessary Book, The Bible. It
has, I must plainly tell you, a very uncomfortable Aspect on you; it looks very
strangely, very oddly, how you could Live quietly so long, and have no Bible
with you.


Jos. I had no Bible; and I knew not where to get one.


Min. Not where to get one! There are more than twice five hundred Christians
in the Town; that would have helped you to a Bible, if you had asked for it.


Keeper.] And, Joseph, I would have helped you to one at the first word, if you
had asked for it.


Min. Your Neglect of the Holy Scriptures at such a Time; and this after you
have been a Great pretender to the Reading of them, and were always vain
gloriously Quoting of Sentences from them wherever you came, -- It looks very
Suspiciously. It confirms my Fear of a Reigning Hypocrisy, under all the Noisy
Profession of Religion you have made among us. I am also afraid, That you have
spent your Time ill; under the Delusions of some wicked People, who did
persuade you, that you would never be convicted of the Murder you are now to die
for; because, forsooth, there were no Eyewitnesses of your doing it. For these
causes, I must now, be the more Earnest and Thorough with you. Give me your
best Attention, as One within a Few Hours of an awful Eternity!


Jos. Yes, Sir.


Min. You are now to Die; the Land where you now Live, would be polluted, if you
should be spared from Death; -- for an horrible Murder. The Murder of any
Person, is a Crime, which forfeits the Life of him that commits it. And, you
know very well, That no Murderer has Eternal Life. But the Murder that you have
been guilty of, is a very Uncommon One; One so Barbarous as rarely to be Known
among the Children of Men. To Murder ones Wife! How Inhumane! How Hideous! How
Monstrous the Wickedness! To Murder, where the greatest Love, that is possible,
is called for! -- I know, you have gone to Extenuate your Crime, with grievous
Accounts, of the Base Humor and Vile Carriage' in her that should have been a
Wife unto you. And I do believe, She was a very Insupportable Wretch. But GOD
called you to Patience, and Meekness, and Goodness; and all possible Trials to
overcome Evil with Good, -- Not, to Knock her of the Head!


Jos. Truly, Sir, I have a great deal to say of That; But I have done with it.
I shall say no more. The Sixth Commandment is, Thou shall not Kill. And I have
[wringing his hands;] broken this Commandment of GOD.


Min. How did you proceed in it? How long was you purposing and projecting of
it?


Jos. Never till she told me, that she had as liev talk with the Devil, as talk
with any of GODS Ministers. This was, but a little before I did the Fact. At
last the Devil putting it into my Heart, in the Night, I took my Ax, and with
the Head of it, I knocked her down; and that she might not recover, I gave her
the second Blow. After this, I put her to Bed, and hackled her Throat with a
Razour: So I left her, and went and called the Neighbors; and told them, I was
afraid of my Wifes making away with her self. But GOD has now brought me out.


Min. It Is time for you, not only to be sensible of this horrid Crime, and the
Cry of Blood in the Ears of Heaven against you: But also to come into some
Sense of all your other Sins. You have broken all the Commandments of GOD. You
must now Examine your self by what your Catechism tells you, is Forbiden and
Required in the Commandments. And Judge and Loath your self, in the view of
what you have done; so many Thousands of Times, Denying the GOD that is Above,
and Henrkening to the Devil more than to GOD, and Exposing your self to all the
Evil that Pursues Sinners* Yea, procuring of Plagues upon all about you. But
then, be sure to lay to Heart, the Fountain of all Sin in the Heart that you
brought into the World with you; an Heart that is desperately Wicked, and the
Mother of Abominations. What must you think, that you deserve at the Hands of
the Glorious GOD, whom you have so affronted and offended?


Jos. Be sure, I deserve to die. I deserve all that the Word of GOD has told me,
is the Wages of Sin.


Min. Are you sensible of this; That unless you Turn and Live to GOD, it had
been Good for you that you had never been born?


Jos. Yes, I am, Sir.


Min But can you of Your self Turn and Live unto GOD?


Jos. I will do my Endeavor.


Min. But except there be more than your own Endeavor for it, it will not be
done. Except GOD give you the Help of His Grace; and Quicken you, it will never
be done.


Jos. I say so, Sir.


Min. But are you not Unworthy that GOD should Quicken you?


Jos. I cast my self on His Mercy.


Min. But you must see, That He may Justly withold the Help of His Grace from
you. Though if you seek to Him for it; there is Hope, and it is a Sign, that He
will grant it.


Jos. Yes, Sir, I know it.


Min. But the first thing you have now to look after is, That your Sin may be
all pardoned; and that GOD may be Reconciled unto you.

Look you; Sin must be punished. You have Sinned, and the Punishment of your
Sin is unavoidable. The Law of GOD has assigned a Punishment for it, which
there is no avoiding of. The Punishment has those Miseries in it, which cannot
without Horror be thought upon. You must either undergo this Punishment your
self, and the Smoke of your Torment under it ascending for ever and ever: Or
else you must find One to undergo the Punishment for you; One to be such a
Sacrifice for you, as GOD shall be well-pleased withal; the Infinite Justice of
GOD Satisfied withal. Can you tell where to find such an One?


Jos. I fly to the Mercy of GOD.


Min. But I tell you, the Infinite Justice of GOD must be Satisfied; or else,
He that made you will not have Mercy on you. Are you willing Your self to
suffer the Punishment of your Sin?


Jos. I am willing to Die.


Min. What? The Second Death! Willing to be Banished from GOD, United with
Devils, Tortured with all the Rage of a Guilty Conscience; Thrown down into a
Devouring Eire* and Everlasting Burnings! Can thy Heart Endure, when I shall
deal with thee, says the Lord?


Jos. I fly to the Lord JESUS CHRIST.


Min. Ay, Now you say Something. This is the Only Flight for a Perishing Soul
Fall down before the Blessed GOD; and Humbly tell Him, That you beg to have
your Sins all Pardoned, because a Glorious CHRIST has been Punished for the
Sins of all His People. The Sacrifice Offered by a Glorious CHRIST, unto the
Justice of GOD, when GOD laid on Him the Iniquity of us all, has been of more
Account unto Him, than if a Thousand Worlds had been made an Entire
Burnt-Offering. He is GOD as well as Man, who has been the Sacrifice for our
Sin, and Suffered in our Stead. And GOD allows the Benefit of the Sacrifice, to
the Sinner, that comes, and pleads it, and admires it, and values it, and
relies upon it.


Jos. Lord, Pardon me, for the sake of Jesus Christ.


Min. But it is not enough, that you be Pardoned; You must be Righteous too.
Else you cannot Look for the Blessedness of the Righteous. Now you have no
Righteousness of your own. You have broke the Law of GOD numberless times. Nor
can you now keep it. The Best of your Devotions and Services, will be defective
Things; Blemished Things: There will be Iniquities in your most Holy Things:
Your very Tears, whereof you have so many, want Washing. In your best
Repentance, there will be that which will be to be Repented of. But now, a
Glorious CHRIST coming as the Head of His People, He did for them Fulfill all
Righteousness; He had a most Holy Heart; He led a most Holy Life. Such was His
Righteousness, that the Pure Eyes of the Infinite GOD, could never tax any
thing amiss in it; could never see any elsewhere that Equaled it. Now, you
must Renounce all Dependence on any Righteousness of your own; and Entreat of
GOD, that He will deal with you as Righteous, because of what His JESUS has
been and has done, on the behalf of His People. Yea, Entertain a Comfortable
Persuasion, that He will do so. Do you understand what I say to you?


Jos. Yes, Sir, I have a Great deal of Knowledge. No body of my Color, in Old
England or New, has so much.


Min. I wish you were less Puffed up with it. But the more you Know, the more
your Sins are aggravated. The Sins of your more Ignorant Countrymen, have not
such Aggravations as yours. -- But the Point I have been upon, must be further
prosecuted. The Sacrifice and Righteousness of your SAVIOR; you will hope for
the Benefit of it. But, how dare such a Sinner as you are, One so horribly
Criminal, hope for such a Thing? What have you to Embolden your Hope?


Jos. I find my self to be more as GOD would have me to be; my Heart is broken.


Min. Now, This is to Spoil all! Sin^^^ Man, Thou must come and hope for the
Be^fit of the Sacrifice and Righteousness provide for thee in thy SAVIOR,
under no Recommendation but This; Lord, I am a Perishing Sinner. I want a
CHRIST, and I am undone if the Sacrifice and Righteousness of a CHRIST be not
allowed unto me. Emboldned by nothing but the Grace of GOD, which makes the
Tender to thee; Qualified with nothing but most wretched Circumstances. Come,
as a Filthy Sinner, adoring the Free Grace, the Rich Grace, which will make
this Allowance unto the Chief of Sinners.


Jos. I am a Sinner. And I deserve to Die.


Min. But now, if your Faith in the Sacrifice and the Righteousness of your
SAVIOR, be not the Hope of the Hypocrite, you will find this precious Effect
of it. The Blood of your SAVIOR being Sprinkled on your Soul, will run warm in
the Veins of your Soul, and make you Wish, and Long, and Groan to be Like Him,
and be all that He would have you to be. You will Detest the Sins, which are
Forgiven you; and abhor to Repeat them. You will study to be Holy in all manner
of Conversation. You will be filled with the Love of GOD; and aim at Serving
and Pleasing of GOD as the Chief End of all; and you will have your Will to be
Swallowed up in the Will of GOD; and give up your All unto Him.


Jos. I desire your Prayers for me.


Min. But, what may be the more Special sins, which you may apprehend, have
provoked the Holy One, to leave you unto what you are now come unto?


Jos. I cannot say. For all my Sins.


Min. But you are now Troubled for your Sins. Which of all your Sins, gives
most of Trouble to you?


Jos. All my Sins.


Min. I wish you had Glorified GOD, by being more Particular in confessing what
might be for His Glory --.

But, Is there any more that I may do for you?


Jos. No, Sir; I can desire no more.


FINIS.

