A Plain Discourse ON Vain Thoughts, WHICH Are great Hindrances of Men's being
SAVED,

From JER. IV. 14. -- How long shall thy (...) thoughts lodge (...) thee?

By Nehemiah Walter M. A.

BOSTON in New England: Printed by B. Green, For B. Eliot, and Sold at his Shop
in King Street. 1721.

Vain Thoughts ARE Great Hindrances Of Men's being SAVED.
JEREMIAH IV. 14. -- HOW long shall thy Vain Thoughts lodge within thee?


IN this Chapter the Prophet Jeremiah threatens the Jews with the Babylonish
Captivity. He Exhorts ther^ to Repentance, if by any means the threatened
Judgment might be prevented. The Exhortation is given to them in the former
part of this Verse* O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness, that thou
ma^^t ^e saved, i. e. Not only Temporally, but also Spiritually and Eternally.
The Prophet is not only concerned for the Salvation of their ^od^^s bu^ also of
their Souls, And the ^aty which he calls them to, is proper for the Salvation
of both. He then Expostulates with them about harboring such Thoughts in their
breast which might be an Obstruction to their Repentance and Salvation, How
long shall thy Vain Thoughts lodge within thee? These Vain Thoughts might be
their thoughts of having Assistance from other Nations, whereby to secure them
against the King of Babylon. Or their Thoughts might be, that there was to need
of washing their hearts from Wickedness, as the Prophet here Exhorts them; for
they were an Hypocritical Nation, Isa. 10.6 A People not concerned about
heart-purity, but contenting themselves with the bare external Performance of
Worship. Or their Thoughts might be that them was no Danger of the Desolation
threatened, seeing they had the Temple of GOD, and Ordinances of His Worship, in
the midst of them Jer. 7.4. Trust ye not in lying Words, saying, the Temple of
the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord are these. They were
apt to think that GOD would never suffer the Babylonians to Demolish that
magnificent House, which was built by His own special Direction, and which He
had Honored with the Tokens of His Glorious Presence, and which was the stated
place of His Holy Worship. Some such Thoughts as these they had, which the
Prophet declares to be Vain Thoughts, that would meet with Disappointment at
the last, and that were for the present an impediment unto their attending the
Right Method for securing their Salvation. The DOCTRINE then from the Words may
be,

DOCTRINE. THERE are Vain Thoughts in the Hearts of Sinners which are Great
Hindrances of their being Saved.
THE Vain Thoughts here intended, are the common cause of vain confidence,
carnal security and false hopes, which prove the ruin of Multitudes under the
Gospel. A desire of Happiness is natural to every Man. Nevertheless, the
generality of Christians do finally miss of Happiness. And if we make diligent
search we shall find that some Vain Thought, or other, is the great cause
thereof. Their Vain Thoughts do frustrate and defeat their desires, and render
them altogether ineffectual to Salvation. It may then be exceeding useful to
point out these Vain Thoughts and show how greatly they do hinder our
Salvation; and also discover the Vanity of them, that so we may no longer
suffer them to lodge in our hearts. The heart of Man is so great a deep, so
deceitful and desperately Wicked that it is impossible to enumerate all those
Vain Thoughts which dwell therein. Yet from the Word of GOD (which gives the
clearest discovery of Man's heart, and in so doing evidences its Divine
Original) we may come to the Knowledge of a great many of these Vain Thoughts.
I shall set some of them before you under these following Heads, with all
possible plainness.

1. THERE are Vain Thoughts in the hearts of Sinners concerning GOD, which are
great hindrances of their being Saved. Sinners oftentimes form such vain
Conceptions of GOD in their Minds as prove ruinous to their Souls. They imagine
GOD to be such a one as He really is not. And these false imaginations do
greatly tend to their Destruction. To Instance here,

1. IT is a Vain Thought, That GOD is ignoran^ of any of the Sins of Men. Such
a Thought as thi^^ there is oftentimes in the Hearts of Sinners. They think
that GOD does not see and know their Sins Psalm. 94.6, 7 They stay the Widow and
the stranger and murder the fatherless. Yet they say, the Lord shall not see,
neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. Especially are Sinners apt to think,
That GOD does not see their secret Sins. Isa 29.15. W^ unto them that seek deep
to hide their counsel from the Lord, and their works are in the dark, and they
say* who sees us? and who knows us? Ezekiel 8.1: Then said he unto me, Son of
Man, have thou se^ what the Ancients of Israel do in the dark, every man in the
Chambers of his Imagery? for they say the Lord s^eth us not. Now such a Thought
as this is ^ great hindrance of Men's being Saved; for it tend ^ to harden them
in Sin, and to make them bold i^ sinning, especially in secret. If they think
GOD is not acquainted with, or takes no Notice of the^ secret Sins, why should
they be afraid to Sin ^ secret? No Eye of Man sees them, and if GOD does not
see them, what should restrain them Thus do they suppose secrecy to be a
security ^ them But the Vantiy of this Thought may b^ seen in a few Heads.

1 GOD is an I^finite Being, and therefore ^ e^^ry where present. The Lisence
of GOD is wit^ (...) all bounds or limits; and therefore He car^ not be
confined to any place 1 King 8.2^ (...) of Hea^^^s ca^^ contain thee. The vast
Heavens do not enclose GOD. He is not only there; but also every where else, so
as that it is impossible to find any place from whence GOD is excluded, Psalm.
139.7, 8, 9. Whither shall I free from thy presence? If I ascend up into
Heaven, thou art there; if I make my bed in Hell, behold thou art there. If I
take the Wings of the Morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea;
even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy Right hand shall hold me. Let us go
where we will, GOD is there; and therefore the most secret place cannot conceal
us from GOD. Jer. 23.24. Can any Man hide himself in secret places, that I
shall not see him? says the Lord. Do I not fi^^ Heaven and Earth? says the
Lord What can an Omnipresent GOD be a Stranger to? What Sin can be hid from Him.

2. GOD is One of Infinite Understanding, and therefore knows every thing. The
Understanding of GOD has no bounds of Perfection; but is Infinitely Perfect,
Psalm. 147.5. His Understanding is Infinite. There are no limits can be set to
it. And consequently there can be nothing excluded from His Knowledge. If there
were any thing which GOD did not know, His Knowledge would be imperfect, and
defective and finite. It Is certain then that GOD knows all things that are done
by Men He sees and knows what ever they do in the darkest recesses and
retirements. Psalm 139.11, 12. If I s^y surely the darkness shall cover me, even
the Night shall be light about me. Yea, the darkness h^deth not from thee, but
the Night shines as the Day: The darkness and the light we both a^ike to thee.
Nay, The very hearts of Men, which are far more undiscernable than the darkest
places, are yet perfectly known by the Great GOD. 1 King. 8.39. For thou, even
thou only, know the hearts of all the Children of Men. There is not so much
as a Thought in the heart, but GOD knows it. Psalm. 139.2. Thou understandest
my thought afar off. In short, All the ways of Man are before the eyes of the
Lord; and he pondereth all his goings, Prove. 5.21, Job 34.21. There is no
Creature that is not manifest in his sight; but all things are naked, and
opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. What Sin then
is it that GOD does not know?

3. GOD will Judge the World in Righteousness, and there ^ must know all the
Sins of Men. GOD has appointed a Day wherein He will Judge all Men: And the
Judge of the whole Earth will in that Day do Right, Genesis 18.25. He will then
render to every man according to his deeds, Romans 2.6. The Reward shall be
according to what the nature and quality of their works have been. 2 Cor. 5.10.
For we must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one may
receive the things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. Those that have done well, shall be well-rewarded, and those
that have done ill, shall be ill-rewarded, and both of them proportionable to
the good or evil they have done. Now GOD cannot thus exactly recompense Men,
unless He have a full, perfect and distinct knowledge of their Deeds. As sure
then as GOD is a just Judge, so sure is it that He knows all the Sins of Men,
even those that are the most secret: And accordingly we are informed that GOD
in the last and great Day, will set the Sins of Men in order before their eyes.
Eccl. 1^ 14. God shall bring every work into Judgment, with every secret thing,
whether it be good or evil. In that Day the most concealed iniquities of Men
shall be laid open to the view of the whole World. 1 Cor. 4.5. Therefore Judge
nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will bring to light the
hidden things of darkness.

FROM these things then it is evident, That the thought of GOD's being ignorant
of any of the Sins of Men, is a Vain Thought; a Thought that has no Truth in
it; no real foundation for it, and that will deceive us if we promise our
selves any advantage from it. Well then, let not such a Vain Thought as this
lodge is our hearts; but let us keep up the contrary Thought in our hearts. Let
us for ever keep it in the imagination of the Thought of our hearts, that GOD
sees all our ways, and counts all our steps. That His eyes are in every
place beholding the Evil and the Good. That if we do evil at any time, in the
most retired Apartment, yet we do it in the sight of GOD. Such a Thought at
this lodging in our hearts, would be a Thought of exceeding great Service and
Advantage to us. This would help to make us watchful and circumspect; to
prevent a great many Sins which we may be tempted unto. The setting the Lord
always before us, is one of the greatest preservatives from Sin, especially
from secret Sins: It is also a good Sign of an heart that is upright with GOD;
for none but such have GOD much in their eye. So much for the first Vain
thought concerning GOD.

2. IT is a Vain Thought. That GOD is so Merciful as not to destroy Men for
their Sins. Sometimes Men have in their hearts such a Thought concerning GOD as
this is: They imagine Him to be such a merciful GOD as they would have Him to
be; a GOD all made op of Mercy, that wont take vengeance for Sin. Are not
Persons sometimes heard to say? That GOD is more Merciful than to damn His
Creatures. And is there not the same secret imagination in the hearts of
multitudes of Sinners? They take up such a motion of Divine Mercy, as if it
would suffer none to Perish in a miserable Destruction. They magnify and extol
the Mercy of GOD; and set it forth to themselves as a perfection that will
infallibly secure them from Damnation. When they would flatter themselves, then
they cry up the Infiniteness of Divine Mercy. Now such a thought as this is a
great hindrance of Men's being Saved. This tends to make them go on securely in
Sin, and be fearless of Damnation: This makes them to think that they may lead
wicked lives, and yet that all shall be well at the last: That Mercy will
prevent their Damnation, and secure their Salvation. This thought is a Vain
Thought; a thought which will not answer our expectations nor afford us that
safety which we promise to ourselves.

THE Vanity of this Thought may be sees under these following Heads,
1. IT is granted that GOD is a most merciful GOD. Thus far the Thought of
Sinners is Right; and it is their Duty to entertain such a thought of GOD in
their hearts. We are to believe that GOD is abundant in Mercy, for so He has
revealed Himself unto us to be. Psalm 86.^.1^. Thou, O Lord, art a God full of
compassion and gracious, long-suffering ann plentious in Mercy. This Attribute
of Divine Mercy lay hid in GOD until after the Apostasy of Men. Then GOD gave a
Glorious discovery of it in the First Promise of the Seed of the Woman. And
afterward GOD more fully and distinctly revealed the exceeding greatness of
His Mercy, Exodus 34.6, 7. The Glory of it shines forth throughout the Holy
Scriptures, wherein in it is declared to be Infinite and Incomprehensible. We
cannot then form in our Minds ^oo great an Idea of it, nor entertain too High
and Honorable Thoughts of it. It Is a vile reflection upon the Mercy of GOD, to
have low and mean Conceptions of it. This is one thing which makes the Sin of
Despair to be so great a Sin. It disbelieves the Infiniteness of Divine Mercy,
looking upon Sin greater than can be forgiven. As if the Sin of Man Exceeded
the Mercy of GOD.

2. THOUGH GOD be most Merciful, yet He is so only to the Repenting Sinner.
Sinners in general are not the Objects of Divine Mercy. GOD does not show Mercy
to all Sinners; but only to such to whom He has promised to show Mercy. Now
GOD's Promises of Mercy are made only to Penitent Sinners. Prove. 28.13. Whosoever
confesses and forsakes Sin, shall find Mercy. Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return to
the Lord, and be will have Mercy upon him. Repentance is made the condition of
finding Mercy, and obtaining Forgiveness. If Sinners perform this condition,
they may be confident of Mercy; but if they fail of Repenting, they will
assuredly miss of Mercy. Pardoning Mercy and Salvation are confined to
Repenting and broken hea^^ed Sinners. It Is therefore mere Presumption for any
other Sinners to hope for Mercy from the Lord. Devils may as well expect it as
they.

3. DIVINE Mercy will be so far from saving impenitent Sinners, as tha^ ^t will
make their Damnation the greater. Though Sinners promise themselves that GOD's
Mercy will be for them, yet they will find it will be against them; it will be
so far from standing up for them as a Friend, that it will be turned to be
their Enemy. It will be so far from exempting them from Punishment, that it
will bring upon them the forest of Punishments. This will be evident if we
consider this one thing, viz While Sinners continue in Sin, thinking that
Divine Mercy will save them notwithstanding, they are Guilty of the vilest
abuse of the Mercy of GOD: For hereby they make the Mercy of GOD an
Encouragement to Sin; and look upon it as that which will afford them
protection in their wicked ways. Now is not this a most horrid Reflection upon
the Mercy of GOD, to suppose that it will shield Men from Justice, tha^ they
persist in wickedness? Is not this to make the Merciful GOD a Patron, and
Friend and Favourer of Sin? Certainly it is. And will no^ this provoke the very
Mercy of GOD to Arm h^^ self against such Sinners? Certainly it will. To such
Sinners as these, that place of Sc^ipture i^ applicable. Isa 27 11. It ^s a
people of no understanding; therefore he that ma^e them, will not have Mercy in
them; ^^d he that formed them will shes thou no favor. Though they are His
Creatures, the Works of His hands, yet He will extend no favor to them. Nay,
so far will He be from showing them any favor, that He will bring Wrath upon
them to the uttermost. Instead of their being made Monuments of His Mercy, as
they expect; they shall be made the most tremendious Monuments of His
Vindictive Justice. Such ungodly Men as thus turn the Grace and Mercy of GOD
into Laciviousness, by making them to countenance their vile Practices, are Men
to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness forever, Jude v. 4, 13. Extremity
and Eternity of Misery will be their Portion at the last.

WE see then, from what has been said, That the thought of GOD's being Merciful
to us though we persist in Sin, is a Vain Thought which will deceive us. Let not
then such a Vain Thought as this lodge within us, let it not be cherished by
us. On the other hand, Let us take up and maintain Right Thoughts of the Mercy
of GOD. Let us think that the Mercy of GOD is a great inducement and
encouragement unto Repentance and Reformation; Thus it is represented to us in
the Scriptures; and thus it is to be apprehended by us* Joel 2.13. Rent your
Heart and not your Garment, and turn unto the Lord your God; for he is gracious
and merciful, s^^w to anger and of great kindness, and ^^penteth him of the
evil. GOD's being a Gracious and Merciful GOD, is an attracting Argument and
Motive to Repentance. It is enough to melt an ingenious Spirit into Tears for
its Sins against ^o good a GOD; and to give him the greatest Encouragement to
return to GOD by unfeigned Repentance. O let us make such a genuine use and
improvement of the Merciful Nature and Disposition of the Great GOD. Let us
think and say within our selves. Shall we Sin against GOD because He is a
Merciful GOD? Shall we deshonour Him, and offer indignity to Him because He is
G^o^ and Gracious? far be it from us thus to do. How base* how vile a treatment
is this! His Mercy shall not ha^den us, but soften as: His Mercy shall not
embolde^ us in Sin, but lead us to Repentance for Sin. He Proclamation of Mercy
shall cause us humbly to com^ unto Him and Accept of His Pardon for Christ^s
sake; and it shall engage us for ever to lay down the weapon of our Rebellion,
and to abide Faithful in His Service. This is the right use which is to be made
of the Mercy of GOD; and if thi^ us^ be made of it, we shall then find that GOD
will Mercifully forgive us our Sins, though they have been never so many and so
great. His Mercy will then secure us from the strokes of incensed Justice; so
as th^^ not the least Punishment shall be inflicted upon us for our Sins,
though they have deserved the Damnation of Hell a thousand and a thousan^
times. The kind Reception that we may then expect to find from a gracious GOD,
is most livelily represented to us in the Instance of peniten^ Ephraim, Jer.
31.18, 19, 20. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself thus, thou have
chastised us and I was chastised; as a Bullock unaccustomed to il^ ^^ke; turn
thou me and I shall be turned, for the art the Lord my God. Surely after that I
wa^ turn^ Prepented; and after that I was instructed I smote upon my thigh, I
was ashamed, yea* even confounded because ^ did (...) the reproach of my Youth.
Is Ephraim ^ (...)? Is he a pleasant Child? For since I s^a^^ against him, I do
earnestly remember him still; therefo^^ my bowels are troubled for him, I will
surely have Mercy upon him, says the Lord --.

THUS much for the Vain Thoughts of Sinners concerning GOD.
2. THERE are Vain Thoughts in the hearts of Sinners concerning the Providence
of GOD, which are great hindrances of their being Saved. GOD who made all
things, does exercise a Providence over them all. He unholds, governs and
disposes of all Creatures. Now Sinners, though they may not deny the Providence
of GOD; yet they entertain Vain Thoughts concerning some acts of Divine
Providence, which do much hinder and endanger their Salvation. I shall here
Instance only in two of them.

1. IT is a Vain Thought, That because GOD in His Providence, exercises
Patience toward Sinners, therefore He will never punish them for their Sins.
It is the usual way of GOD to be patient toward Sinners: He does not presently
punish them; nay, oftentimes suffers them to go a long time unpunished. He not
only exercises Forbearance toward them, but also long-suffering, Romans 2.4.
Now, Sinners hereupon are apt to think that they shall always go unpunished.
They interpret the Patience of GOD as an evidence of perpetual impunity.
Because GOD suspends the infliction of Punishment, they conclude He will
totally exempt them from Punishment. Yea, They are apt to think, that He is not
offended at their Sins; but rather likes well enough of them, as they do
themselves. Psalm. 50.21. These things ^^st the^^ done* and I kept silence. i.e.
I was providentially silent not testifying against thy Sins in a way of
Punishment. Then it follows, Tha^ thoughtest that I was altogether such an one
as the self. Now, Such a Thought as this is a great impediment in the way of
Sinners Salvation (...) tends to make them careless about Repentance and
fleeing from the Wrath to come. If GOD will always let them alone, as they
think He will they may then hold on in their evil ways. Eccl 8.11. Because
sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily; therefore the heart of
the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. But such a though as this
which is lodged in them, is a Vain Though It Is a Vain Thought, that a Patient
GOD was not be a Sin-punishing GOD. Divine Patience yields no ground for such
an imagination. The Vanity of this Thought may be seen from what follows.

1. THE primary Intention of GOD in everlasting Patience toward Sinners, is
that they might Repent* While GOD is Patient, He expects that Sinner^ should
prove themselves Penitent. Such is the^ Infinite goodness of GOD, that He
desires not the Death of Sinners; but had rather that they should turn and
live. And for this end, He does not immediately destroy them for their Sins, as
li^ might most justly do; but gives them time (...) consider of their evil
doings and Repent thereof 2 Pet. 3.9. The Lord is long suffering to us w^ll not
willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance. The Day
of His Patience, i^ a designed space for Repentance. Rev. 2.21. ^ gave her
space to Repent of her Fornication. An^ therefore the Day of Divine Patience,
is attende^ with the Means of Repentance, and calls t^ Repentance. GOD is
therein graciously inviting them to Repent and turn to Himself, Romans 10.21. All
the Day long have I stretched forth my hands unto a disobedient and gain saving
people. In this way GOD is waiting upon them, that He may be gracious to them.

2. IF Divine Patience be not improved to Repentance, it will issue in their
most dreadful Destruction. The Patience of GOD will not last always. It will
sooner or later come to an and: And the end of it will be terrible to
impenitent Sinners. It shall not then be will with them as they imagine; but id
beyond all possible imagination. Eccl. 8. 12, 13. Though a Sinner do evil an
hundred times, and his days be prolonged -- Yet it shall not be well with the
wicked. When GOD's Patience is expired, it shall be far from being well with
them. More is intended than expressed. It means that it shall be exceeding ill
with them. And in other places of Scripture, it is plainly declared how
astonishingly great their Punishment will be. Romans 2.4, 5 Or despisest thou the
riches of his goodness, forbearance and long-suffering, no^ knowing that the
goodness of God leads thee to Repentence? But after thy hardness and
impenitent heart, treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the Day of wrath,
and the revelation of the righteous Judgment of God. All the time of GOD's
Patience, impenitent Sinners are treasuring up wrath; and the longer the Day of
GOD's Patience is, the greater Treasures of wrath are they laying up for
themselves. When Sinners are Impenitent under much Long-suffering, they are
Vessels of Wrath fitted for amazing Destruction, Romans 9 22. The longer they are
spared, the more are their sins multiplied and aggravated, and consequently the
greater will be their Damnation. The measure of Wrath will be according to the
measure of Sin. The longer therefore Men have lived in Sin, the more heavy will
their Punishment be at the last. So far then is the Forbearance of GOD from
being an Evidence o^ Future impunity, as that it prepares a way for the largest
Vials of Divine Wrath to be poure^ out on obstinate Sinners.

WELL then, Let us not be so Vain as to think That because GOD spares us for a
time, He will therefore spare us always, though we continue in Sin* Let us not
thus abuse the Patience of GOD unt^ Impenitency. But on the other hand, let us
fa^^ in with the Gracious design of GOD's Patience by a speedy Repentance. Let
us no longer harden our hearts, but hearken unto His Voice while the Day of His
Patience lasts. Let us think how great a Favor of GOD it is, that His Patience
with us is not yet at an end, and the there is yet room for Repentance and
reconciliation to GOD. He might have cut us down, as He be done many others,
not greater Sinners than ou^ selves. Since then we are continued to have
outstanding in the Lord's Vineyard, let us answe^ the expectations of GOD, by
bringing for^^ the fruits of Unfaigned Repentance, then sha^^ the
Long-suffering of GOD prove Salvation to us.

THUS much for the first Vain Though^ concerning the Providence of GOD.

2. IT is a Vain Thought that because GOD i^ His Providence Outwar^^ Prospers
Men, therefore (...) bears a special Affection to them. How common is it for
Men to bless themselves on the account of their Worldly Prosperity? How ready
are they to conclude that GOD must needs greatly love them because He so
greatly Prospers them? If He bestows upon them Riches and Honors, and Health
beyond what He does to others, they suppose themselves to be the peculiar
favorites of GOD. Surely, think they, If GOD had not a singular favor for us,
He would not so smile upon us in His Providence. Such a Thought as this is a
great Hindrance to Men's Salvation; for it tends to make Men secure in Sin, and
so rest satisfied with their present Spiritual Condition, though it be not good.
The Outward favorable Dispensations of Providence toward them, makes them
think that all is as well as needs be: But this is a Vain Thought, as will
appear from two things.

1. THE Greatest Outward Prosperity is not in it self an evidence of GOD's
Special Love. This is what GOD has testified to us that we might not thereby
miss judge of our selves. Eccl. 9.1, 2. No man knows either love or hatred by
all that is before them; all things come alike to all, there is one event to
the Righteous, and to the Wicked, etc. Prosperous and Adverse Providence are
Common to good and bad, and therefore by them alone no Man can know whether he
be an Object of the Love, or of the Hatred of GOD. Nay, oftentimes the worst of
Men, those that are most abhorred of the Lord, are the most Prosperous Men, as
to this World. Jer. 12.7. Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper?
Wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously? Psalm 73.3, 12. I
(...) envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked. Behold,
these are the ungodly, who prosper in the World, they increase in riches. Nay,
sometimes GOD gives Vast Kingdoms to the worst (...) Men. Dan. 4.17. The Most
High ^^leth in (...) Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whoesoever b^ will, and
sets up over it the ^asest of Men. Not of the basest Spirits, and basest
Lives, are for the most part set up over the Kingdoms of thi^ World. The Holy
Scriptures and the Record^ of all Ages do abundantly confirm this for a tr^^^
It is then a Vain Thought to think that Prosperity, though never so great, is an
Infallible Man of GOD's Special Love.

3. PROSPERITY is oftentimes granted (...) Men, not in Love, but in Truth. So
far is Prosperity from being always a fruit and token (...) GOD's Special Love,
that it is often a fruit and token of His dreadful Wrath. He grant Prosperity
sometimes in Judgment, and not it Mercy: it is many times a Curse of GOD and
not a Blessing to Men. The good thing of this World are many times denied to
Men in love, and many times given to them in wrath Psalm. 78.29, 30, 31. So they
did eat and were filled for he gave them their own desire: but while the^ meat
was yet in their Mouths, the wrath of God can upon them. Prosperity is many
times accompanied with a Divine Curse, so as to prove a s^^^ to Men's Souls,
and an occasion of their eternal destruction. Prove. 1.32. The prosperity of
fools she destroy them. It does but fat them for the slaughter and ripen them
for ruin. Well then, L^^ us not think that the liberality of GOD dispensed to
us in Providence is an Infallible Sign of His Special Favor for us. Let us not
flatter our selves with such a Vain Imagination, that because GOD opens His
bountiful hand to us, therefore we lie near His Heart, and are most dear unto
Him. Bare Prosperity affords no solid foundation for such a conclusion. I say
bare or mere Prosperity; for Prosperity considered in its Circumstances, may be
to a Man a token for Good, and an Evidence of the Fatherly care and kindness of
GOD. And it is so, when Prosperity comes in a way of Honesty and Prayer, when
it is enjoyed with a Spirit of Humility, and a sense of Unworthiness of it,
when it is made an effectual Motive to Love and Serve GOD, when it is
moderately used for our own present Comfort, and readily employed for the Good
and Benefit of others in ways of Beneficence and Charity. Prosperity thus
circumstanced may be looked upon as an Argument of Divine Love; by this we may
know that GOD has a Favor for us. Let us then he concerned that our Prosperous
Circumstances, may always carry along with them such Indications of the Love of
GOD to us, as of a Father to his Children. When it is a Day of such Prosperity
with us we may then most reasonably be joyful, Eccl. 7.14.

THUS for the Vain Thoughts of Sinners concern* in the Providence of GOD; which
was a second sort of Vain Thoughts.

3 THERE are Vain Thoughts in the hearts of Sinners concerning Jesus Christ,
which are great Hindrances of their being Saved. They do sometimes entertain
such thoughts concerning the v^^ Savior Himself, as do hinder their being
Sav^^^ by Him. I shall name only two of them, an^ show their Variety.

1. IT is a Vain Thought That Jesus Christ (...) save Men from Wrath, though
they Live in Sin. Sinners are apt to look open Jesus Christ as a deliverer only
from the Wrath to come. And (...) such a one they accept of Him and are willing
to be Saved by Him. They cry up the Infinit^ Virtue of His most Precious Blood,
as that which is sufficient to Cleanse them from the Guilt (...) all their
Sins, and to save them from the Damnation of Hell. And thus they please
themselves in the all sufficiency and abundant Merit of the Blood of Christ,
and hope to be Saved on the Account thereof, though they continue in Si^ Such a
thought as this makes Men look upon Repentance for Sin, the Mortification of
Lusts an^ Reformation of Life, to be needless things. An^ so it is an
Obstruction to the Salvation of Men Souls, as it puts them by from those things
which are necessary to Salvation. This thought then ^ a most pernicious
thought, and also as vain as ^ is pernicious The Vanity of it will be se^^ from
these things.

1. TO suppose that Jesus Christ will save M^^ from Wrath, though they Live in
Sin, is to suppose th^^ Christ is a Minister of Sin. Such a supposition (...)
this is most vain and impious. The Apostle rejects such an imagination with the
greatest abhorrence and indignation, Gal. 2.17 Is Jes^^ Christ the Minister of
Sin? God forbid. It Is horrid Blasphemy to suppose Christ to be a countenancer
and abettor of Sin. For He is one that Loves Righteousness, and hates
Iniquity, Heb. 1 9. But now, such as think that Christ will save them from
Hell, though they spend their Days in Sin, do make Christ a conniver at Sin,
and an approver of it. They represent Him as One that undertakes to secure them
from harm, though they go on in their Trespasses to the end. They represent Him
as One that died to procure for them a liberty to Sin with impunity. How does
this reproach the Holy One of Israel!

2. IT IS most certain that the great end of Christ's Coming into the World, was
to save Men from their Sins. For this reason was the Name Jesus given to Him,
Because he should save his People from their Sins, Matthew. 1.21. The Great Work
of Jesus Christ was to save from Sin. Sin is the greatest of evils, and
therefore the main design of Jesus Christ was to save from Sin. This was His
chief errand into the World, 1 John 3.5, 8. And ye know that he was manifested
to take away our Sins. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he
might destroy the works of the Devil. Sin is the special work of the Devil, and
this work Christ in a peculiar manner came to destroy. The Devil had set up the
Dominion of Sin in our Hearts; and Jesus Christ came to deliver us from this
Cursed Dominion. He came not to establish the reign of Sin in us, but to
overthrow it, and set us at Liberty therefrom. Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity. So far was Christ from coming to
save Men in their Sins, that He came to save them from their Sin And if Christ
be not our Savior from Sin, in vain do we expect* that He will be our Savior
from the Wrath to come. Salvation from Sin and Wrath are inseparable.

3. IT is also to (...) that the Death of Christ for Sin, is one of the
greatest Motives to abstinence from Sin. In Christ's Dying for Sin, we have the
clearest Discovery of the heinous nature of Sin and its hatefulness unto the
Holy GOD. Therei^ we may see, that Sin was so great an Evil, (...) nothing
could make Expiation or Atonement for it, but the Sacrifice of the Son of GOD
Himself* Therein we may see GOD's hatred of Sin to (...) such, as that He
spared not His own Sea, wh^^ He stood under the imputation of it. The Eternal
burnings of Hell, in which Damned Sinners are Punished, do not give such a
Demonstration of the Lord's abhorring Sin, as the sufferings and Death of His
Son, for our sins (...) Since then the Death of Christ on the Cross for Sin,
does afford such an evident Manifestation of the exceeding greatness of the
evil of Sin, i^ should then fill us with the greatest hatred of Sin The design
of GOD in giving us any way a f^^h of the evil of Sin, is, that we might be
move to hate it, and flee from it. When therefore He gives us the most hideous
prospect of Sin evil, in the Glass of Christ's sufferings and Death He expects
that we should thereby be induce to fear Sin and forsake it. Such then as m^^^
Christ's Death for Sin, an Argument for continuing in Sin, are guilty of a most
vile abused the Death of Christ They make that a Motiv^ to hold on in Sin,
which in its own Nature, and in the intention of GOD and CHRIST, is the
greatest Motive to a Total and Eternal ab^ndoning of Sin.

FROM these things then it is clear, That Men do but in vain hope that Christ
will save them from the Damnation of Hell, though they abide under the power and
practice of Sin. Let us not then entertain such a Vian Thought in our hearts.
But on the other hand, let us think* and say to our selves thus; If I am not
saved from Sin* I must infallibly Perish for ever. If I die in my Sins, Jesus
Christ will be so far from saving me from Destruction, that with His own Mouth
He will condemn, and sentence me to Hell; and with His own hand will cast me
down into the Pit, from whence there is no Redemption. Instead of being a
gracious Deliverer, He will be a terrible Judge and Avenger to me. Let me then
look to Christ to be a whole Savior unto me; to save me from Sin here, and
from Wrath hereafter. In thus doing, I may hope to find Mercy with Him now and
in the Day of His Glorious appearing to Judge the World.

THUS for the first Vain Thought concerning JESUS CHRIST.
1. IT is a Vain Thought, That Christians need (...), obey the Law of GOD,
therefore Jesus Christ has perfectly obeyed it for them It is the opinion of
some, that Christ's complete Obedience to the Law of GOD, in the place and
stead of Believers, makes their Obedience to it needless. They think this
exempts Christians from any Obligation to keep the Commandments of GOD. Christ
by fulfilling it for Christians, has thereby, they suppose, abrogated it, so
that now Obedience to it is not required. Such a thought as this is a great
hindrance of Men's Salvation; for it makes them neglect Duty, and look upon
themselves as Law, less Persons, that are at Liberty to Live as they List; but
such a thought as this is most abominable and vain. The Libertine will find
this his Imagination a mere Delusion in the latter end.

THE Vanity of this Thought appears from what follows,
1. IT is most true, That Christ by His perfect Obedience to the Law of GOD for
Believers, has freed them from the Law as it is a Covenant of Life. To be under
the Law as a Covenant of Life is this viz. If a Man keep the Law perfectly then
He shall Live, if He breaks it by the least Sin that He shall Die. For the
Covenant of Works it Do this and Live, Gal. 3.12. Do not, and Dye Genesis 2.17.
Now thus a Christian is not under the Law. Believers are not bound to yield
perfect, personal Obedience to the Law of GOD in order to the obtaining Eternal
Life. And the reason hereof is, because Jesus Christ as their Surety has
perfectly obeyed the Law for them He has yielded an absolutely perfect and
sinles^ Obedience to the Law of GOD in their stead and therefore GOD does not
now require it o^ them as necessary unto their Salvation. GOD accepts of
Christ's perfect Obedience for them and so does not exact perfect Obedience
from them, in their own Persons, as the condition of Eternal Life. In this
sense it is said that Believers are not under the Law. Romans 6.14. For ye are
not under the Law. i. e. as a Covenant of Works. If they were under the Law as
such a Covenant, it would be impossible for them to be Saved. For they cannot
possibly fulfill the Terms of that Covenant, which requires Obedience in the
highest degree of Perfection.

2. THOUGH Christians are freed from the Law as a Covenant of Works; yet they are
under the Law as a Rule of Life. GOD's Holy Law always was, is and will be a
Rule of Life and Obedience to Men, even in Heaven it self. Matthew. 6.10. Thy
Will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven. It Is the Duty of all to square their
Lives according to this Rule. Believers themselves, though Christ has fulfilled
the Law for them as a Covenant of Works, are yet bound to walk by the Law as a
rule. They are called upon to lead Holy, Righteous, Sober Lives; to be full of
Good Works. Now, nothing is Holy, Just and Good, but what is conformed to the
Holy, Just and Good Law of GOD. The Law then is a Rule to them which they
should be careful to observe in all things. Nay, were not Believers under the
Law of GOD as a Rule of their Lives, it were not possible for them to Sin; for
Sin is a Transgression of the Law. If it be not a Law to them, they cannot be
Guilty of any Criminal Breach of it; but their Sins are many, Jam. ^.2.

3. JESUS CHRIST in keeping the (...) designed Himself to be a Pattern of
Obedience to Believers. So far was He from exempting them from all Obedience to
the Law, that He intended to set them an Example of Holy Obedience which they
should Labor to follow. He (...) not keep the Law merely to give Satisfaction
^ it for them; but also for their imitation, tha^ they therein might be
followers of Him. Christians therefore Ought to walk as he walked, 1 Jo^. 2.6.
And our Lord often calls upon His Disciples to Follow Him, and Learn of Him,
and Do ^ He did. The Gospel is full of such Command^ Christ's Obedience then
does engage Believe^^ unto Obedience, and not dismiss them therefrom His
example annexed to the Rule, is a furthe^ Obligation upon them, unto all Holy
Obedience*

WE see then that it is a Vain Thought, Th^^ Christ's Obedience to the Law for
us, does (...) off the Bonds of Obedience from us. Let u^ then such a Thought
as this be cherished in (...) hearts: But on the other hand, let Christ's
perfect Obedience for us, be used by us as an inducement unto the most willing
and ready Obedienc^ to GOD. Let us think thus with our selv^^ and say, Has the
Great and Glorious GOD whom I had offended by my Sins, appoin^^ His Son to save
me, by satisfying the La^^ for me? Has He sent Him into the Wor^^ to fulfill
that Righteousness for me, which ^ had made my self utterly unable to
accomplish? Has He accepted of the most perfe^^ Obedience of His Son for me; so
as upon the Account thereof to receive me into His Favor and to make over
Eternal Life unto me? Has He done these things for me, and shall I not Love,
and Serve and Honor Him to the utmost of my Power? Surely I will walk before
Him in Righteousness and Holiness all the Days of my Life; and will rejoice in
the hope of Heaven, where I shall perfectly Obey Him, and Glorify Him in the
highest degree for ever.

THUS much for the third sort of Vain Thoughts. viz. Concerning JESUS CHRIST.
4. THERE are Vain Thoughts in the hearts of Sinners concerning Sin, which are
great hindrances of their being Saved. They take up such apprehensions of Sin
as make them more easily to venture upon the Commission of it, and more
indifferent about the Repenting of it. All such notions of Sin, which tend to
reconcile us to Sin, are most ruinous to Men's Souls. Some Vain Thoughts of
this nature, may be here instanced in,

1. IT IS a Vain Thought, That Heart Sins are not Damning. This is the Thought
of some Hypocritical Persons, who are careful to avoid outward Sins; but are
regardless of inwa^d Sins, Matthew. 23.25. The Hypocrite is not upon his Watch
and Guard against Heart-Sins, and yet he cherishes hopes of Heaven. This shows
that he does not think his Heart-Sins will prove his Eternal ruin, while he is
externally a blameless Liver. And how many are there that seem to fear gross
acts of Sin, and to be troubled for them if they fall into them, who yet can
easily allow themselves in sinful Frames of Heart, i^ sinful Tho'ts Desires,
etc* And whence is it the Men are thus easy under the workings of sinful Lusts
in their Hearts? It must (...) because they do not apprehend much danger in
them* They secretly imagine that these intent Sins do unexpose there to the
Damnation of Hell: (...) this is a Vain Thoughts.

For,

1. HEART-SINS (...) exceeding provoking to GOD as well as other Sins. Men are
apt to think the GOD is not much offended at those Sins which are acted only in
the Heart: But this is a ver^ great Mistake; Heart-Sins do render Men (...)
abominable in the Sight of GOD: And therefore our Lord Jesus Christ, does
denounce (...) dreadful Woes against Men on the account of these Heart-Sins;
Matthew. 23.27, 28. We unto you Scrib^ and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye are like
unto which Sepulch^es, which indeed appear beautiful outwork but are within
full of Dead Men's Bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so ye also outwardly
appear righteous unto Men, but within they are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.
Christ here arraigns, and condemns and threatens them, not for visible and
scandalous Sins; but for Heart-Iniquities. And we (...) of GOD's most severe
Punishing an evil Intention, though never Executed, Psalm. 21.10, 11. Their
fruit shall thou destroy from the Earth, and th^^ seed from among the Children
of Men. For they intended evil against thee; they imagined a mischiev^^^^
device which they are not able in perform. No^ there are scarce any Sins more
displeasing to GOD than many Heart-Sins are; such as Unbelie^^ Pride,
Covetousness, Malice, etc.

2. HEART-SINS need to be Repented of us well as other Sins. GOD does as much
Command Men to Repent of their Heart-Sins, as of the Sins of their Lips and
Lives, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts; and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him,
and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. Repentance for sinful Thoughts
is here called for in order to pardon. And thus in our Context GOD call upon
Jerusalem to Wash their hearts from wickedness, that they might be saved. Thus
also the Apostle Peter Exhorts Simon Magus, Acts. 8.22. Repent therefore of
this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be
forgiven thee. Heart-Sins then need forgiveness, and most be repented of in
order to forgiveness. Which shows that they are of a Damning Nature, and will
issue in Damnation if not Repented of. For the design of GOD in requiring
Repentance is, that iniquity might not, prove the Sinners ruin, Ezekiel. 18 30.

3. HEART-SINS will as certainly be brought into Judgment as other Sins. Though
Heart-Sins may escape the Knowledge of Men, yet they do not escape the
Knowledge of GOD: And He observes them with a purpose to call Men to an Account
for them. Jer. 17.9.10. The heart ^s deceitful above all things and desperately
wicked, who can know it? I the Lord search the he^rt, I try the ^rei^s, even to
give every man according to his ways. In the Day of Judgment, the Lord will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and w^ll make manifest the
Counsels of the Heart, 1 Cor. 4.5. In that Day, God will bring every work into
Judgment, with every s^^^et thing whether it be good or evil* Eccl. 12.14. Not
only shall the sinful Speeches and Deeds of Sinners he brought into Judgment;
but also their sinful Thoughts, Desires, Designs* etc. The very secrets of
their Hearts shall then (...) disclosed; Romans 2.16. In the Day when Go^ shall
Judge the secrets of man, by Jesus Christ. Such will be the ca^ctness of the
last Judgment, as that the most concealed iniquities shall be laid open. Now,
if Heart-Sins will be brought into Judgment, it will be into a Judgment of
Condemnat^on, and not of Approbation. Such as shall the^ be found under the
Guilt of will be condemned and punished for them, as well as for the other Sins
they stand guilty of.

WE see then, That it is a Vain Thought tha^ Heart-Sins are not Damning. Let us
not the^ suffer this Vain Thought to lodge in our Hearts* But on the other
hand, let it be our fixed persuasion that all the Workings of Sin in the Heart,
though they break not forth into outward acts, do expose us to the Eternal
Wrath of GOD: And let this thought be improved by us unto deep Humiliation
before GOD for our Heart-Sins. Le^ us confess them, bewail them and fly to the
Blood of Christ for the Pardon of them. Let it also put us upon diligent
watchfulness against Heart-Sins for the time to come. In this respect let u^
Keep our hearts with all Diligence, Prove. 4.23. Keep them from being defiled
with Proud, Unclea^ Malicious, Revengful Thoughts, etc. Such Mourning for
Heart-Sins, and watchfulness against them will be a gracious Evidence of our
Sincerity. Hypocrites may be very careful to keep their outside clean. But
Upright Men only are careful to keep their inside pure and clean. An earnest
desire of, and endeavor after purity of heart, is one of the best Characters
of one whose heart is right with GOD.

THUS much for the first Vain Thought concerning Sin
2. IT is a Vain Thought, That the Living in some single, gross actual Sin will
not issue in Destruction. Such a Thought there oftentimes is in the hearts of
Sinners. They think that if they indulge themselves only in some one Sin, there
is no danger of perishing thereby. They cannot think that GOD will shut them out
of Heaven; and cast them down to Hell, for the Reserve of one Sin. Did they
live in many Sins, then they suppose the end thereof will be Death: But when
it is no more than a single Sin, which they accustom themselves unto, they don't
imagine that this will end in their Damnation. Such an imagination as this
there is sometimes in the Hearts of Sinners, or else the Holy Ghost would not
in the Scriptures so solemnly caution us against it, as we shall presently show
He does. Now this imagination is a vain imagination, as will appear from these
things.

1. ONE Act of heinous Sin has oftentimes issued in the Destruction of Sinners,
much more will the customary practice of it. In the Word of GOD, we have many
recorded Instances of such as have been smitten with Death, and sent down to
Hell, for one gross act of Sin, whereby the Holy GOD was offended. Zimri and
Cozbi died and perished in and for an Act of Uncleanness, Numb. 25.^ Ananias
and Saphira were struck with sudden Dea^^ and Destruction for a Lie, Acts 5.
Now, If o^^ Act of Uncleanness and Lying, does thus end i^ the Sinners
Destruction, then surely repeated an^ continued Acts of Uncleanness and Lying
wi^^ do so. A Course of Sin is far worse than an A^^ of Sin. Consequently if an
Act of Sin brings Destruction on Men, much more will a Course o^ Sin do so. He
that goes on in the Commissi^^ of any kind of Sin, is certainly a far greater
Si^ner, and more worthy of Damnation; than (...) that is only once guilty of
such a Sin.

2. THE living in the practice of any gross Sin, i^ a certain sign of a
graceless Person, that shall ne^^ enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. One that h^
true Grace, is brought off from every way (...) Sin. Psalm. 119.101. I have
refrained my Feet fr^^ every evil way. Not only from some, or from man evil
ways; but from Every evil way. There i^ no way of evil which an Holy Person
lives in The Principle of Grace that is in them, s^^ them against every sort of
Sin without Exception so that they cannot allow themselves in any Si^
whatsoever. Such then as live in any Sin, a^^ not in a state of Grace, but in a
state of Sin. Th^^ the Apostle John declares that such as do on^^ harbor the
Sin of Hatred of their Brother, a^^ in a state of Sin and Death, 1 John 2.9,
11. He the hates his Brother, is in darkness, even until now, h^ that hates
his Brother is in darkness, and walks (...) darkness, and knows not whither
he goes, because that darkness has blinded his eyes. And again, i^ Chap.
3.15. Whosoever hates his Brother as a Murderer; and ye know that no Murderer
has Eternal Life abiding in him. This single Sin of Hatred lived in, proves a
Man to be in a sinful State, and that abiding so he will miss of Eternal Life.
And in other places of Scripture it is expressly declared that such as live in
any gross Sin shall not inherit Eternal Life. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ^e not that
the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither
Fornicators, ^or Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, ^or Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Thus again in
Ephesians. ^.5, 6. For this ye know, that no Whoremonger nor Unclean person, nor
covetous Man, which is an Idolater, has an inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ and of God. Let no man deceive you with vain words; for because of these
things comes the wrath of God upon ^he Children of Disobedience. From these
Scriptures we plainly see that if a Man be of the number ^f any one sort of the
Sinners here mentioned, ^e will not be Saved, but will be Damned. ^f he live in
the Sins of Drunkenness, or Unclean^ess, or Stealing, or Unrighteousness, or
Covetous^ess, etc. he will assuredly perish. Though he ^o not live in all of
them, or many of them, ^et if he live in any one of them, he will not ^nherit
Eternal Life; but the Wrath of GOD will come upon him.

WELL then, Let not such a Vain Thought as ^his lodge within us. But on the
other hand let ^s think with our selves, that every path of Sin ^^ads down to
Destruction. Let me therefore ^^ke which path of Sin I will, I am in the high
way to Hell. If I do not Repent and turn from All my Transgressions, Iniquity
will be my ruin If I do not cast away from me All my Tra^^gressions whereby I
have Transgressed, I (...) surely die. May I then by the help of Divi^^ Grace,
hate and turn from every false way. M^^ it be my hearty desire, and my happy
expe^^ence that no iniquity shall have Dominion o^^ me. May my Life be
blameless and harmles^ void of offense both toward GOD and towar^^ Man. May I
deny all ungodliness, and eve^^ Worldly Lust: And may I with well-ground^ Hope
and Assurance, be able to say with ^ Apostle Paul, that the Lord shall deliver
^ from Every evil Work, and preserve me to ^ Everlasting and Heavenly Kingdom.

THUS for the second Vain Thought conc^^ning Sin.
3 IT IS a Vain Thought, That there are sufficien^ Excuses for Sin. Sinners have
their specious p^^tences which they think will excuse, if ^ justify, their
Commission of Sin. Such a Thou^^ as this, is Destructive to Men's Souls: For it
ma^^ them think they do nothing amiss in sinning and so prevents their judging
and condemna^^^^ themselves for it, as they ought to do, in ord^^ to the
obtaining the Forgiveness of it. If the can excuse their Sin, they see no cause
to R^pent of it. But it is a vain imagination, that ^^sufficient Excuse can be
made for Sin, as may ^ shown under the various Excuses which Sinn^^^ are apt to
make.

1. IT IS a Vain Thought, That a good Intention will Excuse the Commission of
Sin. Sometimes Men pretend to have an eye to the Glory of GOD in the Commission
of Sin. Such there seems to have been in the Apostles times, who imagined that
continuance in Sin would give occasion to GOD to magnify His Grace, in
pardoning of it, Romans 6.1. What shall we say then? Shall are continue in Sin,
that Grace may abound? Their plausible pretense for continuance in Sin, was,
That the Grace of GOD might appear more Glorious in the Forgiveness of Sin.
Sometimes again, Men pretend the doing Service to others by the Commission of
Sin, as in the Case of an Officious Lie, as it is called. Thus Men will tell ^
Lie to promote another's Advantage, or to prevent his receiving Damage. And
because their telling such a Lie is done out of kindness to another, they think
this will excuse them. But none of these intentions, whether of Glory ^o GOD,
or benefit to our selves, will excuse our Commission of Sin. To think that they
will, is a Vain Thought.

For,

1. GOD has plainly declared that the best Intention will not Excuse Sin. As
for that pretense of sinning, that GOD's Grace may be more Glorified, it is
expressly condemned and declared to be most abominable, Romans 6.1, 2. Shall we
continue ^n Sin that Grace may abound? God forbid. This ^s an Expression
denoting the detestableness of ^uch an Imagination; and that Men ought by ^o
means to entertain such a Thought in their Hearts. Again, As for the pretense
of doing good to others of our selves by committing Si^ this is also very
clearly condemned, Romans 3.1. Some affirm, that we say, Let us do (...) that
good my come; whose Damnat^on is just. Here the Apost^^ does evidently condemn
that Principle of doin^ Evil that Good may come; and denounces th^^ worthy of
Damnation, who maintain o^ practic^ it. Let the Good we intend be never so
great be it the saving our own Lives, o^ the Lives o^ others, yet we may not do
Evil for the sec^^ing them.

2. SIN Committed with never so good an Inte^^^^n, is exceeding provoking to
GOD. Sinners ac^^pt to think that GOD is not offended at Si^ when they have a
good design in Committing it ^^t this is a great Mistake, the Scriptures fully
satisfy us to the contrary. GOD Commande^ Saul to Smite Amai^k, and utterly to
de^troy al^ th^^ they had, and spare them not, but to slay both man and woman,
infant and suck^ing, ox and sheep, ca^^ and (...), 1 Samuel 15.3. However Saul
spared the best of the Sheep, and of the Oxen, and of the fatlings and the
Lambs. His design herein b^ declares to be the Offering them in Sacrifice un^^
the Lord GOD, (...). 15. That this was h^^ real design, is not denied by Samuel
the Prophet But taking it for granted; he gives him to unde^stand, That although
he had such a Religious Intention. GOD however was greatly displeased with him
for his disobedience, Ver. 22, 23. A^^ Samuel said, has the Lord as great
delight in burn^ ^fferings and sacrifices* as in obeying the voice of i^ lord?
Be^^^d (...) ^etter than sacrifice, ^ (...) ^^an ^am. etc Be^^u^e (...) have
rejected the word of the Lord, he has also rejected thee from being King.
Again, we have another instance in Uzzah, when he saw the Ark in danger of
falling, He put forth his hand and took hold of it. And God smote him there for
his Error, and there he died by the Ark of God, 2 Samuel 6.6, 7. Undoubtedly
Uzzah had an innocent and good Intention in what he did, yet GOD was provoked
at him because therein he transgressed the Commandment of GOD, who allowed none
but the Priests to touch the Ark, Numb 4 15. It then GOD be so greatly offended
at Men, for Transgressing His Commandment, though they have therein a good end
and design; we may then be assured that a good Intention will not Excuse an
evil Action.

3. THE Servants of GOD have bewailed their Sins committed with a good
Intention and Adored the Mercy of GOD in pardoning them. Take only the Apostle
Paul as a famous Instance in this Case. He tells us that he Shut up many of the
Saints in Prison; that he gave his voice against them when they were put to
Death; that he punished them often in every, Synagogue, and compelled them to
blasphem^^ and persecuted them even to strange Cities. All t^^s he did, because
he verily thought with himself tha^ he ought to do it, Acts 26.9, 10, 11. He
acted conscientiously herein and with a great Zeal (...) the Glory of GOD,
Phil. 3.6. Concerning Zeal, persecuting the Church. He was Zealous for the Law
and Honor of GOD in Persecuting the Church of Christ. So that his Intention
was really good. Yet when he came to be sensible of his Sin, he was also
sensible that hi^ good Intention would not excuse it. And therefore he does
humbly acknowledge his Sin, and admire the Grace and Mercy of GOD in forgiving
it. 1 Timothy 1.13. I was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious; but I
obtained Mercy. From these things then we see that a good Intention is no
sufficient excuse for Sin.

2. IT is a Vain Thought, That the natural Inclination to Sin, will excuse the
Commission of Sin There is in the heart of every Man, a strange propensity to
Sin. Fallen nature is powerfully b^^ssed and bent to the doing Evil. Now this
natural proneness to Sin, Men are ape to suppos^^ a sort of Apology for Sin.
They are ready (...) say, It Is natural to all Men to Sin. This is the i^^ate
and universal Inclination of Mankind; and Nature will have its way. Such
reasonings there are sometimes in the hearts of Sinners. But alas! the
naturalness of Sin, is no Excuse for Sin.

For,

1. THIS natural Inclination to Sin is a just ground of self-condemnation, and
so cannot be a ground of so^^ justification for Sin. Our Inclination to Sin is
a part of the Corruption of our Nature, and a branch of that Cursed enmity
against GOD that is in our hearts. It is said of the carnal Mind, that it is
Enmity against God, Rom 8 ^. Now our great Inclination to Sin against GOD and
oppose GOD, is a Principle part of thi^ horrid enmity. We have therefore cause
(...) judge and condemn and abhor our selves in that there is in us such a
principle of contrariety and opposition to GOD. The Apostle Paul does
exceedingly bewail the remainders of this Inclination to evil in himself, R^m.
7.15, 19. He prea^ed under it as a burden which he earnestly longed to be
delivered from, Ier. 24. That then which calls for self-judging and
self-abhorence cannot justly be made an Apology for our Sin. How can that
excuse us for which we are bound to condemn our selves?

2. THIS Natural Inclination to Sin is an aggrevation of Sin, rather than an
extenuation of it. It is so far from excusing or lessening the Sin, that it
makes it the greater. The vicious inclination, makes the Sin proceeding from
it, more vile and hateful. When David was penitently confessing his great
Transgressions to GOD, he makes mention of the various aggravations of them, as
they had been against GOD, and committed in the Sight of GOD, Yet he does not
stop here, but follows his Sins up to their Fountain, even the Corruption of
his Nature, Psalm. 51.5. Behold I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my
Mother conceive me. He mentions the Sin and pravity of Nature, not for his own
Vindication; but for his greater Confusion and Abasement he produces it, not to
justify himself, but to Justify GOD in Judging him; for that he had not only
done such evil things, but had also such an evil heart in him, from whence they
proceeded. Indwelling Sin then, is no Plea for Sinners, but against them. If a
Murderer should Plead his Bloody Disposition, and Murderous Inclination, would
that excuse him and exempt him from Punishment? Would it not rather make his
speedy Execution more just and necessary? We see then, that Original Sin is no
Excuse for Act^al Sins.

3. IT is a Vain Thought. That Temptation to Sin will Excuse the Commission of
Sin. In this World Men do meet with very many, and very gr^^ Temptations to
Sin, from the Devil and from Men. By these Temptations Men are oftentim^
carried away to the Commission of Sin. No^ Men are apt to make these
Temptations a^ Excuse for their Sins. Thus did our First Pare^^ when they had
Sinned: Eve said. The Serpent ^^guiled me, and I did eat. She excuses the Si^
from the Subtlety of the Tempter. So A^^ said, The Woman (...) gave me of the
Tree and did eat. He excuses his Sin from the sollicitatio^ and enticement of
his Wife. Thus their sinf^^ Posterity go about to excuse their Sin, becau^^
they were strongly Tempted and Urged to Sin but this is no sufficient Excuse
for Sin.

For,

1. TEMPTATION forces no Man to Si^ Tempters can do no more than entreat us,
(...) Arguments with us, propound Motives to us and when they have done all,
they cannot constrain us to Sin. They have not power o^ our Wills to compel
them to Evil: The wi^^ of Man cannot suffer compulsion. If therefore we Sin
upon Temptation, we Sin willingly, a^^ consequently are inexcusable. If we
yield ^ Temptations the fault is our own. Indeed, ^ Men or Devils could offer
violence to (...) Wills and irresistably determine them to (...) we were
excusable. But this they cannot pos^bly do: they must gain our consent, or the^
cannot lead as into Sin. If we do not freely ^^^ply, they cannot force us to
comply.

2. GOD has Commanded to resist Temptation, and offers us his Assistance. If
the Devil Tempt us, GOD has charged us to resist him; Jam. 4.7. Resist the
Devil, and he will see from you. If Ill Men Tempt us to Sin, GOD has charged us
not to give way to their Temptations, Prove. 1.10. My son, if sinners entire
thee, consent thou not. It will not then excuse us that we have been Tempted,
because it was our Duty to resist Temptation, for GOD required us so to do; but
then further GOD not only Commands us to withstand Temptation; but also tenders
us His gracious Assistance. Therefore Christ has directed us to seek unto GOD
by Prayer, for his help against Temptations; Mat. 6.13. Lead us not into
Temptation, but deliver us from evil. This shows that Divine Assistance is
tendered and may be obtained in the way of Prayer. If then we give place to
Temptation, we are inexcusable, because we might have had a sufficiency of
Grace to enable us to resist Temptation. Had we no Prospect of Aids from
Heaven, we might have some show of an Excuse for our being overcome by
Temptation, we might Plead our own insufficiency as a kind of Apology. But
there is no room left for this pretense, because GOD was ready to help and
strengthen us, if we had humbly and earnestly requested of Him so to do.

3. GOD sets before us much greater Motives to (...) Temptation, than any
Tempter does to comply with Temptation. The Great GOD does Infinitely forbid
Satan and his Instruments, in the offers which they make unto us. The most that
Tempters to Sin can promise to us, is only sensual Pleasure, Worldly Profits or
Advancements. Pro. 1 11, 13. Come with us, we shall for preci^^s and (...). The
Devil bid to the highest, when he offered Christ the Kingdoms of this World and
the Glory of them. This is the utmost that ^^e can promise, to win us to a
compliance with his Temptations: But what, is all this World to the things
which GOD promises to us, in case we resist Temptation? He has assured us that
if we overcome, he will give us a Crown of Life, and Glory that fades not
away, he will make us to sit upon Thrones, he will bestow upon us the Heavenly
Inheritance, and make as to drink of those Rivers of Pleasure, that are at his
Right Hand for evermore. These things are incomparable greater inducements to
resist Temptation, than the other are to comply with Temptation. So thought
Moses. Heb. 11.20. Esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches than the
treasures in Egypt: for he had respect unto the recompense of reward. If a Man
therefore shall disregard GOD^s Offers, and take up with the offers of Satan,
is he not inexcusable? Had Men or Devils made better offers to them than GOD
they might have some excuse for hearkening to Temptation. But since GOD does
offer (...) them Infinitely better things, than any other do or can do, they
are therefore without (...) excuse for complying with Temptation to Sin.

FROM these things then it appears, that though Men's Temptations be never so
many and so great, yet that will not be ^n sufficient excuse for their
Commission of Sin.

4 IT is a Vain Thought, That the Commonness of Sin w^ll excuse the Commission
of Sin. Sometimes there are Sins which do become a common practice; the
generality of Men do addict themselves thereunto. Now this is what Men will
allege as an excuse for their Committing such Sins Because it is a common
thing to Cheat, Defraud, overreach, they think this will excuse them in doing
so too. What they do is no more than what the most do; and therefore they
suppose themselves excusable. But this is no Excuse.

For,

1. GOD has strictly charged us not to Commit a Sin, though it be never so
common* GOD knows the pernicious influence of Evil Example, and how apt we are
to think that warrantable, at least excusable, which is universally practiced.
For this reason He has expressly forbidden us to do evil, though never so many
accustom themselves thereunto, Exodus 23 2. Thou ^halt was follow a multitude to
do evil. Let the Multitude be what they will, high or low, rich or poor, wise
or wo^^, we may not follow them in any evil thing. So again in Romans 12.2. Be
not conformed to this World. Though there be a World of Persons that perpetrate
Iniquity, yet we must avoid conformity to them. Since then GOD has so plainly
prohibited the following a Multitude to do Evil, the Multitude will not excuse us
if we do Evil. Either GOD is to blame in forbidding us to imitate them, or we
are to blame in following their Example.

2. THE Commonness of a Sin is rather a reason why we should abstain from it,
than practice it. The more there are that Sin against GOD, the greater call
there is to us to forbear it. Is it no^ enough that there are so many already
engage^^ against GOD; but must we fall in with them to increase the number?
When we see GOD^ Name so much dishonored, we should be mo^^ concerned to
Glorify it. Again, If we follow a Multitude to do Evil, we contract the Guilt
of all their Sins. Our Conformity to them i^ a practical Approbation and
Justification of their Evil Deeds. And this makes as partakers o^ their Sins; 2 John 11. For he that bids ^i^ God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds. He
t^^ favors or coun^^^ances Sinners in their (...) Deeds, is a partaker of
their Evil Deeds. Now we do countenance them in their Sins, when (...) join
with them in their Sins. And if this be (...) what a World of Guilt do we bring
upon (...) selves by following a Multitude to do Evil* We make all their Sins
our own. The Comm^ness of Sin then will not excuse or extenuate Sin^ but makes it
much greater than otherwise ^ would be.

5. IT is a Vain Thought that the Falls ^ ^ery the Men into Sin, will excuse
our com^^ting the same Sins. GOD in His Word (...) informed us of very
Scandalous Sins comm^ted by most Eminent Saints. Now Sinners (...) wont to
plead these example as excuses for the committing the like sins. If they are
Dr^^^ so was Noah: if they lie, so did Abraham. ^ they commit Adultery* so did
David. The (...) Men have done as they do, and this makes the^ think themselves
excusable* But this is a (...) Thought. For,

1. THEIR Sins, thought very Holy Men, were exceeding offensive to GOD. The
Great GOD who has made known to us what their Sins were, has as clearly made
known to us His Holy Displeasure at them, 2 Samuel 11.27. The thing that David
had done displeased the Lord. And to how high a degree He was displeased is
awfully represented in the following Chap. 9th, 10th, 11th Verses, Wherefore
have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his fight? Thou
have killed Cri^h the Hittite with the sword; and have taken his wife to be thy
wife; and have slain him with the sword of the Children of Ammon. Now therefore
the sword shall never depart from thine house, etc. GOD then did not hold His
Servants Guiltless in what they did, nor lightly pass over their Iniquities. If
they then provoked GOD, will that best us out in doing so too? Or if they were
not excu^able in Committing Sin, do we think to be excused in imitating them?
How absurd is such (...) Imagination!

2. THEIR falls are recorded for our Admonition, not for imitation. The design
of GOD in ^anding down to us the Knowledge of their Sin, is that by them we
might take warning, 1 Cor. 10.11. They are written for our Admonition, upon
whom the ends of the World are come. They should be Cautions to us against Sin,
and not Encouragements to Sin We ought to improve them to greater watchfulness
against Sin, and ^ot to a more presumptuous boldness in Sinning. ^f such Great
and Good Men were overtaken ^n Great Transgressions, the more need have we ^o
take heed to our selves, lest we fall. This is the proper use we should make of
such sad Instances of humane frailty. And it is a perverse abuse of them, to
excuse our selves in Sin thereby.

6. IT IS a Vain Thought, That danger of Suffering will Excuse the Commission of
Sin. The Case is many times so circumstanced, that Men must either do evil, or
suffer evil. When this come to be their Case, they frequently commit Sin, that
they may escape Sufferings. Thus in time^ of Persecution, many do Apostatize
from the Profession of Religion for fear of Sufferings: And they are ready to
think, that they may be excused for their Sin, when only a fear of Suffering
was the inducement to it. But this is a Vai^ Thought, as appears from these
things.

1. THE least Sin is a far worse Evil, th^^ the greatest Sufferings. No
Affliction whatsoever is comparably so great an Evil as Sin. S^^ wrongs GOD;
but Suffering only hurts the Creature. Sin wrongs the Soul, but Affliction
hurts only the Body. Sin makes us hateful (...) GOD, Afflictions do not. Sin
tends to no Goo^ but Afflictions may be greatly to our Profit So that Sin is
much worse than any Affliction Nay, it is far worse than Death it self; 1 Cor.
1^ 56. The Sting of Death is sin. It Is Sin that ma^^^ Death hurtful: Take away
Sin, and the Death is unstung, and becomes an innocen^ harmless thing; yea a
thing most sweet an^ desirable We ought then to choose Suffering and Death,
rather than Sin. Thus did Moses Heb. 11.25. Choosing rather to suffer
affliction wi^^ the People of God, than to enjoy the pleasure of (...) for a
season. Thus did the Three Worthies choose rather to be cast into a Burning
Fiery Furnance, than to Sin against GOD, Dan. 3.18.

2 BY Sinning we expose our Selves to much sorer Punishment than Men are
capable of ins^^^^^. Sin exposes us to the Wrath of GOD, which is Infinitely
more dreadful than the Wrath of Man. It is a fearful thing to fall unto the
hands of the living God, Heb. 10.31. He can destroy both Soul and Body in Hell
forever, whereas Men can only Kill the Body, and that but for a time. The worst
that Men are capable of doing to us, is but as nothing to what GOD can do. We
have much more cause then to stand in Awe of GOD and not Sin, than through fear
of Man to venture upon Sin. Fear should rather deter us from Sin, than drive us
to Sin, seeing there is far greater danger in Committing Sin, than Abstaining
from it.

7. IT IS a Vain Thought, That Sin is excusable, because it is but little. It Is
sometimes the Thought of Sinners, that there is no great matter in committing
lesser sort of Sins. Hence they are seldom, if ever, troubled for their
supposed little Sins. They don't count them of such Moment ^s to call for
Mourning and Humiliation before GOD, such peccadilloes, as they are termed;
petty Oaths, little Thefts and Frauds and Surfeits, need not be laid to heart,
and that GOD overlooks them. But this is a Vain Thought,

For,

1. No Sin is in it self little. It Is true, that some Sins are far less than
others, all Sins are not equal; there are some Sins which are as Camels, and
others which are as Gnats compared among themselves. Nevertheless, those Sins
which are Comparatively little, are in themselves exceeding Great. The least
Sin is against the Great and Glorious GOD; it is a Transgression of His Law, a
Contempt of His Authority, a Reflection upon His Divine Majesty; and can that
be really little, which is contrary to the most High GOD? In Truth, as Sin is
against the Infinite GOD, so it is an Infinite Evil. The least Sin is
objectively Infinite.

2. GOD has upon Pain of Death, forbidden little Sins as well as great. It Is
true, That GOD ^s not threatened every Sin with a like measure o^ Punishment.
There will be different Degrees o^ Punishment inflicted, according to the
different Degrees of Sin. As every Sin is not alike h^nous, so every Sin shall
not be alike Punished Nevertheless, Death, Eternal Death, is threatne^ for the
least Sin, as that which it is worthy o^ The smallest Transgression of the Law
of GOD lays Men open to the Curse of the Law, Gal. ^ 10. Cursed is every one
that continues not in (...) things that are written in the book of the Law to
them. If the Law be not kept in an things, it be broken in any the least
Degree, it bring Men under the Curse. The first Sin of Man that was to the
matter of it small, what a Cur^^ has it brought on the World!

THUS we have seen how Vain all the Excuses for Sin are. Let us not then
harbor i^ our Hearts, any such Vain Thought, as if Si^ were an Excusable
thing. But on the other hand, Let us think, that if we Sin against GOD, we are
left without all Excuse, we can have no Cloak for our Sin, but our Mouths will
be stopped for ever. If the Heathen are without Excuse for their Sin, as they
are, Romans 1.20. How much more shall we Christians be inexcusable, whose Light
and Advantages are Infinitely Superior to theirs?

THUS much may suffice for the fourth sort of Vain Thoughts, viz. those
concerning Sin.

5. THERE are Vain Thoughts in the hearts of Sinners concerning Repentance,
which are great hindrances of their being Saved. These Vain Thoughts respect
either the season of Repentance, or the Nature and Truth of Repentance, or the
Duty it self; and in all these Respects, their Thoughts are exceeding
prejudicial to the Salvation of their Souls. e. g.

1. IT IS a Vain Thought, That hereafter will be as proper a season for
Repentance, as the present Time. That Sinners have such a Thought in them is
evident from their Delays of Repentance. All Sinners that are not grossly
ignorant or desperately blinded, do know and acknowledge, that Repantance is a
Duty of such Necessity, as that there can be no Salvation without it. And
accordingly it is their purpose to Repent, but not as yet: Hereafter they will
set upon this Duty, when they come to lie on a Sick Bed, or when they are
arrived to Old Age, or when they are more at Leisure, and less involved in
Worldly Affairs, etc. Now, how can they satisfy themselves in thus doing, i^
they do not imagine that hereafter may be a^ good a season, if not a better or
more convenient season to Repent in than Now? Procrastination carries this
imagination along with it But this is a Vain Thought.

For,

1. IT is reckoning upon a Time which it is (...) uncertain whether they shall
ever enjoy. Loytering Sinners do promise themselves an hereafter to Repent in;
but they have no sure ground to buil^ such a promise upon: So far are they from
being certain of the expected future Season, as th^^ it is altogether most
uncertain. Nothing is ordinarily more uncertain to Men than the Peri^^ of their
Lives. They do not know how some and suddenly they may Die; when they lea^^
think of it, when there is no outward Prospe^^ of it, they are overtaken by
Death; when i^ perfect Health and Strength, they are in a Moment by one
unforeseen Accident or other, brought to their end. How frequent are such
Instance^ in the Course of Divine Providence? We kn^^ not but that our Souls
may be required of (...) this Night: We cannot tell whether we shall see the
Light of another Day. How Vain th^^ is it to Boast of a to Morrow, much more of
^ long Time to come?

2. IF the Time allotted upon should Arrive, the^ is less probability of their
Repenting then than n^^. They themselves indeed may suppose it more probable
that they shall then Repent; yet i^ reality, it is far more improbable that
they should so do. There is far less likelihood of their future, than present
Repentance. Whatever they think, they will be farther off from Repentance than
ever. There are three things which give ground for such a Persuasion.

1. THEY will certainly be more hardened in Sin. Hardness of Heart, is a
natural Consequent of delaying Repentance, Heb. 3.15. While its said, To day if
ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. If Men refuse to hearken to the
Voice of GOD calling upon them to Day to Repent, they will contract greater
hardness of heart. The longer Men live in Sin, the more Sin is strengthened and
confirmed in them. Continuance in a customary practice of Sin, makes turning
from it* exceedingly more difficult; Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his
skin or the Leopard his spots? them may ye also do good, that are accustomed to
do evil. Supposing then that Men should live till that hereafter which they
dream of, they will be so hardened in Sin, as to have less of an heart to
Repent. Oftentimes they are stupid senseless and secure, which is an Evidence
of prodigious hardness of heart contracted. They have nothing of that sense of
the evil and danger of Sin which they formerly had. Their Consciences are
asleep, and they go away with as much quietness, as if they had not the least
Guilt lying upon them.

2 THEY may be more incapable of that scri^^^ Consideration, which is necessary
to saving Repentance. There can be no sound Repentance where Men do not
consider of their evil doings: Now hereafter Men may not he in a Capacity for
(...) Meditation and Reflection upon their Sins, ^ may affect their hearts with
due Grief and S^^row for them. If they come to lie upon ^ Deathbed, whereon
they purposed to Rep^^^ it may be, they are by their Bodily Distemp^^ utterly
incapacitated for serious thinking (...) their condition. They are deprived of
the (...) use and exercise of their Reason, and go out ^ the World Delirious.
Is not this oftentimes ^ manner in which such Sinners Die? and (...) can say
that it shall not be so with them?

3. THEY will have less reason to expect ^ A^^^^tance of the Holy Spirit,
without which it is ^ possible for them sincerely to Repent. If they supp^^^
it is in their own power to Repent when (...) w^ll, they do fatally deceive
themselves: ^ it is GOD only that can work in us a soft ^ penitent frame of
heart. Ezekiel. 11.19. I will ^ the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give
^ an heart of flesh. GOD by His Spirit softens ^ breaks the hard hearts of
Sinners. But (...) little ground have Sinners, who delay their ^^pentance, to
expect that GOD will here^ send His Holy Spirit to bring them to Rep^^tance?
Have they not quenched the Mo^^ of the Holy Spirit formerly? when He co^^^ced
them of the need of Repenting speedi^^ did they not stifle His Convictions
under p^^^tence of Repenting hereafter? Did they ^ purpose notwithstanding to
continue and go^ longer in their Sinful ways, and not turn (...) them, till a
great while hence? And (...) Reason have such to think that the Spirit ^ GOD
will at the last, work in them that ^^pentance which will be unto Salvation?
Have they not much more just ground to think that He will utterly withdraw from
them, and leave them to Die and Perish in their Sins? Surely this is what in an
ordinary way, may be expected. That offered Grace, that has been so long
despised by delaying Sinners, may most justly be denied to them at the last,
and most probably will be so.

WE see then, that it is a Vain Thought, That we (...) as well Repent hereafter
as now. Let us (...) ^hen entertain such a Vain Thought: But on the contrary,
let us think, that Now is the accepted Time, Now is the Day of Salvation; that
the present Time, is the best Time to set about the Work of Repenting and
turning to GOD; and accordingly let us make haste and Delay no longer. Let us
agree quickly with GOD who is our Adversary, and get into good Terms with Him
as soon as possible. Whatsoever our hands do find to do, in the matter of our
Repentance, let us do it with all our might, before it be too late. Our early
and speedy Repentance is what we shall never Repent us of. It will be an
abundant Consolation, that we have not the Work of Repentance to do at Death.
We may then be satisfied that having heretofore sown in Tears, we are now going
to Reap in Joy, and that Jesus Christ says to us as to the Penitent Thief, This
Day shall th^^^ be with me in Paradise.

THUS for the first Vain Thought concerning Repentance.

2. IT is a Vain Thought, That if a gross Sin be Confessed and Bewailed, it is
truly Repented of, though it be not forsaken. Such a Thought as this there is
sometimes in the hearts of Sinners. They are Guilty it may be, of the Sin of
Drunkenness, Uncleanness, etc. Hereupon they make Confession of it to GOD,
Mourn for it, and earnestly beg the Pardon of it. Having thus done, they think
themselves truly Penitent, though upon the next Opportunity and Temptation, they
commit the same Sin again; and when they have thus repeated their Sin, they
renew also their Confessions and Lamentations: And thu^ they go on Sinning and
Confessing, and because as often as they Sin, so often they bemoan it they
suppose that they do really Repent of it* But this is a Destructive and Vain
Thought.

For,

1 GOD has destroyed Sinners for continuing to Commit gross Sins, though they
have Confessed and Bewailed them (...) remarkable Instance of thi^ kind we
(...) in Pharaoh King of Egypt: H^ refused at the Command of GOD to let Isra^^
go; hereupon GOD Punished him with on^ sort of Plague; under the Calamity of
this Judgment he Confesses his Sin, and begs Praye^ for the removal of the
Judgment, and promise^ to let Israel go. No sooner is the Plague removed, but
he renews his disobedience to the Command of GOD. Hereupon GOD smites him with
another Plague, then again he Confesse^ his Sin, justifys GOD, condemns himself
and his People, and Prays for the removal of tha^ Plague; no sooner is this
Plague removed, but he returns to his Sin. And that (...) he renew h^s
Confessions and Rebellions, till at length GOD Destroyed him in a most
astonishing manner. This Example plainly shows, that though Sinners do never so
often confess and bewail their Sins, yet if they persist in them, they do not
truly Repent of them. If this were saving Repentance the Wrath of GOD would not
come upon them as it did upon Pharaoh. In Truth, such Repentance is but a
mock-Repentance, which does rather pull down the Wrath of GOD, than turn it
away.

2. TURNING from all gross Sin, as to the Customary practice of it, is
essential to true Repentance. There are Sins of Infirmity, which are
unavoidable and cannot be wholly abstained from in this Life; but we shall
daily be more or less overtaken with them. Of this nature are, some
Distractions and wanderings of Mind in the Duties of Prayer, Reading and
Hearing the Word of GOD; some sudden involuntary Motions of sinful Fear, Shame,
Anger, Grief, Joy; some vain, foolish, idle Thoughts: The best of Men cannot
possibly keep themselves free from such Sins as these. Therefore it is not to be
supposed that none are truly Penitent who do not so Repent of them, as to keep
clear of them. Such Sins as these are turned from, only as to Allowance,
Approbation and Indulgence: A true Penitent Mourns for these Sins, disapproves
of them and detests them, and would gladly be freed from them; yet he cannot
keep himself free from them. But then as for gross and heinous Acts of Sin,
every true Penitent turns from them, as to the frequent and ordinary practice
of them. Indeed, he may fall into such great Sins; but yet this is (...) and
not common. He does not after Repenta^^^ Multiply such Acts of Sin, and go on
in a ^^peated way of Committing them; No, he (...) forms and leaves off such a
Course of Sinni^^ in this kind: Such Reformation is an Essen^^^^ part of sound
Repentance; Ezekiel. 18.30, 3^ Repent and turn from all your Transgressions --
Cast away from you all your Transgressions whereby y^^ have Transgressed. All
avoidable Sins, such a Gross Sins, are turned from and cast away where there is
sincere Repentance. Such th^^ as hold on in the ordinary Commission of g^^^
Iniquities, do not heartily Repent of them (...) they be never so full of their
Confessions ^ them, and seeming Lamentations for them ^ is then a Vain Thought
that we Repent, wh^^ we don't Reform in this Case. Let not th^^ such a Vain
Thought lodge within us; but let ^ on the other hand think, that if we duly
Co^^^^^ our Sins, we shall forsake them. With peni^^^^ Ephraim we shall say,
What have we any more (...) with Idols? And with Holy David we shall ^ able to
say, We have refrained our feet from (...) evil way.

THUS for the second Vain Thought c^^cerning Repentance.

3. IT is a Vain Thought, That Sins of ^ righteousness are Repented of, though
there be no d^^^^nor design to make Restitution, Such a Though^ as this, there
oftentimes is in the Hearts of ^ righteous Men. They are sensible that (...)
have sinned in Stealing from their Neighbor, or defrauding him. Hereupon they
may Confess their Sin to GOD, and beg the Pardon of it; yet all this while
never purpose or take any Care to Restore what is thus unrighteously gotten:
Without doing this, they suppose their Repentance is sincere and acceptable to
God: But this is a Vain Thought.

For,

1. HE that refuses to make Restitution, does not seriously Confess his
unrighteousness to GOD. There ought to be explicit and solemn Confession of
known gross Sins to GOD. He that does not thus Confess them to GOD, does not
really Repent of them. Now such serious and solemn Confession of the Sin of
unrighteousness, is not made by one that refuses to Restore dishonest Gain: For
if he speaks out all that is in heart, his Confession must run in such Terms as
these. Lord, I acknowledge mine Iniquity, in Trespassing against my Neighbor.
I have sinned in that I have wronged him in his Wordly Interests. However, I
purpose not to do him Right; but to Live and die in the Possession of what I
have unjustly gotten from him. Can such a Confession as this be called Serious?
Is it not rather a mocking of, and trifling with the most High GOD?

2. HE that refuses to make Restitution, does not really hate and grieve for
the Sin of unrighteousness, which he has been guilty of. Nothing is more clear
than that Repentance includes in it, an hatred of and sorrow for Sins
Committed. But how can a Man say that he does hate his unrighteous Action, and
is heartily grieved for it, when he has no will to Restore what he has
unrighteously Gained? These things are utterly inconsistent. Did a Man indeed
abhor the injustice he has perpetrated and were he afflicted in spirit for it,
he would labor to repair the damage he has thereby done to his Neighbor. Men
do but falsely pretend that they hate and are grieved for an unjust
Acquisition, while they contentedly abide in a possession equally unjust: How
could they quietly keep what they have deceitfully gotten, if they had the
least spark of Godly sorrow for their deceitful Dealing? While Men willingly
neglect to make Restitution, they do but delude themselves in thinking they
have th^^ Godly sorrow for their Sin, which works Repentance unto Salvation.
Were it sound Repentance it would bring forth the fruits of Righteousness and
Honesty is Evidences thereof.

3. HE that refuses to make Restitution lives in the Omission of a plain Duty.
It Is evident, that he does not really Repent of his unrighteousness, who
neglects to do what GOD requires of him in that Case: For by neglecting to do
what GOD Commands him, he adds Sin to Sin; and consequently is so far from
Repenting of what h^ has done, that he becomes more Guilty in the sight of GOD.
Now by refusing to restor^ unjust Gain, Men are disobedient to GOD, they don't
do, what they stand bound to do by the Law of GOD. There is a twofold Law which
in this Case they do Transgress; they Transgress the Law of Christian Charity.
The Command of GOD is that in Matthew. 19.19. Thou shall lo^^ thy Neighbor as
thy self. We must Love our Neighbor with the same Truth of Love, as we do our
selves, though not with the same Degree of Love. But how can Men say that they
as truly Love their Neighbor as they do themselves, when they have wronged
him, and will not do him Right? Of true Love it is said, That it works no ill to
his Neighbor, Romans 13.10. It will not hurt him in his Estate; but will rather
help him, and promote his outward welfare.

Again,

THEY Transgress the Law of Equity. The Command of GOD is that in Mic. 6.8. Do
Justly; and that in Prove 3.27. Withold not good from them to whom it is due,
when it is in the power of thine hand to do it. Though it be in the power of our
hand to withold it from him, yet we ought not to do it; but should restore it
to him. Is it not a just thing to give every Man that which is his own? Is
there any Man living that does not know this to be just and equal? Is not this
the Foundation of all Laws and Courts of Judicature for the securing every
Man's Property? Nay, Do not the Early Dictates of natural Light, teach even
little Children to say, That Is mine, give me it? Men then cannot but know that
it is a Point of Justice to return to every Man that which is his. And when it
respects themselves. they can instantly see the Equity in it, and reckon those
Unjust, who keep that from them, which of Right belongs to them. Such then as
refuse to Restore what they have unjustly gotten from their Neighbor, are
transgressors of the Law of Charity and Equity; and while they are willingly
and resolvedly so, how can it be though it that they Repent of their
unrighteousness? They do indeed approve of it, persist in it; and hold fast
Deceit, refusing to let it go.

LET not then such a Vain Thought lodge wi^^^ us. But on the other hand, let us
think, the We ougth to do so to others, as we would they sh^^^^ do to us. We
should suppose our selves to be i^ their Case, and they in ours, and then do by
th^^ as we would in reason have them do by (...) This is the Golden Rule by
which we should regulate our Carriage toward Man. Let us a^tend this Rule in
giving to every one their D^ as we would have them do to us. Let us ^ solve to
do that which is Lawful and Righ^ restoring the Pledge, and giving again, that
wh^^ we have sinfully taken away. Rather than (...) back from any Man that
which is his, le^^ be ready to say with Zacheus, If I have wro^g^ any Man,
behold I restore him four fold. This is (...) way to Live and not Die: This is
to put a^^ the accursed thing, which if detained, (...) bring the Curse of GOD
upon our Perf^ and all that we have. For how many ga^ Estates have been blasted
on the account of (...) unrighteous Methods in which they have be gained? As
ever then we would expect al^ Blessing of GOD, Let us, if we have wrong ^ any,
make Restitution as far as we are able. ^ add as far as we are able, because in
case of r^ inability to make Restitution, GOD will accept of a willing Mind,
joined with a fixed purpose of making Restitution, if ever we be p^^ unto a
Capacity for so doing. In this Case th^^ holds true, 2 Cor 8 12. If there be
^ust a willing (...) that a Man has, and (...) according to that he has not A
sincere readiness to Restore according to our Ability shall find acceptance
with GOD; and He will be Merciful to our unrighteousness when it is Repented
of, with such an honest and ready Disposition of Heart.

THUS much for the Third Vain Thought concerning Repentance.
4. IT is a Vain Thought, That Repentance is no Gospel Duty. This is the most
Vain and worst Thought of all, and yet a Thought by some entertained; they call
Repentance a Legal Duty, and the Preaching of it Legal Preaching, they think
that a Child of GOD ought not to be troubled for his Sins; and that it does not
become a Gospel Spirit to grieve and sorrow for Miscarriages. They say, that
GOD beholds no Iniquity in Jacob, takes no notice of them, as having from
Eternity Pardoned them; and therefore they ought not to Mourn for them: Thus
speaks the abominable Antinomian. Such a Thought as this is most pernicious, as
it makes Men secure and quiet in Sin and Impenitency. The Vanity of this
Thought is so obvious as that little needs be said to Evidence it.

Yet,

1. NOTHING is more clearly revealed in the Gospel to be a Duty, than that of
Repentance. It Is altogether needless to produce the Multiplied Commands to
Repent. It may suffice only to say that Repentance was constantly pressed by
Jesus Christ the Author of the Gospel In His Public Ministry he made it one of
the chief Subjects which He insisted upon, as being that which He was
especially sent to call Sinners unto, Math. 9.13. I am not come to call the
Righteous but Sinners to Repentance: And it is Recorded of Him, that this was
His Practice; Mat. 4.17. At that time Jesus began to Preach and to say, Repent,
for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Mark 1.14, 15. Jesus came into Galilee,
Preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, saying, Repent ye, and believe the
Gospel. Now surely Jesus Christ was a Gospel Preacher, and Preached Repentance
as an Evangelical Duty; and not only did He thus Himself; but likewise
Commanded His Apostle to Preach the same Doctrine of Repentance, Luke 24.46,
47. He said unto them, -- That Repentance and Remission of Sins should be
Preached in his name, among all Nations.

2. REPENTANCE is Commanded in the Gospel as necessary to Salvation. It Is not
only required as a Duty; but as a Duty of absolute neces^^^^ unto Salvation.
Without it Men cannot be Pardoned. Acts 3.19. Repent ye therefore and he
Converted, that your Sins may be blotted out. Without it Men cannot be Saved;
Luke 13 3, 5. Except ye Repent, ye shall likewise Perish. Impenitency will end
in Eternal Perdition; Romans 2.5 after this impenitent heart, treasurest up to
thy self Wrath, etc.

WE see then, That it is a Vain Thought, That Repentance is a needless thing,
and not calle^ for in the Gospel. Let not such a Thought lodge in us; but let
us know and believe that GOD now Commands all Men every where to Repent, and
that if we do not exercise our selves in Repentance, we shall Eternally Perish.

THUS much for the Fifth sort of Vain Thoughts, viz. those concerning
Repentance.
6. THERE are Vain Thoughts in the Hearts of Sinners concerning Obedience,
which are great Hindrances of their being Saved. Sinners do many times take up
wrong notions of true Obedience. They think they do indeed Obey GOD, when they
do not; and thus falling short in their Obedience, they do miss of Salvation.
Some of their Vain Thoughts in this Case may be mentioned.

1. IT is a Vain Thought, That Partial Obedience to the Commandments of GOD is
true Obedience. If Men Obey GOD in some things, in many things, they think they
Obey Him acceptably, though they don't Obey Him in all things. Thus Men
sometimes are seemingly careful and exact in observing the Duties of the First
Table of the Law; they seem to be very Religious toward GOD, in performing
those Duties of Worship which He requires of them. They Pray to GOD in their
Families, they Pray also in Secret, they frequent the Public Worship and
Ordinances of GOD, and are seemingly Devout therein: And now they think they
are Dutiful and Obedient Christians, though it may be all this while they
neglect the Duties of the Second Table of the Law: They are not Just and Honest
in their Dealings, they are not Charitable and Beneficent, they are not Chaste
and Sober.

AGAIN, On the other hand, Men are sometimes strict Observers of the Second
Table o^ the Law; but are negligent and careless about the Duties of the First
Table of the Law: They are Men of Justice and Honesty, Sober and Temperate,
Kind and Charitable: And now they think they are good Livers; and do as much as
needs to be done; though all this while they neglect Prayer, Reading of the
Holy Scriptures and attending on GOD in Gospel Ordinances, and Sanctifying the
Sabbath: But it is a Vain Thought, that such Partial Obedience i^ Right and
well-pleasing Obedience. The Vanity of this Thought thus appears,

1. GOD requires of Men Universal Obedience (...) His Commandments. He does not
allow Men (...) dispense with any of His Commands, but enjoins the Observation
of them all, without Exception. The more difficult, as well as the m^^^ easy,
the least as well as the greatest, are a^^ to be complied with. Numb. 15.40.
That ye may remember and do all my Commandments. Mat. 28.20. Teaching them to
observe all things which ^ have Commanded you. Conformity to the whole Law of
GOD is expected and demanded of us. Our Obedience ought to be as extensive as
the Law of GOD, reaching to every part of it Every Duty required must be
practiced, and no one of them willingly Omitted. Unless there be such a Care to
keep all the Commandment of GOD, ^our Obedience is unsound.

2. PARTIAL Obedience is so far from being pleasing to GOD, as that it is
exceeding provoking to Him. The Holy Lord rejects and abhors such half serving
of Him. Isa. 1.11, ^3. To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto
me? says the Lord. I am full of the burnt offerings of Rams, an^ (...) fa^ of
fed Beasts. And I delight not in the blood of Bullocks, or of Lambs, or of
He-goats. Bring no more Vain Oblations, incense is an abomination unto me, etc.
All these were things which GOD required, and yet the Lord testifies his
abhorence of them. The reason hereof was because they all this while neglected
the Duties of the Second Table of the Law; Ver. 17. Learn to do well, seek
Judgment, relieve the Oppressed, judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widow. And
our Lord Jesus Christ denounces Woes to such Partial Keepers of GOD's
Commandments, Matthew, 23.23. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypo^rites; for
ye pay tithe of Mine, and Annise and Cummin, and have omitted the weightier
matters of the Law, Judgment, Mercy and Faith; these things ought ye to have
done, and not to leave the other undone. And most justly may GOD be offended at
such partial Obedience. For there is no regard to the Authority of GOD in such
Obedience. Things are to be done for this reason because GOD Commands them:
Psalm. 119.4, 5. Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently. O that
my ways were directed to keep thy statutes! The Authority of GOD should be the
ground of our Obedience; but now such as are partial in their Obedience, have
no respect to the Authority of GOD: If that were their Motive to keep any of
the Commandments of GOD, it would move them to keep all His Commandments; for
the Authority of GOD is alike unstamped on all the Commandments. Such then are
Guilty of Contempt of the Divine Authority. Again, in partial Obedience there
is no Exercise of Love to GOD: Our Obedience ought to flow from a Principle of
love to GOD. And when it does so, is will make us study to do all GOD's Will, 1 John 5.3. For this is the Love of God, that we keep his Commandments; and his
Commandments are not grievous. None of the Commands of GOD are grievous or
distastefull to one that truly Loves GOD: He likes then all, and endeavors to
keep them all. Such then as Obey some Commands, and disobey others, do nothing
from Love to GOD W^^ then may GOD be displeased at what they do.

FROM these things it appears that Partial Obedience is not right and
acceptable Obedience. Let us not then vainly think that it is true Obedience:
But on the other hand, let us think that Integrity or Universality is essential
to Evangelical Obedience: And accordingly let (...) show our selves Cordial
Friends to Christ, by doing whatsoever He has Commanded us. Let ^s be such as
Zecharias and Elizabeth, who walked in all the Commandments and Ordinances of
the Lord blameless. Let us have a Conscientious respect to all GOD's
Commandments, then shall we not be ashamed.

THUS for the First Vain Thought concerning Obedience.
1 IT is a Vain Thought, That mere extend Obedience is true Obedience. Some Men
think, that (...) they do outwardly conform to the Law of GOD, they Obey it
sufficiently and acceptably. Thus the Pharisees esteemed themselves very strict
observers of the Law of GOD, when they only kept it Externally, doing no more
than the outward Duties of Religion. So many suppose, that if they are
outwardly blameles^ and regular, that they do as much as GOD calls for. If they
perform Duties of Religious Worship as to the outward Acts of them; if they are
Just and Honest, Sober, Chaste and Charitable, they think they are Righteous
Persons that duly observe the Commandments of GOD. But this is a Vain Thought,
as thus appears,

1. GOD requires inward Obedience of Men, and that Principally. The Law of GOD
is a Spiritual Law, Romans 7.14. The Law is Spiritual. It is given as a Law to
the Soul and Spirit of a Man. It reaches all the Faculties of the Soul, all the
Affections of the Heart, and the Actings of them, requiring their Conformity
thereunto. The Law of GOD is to be kept with our Spirits, as well as with our
Bodies. GOD calls for the Heart and Spirit in His Service, Joh. 4.23, 24. The
true Worshippers shall Worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth; for the
Father seeks such to Worship him. God is a Spirit, and they that Worship him,
must Worship him in a Spirit and (...) Truth. The Heart and Spirit must be
engaged in all our Worship and Obedience. This is the Life and Soul of all
Obedience: This GOD chiefly minds and calls for, Jer. 30.21. -- For who is this
that engaged his heart to approach unto m^st says the Lord. Where therefore
the Heart is wanting, GOD is not obeyed as He ought to be, though Men be never
so outwardly exact in what they do. If their inward Thoughts, Desires, Aims and
Ends are not regulated by the Holy Law of GOD, they do not rightly obey GOD,
though their Speeches and outward Actions be never so Conformed to the Law of
GOD. Outside Obedience, is the least part of Obedience: Spiritual Obedience is
the chief.

2. OUTWARD Obedience without Inward, it exceeding displeasing to GOD. So far
is GOD from taking up satisfied therewith, as that H^ abhorrs it. To turn GOD
off with mere out side Service, is hateful Hypocrisy or Formality, which are
abomidable unto GOD. Thus our Lord testifies concerning the Hypocritical
Scril^^ and Pharisees, Matthew. 15.7, 8. Ye hyphocrites, a^ did Esaias Prophesy
of you, saying, This People draws nigh unto me with their mouth, but their
heart is far from me. And upon this Account our Lord denounces a Woe unto them,
Matthew. 23, 27, 2^. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hyphocrites; for ye are
like unto whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear beautiful outward, but are
within full of (...) Men's bones, and of all uncleanness. Even so ye also
outwardly appear righteous unto Men, but within ye are full of Hypocrisy and
Iniquity. Men that are only externally Religious, are no better tha^ Painted
Sepulchers, most loathsome to the Holy GOD. Though their Lives be never so
specious and beautiful in the ^ye of the World; yet if in their Hearts they do
not Love GOD, Delight in Him, Desire Him. ^ea^ and Reverence Him, all is
disregarded of GOD. He make no Account of Bodily Exercises, when the Heart is
witheld from them. If Men come up to the Public Worship of GOD, and outwardly
attend on His Ordnances; yet if their Hearts go after their Covetousness, or
any other Lust, GOD regards them not. If Men Pray long and often, yet if their
Hearts go not out to GOD, and Pant not after Communion with Him, He regards not
their Prayers. If Men give Alms, dispense their Bounties, yet not with a
willing and cheerful Mind readily complying with the call of GOD thereto, the
Lord regards it not. Let us not then harbor such a Thought in us, as if mere
Bodily Obedience were Sincere and True Obedience. But on the other hand, Let us
think, that if we would acceptably obey GOD, we must obey with and from the
Heart. With our Spirits we must serve Him, approving our Hearts to Him in all
our ways. With our whole Man we must obey Him, Laboring to Glorify GOD both
with our Bodies and with our Spirits: Knowing, that if we have both pure hands
and a clean heart, we shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord, and stand in His
Holy Place above, and there see the Lord and be like Him.

THUS for the Second Vain Thought concerning Obedience.
3. IT is a Vain Thought, That our own Personal Obedience is that which does
Justify us in the sight of GOD. The Jews in the Apostles times we possessed
with this imagination, that they might be Justified by their own Righteousness,
a Righteousness of their own working out. They endeavored to keep the Law,
expecting thereby to Justify themselves before GOD. Thus says the Apostle
concerning them, Romans 9.32. They sought Righteousness by the works of the Law.
And again, Chap. 10.3. They go about to establish their own Righteousness. Thus
do many that call themselves Christians: They think their own Wo^^ and
Obedience can Justify them before the (...) of GOD: But this is a Proud and
Vain Thought

For,

1. OUR own Obedience cannot, ^^stify for our Sin, and therefore cannot Justify
us before GOD. Justification includes in it an exemption from Condemnation, on
the Account of Sin. A Justified Person has no matter of Guilt laid to his
Charge. Romans 8 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? It is
God that justifyeth. He that i^ Justified is acquitted and absolved, all Hi^
Sins are answered for. That then which Justifies us, does Justify us from all
our Iniquities; it is that in consideration whereof GOD Pardon^ all our Sins,
and absolves us from the Curse of the Law; it is that which is the ground and
cause of the Remission of Sin. If it does not remove our Guilt and free us from
Condemnation, it does not Justify us in the sight of GOD. Now this our own
Obedience, cannot possibly do; it cannot make amends for our Sins. Our best
Obedience is what we owe to GOD, and therefore cannot be my Satisfaction for
past Sins. The most Holy Men cannot Answer for the least of all their Sins; Job
9.2, 3 How should Man be just with God? If he will contend with him, he cannot
answer him one of a thousand. All out Duties, and all our Sufferings will not
satisfy for any of our Sins; the best of them are defective and defiled so as
to need Pardon, and therefore cannot procure Pardon for us. It Is only the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, that satisfies Divine Justice for our Sins, and
for the sake whereof all our Sins are forgiven; Ephesians. 4.32. Go^ for Christ's
sake has forgiven you. For the sake of His Satisfaction GOD forgives Sin to
us, and not for the sake of any Satisfaction given by our selves. We are
therefore said to be Justified by the Blood of Christ, Romans 5.9. And it is that
alone which cleanses from all Sin, 1 John 1.7. It Is His Blood which pacifies
GOD, and turns away His Anger from us, and reconciles us to GOD; Romans 5.10.
When we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son.

2. OUR own Obedience cannot Merit Eternal Life for us, and therefore cannot
Justify us before GOD. Justification includes in it a Right to Eternal Life;
it is therefore called, Justification unto Life, Romans 5.18. A Justified Person
is adjudged worthy of Eternal Life, and is looked upon as one that has a Just
Title to Eternal Life; that then which Justifies a Man before GOD, Merits
Eternal Life for him, and is that upon the Account whereof Eternal Life is
bestowed on him. A Justifying Righteousness, is a Meritorious Righteousness,
which procures for us a Title to Glory. Now this our own Obedience cannot
possibly do. Our most exact Obedience, is far short of what we owe to GOD. Our
most Holy Performances, are interwoven with a great deal of Iniquity. So
imperfect and polluted are our best Duties, that the Condescension of GOD is to
be Adored in taking the least Gracious Notice of them. Far are they from
Meriting the smalle^^ Favor, much more from Meriting Eternal Ble^sedness.
Heaven is not a Debt due to us from Justice, but a gift of Grace through Jesus
Christ our Lord, Romans 6. ult. It Is not our Obedien^^ that purchases Heaven for
us, but it is the Obedience of Jesus Chirst in our stead that M^rits it for us.
Our Obedience may Evidence our Title to Eternal Life, but it is the Obedience of
Jesus Christ that procures this Title for us. It Is he that has obtained Eternal
Redemption f^^ us, Heb. 9.12.

3. OUR Sincere Obedience follows our Justification, and therefore cannot be
that by which we (...) Justified before GOD. The Objects of Justifying Grace,
are ungodly Sinners; Romans 4.5. To (...) that works not, but believes on him
that Ju^tifieth the ungodly. They are ungodly before they are Justified, though
they do not continue ungodly after they are Justified; for in the sa^^^ moment
wherein they are Justified, they are ali^^ renewed by the Holy Spirit of Jesus
Christ Justification and Sanctification are inseparabl^ joined together, 1 Cor.
6 11. Such were s^^e ^ you; but ye are wasted, but ye me sanctified, but ye are
justified, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. None
then are Justified continuing in Sin and under the Power them. o^; for the
Benefit of Sanctification always g^es along with Justification. Yet however,
^i^n are not Godly, do not lead Religiou^ and Godly Lives, until they are
Justified They do no works Spiritually Good and pleasing ^o GOD, till they are
brought into a Justified ^^tate. GOD is first reconciled to Men's Persons and
then to their Works; Genesis 4.4. And the Lord had respect unto Abel, and his
offering. His Person was first accepted into Favor with GOD, and then his
Sacrifice was accepted and well pleasing to GOD. We see then that our own
Obedience does not Justify us before GOD. By the works and deeds of the Law,
(which means our Obedience which is made up of such works,) shall no flesh be
Justified in his sight, Romans 3.20. Let us not then trust ^o our own
Righteousness for Justification; but let us renounce our own Obedience, as to
dependence thereon for Justification. We must not renounce Obedience as to the
practice of it, but we must labor to grow more exact therein, and hold on in
the course of it, as that whereby GOD will be Honored, and our own Comfort,
Peace and Salvation be promoted. Yet however we are not to depend upon it, for
Pardon and Life. In this respect we are to look off from it, as insufficient to
procure Mercy and Salvation for us; and we are to look only to the Obedience of
Jesus Christ to the Death for us, as that in consideration whereof GOD will
forgive us all our Sins, and receive us into His Favor and Kingdom. It Is the
alone Righteousness of Jesus Christ whereon we must rest, and which we must
bring to, and Plead with GOD for, the Remission our Sins, and the Salvation of
our Souls. If we are thus careful to keep all the Commandments of GOD, and yet
while we so do, have our entire dependence on the Righteousness of Jesus
Christ, for our Justification before GOD, then are we in the true way to Life
Eternal: Our Souls are then safe, and shall not miscarry. We then do as the
Holy Apostle Paul did; who is a sure Guide to us in this Case, Phil. 3.8, 9 Yea
doubtless, and I account all things but loss for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for when I have suffered the loss of all
things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, and be found in him,
not having mine own righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by Faith.

THUS much for the sixth sort of Vain Thoughts.
7. THERE are Vain Thoughts in the hearts of Sinners concerning Faith, which
are great Hindrances of their being Saved. True Faith is essential to
Salvation. So it is declared to be in the Gospel, Mark 16.16. He that believes
shall be saved, but he that believes not shall be damned. Without Faith there
is no Salvation; but certain Damnation: If Men therefore miss of Faith, they
Perish for ever. Now there is scarce any thing that more endangers our missing
of it, than a Vain Imagination that we are possessed of it when indeed we are
not. And how many are there that think they are true Believers, when they are
far from being so? They take that to be saying Faith, which is not so; and
thence are deceived about themselves. Here I shall mention some of their Vain
Thoughts in this case.

1. IT is a Vain Thought, That a mere belief of the Gospel is a saving Faith.
In the Days of the Apostles there were some who thought if they were persuaded
of the Truth of the Gospel and made a Profession of it, that they were True
Believers and should be Saved. They rested in a naked Assent to the Gospel
Revelation of Jesus Christ. Such as these the Apostle James does particularly
write against in his Epistle. And as there was then, so there are still many
who think, that if they give Credit to the Doctrines of the Gospel, they are
such Believers as have the Promise of Salvation made to them: And hence it is
that many reckon upon being Saved, because they belong to that Body of
Christians, whom they suppose to be most Orthodox and sound in the Faith: But
this is a Vain Thought as will appear from two things.

1. A mere belief of the Gospel, is what may be found in Hypocrites and Wicked
Persons. The worst of men may be Believers of Gospel Truths: In the Holy
Scriptures we have many Recorded Instances of this kind: We Read of such as
were Convinced of the Truth of Christ's Doctrine and that assented thereto, who
yet w^^e vile Persons. Thus in Joh. 6.14. Then (...) Men, when they had seen
the Miracle that Jesus did, said, This is of a Truth that Prophet that should
come into the World. They believed Him to be the Messiah, the Great Prophet
came from GOD; and so prevalent was their Conviction and Persuasion, that they
would needs make Him their King, Ver. 15. There were about to come and take him
by fo^ce, to make that 1 Kings. And yet these same Persons not long after, turn
Professed Enemies to Him. Thus it is also said of Simon Magus, that he Believed
and will Baptized, Acts 8.13. He ackowledged the Truth of the Gospel, and
joined himself to the Church; and yet we find in Ver. 23. That he was in the
gall of bitterness and bond of Iniquity. He was all this while under the
Dominion of Sin.

2. A mere Belief of the Gospel, is to be found in the Devils themselves. They
Believe the Existence of GOD, Jam. 2.19. Thou believe there is one God, thou
do well; the Devils also believe and tremble. They have such a Belief of a
GOD as fills them with dread and horror. They Believe there is a Jesus or
Savior for Sinful Men; Acts 19.15. And the evil spirit said, Jesus I know.
They Believe that this Jesus is the Son of GOD, and that He will it their Judge
and Destroyer, Mat. 8.29. And they cried out, saying, what have we to do with
thee, Jesus thou son of God? Art thou come hither to torment us before the
time. Mark 1.24. Let (...) alone, what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of
Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I k^^^ thee who thou art, the holy one
of God. Th^^ Believe the Gospel to contain the Doctrine of Salvation, Acts
16.16, 17. The evil Spirit which Possessed the Damsel, spoke by her, at least
moved her to speak and say, These Men are the servants of the most high God,
which show unto (...) the way of Salvation. Those evil Spirits do believe all
the Doctrins of revealed Religion, and therefore do in all Ages raise up
Heretics and false Teachers to corrupt and oppose those D^ctrines.

WE see then, that a Faith of Assent is to be found in the worst of Men; yea,
in very Devils. This then cannot be saving Faith. Indeed, saving Faith does
include this Assent in it: Yet this Assent alone is far from being justifying
and saving Faith. Let us not then rest in such a dead Faith as this is, lest we
Perish forever. Jam. 2.14. What does it profit my brethren, though a Man say,
he has Faith and have not Works; can Faith save him? No is cannot.

2. IT is a Vain Thought, That great Confidence of Salvation, is saving Faith.
Some there be that are under a strong Persuasion that they shall be Saved; they
make no doubt of going to Heaven, when they go out of this World; they are full
of Confidence concerning their future happy Estate. Now this Confidence they
account saving Faith: But this may prove a Vain Thought.

For,

1. SUCH great Confidence may be, and oftentimes is, a fruit of gross
Ignorance. Men oftentimes know not what an horrid Evil Sin is, and what
dreadful Wrath it deserves: They know not how Holy and Just that GOD is,
against whom they have Sinned: They know not what that Faith and Holiness is,
without which no Man shall see the Lord. In short, they know very little of
their Sin, Duty and Danger. And when Men are thus Ignorant, it is not to be
wondered at, that they are so Confident. Their gross Ignorance involves them in
senseless Security: They see not their Danger, and so fear nothing. And hence
many times they go out of the World with great hopes and expectations of
Happiness; which is indeed nothing but a pleasing Dream of such as are asleep
in Sin, through the Blindness of their Minds, and when they awake in the other
World, they find it to be so. 1 These. 5.3 When they say, peace and safety, then
sudden destruction comes, etc.

2. SUCH great Confidence may be, and oftentimes is, built upon a false
Foundation. Men sometimes have seeming grounds for their great Confidence;
there is something or other which they found their Confidence upon, though it
be but a sa^d^ Foundation. Of this nature is their Profession of Religion,
their participation in Privileges and common Gifts of the Spirit; (...) which
we shall have occasion to speak mo^^ distinctly hereafter. These are the things
which cherish and support the Hope and Confidence of Hypocrites; but these are
broken Reeds to lean upon which will not prevent their dropping down into the
Pit of Destruction. Job 8.13, 14. The Hypocrites hope shall perish: Whose hope
shall be cut off, and whose trust shall be a spid^^ web.

LET us not then be deceived with a Vai^ and false Confidence. But let us see
to it that our Confidence be well-grounded, and thereby discover it self to be
a Gracious fruit of saving Faith. If it be built upon Jesus Christ, the only
sure Foundation and Rock of our Salvation; if it be grounded on His Merits and
Mediation; and if it be accompanied with diligent Endeavors to Purify our
selves as He is Pure; the^^ is our Confidence such, whereof we shall not be
ashamed; 1 John 3.3. He that has this hope in him, purifieth himself, etc.

THUS for the seventh sort of Vein Thoughts.
8. THERE are Vain Thoughts in the hearts of Sinners concerning Love to Christ,
which are great hindrances of their being Saved. Love to Christ is necessary to
Salvation by Jesus Christ. He that Loves not our Lord Jesus Christ will be
accursed; 1 Cor. 16.22. If Men therefore are deceived about their Love to
Christ, and think they do really Love Him, when indeed they do not, they are in
great danger of Perishing Eternally. Now it is a common thing for Men to
profess Love to Christ, when as in Truth they are far from Loving Him aright:
They have wrong Thoughts, mistaken Notions concerning true Love to Christ,
which prove ^^tal to them in the Issue. I shall here name some of their Vain
Thoughts in this Case.

1. IT is a Vain Thought, That Jesus Christ is sincerely Loved, when there is
an allowed abiding Love to any Sin whatsoever. There is indeed some degree of
Love to Sin in all such as do dearly Love our Lord Jesus Christ. Their Love to
it is not wholly taken away, but there are some remains of affection to Sin in
them, and will be so as long as they are in this World. Yet however, this Love
to Sin is disallowed and lamented. It is a grief and trouble to them to find in
their Hearts any workings of goodwill toward Sin, any tendencies unto delight
in Sin. These relics of Love to Sin, are the lead and burden of their Souls;
and being so, they are consistent with sincere Love to Jesus Christ.

BUT now, When Love to any Sin is allowed, cherished and willingly entertained
in the heart, there is no sincere Love to Christ in that heart Yet many may
think, that Christ may be their Beloved, though they harbor some Beloved Lust
in their Bosoms. They think they may have a friendship for Christ, and a
friendship for some Sin too. If some that evidently take pleasure in Iniquity
were asked, whether they really Loved Christ, they would say, they hoped they
did; and would be much offended if they should be account^^ Enemies and haters
of Christ; yet such they really are; and their thought of Love to Christ is a
most Vain Thought.

For,

1. THOSE that Love Christ do Love Communion with Christ, and therefore cannot
have an allow^^ love for Sin, which separates from Christ. A Lover of Christ,
is one that greatly desires and delight in Communion with Jesus Christ. Cant.
1.5. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where the make thy Flocks to rest
at noon. A Lover of Christ seeks for Opportunities of Fellowship and Converse
with Jesus Christ. This is what his Soul longs for, as that which is most sweet
and refreshing to him; Cant. 2 3. I sat under his shadow with great delight,
and his fruit was sweet unto my taste. No such pleasant Moments as those
wherein they draw nigh to Christ, and Christ draws nigh to them: Such
intercourse as this, is Heaven begun upon Earth and is what they would have
continued and not interrupted. Hence they cannot but hate Sin which deprives
them of Communion with Jesus Christ, and seperates between Him and them. They
know that Sin is a Bar, and the only Bar, in the way of their sweet Fellowship
with Christ, and therefore they cannot allow themselves in any Love to it. It Is
absolutely impossible for Men to hold up delightful Communion with Christ, and
delightful Communion with any Lust. This is in Religion a pure, flat
Contradiction. It Is a most Vain Imagination, that Men may take pleasure in
Filthiness, In^emperance, etc. and take real Pleasure in Communion with Christ
too; 1 John 1.6. If ^e say that we have fellowship with him, and walk (...)
darkness, we lie. It Is a lie, to say or think that we have Fellowship with
Christ, when we maintain Converse with any Sin. For as the Apostle says in 2
Cor 6.14. What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness? and what
communion has light with darkness? These cannot be joined together and united
in a way of Communion: He that cleaves to the one will and must of necessity
forsake the other.

2. THOSE that Love Christ, do Love the Commandments of Christ; and therefore
cannot have an allowed Love for Sin, which is a breach of His Commandments. A
Lover of Christ's Person is a Lover of His Precepts, Joh. 14.23. If a man Love
me he will keep my words. Love is an officious Grace, which inclines to the
doing the will of the Person beloved. One that really Loves Christ, chooses Him
for his Lord and King, to Serve and Obey. He Loves and Delights in the
Commandments of Christ; Psalm. 119.97. O h^^ l^ve I (...) Law! His Love to it is
exceeding great* And not only does he Love some of the Commandments of Christ,
but all of them; Psalm. 119.127, 128. Theref^re I live the Commandments above
go^d* yea above fine g^^d: I esteem (...) thy Precepts to be right. Now he that
thee Loves the Law of GOD universally, cannot allow himself in a Love to any
Sin. Therefore the Psalmist adds in the last cited pla^^ And I hate every fa^se
way. He that Loves all GOD's ways, must hate every Evil way: For all Sin is a
Transgression of GOD^s Law; it is a direct contrariety to the Law of GOD* It Is
therefore impossible for a Man to Lov^ GOD's Law and not to hate Sin: For tha^
which moves him to Love the Law of GOD, must necessarily move him to hate Sin
He Loves the Law of GOD because it is J^st, Holy and Good, and therefore he
must hate Sin, which is unjust, unholy and evil.

3. THOSE that ^^ve Christ do L^ve the Glory of Christ, and theref^re cannot
hate an a^^we^ Let (...) Sin which d^s^^^^urs Christ. A true Lover of Christ,
has his Heart ^^t for the Honor of Christ; he is most tender of the Glory of
Christ, and makes that the great end of his Life; P^^l 1.20, 21. Christ sha^^
be magn^fied in (...) body, whether ^t ^e in Life or by Death. H^ to me to live
it (...) Romans 14 8. (...) F^r w^e^^er we (...) we live (...) the Lord. Such as
Love Christ, have a great respect to the Name and Ho^^^y of Christ: They
Rejoice when Christ is Glorified by others, and they desire to Glorify Him
themselves. How such as are so concerned for the Glory of Christ cannot allow
themselves in Love be sin, which does re^lect dishonor upon Christ. It cannot
be that a Man should take delight in the Glory of Christ, and yet take delight
in that which robs Christ of the Glory due to him.

WE see then, that Men do not really Love Christ, if they maintain a reserved
love for ^^n: Any darling bosom Lust is inconsistent with true Love to Christ.
Let us not think that we Love Christ, when we are in Love and ^eague with any
Lust: But let us be fully persuaded in our selves, that if we Love the lord, we
shall hate all Evil, Psalm. 97.10. If Christ have the Predominant Affection of
our ^^uls, we shall say to every once beloved-Lust, ^et ye hence. Though a Lust
has been as dear ^o us as a right Hand or a right Eye, we shall out it off, and
pluck it out, and cast it away from us.

THUS for the first Vain Thought.
2. IT is a Vain Thought, That Christ is sincerely Loved, when the World is
more Loved than Christ. Men are apt to think that they are real Lovers of
Christ, though they are more passionate Lovers of the World. How many are there
whose hearts are so set upon this World, as that they will Transgress the Rules
of Christ ^ get a little of the World? How many are there that will customarily
neglect Duties of Communion with Jesus Christ that they may ^^ve more time to
follow their Worldly Affairs? They neglect Family Prayer, Secret Prayer,
Public Ordinances through a greedy desire of Gain. Such as these do Love and
Prize the World more than they do Jesus Christ, and yet they suppose they have
an hearty Love for Jesus Christ: But the Thought of such Worldly. minded
Professors is a Vain Thought, as will appear from these two things.

1. SUCH as do sincerely Love Jesus Christ, do account Him the most amiable
Object, and therefore cannot Love any Creature more than Jesus Christ. There is
more of Loveliness in Jesus Christ, than in the whole Creation: For He is the
Great GOD Infinite in Goodness and Excellency: There is none like Him, none
that may be compared with Him for Amiablene^^ This is what every true Lover of
Christ is fully assured of. The Language of his Soul concerning Christ is that,
Cant. 5.10, 16. He is the chiefest among ten thousands, he is altogether Love^.
He sees a surpassing Beauty in Jesus Christ; Psalm. 45.2. Thou art fairer than
the Children of M^n. He is so as to His Human Nature, and every one that Loves
Christ, sees that Man Christ Jesus to be far more Glorious and desirable than
all Men or Angels. Now they who do esteem Jesus Christ to be so Transcendently
Lovely, do Love Him above all things in the World; they see Him to be most
worthy of their Love, and accordingly do give unto Him the Preference in their
Affection. Their Sanctified Judgment concerning the matchless Excellency of
Jesus Christ, does draw forth their Superlative Love to Him: None is so Lovely
in their Eyes as Jesus Christ, and therefore none is so Beloved of their Souls
as Jesus Christ.

2. SUCH as sincerely Love Jesus Christ, do ac^^^^t Him their Blessedness, and
therefore cannot Love the World more than Jesus Christ. An Interest in Him and
the Enjoyment of Him, is th^^ which makes Eternally Blessed and Happy, 1 These.
^.17. And so shall we ever be with the Lord. To be for ever with Him, is to be
forever perfectly Blessed: This is what every Lover of Christ is sensible of.
He sees all Good, Infinite Goo^^ to be laid up in Jesus Christ; this makes him
to say, Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth, that I
desire besides thee, Psalm. 11.15. Jesus Christ is the great Object of the
desires of his Soul; so as that he is willing to have this World, and go away
from all the most desirable Enjoyments of it, that he might be with Jesus
Christ, Phil. 1.23. Having a desire to depart, and be with Christ, which is for
better. The World in his eye is a vain empty thing compared with the Blessed
Jesus, and therefore he can cheerfully exchange the World for Christ. Where a
Man's Treasure is, there is his heart: Math. 6.21. If Christ then be our
Treasure, our Portion, He will have our Hearts.

WE see then that it is a Vain Thought, That such as Value the World more than
Christ, do unfeignedly Love Christ; let not such a Vain Thought lodge within
us: But let us be assured, that if we inordinately Love the World, the Love of
Christ is not in us. If we Love ^^ther of Mother, Son or Daughter more than
Christ, we are not worthy of Him. If we don't Love Christ above all things, we
don't Love Him in Sincerity. If He be not our best Beloved He is not the
Beloved of our Souls. Nothing is Loved so much as Christ, but every thing is
Loved for less than Christ, by every one that is a true Lover of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

THUS much for the Eighth sort of Vain Thoughts.
9. THERE are Vain Thoughts in the he^^i^ of Sinners concerning Conversion,
which are gre^^ Hindrances of their being Saved. Except sinners be Converted
they cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 18.3. Without Conversion
there can be no Salvation. Now Sinners oftentimes do think themselves real
Converts when indeed they are not; and this false Judgment which they pass upon
themselves, proceeds from their Vain, mistaken Thoughts about so and
Conversion. They take that to be sincere Conversion, which is not so. Some of
their Vain Thoughts in this Case may here be mentioned.

1. IT IS a Vain Thought, That Conviction is Conversion. There are but few
Sinners, who live for any considerable time under the Faithful Preaching of the
Gospel, but what do Experience some Work of Conviction. The Holy Spirit does
ordinarily so far accompany the Ministry of the Word, as thereby, in some
degree, to Convince Sinners of their Sin and Misery. They are many times so
awakned as to be full of trouble, fear and terror, which may produce Mourning
for Sin, and prevent the taking that delight in it as formerly they did. Such
is their Consternation through the Apprehension of their danger of Perishing
under the Wrath of GOD, that they do bewail their past Sins, wish they had not
committed them, are concerned about obtaining the Pardon of them, and have some
Purposes of turning from them. Now when Sinners are under such a Convincing
Sense of the Evil of their Sins and their Danger of Damnation, and are thereby
brought to a Confession of their Sin and some Humiliation for it, they are
ready to conclude themselves really Converted; because they are brought out of
a State of senseless Security in Sin, they think they are brought into a State
of Grace; but this may be a Vain Thought.

For,

1 THERE may be great Conviction where there is no saving Conversion. Though
there i^ to Conversion without some previous degree of Conviction, yet there
may be strong Conviction without Conversion. In the Word of GOD we have many
Instances of Sinners that were deeply Convinced, and yet were unconverted. Cain
was under deep Convictions of the Sinfulness and Wretchedness of his condition,
yet remained in an unconverted Estate. Judas was under dreadful Convictions,
yet Perished in his Iniquity. Faelix was so Convinced of his Guilt and
Obnoxiousness to the Judgment of GOD as to tremble, and yet was far from being
Converted. From these Examples it is evident that the Spirit of GOD may greatly
awaken the Guilty Consciences of Sinners, and give them a terrifying sight of
their Sin and Danger, and yet leave them unconverted. All are not brought out
of a State of Sin, that are awakened out of Security in Sin.

2. CONVICTIONS may wear (...), and issue in dreadful hardness of heart. This
is sometimes the sad consequent of Convictions: So far are they from issuing in
Conversion that they do issue in much greater hardness. This was the Case of
Pharaoh. He was often under clear Convictions of his Sin, in disobeying the
Voice of GOD, yet he waxed harder and harder under all his Convictions: His
heart was nothing softened by them, but grew more hardened in his Rebellions
against GOD: He contracted greater hardness, and was by the Just Judgment of
GOD given up to hardness of heart unto his Destruction. And does not frequent
Experience testify, that awakened Sinners ^eturn to their former State of
wretched Security in Sin? Their Convictions die away, their troubles for Sin
are soon over, their Fears and Concern about their Spiritual and Eternal
Condition are at an end, and they grow more easy and quiet in Sin, than ever
they were before: They do not cherish but quench the good Motions of the Holy
Spirit upon their Souls, whereupon he ceases to strive with them, and so they
come to loose all sense and feeling ^f the Evil of Sin.

WE see then that Conviction is not Conversion: Let us not then ^est in ^are
Con^^ction, but be ^estless until it issue in our saving Convers^on to GOD ^o
this end bless GOD for Convi^tions Than^fully entertain all Awakenings from the
Spirit of GOD. It is a great Mercy to be roused out of Sinful Security; and it
ought to be acknowledged as a Mercy. Pray also to GOD, that He would finish
what He has begun, in carrying on the Work of Conviction unto through
Conversion. Pray earnestly that He who has broken would bind up, and that He
who has wounded would Mercifully heal: And give not over Prayer until you find
your Convictions to be Saving by the Gracious Fruits and Effects thereof. What
these are, I shall for your help, just name to you. Self-loathing and
Abhorrence, becoming vile in your own eyes: Self-judging and condemning, really
Pronouncing your selves worthy of Wrath, and that GOD would be Just if He
should inflict it on you: Self-despair, seeing an utter impotency and
helplesness in your selves to save your own Souls: Sense of your need of an
able Savior and Redeemer, and that Jesus Christ alone is this alsufficient
Savior: Finally, hereupon an Humble accepting of Jesus Christ for your alone
Savior; committing your Souls unto Him, venturing your Souls upon Him,
trusting in Him to be Saved from the Guilt, and Power and Punishment of Sin. If
by your Convictions you are thus driven out of self, and brought to embrace
Jesus Christ as the only hope, help and Salvation of your Souls, then are your
Convictions Saving, then have they issued in your turning from Sin and self,
unto GOD in Christ, which distinguishes them from the Convictions of
H^^^^^^tes, whereby they are deceived.

THUS for the first Vain Thought concerning Conversion.
2. IT IS a Vain Thought, That Reformation is Conversion. Sinners do many times
outwardly Reform; there is a visible Amendment in their Lives and
Conversations; some Sins which they formerly addicted themselves unto, they do
now forbear the practice of them; some Duties which they formerly lived in the
neglect of, they do now live in the Performance of them. Now, because they are
Reformed as to such Sins of Omission and Commission, they think they are
Cnoverted Persons: Their external Reformation they look upon as an evidence of
their real Conversion: But this may be a Vain Thoughts.

For,

1. THERE may be Outward Reformation where there is no Inward turning from Sin.
In true Conversion the Heart and Affections are turned from Sin; the Heart is
not toward Sin as formerly it was, but is set against it, it is love to Sin is
turned into hatred of it; Its Joy and Delight is turned into Grief and Sorrow
for it. Sin to a real Convert is become most loathsome, it is the abominable
thing which his Soul hates. Now a Man may be Outwardly Reformed, and yet not
thus Inwardly loath and hate Sin. Though he externally turns and abstains from
Sin, yet he may inwardly love it as much as ever: His Abstinence from Sin may
proceed from a mere sense of the hurt it does him in his Name or Estate. The
Disgrace and Damage which attend Sinful practices may make him Reform. Or the
mere fear of Damnation may cause a Man to break off a sinful way of Living. His
Conscience may fly in his Face, and represent to him the Wrath of GOD which his
Sins expose him to: Hereupon he may Reform and amend his ways, yet all this
while there is a secret allowed Love to the very Sins abstained from; might he
commit those Sins and yet Escape Temporal and Eternal Punishment, he would
freely venture upon the Commission of them. It Is not an inward hatred of Sin
which makes him watchful against Sin; but only a fear of the Evil Consequents
of Sin; so that the Lusts of such a Person are not subdued and mortified by
Grace, but are only restrained by external Motives and Considerations. Sin
still bears Dominion in his Soul, though it does not break forth in his
Conversation as it was will not to do: There is no change of Heart, though there
be somewhat of a change of Life.

2. GREAT Outward Reformation may be followed with a returning to the Practice
of Sin. A real Convert never more returns to a course and trade of Sinning: But
oftentimes such as have been Reformed, have also fallen back to their
Prophanity and Wickedness: Of such we Read, 2 Pet. 2.20, 22. After they have
escaped the pollutions of the world, through the knowledge of the Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled therein and overcome. It is
happened unto them according to the true Proverb, the Dog is turned to his own
^omit again; and the Sow that was washed to her wallowing in the mire. They
were outwardly Reformed, yet afterward relapsed to their former filthy
Practices. Yea, many times such as have greatly Reformed have Returned to their
Sins with greater violence than ever: They have proved for more vile It vicious
after their Reformations, than they were before their Reformation: They wa^
worse than ever, so that their l^^t Estate is far worse than the first, Matthew.
12.4^. Their Lusts that have been so long restrained, when they come to break
forth again, are more impetuous and outrageous.

WE see then that Reformation of Life is not Conversion, not always a certain
evidence of it. Indeed, there is no Conversion, where there is not Reformation:
Yet there may be Reformation where there is not saving Conversion. Let (...)
not th^n rest in ^^^er outward Reformation; but see to it that there be a real
internal Detestation of all Sin, as well as an external Al^^^in^nce therefrom:
When these two are joined together, they are a sure evidence of a Converted
Estate. When Sin is turned from both in Heart and Life, so that we can say with
Davil. I hate every false way, and have refrained my so^ from every evil way,
then are we undoubtedly the Subjects of Converting Grace.

THUS for the ninth sort of Vain Thoughts.
10. Lastly, THERE are Vain Thoughts in the Hearts of Sinners concerning the
Attainment of Salvation, which are great hindrances of their being Saved. Some
of their Thoughts in this Case may be named.

1. IT IS a Vain Thought, That Salvation is easily attained. Such a Thought as
this there is commonly in the hearts of sinners; they think (...) it is a most
easy thing to be saved. Hence it is that they are so careless about their
Salvation, and do so little toward it, imagining that much need not be done in
order to their being saved. It may be, they outwardly attend the Public
Worship of GOD on His Holy Day: It may be they do every Day make a cold,
slighty Prayer to GOD, and not have Him else in their Thoughts all the Day
long. It may be, they do now and then Read in the Holy Scriptures or some Books
of Piety, little regarding what they Read, and less concerned ^o Practice it:
These things it may be are the most that they do; and possibly they do not so
much as this, and yet they hope in this way to be saved. Nay, sometimes sinners
think it so easy a thing to be saved, as that they put off all Concern for
their Salvation, till their Dying Day, supposing that a few Moments may suffice
for the obtaining Eternal Salvation. Such an imagination as this, is exceeding
pernicious and most Vain.

For,

1. THE Commands of GOD require great Diligence in the Affair of our Salvation.
When GOD is calling upon us to secure Salvation to our selves, He ^ets us know
that we must ^ake pains in order thereunto. Thus our Lord says, Luke 13.24.
Strive to enter in at the strait ^re; for many, I say unto you shall seek to
enter (...), and shall not be able Every sort of seeking, some slight and faint
endeavors will not do to bring Men to Salvation. They must Strive to enter in it
the strait ^^ate which leads to Eternal Life. The Word here Translated to
Strive, signifies the putting forth all our Might and Strength, as the
Combatants were will not to do, when they fought for a Prize: And so it plainly
intimates, that we must give all Diligence to obtain Salvation. Thus also we
have the Apostle giving that Exhortation to Christians, Phil. 2.12. Work out
your own Salvation with fear and trembling. We must not give way to sloth and
negligence, but be diligent in the use of all means conducing to our Salvation;
and that with a sollicitous Concern lest we should mist of Salvation through a
failure in our Duty. In the Business of our Eternal Salvation we must not be
slothful, but fervent, serious and vigorous. Whatsoever our hands find to do in
this matter, we are to do it with all our might, Eccl. 9.10. The Gospel is full
of such calls to Diligence, Labor and Watchfulness in order to Salvation. Now
these calls do most evidently testify unto us, that it is no easy thing to be
saved. Were the obtaining Salvation a matter of no great Difficulty, all these
Commands requiring our utmost Diligence, would be needless and impertinent.

2. THE Opposition in the way of Salvation is very great. There are a great
many Adversaries that labor to prevent our Salvation. There are Lusts within
us, which war against our souls, 1 Pet. 2.11. These Lusts do all that they can
to hinder the Salvation, and to procure the Destruction of our Souls. They
obstruct us in doing those Duties which tend to the Salvation of our Souls, and
they solicit us to the Committing those Sins which tend to the ruin of our
Souls. Indwelling Sin is an active Principle, never idle, but always working
more or less. And all its actings are constantly against the good and welfare
of our Souls. Again, there is Satan who is a restless opposer of our Salvation;
1 Pet. 5.8. Your Adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking
whom he may devour. His constant work and business is to tempt Men to Sin and
so to bring Destruction upon them. He watches all Opportunities and takes hold
of all Advantages to make them Sinful and Miserable. Again, There is the World
which is full of Snares and Temptations. The Men of this World by their evil
Counsels and Examples, by their promises and threatenings, do much endanger our
Salvation. The Things also of this World, through the inordinate Appetites in us
after them, do very much oppose our Salvation. Our hearts are apt to be too
much taken with them, too much set upon them, to the neglect of GOD and our
Souls: Yea, we are too apt to abuse them by excess to the satisfying our Lusts,
and so to the destroying our Souls. There is then a great deal of Opposition
both from within and without which we meet with in the way to Salvation. The
adversaries are many, and potent, and skillful to Destroy. It is not then an
easy matter to withstand all this opposition, and to break through it unto
Salvation. We must daily Watch and Pray, and have our eve to Jesus Christ, that
His Grace may be sufficient for us, or we shall assuredly Perish by the hands
of our Enemies.

3. THE Duties required in order Salvation are exceeding Difficult. Indeed, The
Commands of Christ are not in themselves grievous, 1 John 5.3. But his yoke is
easy, Matthew. 11.28. Christ's Commands in their own Nature are Easy, Pleasant
and Delightful; and as far as Persons are renewed and assisted by the Holy
Spirit, they do in some measure experimentally find them so: Yet however, through
the Corruption of our Nature, Obedience to the Commands of Christ is become
impossible to unregenerate Persons, and difficult to the Regenerate in some
degree, and especially at some times. There are some Duties so contrary, and
cross to the Corrupt Inclinations of Nature, that they cannot readily be
performed without much watchfulness over our own Spirits, and very much
assistance from our Lord Jesus Christ: Of this nature, are those Duties
required. Math. 5.44. Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute
you. It Is no easy thing for Men who are subject to sinful Passions and
Infirmities to do these things. Nor is it an easy thing to be content with
every Condition, to give Thanks in every thing, to trust in GOD at all times,
to deny our selves, and take up our Cross and follow Christ. These are things
which we cannot do without special and abundant Assistance from GOD our
Savior, Phil. 4.13.

4. DUTIES of Obedience though difficult must be persevered in to the end. It Is
not enough that we Obey GOD for a time, but we must Obey Him always, in order
to Salvation. Perseverance is a condition of Salvation; Math. 10.22. He that
endures to the end shall be saved. Rev. 1 10. Be thou faithful unto Death, and
I will give thee a Crown of Life. There must be a Patient continuance in well
doing, in order to Eternal Life, Romans 2.7. Such as Apostatize from their
Profession and Practice of Religion will Perish; Heb. 10.38 39. If any man draw
back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, but we are not of them who draw
back unto perdition. It is then necessary unto Salvation, that we abide
constant in the Service of GOD. Now it is no easy thing to bold on, and hold
out to the end, in the way of GOD's Commandments, notwithstanding all the
Difficulties and Oppositions we meet withal. Let us not then entertain such a
Vain Thought, that it is an easy thing to be Saved. But on the other hand, let
us look upon it as an exceeding difficult thing, and unto Man an impossible
thing to be Saved. Nothing short of Almighty Power can bring us into a state of
Salvation; and nothing but the Mighty Power of GOD can preserve us in that
Estate, and bring us to the Consummation of it, in the Kingdom of Heaven. Nor
may we expect that GOD will exert His Power unto our Salvation, unless we are
diligent in the use of appointed Means. Let us not then sit still and do
nothing, as if the attainment of Salvation were a matter of greatest Facility:
But let us humbly wait on GOD in His own appointed way, being instant in Prayer
to GOD Day and Night, following Him from one Ordinance to another, then may we
hope, that GOD will meet us and Bless us, and show us His Salvation.

THUS much for the first Vain Thought concerning Salvation.
2. IT IS a Vain Thought, That eminent Gifts are a certain Pledge of Salvation.
GOD in the Dispensation of Common Gifts, is pleased to make a great difference
between Men. On some He bestows them more sparingly, on others more
plentifully. Now such as are favored with a larger measure of Gifts than
others, are apt to promise Salvation to themselves on the Account thereof;
because GOD has conferred upon them a greater Gift of Knowledge in Divine
things, or a greater Gift in Prayer, etc. than on others, they think they shall
be Saved. They take it for granted, that such unusual Gifts are to be reckoned
among those things which accompany Salvation, which have a certain and
infallible Connection therewith: But this is a Vain Thought.

For,

.1 GREAT Gifts may be unsanctifyed. Men may partake of Excellent Gifts and yet
be void of true Grace. Thus the Apostle supposes that Persons may be the
Subjects of Extraordinary Gifts, and yet be destitute of Love to GOD and their
Neighbors; 1 Cor. 13.1, 2. Though I speak with the tongues of Men and of
Angels, and have not Charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a tinkling
cymbal. And though I have the gift of Prophecy, and understand all mysteries
and all knowledge, and though I have all faith, so that I could remove
mountains, and have no Charity, I am nothing. So that there may be very
Glorious Gifts, even the Gift of Tongues, the Gift of Knowledge in the great
Mysteries of the Gospel, the Gift of Prophecy and miraculous Faith, and yet not
the least spark of true Grace. Men of the greatest Parts, are not always, nay,
seldom are, Men of real Piety, 1 Cor. 1.26

2. HENCE Persons may be excluded from Heaven, notwithstanding their ^minent
Gifts. Being destitute of true Holiness, they shall not s^e the Lord, Heb.
12.14. And though Men may be able to Plead at the last Day, their participation
in the greatest Gifts, yet this will not procure for them an Admission into the
K^ngdom of Heaven. Thus our Lord has assured us, that it will be with many at
the last Day: Math. 7.22, 23. Many will say to me in that Day. Lord, Lord, have
we not prophesied in thy name? And in thy name cast out Devils? And in thy name
done many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you;
Depart from me ye that work iniquity. Jesus Christ will then disown them, cast
them out of His Favor, and separate them for ever from His Gracious Presence.

LET n^^e then build their hope of Salvation upon me^ Gifts though never so
great. They ought to be Coveted and Prized, but are not to be consi^ted in. For
they are not in themselves the lea^^ Evidences of Salvation: But when they are
Sanctified they are then indeed very visible and clear marks of a Right to
Eternal Salvation. And then are they Sanctified, when the free (...) of GOD is
acknowleged in the bef^^^ (...) of them, when the Heart is (...) under the
Enjoyment of them, when the Glory of GOD and the good of others, is truly aimed
at in the diligent improvement of them.

THUS for the second Vain Thought concerning Salvation.
3. IT is a Vain Thought, That a participation in special Privileges will
secure Salvation to us. There are many singular Privileges of Christianity
which Persons participate of, upon the Account whereof they hope to be Saved:
Because they are interested in external Gospel. Privileges, they conclude
themselves in a safe Estate: But this is a Vain Thought, as may be shown under
some particular instances of Privileges confided in.

1. IT IS a Vain Thought, That Descent from eminently Holy Ancestors will secure
Salvation to us Some that are the Children and Posterity of Pious Progenitors,
are apt to conclude that their Relation to such will recommend them to the
Favor of GOD and assure them of the Kingdom of Heaven. They cannot think that
GOD will cast off and destroy the Offspring of His Holy Servants that were dear
to Him: But this is a Vain Thought. Hence John the Baptist Cautions the Jews
against carnal Confidence in this Case, and gives them to understand that their
being the Childern of Abraham would be no Security to them against the Wrath of
GOD* Math 3 7, 9. Who has warned you to see from the Wrath to come? Think not
to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father. Though the Parents be
never so Holy on Earth, and never so Happy in Heaven, yet their Children may be
but out of the Kingdom of Grace and Glory, Luke 13 28 There shall be weeping
and gnasting of teeth, when y^^ (...) see Abraham and Isaac and Javob in t^^
Kingd^^ of God, and you your selves th^ust our.

LET none then rest in their being descended from an Holy Stock. Indeed, it is
a great Mercy in it self to be born of Godly Parents. Such have many Prayers
laid up for them* many Advantages which others have not, and lie nearer to the
Blessing than others do; and to despise this Birthright is a mark of a profane
Spirit, as in Esau: Yet however this is not a Privilege to be confided i^ for
Salvation; it may be a great Advantage to our Salvation if it be duly
improved: But if it be not aright improved* it will be an exceeding great
aggravation of our Damnation. The Children of Pagans and of Wicked Parents,
will have far less to Answer for, than the Children of Holy Believing Parents.

2. IT IS a Vain Thought, Tha^ ^ participation in the Ordinances of the Gospel
will secure Salvation to us. Many Persons, because they are admitted to all
Ordinances, do thereupon conclude that they shall be Saved. They think their
visible Interest in, and outward A^^^^dance on GOD in these Divine
Institutions, will certainly bring them to Heaven: But this is a Vain Thought.
Persons may be Baptized in the Name of GOD, and be solemnly Dedicated to Him in
that Ordinance, they may also sit all their Days under the powerful Preaching
of the Word of GOD; they may be received into the Fellowship of the Faithful,
and sit down with them at the Supper of the Lord, and yet be disowned by Christ
at His appearing. Luke 13 26.27. Then shall ye began to (...), we have eaten
and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets but he shall
say, I ^^il you, I know you not whence you are, ^^epare from me all ye workers
in iniquity.

LET none then trust to their Enjoyment of the Word and Ordinances of GOD. They
are indeed great and distinguishing Favors, for which GOD is to be Praised;
Psalm. 147.19. He shows his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his Judgments
unto Israel, he has not dealt so with any nation; and as for his Judgments
(...) have not known them, Praise ye the Lord. It is also a very great
Advantage to enjoy the Word and Ordinances of GOD; Romans 3 1, 2. What advantage
then has the Jew? or what profit is there of Circumcision? much every way;
chiefly, because tho^ unto them were committed the Oracles of God. Such as are
betrusted with the Holy Oracles and things of GOD, have all external Advantages
put into their hands for the Everlasting Salvation of their Souls. They are
lifted up to Heaven in point of Privileges, but these Privileges must be
improved, in order to their bringing us to Heaven. It Is not the mere enjoyment
of them; but the Wise Improvement of them, that will assure us of Salvation by
them. Let us th^^ look upon them as means of Communion with GOD, and
accordingly be careful to hold up Communion with GOD in the use of them. Let us
then look upon them as means of Grace and Sanctification, and accordingly
Labor to bring forth the Fruits of Holiness in a diligent attendance on them.
If they are thus improved by u^, then have we enjoyed them with the Blessing of
GOD, and then may we be confident that they shall be the Means of bringing us
to the full and Eternal Fruition of GOD in Heaven.

THUS much may suffice for the Doctrinal handling this Point. I shall now
proceed to make some Brief Application of the whole in (...) Word of USE.

USE of Caution, LET us take heed that we ^e not Deceived by Vain Thoughts to
our Distinction. A Caution of this Nature is given to us by the Apostle, in
Ephesians. 5.6. Let no man deceive (...) with Vain Words. There were some it seems,
who taught them that Men might live in Fornication, Covetousness, and such like
gross Sins, and yet find Mercy or Escape Punishment at the last. Such Words the
Apostle calls Vain Words, had bids them take care that they be not de^^ded by
such Vain Words. We had need be concerned that we be not lulled asleep by Vain
Imaginations unto our Eternal Undoing: A Vain Imagination was that which undid
our first Parents and their Posterity. They vainly Thought, that by Eating the
forbidden fruit ^hey should be Wise and knowing as Gods. This Vain Thought
entertained, was the inlet to ^ll that Sin and Misery, that has overspread the
^^ce of the Earth. The Vain Thoughts likewise of Sinners, are equally
pernicious to them, opening the Door to all the Woes and Miseries of the
Eternal World. Let us then see to it that we be not deceived by such Vain
Thoughts. To enforce this Caution a little further, two things may be
considered by us.

1. CONSIDER what a dreadful disappointment these Vain Thought will issue in,
if they are suffered to lodge within us. These Vain Thoughts do fill Sinner
with hopes that it shall go well with them at last, and that their Case is not
so bad as it is represented to be: But their hopes and expectations will
assuredly meet with frustration in the latter end. And how afflicting, yea
tormenting will such a disappointment be! We see that disappointment in this
Life is usual matter of vexation to Men; when they looked for Good, but instead
thereof meet with much Evil, how does it disquiet and trouble them* What then
will be the Anguish and Torment of total disappointment of our Expectations in
the other World? The secure and carnal Christian that hoped to find GOD a
Merciful GOD to him* shall instead thereof find Him a most Just, Terrible and
Sin avenging GOD. The Formal, Hypocritical Professor of Religion that Promised
Heaven to Himself, shall instead thereof be shut out of Heaven and cast down
into Hell O how killing will such a disappointment as this be! Who can conceive
the bitterness of Spirit and Torment of Mind in which they will thus speak to
themselves; We hoped to have found Mercy of the Lord and to have been received
into His Heavenly Kingdom; but behold! we are Eternally excluded from an
Interest in Divine Mercy, and are Vessels of Wrath fitted for and Sentenced to
Everlasting Destruction. How is our hope perished* how is it cut off! how is it
swept away as a Spiders Web! is it come to this at the last, that we must lie
down in sorrow, when we hoped to see no sorrow, and feel no evil? O that ever
we should harbor those Vain Thoughts which has brought such a disappointment
on us!

2 CONSIDER how inexcusable we shall be in the judgment of our own Consciences.
Sinners may now baffle and bribe, and stop the mouth of Conscience, but then
they cannot do so. Conscience will then irresistably discharge the Duty of a
Witness. Accuser and Judge. It will then ^estify unto us, that we did know, or
might ^^ve known, that those Thoughts which we entertained were Vain. That we
were warned against the harboring of them* and might ^^sily have seen and
known the Vanity of them (...) we been minded so to do. That we were ^ot
^^^ling to be undeceived, but loved darknes^ (...) this case rather than light,
because our (...) were evil, and because sinful ways were beloved by us.
Hereupon Conscience will condemn us as Guilty of our own Destruction, and will
declare its Approbation of the Justice and ^quity of GOD in our Eternal
punishment; and will Everlastingly upbraid us for our folly and madness in
taking up and retaining such ^ain Thoughts in our hearts. And how intolera^^e
will the restless Accusations of Conscience ^ee! How insupportable the Torments
from the ^^awings of that Worm that dies not* The ^^ge of Conscience will be a
very He^l in the Soul.

LET the Consideration of these things make us careful that we be not deceived
by Vain Thoughts.

DIRECTIONS follow.
Direct 1. LET us be jealous of our own hearts. Self-Jealousy is a good
preventive of Delusion. Our hearts are naturally Deceitful above all things,
Jer. 17.9. If we be not exceeding watchful we shall easily be deceived by them:
They are apt to flatter us, and to suggest to us, that all is and shall be well
with us, when it is far from being so. Thus it was with the Church of Laodicea,
Rev. 3.17. Thou say, I am rich and increased with goods, and have need of
nothing; and know not that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poor, and
blind, and naked. Our Deceiving hearts incline us to take up too favorable an
opinion of our selves, and to think our state and ways good, when they are not
so. It is therefore great folly to trust to the judgment of our own hearts,
without an impartial and through Examination of the grounds it goes upon; Prove.
28.26. He that trusts in his own heart is a fool. It is our Wisdom not to be
too Credulous, when our hearts speak well of the Thoughts we entertain, and the
practices we allow our selves in* There will be more of Wisdom, and less of
Danger, to suspect our own hearts, than to be hasty in believing them: There
can be no harm in being afraid lest we should be deceived by them. We are more
apt to err on the hand of Indulgence than of Severity; and there is more danger
in self-Confidence, than self-Jealousy: If we are jealous of our selves, it
will only make us more concerned to be better, which will be no inconvenience
to us. But if we are self-confident, we are in danger of being Secure without
due concern to amend what may be amiss. Let us then put the same question to
our selves, as was once put by Jehu, 2 King. 10.15. Is thy heart right? Let us
enquire whether our hearts be right in the judgment they pass upon the Notions
which we espouse, and the ways we walk in. He that is thus inquisitive, is in
an hopeful way not to be Deceived by Vain Thoughts.

Direct. 2. LET us Labor to get a well-informed judgment. Vain Thoughts
proceed ordinarily from an erroneous Mind, Ephesians. 4.17, 18. Walk not as other
Gentiles walk in the vanity of their mind, having the understanding darkened.
Romans 1.21. They became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened. Vain Imaginations concerning GOD, and other things, proceed from
blindness of Mind. We should therefore labor to get our Minds enlightened with
the light of Truth. This will serve to rectify our Thoughts, and prevent Vain
Thoughts. To this end we must Study the Scriptures which are a Light to
discover to us the way of Truth and Error. If we Consult those Holy Oracles of
GOD, they will inform us what Thoughts are Right and what are Vain. If then we
would not be left to call Good Evil, and Evil Good, let us be Conversant with
the Word of GOD, which is the only Rule whereby to know Good or Evil.
Understanding in GOD's Precepts, will discover to us Every false way, Psalm.
119.104. As ever then we desire not to be Deceived, let us acquaint our selves
with the unerring Word of GOD; and let us bring every Thought which we
entertain to that Word, and thereby try whether it be a Vain Thought or not. If
we Diligently and Conscientiously thus do, with a desire to come to the
Knowledge of Truth and Duty, we may hope that we shall not be left to the
deceiving power of Vain Thoughts.

Direct. 3. BE earnest in Prayer to GOD. Unto self-jealousy and diligent
searching the Scriptures, we must add fervent Prayer to GOD: This is a Duty in
all Cases useful and necessary, but especially in those Cases which d^mons
immediately respect the Eternal safety of our Souls; and such is the Case
before us.

AND here three things we should earnestly beg of GOD in Prayer. Viz.
1. THAT GOD would (...) Discover to us those Vain Thoughts that may be in us.
Though our hearts are very deceitful, yet GOD knows them thoroughly, and sees all
the deluding Vain Thoughts that are in our hearts; they may be concealed from
us, but they are not hid from GOD. We should therefore cry to the
heart-searching GOD* that He would give us a disce^n^ng of these Vain Thoughts
that may be hid de^^ from our own eyes. Say as in Job 34.32. That which I see
not, teach them (...). If we are thus really willing and desirous to know the
Evil that is in us, we shall not long abide Strangers to our own hearts. GOD
will show them unto us.

2. THAT GOD would graciously deliver us from the deceiving Power of those Vain
Thoughts that may be in us. Though our Vain Thoughts should be discovered to
us; yet unless GOD put forth His Mighty Power, we shall still be deceived by
them. John the Baptist discovered to the carnal Jews the Vanity of their
Imagination, that their Relation to Abraham as their Father, would secure them
from Destruction, Math. 3.9. And think not to say within your lives, we have
Abraham to our Father. Yet notwithstanding they remained under the Power of
this Vain Imagination. Nothing short of the mighty working of the Spirit of GOD
can cast down the Vain Imaginations that are in us. We should therefore cry to
GOD, that no sinful Thought may have Dominion over us, and that we may not be
(...) to hold fast Deceit.

3. THAT GOD would help ^s to take upright Th^ug^ts (...) put them into
practice. It Is GOD only that can furnish our Minds with right Notions of
things. He makes us in the hidden part to Know Wisdom, Psalm. 51.6. He by His
Spirit leads us into all Truth; and He ^lone can make us to walk in the Truth,
to live up and according to the Truth revealed to us. Pray then to GOD that
when He has discovered the right way to you, He would also enable you to walk
therein. Let the Prayer of David be your humble Prayer to GOD; Psalm. 139.23,
24. Search me, O God, and know my heart: Try me, and know my thoughts, and see
if there be any wicked way in me, and leed me in the way everlasting.

THE Great Concern OF MAN.
ACTS III. 59. -- LORD JESUS receive my Spirit


THESE words contain the dying Prayer of the Martyr Stephen for himself: it is
but a single and a very short Petition, yet it comp^^ses in it all that
blessedness, which a dying Man and a never-dying Soul can desire. Two things
may be observed in it.

1. THE Object of his Prayer or the Person to whom he directs his Prayer, viz.
The Lord Jesus. Our Lord had, a little before, opened the Heavens to Him in a
miraculous manner, and favored Him with a bodily sight of His glorified
Humanity. He saw the Glory of God, and Jesus Christ the Son of man, standing at
the right hand of God. Unto this Lord and King of Glory thus exhibited to him,
he makes his Last Prayer. His Praying Season was just at an end, and he was
passing out of Time into Eternity, yet in this Critical Moment which would be
decisive of his Eternal Condition, he directs his Prayer to the Lord Jesus. If
he now applied himself to a wrong Object, he went out of the World Guilty of
Idolatry, and consequently Perished for ever: but this Man, who was Full of
Faith and of the Holy Ghost, knew Jesus Christ to be the proper Object of
Religious Worship. He (...) Him to be such a Lord as ought to be invocated by
Prayer. Such a Lord, that if we had but one Prayer more to make in this World,
it would be our Wisdom and Duty to make it to Him. Herein then he plainly and
publicly professes his Faith concerning the Glorious Godhead of Jesus Christ
our Savior. This dying Prayer to Christ for himself, and the following Prayer
to Christ, not to lay the Sin of his Murderers to their Charge, are his dying
Testimony to the Adorable Divinity of our Lord Jesus Christ: He is the
Prayer-hearing GOD* unto whom Men ought to Pray both for themselves and for
others, and that for Spiritual and Eternal Blessings, as here.

2. THE matter of his Prayer or the thing which he Prays for, viz. That Jesus
Christ would (...) his Spirit. He Piously Commends his Soul into the hands of
the Lord Jesus Christ: Herein imitating his Lord in ^s ^^ke Case, Luke 23.46.
Father, Into thy hands I commend my spirit. This Dying Servant of Christ, is
concerned for the welfare of his departing Spirit, and in order to this he asks
nothing more, but that Jesus Christ would r^^eive his Spirit: That Is enough,
that is all that is needful unto the future wellbeing of the Soul. If Jesus
Christ will receive it, it shall be well with it for ever.

Hence observe,

DOCTRINE, It ought to be the great Concern of every Man, That when he comes to
Die, his Spirit may be received by JESUS CHRIST.
THIS was the great Concern of Holy Stephen, who herein shows what ought to be
the Concern of every Man.

Under several Propositions this Doctrine may be spoken to.
Prop. 1. THERE is a Spirit in Man which is a distinct Being from his Body. Man
consists of two parts, a Spirit and a Body which are distinct Substances, and
of a vastly different Nature. Man is not all Body, but is principally Spirit.
This is his Chief and most Excellent Part: Though what and how Excellent it is,
we do not our selves perfectly know. The Body of Man is indeed, a most
wonderful and excellent Work of GOD; Psalm. 139.14. I will praise thee, for I am
fearfully and wonderfully made. The frame and constitution of the Body is truly
mavelous. The Spirit of Man however is a far more Glorious and Excellent
Being than the Body. The Spirit of Man, has such a power of Thinking, as to be
able in a Moment to extend it is Thought beyond the utmost bounds of the whole
Creation. It has such a power of Understanding, as to be able to discern
between Truth and Error, Good and Evil. It has such a power of Election, as to
be capable understandingly to choose GOD for its last end and chief Good. It
has such vast and large Desires, which all Created Good is not sufficient fully
to Satisfy. In short, it is a Being of far more worth and excellency than the
whole World, Math. 16.26. What is a Man profited if he shall gain the whole
world, and loss his own Soul? Or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul?

Prop. 2. THE Spirit of a Man remains after the Death of his Body. As for the
Body that is Mortal and must Die; so has GOD Ordained, and so it shall be, Heb.
9.27. It is appointed unto men once to die. Death passes upon all Men by the
unalterable appointment of GOD; and at Death the Body perishes, turning to
rottenness and dust: But as for the Spirit of a Man that remains entire after
the Dissolution of the Body. The Spirit does not Perish with the Body, as Men
may Atheistically imagine.

Here,

1. IT remains as to its Essence. For it is not capable of Dissolution into any
pre-existent Principles as the Body is; and that because it is formed
immediately out of nothing. And though it be in the Power of GOD to annihilate
it, or turn it into nothing again, yet He will not thus do. He has plainly
revealed it to us, that the Soul is of an immortal Nature, that it dies not
with the Body, but survives it and exists after Death, (which will be evinced
under the following Propositions.)

2. IT remains as to it is Faculties and the Exercise of them. The
Understanding, Will and Affections do still continue and perform their proper
Operations. The Spirit of a Man after Death does not cease to act its Rational
Powers; but undoubtedly exercises them more vigorously than ever. At Death it
is freed from those clogs and obstructions, which it often met with from the
Body; and so has nothing to hinder its exerting its Powers to the utmost. The
way and manner of its acting is to us as yet unknown; yet this should not make
us in the least to question the Truth of it; for we do not know the way of our
Spirit's acting while it is in the Body: Who can comprehend the manner of the
Souls acting by the several Organs of the Body? And yet we make not the least
doubt concerning the reality of its Actings. Why then should we disbelieve the
Activity of the Soul after Death, because we cannot conceive the manner of its
Operations? But that it Lives and Acts after Death, and is a Subject of
Blessedness or Misery will be hereafter shown.

Prop. 3. AFTER Death the Spirit of a Man remains not with the Body, but is
separated from it. It does not abide in the Body, nor is it present with the
Body, but departs from the Body; Genesis 35.18. And it came pass as her soul was
in departing; for she died. 1 King. 17.21. Let this Child's soul come into him
again. It was then gone out of him. Death dissolves the Union between Soul and
Body, upon which the Soul immediately departs away from the Body. Hence after
Death the Spirit is said to be absent from the Body, 2 Cor. 5.8. We are willing
rather to be absent from the body i. e. as to our Spirits. After Death there is
a real local distance between the Soul and Body, though how great a distance we
know not in particular, only in general, they are as far distant from each
other, as Heaven or Hell, the receptacles of Men's Spirits are from the Grave.

Prop. 4. THE Spirit of a Man upon its separation from the Body, goes to Jesus
Christ as its Judge. The Lord Jesus Christ is the Great Judge of all Men; all
Judgment is committed unto Him. The last Judgment of Men and Angels will be
managed by Jesus Christ; and so is the particular Judgment of Men as to their
Spirits immediately upon Death, their Spirits do then go to GOD their Judge,
Eccl. 12.7. Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit
shall return to God who gave it. The Spirits of Men do not all go to Heaven to
appear in the immediate Presence of the human nature of Jesus Christ, for
nothing unclean enters thereunto: But they go to Christ as GOD who is every
where, and so can manifest himself in any Place whatsoever. Though in what Place
or after what manner He will thus manifest Himself, is unknown to us. But this
we know that Jesus Christ has all Power in Heaven and Earth, power over all
Flesh, and power to Judge and Dispose of the separate Spirits of Men, Rev.
1.18. I am he that lives, and was dean; and behold, I am alive for evermore,
Amen, and have the Keys of Hell and Death. He has the Keys of Hell or the
Invisible World: He has power to dispose of the Spirits of Men when they pass
out of this visible, into the other invisible World.

Prop. 5. WHEN the Spirit of a Man goes to Christ after Death, it is received
or rejected by Him. One or the other is what befalls the Soul of every Man,
according to the State in which he dies.

1. IF a Man die in a State of Sin, his Spirit is rejected by Christ the
Righteous Judge. The Son of GOD Judges it, Condemns it, Banishes it from His
Presence, and casts it into Hell. How this particular Judgment is managed, and
how long it is in Transacting, we cannot say: But that Judgment passes upon the
separate Soul of a Sinner, and that the Judicial Sentence is executed upon it
in its rejection from Christ into the place of Punishment, is most evident from
the Scriptures of Truth. Thus it is said concerning the World of ungodly Men
who Perished in the Blood, that their spirits are in the infernal Prison, 1
Pet. 3.19. And it is said concerning the People of Sodom and Gomorrah, that
they are actually Suffering the vengeance of Eternal Fire, Jude 7. Which can be
understood only of their Spirits, for their Bodies were consumed in the ^ire
which turned the Cities into Ashes. Thus it is also said of the Wicked rich Man
that when he died he went to Hell and was in Torments, Luke 16.23. Which cannot
be meant of his Body for that was buried in a Grave. It was therefore his Soul
which was tormented in the Flames of Hell; and though this be but a Parable yet
with the Scope it as clearly represents to us the Misery of separate sinful
Souls, as if it were a real Hystory, and asserted it in the most plain words.
Again, We read concerning Treacherous Judas, that when he died, he went to his
(...) place, Acts 1.25. This place that he went to cannot mean the Grave, for
that is not Judas's own and proper place, but the common place of all Men good
and bad, J^b 30.23. It was therefore a place which of special right belonged to
him, as a Betrayer of the Lord of Glory, and this can be no other than Hell the
place of Torments. And consequently he went to this place at Death, only as to
his Spirit; his miserable Corpse remain ^ upon the Earth as a Spectacle of
Horror, while his perfidious Spirit was Suffering the Vengeance of GOD in the
place of Devils.

THUS it appears from the Word of GOD, that the departed Spirits of ungodly Men
are separated from Christ and sent to Hell. And besides the Word of GOD, are
there not many Providential Demonstrations of this Truth, in those dreadful
Anguishes which seize the Souls of Convinced Sinners, when they see the Day of
their Death approaching? What amazing Distresses of Conscience are they under!
what fearful Expectations of Wrath and fiery Indignation from the Lord, are
they filled withal! Th^se things are the forerunners and fore-assurances of
that deplorable Estate their Spirits are entering upon

2. IF a M^n die in a State of Grace, his Spirit is received by Jesus Christ;
is meets with a kind Reception from that Glorious Lord.

1. JESUS CHRIST receives it into ^is Gracious Care. When the Spirit of a Godly
Man goes out of his Body, Jesus Christ takes the Charge of it. He looks after
it, that no injury be offered to it by the Prince of the Power of the Air, and
his Hellish host; as He Himself passed in Safety and Triumph, through the
Territories of Satan in His Ascension to Heaven, so He takes care that the
Spirits of His Servants shall have the like safe and triumphant Passage. And He
not only exerts His own Power herein, but also sends His Holy and Mighty Angels
to safeguard the passing Spirits of Believers. They are all Ministering Spirits
sent forth by Jesus Christ to Minister to them that are the Heirs of Salvation.
Heb. 1.14. And as they Minister to the Saints in their Lifetime, so also at
and after their Death. Their separated Spirits are committed to the Custody and
Conduct of Glorious Angels by the Lord of Angels, and are by them conveyed to
the Place prepared for them; Luke 16.2^. And it came to pass that the Beggar
died, and was carried by the Angels into A^^aham's bosom. They show the
Believing Soul the way to Christ, and bring it to the Place of Rest,
Refreshment and Consolation, which is reserved for the People of GOD.

2. JESUS CHRIST receives it into H^s Gl^rious Kingdom. The Blessed Angels that
are the Souls Attendants and Guardians, do introduce it into the Kingdom of
Heaven, where it is received by Jesus Christ, to be and abide with Him. The
Souls of Believers are then admitted into the immediate, personal Presence of
Jesus Christ. When they are absent from the body, they are present with the
Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8. He then fulfils that Promise which He made to them as far as
it respects their separate Spirits, Joh. 14.3. I will come again and receive
you to myself, that where I am there ye may be also. He takes them to Himself
to be with Him in Heaven, as He said to the Penitent Thief on the Cross, Luke
23.43. This Day shall thou be with me in Paradise. And therefore the Apostle
Paul expected to be with Christ, when his Soul was separated from his Body,
Phil. 1.23. Having a desire to depart and be with Christ. Thus is the Spirit of
every Man received or rejected by Christ, which is the fifth Proposition.

Prop. 6. IT ought to be the great Concern of every Man, that when his Spirit
goes to Christ at Death, it may be received by Him and not rejected. This
should be his desire, this should be his endeavor, that when his dying Hour
comes, his Spirit may be received into the Gracious Care and Glorious Kingdom
of GOD our Savior.

FOR two Reasons every Man should make this his great Concern.
Reas. 1. IF Jesus Christ receive his Spirit, it shall be safe and happy; no
evil shall befall it, all good shall come unto it. What it is Condition shall
be, is represented to us in, Heb. 12.23. It shall be made Perfect, it arrives
to a State of Perfection to the uttermost. I Shall here but briefly mention a
few Particulars in which may be set before us some Representation of that
Perfection which is enjoyed by the departed Spirit of a Believer.

1. IT enjoys a most perfect ^^ison of the Glory of Christ. This is one thing
which Christ prayed for on the account of all Believers, Joh. 17.24. I will
that those whom thou have given me, may be where I am to behold my Glory. This
Prayer is in part answered to every Believer at his Death. The Soul of a
Believer is then received to that sight of Christ's Glory, which be Prayed for.
The Understanding which is as the eve of the Soul, has a clear view and
discerning of the Glory of Jesus Christ.

Particularly,

1. IT beholds the Glory of Christ as GOD, in the highest Manifestations
thereof. This Glory of Christ is in it self invariably the same: But there are
different degrees of its manifestation; and in Heaven there are the fullest
manifestations of it to the Spirits of Just Men. Then eminently does Jesus
Christ so manifest Himself to them as not unto the World. There the Saints are
not in the Dark, not under any Doubts concerning His Glorious Godhead, as they
are sometimes in this World. They see the Glory of His participation in all the
Excellencies and Perfections of GOD, which render Him Infinitely Glorious. They
see the Glory of His Divine Personality, or the incomprehensible manner of His
Subsisting from the Father in the Divine Essence. They see the Glory of His
being the only begotten of the Father equal to Him in Power and Glory. They see
the Glory of His cooperation with the Father, working the same things with the
Father inseparably; being together with Him the Author of all the Works of
Creation and Providence. They see the Glory of His Communion with the Father,
in that Infinite Joy and Delight which He experiences in the Bosom of t^^
Father. They see the Glory of His being ^^e last end of all things that as they
are from Him, so they are for Him and on Him. They see the Glory of His being
the Object of the Worship of every Creature in Heaven, they themselves joining
with the Glorious Angels in the Ascriptions of Glory and Honor. Blessing and
Praise ^^om Him. Thus have they a clear Prospect of the Divine Glory of Jesus
Christ: A Comprehensive Knowledge thereof they have not, neither can possibly
have: For how can a Finite Being comprehend an Infinitely Glorious GOD? They
have however as full and perfect a Knowledge of the Glory of the Godhead of
Jesus Christ as they are capable of. Their enlightened and enlarged Minds are
filled with the Glory of GOD in Christ Jesus.

2. IT beholds the Glory of Christ as Mediator. This Mediatorial Glory is
peculiar to Jesus Christ, who is the alone Mediator between God and Man, 1 Timothy
2.5. Some glimpse of this Glory Believers have in this World by Faith; but it
is through a Glass darkly, and as the Understanding of a Child. But in Heaven the
Spirits of Just Men have an immediate, full and perfect view of the Mediator's
Glory. They behold the Glory of the Constitution of the Person of the Mediator,
as it any be called, who is both GOD and Man in one Person, a most Mysterious
thing, and full of astonishing Glory, the like whereunto is not to be found.
They behold the Glory of His Office, in the great Trust which GOD has reposed
in Him, committing all the concerns of His Glory, a^^ ^he Salvation of His
Elect into His hands. They behold the Glory of His full Furniture for that
Office, in all those unsearchable Treasures of Wisdom and Grace that are laid
up in Him. They behold the Glory of His Mediatory Performances on Earth, in His
State of Humiliation, clearly perceiving the Infinite Satisfaction and Merit
that is in them. They behold the Glory of His Heavenly Intercession, how He
appears in the Presence of GOD for His People, and how He procures for them and
secures to them the Favor of GOD, the Gracious acceptance of their Persons and
Performances. They behold the Glory of His Mediatory Kingdom, seeing Him to be
the L^mb upon the Throne, exercising Dominion over all the Works of GOD, and
Governing all things in a never-failing subserviency to the Glory of GOD, and
the Salvation of His Church. Thus do they behold the Transcendant Glory of
their Redeemer at the Right Hand of the Majesty on High, having a Name given to
Him, that is above every Name; and being the Constituted Judge before whom all
shall stand, and to whom every knee shall bow as the Last Day.

3. IT beholds the Glory of Christ as Man. The Humane Nature of Christ, which
was while here on Earth, under debasing, ignominous and dishonorable
Circumstances, is now in Heaven Crowned with Honor and Glory in the highest
Degree. And though this be the lowest and most Inferior Glory of Jesus Christ,
yet it is but little of it that we do now conceive. But the Saints in Heaven
have a direct and full view of this His Created Glory. He shines in this Glory
before them, as He did before His Apostles in the Mount of Transfiguration here
on Earth; there they behold this Man in all H^s Glory. They behold the Glory of
His humane Nature, in it is Personal Union to the Son of GOD, which is the
highest Dignity whereunto it is possible for a Creature to be advanced. O how
Glorious is that Nature which is so assumed by the Son of GOD as to become His
proper Nature, and to be United to the Divine Nature in His Person! They behold
the Glorious Holiness of His humane Nature in its perfect freedom from all Sin,
and unmeasurable fullness of Grace. They behold the Glory of His humane Nature
in it is wonderful Wisdom and Knowledge. Might and Strength, whereby it criers
all things in the best manner, and effects them to the best purposes in
concurrence with His Divine Nature. They behold the Glory of His humanity in
that radiant and resplendent Luster that is upon it, a dark representation
whereof was given in His Transfiguration, when H^s Face did shine as the Sun
They see that Lamb to be the L^ght of the City of GOD, so as to exempt if from
all need of the Sun or Moon to shine in it. They find that Light to be sweet
and refreshing, and that it is a pleasant thing to behold that Sun of
Righteousness while He shines in His full brightness. Thus do the departed
Spirits of Holy Men enjoy a perfect Vision of the Glory of Christ in His Deity,
Mediatorship and Humanity. There is no vail there upon His Glory, but it all
lies open to the full Perception of the Glorified. O how blessed and happy are
those Spirits which stand continually before Him and behold His Face in Glory!
this is that which is called the Beatifick or Blessed-making Vision. Such a
Vision of the Glorious Jesus as renders them completely Happy. They so see Him
as to be transformed into His likeness, having the Everlasting Print of His
Glory left upon them. Finally, They shall see Him as theirs, in whom they have
a full and Eternal Interest, whereupon with Triumphant Joy they say as in Psalm.
48.^4 This God is our God for ever and ever.

THUS for the first Thing enjoyed, viz. Perfect Vision of Christ.
2. IF the Spirit be received by Jesus Christ, it enjoys Perfect Communion with
Jesus Christ. When the Elect of GOD are brought into the Kingdom of Grace, they
are called unto the actual Fellowship of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. ^.9.
They have saving Interest in Him and Gracious Communion with Him. 1 John 1.3.
And truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with (...) Son Jesus Christ.
Yet this Communion which they have with Jesus Christ here on Earth, is very
imperfect: but when they shall be received into the Kingdom of Glory, then they
shall be admitted unto most perfect Communion with Him. Their Fellowship with
Him now, is only in inchoation and gradual Progress, but then it shall be in
Perfection and Consummation. Communion with Jesus Christ is then Perfect, when
it is immediate, full, uninterrupted and everlasting. Now such is the Communion
which the Spirit of a Believer is received unto after its Departure from the
Body.

1. THE Spirit of a Believer when received by Christ at Death enjoys immediate
Communion with Jesus Christ. While the Spirit of a Believer dwells here in the
Body it is at a distance from the Lord Christ, but when it departs from the
Body it goes into the immediate Personal Presence of the Lord; 2 Cor. 5.6, 8.
While we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord. We are willing
rather to be absent from the body, and present with the Lord. So, Phil. 1.23.
Having a desire to depart and be with Christ, which is far better. The Departed
Spirits of Just Men, do see Christ Face to Face, 1 Cor. 13.12. And therefore
they do enjoy immediate and most intimate intercourse with the Lord of Glory.
In what manner and ways this Glorious intercourse is carried on, we cannot
particularly and distinctly declare. Only this we are assured of in general,
that Glorified Spirits on their part, do immediately Exercise all their Powers
and Graces upon Jesus Christ, in Contemplating, Loving, Worshipping and Serving
of Him; Rev. 22.3, 4. And his servants shall serve him and see his face. On
Christ's part, He sheds abroad His Love in their Hearts, making them to partake
of the clearest and fullest Manifestations of His most dear Affection for them
in a most immediate way. Furthermore, what sweet and Divine Conferences may
pass between Christ and the Church Triumphant, we cannot say. This we know that
when He was Transfigured in the Mount, two of the most eminent Saints in Glory,
even Moses and Elias came down and appeared to Him, and held a Conference with
Him concerning His Decease at Jerusalem, Luke 9.30, 31. Surely this was
something of Heaven upon Earth, some small representation of what is done in
Heaven above.

2. THE Spirit of a Believer when received by Christ at Death, enjoys full
Communion with Christ. The Souls of Believers while in the Body have Communion
with Christ only in low degrees. Though their Communion with Him be at some times
more full than at other times, yet it is always incomplete. Christ now Comes
into their souls, and sups with them, and they with him, Rev. 3.20. They enjoy
some manifestations of Christ to them, but not full. They enjoy some sense of
His Love to them, but not full. The fullness of their Communion with Christ is
reserved for Heaven. There the Saints Love Christ with all their Heart, with
all their Soul, with all their Mind, and with all their Might. Their Love goes
out to Christ in its full Strength, and all their Graces are acted on Him in
the highest degree. There also the Sun of Righteousness shines on them in His
full Strength, filling them with Light, Life, Comfort, Joy unspeakable and full
of Glory, Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence is the fullness of Joy. Then shall the
Apostle's Prayer for the Ephesians have its utmost accomplishment in all the
Saints; Ephesians. 3.19. That ye might be filled with all the fullness of God. They
are by Christ filled with all the fullness of GOD, to the utmost of their
enlarged Capacity. They partake of as much of the communicable fullness of
Christ as their Natures are capable of.

3. THE Spirit of a Believer when received by Christ at Death, enjoys
uninterrupted Communion with Christ. The Communion of the Saints with Christ
here on Earth, is much broken and interrupted by one means or other. The
constant risings and workings of Corruption in them, do always in some measure
disturb their free Converse with Jesus Christ. Such is the remaining vanity and
unsteadiness of the mind, that it often wanders from Christ in the Duties of
Communion. The best of GOD's Servants do sadly experience how difficult a thing
it is to keep their Hearts engaged in close Communion with Christ, and how apt
are they to start aside from Him in Holy Duties. Again, sometimes Holy Men do
fall into such Sins which provoke Christ greatly to withdraw from them, and
which do very much estrange their Hearts from Christ. How fearfully was David's
Communion with Christ interrupted and cut off by his foul Sins? Their Sins do
make a very great separation between them and their GOD, Isa. 59.2. Again, the
necessary occasions of the present Life, and the necessary repose of Nature by
Sleep, do take them off from actual Converse with Jesus Christ. So that on one
account or other there is in this World a frequent interruption of the Saints
Communion with Christ. But now, when their Spirits are received by Christ into
Heaven all bars in the way of their Communion with Him, are totally removed,
nothing deprives them of Communion with Christ for a Moment; they serve and
enjoy Him incessantly, Rev. 7.15. They are before the Throne of God, and serve
him day and night in his Temple, and he that sits on his Throne shall dwell
among them. No Enemy, no Adversary enters there to give the least disturbance
to their sweet intercourse with the King of Glory. There are no Temptations,
hurries, darkness, confusion, corruptions to cause the withdrawing of Christ or
^idings of His Face from them. There is nothing to occasion the least diversion
of Mind from Christ the Glorious Object of their Contemplations and Adorations.
There they can say, in a far more perfect sense, what David once said. Psalm.
57.7. My heart is fi^ed, O God, my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise.

4. THE Spirit of a Believer when received by Christ at Death enjoys
Everlasting Communion with Christ. It enters upon a Communion which never shall
have an end. When it once enters into that Temple above, It shall go no more
out, Rev. ^.12. There it shall make its perpetual abode with Christ: For this
denotes the lasting Nature and Perpetuity of their Fellowship with Christ, as
it is without intermission, so without cessation. Our times of Fellowship with
Christ here on Earth, are but of short continuance; but in Heaven it shall be
perpetuated to all Eternity, 1 These 4.17. And so shall we ever be with the Lord.

THUS for the second thing enjoyed by the separate Spirit, viz. Perfect
Communion with Jesus Christ.

3. IF that Spirit of a Man be received by Christ, it enjoys Perfect Conformity
to Christ. GOD from all Eternity, has determined with Himself, to make all His
Chosen and Called ones like unto His Son Jesus Christ; Rom 8.29. For whom he
did fore know, he also did predestinate, to be conformed to the image of his
Son. This Conformity to the Son of GOD, is begun in this Life and perfected in
the next. When therefore the Spirit of a Believer departs from the Body and
goes to Christ, it arrives unto a fullness of Conformity to Jesus Christ.

1. IT it perfectly Conformed to Christ in His Sinlessness. Jesus Christ always
was harmless, undefiled and separate from Sinners. He knew no Sin, did no Sin,
was without all Sin; no Sin was ever inherent in Him or committed by Him. Now
herein the Souls of Believers are perfectly Conformed to Jesus Christ in
Heaven. In this World their Souls have Sin cleaving to them in all their
Faculties, and all their Operations; but in Heaven this vicious quality is
quite taken away, their Souls have nothing of Sin dwelling in them: They
brought Sin into this World with them, but they carry none of it with them into
the other World. There is not in the Mind the least vanity or darkness; There
is not in the Will the least aversion from Good, or the least Propensity to
Evil: There is not in the Affections the least impurity or irregularity. The
Soul is without the least spot or blemish upon it, Ephesians. 5.27. And this perfect
Ejection of Sin is sweetened by the Blessed impossibility of its making any
re-entrance into the Soul. It Is state of complete freedom from Sin, by the
Grace, Merit and Power of Jesus Christ, is immutable. Thus is the separate
Spirit, of a Believer altogether sinless and impeccable like unto the Lord who
receives it.

2. IT is perfectly Conformed to Christ in His Holiness. The Man Christ Jesus
always was and is perfectly Holy. He is in a way of eminency the Holy and Just
One, Acts 3.14. His Nature and all His Actions were perfectly Holy. Herein the
Spirit of a Believer in its separate Estate is made like to Jesus Christ. In
this World the Soul of a Believer is Renewed after the image of Christ in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.24. And it is renewed more and more Day
by Day, 2. Cor. 4.16. The good Work of Grace and Sanctification begun in it is
carried on in this Life, Phil. 1.6. But it attains not to Perfection till it be
separated from the Body and received into the Hands of Jesus Christ. Christ has
purchased Perfection for it but bestows it not till the Soul goes to Him in
Heaven. Then the Soul is made like to Christ in the highest degrees of Holiness
it is capable of: It is Holy as the Lord Himself is Holy. Not in a way of
equality, for so none is Holy as the Lord; but in a way of as full Resemblance
as the Capacity of the Soul will admit of. And this perfect Conformity of the
Soul to Christ in Holiness, has respect both to the Nature and Actings of the
Soul. It is Habitually Conformed to Christ, possessing such habits of Grace as
are in Christ in the height of Perfection: It is full of Grace and Holiness as
Christ is. It is also Actually Conformed to Christ, exerting such perfect Acts
of Holiness as Christ: It Lives such an Holy Life as Christ Lives, doing the
Will of GOD perfectly as it is done by Jesus Christ Himself in Heaven. Jesus
Christ and the perfected Spirits with Him, are fully of one Mind, one Heart and
one Way, without the least discrepancy. Such Thoughts as Christ has of GOD
Holiness. Sin, etc. just the same Thoughts have the Glorified Spirits.

THUS much for the third Thing.
4. Lastly, IF the Spirit of a Man be received by Jesus Christ, it enjoys
Perfect Contentment in Christ. Jesus Christ in His Glory, is a Soul-satisfying
Object. The Spirits of Just Men that are in Heaven, take full content in Him.
When Christ was Transfigured in the Mount, Peter was so transported and pleased
that he said, T^s good being here; and would gladly have tarr^ed there, and no
more returned to the World. How sweet and satisfying then is it to the Saints
above, to see Christ shining in all His Glory* What a ravishing Object is that
Lord (...) Glory. The Glorified Soul in all his Faculties fines perfect Rest
and Satisfact^^n in the Lord Jesus Christ.

1. THE Understanding is perfectly satisfied or the Contemplation and Knowledge
of Jesus Christ. The Lord Jesus Christ is an Object Infinitely Excellent; He is
possessed of all Divine Perfections, All the fu^^^^s of the Go^i^al dwells in
him, Col 2.9. ^e whole Nature and all the Attributes of GOD do belong to Jesus
Christ. He is God over (...) blessed for evermore, Rom 9 5. There is therefore
an Infinite fullness of Glory and Excellency, of Truth, Wisdom and Knowledge in
Jesus Christ. This fullness of His is most conspicuous to the Spirits in Glory.
They have a clear and distinct, though not a full and comprehensive Knowledge
thereof. Such a Knowledge they have as is fully Satisfactory to their perfectly
enlighted Minds. Nothing more can be requisite to a full Contentment of the
Mind, than an Object Infinitely Glorious, and a clear perception thereof. This
fil^s the Mind with a Knowledge every way satisfying. Such is the Knowledge
which the Saints in Heaven have of Jesus Christ. There the eye of the Mind is
satisfied with Seeing. Christ the Light of Heaven is sweet to the Eye, and it
is a pleasant thing to behold that Son of Righteousness. The Apostle ^au^ was
so satisfied in the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ, though but imperfect,
that he cared for nothing else in Comparison of it, ^hi^ 3 8 How satisfied then
must the Saints in Heaven be, who partake of this most excellent Knowledge in
its Perfection?

2 THE (...) fully sati^fied i^ the (...) and (...) There is i^ Jesus Christ an
immensity of Goodness. He (...) and chief Good, so that the enjoyment of Him is
the highest blessedness. Now this is the Privilege of the Glorified Spirits.
They enjoy Him as the Fountain of Living Waters whereof they Drink and are
fully satisfied. Their Desires do find complete Satisfaction in and from Him,
so as to say, Whom have we in Heaven but that? and there is none that we desire
besides thee. They desire no Object besides GOD in CHRIST, having Infinitely
enough in Him to terminate all their Desires, and to bring them under a Blessed
incapacity of desiring any thing more. This full Satisfaction of desire is also
attended with a fullness of Joy. The Imagination of Man cannot reach that
gladness of Heart which springs from the refreshing light of Christ's
Countenance and the most inward sense or His Love. Faith in Christ here on
Earth does sometimes produce in the Soul a Joy unspeakable and full of Glory, 1
Pet. 1.8. How inconceivable then is that Joy which arises from the immediate
sight and full enjoyment of Christ in Heaven.

THUS we have seen what a safe and happy State the Spirit of a Man is in, if it
be received by Christ at Death. And for this Reason every Man should be greatly
concerned that his Spirit may be received by Christ when it leaves His Body,
Which is the first Reason.

Reas. 2. IF the Spirit of a Man be received by Christ at Death, the Body also
shall in due time be received by Him, and be made happy in Conjunction with the
Soul. If Christ takes care of a Man^s Spirit, He will also take care of his
Body. If He save a Man's Soul, He will save his Body also, for He is a Savior
of the whole Man. Our Bodies, as well as our Spirits are purchased and bought
by Him, and therefore shall partake of Perfect Redemption, 1 Cor. 6.^0. Our
Bodies are sanctified as well as our Spirits, 1 These. 5.23. And therefore shall
be made perfect in Holiness and Happiness. Our Bodies are United to Christ as
well as our Souls, 1 Cor. 6.15. And therefore they shall enjoy perfect
Communion with Christ in His appointed time. For the present they are laid in
the Grave and there sleep in Christ, 1 These. 4.14. and Context; their Grave is
but a Bed of Rest, wherein they take their Repose, under the watchful Eye of
Jesus Christ. After a while, He will come again and awake them out of Sleep by
His sweet and Friendly Voice. When He shall have a desire to these Works of His
hand, He shall call, and they will answer Him out of the Dust He will raise
these Bodies, He will revive them He will new make them, and reunite them to
their Spirits, adorned with most Glorious and, Excellent Qualities; a summary
Representation of these things the Apostles gives us in 1 Cor. 15. These Bodies
shall be made immortal, incorruptible, spiritual, strong, vigorous and
beautiful: And to say all in a Word, Jesus Christ shall Change these Bodies,
and fashion them like unto His own Glorious Body, (...) 3.21. When He has thus
made His Saints to appear in Glory like Himself; He will then put the highest
Marks of Honor upon them, and perform His last and greatest Offices of
K^n^ness for them: He will place them as H^s Right Hand, He will give them His
Public Commendation, He will translate them to Heaven, where He will present
them to GOD His Father with inconceivable Solemnity and Joy, and dispose of
them in the several Glorious Mansions which He has prepared for them, and so
shall they ever be with the Lord, beholding His Face in Righteousness, and
satisfied with His likeness to all Eternity. Thus shall it be done to the Man
whose Spirit is at Death received by the Lord Jesus Christ.

I proceed now to the Application of the Doctrine.
USE, I. of Lamentation,
THAT Men are so unconcerned about having their Spirits received by Christ at
Death. Alas! how little is it the Concern of Men, that their Immortal Spirits
may in a Dying Hour be received into the Redeemers Arms! How many are there
that very seldom, if ever, do entertain serious Thoughts of Death! instead
hereof they put the Thoughts of Death far away from them. They think of Living,
but not of Dying. They are concerned how they shall Live, but unconcerned how
they shall Dye. They are daily taking thought for the Body, what they shall
eat, what they shall drink, and what they shall put on; but all this while take
no thought about their Souls, as to what shall be done for them, or what shall
become of them. How do Men Live as if (...) had no Souls in them, or as if they
were not worth the minding, or as if it were an indifferent thing who had them
after Death! How astonishing is it that Men should thus Live under the Gospel
which so clearly brings Life and immortality to light! How strange and
unaccountable is it, that Men professing Belief of the immortality of their
Souls, and of their passing into a State of Eternal Blessedness or Misery
immediately after Death, should yet be so unconcerned for them; Men believe
that they must certainly and shortly Die, and it may be very speedily. They
believe that after Death comes the Judgment in which their Souls shall be
acquitted or condemned, received into Heaven or cast down into Hell by Jesus
Christ, the great Judge. They Believe these things, they say, and yet are very
little concerned whether their Souls at Death be received or rejected by
Christ, whether they go to Heaven or to Hell. How amazing is such stupidity and
negligence? O let us take heed that we be not found of this number of secure
and sottish Creatures, who neglect to make due Provision for the future welfare
of their Spirits. If we are careless in this matter, how lightly soever we now
account of it, we shall hereafter bitterly bewail it. We shall Mourn at the
last, but with a fruitless Mourning, which will be an Aggravation of our
Sorrow. Undoubtedly, When the Souls of Sinners after Death appear before the
Tribunal of Jesus Christ, they are sensible of their Sin and Folly in the
neglect of themselves. Undoubtedly, they express a Grief and Repentance for
those neglects. Undoubtedly, they wish for, and desire either a return to this
World to Reform their neglects, or a Reception into Heaven, through a Gracious
Pardon of their neglects, but all such wishes and desires shall be in vain.
There is no passage from Hell, either to Heaven or Earth, to be obtained, by
the most passionate and importunate prayers and cries. The Gulf is then fixed
and cannot be removed. The Day of Grace is then ended and can never be
recalled. The Door of Heaven is then shut never to be opened. O then let us
fear, least this should prove our unhappy Lot in the other World, and least we
meet with that fatal repulse, in Math. 25.11, 12. Afterward came also the other
Virgins, saving, Lord, Lord, open to us But it (...) and said, verily, I say
unto you. I know you not.

USE, II. Of Exhortation.
LET us make this (...) great Concern, that when our Spirit^ at Death depart
from our Bodies, they may be received by Jesus Christ. It Is possible the time
of our departure may be very near, it is certain that it is not very far off, we
had need therefore be speedy and diligent in our endeavors that our departing
Spirits may go to Christ to be with Him. I shall here subjoin only this one
Consideration to awaken hereunto. Let us Consider what will become of our
immortal Spirits if Jesus Christ do not receive them. If they are not received
by Him, they will fall into the hands of the great Enemy of our Souls. If they
are rejected by the Savior of Souls, they are delivered up to the Destroyer of
Souls, Math. 1^.34. The Lord in Wrath delivers them to the Tormentors. He
consigns them over to the full power and possession of cursed, malicious and
cruel Devils, to Torment them to the utmost of their Ability; and who can
conceive the doleful Condition of a Soul totally ab^^^^^ed by Christ, and given
up to the unrestrained rage of the Tigers of Hell? Something of the Miserable
^^ate of such a Soul may in part be guessed at, from the dreadful Condition of
those who have been under a Bodily Possession. The Scriptures do represent to
us the sad and doleful case of some whose Bodies Satan had got the Possession
of. Take only that one deplorable Instance related in Mark 5. and Luke 8.
Immediately there ^et Christ out of the tombs, a man with an unclean spirit; a
(...) man out of the city, which had devils a long time, and wear no cloths,
neither abode in any house, (...) had his dwelling among the tombs; and no man
could bind him, (...) not with chains, because he had been often (...)d with
fetters and chains, and the (...) had been plucked a^under by him, and the
fet^e^s be (...) in pieces, (...) could any man (...) him: (...) always night
and day, he was in the mou^tains, (...) to the tombs, crying, and (...) himself
with (...): The ear of Man cannot hear this Tragical Story, without an inward,
deep and con^incing sense of the deplorableness of his condition. Yet however,
this Miserable Demoniac, was in a most happy Condition to what a sepa^ate
Spirit delivered up to Satan is in. For the Devil had not unlimited power over
his Body to do all that Mischief to him, that he would have done; and all this
while the Soul of this poor Possessed Person was precious in the sight of the
Lord Jesus Christ: But a Spirit after Death put into the Possession of Satan,
is Eternally cast away, and abhorred of the Lord, and given up to the Devil to
satisfy his whole will on it. The Lord lays no restraints upon the Devil, but
leaves him to do all that he can to such a Soul in a way of Punishing and
Tormenting it. Surely, the state of such a Soul is as Miserable, as Diabolical
Malice, Hatred and Power can possibly make it; and in this most Miserable
state, must it abide with Devils* under the more dreadful burning Wrath of GOD
to all Eternity: For the Sentence which Christ passes upon it is that, Math.
25.41. Depart ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels. O let this awful Consideration dwell much upon our Spirits, that we may
be concerned to have our Spirits received by the Blessed Jesus, and not by the
Cursed Devil at last. Now if we would have our departing Spirits received by
Jesus Christ, let us attend these following Directions.

Direct 1. LET us endeavor, that our (...) may be broken Spirits. A broken
Spirit, is a Spirit greatly afflicted, humbled and penitent under the sense of
its own exceeding sinfulness. It is sensible of the multitude and greatness of
its Sins. It sees the horrid Evil that is in them, as they have been contrary
to the Holy Nature, Law and Glory of GOD: It sees how its Sins have displeased
and dishonored GOD* wounded and pierced Jesus Christ, separated between GOD
and it, and exposes it to Eternal Destruction. This sight and sense of Sin's
Evil is attended with Godly sorrow and grief for it. A broken heart is grieved
and mou^ns bitterly for that it has grieved the Heart of GOD, and dishonored
the Name of GOD by its Sins; as also for that it has defiled, de^ased and
wronged it self by its Sins. Upon ^hese accounts, it deeply humbles it self,
bemoans it self, loathes it self, judges and condemns it self before GOD. An
heart under ^uch a Penitential sense of Sin as this, is a truly broken heart,
and such a heart GOD will not ^es^^se, but exceedingly Prize and Delight in,
^sal. 51.17. GOD Looks with an Eye of Com^lacency to that Man that is of a
Contrite Spirit, (...).66 2. Yea, He will Dwell with him that is of an Humble
and Contrite Spirit, (...).57.15. Our Glorious Lord Jesus Christ will heal and
bind up the brokenhearted, Luke ^.18. He will Pardon, Revive and Comfort all
that Mourn for their Sins. Thus shall a ^roken Spirit be healed, delighted in,
dwelt with by the Lord while it is in the Body; and after it is separated from
the Body He will ^^ke it to Himself to Dwell with Him in Heaven. This we find
exemplified in the Thief upon (...) Cross. The Lord saw in him a Penitent,
broken Spirit, upon which Christ said to him, This Day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. That broken spirit of thine shall not be cast down into Hell; but
^^all go along with my Spirit, into a Place and State (...) Blessedness
immediately after Death. If then we would have our Spirits received by Jesus
Christ, ^et us see to it, that they be sincerely broken (...) and from Sin. Let
the pleasing Affections of our Souls, viz. Desire, Love, Joy, be with^rawn from
Sin, and the disliking Affections, (...) Fear, Sorrow, Hatred be set against
Sin, then will Jesus Christ receive our Spirits into His Favor and Kingdom.

Direct. 2. LET us receive Jesus Christ with our Spirits. To receive Christ
with our Spirits is heartily to approve, embrace and entertain Jesus Christ as
the only all-sufficient Savior, resting upon Him alone for Salvation; as such a
Savior Jesus Christ is revealed and offered to us in the Gospel, and if we
Cordially accept Him for our Savior, fixing our entire dependence on Him for
the Salvation of our Souls, then do our Souls truly receive Him. Such an hearty
Reception of Christ now, may assure us of His Reception of our Spirits at the
last. If our hearts are opened to receive Him, He will open Heaven to receive
them. It is said in Joh 1.12. To as many as received him, to them gave he power
or privilege to become the sons of God. And if they partake of this High and
Honorable Dignity of Adoption, they also partake of a Coheirship with Jesus
Christ, or a Title to His Rich Inheritance, Romans 8.17. And if Children, then
heirs; heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Jesus Christ. They have by Grace and
Favor, a right to that Glorious Inheritance, whereunto Christ has a right by
Nature and Purchase. Let us then with our Souls consent to take Christ in all
His saving Offices. Receive Him as the great Prophet and Light of the World;
believing the infallible certainty of all His Revelations, and looking to Him
for an enlightened Mind savingly to Understand them. Receive Him as the High
Priest of our Profession, believing an a^-fullness of Satisfaction and Merit in
His Sacrifice offered on Earth, and pleaded in Heaven for us, and relying
thereon for Pardon of Sin, peace with GOD and Eternal Life. Receive Him as the
King of Glory, Believing his rightful Dominion over us, and yielding Professed
and real Subjection to Him. Thus let us with our hearts receive Jesus Christ by
Faith, and the end of this Faith shall be the Salvation of our Souls. Such
Believers on Christ now, shall be Beholders of Him hereafter. Their Faith in
Him, shall issue in the Vision of Him.

Direct 3. LET our Spirits Converse much with Christ in their Thoughts. Though
Christ be absent and at a vast distance from us, even as far as the highest
Heaven is from the Earth, yet our Spirits can go up to Him, and reach Him, and
dwell upon Him in their Thoughts. So wonderful is the Power and Excellency of
the Cogitative or thinking Faculty in Man, that the Mind can thereby visit the
remotest parts of the World and unite it self in it is Thoughts to the Objects
that are there. Thus it can ascend into the Heavens, and follow our great High
Priest who is passed thereinto, and can exercise it self in sweet
Contemplations on Him. As Steven, by an extraordinary Strengthening of sight,
looked up to Heaven and with his Bodily Eyes beheld Jesus Christ standing at
the Right Hand of GOD* so may a Christian with the eye of his Mind look into
Heaven and take a view of Jesus Christ in His Glory there. His Heart and
Conversation may be ^n Heaven with Christ in the Actings of His Min^ upon Him.
Thus should our Spirits be frequently employed in deep and fixed Meditations on
the Lord of Glory. No Object i^ so worthy to take up our Thoughts as a
Glorified Christ. The Holy Prophets of Old, with the closest application of
Mind, took a view of the Sufferings of Christ, and the Glory that should
follow, 1 Pet. 1.10, 11. The Holy Apostles scarce thought of any thing but
Christ, and went over the World to turn the Hearts and Thoughts of Men toward
Christ. This Holy and Heavenly Exercise is what Believers under the Gospel are
especially called unto They are bid to Consider the Apostle and high Priest of
their profession Christ Jesus, Heb. 3.1 They should view Him in His Person and
Offices with most attentive Consideration. They should Look unto Jesus the
author and fre^sher of their faith, Heb. 12.2. The eye of their mind should be
upon Him: Contemplating Him under the various Representations of Him to us in
the Gospel, especially (...) He is set forth in His Heavenly Glory which is the
Reward of His Sufferings, and the highest demonstration of their acceptableness
to GOD. Well then, Let Jesus Christ be the great Subject of our Meditations.
Let us often and often raise up our Spirits toward Him, and maintain an
intercourse with Him in our Thoughts* Let no Day pass without many a flight of
Thought to Him: And let us have our frequent, set Seasons for more thorough,
fixed and steady pondering upon Him. If we thus do, we may hope that our
Spirits shall e're it be long, follow our Thoughts; and that our Spirits which
have so much conversed sweetly with Christ while in the ^ody, shall be received
by Hi^r when they leave the Body.

Direct. 4. LET us commit our Spirits to the keeping of Jesus Christ Our Souls
are in extreme Danger of being Eternally lost. Great is the Opposition which
they meet with, from Lusts which War against our Souls, and from Temptations of
all kinds wherewith they are daily assaulted: And unless the Power of Christ be
engaged for the Salvation of our Souls, they will assuredly fall and perish by
the hands of their Adversaries. Our Spirits are no where safe but in the hands
of Jesus Christ, Joh. 10.28. I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall
never Perish, nor shall any pluck them out of my hands. If He will take them
into His Omnipotent hands, the Gates of Hell shall never prevail against them
to their Destruction. And if we would have Jesus Christ take them into His
hands, we must put them over into His hands. Our Souls, by an Act of their own
must commit the keeping of themselves to the Lord Jesus Christ. They must give
away themselves unto Him, Consenting and Desiring that He may be the Guardian
of these precious Spirits. Let us then, under a sense of our own insufficiency
to keep our Spirits, make a surrender of them to that most faithful and mighty
Redeemer, Psalm. 31 5 Into thine h^nd I commit my spirit: Thou have redeemed me,
O Lord God of truth. Commit them to Him leave them with Him, in a way of humble
Trust and well doing, and He will preserve them to His Everlasting and Heavenly
Kingdom; 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have bel^^ved, and an verily persuaded,
that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day
If we resign up our Spirits to the Conduct and Care of Jesus Christ, He will
secure them from Damning Errors and Practices, He will lead them into all Truth
and Holiness. He will guide them by His Counsel and afterward receive them to
Glory. If we judge Him fit, and only fit, to have so Rich a Treasure deposited
with Him as our immortal Spirits are, and do accordingly be trust Him with
them, they shall never miscarry.

Direct 5. LET us with our Spirits Love Christ and delight in Him. Jesus Christ
calls upon us to give Him the Love and Affection of our Souls, Prove. 23.26 My
son give me thine heart. None has such right to demand it, none such Excellency
to deserve it, as Jesus Christ has. He is the chief of ten thousand, and
altogether lovely. Cant. 6.10, 16. He is an Object worthy of our Superlative
Love and Delight. Accordingly He should be our Beloved in a way of Eminency,
the Person whom our very Souls do Love, and in whom our Spirits do rejoice,
Cant. 3.1. Luke 1.47. Let us then look upon Him as One in whom there is all
loveliness, sweetness and pleasantness, and that in an Infiniteness of
Perfection. Let Meditation on Him, he sweet to our Souls. Let Communion with
Him, be refreshing to our Spirits. Let the Thought and Hope of an approaching
Departure to be with Him, be the Joy and Rejoicing of our Hearts. Spirits thus
solacing themselves in Christ, or but panting after Him in the anxious desires
of Love, shall assuredly be carried by Angels into the bosom of that Lord, who
is the Desire of all Nations and the Delight of all Heaven. He Loves and
Delights in them that Love and Delight in Him, Prove 8.17. And His Love to them
will not suffer them long to be absent from Him.

Direct. 6. LET us Worship and Serve Christ with our Spirits The Heavenly Host
of Angelical Spirits are all the Worshippers and Ministers of Jesus Christ; Heb
1 6, 14 Let all the Angels of God worship him, are they not all ministering
spirits sent forth, viz. by Jesus Christ. They do all of them with the greatest
indications of Humility celebrate His Glorious Excellencies and Operations; Isa
6.2, 3. Above it stood the Seraphims; each one had six wings; with twain he
covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with (...) he did
fl^e. And one cried unto another, end said. Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord, the
whole earth is full of his Glory. And as Glorious Angels, so the Perfected
Spirits of Just Men do Worship and Serve Jesus Christ. They fall down before
Him, and Praise Him for His Redeeming them by His Blood and advancing them to
greatest Dignity, Rev. 5.8.9 And as the separate Spirits of Holy Men do Worship
and Obey Christ in Heaven so should our embodied Spirits Worship and Serve
Christ on Earth. He is to be made the Object of our Religious Worship, Psalm.
45.11. He is thy Lord and Worship thou him The Spouse, the Bride of Christ, i.
e The Church of Christ, is here Commanded to Worship Christ. And they that do
not so are not Spiritually: Espoused to Him. It Is the distinguishing Character
of true Christians, that they are (...) is call upon the name of Jesus Christ
our Lord 1 Cor. 1.2. And thought His Name he not always expressly mentioned in
our Prayers, yet we ever include Him in our Prayers, because we Pray to GOD in
Three Persons, Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Jesus Christ then is to be
Worshipped by us, and that with our Spirits. Such he seeks to Worship him, as
Worship him in Spirit and in Truth, Joh. 4.23, 24. All our Worship and Service
which we yield to Jesus Christ must be Spiritual. We must Serve Him with our
Spirits and Glorify Him with our Spirits as well as with our Bodies, 1 Cor.
6.20. And if we are such Sincere, Hearty Worshippers and Servants of Jesus
Christ while we Live, He will then at Death receive our Spirits. Joh. 12.26
Where I am, there shall my servant also be. If our Spirits Live to Christ, they
shall certainly Live with Christ; Phil 1.21. For to me to live is Christ, and
to dye is gain. What this Gain will be, he mentions in Ver. 23. Having a desire
to depart and to be with Christ which is far better. He should as to his
Spirit, after its Departure out of the Body, gain immediate Communion with
Christ in Heaven: His Spirit should be with Christ and Happy in the Fruition of
Him.

Direct 7. LET our Spirits desire Christ to receive them, and for this end
principally that we may Glorify Him in Heaven for ever. If we would have Jesus
Christ receive our Spirits at Death, we must humbly, and heartily, and
frequently offer up our desires to Him for it in our Prayers. All our Prayers
receive their full Answer in the grant of this one Petition, Lord Jesus receive
my Spirit. This then should be the great matter of our R^quests to Jesus
Christ, that He would at the last receive our Immortal Spirits unto Himself:
And the great end for which we desire that He should receive our Spirits,
should be, that we might Eternally Glorify Him. As His Glory should be made the
main end of our present, so of our future Life. All our desires should
terminate in the Glory of Christ; every thing should be desired in a
subordination to His Glory; and therefore not our own Glory, but the Glory of
Christ, is to be made our last end in desiring to be with Christ in Glory. We
should desire to be Glorified, that we may Glorify Him in the highest degree.
Jesus Christ desired His own Glory in order to His Father's Glory; Joh. 17.1.
Father, the hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy son may also glorify thee.
In like manner we should desire our own Glory in order to the Glory of Christ,
and say, Lord Jesus glorify me, that I also may glorify thee. Such sincere and
hearty Prayer as this is most pleasing to Jesus Christ, and shall most
assuredly be answered by Him. If we look upon Heaven as a Place where Jesus
Christ is Glorified in every thing, at all times, in the highest degree, and
upon this Consideration do ardently desire: to be there with Christ, we may be
sure that our Spirits shall be received by Christ at Death, and that an
entrance shall be ministered unto them abudantly, into the Everlasting kingdom
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
BOOKS Sold by B. Eliot, at his Shop on the North side of King Street a little
below the Royal Exchange, Boston.
THe Benefits of a Good, and Mischiefs of an Evil Conscience. Being Fourteen
Sermons Preached from Three several Texts.

TWelve Single Sermons on various Subjects, Tending to Promote Godliness, and
quicken Persons to walk in the way of Salvation.

THe Great and Last Day of Judgment: Or, The last Trumpet Sounding, the Graves
Opening, all the Dead arising, to receive their last Sentence from the Lord
Jesus Christ, who will descend from Heaven in Matchless Glory, to Reward the
Godly, and Punish the Wicked to all Eternity. In several Sermons.

INvitations to the Gospel Feast, or Free Offers of Salvation through Christ.
Eleven Sermons, from Luke XIV 16. -- 24

AN Essay on the Decalogue or Ten Commandments. Designed as an help to our
better Knowing and Keeping them; and particularly as an help in that Important
Duty of Self-Examination. A Book proper to be Charitably distributed by those
to disposed.

CHristian Advice to the Si^k and Well. In Answer to these Questions. I. What
should Christians do, when under Bodily Sickness? II. How should Christians in
Health, improve the Sickness of others; and how should they carry it toward
the Sick? III. How should Christians behave themselves, when Recovered from
Sickness? And None but the Righteous saved; A Sermon on 1 Cor. 6.9.

FIve Sermons: Viz. The First on Sept. 30th 1711. From Psalm. 73.1. Being the
Last Delivered in the Old Meeting House, which was Burnt, October. 2. 1711. The
Second from Lam. 3.51. At the South Meeting House in Boston, the First Lord's
Day after the Fire. The Third from Psalm. 26.8. On a Fast Kept by the Old
Church. The Fourth from Hag. 2.9. Being the First in the Brick Meeting House,
where the former was Burnt. The Fifth from Zech. 4.7. A Thanksgiving Sermon,
for God's Goodness in providing a New Meeting House for the Old Church. With a
Preface giving some Account of the Fire.

HEarty Submission and Resignation to the Will of GOD, under Afflictions,
Pressed upon Christans, as a very Necessary and Important Duty. In several
Sermons.

These Eight by the Rd. M. Benjamin Wadsworth, Pastor of a Church of Christ in
Boston.

A Discourse of the Glory to which GOD has called Believers by Jesus Christ.
Delivered in some Sermons out of 1 Pet. V. ch 10. v. Together with an annexed
Letter. Both, by that Eminent and Worthy Minister of the Gospel, Mr. Jonathan
Mitchel, late Pastor of the Church at Cambridge in New England. The second
Edition with a Preface by Increase Mather, D. D

THe Practice of Piety: Directing a Christian how to walk that he may please
GOD.

THe Christians Exercise by Satan's Temptations: Or, an Essay to discover the
methods which this Adversary uses to Tempt the Children of GOD; and to direct
them how to escape the mischief thereof Being the Substance of several Sermons
preached on that Subject.

Spiritual Desertions Discovered and Remedied. Being the, Substance of diverse
Sermons Preached for the help of dark Souls, laboring under Divine
withdrawings.

These two by the late Rd. Mr. Samuel Willa^d.

A Plain Discourse showing who shall, and who shall not enter into the kingdom
of Heaven; and how far Men may go, and yet fall short of Heaven, after their
seeming to be Converted and Religious. By Increase Mather, D.D.

THe Triumph of Mercy in the Chariot of Praise. A Treatise of preventing,
secret and unexpected Mercies, with some mixed Reflections. By the late Revd. Mr.
Samuel Lee.

A Funeral Sermon on the Death of that Learned and Excellent Divine, the
Reverend Mr. Samuel Willard, Pastor of a Church of Christ in Boston, and
Vice President of Harvard College. By the late Revd Mr Ebenezer Pemberton. To
which is annexed a Poem on the same sorrowful Occasion, by the Rd. Mr. Benjamin
Colman.

THe Doleful State of the Damned; especially such as go to Hell from under the
Gospel; Aggravated from their Apprehensions of the Saints Happiness in Heaven.
Being the Substance of several Sermons. By Samuel Moodey, M. A. Pastor of the
Church of Christ in York.

THe Best Friend standing at the Door; or Christ Awakening and Affectionate
Call, both to Professors and Secure Sinners, for Entrance into the House. In
Six Sermons. By John Ryther Minister of the Gospel in Wapping.

MAn's Whole Duty: Or the Rule of a Christian's Life and Conversation.
Containing plain and short Directions for the Performance of the several Duties
thereof.

MEat out of the Eater: Or Meditations concerning the Necessity, End and
Usefulness of Afflictions unto GOD's Children. All rending to prepare them for,
and comfort them under the Cross. By Michael Wigglesworth.

A Discourse concerning the Beauty of Providence. By John Wilkins, D. D.

SAcramental Meditations upon diverse Select Places of Scripture. By John
Flavel, late Minister of Christ in Devon.

TWo brief Discourses. The one offering Methods and Motives for Parents to
Catechize their Children, while yet under the Tuition of their Parents. The
other, offering some Instructions for Children, how they may do well, when they
come to Years of doing for themselves.

THe Mariners Divine Mate; or Spiritual Navigation improved. In the right
Management of the Heavenly Voyage, by every one that intends to be Saved. With
serious Observations and profitable Application.

THe Wars of the Jews. In two Books. With the most Deplorable History of the
Siege and Destruction of the City of Jerusalem. Epitomized from the Works of
Flavius Josephus.

THe Spiritual Warfare; or some Sermons concerning the Nature of Mortification,
together with the right Exercise and Spiritual Advantages thereof. Whereunto
are added other Two Sermons* concerning the Mystery of Contentment under
Afflicting Rods and Pinching Dispensations. By that Pious and Faithful Servant
of Christ, Mr. Andrew Gray, Minister of the Gospel, whilst he lived, in the
City of Glasgow.

THe Isle of Man. Or the Legal Proceeding in Man-Shire against Sin. Wherein, by
way of a continued Allegory, the chief Malefactors disturbing both Church and
Commonwealth, are Detected and Attached; with their Arraignment and Judicial
Trial according to the Laws of England. To which is added, The Contents of the
Book for Spiritual Use; with an Apology for the manner of handling, most
necessary to be first Read, for direction in the right use of the Allegory
throughout. By Richard Bernard, Rector of Batcomb in Somersetshire.

A Dying Fathers last Legacy to an only Child: Or* Mr. Hugh Peter's Advice to
his Daughter. Written by his own hand, during his late Imprisonment in the
Tower of London; and given her a little before his Death.

A Preparation for Judgment. A Sermon Preached in London: Wherein is showed,
That the only Time that Men have to Provide for their Eternal Condition, is the
Time of this Life: For after Death comes Judgment. By the Late Reverend, Mr. J.
Buroughs.

THe second Spir^^: Being a fearful Example of an Atheist, Who had Apostatized
from the Christian Religion, and died in Despair at Westminster, December 8.
1692. With an Account of his Sickness, Convictions, Discourses with Friends and
Ministers; and of his dreadful Expressions and Blasphemies when he left this
World. As also a Letter from an Atheist of his Acquaintance with his Answer to
it. Published for an Example to others, and Recommended to all Young Persons to
settle them in their Religion. By J. S. Minister of the Church of England.


