Mr. Hancock's Election SERMON.

May 30th. 1722.

Rulers should be Benefactors.

As it was Considered IN A SERMON Preached before His Excellency SAMUEL SHUTE
Esquire; His Majesty's COUNCIL, and the Representatives of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, May 30th. 1722.

Being the Day for Election of COUNSELORS.

By John Hancock, M. A. And Pastor of the Church of CHRIST in Lexington.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green, Printer to His Excellency the GOVERNOR
and COUNCIL.

1722.

In Council, June 4 th, 1722. Ordered,
THAT Addington Davenport and Jonathan Belcher, Esqrs; give the Thanks of this
Board to the Reverend Mr. John Hancock, for his SERMON Preached to the General
Assembly, on the Day of Election of Counselors, and Desire a Copy thereof in
Order to its being Printed.

J. Willard, Secr.

RULERS Should be Benefactors.
LUKE XXII. 25. And he said unto them, The kings of the Gentiles exercise
lordship over them, and they that exercise authority upon them, are called
Benefactors.
THE high and solemn Occasion of the Day will not allow me to take up the time
in looking back into the preceding Context; I shall therefore only just hint
at the Occasion of the words I have now read unto you, and then consider the
words themselves.

As to the occasion of them, it was an unhappy Contention among the Disciples
of CHRIST about Primary and Superiority, in the Verse which immediately
preceeds the Text, there was also a strife among them, which of them should be
accounted the greatest. Contention is the fruit of pride and ambition. Men that
have a mind to be uppermost in the World cannot be quiet, unless they are
gratified in it. But all the Disciples of CHRIST were not guilty of this
unseasonable affectation; the two Sons of Zebedee it seems were the chief in
this business. Its well the other of CHRIST's Disciples had more wisdom, and
more grace, than to make so much trouble about secular honor and promotion.

IT becomes the Disciples of CHRIST to be humble, and to watch against
ambition. The meek and the admirable JESUS to quiet the Spirits of these
aspiring Disciples tells them, that Temporal Lordship and Dominion did not
belong to them, that he had superior honors to bestow upon them, after they had
served him a while here in the world, and that if they would have a little
patience, he would promote them unto great honor, and make them Sit upon
thrones judging the tribes of Israel.

THEIR business at present was not to be ministered unto, but to minister; and
it was a vanity in them to dream of Temporal Promotion, for his kingdom was not
of this world* The high and dignified Titles of Archontes and B^^^le^s did not
belong to them, but only those of Doul^i, and Diacona^. Temporal Power and
Jurisdiction belongs to the Princes of the Gentiles, and not unto the Ministers
of CHRIST. The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship over them, and they that
exercise authority upon them are called Benefactors. And so we are come to the
Words themselves; and in them we may observe.

1. THE Power that Sovereign Princes are Invested with, it is a Power of
Lordship and Dominion. The Kings of the Gentiles exercise Lordship. They do it
defacto, and they do it de jure. The supreme Dominion is the LORD's; but there
is a delegated Dominion and Power vested in the Sons of Men. GOD is the
Sovereign LORD; but the Princes and Kings of the Earth are his Lieutenants, his
Deputies and Vicegerents, and have a lawful right to exercise Dominion.

2. THE Ends to which they ought to exercise their Authority; to the good, the
benefit, the advantage of those who are under their Authority. This is the
great End of all Rule and Government; and the best Ends of Government are
prevented, when they that have the Dominion tyrannize over the People, and
exercise their Authority in a Lordly and Domineering manner; this Power is
given for Edification and not for Destruction.

3. THE honorable Appellation that belongs to them when they exercise their
Authority regularly, and suitably to the original design and institution of
Government: They are called Benefactors* And very properly called so, according
to the notation of the Word; because they do good in their places, make a
proper Improvement of their Powers, and are Public Blessings to the World.

THE Greek Word Kalountai, is often used for E^^i, they are Benefactors, and
shall be called, accounted, esteemed, and highly honored as such to the
Kingdoms and Countries under their auspicious Government.

THE Kings of the Gentiles* were fond of assuming magnificent Titles unto
themselves, and sometimes the good they did to the Public, justly merited some
memorable Appellation. So one of the Egyptian Ptolomies had the name of
Euerget^es, and if Tertull^s the Orator might be believed, Felix the Roman
Governor for the Province of Judea was a happy Ruler, and might well be called
a Benefactor; for this is the Encomium given of him. Acts 24. 2. Seeing that by
thee we enjoy great quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done unto this
nation by thy providence, etc. This was an Excellent commendation of Felix, his
Government, if it had been true and spoken without flattery. But Tacitus says
of Felix that he was Inexplebilis Gurges an Insatiable Gulf of Covetousness.
The Jewish Historian speaks of his Incontinency, and the Sacred Story gives us
reason end to think that he was Intemperate and Unjust; or else he would not
have trembled as he did, when the Apostle reasoned before him of righteousness,
and of temperance, and of the Judgment to come, And a Man of so much
Corruption, could never make a good Governor. The Pretended Successors of
Peter have also assumed the venerable names of Pius, and Clement, and Innocent,
and Boniface; as if they excelled other Men in Piety, Clemency, Innocence and
good works; but the World knows how poorly they have answered these honorary
Titles.

BUT this is the honorable Appellation which belongs unto the Princes of the
Earth when the^ Exercise their Authority unto the best good of the People: They
are Benefactors: It Is their D^ty to be such, and when they are such it is their
Glory and their Excellency. Accordingly the Doctrine may be,

DOCTRINE. THAT it is the Duty and Excellency of those that are in Authority to
be Benefactors. So to Improve the Power and Authority given them from Above,
that they may deserve to be so called.

THERE are two Propositions I would speak to under this Doctrine.

PROP. I. THAT the Divine Providence does call some to Exercise Authority over
Others. And here we may consider,

1. THAT the Supreme Dominion is the LORDS. Dominion and fear are with Him. His
is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory for ever, Amen.

HIS Authority is the most Sovereign, Absolute and Supreme. He is Higher than
the Kings of the Earth; He has a Name above every Name. All humane Power is
Derivative, but His is an Original, Absolute, Eternal, and Independent Power;
He is the Blessed and Only Potentate; He is the King Eternal, Immortal,
Invisible, the only Wise GOD, to whom belongs the Dominion, and the Power for
ever.

AND His Dominion is the most Extensive. As He is the Everlasting GOD the LORD,
the Creator of all the (...) of the Earth; So He is the Governor* among the
nations, and all Creatures in all places of his dominion are under His Rule and
Gubernation.

THE Princes of the Earth had their Proprietary Governments The ^ead of Syria
is Damascus, and the ^ead of Damascus is Rezin, i. e. Damascus is the Capital
City of Syria, and Rezin is King thereof. The ^ead of Ephraim is Samaria; and
the ^ead of Samaria is Remah^^'s son, Isa. 7. 8. But GOD is the Head and King
over all the Countries and Kingdoms of the World; their Powers are limited and
confined unto their own narrow Districts and Territories; but GOD is a
universal King; He rules by his power for ever, his eyes behold the nations,
Psalm. 66. 7. He has established his throne in the Heaven, and his kingdom
rules over all; There the Ancient of days does sit, and is waited upon with
State and Magnificence, the glorious Angels are His royal Attendance, and there
is an Innumerable Company of them. The Chariots of God are twenty thousand,
even thousands of Angels, God is in the midst of them, as in Sinai, in his holy
place.

AND as the Supreme and Sovereign LORD, He gives Laws unto the whole Creation;
He orders all the times and the changes that go over the Kingdoms, and the
Countries; and in all His Administrations He is excellent in Power, and in
Judgment, and in Plenty of Justice; and tho His Judgments are a great deep, and
we cannot know them by reason of darkness; yet we should always reverence and
adore the rectitude of His governing Providence, and be ready to pay that just
acknowledgement unto GOD, Psalm. 97. 2. Though clouds and darkness are round
about him, yet Righteousness and Judgment are the habitation of his throne.

2. THE Divine Providence calls some from among men, to exercise Authority over
others. The Wisdom of GOD has Established a Government in the World, and
ordained that there should be a rule over Men; and the World without it would
no more be a Cosmos but a Chaos. When Lycurgus was Importuned by one to
establish a popular Parity in the State, Do thou says he, first begin it in thy
own Family. Civil Government is of Divine Institution; and the Institution is
so necessary that human Societies cannot subsist without it. There is a Rule
even in the Kingdom of Darkness, and a Prince of the Power of the Air. The
light of Nature led the Nations to practice upon this Principle: the Gentiles
had their Kings. But the Divine Providence overrules; and GOD that Governs the
World puts the Scepter into their hands. Hence the Prophet Daniel tells
Belshezzar, Dan. 5. 18. The most high God gave unto Nebuchadnezzar thy Father a
Kingdom, and Majesty, and Honor, and Glory. Hence it is said, Prove. 8. 15. By
me Kings reign. For me Kings reign, so some read it; and if we should read it
so, it may teach the Kings of the Earth, that they ought to rule for GOD, and
improve their Authority to His Glory. Some read it, In me, that is, in the
Exalting and Honoring of me they shall reign prosperously: If they honor me,
I will honor them, if they exalt (...), I will Establish them. The best way
for Kings, and their Kingdoms to flourish is to serve the LORD.

BUT we read it, By me, that is, not merely by Divine Permission, but by Divine
Ordination, and Appointment: Whether Kingdoms be Hereditary, or Elective, yet
the Powers that be, are ordained of GOD. The Eternal King has an uncontrollable
right to give the Kingdoms of Men unto whomsoever He will; and sometimes He
sets over them the basest of Men, to the intent that Men may know, that the
Most High does rule, that Dominion is not founded in Grace, and that the Gifts
of Providence are dispensed by a Sovereign hand. So sometimes GOD lifts up
the poor out of the dust, and raises up the beggar from the dunghill, to set
them among princes, and to cause them to inherit the throne of glory; for the
pillars of the Earth are the Lords, and he has set the world upon them, 1 Samuel
2. 8.

THIS may suffice for the first Proposition.

PROP. II. THEY that exercise Authority over others should be Benefactors. They
should exercise their Authority to the benefit of the People, that they may be
worthy of that honorable Appellation.

AND here I shall endeavor first to show wherein they should be Benefactors,
and then shall consider their Obligation to be such.

1. I shall endeavor first to show wherein they should be Benefactors, and I
will only mention four particulars.

(1.) BY making the best Laws for the benefit of the People. Good Laws are a
benefit to a People. And wise Lawgivers are great Benefactors, and have been
honored as such among the Nations. So was Solon, Lycurgus, and others. The
making of Laws is one branch of the Power committed unto Rulers; and the making
of good Laws will be one principal Instance of their Wisdom, their Integrity,
and their Public Care for their People.

LAWS for the defending them in their Common Rights as Men, and Religious
Rights as Christians: Laws for the direction of the Ministers of Justice; that
they may know how to minister Justice and Judgment unto all Israel: Laws for
the detecting and punishing Fraud, Forgery, Perjury, and every bold Iniquity:
The most effectual Laws possible, for the suppressing Profaneness, Intemperance
and every Immorality; and Sumptuary Laws as their Wisdom shall think fit for
the governing the Expenses of a People, the Retrenching the overgrown and
insupportable Excesses and Extravagancies; and Encouraging Thriftiness and
Frugality. The Romans made Laws to moderate the Excesses of Diet and Apparel.

BUT then it should be minded, that it is Execution that gives life and force to
Laws, and makes them quick and powerful, and without this the sons of Zeruia^
will put forth their heads. The Lusts of Men are very unruly things, and they
that are under the dominion of them will run unto all Excess of Riot* These
raging waves of the Sea will be foaming out their own shame, these Sons of
Violence will not be restrained, unless the Civil Magistrate unsheath the Sword
of Justice, and smite through the Loins of them that work Iniquity.

(2.) BY Employing the best of Men in the Administration. I know every good Man
is not qualified for Rule. There are Gifts for Government, that are distinct
from the Gifts of Sanctification* yet the People will rejoice when the
Righteous are in Authority. If Rulers are strangers to GOD, to CHRIST, to
Virtue, to Religion, and they that work wickedness are set up, and Men of the
most Loyal and Religious Principles, through unreasonable prejudices laid aside,
it cannot be for the Honor of GOD, for the Interest of a People, nor for the
glory of the Government. When Solomon saw folly set in great dignity, he says
it was an Error: Eccl. 10. 5. The most distinguishing honors are certainly due
to Men of Merit, to such as have distinguished themselves by their Virtue,
their Loyalty, their Fidelity; by their noble and generous Service for the
Public; their good deeds should not be forgotten, their names ought to be in
everlasting remembrance. The Laws of Honor, of Justice, and of Gratitude
oblige hereunto. The Roman greatness was much owing to their Honor and Justice
herein* And the Persian Monarchs kept a Register Book of the Names of the
Benefactors, that Honor might be done them accordingly, Esth. 6. And he that
deprives Men of the honor due to Virtue, deprives them of Virtue it self, says
Cato. And on the other hand, when Persons have rendered themselves unworthy of
the Public Trust, by their meaness, their mercinariness, their baseness* by
their loose principles, and their corrupt and covetous practices; they should
not have the Public Countenance; they should have no Opportunity put into
their hands to go off with the spoil of their oppressed Neighbors; they will
transgress for a piece of bread. They should therefore break the Jaws of the
wicked, and pluck the spoil out of their teeth.

(3.) BY setting the best Examples before the People. Good Examples may do a
great deal of Good. The Examples of Rulers will be likely to have a great deal
of Influence, when they are Men of Virtue, Probity and Goodness, and excel
therein. Their bright and shining Examples will enlighten and influence others.
But when Rulers are the Rulers of Sodom, the People will be the People of
Gomorrah. If a Ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked. They should
not therefore indulge themselves in any thing that is mean, sordid, or
dishonorable. Its pity that Men of Honor and Distinction in the World, should
bring a stain upon all their Glory by a sordid Indulgence unto any base Lust,
or tarnish the brightness of their Character with some such Exception as that,
or one a great deal worse than that, 2 Kings 5. 1.

(4.) BY doing what they can to establish and promote the true Religion.
Religion is the Life of a People, and by taking care of that we shall prolong
our days in the land, which the LORD GOD gave unto our Fathers.

IT is the Strength of a People, and by taking care of that, Rulers will be the
Strength, and the Stability of our times.

IT is the Safety of a People, and by taking care of that, we shall be safe
under the shadow of the Almighty. And in the Day when it shall revive and
flourish, even in that Day shall this Song be sung in the Land, We have a
strong City, Salvation will God appoint for walls and for bulwarks

IT is the Glory of a People, and it will make us high in name, and in praise,
and in honor above all people. Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a
reproach unto any people.

RELIGION has both a natural and moral tendency to promote the Prosperity of a
People: if Religion flourishes the Country will flourish; and we shall prosper
whithersoever we turn our selves. Our Merchandise will flourish, and that will
be a benefit to the Country; our Fishery will flourish and that will be an
advantage; our Husbandry will flourish, and that will be a benefit, for the
King himself, is served by the field: then shall Zebulun rejoice in his goings
forth, and Issachar in his tent.

RELIGION tends to prevent and divert Divine Judgments; and the Judgments of
GOD are wasting and breaking things; they make a Land mourn, they cause the
glory of Jacob to wax thin, and the fullness of his flesh to wax lean.

RELIGION tends to secure the Divine Presence and Blessing; and the Presence of
GOD with a People, is the making of a People; if GOD leave them they cannot be
happy, if GOD be with them they cannot be miserable. The Lord his God is with
him* and the shout of a king is in the midst of them; he has as it were the
strength of a Unicorn, Numb. 23. 21. Where there is much of Religion or the
Power of godliness among a People, GOD will not leave them, nor forsake them.
So that our Religion is the foundation of all our hopes and expectations. This
is the best foundation we can build our hopes upon, both as to the present and
future Generation; as long as this shall continue in its glory, and increase,
we may humbly hope for the blessing of Heaven even upon our latest Posterity:
for the Mercy of the LORD is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that
fear him, etc.

2. LET us consider the Obligations on Rulers to be Benefactors.

(1.) THEY are Ordained of GOD for this very End. Romans 13. 4. That they may be
Ministers of GOD for good; Instruments in the hands of Divine Providence to the
weal and prosperity of a People. This is the End of their betrustment, they
should therefore lay out themselves for the good of the People; defend their
rights and liberties, and protect them in all their valuable Privileges, and
when they do so, they are the light and life of a People. They are as the light
of the Morning, when the Sun arises, even a Morning without clouds, 2 Samuel 23.
4. They are the breath of our Nostrils, the anointed of the Lord; of whom we
said, We shall live under their shadow among the beathen.

BUT when Rulers forget their duty, and abuse their Power; when they neglect
their care, their People and their charge; grow Imperious and Tyrannical, lord
it over GOD's Heritage, and are like the kine of Bashan in the mountains of
Samaria, that oppress the poor and crush the needy, and say to their master
bring and let us drink; they are so far from answering the Ends of Government,
and from being Benefactors, that they are the greatest Burdens unto Mankind,
and the greatest Plagues and punishments to the World. As a roaring Lion and a
ranging Bear, so is a wicked ruler among the People, Prove. 28. 15.

(2.) THE Public Support is another Obligatition upon them. For this very
cause do we pay tribute, says the Apostle, Because they are Gods Ministers
attending continually upon this very thing, Romans 13. 6. The bread of the
Governor is given that they might Employ their Time, their Talents, and Powers
in the Service of the Public. Reason and Conscience obliges the People to
support them if they do attend upon it. And the Lord JESUS CHRIST has laid this
duty upon the People toward their Rulers, in the same Commandment with the
duty they owe to GOD. Math. 22. 21. Render therefore unto Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. And therefore as we
should be ready to render tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, and honor to whom honor is due; so they that
receive it are verily debtors unto us, to do us all the good they can.

(3.) THE special Trust and Confidence reposed in them is a further Obligation
upon them. The King as Supreme is put in trust by GOD to be a Nursing Father to
His People: and Governors, and such as are sent abroad by him, into the Kings
Provinces, are Entrusted by their Royal Master, and He has a Confidence in them
that they will Exercise their Authority to the best advantage of the Provinces.
But if they should seek not their welfare but their hurt, and damage arise to
the King, or to His Subjects; They basely betray their trust, are false to GOD,
and disloyal to their Prince; are criminal and deeply guilty, and forfeit the
good Character in the Text. Yea, they are under the Oath of GOD, and that adds
weight and solemnity to the trust; and they cannot neglect their duty herein
without the deepest Perjury and Guilt: The tie is Sacred and Deep to manage
this great betrustment faithfully, and to them may be directed the words of the
wise Man, I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, because of the Oath of
God.

(4.) THE Sacred Rules given by the Holy Ghost, to direct their
Administrations, are a strong Obligation upon them. They have indeed the
Statutes of the Kingdom for their direction: but yet they should make the
Statutes of GOD the Man of their council; they should have a Copy of these
always before them, and should read therein all the days of their lives; and
they shall do well if they take heed unto them: They cannot be good Rulers, if
they have no regard to the Rules of Righteousness and of Justice; if they turn
aside after Lucre and take Bribes, and corrupt Judgment, they forget what the
Spirit of the LORD said unto David, 2 Samuel 23. 2. The God of Israel said, the
Rock of Israel spoke unto me; he that rules over men must be just, ruling in
the fear of the Lord.

(5.) THE honorable Titles given to Rulers, teaches them they should be
Benefactors.

I have said, ye are gods, and GOD is the great Benefactor: they are the
Anointed Cher^^ that (...), and should stretch the (...) of their Protection
over all the People.

THEY are the shields of the Earth, and should defend them from all that shoot
their Arrows at them.

THEY are the Pillars of the Earth, and should support and strengthen the
State, by their Wisdom and Counsel.

THEY are the strong foundation of the Earth, and if the foundation is
overthrown, what can the righteous do?

THEY are heirs of restraint, according to the Marginal Note in Judge. 18. 7.
and should put a check to the growing Sins of the times, by punishing
Intemperance, Excesses and Iniquities of the places where they Rule. He is the
best Magistrate who restrains Sin most Sin does the greatest hurt, and the
preventing of that will do the greatest good.

THEY are the Shepherds of Israel, and should lead them to the still waters,
and make them to lie down in green pastures.

THEY are the Heads of the tribes (...) Cass^^d.
of Israel, and as the head is to be a guide unto the body; so they should lead
them by the Integrity of their heart and guide them according to the
skilfulness of their hand.

AND thus I have endeavored to show your Duty, and your Obligations to it.

LET us pass into the Improvement.

USE, 1. SEE what should govern the Sons of Men in desiring or accepting places
in the Government. Not merely to gratify an ambitious ^^mour, or that they
might have the Dominion; nor that they may Domineer and Lord it over others,
because they delight to crush under their feet the prisoners of the earth: But
that they may serve GOD, and his People, and be Public Blessings to the World.

MEN that are desirous of Rule should examine their Principles, and see what it
is that governs them in their Desires; and their Capacities too, to see whether
they are equal to the Places they desire. "There are aspiring Absaloms that
say, O that I were a Judge in Israel, and will caress the People, and use all
the arts of Insinuation to make an Interest for themselves". But alas, they
that are fondest of places are not always the fittest for them; and it amounts
to a demonstration that it is so, when we see they don't know what to do with
them when they have them.

WHEN such petition for Promotion, they may be modestly (...) replied to in the
Words of our Savior unto these two aspiring Disciples, Ye know not what ye ask

2. WHEN Rulers are Benefactors, they should be treated as such, and be Loved,
Obeyed and Honored accordingly. A Just and Wise Government is a Divine and
Heavenly Blessing, and when the Eternal Father commands this Blessing upon us,
we should accept it always with all thankfulness. We have such an Interest and
Concernment in the Princes that sit upon the Throne of Great Britain, that when
the Throne of those Kingdoms is filled with such a Royal Benefactor as it is
this Day, we should bow our knee unto the Father of Spirits for such a Royal
Blessing, and be ready too to bow the knee unto our most gracious King, and cry
before him, as they did to Joseph in the Day of his advancement, A^rech, which
signifies, tender Father. And they that are uneasy under such a Government and
Rebellious to it, are certainly guilty of the greatest Ingratitude to GOD, and
to their Prince: And yet under the best of Kings, there are such uneasy and
male-contented Spirits, who are difficult to the public Peace and
Tranquillity. But the Sons of Belial shall all be as thorns thrust away,
because they cannot be taken with hands; but he that will touch them, must be
fenced with Iron and the staff of a spear; as 2 Samuel 23. 6.

AND when by his Royal favor we are blessed with Rulers, who are disposed to be
Benefactors to us, and are glad of opportunities to serve us, and promote our
best Interest, we should show our selves a Loyal, and a Grateful People, and
testify the sense of the Divine Favor to us herein, by obeying the Powers that
are set over us; Let us fear God, and honor the King, and not meddle with them
that are given to change.

3. LET those who are called by the Providence of GOD, to exercise Authority
over us, be Benefactors to us. Let our Spiritual Rulers be Benefactors. When
our Savior says to His Disciples in the next words to the Text, but ye shall
not be so* He does not mean that they should not be Benefactors, No; they
should be eminently such. They are Rulers in the House of their GOD; but they
must not Lord it over God's heritage. They are not Lords of their Faith; they
have no just claim to a Spiritual Jurisdiction over the Consciences of Men, to
make Ecclesiastical Canons, and demand Obedience to them upon the pain of
damnation. Their business is to Study, and Pray, and Preach, and use their
utmost wisdom and skill to bring Men from under the power of Satan, that he may
no longer exercise Dominion over them* to show them that the Government of
CHRIST is the most easy and safe; that his yoke is easy, and his burden is
light; and so to bring them to obey the Laws of CHRIST, and the Doctrines of
the Gospel.

IF you can serve them in their (...) Interests, if you can do any thing that
by the Blessing of GOD may prevent their misery in a day of common Calamity,
you will do well; but you will be Benefactors indeed, when you study to do
their Souls good, to convince them of the evil of Sin, and the danger of
damnation, of the necessity of Repentance toward GOD, and Faith in our LORD
JESUS CHRIST; to bring them unto a sense of their Duty, and into the Love and
practice of Virtue: This is the greatest Service that you can do to poor
Sinners; in doing this you will be the greatest Benefactors to them; you cannot
do them a greater kindness: And know for your Encouragement, that he that
Converts a sinner from the Error of his way, shall save a soul from death.

AND let Civil Rulers do us all the good they can also. I have hinted a few
things wherein you may be Benefactors to us. I shall not stand to repeat them,
only one thing I must beg leave to Inculcate, and to Insist upon, because all
our happiness is bound up in it; and that is RELIGION, and nothing is more
worthy of your Care; nor can any thing make us happy without it.

CAMILLUS did Appeal to the Experience of the Romans, whether ever they had
better Luck than when they carefully served GOD, or worse than when they
neglected Him. And Cyrus as Xenophon observes, laid the foundation of the
Persian Empire, not so much by his Valor, as by a Religious Worship of Heaven,
and Liberality in the Service of GOD. And does not the Prophet of GOD ascibe
the Prosperity of Israel, in the Days of the good King Josiah, to his Virtue
and his Goodness, his Religion and his Righteousness, and sets his Example as a
Pattern for Government before the face of his Successor? Did (...) ^hy father
eat and drink, and do Justice and Judgment, and then it was well with him? Jer.
22. 15.

AND has it not always been round, that the Decays of Religion among a People,
has been a fatal Symptom upon them? And that there is no surer Sign of a
Countries Destruction than Contempt of Religion? despising the Ep^^d was, as
one says, the rot of Saul's Kingdom; this was it that br^t Judah Low, and laid
her even with the ground; 'Twas this that sapt the foundation of that once
stately and flourishing Kingdom, and hastened upon them those Consumptive
Judgments that devoured Jacob, and laid her pleasant Places desolate.

AND I am sure if the welfare of this People, of this Country, and of these
Churches has such a Dependence upon our Religion, its worth while to take care
for the life and growth, the preservation and the prosperity of it; and if our
Rulers would be Benefactors to us they must Espouse the cause thereof.

Two things I would say, if need be; to move you to it,

1. IT is the best Religion in the World. It is a Religion that came from
Heaven, and it will carry every Man thither who is true to the principles of
it. A Religion that came from GOD, and is purely of Divine Institution: A
Religion that has not only GOD for its Author, but Holiness for its Rule, and
Happiness for its Reward. A Religion that Instructs in the whole Duty of Man;
and teaches us to fear GOD, and honor the King, as well as to love the
Brotherhood: A Religion that recommends Whatsoever things are true, honest,
just pure, lovely, and of good report, Phil. 4. 8. A Religion that not only
binds us to a strict (...), but to the highest degrees of Sanctification. A
pure Religion, and undefi^ed before God, and the Father. A better Religion than
the Ancient Jewish; and much better to be sure than the present Romish
Religion, where they have a Catechism to begin with without the Second
Commandment; a Sacrament without a Cup; a Bible in an unknown Tongue: and a
Service that cannot be understood; and no wonder if they have therefore a Faith
without knowledge, a Hope without a foundation, and a Charity that damns all
the World but themselves.

2. OUR Religion is the best thing that he have: end if we lose that, we shall
lose our all; if we lose that we shall lose our GOD, and shall come to Mica^s
doleful Lamentation, They have taken away my gods, and what have I were? We may
then baptize our Ic^^b^ds, and cry, Where is the Glory! Therefore though our
honorable Rulers have other things to take care of, yet this is the One Thing
needful; and ought to be secured above all. And two things are necessary to the
support thereof, That a proper care be taken of the Ministers of Religion, and
of the Means of Education.

(1.) OF the Ministers of Religion. That the Persons that Exercise this
Ministry in your Government be Sound in the faith, holding fast the faithful
word, etc. Titus 1. 11.

MAGISTRATES and KINGS, as one observes well, are to be Reformers of Corruption
in the Church, as well as of Disorders in the State. Indeed they have no power
that is formally and intrinsically Spiritual and Ecclesiastical, but only
objectively so: they have not the power of order which gives authority to
Preach, nor the power of the Keys by Ecclesiastical Censures; yet they have a
power of Jurisdiction over Churches, and ought by their Laws to provide for the
Worship of GOD, to root out Heresies, to prevent Schisms and Rents in the
Church of GOD, to take care that the order of the Churches in a Country be not
Insulted, and trampled under foot; and to see that all things be done decently,
and in order.

THEY are also to take care that the dignity of the Ministry be preserved, and
the Contempt of the Clergy prevented, that the Tribes be brought in to the
house of the LORD, I mean, That they who serve at the Altar, may be able to
live upon the Altar The Provision made for them under the Gospel is sufficient,
and they have power from CHRIST their Master to challenge an honorable
Support, a Maintenance worthy of the hardness of their Service, and the dignity
of their Office, and if they had it they need not prophecy in Sackcloth: and
the Mean Circumstances some of them are under, and their oppressing cares,
temptations and discouragements, tend not to the furtherance but to the
hindrance of the Gospel: it is a means to bring the Gospel it self into
contempt, and fill the Country with a mean, and insufficient Ministry.

(2.) OF the Means of Education. The Nurseries and Seminary of Learning, the
Schools, and the College; that our Sons may be as Plants grown up in their
Youth, Plants of renown, and not weeds or degenerate Plants. A Liberal
Education is much for the Service and Glory of the Country; and the Government
should take the greatest care for its Encouragement; that so the Schools may
supply the University, the University the Churches, the Seats of Judicature,
and the Council Board. Unless we are of the mind of the Inhabitants of Norcia,
who (its said,) had the Liberty of choosing their own Magistrates, but took a
most Exact and Particular care that no Man that could Read or Write should have
any share in the Government.

MAY GOD Almighty bless the College and the Benefactors of it* and may that
Society always answer the End of its foundation, Endowment, and Benefactions.

AND let the Laws for Schools be supported with such Sanctions as may break in
pieces all the base, unworthy Attempts to elude them, by those who are no
Friends to Learning. And let GOD raise up of our sons to be prophets, and our
young men to be Nazarites unto the Lord. And may the Sons that the College
brings forth, prove always the Joy of their Parents, and the Honor of their
Tutors, the glory of the University, and a blessing to the Country: Peaceable
to the State, and Serviceable to the Church.

IN these things our Rulers may be Benefactors to us. You have greater
Advantages to be so, and greater Opportunities, than other Men. You are under
greater Engagements, and you have greater Encouragements: The People of GOD
will Honor you in the gate, and rise up, and call you Blessed; and the Churches
of GOD will bless you; if they see your daily care for them, they will put up
daily Prayers for you, that the great GOD would recompense all your fatherly
Care of the Country and of these Churches into your own Bosoms. The People of
the Land will be under no temptation to conspire, or rebel against the
Government, and meditate Revolts and Revolutions, but will sit under the shadow
of your Government with great Satisfaction and Contentment, and the GOD that
chose our Fathers to be His People, and placed them here because He delighted
in them, will also delight in you, and remember you according to all the good
that you shall do for this people.

BUT if you should abuse your Power, and go over all the bounds of your Duty,
and Obligations; oppress and vex this People, and lay heavy burdens upon them,
and grievous to be born, you I forfeit the gratitude and regard due to
Benefactors; and become obnoxious not only to the resentments of the People
groaning under their burdens, but also to the Divine Displeasure; for if GOD
has still a Delight in us, He will not suffer us to be wholly oppressed, and
spoiled; but He will plead our cause and execute Judgment for us. As Oppression
makes a wise Man mad, so it makes a righteous GOD angry.

WHEN Nebuchadnezzar's Pride and Insolence, was grown to an insufferable
height, the Decree came forth for His Deposition; A watcher and a holy One
came down from heaven, and cried aloud against him, hew down the tree, and cut
off his branches, shake off his leaves, and scatter his fruit, Dan. 4. This
matter was by the Decree of the (...), and the demand by the word of the Holy
One, to the intent that such Monsters of Men may know, that they are more sit
to be turned a grazing among the beasts of the Field, then to have a Rule over
Men.

BUT we hope better things of you our most Honorable Rulers, though we thus
speak, and expect better things from you.

WE are the Subjects of the best of Kings, and expect to enjoy under your
Government all the Liberties which our gracious King has Indulged us with.

WE are the People of the LORD, and look not only for Justice, but for Favor
from you.

WE are a ^r^e People, and ought not to be br^t under bondage, nor made to
serve with rigor, and put under saws and harrows of Iron.

WE are reasonable Creatures, and the Rule you have over us, is not a Rule over
Beasts, but over Men.

YET we are a poor, sinful People, and you had need do all you can, to Reform
us, an^ make us better.

YEA we are a broken and divided People, and need all your Wisdom, and Skill,
and Compassion to heal our Div^sions, and make up our breaches, and if through
your Wisdom and Application, we shall once again come to be a City compact
together, the Tribes shall go up, the tribes of the Lord, to the testimony of
Israel, to show their thankfulness unto the LORD.

AND O that it would please your Excellency to Improve all your Interest at
Home, and your Wisdom and Power here, to lead us out of all our Difficulties.
You have it much in your Power to be a Benefactor to us, by your Assenting and
Negative Voice; and we trust you will still and always esteem it your Duty and
Glory, as well as your Wisdom to use that Power accordingly.

THE Divine Providence is to be adored which took care of You, in the Years
when you Jeoparded your Life in the high Places of the Field, and covered your
head in the day of Death and Danger; in the Battle of the Warrior, with
confused Noises, and Garments rolled in Blood; when you heard the Thunder of
the Captains, and the shoutings: when a thousand fell at your side, and ten
thousand at your Right hand; when you went on to meet the Armed Men, under one
of the bravest Generals in the World John Duke of Marlborough.
, not as the Horse rushes into the Battle, with a brutish fearlesness, and
thotlesness; but stood and fought with a Christian Courage, Bravery and
Resolution, till the GOD of Armies brot you off with Salvation, and Honor, and
the Glory, and the Victory.

MAY the GOD that Instructed you in the Art of War and taught your hands to
War, and your Fingers to Fight, now He has set you in the first Seat of
Government here, give you understanding in the times to know what Israel ought
to do: fill you with a Spirit of Council, and of Might, of Zeal and prudent
Resolution; make Righteousness the Girdle of your Loins, and Faithfullness the
Girdle of your Reins, make you more and more a steady Friend and Father to the
Country, a great Blessing and ^enefactor to us.

YOU have need of Patience to bear the frowardness of the Congregation, their
Cumbrance, their Burden, and their Strife; and of Wisdom too to go out and come
in before us; and it will be pleasing unto GOD, if you go unto him for both: He
gives liberally, and upbraideth not.

AND let those who are to stand this Day in the Quality of Electors, do us all
the good they can in that Capacity, that this Day may be a good Day, the Day of
our Rejoicing, and the Day of the Gladness of our hearts.

THE Providence of GOD and your Principals have put this Honor upon you who are
the Trustees and Representatives of the People, and you may be very Seviceable
to this People by choosing out from among our Tribes, able Men, fearing God,
hating Covetousness; Men of Truth, able to support the Authority of their
Places, and equal to their solemn Trust and Charge The Catholic Queen of Spain,
(...) Issabella, took such Care that all places under her should be filled with
proper Officers, that she did give strict Order in Writing, that even the
Cryers place of such a City should be given to such a one, because he had the
best Voice; and if Catholic Princes had such care and respect to the quality
of Persons that filled up the meanest Offices; what Care ought there to be had
i^ those of Justice and of Government?
.

YOU know the Public Interests of this Country are too precious to be put into
the hands of Men who are either unskilful or unfaithful, who are really unfit
for Council and for Rule; and we have this confidence in you, 'that' according
to your Power you will prevent it: we have a great dependence upon you, that
you will deal truly and sincerely in this business.

IF Electors once come to be under the malignant Influences of Prejudice,
Partiality, Disaffection, or any Corrupt and Private views, inconsistent with
the Public Interest, they will render themselves unworthy of the Electoral
Dignity, (if I may use the word here) and they will never give a perfect Lot.

YOU should manage that great betrustment under the awful View of the strict
^ccount you must one day give of your doings herein: You should therefore sit
and act, deliberate and vote, as under the government of the best and most
excellent Principles. Let the honor of GOD, the good of the Country, and the
peace of your own Conscience, govern you all the Day long, that when you come
at Night to reflect upon the Actions of the Day, your Consciences may have no
reason to reproach you for doing amiss; but you may be able to say, that in the
Integrity of your hearts, and in the Innocence of your hands you have done all
this. And ask wisdom of GOD, and we will ask for you, that as the day is, so
your strength may be. We will also pray unto the LORD our GOD for you, To
deliver you from the same of the ^owler, and from the noisome pest^lence; That
He would preserve you in Health, and keep you in perfect Peace. We wish you the
Wisdom of GOD for your direction, even the Wisdom that is from above, which is
first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and
of good fruits; without partiality, and without hypocrisy; and that this wisdom
may dwell with you.

WE wish you a happy Temper, Unanimity and Agreement; the best Conduct, and
Dispatch in all the business of the present Day, the present Session, and the
present Year; free from all Unchristian Jars and Unmanly Reflections; free from
all Angry Resentments, and Intemperate Heats in your Debates; free from all
Unhappy Non-Concurrences, and undesirable Dissolutions.

WE wish the GOD of Peace may be with you; that the Prince of Peace may preside
among you; that the Peace of GOD may rule in your hearts, and in your minds;
and that Grace, Mercy and Peace may be Multiplied unto you: This is the
Blessing which we wish you, out of the House of the LORD, and let all the
People say, AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 29 and 30. r. Douloi, and Di^con^i. p 3. 1. 1^. for prevented r.
perverted. p. 12. l. 25. for fullness r. fatness.


