A TREATY OF Peace and Friendship Made and Concluded between His Excellency Sir
WILLIAM KEITH, Bart. Governor of the Province of PENNSYLVANIA, For and on
Behalf of the said Province, AND THE Chiefs of the Indians of the Five Nations,
At ALBANY, in the Month of September, 1722.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by Andrew Bradford, at the BIBLE in the Second Street;
MDCCXXII.

Septem. 27, 1722.
THE Honorable Sir William Keith, Bart. Governor of the Province of
Pennsylvania, etc. having, upon the Report that an Indian of the Five Nations
had lost his Life by Means of some Traders of this Province, sent two Members
of Council, in March last, to Conestogoe, to enquire into the Fact. Those
Members, in Pursuance of the Governor's Orders, dispatched an Indian called
Satcheechoe, one of the Cayoogoes, to the Chief of the Sinnekaes, to acquaint
him with the Care the Governor had already taken in that Affair, and would
further take, to-punish the Offenders. In Answer, the said Chief, by the (...)
Messenger, desired to see our Governor in their country.

The Governor hereupon sent back the same Indian with some Presents, to inform
the Chiefs of the Sinnekaes, and others of the Five Nations, That Col.
Spotswood, Governor of Virginia, designing with Col. Burnet, Governor of
New York, to meet their Chiefs this Summer at Albany, He would take that
Opportunity to see them in the same Company.

The Time approaching that the Governors had appointed to meet the Indians, the
Assembly of this Province, by whose Advice the Governor had engaged to the
Indians to visit them, were called together to provide for the Charge. The
Subject of the intended Treaty, The Value of the Presents to be made, and
Members of Council to accompany the Governor, viz. Richard Hill, Isaac Norris
and Andrew Hamilton, Esqrs. were agreed on by the Governor, Council and
Assembly, and Sums of Money to defray the Charge were voted.

The Governor set out from Philadelphia the 8th Day of August, taking Col. John
French, another Member of Council, with him, whom by his Letter he had called,
on Behalf of the Counties on Delaware, to assist at the intended Treaty. The
other Members followed a few Days after. On the 17th Day the Three Governors,
with their respective Companies, set Sail in several Sloops from New York up
Hudson' s River. On the 20th they arrived at Albany.

The Governor of New York spoke first to the Indians; the Governor of Virginia
treated next with them: But the Chief of the Sinnekaes, with whom the Business
of Pennsylvania principally lay, having delayed his Coming, Sir William Keith
our Governor deferred his Treaty the longer.

On the 7th of September our Governor spoke to them, and the same Day the Two
Sinneka Chiefs arrived. Immediately after their Arrival they waited on our
Governor at his Chamber, and laid on Otter Skin at his Feet. Connisooa showed
the Golden Medal sent him last Summer by our Governor from Conestogoe, being
hung at his Neck. Cajenquarahto also produced the Mourning Ring the Governor
had sent last Spring by Satcheechoe, with the other Presents.

The Governor's Speech was in the following Words, Interpreted by James le
Tort, and an Indian from Sasquehannah called Capt. Smith, whom the Governor
took with him, together with Satcheechoe, the Messenger, who had been twice
sent to the Five Nations.

The Honorable Sir William Keith, Baronet, Governor of the Province of
Pennsylvania, and Counties of Newcastle, Kent and Sussex upon Delaware, His
Speech to the Five Nations of Indians at Albany, the 7th Day of September, 1722.
BRETHREN,
I Have traveled a great Way to see you, and to hold some Discourse with you.
The People of Pennsylvania have always been Friends to the Five Nations: They
have punctually kept all their former Treaties with you. They expect, that you
do not forget them, and therefore I am come to brighten the Chain between us.
You sent me Word, that you desired to see me, and I have obtained Leave of my
Brother, the Governor of New York, to renew at this Place our former Treaties
with you; and I am glad he is present with us, to hear and observe all that is
spoken.

Some of your ancient Men can yet remember the first Settlement of the Province
of Pennsylvania by William Penn: He was a good Man, and had a great Affection
for all the Indians: He entered into Leagues of Friendship with them, and
treated them as his Brethren; and he gave it in Charge to his Governors, whom
he left in his Place, and to all his People, that they should continue to do
the same.

Diverse Great Men from the Five Nations have, on several Occasions, visited us
at Philadelphia and Conestogoe. We were always glad to see them, and treated
them kindly like Brethren. They made firm Leagues of Friendship with us, and
frequently renewed and strengthened them. We became as one People, and hope
always to continue so; and as often as the Five Nations renewed their Leagues
with our great and good Friends the Governors of New York, it still united them
more nearly to us, as being Subjects of one and the same Great KING.

Last Summer the wise and good Man Gesaont, with some others of your People,
came, in the Name of all the Five Nations, to visit us at Conestogoe* We
received them with Joy, and opened our Hearts to each other. He rejoiced to see
us and our Indians live in so much Love together. We then brightned the Chain,
that it might be clear, strong and lasting as the Sun and Stars. But when we
heard that Gesaont died in Virginia, we were very sorry; yet I hope the Five
Nations received my Words of Love and Friendship to their Sachims, and to all
their People, with the Golden Medal and the Presents then delivered.

It was then stipulated and agreed between us, That we should all be as one
People; That the Five Nations should not do an Injury to any of us more than to
themselves; and that we should not do an Injury to any of the Five Nations more
than to our own People: Or, if any Person did such Injury, they should be
punished for it in the same Manner as if done to an Englishman.

Since that Time a very unhappy Accident has fallen out, which gave us great
Grief: Last Winter we heard, that one of the Five Nations had lost his Life by
Means of some of our People.

The very next Day after the News came to me at Philadelphia, I sent two of my
Council to Conestogoe, to enquire into the Matter and bring me the Truth. They
sound that the Quarrel arose about Rum, between a Brother of the Five Nations,
who hunted near Potomack, and two of our Traders.

The Indian was angry, and went hastily and took his Gun to kill the
Englishmen; they, in Defense of themselves, seized the Indian, and in
struggling gave him some Blows, and left him. We heard, that our Indian Friend
and Brother died the next Day.

The Men who did this were brought to Philadelphia and put in Prison; and they
will be tried according to our Laws, in the same Manner as if they had killed
an Englishman. And to prevent such Mischief for the Future, we have made a
severe Law against selling Rum to the Indians.

Though this Misfortune gave us great Grief, yet we are persuaded that the
Chief Sachims of the Five Nations are so wise as to know, that such Accidents
may happen without any ill Design amongst the nearest Brethren. And by this
they will see, how strictly we keep our Leagues and Treaties, in punishing
those who shall dare to offend and injure them, or any of their People.

I made haste to send a Message to the Five Nations by Satcheecho to express
our Sorrow, and I received their kind Answer by the Return of the same
Messenger. You received our Message like true Brethren, desiring us, to wipe
away our Tears, and invited me to come and see you. Immediately I sent
Satcheecho back with this Answer, That I would meet you at Albany, with my good
Friends the Governors of NewYork and Virginia; and I sent some Tokens to your
Sachims, which I hope they received, with a Mourning Gold Ring off my own
Finger to Sakaunkauta.

Satcheecho returned speedily, and said, You would be glad to see me at Albany;
He also told me, You desired John Cartlidge might be released out of Prison,
and the Injury done to your Kinsman might be forgot. But Satcheecho brought no
Belt, nor any other Token to confirm his Words; and therefore I have brought
him along with me, that you may know and tell me if he spoke Truth.

Brethren,

You see I am come here with Four of my Council to visit you. I have left my
Family and People, and have traveled a great Way to take you by the Hand, to
join Hearts, and to rejoice in seeing each other's Faces: For all Clouds and
Darkness must be done away, that the Flame of Love and Af^^ction may burn clear
in our Breasts.

I have brought these Goods with me to bind my Words, viz. Five Pieces of
Strouds for Clothing, Five Casks of Powder and Five Hundred Weight of Lead to
encourage your Hunting, that you may grow rich and strong. And I desire you may
receive them as a Pledge of our firm Resolutions to live in Perpetual Peace,
and under the strongest Ties of Friendship with the Five Nations; that you will
ever remember us as your Brethren, and not suffer your young Men, when they
travel, to hurt any of our Inhabitants, no more than they would their own, or
to kill their Cattle and Stock: And that this Visit, and the Covenant-Chain
which is hereby brightned, may be recorded in everlasting Remembrance, to be
sent down to your and our Children, and to our Children's Children, to last as
long as the Mountains and Rivers, and the Sun and Moon shall endure.

I also give you these two Pieces of Blankets, to wipe away and to dry up the
Blood that has been spilt, and to cover it so as that it may never be seen or
heard of any more.

I live at a great Distance from the Brethren, and perhaps may never see so
many of your grave ancient Men together again; I will therefore, like a true
Brother, leave with you my best Advice, for the Happiness and Welfare of all
your People: And as often as you look upon those two Belts remember, Two Belts
said down
that This One signifies the Strength which a wise Nation acquires and secures
to its People by peaceable Councils; and increasing the Number of its Friends:
And this other Belt represents to you A bold, firm, true Heart, that abhors
Falshhood, but is ever faithful to its Friends, and punctually observes
whatsoever it promises.

The Answer made by the Indians of the Five Nations, viz. The Maquase, Oneydes,
Onnondages, Cayouges and Sinnekaes, to the Propositions made by the Honorable
Sir William Keith, Bart. Governor of Pennsylvania, etc. in Albany, the 10th Day
of September, Anno 1722.
PRESENT

The Honorable Sir WILLIAM KEITH, Baronet, Governor of Pennsylvania, etc.

Esqrs. Members of the Council of Pennsylvania.
Richard Hill, Isaac Norris, Col. John French, Andrew Hamilton,
Esqrs. Commissioners of the Indian Affairs.
Col. Peter Schuyler, Peter Van Brugh, John. Cuyler, Hend Hanse, Evert Banker,
Philip Livingston, Joh. Bleecher, John Collins,
Interpreted by Lawrence Claese into Dutch, and rendered into English by Robert
Livingston; Tanachaha being Speaker.

Brother ONAS;

[ which signisies a Pen in the Language of the Five Nations, by which Name
they call the Governors of Pennsylvania, since it was first settled by William
Penn.]

I. YOU told us in your Proposition some Days ago, That you was come a great
Way to see us of the Five Nations; We thank you for your Good Will to us, and
are very glad to see you here in good Health: And we hope a good Understanding
and Agreement will be made and concluded between us.

You told us also, That you are come to renew the Covenant-Chain that has been
made between us so long ago, even at the first Settling the Province of
Pennsylvania, and to brighten the Chain, and to remove and do away any Spot of
Rust that may be grown upon it since our last Meeting and Conference at
Conestogoe.

Brother Onas,

II. You have told us, That at that Time you brightened the Covenant Chain
between us, that it might be clear and lasting as the Sun and Stars in Heaven:
For which we thank you. And we being now all present, do, in the most solemn
and public Manner, renew the Covenant and brighten the Chain made between us.
that the Luster thereof may never be obscured by any Clouds or Darkness; but
may shine as clear and last as long as the Sun in the Firmament.

Brother Onas,

III. You have likewise told us, How William Penn, who was a good Man, did, at
his first Settlement of the Province of Pennsylvania, make Leagues of
Friendship with the Indians, and treated them like Brethren; and that, like the
same good Man, he left it in Charge to all his Governors who should succeed
him, and to all the People of Pennsylvania, that they should always keep the
Covenant and Treaties he had made with the Five Nations, and treat them with
Love and Kindness. We acknowledge that his Governors and People have always
kept the same honestly and truly to this Day: So we on our Part always have
kept, and for ever shall keep, firm Peace and Friendship, with a good Heart, to
all the People of Pennsylvania. We thankfully receive and approve of all the
Articles in your Proposition to us, and acknowledge them to be good and full of
Love: We receive and approve of the same with our whole Hearts, because we are
not only made one People by the Covenant* Chain, but we also are People united
in One Head, One Body and One Heart, by the strongest Ties of Love and
Friendship.

Brother Onas,

IV. You desire there may be a perpetual Peace and Friendship between you and
the Five Nations, and between your Children and our Children, and that the same
may be kept as long as the Mountains and Rivers endure. All which we like well,
and on our Part desire, that the Covenant and Union made with a clean and true
Heart, between you and us, may last as long as the Sun and Moon shall continue
to give Light. And we will deliver this in Charge to our Children, that it may
be kept in Remembrance with their Children, and Children's Children to the
latest Ages. And we desire, That the Peace and Tranquillity that is now
established between us, may be as clear as the Sun shining in its Luster,
without any Cloud or Darkness, and that the same may continue for ever.

Brother Onas,

V. We have well considered all that you have spoken, and like it well, because
it is only the Renewing of former Leagues and Treaties, made between the
Government of Pennsylvania and Us of the Five Nations; which we always believed
we were obliged to keep. And as to the Accident of one of our Friends being
killed by some of your People, which has happened by Misfortune and against
your Will, we say, That as we are all in Peace, we think it hard the Persons
who killed our Friend and Brother should suffer: And we do, in the Name of all
the Five Nations, forgive the Offense, and desire you will likewise forgive it;
and that the Men who did it may be released from Prison, and set at Liberty to
go whither they please. And we shall esteem that as a Mark of Regard and
Friendship for the Five Nations, and as a farther Confirmation of this Treaty.

Brother Onas,

VI. We say farther, We are glad to hear the former Treaties we have made with
William Penn repeated to us again, and renewed by you; and we esteem and love
you, as if you were William Penn Himself. We are glad you have wiped away and
covered the Blood of our dead Friend and Brother; and we desire the same may be
forgot, so as it may never be more mentioned or remembered.

It is needless for us to answer every Particular of your Proposition, because
we acknowledge the Whole to be good and acceptable to us; especially your good
Advice, which we will always remember: And in Testimony thereof, and as a full
Confirmation of our Agreement, Consent and Approbation of all that you have
proposed, and we have here said and promised, we lay down a few Beaver, Bear
and dressed Deer Skins: And so concluded.

Then the Governor expressed his Satisfaction with their Answer; and gave them
Thanks for their Good Will and Love to Him, and the People of Pennsylvania.

The Indians then desired to know of the Governor, If the Men who were in
Prison for Killing their Friend and Brother were discharged? To which the
Governor answered, That "they were let out upon Bail." They then desired, That
the Men might be discharged: To which the Governor answered, That as soon as he
returned to Philadelphia, he would give such Orders in that Affair, as should
fully Answer the Request of the Five Nations, in Order to confirm the
Friendship that is so happily renewed and established by this Treaty.

A true Copy, Examined by PHILIP LIVINGSTON, Secr. for the Indian- Affairs.

The Chiefs of the Indians expressed a great Affection for the Governor and the
People of Pennsylvania. And it appeared that Satcheechoe had faithfully
discharged his Trust in both the Messages sent by him.

When our Interpreters were coming away the Chiefs informed them, That they had
something further to say to the Governor; upon which they were detained. The
next Day, the 14th of September, the Governor received at his Chamber the Ten
Chiefs of the Five Nations, being Two from each; together with Two others, said
to be of the Tuscororoes: And by the Interpretation of Lawrence Claese, Public
Interpreter for the Indians, in the Presence of Philip Livingston, Secretary
for Indian Affairs at Albany, both whom our Governor desired to be present,
they spoke as follows:

Brother Onas,

WE here now freely surrender to you all those Lands about Conestogoe, which
the Five Nations have claimed: And it is our Desire that the same may be settled
with Christians; in Token whereof we give this String of Wampum.

Brother Onas, According to the best of our Understanding, we have renewed at
this Time with you all former Treaties between your People and us; we therefore
expect, that if any of our People come to trade at Philadelphia, you will order
that they be received like Brethren, and have the Goods as cheap as possible.
So we wish you all Prosperity and a good Journey Home.

Now we are going to depart from one another, we your Brethren, the Sachims of
the Five Nations, desire that you would give us some Provisions, to help us on
our Journey. On which they gave 2 small Bundles of Beaver and dressed Skins.

Sir William Keith' s Answer.
Brethren,
YOU know very well, that the Lands about Conestogoe, upon the River
Sasquehannah, belong to your old Friend and kind Brother William Penn;
nevertheless I do here, in his Name, kindly accept of the Offer and Surrender
which you have now made to me, because it will put an End to all other Claims
and Disputes, if any should be made hereafter.

Brethren, I understand, as you do, that we here at this Time renewed all
former Treaties between the Five Nations and Pennsylvania; and considering how
well you are provided with Goods at Albany, I think Philadelphia will be far
out of your Way to trade; but as often as any of your People come to us in Love
and Friendship, they shall be treated like Brethren.

I am not able to provide for you here as if I were at Home; but I will order
some Bread to be got for your particular Use: And I heartily wish you well Home
to your own Families.

FINIS.

