SOME REMEDIES PROPOSED, FOR THE Restoring the sunk Credit Of the Province of
PENNSYLVANIA; WITH Some Remarks on its Trade. Humbly Offered to the
Consideration of the Worthy Representatives in the General Assembly of this
Province.

By a Lover of this Country.

-- Amor Patria, Ratione valentior Omni.

Ovid. ex Pont. Printed in the Year, 1721.

Some Remedies proposed for the Restoring the sunk Credit of this Province of
Pensylvannia; with some needful Remarks on its Trade.
IT is a necessary and primary Maxim in every Trading Country, That the Credit
of the Country must be preserved: In doing of which two Things are needful;

I. The Produce and Manufactory must be good in their Kinds, and not wanting is
Weight or Measure.

II. The Pay of the Country ought to be ready and punctual.

So necessary are these Maxims to be observed in all Trading Countries, that no
Country can be found either rich or happy so long as they are neglected. We
need go no farther for an Example, than by comparing the former with the
present State of this Province. When formerly, the Produce of this Province was
preferred before that of New York for its Goodness, and our Payments at Home
ready and punctual, Did any People on this Continent increase more in Riches?
And who was there then in Trade that did not get Estates? And, where a Country
of better Credit? But since our Produce has deservedly got an ill Character in
the West Indies, by our unrestricted Manner of Bolting; and our running Stock
of Money being sunk has introduced the most scandalous Custom at Home, of
endless Trust and a beggarly Discount; Where is there a Country more scandalous
Abroad, and more beggarly at Home?

Almost every one knows, how short we fall in ballancing our Trade with
England, and that if some Produce or Manufactory could be found to balance
that Trade, the Advantage we have in the West India Trade would in some time
procure us a Stock of Running Cash; but when good Fortune will be pleased to
favor us in this last Particular, is not possible for any one at this time to
tell, though several Things may be very reasonably offered to our Trial, which we
need not neglect: But in the mean time the D^ing Credit of a Country must not
lie unregarded. Diseases, whose Remedies are unknown, are cured rather by
Chance than Skill; and therefore may prudently be left to the Result of Time:
But Diseases, whose Cures are known, are not to be neglected. For, as one of
the Faculty wisely says, every Disease is not mortal, yet every Disease is
hurtful; therefore it is highly imprudent not to cure a Disease as soon as
possible.

The only Remedies that at present can be proposed, to restore the sunk Credit
of this Province are, what the recited Maxims of all Trading Countries directs
us to; which are evidently two, viz.

1 st, That the Commodities we export for the future, be good in their Kinds;
that is to say, Our manufactured Wheat must be so carefully inspected, that no
Mistake or Trick of Bolters, shall impose upon us Course Midling instead of
Fine Flour, or patch us up an Invoice to cousen the Buyer Fifteen in the
Hundred; Knaveries too commonly practiced, to the unspeakable Loss and
Discredit of this Province.

We are informed by late Advices from Jamaica, That New York Flour is sold for
40 s. per Barrel, Philadelphia Flour at 30 s. The Reason for this Difference in
the Sales is undoubtedly the Badness of our Flour. (...) Bolters pack up what
they please, but (...) New York all their Flour is weighed and examined, at an
Office appointed for that Purpose.

The ill Character our Flour justly meets with in the West Indies occasions
Losses to this Country of many Kinds: As, 1 st, The New York Flour being justly
preferred before ours, is certain to be sold first; our Vessels do frequently
wait till New York Flour is sold, or go to another Port. Our Voyages by this
Means are rendered long, and consequently more expensive by several Pounds per
Cent. than they need to be. We also export less Flour probably by One Third
than we should do, were our Flower esteemed equal with theirs of New York.

Innumerable are the Losses that flow from hence: Could we sell but a Fifth
more Flour in the West Indies than we now do, which is the least we can suppose
if ours was equal to New York, that One Fifth must return to us Cash or
European Goods: For, as observed before, we have the Balance of that Trade;
for which Reason the West Indies are obliged to fill up our Accounts with Cash,
or the Produce of some other Country in Demand with us. Therefore never so
small an Addition to this Trade, would be so much Help toward ballancing our
Trade with England.

It may not be amiss likewise to observe by the by, That the less West India
Produce (...), the more will the West India Trade be in Debt to us for
balance: For which Reason, the more we discourage the Importation of Rome, but
more especially Melasses, the more will the Balance fall in our Favor.
Melasses ought in particular to be discouraged, for it not only in many Cases
discourageth the Raising of Barley, but the Distilling of other Spirits, not to
be despised; particularly, that from Apples and Peaches, Liquors capable of
Improvements, not inferior to the best (...) Brandy for wholesome and friendly
Effects; in many Cases medicinal, particularly the Peach-Spirit, if rightly
distilled.

The 2 d Thing necessary for the Restoring the sunk Credit of this Province,
is, The Pay of the Country must be rendered more ready and punctual than it is
at present.

It is melancholy to tell the miserable Condition of this Province, occasioned
by a Neglect in this last Particular. How deplorable are the Lives of the
common People! Their Trades and Callings discouraged and valued at naught: What
real Estates they have had are mortgaged, eat out and consumed; and the whole
Province looked upon by all Foreigners, as a Country beggarly and scandalous,
not worth Trading with. But the melancholy Decay of Credit in this Province
requires not much Time to demonstrate, for every (...) is too sensibly
convinced of it; nor (...) any farther than into (...) to convince is that a
(...) Money now wanting is the (...) D^cay: The common Necessaries for (...)
brought to the Market are not to be bought, because Change (as Silver and
Copper is commonly called) is not to be had; all our Domestic Trade is become
nothing but Discount, A miserable Make-shift good for Naught, but to enrich
Knaves and beggar Fools.

Now to recover a running Stock of Money sunk in any Country, these three
Things are proposed to us.

1 st, To recover the Balance of a Trade, which may be said to be lost; or, by
forcing some New Trade, where the Balance may be hoped will fall in Favor of
the Country.

2. To raise the Price of Silver or Gold; for these, like other Commodities,
will be carried to the best Markets.

3. To make Money by Public Authority, which shall pass by Virtue of a Stamp
impressed on something there to be had, whether it be Pewter, Silver, Spelter,
Brass or Paper, it matters not which, the ready Currency of the Thing is all
that is to be looked to.

And these three are the only Ways made Use of, to procure a running Stock sunk
in any Country.

The first Thing proposed cannot be procured in this Province by any Means yet
tried. The Second will undoubtedly do something, though probably too slow: But
the Third promises, not only a speedy Recovery of our sunk Stock, but likewise
Matters profitable, and highly needful for the Country in general; which, we
hope, will appear by what follows.

But, before we propose any thing in this Matter, it will be necessary to
answer some Objections, that are sequently offered against raising a Running
Stock after this third Manner proposed; wherein also, by the by, we shall
observe the Method and Success of other Countries in this Particular.

It is a common Notion of Men unacquainted in Trade, That Nothing can be made
the Running Stock of any Country, but Silver or Gold, without some Loss to that
Country. And this is a Mistake sensibly arising from a defective Knowledge of
what Silver and Gold really is on the one Hand, and the Nature of a Running
Stock on the other.

For Silver and Gold has no more Title to be a Running Stock of any Country,
than. John of Nokes has to be Lord Mayor of London; they are allowed to be so
by the general Consent and Choice of a Country, and because of the comparative
Value they have above most other Commodities: Besides, their convenient
Carriage and easy Conveyance make most Countries choose them as running
Purchasers of all other Commodities; yet any other Commodity may be made a
running Stock as well as these.

And again: The narrow Notions Men generally have of the Nature of a running
Stock, make them suppose, That nothing can be made the running Stock of any
Country without some Loss.

Was the running Stock of any Country designed for no other Use than to be
exported? Then nothing could be preferred before Silver or Gold, because they
are in Demand in most Countries; and skilful Merchants could sca^^^ ever lose
by them, as they too frequently do by other Commodities.

But as it is most evident, That the running Stock is a thing which every
Country wisely covets to preserve; therefore whatsoever is the Running Stock of
any Country, must be by so much the more valuable, by how much it is capable of
being confined to the Business it was designed for: And herein Silver or Gold
cannot be so certainly confined, as some other Things in Use may.

But what is the most proper thing to raise a Running Stock of Money in this
Province, the Legislators ought to be the best Judges: However, we hope to be
pardoned, if we take a View of other Countries, what Methods they have taken,
and what Success they have met with in their farther Proceedings in this Affair.

We find it was ever the Opinion and general Custom of most Countries, where
Gold and Silver was not sufficient to carry on the Domestic Trade, nothing was
equal to STAMPED PAPER, whose indebted Value was secured to the Receiver by
some certain Fund.

The Dutch indeed, by Virtue of a Stamp, impressed on a base Metal, have raised
a Running Stock of Money, which is frequently imported into other Countries;
but the intrinsic Value of this Money is near One Fifth short of the Value it
commonly passes for. Such a Kind of Money, and sometimes much worse, have we
frequently met with, which, by the Authority of some Prince or State, has been
made current, to supply some pressing Occasions. But this Kind of Money being
supported only by an absolute Power, and not by any visible Fund, cannot be
made but where such a Power does preside and gives Assent to the Currency of
such Money: But in little Colonies, at a great Distance from their Prince, such
Money cannot be expected will be allowed by him to be made.

In this Case, a Piece of Paper, stamped and figured, not easily to be
counterfeited, expressing the Value it shall pass for, (in the Manner and Form
hereafter mentioned) and this Value secured to the Possessor by some visible
Fund, is really a Money not inferior to the best Silver and Gold for a
Domestic Trade, and is evidently superior to the Money made of base Metals,
supported only by the Authority of one or more Persons Will and Pleasure, and
not by any intrinsic Value or visible Fund. But it is as possible to beat the
plainest Truths into some Men's Heads as it is to make a Dromedary speak: They
readily tell us, That Paper-Money is naught; It is destructive (say they); To
all Places, where it comes, it carries away all the Silver: And thereupon call
to evidence (as they weakly suppose) the ill Fate of South Carolina and Boston:

But should we suppose Paper-Money in any Case injurious to South Carolina or
Boston, it would be a gross Mistake; though it is to be confessed, that in
South Carolina they were ^^duced to such Straits (by their Indian Wary (...)
pay off Soldiers, and other War-Expences, that they were obliged to make more
Paper-Money than, in Time of Peace, their Domestic Trade had occasion for. And
in Boston, this is the Fault of their Paper-Money (if any) they have too much;
yet can neither the Trade, nor the Silver or Gold of South Carolina or Boston
be said to be lessened one Jot by this.

It is only the Want of a Produce or Manufactury in a Port, to balance the
Trade of some other Port it deals with, or the low Value is set on Silver or
Gold, do carry it out of any Port. As to Trade, a due proportioned Quantity of
Paper-Money; whose Value is secured, is as far from hurting it, as a Piece of
Bread an empty Traveller.

Since they made Paper-Money in Boston are less Fish exported? Or, fewer
Vessels built? Do any one refuse to receive their Bills? By what Trade can they
possibly get a sufficient Stock of Silver or Gold, to supply the Country with
Running Cash? And if they can no where command it, as most certainly their
Trade at present cannot do it What (...) they do without Paper-Money? Must
every Gentleman, Tradesman, etc. turn Fish Merchant? What an odd Kind of
Running Stock of Money must stinking Fish make? Instead of a Bag, or Pocket,
they must hire a Cart to carry Home Fifty Shillings; and after all, the
intrinsic Value of their Running Stock would be daily in Danger of rotting or
wasting some way or other.

The very same may be said of South Carolina; Does Paper-Money frighten Silver
or Gold from coming among them? Or, are they not incapable of ballancing the
Trade of most Moneyed Parts? Do fewer Vessels go from thence to England? Do not
Foreigners receive their Paper-Money? O, do any refuse to take it again at the
same Rates it was received? Do any Traders lose a Farthing by it? And, to
conclude, If there was not Paper-Money in South Carolina, how could the Trade
of that Country be so readily dispatched as it is?

It is to be confessed, That one of our Neighboring Provinces has met with
ill Success in their making Paper-Money; it sunk in its Value: And the Public
Authority rather encouraging this Misfortune, than putting any Stop to it, its
Value entirely vanished, and the whole Country was greatly injured by this
Misfortune, particularly Barbados. But this proceeded not from any Evil
entailed on Paper-Money, but the bad Managing of it: For, in the first Place,
they allowed it not to be (as it ought) a lawful Tender in all Payments; which
thing will ever render Paper, or any other Money, inferior to that which is
unlimited in its Payments. Besides, Governor Granvill immediately after being
called Home, and having a large Quantity of Paper-Money by him, offered it at
some Discount for Silver-Money. Had none been overlooked in this wrong
Proceeding, none but His Excellency would have been a Loser, those that bought
of him would have got by it: But, like Men as ignorant of their own Interest,
as of the Nature of the Money they had made, every one strove who could most
undervalue it, till at last, almost every one had a worthless Paper left in his
Pocket, with the Title of Pounds, though not worth one Farthing.

And this is no other than will happen in Matters of higher Nature, if Laws are
made not to be obeyed. Had the Magistracy timely punished such Persons as
offered to buy or sell at a lower Value than what the Legislators had
authorized the Bills to pass for, all the ill Consequences would have been
prevented, and they might have done as much Good to the Country in general, as
any Money not a sufficient Tender in all Payments could have done.

But to propose the best and most certain Manner of making Paper-Money, not
inferior to Silver or Gold, for the Running Stock of any Country, three Things
are necessary to be regarded, viz.

I. The Funds from whence it rises; or, more properly, the lands that give it
Credit.

II. The Manner of preserving its Value.

III. The Manner of Sinking it.

1. One Kind of Fund made Use of to give Credit to a certain Quantity of Paper
Money, is, A real Security given for a certain Quantity of Bills, at an Office
appointed by Public Authority for that Purpose; which is no other than like
the Manner of mortgaging the Estate of one Neighbor to another; except that
here the Money belonging to the Government, the Interest becomes the Publick's
Advantage. And this public Way of lending Money has been looked upon of such
Advantage to the Borrower, as well as undoubtedly it is to the Lender, that
private Offices of this Kind have been encouraged; particularly, one at
Westminster, authorized by Patent, to lend upon Security of House, Lands,
Goods, Wares, etc. A Thing of Advantage to the poorer Sort, as well
Housekeepers as Tradesmen, who, by some Misfortune, had fallen behind-hand in
their Stocks, by which Means they were happily furnished with Money to carry
forward their sinking Trades, or buy Food to feed their starving Families, till
such time as by Industry they could mend their sunk Fortunes; which bad Fate
often happens, both to the Good and Wise, by Ways unforeseen by any Mortal, as
Fire, Sickness, becoming Surely, Persecution, Robbery, etc.

2. Another Fund in Use to give Credit to a certain Quantity of Paper-Money, is
a Tax hid by Public Authority; which, after a limited Quantity of Paper Money
has been dispersed through a Country, for paying some public Debts, whether
Arrears, or Yearly-Salaries of public Officers, or Buildings for the public
Use of the Country. etc. The said Tax laid upon such unperishable Produce or
Manufacture of the Country, as will sink yearly a certain Quantity of the said
Bills, sometimes One Twealfth, One Eighth, or One Fourth, as the Legislators
think most easy and advantageous to the Public.

But to make this more plain, we shall suppose, That in this Province there is
a very great Necessity for some public Buildings, and to pay public Debts,
etc. which is indeed beyond Supposition; and what is also as true, That we have
not Money to go to the Market with, much less to pay large Taxes; and that
Three or Four Thousand Pounds must be raised very quickly, to pay these our
public Demands: And should we suppose our Legislators world appoint Bills to
be made to the Value of the above Sum, and the said Bills to be paid to answer
the said Demands, then such a Tax must be laid upon some of our Produce, or
Manufactury, as will raise per Annum the One Eighth, etc. of the said 4000 l.
which Tax being yearly paid in Bills into the Treasury of this Province, and
those Bills destroyed as soon as they are received, will evidently in Eight
Years sink the whole Sum of Four Thousand Pounds. Which Way of raising of large
Sums at once, and paying by Degrees, is certainly the easiest and best Way for
the Raising of public Buildings, or paying public Debts, that ever was
undertook by any Country: Besides that, to omit the great Advantage a Country
drained of its Cash must enjoy, by the Running Stock of Money that must
naturally circulate from such an Undertaking.

The second Thing necessary, in order to preserve the Value of Paper-Money
(after once it is distributed through a Country, That it fall not lower than
the stated Value of Silver, brings to our Consideration the most material Art
of Managing of Paper-Money: From the ill managing of this Part have all the
Misfortunes happened that ever befell Paper-Money: To avoid which three Things
are necessary to be regarded.

1. That it exceed not in Quantity the Running Stock of Money a Country demands
in its Trade.

For Paper Money being no exportable Commodity, whatsoever Quantity there is
above what the Trade demands, will lie dead, and consequently sink the Value of
the whole Sum of Bills in Proportion to the dead Quantity.

2. Paper-Money must be made a lawful Tender in all Payments.

For what Money soever is not such, cannot be called the Current Money of any
Country but a lame Stock; like a foundered Horse, will disappoint the Owner at
some time or other, and teach him, that to run well, it is necessary he should
be sound in every Part. If any Kind of Money will not buy me Bread as well as
Drink, my Wants are scarce Half supplied, and I may starve for want of this one
Thing necessary, as well as if I had neither.

3. That Interest of Paper-Money must not be inferior to Silver, or any other
Currency of a Country.

For what is it makes Money valued in a Country, but the general Use of it in
paying all Debts, and procuring us all our bodily Wants; and withal, be every
way as valuable to the Possessor, as the Money of a Country can be made to be??
And how can any Money do otherwise than deceive the Possessor, if he cannot
lend it upon the same Interest, as any other at the same Time in Use? Which
thing, if not regarded, will sink the Value of Paper-Money, as well as any
other thing whatever.

3 dly, The last Particular, we proposed to render Paper-Money no way inferior
to Silver or Gold; that no Possessor of the said Money shall, upon the Calling
in of the same, receive any Loss or Damage: But this being very easy to be
collected from what has been said, it would be needless to add any thing
further in this Peace.

Whilst we have been thus expatiating on the low State of this Province,
proposing a reasonable Way for her Recovery, and had brought these Remarks to a
Conclusion, there are two Things of ill Consequence, that happen to us from
Abroad, which just now occur to our View, the Remedying of which cannot but be
of Advantage.

The first is, Rum imported from the West Indies in high-bilged Cask; which
does evidently wrong this Country, in its Returns from thence, no small Value
yearly; besides the great Loss Retailers of Rum (who are generally of the
poorer Sort) must needs sustain.

The second Thing, is, Our Over-looking the Vessels of a Neighboring Colony,
who very much hinder the Freight of our own; and at the same time do lessen the
Balance of our Trade in the West Indies: They bring us nothing of a Produce or
Manufacture of their own worth mentioning, and at their Return rob our Vessels
of their Freight to the West Indies; and what is worse frequently import us
Salt: For if we consult our own Interest, we ought to import it in our own
Bottoms only.

The Nation of England esteems it no small Loss, to suffer Hollanders,
F^^nings, and a^^ others, to be Cariers betwixt them and other Countries, as
appears by the Act of Negation, 12 Car. II. forbidding all Foreigners import
any Thing, but each one the Product of his own Country.

We already know, That Men, fond of a Notion of a Free Port, will be highly
offended at the above; but our designed Brevity c^^ling us to conclude, we
cannot in this Pla^^ insist on those Arguments, which would evidently show,
That such Notions (as they are generally received) are not founded on a right
Knowledge of what a Free Port rea^^^ is: Which, in short, cannot be without the
License and Protection of a Prince or Stat^ all other Ports, that receive
Vessels not (...) Peace with their Prince, or allow prohibited Goods to be
imported, are guilty of a Brea^^ of Trust, and in some Cases Treason.

But the true Interest of a Port, not allow^^ to trade after this extraordinary
Manner, (...) First, To preserve its Credit at Home; a^^ Secondly, The Balance
of its Trade Abroad Whatever promoteth these ought to be ^^couraged. This, and
no other, is the fi^^t Trade that ought to be allowed in any Po^^

And now, out of a hearty Zeal for t^^ Good of our Country, having briefly run
^ver the real Causes of the Decay of Trade and Credit in this Port, and also
briefly proposed (as we humbly conceive) some of the best Remedies to restore
our Credit, and increase our Trade both at Home and Abroad, it is to be hoped,
as every Inhabitant of this Province cannot but be sensible of the said Decay
of Trade and Credit, that they will be as ready to encourage every Thing, that
may tend to restore the same to its former happy State; those happy Times, when
our Produce was preferred before any others of the same Kind in the
West Indies, and our Payments at Home ready and punctual: So good was their
Credit, and so generous the Inhabitants in their Dealings one with another,
that Dunning, the Bane and Destruction of all Trade, was not heard of in
Pennsylvania: But where is there, at this Time, a Country more behind in their
Payments, and more careless of the Goods they export; and consequently of worse
Credit at Home and Abroad?

FINIS.
Page 9. line 10. read, Nothing but Silver and Gold. p. 10. l. 7. read,
inferred Value.


