A Word of Comfort TO A Melancholy Country. OR THE Bank of Credit Erected in
the Massachusetts Bay, Fairly Defended by a Discovery of the Great Benefit,
accruing by it to the the Whole PROVINCE; With a Remedy for Recovering a Civil
State when Sinking under Desperation by Defeat on their Bank of Credit.

By AMICUS PATRIAE.

Maximus in Republica nodus est, et ad Res Praeclare,
Gerendas Impedimentum, Inopia Rei Pecuniariae.
Cicer. The Want of Money (or a Sufficient Medium of Trade) is the greatest of
all Interruptions in a Common Wealth; and puts by, or Obstructs the carrying on
of Business in a Flourishing Manner.

BOSTON: Printed in the Year, 1721.

The Following Discourse ON A Bank of Credit, Is Humbly DEDICATED to the
Merchants in Boston.
HONORABLE GENTLEMEN!
THese are the Tributary Acknowledgments of my Candor of Spirit toward, and
studious Thoughts for the Outward Well-being of my Native Country.

And considering your selves as holding the Helm; or as being Principal
Steers-Men in the Common Affairs of Temporal Interest and Profit; and so I look
upon you as the Great Agents, and Factors (...) your Country: And also as
faithful and trusty Treasurers in it, to the Government, and Imperial Crown. I
therefore direct my self to you for Umbrage and Probation. And knowing you have
such Comprehensive Thoughts and Regular Ideas in all Points of Business, if the
present Tender finds Acceptance with your selves; then your Colleague and
Brother, in Great and Profitable Effects, the Farmer, will (I doubt not)
receive it as Merchantable Ware, and look upon it as worth his Penny, and Time
in perusing it.

And Moreover GENTLEMEN!

As to the Design Comprehended in the following Sheets: I do imagine; that as
Merchants and Farmers, are the Grand Pillars of the Flourishing State of this
Common Wealth, so being joined together are the Atlas which bears up the Great
Globe of our Temporal Business: But without a Medium you place your Feet on a
Vacuum: or your Standing is but upon Fluid Air. Therefore I must needs think
our Legislators, will by their powerful Fiat upon your joint Intercessions,
form a sufficient Basis for you, That you may stand Strong, Steady and Firm,
with the Stupendous Load on your Shoulders; for if you Slump and Plunge, we all
sink with you.

And that which under Divine Favor must prevent so direful a Catastrophy, and
bear you up; must be a Sufficient Bank of Credit, under their own immediate
Management; or resigned to your selves; And the sooner it is Decided, with the
Qualities and Contents, the better: for that it will Cancel, Obliterate, and
Correct all Melancholy Presages, and put new Vigor into Men's Courage and
Affairs.

Honorable Gentlemen! Your Candid Acceptance of this Slender Oblation, Will
Oblige Your very Humble and Devoted Servant, A. P.

Massachusetts Bay IN New England.
TO Consider This People, so Enobled in their Government; Religon, Trade,
Produce, and Properties in Soil; with their Manly Genius, and Wisdom, being so
manny Great and Royal Gifts of Heaven; And what they are in a fair Prospect,
with the Blessing of GOD, like to Arrive to, in their External, affairs, in a
few Ages more; It would grieve a Man's Heart who is either a true Lover of his
Country, or of Mankind, to see them Entangled [as once Abraham's Miraculous
Victim was caught in a Thicket] in a Labyrinth of perplexing Thoughts, in so
plain a Case, as they are now Laboring under, Scil. In that Matter, and
Affair, Relating to their Medium of Trade, and Bills of Public Credit. I must
acknowledge [upon a Presumption that a fair, Medium of Trade, or Commerce can
no ways be upheld, or continued in this Great Province] our Destiny is very
Apparent, and will come upon us like an Armed Man; for there will be no
Evading, most Ru^ful Circumstances in a Little Time; for that without a Medium,
all things will Jumble, Run Retrograde, and Tumble into Caos; and this must
needs fill us with many Evils both of Sin, and Misery; as Murmurings, Revilings
of Governments, Injustice, Oppressions, Discouragements; and possibly
desperation it self in a very great Degree in our Temporal Affairs: For what
will most Men care for, in such a Confounded Condition, more than just to
shuffle along through an Unfortunate World; and let them that come after even
shift for themselves? for what will despair, in Outward Affairs, Suggest less
to any Man, Then when he is Dead the World is at an End. But to be brought to
such a Disposition of Mind is a great Imperfection in the state of Man: If it
prevails in Religion it Damns him; and in Naturals it Undoes him, for that it
Cuts the Throat of all Endeavors. That for my own part, I must therefore needs
Reverence the wise Premonitions of those who begin to feel the Stroke, who are
nextly Exposed; and where the Woes will fall first and Heaviest, when things
are Come to Extremity, and that is our Capital: Where Possibly Ten Thousand
Lives are housed, and must be Supported by Trade, according to the Method they
have been always Trained up in: Therefore if you Suppress, or let fall the
Current Medium, they are absolutely Undone, as to any thing that looks like a
Flourishing Condition: And when our Head is spoiled, the Members of the Body
will soon Languish. But yet I cannot see any Just Reason for them, or us [from
any Symptoms we yet feel] to infer Conclusively, that our Case is in the least
Degree Desperate: For that the Means of our Relief are in our own Hands; and we
can save our selves, as Easily, as to say the Word. Indeed if we should be so
Corrupt, or Silly as to abandon our selves to Ruin, rather than use a plain
Means for our Support we must then lie down and Dye. Or if when we are Cripled,
we will sullenly sink down under the Stoke rather then use Crutches, we may
then spend the Rest of our Days in self Condolence over our Miseries; but who
will Pity us? and not rather Brand us for Self-Murderers; in that we have very
Laudable Means, Honorable among Wise Men, and Justifiable before GOD, for our
help; and that is a Bank of Credit, either under the Maagement of the
Government, or in the Hands of Particular Gentlemen of Known Integrity and
Estates.

This may be Considered under a few heads, Scil. Propositions and Questions.

I. PROPOSITIONS.
I. PROP. [Not to meddle with our Morals.] We are Defective in Nothing, or in
Nothing so much as in the want of a Sufficient Medium of Trade.

These are some of the Happiest Days we have seen for this Fifty or Sixty Years
last past. We have now, with full Satisfaction found Protection, and Umbrage
under the Wings of a Protestant Prince, who holds the Balance of Europe: And
Desires to be in nothing Greater, then in the Happiness of His People. There be
now no Machiavilian Councils held near the Throne how to Inslave the Nation;
But all is Contrived now to Render it Free, Rich, Great and Powerful. So that
things are very Happy at Home. And this Province also is under Halcion, and
very Joyful Circumstances, being Headed by a GOVERNOR who imitates his Master
in his Royal Virtues, his Courage, Justice, Clemency, and other Enobling
Qualifications which Adorn a Prince. And to perfect our happiness we enjoy the
Gospel Liberties, without Infringment; together with Health, Peace and Plenty.

And yet our Medium of Trade is so ^xceeding short, and insufficient that
Business begins to Clogg; or does not go on so ^oundly as it might do, were it
more redundant and full. As for the Money Medium we have none at all, its quite
Exhausted; and the Bills which have supplied its ^lace, they are grown very
scarce, which is evident by the Loud Complaints of Town and Country.

II. PROP. Temporal Commerce and Trade, is as necessary for the Convenience,
Comfort and Outward Profit of Man, whilst he holds his T^nure on Earth, as
Civil Alliance and Cohabitation. For that it may be said of Single Persons and
Families, as well as of Countries. N^n Omnis fert Onmia Tellus. All Men as all
Nations don't raise all things that are for their Benefit and Comfort; therefore
Trade is very needful. Though it be certain, That Trade and Commerce may be
managed or carried on, especially by distant Parts of the World; and in some
Cases by Persons of the same Country by Exchange and Trucking one Commodity for
another; let them be what they will. Yet we must note, That this Method in
Business, is fitter for such a People, who (to indulge themselves in great
Idleness and Sloth,) Dwell in the Clefts of the Valleys, in Caves of the
Earth, and in the Rocks, and d^gg Juniper Roots for their Meat, or can Live
upon Acorns: But it is not at all agreeable with a Wise and Fus^ing People, that
would spend their Life, to the height of Religion, and right Reason. For that
to Exchange all sorts of Commodities without a suitable Medium will destroy
Trade, and render it impracticable, as to any great Good, or Clear Profit that
will ensue upon it to such a People. For that the inconveniences that will
attend a Common Barter without a Medium are innumerable and intolerable. As to
mention but one. In this way, unless both the Parties dealing (which rarely
happens) have the like occasion, of each others Commodities; he that has least
necessity well overreach the other, by imposing the Price of both; and always
to his own Advantage and the others Detriment; which is not any ways just or
equal. And indeed its hardly p^^sible to uphold Equality where there is no
Common Medium known and allowed of to be as a Rule or Measure between them.
Therefore,

III. PROP. All Prudent M^n and Civil Nations, upon long Experience, find that
a Convenient Medium must be had, and made use of to Support Trade and Commerce
with due Advantage. Two Things may be observed under this Proposition,

1. A Medium of Trade need not be Costly, if it be but Convenient and Safe.

2. The more Cost and Intrinsic Worth a Medium carries with it, or the more
Valuable it is in it self, the less useful it will be in supporting an
Universal Trade and Commerce. Which will be evident by a Comparison fairly Run
between the Money and Paper Medium; upon a Presumption the latter is upon good
Security, and found at Bottom.

1. The Money Medium from its costly and valuable nature, is very inconstant,
unfixt and volatile. Few Governments can Lock their own Doors so close, but
that it is apt to Steal away and make its escape: whenas the other is constant,
abiding, and keeps within its own Circuits. The Money is a staple Commodity,
and universally acceptable in all ports of Trade; and then being shuffling and
always liable to Exportation, there is no Depending upon it for carrying on any
Business in a steady way; for if Men enter into some Wise and Great Engagements
with a confidence in the Money Medium, away it slips; leaves them in the
lu^^ch; to solve, unsolvable Obligations, and possibly to their undoing. But
now on the other hand, whatever valuable Designs Men set forward upon the
Reputation of the Paper Medium, being always at home, they may in their prudent
Conduct, acquiesce and depend upon it, with the greatest assistance.

2. The Money Medium is not only Good Merchandise; but bring of so durable and
rich a nature, it is a very fine Estate for the Wise and Fortunate to secure
amongst their intended Bequestment for the next Age. To lay up Gold as the
Dust, and the Gold of Ophir as the Stones of the Bro^k, seems a Promise a ne^ed
to that Rule of Duty whereby Parents are obliged to lay up for their Children;
That when Men are in Possession, either from Avar^ce, Prudence, Duty, or good
Nature to their own, are very does to part with this charming Specie. And though
it may go from them with less pain then when their Skin is stripped from their
Fingers, yet it comes away with much aversion. For of this Specie it may be
said, Sui Nimi^^^ Tenax. So that it cannot rationally be supposed so convenient
a Medium to support a common Barter and Commutation amongst all Men, as that
which is less valuable in its own Nature, and so Persons are more apt to part
with it.

3. The Money Medium inclines Men more to Extortion. Dissembling, and other
Moral Evils in Trade, then One which has no Intrinsic Value in it. They are
the Moneye^-M^n that hi^le and han^ high upon their Terms; and usually
undervalue every Commodity exposed to Sale. Its naught* Its naught, says the
Buyer; though he knows better when he says so: And its Money you expect, and
therefore you must lower your Price, or I shall not be your Chapman, etc. yet
dissembles all the while. And thus under the instance of such a high tempered
Medium, Men o^ Trade are fain many times to Sell with little or no Profit, or
at half price, or how they can. And how often are Men in compassing the Money
Medium impelled to prevaricate with Truth. For have not some (possibly in
Jest-Earnest said, What pity it is that Lying was a Sin, it being so necessary
in our Trade? That of this Medium we may but too sadly complain, and argue as
once the Poet, Auri Sacra fames, Quid non Mortalia cogis Pectora?

The Love of Money is the Root of all Evil.

But the Paper Medium is easy of Exchange, and not so apt to corrupt the Mind.
So that,

PROP. IV. This Province can create for themselves, a Sufficient Medium, that
shall answer all Points of Business and Profit, better then Money: And that by
a Public or Private Bank of Credit; and either of them will do under the
Influence, Patronage, Sanctions, and Awe of the Government.

A few Things under this Head,

1. As to the Money Medium [to what has been fairly sail, I may here further
a^d] It seems altogether in vain for us to expect it, or make any Projections
Concerning it. Were it a better Medium of Trade then really it is, we have not
the matter of it in our own Country and our present Capacity denies us of it.
And moreover, all Countries Generally complain of the scarcity of this Specie;
as Sweedland, Germany, France, etc. nay Spain it self, who is the Proprietor of
the Mines in Mexico, and Peru? That what can we expect will fall to our Share?
Indeed we have no Reason to be overfond of it; for, when we had it, it was
never sufficient in a due Degree, to Support the Government, and carry on the
business of the Country, but at a very Poor and Pitiful Rate. That it seems to
me as though we had lost one half of our time for want of a sufficient Medium:
For where Men have Done Well, they might have Done much Better, and where as we
have been fain to Creep, we might have Run in Business, and advanced our
Country double in the time to what it is; had we (...) a full Medium. And as
for what we had it was rather the means of our Oppression, then of our
Prosperity, when it was in use and F^shio^: but (...), and Finally, when we
have been M^s^^rs of a small Stock, not near a sufficiency to supply our Trade,
etc. as has been said; yet then, the Trading part of Men, have made it
Merchandise (...) off: And we find it like the Animals going into the (...),
Vestigia nulla retrorsum: there is none comes back, etc. That after such a long
and Clear Experience, can we be so dull and stupid, as to think that if (...)
can get it again we can keep it? No! by no Means! unless you will burn our
Ships, and knock all our Merchants on the Head; and make such a wall as may
keep all Men who know the value and intrinsic wo^th of Money, from Trading
with us: For that if it comes back, and does us any good as a Medium of Trade,
it must be Current; and always upon the R^n, that there will be no stopping of
it, but away it goes, by Sea, or Land. And i^ any Laggs be^^nd, a Thousand to
one, but it is Clapped up close prisoner for after Ages, or exposed to buy Bills
at Cent, per Cent, and so away that goes after the rest, like the helve after
the Hatchet. Especially considering how at present it is with us. Therefore.

2. If there be any Help for us, our Relief is by a Bank of Credit. The Paper
Medium, is the Medium which we must depend upon. And if this had been Projected
and wisely used Twenty or Forty Years before it was; it seems to me as though
Thousands of Lives, and more Thousands in Temporal profits would have been
saved. We might have so Built and Fortified our Country, and decoyed such
Numbers of Inhabitants to us, that a parcel of poor Naked Indians, had never
attempted our Ruin, or prevailed as they have. But however, it seems for the
future we shall not much mend the matter in the next Century if our very next
business in order to our most flourishing State, is to call in all our
out-standing ^kills with all Expedition, break up our Bank of Credit, and all
Men set their Mouths wide open, and keep gaping for the return of the Money
Medium, before we can do any more great fea^s. But I hope our Eyes will be
oponed wider than our M^uths, that so we may see that the happiness of our
State, as to our Outward wellbeing, is under GOD, moved in a Bank of Credit, as
being the best Method i^ ^usiness for us, and not to wait upon Chymeras, of
such frightful uncertainties.

I shall proceed and open my assertion under two heads, Sell By setting in a
fair Light what this Medium has do^^: And, What it can do for us; if we shall
see C^use to be so careful of, and kind to our selves, as to make further use
of ^t.

1. What it has done (...) it has been Projected, by the Wisdom of our
Legislature. I am very well assured, and think I have very good Authority for
it; that our State, and Outward Condition, had been very horrid, and Desperate;
long before now, if the Bills had not been ^mitted; But they have supported us,
and done every thing for us that has been needful in our Civil and Secular
Affairs since their Authorization.

Yea they have been the Means of our Support in all our great Works we have so
Comfortably carried on, for now well near Thirty Years last past. And here I
shall instance, but in a very few particulars,

I. Pa^t^. By our Bills we have Supported and Maintained a Chargeable
Government in Church and State, without Grumbling.

In our most happy Times [as in our fondness we call them] We allowed our
Governor an Hundred per Annum, etc. and when the Salary was changed, from the
Corn Specie to Money, there was such a muttering and grumbling in the Country,
as though they were going into mutiny. What! to Pay such a Salary, and pay it in
Money! Oh! these Impolitick Statesmen of Deputies will quite undo us! But now
^nce the Bills have taken Place, we have given our Governor a Thousand Pounds
per Annum; and every Man cries, GOD bless him with it, as far as I know; I see
no Scowling Faces, nor hear of any Discontent. And Gentlemen! Is this a Dull
Illustration? At the lowest rate, Men value our Bills at, I suppose it may be
equivolent to five Hundred Pounds Sterling. And this we have done frankly; but
it has been done by our Bills. And what do you think it is the way quite to
undo us to Emit more! Certainly it cannot be! Our Government in Church and
State; in Schools and College possibly has not stood us in less then Thirty if
not Forty Thousand Pounds Annually for many Years, and all this we have done
with Cheerfulness, but it has been mainly done by our Bills; for we must have
sunk under our Load without these (...). I would speak of one particular
Example further in our carryings on, and that is with respect to our College.
Oh what Pegging, and Contributing was there; even from every poor Girl and Boy,
that had but a Penny to part with to a Beggar, to bring Venerable Harvard into
its first Brick? But now Alas! at a words speaking up goes an other Parallel
with that, and we hear nothing of Begging, or of any Groans in its Birth. Oh
Dear Country! These Bills are of a very impregnating Nature, they will beget
and bring forth whatsoever you shall please to fancy. For do but Fancy or wish
a Noble Fort in any of your Frontiers; set the Bills to work and up it goes in
a Trice. Or if you have a Mind to Cultivate your Vast Woods to the North, or
North-West, the Bills will do it as Effectually, as ever King of England,
subdued the Old Britains by chopping down theirs.

But in one Word more, as to our College, Do but compute the Classes of that
Famous Society, for the last Thirty Years, which is the Run of our Bills; And
our Alma Matter, (if we infer from her fair, and numerous Offspring) seems
apparently to have renewed her Youth, and grown Younger and Younger. Sometimes
we were wont to have One, and sometimes Two, (...) Three at a Birth, with
abundance of groans to bring ^^em forth; and in some Years nothing but Dead
Embrio's, or Abortions; so poor and insufficient was the Seminal Matter and
Flames of our State, viz. Our Medium. For indeed proportionably to our Number,
we had more Corn and other Produce, then we have had in these late Years, but
in those Times had no sufficient Medium at all. But of late our Dear Mother
brings forth Thirty or Forty at a Birth; And escapes not a Season, but makes a
great Addition Yearly to her Numbers; That if you crush our Medium, you will
Abate her strength, and thereby suppress her fertile, and noble Conception; for
Apparently this is the means that has awakened her Genial Powers.

One Instance more shall issue this Head; And that is as to Ecclesiastical
Affairs: I do presume we have not set at much less that Twenty Thousand Pounds
per Annum, for the Support of the Gospel for many Years.

Object. But some may take me up very short, and say, Never plead this Example;
here is the soar place; these are the Men who have been injured by the Bills.
All Men say, there has been much Unrighteousness committed by them, and it has
in a special manner fallen upon these and other Salary Men; that there is no
reason to Admire the (...) under this head: For of all Men, Salary Men have
been the only Sufferers; others (...) themselves and keep up an equivalent to
Money, when Money grew scarce and Dear, and Bills Cheap and Plenty.

Answer. 1. Gentlemen! I hope the Wise, and Ju^tici^us will not be affrighted,
from a Noble design at one piece of Pad Fortune. For,

2. Could not the Government easily have Traced the motion of the Bills, and
helped themselves by making some Just Addition to their own Salaries? Surely
they might, and none could have blamed their Care, Justice, and Prudence. And
could they not also have made a small Precept, in favor of their Gospel
Ministry, to encourage their People to Regard Justice, and make an equivalent?
Indeed many good People were so wise and Just, as to do it without one: And
possibly most Places took it into Consideration, and (...) something; that
there has not been near s^ much Unrighteousness in the Country as some Men
(...). But however there is no b^ame owing to the M^dium; but if any is Due it
is a Debt to them that had the Management of these things. But,

3. When we had a little Silver Money, it was always high Prized; and other
things were in great ^^^jection to it: And it held such a sway, and to such a
degree of Tyranny, from the rate it was kept at, and from the continual escape
it was making, it had brought us into a pitiful heap of Circumstances, and
especially, as to our Ministry in Church order, for before the Bills came into
use; it would ma^e one sick to tell over the Story of these things; Oh the
Repineing, higling, complaining of Poverty, with bad and poor payments,
Criminal and Dreadful Benu^^ments, as though Sacrilidge were no Sin, a^ but a
very venial one; and not only in this or that poor village but too
Epidemically. But since the Bills ^ave been in Force, these Annuities have not
only ^^en Augmented, but Frankly and Seasonably paid, and I believe it has
been so through the Country. And ^o we think those Reverend Men, don't find that
they can make as good a Dinner on the Bills of Credit, as on Gold, and Silver?
Yes! Every whit; and where due Additions have been made, the seasonableness and
^ound Payments have made their lives much more easy, and comfortable, then when
Silver Ruled the Roft. And thus our Bills have been one of the best of all
Temporal Blessings in the Management, and for the supp^^t of a Chargeable
Government both in Church and State.

2. Benefit. We have maintained, carried on, and almost gotten through the Charge
of a Bloody, Long and Expensive War. The Wars since they began in this Country,
have Exhausted, Wafted, and Confounded, besides Lives, more (I do imagine,)
than Two Millons of Pounds, within the Vicissitudes of about Forty Years. For
how many fair Towns have they demolished? And many more have they prevented of
a Being? And what an immense Treasure have we been defeated of; as well as what
we have consumed, to save what we have yet left? A^^ had not these Bills been
Projected, within the last Thirty Years, it seems to me, we had been in danger
of a Mutiny from their irresistible Oppressions, we must have fallen under one
from another; and if so, our Enemies might have stood still and breathed, till
we had done their Work for them. But the Bills so soon as Projected, gave ease.
The Canada Voyage under Sir Wm. Phips, which stood us at Thirty Thousand Pounds
was solved by the Bills. And since the Eastern and French Wars, have hardly
been felt, only now and then in the smart of a Spear or Bullet, or in the Death
of a particular Friend, etc. But as to the Civil and Public Cha^^e; it has by
the Bills been ca^ve^ along with so much Ease and Alacrity, as though we had had
the Riches of an Empire to Command.

Object. But some Men may say, Indeed for carrying on of a War, the Bills of
Public Credit, are a very proper Means. Sir Edward Cook that great Statesman
and Oracle, allows the Bills to be very proper in a time of War.

Ans. If they are proper in War, why not in Peace? Indeed, it is an old Saying
and a true one, Scil. Money is the Sinews of War. And if it be why not also in
Peace? For I don't see how a People or Body Politic can well hang together
without such Sinews in Peace any more than in War. For the meaning is, that
Money which Answers all things, is to Support, Carry on and Defray all Charges;
and if a People have a full Supply of it, then they are strong, and have good
Sinews, Ligaments, Bones and what not to carry their Load, and go on with their
Duty. And certainly, that Medium which will enable them in their Duty in War,
will be of Equal Advantage in time of Peace. Which may be more evident if we
distinguish between a Country that has a Sufficient Stock of Money as a Medium
of Trade in time of Peace, (Sir Edward Cokes Case) but not so plentiful as to
supply all the Emergencies of War; therefore the Bills may be prudently made
use of in such a Case to enlarge their Stock. Now we must understand, that the
Case is very different with a Country which has no Money at all: for if the
Bills will suit and relieve the former in a time of War, they must needs be a
very good Medium for the latter, both in the time of Peace as well as in War.
Unless you will be so Rash as to suppose a Country may do without any Medium at
all in time of Peace; if they can have one in War: which to suppose is contrary
to the suffrage of Mankind. Therefore as the Bills have Relieved us, so
eminently in War, we may rationally depend upon them in times of Peace, seeing
our Money (...) all gone, and not likely to return, unless our Merchants will
fetch it back for us.

3. Benefit. By our Bills, is the flourishing State that our Country is now in.
For that within this Twenty or Thirty Years, notwithstanding, all our Grand
expenses, vast Consumptions, horrid Waftes and Depredations: We have kept a
great part of our Country in very good Repair, and are sensibly grown in our
Outward Affairs. For is there not Apparently, through the heart of our Country, a
greater aspect of Wealth, and good Fortune, to be seen, as we pass along, than
ever? Are not our Lands finely built, and fenced, with noble Stocks of Cattle
feeding, and coming to a good Market? How many new Precincts have been set off
within this Time, for Promoting Virtue and Religion; with Costly Houses for
God's Worship Erected; fair Salaries Settled, and all these great Charges
carried on, if not without groaning, yet without grudging or grumbling? Now
Gentlemen! These things in an eminent degree, are all under God and Nature,
owing to our Bills. Nay! Look but into Boston, (if you knew it but Twenty Years
ago) you will find an invincible Plea under this Head. Pray now! How came that
Famous Emporium, the Mistress of our Towns, to rise as a Phoenix, out of her
own Ashes, so suddenly, and in greater Glory than ever? And Rear up such an
Exchange for the Seat of Government and Congress of Merchants; so costly and so
fair, as it need not blush to show its Face with most in Europe of that kind?
These things with a Thousand others of Moment, are peculiarly owing to our
Bills. For again, was it our Gold and Silver that has created such a stupendous
Appearance of useful and costly Storehouses on the Long-Wharffe in Boston?
Consider the Foundation and Superstructure; and also how stocked with all
Valuable and Usef^^ Commodities, from all parts of the World from Year to Year?
Why as to Means. ^ext to the Wisdom, good Husbandry, Courage, Brave and Prudent
Conduct of our venturesome Merchants, all is to be attributed to our Bills of
Credit. For without them in some degree, according to my sense, you could no
more have Lived thus ^on, and do^e these things, and kept up your Outward
Estate in such a Plight, and Capacity, than you could have pretended to have
made a Moon and Stars. What! and now in a great Fright to throw away the means
of our Salvation! But let Divine Goodness Divert such an Infatuation.

2. Thus after a short view of what the Bills have done, I shall Consider, What
they can still do. Or what Benefits we may yet Reap in the Continuation of them.

1. The Bills can support, maintain and preserve our Merchandise with great
advantage and clear profit. Indeed the Storehouses of our Corn, Flower, Flax,
Pork, Lumber, etc. are many of them in other Colonies, but our Bills will fetch
them all home, and fully answer their Value and Importation, and not in a much
inferior degree than Silver it self, when in its best Capacity; as will appear
something more clear in the following Competition.

In the Present Year, 1720. Goods Sold for Bills, Formerly Goods Sold for
Money. Barbad, Sugar, 30 s to 50 s C Barbad, Sugar 25 s to 45 s p. C.
Bever-Skins, 3 s 10 d p. Po. Bever-Skins, 5 s to 26 d p. Po French Salt, 18 s
p. Hoggsh. French Salt, 20 s to 16 s Hog. Bees Wax, 2 s per Pound. Beeswax 22
d to 18 d Poun. Hopps 5 d per Pound. Hops, 11 d to 9 d to 4 d Poun. Wheat
Virginia, 6 s p. Bush Wheat Virginia, 5 s 6 d Bush Indian Corn, 3 s per Bushel.
Indian, 18 d to 3 s to 6 s Bush. Hay 3 s 6 d per C. Hay, 2 s 6 d open. to 5 s
Screwed

That surely our Bills by this Comparison are not without Value, neither are
they under so fatal Eclipse, as to deserve quite and clean to be made Extinct
in Darkness, as some Men pretend to; but by this Account, will fairly do our
business; and all things Considered, [notwithstanding some odds in the Terms]
may be esteemed by us p^r with Money. And as for our Province, the Produce of
it, which possibly amounts to near a Million, [or say half the Money] per
Annum; and a great Part stands for the Market. viz. in Milk, Eggs, Butter,
Cheese, Poultry, Fruit, Cider, Hay, Corn, Flax, Hemp, Fat Cattle, Horse, Tar,
Pitch, the Royal Whale with his Bone and Oil, the Cadd Fish, C^^s^^, etc.
dried, which last mentioned possibly yields us half one Hundred Thousand Pounds
in ^ Year; and out of the whole premises we furnish out several Staples for
other Countries, and for some of the ^est of Ports: Also with our Lumber, and
the Ships we build etc. All these things our Bills will Answer for, to the
Profit of the Merchant in supporting a Foreign Trade. This is Fact: When Money
was going, and the Bills first Commenced; the owner of the Fish, when the
Merchant has made the offer Scil. Must I pay you in Money, or in Bills? In
Bills, says the owner, they are most a commodable, and best for dispatch: And
though there is no such Competitinow, the Money being rooted out and supplanted
by the Sills; Yet the Bills Retain their Honor; and are in such Demand with
all Men, that they are a valuable Consideration, for all other Species, upon
which our whole Trade, and Merchandise Circulates, and as Current as Money it
self. It must hence be Conclusive, that they will do us Immense Service, and
Serve as a Medium, for increase of our Wealth, and Flourishing State if we are
pleased, not to be so indiscreet as to throw them away.

It is to be observed that all Beneficial things add, something to the common
Pile. Every Spoonful adds to the Cistern. Every frugal Family, and Industrious
Man, who earns and lays up any thing more then he has Occasion to consume, is a
good to the Commonwealth: But it is to be allowed of as a great Truth, that
amongst good Husbands, it is the Wise Merchant that is the great Benefactor to
the Public: For that it is very Apparent to any discerning Persons, that
[notwithstanding what ever some Men are pleased whimsically to say about
Merchants over Trading; whenas amongst the Wise and Skilful in those Mysteries
there can be no such thing amongst them; no more then there is amongst Men,
whom GOD teaches to Thresh out the Corn, of their over Threshing themselves;
for that Wisdom is profitable to direct in all Affairs] I say it is the
Merchandise of any Country, Wisely, and vigorusly managed, this is the king of
business, for increasing the Wealth, the civil Strength, and Temporal glory of
a People. Merchandise was an early Projection, for the Convenience of Nations;
and for the increase of Wealth and Profit amongst Men. A company of Ishmaelites
[Traders] from Gilead, with their Camels, bringing Spicery, and Balm, and
Myrrh, going to carry it down to Egypt. [To make their Market] Genesis 37. Tyrus
that was but a Naked Rock, at the upper end of the Mediterranean; Yet by
Merchandise became the queen of the Seas, the Metropolis of the World, and
Admiration of all Countries. Says the Prophet, These were thy Merchants in all
sorts of things, in blue cloths, etc. The Ships of Tarshish did sing of thee in
thy Markets, and thou wast replenished, and made very glorious in the midst of
the Seas. Ezekiel. 27.

That certainly if a great Rock spread out in the Sea may be thus cultivated,
and brought to such perfection, by making it a Place for the World to meet at,
and to Buy and Sell on; and a Rock which never (...), if in a few Ages may be
over run with such a Moss, as the Prophet cloths the Rock o Tyrus with. Then
what a perfection may Cape-An^, or Gloucester, a Promontory thrust so far into
the Sea, Or in a peculiar manner Boston so spacious an Isthmus at the head of a
noble Bay, with a bold and spacious Harbor, the Center of a vast Continent,
spread over with Industrious Colonies; I say what a Capacity, may this Place be
brought to, by Commerce and Merchandise, in a few Ages more, unless they are
Mortifyed, and Slain for want of a Suitable Medium, to support their Trade? And
to this Purpose says the Learned Melloy, All Mankind a^e Traders by themselves,
or others, and the ends designed by Trade, Commerce and Merchandise, are the
Strength, Wealth, and Employment, of all Sorts of People; and where it does
most Flourish, the end of it tends to the Advancement, Opulency, and Greatness
of such a Kingdom and State. We need not Run into the History of Earlier Times,
to give an Account of the many Kingdoms, and States that have Risen by
Industry, and Commerce: It is enough if we cast our Eye on our Neighbor the
Hollander, a Place by Relation of Ortelius, not much bigger then Yorkshire; and
such a spot as though GOD had reserved it a as place only to digg Turff out of,
for the accommodations those Countries, wherein he boards up the Miseries of
the Winter, it affording naturally not any one Commodity of use; yet by
Merchandise and Trade (the Daughters of Industry) it is now become the
Storehouse of all those Merchandise that may be Collected from the Rising to
the Setting of the Sun: And gives those People a Name as large, and high as the
Greatest Monarch this day on Earth. Hence it is that Trade, Merchandise and
Commerce, are become the only Object and Care of the Great Princes and
Potentates of the Earth, as knowing that the P^^um and Effects of Commerce, is
Riches, and the ^^enty of all things conducing to the Benefit of Humane Life,
and for the Supporting their Crowns and Grandeur, and Fortifying their
Countries and Kingdoms with Reputation and Strength. Mol. Praef. De Jure
Maritisno.

Now if the Case be so, and this though a Brief, yet a true Representation of the
Great Benefit of Merchandise, which to Suppress, Des^^^ or Weaken; or not
support with all imaginable ^ncouragement, is to darken the Crown, weaken the
Strength, and make the Glory of a Nation, or Country, to ^erish.

That Gentlemen! If a ^ank carried on by Bills of Credit, will Bonafide, secure
so noble a Trade as belongs to this Province, and will keep it up on all sides
to the height, and in a vigorous Circulation [as it is most Apparent that it
will] then let the Merchandise be accommodated, which will be for the Interest
of the Crown; and fill our Country with Joyful Songs and Praises to GOD for His
Goodness. And methinks, the Merchant and Farmer will continually Charm us [by
inter-changing their Friendly Salutatitions in managing their Conmerce] upon a
full Settlement of so proper a Medium for each Man's Interest. For can we
expect less from the venture some Merchant, than that [when having Collected
his valuable Cargo for a Foreign Fo^^, by the Credit of the Bills] he should
with cheerful hopes hoist his fore-Course, and bid his Country thus Farewell,
etc.

Tityre, tu Patulae Re^ulan^ sub Tegmine fagi
Tenui meditaris avena
Nos Patriam fugimus.
Farewell dear Country, whistle to your Teams!
We for your sake* now leave the quiet Shore.
But if the Wind will stand behind our Beams
We hope again [with double stock or more]
To hear your Oaten l^p^s.
And from the Larborious Farmer, in hope these Foreign Enterprises will enliven
the Markets, for his own Productions; and that the Bills will maintain a quick
Circulation; secretly blesses himself, (in Saluting his Departing Brother)
with,

Oh! Melibae! Deus nobis bat Ocia fecit. Brave Boys go your ways! We love the
Beech's shade,
Here we will stay this is our Element;
That is yours: And thus has God wisely made
Spirits to vary; Riches to Cement.
I shall conclude the Paragraph, with that Excellent Saying of Sir Edward Coke,
Scil.

Trade and Traffic, is the Life of a Common Wealth. 2. The Bills will maintain
a numerous Set of Mechanics, who are the inseparable Adjutants of Merchandise,
etc. The Blacksmith who makes the Anchors, and does the rest of the Ship-Work;
though he moyles in a dangerous Element, for such a Medium of Trade; yet makes no
scruple, but rather than miss of so rich a Prize, takes the Bills; though the
Sparks fly. They suit his Profit; Purchase his Stock, Iron, Coal, etc. Support
his Family, etc. And* so officious they will be to all others of such like
Mysteries and Labor.

3. The Bills will Sustain the wbole Ministry, and all Charges in Church, and
State. What would Men have then?

Object. Oh! say some, we will try a Corn and Provision Medium, till the Money
comes.

Ans. This at first hearing was very surprising, for there appeared such a
numerous set of Oddities and Chymaeras in it, that I found it hard keeping in
due Bounds. For besides Infinite other Improprieties, thought I, how is it
possible, That Judicatory should be carried on, and Supported. For how shall
Mr. Sheriff be answered for laying the Writ? Will it not be extreme odd to
tender Codled Apples, or Eggs, or any such small Species? As for Money there is
none left. And when the Plantiff enters his Action, Things will be still at the
same Plunge. And as for Councellour's at Law, they generally allow themselves
very plump Fees, that in attending on our Country Sessions, they must expect to
come with large Wallets, and Load home with Corn, Poultry, or what other
Convenient Chattels their Clients have, etc. That to think a Country so full of
B^siness of greatest Moments; and pretend to suppress a Medium so accommodated
to all Affairs, and every Man may carry it in his Pocket, I say, to throw away
this; and take up with one that is a heap of Luggage, and requires all the
Wagons, Carts, and Sumpter-Horses in our Country to carry it from Town to
Town. Thought I, this is Ridiculus mus^ all over.

4. The Bills of Credit will Reinforce our necessary and painful Husbandry. Nay
they are better to the Farmer ^ar away then the Gold or Silver Medium, for
there is so much of a secret Charm attending that, and carrying so much a
Tyranny in its nature, that Men who have it seem infatuated by it, and are
inclined thereby to violate the Rights of other Men, without Regard to Reason
or Justice, for how will Moneyed Men higgle down every thing; and use many
unfair Artifices to sink and lower the Price of what comes to the Market. For
one he cries, Heus Amies! What have you to Sell? Indian Corn. At what a Bushel?
Three Shillings. What not under that? No, C^^ps are very short, and I cannot
afford it under? H^h! Country! that wont do, for I Will Sell you Forty Bushels at
One and Twenty-pence; though it may be has not had a Peck in his House for these
Three Weeks. Now we must note, there is Money in the Case, and many Temptations
attending it.

But the Bills have another look and influence with them; and more readily
yield to Men's Equal Demands in what they have to Sell. And by this means, the
innocent Farmer (who is usually more simply honest and plain hearted, (than
with Fraud and Dissembling to beat long upon a Bargain) has better Markets
opened for his Effects throughout the Year. There is indeed scarce any thing
comes amiss to the City out of the Country, and the Bills make a ready and full
Penny for it. The Farmers little Crops, or first Fruits, his Milk, Eggs,
Cherries, Chickens, Green Pees, and what not! hereby he ^e^ps a fine Income in
the first of the Year, before his greater Effects come in, as his Firkins of
Butter, Chase, Cider, Fat Cattle, etc. And the Bills will Circulate all, and at
a very good Rate. And thus it ought to be in all wise and well Regulated
Countries. The Farmer must be duly, and suffic^ently encouraged o^ you ruin
all. Keep him in a thr^ad-bare Coat, and starve him of his Profits, by
P^nc^^ng, and Penurious Markets, and Prices, you will then much dis-animate on
of the best Servants to the Crown, and the mea^s of your Plenty, your Safety,
and Flourishing Co^^^tion. But Trade with him upon free and reasonable Terms,
and the Bills in their very nature admit of it; for they allow of a quicker
dispatch, and fuller Price, and with more Equity, and thus it ought to be; and
this animates the Farmer, keeps him to his Plough; Brightens and inlivens all
his Rural Schemes; Reconciles him to all his hard Labor, and makes him look
Fat and Cheerful. And I must note unto you, you must keep up your Farmers
heart; for if he fails, you are in danger to starve all; and also he is the
best Wall to his Country; the King and all Men, must be maintained out of his
Field; and defended too; for from hence Muster-Rolls are filled up, and Armies
are Reinforced with the Best Soldiers, and most Effective Men. Therefore Judge
Littleton, (in his Twelve sorts of Services; or manner of holding Lands, or
Tenements,) having placed Socage, or the Service of the Plough, next following
to Knights Service, says Coke, It is done very aptly, or most properly; for
that the Ploughman makes the Best Soldier. That let Knights Service lead the
Van, and Socage will with a Dareing Resolution bring up the Rear. And this
Coke, more fully Explains, in opening the Tenure of Socage. For there he says,
Agriculture, and Tillage is of a great Account in the Law, as being very
profitable to the Commonwealth. For by the Failure of Husbandry, and Tillage,
many great disadvantages ensue; and in a peculiar manner the Defense of the
Kingdom will hereby be much infeebled and impaired; for that the Body's of
Husbandmen being more strong, and able, and patient of Cold, Heat and Hunger,
than of any other Men, they therefore make the Best Soldiers. He inforces his
Observation from a like saying of the wise Seneca, Scil. Nullum Laborem
Recusant Manus, Qua ab Arato ad Arma Transferuntur, etc. Fortier aute^^ Miles
ex Confragoso venit, sed ille unctus, et N^tidus in Primo Pulvere Deficit. Or
thus, Those Blades who are Detach't from rugged grounds;
And then drawn up into Battle array,
Will stand the hardest Brunts; Bear the deepest Wounds
When Neat, and Oyled Heads will run away.


Now all these Great and Noble Designs will our Bills maintain, if we have but
the Wisdom and Sense to improve them.

5. There is one great Benefit more, which I imagine will issue from the Bills:
To me it seems as though they might be instrumental for the Increase of the
Number of our Towns and People. It Is very grievous to think, what Rich Tracts,
and Vast Territories we have deserted so many Ages to Owls and Sa^v^s, which
might be Subdued and made noble Seats; Brightned with the Worship of God, and
of Immense Benefit to the Crown. In our present Settlements, we are but like
the Lift on the Cloth; whenas in an Age or Two more (with an ordinary Blessing)
we might more than double our Country, in Number of Towns, and People; and the
encouragement which may be given by the Bills of Credit (in the present
Juncture of Affairs in the Christian World) will certainly forward the Design
abundantly.

For suppose we admit of this Projection. That a Range of Townships, from River
to River, Four Mile Square (according to the view of our late Gentlemen) and 50
or 60 Heads of Families joining for a Society, etc. to settle within three
Years, etc. and that every Master of a Family Adventuring to support him in his
Undertaking, in Building, Clearing of Ground, Buying Servants, Stock, or other
ways, etc. they and each one so Choosing shall take one Hundred, or one Hundred
and Fifty Pound out of the Bank, upon Reasonable Security; and shall have it
Ten Years Rent free, and then Repay it, etc. I do presume by these means we may
Subdue and Settle those Desolate Lands with very good and Effective Men: and if
done each Town would be Worth more than Ten Thousand Pounds to the Public, at
the Expiration of the Term. And on other Considerations it would much Advance
our Country.

For then those Woods and Swamps which are now Impregnable Forts and Ramparts
for a Naked Skulking Enemy, and renders them invincible, when once brought
under Culture (and now or never) will be somewhat like the Wall of China, which
is a Barrier to that Empire, against the Tartars; or that in Britain, Erected
by the Romans, to cover their Conquest, against the Picts. So would this be to
us in some measure, against a like Enemy.

And then we may go on with great Encouragement, Boldness, and Dispatch to fill
up such Vacancies as will still remain, between the Old and New Settlements,
which will add greatly to our Strength. And if we can prevent the Approach and
sudden Slaughters of War by such Precaution; or only make our selves strong and
powerful, it must needs administer much to our well-being, and also to our
Security upon any Rupture.

Object. But possibly you will say, Where be the Men, That Is the main Point?

An^w. Do you prevail with the Government to settle the Terms, etc. and leave
me to find the Men, etc. which I doubt not of, both out of our own, and other
Countries. For this will invite our good brethren out of North-Britain, and
Ireland, who will bring with them equal Religion with us; but a Superior
Ingenuity and Skill in Manufactures. We have also a great many likely Men, who
will be accomodated, and also suit the design: For, that many of our Old Towns
are too full of Inhabitants for Husbandry; many of them living upon small
Shares of Land, and generally all are Husbandmen; or if they are any of them
Tradesmen; their Husbandry hinders their Trade: And also many of our People are
slow in Marrying for want of Settlements: whereas in old Countries they
generally Marry without such Precaution, and so increase infinitely, etc. We
have Old Batchelours, with Dames to Match them, to settle several Towns, etc.
And when we have accomplished this Projection,

6. We may expect that Manufactures will go on a main in our Country. And when
we once come to such Perfection, we seem to presume our Capacity will be such,
that we may fetch back the Money; but nothing of that nature in the ordinary
course of Business can be done, before this comes about. And to pretend to
Manufactures, without a great Overplus (to our Husbandry) in our Number of
People, is but to talk Chymaerus. And though now in our present Capacity, all
good Householders do what they can, for Ordinary wear for a Family, to rub along
with through much hard Labor, and Cold Winters; and so in the Run of the Year
we, after a Fashion, make up our Produce of Wool, etc. But this is nothing like
Manufacturing the Effects of a large Country for a Foreign Vend. But when our
Country is filled with People; and we can afford some Towns fully stocked with
Artificers, Combers, and Weavers, etc. And Farmers shall keep large Walks for
Sheep, and every Man shall keep close to his own Calling, then we may do
something to purpose in Manufactures, but not before. This seems plain, from
the Examples of Old Countries, where bring over-crowded with Inhabitants. they
are fain to Beg, Steal or Fight for their Living, or Work for Sixpence or a
Groat a Day, great Numbers of them. Therefore our Business is to encourage
Settlements, with all Dispatch, that we may put things into some good
Forwardness, and leave a Wise Model for the next Age to go by. And the BILLS
will do it all.

This is very obvious, our Country, though of a pretty Austere Climate, yet if
well and effectually managed, is capable of a Self-Subsistence, as fully as
most Countries in the World. If I am not misinformed, or mistaken, the Juice of
many of our Sweet Trees, and the Fruit of others, will yield a Generous Sugar.
And if we cant well do with our Cider, or without Wine, why may we not
Cultivate the French Grape; we being many Degrees nearer the Sun than they. But
if not, our Bees can do great Feats, if rightly managed, in producing a
Generous Nectar, equal with the best of Wines in strength and healthfulness.
Also our Soil yields plenty of Corn, etc. Feeds and Breeds all sorts of Cattle,
etc. and is very natural in its productions to maintain an Excellent, Vast and
Profitable Manufacture both of Woolen and Linen. Wool, Flax, Hemp, are very
natural to our Climate. And also the Iron Mine, but this does usually eat up
its Owners for want of Hands; and so will all the Rest of our Manufactures do,
as has been said. Therefore the Business of our present Age is to encourage a
Foreign Trade; and give it all the Support and Advantage we are Capable of; for
most certainly with help of such a Medium, and in such Plenty, as by it we can
easily Vend and Circulate our own present Produce and Effects; we can then Buy
of our Merchants many necessary as well as convenient Things, cheaper than we
can possible make them, and so save our Time by the Bargain, for other and more
profitable Business.

Also it is, and will be much for our Service to Reinforce our present
Husbandry, so far as it spreads; Let the Farmer have all Due Encouragement, as
before, etc. But in a peculiar manner, it is our Wisdom to promote the increase
of our Plantations, and Multiplying the Number of our People, Our Bills will
Support us in all these Affairs if the Almighty will give us the Wisdom and
Vert^^ to improve them.

It is most Certain GOD gives us many wise cautions to correct Inordinacy, and
all Sinful distrust concerning the Things of this Life: But he has left it as a
Charge upon our Nature, to Propagate our Species: And also has denounced many a
heavy Penalty to constrain us Faithfully to preserve and uphold His Kingdom;
And Civil Government, and good Order in His Empire. And by no Means to slight
the Comfort, and Outward felicity of our Lives and Families; If we do he marks
us in the muster Rolls of his Hosts, to be worse than Infidels; Therefore all
due Means must be used; and your Bills of Credit are a Complication of all
Profitable measures, for bringing about, and accomplishing these great Ends.
Therefore in Obedience to GOD and Nature they ought to be kept up; and Improved
as the Means of our Wellbeing, unless we are sunk into a Lower Capacity, as to
all sense of Interest, Religion, and Honor, than Men who have never been used
to either.

II. The Questions, Now follow, and Principally we may Consider how to Preserve
the Value, and Dignity of our Bills? And then by whom a Bank of Credit may be
best managed in this Province? And Finally how a Bank may be Qualified for the
best good of the whole? I shall at this time Confine my Discourse to the two
first. Then,

I. Question. How shall we keep up the Value of our Bills of Public Credit?
There be many good Gentlemen, that profess they would join their suffrage for
their Establishment, if there was any way to keep them Par with Money.
Therefore this is the great Question, How it shall be done?

Answer. To this puzling Question, I shall Answer under a few heads, or thus
Cut the Gordian Knot.

1. Gentlemen! You must do by your Bills, as all Wise Men do by their Wives;
Make the best of them. It is an acknowledged Theorem, that there is no doing
without Wives. The Lonesome and ^ower Philosopher would frankly confess, that
Women, were necessary Evils: For without their Assi^t^nce the whole Humane Race
must vanish; And unless they are Metamorphised into things called Wives, the
whole Species would soon Laps into an heard-of B^utified Animals. The great
Skill is to cultivate the necessity and make it a Happiness; for that end, Wise
M^^ Love their Wives; and what ill-conveniences they find in them they bury;
and what Virtues they are inrich't with they Admire and Magnify. And thus you
must do by your ^ills for there is no doing without them; if you Divorce or
Disseize your selves of them you are undone; Therefore you must set them high
in your Estimation; and be no ways Prodigal of their Reputation, so as to
vilify or run them down; as though they had more mischief than Good in them. You
must not Presage any terrible Destinies descending from them, as though you
thought the Public Faith was so Debauched as no^ to be trusted; or that they
were (...) by the creating Power of Government like Birds of Prey to rob our
Corn Fields or Ravage our Country. All manner of Aspersions cast upon them by
Fear or jealousies must be wiped off, and they be looked upon as the Best of
Pawns, and better: than Money in hand; This must be our Rule, because the Fund
is firm at Bottom; and the Government which has the management, will do that
which is Good, Right and Equal to all Men. And also for the sake of our own
private and Public Good. Such a temper of Mind will for ever, not only secure
the Currency of our Bills; but will most certainly keep up their Value equal
with Money; or to such a Degree, as by just proportion ought to be: and this is
best of all. For,

2. We must not judge we have lost in the value of our Bills, from some
experience we have had in improving of them, when they have seemed to sink
below their due Estimation. For at their beginning they were (generally
speaking) par with Money, and many times preferable to it, for at times Men
would allow 25 s or 50 s per Cent. in Money for the Bills. And though it is also
certain when Men had Clipped the Money down to Fifteen-penny weight, Bills fell
also to that value in ordinary Trade; yet this informs us that the Bills were
still held equal with Money: but after the Money and Bills had with equal
Currency past at that rate for some Years; some particular Men who had Bonds
for Lawful Money against their Neighbors would refuse the Bills unless Two and
eight pence upon the Bills were added to make them full Seventeen penny; yet in
these Times some Men made no odds either in Use or in their Principal. And
again, When the Money was more drained out of the Country, and grown more
scarce, then some particular Creditors (though not all) demanded Two Shillings
more to be added to the Bills to make them completely the Silver Specie. Yet
under all these Alterations, it is to be observed that the Bills past, with as
great a Currency as the Money.

But moreover, the Bills seem to have lost a Point in their Reputation by
certain Emergencies, that have not been so well observed; or some Casualties
which happened, before or about the time when they grew more plentiful. As for
Instance, The British Fleet was some Means of Raising the Price of our live
Stock, there was also in some of the late Years, a considerable scarcity of
salt Provisions, for the support of the Fishery, and of Shipping, for that Pork
was not imported so plentifully as at other Times. And also there was a great
resort of Foreign Ships of Trade, that whilst here, mainly Victualled with our
fresh provisions: And our Fishery also supplied it self from a Weekly Slaughter
in a great Measure: So that all Provsions grew to a great height, to what they
had been, and made it seem as though the fault had been in the Bills; when as
under such Circumstances, if we had had our Silver in equal Proportions, as
ordinarily; there would have been possibly no great odds in Prices; and that
because of the present Scarcity and large Vend. Whence it must needs be great
Weakness in any to infer the insufficiency of the Bills from what has past
hitherto; for if they do they are very weak Logicians, or else have mist of the
True Premises, as has been now Recited.

3. This One Particular may further be observed, which may rationally presage
their rising and keeping High Enough in all our Affairs: For that however Times
have been, yet the Bills have done all the Business of our Country, they were
Ordained for. And also though many hard Demands were made upon them on the
account of Money Obligations, yet it was far better to the Debtor, than to have
paid the Specie Indented for; because the Bills were to be had upon Reasonable
Terms, but the Money was not; it being almost quite gone out of the Country;
and had left many Men under heavy Bonds, (so sickle is it in its own nature)
which the Bills by their Currency Relieved, though with such an Allowance. So
that at that Rate they were really and truly better to us than Money. Indeed if
their Currency had been Blank'd or Baffled in any of our Great Affairs, either
as to Private Debts and Obligations; or more Public Duties, we might have some
fair Plea against them.

As suppose the Public Ministry in Church or State had slighted them.

Or, if the Merchants had demurred, or frowned, and said, Gentlemen! These
Paper Tickets; we will have nothing to do with them; they will not so much as pay
Ware and Tare; much less Reimburst our Costly Cargo's; No! We cannot part with
our Brass, Copper, Pewter, with our Bread-Cloths, Silks and Scarlet, upon these
Terms.

Or if the Farmer had shockt up his Shoulders, and said, These Tickets will not
Answer for Fine Horses, nor pay for Raising, Grasing and Staling Fat Oxen.
Therefore for our Parts, we will neither meddle nor make with them. Such
Affronts and Checks had been an effectual Estoppel to them; and might have sunk
all Men into despair of their rising to an equal Value with Money; but there is
nothing of this Nature has appeared; but all sorts of Men have taken them in
supporting all their Affairs; and they have been so Convenient, Good and
Acceptable, that we have now I suppose issued all Specialties, And have Settled
all Trade, Debts and Obligations upon their Credit, and a presumption of their
continuance; which signifies the high Esteem and Value which we have for them;
and in that we have no other Medium to depend upon, this will be as high in
Estimation, as Men in Justice and Reason can expect. For,

4. All Men of Sense and Humanity (but such who Love themselves more than all
Mankind besides) will allow, That it is too hard a Fate for Men of good Conduct
to spend their Days in Rolling the Stone of Sisyphus: But that by their
Frugality and Painful Improvement of the Means of their Subsistence, they ought
to make a clear Gain, as being most agreeable with the Law of God and Nature.
And if our Bills will admit of this, as a Medium of Trade, as well or Better
than Money: And when they are at such a Pitch and Degree, as to accomplish this
end: We may then justly affirm, that they are in our Case equal or Superior to
Money. For if they will do all the Business, and keep us thriving, will not
this be as good as Money? Yea, I am very sure it will, and better too: For that
the Money Medium has been the Means of our Oppression, rather than of our
Flourishing State, as has been said. It is not a little Sprinkling of Money,
which is always upon the Wing, or Bobbing up and down like Tantalus his Apples,
that will make a Country Rich. But it is Diligence, Frugality; and the
Circulation of the Produce, with a clear Gain and Profit to every Man, whereby
he is fully Recompensed for the use of his Prime Stock; for his Labor, and the
Risque which he runs: But I am very well persuaded, Money has never done this
as a Medium in New England; nor nothing near it: Especially as to Farmers, and
Husbandmen, which is the great Studd and Strength of our Country: Therefore
abundance if not gone behind ^and, have stood it a stay; or with all their hard
Labor, and hard Fare, have turned like the Door on the Hinge, as though
Sluggards, whenas the Fault has been in the Medium of Trace, on which they have
depended, Scil. In the Money Times. This seems very plain in many, but I shall
consider it but in one Example, viz. In Neat Cattle.

And here let us imagine, how long, and cold our Winters are; and what care,
time, housing and fodder must be employed, and spent upon a Stock of Cattle, to
Raise, Feed, and fit them for the Market, etc. Now can any Rational Man [that
knows any thing of this Affair] Judge it agreeable with any Points of Equity,
the Rules of Fellowship, and profit; for Men to sell their Cattle, as they have
been Constrained to do, in the Money Times. Scil. Five or Six Pounds for a Yoke
of Oxen when Lean; or for Six or Seven Pounds when Fat? And as for those which
have always Lay'n upon charge till they have come to the Market, viz. young
Cattle coming four; these have commonly been Sold at Thirty or Forty Shillings
per Head, which has not made out near the Prime Cost. And if so this is but
little better then taking their Labor, for their Pains; which is Certainly a
very poor Method for Farmers to grow Rich by.

Now, Gentlemen! If the Bills have been the Farmers Rescue by easing such
Points, etc. then though they don't come up to the Rigorous Value, and Price of
Money, when it was a mere Etxtortioner, or but little better than a common
Robber: Yet if they bring things nearer to the Rule of Equity; and Adjust
matters in Commerce so fairly, that all Men may live and thrive, upon their
Labor and Profits; this is to bring the Bills to such a Level, as the Money
ought to be at in a Country of Trade, and Religion, whete Men should love their
Neighbors as themselves; and do as they would be done by; and therefore should
be Willing, that others should live Prosperously upon their Means, their
Incomes, Labor, and Profits, as well as themselves. And when it is thus in a
Country; and through Mercy it has thus happened with us under the Government of
our Bills: Now from what has been said, the Consequence is not that the Bills
are fallen below the just value of Money; but the meaning of it is, that our
Native produce is Risen, and brought up to a due Value, or Estimation, by the
Improvement of the Bills; which ought to be approved by all good Christians,
and Common Wealthsmen. And this may be further supported by the Judicious.
Opinion of Sir Edward Coke in his Tenure by Rents, [and indeed in some sense
all our Lands are Rent Tenure-Lands; as we owe and must pay for them an Annual
Income to Church and State] Therefore [according to Sir Edward] If Trade and
Commerce be maintained, so that our Native Commodities, and Produce of our
Country, which are Rich, Necessary, and Costly Things; without which we cannot
possibly subsist; If these be holden up at a good Rate; and be kept salable at
such a Value, that the Labourer and Farmer may make a clear Profit by them,
then may Tenants do their Duty to their Landlords the better; and they
themselves live like Men.

Object. But does not this hurt all Salary Men by keeping up the Prices of our
own Produce?

Answer 1. The Country has by the Money Medium, and the Indians, been kept,
near Forty Years in low Circumstances, to what they might have attained to, if
they had had better Neighbors, and a better Medium of Trade. And many
Precincts have been set off, etc. Such Things have without Doubt kept the
Salary at a lower Ebb, etc. But howsoever,

2. As the Money was to blame for setting the Salaries so low in the time of
its Government; so let the Salaries now Rise proportionably by the good Fortune
of the Bills; then none can complains of ill Usage, from any Baulk on the first
Terms of Settlement.

5. As we are in this present attempt, trying whether we cant find that the
Bills are truly and justly par with Money; so we set the Scales even, and weigh
Right without doubt we shall. And for this end, or in computing the true Value
of the Bills we must distinguish. (1) Between a full Stock of Money, and no
Money at all, or that which is next to none. And this you will find to make a
great odds in the Case. For if there be no Money, or that which is next to none
in our Country; and we infer that the Bills are of no Value, because they wont
purchase Money; or really are of no more Value, but only of so much as they
will in Fact procure in Money; this is a very corrupt and fallacious Method, in
adjusting between Money and the Bills. Yet so far as I can perceive, this is
accounted, the Crime, and Ground of Process against the Bills. That is to say,
because the Bills will not now purchase Shilling for Shilling and Pound for
Pound, in good Dry Money, Pieces of Eight, at
Seventeen-penny-half-penny-weight, Therefore the Sentence is past, that they
must be Burnt, as though they were State Heretics; whenas there is not a
Shilling to be seen or heard of in ordinary Commerce or Conversation.

But, Gentlemen! By this kind of Judicature you may Indict Gold and Silver for
Insignificant Fools; or empty Ciphers, in the Affairs of Mankind; and affirm
that this Silver Money has quite lost its Value, and is become good for
nothing. For that the time was a Man may say, that I could have bought good
Wheat at Four Shillings in Money per Bushel, and now its all gone out of Town
and Country; that if I would give Forty Shillings for a Peck I cannot get it. Oh
this Silver Money is worth nothing at all. Now, Gentlemen! This is the great,
meritorious, and strongest Plea, as you suppose for the Condemnation' and
Execution of the Bills. i. e. They must go to Po^^ and be all Burnt, because
forsooth, the Money is all Far away. This is the true State of our Present
case. But it is a very Corrupt Judgment [by such Pleas] is drawn up against the
Bills. For in our own Experience when the Money was most plentiful the Bills
were equal, and in many Instances superior to the Money, as has been laid. And
do but Reduce your Money again, bring it on to the Spot; and I will hold you a
wager of Five Hundred Pounds, the Bills shall in our ordinary Way of Trade and
Commerce be of higher Value and Estimation then the Money; Only you shall be
Bound, to oblige the Money to keep at home as honestly and constantly as the
Bills do. Thus it is in Holland and in Venice, Examples which I shall make
farther use of by and by.

Therefore Good Sirs! Don't be rash against your Bills, least you Kill the best
Servant you ever had, without sufficient and legal Evidence, for if you do, it
will be a kind of Murder; and may be, will be repented of when it is too late.

(2.) We must also in the Decision of this Question distinguish upon the
Qualifications of Communities and Governments, and what follows upon the
Difference between them. And Imprimis, we must Consider in our own Case; that
we are not only a Dependent Government in our civil Relation to the Crown of
England; But also in some Degree we are a Dependent Merchandise on the same
Kingdom; neither as to our Trade can we be other waves till we are come to a
greater perfection in our Manufactures. Therefore Men may Talk of Shortning our
British Trade whilst they are Weary; and upbraid us with our Finery, etc. which
are Theams more proper for Pulpits then Statesmen to Talk of [for what were
Ingenious Mysteries, and Inventions dignified for with Lawrells? For working
Wood, Iron, Brass, Leather, etc. into Fine Coaches and Chariots, and Horses as
Fine and Proud as they, suited to them; why were these made, etc? And turning
glittering Earth, and glutinous matter of Worms into Embroderies, etc. But to
furnish a Generous People, that would Banish sordidness, and live Bright and
Civil, with fine Accomplishments about them?] Therefore I say, if we will Live
upon Ground-Nuts and Clams, and Cloth our Backs with the Exuviae, or Pelts of
Wild Beasts, we may then lower our Expenses a great Pace; and renounce th^s
Branch of our Merchandise; but if we intend to L^ve in any Garb, or Port, as
becomes a People of Religion, Civility, Trade and Industry, then we must still
supply our selves from the Great Fountain; but yet the pressing necessity under
this head, always has and always will keep us short of Money; for there is
nothing better for Returns, nor more pleasing (not only to our Correspondents,
but to our Superintendants rather; and so to our Great and Kingly Owners at
home) than our Money as it comes to hand; and therefore away it has and must
go; yet this Defect in our State of Being is well enough supplied by our Bills;
but only as to those who are Enemies to them, they take some seeming Advantage
against them by our want of Money; as under the Antecedent Illustrations, and
also under this present head; It makes way for them to keep up many small
Scandals against our Bills; for upon every odd and unlucky accident in
Commerce, all must be, attributed to the Bills, they must bear the blame; and
especially where the Prices are higher then usual. For if one ask's [tho' it be
in a time of great ^rought] something more for the Butter and Cheese; presently
the Buyer, [if a Back-friend to the Bills] flies out against the Bills, as though
there would never be good Days till they are all Burnt. Or if we Sell our
Pumpions, Squashes, or Apples a little dearer, [tho' the Grand reason may be
from the Worms and Buggs that Devour our Trees and Vines, etc. Yet] it must be
all attributed to the deficiency of the Bills: Oh these Bills will quite undo
us by hoisting up the Markets! etc. Whenas if our Money was in our Country in
equal proportions with our Bills, it would be the same in all our Trade: Nay
the Bills would be preferable to the Money; for thus it is in Holland, and
Venice, where they have as much nay more Money than they have Bills. And the
Reason of it is as bright as the light at noon Day. For that they are
altogether Independent as in their Government; so in their Merchandise, that
when in their Trade Gold and Silver comes to them as the chance may be; they
are under no awe or Obligation to any Foreign and Kingly Merchants to drain
them [from any necessity] of that Specie; therefore their Money is Colleague
with their Bills, and Dwells as entirely at home as though a Prisoner; and yet is
in all Men's hands, etc. and equal in Commonness with the Bills; and yet the
Bills in Holland are Three Pounds per Cent better than Money, and in Venice, 20
l. But the Case is quite otherways with as, as has been fairly distinguished,
and that is because, we have no Money at all; and if we get it we cannot keep
it, in our present Capacity.

Therefore Good Gentlemen! Out of Love to your Country, and the Civil
Well-being of it, Ponder these things Wisely; and be persuaded to keep up your
noble Fund; keep it full; and full enough, which so suits your Climate, and
your Circumstances; And abate all Prejudice against so noble and wise a
Projection, as your Bills comprehend, and then your Bills will be as good as
Money.

6. In favor to our Bills, we must not Compute their Destiny from any silly
Instances, of such a Nature, which we may chance to pick up in the World. As
why need we fret and plague our selves, with the Recitation, or by Objections
raised from South-Carolina's Fate or Folly? as though it was to be an infallible
Rule o^ Prediction, for us to foretell what would happen to our Bills and
Commerce because it has happened to theirs. For although the People or Government
of that Colony, have made themselves Ridiculous by Emitting of Bills of Credit;
and had neither Prudence nor Courage enough amongst them to secure their Costly
Projection, from being more then a Fools-Bauble? What Is that to us? Ours at the
worst of Times; and under their greatest Misfortunes, they have been reduced
to; have done, not only the Business they came about; but a World more; and
have gone beyond the Expectations of our Wise Projectors; and have all along
kept a very good Port, Currency and Estimation among all Men. And though the
Produce of our Country has risen under their influence, to the encouragement of
the Oppressed Farmer, yet have not been so prostituted by the Folly or Knavery
of any, but that they have kept up a great Credit, and Currency to this Day.
And therefore notwithstanding any such debauched Example in the World, any
Rational Man, from what has been, and what is, may easily infer what will be.
viz. That our Bills will be the Best Medium we can have; and finally to gain
our Conclusion, without leaving any room to Doubt.

7. Let us look upon our Public Bills through such Bright and Manly Examples as
we have derived to us (not from Fools) but from the Wise and Prudent, in the
Management of the Affairs of this Life.

1. Inst. New York Colony has kept up the Value of their Bank Bills, equal with
their Money. This has been done by their Prudence; and not from any intrinsic
Value, either in their Bills or in their Bank: ours are as Valuable in
themselves as theirs. For though our Bills are not Founded in Money; yet are
supported by the Public Faith; and derive from a Land Security, which is
better then Money, from its certainty, or immutability. So that the Credit of
their Bills is owing to their wise Conduct; for they all know the formal
Distinctions between Silver and Bills as those at Carolina, or as we do, though
possibly they had some advantage above us, in not much altering the Prices of
their own Produce; from their Climate, Soil, Intervale River Lands, and Indian
Laborers, etc. whence they Raise all sorts of the Provision Species cheaper
then we can: for we being crowded so much nearer the Pole; and our Indians
being most of them killed off, that would work for 9 d or 10 d per Day, our
Farmers must be indulged some grains of allowance upon a Crisis to rise in
their Prices, which possibly the other Colony has not done, etc.

2. Inst. The Banks in Europe, with the Bills of Credit for the support of
Commerce have been very Profitable. I shall in a special manner insist upon the
Bank of the Republic of Venice. Under Divine Providence the Venetians owe
their present good Fortune, Strength and Glory in a peculiar Degree, to their
Bank Bills. They are a People, who have raised themselves, from a Company of
Unfortunate Mortals, who to escape from the extremity of their Condition
pursuing them on the Continent, fell upon the broken Banks, or Islets, at the
upper end of the Adriatic Sea, many Ages ago; where they Built their Town, now
become the Famous City of Venice.

And after some time they Projected a Bank of Credit, to Support them in their
Settlements of Trade, And in a peculiar sense by this means, etc. are become
one of the most Splendid People on Earth; And are able both by Sea and Land to
vie it with the Great Turk; and now stand on that side of the World, a firm
Barrier ^o Christendom, against that haughty Infidel. Their Bills of Public
Credit have been exceeding serviceable in supporting their Worldly Affairs: And
yet possibly, for some scores, if not for some hundreds of Years, have not kept
one Ducket in their Public Treasury to keep up the Credit of them.

Take the following account from a Credible Author* relating to this Affair,
viz.

Bills wherever Banks have been erected (though Money Banks) always have been of
better Value than Money in Specie.

Whereof three Reasons may be given.

1. Reason. For the ease of Compting, and Carriage; and preventing Damage to
the receiver by Counterfeit, Clipped, Light or Base Coin, (which is obvious to
all.)

2. Reason. For Safety in Traveling, Laying up, etc. as visible as the other.

3. Reason. For the Advantage that is to be made by the Exchange, on the
account of such conveniences. Whereof take two Examples, viz.

1. Example. The Bank Bills of Holland, are ordinarily better than Money, by at
least Three Pounds per Cent. And,

2. Examp. Those in Venice by Twenty Pounds per Cent. And Laws are made there
to keep them from rising higher; for they were once at 28 l per Cent. and not
without some difficulty reduced to Twenty. So that Each Bill of 100 l is now
Current at 120 l

Object. But how is that possible or Credible?

Ans. There is this Account rendered of it (which has confirmation by many
other Instances that might be given concerning the current Prices of many
Commodities, which have not so much of intrinsic Value in them) viz. The State
of Venice Propounded the Erecting a Bank to consist of Two Millions of Ducats
(comprehending Six Hundred Thousand Pounds) accordingly Moneys were brought in,
and Bills given out for the same Value; and a stop put to the receiving in, or
giving out any more of either. The usefulness of these Bills was suddenly found
to be such in the practice, and employment of them, upon the three
forementioned Accounts, that every M^n at one time or another, found his
Affairs required them; so that at first such Bills would not be parted with for
Money, under Ten Shillings per Hundred Pounds: And no sooner was that become
the Current Rate; but they were successively raised, by Ten Shillings at a
time, till they come to be in every ones Estimation 28 l per Cent. better than
Money in Specie; and so passed accordingly. Whereupon the State of Venice
Enacted several Laws against their passing so high, which failing to accomplish
what was Required; at length they conceived it necessary, in order to the
bringing down the Price, to propose the giving forth Bills, for Three Hundred
Thousand Ducats more, By which means they brought it back to Twenty Pounds per
Cent. (which pleased the People) And then fixed it, from rising higher
afterward by a severe Law. Since when, it stands so to this day: and this is
no more than what is familiar in the Price of other things, viz. Diamonds,
Rubies, Pearls, Horses, Pictures, etc. which have their Estimation from the
various Pleasures and Fancies of Men, etc.

And if it be demanded. What induced that State to allow it so high?

The Answer is easy: viz. The State of Venice had made use of the Moneys
Deposited, in their Public Occasions, (where observe the Hazard of a Money
Bank,) and having promised for Satisfaction of Creditors, to raise the like
Sum, if they should have occasion for (...), they Reap this Advantage of their
Peoples high Opinion of the Bills, that they are thereby assured, that never
will any Creditor come to ask them a 100 l for a Bill of a 100 l when he may
have a 120 l from another hand. A notable way to pay a Vast-Debt. But by means
hereof, the Creditor has no other Fund, or Security but the States Word: for
there is not one Ducket for them in the Bank.

Now Gentlemen! Let me Pray you, with Sedateness of Thought to peruse and think
over these Noble and Famous Examples, in the Affairs and Wise Managements of
Civil States.

Consider the Men, the Means, and Concommitants, Consequents and Effects which
follow, etc. and distinguish well, and like true lovers of your Country, and I
am ready peremptorily to conclude, you will discern, that these Examples now
laid before you, carry in their Aspect Good and Happy Omens toward us; And
that if we are not under invincible Prejudice, or sunk into Despair: but are
yet capable of receiving influence for our Civil and Temporal Good; we must
needs by such Examples, and from the deep Wisdom, State-Reason, and Policy in
them, be raised to a Masculine Resolution, to make use of the like Means, for
the vast Benefit of us, and ours: And why not from Generation to Generation,
(and that without Boggling) as the Renowned Venice has done? Unless we suspect
we shall grow too Rich, too Great and Powerful!

1. Consider Persons; And I cannot think, but you will allow, so far as
Imagination is necessary in raising the Glory, and value of a thing, the People
of this Province are as capable as any other: For that certainly we carry as
much of the Lapis Aurificus, or Philosophers Stone in our heads, and can turn
other matter into Silver or Gold by the Power of thought as soon as any other
People, or else I must own I have not yet Learnt the Character of my Country.
And you may observe the Venetians did a great deal, in this Important Business,
by the power of a wise Imagination. But,

2. As to Means, and the Reality of things; we have as good a Medium, and as
well adjusted as theirs. For we are upon as sure a Bottom, and (as our Author
Suggests) much surer, than they. For that our Bills are upon a Land fund, or
security, and the Public faith to Defend it; and the Government to manage it,
to regulate, and see that every thing shall be done in the issue and
termination, as becomes a wise Government. Then where is there any room left
for Baffling, Doubting or Hesitation, where Men have any Love for their
Country, and a public Spirit in them.

3. As to Effects, Consequents, Concomitants, etc. They are very numerous, in
every State relating to this Subject; and in Times, Places and Examples very
Differing, etc.

As to our own Concerns, to pass all other Remarks, this is an attendant on our
State, etc. viz. A Medium of Trade it must be had, its indispensibly necessary;
our Money, that little we had is gone; we have had long Experience of the
usefulness and profit of the Paper Medium; as has been said: It does all our
Business, hurts no Man, but blesses all Men (but what is purely Accidental,
etc.) The whole Country in this Projection have been Owners (by their own
Creation) of a Better, and more valuable Treasure, and of clearer Profit in the
use and management of their Bills: than the Mines of Mexico are to the
Spaniards, were these last obliged to make good all out-sets.

We have possibly from the first Projection Exhibited half a Million in Bills
of Credit: It is a mighty Estate, and acquired with little or no Cost. Whereas
if those who work upon the Mines in Peru and Mexico, were allowed but a
Bisket-Cake for Provisions, and a Penny a Day for Wages, they would run the
Crown, and Owners deeply in Debt, as is Reported. That certainly Our Mine,
which we work upon is Richer than theirs: for that we can cleanse Ours from the
Oar, and Run it into Coin, at about Fifty Shillings per Thousand Pound. And if
so, suppose we cannot bring our Bills up so high as Venice has theirs, nor
reach to the rigorous Value which our own Money his stood at? Yet
notwithstanding we may venture by the Power of Thought to conclude them in our
own Concerns, to be as good yea better than Money. For we must consider, our
Medium is our own; it cost us little or nothing: And yet will keep us Loyal and
Obedient to our PRINCE, by (hearfully) Supporting Church and State. And also
just and Equal in our Trade and Dealings one with another; And make us Great,
Rich and Flourishing in our Outward Affairs: And what can any Medium do more
for any People?

II. QUESTION.
WE now come to Examine into the Second Grand Question. Scil. By whom may a
BANK OF CREDIT be managed, most to the Advantage of this Province?

Answer, The Answer is in Two Parts.

1 Part, Relates to the Public. It is very apparent, that those who ^ave had
the Management of the Bank hitherto, have done it well They have in their great
Wisdom saved and supported their Country; and why should any M^n meditate a new
Ministry, for this Great Trust? For that there be very forcible Reasons why the
Country and Government, should keep it in their ^wn Hands. As, (1) It is
agreeable with the Examples of other Wise Governments; who for their Wisdom,
Conduct, and Success are worthy of our Imitation; as Holland, Venice, New York,
etc. Though its true, (Exempla Illustrant, Quamvi, non Restringunt.) such things
informs us, but do not always bind us, etc. (2) The Profit accruing by a Loan
Bank seems most reasonable it should be to the Public; thereby every one has a
proportionable share of the Income. (3) Where Money (as in our Case) is not to
be had, to Support the Government; the Government must of necessity, Annually
Emit such a Number of Bills, as will Answer the Public Charge, both in Peace
and War. For to do it by the Corn, and Provision Specie, it will soon be found
intolerable: For that when the Bills are Emitted and Circulate, it will be an
ease to Officers, and also to the People, etc. for every Man may pay his
Assessment, as he sits in his Chair; he need never Tackel up his Team to
transport his Burdensome Loads to the Seat of Government; and when it comes
there, possibly it must lie, and fat the Rats and Mice, whilst it waits for a
Market, etc. Now under this Presumption that the Government will think it best
to keep our Bills in their own proper Business; if a Bank be Erected by Private
Gentlemen, this will occasion various sorts of Money in our Country, and this
may be as the Cholick in our Bowels; ^r occasion many Inconveniences in ours
Affairs: And therefore it seems far Best for the Public to hold all in their
own hands. (4) A Loan Bank Erected by the Country, as ours at present is; it
must always be founded and Supported by the Lands of particular Gentlemen, and
in this sense, it is really and truly a Private Bank, both as to the Matter,
and the Persons involved. And those Men who run that venture, and thereby
disperse the whole Fund, for the Advance of the Public Trade, as well as for
their own Profit, must needs be esteemed great Benefactors to the Public; and
to treat them with any thing that looks like Surprise, or Tricking, will not be
Honorable, nor agreeable with Wisdom, if any mischance should happen, etc.
This is to signify that these are the Men that lie at Stake, and are only in
hazard. For those who take the Bills in the Circulation of them, have the
Public Faith to rest upon, and the Authority of the Government; which have
taken sufficient Pawns for Security in the Land-Deposited, etc. So that the
Possessors of the (...) are secure and out of Danger. Yet also in the
management of the Projection in this way, considering the Temper, Wisdom and
Power of the Ministry which has the Care of the Bank, viz. The Government: they
will better Umpire all C^ses, and do every thing that is Equal, Right, and full
of Clemency to the Bankers, who are most in danger, as well as see Justice done
to other Men, etc. Whenas possibly a Private Bank (properly so considered) may
not be so safe on all sides: There may be more danger of Partiality,
Collusions, Fraud, and thereby plunging or snapping Men's Estates, put into a
Private Bank, upon some Innuendo's, Niceties, or Punctilio's in Law, at least
it may seem so to some, etc. That upon a Presumption that the Public shall
think meet to continue the Bank under their own Management; it must needs be
allowed by all to be, and remain in very Good, nay in the Best of Hands. But
yet,

II. Part.
AS to a Private Bank (peculiarly so considered) there be very good reasons to
be given why a particular Company or suitable Gentlemen, should be Entrusted
with such a Grand Affair for the service of a Country. ( Scil. Under the
Inspection of the Government, etc.) That is to say, In our Case, if our Country
and Government find their own Rank (as to their Apprehension, etc.) is
fateagued, with some such incumberments, and inconsistences, that they neither
can, nor will dispense with. As to Instance, first in the loss of the Money,
they cant bear it, but will try for the Recovering of it, etc. And also, as to
the value of the Bills they will not be contented to set down with the decision
that common Trade, and Commerce has hitherto made on this Point, For says
abundance of Men (and may be very wise Men tool) let every Body say what they
will, and with their fine flourishes Paliate the matter: Yet its Plain enough,
the Money has been two hard for the Bills, and apparently has made a Fool of
them: And though the Bills have kept the House; and the Money is gone from home;
as though it had been turned out of Doors for a wrangler; yet the Bills have not
done their Office fully, or played their part as was intended: And they are so
qualified in their own Nature; and so soft and apt to warp, that no Government
can so stiffen them, but when all is said and done as can be, they will remain,
but a leaden rule in measuring Exchanges, etc. And therefore the Country is
resolved to call in all out-standing Bills, and in convenient time dissolve
their Bank; and try for the Money Medium; for that there be abundance of Men,
that have these Idea's, Scil. Let the Bills be all Burn^; and the Money will
come. Now, if we are reduced to such a notion of things; and to such a
Resolution; there is then, apparently very great, and strong Pleas, why a
particular Company of Gentlemen should erect a Bank of Credit; for that it is
very plain, upon the foresaid Hypothesis, such a Projection will no ways
hinder, but help and bring to Birth the foresaid Resolutions and hopes; but to
throw up the present Fund, and leave all our Affairs open to chance and
hap-hazzard; without substituting another for the sake of a Medium, will be to
murder our Temporal Business; and at once undo our selves. So that if the
Country is quite heart sick with their own measures; I am very well assured,
upon a very good Argument, that a Private Bank shall cure them, and do every
thing to their Satisfaction. I shall with all convenient Brevity, offer a few
Preliminary Thoughts Relating to the present Subject; and then point at Persons
proper to be entrusted with the Affair; and the Reasons of it.

1. A Few preliminary Thoughts, wherein I shall distinguish between a Public
and Private Bank. Viz. Imprimis, A Public Bank of Credit, as somewhat
Pr^cari^us; yet it carries a vast Bounty with it to those Countries who h^ve
the Wisdom to give it an Honorable Reception: But to others it is but a Common
Plague. There be Two Principles absolutely needful to preserve it in a Country,
viz. Prudence, and a Public Spirit in Head Men of Estates; if such Men will
but wisely govern their Private Interests in favor of it; they will soon
shackle other Men's; and Bridle their Recusancy, and bring them to conformity. A
Wise Government may Project, but it is Wise and Great Men under Government,
that must Cultivate such a Projection, for a Public Good. Therefore where the
Principal Men of Estates and Trade will become Patrons, (though not personally
involved) this will support it. I do imagine the formal Reason not of the
Being, but of the Prosperous and Flourishing State, of those Famous Banks (that
have been mentioned) owe for their Glory, to this Temper of Mind, in the
Principal Gentlemen of the several Countries, where they were Erected.

That is thus. At the first Commencement and Opening of those Funds, we must
imagine, these Men paid a great Veneration to the Bills: And there being a
Trade going forward, peculiarly under their Management; and also many Credits,
and Bonds for Lawful Money, against other Men, etc. It was after this manner,
etc. [1] As to their Trade, when Men come to buy a Supply with the Bills; they
accommodate them at the Old Money Price, and take the Bills without Higling or
making any distinction, etc. And (2.) As to their Bonds, and Obligations for
Specialties, when the Debtor comes; possibly he inquires. Sir! there is a Bond
of One Thousand Ducats in your hands against me, will you take Bank Bills?
Reply, Bank Bills Man! There Is nothing will suit me better than Bank Bills: For
I must tell you, I have that high Opinion of the Bills, that I will abate part
of my Interest, if you will clear the rest, and the whole Principal by the
Bills. I do assure you my good Friend, and you may tell it to all your
Neighbors, that we in the Merchandise do prefer the Bills above the Money,
etc. Now such a prudent Temper Circulating, and Influencing the Principal
Members of such a Grand Community, will soon become a Law for all other Men,
etc. Thus it has been in Holland, Venice, New York, etc.

But on the other hand, Where the Bills ^^ve gone up and down and been
Ridiculed. Its owing to head Men and Men of Fortune, Avice Versa, etc. In
France, Sweedland, and South Carolina, etc. Now, it seems to me plain that if
those Civil powers or States that have stood and looked on and seen their Noble
Projections for the Advance of Trade trampled upon, and could not possibly
prevent the Prostitution, if they had (I say) when they discerned things
lapsing into such Confusion, Resigned the Management of the Bank to principle
and suitable Gentlemen, or turned their public into a private Bank; they might
have easily Recovered the Glory and Sufficiency of their Bank, etc. Especially
if supporting and Reinforcing the Bequestment with due Sanctions. As, (1.) That
the profit, shall be fixed in the Trustees, etc. (2.) That the Government
inspect, etc. (3.) That the Bills shall be held as Current and Lawful Money, in
answering all Assesments, and also in discharging all Creditors, to the
Public, as their own Bills, etc. And though in this Method, the sensible profit
seems a Booty to some particular Men; but the General Good by keeping up a
valuable Medium for all Business, is as equally beneficial to all Men in
common, as though done by the Government. So it will ^o^n in any Example in the
World, as I imagine, and so in our own Case, where there is found, such defects
as cannot be Remedied otherways, etc.

2. The Persons to be Entrusted, must be M^n of known Integrity, of Real
Estates, Good influence, and Considerable Trade.

A Convenient Company of such Men imbodied by a Charter from the Government,
etc. may Manage a Bank of Credit, as matters may be Circumstanced, better than
the Public Government; viz. when things are out of Joint, as in France, etc.
and ^s some think in our own Case in some degree, as has been said, etc. I say
such Men by their Example, and wise Management can do more to bring things
right, and keep them so; then all the Menaces, Penal Laws, or Wisdom of a
Government. I have not yet understood that the King of Sweden, with all his
bigg and Majestic Looks, or Imperial Orders, could ever Rescue his Bank Bills
from the Contempt they met with in his Common Markets. Now I say, it appears to
me, that there may be such Gentlemen involved in this Affair, who can (upon the
aforesaid Presumptions) do more than the Government, or any regular Monarch on
Earth. I shall just point at such Men as the proper in this Case. Scil. Landed
M^^, etc. Great Merchants, who (though worth many Thousands) keep the main of
their Personal Estate, stating in a way of Trade, and Merchadize, both in their
own and other Countries. Also such other Gentlemen, Men of great Estates, and
of great Wisdom, who though they keep up a very Considerable Trade, and
Merchandise, yet let out much at Interest; and as their Gains this way is less,
so also is their Risque: There is a sort of Wise and very Prudent Men, that are
a kind of Amphibians beings who live in both Elements, Land and Water, these
are Eminently Qualified, as Members for a Private Bank. And also Rich Farmers,
and Mechannicks, Men of Character, and Influence (according to their Sphere) in
the Places where they live. The main of these Men must belong to our
Metropolis, and other Seaports and Towns of Trade, and others to be dispersed
through the Province. A Convenient Company of such Persons so Qualified, and
Incorporated, I do Imagine, shall be capable to carry on a Bank of Credit with
greatest Advantage, with an Immense good and Benefit to the Public. For new
being entrusted by the Government with the Outward happiness, wellbeing, and
flourishing State of their Country; being also instituted, not merely for their
own Private Interest; but to promote the Public Good, they must needs act in
such a Sphere in some proportion like the Government it self; as being now
become Public Benefactors, and Common Fathers to their Country; and being Men
of Noble and Great minds; must and will consult the Good of other Men, as well
as their own. And that such a Community are capable of doing great Service in
this Affair, is obvious from the following Reasons.

3. The Reasons are,

1. Reason. For that this Company of Gentlemen can Regulate the Prices of all
Things Yearly in the common course of Trade, and Commerce. The wild and
insulting Prices of Things have ruined the Foreign Banks, etc. And possibly
something of this Nature has been a Deminution to our own, etc. Now there is a
sovereign Remedy provided in this Projection, against such an inconveniency,
and mischief. For by the Wisdom, Precautions, Example of these Men, they will
thereby conduct all such Points, as though Controllers and ab^olute Masters of
the Market, and yet hurt no Man's Property, or Infringe Liberty; and hereby
Equity in Commerce will be better upheld; Excessive Demands suppressed; the
Honor and Credit of the Medium maintained; And the Just and Reasonable gains
and profits of all Men suited and secured. For we must further note, that they
are Men of differing Functions, and their own Interests, as well as Honor,
Wisdom and Honesty, will oblige them always to steer right, and do well for
other Men; for if they hurt others, they hurt themselves. And no Man need
suspect or fear, no not a Knave, much less a wise and honest Man under this
head. For that it is a very sure Maxim, viz. Self Interest will neither Cheat
or Lie: For that this is the String in the Nose (through the World) which governs
the Creature.

2. Reason. For that this Projection will both keep up the Value, and also the
Circulation of the Bills; and in a great Measure prevent hoarding for the
future, and correct it at the present. I am not so seen into the Capacity,
State, Produce, Trade, and Business of my Country, as to be Peremtory; yet do
imagine, that our Medium at this Day, as to our outstanding Bills, is not near
Sufficient for the whole Trade of this Country, and a great part of them,
possibly is confined. Some Men it is very probable, do according to their
Usage, their Income, and Trade, Annually yielding a considerable Surplusage, to
what they have occasion to pass away (Lay it up) till Opportunity presents to
Let it out at Interest, etc. This seems to make some stop, or divert the common
stream. But many others (as some Men Jealous) keep close what they can lay
Hands on, for a peculiar Market. And its well if more then one Third of our
Supply and present Stock is not stopped by this means, like Stagnate Waters, in
Pits and Mud-holes. And I doubt there be a great many Men, subtle in Business,
who by their Politic Measures, make Goods do, when they should rather pass
away Bills, that they may keep Circulating, etc. But however when the Principal
Men of our Country, shall be involved in the management abovesaid, such things
will in likelihood be solved, etc. and so the Common Fountain will, as indeed
it should, always move and Circulate, like the Main Ocean. This great Body was
Ordained, to supply the Earth with Showers; with Rivers, and smaller Streams,
for the satisfying the Thirst, and nourishment of every living Thing: Even the
Plants, Birds and Worms, are supported by its Bounty; and then the Tributary
Clouds, and Springs repay themselves to the Seas. So it should be in our Case,
and the means proposed, carries such a prospect with it, that the future, and
also the present State of things for Hoards, will soon dissolve upon such an
institution, or surrender.

3. Reason. From the Capacity that many Hundreds of the Kings very Good and
Loyal Subjects are reduced to, in their Temporal Affairs, upon a confidence in
the Paper Medium, and the Continuation of it; That to Suppress it will be
attend^d with many Grievances. Therefore Quaere, Whether the Mouth of Aeolus
his Cave, is not here or hereabouts? And though it be, the Projection offered,
will certainly shut, and bolt the Door, and Divert all that is portentous from
that Quarter.

4. Reason. Finally, For that this Projection will be a Remedy, for that which
many Men grown under as our greatest Misfortune; unless the Case is absolutely
^esperate; and if so, all Men must be Resigned: but otherways, this is the
only, and proper Method, to fetch home our Money; and to keep it when we hive
got it: And this you suppose will help all Cases. I say if it be practicable,
or within the R^^c^ of honest Men's Art, and Wisdom to recover the Silver or
the use of this Province, this is the way to do it. For hereby your Merchants,
and most Potent Men in such Business, will come under Obligations to do what is
in their Power, i^ O^^er to it. And there is none can do it (or so much as
pretend to it) But themselves. For as i^ Domestic^ Interests, it is a common
living, that a M^n must ask his Wife whether he shall be Rich? So in this Case,
we must ask our Merchants, whether we shall have our Money Medium, yea, or no?
It is certain we are happy, in a Celebrated, Wi^e and Powerful Government; who
can do very Great Things, being Endowed with a Civil Omnipotency, but they
cannot help us in this point. When we had our Money, they did all they could;
they Enacted frightful and pen^l Laws; Erected Walls, and set their Guards to
Co^fi^e it; but could not keep it; and now its gone cannot command it back
again.

Or may we imagine, that the F^sh will bring us in according as it is computed,
Fifty Thousand Pounds; and should it do so, and much of it in Money? we must
observe, that the Merchants have a peculiar Dominion over this Valuable Staple.
And the Outlet is vast, (as Salt, Rigging, etc. Provisions, Sea-Stores Craft,
and what ^ot) and all is from the Merchant, etc. that is the Money comes, it
must needs fall into the Merchants hands, as the Figgs into the mouth of the
Eater, etc.

But you will say, the Merchant must disperse abundance of the Money, he must
Live, and Buy Provisions, for the Support of himself and Family. Ah! Dear
Country! They have so many Subter^uges, and whiprows for a Livelihood that
there is ^o starving them out of their Money, when they have once ^^ot it! may
be they will want now and then a few Apples for the Children, or a fat Foul
for the Table, etc. but alas! they will often make a Ribbon, or some such pretty
thing do, to Coaxes the Farmer's Daughter of her Cargo, and save their Money.
And as to the main of their Cheer, and Maintenance. Scil. Their Furniture,
their Clothing, Corn, Flower, Salt Provision, yea almost a full supply, do
they know how to fetch by their Merchandise, from other Places and save their
Money, etc. but suppose some considerable Part, would Circulate; It is always
passing into the Gang way of our Merchants; and they are always upon the Watch,
to make their Returns, and this is one of the most profitable Species to that
Purpose, etc. so that Money held and Improved upon such Terms is but like a
scramble, catch it w^o can catch: Or but like a Flock of Wild Foul much
beaten, which is always ready to start and be done, that they are no profitable
Game. So I say such a S^itt^sh parcel of Money, or Money in a Country Improved
upon such fickle Terms, is most certainly no Medium to be depended upon, in the
Wise management, and steady carrying on of Business. So that upon this
Supposition, that the Money may be Recovered and Preserved for our use, it must
be done by our Merchants. Therefore if you are positive, and resolved, that you
cannot do without the Money, you must then Oblige your Merchants to fetch it;
and when it is comes, they must keep it for you, and not make Returns with it.
But let it go in Copartnership, and as Colleague with the Bills, for a Medium
of Trade, is in Venice, etc. And for this end (as things are now stated) under
the settlement, and Inspection of the Government, etc. You must Resign the
^usi^ess of the Bank to them, etc. as has been said: and this is the most
prope^ and effectual Remedy for your help. This will most certainly Cure us of
all diseases Re^^ting to Trade and Commerce, which we Groan under, and of which
we fill the Country with such Lo^d Complaints, Thus I Conclude, wishing my
Country all Blessing, and a settled Posture in their (...); and that they may
fix upon that way and method, in their Temporal Concerns of Trade and Commerce,
as we (...) most to their Happiness, both for them and the^^, both for the
Present and Future Ages.

So GOD Save King GEORGE; Direct His Wise Government, and Bless this Province.

FINIS.

