MEMORIAL, Humbly showing, the Past and Present State of the Land lying Waste
and Un-inhabited between Nova Scotia, and the Province of Main in New England
in AMERICA.
THAT the said Land was first possessed by the French, and about the beginning
of the Reign of King Charles the Second, the Dutch in their War then with
France, drove the French from thence. It was afterward with New York confirmed
to the Crown of England, and King Charles the Second granted it with New York
to his Brother James Duke of York, who at his own Expense settled One Thousand
One Hundred English Families thereon, and kept it in his own Possession 'till
he Abdicated the Crown, and at the Revolution the said Settlement was broke up
and destroyed by Fire and Sword by the French and Frenchify'd Indians from
Canada, etc. And the whole Land laid wast as it remains to this Day.

THE Inhabitants of the Province of the Massatusets-Bay, by a false Suggestion,
obtained a Grant of the said Land from their late Majesty's King William and
Queen Mary in the Year 1691, with a Reservation, that the Government of the
Massatusets should pass no Grants of any of the said Lands without the
Approbation of the Crown; After which, the Massatusets would not be at the
Expense of Protecting and Defending the same, but in the Year 1696, gave it up
to the French King, to whom it remained 'till the Year 1710, that General
Nicholson with her late Majesty's Arms Reconquer'd the same; which was
confirmed to the Crown of Great Britain by the Treaty of Utrecht. But neither
the Massatusets nor the French, settled any Inhabitants thereon since the
Revolution.

THE North side of it adjoining to Quebeck, the Seat of the Government of
Canada and the native Indians there being converted by the French-Iesuits, and
poisoned by their Principles, and constantly Allied and Confederated with the
French Nation, will render it Impossible to be Settled but in time of Peace
with France: For which reason, and considering the Destruction of the form.
English Settlement there at the Revolution as aforesaid, to prevent the like
Mischiefs for the future, the Petitioners for Settling it have been, and are,
very desirous to improve the present Opportunity of Peace, in getting a
powerful Body of People settled there capable to defend the said Land; And that
it may be Erected into a Province and settled under his Majesty's Government
(not Proprietory) and granted in Trust to several Noblemen and other fit
Persons to be appointed by his Majesty Trustees for the well Ordering and
Settling the Land, and to pay Annually a Quit-Rent to the Crown of Twenty eight
Pound Weight of Hemp for the use of the Royal-Navy for every hundred Acres of
Land taken up, at which Rate, when the whole is Settled, by Computation the
Quit-Rent will amount to the value of One hundred thousand Pound Sterling per
(...).

THE Lords Commissioners for Trade and Plantations, in the Year 1716, when the
said Petitioners was by His Majesty referred to that Board, did propose that
the Petitioners should provide Trustees to the Crown, for settling the said
Land, which the said Petitioners then performed to their Lordships great
Satisfaction with Persons of great Worth, that were willing for the general
Good of the Public, to undertake the Trust: But, the Claims against the Crowns
Right coming then to be laid before their Lordships by the Agent for the
Province of the Massatusets-Bay, in behalf of the said Province, and several
others, which (...) a Report was made to His Majesty, that the said Land did
not belong to the Crown: The said Lords Commissioners, did notwithstanding, at
the same time Report to His Majesty in favor of the Petitioners, for a
Settlement for them and their Families, upon His Majesty's Conquered Lands
Adjacent thereunto, which Report was made the 21st of July, 1718.

That His Majesty the same Day the said Report was Read in Council, was
Graciously pleased to Refer the Matter to the Right Honorable the Lords of the
Committee of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, before whom the said
Petitioners (it is humbly hoped) have now made out the Right of the Crown to the
said Land that they first Petitioned for a Settlement on; which they have
performed by great length of Time, Labor, and Expense, against a Powerful
Opposition: And having spent the Prime of their Years in the Service of the
Crown, and was several of them at the Re-conquering the said Land, and then had
Her late Majesty's Most Gracious Promise, that they should have the Preference
of all GRANTS of Lands there, which Promise Her Majesty again Repeated to the
Petitioners since the Conclusion of the Peace.

And having according to the said Proposal made by the Lords Commissioners for
Trade, etc. prepared Trustees of great Worth, Noblemen, Gentlemen, Merchants,
etc. who are willing to undertake the Trust of settling the said Land, and
carry on Trade and Merchandise on the same Conditions to the Crown, that the
Petitioners have proposed in their humble Petition to His Majesty the 21st of
July, 1718. (jointly with the Petitioners) viz. That the Property of the Soil
and the Government shall remain to the Crown, and all Trade be free for all His
Majesty's Subjects (by which Scheme) what By People that may adventure thither
and settle at their own Expense, and what By Families that the Trustees may
have Power to transport and settle, that are not of Ability to transport and
settle themselves. The Province may be speedily peopled in such a Powerful
Manner, that may not only put it out of the Power of France ever to recover or
disturb the same; but in all probability may render it capable to reduce Canada
in a future War with France, and may in a little time become the most useful
Province in America: The Soil and Climate thereof being fit for Raising Hemp
and Flax, which is designed to be the Staple Commodity of the Province as
Tobacco is in Virginia; and all other Sorts of Naval Stores may be Raised and
had there in great Abundance, which may be brought to Great Britain in Exchange
of our own Manufactures, and considerably increase the Consumption of every
Branch thereof. It will join His Majesty's Empire there as it were with a
Chain. And from the Advantage of its Situation for Navigation and Trade, may
(if the Settlement be encouraged) become an extraordinary Nursery for Seamen,
and produce a great Addition of Strength to the Crown both by Sea and Land.

The Premises Considered,

The Petitioners therefore Humbly Prays, That it may please your LORDSHIP to
Move, that His MAJESTY may be Graciously Pleased to GRANT, That the said Lands
and Islands may be Erected into a Province, etc. by the Name of GEORGIA or
otherwise, as His MAJESTY shall think fit: And that the Property of the Soil,
and the Government Remain in the CROWN; That the Petitioners and others may
Transport themselves and Settle there at their own Expense. And that they who
may be the Trustees, may be Empowered to Transport and Settle People there: And
that such Privileges may be Granted to the Inhabitants of the said Province, to
Encourage the speedy Peopling and effectual Settling thereof, during the
Interval of Peace, As His MAJESTY in His Great Wisdom shall think fit.

And His MAJESTY'S Humble Petitioners, As in Duty Bound shall (...)
A MEMORIAL, For Erecting his MAJESTY'S Land and Islands, lying between
NOVA SCOTIA, and New England in America into a Province.

Humbly Offered to the Consideration of the Right Honorable, the Lords of His
MAJESTY'S Most Honorable, PRIVY COUNCIL.


