A LETTER TO A Friend in the Country, Attempting a Solution of the Scruples and
Objections of a Conscientious or Religious Nature, commonly made against the
New Way of receiving the Smallpox.

By a MINISTER in BOSTON.

Luke 6. 9. Then said Jesus unto them, I will ask you one thing, IS IT LAWFUL
TO SAVE LIFE, OR TO DESTROY IT? ^^s 5. 38, 39. And now I say unto you, Refrain
from these Men, and let them alone: for if this counsel, or this work be of
Men, it will come to naught: But if it be of GOD, ye cannot overthrow it; lest
happily ye ye found even to fight against GOD. BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND,
for S. GERRISH, at his Shop in Cornhill.

MDCCXXI.

To my Friend in the Country.
SIR,
THE new Method of receiving the Smallpox by Incision (or Inoculation as it is
commonly called) has been, you know, the Subject not only of plentiful
Discourse, but of angry Debate and fierce Contention among us in this Town. And
it is a very unhappy Circumstance attending us here, that almost every thing
that is now done or doing among us, if it be at all of a public nature,
creates Heats and Animosities. I am in hopes our good People will by and by be
sensible of the folly and mischief of this, and come to such a Temper as will
suffer them to differ from one another without being angry with one another. In
the mean time* I hope that the People in other Towns where the Distemper has
made its Entrance, will preserve a better Temper, if any among them should put
this Method into Practice.

HOWEVER some among us may appear against it out of Party and Prejudice, or
make an Engine of it to serve Designs, not friendly to the Peace and true
Interest of the Place, yet there are many who are Conscientiously averse to it,
I believe; and, if these preserve the Meekness of Wisdom, they are (as a very
Reverend Person has lately said of them) greatly to be commended and honored
in that they will not act against a doubting Conscience.

I perceive that the Scruples and Objections commonly offered by People here,
have such a force upon your Mind, as keeps you from going into this Method
which may be your Safety and Preservation. Now Friendship, (the Offices of
which should be sacredly regarded by us,) obliges me to attempt to relieve and
help you, in a Matter wherein your life, so precious in it self, and deservedly
dear to me, is so much concerned.

FOR Satisfaction about the Safety of this Method in an ordinary way of
Providence, together with the Easiness of it, I refer you to the Observations
on it made and published by the Reverend Mr. Colman; of the greatest part of
which Matters of Fact by him related, I have my self been an Eye witness.

BUT that which you want Satisfaction about is, the Scruples and Objections of
a Conscientious or Religious Nature, which are commonly offered by People
against this Method, These, I shall endeavor to answer and resolve, as I am
able, in a few words; and if they afford you any Light or Satisfaction
respecting the same, you may communicate them to whom you please; and if it
should be though it worth while to make them public, I think none can censure me
for starting out of my Line, or meddling with what is none of my Business, since
the thing I am now upon relates to Religion and Conscience.

ONE great thing urged against this Practice is, That it is not lawful for me
to make my self sick when I am well: Or voluntarily to bring a Distemper upon
my self. To bring Sickness upon ones self for its own sake, is what no Man in
his right wits would do. But to make my self Sick in such a way, as may
probably serve my Health, and save my Life, and with such a Design is certainly
fitting and Reasonable, and therefore lawful. This is every day practiced among
People without any Scruple, in Purges and Vomits, and other things in Medical
Use. Now, if I may lawfully make my self Sick by taking something in at my
Mouth, why not by putting something in at my Arm? Or, if I may lawfully make my
self Sick for one day, why not for two days, or more, as the Case may require?
Aye, but this is to bring a Distemper upon my self. I think it can hardly be
called bringing it upon my self, when the Case is so with me, (not having had
the Distemper, and living in an infected Air) that I cannot but expect to
undergo it in a very little time. I know indeed GOD can preserve me from the
Infection, but when my Neighbors all round me are visited, I know of no
Warrant that any particular Person has to expect an extraordinary Preservation.
He that has no reason to think, but that he is as liable to the Smallpox as
other people are, and yet keeps in the Way of it, expecting that God will
preserve him untouched, however some may give it the Name of Trust and Faith,
and the like, I cannot but look upon it and call it Presumption. In short, I
cannot but think, when I am in such Circumstances, that I cannot rationally nor
warrantably expect to escape the Distemper, it is th^n lawful for me to bring
upon my self a lesser Degree of it, to prevent a greater. I Will put the Case
thus, If I have not had the Smallpox, it is to be supposed, there is in my
body, what I Will call the Fuel of that Distemper, and there only wants the
lighting of a Spark to set this Fuel on burning. The Air I breath in is full of
these Sparks; and I may expect every Breath I fetch to draw some of them in: If
now it appears upon daily Experience, that making an Incision in my Arm, and
letting the Spark in that way, the Fuel will burn with less fierceness and
consequently danger; why may not I take it in that way? Why must I needs stay
till it come in at my Mouth or Nostrils, or through some of the porous Parts of
my body? For my part, I think the Law of Self-Preservation, which is GOD's Law,
requires me to take this Method of Safety, whereby (to use the apt Words of
another,) the Disease is, through GOD's common Blessing, happily converted into a
Remedy.

WHAT then, will you not wait GOD's Time for it? They ask. I think then is the
Time Providence calls me to this Method of Safety, when I am in imminent and
immediate danger of the Distemper the other way. Should any one go into the
Practice of Inoculation, out of a fancy or Bravado, without his being in known
hazard of the Distemper by the common way of Infection, I should not think it
warrantable. But then is GOD's time for us to use means of Safety, when we are
in apparent danger of any deadly or destructive Evil.

BUT then, it is asked again, What cannot you trust GOD? -- I suppose every body
will allow that the Use of Means is not inconsistent with Trust in GOD; and why
there cannot be Trust in GOD in the Use of this means, as well as other, I
cannot imagine. Why, it is a going from GOD to Man, some say. What then, cannot
we make Use of Men and Means in a time of danger without going from GOD? If
any, like Asa, look to the Physician, and not to the LORD* they are very
irreligious and profane therein. But if any do principally and in the first
place seek to GOD, may they not then innocently and lawfully make use of the
best humane help the Providence of GOD affords them? I must profess and declare
on the part of many of the Inoculated, that they and their Friends concerned in
them, have gone into the Practice with many Prayers to GOD, and other suitable
expressions of Trust and Devotion.

BUT still some say, this Practice looks to them like taking God's Work out of
His hand. -- Indeed this Distemper can arrest none without a Commission from
God. But yet it is not inflicted by God's immediate hand; we receive it in a
natural way, and by means of second Causes; and this we do in the Way of
Inoculation, as well as of common Infection. If we have the Small Pox in either
of these ways, it is still the Work of God: For all second Causes depend on and
act under Him the first Cause. And, the Application of Means natural for this
or that End, is it not an Application to the God of nature? If God does not
cooperate by His actual Providence can the Effect be produced? For, who is he
that says, and it comes pass, when the Lord commands it not? What is there
of the hand or power of Man in this Work, after the Incision is made and the
matter applied? The Work is still left with God, and we must wait upon Him for
His actual Influence and Blessing, even as the Husbandman does for the Rain and
Shines of Heaven, after the Seed is thrown into the Earth.

BUT the Small Pox is a Judgment of God, sent to punish and humble us for our
Sins; and what shall we so evade it, and think to turn it away from us? I fully
agree to it, that it is a sore Judgment of God upon us for our Sins, which we
have much deserved: And it is greatly to be lamented that it has no better
Effect upon the hearts of Men --. But is it Unlawful to use means for our
Preservation from a desolating Judgment? Especially, if at the very time that
God sends the Judgment, He shows us a way to escape the Extremity and
Destruction at least, if not the Touch of it. If a gracious God shows us so
much Mercy as this under the Judgment, does it become us to put it away from
our selves, or rather should we not accept it with Adoring Thankfulness? If
this Town was to suffer an Inundation, that would be a more terrible Judgment
than this, and we should look upon it too as a righteous Punishment for our
Sins; yet would any refuse to make use of a Boat, or a Plank that might
providentially come in his Way, thinking that to do it would be a criminal
Evading the Judgment? I trow not,

BUT, some have said to me, This Method tends to take off the fears of this
Distemper from the Minds of people; and who knows of what Spiritual Advantage
these fears might be to them? In Answer to it I ask them, Whether GOD cannot
make the Mercy of their Preservation and Recovery in this Way of Spiritual
Advantage to them also, and by that lead them to Repentance? And, I truly hope,
the Salvation of GOD bestowed upon some in this way, as well as the other, will
have a gracious sanctifying Effect upon them, under the powerful working of the
Spirit of Grace. I was glad to see the serious Frames some of them were in at
the very time, how much affected they seemed to be with the favor of GOD to
them; what a good Profession of holy Resolution, some of them made. And I would
take this Opportunity to call upon them from GOD to remember the same, and to
be daily performing their Vows.

SOME Object against the Practice because of the Unhappy Consequent of it among
us; the Feuds and Contention, Sin and Mischief that it has occasioned. -- Of
this, I hope, I am a mournful Spectator; And it has made me sundry times ready
to take up that Wish, Oh that I had Wings like a Dove! And I must freely
declare, that I look upon that Spirit of Party and Division that is reigning
among us, to be a sorer Judgment of GOD upon us, than the Distemper which has
so distressed us. But yet, I am far from thinking that the Badness of the thing
in it is self is to be argued or inferred from this Effect of it. For does not
the same Effect attend many other things unquestionably good in themselves;
such as the building of Houses for the Worship of GOD, the Choice of Ministers,
and of Persons to serve in the State, etc? Nay, the very preaching of the
Gospel in the World, though it be the Gospel of Peace, and the Gospel of
Salvation too, has been, and is, accidentally, through the Corruption of Men's
hearts, and under the Influence of the envious Enemy of Mankind, the Occasion
of all this; according as our Savior has foretold that it would be, saying as
Mat. 10. 34, 35. Think not that I am come to send Peace on Earth: I came not to
send Peace but a Sword. For I am come to set a Man at variance against his
Father, and the Daughter against her Mother, and the Daughter-in-law against
her Mother-in-law. And a Man's foes shall be they of his own house.

SOME frame an Objection against this Practice from the Decrees of GOD. They
say that GOD has predetermin'd and fixed the Period of every ones life, beyond
which nothing shall protrect it; so that if this time be come Inoculation will
not save the Persons life. But this Argument may as well be urged against the
Use of all Physic, nay even of Food, as against this Practice. I truly
believe, as my Bible teaches me, that GOD has fixed the Period of every ones
life; but I also believe that He has done it with a Regard to Second Causes, or
that Course of Nature which He has established; the End and Means are
determined together. He that has fixed in His own Counsel how long we shall
live, has also determined that by such and such means our lives shall be
continued to that Period of time. And how does any one know, but this is to be
the appointed Means, of their Preservation in life?

SOME have asked Whether we could assure them their lives in this Way? It is
strange that any should put the Question! When there is none can give the
Assurance of this not in the most innocent and common Means that are every day
made use of: Why then should they demand it in this? I know of one who died
under a Vomit. Another, whom I also knew, died by pulling out a Tooth; the
bleeding at the Gums after the Extraction of the Tooth could not be stopped, and
in a few hours he died. And for my own part, as much as I am now for
Inoculation, I am not at all shy to say, that a Person may miscarry under it:
For GOD is Sovereign, and will keep us in a dependence upon Him in the use of
all Means. But if it be safe under the common Blessing of GOD, that is
sufficient to warrant me to venture upon it, when there is Occasion. Nay, if
one in an hundred should die in this way, while there is Demonstration (as
there then would be) that it is ten times as safe as the common way of
infection. This, I humbly conceive, would be sufficient to justify my going
into it: Though I must confess, in this particular, I was once of another mind.

BUT suppose I should die in the way of Inoculation, would it not make a dying
hour very dark to me, to think that I used means to bring it upon my self? This
is a Question I must confess, has been the most affecting to me, of any that
have related to this matter. But after the most serious consideration I have
bestowed upon it, I thus think; "If a Person should die under Inoculation, he
dies in the Use of the most likely means, he knew of* to save his life in a
time of common peril; he dies then in the Way of Duty, and so in GOD's Way: If
the Blessing is denied, he must humbly resign this his frail life unto the GOD
of it, Looking for the Mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal Life.

THERE is one thing more said against this Practice, which I am loath to take
Notice of, because of the -- of it; but it being so frequently in the Mouths of
People, I cannot but name it. It Is this, that it is originally from the Devil.
Sure this is the effect of Transport, etc. I will return a better answer to it
than it deserves. If it be a Method of Safety, and a Benefit to Mankind, as
hitherto it appears to be, how came the Devil to be the Author of it? Was he
ever a Benefactor to Mankind? No: But he is a Murderer from the beginning.
Every Age of the World produces some new and useful Discoveries in one
Profession, Art and Science o^ another: And, if this Discovery be reserved for
our Day, why should it not be accepted in all places with all Thankfulness* In
a word, I cannot but think, it is Original derived elsewhere, because my Bible
teaches me that every good and perfect Gift comes down from the Father of
Lights.

AS to that Objection of the danger of others catching the Distemper of the
Inoculated, there needs only this to be said; That as it is to be supposed, the
Practice will not be gone into till the danger of Infection becomes common in a
place, so there may be Methods easily taken to prevent its hazarding others
that cannot yet come into it. And I think there ought to be a prudent Care in
this respect.

THUS, my Friend, I have freely given you my Tho'ts about this Practice so much
spoken; against. I must now leave you to judge for your self; praying GOD to
show you his Way. If you come into the Practice, I know you will not do it in
carnal Security; for that may provoke GOD to deny the Blessing. And, if GOD
please to give it the desired Success, you will religiously give Glory to Him, not
only for delivering you from Death, but for saving you from such a bed of
Corruption, as others have many wearisome days and nights appointed them in;
you will think your self the more obliged to thank and praise your kind Physician,
(I mean the Great One) who has wro't your Cure by so gentle a Method.

I have no more to add but my Prayers, that you and I may be made meet for,
and, in GOD's time, bro't safe to, that World where (...) shall be no more
Sickness, nor any more Death; where Sin, and all the penal Consequences of it,
shall be done away for ever.

I am, Your hearty Friend and Servant.
Boston November, 20 th. 1721.

