A Discourse Had in the College-Hall At Cambridge, March 27. 1722. Before the
Baptism of R. Judah Monis. By Benj. Colman, V.D.M. To which are added Three
DISCOURSES Written by Mr. Monis himself, The Truth, The whole Truth, and,
Nothing but the Truth. One of which was delivered by him at his BAPTISM.

BOSTON: Printed for Daniel Henchman, and sold at his Shop over against the old
Brick Church in Cornhill. 1722.

Moses a Witness to our LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST.

A DISCOURSE Had in the College Hall at Cambridge, March 27. 1722. Before the
Baptism of R. Judah Monis.

By Benjamin Colman, M.A. and Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Romans 11.15. For if the casting away of them be the reconciling of the World;
what shall the receiving of them be but life from the dead?

BOSTON: Printed by S. Kneeland, for D. Henchman, and Sold at his Shop. 1722.

PREFACE.
THE following Discourse, humble and plain as it is, and on an Occasion so rare
and singular, needs no more to be said in Excuse of it, than these two things:
first that it was prepared in obedience to the Desire of the very Reverend Mr.
Leverett, the present Learned Head and President of the House where it was
delivered, in case of the Absence of the Aged and Venerable Dr. Increase
Mather, who if his Years had permitted him would have presided and served on so
great a Solemnity: And secondly, that the Author pretends to little more in
this poor Performance than to give a small Collection of the Thoughts of a few
Select Authors, that stood by him on his Shelf, upon the Instances which he has
here chosen; the Propriety whereof is submitted to the Censure of the Candid
and Judicious Reader.

AS to Mr. Monis himself, it must be confessed that he seems a very Valuable
Proselyte; (as a Learned Person has said to me of him) and would be so esteemed
by the learned and pious in one Profession or other of Christianity. He is
truly read and learned in the Jewish Cabbala and Rabbis, a Master and Critic
in the Hebrew: He reads, speaks, writes and interprets it with great readiness
and accuracy, and is truly (...), apt t^ teach. His Diligence and Industry
together with his Ability is manifest unto men's who have seen his Grammar and
Nomenclator, Hebrew and English; as also his Translation of the Creed and
Lord's Prayer, the thirty-nine Articles of the Church of England, and the
Assembly's Sho^^er Catechism into Hebrew. And he is (...) translating the
Larger Catechism; a Work I suppose never before attempted. To crown all, His
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, both the Old and New Testament is very happy
and extraordinary, which he adorns with a laudable Conversation. Upon all which
I may well aid the Words that a Reverend Minister lately had to me; Who knows
what great designs of Providence may be hereby served, respecting that People
of Promise, whose Inlightning is so often the Subject of our Prayers.

GOD grant that (as our SAVIOR said to Peter) being Converted himself, be may
minister unto the Conversion of his Brethren; who were once the peculiar People
of GOD, and are still beloved for the Fathers sake. At least I trust the
Gracious GOD may mean Us (I mean the College and these Churches of CHRIST)
great Benefit from Mr. Monis his Services, if the Honorable and Reverend the
Overseers of the College shall think good to confirm the Choice which the
Reverend President and Fellows, the present Corporation, have lately made of
Mr. Monis to teach the Hebrew Tongue unto the Students; or rather if in their
Wisdom they shall see meet to Appoint Him Hebrew Professor: for which good and
great Work we have no Man likeminded, as well as Capable.

Moses a Witness unto our Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST.
JOH. 5.46. For had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed Me; for he write
of me.


OUR Lord Jesus is here discoursing with the unbelieving Jews, affirming
himself to be the Messiah whom they looked for and ought to believe in. At the
17. v. of the Chapter he told them that GOD was his Father, and that He was One
with Him in Essence and Working. At this they took great Offense, because he
made himself equal with GOD. But our LORD justified what he had sail, and added
many like glorious Words thereunto, respecting his own Eternal Godhead and
Divine Nature.

HE told 'em, that as the Father has life in Himself, so he has given to the
Son to have life in Himself: that a (...) raises up the Dead and quickneth
the^ (...) ^in Sin or in the Grave) even so the Son quickneth whom he will:
that the Father has committed all Judgment (the present Government of the
World and the final Judgment of it) to the Son, that all men should honor the
Son even as they honor the Father.

AND then in Confirmation of all that he had said concerning Himself he
produces three Witnesses. 1. He appeals to the Testimony of John the Baptist,
whose words concerning Christ some of them had heard, and they had born him (as
he well deserved) a high Reverence. This was He of whom Maiachi, the last of
the Prophets of the Old Testament had spoken, saying, Behold I send my
Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me, and the LORD whom ye seek
shall suddenly come into his Temple. 2. Our Lord appeals to the Works and
Miracles which he had wro't, as a greater Testimony than that of John. And
lastly, He refers 'em to the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and particularly
to the Writings of Moses. 1. To those Scriptures in general: v. 39. Search the
Scriptures (and none other were then extant but the writings of Moses and the
Prophets) for in them ye have Eternal life, and these are they which testify of
me. 2. To the Writings of Moses in particular: v. 45, 46, 47. Do not think that
I will accuse you to the Father, (i. e. I am not your only Accuser) there is
one that accuses you, even Moses in whom you trust: For had ye believed Moses,
ye would have believed Me, for he wrote of me: But if ye believe not his
writings, how shall ye believe my words?

THE Jews had and ever will have a great and just Veneration for Moses. They
are his known and professed Disciples. He was under God the Lawgiver to and
founder of the Jewish Church. In him they trusted, as our Context speaks; and
they did well to trust and conside in his Veracity; for he was faithful in all
his house, as the Apostle to the Hebrews says.

HE was the first Inspired Writer and Pen man of Scripture (...) the Father of
the Prophets and a Prince among 'em. Like him there arose not another in Israel
whom the Lord knew face to face. He stands liken'd to CHRIST the Lord of the
Prophets: A Prophet like unto thee shall the LORD thy GOD raise up.

THE highest sort of Revelation was among the Jews called Gradus Mosaicus See
Arch-Bp. Tillotson's Sermons, Vol. 5. p. 404.
They conceive of it as an Immediate Divine Impression on the Understanding,
without fear, amazement or fainting. They think that He only among the Prophets
preserved his ordinary temper under the highest Revelations of GOD to Him.
Whereas Daniel and John, the favorite Prophet and Apostle, fainted under their
Visions; yet were they Men highly beloved and of an excellent Spirit.

TO this Moses now our LORD JESUS appeals in my Text: He shall speak and
witness for Him to the Jews: He their own Prophet and Lawgiver shall be their
Judge: By his writings they shall be Convinced or Condemned. He accuses them
for their Unbelief and Infidelity. Had the Jews but heeded and rightly
understood what Moses had wrote, they would have believed in and received our
LORD JESUS. In rejecting Him they did in effect deny and reject Moses himself.

THIS is our Savior's Argument in my Text, and it was ad Homines; the best
that could be to have convinced the Jews, and I hope it appears to You much to
our present purpose on such a Ones Conversion to the Faith in Christ, and
Submission to the Baptism of JESUS. Had ye believed Moses ye would have
believed Me, for he wrote of Me.

HOW forcible are right words! this is open, sincere, bold and daring Argument.
And this was the manner of our LORD and his Apostles always. See Luke 24.27.
And beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded through all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself. And so the Apostles converted the
World, witnessing both to small and great and saying none other things than
those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. This way Paul took (in
the wisdom of GOD) to convince his Countrymen at Rome; Acts 28.23. He expounded
and testified the Kingdom of GOD, persuading them concerning Jesus, both out of
the Law of Moses, and out of the Prophets, from morning till evening. A most
delightful Argument, and which would hold one much longer and not tire him. I
may say of it, as the Disciples in the presence of their transfigured LORD did,
while Moses and Elias talked with Him, -- It is good to be here

BUT I have only a few minutes allowed me to show you from Moses that JESUS is
the Christ. I can only give you a short Specimen out of his writings. We
believe the writings of Moses, therefore we believe in CHRIST. I can only lay
before you a few select Instances out of the first Book of Moses, called
Genesis. As, 1. the Promise of the seed of the Woman to break the Serpents
head. 2. Abel's acceptable Sacrifice. 3. The promises and Covenant of GOD given
to Abraham. And 4. The Blessing of Judah. -- In many other Instances, Moses
wrote of Christ, but these are some of the most Eminent which ly first in the
Order of his Writings.

I. PASSING over what the Apostle says concerning Adam that he was the figure
of Him that was to come; I insist upon the first and very famous Promise of a
SAVIOR unto miserable Man upon his fall; Namely, that HE should be the Seed of
the Woman and should bruise the Serpents head, which should bruise his heel.
Genesis 3.15. This is so fully answered and explained in the Account we have of
the Conception, birth and death of our LORD JESUS, that nothing can be more
plain and familiar. He was born of a Virgin, made of a Woman, by the power of
the Highest: A Virgin did conceive and bare a Son, and the Holy thing born of
Her was the Son of GOD. See and compare Isai. 7.14. with Matthew. 1.23. Luke.
1.35. and Gal. 4.4. Christ's heel was His Humane Nature wherein He trod upon
our Earth: This was bruised in His Crucifixion and Death: But at the same time
the Serpents head was broken hereby, the Kingdom and works of the devil
destroyed by it.

Maimenides, the great Jewish Doctor and Interpreter, justly admired this
passage, (as Bp. Patrick quotes him) That the Seed of the Woman should be only
mentioned an not of Adam. This (said he) is one of the passages in Scripture
which is most wonderful, and not to be understood according to the Letter, but
contains great wisdom in it.

VERY true, Great is this Mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the firsh, to
destroy the Works of the devil. The Son of GOD too^ our Nature of the Blessed
Virgin Mary; the Old Serpent, which is the devil and satan, did all that he
could to destroy Him by Temptations and Persecutions; in the first way be
prevailed nothing, the Evil one came and found nothing in Him; in the last way
he reached his heel. His Holy and Flesh, which was bruised indeed in His
Crucifixion; but by that very means the devil himself was conquered and van^
(...) and Mankind redeemed; and so the Serpents head was broken. Heb. 2.14.
Through death He destroyed him that had the power of death, that is, the devil.

SO that CHRIST our Savior, as revealed to us by the Gospel, in the manner of
His Incarnation and in the End and glorious fruit of His Death, was more
obscurely revealed to Adam as soon as he had fallen. The Sum of the Mystery of
CHRIST is undeniably contained and delivered in this Prediction; It shall
bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.

CHRIST's heel was literally bruised, when His feet were pierced and nailed to
the Cross, but then the Serpents head was broken because CHRIST did on the
Cross spoil Principalities and Powers, triumphing over them, Col. 2.15. This
then as it is among the first, so the most Eminent passages in the Writings of
Moses to be Interpreted concerning CHRIST.

II. I Instance in Abel's Sacrifice and Sufferings. Righteous Abel Mat. 11.23,
35. Heb. 11.4.
. who has been esteemed a beautiful Type of Christ in his Sanctity, in his
acceptable Sacrifice, and in his Sufferings and Martyrdom: Only the Blood of
JESUS speaks better things than the blood of Abel, Heb. 12.24.

IT appears from Abels Offering, of the first-lings of his flock and of the fat
thereof, and the LORD's having respect thereto; Genesis 4.4. That Sacrificing was
certainly an Instituted mode of Worship from the fall of Man, a Positive Law
given to Adam; without which it would never have entered into Adams or Abels
heart to have offered the bloody Victims of Peasts unto GOD.

I am not ignorant that some of the Learned Rabbi's, See Outram de Sacrif. p. 9.
and by name Maimonides, R. Levi Ben Gerson, and Isaac Abrabenel, and with them
the Learned Hugo ^rotius, have thought and taught otherwise: But I think I have
right Reason and the whole Tenor of Scripture, as well as the Consent of
Christian Doctors in what I have said. It does not seem at all probable, as Bp.
Patrick on the place says, that Adam would have presumed to have invented a way
of Worship, by killing Beasts and burning their fat: Especially since one
cannot find any Inclination to it in Nature. Doubtless he had the Direction of
God herein, and probably those Beasts of whose Skins the Lord made Clothing
for our fallen Parents were the first Sacrifices offered to GOD. Eusebius
therefore well judges that this way of Worship was not taken up by chance, nor
by a Humane Motion. I wonder not therefore at all that Plate should be at such
a loss about this Rite of Worship, "as to say that it was not possible for our
mortal Nature to know the reason of it. Nor has it surpised me to find those
that were eno' Masters of Reason among the Gentiles, who having long before
loft the Notices of the Divine Original Institution and of the reason thereof,
did ridicule as far as they durst the Sacrifices of their days as a foolish
piece of Superstition; it seeming very Absurd to them to suppose the Deity
should be pleased in, or served acceptably by, the blood of Beasts. And I
confess that to the bare reason of Mankind, unenlightened by the Holy
Scriptures, it might well look so. But now Christianity makes plain to us the
Reason and End of the Institution of Sacrifices from the beginning.

MAN had by Sin forfeited his life, his Soul, into the hand of GOD's avenging
Justice. GOD had given unto Man the promise of a Savior, and a Covenant of
Life, Pardon and Salvation. To obtain this for us the SON of GOD was to take
our Nature in his appointed time, and therein die a Sacrifice for Sin, and make
his Soul an Offering by the shedding his precious blood. Now as typical hereof
and to direct the eyes and Faith of Mankind to the Great Sacrifice in the Death
of their Savior, GOD instituted to Adam and to his Posterity until the time of
the Death of CHRIST the Worshipping him by Sacrifices; being the Offering of
the Lives and blood of some Beasts to Him in a solemn and religious manner
directed by Him.

ACCORDINGLY we may be sure that Adam practiced himself, and also instructed
his Children in the Mode of worshipping GOD by Sacrifice, and in the meaning
thereof. Whence it was that Abel offered his excellent Sacrifice: He exercised
Faith in the great Sacrifice of his SAVIOR, which was to take away Sin; he
looked to the Great Sacrifice of Atonement in the sense of Man's Sin and
Apostasy from GOD: He humbled himself before his Judge, deprecated Divine
Wrath, and implored Forgiveness, by Faith in the promised Savior.

CERTAINLY Abel's faith, celebrated by the Apostle, had this respect to GOD's
Institution, and to the Promise of a Redeemer, who in the typical Reference of
these first Sacrifices was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the World,
Rev. 13.8. It is the first Figure left on Record of CHRIST's death, and of the
infinite pleasure that GOD has therein.

I pass over Enoch's translation, and Noah's preservation; and come to the
third Instance.

III. IN the Covenant and Promises of GOD given unto Abraham. On this I shall
enlarge a little. " Abraham was a typical Head of GOD's Church and Covenant
People: CHRIST is the true Head. To Abraham and to his Seed were the Promises
made, so are the Promises of the Eternal Inheritance to the Elect in Christ. In
Abraham were the two Dispensations of the Covenant of Grace shadowed out, the
Legal and the Evangelical. See Gal^ 22, 25. Moreover, Abraham's illustrious
Submissions to the Will of GOD, and the Glorious Instances of his entire and
absolute Obedience thereunto, may be esteemed very bright Figures of the
perfect Obedience of our LORD JESUS, both Active and Passive. His offering up
his Isaac at GOD's Call is a kind of figure of the FATHER's not sparing his
Only begotten Son, but delivering Him up for us all. And his prevailing
Intercessions for others, is no obscure Shadow of the Efficacious Mediation of
CHRIST. To be particular,

1. VERY famous is the Promise and Blessing given to Abraham, and three times
over repeated to him, Genesis 12.3. In thee shall all the Families of the Earth be
blessed. 18.18. All the Nations of the Earth shall be blessed in him. 22.18.
And in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the earth he blessed. Verily there is
some mighty Blessing contained in these Words; of Universal and Everlasting
extent, not only to the Natural seed and Posterity of Abraham, but to all
People and Languages under Heaven; to be obtained for them and derived to them
by this Promised SEED. The Apostle to the Galatians gives us the true
Interpretation and only Fulfillment of this Promise. Gal. 3.7, 8, 9, 14, 16. The
Scripture foreseeing that GOD would justify the Heathen through faith, preached
before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all Nations be blessed.
So then they which be of Faith are blessed with faithful Abraham. -- To Abraham
and his seed were the Promises made. He says not, and to Seeds, as of many;
but as of One, And to thy SEED, which is CHRIST.

THE Sum and Substance of the Gospel was thus preached to Abraham in a very few
words. CHRIST is the Grand Blessing to the World: All the Families of the Earth
that are blessed by GOD are blessed in Him; All that believe in Him are blessed
of whatever Families of the Earth they be; The Messiah was to come from
Abraham's joins as CHRIST did, the common Savior and highest Blessing of lost
Sinners. Act. 3.25. Unto you GOD having raised up his Son JESUS, has sent him
to bless you by turning you every one from his Iniquity.

CHRIST is this Singular, Eminent and particular Seed promised to Abraham, the
Author of all Blessings ( the Author of Eternal Salvation) to Mankind.

2. THE great Rite and Sacrament of Circumcision which GOD gave to Abraham and
his Seed, the Sign and Seal of His Covenant in their flesh: Genesis 17.10, 11.
contained in it much Gospel Mystery. It is called the Covenant of Circumcision,
Act. 7.8. And a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. Romans 4.11. And we are said
upon our believing in CHRIST to be circumcised with the Circumcision made
without hands, in putting off the sins of the flesh by the Circumcision of
Christ. Col. 2.11. By all which it appears that this great Article in the
Jewish Religion had a singular Aspect on CHRIST and Accomplishment in Him.

THE Covenant of Circumcision, and my Covenant in your flesh: "It is a
Sacramental phrase, The learned Mr. Samuel Mather, on the Figures and Types of
the Old Testament.
the Sign for the thing signified; as the Lamb was called the Passover, and as
the Bread and Wine are called the Body of CHRIST: So Circumcision was called
the Covenant, i. e. the instituted Memorial of it. Thus Christ was given for a
Covenant to the people; Isai. 49.8. And this was sealed to Abraham in
Circumcision, that GOD would give him a blessed SEED, even CHRIST.

CIRCUMCISION indeed looked to a Church-seed, a believing Seed: But it seems
Ordained primarily with an Eye unto the promised Seed that should proceed from
the loins of Abraham. And some give this particular Reason why it was peculiar
to the Males, from the Respect it bare to CHRIST's blood. "It was a bloody
Ordinance, and one kind of Instance (says Mr. Henry) how that all things by the
Law were purged with blood. Heb. 9.22. Surely it was a sort of the Blood of the
Covenant which the LORD made with that People.

IT was (as Baptism now is) Mather, on the Figures and Types.
a Sacrament of Initiation into the Covenant of Grace: A sign to represent, and
a Seal to ratify and confirm, the Bonds and Blessings of it. It held forth the
sufferings of CHRIST, whose blood began to be shed in His Circumcision. He bare
our sorrows even from His Cradle in His holy flesh: for as He know no Sin, so
He needed not to have been Circumcised, but as He was made Sin, and under the
Law for us. Circumcision shadowed forth the spotless and glorious Righteousness
of the Promised Seed; His Personal Purity and Holiness and the Spirituality and
Sanctity of His Laws: That the Sinner must be Holy and Spiritual like Him in
heart and life, and by faith in Him stand Holy and as without Sin in the sight
of GOD.

AS therefore we now are buried with Christ in Baptism, so they of old were
mystically Ingraffed into Him by Circumcision: And in the Baptism of our
Children we are complete in Christ, even as the Jews were by the Extent of
GOD's Covenant unto their Children, in the Faederal Rite of Circumcision.

THERE are moreover some other Illustrious Figures of CHRIST that belong unto
the Story of Abraham.

3. ONE is the famous Character of Melchizedek, and His blessing Abraham upon
his Return from the slaughter of the Kings. We have the Story written by Moses,
Genesis 14.18, 19, 20. And the Apostle expounds it for us concerning CHRIST, Heb.
5.6, 10. and 6.20. and again through out the whole Seventh Chapter of that
Epistle, where the Apostle opens at large and applies to Christ the Psalmists
words, in Psalm. 110. Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek.

WHO this Melchisedec was we know not, and therefore is it hidden from us, that
he might be the more Illustrious a Type of Christ: for being introduced without
Father, without Mother, without beginning of days or end of life, he was made
like the Son of GOD, of Wh^m it is said, -- And who shall declare his
Generation?

MELCHIZEDEC was King of Salem, so Christ is the Prince of peace. Melchizedec
was both King and Priest together, and so is Christ unto His Church for ever.
Christ abides a Priest continually, as of Melchizedec it is witnessed that be
lives: Heb. 7.8. i. e. The Scripture speaks only of his living and nothing of
his death; as if he had lived for ever, and were like CHRIST a Priest for ever
after the power of an endless life.

THIS Melchizedec bro't forth Bread and Wine unto Abraham, as Christ has lest
the Mr. Henry.
same Memorial of Himself to his Church, to represent the spiritual Provision
of strength and comfort laid up for us in the Covenant of Grace, for our
refreshment in our spiritual Warfare and conflicts. Melchizedek appears in this
Act and in his Office greater than Abraham, for he received Tithes from him,
and blessed him in the Name of the Most High GOD; and without all Contradiction
(says the Apostle) the less is blessed of the Greater: Yea Levi also, and the
Aaronical Priestnood it self, paid tithes to this Melchizedec in the loins of
Abraham. Heb. 7.7, 9. Agreeably you know to whom it was said, -- Art thou
greater than our Father Abraham? and who it was that said of himself, -- Before
Abraham was I am. As Melchisedec blessed Abraham, so GOD has sent His SON JESUS
to bless us, -- and whom he blesses are Flessed indeed. Melchisedec blessed
GOD for Abraham, so Christ is the Mediator both of our prayers and praises, to
offer up ours and his own for us. Abraham gave the tithes of all his spoil to
Melchisedek, which Homage and Acknowledgment is due from us to Christ, whose we
are and all that we have.

IN this Blessing of Abraham by Melchisedec all Believers are virtually blessed
by Jesus Christ: (says the devout Mr. Burkit.) For Melchisedec represented
Christ in what he did, and Abraham represented all his believing spiritual Seed
in his receiving the Blessing. And truly it looks as if our Tithes were the
Proportion due still to Christ out of our Estate under the Gospel; because
Abraham paid it to Christ, in Him who was so great a Type of Him, so long
before the Days of Moses. For therefore the T^the is not to be reckoned to
belong to the Ceremonial Law, or to be only of the Levitical Obligation and
Antiquity; for though Moses required it as he did Circumcision also, yet
neither of 'em were Originally of Moses, but of the Fathers, John 7.22.

TO conclude, Melchizedek as a Priest had no Predecessor nor Suc^, so neither
is the glorious Priesthood of Chr^ derived from or transmitted unto any, but it
is an Unchangeable Priesthood. Now consider how Great this Man was! -- but why?
-- even because he was the Representative of Him who is the King and Priest of
His Church.

4. THE other Figure and Type of CHRIST in the History of Abraham is his
Offering up his Son, his Only Son, Isaac, whom he loved, at the command of GOD.
Genesis 23. Isaac was the promised and blessed Seed, the chosen of GOD, and the
Darling of his Father: Abraham was bid to offer him up with his own hands in
Sacrifice. So GOD spared not His Only begotten Son, but delivered. Him up for
us all. The Wood for the fire was said on Isaac to bear as a figure of Christ's
bearing His Cross. Isaac was the Lamb for the Burnt-Offering: Christ is the
Lamb of GOD whose blood was shed for us, as of a Lamb without blemish and
without spot. GOD freely gave his Son to die for us, the Son of GOD freely laid
down his own life, he made it his own Act: So Obedient and Innocent Isaac seems
to have submitted freely to his Father, in the offering of himself; without
objecting against the Will of GOD, without any struggling or resistance,
without any attempt to escape. Isaac was bound however for the Altar and laid
upon it, so Christ was bound in order to his death. Moreover, In the very
Mountains of Moriah where Isaac was offered, the Temple which was the Place of
Sacrifices was afterward built: See the 2 Chronicles. 3.1. And here was Mount
Calvary where Christ was crucified. At last Isaac was released by the Angels
Voice from Heaven, and a Ram (provided by the hand of Heaven and presented
there) was offered in his stead; which Ram was the figure of Christ Sacrificed
in our place, and of the Believers discharge from death by his death. It might
moreover signify, that the offering up that Blessed Seed lately promised, and
typified by Isaac, should be So Mr. Mede, Dr. Patrick, and Mr. Henry.
suspend^ till the fullness of time, and that in the mean w^e the Sacrifices of
beasts should be still accepted, as they had hitherto been; to be unto the
Church the pledges of that great Expiation which should one day be made by the
death of Christ. In a word, the Ram was a Sacrifice of God's providing and not
Man's: So the Incarnation and Death of Christ was the gracious and blessed
provision of Heaven for us, and not ours for our selves; and should be to our
surprise and joy, as it was to Abraham to hear the Angels words, and to see the
Ram fast in the thicket.

I pass over Jacobs Ladder, and Joseph; Sufferings and Exaltation, and shall
only lay before you,

IV. THE Blessing of Judah from the dying lips of Jacob. Ger. 10.8, 10. Judah,
thou art He whom thy Brethren shall praise; thy band shall be in the neck of
thine Enemies; thy Fathers children shall how down before thee; -- the Scepter
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Langiver from between his feet until Shileb
(...), and unto Him shall the gathering of the People be. From this Prediction
the Christian Church has always proved against the Jews that the Messiah is
come, that JESUS is HE, and that we are not to look for another.

THE name Judah signifies praise: his Mother gave it him to express her
Thankfulness to GOD, but Providence had a further meanning in it, because of
the future Honors and Fame or that Neble Tribe; particularly the Royal Dignity
its refting in it, and the Messiah's coming cut of it. This was the praise of
Judah. It was a numerous and warlike Tribe; for Courage and valor, Conquest
and victory likned to a Lion: and you know who it is that is called, the Lion
of the Tribe of Judah; even our Victorious, risen, ascended and reignite JESUS.
Rev. 5.5.

BUT the most Eminent Prophecy is in the tenth verse; The Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet until Shiloh come; and
unto Him shall the Gathering of the People be.

THE Jews have been as much confounded by the Interpretation and Application of
this Prophecy to the Person and Time of our Savior, as almost by any one in
the Old Testament. They generally own that by Shilch is meant the Messiah. So
the Talmudists, Cairites, Cabbalists, Targum, Onkelos and others do agree, as
Monficur Basnage proves. The various Interpretations given of this Mysterious
Word do all agree to the Messiah. Some read Shiloh -- Him that is Sent; a well
known Name of Christ: Others read it -- His Son or Seed; others the Peaceable,
the prosperous, August, renowned. The Messiah or Christ is all these in a way
of Eminence.

JUDAH by this Prophecy was to have the Scepter, and the Lawgiver was to be of
him, till about the time of the Coming of Christ it should fore this Honor and
Pre-eminence above the other Tribes; while at the same time the Gentile Nations
should be called.

THE word Schevet, which we read Scepter, might also be translated Tribe. Moses
several times uses the Word in this sense, and Mr. Basnage thinks him the best
Interpreter of himself. The sense then would be -- Judah shall remain a Tribe
until Shiloh come. Now if this be the true Reading it was wonderfully
fulfilled, as every child knows. For the Kingdom of Judah were not captivated
and loft with the ten Tribes of Israel, who broke off under Jeroboam from the
House of David, and were carried away by Salmanasser, and we scarce know what
became o^ 'em unto this day. But Judah continued a Kingdom about a hundred
Years after, and then was carried Captive to Babylon, where the poor Tribe was
in a manner preserved Entire, and after Seventy Years as many as would returned
and rebuilt Jernsalem, under the favor of Cyrus and other Persian Empetors;
and in time it revived again into a kind of Kingdom, and gave the Name of Judea
to the Land of Israel, and so continued to the Coming of Christ: For the little
Tribe of Benjamin, the Remains of Levi, and some few poor Families of some
other Tribes were in a manner Incorporated into, and lost in this of Judah. But
soon after the death of Christ came on the destruction of Jerusalem, and the
disperxsion of the Tribe of Judah, and these Remains of that woeful People are
dissipated through the Earth, no more a distinct Tribe; their Genealogies are
lost and confounded; there is not a Family, no not the House of David, that know
certainly or can prove their line and descent.

BUT let us read the Word Schebet Rod; and the Question is, What kind of red is
here meant? The Jews perversely say, in spite of the scope of the whole Blessing
here given, It is the Rod of Correction: which they are indeed under in the
utmost Emphasis of the Word. But this Interpretation does the utmost Violence
to the Context, which speaks altogether of Judahs Pre-eminence, Honor,
Superiority, plenty felicity; Majesty, Victory and Empire. This therefore ought
to determine the sense for us, that it is the Red of Dignity and Government
that is here meant, which is to say a Scepter; the strong Red of them that hear
rule. Ezekiel. 10.11.

THE LXX therefore read it (...), the Ruler; of whose Authority and Dignity the
Rod, Staff and Scepter is the Ensign. Amos 1.5. Him that holds the Scepter:
i. e. the King or Chief Ruler. Very justly therefore do we translate it
Scepter, and the Prophecy was that Judah should hold it.

THE other Word Mech^kek, which we translate Lawgiver, signifies, (as Bp
Patrick observes both from the Scripture and Jewish use of the word) a Power
and Government inferior to the Royal Dignity; Governors dependent on and
deriving from Another that is Supreme; such as after the Captivity were set
over the Jews by the Kings of Persia, and afterward by the Roman Empire.

FROM the days of David to the Babylonish Captivity Judah had properly the
Scepter or Royal Power: And after their return from Babylon to the days of our
Savior and a few years after, they had a Government and Governors among them;
and generally before our Saviors time the Governor in Chief was of
themselves; and the Government was mostly Jewish, the Great Council or Sanedrim
having great power and Authority unquestionably lodged in them. At the Birth of
CHRIST the Romans had the Sovereignty over 'em, and the poor Remains of Power
and Dignity were departing apace from Judah.

Mr. Basnage thinks we have been too much cazled with the word Scepter, as if
it must necessarily imply a proper Regal Authority. This (he thinks) has run
Christian Exp^sitors into inextricable Lybyrinths; in as much as there were no
Kings of Judah from Moses to David; so neither any from the Captivity in
Babylon to the last destruction of Jerusalem. So that the prope Scepter or
Regal Authority began 600 Years after the Oracle of Jacob, continued but about
500 Years, and ended 500 before Christ; and so in no wife seems to answer the
Prophecy.

BY Scepter therefore he would have us to understand only a High Degree of
Pre-eminence, which was the portion of Judah when it did not hold the Regal
Scepter. Judah excelled the other Tribes in Numbers and in Valor. When the
Government was Aristocratical Judah had the first port, and marched at the head
of the Tribes. When it was Monarchial, the Kings were chiefly of this Tribe,
yea in a constant Succession they were so from the time of David. And wh^ the
Council or Sanedrim governed, Judah was the Tribe in Being, and Jerusalem the
Seat of the Government. Thus in all respects it had the Pre-eminence.

BUT now the last Destruction of Jerusalem has confounded this Tribe of Judah
and scattered them through the Earth. It has only this Shadow of Pre-eminence
left, that in its dispersion it is preserved a distinct Body among the Nations,
here a Person and there a Family or two, but uncertain for the most part
whether they belong to Levi, to Benjamin or to Judah. The Scepter subsists no
where, nor has it been any where for more than Sixteen whole Centuries past.
Judah is a Vegab^nd and Fugitive; the Scepter is departed, not by an
Interruption of 70 Years as before, but through a Duration of 1700 Years.

ALL this proves that Shil^b is come, and points unto our LORD JESUS as the
Blessed Person so called, upon whose death the dispersion of Judah followed, as
He with tears foretold and threatened. And unto Him we have seen the G^th^ing of
the People to be; and we cur selves (among the Gentile Nations) are a part of
the happy Instance and proof of it. Mr. Mede therefore judges, that this
Prophecy was not fulfilled till the time of the Destruction of the Jewish state
by Titus, which he thinks agrees to the letter of our Saviors words, Mat.
24.14. This Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the World, for a
Witness unto all Nations, and them shall the End (soil. of the Jewish State)
come.

THUS dying Jacob at a great distance saw Christ's day, and it was his great
Comfort and Support on his Deathbed; as Mr. Henry says on the place. He
foretells that the Scepter should come into the Tribe of Judah, that Shilob the
promised Seed should be of it; that in Judah a Government of its own should
continue till the Coming of the Messiah; long after the Kingdom of Israel or
the Ten Tribes had ceased, without any Revival. And so it was: Our LORD came of
Judah, the Praise of all his Saints; To Him belongs the Scepter, and He is the
Lawgiver. In the day when the Jews rejected him, they confessed the Scepter
departed from themselves: We have no King but Casar, said they to Pilate, and
again, It is not lawful for us to put any man to death. See John 18.31. and
19.15.

On these grounds we say then that our LORD JESUS is the CHRIST, the promised
Shiloh; just about whose time on Earth the Scepter departed from Judah, and
upon their dispersion the Nations were Converted to Christ and taken into his
Church; which is the Kingdom of GOD in the World. Genesis 19.18. I have waited for
thy Salvation, O Lord.

THUS I have given a Specimen out of the Writings of Moses, in his first Book
which is called Genesis, by which we may see how much he wrote of CHRIST; and
that if we believe his Writings we must needs believe in Christ, that He is the
true Messiah and the Savior of Men.

THE time would sail me should I now look into the other Books of Moses, to
interpret what he there writes concerning Christ. The Deliverance of the Jewish
Church out of Egypt was a great and singular Type of the Redomption of Souls
from the more cruel and miserable servitude of Sin and Saran: The Paschal Lamb
was an Eminent figure of the Son and Lamb of God slain for us; our Sacrificed
Savior: The Manna from Heaven was a figure of Him the true Bread, and bread of
Life: The water from the smitten Rock which followed the thirsty Camp of Israel
and satisfied 'em, was a figure of the Overflowing and ever flowing refresh.
wants and Consclations for every famishing and thirsty Soul from a Smitten
Savior: The Levitical Tabernacle; Priesthood, Sacrifices; Ceremonial
Uncleanness and Cleansings; were full of spiritual Mystery pointing to
Christ, His Natures, Offices, Sacrifice and Benefits: And finally, The Mosaical
Festivals and Solemnities; the Day of Atonement, the feast of Penticost and
Tabernacles, Trumpets and New Moons, the Sabbatical Year and the " Jubilee, did
in many respects refer to him: According to that of the Apostle to the
Galatians, The Law was a Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ.

BUT I shall not enter into any of these particulars: I speak in the presence
of them that need it not, and to a Master in Israel that happily knows these
things; who having been a Disciple of Moses from his Infancy appears now among
us openly to profess himself a Disciple of JESUS; because he finds that Moses
and the Prophets of a truth wrote of Him, and that their Writings are fulfilled
in Him; and that therefore He must be and is that Prophet which should come
into the World.

SIR, We thank GOD for the Illumination he has given you, and your professed
Subjection this day unto the Gospel of Christ. We rejoice and give Glory to GOD
in your Conversion from Judaism to Christianity. You come not to Jesus by
Night, as Nic^demus a Matter in Israel once did under some good Convections,
but still in darkness and fears: You come to CHRIST in open day, and to his
Baptism in this compicuous Place, and with a full persuasion of the Verity of
the Christion Doctrines, and with a full purpose of heart by the Grace of
Christ to walk in all his blessed Laws and Ordinances all the days of your
life; entirely placing your trust and hope in Him for Salvation. We also are
assembled this day in solemn and awful form to receive your open profession of
his Name, and bid you welcome (so far as in us lies) unto his blessed sect and
saving Arms.

AND now what Words more apposite and awful can I direct unto you on this
Occasion, than those of our LORD's unto Nichodemus? St. John 3.3, 5. Verily,
verily I say unto thee, Except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of
God: Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God.

GIVE me leave to explain and press those words upon you, as bringing you the
most pertinent Direction and proper Exhortation, and receive them as from the
mouth of CHRIST unto You upon your present Coming to Him.

SOME of our learned Christian Doctors See Dr. Hammond in loc.
tell us that the phrase (...), born again, denotes no more than becoming a
Proselyte of Christ; and consequently the Confessing him publicly in his
appointed way. And then (...), born of water, means only being received as a
Proselyte to Christ by Baptism. The Proselytes among the Jews were Initiated by
washing or Baptism, and it was a kind of putting off all their former
Relations, kindred and Consanguinity, and so a being as it were new born. Our
Savior therefore wonders (say some) that Nichode^es, a Master in Israel should
not understand this Mode and Form of Speech, You must be born again. For as a
Heathen proselyted to the Jewish Religion did in a manner like Abraham leave
his Country and Fathers house, his Brethren and Sisters, in renouncing their
Idolatries; So a Jew becoming a Christian Proselyte forsakes his Jewish
Principles, customs and Communion, and comes over entirely into a new
Dispensation, a new worship, Doctrine and way of Salvation.

BUT this Interpretation, though it looks ingenious and has a face of Learning,
does by no means come up to the sense and life and power of our Savior's
Words. You must understand Him to mean nothing else than a Divine Celestial
Birth, a blessed Regeneration, a heavenly Ren^vation passing on the Soul from
the power of the HOLY GHOST. This New Birth is the thing signified, represented
and sealed by Baptism, and is the Soul and Substance of that Sacred Ceremony
See Pools Annot. in loc, and the learned Stephen Charnock.
: For the Grace of the Holy Spirit in purifying the Soul is fitly represented
by the washing with water: See Isai. 44.3. Ezekiel. 36.25.

SO then to be born of Water and of the Spirit means a Soul renewed by the
Power of the HOLY GHOST, working and cleansing like Water. Accordingly we read
Titus 3.1. of the washing of Regeneration and the Renewing of the Holy Ghost.
Which means the same with, 1 Pet. 1.2. The Sanctification of the Spirit unto
Obedience: In short, He that will enter into the State of the Gospel must be
baptized, and he that enters into a State of Grace is Regenerated. Clarks Annot.


"THERE must be a Change from Nature to Grace, or else no change of Principles
or Profession will save a Man. Nichodemus may own and confess Christ, and
submit to him from a real Conviction in his Conscience that He is the Great
Teacher and Messiah come from God; and so a Jew may receive the Baptism of
Christ; but if a regenerating Change does not pass upon his Soul, producing a
new Heart and Life, his Baptism will not save him. The Answer of a good
Conscience toward God is all in all in a Proselyte coming to Baptism.

NICHODEMUS Mr. Henry in loc.
was no doubt one of those that expected the Kingdom of the Messiah, and was
looking for Redemption in Israel; and it may be he came early to Christ (says
one) to secure a Place for himself in the expected temporal Reign and Kingdom
of the Messiah. But our Lord surprises him by telling him that His Kingdom was
a Spiritual thing, and if any Man would share in the Benefits and Advantages
thereof it must be by a Change wro't in his Spirit: A new Nature must be given
him, he must become a New Creature, a New Man: New Principles, new Affections,
new Aims must govern in him and produce a new, holy heavenly and divine life.
The Pharisees placed their Religion in an External purity and in outward
performances; but Christ requires Internal Sanctity and heart purity: Psalm
51.5, 10. Behold thou desire truth in the Inward part: Create in me a clean
heart, O GOD, and renew a right spirit within me.

THE learned Mr. Charnock excellently paraphrases on our Lord's words to
Nichodemus after this mander: "You must become a New Man if you come to me:
Away with your old notions and Pharisaical pride: deny your honor, credit, and
worldly Interest, and confess me openly before the World: a legal frame and a
Pharisaical Righteousness will never advance you to or in my Kingdom: Think not
to say within your self, I am a Son of Abraham: You must become a Son of GOD by
Grace and Sanctification.

I though it it proper thus to enlarge on and illustrate our Blessed Savior's
Words to a Master of Israel upon his Coming to him. I have done it in the best
words of our Christian Expositors as I could hastily collect them. And now I
leave them with You that have been a Rabbin, and pray you to apply them unto
your Self in this single serious Enquiry, -- Am I born again? has a new Birth
passed on me? Am I a new Creature? What have I experienced of a Work of Grace
begun and carrying on in my Soul?

BELIEVE me, Sir, our Christian Baptisin is a great Solemnity in our Holy
Religion! it is a very reverend and hely Ordinance; supposes you in a state of
Grace and calls for a very gracious Frame.

IT is easy for you to receive a place in the visible Church and Kingdom of the
Messiah, but w^n it there is an Invisible State of Grace and Salvation; Are you
in that?

IS your Heart right with God this Day? Are you upright in the sight of Christ,
wh^ searches your Heart, in this Dedication of your self unto Him? What
signifies Baptism without this? Be sure that you have no By-ends, no finifter
and corrupt Views, no worldly Advantages, in what you do this day. GOD torbid,
that these should act you. We hope, we believe they don't: You have solemnly
professed that they do not.

WE cannot be content with your good Profession: we seek your saving Conversion
to Eternal (...). Is there a Change in your heart as well as in your
Principles? You renounce your Jewish Infidelity, do you renounce also all Sin,
every evil way^ Is your desire true and servent after inward Grace and
Holiness? and is your purpose and resolution firm, by the help of God, to
endeavor after that ^ory heavenly life which the Gospel requires, in
Conformity to the Example and Life of the Blessed JESUS?

IF it be thus, then admire and adore the Distinguishing Grace of God unto you!
B^indnes^, has happened to Israel, but blessed are your Eyes or you see! The
Grace is Sovereign and free which has touched you, while your dear Nation yet
remain hardened. O had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of
Glory! -- and yet they will not know him, though they have born so long the Curse
your Fathers im^recated on you when they rejected him before Pilate.

WE lock for the happy day of the Conversion of the Jews and of Isreal's
Salvation; we daily and earnestly pray for it with great desire; we wait for it
with a holy Impatience; It will be life from the dead to the Christian World:
-- What hinders it? You may read 2 Cor. 3.14, 15, 16. Even unto this day when
Moses is read the vail is upon their heart: Nevertheless when it shall turn to
the Lord the vail shall be taken away: Now the Lord is that Spirit and where
the Spirit of the Lord is there is Liberty. There is a vail of Spiritual
Blindness upon the Jewish Nation, judicially laid on them for their rejecting
Christ. This hinders 'em from seeing in the reading of the Old Testament, how
Moses and the Prophets wrote of him. But the day is coming when God will open
their eyes to see this and then they will immediately relent, and look unto him
whom they have pierced. The blessed and holy Spirit of Grace will fall upon
'em, enlighten, convince, convert 'em; and free 'em from their present
prejudices. The Son of God will make 'em free and they shall be free indeed.

IF you, Sir, are freed from the Prejudices of your unhappy Nation, once the
most honored and dignified upon Earth, it is Christ has freed you, Give him
the Glory. I salute you this day as Philip did Nathanael: Joh. 1.45. We have
found him of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets did write, Jesus of
Nazareth. You believe, and are going to Him. O may the All-seeing Lord say of
you and to you as he sees you coming, -- Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is
no Guile.

HE I trust has seen you in your secret Solemn Consecration of your Self to
Him. Now do it again in the presence of us all, and say to our Gracious
SAVIOR, -- Rabbi, thou art the Son of GOD, thou art the King of Israel.

THE END.
THE TRUTH, Being a DISCOURSE Which the Author Delivered at his BAPTISM,
Containing Nine Principal Arguments the Modern Jewish Rabbis do make to prove,
the MESSIAH is yet to Come: With the Answers to each, not only according to the
Orthodox Opinion, but even with the Authority of their own Authentic Rabbis
of Old.

And Likewise, With the Confession of his Faith, At the Latter End.

Dedicated to the Jewish Nation. And Prefac'd by the Reverend INCREASE MATHER,
D.D.

By R. Judah Monis.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, for D. HENCHMAN, at the Corner Shop on the
South side of the Townhouse. 1722.

Advertisement.
THe Author Hopes the English Reader will afford the following Discourses his
Candor, and Excuse any want of Accuracy in the English Idiome, (and
punctation,) considering the English Tongue is what he has not been very long
used to, and for that reason does not pretend to be a complete Master of. As to
the Quotations for want of the Hebrew Types in this Country, he is obliged to
give them only in English, but he refers to the particular places of the
Respective Authors, and Submits to the Censure of the Learned, whether they be
misrepresented or no. Where any Hebrew Words are written, he has used such
English Letters, as he apprehends will best convey the sound and pronounciation
of the Hebrew Word: to the Reader.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Conversion of Mr. Monis to Christianity, is an Effect of Divine Grace. The
Truth and Reality of his Conversion appears in what is here Exhibited, in that
he has notably confuted the Jews, from the Scriptures in the Old Testament,
which they pretend to believe. Here is also asserted and proved, the Deity of
our Lord Jesus Christ. And that although he is a Man, yet more than a Man. And
here also is asserted and proved the Glorious Mystery of the Trinity, that that
GOD whose Name is Jeh^vab is the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. These are the
main Principles whereby Christianity is distinguished from Judaism and other
false religions. There will a time come when there shall be a General
Conversion of the Jewish Nation. There have been some of that Nation brought
home to Christ, who have proved Blessings to the World. In special Emanue!
Tremelius was such an one, whose dying Words were, Vivat Christus, et pereat
Barrabas. Let Christ Live, and let Barrabas Die. There were Two Jews, viz. John
Alexander and Theodore John who joined themselves to the German Lutheran
Congregation in the City of London. A Learned Man, viz. Dr. Kidder gives an
account of Two Handred (...) lately Converted in the City of Frankford. The
Blessed Day is coming when all Israel shall be Saved, as I have Evinced in a
Discourse on that Subject, written in the Year 1667, and also in my Answer to
the Reverend Mr. Baxter, and Dr. Lightfoot, printed An^ 1695. And the
Providence of GOD s^ Intimate this. The Miraculous manner of GOD's preserving
the Jewish Nation is an invincible Proof hereof; for it is an unpresidented and
incomprehensible thing, that GOD should for Two Thousand Years preserve this
People, dispersed among other Nations, without being confounded with them in
their Religions and Customs, as is usual among all dispersed People; this
clearly Demonstrates that GOD has preserved them for some great Design, which
what can it be but their Conversion?

IT is moreover True, that many particular Jews, who have been Converted or
rather Perverted to Popery, have after Renoun^ their Christianity. There was a
Rabbinical Professor at Vienna, who was thought to be Zealous for Christianity,
so that he Translated Paul's Greek (...) to the Hebrews into the Hebrew Tongue,
who afterward returned to his Judaism.

ALSO comed Otton who after his Conversion writ violently against the
Synagogue; nevertheless this Man Scandalized at the Devotion of his Brethren,
Quitted his Profession and Returned to Judaism.

MANY other Examples I might mention but I forbear. There is no cause to fear
that Mr. Monis will Renounce his Christianity, since he did embrace it
Voluntarily and Gradually, and with much Consideration, and from Scriptures in
the Old Testament.

GOD Grant that he (who is the first Jew that ever I knew Converted in
New England) may prove a Blessing unto many, and especially to some of his own
Nation: Which is the Prayer and hearty Desire of,

Increase Mather.
Boston, May 1st. 1722.
To my Brethren According to the Flesh.
Dear and Beloved Brethren,
I Do expect the News of my Embracing the Christian Religion that came to your
Ears some time ago, has been somewhat surprising to you all; and I am afraid
you did not think it to be the best you ever have heard; If so I am very sorry
for it, and hope in the God of Love and Mercy, that He will keep me in my
belief, with that Love toward you in particular, and to all Mankind in
general, and more especially to those that belong to the household of Faith, as
his holy Word has directed me: and have mercy upon you, and in due time take
the Vail from before the eyes of your Understanding, that so you may see the
veracity of his Christ.

ONE thing I would entreat of you, (which in case you will be willing to grant
unto me, I am in great hopes you love your Souls, and hear that brotherly
affection and love toward me, as in duty you are all obliged to; Lev. 19.17,
(...). Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart: thou shall in any wise
rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. Thou shall not avenge not
bear any grudge against the children of thy people, but thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self: I am the Lord.) viz. To read the following Discourses
with attention and without Prejudice (if possible) and examine the quotations
therein contained; and if you find them truly quoted and sincerely transleted
(as doubtless they are) you will not judge otherwise of me, but that my
embracing Christianity, was because I was fully persuaded it is the only
Religion wherein I thought I could be saved; And not because I bad self ends,
neither because I found in any Book of the Old Testament any folshood, or any
thing that I dislike, (which God forbid) But on the contrary, I did it for
God's Glory, and because I saw in the Writings of the Old Testament (which I
verily believe and am fully persuaded to be God's Word) the Prophecies that
speak concerning the Messiah, viz. of his Birth, i. e. the Place, and from
which Seed, Tribe and Family; Of his Growth, i. e. meek and low; Of his
Function and Miracles to Preach and Comfort the sorrowful and afflicted ones,
of his Mission, a Lawgiver like unto Moses; of the time and manner of His
coming, i. e. in the Second Temple, and in a very low and mean Condition; of
his Death and Sufferings, i. e. for our iniquities; and not for himself, but
made an offering for Sin: And finally, of His Resurrection, and Ascension,
fully accomplished in our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; And likewise of His
setting at the Right Hand of God the Father, and of His being the Son of the
Living God from the beginning, Coequal and Coeval with Him from all Eternity,
very and Eternal GOD.

Dear Brethren, I cannot but think some of you are very much troubled at my
proceedings, but this I would desire and heartily beseech of you, to know and
be fully persuaded, that the Christian Religion (the Protestant I mean) is not
such a one as you take it to be, but it is the best of all Religions, and so
far as I know the clearest from Superstitions of any whatsoever.

THE Doctrine of the ever blessed Trinity (that you very much stumble at) is
not an erroneous one (as you through a mistake do apprehend) but a true and
certain one, that God has been pleased to reveal in his Word, i. e. in the Old
Testament from the very beginning, ( vide, the third Discourse) although, not
with that clearness as He did afterward in the New Testament, which I most
surely and certainly believe to be the Word of God, as well as the Old; because
I cannot see any substantial reason that can be alleged to invalidate the
Authority of the New, but the same may be brought to desprove the veracity of
the Old; and so to the contrary the same Reasons that any Rabby whatsoever may
bring to prove the Truth of Moses's Miracles, and the rest of his Words, the
very same may be with equal strength improved to evidence the certainty of
Christ's Wonderful Works and Mission.

INDEED if I had declared my self, to be one of the Church of Rome's Communion,
I should not Wonder, in case I was censured by the least of you, because that
would be nothing else but practically to deny the Law and the Prophets, etc.
But since I have not (God forbid that I or any of you should,) and my embracing
the Protestant Religion, I did it not rashly, but upon mature thoughts and
deliberation (as you may see by the following Discourses, and more of this
Nature that I do design to acquaint you with, if God by His most holy will and
pleasure, shall open the way for it.) I hope you will follow the Advice of our
Countryman ELELL, left recorded for your imitation, in the Second Chap. of
MASSECHETH AUBOTH, 4.

Dear Brothren, I am very sensible there are a great many places scattered up
and down in the Talmud Medrashim, and other Writers, that you can allege
against me, to disprove my Interpretations of the Prophecies; Therefore to
prevent you the trouble of saying so, I say, That I never did (nor shall)
pretend to quote them as infallible ones, but only to let you know in a more
particular manner, and the rest of the Learned World besides, that even among
the Rabbis of old, there have been sundry of very great Note, Fame and
Authority among you, that understood the places in the Old Testament that speak
concerning the Messiah, even as we Christians do, and that Christianity is not
an upstart Religion, us all of you at this time do falsely suppose, but as old
and ancient as the Bible it self, which is the only true and infallible Rule
that we must take for our Guide. Isai. 8.20. To the law and to the testimony:
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them.

AND so I Conclude Trusting in the Name of our GOD, that He will Inlighten you
in the True Path of Eternal Happiness, when in (...) Infinite Goodness He shall
be pleased to bestow the Riches of His Free Grace upon you, which that it may
so be, is the Earnest Prayer of,

Your Loving and Affectionate Brother, According to the Flesh, Judah Monis.
Cambridge, May 1st. A.D. 1722.
The Truth.
PSALM CXVI. 10. I Believed, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly Afflicted.


AS Nothing can be established without a Foundation, so likewise according to
the firmness and solidity of said Foundation, the Superstructure will last or
decay. Or as every thing which is to be established requires a Foundation for
it, so likewise every thing according to the Nature of it, the Foundation must
be answerable thereunto. This Maxim is ancient and infallible, and so common
that nothing can be more obvious to the beholders. We have heard or seen
several instances of this Nature, not only in Worldly Affairs, but even in
Spiritual also. We read in the Acts of the Apostles, Chap. 5.39. how the Great
Doctor Gamaliel used this very Argument, for the Deliverance of Peter and the
rest of the Apostles from the hands of their Persecutors, saying, If it be of
God ye cannot overthrow it, i. e. if the Doctrine which these Men teach is
founded upon Men's Foundation (as that of Teudas, and of Judas the Galilean
were,) it shall certainly perish; but in case their Doctrine, is founded upon a
sure and good Foundation, (i.e. in God,) I advise you not to meddle with them:
because it is impossible for you, or all the World together, to overthrow it:
but they shall flourish and last for ever. The Jewish Senate as soon as they
heard him say so, were convinced with the strength of the Argument, and rested
from killing them; and they being delivered, went on to teach and preach Jesus
Christ in the Temple, and in every house daily: and because the Foundation
which the Apostles did lay their Doctrine upon, was Jesus Christ; For this
reason it not only flourished, but it has lasted ever since, and shall endure
for ever. Jesus Christ is called by the Apostle Paul to the R^mans, Chap.
15.20. and 1 Cor. 3.11, 12. A Foundation, to teach us, that any thing which is
founded, a built upon it, can never decay or fall, but will rema^ permanent and
durable till the Worlds end; and for our assurance and encouragement we find
recorded (...) Mat. 16.18. Christ said to Peter upon his confession that Jesus
Christ, was the Son of the Living God -- Upon this Rock I will build my Church,
and t^ gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Upon the Foundation, this
Everlasting Basis, the Church a the Living God, has been since the beginning,
establishlished and built; from the beginning upon the Expectation of Christ's
being to come, and afterwars upon his being already come. We Christians do
believe that Jesus Christ the Son of the Living God, (...) already come, and
the Jewish Nation, that He is (...) come. We that believe that Jesus Christ is
the S^ of the Living God, and that He is already come, prosper daily, and they
that deny Him, never d^ But to the contrary they have been as it were abandon^
from his presence and favor, both in Church (...) State; and I verily believe,
and am fully perswade^ they shall never come to be a gathered Nation w^
Grandeur and Splendor, either Corporeal or Spiritual, till they come with one
consent, and Acknowledge what they have denied hitherto, even, that Jesus
Christ, the Son of the Living God is already come as it was predicted by all
the Prophets, and till the^ (and not before) we cannot expect, (with any
reason) they shall be as they were before. This truth may be plainly seen in
the Prophet, H^s. 3.4, 5. Whom (rebuking the Nation for their incredulity or
unbelief,) the Lord bid to love a Woman beloved of her friend, etc. which
accordingly he did, as we read, ver. 1, 2, 3. and then he goes on to pronounce
their desolation in the following words, For the Children of Israel shall abide
many days without a King and without a Prince, and without a Sacrifice, and
without a Statue, and without an Ephod and Teraphim. Afterward shall the
Children of Israel return, and seek the Lord their God, and David their King,
and shall fear the Lord, and his goodness in the Latter days. The first part of
this Prophecy we do see, has been fulfilled to the very last tittle, they
having been for the space of above 1650 Years (since the destruction of their
Commonwealth,) deprived of all those things mentioned in the fourth verse; and
reduced from that State they were formerly in, which was such as could make any
Nation happy, to such a one as they are now in, scattered all over the World,
subject to all sorts of Nations, that are willing to let them live among them,
ruled by their own Enemies, paying Tribute to all Nations where they live, and
finally enduring all the Calamities and opprobrious Treatment that can make
them unhappy: and as we have seen the first part accomplished, so I hope the 2d
part will be fulfilled also, i. e. that they shall return, and seek the Lord,
and David their King, i. e. the Messiah, the Lord Jesus Christ, and fear him
and his Goodness in the latter days, and look on Him whom they have pierced,
Zech. 12.10. Rev. 1.7.

WE read in the Acts of the Apostles, Chap. 4.12. That there is no other Name
under Heaven given among Men whereby we can be saved, but the Name of Jesus
Christ. This is so absolute and infallible, that the best Divines among the
Protestant Nation all agree and declare, That those who having never heard the
Gospel, know not Christ, and believe not in Him, cannot be saved, be they never
so diligent to frame their Lives according to the light of Nature, or the Law
of the Religion which they profess. If so (not to infringe upon Christian
Charity) it is certainly an astonishing thing, and a thing of great Admiration
to see so many Nations, and so many Kingdoms in the World, which do perish for
lack of Vision! And more in particular we are to bewa^ the Jewish Nation above
all the rest of the World, a Nation which were once God's favorite, People
who^ God chose from all Nations to communicate to then his Divine Oracles; and
condescended to give them such Excellent Epithets as to call them, My Children,
my First Born; my Beloved; my Peculiar People, etc. to see them so rejected as
to come to be the scorn of all Nations, and a laughing stock of all People Not
from Yesterday, but for these Seventeen Centuries and upwards! --

AS to the coming of the Messiah, i. e. the He is already come; I could prove
with sever^ Instances at large, namely of the time and place the He was to
come, of His Birth and Sufferings, and that He is the Son of the Living God
from (...) beginning, Coaqual and Coaval with God the Father from all Eternity;
all these Points and sundry others I could prove, as I said, to be nothing but
the Truth, not only by the Authority of the Sacred Oracles, but even by the
Opinion of their own Rabbis of old But the Jewish Nation, at the present time,
which do deny all these Truths, do bring a great many Objections, to disprove
and invalidate the veracity o^ them. And at present I do purposely design to
tak^ Notice, only of those made against His being come Which if I answer them
in full, (as I hope I shall) then we may fairly conclude that He is already
come. These are Nine, which I do design so far as the time will allow, to
Examine every one in particular without partiality, and Answer them, not only
by the Authority of the Sacred Oracles, but even by the Authority of then own
Authentic Authors, imploring God's Grace with the Psalmist, Psalm. 19.14. --
Let the words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy
sight, O Lord, my rock, and my redeemer.

I shall lay (...) first the Objections as they state them, and afterward in
my Answer to them distinctly, I shall show whereon they ground their Opinions.

Namely,

1st, THAT at the coming of the Messiah there shall be a Great War, called the
War of Gog and Magog, made up of a certain People, newly Born for that Purpose,
in which War the King Messiah shall Conquer, by killing the Enemy's King by the
Breath of his Mouth.

2dly, AT the time of the Messiah, the Ten Tribes with the rest of the Jewish
Nation, shall be gathered together into one place, even in Judea.

3dly, WHEN the Messiah shall come, He shall Build a third Temple in Jerusalem,
as was formerly; but with more Glory and Majesty.

4thly, AFTER the coming of the Messiah, every dumb Creature shall be as they
were before Adam's Sin.

5thly, AT the time of the Messiah and for ever more after, an Universal and
General Peace, shall be all over the World.

6thly, THE Messiah was to come at the end of the World.

7thly, THE Mountain where the House of God was Built, M^ly shall Grow up, and
be higher than any Mountains and ^lls in the World.

8thly, ALL Nations in General without exception, shall acknowledge him to be
the Messiah promised by the Prophets of old.

9thly, and lastly, THE very same Law that God gave to the Jewish Nation from
the beginning, either Moral or Ceremonial is to be kept until the end of the
World.

THESE are the chief Arguments, or Objections that I remember the Modern
Rabbis do make to defend themselves by, and with them do oppose their True
Lord and Savior, and are the only ones, which I think deserves Notice, so far
as to bestow any pains in Answer to them. (Hoping in Case I shall answer them
in full, with God's Blessing it will make such a deep Impression on the Hearts
of my Brethren, as to Acknowledge it, and Publicly Confess it.) viz.

The

1st, Argument is, THAT at the Coming of the Messiah, there shall be a great
War, called the War of Gog and Magog, and the Army of said King shall consist
of a certain Dwarf kind of People which shall come against the Messiah, and he,
the Messiah, shall overcome him, and kill him by the Breath of his Mouth. This
their Opinion is grounded upon the 38th, and 39th, Chapters of the Prophet
Ezekiel, and they argue thus; Since said War never was as yet, neither when
Christ came, nor afterward, ergo, The Messiah is yet to come.

To which I answer,

TO understand what the Prophet says, according to the Interpretation which
their Modern Rabbis have newly Invented, (who apply so many different
Scriptures to maintain their Chimaerical notions, as I could make it appear if
I had a mind to expose them) I think it is nothing but a Folly, and I am sure
if the Spirit of Truth had not left them, they could very quickly see with what
kind of Food they have been fed of late by some of their New upstart Rabbis.
Particularly ever since they took such an Aversion and Hatred to all Religions
in the World, and more particularly to the best of all Religions, even the
Religion of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and have left the good old way,
which their ancient Rabbis did constantly put upon the Prophetical Expressions.

Therefore I say,

THAT there shall be a War, and a Great one indeed in the Latter end, I
Believe, because the Prophet plainly says so; But that this War should be at
the first Advent of the Messiah, and that the Messiah's Enemies should be a
parcel of Dwarfs (as they Dream,) this is altogether false, because all those
Nations mentioned in these Chapters which shall join together with King Gog in
this War, are very well known in the World, (if we understand it Literally) as
the Muscovites Deciphered in Meshech and Toobaul; the Mohammedan Persians in
Paurass; the Arabian Ethiopians in Koosh; the Libyians in Poot; the Galatians
in Gomerr; the Turks in ^ogarmau; Sundry Nations of Arabia Felix in Shebau and
Dedaun; and the Africans in Tarshish; the Original of all these, they may
easily find in reading the first 7 Verses of the 10th Chapter of Genesis; but
the Question is to know, who this King Gog is; to which I say that according to
the Opinion of the best Divines, this name is not given to a particular King,
but it is a name given to all those which do Oppose Christ, who are called
Antichrists; these, shall at the latter end appear more openly than ever they
did, and disturb the Church of God, for which Reason, Christ as the Head of the
Church, shall destroy them with the Breath of His Mouth; pleading against them,
with Pestilence and with Blood, with a Tempestuous and an Overflowing Rain of
Hailstones, Fire, and Brimstone, as in v. 22.

TO prove the Truth of my Explication with Christian Authors, or with the 20th
Chapter of the Revelations, I know it is in vain (as to them) therefore I only
desire of them to Read the Book called ^mauh David composed by that famous R.
David de Pomis under the Word Armiles, and there they will find this worthy
Author plainly says, that this King Gog the Prophet spoke of in this place, is
Armilos which is the same (N. B.) that the Christians call Antichrist.

THE Name of Armilos that this Famous Rabby gives to Antichrist is not of his
own, but he has it from the Targum which (Paraphrasing the 4th verse of the
11th Chapter of Isaiah, which runs thus, But with Righteousness shall be (the
Messiah) Judge the poor, and reprove with equity, for the meek of the earth,
and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his Mouth, and with the Breath of
his Lips shall be slay the wicked: From whence the Jewish Nation have the
Notion that the Messiah shall kill the King Gog with the breath of his mouth,)
says thus, And He shall s^ite the Sinners of the Earth with the word of his
mouth, and with the speech of his lips shall cause Armilos (or Antie^ in) the
wicked to die.

I cannot but admire the Jewish Nations Notion to believe, this War should be
in the first advent of the Messiah; since one of the principal Arguments which
they allege against the certainty of Christ's being come, is that general
Peace that should be in his days, and for ever more after, as we shall
understand anon. And yet they argue against us because there was he War; how
could it be a War (and of such quality and quantity as this is described by the
Prophet in these two Chapters) and yet be Peace? Or how could it be a general
Peace in his days, and for evermore after, and a War in the same time? These
two things Peace and War, are so contrary one to another, that can never be
reconelled in the World as the Jewish Nation do believe, i. e. To be all in one
self same time and person; therefore since both Prophecies are true, because
both proceed from the Fountain of Truth, we must certainly conclude they speak
of two different times, as we say, i. e. the Peace time, at the first advent of
the Messiah, and the Wars time, some time before his Second Coming.

FOR the Confirmation of my Assertion, I will quote one single passage more out
of their own Rabbis, and then conclude with this Argument, viz.

IN Bereshith Rabbau, a Book of Great Authority among them, treating upon the
11th. verse of the 40th Chapter of Genesis, which says, And Pharaoh's Cup was
in my Hand; after a large and adilated Discourse, the Author ponders upon the
word which our English Translators translated, Salvation, in the 13th. verse of
the 116th Psalm, which in the Original is in the Plutal Number Heshoognoth,
Salvations, and says (...), Cup of Salvations: Cup of Sal(...) (in the
singular) is not wrote in this place, But (...) of Saloations (in the Plural to
teach us there shall be two Salvations) one in the Time (or days) of the
Messiah, and another in the time (or days) of Gog.

NOW out of these Sentences I gather Two things; first, that the time of the
Messiah, and the time of Gog are two different Times, and secondly, that Christ
was to be a God as well as Man, contrary to what they are willing now to own,
because they say, that be shall kill the wicked with the Speech of his Lips,
and I ask, who is that that could or can kill another Man like himself with a
single Breath only? Did ever any Man do such a thing? Or can any Man kill the
least visible Creature by the Breath of his Mouth only, much more a Man? No,
certainly; therefore let us conclude that this Prophecy of Gog although it speaks
concerning the Messiah, is not fully accomplished as yet, and in vain the wait
for his coming depending upon what is said concerning this War of Gog and Magog.

2dly, THE Second Argument they bring to prove the Messiah is not yet come, is
because, (they say) When Christ shall come, be shall gather the ten Tribes in
company of all the rest of the Jewish Nation, that are s^attered all over the
World, and bring them all together into one place even in the Holy Land. This
Opinion they ground upon what is written in Deu. 30. (...) 5. in Isai. 11.11,
12. and in Ezekiel. 39.25, -- 29. If any of thine be driven out unto the utmost
parts of heaven, from thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence
will be fetch thee. And the Lord thy God will bring thee into the land which
thy fathers possessed, and thou shall possess it: and he will do thee good, and
multiply thee above thy fathers. And it shall come to pass in that day, that
the Lord shall set his hand again the second time, to recover the remnant of
his people which shall be left from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros,
and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the
islands of the sea. And be shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall
assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah
from the four corners of the earth. Therefore thus says the Lord God, now will
I bring again the captivity of Jacob, and will have mercy upon the whole house
of Israel, and will be jealous for my holy name: After that they have born
their shame, and all their trespasses whereby they have trespassed against me,
when they dealt safely in their land, and none made them a^id. When I hay^
brought them again from the people, and gathered them out of their enemies
lands, and am sanctified in them in the sight of many nations. Then shall they
know that I am the Lord their God, which caused them to be led into captivity
among the heathen: but I have gathered them unto their own land, and have left
none of them any more there. Neither will I hide my face any more from them:
for I have poured out my spirit upon the house of Israel, s^ith the Lord God.
And they argue so, we find with sad Experience that not only we are not
gathered according as it has been predicted, but we have been and are Tossed to
and fro, from one Nation to another every day more and more; suffering several
Persecutions and diverse Calamities, as the whole World is sensible, and
therefore the Messiah which was to deliver us from all these Tro^bies is yet to
Come.

To this I answer,

THAT I am Heartily sorry to see them in such a Troublesome Condition as they
are, but for this they may t^nk their forefathers and no body else, because if
they had received the Lord of Glory for their Prophet, Priest and King, as he
was offered to them at the beginning, they would never have been under such
Circumstances as they are now in, but would have remained in their Land, and
enjoyed their Privileges as they did before, without being deprived of them.

IF I was of the Opinion of several Divines, and even of sundry Jewish Rabbis
I could make it appear that all those places they quote to uphold their
Opinion, and several more scattered up and down in the Old Testament, are
already fulfilled in their Deliverance from the Babylonian Captivity; and
likewise that the Ten Tribes, which Shalmanezer King of the Assyrians carried
Captive to Halah and Haber by the River Gozan, and in the Cities of the Medes,
as we read in 2 Kin. 17.6. and 18, 11; are either totally lost, or at least
they are so mixed and mingled with those Nations where they were carried, that
their return in a distinct Body as they were before their Captivity, is next to
impossible.

BUT since I cannot see so clearly into the Exposition of the said Prophecies
as they do, I beg leave to dissent from them in this point; Because at that
time, i. e. at their return from Babel, neither the Ten Tribes nor the whole
Two did return to Jerusalem, and at that time they were not scattered all over
the World, and therefore they could not be gathered from whence they were not;
and the words seems plainly to declare they should be scattered, because in
Isai. 11.11, 12. it is said, that the Dispersed of Judah shall be gathered from
the four Corners (or Wings) of the Earth. Therefore I am prone to think this
Prophecy does speak of the state and condition, the Jewish Nation are now
under, scattered up and down the whole World, and that God does here promise to
gather them as they were before.

BUT this one Thing I would put the Jewish Nation in mind of, i. e. that
although, I grant their return, and plead for them, against those that understand
it otherwise; yet let them know, and be fully persuaded, that this return will
never come to pass, till they acknowledge the Lord Jesus Christ, for their
Messiah and Goell, i. e. Christ and Redeemer.

HERE the Jewish Nation cannot bear to hear this Condition, because (they say)
nothing of that nature is mentioned in these places. Therefore my business at
present is to make it appear, that this Condition, i. e. of their Conversion to
Christianity is to be understood; else, I know they will never be satisfied;
(and pray God they may after.)

N.B. AS it is a thing granted of both sides Jews and Christians, that God is
Infinite, Unchangeable, and Righteous, to fulfill all his Promises, so likewise
we must certainly conclude and believe, that the same Spirit of Truth which
communicated the Will and Mind of God to one Prophet, the same was with
another, and although they seem sometimes to contradict one another;
nevertheless, they all speak true, and the fault lies in us, who have not sense
enough to understand them, so as to reconcile them together, and make them
speak one and the self same thing.

NOW the way and Method that we must take to reconcile those Places which seems
to contradict one another is, to have a recourse to another place in the very
Word of God, which speaks of the same thing with more clear expressions, and
not to depend upon the Explication of any Man whatsoever (as the Church of Rome
does, i. e. to the Pope,) because in the very Word of God we shall find
sufficient Light to inlighten us in any thing that we are in need of. Now if we
read some places in the Bible, and take them seperately from any other, we
shall find very plainly the downfall of the Jewish Nation, so as they shall
never rise more. As in Hos. 1.6. We read thus, I will no more have mercy upon
the house of Israel, but I will utterly take them away. So likewise in Amos
5.1, 2. Hear ye this word which I take up against you, even a lamentation O
house of Israel: The Virgin of Israel is fallen, she shall no more rise; she is
forsaken upon her land, there is none to rise her up. In Isai. 6.10. Make the
heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest
they see withtheir eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their
hearts, and convert and be healed. And several more.

AND if we look in other places (as those cited by the Jewish Nation) we shall
read in them every thing contrary to other Prophets Predictions.

NOW to say any otherwise, than that both speak true, is the same as denying
the Canon of the Bible, and to own both, seems too gross a folly for any
sensible Person? What must we then do? Deny all we dare not: Own all we cannot:
What then? We must have a recourse, as I said before, to other places in the
Bible, where we shall find Light enough to enlighten us to understand such
Scriptures.

THE Prophet Ezekiel, speaking upon the same Subject in another place,
foretells the Salvation of his People, with the Addition of a Shepherd, even
David his Servant, which God will set up to seed and rule over them as a
Prince, Ezekiel. 34.22, 23, 24.

THE Prophet Hosea treating upon this very same point in the 3d Chap. ver. 5th.
says these notable words, Afterward shall the children of Israel return and
seek the Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his
Goodness in the latter days.

THE Prophet Jeremiah is more wonderful in describing the condition of the said
deliverance, Chap. 3d. 8, 9. which runs thus, For it shall come to pass in that
day says the Lord of Hosts, that I will break his yoke from off thy neck, etc.
But they shall serve (or worship) the Lord their God, and David their King,
whom I will raise up unto them.

HERE in these places we find a full answer, and an entire reconciliation to
the aforesaid places. i. e. their return does depend upon this Condition, that
they shall seek the Lord their God, and David their King, as in Hosea; and that
they shall serve (or worship) the Lord their God, and David their King, as in
Jeremiah; and to prevent any mis-interpretation of the words, David their King,
for King David, (as the Jewish Nation do,) the Prophet Jeremiah uses the word
AUKIM, I will raise in the future Tense, to signify the Messiah which was to
rise from the Dead, and this King David indeed was to be their King, and him
they must seek and serve in the same way and manner as they seek and serve
their God, even the Lord Jehovah, mentioned together, because both are of one
self same Substance, equal in Power and Glory from all Eternity. And no^ least
they should think this way of Paraphrasing the words, David their King as I do,
to be somewhat out of the true way, I will quote one single Authority (of a
great many that are to be found among their Rabblns) which says the same as we
do word for word, and then conclude this Argument.

THE Targum, upon the 5th. verse of the 3d. Chap. of Hosea, paraphrasing the
words, and they shall seek the Lord their God and David their King, says the
following words, After this the children of Israel shall return in Contrition,
and they shall seek the Service of the Lord their God, and they the Messiah the
Son of David their King.

NOW I hope they will be convinced, that their return and being gathered as
they were before, depends altogether upon seeking and obeying the Lord their
God, and the Messiah who is already come, and who is their Lord and Redeemer,
else in vain do they expect to be delivered, saved, and brought over again to
the former Glory.

Thirdly, THE Third Argument they bring to prove the Messiah is yet to come, is
because (they say) a Third Temple is to be built at His Coming; and this they
prove out of what is written in the last Chapter of Ezekiel, and more
particularly of the 12th, and 13th. Verses of the 6th. Chap. of Zachariah,
which runs thus, And speak unto them saying, thus speaks the Lord of Hosts,
saying, Behold the Man whose Name is the Brench and be shall grew up out of his
place, and he shall build the Temple of the Lord, even he shall build the
Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the Glory, and shall set and rule upon
his Throne, and the Counsel of Peace shall be between them both. And now they
argue thus, Since a Third Temple is not built, which is the true mark, and
insallible Sign, ergo, the Messiah is yet to come.

To this I answer,

THAT this Prophecy, speaks concerning the Messia^ who is that Branch that grew
up cut of his place, I grant; But that any of these places by them alleged
have any reference to the third Temple upon Earth, (as they falsely suppose,) I
do absolutely Deny, for Two Reasons.

1st, BECAUSE it is contrary to the Word of God. And,

2dly, BECAUSE it is contrary to the opi^ion of their own Ancient Rabbis.

1st, THAT it is contrary to the Word of God, as we read in Jer. 7.4. Trust ye
not in lying words, saying, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, the
temple of the Lord, are these. It seems by the Words of this Prophet, that even
in his days, this notion of having three Temples was introduced among the
Nation by the false Teachers or lying Prophets, which in his time grew in
abundance (as we read in several places of this Prophet) who did Teach and
Prophecy to them in God's Name several false and lying Doctrines, on purpose to
encourage them in their Wickedness; among the rest of the falsehoods, they
taught, that God would not destroy the Temple, and keep it for ever desolate;
under a Pious pretense, that he then would not have a house to observe the
performance of the Sacrifices in, and that therefore in case the Temple should
come to be destroyed as Jeremiah said, He would Rebuild it and Trebuild it over
again. As soon as the Prophet Jeremiah understood that this lying Doctrine had
made such an impression in the Ears and Hearts of the People, so that they
would not leave off going aftray, and return to God with a sincere Repentance,
and a true Obedience, as he in God's Name, several times had admonished them;
The word of the Lord came to him and bid him go and stand in the gates of the
Lord's house, and proclaim the following Edict, not to a single Person or
Company, but in the presence of Judah and all that use to come and Worship the
Lord within those Gates. Thus says the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, amend
your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place. Trust
ye not in lying words, saying, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord are these. i. e. This Doctrine [which the false Prophets
have taught you, flattering you, that the Temple shall never be destroyed but
remain entire for ever, and that in case it should happen to be as I said, the
Lord will Rebuild it over again, not only the second time, but even the third
also, (which is intimated in the Triplication of the Words, the Temple of the
Lord)] is a false and a lying Doctrine, do not Trust to it, because there is no
truth in it; but the way to be preserved in the State and Condition you are in,
is to amend Thoroughly, else I will do to this House as I did to Shilo, i. e. it
shall never be Rebuilt again the third time, as your false Prophets and
Teachers give you to understand.

This is the true Word of God, and as such can never be altered; and although
an Attempt has been made by Julian the Apostate to build it a third time, on
purpose to oppose God's Word, as the Histories gives us an account,
nevertheless it never came to pass, and never will to the Worlds end.

2dly, BY their own Ancient Authors; I do not remember they ever lest any thing
recorded, wherein they show this opinion i. e. that a third Temple was to be
built as the Modern Jews do Believe of late (who I am very much afraid they are
somewhat couched with the same spirit that their Countrymen were in Jeremiah's
time, because they have a parcel of Teachers newly started up, so
self-conceited and so proud with their Religion, that they have lest the good
old Interpretation that their good Honest Rabbis of Primitive Ages used to
give to the Holy Scriptures, and have invented many Chimerical notions to
uphold their new Doctrine, which neither their Fathers, nor their Fathers
Fathers ever heard of, from the very day the Jewish Religion was founded till
now) but always understood the Temple should be Built but twice, in the Book
called Shingnone^ upon the 17th Verse of the 28th Chapter of Genesis, are the
following Words, And he was afraid, and said, How dreadful is this place! this
is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven. Our Father
Jacob saw (in his vision) the Temple, Built, Ruined, and Built again, the
Words, How dreadful is this place, imply, that he saw it Built. The Words, This
is none other but the house of God, imply, that he saw it Ruined, and the
words, and this is the gate of heaven, imply, that he saw it Rebuilt and
Completed for the future. [Which Interpretation of that Text, I would not be
thought any otherwise to improve than as it shows us that the Ancient Rabbis
knew nothing of a third Temple.] And in a more Ancient Author than this, we
read (in the Book called Bereshith Rabbau upon the first verse of Genesis) the
following words, Rabby Hijau, said in the beginning at the Creation of the
World the Holy and Blessed One, (i. e. God) saw the Temple Built, Ruined, and
Rebuilt, etc. From this place also and sundry more, that I could quote, it is
plainly to be seen, even by the confession of their own Rabbis, that neither
our Father Jacob, nay (what is more remarkable) nor God Himself ever knew any
thing about this Third Temple, but saw it built twice only.

BUT that they may be fully satisfied in this point, so as not to live with
such false hopes, I will quote one passage more of one of their biggest
Expositors, whom they call for his great understanding the true meaning of the
Scriptures Dzna Hautoran, the Ears of the Law, (because as they say, by his
meaning they come to hear and understand what God says,) ^abby Selomo Jarchi,
upon this very same Prophecy of (...). 6.12, 13. And speak unto him, saying,
Thus speaks the Lord of bosts, saying, Behold the man whose name is the
BRANCH, and he shall grow up out of his place, and be shall build the temple of
the Lord: Even he shall build the temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the
glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne, and he shall be a priest upon
his throne, and the counsel of peace shall be between them both. Which they
allege to disprove the veracity of Christ's coming; and then conclude this
Argument. His words are as following, Whose name is the Branch, this is
Zerubabel aforesaid, and some lay this signifies the king Messiah; and this
fabric is to be understood of the Second Temple.

NOW since they have so great Veneration for this Rabby, and he says that this
Building is to be understood of the Second Temple, let them be silent, and be
convinced, I beseech them, that the Third Temple is never to be Built,
(whatever their new up-start Rabbis do teach, feeing it is proved with as many
Authorities as any Judicious Person can desire to have for the Satisfaction of
any doubt whatsoever,) and conclude, that the Messiah is already come; and with
this belief, and obeying what He has commanded, I hope they will be gathered
from all parts wherever they are, even since the Captivity of the Ten Tribes,
into their Country, in a National Body as they were in former Ages, and be
Settled, and Build Churches, as many and as pompous, as their hearts shall
wish; and serve and worship the True and the Living God through Christ; and be
established for ever.

Fourthly, THE Fourth Argument which they bring to prove their Opinion, is,
That every thing, i. e. every Creature shall be as it was before Adam's fall,
without being hurtful, but innocent, and live in peace one with another. --
This they prove with what Isai. 11.6, 7, 8, 9. says, which runs thus. The wolf
shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard shall lie down with the Kid, and the
Calf and the young Lion, and the fatling together, and a little child shall
lead them: And the Cow and the Bear shall feed, their young ones shall lie
together, and the Lion shall eat straw like the Ox: and the sucking Child shall
play on the hole of the Asp, and the weaned Child shall put his band on the
Adders Den: they shall not burt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain, etc. And
they argue thus, Since these things should come to pass, at the time of
Christ's coming, and we never saw nor heard, that ever the Creatures act so,
but they are as fierce as ever they were; ergo, The Messiah is not come.

TO this I answer, that although some of their new upstart Rabbis for to uphold
their Opinion or Belief, do maintain that this Prophecy is to be understood
literally, I beg of them not to be so easily drawn aside from the Opinion of
their Old Teachers, and then I am fully satisfied they will quickly embrace the
true Messiah.

Who is like unto Daimonides among them? None. Since they have a saying among
them, to show the great Veneration and esteem they have for him, as following,
Dimoshe ^egnaud moshe Lo kaum k^moshe: From Moses the Lawgiver till Moses the
Son of Baimon, never was another like unto this Mosas. (If so, let us hear what
this great Man says, upon this very same point at the end of his Book called
Raubenu Moshe. If I have not forgot the very Words, I think they are as
following, else I know and am sure he says the same in substance,) viz. Let not
such things arise upon thine heart, that in the days of the Messiah any thing
shall be deprived of its usual nature, neither shall there be any innovation in
the works of Creation, but the world shall follow its own course, and this that
is writ, in Isai. 11.6, 7, 8, 9. The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, etc.
is a parable and an Enigma, and signifies that the Israelites or Jewish Nation
shall dwest in Tranquillity with the wicked of other Nations of the World. Now
by this Quotation they may see (if they have a mind to,) how this Prophecy is
to be understood, even according to the biggest Champions among their Rabbis.
But who are those compared in particular to the Welf, Leopard, etc. is not my
present business at this time to determine. But the Prophecy is to be
understood in an Allegorial sense, and the best Allegory that can be found,
Conformable to the Orthodox opinion, is, That those Men and Nations which
before the coming of the Messiah were proud and fierce as Lions and Wolves, and
the rest of the Ravenous Creatures mentioned in the Text, at his coming shall
all grow as meek and pliable as Lambs, and Kids are, by subduing their Wills to
the Obedience of Christ's Laws, and they shall feed together, i. e. of the Word
and Sacraments, all alike without any difference between them, even from the
King to the Peasant, they shall all be ruled, by the same Laws and Directions
that Christ shall prescribe, and they shall Live peaceable and quiet one with
another, not hurting one another, either in Estate or Name. This has been
punctually fulfilled at Christ's coming (and ever since by all the True and
Sincere Christians) in the Conversion of so many cruel and savage fort of Men,
they rendering Obedience to Christ's Laws, became as tame and tractable as any
whatsoever, because the Laws of Christ teach nothing but Humility, and Exclaim
against Pride and Arrogance, as is well known to all his followers. And

NOW so long as they cannot prove that this Prophecy and others of this nature
are to be understood F^ally by any Authority more Ancient and Authentic then
Maimonides, nor give a better Interpretation than this, Let them hold their
Tongues, and Confess the Truth, (even that Jesus Christ, the Son of the Living
God, is the True Messiah, who is come already into the World for the Salvation
of Sinners, such as they and we are,) if they have a mind to be saved.

5thly, THE fifth Argument they allege to establish their Opinion is, that
when the Messiah shall come and for ever more after his coming till the Worlds
end, there shall be a general and universal Peace all over the World. This they
prove out of Isai. 2.4. which runs thus, And they shall beat their Swords into
Plowshares, and their spears into pruningbooks; Nation shall not lift up Sword
against Nation, neither shall they learn War any more. And they argue thus,
Since a General and Everlasting Peace is promised by the Prophet in this Place,
to be in the Time of the Messiah, the contrary of which we daily see, (that not
only the Wars are not ceased since Christ's Coming, but on the contrary, they
have increased daily, not only with the ordinary way of fighting, that was in
use in those days; but even with a new Invention of Fire Arms, never heard
before a few hundred Years ago,) therefore (they say) if all the Arguments
could be answered, this is unanswerable, because the words are plain, i. e.
Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall they learn War any
more. Ergo, The Messiah is not come at yet.

TO this I Answer,

I know some to avoid this Argument, would have the Prophet speak here, of that
inward Peace of Conscience, that every Good Christian enjoys that follows the
Laws of Christ; which Peace is an Everlasting Peace. Some understand this place
for that Eternal Peace, that shall be in the Church after the Jews and Gentiles
shall be brought together, under one Shepherd and Bishop of Souls; and that
then (and not before) this Prophecy shall be fulfilled. Some would have this
Prophecy to be already fulfilled in that General and Universal Peace that was
through the whole World in Augustus Time, as we read in Luke 2.1. And it came to
pass in those days, that there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all
the world should be taxed. This last Opinion I am apt to think is what the
Prophet meant in this place. But the Jewish Rabbis are very stiff in denying
of it, alleging the words, Neither shall they (...) War any more. And though
this seems the strongest Argument they have against Christ's Coming, and seems
to have the best face and color to uphold their Opinion, I design in a few
Minutes time to show the Rottenness of it, hoping if they will seriously
consider it, they will all come and look on Him, whom (with their inward Jarrs
and Contentions) they have pierced.

I say then, That God by His Prophet, never intended, that after the coming of
Christ, a perpetual Peace shall be in the World, because if he had so intended,
we should all live in Peace and Tranquillity, since He is come, and being the
contrary we daily see and feel, ergo, we may certainly conclude, that he never
meant so.

BUT the true and genuine meaning of this Prophecy is, God declares that at
Christ's coming so long as He was upon Earth bodily, and no longer, the World
should enjoy Peace. And this for Two Reasons, First, To show that He was the
King of Kings, and therefore so long as he was upon Earth, none should be so
daring, as to take up Arms one against another, seeing their Lord and King was
upon Earth. And Secondly, Because after his Death, not only his Enemies, but
even those that are true-hearted Christians so long as they are in this World,
are liable to fall under a great many Temptations, and be left of God for a
while, (for Reasons to Him only reserved) and so swerve from that temper and
way of Peace that Christ their Lord and Master had dictated to them.

NOW according to this Prophetical Prediction, the Thing came to pass just
exactly as he foretold it, because so long as Christ, was upon Earth
personally, we read of a General and Universal Peace that was through the World
in Augustus Reign, and after his Death the Wars begun to break out again as it
was formerly, not only between one Nation and another, but even among
Christians themselves.

IT is not worth their while to argue from the Words. Neither shall they learn
War any more, any thing to disprove the veracity of this Interpretation,
because that Word which they and other Interpreters Translated More, in the
Original is, Gnod, which Word, although sometimes it is understood more, or for
ever, this is very seldom, and for the most part, (...) to be understood for a
little while. To prove the it is requisite only to persuade them to read with
attention the 35th Chapter of Genesis, and the 10th Verse, and there they will
find that God said to Jacch that his name should not be called Jacob any more,
but Israel should be his name, which Word more in the Original is Gnod, and yet
we find he is called in this very same Chapter Jacob again, eight times,
besides infinite other times elsewhere. And in case this proof will not satisfy
them they may go and read what that Famous Rabby, ^id Kimchi, says in his
Dictionary called Sherashim who when he Expounds the Word Gnod, says the
following Words, Sometimes this Word more is to be understood for a little
while. Prove. 31.7. Let him drink and forget his poverty, and remem^er his
misery no more, it is not to be understood for ever, but while the Wine is
within him, etc.

AND now since Christ is already come, and none but Fools, Reprebates, or
Obstinates do deny it, and yet the War is not ceased from the Christian World
(at least) we may certainly conclude, that this Word More in this Place, is to
be understood for a little while, as it came to pass, i. e. in that only while
that Christ was upon Earth. So let them leave off railing, and conclude the
Messiah is already come, although the War is not yet ceased.

AS to the Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Arguments, which they bring to support
their folly. Which are,

Sixthly, THAT the Messiah was to ^ome at the End of the World. The

Seventh, THAT the Mountain which the House of the Lord was built upon, is to
grow miraculously above all the Mountains and Hills of the World.

And the

Fighth. THAT all the Nations of the World without exception shall acknowledge
the Beshah, when shall come for the true Christ promised by the Prophets.

SEEING they are all grounded upon the 2d verse, of the 2d Chap of Isaiah, I
shall handle them together.

THE Verse runs thus, And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the
mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the mountains,
and shall be exalted above the bills, and all Nations shall flow unto it.

NOW they argue thus, Since we see that your Christ is come above 1700 Years
ago, and the Mountain of the Lord's House, never grew so as to be higher than
it was before is coming; Neither do all the Nations in General without
exception, acknowledge him to be the true Messiah. Ergo, He is not that Messiah
which was pr^ted by the Prophets.

To these I answer,

TO the Sixth. Although some times this phrase, in the latter days, I do grant,
is to be understood at the End of the World, as they say ^evertheless, this
very expression, signifies sometimes, the time when the thing which is
prophesied shall come to pass, although it be a few Years after. This ^ay be made
to appear ^f we read the 39th Verse of the 19th Chapter of Jeremiah, where it
is said, But it shall come to pass in the latter days that I will ^ng the
captivity of Elam, says the Lord. Which and of days although it is expressed with
the same phrase, yet the thing came to pass a few Years after, i. e. in the
time of Cyrus King of Persia, and not at the end of the World; as we read in
Ezra 1.1. And so this place is not to be understood at the end of the World as
the modern Jewish Rabbis say, but only the time when Christ was to come. This
Exposition is so certain, that their own Authors, even that famous Rabby David
(...) expounding the same Text understood it so also, his words are as
following, Every pla^ where it is said in the last days, is to be understood
the time of the Messiah. It is not worth their while to argue and say as they
do, viz. That although said expression sometimes signifies as I said, yet in
this place it is to be understood as they say, even that he is to come at the
End of the World, because it may be made appear at any time, and place, that
the Messiah was not to come at the end of the World, as they say, either by the
Scriptures, or by their own Authors.

BY the Scriptures, in the fulfillment of the Time that the Prophet Daniel
prescribed; viz. the Messiah was to come, at the time that the Seventy
Prophetical Weeks was ended. And if we could be certain when these Seventy
Weeks begun, it could be demonstrated and plainly made to appear, that Christ
came just exactly at the time appointed.

BY their own Authors I find in the Talmud Basetheth Sanedrin, Chap. Heleck, a
famous Description when the Messiah was to come, which deserves to be engraven
and kept for a Monument to all Ages. The words are as following, It was read in
the House or S^eel of Elijah, Six Thousand Years the World shall last, Two
Thousand Years shall be void (i. e. without Law) Two Thousand Years with Law,
and Two Thousand Years shall be the days of the Messiah. So that according to
their own reckoning the Messiah must have been come above 1482 Years ago, and
therefore these latter days, are not to be understood, at the End of the World,
but the time when the Messiah was to come.

UPON this last quotation the Jewish Rabbis, argue thus, Although said Sentence
is so as I say, yet there are these words at the end of it, And for our great
Sins there have passed from them all those that have passed. Which words imply,
(they say) that although the Messiah was to come at the beginning of the 5th
thousand, this was to be understood in case we were good, but not if we were
great Sinners.

TO this I answer.

THAT these last Words which they pretend belong to the Sentence are forged and
spurious, and were added to the Sentence, after they saw that our Lord Jesus
Christ was manifestly pointed forth by this Prediction, and because be came at
the time appointed by it, and they would not own him; with their conrupt
affections toward Christianity, made the (...) of these words to it, to cover
with some color the stiffness of their Necks. This I prove with two very
probable reasons.

First, BECAUSE if we examine the Sentence (...) the beginning to the end,
where they will have it fi^sh'd, we shall find it is comp^s'd of two Language,
the first from the beginning 'till where I ended is nothing but Jerusalemitical
Tongue, and the (...) part, i. e. that addition which they would have belong to
it, is nothing (...) pure Hebrew phrase, (such as Mojes himself could hardly
make better;) wherefore I (...) but think that they are forged words as I said,
because in all the Jer^tane Talmud I do (...) member that any one Sentence is
there expressed in two different Tongues, i. e. Two thirds in one, and the rest
in another, as this would be if I grant to them what they falsely would have it
be; and in case they should charge me with want of Charity, for charging them
with what I cannot prove fairly, i. e. with showing them the Original. But upon
Suspicion only; I say

Secondly, THAT these words were Spurious and Forged. Because if we examine the
time and place, when this Sentence was said, we shall find, that I do not wrong
them, in charging them with falsifying of it. N. B.

THIS Prediction was said at the House or School of Elijab, who was a Rabby of
that Name, that flourished according to the calculation of times, made by their
own Authors, as we find in the Book called Sever Guolaum above 400 Years before
Christ's coming, a little after the Building of the Second Temple, and in the
City of Babel. Now how could the said Sentence or Prediction be delivered with
these words, and for our Sins, etc. at the end of it, so long as the time was
not yet come? (much less pass) and therefore we may certainly conclude, these
words were added to the Sentence, although we cannot produce the first Original.

NOW to avoid such censures and reflections as commonly are made by Persons
upon those that dissent from them, I will quote one Passage more very
remarkable, wherein any body may plainly discover, that according to the
Traditions received among the Jewish Nation, a great many Hundred Years before
Christ's coming, the Messiah was to come at the time He did, and not before or
after. And I purposely design not to criticize upon said Tradition, but only
repeat it, and calculate the time.

THE Talmud Mas^ech^t San^drin, Chap. 11. p. 98. says thus, Rabby Maiaui in the
Name of Rabby (...) the Son of Rabby Dimeon said, The Son of David (i. e. the
Messiah) shall not come till the Power of the Judges and Officers shall be
taken away from Israel, as it is written. Isai. 1.26. And I will restore thy
Judges as at the first. This Tradition we find exactly came to pass at the time
when our Lord and Savior came.

THUS, the Jewish Nation did count in the 9th day of the last Month Ab, (i. e.
22d. of July) 1653 Years since the destruction of the Second Temple. And the
Talmud Mass^ch^t Gnau^dau Zautau, Chap. 1. p. 8. says, That Forty Years before
the Destruction of the Second Temple, the power of Judging was taken away from
the Sann^rin. And in Luke 3.23. it is said, that Jesus Christ was about Thirty
Years of Age, i. e. at his Baptism, that being the time that God began to
manifest his Power with the descending of the Holy Ghost upon Him. Now the
Addition of these Three Periods of time makes the Sum of 1722 Years as we say,
exactly with the allowing of a Year for the broken parts of the time, i. e.
Christ not being Thirty Years complete; but as the Verse says. About Thirty
Years: and in likelihood the power of the Sa^edrin did not depart from Israel
immediately after the 40 Years were expired, but there abouts. And so we may
very well conclude from the aforesaid Quotations, that these words, in the last
days are to be understood at the time when Christ come. And not at the end of
the World, as the Modern Jewish Rabbis will have (...).

TO the Seventh, That the Mountain of the Lord's House. i. e. the Mountain upon
which the House of the Lord was Built, is to grow Miraculously higher than all
the Mountains and Hills in the World, at the Time of the Messiah, where they
draw a Consequence, that since this thing never happened, ergo, the Messiah is
not come. I answer,

THAT although I have no mind to infring my Christian Charity, yet I cannot help
for my Life but think they are turned Fools; because how can any Body in the
World (except he be deprived of common understanding) make such an Argument as
this is, and not only Argue but Believe that ever such a thing would ever come
to pass! I am really ashamed to Rehcarse such things from Men that are so
might^y conceited of themselves as the Modern Rabbis are, in that they should
be filled with such notions as these, on purpose to maintain a Falsehood; and if
they should wait to be Converted, to the Messiah that is already come, or for
the Messiah to come, till such a thing shall come to pass Literally, I do
verily believe that neither they, nor their Children after them till the Worlds
end, will ever see that Day, and be Converted. (God forbid.)

BUT this Mountain is that very same Stone which was cut out without hands and
became a great Mountain, spoken of in Daniel 2.34, 35. Thou saw till that a
Stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image upon his feet that were
of iron and clay, and brake them to pieces. Then was the iron, the clay, the
brass, the silver and the gold broken to pieces together, and became like the
chaff of the summer threshing-floors, and the wind carried them away, that no
place was found for them: and the stone that smote the image became a great
mountain, and filled the whole earth. Which all Expositors (that I know of)
Jews and Christians, understand for the Messiah.

THIS Mountain, or this Christ is that very same which the Prophet speaks of
here, and says, that the Church (which is called the House of the Lord) shall
be built upon the Top of the Mountains, and exalted above the Hills, i. e. far
above all Principality, and Power, and Might and Dominion, and every name, that
is named not only in this world but also in that which is to come, Ephesians. 1.21.

THIS is the true meaning of this Place, and not that the Mountain shall raise
up, as some of their Modern Rabbis say now, contrary to what their
Predecessors said in former days; Rabby David ^imchi (although he was not one
of the best affectioned to the Christian Religion as its well known to all
those that are acquainted with his Writings,) as a Man of sense, understood it
otherwise. His Words are as following upon the 4th Chapter of Micah and the 1st
Verse, But in the last days it shall come to pas^, that the mountain of the
Lords house shall be established in the top of the mountain, and he shall be
exalted, etc. the morning of being established and enalted, is not that the
mountains shall be higher (bodily) than it was before, but that the nations
shall ^alt him, and honor him, and come to worship the name of the Lord in it.

AND now since we saw this punctually sulfill'd against all the oppositions
that could be made in the Establishment of Christ Church, let us conclude that
the Messiah is already come, and that He is the only King and Sovereign of all
Creatures, either Terrestial or Caelestial whatsoever.

TO the Eighth Ar^ument, That because all the nations of the World without
Exception do not acknowledge the Messiah, according to those Words, and all
Nations shall ^ow into it, therefore Christ is not the Messiah promised. I
answer,

THAT although sometimes the Particle Roll signifies All, nevertheless a great
many times, signifies a Part of the Wh^le, and so Rabbin David Rimchi in his
Book called, Sherashim in the Root Raulaul says the following Words, And
sometimes this Particle All denotes ^rt of the whole, e.g. and all Countries
came into Egypt to buy Corn, etc Genesis 41.57. And we cannot suppose that all the
World of all the Countries came to Egypt to buy Corn, but some o^ them only.

A Great many more instances I might bring, to prove my assertion, but because
I know the wise Men among them do own it, I shall wave it, concluding, that
although in this Place the Prophet says, that All the nations shall flow into
it; he means not All without Exception, as the Jewish Nation do suppose, but
some only. And it is as much as if he had said, and some of the Nations shall
flow into it. But as to this Exposition I expect they will argue thus.

Namely,

IT is true that the Word Roll sometimes signifies a part of the whole as I
said, but since the same Word, sometimes signifies All, the meaning o^ this
Place is not to be understood as I said, but as they say. And therefore, etc.

To this I answer,

THAT this Particle Roll in this Place, precisely must be understood as I said,
and not as they say, because when the Prophet Micah 4.1. Prophefieth this very
same thing, He says the same that the Prophet Isaiah does, except the Word
Roll, all viz. And People shall flow into it; and not all the People to teach
us, that not all the World shall ever come to the knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ, but some of each Nation only. This we see daily accomplished.

FOR although the Church has increased into a great Multitude, and the Name of
Jesus Christ has been carried through the whole World, and a great many Nations
are Converted from Paganism, and have bowed their knees to the Lord of Glory,
i. e. submitting their Obedience to His most holy Will and Pleasure, yet
according to Mr. Tavernier's Computation, L. 2. C. 8. p. 90. If we should
divide the People of the World into 30 Parts, we should find that Christians,
(not Protestants only, but even of all sorts of Sects and Persuasions) do make
5 Parts only, the Mahomitans 6, and the Heathens Idolaters 19. Which plainly
shows, that although many be called few are chosen, because strait is the gate
and narrow is the way; which leads unto Life, and few there be that find it.
Let us then conclude these three Points with a Recapitulation of the True and
Orthodox meaning of this Prophecy which is as follow,

AND it shall come to pass in the Last days, i. e. in the days of the Messiah,
that the Mountain of the Lord's House, i. e. the Church of the Lord which is
founded and established upon a Stone or a Rock, that was Cut out without hands
and became a great mountain. Shall be established in the Top of the Mountains
and shall be exalted above the Hills, i. e. Flourish and increase, overcoming
all oppositions against her. And all Nations shall flow unto it, i. e. Some
Nations, or some of each Nation, a Remnant of each shall come and submit
themselves to the Laws and Ordinances of Christ their Redeemer.

THE 9th, and Last Argument they bring to prove the Messiah is yet to come, is,
That Christ at his coming shall not abrogate any thing of the Law of Moses, but
the said Law (not only the Moral, but even the Ceremonial) shall be kept to the
World's end. And since we see that by the coming of your Christ not only all
the Ceremonial part is abolished, but even some of the Moral also (as the
keeping of the Sabbath) ergo He is not the true Messiah promised by the
Prophets. This fond opinion they ground upon the 20th, 21st Verses of the 59th
Chap. of Isaiah, which runs thus, And the Redeemer shall come to Zion, and unto
them that turn from Transgression in Jacob says the Lord. As for me this is my
Covenant with them says the Lord, my Spirit that is upon thee, and my words
which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, not out of
the mouth of thy seed, nor cut of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord,
from henceforth and for ever.

TO this I answer,

First, IF we understand this Prophecy Literally, it speaks nothing concerning
the Messiah, but only of the Redeemer that was to deliver them from the
Captivity of Babylon, and Cyrus King of Persia, is questionless, the Redeemer
here intended, as we read, Ezr. 1.1.

BUT 2dly, If we understand this Place Typically, I am prompt to think it makes
more for our side than for theirs: and the Covenant here mentioned, is the very
same that the Prophet ( Jer. 21.31, 32, 33.) speaks of. And this new Covenant
that the Messiah was to establish at his coming, is that which the Prophet
Isaiah says in this Place, shall not depart from the Church, which is that very
seed spoken of, in Chap. 53.10. He (Christ) shall see his seed, he shall
proloug his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. And
since this was to be a Law, and a Covenant (which Words are in the Old
Testament Synonymous Terms, as we Read, that the very Decalogue which is called
a Law, in Deuteronomy. 4.44. is called a Covenant in Exodus 34.28.) made with Christ's
People according to his Holy Will and Pleasure, the expressions are with the
Affixy of the 2 P. M. S. i. e. My Spirit that is upon thee, that is upon
Christ, and it is as much as if it had been plainly said, that the Word and
Spirit should never depart from him, nor from his holy Seed after Him, but
should continue for ever till the end of the World, and that the Old Covenant
made with them in Moses's time should be abolished, as the Apostle to the Heb.
8.13. observes, when he says, -- And in that he says a New Covenant, be has
made the first old, now that which decays and waxes old is ready to vanish
away. This is the True and Genuine meaning of these Prophesies, and not (as
they falsely suppose) i. e. that the Messiah should not abrogate the Law of
Moses. This is not our opinion only, but even their own Authors and Expositors
understood it so also. And because I am not willing to be too Proli^e, as I
could it I had a mind to explain, Isa. 42.7. and 49.9. and I know that a
quotation of one of their Rabbis (to the most part of them,) is of more
Authority than the written Word, I will allege one, of sundry that I could,
and then conclude.

IN that Ancient and famous Book of theirs called (...) upon the last Word of
the 11. Chap. of Eccl. are the following words, Vanity, the Law which a man
learns in this World (i. e. before the coming of the Messiah) is vanity, in
comparison of the Messiah's Law. This sentence plainly shows Two very
remarkable things, 1st, That there should be Two Laws, one before Christ's
coming; and another after. And 2dly, That the Law before His coming is nothing
but a mere ^hadow and vanity in comparison of the Law, that was to be in the
Church of God after his coming; and this is the very same thing that the great
Apostle Paul says to the Col. 2.16, 17. Let no man therefore judge you, in
meals or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the
sabbath days, which are a SHADOW of things to come, but the body is of Christ.

AS for the other part of the Argument, in which they suppose that since
Christ's coming the 4th Commandment is abolished, I shall not meddle with it at
this time, because (besides that it has been answered by sundry Learned Divines
at large before now) it would take me a great deal of time, in handling of it,
with all the Branches belonging thereunto.

THEREFORE since I have answered in full and as short as I could, the principal
Arguments that I can remember the Jewish Nation do bring to In^date the
Veracity of our Christian Religion. Let us draw to a Conclusion saying with the
Psalmist, I believed therefore have I spoken, I was greatly aff^ted. It is the
Opinion of the best Expositors, that King David in composing this Psalm, aimed
not only a Solemn Thanksgiving to God for his Great and Glorious deliverance
from grievous and dangerous Calamities that he had been under, but also from
great Perplexities and Terrors of Mind, arising upon him from the deep sense of
God's displeasure toward Unbelievers. Now it seems to me that this Godly King
having with serious Consideration pondered the great and manifold Goodness of
God toward Sinners from the beginning, in finding out a way to deliver them
from the Wrath which was to come, i. e. in sending in the fullness of time, His
Only Dear and Beloved Son into this World, out of his own Loins, according to
the Flesh, not only to suffer, but even to dye for their Sins and
Transgressions, on purpose to reconcile the World of Mankind to God, I say
after the Meditaion of God's Love, and likewise the poor and miserable
Condition of Unbelievers in General, and of the Jewish Nation in particular, he
broke forth with these notable Words, I believed therefore have I spoken, I was
greatly Afflicted. If so let us Believe and be fully persuaded that Jesus
Christ of Nazereth is the only Son of the Living God, and the True and only
Messiah Prophesied of by the Prophets from the beginning, who came in the
fullness of time, according to the Promises for the Salvation of all those
Sinners that Believe in him, that he Dyed and Suffered for our Sins, and Rose
for our Justification, and is set down at the Right hand of God the Father,
making Intercession for us, from whence he shall come to Judge the Quick and
the Dead. If you with Sincerity Believe this, which I do Solemnly Declare and
Profess (before God, His Holy Angels, and all this Congregation) to be my only
Belief i^ which I Hope to be Saved; Then we have a sure foundation, and an
Everlasting Basis that can never be moved, and Living according to this Belief,
i. e. Obeying Christ's Laws and Ordinances, which I Purposely do design with
GOD's Help to follow from Fenceforth, we may be sure to obtain through God's Free
Grace the Everlasting Life in the World which is to come, World without End.

AMEN.
THE Whole Truth: BEING A Short ESSAY, WHEREIN The Author discovers what may be
the true Reason why the JEWISH NATION Are not as yet converted to CHRISTIANITY,
Besides what others have said before him. AND LIKEWISE, He proves the DIVINITY
of CHRIST, not only with the Authority of the sacred Oracles, but even by the
Opinion of the Jewish Author's of old; and answers all the Objections that the
Discourse brings forth out of Isai. 9.6, 7. Concluding with a Word of
EXHORTATION.

By R. Judah Monis.

BOSTON: Printed for Daniel Henchman, and sold at his Shop. 1722.

The whole Truth.
PSALM CXVI. 10. I believed, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly aff^ed.


CONCERNING the Jewish Nation's Conversion to Christianity, (...) as to the
Reason why they are not converted, in so long and dilated a Time of above 1700
Years, since Christ's Appearance into the World, I find our Divines do differ;
and Eight several Reasons are by them aliedged: Namely,

First, Some are apt to think the idolatrous Worship of the Romiso Church is
the Cause of it, because (they say) ever since the Jewish Nation have paid
smart enough for the Sin of Idolatry, which they were addicted to before the
Destruction of the first Temple, suffering so many Troubles, Afflictions and
Calamities, as both sacred and profane Histories have left us an Account of,
they took such an Aversion to said Sin, and so abhorred those that commit it,
that nothing can be compared to it: And therefore, when the Romish
Missionaries, and sundry other Sorts of Priests and Friars of the Romish
Communion, do engage with any of the Jewish Nation, in any public or private
Disputation, about the coming of the Messiah, and what Sort and Manner of
Worship the Church is to follow in case He is already come, for the most part,
the Popish Doctors do come off with the worst; and in case the Rabbits are
sophistically bit, nevertheless they will not yield to them, because they teach
what is contrary and opposite to the Second Commandment; saying (and with a
very good Reason) that the Messiah which is promised by the Prophets, is not to
come for to abrogate any Laws of the Decalogue, and particularly such as are
contrary to (...) Divine Majesty, and therefore they remain unconverted.

Secondly, SOME are of Opinion, the Reason of their being so long unc^^verted,
is to be attributed to the Lives and Convertation of some of the Protestant
Religion, who live not according to the Rules of Morality; whence, without
further Examination, the Jews conclude the Messiah is yet (...) come.

Thirdly, SOME do think the Reason that hinders their Conversion, is their
Stubborness and Stiffneckedness, because they are not willing to give Ear to
what is recorded, minding nothing but their own Interest and Pleasure, and
therefore God (as it were) has left them, and they can never be converted; and
they bring sundry Examples out of the sacred Oracles for to prove their
Assertion.

(...), SOME do conceive the Reason of their not being converted in so dilated
a Time, is more to ^e attributed to the Manner and Way in which they have been
t^rated by sundry Princes of Christendom, (...) with Fire and Sword, as in the
Kingdoms of Spain and Portugal, contrary to all the Laws of Nature; they
knowing, that Religion is not to be forced, if it be a true one, and that only
the false does use such Means and take such Methods for to be established and
propagated; and so concluding, the Christian Religion to be one of them, else
the Christians would not force them with such ex^uisite Torments, to make them
forsake their own and follow theirs.

Fifthly. SOME do imagine, the Differences that have been in the Protestant
Church, have been the Cause of their remaining unconverted. Without further
Examination, when they see so many Jarrs and Debates among them, every one
upholding their own Opinion to be the best and the truest, and condem^ing the
others: They say, Let them first agree among themselves, and afterward we will
consider what to do. [This I know to be true by Experience.]

Sixthly, SOME do say, the Reason of their not being converted, is to be
attributed to the great Fondness they have to their Rabbis or Teachers, since
they take it for granted they are infallible in their Doctrine: Whatever they
teach in Public or Private, by Preaching or by Conferring, they unanimously
conclude all they say to be true, under a Supposition, that they would not
teach a thing which they really thought to be false, and cause by their
Doctrine the Ruin of others: And so some charge the Want of their Conversion to
their Teachers altogether.

Seventhly. SOME say the Reason of their not being converted as yet, is,
because they cursed themselves and their Children after them in the Time of
Christ's Crucifixion, as it is recorded in Matt. 27.25. Then answered all the
People, and said, His blood be on us, and on our Children. And therefore, since
they are under the Curse, they are of Necessity so blind with a spiritual
Blindness, that they cannot see the Light of the everlasting Gospel, and have
(as it were) before the Eyes of their Understanding, a Vail that hinders them
from apprehending the great and true Mysteries, prescribed in the New Testament.

Eighthly and lastly, SOME are apt to think, the Reason of their Unbelief does
proceed from their being under the Yoke of the Law, and so under a Curse, as
the Apostle says to the Galatians, 3.10. For as many as are of the Works of the
Law are under a Curse; for it is written, cursed is every one that continues
not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them.
Therefore (they say) so long as they are under a Curse for not being able to
obey the whole Law, and will not come out of that Bondage, and embrace
Christianity, they are as (it were) left, and so they remain unconverted.

THESE are the Eight chief Reasons (which I can remember) our Divines do give
for their Unbelief: But with Submission, I am prone to think, another may be
given; for although those aforesaid seem to carry some Weight in them, yet if we
examine each distinctly, we shall find such Flaws in them, which will show the
Uncertainty of them. Namely,

FOR the First, Those that live among Protestants might be convinced of the
reality of Christianity, because they do not worship Images, nor bow down to
Stones and Stocks as the Papists do, but do preach against said Manner of
Worship, and teach that it is contrary to the Word of God, as may be plainly
seen in all their Writings.

FOR the Second, If the Lives and Conversation of some few Persons shouldly in
the Way of their Conversion, the Lives and Conversation of a great many eminent
and Orthodox Christians of the Protestant Church of sundry Sorts and Ranks, who
live up to their Profession, so far as in them lies, and particularly among the
Clergy, would take off the Force of their Objection.

FOR the Third, Those who are not employed in worldly Business and Mammon, (as
I know a great many are) and who do live a contemplative and speculative Life,
should not be hindered from being converted, since nothing stands in their Way
to fatten and harden their Hearts or to stop their Ears: And these we know are
those very ones which do uphold their Opinion with their vehement preaching and
teaching the common sort of People, contrary to the Truth.

FOR the Fourth, Those that live under the Protection of sundry pious and
religious Princes, ever since they can remember, protected by the Laws of the
Country where they live, (as in the English and Dutch Dominions, and sundry
others,) should be converted, and invite the rest of their Brethren to come,
live and do as they did, and be all in one Body, i. e. under one Protection,
with Peace and Liberty of Body and Mind.

FOR the Fifth, Although the Protestants did and do differ among themselves, and
have had sundry Jarrs and Animosities concerning Religion, of which the learned
World is sensible, nevertheless, they all agree in the main Point, i. e. That
Jesus Christ is already come for the Salvation of all those Sinners that
believe in him; and their Differences are nothing concerning any fundamental
Point in reality, but indifferent ones.

FOR the Sixth, Although in general they are so fond of their Rabbis, as Dr.
Kiddar supposes, yet the learned among them do make a great Difference between
those Doctrines which they take to be oral, recorded in the Talmud, Bedrashim,
etc. and those private Exposit^, which a particular Rabbi puts forth; as it may
be testified by those learned Gentlemen that are acquainted with their Writings.

FOR the Seventh, That Curse they took upon themselves and their Children after
them, recorded in Mat. 27.25. in the Time of Christ's Crucifixion, may be
answered with what is recorded in Luke 23.34. Then said Jesus, Father forgive
them, for they know not what they do.

FOR the Eighth and last, It may be answered, the Word Koll that signifies
All, is not in the Original, as may be seen in Deuteronomy. 17.26.

THEREFORE I say, since we see said Reasons may be answered, and they remain in
their Judais --, another may be offered, which I think is unanswerable: Namely,

I TAKE all the Reasons already named, and a great many more that may be
offered of that Nature to be nothing but the Effects of that principal Reason
that is the Cause of it; which is (so far as I am able to search) that which is
recorded in the Epistle of Paul to the Romans, 11.25. Blindness in Part is
happened to Israel, until the Fullness of the Gentiles be come in. The Jewish
Blindness, which is the Cause of their not being converted, the Apostle calls a
Mystery, and considered as such, we must not be very forward to guess at it,
more than it has been revealed. The Apostle tells us, this will last till the
Fullness of the Gentiles be come in. Then it seems to intimate, they shall come
in as a Nation together with the Gentiles, under one Shepherd, and not before,
as the Evangelist John 10.16. does say, And other Sheep I have, which are not
of this Fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my Voice; and there
shall be one Fold, and one Shepherd; meaning the Jewish Nation. And,

THESE Words In Part of the Apostle to the Romans, make me think, it intimates
the Blindness which some Part of the Nation have, i. e. their Rabbis or
Teachers, which do keep to rest of the Common People in the same Way with them,
i. e. in Blindness, not able to see that the Messiah is already come.

NOW, since I have shown (so far as I can see) which is the true Reason of
their being unconverted, let us inquire, which are the chief Points these two
Churches, i. e. of the Jews and true Christians, do differ in.

IF we examine the Creed of the Jewish Nation, we shall find the true
Christians do agree with them in all Points of it, except one; Namely, We
Christians believe Christ is already come, and they (the Jews) that he is to
come: And this is the chief and principal Point these two Churches do differ
in; and it is as the Hinge whereon the whole Controversy between them does hang.

THAT they are to believe, according to their Principles, that the Messiah is
to come, is unquestionable, seeing it is the Twelfth Article of their Creed,
according to Maimonides upon the Mishna of Sanedrin Chap. ^elck: The Substance
of his Words are as follow, viz. The Twelfth Article is the Messiah, i. e. to
wait and believe that he is to come, etc. according as all the Prophets did
prophecy, from Moses even to Malachi; and whosoever doubts it, or mistrusts
his Excellency, it is as much as if he denied the Law, and he has no Share in
the future World. This Article they do believe, and wait for him to this very
Day.

THAT we believe that He is already come, is questionless, because whosoever
among us should deny it, is no more a Christian, as whosoever believes among
the Jews that he is already come, is no more a Jew.

TO prove that he is already come, with going through all the Prophecies and
plain Demonstrations that can be ^ought for it, and answering all the
Objections that the Jewish Nation do argue upon each, would be almost an
endless Piece, (more fit for a long T^se than for a short Essay,) and if it
was, I would withdraw, since it would be no Advantage at all, either to the
Unlearned or to the Learned. As to the first, it would fill their Minds with a
Heap of Sophistical Arguments, and perhaps do to some more Hurt than Good; and
as to the second, because they know those Things already, it would be nothing
else but to entertain them with superfluous Discourses: Therefore I shall only
pitch upon one single Prophecy, recorded in the Prophet Isat. 9.6, 7. which
runs thus, For unto us a Child is born, unto us a Son is giv^n, and the
Government shall be upon his Shoulder: And his Name s^all be called, Wonderful,
Counselor, a Mighty God, Everlasting Father, a Prince of Peace, of the
Increase of his Government and Peace no End, (as the Original renders.)

THE Reason of my undertaking to discourse upon this Prophecy more than any
other, is, because the most part of the Christian Doctrine is therein
contained, and particularly these For Points are therein expressed. Namely, 1.
THE coming of the Messiah. 2. WHAT Sort of Person said Messiah should be. 3.
WHAT Kind of Government said Messiah should bear, and how long it should last.
And, 4. And Lastly, HOW and from whom said Messiah should proceed.


THE Explication of said Prophecy, is, That the Messiah is already come, that
He is the Son of God, that His Reign shall endure for ever, and that He was to
proceed from a Virgin. So ^ar in General.

NOW for the Explication of each in particular.

BUT before I undertake to detect and answer the Objections which the Jewish
Rabbis do make, to disannul the orthodox and genuine Interpretation of this
Prophecy, I think it will be very proper first to explain every Point as it
should be, that so, when we come to take a View of the Jewish Interpretat^er,
we may be more able to see the Fallacy of it, and more ready to answer all, or
the most principal Objections they oppose against the Catholic Sense of the
Prophet.

First, THE coming of the Mess^. Before I begin to open the Four Points
mentioned by the Prophet, we must first take it for granted, as a Thing
unquestionable by all Sides, i. e. Jews and Christians, that this Child here
mentioned, is the same that is spoken of in the Seventh Chapter of this
Prophet, v. 14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and (see)
shall call his Name Immanuel, (as the Original renders.) This granted, I go on.

1. THE coming of the Messiah is intimated in the Words, For unto us a Child is
born. These Words, Unto (...), do primarily mean the Jewish Nation, from which
Christ, according to the Flesh, was to come.

2. IF we believe the Jewish Expositors upon Isaiah, they affirm, the Prophet
Isai^h was Grandson to J^ash King of Judah, Nephew to Amaz^ King J^aso's Son,
Cousin-German to ^iah King of Judah, and Father in Law to King Menass^h; and as
he was one of the Royal Stock of the Kings of Judah, these Words, Unto us, may
have some Reference to Christ, i. e. not only that He was to proceed from the
Jewish Nation, but from the Royal Family of the Stock of David also, as the
same Prophet says in the 11th Chap. and 1st Verse. And there shall come forth a
Rod out of the Stem of Jesse, and ^ Branch shall grow out of his Roots: Which
all Expositors (that I know of,) understand for the Messiah.

CHRIST was called by the Prophet a Child for Two Reasons: Namely, 1. FOR the
Similitude He had to a Child, being sinless, as it is recorded in the Epistle
to the Heb. 4.15. Yet without Sin; and in John 3.5. In him is no Sin. 2. AS
none can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but such as are sincere and Spotless
like Children, with the Regeneration of the Spirit, as in Mark. 10.15. Verily I
say unto you, whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as little
Children, he shall not enter therein, i. e. being sincere and spotless: So
likewise we never heard of any Body could charge Jesus Christ (and make it
good) with any unfair Dealings, either in his Life or Conversation, so long as
he was upon Earth; but he always carried Himself with all Uprightness and
Sincerity imaginable, as His Holy Person did require, teaching the Commandments
of God to all Persons whatsoever, as we find it recorded in Mat. 19.17. But if
thou will enter into Life, keep the Commandments. This sort of Doctrine He used
to teach, and no other, wherein he snewed, he was sent by God, as in John 3.2.
We know that you are a Teacher come from God.


Secondly, THE second Point is, what sort of Person the said Messiah should be.
This is declared in the following Words, namely, Unto us a Son is given.

CHRIST is called by the Prophet (after he denominates him a Child, in
Reference of his being sincere and spotless) a SON, having Reference to his
being the Son of the living God, not as a Frimegentus, or Firstborn, that
might signify that he begat another besides, but as an Un^genitus, or only
begotten Son, from all Eternity, or before any Time whatsoever.

THAT H^ was called the Son of the Living God in the New Testament, none but
those that never read it, nor have heard of him, are ignorant: But that he is
so called in the Old Testament, and in the best Jewish Authors or Rabbis of
old, is my present Business to prove, i. e. before they had took such an
Antipathy against all Sorts of Religion but their own.

PLAIN Text is that which is recorded in the second Psalm and last Verse, which
says, Kiss the Son, i. e. adore, or embrace the Son, because he is not only a
Man, but God also.

THAT this Verse speaks concerning Christ, is clear and manifest by the
Context: In the second Verse of said Psalm it is plainly expressed, The Kings
of the Earth sit themselves, and the Rulers take Counsel together against the
Lord, and against his anointed.

THE plain Testimony of their Authors is to be found recorded in that famous
and renowned Expositor among them, Then Ezra, who says upon said Verse as
follows, Kiss the Son, Behold, serve the Lord (with Fear) is referrring to the
Lord Jehovah; and kiss the Son, refers to his Christ; and the Word Bar is to be
understood as in Prove. 31.2. What my Son, and what the Son of my Womb; and so
is written in the the 7th Verse, Thou art my Son. It is not He only that
understood it so, but before him, those that are in more Authority among them
understood it so also, as may be seen in that famous Book called, Medrash
Tehelim, upon said Psalm, which I omit for Brevity sake.

THE biggest Difficulty the modern Jews do oppose against said Exposition, is
this, They say, (when they talk with those who understand little or nothing of
the Hebrew Tongue) the Word that is translated in our English Bibles Son, in
the Original is not Ben but Bar, which Word signifies not a Son, but something
else; and they bring plain Examples for it, by which they do silence those that
know no better.

BUT such Shifts to oppose the Truth will not always do. To answer said
Objection, it is requisite only to send them to that famous Dictionary of the
Hebrew Tongue, composed by that learned and famous Author Rabbi David Kinchi,
(whom they all acknowledge to be a Nonesuch,) called Sherashim, and there they
will find this Word Bar signifies the same with Ben, a Son.

BUT since I am upon this Word Bar, I think it is proper to give my Thoughts
upon it, because by the true Intelligence of it, we shall discover some great
Mysteries of the Christian Religion, comprehended in this single Monosyllable,
Bar.

THIS Word Bar, so far as I can learn, signifies Three Things: Namely, 1. A
Son. 2. Pure, or clean: And, 3. Corn, or Food.


FOR the First, As in Prove. 31.2. What my Son, and what the Son of my Womb.

FOR the Second, As in Job. 11.4. For thou have said my Doctrine is pure, and I
am clean in thine Eyes.

FOR the Third, As in Genesis 42.25. Then Joseph commanded to fill their Sacks
with Corn, or Food.

IN all these Places, the Original is expressed with one Word, namely, Bar.

NOW since we have discovered and found out the true Meaning of this Word Bar,
I am apt to think, the Author of the Second Psalm, who doubtless spoke by
Divine Inspiration, sat down the Word Bar and not the Word Ben, which signifies
a Son, more immediately, not by Chance or accidentally, as some profane
Writers do, but providentially, to show and teach that Christ that was to come
in the Fullness of Time, was not only to be a Son of the Most High, as the Word
Ben would signify, but that He was to be a pure and clean Son, indeed, without
Spot or Blemish; and not only so, but that he should be the true Corn and Food
indeed to all those that believe in him.

THAT he was the Son of the Living God, is evident in this Psalm 2.7. The Lord
said unto me, Thou art my Son; and in Mat. 3 17. And lo, a Voice from Heaven,
saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

THAT he was pure and clean is plain in Isai. 53.9. He had done no Violence,
neither was any Deceit in his Mouth; and in Heb. 4.15. Yet without Sin.

THAT he was the true Corn or Meat indeed, is manifest in Psalm. 72.16. There
shall be a handful of Corn upon the Top of the Mountains; and in Joh. 6.55. For
my Flesh is Meat indeed.

TO demonstrate plainly that this Psalm speaks concerning the Messian, by their
own Authors, the Book called Medrash Tehelim, upon the second Plalm, v, 8. has
this Sentence, R. Iohanan says, To Three Persons we find the Holy One (i. e.
God) said, Ask; namely, to King Solomon, to King Ahaz, and to King Messiah; to
King Solomon as it is written in 1 King. 3.5. In Gibeon the Lord appeared unto
Solomon in a Dream by Night, and God said, Ask what I shall give thee; to King
Ahaz as it is written in Isai. 7.11. Ask thee a Sign of the Lord thy God; and
to King Messiah as it is written in Psalm. 2.8. Ask of Me, etc.

A GREAT many more Instances I might bring to prove my Assertion, as what Rabbi
Selomon Iarchi says upon said Psalm; but those that are alleged will be
sufficient, till I find any Body whatsoever shall oppose them.

OF this great Messiah, the Son of the Living God, the Prophet says, The
Government shall be upon his Shoulder. These Words may be understood in two
Ways, either in a metaphorical or in a literal Sense. If we take them in a
metaphorical Sense, they may allude to the Way and Manner of his Government all
over the Universe in General, as a Viceroy under his Father, or to his
Government all over his Church, seeking her Welfare, to her utmost Advantage in
a peculiar Manner, as we read in Mat. 11.27. All things are delivered unto me
of my Father; and in John 13.3. Jesus knowing that the Father had given all
things into his Hands. But if we understand it literally, it may have a
Reference to Christ's Cross, which he bore upon his Shoulder, as in John 19.17.
And he bearin his Cross, went forth, etc. by which Action He overcame all his
Enemies, and caused the Redemption of Mankind.

NOW after the Prophet has told us the Humanity of Christ, in the aforesaid
Expressions, in the next Place he declares unto us his Godhead: And therefore,

THIS great Point of Divinity, so mysterious, so profound, and so fathomless,
that except it was revealed, it would never be believed, the Prophet opens unto
us, in saying, that his Name shall be called, Wonderful, Counselor, a mighty
God, and Everlasting Father, (as the Original carries it.)

FOUR particular Names the Prophet does declare to the Jewish Church in
particular, and to the whole World in general, that the true Messiah (who was
to come six hundred Years after) was to have, as particular Marks to
distinguish him from the false ones: Namely, 1. Wonderful. 2. Counselor. 3. A
Mighty God. 4. An Everlasting Father.


AND since all the Four Titles aforesaid belong to God and no one else, if we
find them attributed to Jesus Christ, we may certainly conclude He is the true
Messiah, and not a Man only, but God also. Therefore let us examine each one in
particular without Partiality, and we shall find the Truth thereof clearly
appear to our Sight.

First, WONDERFUL. This Title may have Reference to one of three Things, or to
all three together: Namely, 1. TO Christ's Miraculous Works. 2. TO his
wonderful and supernatural Way of Conception. And, 3. TO the astonishing Work
of Man's Re demp tion. And,


First, TO his miraculous Works. If we could examine all Christ's Works, we
should find he did more miraculous and wonderful Works in his Lifetime, than
all the Prophets together, even Moses himself.

THAT the Messiah which was to come, was to perform great and wonderful Works,
such as none but God is able to act or perform, (to show that he was to be the
true God himself,) is clear and manifest, by what the same Prophet says in the
35th Chapter of his Prophecies: Therein I find four certain Marks, wherewith we
should know the true Messiah from any false one, at the Time of his coming,
((...) we understand said Prophecy as some do, wh^ is the most genuine way of
any that I know.)

THE Words of the Prophet are as follow: Say to them that are of fearful Heart,
Be strong, fear not; Behold, your God will come and save you. And then follow
the Marks of said Savior, in the 5th and 6th Verses: Namely, Then the Eyes of
the Blind shall be opened, the Ears of the Deaf shall be unstopped: Then the
lame Man shall leap as all Heart, and the Tongue of the Dumb shall sing.

ALL these four Marks, and a great many more, we find recorded in Mat. 15.30.
agreeing to our Christ as the true Messiah promised by the Prophets: And great
Multitudes came unto him, having with them those that were lame, blind, dumb,
maimed, and many others, and cast them down at Jesus Feet, and he healed them.

BY the Tokens of his wonderful Works he answered to John the Baptist's
Disciples, when he sent to him, to know whether he was the true Christ that was
to come, or was not; as we read in Mat. 11.4. Jesus answered and said unto
them, Go and show John again those things which ye do hear and see; the Blind
receive their Sight, the Lame do walk, the Lepers are cleansed, and the Deaf
hear; the Dead are raised up, and the Poor have the Gospel preached to them:
Which Answer plainly shows the Veracity of his Mission, and the Certainty of
his being the Christ promised to the World a great many Ages before him: For,
Who ever was? Who is? Or, Who ever shall be able to perform such wonderful and
miraculous Works? Certainly none but He, who is the very Wonderful indeed in
all his Actions. None but one that is God as well as Man, could act as he did.
Let all the Powers above or beneath, or both together, convene and join Forces,
and try whether they can do the same. If they cannot, as certainly they cannot,
then let us be assured whoever did thus is the true Messiah, God as well as Man.

Secondly, IT may have Reference to Christ's wonderful and supernatural Way of
Conception, namely, of a Virgin, overshadowed by the Holy Ghost, without any
carnal Copulation.

WHAT greater Wonder than this can there be? This supernatural and wonderful
Way of Christ's Corception is recorded, first in the old Testament, as it
should be; and secondly, confirmed in the New, as it was.

1. IN the Old Testament, as it should be, we and it in Isai. 7.14. Behold, a
Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son; (this is the very same Son that we are
discoursing upon,) and afterward confirmed by the Prophet Jer. 31.22. when he
says, The Lord has created a new thing in the Earth, a Woman shall compass a
Man: Which Words, with Submission, I verily think are to be understood of
Christ's wonderful Conception, because it was a new Thing indeed, and a thing
never heard before, i. e. that a Virgin should conceive and incompass a Man;
else, if it was by the ordinary Course of Nature, what new Thing would that be?
And if it was by the Knowledge of a Man, then she was no more a Virgin: And the
Prophet calls her a Virgin when she should conceive; Ergo, it was done by none,
or without Man's Knowledge, ( i. e. by the ordinary Course of Nature,) but in a
supernatural Way.

2. CONFIRMED in the New Testament, as it came to pass. We find it recorded in
Mat. 1.18. giving an Account how the Birth of Christ was, he says the following
Words, The Birth of Christ was on this wise, when as his Mother Mary was
espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with Child of the
Holy Ghost.

NOW, since the Messiah promised by the Prophets, was to be conceived in a
different Way from others, namely, in a supernatural Way without the Knowledge
of any Man; and since Jesus Christ was so conceived as the Evangelist plainly
does relate and affirm, let us be entirely satisfied that He is the true
Messiah that was promised of old; and so to his Conception the Word Wonderful
may have a Reference.

Thirdly, THIS Word Wonderful may have some Reference to the astonishing Work
of Man's Redemption. This Thing, take it as it is, is so wonderful and so
astonishing, that the Angels themselves did greatly admire, and desire to look
into it, as it is recorded in the 1 Pet. 1.12. Which Things the Angels desire
to look into.

THEREFORE, Let us conclude this Point, that this Word Wonderful does refer to
his wonderful Works, or to his supernatural Way of Conception, or to his
astonishing Work of Redemption in particular, or to all of them in general: And
let all those that cannot show any other Person to whom these Things belong,
stop their defiled Mouths and Railings, and cry with us, in Admiration, the
Words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 104.24. O Lord, how manifold are thy Works, in
Wisdom have thou made them all.

Secondly, THE second Title the Prophet gives to the Messiah which was to come,
is, Counselor. This Title may be applied to Christ in two Respects: Namely,
with respect,

1. TO the good Counsels He gave to his Disciples and Hearers, when he was upon
Earth.

And,

2. TO the Publication of the New Testamant.

First, WITH respect to the good Counsels he gave to his Disciples and Hearers,
when he was upon Earth. This is so infallibly true, that I do not remember any
Body, directly or indirectly, did ever accuse him of stirring up the People of
any Rank or Quality, against any of their Superiors; but the contrary we may
see in the first Epistle of Peter, the second Chapter throughout.

Secondly, IT refers to the Publication of the New Testament. This was
prophesied above five hundred Years before his coming, by the Prophet Jer.
21.31, 32. Behold, the Days come faith the Lord, that I will make a new
Covenant with the House of Israel, and with the House of Judah: not according
to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers, in the Day that I took them by
the Hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt.

ANY Body may plainly see, that the Prophet in this Place does prophecy now God
would make a new Covenant, and give a new Law to his Church at the Fullness of
Time, at the coming of the Messiah, quite different from that Law he gave them
at the Time of their coming out of Egypt; a Law which we should be guided by,
because on the fulfilling what is therein contained, does depend the Salvation
of our immortal Souls.

THE Jewish Rabbis of late, when they are pressed with this Prophecy, answer,
That it is not to be understood as we say, (namely, that the Messiah is to give
a new Law for us to be guided by,) because the Word Law is not expressed in the
Verse, but a Covenant, which does imply a new Reformation of the old Covenant,
or else a new Confirmation of the Law of Moses. To this I answer.

IT is true, that in this Place the Word is Berith, which signifies a Covenant;
but I find the Law which God gave in Mount Sin^t to the Jewish Nation in
particular, is called Berith also, as in Exodus 34.28. And he wrote upon the
Tables the Words Nauberith of the Covenant, the Ten Commandments. In both
Places the Expression is alike, i. e. Berith; and if the Law was called Berith,
and the New Testament is called Berith also, I do not see what Difference they
can ma^^ between the two Berithiyoth Covenants. Neither do I see but that the
same Words being used thus, may be very well brought to prove the Publishment
of the New Testament, as a new Law after Christ's coming.

BUT they say again, that this Answer is not sufficient, because the Word Torau
which signifies a Law more immediately, is not expressed in the Text; and in
Case the Prophet had meant, that a new Law should be given at Christ's coming,
he would say Torau, and not Berith.

TO answer this Objection, I think it is requisite only to persuade them to read
with Attention the following Verse, and there they will find how the same
Prophet calls this very Covenant which he calls before Berith, by the Name
Torau. The 33d Verse runs thus, But this shall be Nauberith the Covenant that I
will make with the House of Israel, after those Days, faith the Lord, I will
put Torauthee, my Law in their inward Parts, etc. where we see the Prophet
called the Covenant which he mentioned before, my Law, to remove all manner of
Doubts of its being understood for the Law of Moses, as they say.

BUT it may be the Brightness of God's Word will not at once let them see the
Truth of our Doctrine; as a great many times it happens to those who from the
Dark, on a sudden come, or are brought to the Light, that the Clearness and
Brightness of the Sun, makes them to be blinder than they were before, not
Because the Sun is dark in it self, but because they are so naturalized to
Darkness, that the Excellency of the Sun's Light is too strong for them:
Therefore I shall take another Method with them, to let them see the Brightness
of our Doctrine if I can, namely, by quoting to them some of their own Authors,
by which Means, I hope to bring them by Degrees out of Darkness, to see the
Brightness of the Sun of Righteousness, even to the Knowledge of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the Doctrine prescribed by him in the New Law, or the New Testament.

IN that famous Book called Mechiltau upon the Words of the 9th Verse of the
26th Chapter of Leviticus, which says, I will establish my Covenant with you,
has the following Sentence, viz. And I will establish my Covenant with you, not
as the first Covenant was which you have anulled and broken, etc. but a new
Covenant that shall endure for ever, as it is written, Jer. 31.31. Behold, the
Days come says the Lord, that I will make a new Covenant with the House of
Israel, and with the House of Judah.

THESE Words do plainly show, that the Rabbis of old, understood that God
would give a new Law at the coming of the Messiah, and they prove it from this
Text also, whatever the modern Rabbis do understand now.

AND because by the Mouth of two Witnesses every thing is to be established, I
shall bring another Witness of their own, which will attest the Certainty of
our Doctrine, and then in case they wont hearken to it, but remain in their
Judaism, I shall leave the Case with him who is able to open their
Understanding, in the Time appointed according to his Promise.

IN that ancient and famous Book of theirs, called Medrash Koelleth, upon the
last Word of the 11th Chapter of Ecclesiastes, is recorded the following
Sentence, Vanity; The Law which a Man learns in this World is Vanity in
Comparison of, or before the Messiah's Law.

OUT of said Sentence any Body may plainly see, not only that they call it
expressly the Messiah's LAW, but that they also say, this is so much better than
the former, that the first Law is a mere Vanity in Comparison to the latter, i.
e. the Messiah's LAW, and not COVENANT, to avoid any Mistakes for the Time
ensuing.

Thirdly, THE third Title the Prophet gives the Messiah, is, A mighty God. This
is a Title that certainly cannot show any thing else but that he is God as well
as Man. The Name Ale, which signifies strong God, (from the Root Auyall He
strengthened,) and which King David gives to God the Father, in Psalm. 95.3. For
the Lord is a great God, the Prophet gives to the Messiah in this Place.
Whereas, in case the Messiah was to be a Man only, as the modern Jews (and
sandry Heretics in the Church did and do) suppose, I am apt to think the
Prophet would never have called him Ale Gibbor, A mighty God.

THE modern Jewish Rabbis to avoid this Difficulty, do say, that the Name of
Ale, God, signifies a great many Times in the Scriptures, a Judge, etc. and
therefore out of this Place the Divinity of Christ cannot be proved. To this I
answer.

ALTHOUGH it is true, as they say, yet among all those Judges, etc. which are
called God or Gods in holy Writ, we never find that any of them are called
Jehovah, but Aloim only. Therefore if I find a Place where Christ is called
with the tremendous and fearful Name Jehovah, which is the same by which God
the Father is known, I hope they will be satisfied he is God also; since this
is a Name called the Tetragrammaton, which they have in such superstitious
Veneration, that they wont pronounce it, not only upon common Occasions, (for
this would be a very pious and religious Principle indeed,) but refuse to call
upon God by this Name even in their public or private Worship, or in reading
the holy Scriptures, which is altogether without Warrant.

THE Place where Christ is called Jehovah, is plainly to be seen in the Prophet
Jer. 23.5, 6. which is as follows, Behold, the Days come says the Lord, I will
raise upon David a righteous Branch, and a King shall reign and prosper, and
shall execute Judgment and Justice in the Earth. In his Days Judah shall be
saved, and Israel shall dwell safely: and this is his Name whereby he shall be
called, Jehoush our Righteousness.

THIS Prophecy they do acknowledge to be understood of the Messiah; and in it
we plainly see, how the Prophet called him Jehovah, to teach us the great and
high Mystery of the Godhead of Christ; because the Deliverance of the Church
from the Captivity of Satan, was to be wrought by one that had the Power over
him, and not by Man; for this was impossible for any to perform, except God
himself, who was and is her true Savior and Deliverer.

WHEN the modern Jewish Rabbis are pressed with this Argument, they say, that
the Name Jehovah is not a Name given to God only, but to sundry other Things
also, as in Genesis 22.14. Abraham called the Name of that Place where he was to
sacrifice his Son Isaac, Jehovah will see; and not only Abraham, but even Moses
himself, after Joshua fought and discomfited the Hamalikites, did build an
Altar unto the Lord, and called it Jehovah saying, Jehovah Nesee, Exodus 17.15.
Gideon the Captain, after he had such good News, i. e. that he should not die
for the Sight he had seen before, did build an Altar unto the Lord, and called
it Jehovah Shallow Judge. 6.24. The Prophet Ezekiel. 48.35. after he gave a
Description of Jerusalem rerrestial (as they say) he called it Jehovah there.
Therefore (they say) since we see, said Name is applied by such Pillars of the
Church as Abraham, Moses, Gideon and Ezekiel, to other Things, i. e. the first
to a Mountain, the second and third to Altars, and the fourth to a City, and
all are inanimate Creatures, far below the Dignity of a Man, and yet no Body
can suppose, because they are so called, that they are God; with much more
Reason may we attribute said Name to the Messiah as a Man, who is of more
Dignity than Stones are, without his being more God than the rest.

BUT since the Answer to this Objection, which seems to have some Weight in it,
has been distinctly given by sundry of our Divines, I shall not meddle with it
at large, but only bring a couple of Authorities of their own ancient Rabbis,
very authentical with them, which shall show the contrary of what they argue,
and establish the Certainty of our Doctrine. These are as follow.

1. THE first is Maimonides, who in his famous Book called Mora Neboohim, in
the sixty-first Chapter of the first Part, treating upon the different Names,
or Attributes which we find the Prophets did give to God, says thus, All the
Names of the most High which are found in the Books, (i. e. of the Bible,) are
derived from his Actions, and that which has no Derivation in it, is only one,
i. e. the Tetragrammaton, which is appropriated to the most High only;
therefore it is called a declared Name, which signifies the very Essence of
the most High, with clear Demonstration, in which there is no Equal or Partner
with him. But the rest of his Names, i. e. Judge, Mighty, Righteous, Merciful,
God, etc. are all Names which declare the Effects and Derivation, etc. But the
Tetragrammaton Name is unknown as yet as to its certain Derivation, and
therefore it is attributed to him only.

2. THE second is that which is recorded in that ancient Book of theirs, called
Medrash Achau, which is an Exposition upon Lamentations. Upon the sixteenth
Verse of the first Chapter, and upon the Words, Because the Comforter is far
from me, it brings in the following Sentence, Rabbi Abau the Son of Rahaunah
(it being asked him before what the Comforters Name was to be) said, Jehovah is
his Name, as it is written in Jer. 2^.5. And this is his Name whereby he shall
be called, Jehovah our Righteousness.

NOW, out of said Authorities I gather two Things of a very great Consequence,
Viz.

1. THE Name called the Tetragrammaton, is of such Excellency and Veneration,
that it is to be attributed only to God, as the Supreme Being, and no none
else, because they are all Creatures.

2. THE Comforter of Israel was to be called by said Name; from whence I draw a
very fair Conclusion, even according to their own Principles, that Christ the
Comforter was a true God, since he is called in the Scriptures by that Name
which none but God is to be called by How the Scriptures are to be understood,
when the said Name is given to sundry Things. see Rabbi Selomo Jarchi upon said
Texts.
.

THIS Doctrine of Christ's DIVINITY, is so certain and so true an one, that
although a great many Heretics in and out of the Church did question it, I find
one of the first Writers in the primitive Ages, calls whosoever should preach
that there was but one God alone, so as to take away the Divinity of Christ, a
Devil, and an Enemy of Righteousness. ( Ignatius at Antioch.)

NOW, since we have justified our Cause, (even by their own Authorities, viz.
that the Son of Man is not only a Man but God also,) I shall go on to consider
the fourth and last Title the Prophet gives to the Messiah.

Fourthly and lastly, THE Messiah is called an Everlasting Father. Here as to
this Title we must be very careful how we understand it; for although the Prophet
called him so, yet he does not mean in that Sense of Divine Paternity, and with
that peculiar and evangelical Epithet whereby we acknowledge in our Creed, the
first Person of the ever blessed Trinity; because if we should understand it
so, we should fall into a gross Error (God forbid:) But this Title of an
Everlasting Father, is to be understood in this Place, as attributed to the Son
in an allegorical Sense, or as a relative Title, and no more.

TO understand said Title fully, it is requisite to have recourse to the
Original, and after a due Enquiry, with all Reverence and Submission, we hope
to find the true Meaning of it. And so far as I can learn, this Word Father,
that in the Original is Aubee has six Significations: Namely, 1. IT signifies
a Father, or Natural Generator. 2. A Patriarch. 3. A Doctor, or Rabbi. 4. A
King, or Magistrate. 5. AN Inventor of a new Thing. 6. AND lastly, A Desire.


FOR the first, Genesis 47.1. Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said, My
Father and my Brethren, etc.

FOR the second, Deuteronomy. 17.5. For a Father of many Nations I made thee.

FOR the third, 2 Kings 2.12. And Elisha saw it and cried, My Father, my
Father, (when he was not his Father, but his Rabbi.)

FOR the fourth, 1 Samuel 24.11. Moreover, my Father, see, etc. (He was not his
Father, but his King.)

FOR the Fifth, Genesis 4.21. He was the Father of all such as handle the Harp and
Organ, i. e. an Inventer of these Instruments.

FOR the sixth and last, Job. 34.36. My Desire (...), that Job may be tried,
etc.

IN all these Places, we find the Original to be expressed in one Way, i. e. by
the Word Aubee; agreeable to which I am prone to think, the Messiah was to be
called a Father, in all the Meanings aforesaid, except the first.

NOW (to avoid any Mistakes) let us examine each one in particular,

JESUS CHRIST was to be called a Father, not as a Generator, as I said before,
but as a Regenerator; and he was so, as in Mat. 19.28. And Jesue said unto
them, Verily I say unto you, that ye which have followed me in the
Regeneration, when the Son of Man shall sit in the Throne of his Glory, ye
shall sit upon twelve Thrones.

JESUS CHRIST was to be called a Patriarch of many Nations, as he is the Father
of all those that believe in him to be justified; as in Acts 13.39. And by him
all that believe are justified from all things.

JESUS CHRIST was to be called a Doctor, or a Rabbi, and so he was, as in Joh.
3.2. Nichodemus came to Jesus by Night, and said unto him, Rabbi, we know that
thou art a Teacher come from God.

JESUS CHRIST was to be called a King, as in Zech. 9.9. Behold, thy King comes
unto thee. And in Rev. 17.14. And the Lamb shall overcome them, for he is Lord
of Lords, and King of Kings.

JESUS CHRIST was to called an Inventor, as he was to invent and institute
another Sort of Government, far better than the former, for the Propagation and
Welfare of his Church, as he is the Head of it; as in Ephesians. 5.23. Even as Christ
is the Head of the Church.

JESUS CHRIST was to be called a Desire, because he has been always desirable
to all Nations, even to this Day, by those that wait for him; as we read in
Hag. 2.7. And the Desire of all Natione shall come.

I NOW pass to the third Head.

Thirdly, THE third Point of the Christian Religion, which the Prophet speaks
of in this Place, is to show what sort of Government the Messiah should bear,
and how long it should last. This is declared in the last Part of the Text;
namely. The Prince of Peace; of the Increase of his Government and Peace no end.

TWO Points are comprehended under this Head: Namely, 1. WHAT Sort of
Government he should bear. And, 2. HOW long it should last.


FOR the first, When the Prophet has a mind to declare, that Christ's
Government should be with Peace and Amity, with Love and Union, without Jarrs
and Debates, he says, The Prince of Peace; and in a way of Anadiplosis, he
repeats the same at the End. This Manner of Government we find Jesus Christ did
preach, and nothing else, as it is plain to be seen in sundry Places of the New
Testament, Mat. 9.50. And have Peace one with another. Romans 12.18. Live
peaceably with all Men. Heb. 12.14. Follow Peace with all Men, etc.

THIS is that universal Peace the Prophet Isaiah 2.4. does foretell should be
at the Time of Christ's Appearance; and so it came to pass, as may be evidenced
in that General Peace that was through the whole World at the Time of his coming;
as we read in Luke 2.1. Concerning the Tax that was said upon all the World by
Casar Augustus's Decree.

HERE the Jewish Doctors as the chief Opposers of Christianity, argue thus:
Jesus cannot be the Messiah promised by the Prophets, because he plainly said,
that he did not come to send Peace on the Earth, but War and Variance one
against another, as we read in Mat. 10.34, 35. and in Luke 12.51. And all the
Prophets in General foretold the contrary. To this I answer.

I OWN that Christ said so, not because I cannot help it, but because said
Expressions do prove and show the Veracity of our Doctrine, if we understand it
aright. If we examine the Words that Jesus Christ said, we shall not find he
said, that he came to make War, (as they say,) but in Matthew it is said, to
send a Sword, and in Luke, to give a Division: Which Words are to be understood
thus.

FOR the great Dissaffinity that there is between Darkness and Light for the
great Unequality there is between God and Belial, and for the great
Disproportion there is between God and Satan, Christ foretells, (as one that
knew all things, as one that knew what would come to pass between his followers
and those that denied him,) that the time would come, when the preaching of his
everlasting Gospel would make a Division between these two Parties, as if a
Sword had cut them asunder; not because the Nature of the Gospel it self is to
bring Divisions and Jarrs among the true Believers, for we know to the
contrary, both by Records, and (what is more convincing) by our own Experience:
But from the great Enmity that there is between God and Satan, the Division
between the two Parties does proceed, as contrary and opposite one to the
other. But the Gospel it self produces nothing but good Will and Friendship
among true Believers, as it is recorded in Acts 4.32. And the multitude of them
that believed were of one Heart, and of one Soul.

Secondly, HOW long said Government should last. This is plain and manifest in
the next Words, Of the Increase of his Government and Peace no End.

IF we examine Histories, we shall find that all the Monarchs and Potentates of
the World that have been since the Creation, have proved hitherto very frail
and perishing ones, (although they show to be as firm as Rocks, in the Time of
their Dominion and Government, as the Chronologers are very well informed,)
except the Dominion and Government of Jesus Christ: This, instead of
decreasing, every Day grows bigger and bigger, although it began with the most
unlikely Means imaginable. So this Dominion the Prophet says, shall never come
to an End, but shall be permanent and durable for ever; Of the Increase of his
Government and Peace no end.

THE Meaning of the Words, No End, (that in the Original is Rets from the Root
Kautzautz He did cut,) is as much as to say, It shall never be cut off, but it
shall increase every Day till the Fullness of the Gentiles do come in, and next
the Jewish Nation, as a Body, being all under one Shepherd, the great Bishop of
Souls, and until the Work shall be finished, and our Lord Jesus Christ shall
return every thing to God the Father, with subduing all his Enemies under his
Feet, and destroying all his Adversaries, even Death it self, and all the Elect
obtain and enjoy everlasting Happiness with him in eternal Glory, as it has
been promised by the Apostle Paul to the Corinthians, in 1 Cor. 15.24, 25, 26,
27.

Fourthly, THE fourth and last Point of Christianity the Prophet speaks of in
this Prophecy, is, How, or from whom the Messiah should proceed. This Point has
two Considerations: Namely, 1. HOW. And, 2. FROM whom.


FOR the first, How. This may be answered two Ways. 1. Negatively. And, 2.
Affirmatively.


First, NEGATIVELY: Not of a married Woman, as other lawful Children are, which
by the Course of Nature are born and propagated. But,

Secondly, AFFIRMATIVELY: Of a pure and immaculate Virgin, and not from any
Virgin whatsoever, but from one whose Name was to be called Mary.

THESE two mysterious Points the Prophet does foretell in the Word, Of the
Increase.

TO understand this Doctrine, it is requisite for us to have recourse to the
Original, else it will be never understood.

THE Word in the Original is Lemar^a, Of the Increase, Said Word is wrote with
a final Mem in the middle, contrary to all the Grammar Rules; and it is that
only Word which is wrote so in the whole Bible. It is not to be supposed to be
the Printer's Fault, but the contrary; in case it was not so wrote, it would
have been counted an Error.

I AM prone to think, the Penman of this Book, with a great and particular
Providence, did write it so, to show us the Doctrine we are upon. To prove that
it is done providentially, it requires us only to take Notice, how the Jewish
Writers for the Preservation of the holy Scriptures, have taken the Care to
advertise their Synagogue, for the Preservation of said Word, and to write it
in the same Manner, and no otherways, although they understood not the Meaning of
it; and I am apt to think since the Beginning it was kept so, as we have it
now. I remember the Words of one of their Rabbis commenting upon said Word,
wrote with a Close, or final Mem in the Middle, says thus, Mem closed (in this
Place) a close or a mysterious thing signifies." And though he does not tell
what, either because he would not, or because he knew not; nevertheless, he
knew that so it should be, and that so it was from the Beginning, otherwise, if
he (or any other) knew any thing to the contrary, they would certainly, have
told it. In the Margin of some of our corrected Bibles, I find this
Advertisement set down as a Monument, that every Body should take Notice of it,
i. e. A close Mem (must be set) in the middle of the Word. Therefore to think
that all the Admonitions and margin Writings in Company with the Antiquity of
the Book, should be set and recorded casually and by Chance, I cannot join with
those that think so, but believe it does signify these two Points: Namely, 1.
HOW. And, 2. FROM whom Christ should proceed.


FOR the first, How. If we take notice of the Shape of said Letter, we shall
find it shaped with four Corners, thus, closed in all Parts, to show that the
Mother of our Lord was to be a pure Virgin, closed without being known by any
Body carnally, but overshadowed by the Holy Ghost.

FOR the second, From whom. Not from any Virgin whatsoever, but from one whose
Name was to be called MARY, and no other. This is deciphered in said Letter,
which is the first of the Letters which the Name Miriam or Mary begins with,
and according to this Prediction, in the Fullness of Time it exactly came to
pass, as we read in Mat. 1.18. Now the Birth of Jesus Christ was on this wise:
Whenas his mother Mary was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she
was found with Child of the Holy Ghost. And the same is recorded in Luke 1.27.

TO confirm this Doctrine, it is to be observed, that the Scripture for the most
Part, when it mentions Christ's Mother, it does it with both Names together, i.
e. Virgin, and Mary.

NOW, since I have been long enough in opening the true Meaning of this
Prophecy, how it is to be understood, according to the Catholic Sense of it,
it is time for me to take a View of what the modern Jewish Witters or Rabbis
do say upon it, i. e. those that bear the biggest Sway nowadays in their
Synagogue. And with what has been said, I hope the Fallacy of their
Interpretation will appear clearly to our Sight.

THE modern Jewish Writers, such as Rabbi Menass^h Ben Jsrael and Rabbi Jsaac
Abrabanel, etc. do, first, Affirmatively say (whatever their Predecessors said
to the contrary) that the Child the Prophet here speaks of in this Place, and
in the 7th Chapter, is concerning Hezekiah, King Abaz's Son, because in his
Days they were delivered from the great Oppression that the House of David was
under by the Confederacy of two great and mighty Kings, i. e. Razin King of
Syria, and Pekah King of Israel, who did convene together with the Strength of
their Armies against Abaz King of Judah, as in the 7th Chapter of this
Prophesy; and in this Sense God was with them in a wonderful Manner, and
delivered them with such unexpected Deliverance; and he, King Hezekiah, was the
Child I manuel foretold by the Prophet, because in his Days God was with them
in a wonderful Manner.

Secondly, NEGATIVELY, (they say,) The Child spoken of by the Prophet, has no
Reference at all to the Messiah, for three Reasons.

First, (THEY say,) How is is possible, that that which was to come six hundred
Years after, could be taken for a Sign of Comfort of their being delivered from
the Terrors and Dangers they were under at the Time when the Prophet delivered
his Message? Would it be a Comfort to any Man that was lame, or weak, or with
any Bodily Disease, to tell him such News, namely, that his Posterity five or
six hundred Years after he was dead and rotten, should be sound, strong, and in
good Health? What cares any Body for such News; or what does any Body care for
such Comforts, so long as he that suffers is not to be the better for it?

Secondly, THE second Reason why this Prophecy cannot be understood of the
Messiah, (they say) is, because the Word is in the Preterite Tense, Vauikrau,
And he called. Whereas, if it was a Prophecy that was to be understood of a
Thing which should come to pass some hundreds of Years hence, the Word would be
Vackaura, And he shall be called, in the future Tense.

Thirdly, THE the third Reason why it does not concern the Messiah, (they say)
is, because all the Titles described in it, as. Wonderful, Counselor, A mighty
God, and An everlasting Father, are Titles belonging properly to God, and not
to Man; and only the Title of Prince of Peace, is the Title of the Person the
Prophet speaks of, which is King Hezekiah, or any Body else whatsoever, the
Messah excepted, as the Accents do show.

THESE are the chief Arguments which do deserve to be taken Notice of, or are
worth answering: Therefore I shall first make it appear, that the Words of the
Prophet cannot be understood of King Hezekiah; and secondly, I shall answer
said Objections in full; and then conclude.

First, TO prove this Prophecy could not be understood of King Hezekiah, three
very strong Reasons may be brought or offered.

First, HIS Reign not being perpetual and permanent for ever, as the Prophet
says, Of the Increase of his Government and Peace no end. But the contrary we
read in 2 King. 18. that because he rebelled against Sanherib King of Assyria,
the War went so far between them, that the Assyrian's King came against him,
and took all the fenced Cities of Judah, and King Hezekiah was forced to buy
the Peace of him for the Sum of 300 Talents of Silver and 20 Talents of Gold,
which amounts (accoring to Mr. Clark's Computation) to the Sum of 266906 l. 5
s. Sterling. Now I ask, Is this to have Peace in his Dominions without end?

Secondly, IF we consider (...) old King Hezekiah was when he came to reign,
(...) ^all find this Prophecy cannot be understood for ^o of him. We read in 2
King. 18.2. King Hezekiah was twenty five Years old when he began to reign. And
in 2 King. 16.2. we find King Abaz his Father did reign sixteen Years.
Therefore it consequently follows, King Hezekiah could not be less than Nine
Years old when this was foretold by the Prophet. Now I ask, How could he be the
Child whose miraculous Conception and wonderful Birth was here foretold, since
he was already born, and by no other Way but by the ordinary Course of Nature,
contrary to the Prophet's Words, that he was to be of a Virgin?

Thirdly, IF we could search all the Histories of the Kings of Judah, or any
other whatsoever, either of the Jewish Writers, or any other Nation, we should
not find that King Hezekiah was ever called by the Name Imanuel, neither as a
proper, nor as an appellative Name: Therefore I do greatly admire, how the
modern Jewish Rabbis, and in particular Rabbi Menasseh Ben Israel, a Man of
such great Learning as he was, in his Confiliador, does maintain said Opinion,
without Warrant, or any Color of Truth.

NOW since we have made it appear, that this Prophecy cannot be understood of
King Hezekiah, as the modern Jewish Rabbis will have it, let us go to the
next, namely, to see whether we can Answer their Objections; and in Case we can
(as doubtless we shall) the Whole Truth will certainly appear and come to Light.

First, IF we examine the Co^stext, we shall find the great Sorrow and
Affliction King Ahaz was under, when he saw two mighty Kings joining Forces
together to come against him, from which Sight the Hearts of his Subjects
together with his own, did shake and move, as the Trees of the Woods are moved
against the Wind, left he should be destroyed in Company with the whole Royal
Family. God seeing the Affliction (which certainly was great) that his Majesty
King Ahaz was under, sent the Prophet Isaiah to Comfort him with these
agreeable and Comfortable Words; Take heed and be quiet, fear not neither be
faint bearted, for the Two Tails of those smoking fire Brands, the Counsels
and Devices these two Kings have took against thee and the House of David,
shall not prevail; thus says the Lord, it shall not stand, neither shall it
come to pass, etc. and then the Prophet, to establish him in (...) Faith, told
him, he should ask a Sign for it: But his Royal Majesty, either through
Incredulity, or Modesty, or being certain the thing would come to pass (which I
am not about to inquire into) refused it; yet nevertheless the Prophet
following his Divine Inspiration, said unto him, Behold a Virgin shall conceive
end I car a Son, and (she) shall call his Name Imanuel, etc. in which Words the
Prophet foretold him very plainly, the Establishment of his Kingdom; because
since it was appointed from the Beginning, (...) the Love, the Great Love that
God the Father both to Mankind, to send his beloved Son into the World out of
the Stock of David, how could said Son, or said Messiah, come from such a
Stock, in case it was destroyed and perished at that Time, as he thought it
would? Most certainly the Word of the Lord appointed and Determined from all
Eternity mu^ come to pass; and in Case the whole Royal Stock would Perish, as
he feared, the thing would never be, which is impossible. Therefore I say, what
greater Assurance could he have for his Deliverance? or, What greater Comfort
for his Afflictions, than to have such News brought to him by a Prophet? Surely
none. If so, let us conclude, that although the Promise was not to come till a
great many ages and Generations, after he was Dead and Rotten, yet it was a
great Assurance of his Deliverance, and a great alleviation of the present
Afflictions he was under; since, if he and the whole Stock should perish as he
feared, the Thing appointed would never come to pass, which is contradictory in
it self.

Secondly, THE Second Argument is, That the Prophet speaks in the Preterite
Tense, etc. I think it would be a great deal in their Way (as it is usual to
say) never to Argue it, since it is a Thing that we find very common in the
Holy Writs, to express the Future Tense with a Preterit Expression, to show the
certainty of the Thing foretold, as if it was already come, and I am fully
satisfied they know it as well as we See Genesis 15.16. and 16.14. Levit. 13.4 l.
2 (...). 2.16. Isai. 62.2. Neh. 2.7. etc.
.

Thirdly, AS to the Third Objection, That all the Titles of the Text belong to
God, till it come to the last, namely, the Prince of Peace, I think, with what
is already said, it remains fully answered, i. e. that all those Titles in
general belong to the Messiah not as a Man only, but as a God also.

To prove that said Titles belong properly to the Person Nominated, and not to
the Nominator, If they could but see the Truth, they could not help owning it,
because the Running of the Text does show it: For in Case they should have a
reference to the Nominator and not to the Nominated, as they would have it to
be, the Text would be thus, Vauikrau Dela Yognetz are Guibox Iubee griaud eth
Shemo faur Shaulome, And the Wonderful Counseiler, the mighty God, the
Everlasting Father shall call his name the Prince of Peace. But since the Text
says, And his Name shall be called, Wouderful, Counselor, a Mighty God, an
Everlasting Father, ^ Prince of Peace, it does clearly show, that all those
Titles do properly belong to the Person Nominated, namely, the Messiah, as God
and Man, and not to the Nominator to God alone, as already said.

Concerning the Accents, they plead for it, for to prove their Sophistical
Interpretation, I am willing at any Time and Place, to make it appear, that the
Accents set under the Words Iubee gnaud Everlasting Father, snow the Certainty
of our Doctrine, and Contradict theirs, following the Rules of said Art, which
I omit at present, since it is ^ore fit for a Personal Disputation, than for
such a shor^ Discourse as this is. See T. Art. F. 134.


Now since I have proved with God's Assistance, four Principal Points of
Christianity that are contained in this Prophecy; Namely, 1. The coming of the
Messiah. 2. What sort of Person said Messiah should be. 3. What kind of
Government he should bear, and how long it should last. 4. And lastly, How and
from whom said Messiah should proceed, with all the Branches therein contained,
not only by the Authority of the Old and New Testament, (as both infallible)
but even with the Authority of those that will not own that he is already come,
and likewise have answered their Principal Objections, which they object
against the Orthodox Meaning and Interpretation of said Prophecy, I shall
conclude with a Word of Exhortation.

I believed, therefore have I spoken, I was greatly afflicted. King David, a
Man after God's own Heart, a Man endowed with a Divine Inspiration, a Man that
knew how these Things should be, i. e. that in the Fullness of Time God would
send his Dear and Beloved Son into the World for the Salvation of all those
Sinners that Believed in him, was ( as I take it) very much perplexed, and very
much afflicted in his Mind, about his Nation's Condition at that Time, whether
or no they would acknowledge Him for their Messiah and Savior, and accept him
for the Redeemer of their Souls: But at last, by the Strength of his
Imagination, and by the Pregnancy of his Thoughts about this Point, this great
and important Point, he broke forth with this Expression, I believed. This
Word, being of a very large extent, includes in it, not only the Truths plainly
revealed, but even those that mystically were signified in the Ceremonies of
the Law; namely, the coming of the Messiah out of his Family, according to the
Flesh; and therefore publicly confessed it, with strong Perseverance, and
without Shame, I believed, therefore have I spoken.

DEAR and beloved Brethren, Let us all unanimously follow his Steps: Let us all
with one Consent imitate his Example: Let us all with one accord tread in his
Paths, i. e. in believing that the Messiah is already come; and not only
believe it with an implicit Faith, because it is upheld by the Judgment and
Authority of a great many agreeing together, as those of the Romish Church do
believe, but because the Lord has spoken it, and it is certainly come to pass;
and not believe only, and be ashamed to publish it to others, but believe and
publicly declare it to the whole World, at any Time and Place, as Opportunity
shall present, without Shame, i. e. that Jesus Christ is the true Messiah
promised by the Prophets; and that he is the Son of the living God, God as well
as Man, coequal and coeval with God the Father from all Eternity; who came for
the Salvation of Sinners, who suffered and died to make Reconciliation between
God and us; raised for our Justification, and fits at the Right Hand of God the
Father, from whence he shall come to judge the Quick and the Dead. And by such
a Confession, we hope to be consessed by Him before his Father which is in
Heaven, as it is recorded in Mat. 10.23. Jesus Christ said to his Disciples,
Whosoever therefore shall confess me before Men, him will I confess also before
my Father which is in Heaven. AMEN and AMEN.

NOTHING BUT The Truth: BEING A Short ESSAY, WHEREIN The Author proves the
Doctrine Of the Ever Blessed and Adorable TRINITY, Both out of the Old
Testament, And with the Authority of the Cabalistical Rabbis, Ancient and
Modern: And that said Doctrine is not a NOVELTY, as his Countrymen do think,
but as ancient as the BIBLE it self.

By R. JUDAH MONIS.

BOSTON: Printed for Daniel Henchman, and sold at his Shop. 1722.

Nothing but the Truth.
PSALM CXVI. 10. I believed, therefore have I spoken: I was greatly afflicted.


FAITH, or Belief, is the Foundation which the whole Structure of Christianity
depends upon. The Souls of true Believers are so raised, so carried, so
elevated, and finally so transported to the upper Mansions, with the sweet
Contemplation of the high and profound Mysteries contained in the New
Testament, that none but such as have the Happiness of enjoying them, can tell
or say any thing about them. The Fruits that are obtained by the Meditation and
Contemplation thereof are so ravishing, that none can declare them in full:
Even those who do enjoy them, find them so much above their Capacities to
express, so much beyond their understanding to declare, and so sublime to be
communicated and rehearsed, (if ever they might come to be heard) that it would
not be comprehended and understood. It is the first fruit of the Spirit says
the Apostle Paul to the Galatians. Gal. 5.22. and therefore how can any, that
are Destitute or deprived of such Spirit ever come to understand any thing of
it? Carnal Men Laugh at the Truth and Orthodox Points of Christianity, for
lacking of Faith to believe them. The Doctrine of Christ crucified was to the
Jews a Stumbling Block, and to the Greeks Foolishness, because for want of
Faith they could not be persuaded of the Truth thereof, but it was counted in
their foolish Conceits and carnal Minds, nothing but Foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.23.

NOW, under this Word BELIEF are included all Points of the Christian Religion
in general, and all, I am prone to think, King David aimed at, when he
expressed these Words, I believed; because he being 2 Type of Christ, and
knowing the Messiah should come out of his Loins, after his pondering and
meditating upon the Truths and profound Mysteries that were to be revealed to
the Church in the Fullness of Time, he cried out, I believed; implying in these
Words, that although he knew he should not see that Day, nevertheless he was
fully satisfied all those Mysteries, which in Process of Time God would reveal
to his Elect were true; and the Reason of the Expression, I was greatly
afflicted, may have a Reference to the Condition he foresaw the Jewish Nation
would be in for their Unbelief.

AMONG the great, deep, and fathomless Points of Divinity, which God of his
infinite Mercies was pleased to reveal, i. e. to open more clearly than he did
before to his Catholic Church, is the great Mystery of the sacred and blessed
Trinity. This Point I do now design to prove, not to be a new Doctrine since
Christ, as the modern Jews through a Mistake suppose, but from the very
Beginning, with clear Demonstrations out of the old Testament, and their own
authentic Authors, i. e. those that have the true understanding of the Law and
of the Prophets, (as they say,) called by them, Baugnaula Bohmath hauameth, the
Masters of the True Science, i. e. their Cabalistical Authors, ancient and
modern, and answer the Objections that the Discourse will bring forth

AND before I begin, I implore God's Assistance, saying with the Psalmist,
Psalm. 51.15. O Lord, open thou my Lips, and my Mouth shall show forth thy
Praise.

THIS Point is of such Weight, and of such great Importance, that except a Man
believes it, he can never be saved; because, to believe in God the Son as our
Redeemer, as in Gal. 3.13. and Rev. 5.9. and in God the Holy Ghost as our
Sanctifier, as in Romans 15.16. and 1 Cor. 6.11. (Titles and Dignities belonging
properly to God, because none but God only can redeem and sanctify our Souls,
as in Psalm. 130.7. and Lev. 20.8.) and at the same Time to deny the Coequalness
and Coevalness of she three Persons from all Eternity, seems to be so contrary
to that Idea which the whole World of Mankind have of a God, that nothing can
be more weak and absurd in it self than this is: And I am sure such as do
believe this Doctrine (as the Arians did of old, and sundry other Sects since)
do believe in more Gods than one, contrary to what the Scriptures teach, and
they themselves pretend to affirm. And if we confider the thing aright, we
snall find this Blasphemous Doctrine of denying the Coequality of the three
Persons, has been a great Stumbling Block to the Jewish Nation's Conversion,
as well as the worshipping of Images by the Papists, there being no other
Difference between these two Opinions only this, viz. One worships Idols in
actu, namely, the Papists, and the other in potentia, i. e. the Arians, etc.
and of the Two, I think, (if I may pass my Judgment,) the last is the worst,
for two Reasons.

First, BECAUSE the Poison of their idolatrous Worship is mantled under the
Cloak of some Scriptures, which they make to be like a Nose of Wax, to twist
and twitch which way they will, to serve their Turn: Whereas the Papists,
whatever they pretend to say for to uphold their Opinion, or, whatever they
pretend to allege in Defense of their Image Worship, yet the Words of the
second Commandment stand as Witnesses and as Monuments, against their devilish
Doctrine and Distinction of Latria, Dulis, and Hyperdulta, and the like.

Secondly, BECAUSE since the Papish Worship is so plainly and openly performed,
every body who has any Light (in the least) in the Sacred Oracles, does
plainly discover the Falsity and Erroneousness thereof, and are aware of it;
But the Arians; etc. do carry on their Work so cunningly, and their Disputes so
Sophistically, and their Worship is so much like the true and Orthodox one, Ape
like, that it is very difficult to perceive wherein the Gangreen lies, without
it be by a good understanding Man indeed, and therefore it is the more
dangerous to be Snared and caught by them, particularly to the weak and
unlearned; Wherefore as I am fully persuaded, it is true and infallible what
Or^gen against Celsus says in his 8. Book, that the Devil dwells in the Temples
of Idolaters, so I am fully satisfied He Inhabits in the Hearts of those that
deny the Coequality of the Three Persons of the Ever Blessed and Adored Trinity
from all Eternity, because nothing can be more plainly demonstrated, either
from the Old or New Testament, than that all Three, i. e. the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, are Coequal, C^eval, and C^eternal.

BUT since my Design at present, is not to meddle with the Artans, I shall
leave them, and turn my Face toward the Jews, who are my Brethren according to
the Flesh, and for whom my Heart is ready to burst, when I Seriously think on
them, to see them (...) in their Spiritual Darkness; and my Eyes do run, when I
consider the forlorn State and Condition that they are in; namely in denying
the Doctrine of the most Blessed and sacred Trinity, so often repeated by the
Prophets of the old Testament, and the chief Rabbis among them.

But before I begin to quote the Authorities, for to prove my Assertion, I
think it is very proper to give them to understand, what we mean when we say, We
believe that God is ONE in Nature and Essence, and THREE in Persons, the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and afterward make it appear, that their
Rabbis, even the chief among them of old, and of late, understood and believed
the same in Substance as we do; and the True Christians and they, differ only
in Terms.

IN quoting their Sayings, I do purposely design not to Criticize upon the
Words, least they may say, that I draw and make them say what I have a mind to,
but only quote and Translate them Faithfully, and let them Judge afterward.

ATTEND, and let us not be mistaken for the Lord's Sake, because in this, q. d.
in understanding this Point as it should be, depends the Salvation or the
Perdition of our Immortal Souls.

WE do not worship, neither do we believe in Three Gods, as the Jewish Nation,
through a Mistake, do fal^ly think, But,

WE Believe and Worship ONE Eternal, most perfect and Omnipotens, and (...)
only Wise God, One and the same in Power, Essence, and Eternity, but Three in
Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. There is the same Nature,
Essence and Deity of them (...) though they be distinguised in Persons. Somewhat
is (...) to thus all, as the Godhead, Divine Power and Nature. Somewhat
Incomm^, as the several Properties of the Persons, viz. The Father to Beget,
the Son to be Begotten, and the Holy Ghost to proceed from them both. There is
(...) Difference in the Trinity for their is ONE Essence and Divine Nature
common to them all. The Son in the Blessed Trinity is Begotten of his Father' s
Essence and has the whole Essence of his Father, not by Propagation,
Partition, or Pro^^uence, but only by Communication. The Son is not the Son of
himself, because he is the Son of the Father, but he is very God of himself.
The Essence of the Son is of himself, not of the Father, because it is one and
the self same Essence which the Father has. He is indeed God of God and Light
of Light, by this Distinction, not as he is God, is he of God, but as he is the
Son: For the Person of the Son to be Begotten of the Essence of the Father we
grant, but for the Essence of the Son to be Begotten we deny. And so we
conclude that Christ, as he is the Son, he is of God the Father, but as he is
God, he is of himself; because if Christ 's Essence was not of himself, he
would not be God. The Holy Ghost is of the Father and of the Son, neither made
nor created, but proceeding from both, of one Substance Majesty and Glory with
the Father and the Son, very Eternal God.

THIS is our Belief concerning the Three Persons or Degrees, and Forms of the
Deity, as Tertullian does Term them. And this Doctrine we are ready at any Time
to prove, and to dye for it, if Occasion should present.

NOW to go through the great and manifold Train of Scripture Proofs, for to
demonstrate my Assertion, and Answer all the Objections thereof, this would
grow to a great Bulk contrary to my Design at present, and likewise it would
prove a Task somewhat unnecessary for me to undertake, being it has been done
already before now, by such as are more able than I am, and in likelihood, than
I am like to be. Therefore I shall withdraw, and only take the Pattern of a
Gardener, who, when he goes into a Garden to make a Posie for to present it to
any of his Friends; here he picks one Flower, and there he gathers another, and
by degrees he forms it so conveniently, that it may be carried about, and give
that pleasure and delight to the Sight, and fragrancy to the Smell, as the
Qualities and Quantities of Flowers that are in it will afford to him that
bears it; but those which are not satisfied with it alone, they may go to the
Garden themselves, and there they may choose and pick which they please; So at
present I design to compose a small Posie, i. e. a small Discourse, of such
Flowers, i. e. of such Scriptures and Proofs out of the Jewish Authors, upon
the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, so as it may be carried about by any body,
and they may take Delight and Pleasure in reading of it, and admire Gods
Providence in beholding such Sayings, even out of the Mouths of our Enemies,
and let them Judge, Deuteronomy. 32.31. and those that are not satisfied, they may go
to the Garden themselves, i. e. to the Holy Scriptures, where they will find
Flowers enough of all sorts, either for Bigness, Col^ar, or Scent, etc. i. e.
Scriptures enough to satisfy them in full. And for the sake of those who are
not acquainted in said Garden, so far as to find said Flowers, I will nominate
the chief of them, and where they are to be found, that so they may have a
Recourse to the Places when they see Cause, which are as follow, viz. Genesis 1.1.
-- 1.26. -- 18.2, 3. -- 20.13. -- 35.7. -- Exodus 3.14. -- 20.5. -- 34.6, 23. --
Deuteronomy. 4.7. -- 5.7. -- 6.4a. -- Josh. 22.22a. -- 1 Samuel 4.8a. -- 2 Samuel, 7.23. --
22.32. -- Jer. 23.36. -- 66.9. -- Pro. 30. c. -- Psalm. 2.7. -- 18.32. -- 58.12.
-- 50.1a. -- 67.7, 8. -- 96.1, 2.7, 8. -- Isai. 6.3a. -- 48.16a. -- and Mala.
1.6. -- N. B. Those marked thus [a] are very remarkable Ones.


OF all the said Quotations I must freely Confess, that although for the most
part they are very strong Proofs, to Convince any that have a true Grace in
understanding the true meaning of the Scriptures, and are not prejudiced
against all sorts of Opinions, (as the Jewish Nation, etc. are) nevertheless
some are not so conclusive, and therefore when they see that, they conclude
without farther Examination, that all are alike, and do form such strange and
false Ideas, as to believe that all Nations but themselves are what they should
not be, alleging for the Standard of their True Religion that Text of Deuteronomy.
6.4. Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord.

THIS is that Great Tower, that Strong Bulwark, that Impregnable Fortification,
which the modern Jews, learned and unlearned have and hold, against all those
who do oppose the unity of the Godhead, either in Words or in Thoughts;
teaching these Words (or this Text) in a more special Manner to all their
Children from their Infancy, with a Design they should be ingrafted into them
as a second Nature, and they are obliged to repeat it three Times a Day at
least, viz. twice in Public in their Synagogues, and once before they go to
Sleep, and according to R. Judah (...) Opinion, they are obliged to tell this
Text in the Morning once more (besides the Three Times aforesaid) before they
perform their Morning Dut^, as it is recorded in his Book called ^autta (...),.
27.

LIKEWISE they teach (as a Tradition,) that Paradise with all the Excellences
of it, was not Created, but for those that believe the Unity of the Godhead,
and do acknowledge it in their Hearts as well as with their Mouths, when they
read the aforesaid Verse; and ^uchmam or Hell was not Created with all the
Miseries of it, but for those that serve Idolatry, i. e. for those that do not
unite or Believe in the unity of the Godhead in their Hearts and Minds. -- (And
least they may charge me with saying a Thing they never said, I desire them to
read what R. Moses Kauro says in the Book aforesaid,. 91. in the Name of that
Great and Famous Rabbi, called Rabbanoo Bahauya which signifies, Our Universal
Master of the Law, in his Book upon the Text aforesaid, in the Section called,
Mauethhaunaun) and therefore they believe they shall all be Damned, (which God
forbid,) in Case they give Consent to any Doctrine whatsoever beside their own.
Alas, alas! I am heartily sorry for them all, and since this Text is the chief
Tower which they lay so much Stress upon, in Case I should batter it, and make
^pear with their own Principles, that the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity is
very clearly and plainly demonstrated in it, I hope they will be Convinced, lay
down their Arms, and Acknowledge it in the same way as we do, being the same as
their Rabbis or Masters did actually teach and believe before now. By the Way,

LET them know that neither they nor all their Rabbis, ever believed the unity
of the Godhead, as the True Christians, did, do, and for evermore shall, i. e.
with that Clearness that the Everlasting Gospel has revealed, as it may be
seen, (as I said before) in as plain Words as possible, on purpose to make them
know, i. e. to open the Eyes of their understanding if possible.

TO prove my Assertion, I would have them be pleased to read with Attention the
following Quotations, and afterward compare them impartially (if they can)
with what we believe; and then in case they do not find the Doctrine to be the
same, only differing in Words, I give them leave to judge as hard of us as ever
they did in their Lives: But in case they find it to be the same, the very same
Doctrine which they themselves did believe, and left their Thoughts in Writing
(providentially as I take it, to show the Veracity of our Doctrine) I entreat
them to be persuaded of the Truth, and look to the Lord, whom their Forefathers
have pierced.

IN that famous Book, more ancient than the Talmud itself, composed by one of
the Sages of the Mishnau, by Name Rabbi Simeon Ben Johauy called Zohar, i. e. a
Light, [for the great Light and Truths therein contained, a Book of as great
Value and Authority among them all (even those that know nothing about it) as
the very Five Books of Moses,] Page 43. upon the Words of the 13th of Exodus,
Verse 16. And it shall be for a Taken upon thine Hand, says thus, The holy and
blessed one (i. e. God) created the World when he covered himself with the
Covering of Light, (or Splendour;) and this is that which unites the Unity, and
therefore the Words, Hear O Israel, Deuteronomy. 6.4. are next to the Words, And it
shall come to pass, Deuteronomy. 11.13. The Unity of every Day is the same in the
Text. THE LORD, the first (or ancient,) and OUR GOD, THE LORD, these are all
one, and therefore is read ONE. These are three Names, How are they one? Although
we reed One, this One (or Unity) by the Vision of the HOLY GHOST is known, and
is as plain as the Eyesight, that THESE THREE ARE ONE: And this is the Mystery
like the Thunder; the Voice which is heard is One, and yet are included in it
Three Colors (or Things,) viz. Fire, Wind and Water; and all are One in the
Secret of the Thunder, and none but One. So here also. THE LORD, OUR GOD, THE
LORD, are One, Three Colors (or Things,) they make all One; and this is that
Union which every Day is manifested by the Secret of the HOLY GHOST.

IF this Quotation is not sufficient, behold what is recorded ^n the same Book,
Page 203, treating upon the Exposition of said Verse, Deuteronomy. 6.4. in it will be
found the following Words, [Take Notice of this excellent Exposition.] THE
LORD, OUR GOD, THE LORD: This is his very Secret, from the Top of the Rack is
it, (i. e. from the very Beginning,) and it is united at the HEAD, STEM, and
ROOT. THE LORD: This is the Head above, a Spirit ascended. OUR GOD: This is the
Stem, which is called the Stem of Jesse. THE LORD: This is the Root which
is beneath; and upon this Secret the Unity is united as it should be, etc.

MOREOVER, to discover more fully the Deity of the Holy Ghost in particular, as
proceeding from the Father and Son, take Notice of the following Exposition,
recorded in said Book, P. 237. THE LORD: This is the Mark of the Letter Move
the high Head of the Holy Name. OUR GOD: This is the Secret which is marked by
the Letter ^a, the second of the holy Name. THE LORD: This is the Proceeding
which proceeds from beneath, in the Secret which is marked by the Letter Vau;
these two Letters are drawn to be in this Place, and they are all one, (one
Unity,) all these three are one Unity; since that each one is made in one Unity
of themselves.

IN that famous and most ancient of all the Books the Jewish Nation pretend to
have, called Sepher ^auyatzcetau, (a Book which some of them would have to be
as ancient as our Father Abraham, and of his Composing also, as they say,) it is
plain by what is said concerning the Godhead, that God is Three and One, as we
Christians believe, though not with the same Expressions as we use, the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost; but he calls him Numerations, and Lights, (from
whom I am prone to think Tertullian took his Expressions.) The Words are as
follow. ( N. B. I quote not the Page, because I forgot it; but the Sentences
are to be found in it, as may be made to appear at any Time when the Book shall
be produced.) They are three Lights, an ANCIENT LIGHT, a PURE LIGHT, and a MOST
PURE LIGHT, nevertheless all these are only ONE GOD.

IN another Place he says thus, And know ye, the THREE HIGH NUMERATIONS all are
united together, and never are divided.

THIS Doctrine is most certainly received by all Cabalistical Authors, without
Contradiction or Dispute; so as that Rabbi Joseph Giguitillia, a famous Rabbi
in this Science, treating upon the Explication of the Ten Numerations or
Gnausaurau Sapheeroth, I remember he has this Expression, The three Highest no
Eye ever saw, and there is not the either Separation or Division, (God forbid
to say so;) and be that cuts or divides, his Blood on his head, and it had been
better for him that he had never been created.

THE Kauvaunau Intention, which their best Cabalistical Authors do oblige them
to have, when they read said Verse, is to unite the Godhead in these three
Numerations or Lights aforesaid, as those who are acquainted with their
Writings can testify.

NOW having with as much Faithfulness (...) possible, quoted and translated
some of the many places, that show the Truth of our Doctrine, (although by them
at present denied,) I shall take the Liberty to say something of my own, which
I hope will be taken for an orthodox Opinion, by all Men, even by the Jews
themselves, if they will but consider with Attention what has been alleged out
of their own Authors, and even of those they acknowledge to be the wisest and
most Godly among them. (Vide more of this Nature in Buretorf's Lexicon, Page
152.)

The Translation of the Verse in Deuteronomy. 6.4. which our English Translators
translated (conforming themselves to the English Idiom,) Hear O Israel, the
Lord our God is one Lord, is somewhat faulty, because according to said
Translation, this Doctrine (of the blessed Trinity) cannot be raised out of it.
Therefore, to find out this fa^homless Mystery, we must have Recourse to the
Original, and there we shall discover it with great Ease and Facility. The
Words are to be translated thus, Hear, O Israel, the Lord, our God, the Lord,
is One. Now, after we have translated the Verse acording to the Original, in
order to understand the true and genuine Meaning of it, we must take Notice of
the preceding Chapter's Discourse, which is thus.

Moses knowing that the End of his Life was very nigh, Deuteronomy. 33.1. was willing
before his Death, to make a Recapitulation of all the Laws of God unto his
People, with some wholesome Admonitions; that so after his Death they might
never blame him for being careless in discharging his Duty toward them.
Therefore, after he had repeated the moral Law, as the unalterable Word till
the World's End, he tells them in General of a Colloquy that passed between
them, of their desiring of him to be a Mediator between God and them, the
Lord's hearing their Words, his Wishes for their keeping their Hearts toward
God all their Days, to fear him, to keep his Commandments, his Counsel to them,
and finally, the Promise of God's Favor toward them, in case they would
follow his (...), because the End of the Law was the Obedience of it.

AFTERWARD he begins to particularize to them sundry Obligations and Duties
which were incumbent upon them, and the first that he mentions is the great and
profound Mystery of the Godhead, Three in Persons, and One in Essence, with
these Words, Hear O Israel, the Lord, our God, the Lord, is One. Moses begins
with this O YES, because without the Knowledge of the true and living God, One
in Essence, and Three in Persons, none can be saved. These three Persons (not
Gods) are plainly to be understood in the Repetition of the three sacred Names,
viz. THE LORD, OUR GOD, THE LORD, these three he tells them are One, not three,
as the Words seem to imply, but One only and simply, without Beginning and
without End.

THIS Doctrine he admonishes them to consider and believe, when he said, Hear O
Israel. He might use the Phrase of Mauauzeeno^, as he did in Deuteronomy. 32.1. and
Ex^i. 15.2^. which also signifies, Hear; but he uses the Word Sh^mang, because
besides the litteral Sense of it, i. e. Hea^, it implys in it, (...), Take
heed, Take Notice, Mind, Consent also; to teach and instruct them, that this
Mystery was so deep, and so high to be understood, that a bare superficial
Knowledge of it was not enough to comprehend it; but it required a (...) Study,
and a deep Observation to be in some measure Master of it, else with a
superficial Knowledge of it only, it would bring a Person to understand and
believe, either that there is a Plurality of Gods, or deny the Trinity of
Persons in the Godhead, (as the Jewish Nation have done of late, and the rest
of the Nations did of old.) This I am prone to think, is the true and genuine
Meaning of this Scripture, else, i. e. if he meant as the Jewish Nation of late
would have him mean, q. d. that God is One, denying the Trinity of Persons, the
Verse should run thus, Hauauzeenoo Israel ^udonauy Thaud, Hear O Israel, the
Lord is One: But since he does not say so, but as we find it, it is as much as
if in plain Words he had said thus, Take heed, and consider, and give Consent,
O Israel, that THE LORD the Father, OUR GOD the Sin, THE LORD the Holy Ghost,
i^ One.

DO not mistake me, and think that there are three Gods of three different
Essences, neither one God without the Plurality of Persons; but yet there is
One only God in Nature and Essence, and Three distinct Persons, all equal in
Power and Glory, coequal and coeval from all Eternity.

THE Jewish Nation cannot bear to hear or think of such Distinction as we make,
viz. Three (...) Persons, and one in Essence; saying, How can it be, that God
is One and Three, and Three and One? This Doctrine (they say) is so contrary to
Reason, that any Person whatsoever may see the Absurdity of it at the very
first View. To this I answer.

LET them read and consider the Words of the second Article of their Creed; and
in them they will find (when they confess God's Unity) the same Distinction of
Words, and I think with more Absurdity, as they call it. The Words as they are
in their Jgdal being the same that Mar^ides says upon the Exposition of the
Mishnau of Sanedrin, Chap. ^clek are thus, He is One, and not one like his
Unity. Now I might argue and say as they do, He is one and not one; How can it
^e, for God to be one, and not one like unto him? This is against all Reason,
for to be one and not one, and yet one. And yet for all this Contradiction of
Speech, they believe he is one: So we Christians say, That God is One and
Three, and not Three, but One. And I think there is more Regularity of Speech
to say as we do, than to say as they say; their Doctrine being more
contradictory in it self, than ours is.

BUT since I know, that such Way of arguing is nothing but quarrelling about
Words, I do not see any Necessity to make use of it, provided we understand one
another; and as we do them, I hope they will in Fullness of Time understand us
also.

THE Word Persons is another Expression which they cannot approve of. But as I
said but now, this is to quarrel about Words; and the Word Persons being only a
Word that we use to convey our Ideas to the Hearers, and make them understand
in some Measure what we mean by this Doctrine. Let them use what Terms they
will, either Numerations, L^ghts, or what they please; and in case they
understand and believe the same as we do, I am contented.

HERE I expect the Jews will argue (if ever they come to read this Discourse)
thus.

IN Case the Verse is to be understood as I say, Why does it not say, The Lord
three Times, and not, The L^^ Our God, The Lord, having the middle Name (in the
Original) the Sophixy of the First P. C. P. at the End, viz. Our.

TO this I answer, (and I hope, if ever they come to understand this Mystery so
far as to argue after this Manner, i. e. to criticize upon the Words, I have
won the Field,) The first Person of the Godhead is called Jehovah, The Lord;
and since this Name they themselves own is given to God, and I have already
proved by their own Authors to him only, (in Page 24. of The whole Truth,) I
shall not insist upon it.

THE second Person is called Alohanoo, Our God. Here they stumble, for which I
am very sorry; but I wonder not, since what this name signifies has been from
the ^^^ning a stumbling Block to them, as it (...) told in Isai. 3.14. and I
hope with God's Blessing they shall be raised again, according to his Promise.

Three Reasons may be given, and very remarkable ones.

First, BECAUSE Moses was willing to declare to the People (though not with that
Clearness as it came to pass in the Fullness of Time) the great and high Mystery
of the second Person's Incarnation, in which he was to take the Humane Nature
upon him, and suffer for the Salvation of all those Sinners that believed in
him; and therefore he is called, Our God, i. e. a Man like one of us, Sin
excepted, H^. 4.15.1 Joh. 3.5. and at the same time a God also, coequal with
the Father, who is first mentioned in the Text.

Secondly, THE calling the second Person, Our God, was to show them, that he
was to be incar^ted, and not the first nor the third, because to him (the
second) belongs properly the Office of a Med^at^r and to no^e else. And,

Thirdly and (...), IT may have a Reference to the Jewish Nation in particular,
from whence he was to proceed, according to the Flesh, as it was promised to
(...), some Hundreds of Years before, G^n. 21.12. And he calls him Our God, i.
e. ours in a particular Manner, from one of ours, and not from any Nation else.

AND that this way of expounding the Words, may not seem to them any other than
a true and orthodox one, I will prove it with quoting to them one Pa^^age out
of a great many, which are to be found among their Writings; from one who had
the Opportunity to search and examine all the Authors before him, that treat
upon this Point, and fot his great Learning and Pretty, was called by the
Consent of all the Jewish Nation, even in his Lifetime, The person wise Man,
The Pious or Godly, The Theologer, Glory of the wise Men, The Holy, Our
Teacher, My Teacher, R. Jacob Sasportas in his Book called The Holy Temple,
printed in Amsterdam about Seve^^y Years since, Page 15. says the following
Words, THE LORD: This is the Father most high. OUR GOD: This is the white Head,
most Ancient, the Eternal One, the Soul of (...).

HERE this worthy Author makes a Distinction in the Meaning of the Names, The
Lord, and, Our God, by which Words he says the same in Substance as we
Christians believe, even that the Name of The Lord first mentioned, is the
Father most high, and the Name of Our God is the Son, which is that White Head
mentioned in Dan. 7.9. and in him all the Fullness of the Godhead dwells
Bodily, Col. 2.9. which Text of the Apostle is the same that is recorded in the
Book Zohar aforesaid, Page 79. viz. (Take Notice of these Words, and judge
afterward.) And he is in the high My^ery, and for this Reason is called his
Son; and this is the old Israel aforesaid, which is the Son of the most old, i.
e. of the Most ancient, and all is one and the same.

THIS old Israel, mentioned in this Place, is not the Jewish Nation, but the
second of the three Lights aforementioned; and this they called a Son of the
most old, i. e. of the most ancient; and these two are one and the self same.

THE third Person, i. e. the Holy Ghost, is called Jehovah the Lord also, to
show that he is very God, of the same Essence as God the Father and God the Son
are. And because I know they now absolutely deny this Doctrine, to satisfy
them, I would have them read the second Verse of the 11th Chapter of Isar^h,
and there they will plainly find the Holy Ghost is called Jehovah the Lord also,

AND now, since we have fetched Honey out of that great and mighty Rock, i. e.
proved the Doctrine of the blessed Trinity out of the very same Text with which
the Jews defend themselves, and fight against us with, even by the Authorities
of their own Rabbis, and those of the first Rank, ancient and modern, let us
see whether we cannot gather Oil out of a flinty Rock also, i. e. prove this
very same Doctrine to be included in this very same Name Jehovah, with their
own Principles and Rules, and then conclude with a Word of EXHORTATION to my
Brethren in particular, and to all in general.

THE Name Jehovah is so full of Mystery, and there are so many profitable and
delectable Things ( i. e. spiritual) to be gathered out of it, as can very well
be thought of any, even the wisest that ever was, (in case we do not run too
fast upon Superstition, as most of the Jewish Rabbis do.)

THIS is so certain, that it is the Opinion of a great many and worthy Divines,
that Moses Petition to God to let him see his Glory, Exodus 33.18. was to let
him see the high and deep Mysteries which are included in his sacred and
everlasting Name, i. e. the great and dreadful Name Jehovah, (which whosoever
names vainly is worthy of Death.) But since touching the Almighty we cannot
find him out unto Perfection, even the best of Angels are charged with Folly,
when He understood Moses Request, answered him, Verse 20. Thou can not s^e my
Face, for no Man shall see Me and Live, i. e. for you to understand in full the
Mysteries of my sacred Name, it is impossible, said God, so long as you are in
Body and Soul together. It is contrary to the holy Nature of my Name to be
comprehended in full by any Creature whatsoever, therefore it is better to
desist. Nevertheless, I will grant you so far, that you shall obtain so much
and so great Honor of me, that you shall see my back Parts, but my Face shall
not be seen, i. e. you shall acquire so much Knowledge, and understand more of
the Nature of my unsearchable Name, than any of the Saints that went before you
ever did, even the Patriachs themselves, as in Exodus 6.2, 3. Therefore, let us
with all Humility and holy Fear, see if we can find something included in this
fathomless Name, that may prove for our Instrustion and spiritual Comfort.

THAT the holy and most blessed Trinity every Person by it self is called
Jehovah has been demonstrated by sundry worthy Divines before now, whose Names
will be for a Blessing to the Generations to come. But that all the three
Persons are included and comprehended in the Name Jehovah, I do not know any
who have showed it before me. Therefore I shall premise some things which I
think are very necessary to be known for the better Intelligence of it, begging
the Reader's Patience for a while. Viz.

First, THE Name of the Lord in the Original is, Jehovah, the Root is Kavauh,
which signifies a Being, or Essexce.

Secondly, THIS Name amounts, according to the Hebrew Numeration, to the Sum of
26. viz. Yode 10, ^a 5, is 15. Uaw 6, makes 21, and (...) 5, sums in all 26.

Thirdly, OUT of this Name the Cabalistical Authors do form several Different
Names, and all are in the same Esteem and Veneration among them, as the very
Name Jehovah, and they are very cautious not to Reveal any of them to any Body,
even of their own Nation, except it be to a Man accepted in General for a wise,
pious, sober, and blameless Person from his Infancy, according to the strict
Rules of Religion. Some of the different sort of Names are as follow.

1. THE Name of 45 as they call it, which is formed thus, Bode Vau Dauleth, ^a
Juleph, Vau Juleph Vau, Ea Juleph, The Numeration of said Letters together as
they are wrote amounts to 45.

2. THE Name of 52 as they call it, which is formed thus, Yode Vau Dauleth, Ha
Ha, Uau Uau, Ha Ha, following the same Rule, it amounts to the Number of 52. A
great many more they do form, which I omit at present not being to my purpose.

Fourthly, THEY have three different Ways of Numeration, viz. the first they
called Mispaur Grudol, a large Reckoning. The second Mispaur Kautaun, a ^ort
Recoming. The third Mispaur Gmtzaugn^e, a middle Reckoning, The first is that
Way which is most common, i. e. from 1 to 9, from 10 to 90, and from 100 to
900. The second is that Way of Reckoning, which never rises higher than 9. e.
g. from Juleph to Jeth is 9, and then begins again, from Yode to Tzadde is 9
also, and then again, from Kuph to Tzadde final, makes 9 likewise. The third is
that in which the final Letters are not to be counted higher than their Equals,
e. g. Cauph ^auph amounts to 20 each, and not 20 and 500, as the common Way is,
and so all the rest of the double or final Letters follow the same Rule.

Fifthly and lastly, AS they numerate by the Letters of the Alphabet, so they
do also by the Punctation of said Letters, and so every Tittle or Point amounts
to 10, the Pautauh to 6, and the Caumetz to 16. And when they want any Number
to make up the Sum of what they are a going to show or teach, sometimes they
make it up by the Number of Letters, sometimes by the Number of Words, and
sometimes by both.

THESE Five Premises will be sufficient at present to make appear the Truth of
what I am going to assert, even according to their Cabalistical Principles.

NOW observe, Our sovereign Lord Jesus Christ is called a Son, because he is
the true and beloved Son of the living God; him we are all obliged to obey, and
follow his Laws and Directions, as in Mat. 17.5. And lo, a Voice from Heaven,
saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him.

THE more immediate Word for a Son in the Original is Ben, this amounts
according to the third Rule of Reckoning to 52, which is the same Numeration of
the Name Jehovah, as the second Way of Spelling of it. Again,

The Lord Jesus Christ is called Idam as the Apostle Paul says to the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 15.45. The first Man Adam was made a living Soul, the last
ADAM was made a quickening Spirit. Now the Word Idam following the same rule
amounts to 45, and so likewise the Name Jehovah according to the first Way of
Spelling of it amounts to 45. and said Name is called by them Idam also in
several places of the Book Zohar aforesaid, p. 98. and 117. (for Brevity sake I
omit the Words, but I am ready to show hem at any Time when demanded of me.)

A great many Mysteries and high Secrets the Cabalistical Rabbis do pretend to
know, and do declare they are included and Enclosed in this Name of 45.
aforesaid, and although I am sure they teach a great many Chimerical Notions,
Nevertheless, very often they say somethings which are nothing but pure
Christianity, clothed under different Terms, for want of the true Knowledge of
the everlasting Gospel. One that just now came into my mind I will Rehearse,
that so the Truth of my Assertion, may be made to appear, and I am more free in
telling of it, because it is very much to my present purpose.

THEY teach that God created the World with the Name of 45. and they prove it
out of Prove. 3.19. The Lord by Wisdom has founded the Earth. The Word in the
Original is Bahohmah, and they turn said Word, which is translated, By Wisdom,
according to their way of explaining the most part of the Scriptures, thus,
Bahohmah Bacoauh Mau,

By Wisdom, By the Strength of Mau i. e. by the Strength of the Name 45,
saying, The Lord by the Strength of this Name founded the Earth.

NOW I beg any to consider what Doctrine this is, but the same that is recorded
in John, at the Beginning of his holy Evangelium, John 1.1, 2, 3. In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God; the
same was in the beginning with God; all things were made by him, and without
him was not any thing made that was made.

THIS WORD aforesaid is the true Mau, i. e. the true Idam, which amounts to the
Number of 45, as the Word Mau does, which was from the Beginning, i. e. from
Eternity with Jehovah the Lord, which amounts to 45 also, as aforesaid, to show
that the Son and the Father are all one, of the self same Numeration, i. e. of
one and the self same Essence.

NOW, having found out that the two first Persons of the Blessed Trinity are
included in the Name Jehovah, let us see whether we can find the third Person
also.

THE third Person in the Hebrew is called Rooauh Eaukodesh. This Name amounts
(according to the second way of Numeration, and the fifth, i. e. of the
Punctation) to the Sum of 101. Now, take Notice, since the Holy Ghost is
neither made, created, nor ingendered of the Father or of the Son, but
proceeds from both, one and the same Substance, so likewise we shall find his
Name proceeds from them also, viz. The Name of God the Father, Jehovah, amounts
to 26, according to the second Rule. Jesus Christ is called in Genesis 18.3. and
more plainly in Mal. 3.1. Audonauy, which Name amounts to 65, by the first Rule
of Numeration. Both together makes 91, and with the Addition of the eight
Letters of both Names, and the two Names themselves, according to the fifth
Rule, come to be in the whole 101 also, to show that the Holy Ghost proceeds
from both, i. e. the Father and the Son.

AGAIN, The Name Roo^h, which signifies properly a Spirit, amounts (according
to the second Rule of Numeration) to 16, and the Root of the Name Jehovah,
which is Hauvau, amounts to 16 also, to show that the Holy Ghost not only
proceeds from the Father and Son, but even he is of the same Root and
Substance, or Essence as the Father is, i. e. equal in Power and Glory, from
Everlasting to Everlasting. Moreover,

THE three aforesaid Lights commonly are called by them Ketter Hohmah Beenau,
and the first they called Head, The Head of all things, The Head of all Heads,
The enclosed of all Enclosures, etc. The second they called, The first Adam,
The first Head also, etc. and the third they called, The Holy Ancient, and
sometimes Ancient only, A living God, and sundry other Names, which all do show
the very same Doctrine as we do teach, even that all Three are One, equal in
Power and Glory; and ( N. B.) of these Three Lights aforesaid, they explain the
Text in Deuteronomy. 32.39. See now, that I, even I am he, and there is no God with
me, as it is plainly to be seen in the Book Zohar aforesaid, Page 22. The Truth
of this Doctrine leads me to Think,

THAT when we read in the old Testament, that the Saints of old, as King David,
etc. did crave any Mercies or Favors of God for his NAME sake, It was as much
as if they had asked it in the Name of the whole TRINITY, because in his Name
Jehovah all the THREE Persons are included, as I said; and therefore they were
sometimes answered, if the Thing by them desired, was according to his most
holy Will and Pleasure, etc.

NOW, from what has been said, whosoever fears the Lord, or has any regard for
his Soul, may easily discern how great and high a Sin it is for any Body to be
guilty of the Breach of the third Commandment, and likewise what is the Reason
^t whosoever takes the Name of the Lord in vain, HE will not hold him
guiltless, but the Curse shall fall upon him, and enter into the House of him
that swears falsely his Name, and consume it, from the Timber even to the
Stones thereof, Zech. 5.3.4.

MORE I might say to prove this Doctrine, even by the Authority of the Jewish
Writers of this Science, not only upon Dent. 6.4. but upon sundry other Texts
of the Scripture: But with what has been already said, I hope I have plainly
and fully demonstrated, that the God which we adore and hope to be saved by, is
not three Gods, (God forbid we should say so,) but only One living and only
true God; One in Substance and Essence, but Three Persons, Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, all equal in ^ver and Glory from all Eternity. And therefore let us
come to a Conclusion in a Way of EXHORTATION.

^LEY us follow King David's Steps, saying, I (...), therefore have I spoken.

O^ ^et us keep st^fast in this Belief, all the Days of our Life, that so at
last we may come to live an ^nal Life with Him who is the true Life, even Li^
it self.

^LEY us ^ut withdraw aside from this Belief, in believing strange Gods, even
the Imagination of ou^ ^ked and deceitful Hearts, but keep (...) Gods Word, in
obeying his holy Command (...), and be careful how we take his great and (...)
Name in vain into our polluted Lips.

O! LET us be thankful, that such Truths have been discovered unto us, poor,
sinful, miserable wretched and degenerate Creatures, and cry with Astonishment
and deep Admiration, O Lord, What is Man that thou art mindful of him, and the
Son of Man that thou visitest them.

O! LET us look upon ourselves altogether unworthy of enjoying so many manifold
Privileges as we do; and above all, in living where we have the true Doctrine
of God's Word declared unto us, in its right and true Meaning according to his
holy Will and Pleasure, without being disturbed by the Enemies of his Catholic
Church, when he has not dealt so with any Nation, and as for his Judgments
they have not known them. HAULALOOYAUH Praise ye the Lord.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT.
Gentle Reader, The Autho^ ^ping you are endowed with the Spirit of
Forgiveness, desires you would not only forgive the Errors of the Press, but
even his appearing in Public, seeing both were unavoidable.


