A Dying LEGACY of a MINISTER To his Dearly Beloved People, Showing,

I. THAT true Believers on JESUS CHRIST may be Assured, of the Salvation of
their Souls.

II. THAT Spiritual Wisdom, or Grace in the Soul, is of all things the most
Desirable.

III. THAT there is none whose Dignity and Glory may be compared with that
which belongs to our Lord JESUS CHRIST.

Being the Three Last Sermons Preached By INCREASE MATHER, D.D.

Heb. XIII. 7. Remember not only them which do, but them which (...) spoken to
you the word of GOD; whose faith follow, considering the end of their
Conversation. BOSTON: Printed by S. Kneeland, for J. Edwards, Sold at his
Shop.1722.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
SOME Tears are past, since a Minister who Lived Fifty Miles from Boston, ( and
is since gone to his Everlasting Rest) Wrote to me, desiring, that I would
print more of my Sermons, Because (as he said) they found great Acceptance in
the Country; many Professing that they had been Edi^yed by such of them is they
had seen; If it were so, I acknowledge no Honor is Due to me, or to any of my
poor Performances; But unto that Free Grace, that dub sometimes give Favor
unto them, that are not Men of Skill.

OLD Age has so Debilitated me that I have no Hopes of Preaching another
Sermon. Besides my Right Hand is become Paralitical, and shakes after that
manner that I cannot Write any Long Discourse, which gives me ^ Supersede as
from Preaching. I used to Write largely; though I bless GOD for my Memory. I
never made use of (...) ^^ies in the P^lpil.

A^ for the Sermons now Published, One who has the Pen of a Ready Writer
Transcribed them, and first them unto me; having (...) them; I find they agree
with what I delivered. I look upon these as my Last Sermons. And therefore have
Given them the Name of my Dying Legacy. Indeed since these Sermons were
Preached I entertained the Congregation with another short Discourse, not
Worthy the Name of a Sermon, so that (as I before said) I take these to be my
Last.

THE First Sermon that ever I Preached in Boston, was in the Year 1661,
immediately upon my Coming from England. I was then in the Twenty-Second Year
of my Age: And had been several Years a Preacher of the Gospel in other Parts
of the World, and I have (through Grace) continued to Preach the Gospel of
CHRIST here in Boston until the end of the Eighty-Third Year of my Age, which
is above Sixty Years. But (which I rejoice at) I have known many who have done
more Good in a few Years then I (an Unprofitable Servant) may pretend unto in
many.

I did (when I spoke my last unto the Dear People to whom I have these many
Years been Preaching) Declare to them, that the greatest Affliction I had in
this World, was that I could do no more Service for them, whom I Love more
dearly than my Life. Now I can do no more God in this World, I desire to Dye
and Go to a better: But I must Humbly and Patiently Wait GOD's Time.

I would Gladly do some Good after I am Dead. I hope the Books I have Written
will do Good unto some of the People of GOD, when I can neither Speak nor
Write. This is my Hope concerning these poor plain Sermons. The LORD Grant that
it may be so, and that CHRIST may be Glorified by them.

INCREASE MATHER.
Boston, June 21st, 1722.
True Believers on JESUS CHRIST may be assured, of the Salvation of their
Souls. Sermon I.
1 PETER I. 9. Receiving the End of your Faith, even the Salvation of your
Souls.


THE Apostle in the preceding Verse, declares concerning the Persons be
directed his Epistle unto, That they did Rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full
of Glory. In this Verse he gives the reason why they did so, It was because,
They were sure of the Salvation of their Souls, though this Salvation they did
not receive in this World in the Fullness of it, yet had a^^urance of it,
because of the Faith God had given them.

DOCTRINE
THAT True Believers (...) JESUS CHRIST, may be assured of the Salvation of
their Souls.



IN the Prosecution of this Doctrine, I shall only speak unto Two Particulars.

I. WHAT is implied in the Salvation of the Soul.

II. HOW it appears that True Believers in CHRIST may be assured of the
Salvation of their Souls.

I. E^q. WHAT is implied in the Salvation of the Soul.

For Answer,

1. Prem. THE Soul is put for the Whole Man, (...) of Body and Soul. Man
consists of these Two Essential Parts; a Humane Body and a Reasonable Soul, the
Believer serves God with both, both with his Body and with his Soul* (...) Cor.
^6. 20. Glorify God in your Body and in your Spirit, which are Gods. The Body
is not Saved without the Soul, but the Soul is Saved without or before the
Body; the Soul is present with the (...) before the Body is. Thus Lazarus when
Dying, his Soul was immediately in the Hands of Angels: And the Scripture
speaks of the Souls or Spirits of Just Men made Perfect. It is said of Abraham,
when he left this World, he was Gathered to his Fathers, viz. to She^, Noah,
and to those Just Men that were gone out of the World before him. God sent His
Holy Angels to carry Abraham's Soul to them.

2. THE Salvation of the Soul implies a Deliverance from (...) Evil whatsoever.
Psalm. 121. 7. The Lord shall preserve thee from (...) Evil, He shall preserve
thy Soul. The Preservation of the Soul implies a Preservation from all that
Evil which Sin has brought on a Woeful World; especially Deliverance from Sin is
implied therein. Believers are delivered from Sin they are delivered from the
Dom^nion of Si^ (...) this World Romans 6. 14. (...) not have dominion over you.
Also from the very being of Sin, when the leave this World, 7. Verse of the
Chapter, He that is dead is freed from Sin. Believers when Dead they are
perfectly freed from all Sin, freed from the Woeful Effect and Consequences of
Sin. They are also delivered from Death especially from the Second Death,
delivered from the Death of the Body and of the Soul too. That is implied in
the Salvation of the Soul.

3. IT implies positive Good, all posi^ive Good. Spiritual Blessings in
Heavenly Places; all that Good that is contained in the Covenant of Grace,
Justification, Sanctification, Adoption, Eternal Life in Heaven, all this is
implied in this One World Salvation. But then, How does it appear that
Believers on Christ shall have this Salvation that has been thus described.

1. IT is evident, because they belong to the Election of God. I The^. 1.4.
Knowing brethren, your Election of God. Some know it, more might know it, if
the fault were not their own. They are not so diligent in the use of means as
they should be, therefore did the Apostle exhort, 2 Pet. 1. 10. Give all
diligence to make your Calling and Election sure;. And it is said concerning
the Gentiles, Acts 13. 48. As many as were ordained unto Eternal Life believed.
All that are Ordained unto Eternal Life either do, or shall become Belielievers
in Jesus Christ. Election is that which shall not be disappointed. Men may
purpose and not perform, but what God has purposed He will surely perform. The
Apostle mentions some that had made a Profession of Religion and afterward
fallen away, of whom were Hymeneus and Philetus, nevertheless (says he) the
foundation of God stands sure. The Election of God that stands sure God will
see to the Performance of what, He has determined to do. It is foretold false
Prophets shall arise and deceive Men, if it were possible the very Elect
themselves, that implies, It is not possible that the Elect of God should be
deceived, that any one Soul God has set down in His Book of Election should
miscarry. Therefore Believers in Christ shall not fail of Eternal Life.

2. TRUE Believers are such as Obey the Lord JESUS CHRIST. They yield Obedience
to the great Commandment of Christ. Heb. 5. 9. He is the Author of Eternal
Salvation to all that Obey him. Eternal Salvation follows upon Obedience unto
the great Commandment of Christ. Now the great Commandment of Christ is that
Men should Believe. Christ has said, This is His Commandment, that we Believe.
This Commandment in a special manner Salvation turns upon. Therefore it was
said to one, (...) on the Lord Jesus Christ on (...) shall be Saved. By Faith
the (...) is Purified* 1 Pet. 1. 22. ^e purified your Souls in obeying the
Truth. Where there is Obedience there is a Purified Soul, and a Purified Soul
shall be admitted into Heaven.

3. TRUE Believers, they are Sanctified, therefore shall be Saved. It is said,
They shall have an Inheritance among them that are Sanctified. All that are
Sanctified shall have an Inheritance in Heaven given to them. Thus it is with
Believers, they are Sanctified, when God works Faith in any Man, that Faith
does not come alone, but there are other Graces of the Spirit of GOD that come
along with it, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6. All the Graces of the Spirit of God are in the
Soul of the Believer (...) is come down into the (...) of the Believer in
respect (...) Grace wrought there (...) his Soul shall go (...) when he dies.

4. WHERE there is Faith there is Repentance for Sin. Faith and Repentance
always go together, Acts 20. 21. Testifying Repentance toward God, and Faith in
our Lord Jesus Christ. Where there is true Faith in Christ there is Repentance
toward God. Now Repentance is said to be unto Salvation, if it be true
Repentance. Therefore it is said concerning the Gentiles, Acts 11. 18. That God
had given to them Repentance unto Life. Where there is true Repentance, Eternal
Life will certainly follow. There are two things implied in true Repentance.
One is that of Forsaking Sin, Prove. 28. 13. Whosoever Confesses and Forsakes
shall find Mercy. He that Confesses Sin ever so much but Forsakes not Sin shall
find no Mercy, but whosoever Confesses and Forsakes shall be Forgiven. Ezekiel.11 30.
Repent and turn from all your Transgressions, so Iniquity shall not be your
Ruin. The other thing implied in true Repentanc^ is, a turning to God, Isai.
55. 7* Turn to the Lord and He will ^bundantly pardon. So Repentance includes
in it a For^aking of Sin* a turning unto God, a becoming His Servants, living
to His Glory*

5. AS for true Believers their Sins are all forgiven to them therefore they
shall go to Heaven when they die and leave thi^ Worl^. God for Christ's sak^
has Forgiven them, E^h. 4. 32* God for Christ's sake has Forgive^ you. God has
so Forgiven all Si^ to them, that their Sins shall b^ as though they had never
bee^ committed, Jer. 50. 20. In th^s^ days, and in that time, ^aith the Lord,
the Iniqui^y of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none and the
Sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I will Pardon them whom I
reserve. Their Sins shall be as though they had not been. God deals with the
Believer as to his Eternal State, as though he had never been Guilty of any one
Sin, therefore he shall have the Inheritance of Heaven given to him. It is only
Sin that keeps out of Heaven. As for Believers their Sins are as if they had
never been, therefore they are said to be blotted out; a Debt blotted out is as
though it had never been.

Lastly, BELIEVERS are the Righteous. It is said, The Righteous shall go into
Life Eternal, Mat. 25. 46. Believers in Jesus Christ are those Righteous Ones.
They become Righteous through the Righteousness of Christ imputed to them. It
was a notable Speech of one of the Martyrs, Here is a Wonderful Exchange,
Christ has my Sins and I have His Righteousness. The Scripture speaks after the
same manner, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Christ was made Sin that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him. How was Christ made to be Sin? Only by Imputation;
He had no Sin of His own but the Sins of Believers were Imputed to Him. How are
we made Righteous but by having His Righteousness Imputed to us? It is a great
Scripture Truth, Christ becomes the Surety of Believers, He has undertaken for
their Cause, to Answer For their Sins, to bring in a Righteousness that shall
be sufficient to Save them. These things are evident proofs of the Doctrine
before us.

USE I.
IF Believers shall have Eternal Life given to them, what shall we think will
become of Unbelievers, that continue in a state of Sin and of Unbelief, Shall
they have Eternal Life? No, GOD in the Gospel says, He that Believes shall be
Saved, and be that Believers not shall be Damned. The Unbeliever is under a
Sentence of Death. He is Condemned already, Joh. 3. 18. Not only shall he be
Condemned hereafter in the hearing of the whole World in the Last and Great
Day, but he is Condemned already, the Sentence is already past upon him, it is
not removed but abides on him, as long as he abides in his Unbelief, if he Die
in his Unbelief he shall certainly Perish; God has not only said but Sworn it,
that the Unbeliever shall not be Saved, Heb. 3. 18. To whom swear be that they
should not enter into his rest, but to them that believed not. Alas! The
saddest Punishment that can be must befal^ (...) the Great Day. Men may be
ready to think if they ar^ Guilty of such and such Horrid Crimes, if they were
Drunkards, Swearers, or the like, then they shall have a Dreadful Punishment in
Hell; Ah, so shall Unbeliever too, though they may have been very Civil and
Moral in the World, yet if they Die in an Estate of Sin and Unbelief, their
Punishment will be more Intolerable than that of Sodom and Gomorrah; Christ has
said so, Mat. 10. 15. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for the
(...) of Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of Judgment, that for that City, Sodom
and Gomorrah they were Damned above Ground, Fire came down from Heaven and
Consumed them, which was a Dreadful Punishment, but do you not think your
Unbelief will bring a greater Punishment upon you, if you Live and Die in your
Unbelief it will be so; such are De^pisers of the Son of God. Says the Apostle,
If they that despised Moses Law died without Mercy, of how much (...)
Punishment shall they be thought worthy, that have trodden under foot, the Son
of God. Unbelievers, have Trampled the Son of God under Foot: Christ has been
offered in the Gospel to them, and they have Rejected and Refused Him.

USE II.
IF it be as has been said, There Believers in Jesus Christ should be very
Willing to Die and leave this World that they may go to the Inheritance in
Heaven reserved for them. It is a very Unbecoming thing for a true Believer to
be Unwilling to Die. We find the Servants of God of old were very Willing to
leave this World, so was Abraham, it is said he was an Old Man and full of
Days, he had had enough of this World and was Willing to go out of it it was
because he had a fight (...). Heb. 11. 16. They de^^red a better Country, that
is an heavenly. Thus New Testament B^live^rs have been very Willin^ to (...)
and leave this World, ^ Cor. ^^. Being willing to be (...) from the Body and
present with the Lord. Thus we see the hold Apostle Paul, Phil. 1. 23. Desire
to depart and to be with Christ whi^^ we f^r (...). Also good old Simeon says
he, Now, Lord let that thy Servant depart in peace; he does not say
hereafter, so many Years hence, but Now, Now, the sooner the better. I^ that
Beli^vers are so Unwilling to Die are leave this World, it proceed from ill
causes, either they have too much Love to this World therefore they are loath to
depart From it, or it is because they do not think of Heaven as they should do.
Let not a Day pass over you without serious thoughts of Heaven. Make sure of an
Interest therein, and I dare affirm to you, you will long to be in Heaven, and
this is what becomes Christians.

THE Third Use shall be a Word of Exhortation to us all. And O hear me this one
time, belike I shall seldom, it may be never ^eak to you again after this Day,
this (...) time hearken to me, the Exhortation to you is,

USE III.
MAKE sure faith Salvation of your Souls. O let every one that hears me this
Day, make sure of (...) Eternal Salvation of his Soul. Therefore Consider a few
things, Consider,

1. EVERY One of you has an Immortal Soul that must either be Happy or
Miserable throughout Eternal Ages. The Soul does not Die when the Body Dies but
goes (...) to another World. It is said concerning Rachel, Genesis 35. 18. An her
Soul was in departing for (...) died. Then her Soul did not die no, but
departed, went away (...) of this World. If our Souls don't Die, what do they
do? They did immediately appear before the Great GOD, and a Sentence (...)
passed upon them. Eccl. 12. (...)* The Body returns to the earth as (...), and
the Spirit returns to (...) who gave it. The Spirit the Imm^rtal Soul of a Man
when his Body dies, returns to God to appear before his Judgment Seat (...)
receive a Sentence from Him, ^^ther of Eternal Life or Eternal Death. Stephen
did not this that his Soul would Die who his Body did; therefore the last Words
he spoke, when he was going out of this World was, Lord Jesus receive my
Spirit. The Parable concerning Dives and Lazarus does declare this to be so, we
read (...) of the Death of their Souls when their Bodies Died. It is said the
Soul of Lazarus when he Died, Angels carried it into Abraham's Bosom: But Dives
who had Lived deliciously, when he Died, he Cried out, I am Tormented in this
Flame. O there is a Fire in HELL that Torments Men that Die in their Sins, in
their Unbelief. O that Men would think of the ETERNITY that follows upon Death.
A good Man when he Dies he enters upon Eternal Happiness, 1 John 2. 17. He that
does the Will of God abides for (...). But as for a Wicked Man when he Dies,
his Soul is Miserable forever. O then think of ETERNITY! It was a sad Speech,
of Francis Spira in his despairing Agonies, O says he, If I were to be in the
Fire of Hell but for a Thousand Years that would be tolerable, but when I think
on ETERNITY I am Amazed. It may well Amaze Sinners to think on that ETERNITY of
(...) and Misery that will come upon them if they (...) in their Sins.

2. CONSIDER the Worth of the Soul, It is of Unspeakable Worth. It was good
Advice a Religious Man once gave to an Emperor (says he) I advise you every Day
to think on think on those Words of Christ, Mat. 16. 26. What shall (...) Man
give in exchange for his Soul. If a Man (...) the whole World and Use his own
Soul, what is he pr^^^ed? O that you would think of those Words every Day. Many
behave themselves as if their Souls were nothing worth, like that wretched. Man
spoken of Luke 12. 19. That said to his Soul, Soul take thin^ ease, Eat, Drink
and be Merry. One of the Anci^^ts Observes upon it, that if he had had the Soul
of a Swine in him he could not have talked more brutishly. Consider the Worth
of the Soul, consider what it is capable of What is the Soul of a Man capable
of? It is Capable of Divine, Knowledge, of knowing GOD and JESUS CHRIST, Whom
to know is Life Eternal. If the Soul be Capable of such Glo^ious P^rf^ctions it
ought not to be despised, but we should be Careful for the Salvation of it; we
see the Worth of the Soul by the Price that was given for the Salvation of it,
Psalm. 49. 8. The Redemption of the Soul is precious, and it ^^aseth for ever.
As to any thing Men can do, or all the World can do to Redeem the Soul it
signifies nothing, nothing but the Blood of Christ can Redeem the Soul, the
which is of Unspeakable Worth and Value.

3. CONSIDER, if a Man shall Lose his Soul he is Undone forever. He is
Hopeless, Helpless, and Friendless too. If he lose his Soul he will not have One
Friend in Heaven nor Earth that will stand by him; Sinners who were his
Companions in Sin, will upbraid him when in Hell, they will say Cursed be thou
who ha^t drawn me into Sin. I remember a Story concerning One of the Kings of
Scotland, who thought that One who had been his familiar and special Friend,
appeared to him with those Words, Woe worth the Day that ever I knew thee, for
to please thee, I have Sinned against my Conscience, for which I am now
Condemned to the Fire of Hell. The King was amazed and sent immediately to know
how that Man did, and answer was returned that he was just Dead. So that
Sinners will have no Friends, they will be Hopeless and Friendless.

Lastly, CONSIDER, if we or any One here Lose our Soul, we shall be found
Guilty of Destroying our own Souls. For God in His Gospel does offer Eternal
Life to us, there is not One Man here this Day, but I declare from God unto him
he may be Saved if he will; if he come to Christ he may be Saved, so does the
Scripture speaks, Rev. 22. 17. Come whosoever will, let him take the Water of
Life freely. Whosoever will if he come Repenting and Believing in Jesus Christ,
he shall have Eternal Life given to him. We have had solemn Warnings to prepare
for Death and Eternity. God has given us Warnings by His Word many a time, and
Warnings by His Providence many a time. The Lord has taken away others by
Death, that has been a Warning to us. We should hea^^en to the Voice of God
here in How many have we seen of late that have Died, Death has taken them out
of the World, that is a solemn Warning to every One that hears of it to prepare
for Death; there is a Voice of God in such things as these are, O prepare for
Death, think on Eternity, and make sure of Eternal Life before Death come upon
you. They shall be most inexcuseable that will not hearken to the Voice of God
that speaks to them, that calls on them after so solemn a manner.

Quest. What shall we do that we may make sure of the Salvation of our Souls?

1. BEWARE of Soul-Destroyers if you would have your Souls Saved. Sin is the
greatest Soul-Destroy^r in the World, therefore take heed of Sin. Ezekiel. 18. 4.
The Soul that sins it shall die. Wisdom says, Prove. 8. 36. He that sins
against me wrongeth his own Soul. So do Sinners do, they wrong, they ruin their
own Souls when they Sin against God. O that you would remember that One Sin
indulged in you will destroy the Soul: therefore did David pray, Psalm. 119.
133. Let not any iniquity have dominion over me. Iniquity if it have Dominion
over a Man it will prove the ruin of his Soul.

AGAIN, Wicked Companions are Soul-Destroyers, therefore beware of them. O let
Young Men think on these Words, Evil Companions are Soul-Destroyers; so says
the Scripture, Prove. 13. 20. He that walks with the wise shall be wise, but a
Companion of fools shall be destroyed. Many a Young Man has been destroyed
forever, has lost his Soul by falling into acquaintance with those that were
Wicked, who have drawn him into Sin which has proved the ruin of his Soul.

La^tly, MAKE sure that (...) have True Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. O let
not the Lord Jesus Christ complain of any One that hears me this Day, as He did
of the Jews, John. 5. 40. Ye will not come to me that ye mig^t have Life. I
wish you would consider of this O^e thing, Many go far and fall short of Heaven
for want of having True Faith in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Men may be
Sober, Civil and the like, yet fall short of Heaven because the^ have not True
Faith in Jesus Christ. It is reported that a Godly Minister, Visiting a Sick
Man, took occasion to show that a Man might be a Sober, Blameless Man before
the World* and yet not go to Heaven, for want of True Faith in Christ; and an
Old Man happened to be by, who was much affected with what he heard, and would
afterward often say, if I had Died before I was Seventy Years of Age, I should
have missed of Heaven.

O that Sinners both Old and Young would make sure of an Interest in Christ
before it be too late. Give your selves up to Him, Give your Hearts to Him, so
may you hope for Salvation by Him, and the Lord of Heaven Grant it.

Spiritual Wisdom Or Grace in the Soul, is of (...) things the most Desirable.
Sermon II.
PROVERBS iii. 15. She is more Precious than Rubies and all the things (...)
can desire^ are not to be Compared unto her


SOLOMON in these Words speaks of the Excellency of Spiritual Wisdom, he
compares it to things most Desirable to Men; and gives the Preference to
Wisdom; he com^^res it, first to Silver, then to God, thirdly to precious
Pearls, to Rubies which are more precious than Gold; then says, All the things
thou can desire, are not to be Compared unto her. But then the Inquiry will
be, What is this Wisdom? For Answer to that, other Scriptures tell us what it
is, what is meant thereby, especially Psalm. 111. 10. The fear of the Lord, that
is Wisdom. That is meant here, and the Fear of the Lord expresses itself in a
due care to keep the commandments of God.

DOCTRINE.
THAT Spiritual Wisdom of Grace in the Soul, is more desirable than any thing
in this World whatsoever.



I shall mention some things that are Demonstrations of the Truth before us.

First, WE may argue by way of Comparison. All other things that are Desirable
are not to be C^^pared with this Wisdom. Ri^^es are Desirable among Men, (...)
the great Things of this World are not the True Riches, Luke 16. 11. If
therefore ye have not been faithful in the Unrighteous (...), who will commit
to your trust the True Riches. The True Riches is a being Rich toward God.
When a Man is Rich in Faith Rich in good Works; when he does much Good in his
Generation, and is Glorifying God continually, then he is Rich indeed Worldly
Riches are not to be compared unto Grace in the Soul Who does God give the
great Things of this World to? He gives them to the Nimrods, Se^nacharibs,
Nebuchadnezzars of this World, to the worst of Men, Dan^ 4. 17. God sets
over Kingdom the basest of Men. God gives these Things, even a great portion of
them to His Enemies, but Grace in the Soul He gives to none but His Friends, to
those that are His Children. It was a Luther saying, of that vast Dominion God
has given to the Great Turk, that it was, A Bone which God did throw down from
His Table for that great Dog the Turk to run away with. Health is Preferable to
Wealth, many that have had great Riches when they have been in racking Pain,
would have given all their Estate to enjoy the poor Man's Health. What then is
the Health of the Soul? As John said to Gaius, I wish above all things that
thou may prosper and be in Health, even as thy Soul prospers. He had a
Soul full of Grace, in that respect did Prosper; Strength of Body is a great
Mercy, what then is the Strength of Soul? Psalm. 138. 3. Thou have strengthened
me with strength in my Soul. Paul Prayed for those he wrote to, that they might
be str^ngthened with might in the inward man. Thus if we compare Spiritual
Wisdom to the things of this World, they are not comparable to it; the great
Things of this World are not comparable to it.

AGAIN, If we Compare it with Spiritual Gifts and Seize, though they are
Desireabl^ (...) they are not to be compared with Grace in the Soul. So says
Paul, 1 Cor. 12. 31. Yet show I unto you a more excellent way. A more excellent
way then that of Gifts, Learning, Seize which are very Desirable, yet a
Man may have them and for all that Perish. If I speak with the Tongue of Men
and Angels (says the Apostle) and have not Charity what am I but sounding Brass
and tinkling Cymbal. If I have not Grace in my Soul notwithstanding these Gifts
and Seize I am nothing. A Man may have excellent Gifts, yet be but an
Instrument of Satan. Austin said to a Young Man, of great Gifts, the Devil
longs to have those Parts of thine to serve his Interest. A Man of excellent
Gifts yet not Serving and Glorifying God with them, may Perish to Eternity.
Saul was among the Prophets, and he that was among the Prophets is now among
the Damned in Hell. Judas was adorned with admirable Gifts, yet was a Son of
Perdition and Cast away forever. This Demonstration proves the Doctrine before
us, That Grace is most Desirable.

2. Demon. AS for Grace the Excellency of it does appear from the Perpetuity of
it. As for other Things they are not Lasting, much less Everlasting. But Grace
is so, 1 Cor. 7. 31. The fashion of this World passes away. They don't endure
forever, but Grace in the Soul that endures forever. They shall fear me
forever, says the Lord. If a Man has True Grace it will Last forever. They
that have the Grace of Faith it shall abide with them as long as they Live in
this World. The good Things of this World may depart from a Man; A Man may be a
very Rich Man to Day, yet be as poor as Job to morrow, Grace lasts not only for
Time, but for Eternity. These Outward things Death comes and puts an end to
them all. Psalm. 49. 17. He shall carry nothing away with him. But if a Man has
Grace in his Soul, he will carry that away with him, that will continue with
him till he comes to Heaven, and will be in a greater Perfection in Heaven than
ever it was here in this World. Thence Grace is compared to Living Waters, to a
Living Spring that never runs dry. Hence Christ said to the Woman of Sameria,
The Water that I shall give, shall be Living Waters, springing up into
Everlasting Life. Grace is compared unto a River, John 7. 38. He that Believes
in me, out of his belly shall flow Rivers of Living Waters. Rivers continue
from One Age to another. Thus it is when True Grace is wrought in the Soul, it
continues forever; therefore the excellency of Grace appears to be above the
things of this World from the Continuance of it.

3. Demon. IF a Man has Grace in his Soul, he shall have of the Things of this
World, such a portion as Infinite Wisdom shall see best for him. It may be the
Wisdom of God does not see Good for some of His Servants to have much of this
World, therefore denies it to them, Jam. 2. 5. The poor of this World, rich in
Faith. Christ said to the Angel of the Church in Smyrna, I know thy poverty,
but thou are rich. Rich in Grace, though poor in this World. When God sees his
Servants would receive Damage by having much of this World, in Love and
Faithfulness He denies it to them; but He gives them that which is much better.
1 Timothy 4. 8. Godliness has the promise of the Life that now is, as well as of
that which is to come. Godliness has a Promise of Blessings that respect this
present Life, so far as Infinite Wisdom shall see good for them. Psalm. 84. 11.
No good thing will be withheld from them that walk uprightly. Is so he such a
Thing is a good Thing in it self and good for such a Man, he shall not want it.
Psalm. 34. 9. O fear the Lord ye his Saints, for there is no want to them that
fear him. They may be without this and the other good Thing, but they shall not
want it. God will give them such a portion of the good Things of this Life as
in His Infinite Wisdom He sees best for them.

4. Demon. A further Evidence of the Truth, is, in that Grace in the Soul is a
wonderful Pr^servative. It preserves from the worst and greatest of Evils, it
preserves Men from Sin and from Satan too, that he shall not have his Will over
them. 1. John. 5. 18. He that is born of God sins not, he cannot Sin because
he is born of God. He cannot Sin as others do, he cannot Sin without Repentance
for it. He cannot Sin with his whole Heart and Soul as Ungod^y Men do, and he
that is born of God keeps himself, and the wicked One touches him not. The
Devil shall not come at him, shall not ruin him. Grace in the Soul pre'erves from
the power of Satan and from Sin: We see notable instances of this in the
Scriptures, as now, there was that instance of Joseph that was tempted by his
lewd Mistress; he had the Fear of God in his Heart, that kept him from being
overcome by that Temptation. Says he, How shall I do this Wickedness and Sin
against God. He cannot do it. Thus it was with David diverse times, said he,
Psalm. 18. 23. I kept my self from mine iniquity. It was from the Grace in
David's Heart that he was kept from that Iniquity, which he was in special
danger by; there was that Iniquity of Killing Saul, he had opportunity to have
done it, and was urged by other Men to do it, so he might have delivered
himself from the Hand of his Enemy, but he did it not, he kept himself from
that Iniquity, he knew that God would be Dishonored if he did that thing. So
when in his Passion purposed to have Destroyed the House of Nabal and all his
Family; when Abigail came to him and gave him good Advice, said he, Blessed be
thou and Blessed be thy Advice, thou have kept me from shedding of Blood: In my
Passion I resolved to be revenged on such an ungrateful Wretch, but now I have
^ltered my Mind. Thus Grace keeps Men from Sin. If Men live in Places where
there is much danger of their Sinning, if they have Grace in their Souls they
will be Preserved notwithstanding. It is said of Obadiah, He feared the Lord
greatly, 1 Kin. 18. 3. Therefore he did not do as Ahab's Courtiers did, when
many Prophets were cut off. This Man that Feared the Lord, did take Care of the
Prophets of the Lord. Thus Daniel, when in the Court of a King that was a great
Idolater, he did not fall in with that Idolatry, he was bold as a Lion, he
would rather be throw among the Lions than be Guilt of such Idolatry. Nehemiah
brought up in the Court of Persia, he was not as other Courtiers, so did not I,
says he, because of the Fear of God. Be sure there are two Sins that if a Man
has Grace in his Soul he shall be kept pure from he shall never become Guilty
of. One is the Sin against the Holy Ghost. Psa^. 19. 13. I shall be innocent
from the great Transgression. The Sin against the Holy Ghost is the great
Transgression, but the Gracious Soul shall be kept (...) from it. The other Sin
that the that have Grace in their Soul shall never become Guilty of, is the Sin
of Final Impenitence. It is true a good Man may fall into very grievous Sins in
an Hour of Temptation: As we see in Peter, a very good Man, yet in an Hour
Temptation he fell grievously, but he did not persist in his fall but did
immediately repent, he went out and wept bitterly. David Sinned grievously in
that matter of Uriah, the Hittite, but he Repented of it and published his
Repentance before the whole World, Psalm Fifty-first is the Psalm of David's
Repentance on the account of that grievous Sin. So Solomon was Guilty of great
Backsliding from God, but he Repented of it: The Book of Ecclesiastes is the
Book of Solomon's Repentance. They that have Grace in their Souls may fall
grievously but not utterly, he shall arise a^ain. So we see that Grace is the
most Desirable Thing.

5. Demon. GRACE is the mo^^ Needful Thing that can be, that se^^ forth the
De^ireableness of it. N^thing in the World is so Needf^^ as for a Man to have
Grace (...) his Soul. Luk* 10. 42. One thi^^ is Needful. What is that thing* Is
it for a Man to have a great Portion in the World, is that the One thing
Need^ul? No verily* if it was, Agur so wise and goo^ a Man, would never have
prayed to God that he would no^ make him a Rich Man, he prayed (...) much
against Riches as against Poverty, says he, Give me neither Poverty nor Riches,
Feed me wit^ Food conv^nient for me. That is the One Thing Needful, that will
stand a Man in stead in a Dying Hour, when all the World shall forsake him; and
that is Grace i^ the Soul. Prove. 14. 32. The Righteous has Hope in his Death.
If he is Righteous, if he has Grace in his Soul, it will go well with him at
his Death. Joh. 8. 51. If a Man keep my saying he shall never see Death. That
is Furnal Death, the Death of his Soul, he shall never see it if he has Grace
in his Soul. So that Grace is the One thing Needful. I^ ^ill make a Man have
confidenc^ and boldness in the Day of Judgment; when he thinks of the Day of
Judgment, he can think of it with Joy and Triumph, 1 John 4. 17. We have
Boldness in the Day of Judgment, because as he is so are we in this world. We
have the same Grace though in a poor degree, yet of the same Nature that was in
the Lord's Heart, therefore have we Boldness in the Day of Judgment; It shall
do us no hurt, it will be a happy Day to us; that is most Needful which is
Necessary to bring a Man to Heaven. So is Grace in the Soul, Joh. 3. 3. Except
a Man he Born again be cannot see the Kingdom of God. Grace in the Soul, that
is Regeneration, a Man cannot see God without it. He^. 12. 14. Without Holiness
no Man shall see the Lord. Then Holiness of Grace in the Soul is the most
Needful Thing: For without that, a Man shall never see the Lord.

6. Demons. IF a Man has Grace in his Soul he will be an active Instrument to
Glorify GOD in the World. That is an Excellent thing, what more Desirable than
to Glorify GOD in the World? But if a Man has Grace in his Soul he will do
thus. God chooses such to be Instruments to Glorify His Name, 1 Samuel 16. 6, 7.
When Eliah appeared before Samuel he thought that was the Man God Designed to
make use of to Glorify His Name, he being a goodly Person, but says God to him,
The Lord sees not as Man sees, for Man looks upon the Outward appearance
but the Lord looks on the Heart. God looked on the Heart of David, he saw the
Grace that was wrought in his Soul, he was the Man God chose to be a special
instrument to Glorify His Name. If a Man has Grace in His Soul he will improve
whatever Talent God has bestowed upon him, to his Glory. If a Man has Grace in
His Soul he will be a Fruitful Christian and that will be for the Glory of God,
Joh. 17. 8. Herein is my Father Glorify^d that ye bear much Fruit. If a Man has
Grace in his Soul he will bring forth Fruits of Righteousness and Holiness. If
a Man has Grace in his Soul he will be made a Blessing, he will not only be
Blessed but be made a Blessing to others. Therefore the Righteous are compare
(...) Trees planted by the Rivers of Water, the World fares the better for such
Trees as those are, they are Blessings to the World. If a Man is only a Servant
in a Family, if he has Grace in his Soul he will be a Blessing to that Family.
Of Onesimus it was said, he was unprofitable, but now Profitable, now that he
is Converted, now he has Grace in his Soul, now he is prof^table. Jacob when he
dwelt in his Uncle Laban's Family, Laban found by Experience that the Lord had
Blessed him for his sake. A Godly Servant is a Blessing to his Master he will
pray for his Master, as Eleazer did, that prayed, O Lord God I pray Thee, Bless
my master, Abraham. Little does the World think how much they are beholden to a
few good, honest Men in it. It is said, The Righteous is an Everlasting
foundation. The World stands for their sakes; if all the good Men in the World
were gone out of it, the World would not stand one Day longer: God would set
the World on Fire and Consume it. If the Master of a Family has Grace, the
whole Family with fare the better for him; it may be he may pray down Grace
into the Souls of his Children, and that would be a happy thing indeed.
Likewise other Blessings, as God said to Abraham, I have heard thee, concerning
Ishmael, I will bless him. Many times there are those in public Places, that
many are the better for them. There may be a Man, and there may be Thousands in
the World that will Bless God to all Eternity, that ever they knew that Man.
They are Partakers of Spiritual, Eternal Blessings by means of this or that
Man, that they will Bless God forever that ever they knew that Man. Therefore
Grace in the Soul is most Desirable.

7. Demon. IF a Man has true Grace in his Soul, he is very like these in
Heaven, that shows how Desirable a thing Grace is. It makes Men like the
Spirits of Just Men that are gone to Heaven. Here they have but a little Grace,
a few drops of Grace, but in Heaven their Souls are full of Grace, that which
is in part is there done away, that which is perfect being then come, it makes
Men to be like the Angels in Heaven. The Angels they are Holy and are always
Pleasing and Glorifying God, and that Man that has a great degree of Grace is
very like to the Angels of Heaven. One speaking of the Martyr Bradford, who was
a very holy Man, said he, that Angel of God John Bradford. Nay, Grace in a
Man's Soul makes him like unto the Son of God, makes him like unto the Lord
Jesus Christ Himself, Of his fullness we receive and Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.
16. We receive Grace that is answerable to the Grace that is in the Heart of
Christ, though as to degrees not comparable to it, He received of the Spirit
without Measure; they that have Grace are more like to Christ than other Men,
the more Grace a Man has the more he resembles the Lord Jesus Christ. Grace
makes a Man like to the Blessed GOD Himself, GOD is infinitely Holy; Holy,
Holy, Holy is the Lord God Almighty. God the Father is Holy, God the Son is
Holy, God the Spirit is Holy; the more Holiness Men attain to, the more like
are they to God. Grace is called His Image, and it is called the Divine Nature.
Grace makes Men like to God (...) therefore of all things most Desirable. I
shall mention but One thing more to prove the Doctrine.

8. Demon. IF a Man has Grace in his Soul be is bound for Heaven and will soon
be there. Grace in his Soul gives him a Title to Heaven, Psalm. 84. 11. God will
give Grace and Glory. If God give Grace, He will surely give Glory in due time.
Such a Man is bound for Heaven, Heaven is come down into his Soul when Grace
comes down into his Soul. Therefore it is said, He that believes has
Everlasting Life. Not only that he shall have it, but he has it already in the
Beginni^gs of it, This is Life Eternal to know thee the only true God and him
whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. A Man that has Grace, that knows God, that
knows Jesus Christ, Life Eternal is begun in his Soul, and he will soon be
there. It may be he has a long time been Serving God, it may be he feared God
when he was a Youth, certainly he will be in Heaven in a very little time. You
may then conclude, That Grace in a Man's Soul is of all Things most Desirable.

APPLICATION.
IF Grace in a Man's Soul is most ^esireable what shall be thought of those
that have no Grace in their souls, but the contrary. Alas but few comparatively
have Grace in their Souls; as is said of the straight gate and the narrow way,
few there be that find it. So Grace in the Soul, Few there be that and it. Many
manifest they have no Grace in them, for they allow themselves in Wicked Ways,
Sin^^l Courses, they speak very foolI^hly The Transgression of the wicked faith
within my heart, there is no Fear of God before their Eyes. Drunkards,
Swearers, Liars, Sabbath Breakers, have no Fear of God before their Eyes, 1 John 3. 10. In this the Children of God are manifest and the Children of the
Devil. These two divide the whole World. It is a strange thing but very true,
there is not a Man in this World, not a Man in this Assembly but either he is a
Child of God, or a Child of the Devil. O that Men would consider of it, there
are but Few comparatively that have Grace in their Souls, therefore be
persuaded to labor after this Spiritual Wisdom. What shall you do that you may
obtain it, is not that a question worth considering Let me tell you what you
shall do.

1. YOU must ask it of GOD Jam. 1. 5. If any Man lack Wisdom let him ask it of
God, that gives ^^berally. This Spiritual Wisdom God can give it, God gave it
to David, Thou have put Wisdom into my inner part, says he. Therefor we should
go to God for it, let us be importunate with the Lord for it. God has said
con^erning his Elect Israel, He will give them a New Heart, says he,
nevertheless I will be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them. He
will have Men come and beg Grace of Him, who only is able to give it, and would
have them cry earnestly for it, to list up their Voice for Understanding. To
search for it, search for it in the Mines of the Scriptures, there this Wisdom
is to be found.

Therefore,

2. CONSULT the Word of God, that so you may attain this Wisdom, this Grace you
have heard of. There was a famous Jew Converted only by Reading the Fifty-third
Chapter of Isaiah. And a Young Man who was an Atheist, by Reading the First
Chapter of John's Gospel, God set in with it upon his Soul that he was
Converted from his Atheism and became as great an Instrument of Glory to God
and good to his Church it may be as any Man in the World in his Day. So
concerning hearing the Word, Faith comes by Hearing and Hearing by the Word of
God. When you come to hear, Hear in good earnest that your Souls may receive
Benefit thereby. Beware of being deceived for the Lord's sake, for your own
Souls sake beware of being deceived, of thinking you have Grace when you have
not, for that has been the ruin of many a Soul. Alas! some think Morality is
Grace, if they are free from Scandals before the World* they think they have
Grace in them. We Read of a Young Man in the Gospel that come to Christ and
said, Lord, What shall I do that I may obtain Eternal Life, Christ put him in
mind of the Commandments, says he, All these have I kept from my Youth, What
lack I yet? He had been a Civil, Moral Young Man,and therefore concluded he had
Grace in his Soul. Many are deceived by a false Conversion. O Beware of that.
They have had some Experience of the Workings of God's Spirit on their Souls,
some Reformations have been obtained by those Workings, they now conclude
surely they are Godly, they have Grace in their Souls, yet are deceived, there
are very many it is so with. It is a sad Truth that the Visible Church has more
Hypocrites in it, than there are true Children of God. O then take heed of
being Deceived, and of thinking you have Grace when you have not.

There is none whose Dignity and Glory may be compared with that of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST. Sermon III.
HEBREWS III. 3. This Man was Counted worthy of more Glory than Moses.


THE Apostle in these Words makes a comparison between Christ and Moses: he
does acknowledge that Moses had a Glory, a Dignity belonging to him; but not
comparable to that Glory which belongs to our Lord JESUS CHRIST. This he
Confirms by diverse Simi^i^udes, in that the Builder of the House is Worthy of
more honor than the House. JESUS CHRIST is the Builder of the Church, Moses
was Builder but of Part of it. He that Built all Things concerning the Church
of GOD is CHRIST Himself. He then is Worthy of more Glory than Moses. Moses did
act as a Servant in what he did, CHRIST as a Son, a Son is Worthy of more
Honor than a Servant.

DOCTRINE.
THAT no Man in this World is Worthy to be Compared with the Man CHRIST JESUS



NO Man has, nor ever was there any Man that had that Glory, that is Comparable
to what is to be affirmed concerning the Man CHRIST JESUS.

For Clearing the Doctrine I shall mention several Things that Evince it.

1. THE most eminent Persons that have ever been in this World were only Types
of JESUS CHRIST. As for Moses, the Apostle prefers JESUS CHRIST above Him.
Moses, it was said of him he was King in Jeshurun, his Power, his Dominion was
only in Jeshurun, that is among the Children of Israel. JESUS CHRIST He is the
Head and Ruler even over the whole Church of GOD, over the Spiritual Israel, as
well as over the Natural Israel, John 1. 49. Thou art the Son of God, thou art
the King of Israel. Moses indeed was a Lawgiver, CHRIST has given another Law,
the Moral Law, that CHRIST has Confirmed, the Ceremonial Law, that CHRIST has
Abolished by His Coming. John 1. 17. The law was given by Moses, but grace and
truth came by Jesus Christ* Christ has given a Law that is a more gracious
dispensation. M^s^s was a Man that had a greater familiarity with God than ever
any Man in this World had; it is said, God spoke *o Moses face to face as a Man
speaks to his friend. Now Jesus Christ had a greater familiarity with God
than ever M^s^s had: No m^n has (...) God at any time but the Son, ^e (...)*
seen him, that lies in the (...) of the Father, and has made suc^* discove^ies
of the bosom (...) i^ the heart of the Father as never (...) Man did before
(...) If we speak of Melchised^ck he was a Man of great Renown and Glory. He^*
7. 4. It is sa^d, (...) how great this Man was. Yet he was but a Type, a Sha^ow
of the Lord Jesus Christ. Melch^s^d^ck, he was King of Sa^^m, King of
Righteousness. It is ^^id Christ is so more emi^ently. Mel^his^d^ck was like to
the Son of GOD, but Christ is really so. Melchised^ck was without Beg^n^ng or
End of Days, H^s^^^ically ^e was so, there is nothing said (...) the Scripture
where he was ^orn, whence he came, he was ^I^torically without beginning (...)
end of Days. Christ is so ^^ally and Truly, therefore greater than
M^l^h^s^d^ck.

IT is supposed that Melchise^^ck said the Foundation of the (...) Jerusalem,
besure Christ (...) that has laid* the Foundati^^ of the Spiritual Jerusalem,
He built that to the Glory of GOD. Abraham was a Man of great Renown, the Jews
did highly admire him, yet the Jews would say when Messiah shall come, He shall
be greater than our father Abraham. So He was, Abraham had a Glorious Title of
being the Father of the Faithful, Christ has a far more Glorious Title, He is
said to be the Everlasting Father. Abraham counted it his great happiness that
he should have Redemption by Jesus Christ, that Christ would come as a Redeemer
into the World and Die for his Elect, that He would Rise from the the Dead; and
how did Abraham know this? John 8. 56. Christ, said to the Jews, Your father
Abraham saw my day and r^j^yced. he saw it and was glad. By Faith he knew that
all nations should be Blessed in Him. That is in respect of the Messiah, the
Coming of Him. When Isaac was bound and laid on the Altar ready to be offered
up, but was wonder^^lly delivered from that Death. Hereby God instructed
Abraham, that Christ should come and Die, and thereby accomplish that
Re^emption that he and all the Elect of God should partake of. David was a Man
of great Re^own and Glory. Christ was greater than he, therefore Christ says,
Psalm. 110. 1. The Lord said unto my Lord sit thou at my right hand. So likewise
Solomon was a great Man and Renowned, but when Christ was in the World, it was
said, A Greater than Solomon is here. Who is that greater than Solomon? it was
none but Christ Jesus; and He was greater in that wherein Solomon's chief
Excellency did con^^^t, his Wisdom. It is said, Solomon was Wiser than all Men,
but Jesus Christ had greater Wisdom than Solomon. It is said of Him. Col. 2. 3.
In (...) are bid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge. The Wisdom of God
appears more in what He has done by Jesus Christ than in all things whatsoever
God did. Christ Himself was full of Wisd^^* all Treasures of Wisdom were hid in
Him, so then He was greater than Solomon. Thus we see the most Eminent Men that
have ever been in the World, were only Types and Shadows of the Lord Jesus
Christ.

2. THIS Man my Text speaks of Jesus Christ, is God as well as Man. God and Man
in One Person, which cannot be said of any One else such a Glory as may not be
Affirmed of any other Man that ever was, or is, or shall be in the World.
Christ in the Scripture has the Name of God given to Him. Job knew this to be a
Truth, therefore said, Job. 19. 25. I now that my Redeemer (...), and that he
shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth, though after my Skin Worms (...)
this Body, yet in my flesh shall see God. Christ is said to be God, not only as
Princes are said to be Gods, but He is styled the Migh^y GOD, the Great GOD,
the GOD over all Blessed forever. Therefor He is said to be the Son of God,
not the Son of God as Angels, by Similitude, or as Belie^ers by Adoption, but
God's own son, Romans 8. 32. God spared not his own Son, but delivered him to
Death for us all. Spared not His own Son, now an own Son is equal with His
Father in respect of Nature, so is Jesus Christ the son of God. It is said of
Him, He counted it no robbery to become equal with God. If He had (...) been
really so, it would have been the greatest Robbery to have pretended an
Equality with God. The Jews thought Christ was Guilty of the highest Bla^phe^y,
when He said He was equal with the Father, that He was God's own Son, Christ
said I have (...) many good works, for which of these do you go about to stone
me? They said to him not for thy good works do we stone (...) but for thy
Blasphemy, in that (...) being a Man make thy self God. If any other Man in
the World had said so, the Blasphemy would have been very great, but when
Christ said so, it was a most Glorious Truth necessary to be Believed. Zech.
13. 7. Awake (...) sword against the Man that is (...) Fellow, faith the Lord
of Host. What Man is it that is the F^^low of the Lord of Hosts that is equal
with Him, but only the Man Christ Jesus; therefore He (...) to be acknowledged
as God, ^s the true God, and that Name that belongs to the true God and to Him
only is given to Christ, namely, the Name of JEHOVAH, Psalm. 18.18. He whose
Name alone (...) Jehovah. None but the true God has that Name of Jehovah given
to him without the great^st blasphemy, but this Name is given to Christ:
Therefore Christ says, Rev. 1. 8. I am he, which is, and which was, and which
is to come. That is the interpre^^tion of the Name Jehovah. The Essential
Attributes that belong to God are affirmed concerning our Lord Jesus Christ.
That Attribute of Eternity is peculiar to God, to be without beginning and end
of days; this is true concerning Jesus Christ: He says, Rev. 1. 11. I am the
first and the last: the first Being, and cannot but endure to all Eternity. He
then is Eternal, and so is the true God, therefore the Name of, I AM, is given
to Him. He said to the Jews, before Abraham was, I AM. When Moses would know
what His Name was, He said, I am that I am: That denotes His Eternity, that He
always was, and always will be. So Omnipotence, and Omnipotent are Essential
Attributes of God. Job says, Thou can^t do every thing. The like is to be said
concerning Christ, He can do every thing; and He gives to Himself that Name of,
The Almighty, Rev. 1. 8. Therefore He is the true God. Omnipresence, that is an
Essential Attribute of God; to be in all places at the same time. Christ says,
No Man has ascended up to Heaven, but the Son of Man which is in Heaven, Joh.
3. 13. Christ was on Earth then, He was in Heaven and on the Earth at the same
time, therefore Omni-present. And because He is the true God, He is
Omnisci^ent, He knows all Men and all things, He knows what Men are. When there
were some that did pretend to be Christians, it is said of Christ, Joh.2.24. He
would not trust himself with them, for he knew all men. And Christ said from
Heaven, the Churches shall know, that I am He which searches the reins and
hearts. It is God's Prerogative to search the Heart, whether Men are sincere in
their pretenses to Religion. But Christ knows this, He knows the hearts of Men,
this is true concerning our Lord Jesus Christ. Concerning this very Man the
Text speaks of, who is God as well as Man.

3. JESUS CHRIST is the Mediator between God and Man. Moses indeed was a
Typical Mediator, I stood between God and you, says Moses. But now Christ and
He only is the Mediator between God and all His Elect; they being under the
Mediation of the Lord Jesus Christ are Saved by Him. 1 Timothy 2. 5. There is One
God and One Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus. He is called
the Savior of the World, He is the Savior of all Men that shall be Saved. God
has laid help upon One that is Mighty to Save. Isai. 63. 1. Who is this that is
traveling in the greatness of his strength, Mighty to Save. Christ as Mediator
has a Threefold Office belonging to Him, that of a Prophet, Priest and King;
that is greater Glory than can be said of any other Man; diverse have had Two of
these Offices, David was a Prophet and a King, not a Priest. Samuel was a
Prophet and a Priest, but he was not a King. Whereas Jesus Christ has all these
Glorious Offices. Moses ^pake of Him when he said, The Lord shall raise up to
you a Prophet like unto me. Other Prophets were so but for One Generation, they
were subject to Death as well as other Men. Do the Prophets live forever, Zech.
1. 5. No, the Prophets are Dead, all the old Prophets are Dead, they were
Prophets but for One Generation, but Jesus Christ is a Prophet to the Church of
God through all Generations, from the Beginning to the End of the World. The
Jews said very truly, when Christ was among them, There is a great Prophet
arisen up. There never was such a Prophet seen in the World as Jesus Christ
was. He is also (...) great High Priest; says the Apostle, Having such a great
High Priest, Let us draw nigh to God. Never was there such an High Priest in
the World that did do as He did, Offer a Valuable Sacri^^ce to God to make
Atonement for the Sins of Men, all the Creatures were not sufficient for that,
Lebanon was not sufficient for a Burnt-offering, could not obtain
Reconciliation with God: but now Christ as Priest has Offered such a Sacrifice
as is suitable to the Majesty of GOD, for He has Offered Himself, Heb. 9. 26.
He has put away Sin by the Sacrifice of Himself. That now was more than if all
the Creatures in the whole World were Offered a Sacrifice to Appease the Wrath,
and to Satisfy the Justice of God. He Himself was a Divine Person, though it
was not the God head but the Manhood that Suffered, but that Man being an
Infinite Person, His Sacri^ice was of Infinite Value to make Reconciliation for
the Sins of His People, therefore this Man is worthy of greater Glory than ever
any other Man is or could be; and He is a King also, He is King of Kings and
Lord of Lords. The most Excellent King that ever was, and the most Glorious
Lord that ever was, that has all the World under His Dominion. Many have
Attempted to obtain an Universal Monarchy, but no Man ever attained to it. But
Jesus Christ is King of the Universe, and the Day will come when He shall be
Acknowledged to be so, Zech. 14. 9. There shall be One Lord and One King over
all the Earth. Christ is King over all the Earth, and not only so but He is
King in Heaven too, which cannot be said of any other. Christ therefore said to
His Disciples, All Power in Heaven and on Earth is given to me. Therefore such
a Glory belongs to Him as cannot be said of any other.

4. IT is evident in that Christ is greater than the Angels. Ezekiel. 1. 26. It is
said, Over the Living Creatures was a Throne, and a Man sat upon it. Christ is
He that sits upon a Throne, and He is over the Living Creatures which are the
Angels, they are all under His Dominion. The old Jews had a saying among them,
that was very true, That when Messiah co^es He shall be greater than our Father
Abraham, greater than Moses, yea, greater than the Angels. This is Affirmed in
the Scripture concerning Christ, that He is greater than the Angels, better
than they, Heb. 1. 4, ^3. Unto which of the Angels said (...) at any time, Sit
thou at my right hand. Now Christ's ^itting ^t the Right Hand of God de^otes
the greatest Glory that possible can be, nay the Angels Worship Him, ver. 6.
Worship Him all ye his Angels. There is ^ot an Angel in Heaven but must Worship
and does Worship the Lord Jesus Christ. We read in the Revelations that Every
living Creature in Heaven, is saying, Blessing and Hon^ur, Glory and Power be
u^^o Him that ^itteth upon the Throne and to the Lamb forever and ever. And the
Angels are said to be made Subject to Him, they go at his sending, I Jesus have
sent mine Angel; they come at His Call, they are Obedient to Him, He is their
General. Among Men the General is greater than his Soldiers, so it is here, the
Armies of Heaven follow Him. The Angels of Heaven they follow Christ, they are
under His Command, His Conduct, so that this Man is Greater than Moses, Greater
than ever any Man in this World ever was or shall be.

5. CHRIST has done, does do, and will do such Things as none else can do.
Miraculous Things He has done, that shows what a Glorious One He is, Joh. 2.
11. It is said, This beginning of Miracles, Jesus did in Cana of Galilee: and
manifested forth his Glory. Christ showed forth His Glory not only by His
beginning of Miracles, but by all the Miracles that ever He wrought, thereby
showed He was such a Glorious Man as the like never was in the World. Therefore
when there was a Man born Blind and was healed by the Lord Jesus Christ, it was
said to the Pharisees, it is a mavelous thing that ye know not from whence He
is. It was never known since the World began, that a Man should open the Eyes
of one that was born Blind, Joh. 9. 32. Therefore He is no ordinary Man. Christ
cast out Devils by speaking (...) Word. The Disciples came to Him saying, Lord,
Even the De^ils are subject to us through thy Name. He stilled the Tempest.
There was a time when the D^^ciples were in great danger at Sea, of being
Castaway, Christ was in the Vessel, they came to Him saying, Lord, carest thou
not that we perish; and Christ commanded the Winds and Sea to be quiet and
immediately the Storm ceased, that the People were amazed, saying, What manner
of Man is this, that even the Winds and the Sea obey him. Yea, Christ has done
greater things than these, He has caused the Dead to come to Life again, when
Lazarus was Dead and in his Grave some Days, Christ stood over the Grave and
said, Lazarus come forth. And immediately upon Christ's speaking the word he
that was Dead came forth. And there shall a Day come, When all that are in
their Graves shall hear the Voice of (...) Son of God; and they that hear shall
come forth, some to Everlasting Life and some to the Resurrection of Damnation.
All the Men in the World, not one Soul in this Congregation, but shall hear the
Voice of the Son of God one Day, and be restored to Life again, after they have
been Dead, the Lord knows how many Years.

6. EVERY Man is beholden to the Lord Jesus Christ Christ is God, they are
beholden to Him for their very Beings. It is said of Christ, Joh. 1. 3. All
things were made by him and without him was not any thing made that was made.
Therefore it is said, Rev. 3. 14. He is the beginning of the Creation of God.
We may not imagine that the meaning of these Words ^s as Arians say, Christ was
the first Creature that was made, no, no, but that all Creatures received their
beginning, their Being from Him. Men are beholden to Christ for their
Preservation, Col. 1. 17. By him all things consist. Heb. 1. 3. He upholds all
things by the word of his power; Being God as well as Man. Men are behold^n to
Christ to that they have the means of Grace, are under a dispensation of Divine
Patience. Thou had^t been in Hell long before this Day if it had not been for
the Lord Jesus Christ. He has obtained this favor of God, that Mankind should
be put under a dispensation of Divine Patience. He is the Savior of all Men,
especially of them that Believe; and whatever Men enjoy that is desirable they
are beholden to Jesus Christ for it. Some have greater power and dominion than
others, it is Christ that has given it to them. By him Kings reign, and Princes
decree justice Some have greater Wisdom than others, it is Christ that has
given it to them. Some have a far greater measure of Grace than others have, it
is Christ that has given it to them, Ephesians. 4. 7. Unto every one of us is given
Grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. So that all Men are
beholden to the Lord Jesus Christ for what they enjoy: This is what cannot be
said of any other Man than this God-man I am speaking of.

7. CHRIST fills the Heaven of Heavens with His Glory. Ezekiel had a Glorious
Vision of the Temple, and he says, The inner court, which was a Type of Heaven,
was filled with the Glory of the Lord, Ezekiel. 43. 5. So the New Jerusalem, it is
said, There was no need of the Sun to give light, neither of the Moon to shine
in it, for the Glory of God and the Lamb is the Light thereof. Christ now in
Heaven sits on a Throne, and whose Throne is it He sits on, Rev. 3. 21. I am
sit down with my Father in his Throne. Isaiah had a most wonderful Vision,
Isai. 6. He saw the Seraphims, that is the Angels called Seraphims, they
covered their Faces, they are not able to look upon the Glory of Christ without
Admiration at it; and what did the S^^^phims say, they said, Holy, Holy, Holy
Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of thy Glory. So the Angels are saying
in Heaven, The whole Heaven is full of thy Glory. The Apostle John says, Isaiah
spoke this when he saw His Glory. We see the Truth confirmed in the Particulars
mentioned. A Word by way of Application.

APPLICATION.
USE. I. IS CHRIST such a Glorious One, then certainly it is a great Honor to
be a Servant of Jesus Christ. John Baptist thought it to be so, therefore said,
Mat. 3. 11. I am not worthy to bear his shoes after him. That is to say, I am
not worthy of such a Dignity as that is, to be a Servant of Jesus Christ. They
that are Servants of a great Man are counted happy, on that account, as the
Queen of Sheba, said to Solomon, Happy are these thy Servants that wait upon
thee. But to be a Servant of Jesus Christ is a greater Happiness than to be a
Servant of Solomon. The greatest Happiness in the World is to be a Servant of
Jesus Christ. Theodosius the Emperor was wont to style himself, a Vassal of
Jesus Christ. This is an Honor belonging to all Believers. But what is it then
to be employed in any Peculiar Service for Christ, to Preach Christ to the
Souls of Men, how great is that Honor. Says the Apostle, To me is given this
Grace that I should preach the Unsearchable Riches of Christ, Ephesians. 3. 8. What
should a Christian desire to Live for, but that so he may do Service for the
Name of Jesus Christ. For me to Live is Christ, says Paul. That is the reason I
am willing to Live a while longer that I may Serve Christ. Therefore it is,
when Ministers grow Old and cannot serve Christ they should long to Die; when
they can do no more for Christ the end of Life, the design of Life.

USE II. TO Preach CHRIST is certainly the Duty of His Ministers. They cannot
Preach Christ too much. Paul when he was at Rome, he taught the Things that did
concern Jesus Christ. So all the Apostles like Paul, did preach and reach Jesus
Christ, that was the Sum of their Ministry. There are some Ministers, that
there is very little of Christ in their Ministry, there is very good Morality
in it. It is true, the Law must be preach^d that Men may be made sensible of
their need of Christ and go to Him for Life and Salvation. But to preach
Morality is no more than what some Heathen have done; how are such Ministers
unlike the blessed Austin, that said he could not take pleasure in reading
T^lli^^s Works, though he delighted in his Eloquence, for says he, I don't see
the Name Christ in all Tallie's Works. It was good advice, that Dr. Sibbs gave
to a Young Man who was desig^ed for the work of the Ministry, said he, Young
Man, Preach Christ above all Things or you will never do much Good by your
Ministry.

USE III. FOR any Man, yea, for the greatest Man in this World to set himself
against Christ and His In^erest is the greatest Folly in the World. Be wise O
ye Kings, be in^tructed O ye Judges of the Earth, Kiss the Son lest be be angry
and ye ^erish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little. When Saul
was Persecuting the Church a Voice came from Heaven, saying to him, Why d^^t
thou Persecute me, thou will find it hard to kick against the Pricks. When Men
set themselves against Christ they do but hurt themselves. It is storied of
Julian that great Apostate, it is thought he Committed the Unpardonable Sin, he
was engaged in a War with the Persians, said he would when that War was ended
Sacrifice in the Blood of Christians. When it was e^quired of one that was a
Christian, What do you think your Christ is during now? He replied, I tell you
what He is doing, He is preparing a Coffin to put Julian in. So it came to
pass, there came an Arrow from Heaven that shot cut his Bowels, he cried out O
Galilean, Thou have overcome me, Thou have overcome me. It is reported
concerning Maximilian, another Emperor, that was a great Persecutor and a great
Enemy of Christ, Lactantius and others say, that Man had a strange Vision, he
thought he saw Christ sitting on a Throne, he cried out, O Christ have Mercy on
me, O Jesus Christ pity me, and died in dreadful despair. This is according to
the Scripture, Rev. 6. 15, 16. Great men, Kings, Captains, Mighty men, they
cried to the Rocks to fall on them, to the Mountains to hide them from the face
of him that ^itte^h on the Throne and from the wrath of the Lamb, for the Great
day of his wrath is come and who shall be able to stand.

USE IV. I suppose this will be the last time that I shall be Capable of
Speaking to you in the Name of the Lord. And I have therefore chosen this
Subject because I am desirous to leave you and all the World Preaching Christ
among you. Oh! Let us all make sure that we be of th^se that shall One Day see
the Glory of Christ to our Unspeakable Joy and C^nso^ation. We shall see
theGlory ofChrist, there is not one Soul, not one Man nor Woman in this
Assembly but the Day is hastening that they shall see the Glory of the Lord
Jesus Christ, When he shall come the Second time, he will come in Glory, and He
will sit on the Throne of His Glory, and Every Eye shall see him, ye^ they that
have Crucified ^im, shall see him, Ah, but little to their Joy, to their
Comfort, they shall see Him and be full of Confusion at the sight of that
terrible Glory wherein He shall appear to them (...) the Last Day. But what
shall we do that we may* see Him with Joy, with Consolation? I say to you only
one word that has been said many a time, you must make sure of True Faith in
Christ, that has been often pressed upon you, Make sure of True Faith in
Christ, that will make the Day of Christ to be a Joyful day to you indeed: But
the difficulty is for a Man to know whether his Faith be True or no. To make
sure of that consider, That Life or Death depends upon this one thing, that
your Faith be True. For indeed the greatest part of Men that call them^^lves
Christians are deceived, they think they have Faith when they have not. I am
persuaded there is scarce a Man in this Assembly, that should I come to you one
by one, and ask, do you Believe in Jesus Christ? he will say, yes; do you think
I am a Turk, or a Jew. But is your Faith a True Faith, does your Faith work by
Love. If a Man has True Faith he Loves Christ more than any Creature in this
World, yea, more than his own Life. A Man that has True Faith will readily part
with his Life at the Command of the Lord Jesus Christ. Christ has said, and
wont you believe His Word. Luke 14.26. If he do not hate his Life in
comparison; that if Christ should call him to part with his Life he will
readily do it, Faith that thus works by Love, is True Faith, therefore make
sure of that. One thing more, for Consolation to Believers, They shall not
tarry till the Day of Judgment to behold the Glory of Christ, but shall
presently upon their Death be with Christ to behold His Glory. Being absent
from the Body, they are present with the Lord. The Soul of the True Believer is
no sooner absent from the Body, but Holy Angels carry him into the presence of
the Lord Jesus Christ, into Unspeakable Glory and Happiness, this is what
Christ has prayed for on their behalf, Joh. 17. 24. Father, I will that they
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am to behold my Glory. Amen, Dear
Lord, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.

