Some Important TRUTHS ABOUT Conversion, Delivered in sundry SERMONS,

By Increase Mather, D. D. Teacher of a Church at Boston, in New England

With a Praeface by Dr Owen. The Second Edition.

Zech. 1.5.6. Your Fathers, Where are they? and the Prophets, Do they live for
ever?

But my Words and my Statutes which I commanded my Servants the Prophets, did
they not take hold of your Fathers?

Joh. 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them.

London Printed. 1674. Boston, in N. E. Reprinted by John Aller, for John
Edwards, at his Shop at the Head of Kingstreet. 1721.

The CONTENTS.
I. THat a sound and through Conversion is of absolute necessity in order to
the Souls enterence into the Kingdom of Heaven. II. That they that live
unprofitably under the Gospel are in a very dangerous condition. III. That it
is the great Intrest of men to hear and open to Christ, when he knocks at the
door of their Souls. IV. That some Sinners are so given over by God, as that
his holy Spirit does for ever cease striving with them. V. That seasons of
Grace are timely to be Improved and Redeemed. VI. That the number of those that
shall obtain Eternal Life, being compared with those that walk in the way to
destruction, is but a small number. VII. That Christians ought to work out the^
own Salvation, and that with fear an^ trembling.
To the READER.
THe Subject Matter of the ensuing Discourse is represented summarily in the
foregoing Contents. And a little comparing of the Heads proposed to be handled,
with the state of things amongst the generality of them who are called
Christians in the World, will sufficiently evidence the seasonableness of
managing such a Design, or publishing Discourses of this nature. Wherefore the
things treated of being such, as at first view will extort an acknowledment
from all persons not under the power of avowed Atheism, that they are of the
greatest Importance; the open Presumptions and Security of the minds of many
under the present decays of Light and Truth, both in their Power and
Dispensation, rendering their proposal and pressing on the Consciences of men,
both seasonable and necessary; there is nothing further to be considered about
them; but only how the Author of this Treatise has aquitted and discharged
himself in the management of his Design: This by an unexpected Providence in
the Death of a worthy Person who furthered the Publication of it, is required
of me, with an Importunity which I could not withstand, to deliver my thoughts
unto. For although the Treatise be such in the whole, and all the parts of it,
as needs no Recommendation of mine, nor of others though of more weight and
Authority than in any thing I pretend unto, nor perhaps will any thing that I
can say contribute much unto its esteem with others; Yet out of that respect
which I bear to the worthy Author, in that great distance from us wherein the
Providence of God has fixed his station in's Church and the World, I was not
unwilling in a few words to declare my Judgment of his Labor in this matter,
if so be it might prove a means to further the reception and usefullness of it
in the World. The Apostolical Rule is, that in Doctrine the Ministers of the
Word should show Uncorruptness, Gravity, Sincerity, sound Speech that cannot be
condemned. And I think I may say without offense, submiting my Judgment unto
that of other Readers, that I have not seen many Treatises of this nature,
wherein that Rule has been more diligently attended unto. Whatsoever else the
Author aimed at, it is evident that plainness, perspicuity, gravity in
delivering the Truth, were continually in his eye; nor has he come short of
attaining his Design. And whereas it is kown unto all, unto whom he is known,
that he is a person of singular good Learning and Reading, he has in this
Discourse andoned all Addit^onal Ornaments whatsoever, betaking himself alone
unto the Exercise of a sound Judgment and Spiritual Wisdom, in giving Evidence
and Authority to be* Truth, over the Consciences of all who are concerned in
these things. And as these are the principal, if not the only things, which in
such an endeavor are to be attended unto; so the particular Applications that
are made herein of the Truths solidly before confirmed, unto the Conscinces of
Men and the Occasions of Life, are such as will discover the Author a Workmam
that needs not to be ashamed. Wherefore the whole Discourse being, as to the
Subject Matter of it, of the greatest importance, as to the Time of its
publishing seasonable, from the present Circumstances and peculiar Temptations
of the Age wherein we live; the Confirmation of the special Truths insisted on
stable and solid; the manner of Teaching and Instruction observed throughout,
being suited unto the condition and capacity of those who are most nearly
concerned in it; I do steadfastly hope that it will, and shall earnestly pray
that it may, every may answer the Design of the worthy Author in an effectual
Tendency unto the Glory of God, and the Good of the Souls of Men.

John Owen.

To the Second Church and Congregation at Boston in New England.
Grace and Peace from God by Jesus Christ.
THE holy Apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ, although they were sent forth,
with a largeness and fullness of Power, (their Commission extending it self as
far as every Creature, that is, every Man, (for the Hebrews were wont to call
Man by that name of Creature) or men of all sorts, and in all places; the Lord
having said to them, Go ye into all the World and Preach the Gospel to every
Creature: he that believes and is baptized, shall be s^ved; but he that
believes not, shall be damned:) Nevertheless it is evident not only from those
that write the Lives and Travles of the Apostles, but also from the sacred
Scriptures, that they did by mutual Consent, divide the World among themselves,
each taking a several part thereof, as h^s more special Charge. Hence is that
Rule, Line, Measures, which we read of 2 Cor. 10.14, 15, 16. intimating that
those that were invested with Apostolical Authority, yet had one this, and
another that portion of the World, measured out as his more peculiar. Allotment
to Travel and Labor in John's more peculiar Charge was in the lesser Asia;
Paul takes the Gentiles, and Peter the Jewish World before him, Gal 2.7, 8, 9.
Accordingly we find them not only by word, but also by Epistle, specially
endeavoring the good of those amongst whom their appropriated charge lay. John
does by the Commandment of Christ write to the seven Asiatick Churches. Paul
directs most of his Epistles to believing Gentiles. Peter being Conversant in
Babylon (which was says Scaligar Asianae metroplis) does from thence write to
the dispersed Jews whose welfare (above others) he did seek to promote. And
this last mentioned Apostle does in his second Epistle, not only say, I will
not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things, though you
knew them, and be established in the present truth; yea, I think it meet as
long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir you up by putting you in remembrance.
But he does moreover add. I will endeavor, that after my decease you may be
able to have always these things in remembrance. For both which he gives the
reason knowing that shorty I must put off this my Tabernacles This Apostolical
Practice is (and should be), a sufficient inducement to Ordinary Ministers,
faithfully to endeavor the good (indeed, as there shall be opportunity, of all
men but especially) of their peculiar Flocks, and Charges. This consideration
then has caused me first to preach and now to publish the ensuing discourses
(such as they be) for your sakes. And this I do the rather, because (though I
cannot say with the Apostle, I know, as not having had such a Revelation as he
there speaks of, yet I can truly say, I have had many serious thoughts, and
expectations of it that I must and that very shortly too put off this my
Tabernacle. For albeit I am through the Mercy of God still in present health; and
my days are not such, but that according to the ordinary Course of nature I
might continue many years among you; yet some things; there are, which cause me
to expect otherwise. I must needs take notice of that which is the Observation
of every one, viz. That the Lord of late years is calling home, his poor
Ambassadors one of New England apace both old and young. And it is known unto
you all, that God has come very near unto me, by taking from me* Father and
Brother, both which were employed in the same Minis^^^, which be (...) ^o^e
s^fed to put me (the least (...), yea and since (...) his (...) upon my person
in (...) a brought me (...) d^^th* as that both you and I, we dispaired of
Life. But it having pleased the prayer hearing God who raises the dead, to
remove that Sentence of death which I had in my self, and to restore me to you
again, how should I not by the providence mentioned be awakened my self (and
endeavor to awaken others) to make have to finish the work which upon the earth
the Lord has given me to do; and therefore by all means (wherein I may) labor
to promote the S^lvation of you, whose Everlasting weal (above others) I ought
to seek after? If that may in any measure be the effect of this publication, my
End is attained. Some of Christ's Words after his death were more effectual
than in his life; so it often falls out with the Words of his poor Servants.
Hence (says that man of God sometimes famous amongst us) I have desired to sow
Seed; both by Pen and Tongue, both present and absent, alive and dead, not
knowing whether shall prevail most, either this or that, or whether they both
should be alike good.

I cannot commend these Sermons to you from the manner wherewith the truth is
managed, or from anything of mine which does attend them. I can indeed say that
I have aimed at brevity and perspicuity (which dom are seen together) yet as
there is nothing that ever I did in my life, but I have cause be ashamed of it,
in respect of the many and great Infirmities adhering to what I have done; so
in particular as to what is here presented to you. Yet (I say though the
management of those discourses, be exceeding weak, imperfect, and sinful, so
far as there is an thing of mine therein; Nevertheless the Truths themselves
which are here handled, are such as do command all your Attentions. This
Consideration also was it, that prevailed with me to publish what is now in
your hands. When I considered, that the World has too man's Books in it
already, and that of making many Books there is no end, some discouragement
tell upon me; but withal remembering that there is not a superfluity of these
Books, (of which the more the better, is one well speaks, when Husbandmen
complain of too much Corn, then let Christians complain of too many such Books)
which being wholly practical and about things that do concern the power of
Godliness, speak to the life of Religion, I was again animated to cast this
M^te into the Lord's Treasury. For sure I am there are none amongst you, but
these things are of high concernment to you.

There are two (and but two) sorts of M^n and Women amongst you. Some of you
(and through grace many of you) are brought out of the miserable estate of Sin
and Nature, truly to close with Jesus Christ, and with God in him; to you I
would commend what is here concerning working out your Salvation, and
concerning these renewed and second Conversions, which even Christ's own
Disciples may stand in need of.

Others of you (and to speak the truth plainly to you) by far the greatest part
of you, (the more is my grief) amongst whom I have for thus many years been
preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, are to this day in a natural iregenerate
estate; Do you consider what is here said concerning the absolute necessity of
a true Conversion unto God in Christ, and the exceeding danger of living
unprofitably under the means of Grace, and that God's Spirit may soon give you
over and then you are undone. Yea let all of you consider and remember, that
Christ knocks at your doors; and that precious time should be redeemed, and
that strait is the Gate and narrow is the Way, which leads unto life, and few
there be that find it.

And as the sense of my own mortality drew me both to publish and preach these
Sermons; so likewise the same thing causes me at this time, and in this way to
speak a few solomn words to you, and to leave them upon Record among you.

The first word that I would say to you is this, for that little time which I
shall continue with you, let me have the help of your fervent and constant
Prayers. I believe you will all acknowledge, that my closing with your desires
(which I withstood for diverse years together) in coming under that dreadful
bond of Office-Relation, was the return and answer of your Prayers, yea of your
extraordinary Seekings unto God about that matter; and I doubt not but you will
all lay, that my being delivered from so great a death as that which above two
years ago I was under the Sentence of, is also an Evidence that God has heard
your Prayers: Now then the experience of the power which your Prayers have with
God as it does encourage me to desire them, so let it engage you to continue
them. See then (for it is your duty so to do) that whenever you fall upon your
knees in your Closets to pray for your own Souls, that you bear me upon your
hearts and make particular mention of my poor name before the Lord: what shall
I say unto you? I might tell you that equity requires this at your hands; for
God is witness, and day and night sees it, that I am mindful of you before the
throne of grace, and that almost in every Prayer of mine. And I might say to
you, that if you grant my request herein the benefit will be your own, All
things are yours; my Gifts (such weak ones as they are) my Time, my Studies,
all of them are yours, who are my dearly beloved, and your Salvation longed
for. If Christ fill me, I shall be the better able to give out to you. The more
of the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit that a Minister does receive from above,
the better it is for them that wait upon his Ministry. Therefore deny me not if
you expect your own Spiritual Welfare. But I will say moreover, that I need
your Prayers; and therefore let me have them. You see and cannot but be
sensible of the state of the Lord's poor New England People; Our Prophets and
our Fathers where are they? It is sad, but so it is, New England has of late
been a grave of God's Ambassadors. Therefore those few that yet survive, need
so much the more the help of the Prayers of God's praying people; Paul's are
departed, pray then for Timothies, Daniels are gone to rest, pray then for
Haggai's and Zacharies, that do succeed; Moses's are dead, pray that the Lord
would take of the Spirit which was i^ Moses, and put it upon the Elders of
Israel; Elijahs are taken up; pray then that the Lord Spirit may be doubled
upon succeeding etc surviving Elishaes, and in special upon him that now
speaks to you, who is the least among all the Lord's Servants, and not worthy
to be called a Minister of Christ. All the Lord's Ministers need your Prayers,
but none so much as he that is now writing to you, as being circumstanced with
difficulties and temptations, which you little think of (but blessed be God
that Christ sees them) above others. I have heard concerning blessed
Borroughs, that if any one came to visit him, after expression of civil
courtesies he would soon say to them, have you any business with me? if you have
let me hear it if not, be not troubled at me but hold me excused, that I desire
to retire to my study, for I have much work to do, and but a little time to do
it in. Truly so it is with me, therefore I greatly need and earnestly desire,
the continual Prayers ^f every Man and Woman amongst you that fears God, or
that knows what it is to pray. That great Apostle even blessed Paul not only
in one but in all his Epistles, desires the Prayers of Saints for himself. How
much more do Ordinary Ministers stand in need thereof. And know for your
Encouragement, that you may b^ your Prayers be a means to lengthen o^^ the
liberties, healths, lives of your Minister^ as the examples of Paul and Peter
do make ^ manifest, Phil 1.19. Philem 2.2. Acts 1 ^ 5. Heb 13.18, 39.

Secondly, See that you stand fast in the Fa^^ and Order of the Gospel.
Remember therefore what you have been taught; and h^^ fast the things which
from Scripture y^^ have received, and been instructed in (...) only in these
poor Sermons but in ma^^ other. You know that in former years ^ have (according
to the measure of Gr^^ received) weakly discoursed and gone ov^^ the first part
of the body of Divinity, or ^ doctrine of Godliness; wherein you were
^^structed, concerning the Nature and Attributes of God, the Misery of man by
the fall, and the Redemption of Christ, whose Person, Natuers, Office,
Humiliation and Exaltation, have been largely opened and applied amongst ^ou,
of these things you have heard some ^undred of Sermons. And since my being
^estored to you ( as God has enabled) I ^ave gone over that Platform or Rule
of ^rayer which Christ has given to his Disciples, and those eight Characters
whereby the Lord has described a truly blessed man; and the parable of the
Wise and Foolish ^^ilders; and the parable of the Sower, etc. ^ beseech you let
not these things altogether ^ye with me. Nor think it much if I tell ^ou, that
if either you remain ignorant of ^^e Truth, or hereafter depart from the ^ruths
you have known, the words which ^^ve been spoken to you, will be a witness
^^ainst you at the Last Day. But especially ^ speak this because I fear there
is a Tempta^^on coming upon New England, wherein ^^en shall be tried with false
Teachers, whom God in his just and dreadful Providence, will send to punish the
Contempt of ^^s Gospel. In my public Ministry I have sometimes said to you,
that it is most certain that there is a dark time coming on New England; dismal
calamitous days are at ^^nd. The Scripture which proves it is that Isa. 57.1.
The righteous is gathered before the evil to come: was it ever known in any age
of the World, that God gathered many eminently righteous men at once (as with
us it has been) into his Heavenly barn, but a sad storm was at hand? And I am
verily afraid that this which I am now mentioning, together with the miserable
attendancies of such a Calamity, is (at least part of) the evil that is a
coming. We know from the Scripture that the death or departure of the Lord's
eminent Servants is wont to be a prognostic of Corruption in Religion, Deu.
13.29. Acts 9.29, 30. Again, when the Lord's faithful Ministers have been
undervalued and discouraged, God is wont to punish such a people with false
Teachers It is Luther's observation on Gal. 6.6. that the reason God afflicted
the Churches in Galatia, the Church at Corinth, etc. with false Apostles, was
because they were guilty of neglect toward their faithful Teachers. When the
Jews rejected the true Messiah, God punished them by sending false Christ's
amongst them; so when faithful and able Teachers are not so encouraged in the
Lord's work, as it ought to be, the Lord a judicial dispensation sends unto
such a people, ignorant, or profane, or seducing Spirits, that he so may take
revenge for the Contempt of his Grace offered in the Gospel. Now if ever this
were the sin of a professing people, it has been the sin of New England.
Besides all this it is a sad Truth, that a Spirit of division is a foreruner of
Apostasy and Corruption in Religion, as the Scripture plainly intimates, 1
Cor. 11.18, 19. I hear says the Apostle, that there are divisions amongst you
and I partly believe it, Now mark his Reason, For there must be also Heresies
amongst you. A Spirit of division is a Prognostic of a Spirit of Heresy,
therefore, says he, in as much as there must be Heresies, I am apt to think
that the report about your divisions is true. Hence also another Apostle, when
he is mentioning preservatives against the infection of error and Heresy,
says, keep your selves in the love of God, Jude 21. because that divine grace
of Love is a notable means to preserve us from the prevailing power of a Spirit
of error and delusion; and breaches of the Royal Law of Love are usually
punished with this forest Judgment. Now alas the world rings with our
divisions. Many are the breaches of the City of David, which is one of the
saddest Symptoms that can be; that this Calamity is approaching which you have
been warned of. These things I have spoken to you more largely in my Public
Ministry; yet I thought it not amiss here again to mention them that so they
might not be forgotten. Paul said to his Philippians, To write the same things
(which have been preached) to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but for you it
is safe. And I am persuaded one Reason why the Church at Ephesus was so
vigilant and zealous against false Teachers, was, because Paul had beforehand
told them, that they should be tried with this Temptation, Rev. 2.2. with Acts
20.29. Now then being forewarned be forearmed also. And to that end let me add
a third word which is this, when the Lord has removed from you your present
Teachers, see that you carry it with respect to the Ministry of the word as
ought to be. Do not think it safe for your Souls to Live without Ministry and
Ordinances, which Christ will have to be, and to continue in his Church even
unto his Second Coming, Matthew. 28.28. 1. Cor. 11.26. Ephesians. 4.12, 13. Nor may you
think that every Christian is fit for this work, for which who is sufficient?
2. Cor. 2.16. An Interpreter must be one of a Thousand, Job. 33.23. Know
therefore that humane Learning (as it is commonly termed) is very useful and
needful for one that would approve himself an able Minister of the New
Testament. How shall a man be able argumentatively to convince the Subtle
Adversaries of the truth without this; which yet is the necessary qualification
of every Scripture-Bishop? Tit. 1 9. How shall Scriptures hard to be understood
he opened without this help? 2. Pet. 3.16. Indeed extraordinary Officers were
not always fitted for their work by a precedent education, but as they were
suddenly and extraordinarily called unto the Lord's work, so they were suddenly
and miraculously gifted thereunto. But search the Scriptures and you will find
that Ordinary Teachers in the Church were ever fitted for that great work of
Teaching the Lord's people by a learned Education. There were in the
Old Testament Church, not only Extraordinary but ordinary Prophets. Hence Am^s
says, chap. 7.14. I was no Prophet. He was an Extraordinary Prophet, but
therefore his meaning is that he was no ordinary Prophet: whence he adds
neither was I a Prophet's Son, meaning that he was not educated in the School
of the Prophets; for those are frequently styled the Sons of the Prophets, who
were not their natural Sons, but their disciples or Scholars, being diligently
instructed in the Law of God, that so they might be fit to Interpret the same
to others. Hence were the appellations of Nazarites, Scribes, Pharisees,
Lawyers, etc. All which name^ were at first honorable among the Lord's Ancient
People till they did by degeneracy from their primitive Institution become
odious; Amos 2.11. Ezr. 7.6. Mat. 13 52. and 23.34. Mal. 2.8, 9. And as for the
New Testament Church, the Teachers therein have all along been Learned Men.
Albeit, as for the Apostles, Christ found most of them very unlearned, when he
first called them, yet he would not suffer them to continue so, but would
rather work a Miracle Miracle to make them understand the tongues, than that
they should be unlearned still. Yea the truth is, that there never was any man
eminently serviceable as a Teacher in the Church since the Apostles, except he
were a Learned man. Ancient (Fathers as they were called) who defended the
Truth against the Heathen Philosophers and the Heretics of those times, such
as Justin Martyr, Cyprian Austin, Hierom, etc. were Learned men: And had some
of them had more Learning in the Original Languages, it had been better for
them, and for the Church of God; for thereby many a misinterpretaion of the
Scripture would have been prevented. And as for the great Instruments of
Reformation and opposers of Antichristianism, such as Calvin, Luther,
Malancton, Zwinglius, etc. they were all of them very Learned men; wherefore
believe not those that would persuade you; that Schools of Learning, Colleges
etc. are Antichristianism, or late Popish Inventions. Does not the Scripture,
before ever Popery was thought of, inform us of Schools of Learning? Do we not
read of the School of Tyrannus, where Paul was once a Disputant, Acts 19.9? and
does not the Old Testament speak of Masters and Scholars, Mal. 2.12. 2. Chron.
25.8. yea of Colleges. 2. King. 22.14. and in other places? The Jews also tell
us of 3 famous Universities erected by their Fathers in Babylon, that so
Religion might be preserved among them. Ecclesiastical story informs us that
great care was taken by the Apostles and their Successors in the primitive
times for the settling of Schools of Learning in all places, where Churches
were planted, that so the Truth might be propagated to Succeeding Generations;
Magd. Cent. 2. c. 7. and 3. Chap. 7. And it is worthy the taking notice of,
that the Interest of Religion and good Learning, have fallen together; the
fourth and fifth Centuries, are called the Learned ages; and then did Religion
Flourish more than afterward: but when Popish darkness overspread the world,
almost all good Learning was lost with Religion. But when the light of the
Gospel did again break forth, about the same time did the Lord in his good
Providence revive the knowledge of Tongues and Arts. Hence the enemies of true
Religion have been enemies of Learning. Some have observed that Jeroboam that
so he might carry on his design of Corrupting Religion, did put down the
Schools of Learning that were erected in the Land of Israel, which Elijah and
Elisha did again restore. Julian the Apostate, that so he might root out the
Christian Religion, destroyed all Public Schools of Learn^ng amongst
Christians. Some of ^he Popes have been great enemies to Academies and good
Literature. And so are the Turks, because the light thereof would be a means to
discover and scatter the falsity of their dark Religion. It concerns Impostors
to keep their Shops dark, that so they may the more easily put off their
deceitful wares. The Jesuits in their private Instructions, lately discovered
and published, Chap* 16. have this for one, we must teach that Learning is
needless in a Parish Priest (so they Jewishly term a Minister of the
New Testament) and that if they understand the Gospel it is sufficient. These
subtle Spirits of Devils, as John calls them, know full well, that if they
could bring it to pass; that there should be no Learned men to oppose them, the
World would soon be theirs. But concerning this point you may satisfy your
Consciences by reading discourses on this Argument, such as Mr. Chauncie's
Sermon on Amos 2.11. Mr. Waterhouse's Apology for humane Learning; and
especially Mr Reyners godly and elaborate discourse concerning the necessity of
Humane Learning for a Gospel-preacher; And Mr. Gale's Court of the Gentiles,
here it is proved that humane Literature has received its Original from the
Scriptures, and from the Jewish Church. I would not have said so much to you
about this matter had there not been some special Cause for it. Let me further
add. Look not upon gifts only in your Choice, but respect in a peculia^ manner,
that regenerating grace, whereby gifts are sanctified; It is needful that
gravity, humility, and the fear of the Lord should be conspicuous in such,
whose Relation ingageth them to be in word and in Conversation, an Example not
only to the World, but even of believers themselves.

And when the Lord gives you such as are Pastors after his own heart, feeding
you with knowledge and understanding, see that you encourage them in the Lord's
work, and grieve them not, for that will be unprofitable for you; you may
quench the Lord's Spirit in them by grieving their Spirits. What a thousand
pities is it, that when the Lord has raised up men of rare parts and choice
Spirits filling them with Heavenly Treasure, that they should have their hearts
broken, and be bro't to the grave with Sorrow? I speak not for my self,
Brethren; For as for me, I deserve that nothing else but necessities,
distresses, discouragements, reproaches, slanders, should be my portion,
because I am the chief of Sinners; But I beseech you, let not others who are
men of God, and Servants of Jesus Christ, I say, let not God^s m^n and Christ's
Servants be so dealt with, lest the^r M^ster who has said, he that despises
you, despise^h me, see i^ and be disp^eased: Verily at whose hands soever the
Lord Bear with such thing in New England Professors: He will not be^^ with it.

One Word more let me leave with you, It is this; R^m makes you must give an
account another d^ty for all the m^ans of grace which have any way been
^o^^hs^^^ed to you. All these m^ns which have been preached to you whether by
others of the Lord's faithful Servants, or by me, who am the weakest Creature
and the greatest sinner, that ever sp^^k^ to you in the name of the Lord, yet
you must be accountable for them all at the Last and and Great Day, yea and for
Books also. There will be a Reckoning come for Talents of all sorts Now Good
Books are precious Talents. They are a fruit of the purchase of Christ's blood.
And it is God does raise up and gift his Servants, for writing as well as
speaking; yea* and by a secret work of his Spirit inclines their hearts
thereunto. Although* this work, if done as it should be requires much study
which is weariness to the Flesh; yet God makes his Servants willing to undergo
this trouble and labor for his peoples sake: And therefore he will surely call
men to an account, about the improvement of these Talents. You complain
sometimes of your unprofitable hearing (and you do well to complain of it) But
have you not cause to complain, and mourn for your unprofitable Reading? One
Dedicating a Book to another, well says, That Books are a testimony likely to
be produced in the day of Judgment against the persons to whom they are
inscribed, in Case there be any defection either in Judgment or manners from
the Truths therein contained. I shall add no more at present. Some other things
concerning Christ and Heaven. I would fain leave with you. However that shall
be, I am not altogether without hope, but that these poor Labors shall be
blessed, for the Spiritual and eternal good of some of God's Chosen, both while
I am here, and after I shall cease to be in this World.

I pray you Remember, That these truths were spoken to you, by one whom God
brought out of his grave in purpose, that so he might declare these things to
you. So I commend you to the Word of his Grace which is able to build you up*
and to give you an Inheritance amongst all them who are sanctified.

I Rest, Your Loving (though unworthy) Teacher INCREASE MATHER.
From my Study in Boston, in New England, the 13 day of the 4th Month. 1674.
A Sound and through Conversion, is of absolute necessity in order to the Souls
entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Math. 18.3. Verily, I say unto you, Except you be converted, and become as
little children, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.


THese words were spoken by the Lord Jesus Christ; the occasion of them we may
see in the first Verse of the Chapter; viz. An ambitious Enquiry amongst the
Disciples, which of them should be the greatest man, or have the greatest
Dominion in the heavenly Kingdom of Christ: The Lord tells them in this Verse,
that such Ambition was not the way to Heaven; but on the contrary, that if it
did continu^ (...) mortified, it would surely exclude them out of that Kingdom.

In the words we may take notice of three things: 1. The main Truth which is
here affirmed, sc. That Conversion is of absolute necessity, in order to
obtaining the Kingdom of Heaven, Except there be Conversion, or (which
explaineth the other) except there be a becoming as little children, even a
Regeneration, and beginning the world anew, as it were, except there be this,
there shall be no entering into the Kingdom of Heaven. 2. We have here the
Persons unto whom this was spoken so the Disciples of Christ; Except [you] my
own Disciples be converted, I say to [you] that [ye] shall nor enter: Not but
that they were converted already; yet this may well be spoken, even to
converted persons, thereby to convince them further of the necessity of that
Conversion which they had already attained. Also, because though they were
converted in respect of their state, yet they stood in need of a further
Conversion in respect of a particular will, which they were too much unle^^ the
present prevailing power of. And this shows, that all men whatsoever are
concerned in the truth delivered: For if it be true concerning Disciples of
Christ, that they must be either Converted, or not saved, certainly this is
true, concerning all other men. 3. We have here the manner of the expression.
This Truth is not barely affirmed, but with a Verily; Christ does not only say,
but pronounces it with a Verily, saying, Verily, except you be converted, you
shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; which notes both the certainty and
the solemnity of the thing expressed. This word [ Verily] was frequently used
by Christ, yet never but when there was some weighty and solemn Truth affirmed
by him. The Doctrine therefore which we shall (by the Lords assistance) speak
unto from the words, is, That it is a most certain and weighty Truth, that a
sound, through Conversion is of absolute necessity, in order to the Souls
entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven.

In the Doctrinal prosecution of this point, we shall attend two things, First
we shall lay down some Propositions for clearing and opening the Truth about
Conversion. Secondly, we shall demonstrate the Truth by Argument.

^ The Explication of the Truth, may be set before us in sundry Propositions.

Prop. 1. God is the principal Cause and Author of that Conversion which is
here spoken of. The The words indeed may be rendered, Except you Convert; but
this shaveth rather man's duty, than his power to Convert himself; I say, God
and not man is the principal Cause of this work. Hence converted persons are
said to be born of God, and not of man; because not man, but God alone is the
Author of Regeneration, John 1 13. therefore it was that Ephraim braved, Turn
thou me, and I shall be turned, Jer. 31.18. as if he had said, Except the Lord
turn me, the work will never be done. And God does this by his holy Spirit,
therefore a converted person is said to be born of the Spirit, John 3.6. and,
born after the Spirit, Gal. 4.29 And the Spirit of God is called, the Spirit of
Grace, Heb. 10.29 because all Grace, and especially Converting-Grace, is from
him: The truth is, that as Conversion is taken for the infusing of a new
Principle of Saving Grace into the Soul; so men are altogether passive in their
Conversion, and the Eternal Spirit is the only principal Agent therein. Hence
Conversion is called, a new begetting, 1 Pet. 1.3. Now in begetting, the thing
begotton is no^ act ^e^ ou^ w^olly passive: And it is called, a R^surrection,
or quickening of a dead person, Ephesians. 2.1. John. 5.24, 25. Has a dead man
power to raise himself out of his grave, or is it in the power of men or
Creatures to quicken those that are dead? much more may we say thus as to dead
Souls, that are buried in a grave of sin, guilt and misery: Yea, in Converting
a Soul, there is a Converting-power put forth, Col. 3.10. which shows both
that the Soul is passive in this work; and also that it is above the power of
men or creatures to accomplish. Creation is a bringing of something out of
nothing: Now in as much, as there is a kind of an Infinite distance between
Being and No-being; therefore an Infinite power is required, to produce a work
of Creation. So it is in Conversion. Nay, that is harder than mere Creation:
because in the first Creation there was no opposition: But now when God enters
upon this work of the new and second Creation, there is whatever resistance
all the powers of Darkness can make against him. Look, as it is an easier
matter to make a new Glass, then to mend a broken one; so it is easier to
create a new Soul, than by Conversion as it were, to make anew the broken,
ruined Souls of men.

Propos. II. The word of God is the instrumental means of Conversion, Jam.
1.18. Of his own will begat he us, with the word of truth. God is (as said) the
principal Cause, but the Word of truth is the Instrument and Mean in the hand
of the Spirit, whereby this mighty and astonishing work is brought to pass,
Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the Soul. The Word of
the Law, strictly taken, is partly Instrumental and Influential to the Souls
Conversion. For thereby is Conviction of sin and misery, Romans 3.20. By the Law
is the knowledge of sin. If a man comes to see and acknowledge himself to be a
sinful and miserable Transgressor, this Conviction is by means of the Law. The
Ceremonial Law was a plain conviction and evidence of the guilt of sin. Hence
it is called the Handwriting that is against us, Col 2.14. because it was, as
it were, a Bill of Indictment against the Observers of it: The Jews when they
observed Circumcision, did thereby confess themselves guilty of Original sin,
which is the sin of Nature; and when they offered any Sacrifice, they did
thereby acknowledge, that they deserved to be dealt with, as they did unto that
Creature which was sacrificed by them yea, to be made Eternal Sacrifices to;
Infinite Justice. And the Moral Law does convince of sin When that in the holy
nature and Exact purity of it, is brought home to the Soul, Conscience is
convinced and awakned thereby, with the sense of Transgression and guilt. Hence
the Apostle says Romans 7.9. I was alive without the Law once: He speaks of
what he was, in his natural unconverted estate; before the Law was effectually
brought home to his heart, he was alive in his own conceit; But when the
Commandment came, I dyed; when God set the Law, in the spiritual nature of it
before him, then his Conscience was touched indeed, that he saw himself to be
by nature, no better then a dead and damned creature: Now Conviction of sin is
the way, and indeed the first step toward Conversion. But especially the Word
of the Gospel is the great means of Conversion: Hence it is called, The
Ministration of the Spirit, and of life, 2 Cor. 13.6. because it is the means
by which Spiritual life is conveyed to the Elect. The Law without the Gospel
will never Convert: Hence men that have been strangers to the Gospel, have been
unacquainted with the Mystery of Conversion, all their knowledge in the Law
notwithstanding. The Gentiles, notwithstanding the Internal-Law written in the
heart; and the Jews, notwithstanding their knowledge of the External-Law, yet
were strangers to true Conversion, because they knew not the Gospel in the
power of it. The Law without the Gospel, will but drive to despair, and so set
the sinner further off from God, but will never bring him home to God again: It
is also true, that God does many times bless Providence, Afflictions
especially, to help forward the Conversion of his Elect; but that is, by
causing them thereby to mind and remember what the Word says, Affliction
makes a sinner to think of Christ. But how came he to hear of a Christ, or to
know that any help is to be had for his Soul? This knowledge is by the Gospel;
so that still it remains true, that the Word is the principal Means of
Conversion.

Propo. III. In true Conversion, the Soul is turned from Saten, the World, Sin
and Self. In all changes, there is the term from which the change is: Now the
Proposition is expressive of the term from which the change in conversion is
wrought. There are four particulars comprehended under this; we shall briefly
touch upon each of them as we go along: 1. The converted Soul is turned from
Satan; therefore when Paul was Instrumental toward the Conversion of the
Gentiles, he is said to turn them from the power of Satan, Acts 26.18. and when
the Disciples were sent forth to preach the Gospel, and thereby to Convert the
World, Satan is said to fall before them, Luke 10.18 Conversion is the same
with effectual Vocation: Now in Vocation, the term from which the Soul is
called, is Satan's Kingdom, 1 Pet. 2.9. He has called you out of darkness;
namely, out of the dark Kingdom of Satan. 2. From the World; therefore Christ
said to his Disciples after their Conversion, Ye are not of the World, I have
chosen you out of the World, John 15.19. Sin does carry away the Soul from God
to the Creature; but now in Conversion, it is taken off from the Creature
again; as we see in David, Psalm. 119.96 I have seen an end of all perfection:
His heart was taken off from the Creature, so as he did not look for his
happiness there. The like we see in converted Paul, Gal. 6.14. I am crucified
to the World, and the World unto me. The World was as a dead object before his
eyes, which is unlovely and undesirable 3. From Sin: Often in Scripture,
Conversion is called, turning from sin, Isa. 59.20. Jer. 26.3. and a breaking
off from sin, Dan. 4.27. and a casting away transgression, Ezekiel. 18.31. Isa.
31.7. yea, it is a turning from all sin, Ezekiel. 18.21, 30. Herein especially
Conversion does consist, namely, in a tr^de turning from sin; that is, when the
life (...) heart is thoroughly divorced from every false (...) evil way. Men may
confess sin yet if they do not forsake it, this is no Conversion. Prove. 28.13.
They may forsake sin (...) their lives, yet if there be a love and l^^^ing unto
any lust in the heart, there is (...) true Conversion. But of this more
aft^^wards. 4. The Converted man is turn^^^ from Self also; This is the first,
and inde^^ one of the hardest Lessons in Christianity ^ that a man must deny
himself, Matthew. 1^ 24. A Natural man, makes not only the World, but Self his
God. He makes himself his own Last end: He lives to himself; but the
Converted man does not s^* Herein is a main matter in Conversion* and that
wherein the truth of the work, i^ discerned: namely, when the sinner is indeed
unbottomed from Self, especially from righteous Self: and Conversion does imply
a work of Humiliation, which is that where by the Soul is taken off from
resting it righteous Self: Some there are that attain unto a seeming, and as it
were, an half Conversion, but here they stick and perish: they do in part
forsake the World and sin, but then they go to duties and righteousness of
their own: But in true Conversion, the ^oul is taken off from this bottom also.
^ence Paul, after his Conversion, could ^y, not having my own righteousness,
Phil 3. (...) He did re^ounce all that was his own; not only his own Sins, or
his own Will, or his own Relations, so far as they stood in ^^^position to
Christ, but his own Righteousness and all.

Propo. IV. In true Conversion, the Soul (...) turned to God in Christ. In all
changes ^here is the term to which, as well as the ^erm from which the change
is. Thus in ^onversion, the former Proposition was ^^pressive of the term from
which; this is ^xpressive of the term to which the sinner is ^harged: We have
them both mentioned, Acts 26.19 where the Conversion of the Gentiles is called,
not only a turning from Satan and darkness, but unto God: Therefore it is said
of John Baptist, that he should ^^rn many of the children of Israel unto the
Lord ^^eir God, Luke 1.16. because he was Instrumental toward their
Conversion: God went forth with John Baptists Ministry to the Conversion of
many Souls, therefore he is said, to turn many to the Lord: And very often
Conversion is called, a turning to the Lord, Deuteronomy. 30.10. Hos 12.6. Conversion
is an undoing the work of sin; sin is a departure from God; So Conversion is a
going to him again. Hence the Converting Prodigal said, he would go to his
father, Luke 15.18. By these two parts, or terms, is the whole nature of
Conversion described; see Isa 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts: These words are expressive of the first part of
Conversion; sc. when the Sinner is turned from evil, and that not only as to
his way, or outward conversation, but in his own thoughts, and inward
disposition of heart; it follows, and let him return to the Lord -- To our
God: These words are expressive of the other and positive part of Conversion
Moreover, this turning must be to God in Christ; for true Conversion is an
Evangelical work; Though a man should repent with a Legal Repentance, and turn
to God in a Legal way, this is no Conversion, if Christ be not turned unto and
God, even the Father in him. The Jews did thus return, yet they Converted not,
because they sought God out of Christ, Romans 9.32. Hence Conversion is called, a
seeking of Christ, Hosea 3.5. and converted Ones are described to be such, as
are in Christ, Romans 16.7. Paul there says, that his Kinsmen Andronicus and
Junius were in Christ before him, meaning, that they were Converted before him;
and to have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. Although there are many that call
themselves Christians, that know not what Conversion means, yet a true Convert,
and a true Christian, are the same: Conversion does imply faith in Christ. It
has been a great Question amongst some, Whether Faith or Repentance be first
wrought; and a great deal of disputing there has been about this point, which
might have been spared. The true and plain Answer is, That as Repentance is
taken for the first part of Conversion, so it is in order of Nature, before
Faith, though in time with it: The term from which, is in order of Nature,
before the term to which; but as Repentance is taken for the whole work of
Conversion (as often in Scripture it is) so it implies Faith in Christ. You
heard but now, that Conversion and Vocation are the same. Now in Vocation, the
term to which the Soul is called, is the Kingdom of Christ, Col. 1.13. This
Text does intimate, that Converted ones are brought into the Kingdom of Heaven;
and it must needs be so, because in Conversion, the term to which the Soul is
brought, is the Kingdom of Christ; now that is meant by the Kingdom of Heaven,
even the heavenly Kingdom of the Messiah: Christ's Kingdom, and the Kingdom of
Heaven, are the same.

Pro. V. True Believers on Christ may undergo a farther, and, as it were, a
second Conversion. This is plainly (and indeed a main thing intended therein)
intimated in the Text: Christ here tells his own Disciples, that except they
were converted: i. e. except there were, a new Conversion wro't in them, and
upon them, they should not see Heaven. There is an universal and a particular
Conversion: One in the state of Nature, needs the former; a true Christian may
stand in need of this latter. This may be secretly hinted at by that
expression, Jer. 4.3. Plough up the fallow ground of your hearts. Fallow ground
you know, is such as has been once broken up already; but by reason of its
being overgrown with weeds and thorns, etc. may need a further and a new
breaking up. So it is here, they that have had their hearts truly broken up for
sin, may become fallow ground, so as to need that new furrows should be made in
their Souls: They may be so overgrown with the weeds of sin, as that the
Ploughshare of Repentance must again break up their hearts (...) Conversion is
sometimes taken for a spiritual habit infused into the Soul, so it is not to be
reiterated; for the habit of Grace wrought in the first Conversion, is never
lost. Sometimes it is taken for an act proceeding from that habit: Thus a man
may be converted over and over again, yea, thus a Christian is converting all
his life long; that is to say, he is still getting further off from sin and the
World, and nearer unto God in Christ; the life of a Christian is and ought to
be a life of Faith and Repentance. Hence even true Believeres yet are called
upon to repent: So we find in those Epistles which the Lord Jesus sent from
Heaven to the Churches, they are commanded to repent, that is, to renew their
Repentance. And this Truth is evident, in that a true child of God may be too
far subject to the prevailing power of some special corruption, in which case,
a new or further Conversion is requsite. This was the case of the Text; the
Disciples were under the present predominancy of an ambitious Lust, in a great
measure, therefore the Lord tells them, they must be converted. The like we
find in that good Prophet Jeremiah, see chap 15. verse 19. Thus says the Lord,
if thou return, then I will bring thee again, and thou shall stand before me:
You may see in the former Verse, that the good man was surprised with a pang of
Unbelief; and while the temptation and corruption prevailed upon him, he
manifests much impatiency and murmuring of spirit: Now says God to him, if
thou will return from this evil frame of spirit, if thou will convert thee from
these evils, then will I again make use of thee in my service, etc So that a
very good man may be distempered with particular Corruptions, so as to need a
returning and converting from them to the Lord again. Yea, it is a sad Truth,
that a Godly man may possibly be under the present power of some Corruption, in
such a degree, as that it is impossible for him to get to Heaven until that
coruption be further mortified. This is plainly affirmed by the Text, Christ
declares to his Disciples, that except that Lust of Pride were further
mortified in them, they should not enter into Heaven. Some sins which true
Believers are guilty of, they must and shall repent of them before they go out
of this World, that so they may be fit for Heaven.

Again, Grace may be exceeding weak in a true Believer, and in that case a
further conversion is necessary: Ordinarily it is thus with new Converts; in
such, many times Grace is very weak, and Corruption is very strong; there is
little Knowledge, and much Ignorance; little Humility, and much Pride; and
thence a further Conversion must be. This we see in the Disciples themselves, a
long time they were marvellously Ignorant, and yet too full of Pride and other
corruptions: But after the Ascension of Christ, there was a mighty change
wrought in them; Then was that accomplished upon them, which here Christ said
must be, a new Conversion, they were endued with a power from on high, Luke
24.49. The Lord from on high poured his Spirit mightly upon them, and thereby
were they wonderfully changed; The change which was then wro't upon the
Disciples, was not much less, than that which was wrought on them at their
first conversion; they differed from what themselves were before, well nigh as
much as at their first Conversion they were made to differ from other men.

Again, True Believers may be under sad Spiritual decays, and in this respect
they may need, as it were, a new Conversion. This we see in the collasped
Churches of Asia, yea, a godly man may fall into gross sins, such as waste and
wound the Conscience, and break communion with God; indeed into any sin, though
never so vile, except only that sin against the Holy Ghost, and final
Impenitency. Now in this case a new conversion is necessary; we see instances
hereof in David, Psalm. 51.10. after his fearful fall and miscarriage in that
matter about Vriah (for that, as the Title shows, was the occasion of his
penning that Psalm) he prays, that God would create a clean heart, and renew
a right Spirit in him: He speaks as if all the work of Conversion were to
begin anew again. And in Solomon: His penitent Soul wrote a Book of Repentance;
Ecclesiastes is the Book of Solomon's Repenance, not of his first, but of his
second Repentance. And another instance hereof we have in Peter: Hence Christ
said to him, Luke 12.32. When thou art Converted, etc. Peter was Converted
before that him, as that by the sudden surprizal of a time, bu^ Sa^an so far
prevailed upon Temptation, he became guilty of Lying and Perjury, and (which
was worst of all) denied Christ too: Now in regard of this fearful fall into
sin, he stood in need of being, as it were, Converted anew; therefore Christ
said to him, When thou art converted, meaning, when he should he should have
repented of his grievous Transgression Besides all this, the truth of what you
hear is evident, if we consider the several steps of Conversion; e.g. A true
Believer may undergo a new work of Conviction and Illumination; God may teach
him that which he has not seen, Job 34.32 he may have further Visions of God,
and Visions of his own Heart too, yea such discoveries, as may differ in
degree, as much from the enlightnings received, when first Illuminated, as the
knowledge of a man differs from the knowledge of a child, 1 Cor. 13.11. and he
may undergo a new work of Compunction or Contrition for sin. Hence David after
his fall complains of broken bones, Psa. 51.8. because his sin occasioned and
caused as much grief to him, as if all his bones had been shivered in pieces.
And Solomon found his vanity in the end of it, more bitter than death, Eccles.
7.26. And Peter, when his Conscience was touched with a saving remorse for his
sin, went out and wept bitterly, Mat. 27. ult. So for Humiliation, a true
Believer may undergo that work anew: We see it in Job, after the sinful
distempers of his Spirit had broke loose, he cried out against himself, I am
vile, chap. 40. verse. 4. And in as much as his Repentance and Humiliation was
not altogether so deep and through as should have been, the Lord speaks more
awakeningly to him, until he cry out a second time, I abhor my self, and
repent in dust and ashes, chap. 42.6. And the like we read concerning Hezekiah,
2 Chronicles. 32.26. He humbled himself, for the pride of his heart; not but that he
had humbled himself for that and other sins many a time, and many a day before
that time, but then he renewed his Humiliation before the Lord. And a further
work of Conversion may be wrought upon the Believer, in respect of Separation
from sin, and Amendment of life. Thus also with David, Psalm. 119.67. Before I
was afflicted, I went astray, but now have I kept thy word: Not but that he
made Conscience of his ways from his youth up, but that affliction was a means
to make him more circumspect and exact in his walking before God. So the
Corinthians, after that humbling Providence about the Incestuous Person, were
much reformed, 2 Cor. 7.11. Also in respect of closing with Christ, a true
Believer may fall, as it were, under a second Conversion: We therefore read,
that the Disciple believed, John 2.11. the Disciples believed before, otherwise
they had not been called Disciples, but now they renewed their closing with
Christ. So that the Holy Spirit does sometimes go over the work of Conversion
in all the steps of it, in the hearts of his children, and that again and
again; yea, and sometimes he does all this in a very eminent manner.

Prop. VI. In true Conversion, there is a change, even of the whole man. The
sanctifying change wrought in conversion, must be proportionable to the
defilement of natural Corruption. Now that is total; what the Prophet speaks,
concerning that woeful defection and corruption of the Jewish state, Isa. 1.6.
From the sole of the foot, even to the head, there is no soundness in it, but
wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores, may truly and fitly be applied unto
the corrupted estate of all men by Nature. This Corruption of Nature was
Typified under the Law by the spreading Leprosy (Lev. 13.12, 13.) which
covered all the skin of him that had the Plague, from his head even to his
foot. Now the Plaster must be answerable to the Sore; therefore inasmuch as
the Corruption of Nature is universal, as to all parts and faculties; so must
Repentance and Conversion be universal. Hence a true Convert is said to be a
new, and another Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in Christ, he is a new
Creatures old things are passed away, behold, all things are become new. In
Conversion, Heaven and Earth is new; that is to say, all is new from the top to
the bottom; it is such another change as that, which shall pass upon the World
at the last and Great Day; Indeed, then the materials shall be the same, but
there will be a wonderful alteration as to qualities; so it is when a Soul is
converted. As if a man should deface a deformed Picture, and in the room of it
should draw another complete and beauiful; here the subject matter is the same,
only here is a new Image. Thus the Holy Spirit draws the blessed Lines of the
Image of God on that Soul, where once was the deformed Image of Satan. But to
evince the truth of this Proposition, by Induction of particulars: 1. In
conversion, the head is made new. A true convert has a renewed mind, Ephesians. 4
23. Hence Conversion is in the Scripture called, Illumination, Heb. 10.32. and
opening of the eyes of the Soul, Acts 26.18. Ephesians. 1.18. Whenever God converts a
Soul, he lets in a new, and a blessed light into the Understanding, that the
sinner has other apprehensions about God, and Christ, and Heaven, and Sin, and
Hell, and Spiritual objects, than once he had. Every converted sinner may say,
as the man that was born blind said, after Jesus Christ had healed him, John
9.25. One thing I know, that whereas I was born blind, now I see. Some that are
truly Converted, cannot tell exactly the time, or the means, or manner of their
Conversion; yet this they know, that now they see Spiritual things with another
kind of sight and apprehension, then once they did. The truth is, that
conversion does begin here: As in the first Creation God began with light, so
in this second and new Creation, the Lord begins with effectual Conviction and
Illumination* 2 In Conversion, the heart is made new, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new heart
will I give. Converting Grace is promised to the Elect under that expression. A
new heart is given to a man, when that heart which once was hard and senseless,
is become soft and tender; when an heart of stone, is turned into an heart of
flesh; and when that heart which once was full of nothing but pride and vanity,
is become humble and meek. And when that heart which was foolish is become
Spiritually wise, Prove. 10.8. The Heart is often in Scripture, put for the Will,
because it is the seed and subject thereof, as the head is of the
Understanding. Now in conversion, the Will is wonderfully changed, P^s^. 110.3.
A willing people in the day of thy power; when the day of Gods power does pass
upon the Soul in Converting Grace, the Will is captivated. The Will then
refuses old sinful Objects which once were delighted in; and instead thereof,
chooses new and better Objects: That Will which before was obstinate and
rebellious, is now become pliable to the will of God in every thing. You see it
in Paul, when he was in the Pangs of the new birth, Lord, says he, what will thou have me to do? Acts; 9.6. And this alone proves the truth of the
Proposition before us; for a change of the Heart or Will, infers a change of
the whole man; the Reason is, because the Will is the Empress and Commandress
of the Soul. Hence the act of any faculty or part belonging to a man, is not to
be accounted the act of the whole, except the Will be involved in it. 3. In
conversion, the affections are renewed: A sincere Convert does not affect those
evils, which once he did affect; and does affect those good things which once
he did not affect; Converting Grace causes a mavelous change upon the
affections; e. g. If we speak of Love and Haterd* when a sinner is Converted,
these affections are much altered and placed upon new and other Objects: He
loves Spiritual good things in the chief place; he loves God and Christ above
all, Psalm. 73.25. Luke 14.26. he loves Truth, Ordinances, Saints, Holiness, as
such, which the Natural man does not; he hates sin, and that universally,
Psalm. 119.128. Prove. 8.13. he has an heart after God's own heart, Acts 13.22.
that is to say, he does love the things which God does love, and hates the
things which God does hate. Again, the sincere Convert has new joys and
sorrows in his Soul. As for the Natural man his chief joy and delight is in
some carnal, worldly Object, either in the Pleasures, or Profits, or Honors
which the World affords: But as for the Converted man his chief delight is in
Spiritual Objects; as in the favor of God, and communion with him by Jesus
Christ, and in the precious Promises, etc, yea, he finds more sweetness in one
good look from God in Christ, or in one Promise, than in all that the whole
Earth can afford, Psalm. 4.6. and 94 19* So for Sorrow; the greatest sorrows of
a Natural man, are upon the account of some worldly cross or disappointment;
but the Converted man is grieved most of all with the loss of Gods favor,
Psalm. 30.6. and with the dishonor done to Gods name in the World, Psalm.
119.136, 158. as to intellectual and rational sorrow, Sin is the matter of
greatest grief unto his Soul, especially those sins which before Conversion
were the most delightful, after Conversion are the greatest bitterness of Soul.
Again, where there is true Conversion, there are new hopes and fears; his hopes
are placed chiefly upon Eternal Objects, upon Christ, and Heaven, and Eternal
Life, Col. 1.5, 27. and the like may be said concerning his Fear, it is not
placed so much upon Temporal, as upon Spiritual and Eternal Objects. I do but
touch at things is we go along; but by this you see, that Converting Grace
makes a wonderful change upon the affections; yea, upon all the affections,
whether they be affections of Union, or affections of Aversation. 4. In
Conversion, there are new thoughts put into the heart; and if there be a real
and through change, in respect of the thoughts, it is a special Evidence of
true Conversion, Isa. 55.7. An Unconverted sinner, or one that has only a
common work of Gods Spirit upon him may possibly make some Conscience of his
words and outward actions; but it is rare for such an one to look narrowly and
diligently to the inward thoughts and workings of his heart; but where the
Gospel prevails to a sound Conversion of the Soul, it brings every thought
into subjection to the will of God, 2 Cor. 10.5. The sincere Convert will not
allow himself in so much as in vain and unprofitable thoughts, Psalm. 119.113.
vain thoughs do I hate; much less in proud thoughts, or unclean thoughts, or
revengeful thoughts. 5. In Conversion, there is a great change wrought, in
respect of Words: It is therefore sometimes expressed in the Scripture, by the
Circumcision of the Lips. And by that phrase, of a pure Language. Zeph. 3.9.
The same man that before his Conversion, was it may be, a Reviler of good men,
a Scoffer of Godliness, a profane Swearer, or a filthy speaker; after his
Conversion, you shall hear no more such evil Communication from him: but
instead thereof, he will be speaking about Christ, and Heaven, and the estate
of his own immortal Soul, and be full of gracious, edifying discourse; such a
mighty change does Converting Grace work, when it comes in power. And certain
it is, that except a man's Lips and Language be sanctified, he is a stranger to
Conversion, and to the power of Religion or Christianity; James 1.26. If any
man seem to be Religious, and bridleth not his tongue, he deciveth his own
heart, his Religion is vain. Men may call themselves Christians, and yet have
unbridled tongues: and they may think to be saved, because of their Profession
of Christianity; but alas, they deceive themselves, and all their pretenses to
Religion will prove a vain thing, if they have not a pure Language. 6. Where
there is Conversion, there is a new life and Conversation, Ephesians 4.22. Rom 6.4.
He that is Converted, does, as it were, turn over a new leaf, and leads a new
life, quite differing from what he formerly lived. And this is that which is
especially signified by the word [ Conversion:] The word is a Metaphor taken
from a man, that is walking in a wrong way; but if ever he would come to his
journeys end, he must turn quite about, and go in a contrary way to that, which
at present he walks in. Men by Sin turn out of the right way; sinners are
perverters of their way, but by Repentance and Conversion, they return, and are
bro't back into the right way again, Jer. 3.21, 22. The true Convert walks in
new ways, and takes new courses: He did walk in the way of sin, he does walk
in the way which is called holy; he did walk in the broad way, he does walk in
the narrow way. 7. Where there is Conversion, there will also be a change in
respect of company: As a new Conversation, so a new Company to converse withal,
Prove. 13.20. We see a sudden and mavelous change, in this respect, wrought in
Paul at his first Conversion, Acts 9, 26. before his Conversion, he delighted
in the Company of none but carnal Jews, but after his Conversion, none so
welcome to him as Godly Christians; Those very persons that before he did
malign, and hate to the death, afterward he ventured his life for their sakes.
And indeed there is nothing that does make a greater discovery of a man's
spirit, than the company which he does frequent and delight in. A propane
spirited man, Loves profane company, one that is not profane, and yet
unconverted, only civil and outwardly blameless in his Conversation, delights
not in profane Company, nor yet in Godly Society, only in such as are in the
same state and form with himself, But gracious Souls delight in such as truly
fear God; yea, the more there is of God in any one, the more does the true
Convert delight in Communion with him, Psalm. 119 63. I am (though a King) a
Companion of all them (be they never so mean in this world) that fear thee, and
of them that keep thy Precepts. By these things then you see, that in
Conversion there is an universal change wrought upon the sinner. Thus much may
suffice to be spoken by way of Explication. The nature of true Conversion has
been opened unto you in the Propositions cleared, which are expressive of the
Causes, Parts, degrees, Subject of true Conversion.

We come now to demonstrate the Point s.c. that a sound through Conversion, is
of absolute necessity to the Souls entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven. And
this is proved. 1. From plain testimony of Scripture. The words of this Text
(if there were no more) are a plain proof of this Doctrine, they stand li^^ a
Flaming-Sword, to keep all Unconverted Sinners from any hopes of entering into
lost Paradise: See also John 3.3. Jesus said, Verily, verily I say unto thee,
except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Mark how every
word is solemn and weighty, [ I] say unto thee, [ I] that am truth it self; [
I] that never spoke, nor can speak any untrue, or any idle unprofitable word [
I] say unto thee, and this with a Verily; and that doubled, Verily, verily,
except a man, that is to say, any man whatsoever, be he high or low, be he
learned or unlearned, if he be a man, except he b^ born again, it is not only
true that he shall not, but that he cannot see the Kingdom of God: Therefore
also the Apostle has said, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of
God, 1. Cor. 15 50. Mere Nature, or unsanctified Nature can never go to Heaven.
And indeed all the threatenings in the Word of God, are evidences of this truth:
The Law threatens sinners with most certain death, Genesis 2.17. And the Gospel
denounces no less then Eternal Damnation, against every Unbeliever, Mark
16.15, 16. Therefore without Co^version, there can be no Salvation.

Argum. 2. Because a Natural Unconverted man, has no Interest in Jesus Christ:
There is no Salvation to be expected, but by Christ, Acts 4.12. neither is
there Salvation in any ^^her; for there is none other name under Heaven,
whereby we must be saved. If ever a man would get to Heaven, he must be sure to
go in at the right door: Now Christ is that Door; John 10.9. Christ himself
there says, I am the Door, by me if any man enter in, he shall be saved. And
again, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life, John 14.6. Men may imagine there
are diverse ways which lead to Heaven; but it will be found true, that there is,
and always was, but one way to Heaven, and that is the way of Faith unfeigned
in Jesus Christ the Son of God Now as for a Natural Unconverted man, he has no
real Interest in Christ; he is a miserable stranger to the life of union and
communion with the Son of God: Therefore the Apostle, declaring what the
Ephesians were by Nature, says, they were without Christ, Ephesians. 2.1 2. and
the same Apostle says to the Corinthians, If any man be in Christ, he is a new
Creature, 2 Cor. 5.17. They therefore that are not become new Creatures, but do
remain still in their old, natural, sinful estate, are not in Christ; and
therefore living and dying in their present states, they shall not enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven.

Argum 3. Because one sin, if loved and lived in, will certainly exclude the
Soul out of Heaven. This Text does plainly intimate, that, that one sin of
unmortified Pride, is enough to keep out of Heaven. The like may be said
concerning any other sin; one wound may ki^l a man, as well as a hundred; one
leak will as certainly sink a Vessel to the bottom of the Sea as many: So one
lust, if loved and lived in, will kill and sink a man's Soul for ever: Therefore
the Scripture says, Repent and turn from [all] your Transgressions, so
iniquity shall not be your ruin, Ezekiel. 18.30. Though a sinner should run from
many Iniquities, if there be but one sin left behind unturned from, that one
will prove the utter and Eternal ruin of his Soul. This is the undoing misery
of many, that go far, and bid fair for Heaven, that they leave one unmortified
lust behind, which becomes their ruin at last. Jehu went far, but there was a
lust of Ambition left in him that was never subdued. Judas went far, but there
was a lust of Coveteousness never mortified in his heart. Herod went far, and
did many things, but there was a lust of Uncleanness that he was never
delivered from; and by this means did these men all lose their precious Souls.
Know therefore for certain, that if there be but one lust loved and lived in,
that will exclude out of Heaven. Though a men's sin should be as dear to him as
his right hand, or his right eye; if he do not forsake it, he must be cast into
Hell fire, where the Worm dies not, and where the fire never shall be
quenched, Mark 9.47, 48.

Having opened and proved the Point, we proceed, in the Lords fear, to make
some Application of it. Now by way of Use, 1. We may hence infer, That they
that are truly and thoroughly Converted to God in Christ, are in a very happy
condition. There are two things here that do show the happiness of such Souls.

1. In that a Kingdom is theirs, they do enter upon a Kingdom; therefore
sincere Converts are called, The children of the Kingdom, Matthew. 13.38. they
are such children as have a Kingdom for their Inheritance. Amongst men, a
Kingdom is the highest dignity; so to show the glorious happiness wherewith
such shall be dignified, they are styled Heirs of a Kingdom. 2. Another thing
which sets forth their happiness, is the quality of the Kingdom which they
shall possess, it is an heavenly Kingdom: The Text calls it, the Kingdom of
Heaven. All earthly Kingdoms are as nothing, compared with this. This Kingdom
of Heaven notes three things; all which do set forth the wonderful happiness
of truly Converted ones. 1. It notes a state of saving sanctifying Grace: Often
times in Scripture, the being brought out of a state of Nature into a state of
Grace, is called, entering into the Kingdom, Col. 1.13. Matthew. 21.31. For then
men are delivered out of Satan's, and are become Subjects of the Lords Kingdom.
Now they that are brought into a state of Grace are happy indeed: For Grace is
Heaven begun; he that has Grace, shall as certainly go to Heaven, as if he was
there already; which may be one Reason why this Expression, of the Kingdom of
Heaven, is put to signify a state of Grace. 2. It may note the Glory and
Dominion which the Saints shall possess at the last and great Day, Luke
22.29.30. I appoint unto you a Kingdom -- You shall sit upon Thrones judging,
etc which evidently intimates, that at the Judgment-Day the Saints shall have a
Kingdom. And no doubt this is a special thing aimed at in the Text, as will
appear to him that well considers the occasion of these words: And though the
Ju^gment shall be in this Lower visible World; yet this is fitly called the
Kingdom of Heaven, because it will be a most heavenly Dispensation; also in
respect of the Original of i^, the God of Heaven will set it up. New Jerusalem
comes down from God out of Heaven, Revel 21.2 In a word, at the Last Day,
Converted ones shall be so many heavenly Kings; therefore happy are they. 3.
This Expression may note, that Eternal bliss which he Saints shall enjoy with
Christ in the highest Heaven. Many times in the Scripture, Heaven and the
Kingdom of Heaven notes that life of Glory which the Saints shall partake of
with Christ in Heaven to all Eternity. And this also is intimated here in the
Text, to be the Portion of Converted ones. And besides these things which the
Text expresses, there are other things that manifest the happy estate of such
persons. For thirdly, They are the children of God. Christ proves, that
Peacemakers are blessed, because they are the children of God; Mat. 5.8. Now
then are Converted ones blessed, for they are the children of God; therefore
are they said to bear his Image; Col. 3.10. even as a child bears the Image of
his father. Hence, after the Prodigal was converted, the Lord says of him,
This my son was dead, but he is alive again Luke. 15.24. So God then owneth him
for his Son. All the men and women in the Wo^ld are divided into these two
ranks, either they are the children of God, or else they are the children of
the Devil, 1 John 3.10. Natural men are still the Devils children, Scripture
calls them so; But as for Converted persons, they are Gods children, and
therefore happy. 4 All their sins are pardoned. Blessed is the man whose
transgessions is forgiven, whose sin is covered; Blessed is the man unto whom
the Lord imputes not iniquity, Psalm 32.1, 2. Now this is true concerning all
that are indeed converted, Rom 8.30 Whom he called, them he justified. Where
there is eff^ctual Calling, or Conversion, there is Justification, which
implies the Remission of sins; yea, though a man may have been guilty of never
so many and great sins, yet if he truly repent of them, and turn from them unto
God in Christ, they shall all be pardoned, Isa 55 7 We see it in Paul, he was
the chief of sinners, yet he found mercy, that is, pardoning mercy (for by
Mercy, forgiveness is many times meant in the Scripture) upon his Conversion to
Christ, 1 Timothy 1.14, 15. And Mary Magdalene (if she were the person spoken of,
Luke 7 47.) was a great sinner, yet when she truly repented, and turned to the
Lord, her sins, which were many, were forgiven; Yea, more let me say, though a
man had been the greatest sinner in the World if he truly and thoroughly Convert
from the evil of his ways, and turn to God in Jesus Christ, the Lord will take
him into his favor, and be as fully reconciled to him, as if he had never
committed any such sins; This we see also in Paul and Peter, though both of
them had transgressed heinously (as before was said) yet when they Converted,
God took them into his favor; and to show that he was fully reconciled toward
them, he employed them in his service, and made them instrumental in the
Conversion of many a Soul.

Use 2. We may likewise see by this, the woeful misery of all those that remain
in an Unconverted estate. But every one will be ready to say, Unconverted
persons are miserable indeed, as being such as shall be excluded out of Heaven.
But are we not all Converted, are we not all Christians? Alas Friends, deceive
not your own Souls, I do beseech you; But therefore know, 1. They that remain
ignorant in spiritual things are unconverted, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit, neither can be know them, because they
are spiritually discerned So that they that are unacquainted with the things of
the Spirit, are in their natural estate still. What shall we think of those
then, that mock and deride at the workings of Gods Spirit upon the Soul in its
first, or in after Conversion? And what shall we say of those that remain
ignorant in Fundamental Points in Religion? Some though they live under
Gospel Light, yet are so, if they be examined about the great matters of
Religion, especially about Christ, they bewray lamentable ignorance. Certainly,
if ye are not turned from darkness to light, ye are not Converted, Acts 26.18.
And if the Soul be without knowledge, it is not good, Prove. 19.2. It Is not
possible for the Soul to be entered into the Kingdom of Heaven, and yet to live
in darkness and ignorance still. 2. They that are Profane either in heart or
life, are unconverted. Esau was a Type of all natural irregenerate men; and he
is called a profane person, Heb. 12.16. Alas, how many such are there, whose
hearts slight and despise Spiritual blessings, even as Profane Esau did? Oh
the secret Profaneness and Atheism of the hearts of men and women! Whence is it
that many live in a careless neglect of God, and of the things of God, and of
there own Salvation by Christ, but from the Profaneness and Atheism of their
hearts? Psalm. 14.1, 2. So as for all those that live in any scandalous sins
against the first or second Table of the Law, it is certain that they are not
Converted. Hence the Apostle speaks as you find, 1 Pet. 4.3, 4. The time past
of our lives may suffice us to have wrought the will of the Gentiles, when we
walked in lascivousness, lusts, excess of wine, revellings, banquetings, and
abominable Idolatries, wherein they think it strange that you run not with them
to the same excess of riot. So that when they were Converted, they quite left
off their profane courses, that once they had lived in. All you therefore that
are Drunkards, or Lascivious persons, or that follow any other Profane
courses, except you be Converted, you shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. 3 They that have nothing beyond Civility and Morality, are in a
Unconverted estate. There is a Generation risen up of late, who give out, as if
Saving Grace and Morality were the same. But woe ^o that man's Soul, that shall
either say or think so: Certainly, there is a difference between a mere Moral
man, and a true Christian. Many Heathens have excelled as to Moral Endowments.
Nay that Apostate Infidel Julian the Emperor, yet as to Moral Accomplishments,
was a rarely qualified person; But shall we say that, that Enemy of Christ had
Grace in his Soul? It Is true, that Morality is good and lovely, yea, and such
persons are nearer Conversion than profane ones are, Mark 12.34. yet this may
be without Grace. The young man in the Gospel was a very Civil, Moral Man, but
he lacked saving Grace for all that, Luke 18.21, 22. The Pharisee was no
Extortioner, nor Unjust, nor an Adulterer, nor like the Publican; and yet for
all that, in his Natural, Unconverted estate, Luke 18 11 Paul before his
Conversion, was to^^^ing the righteousness of the Law blameless, Phil. 3.^ They
therefore that bless themselves in their Condition, only because none can say
to them, that black is their eye* or charge them with any scandalous
miscarriages in their lives, are in an unconverted estate. 4 So likewise are
they all whose Religion is nothing else but Education. Alas, there are many
that are deceived with this; All their Religion is the mere Impression of a
godly Education, without any special work of the Holy Spirit upon their Souls.
Not but that a Religious Education is a great mercy, yea, and to many of the
Elect it is the great means of their Conversion. But when Education alone is
rested in, without experience of a Regenerating work of the Spirit the^ a man's
case is sad. There are that b^c^^se they were born of Christian Parents (...)
baptized, and when grown up, pro^ (...) Christian Religion which they have bee^
(...) ca^ed in, therefore they think that the (...) no other Conversion. Like
that Prelate (...) when one was convented before hi^ (...) going out of his
Parish Church; the (...) alleging, that the Reason why he di^ (...) was,
because the Minister whom he we^ (...) hear, was the Instrument of his
Convers^^^ and therefore he could not but love to (...) him preach. How (said
the Prelate) Converted by him! Were thou a Jew, or wast thou a Turk, that thou
should talk of Conversion? Art thou born an Englishman, and a Christian, and
do thou speak of Conversion? Thus, I say, many Christians are like Nicodemus,
who though it that the Doctrine of Conversion amongst the Jews, that were by
Education and Profession the People of God, was a strange Doctrine, John 3.5,
6, 7. There are many Christians that have no Religion or Conversion, but such,
as if they had been brought up amongst Jews, they would have been Jews; if
amongst Mahomatans, or Papists, they would have been so too; only through the
efficacy of Education, in Conjunction with natural Devotion, they make some
show of Christianity, without ever experiencing the saving operations of the
Holy Spirit in their hearts whereas he that is converted indeed is born of the
Spirit. John 3.6.

Lastly, They all, whose Reli^^on is, in being of this or that persuasion, are
in an Unconverted estate. True it is, that men must be of a right Persuasion
and Belief in the Fundamental Points of the Christian Faith, or they cannot
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. But though Orthodoxy, in respect of
Judgment, be necessary, yet it is not sufficient unto Salvation: Nevertheless,
there are some Christians, that if we take from them this or that particular
Opinion in some lesser Points, all their Religion is gone. This is sad; what
says the Scripture? Gal. 6.15. In Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails
any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a new Creature. So that a man may be of that
Party or Persuasion which are for Circumcision, or of that Party or Persuasion
that are against Circumcision, and yet not be a new Creature. If therefore all
a man's Religion lies in this, that he is for or against Circumcision the case
is sad with him: for he is no new Creature, no true Convert. Some there are,
that their Souls are undone with the Monopoly of an Opinion, their Religion is
all in parties. And Oh that there were not need to speak of this amongst us
also! Some, if they be of the Anabaptists Persuasion, here is all their
Religion; others, if they be Independents (as the World speaks) here is all
their Religion; others, if they be against this or that Superstition, here is
all their Religion. Alas, alas! Conversion does not consist in these matters
only; if therefore these things be the main of ones Religion, that is a sure
sign, that his Conversion was slight and overly, and that he has not attained
to that sound and through Conversion, which the Text and Doctrine speaks of.

Now then we come a little to spread before you the woeful misery of all such
Unconverted Souls. Know then, 1. That as long as thou art Unconverted, all the
sins that ever thou did commit in thy life, remain unpardoned. Hence is that,
Mark 4.12. Left at any time they should be Converted, and their sins forgiven
them. So that sins are not forgiven, except there be Conversion: therefore thy
Soul is in a miserable case; for any one of thy sins, though it were the least
sin that ever thou did commit in thy life, yet if it remain unpardoned, the
guilt of it is enough to sink thy Soul down into the Bottomless Pit. What then
is like to become of thee, since all thy sins, thy numberless sins, thy great
sins, lie in bank against thy Soul, not so much as one of them forgiven? 2 An
Unconverted sinner has no Friend: He has no Friend in Heaven; God, in whose
favor is life, is Enemy to such a sinner: Natural men are called the Enemies
of God, Romans 5.10. Col. 1.21. Oh, to be out of Gods favor, that is misery
indeed. Hence Cain cried and roared at the doleful apprehension of his
wretchedness, when he saw himself cast out of Gods favor; Oh, says he, my
punishment is greater than I can bear, for I must be hid from the face of God.
This is thy very doom, that art in thy Natural, Unconverted estate. And
inasmuch as God is thy Enemy, all Creatures in Heaven and on Earth are so too,
Hos. 2.18, yea, there is a secret Curse upon all thy enjoyments. For 3. Thou
do nothing else but sin against God. An Unconverted sinner never thought one
good thought, nor spoke one good word, nor did one good action before God in
all his life: His Civil Actions are sins, Prove. 21.24. The ploughing of the
wicked is sin: So his Natural Actions, his eating and drinking, etc. is sin.
Nay, his Religious Actions are sins, his praying, and hearing, and fasting, and
reading, all are so many sinful abominations in the Lords sight, Prove. 15.9.
and 28 9. Psalm. 109.7. A Natural man may do, and speak, and think many things,
which for the matter of them are good; but as done by such a person as is out
of Christ, they are not good, but evil in the sight of God. Certainly this
would be an awakening Consideration, if sinners would think sadly of it. Can
thou make light of this, that look how many actions there have been done by
thee in all thy life time, how many words thou have spoken, how many thoughts
have been in thy heart, so many sins art thou guilty of, and must one day
answer for them all! Lastly, Thou art in a state of Death and Condemnation. A
Natural man is dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2.1. A poor sinner has all
the miserable properties of a dead man belonging to him. As now a dead man
cannot stir or go, so it is with a sinner, he cannot walk in the ways of God;
one that is dead cannot hear, so a sinner is deaf to all the Calls of Heaven.
The Lord gives many a loud knock and call, yet the sinner hears nothing; the
reason is, because he is dead. Again, a dead man cannot speak; so it is with a
sinner, he has no ability for spiritual discourse. This is the reason why some
of you live in the neglect of Prayer. The Word has told you many a time, that
you must pray in your Families, and in your Closets too, and you go with
Convinced Consciences that this is your duty, and yet you do it not; why? you
say you cannot: I would pray in my Family, but I cannot. Alas, poor Creature, I
believe thee; for thou art dead in sins, and how should a dead Creature speak
unto God in Prayer? Yea, and an Unconverted sinner is not only under spiritual
death for the present, but he remains under a sad sentence of Eternal Death,
John 3.18. He that believes not, is condemned already. It Is not only true,
that he shall be condemned hereafter, but he is so already. The sentence of
Death is already pronounced against him, and shall as certainly be executed
upon him, if he turn not, as if it were already done. Oh consider and tremble
at it, all you that live in sin. I must tell you, for I should not be able to
hold up my head before the Son of God another day, if I should forbear to tell
you the truth; and therefore I tell you plainly and truly, If any person
amongst you, man or woman, be they high or low, rich or poor, shall not turn
from sin, yea, and from all sin, Eternal Death shall as certainly be your
portion, as if you were already in Hell.

Use 3. Let such a solemn Truth as this, part us upon serious and impartial
Examination about this Point, whether we be indeed Converted or no. Sure it is
no wisdom for us to let a matter of such moment lie at uncertainties; yet such
madness is in the hearts of many of the sons of men, that they go on carelessly,
although if they should dye in their present condition, they know not whether
their Souls must for Heaven, or for Hell, as not minding whether they be in a
Converted, or (...) Unconverted estate. But Oh, put this matter to the Trial,
and come to some certainty about your Spiritual and Eternal states.

You Will say, But how shall we know whether we be Converted or no?

Answ. 1. T^y by that Character which the Text does a^ford, viz. That Converted
persons become as little childr^^. Look as little children are come into a
World, where they never were before; so it is in Conversion, the Soul begins the
World anew, as it were, and the sinner leads a new life, which before he was
not acquainted with. Hence is that Expression Romans 6 4. Walk in newness of
life. Particularly, there are diverse properties in little Children which set
forth a Converted person; e. g.

1. Humbleness of mind: A Child has no ambitious high designs in his heart,
only minds lesser matters. Hence David says; Psalm. 131.1, 2. Lord, my heart is
not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty, neither do I exercise my self in great
matters, or in things too high for me: Surely I have behaved my self as a
weaned child that is weaned, my soul is as a child. David was accused, as if he
had had ambitious aspirings after Readiness Kingdom; But says he, I am as free
from those Imputations as a child that is but a weanling, who has no such
aspirings in his thoughts. Now this humbleness of mind, is a special thing
intended in the Text by Conversion. Unmortified Pride is a Soul-damning sin;
yet there is no sin more natural, or more hard to subdue than Pride; it is the
first that lives, and the last that dies. Hence the work of Conversion is
well expressed in the Text, by the Mortification of that one lust. And often in
the Scripture, a Natural man and a Proud man are the same, Mal. 4.1. and a
Converted man, and an Humble man are also the same, James 4.6. Luke 18.14. He
that humbles himself shall be exalted. That humbling notes Conversion.

2. A Child is teachable and tractable: A Child is far more easy brought under
Discipline, than an elder person that was never used to it. Thus it is with a
Convert: He is become mavelous teachable, ready to be led with the Word and
Spirit of God; It is said of such, Isa. 11.6. A little Child shall ^ lead them.
Now then, consider, will the least word of God aw you, and lead you this way or
that way? Though the Instrument be never so contemptible, yet if he bring
Scripture along with him, does the Authority of that carry you before it, this
is a good sign.

3. Children are apt to forget wrongs: Hence is that, 1 Cor. 14.20. in malice
be ye children. You often observe that Children, though they fall out never so,
yet in a little time all will be forgotten, and they will become as good
friends as ever they were. Truly he that cannot forgive wrongs, has no Grace
in his heart; so if a man has a forgiving spirit, it is a good sign; yea, if a
man does freely forgive those that wrong him, and if he does it out of
conscience to the holy Commandment of God, and out of a sense of the Grace of
God toward him, in pardoning of his many sins, it is one of the clearest
evidences of a true Child of God that can be given. This has Christ taught us,
Mat, 6.14, 15. For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father
will also forgive you: But if you forgive them not their trespasses, neither
will your heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses. So that you see it holds
true both in the Affirmative and in the Negative, That a forgiving spirit is an
Evidence of a true Child of God; and the want of this, an Evidence of the
contrary. But besides these Characters which the Text does afford, some other
things may be mentioned as marks of Trial here. Therefore,

2. Try this matter by the greatness of this change which is wrought in
Conversion. You heard in opening the Point, how Conversion does imply an
universal change? Is it so with you? Have you new heads, new hearts, new words,
new thoughts, new lives and all? Moreover, the change wrought in Conversion is
universal, in respect of entire obedience unto all Divine Commands, and an
utter forsaking of every false way. Therefore it is said, the fruit of the
Spirit is in [ all] goodness, etc. Ephesians, 5.9. Where the Spirit has wrought
Grace, there is all goodness; Such a Soul does practice all duties, and forsake
all sins. It is indeed the greatest change that men are subject to. It is a
mavelous change which Death brings along with it; hence Job calls his death
his change; It is so by way of eminency, Job. 14.14. But Conversion brings a
greater change with it: For at death the change is only in respect of place and
degree, etc. But in Conversion there is a change wrought in respect of state and
kind, Ephesians. 5.8. Ye were sometimes darkness, but now are light in the Lord.
There are new and quite contrary qualities wro't in the Soul, so as the sinner
converted differs as much from the sinner Unconverted, as light differs from
darkness. For,

3. If a man be converted, then his nature is changed; therefore such are said
to partake of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Such an one does not only new
acts, but there is in him a new nature, from whence these acts do proceed. He
has not only new practices, but a new principle. Hence it is in some sort
unnatural for a converted man to sin, that is, so far forth as he is
regenerates, 1 John 3.9. Whosoever is born of God does not commit sin, for his
seed remains in him; and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. And it is
natural unto him to do good, and to endeavor to please God. Hence Paul says
to the Philippians concerning Timothy, that he did naturally care for their
estate, chap. 2. verse 20. This was, because Timothy was a Converted, Gracious
man, and so a new Nature was conferred upon him. Had it not been for converting
Grace, such a care as that was, had never been natural to him.

4. You may try whether you are Converted, by that spiritual combat which is
peculiar to the Regenerate. It is with a Child of God, as it was with Rebecca,
in whom there was a Jacob and an Esau; or as it was with the house of Abraham,
where there was an Isaac and an Ishmael. So it is with the heart of a
Christian, there is a Regenerate and Unregenerate, part conflicting and
combating the one against the other, Gal. 5.17. Now if there be Spirit lusting
against the Flesh, that is a sure sign that there is Spirit; only there is a
dangerous delusion here, which many deceive themselves with; they take the
Reluctance of a natural enlightened Conscience against sin, to be the spiritual
Combat, which is peculiar to the Regenerate, but these differ much. As to the
ground of the opposition, there is a difference; the one opposes sin, because
of the vileness and filthiness of its Nature; the other only, or chiefly, for
fear of punishment. It may be illustrated by this familiar Comparison; Some men
are loath to meddle with coals of fire, because of filth which is about them;
others never stick at that, only because of fire, lest happily their fingers
should be burnt, they are loath to meddle; So it is here, a Natural man would
never fall out with sin, because of the filth of it, only there is fire in sin,
which would burn his Conscience if he should meddle with it, and therefore he
forbears some acts of sin; but the sincere Convert is acted from another
Principle. There is also a difference as to the evils opposed; for when the
Conflict is only from an enlightened Conscience, the evils opposed are wont to
be more gross and vile; but in the spiritual combat, seemingly little sins are
mourned under, even vain thoughts are a wearisome burden. In the one, only
some sins are opposed; in the other all sin. So likewise there is wont to be a
difference in respect of the continuance of the opposition: That which proceeds
only from an enlightened Conscience is wont to be but now and then* perhaps when
some gross sin has been committed, or the like; but the spiritual Combat is
constant, and without Intermission.

Use 4. Let it be a word of Exhortation, Oh convert your selves to God in
Christ. Consider therefore the happy condition of all Converted ones; Of this
you heard in the first Use. Consider the misery of the Unconverted: Of this you
heard in the second Use. Consider also the absolute necessity of this
Conversion; you [must] be born again, John 3.7 There Is a must for it, you must
be so, or else be shut out of Heaven to all Eternity: Of this you heard in the
Demonstration of the Doctrine which has been insisted on.

A word or two more let me say, 1. Remember that you are in continual danger of
ruin, as long as you remain unconverted. It is a dangerous thing for any man
to defer his Conversion one day, or but one hour. I have sometimes put you in
mind of an Expression of Mr. Boltons, who said, He would not be in the
condition of an unconverted man one hour, though he might have all the world
for it, lest happily death should come upon him in that hour, and so Repentance
be too late. O methinks: I would not be in my Natural, Unconverted estate again
one moment, though I might have ten thousand Worlds for it, lest Death should
seize upon me in a moment, and so my Immortal Soul be lost. Think sadly of it,
you that know not what the new birth means: If death should find thee in thy
present condition, it had been better for thee never to have been born; better
for you never to have been born, than not to be new born, yea, it had been
better for thee to have been a Dog or a Toad, or a Serpent, or the vilest
Creature in the World, than to dye in a Natural Unconverted estate: For these
doleful Creatures when they dye, see an end of their misery (...) but when thou
dyest, thy miserys begins; when once thy Immortal Soul is out of thy body, thy
endless and ^easeless woes will come upon thee, without any hope of remedy. 2.
One w^rd more I must needs say unto you; and there ^e be it known unto you,
that if any of you will venture on still in you^ ^r s^^^ses, so as to dye in
your sins, your blood shall be upon your own heads: I remember what the Lord
said to his Prophet; Ezekiel. 3.17, 18, 19. Son of man, I have made thee a
Watchman unto the house of Israel, therefore hear the word at my mouth, and
give them warning from me: When I say unto the Wicked thou shall surely dye,
and thou give him not warning, nor speak to warn the wicked from his
wicked way, to save his life, the same wicked man shall dye in his iniquity,
but his blood will I require at thine hand: Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he
turn not from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall dye in his
iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul. Now then let me deliver my Soul
this Day, Behold, I do here in the name of the Lord solemnly and earnestly warn
every sinner amongst you, that you make haste to turn unto God in Jesus Christ;
and I declare to you, that if you do it not, you shall not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. God before whom I stand, and holy Angels that are here
present, and all this Assembly, shall bear me witness at the last Day, that
warning was given to you: Now if you will not take the warning, at your peril
be it. And I have rejoicing in my own Soul, that this is not the first time
that I have given you warning, but many a time, yea, without ceasing for the
space of these ten years, that the Lord has upheld me amongst you, you have
been told of these things. Now I call Heaven and Earth to record this day, that
I have set before you Life and Death; therefore choose Life, else your blood
will be upon your own heads.

Object. But some will say, We cannot convert our selves.

Answ. Yet observe these two Rules.

1. Put away all vain thoughts of being in a good estate already. Many might
have been converted, if they had not taken up with a false and groundless
persuasion of their being in a good and converted estate already: This was the
ruin of the Jews and Pharisees especially, Joh. 9.2. ult. Remember that
Conviction of Misery, is the first step toward Conversion. We see it in the
Prodigal, Luke 15.17. he cried out, I perish; thou must see that thou have a
perishing, dying, damning Soul, and then there is hopes of a right Conversion.

2. Go to God for Converting Grace, say as Ephraim did, Jer. 31.18. Turn thou
me, and I shall turned. And go and pray, as for thy Life and Soul, which lies
at stake until the Lord convert thee. Suppose thou were condemned to dye a
natural death; if the Judge should tell thee, if thou would pray and beg hard
for thy life, thou should have it. Oh how would thou pierce the Heavens
with thy cries: So it is here, thou art condemned to dye an everlasting death;
nevertheless the Lord says, If thou will pray and seek to him for life, the
Sentence yet may be reversed. Therefore do thus before the Decree bring forth,
Seek ye the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near.

They that live unprofitably under the Gospel, are in a very dangerous
condition.
Hebr. 6.7, 8. For the earth which drinks in the rain tha^ comes often upon
it, and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives
blessing from God: But that which bears thorns and briars is rejected, and is
nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.


THe scope of the Apostle in this Chapter, is to exhort the believing Hebrews
unto Constancy in their Profession of the Christian Faith; and to dehort and
dissuade from all Apostasy therefrom: And this he does by setting before them
the benefit of the one and the evil and danger of the other.

The danger of Apostasy is here very awfully described, by showing, that they
that are wilful and ^otal Apostates from the Truth, cannot attain unto
Repentance, but they must lie under the Curse of God to all Eternity. And this
the Apostle proves by three Arguments; 1. From the Inmmutability of the
Counsel of God; hence he says, It is imposible for such to be renewed by
repentance. He does not only say, that it shall not be, but that it is
impossible that it should be; which Expression may respect the unalterable
Determination of God to the contrary, which makes the thing impossible. 2.
Because they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh; that is to say, they
do it as much as in them lies: And therefore, either God must give another
Christ, or Christ must come again to suffer and satisfy for their sins,
neither of which shall be, or else such sinners must remain under the Curse
eternally. 3. The Apostle proves this by showing the Justice and Equity which
is in such proceedings; and that is done in these words, which are
Aitiolological they give a sufficient Reason for that which before was
asserted. Lest any one should think this hard and unreasonable, he does in
these words, by a familiar, and yet elegant Comparison, taken from that which
is customary amongst men, and applied to Divine matters, both illustrate and
demonstrate the point. The sum is this; We see (says the holy Apostle) that
men if they bestow much pains in tilling a piece of ground, and yet it will
bring forth no good, but abounds with evil fruit, they do even execrate such
ground, and forsake it, and at last make fuel of it; and therefore God may well
deal so with sinners.

The words being a continued Allegory, we shall a little open some of the
Terms, before we come to the Doctrine from them.

By the Earth here spoken of, men are signified, so in the Parable of the Sower
( Matt. 13.)

By the Ground men are signified, who are indeed fitly compared to the ground,
because they are the subject of Divine Cultivation The earth is tilled and
dressed, so are men in a mystical sense: Seed is not sown in any Element but
the earth only; not into the fire or water, but into the moulds of the earth:
So the seed of the Word is dispensed amongst no other Creatures but men; only
its true the Gospel is said to be preached to every Creature, because the
Hebrews were wont to call Man by the name of Creature: So that by every
Creature is meant, nothing else but men of all sorts. Again, Man is a poor
earthly Creature; so he is in respect of his original, and in respect of his
end; therefore God said to Adam after his fall, Dust thou art, and unto dust
thou shall return, Genesis 3 19. Hence men are fitly compared unto, and resembled
by the earth.

By the Rain here spoken of, we are to understand, the Gracious Dispensations
of God: In special, his word, and most of all, the word of the Gospel: The word
of God is frequently compared in the Scripture unto Rain, Deu 32.2. My doctrine
shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as the dew, as the small rain
upon the tender herb, and as the showers on the grass. Hence is that phrase of
dropping the Word, Ezekiel. 21.2. Amos 7.16 Mich. 2.6. And fitly is the Word of
the Gospel compared unto rain; for rain, if it fall upon good ground, causes
much fruitfulness, Psalm. 65.10, 11. Isa. 44.14. so does the Word, when it
falls into good hearts: The rain comes from Heaven, the Heavens do, (though
not of themselves) give showers: Thus concerning the Word, it comes from
Heaven, the Ordinances of the Gospel are the influences of Heaven; as it was
said concerning John's Baptism, that it was from Heaven, so are we to say
concerning all the Ordinances of the Gospel. Hence Mat. 5.3. it is said of the
poor in spirit, that the Kingdom of Heaven is theirs.

Further, By Thorns and Briars, here are signified the sins and corruptions of
men: So Mat. 13.7. it is said the thorns choked the word; where by Thorns are
meant, those sins of Voluptuousness and Worldliness. The corruptions of men are
fitly resembled to thorns and briars, because these are wont to spring of
themselves. Bad and barren ground, does naturally produce such things; even so
sin and vice is natural to men. Thorns and briars are unprofitable things,
there is little use of them; even so the sins of men are unfruitful (or
unprofitable) works of darkness, Ephesians. 5 11. Sin is good for nothing; it is
good neither for a man's body, nor for his soul, nor for his name, nor for his
estate, nor for anything; yea moreover, thorns and briars are hurtful, they
will tear a man's clothes, wound his flesh, and prejudice the ground were they
grow; so the sins of men wound their souls, and are prejudicial to others where
they are committed. Thorns and briars are them more hurtful, for that they are
of a spreading nature, and hard to be got out of the ground where they are
rivetted; this is the nature of many evil herbs: So it is with the corruptions
of men's hearts, if once a vice be rivited in a man's soul, it is mavelous
difficult to root it out from thence. But I must not stay here, nor shall we
stand upon any further opening of the words, besides what may be spoken to
under the Doctrine from them, which is this;

Doctr. That those men who live under the influence of the Gospel, and the
Ordinance thereof, and yet either bring forth no fruit, o^ only evil fruit, are
in a very dangerous condition.

In the Doctrinal prosecution of the point, three things may be attended: ^ To
show what fruitfulness it is, which ^ required under the Gospel. 2. How ^ does
appear, that they that remain unfruitful under the Gospel, are in a very
dangerous condition. 3. Wherein the danger of being unprofitable under the
Gospel does consist.

Qu. 1. What fruitfulness is it which the Gospel requires?

Answ. 1. There is an inward fruitfulness, which is inward qualities and
dispositions of Soul. In inward, gracious frames of heart, true saving,
sanctifying Grace is spiritual, fruit, Gal. 5.22, 23. The fru^^ of the Spirit
is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness,
Temperance. Good fruit is pleasing to the taste; these precious Graces are the
furits which are pleasing to the Holy Ghost. Where there is a sound Conversion
unto God in Christ; I say, ^here there is sincerity, there is this inward
^^uitfulness. It is said of the godly man, that (...) shall bring forth fruit
in season, and his leaf shall not wither, Psalm. 1.3. Bearing fruit, is opposed
to bearing leaves only: Leaves note outward Profession; Fruit inward Sincerity:
This then is that which the Gospel requires, and the fruit which it brings
when it comes in power, Col. 1.6. The Gospel brings forth fruit in you; this
fruit was ^^eir faith in Christ, and true Conversion (...) God by him: They are
changed from Sinners, into Saints; they were brought out of a state of Nature,
into a state of Grace, by the power of the Gospel; therefore it is said that
the Gospel bro't forth fruit amongst them.

2. There is an outward fruitfulness; that is, when not only a man's heart, but
his life also is comformable to the will of God in Christ. Thus good works are
called fruit, Col. 1.10. Walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being
fruitful in every good work: Therefore the Scripture speaks of the fruits of
righteousness, Phil. 1.11. because if a man do the works required by the Law of
Righteousness, after an Evangelical manner, this is such fruit as pleases God.
And this also is required under the Gospel; hence when John preached the
Gospel, he said, Bring forth fruits meet for repentance, Matthew. 3.8. See (says
John) that ye walk according to the Rule of the new Creature; let your
Practices, Lives, Conversations be such, as that it may appear, that your
Profession of Repentance is sound and sincere. The Gospel does require not only
Faith, but Obedience also (and indeed where the one of these is in sincerity,
the other will be too) it calls both for internal and external Obedience, even
for Faith and Works: Both these are here signified in the Text by that phrase
of, herbs meet for him by whom it is dressed. Men are (as was said) the Earth,
God is the Dresser of this Earth: He is compared to an Husbandman; the Herbs or
Fruits which is meet for such a Dresser, are Grace and Holinese, Faith and
Obedience in heart and life.

3. The Gospel does require, not only such fruit as has been expressed, but
moreover, that men should he abundant therein: I say, an abundant fruit-bearing
is requisite for men, living under the gracious Dispensation of the Gospel.
Hence the Apostle in this Epistle to the Hebrews, chap, 12. v. 14. etc. does
from this Argument press unto Holiness, even because they were not under the
Law, but under the Gospel. Holiness (says he) was required under the Law, but
how much more under the Gospel? The more God has done for you, the more ought
you to do for him: That special favor which the Lord has bestowed on you, in
bringing you under the gracious Dispensation of the Gospel, should be an
engagement upon your hearts to so much the more Holiness. It is a great measure
of Holiness, which the Lord look: for from New-Testament-Believers; therefore
did Christ say, Bear much fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples, John 15.8. Men do
not act as becomes the Disciples of Christ, except they bring forth much
fruit; they do not walk as becomes the Gospel, except they be very holy.
New-Testament-Believers have ( ordinarily) a far greater measure of light and
knowledge in Divine things communicated to them, than was given ( ordinarily)
to Old-Testament-Believers; and therefore more Faith and Holiness is required
to be found in them. God did bear with such Infirmities, Ignorances,
Carnalities in his people, in the days of old, before the coming of Christ, as
he will not bear with now under the Gospel: It is requisite, that men should be
answerable to the Dispensations of God toward them, Luke 12.48. Unto
whomsoever much is given, of him shall much be required; and to whom men have
committed much, of him they will ask the more. Now they that are entrusted with
the Gospel, and Ordinances thereof, much is committed to them: If seed be sown
in a rich soil, men expect much fruit; they that are planted in the House of
the Lord, as all that enjoy the Gospel and Ordinances thereof in their power,
purity and glory, are so, are planted in a rich soil indeed. Ground which is
plentifully watered, should be abundantly fruitful: They that live under the
blessed distillations of Gospel Ordinances, are plentifully watered, Isa 49.10.
He shall lead them by the springs of water: What are those springs of water,
but the Soul-refreshing Promises and Ordinances of the Gospel? Hence Christians
are compared to watered Gardens, Isa. 58.11. A Garden which is often watered,
it is expected that it should be exceeding fruitful: So then ought Professors
of the Gospel to be.

We proceed therefore unto the Second thing; and that is to inquire, How it
does appear, that unprofitableness under the Gospel is a very dangerous evil.

I shall only mention two Arguments, evincing the truth of this.

1. Because they that slight the Gospel, are the greatest and most guilty
sinners in all the World.

The greatest sinners are in danger of incurring the dreadfullest Condemnation,
now so are they that Live under the Gospel, and yet slight it, such sin at high
and dear rates indeed; for they sin against light, as Jobs phrase is concerning
some, They rebel against the light, chap. 24.13. Had it been possible for them,
they would have plucked the Sun out of Heaven, that their wickedness might not
have been discovered: So Despisers of the Gospel, are Rebels against the light:
yea, against the highest and most spiritual light that ever shone upon men.
When Christ preached the Gospel in some dark corners an the Land of Judah, it
is said, that the people which fate in darkness, saw a great light, Mat. 4.16.
The light of Nature is but a dark glimmering light, and the light of the Law
was dark, compared with that of the Gospel: but now the Gospel is the most
Clear, Divine, Spiritual, Glorious Light that ever shone into the hearts of
men. Hence if men despise it their sin, guilt and danger is most fearful: yea,
and such persons do not only sin against the clearest Light, but against the
highest Love that ever was. It was a wonderful Evidence of Divine Philanthropy,
even of the love and kindness of God toward mankind, Tit. 3.4. that he should
find out a way for sinful men to come unto Salvation, and by the Gospel he
disovers this way. Now to slight the kind offers of God, must needs be
hainously evil. God shows special favor to that people, upon whom he
bestows the Gospel and Ordinances thereof, Psalm. 89.15. Blessed are the
people that know the joyful sound, they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of thy
countenance: The silver Trumpets under the Law, by which the people were called
together, at the times appointed for Sacred and Solemn Assemblies, did typifie
the Gospel and holy Ordinances thereof. It is a blessed thing to be often
hearing the joyful sound, which is made by the Silver Trumpet of the
Everlasting Gospel; such have the light of Gods countenance toward them, God
from Heaven seems to look on them with a pleasent, favorable countenance. Now
then to slight this favor, that is dangerous, Romans 2 4, 5. Despisest thou the
riches of his goodness -- After thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest
up to thy self wrath, against the day of wrath. They that live impenitently
under the Gospel, they despise the riches of Divine goodness? therefore cannot
expect other, but that treasures of wrath will be laid up against them, and one
day laid out upon them. In a word, this sin of slighting the Gospel, is
virtually and causally all sin; for all a man's other sins would be forgiven, if
this were not superadded to the rest. If men did embrace the Gospel, they
should also receive the Remission of sins. Unbelief is the greatest sin that
ever any of you were guilty of in your lives: This binds the guilt of all sins
against the Law, upon a man's Concience forever: Now by Unbelief is not meant,
the doubting whether our sins are forgiven, but the refusing of the motion of
the Gospel, when the Gospel freely offers Christ and Pardon; Life and Heaven
with him: Now to neglect him, and to lie out from him, to prefer the World, or
it may be, a base Lust, before the blessed Son of God, this is that Unbelief
which provokes God more than transgressions of the Law does.

2. Because to slight the Gospel, is to sin against the remedy. There is but
one only Remedy in all the World for a poor sinner; namely, that which the
Gospel tells us of, Acts 4.12. Neither is there Salvation in any other; for
there is no other name under Heaven given amongst men whereby we may be saved.
Now for a man to reject a Remedy, and an only Remedy that is exceeding
dangerous. Suppose a man to be poisoned, yet if he has a Sovereign Antidote
offered to him, he may do well; but if he shall foolishly and wilfully refuse
this Antidote, then his case is dangerous, deadly, desperate: Thus it is here,
all men are poisoned with sin; that deadly venom of sin, the old Serpent has
poisoned the whole World with it: But now the Gospel brings an Antidote against
this Poison, even the precious Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ: he that shall
refuse this Antidote, will certainly perish. If the Children of Israel when
they were stung in the Wilderness with the fiery Serpent, had not regarded the
Brazen Serpent, they had certainly perished; thus then to refuse the Gospel, is
to sin against the only remedy: As Ely said to his Sons, If one man sin
againest another, the Judge shall judge for him; but if a man sin against the
Lord, who shall entreat for him, 1 Samuel 2.25. So if a man sin against the Law,
the Gospel may help him; but if he despise the Gospel, what help then is left
for him; so that this is a dangerous evil. But the truth of this will appear
further, in speaking to the third thing; that is, in showing wherein the danger
of unprofitableness under the Gospel does consist.

In what respect is unfruitfulness under the Gospel and Ordinances thereof
dangerous?

Ans. 1. There is danger, lest the Lord should be provoked hereby to take away
his Gospel. The abuses of mercies, provokes the Lord to take them away: So the
Lord threatens them, Hosea, chap 2. that because they had abused Temporal
Blessings; Therefore, Verse. 9. I will take away my corn, and my wine, says
GOD, Will the Lord take away food for the body, if abused, and will he not much
more deprive men of spiritual food for their Souls, if they be not thankful and
fruitful under these enjoyments? hence Christ said to the Jews, The Kingdom of
God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits
thereof, Matt. 21.43. meaning, that the Word and Ordinances should be taken
from them, and be given to the Gentiles; had they not been unfruitful under the
means of grace, it should never have been so. And this was long before it came
to pass, foretold by the Prophet, Isa. 5. The Lord there tells what he would do
to his unfruitful Vineyard, Ve^se. 5. he says, he would break down the wall
thereof: Now the Word and Ordinances were as a wall of Distinction and
Separation, whereby Israel was differenced from the Heathen Nations; and again,
Ver. 6. The Lord says, that he would command the clouds, that they should rain
no more upon it; that is, that they should be deprived of the Ministry of the
holy Prophets: Therefore afterward we hear that people complaining, that they
had not their signs, there was none to tell them how long, no Prophet amongst
them, Psalm. 74.9. This was a just punishment for their unprofitableness: And
you know the Lord told Ezekiel, that he must become dumb, because the people
were rebellious, chapter 3.26. the Prophets of God must be stricken dumb, yea, and
dead too, they must be carried down to the place of silence, because the house
of Israel is a rebellious house. This is that sin which brings many a precious
Minister into his grave, that might have lived long, and have done much service
in his Generation; Oh but the unprofitableness of a disobedient people killed
their Minister.

2. They that live unprofitably under the means of Grace, are in fearful danger
of the curse. This is expressed in the Text, when its said, that such an one is
nigh unto cursing; every moment of his life, the Eternal Curse is ready to
seize upon his Soul; he is as nigh to the execution of the Curse, as he is to
death, which in a moment shall overtake him. As there is but one step between
him and death, so there is but one step between him and the Curse. In this
respect it is true, that all sinners (I mean all that in respect of their state
are such) are nigh unto cursing: But more especially this is true concerning
such sinners, as live unprofitably under the precious means of Grace; hence is
that, 1 Cor. 16.22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let him be Anathama
Maranatha: By one that loves not the Lord Jesus Christ, is meant such persons
as are spoken of in my Text, even Despisers of the Gospel; men that have heard
of the excellency of Jesus Christ, and yet care not for him; now so living, and
so dying, Let him be Anathama Maranatha: As if it were said, Let him be
accursed in Heaven, and accursed on Earth, curse him all ye Angels in Heaven,
curse him all ye Saints on Earth, and let those curses remain on him, until
Doomsday. Moreover, God is wont to be quick and speedy in punishing sinners
under the Gospel: So Mal 3.5 I will be a [swift] witness against you: It is
there spoken against Carnal Gospellers, So Revl. 2 5 In this respect, Gospel
despisers are truly said to be nigh unto cursing.

3. Such persons are in danger of being Judi^ially given up to everlasting
unfruitfulness This is the Curse here spoken of. That ground which is barren,
is called Cursed earth, Job 24.18. hence such are said to be rejected. That
which is execrable and An athematized, is forsaken, even so such sinners are
forsaken of God for ever. The Lord does never punish sin more dreadfully, than
when he does punish sin with it self. So it is here, the Lord by a Judicial act
does punish sin with sin: This was their sin (says God) that they were
unfruitful under fruitful means; and therefore this shall be their punishment,
they would not profit by what they did enjoy, and therefore this shall be their
plague, they shall be given up to everlasting barrenness of Soul. There is an
awful Scripture to this purpose, which we shall a little open to you as we go
along; it is that Ezekiel. 47.11. The miry places, and the Marshes, shall not be
healed, they shall be given to salt. By miry places, are meant such earth as
that which my Text speaks of. In miry places, the water and the earth mix
together, the water has not a free passage, but stands and corrupts there;
even so when the waters of the Sanctuary, that is, the Doctrine of the Gospel
has not a free passage through the hearts of men, but the Word comes to the
ear, and there it stops, and does not run through their hearts and lives, but
the Word mixed with the corruptions of men, that they can hear Sermons, and
keep their lusts too, these now are miry places. Observe then the judgment of
God upon them, they shall not be healed; that is to say, they shall never be
converted. They would not be converted, this was their sin; therefore they
shall not be converted, this shall be their punishment, but they shall be given
to salt,; that is to barrenness of Soul. Salt signifies Barrenness, Deu.
29.23. it is said the land was salt; i. e. Barren. Thus then are unfruitful
Hearers of the Word in danger of being judicially given up by God to
everlasting Barrenness of Soul: Therefore when Christ saw a figtree, and found
nothing on it but leaves only, he said unto it, Let no fruit grow on thee hence
forward and forever, Mat. 21.19. The Son of God that has eyes like a flame of
fire, he looks into the hearts of men; and if he find that there is nothing but
the leaves of an outward Profession, but no fruits of Saving Faith and
Repentance, though they have enjoyed the means of Grace, now the Lord secretly
passes this heavy doom upon such souls, saying, Never let fruit grow upon such
a sinner hence forward and forever. He would not believe, therefore never let
him believe; he would not be converted, therefore never let him be converted.

4. Unprofitable hearers of the Word are in danger of utter ruin, Luke 13.6,
7. A certain man had a Fig Tree planted in his Vineyard; he came and sought
fruit thereon, and found none: Then said he to the Dresser of his Vineyard,
Behold these three years I come, seek-for fruit on this Fig Tree, but find
none, cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground. So that unfruitful hearers of
the Word, are in danger to hear that Sentence Cut it down: Inasmuch as they
hear Sermons, and yet will not repent and believe, therefore down with them
(says God;) their bodies down to the Grave, and their Souls down to Hell, Down
with them! Thus did John Baptist preach to the unfruitful Jews, Mat. 3.10.
Every tree which brings not forth good fruit is hewn down. Such Trees such
Professors of Religion, as either bring forth no fruit, or nothing but leaves
of Profession, or else only evil fruit, shall be hewn down! yea, such are in
danger of being cast into Hellfire; therefore John adds further, and cast
into the fire, And this is also expressed in the Text, when it is said, whose
end is to be burned, that is to say, this is the end, even the event which
shall befall such earthly Christians, that they shall be thrown into the fire,
which never shall be quenched. You know in some Countries they burn Turf: The
earth which is altogether unfruitful, is made use of for fuel; thus does the
Lord say concerning men, either let them be for fruit, or else for fuel. As the
Prophet speaks concerning the Vine tree, (Ezekiel. 15.) that if it do not bear
fruit, it is fit for nonothing else but the fire. So for Christians, either
they must bring forth fruits of faith and holiness, or else they must be made
fuel for the fire of Divine wrath to feed upon to all Eternity. But more may be
spoken to this purpose, in the Application of the Point* Because I would finish
at this time, I shall only mention one Use of this Truth.

Use. And let it be a solemn word of warning and awakening, to every soul that
hears me this day. Oh beware of living unprofitably under the Gospel and
means of Grace which you are made to partake of. Consider what has been spoken
concerning the greatness of this sin, and consequently the dreadful danger
which is therein. Is there any man willing to be cursed, rejected, burned? If
not, in Gods fear take heed that you do not remain unfruitful under those
showers of Heaven, which from day to day fall upon your Souls. Remember also,
that unfruitfulness is the ready way to be deprived of Gospel Ordinances, and
all the means of Grace. Sometimes indeed God does take away men from the means,
because of this sin; hence the Lord strikes them with sickness, that they
cannot come abroad to the public Assemblies of his People, though they would;
nay, with death it self. Thus we see in the Corinthians (chapter 11.) though they
were true Believers, and such as should not be condemned with the World at the
great Day; yet because they did not come to, and profit by that Ordinance of
the Lords Supper as they should have done, therefore sickness and death befell
them. Sometimes again, God takes away the means from men, because of this sin,
Oh, I fear, I fear, I fear, this will be the Judgment of God upon New England!
I confess sometime, when I have not before my coming into the Assembly had any
such thought in my heart, yet as I have been here standing and speaking before
the Lord, such words as these have been, as it were forced from me; but now I
do upon saddest deliberation speak it. Alas, alas! how are many Professors
amongst us too like the Gergesens, Matthew. 8.34. that prized their Swine above
Christ: Thus do men value their Possessions in the World, above Christ and
Gospel. Hence it is that so little encouragement is given to the Gospel all the
Country over; I am sorry to speak of these things, did not Conscience and Duty
constrain me to it) which is a sad evidence, that the Lord Jesus will depart
from these Coasts e're long; yea, and there are already lamentable symptoms of
the Lords departure: God is never wont to remove his Gospel and Ordinances all
at once, but by degrees; but now there begins to be a scarcity of Spiritual
Food amongst us already. Look into Plantations round about, and consider how it
is; There was a few years ago a Lecture at Dorchester, and at Dedham, at
Braintrey, etc. But it is not so at this day. All these places (and many other)
had Ministers and Sacraments amongst them, when as now they are deprived
thereof. Besides, our woeful declinings from First-love to Christ, and to his
holy Institutions, and to one another, are a sad sign, that the Lord intends to
remove his Candlestick out of this place, Rev. 2.5. What do these things
portend, but that these Bethels will become Bethavens, it may be e're this
Generation be passed away? But besides these things which have been insisted
on, let me spread before you a few Awakening Considerations, which should cause
you to dread this sin of unprofitableness under means of Grace.

Consider 1. That you are not, you cannot be Christians indeed, except you be
fruitful. It is given as the Character of a false Christian, or an Hypocrite,
that though he be a Branch in Christ; that is to say, a Professor of the true
Christian Religion, yet he bears no fruit, Joh. 15.1. And it is noted
concerning those unsound Professors, which proved Apostates at last, that they
were unfruitful, Jude 12. Those that have indeed an interest in Christ, are
always fruitful; They that are married unto Christ, bring forth fruit unto God,
Romans 7.4. If therefore there be not a bringing forth of this fruit, that is a
sure sign that the soul was never married to Christ, never united unto him by
faith, never had a saving interest in him. It may be said of every true
Believer, as was said of Onesimus, Phil. 11. In time past unprofitable, but now
profitable. So a sinner before his Conversion, is an unfruitful Creature; but
when once he is effectually brought home to God, then he is profitable; If he
be (as Onesimus was) a servant, he is a profitable Servant; he labors to
conform himself to the will of God and so to please God in every thing;
whatever Relation he stands in, he brings forth fruit according to that
Relation, endeavoring to answer the duties of that Relation; never say or
think that you are Christians, if it be nor thus with you. Hence it is, that
the Conversion of sinners is in the Scriptures set forth by saying, Instead of
the Thorn shall come up the Firr-tree; and instead of the Bryer shall come up
the Mirtle-tree, Isa. 55.13. That is to say, they that were before like the
Thorn and the Bryer, even unfruitful, and unfit for any good work, shall become
fruitful.

Consider 2. That many hearers of the Word are altogether unprofitable. Yea,
the most by far are so; so we read in Mat. 13. concerning four sorts of ground,
and but one of them good; that is to say, four sorts of hearers of the Word,
and there are three to one that are bad. Oh, how should this awaken! And alas,
if we look into the World we shall find, that indeed it is thus: As it was said
of Ephraim, that he was an empty Vine, that bro't forth fruit unto himself;
thus it is with many, yea, with the most of men, nay of Professors, they bring
forth fruit to themselves, to the World, to Satan, but not to God. How is it
with many of you? you have leaves and that is all, even Profession without
Practice; others of you, you bring forth the fruit of Morality and Civility,
and that is all; you bless your selves that you are no Drunkards, no Adulterers,
no Swearers; but I beseech you consider, Morality and Civility alone, is no
saving Evangelical work; you may have this, and yet fall short of that fruit
which the Gospel requires: There are others, that instead of good, they bring
forth evil fruit, even Thorns and Briars. Are there not lamentable Divisions
and Contentions amongst us? such fruit is, Thorns and Briars. Behold, the Lord
has planted a Vineyard amongst us? Psalm. 80.8.9 etc. may marvellously be
applied unto us: God has bro't us as a Vine out of Egypt, he has cast out the
Heathen, and has planted us, he has caused this vine to fill the Land But
alas for us! we have been an unfruitful Vine; How may the Lord complain against
us, as against his people of old, Isa. 5.2. He looked that it should bring
forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes: So has it been with us, wild
grapes have been brought forth, Profaneness Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
Swearing, Unlawful Gaming, etc. Oh, how may we tremble to think what God will
do.

Consider 3. That the Word and Ordinances, if they do not good, they will
occasion much hurt unto us. Certain it is, that the Ordinances, if powerfully
dispensed, shall have their effect and operation upon the hearts of men, Isa.
55.10, 11. For as the rain comes down, and the snow from Heaven, and returns
not thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth fruit, and bud,
that it may give seed to the Sower, and bread to the eater* So shall my Word
be, that goes out of my mouth, it shall not return unto me void, but it shall
accomplish that which I please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereunto I
sent it. Ordinances, if they do not soften, they will harden; if they do not
convince and convert, they will blind the minds of men, and seal up their souls
under secret wrath. Hence the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. We are unto God a
sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish; to the
one are we a savor of death unto death, and to the other, the savor of life
unto life. Oh, how would men and women sit trembling under Sermons, if they did
believe, that they were about a matter of life and death, yea, a concernment of
everlasting life, or everlasting death. Sermons shall have their effect upon
the hearts of men, either to save or to damn their Souls, Isa. 6.9, 10. Go
(says God to the Prophet) make the heart of this people fat, and make their
ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they convert, and be healed. Mark, I
beseech you, was there ever a more dreadful word spoken? One would have
thought, that if the Prophet spoke to them, it should have been only, that they
might have been converted; but the Lord by a Judicial hand upon them for their
Unprofitableness, sent his Prophet to harden their hearts, lest they should be
converted. So for Sacraments, they will have their effect upon men's Souls,
either for life or for death. We read of Judas, that after he had received the
Sop, Satan entered into him; even so, when you have been at the Lords Table, if
Christ do not enter into you, Satan will; either Christ or Satan will come and
take a fuller possession of your Souls. Believe it, Sermons, Sabbaths,
Lectures, Sacraments, they shall all of them work, either for life, or for
death.

Consider 4. Long continued Vnprofitableness under the means of Grace, is a sad
sign of Reprobation. I tell you truly, this is one of the blackest marks of an
Eternal Castaway, 2 Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
lost. If the Gospel be withheld from a people, its a sign they shall perish; or
if it be sent to them, yet if in the life, and power, and saving efficacy of
it, it be hid from men's Souls, that is a sign that they shall be lost: It is an
awakening word which you may find, Jer. 6.2. ult. The bellows are burnt, the
Lead is consumed of the fire, the founder melts in vain, for the wicked are
not taken away, reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord has
rejected them: As if it were said, God and man even the Lord by his Prophets,
has bestowed much labor about this people, and yet they continue wicked
still, therefore are they to be looked upon as Reprobate and rejected ones.
Christ tells the Jews, that the reason why they did not believe was, because
they were not of God, John 8 47. and because they were not sheep, John 10.26.
that is to say, because they did not belong to Election. If men live long
unprofitably under means of Grace, this is a sad token that they do not belong
to Election. Indeed secret things belong to God, and therefore it is no
absolute Con^^^sion, that if a man live many years under (...) powerful
preaching of the Gospel, and (...) not converted thereby, that he shall (...)
be converted, yet it is a sad suspicion (...) calls his Elect, some at one age,
some (...) ^ther, but generally before old age, e^ (...) where men live under
the Gospel. O (...) headed sinners, tremble at it before the (...) this day,
and let this word at last (...) you.

Consider 5. That as for your part (...) has bestowed much means upon you,
(...) ^ken much pains with you. The rai^ (...) often fallen upon you, outwardly
y^^ (...) had Jacobs blessing, Genesis 27.28. Go^ (...) thee of the dew of Heaven.
(...) the showers of Heaven have fallen (...) you; some of you have lived all
yo^ (...) under blessed Influences; you have h^ (...) ^^ligious Education, you
have been bo^ (...) bred under Gospel light, and Gospel ^^dinances. Have thou
not heard a tho^ (...) Sermons and more, since thou have bee^ in the World?
there are many of y^^ ^ha^ have so. But in the name of God, a (...) converted?
or are you still in the s^ (...) o^ nature? or if you think you are (...) ^ed,
do you then grow in Grace ^^^^rding to the means which you have (...) ^ed? you
have had the Gospel, when (...) in the World have been deprived of (...) you
have been beyond others in Privileges, are you beyond them in holy
Conversation and Godliness? Oh that it were so!

Consider 6. That the Lord keeps a strict account what means are afforded unto
you. God to^^ notice against the Jews, that they had lived about twenty years
under the Prophet Jeremies faithful Ministry, Jer. 25.3. Whatever ^alents are
bestowed on you, assure your selves, that the Lord will call you to an account
for all one day: Thus Luke 13.7. Behold these three years I come seeking fruit,
and find none; The Lord takes notice how many years you live under means, yea,
how many Sermons are preached to you. Oh, are there not some of you, that have
lived not only three years, but three times three years and more, yea, twenty,
thirty, some ^f you forty years under the precious dews of Heaven, and yet no
living fruit to be seen on you to this day: Oh, this is exceeding lamentable.

Consider 7. and lastly, That if you should dye in your sins, you will incur
the sorest condemnation that ever was. God forbid, that it should be so; yet I
dare not but tell you, that in case you dye without true Repentance, and
sincere Faith in Jesus Christ, of all Creatures upon the face of the Earth, you
will become the most miserable. Hearken secure hard-hearted sinners; all you
Christless, Graceless Creatures, that are here before the Lord this day,
tremble at this word. It is said concerning fruitless Christians that they
shall be cast into the fire and burned, Joh. 15.6. One would think that there
were no need of saying, they shall be burned, after it was said, they should be
cast into the fire; but that is to show, how sore the punishment of such
sinners shall be. Remember that word Mat. 11.24. Thou Capernaum which art
exalted unto Heaven, shall be brought down to Hell: It shall be more tolerable
for the Land of Sodom in the day of Judgment than for thee. How were they
exalted unto Heaven, but in respect of the means of Grace? They did for some
time live under the Ministry of the best Preacher that ever was upon the face
of the earth, or that ever shall be; yet because they brought forth no fruit
but thorns and briars, they were to be cast down into the deepest place in
Hell. Oh! thou impenitent Wretch, it will be more tolerable for the Vilest
Wretch in Sodom at the Day of Judgment, than for thee. What says the
Scripture? Heb. 2.3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation. The
Salvation of the Gospel, if it be but so much as neglected, there will then be
no escaping the Wrath of God. If Salvation, yea, great Salvation, and so great
Salvation, be neglected, there will be no escaping of Wrath to the uttermost.
See then that you refuse not him that speaks from Heaven; for if they escaped
not, who refused him that spoke on Earth, much more shall not we escape; if we
turn away from him that speaks from Heaven.

It is the great Interest of men, to hear and open to Christ, when he stands
knocking at the door.
P^^al. 3.2^. Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man hear my voice,
and open the door, I will come into him, and sup with him, and h^ with me.


THese words are part of that Epistle, which the Lord Jesus Christ sent from
Heaven to the Church of Laodicea. In which Epistle he does both convince and
exhort them. First, he convinces them, and that of two evils; especially, 1 Of
their Formality and Hypocrisy, verse 15, 16.2. Of their Pride and
Self-conceit, verse 17. Having convinced ^em of these evils, he proceeds (in
verse. 18, 19.) to exhort them unto Repentance, and that they would repair to
him for help and healing of these things, which were amiss among them, and
which he had reproved them for.

In this Verse that Exhortation set down, in the two foregoing Verses, if
further urged from a double Argument, 1. From the gracious opportunity which
they then had, inasmuch as Christ was then amongst them; in the first part of
the Verse. 2. From the good and benefit which would come thereby; in the latter
part of the Verse.

For opening of the words, before we come to the Doctrine from them, we shall
only enquire, what is here meant by the Door, when Christ says, If any man
open the Door, etc.

What is this Door?

Answ. Thereby the Heart is signified. Hence the Scripture speaks of opening
the heart: It is said of Lydia, that she was one whose heart the Lord opened,
Acts 16.^4: The words are a Metaphor from the opening of a Door. The Door is
that by which men enter into the House. So it is by the Heart, that the Lord
enters into a man to take possession of his soul. A Christian is compared to an
House; now the Heart is the Door of that House. Moreover, the Doors or Gates of
Cities in old times, were the strength thereof, So is the Heart of a man his
strength. The Gates were places of Authority, men were wont to sit in Judgment
in the Gate; so the Heart bears Authority over the whole man. And Gates were
for Consultation; so is the Heart, therefore we read of the Counsels of the
Heart. The Heart is the Counsel, Strength, Authority of the whole man. Hence it
is that if Christ has not the Heart, he has nothing: Though he should have a
man's Judgment, Tongue, Conscience, Estate, if he has not his Heart, he is kept
out of Doors still.

Doctr. That when Christ does stand and knock at the Door of the hearts of men,
it is, as their duty, so their interest, and will be their happiness, to hear
and open to him; or, That it is the great interest of men, to hear and open to
Christ, when he stands and knocks at the door of their Souls.

In the Doctrinal prosecution of this Point, four things may be attended; 1. To
show what is implied in Christ's standing at the door and knocking. 2. How or by
what means Christ knocks. 3. What is implied in hearing Christ's Voice, and
opening to him. 4. How it does appear that they are happy that receive Christ;
or that it is the interest of men so to do. To all these briefly.

Quest. 1. What is implied in Christ's standing at the door and knocking?

Answ. 1. Herein is implied, That Christ is not so far entertained as ought to
be. As for every sinful man, either Christ is out of his heart totally, so it
is as to to those that are in a state of sin and unbelief, John 1.11. He came
to his own, and they received him not. The unbelieving Jews gave no
entertainment to Christ, but they shut him wholly out of doors, as it were.
Faith and Repentance does open the door to Christ; so Sin and Unbelief does
shut the door against him; hence the Apostle says to the Ephesians, that by
Nature they were without Christ, Ephesians. 2.12. The natural man is out of Christ,
and Christ is out of him; or if Christ be not out of doors wholly, yet he is so
comparatively. Of some Christ is not at all entertained; of others, not so much
as he should be. There is a first and a further entertainment of Christ; the
one of these concerns Unbelievers, the other Believers. The Saints themselves
may give a further entertainment unto Christ; hence Christ knocks at the door,
even that he might have yet further entertainment. As in great houses there are
many rooms, there are rooms of common entertainment, and there is a Closet for a
man's self, and his intimate Friend, Thus it is here, Christ would be admitted,
not only into the out rooms of the Soul* but into the very Closet; that is to
say, in to the very heart. Hence he knocks, because men do not give him so
much of their hearts as they ought to do. Therefore,

2. This knocking implies, That Christ seeks to come in: He desires
admittance into the hearts of men, This knocking is attended with a motion,
that the door might be opened, as you may see in that Parallel Scripture, which
the words of the Text seem to allude unto, namely, that Cant. 5.2. My Beloved
knocks, saying open to me. Hence also in the Text, Christ does not only say,
I stand and knock at the door; but adds, if any man hear my voice; So that
with this knocking, there is a voice, a call, a motion from Christ, that the
door of the heart may be opened. As men sometimes, before they knock at a door,
they call an^ say, Who is within there? Who keep^ house? Thus does Christ call
upon sinners, Who is within in that heart? Who is the Housekeeper? Is there
any room for me there? Shall I come and lodge in that Soul of thine?

3. Herein is implied, That Christ does even stay and wait upon sinners, that
he may do them good. This is here intimated by standing, I stand at the door
and knock; This standing is a waiting Posture, the Greek word is as much as to
say, I have stood, and do stand still: Christ does not come and knock at the
door once, and then away again presently, but he stands there. The words note
then, not only that Christ makes a motion of mercy to poor sinners, but
moreover Constancy and Assiduity in the motion; therefore he says, Isa. 65.2.
I have stretched forth my hands all the day long. Such is his wonderful
Patience and Grace, as that he is pleased to stand knocking at the door, as it
were, from morning till night, even all the day long; Whence it is also said,
that the Lord waits to be gracious, Isa. 30.18. He waits upon sinners, till he
has run through a course of means of Salvation with them. As a Physician does
attend upon a Patient, until he has run through a course of Physic, and then
indeed he gives him over, when he sees there is no good to be done upon him:
So does the Lord deal with the Souls of men; he waits also even till the sinner
has run through a course of sin and wickedness, many a sinner, until such time
as he has quite filled up the measure of his sins, Christ does wait to be
gracious to him, thus does he stand at the door

Quest. 2. How or by what means is it that Christ does knock and call at the
door of the hearts of men?

Answ. 1. Christ knocks at the hearts of men by his Word; by this Epistle he
knocked at Laodicca's door. Hence in the Text Christ's voice is spoken of. When
Christ's Voice, his Word is heard, then is he knocking at the hearts of men;
therefore the Word is compared to an Hammer, Jer. 23.29. Is not my Word like an
Hammer, etc. An Hammer you know is an Instrument whereby men sometimes knock
and break open doors. So does the Lord by the Hammer of his Word knock and
break open the doors of the hearts of sinners. The Lord knocks by the Promises
of the Word, and Threatenings also, these are knocking awakening words indeed;
so by Instructions and Exhortations, etc. Hence it is, that as for all men that
enjoy the Ministry of the Word, whosoever they be that have the Gospel
dispensed amongst them, Christ knocks at their doors, and desires entrance
into their hearts.

2. Christ knocks by his Works. There is a secret voice of the Lord to the
Soul in every Providence, though few hear it, few understand it. As now by
mercies, Romans 2.4. The goodness of God leads thee to Repentance. It should be
so, this is Gods end in bestowing mercies and good things upon the Sons of men;
it is thereby to awaken and to stir them up to Repentance, that the Lord and
they might come together. That Preservation, Provision, Protection, which the
Lord in his gracious Providence is pleased to afford unto sinners. Those common
mercies which he bestows upon the vilest of men, Food, and Raiment, Health,
Wealth, nay, every meals meat, and every nights rest and sleep, by all the Lord
is knocking and calling upon men, that they would learn to know, and love, and
serve him, that gives all good unto them; as it is said, Prove. 18.10. A man's
gift makes room for him; eve^ so Christ seeks for a room in the heart, by the
gifts which he bestows, and is therefore most worthy to be received with the
highest entertainment.

Again, the Lord knocks at the door by Afflictions, as we see in his Context,
Whom I love, I rebuke and chasten (says Christ) and then it follows, I stand
at the door and knock. How? even by chastening Dispensations of Providence:
Therefore is that, Mic. 6.9. Hear ye the rod. Affliction is Gods rod; and an
iron rod it is, whereby the Lord does, as it were rap at the door of secure
sinners. If the Lord afflicts a man, he strikes and gives blows: Hence
David says, Remove thy [stroke] from me, I am consumed by the [blow] of thine
hand, Psalm. 39.10.

3. Christ does call and knock at the doors of men's hearts, by the voice of his
Spirit; It is said, Isa. 30.21. Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee,
saying, This is the way, walk therein, etc. namely, a word spoken by the secret
whisperings of the holy Spirit, saying to the sinner, Thou art out of the way,
if ever thou desire to be happy, thou must forsake this way thou art going
in, and turn into a new and another way. This is partly meant by the Voice
which my Text speaks of, namely, the voice of Christ's spirit. Sometimes a
poor Creature begins to think seriously with himself, Am I in Christ, or out of
Christ? Am I in a state of Nature, or in a state of Grace? If I should dye in
this condition, what would become of my poor Soul? Secret thoughts are darted
into the heart of a sinner, that it is high time for him, to think of making
his peace with God. He does, as it were, hear a voice behind him saying, Man
look about thee, there is one thing needful, and thou neglectest that, and in
the mean time are taken up about needless vanities? Now these are the secret
wisperings of the Spirit of Christ, whereby he knocks and calls upon the
hearts of men.

4. Christ knocks and calls upon the heart, by the voice of Conscience. A man's
Conscience is Gods Messengers, whereby he knocks at the door, and speaks
home to the hear, Pro^. 20.27. The spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord,
searching the inward parts of the belly. So that the inward parts of the belly,
that is to say, the most secret corners of the heart, are ransacked by the
spirit of a man, by which the Conscience is meant. And when Conscience
speaks, the Lord speaks also; for Conscience is Gods Messenger, (as was said)
it comes armed with Authority in his name; and hence is said to be the candle
of the Lord, because it is of the Lords sending and setting up. The voice of
Conscience is many times a roaring voice, whereby the Lord does Awaken the most
secure and sleepy sinners. Conscience has a Commission, that I may so speak,
not only to knock at the door, but if need be, to break the door down, rather
than that the sleepy sinner should not be awakened.

Que. 3. What is implied, in hearing Christ's voice, and opening to him?

Answ. 1. Herein is implied, a regarding what the Lord says. It notes a
diligent attention, even a listening unto Christ's voice. This is called
harkening and considering, Psalm. 45.10. Hearken, O Daughter, and consider, and
incline thine ear. A man may hear the voice of Christ, and yet slight all that
he hears of, or from Christ. So it was with the Jews, and so it is with the
greatest part of them, at whose door Christ is pleased to knock. Hence Wisdom,
that is Christ, complains, I have called, and ye refused? I have stretched
out my hand, and no man regarded; but ye have set at naught all my counsel, and
would none of my reproof, Pro. 1.24, 25. But the hearing which the Text
speaks of, notes due regard unto what is heard.

2. In this hearing Understanding is implied, even a discerning who it is that
stands knocking and calling at the door. He that hears my voice, that is,
that knows that it is the voice of Christ which is speaking to him, as John
10.3. The sheep hear his voice; and then verse 4. For they know his voice, and
verse. 5. But they know not the voice of strangers. That then is meant by
hearing the voice of Christ, even a knowing that it is his voice, so as to be
able to discern it from all other contrary voices. Except a man be able to
distinguish between the voice of Christ, and of Satan; between the good motions
of the Spirit of Christ, and the sinful motions of the evil Spirit, he cannot
be said to hear and open to Christ. Thus the Spouse in the Canticles, It is the
voice of my Beloved that knocks. Christ no sooner spoke, but presently she
knew whose voice it was that called to her, Cant. 5.2. So that acquaintance
with the voice of Christ is here included.

3. Herein also is implied, yielding of obedience to Christ. Hearing is
oft-times in the Scripture the same with obeying, Isa. 55.3. Hear, and your
Souls shall live; that is, obey, and you shall live: For hearing without
obedience is no hearing at all, 1 John 4.6. He that is not of God, hears not
us, that is, obeys not the Doctrine which we teach; and therefore is in the
same, or in a worse condition, than if he had never heard any thing. Thus he
that hears Christ, submits to the Authority of his Commands: Let me bear sway
in thy heart, says Christ, suffer me to bear rule in my own house, to be King
in my own Throne. Now where Christ's voice is duly heard, the Soul does not
resist, but yields it self to this Command of his.

Therefore lastly, herein Believing is implied. The door is set open to Christ,
when the heart does by Faith receive him: Believing is nothing else but a free,
willing kind entertainment of Christ into the he^^t, John 1.12. To as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God: And who are
they? Even to them that believe on his Name. They that in the beginning of the
Verse are called Receivers of Christ; in the latter part of the Verse are
called Believers on him. When the door of the heart is freely set open for
Christ to come in, and lodge there, this is believing. As a Friend willingly
sets open the door to his Friend, he says Is it you? Come in with all my
heart. When the Soul carries thus toward the Lord Jesus, saying, Is it Christ
that desires admittance into my Soul? Let Christ come in and take possession
of my heart for his own for ever; this is implied in this hearing and opening
to Christ.

Quest. 4. How does it appear, that they are happy that do thus open to Jesus
Christ?

Answ. Two things do abundantly evince this, both which are mentioned in the
Text.

1. In that he that does thus open his heart to Christ, shall have union with
him; I will come unto him, says Christ, so as to dwell with him, so as to live
in him. I will come to him, not as a Sojourner, but as an Inhabitant. Such an
ones heart shall be my house, Ephesians. 3.17. He dwells in the heart by faith. Now
union with Christ is a blessed thing. Happy they that have this glorious
Dignity belonging to them; for if a Soul be united to Christ, there is union
with God also, the Eternal Fountain of all life and happiness. Hence is that, 1
These 1.1. To the Church which is in God, and in the Lord Jesus Christ. He that
is in Christ, is in God also: If there be union with the Son, there is union
with the Father; for the Son and the Father are one. Christ never comes alone,
but if he comes, the Father comes with him; therefore Christ said, If a man
love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him, and [We] will come
to him, and make [Our] abode with him, John 14.23. Now Gods company is enough
to make the Enjoyers of it happy, Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence is fullness of
joy. Perfect happiness is in Gods presence; and therefore also in Christ's
presence, seeing these always go together.

2. Another thing which does evince the happiness of those that thus entertain
Christ, as has been opened to you, is that they shall enjoy Communion with
him. This is here expressed by supping. I will sup with him, and he with me;
that is to say, there shall be a mutual blessed Communion between Christ and
such a Soul. Receivers of Christ, that is, Believers on him, have Communion
with him, 1 Cor. 1.9. God has called us to the fellowship of his Son Jesus
Christ our Lord. This Fellowship, this Communion with Christ, is in respect of
all his blessed benefits, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification,
Glorification, all is here included in supping with Christ: It is as much as if
it were said, such a Soul as does open the door, shall feed and feast
everlastingly upon Christ, and upon his benefits; yea, this supping with Christ
notes, Intimacy of Communion; That Ordinance wherein Believers have that most
Intimate Communion with Christ, is called, the Lords Supper; so this supping
with the Lord, notes free and full Communion together, even such as is between
Friends that sit at the same Table together. And especially it notes, those
intimate embraces and unconceivable Communications, which shall pass between
Christ and his in the World to come; the state of glory, and that full sweet
Soul-satisfying Communion, which the Blessed shall in another World enjoy with
Christ, is set forth by similitudes taken from Eating, Drinking, Supping or
Feasting (for it was the Eastern manner in old times, to have their great
Feasts, not at noon, but at night; not at dinner, but at supper; I say the
glory of Heaven is set forth by the similitude of a great and sumptuous Feast;
so it is here in my Text.

But thus much shall suffice for the Doctrinal handling of this point, we shall
conclude only with one Use of Exhortation, and let it be in the words of the
Psalmist, Psalm, 24.7. Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lifted up ye
everlasting doors, and the King of Glory shall enter in. That Text indeed is
firstly and tipically to be understood concerning the doors of the Sanctuary
being set open for the Ark to enter in, and then fulfilled, when the Eternal
gates of the highest Heaven were set open, for Christ the King of Glory to
enter in at his Ascension; and lastly are to be applied to men's opening the
doors of their hearts, that Christ may come in there: Oh then be exhorted this
day, to set open the everlasting doors of your Souls, that Christ the King of
Glory may come in. And for that end consider seriously a few things.

Consider 1. That Christ is importunate in the motion which he makes, that he
might have possession of your Souls: Hence he continues following the suite a
long time, Prove 1.22. he there says, How long ye simple ones will ye love
simplicity? So that Christ does wait, and that for a long time (Oh how long) at
the door of men's hearts: And he renenweth his motion for entrance full many a
time and often, Mat. 23.37. How often (says Christ) would I have gathered you,
etc. So now often has the Lord Jesus been knocking at thy heart, how many scors,
how many hundred, how many thousand times? Have thou not had many good motions
in in thy heart, and many convections and awakenings upon thy Concience? Have
thou not heard many Sermons, received many mercies, felt many afflictions? By
all these now has the Lord been knocking at that heart of thine. Now this
importunity should be a Motive to prevail with you, to open your hearts unto
Jesus Christ; for our importunity does prevail with him to open the door of
Heaven to us, Luke 11.5. -- 10 therefore his importunity should prevail with us
to open the door of our hearts to him. Shall our importunities prevail with
Christ to open his door to us, and shall not Christ's importunity prevail with
us, to open our door to him.

Consider. 2. That Jesus Christ has right to enter in; for the house is his
own, at whose door he knocks. If servants should rise up, and in Rebellion
shut their Master out of doors, how vile a thing were that? Why so it is when
sinners do by unbelief shut Christ out of their hearts. You then refuse to let
the Master of the house come within his own dwelling: Thy Soul is Christ's own
House; it is so in respect of right of Creation. As the Apostle speaks
concerning that house of the Church, it is Christ's own house, for he built it,
Heb. 3.3, 4. so Christ has built this house, he has made thy Soul to be an
house for himself to dwell in: And if thou belongst to Election, thy Soul is
Christ's, (...) respect of right of Redemption, 1. Cor. 6. ult. Your spirits are
he Lords, you are bought with a price; your Souls are the Lord Christ's, and
that by right of Redemption* So that when Christ bids you open the door; the
Owner, and he that is Lord of the house demands entrance; Oh sh^t him not out
of doors.

Consider. 3. That Jesus Christ is worthy to be entertained by you: He is so in
respect of the Royal Dignity of his Person, Psalm. 45.2. He is fairer then the
children of men* No man so excellent as the man Christ Jesus, yea, his
excellency is above the Angels. If an Angel should come to one of your doors,
you would be loath to shut the door against him Behold, he whom all the Angels
in Heaven worship; he, at whose glory all the Angels in Heaven are amazed,
crying before him, Holy, holy, holy, Lord of Hosts, the whole earth is full of
thy glory; he knocks at the door, and will thou shut him out? Christ is God as
well as man, he is the King of Glory, and the Lord of Host, Also Christ is most
worthy to be entertained, in respect of his goodness, as well as in respect of
his greatness? If a good man should knock at your door, and you should see and
know that it were such an one, a very precious good man, you would be loath to
turn the door against him, And will thou turn the door against Jesus Christ,
who is not only good, but Goodness it self? Again, Christ is worthy of
entertainment, in respect of that Relation which he stands in: This motive is
urged, Cant. 5.2. Open to me, my Sister, my Spouse. Will a Sister shut her
Brother out of doors, or a Wife her Husband? yea, Christ is a Father. How
horrible is it for Children to shut their Father out of doors? yet so, and
worse than so it is; when Christ is not duly entertained in the hearts of men.
To say no more, Christ is worthy to be entertained, in respect of that which he
has done and suffered for his people: Oh, how much has he done? he has taken
a long journey, that so he might be entertained in that heart of thine, and
will thou shut him out at last? If a Friend should come from a far Country to
visit you, sure you would not shut him out of doors? Behold Christ has come
from Heaven to the Earth to visit that Soul of thine, and will thou give him no
entertainment? Nay, he has given his life for thee, and that is more than the
life of all the Angels in Heaven, and will thou regard him now? Consider how
great things he has suffered for thy sake; he stands knocking, till his head
is filled with dew, and his locks with the drops of the night, Cant. 5.2 yea,
he has stood knocking at thy heart, not only with his locks filled with the
drops of the night, but his body filled with drops of blood: Oh, then never
shut him out of doors.

Consider 4. The exceeding benefit which you will reap by giving entertainment
unto Jesus Christ. There is nothing lost by showing kindness to good men when
they come to our houses: He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet,
shall receive a Prophets reward; and he that receivth a Righteous man in the
name of a Righteous man, shall receive a Righteous man's reward, Mat. 10.41. But
what reward must they needs have ther^, that shall receive the Son of God
himself? Behold I come (says Christ) and any reward is with me, Rev. 22.12.
The very company of a godly wise man is profitable; but what then is Christ's
company; Christ never comes empty-handed into any house, into any heart; no,
but he comes with both hands full of blessings. We read that when the Ark was
in the house of Obed-edom, God blessed Obed-edom; and blessed his house, and
blessed all that he had, because of the Ark of God which was in his house. The
Ark was a Type of Christ; then where Christ comes, God blesses that house,
that heart, with all manner of blessings. Oh, consider, if Christ come into the
house, he will bring provision with; I Will sup with him, says the Lord; your
entertainment of Christ shall cost you nothing. Alas, the house is nothing but
bare walls, before Christ comes into it, but then it is full of provision;
yea, if Christ be entertained, he will protect the house, as well as provide
for it, Phil. 4.7. The peace of God shall keep your hearts through Christ
Jesus. Have not some of you your temptations, and your pangs of unbelief with
them; and then you cry out (as David I shall one day perish by the hand of
Saul;) I shall one day perish by the hand of the Tempter, such a Corruption, or
such a Temptation will be my ruin at last. My serious counsel to you is, get
Jesus Christ into your hearts; and if Christ be there, let the Devil do his
worst, you need not fear him, Christ will gaurd the house against all the
Devils of Hell, he will defend thy Soul against the Temptations of the evil
one. In a word, if Christ come he, he will bring Salvation along with him;
therefore when Jesus Christ was received into Zacheus his house, it was said,
This day is Salvation come to this house, Luke 19.9. Oh happy Soul! where Jesus
Christ shall be entertained.

Consider. 5. The evil and danger which is in refusing to entertain Jesus
Christ: Every knock that Christ has given at thy door, will sink thy Soul so
much the deeper into Hell, if thou refusest him now. You may slight Christ, but
the day is coming, when slight him if you can or dare. They that were invited
to the Marriage Feast, made light of it, and went away, one to his Farm, and
another to his Merchandise, etc. Mat. 22.5. so now, when the motion of the
Gospel is tendered to you, you may make light of it, and go away to your Shops
and Ships, and buying and Selling, and never mind whether Christ be formed in
you or no. But the day is at hand, when every neglect of Christ shall be
heavier than Mountains of lead upon thy miserable Soul. Be it also known to
you, that if you will not hear Christ now, he will not hear you another day;
see that solemn Scripture, and tremble at it, Luke 13.25, 27. When once the
Master of the house it resen up, and has shut to the door, and ye begin to
stand without, and to knock at the door, and to say, Lord, Lord, open to us:
and he shall answer, I say unto you, I know you not, whence you are, depart
from me all you workers of iniquity. Thus it will be at the last day, thou will
cry, Lord, Lord, open to me! Oh, how thou will cry, Lord, Lord, let me go to
Heaven: But the Lord will say to thee, Remember thou sinful Wretch, remember,
there was a time when I called to thee, but thou would not open the door of
thy heart to me, and therefore now the door of Heaven shall not be opened to
thy Soul: Thou did not care for my company when time was, and therefore now
depart from me.

Consider. 6. Either you must entertain Christ into your hearts, or a worse
Guest. Certain it is, that this house will not stand empty long. Other houses
may stand empty, but the heart will not; either you must entertain Christ or
the World, and the truth is, this is the reason why many give such cold
entertainment unto Christ, it is because they are so hot in pursuing of the
World: The World makes such a noise and lumber in their ears, that they cannot
hear Christ knocking and calling upon them. Thus it was with Laodicea, they
were so taken up with their goods and riches, that they had no leisure to
attend unto what Christ said to them. Again, if Christ be kept out, the Devil
will be kept in his possession still: You may see an awful Parable to this
purpose, Luke 11.24, 25, 26. yea, let me tell you, that if you do not entertain
Christ, you will lodge that in your hearts which is worse than any Devil in
Hell, that is, sin, Jer. 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness,
that thou may be saved; how long shall thy vain tho'ts lodge within thee? So
it will be, vain thot's, proud thot's, unclean thot's, will lodge within thy
heart, if Christ be not there: How lamentable is it, that if the World^ or
Satan, or Sin call, men can go presently. But if Christ call never so
earnestly, they have no heart to stir. What? to shut Christ out, and receive
his Enemies within! How will you be able to stand before the Lord, or your own
Consciences another day for this?

Consider. 7. That Christ is knocking at every door this day. This Truth
concerns every Soul amongst you. Look into Societies, Christ is knocking
there: And I had like to have spoke a dreadful word, and to have said, that
Christ has given leave to Satan to knock ^here; What else is the meaning of
those doleful noises in the Temple, even divisions and tearings in Churches?
Christ knocks at the Church of Laodicea, so he has at many Churches amongst
us. Have not many Stars of late been removed, to shine in an higher Orb of
Glory? Many precious Ministers have been smitten with sickness, yea, and with
death too. Thus has Christ knocked at our Churches doors, and so he has at
the door of the whole Country, by those blastings, droughts, etc. That have
been in former years, and that excesive rain which is at this day. Methinks I
hear the Lord Jesus from Heaven, saying, O New England, New England, be
instructed, least my Soul leave thee desolate. And as for particular persons,
they cannot say but that Christ has been knocking and calling to them; You all
have the Gospel preached to you, and therefore the Lord's calling upon you; and
do you meet with afflictions? and do you recieve many mercies? those are all
knocks from the Lord of Heaven, I would you wist it. Art thou a profane
sinners? yet Christ knocks at thy door, and says to thee, Forsake thy sins,
and come to me. Art thou an Hypocrite, a dead, formal, lukewarm Professor of
Religion? yet Christ knocks at thy door: Thus it was with some in Laodicea,
they were lukewarm, yet did Christ stand and knock at their doors, that so (if
possible) they might be roused out of their deadness and security. Art thou a
true child of God? yet Christ knocks at thy door, that so thou may give
him further and better entertainment. There are some corners of thy heart that
are not so full of Christ as they should be; Therefore does the Lord knock at
thy door, that so every corner of thy Soul might be filled with the Spirit of
^he Son of God.

Quest. But how shall we entertain Christ?

Answ. 1. Go to Christ that he would open the door of your hearts: You cannot
open them your selves, then do not shut them, but go to Christ, and pray him to
open to them: He has the key of every heart in his hand, he opens, and none
can shut, Rev. 3.7. Pray to him then, that he would put his hand in at the hole
of the door, Cant. 5.4. There is the hand of Christ's Power, and of his Spirit,
pray to him that these may open thy shut-up heart: When Christ knocks, do you
knock too, and to him that knocks, it shall be opened, Mat. 7.7. Blessed
shall be the man that hears him, watching daily at his gates, waiting at the
posts of his door, Prove. 8.34.

2. Away with sin. Christ will not come in, except sin go out; And therefore as
ever you desire Christ's company, away, away forever with your vile lusts, and
secret haunts after sin. Oh thou sinner, thou do shut the King of Glory out
of doors: As it is said, Who is the King of Glory? so I say, Where is the King
of Glory? Is he in thy heart? No such thing, if sin be willingly entertained
there; wherever he be, to ^e sure he is not in that heart of thine, (...) any
unmortified lust abide there, 2 Cor. 6.15.

3. Entertain Christ wholly; that is, 1. Let Christ have thy whole heart: You
must not divide your hearts, between Christ and other things, but let Christ
have all: I am sure he is worthy of all; and he will have all, or none. Some
do, as it were, half open the door to Christ, as Agrippa did, when he was
almost persuaded to be a Christian, Acts 26.28. But see that you receive Christ
freely and fully.

2. Embrace whole-Christ, Christ in his Person, as the only excellent and
desirable one; and in all his Offices; as Prophet, to instruct you; Priest, to
save you; King, to rule you. Some would have Christ to be a Savior to them,
but not a Lord over them; but if Christ come, he will be a Lord in his own
house: Let him then set up his Kingdom in thy heart; let him rule there by his
Word and Spirit, then will he sup with thee, and thou with him.

There are some sinners so given over by God, as that his holy Spirit does for
ever cease striving with them.
Genesis 6.3. And the Lord said, My spirit shall not always strive with man, for
that he also is flesh; yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years.


OF this Chapter there are two parts. The first is concerning Gods
Determination to destroy the old World with a flood, because of the general
defection and wickedness of the World. The second is concerning Noah's preparing
of an Ark, wherein himself and his house were to be saved.

This Verse falls under the former of these; in the which we have three things.

1. A Divine Commination. The Lord said, My Spirit shall not alwyas strive. T^
^ Hebrew word which is here used for (...) ^ving, signifies to contend, or to
dispute, which is after the manner of men spoken concerning the Lord. For men
sometimes have a contention, a strife and conflict in their Spirits, what they
should do, or what course it is best for them to take. After this manner does
the Lord here speak, saying, I will not always have a strife and conflict in my
Spirit about the children of men; I am now come to an issue about that matter,
the thing is concluded.

2. We have the Reason of this Commi^ation, For that he also is flesh; this is
the Reason why the Lords Spirit will cease striving. He is so, that is, man is
so, yet, even mankind; and consequently men of all sorts and conditions, even
Professors of Religion as well as others, the Sons of God, as it is expressed
in the former Verse: There were some that were only the Son, of men, that is,
such us never minded God, nor did make any profession of his name; others did
profess the fear and worship of God, and these are called his Sons. These words
may have dependence on the la-Verse of the fourth Chapter; where it is said,
that unto Seth there was born a Son-then began men to call upon the name of the
Lord. The Posterity of Cain were a profane, irreligious Generation, but the
Posterity of Seth were otherwise. Religion was for some time settled in Seths
Family, in their Generations; but in process of time they did degenerate from
the Faith and Religion of their Fathers, and became as bad as the Cainites
themselves. They were flesh; that is, Carnal and Sensual. In the Scripture, the
things of the Flesh, are set in opposition to the things of the Spirit, Romans
8.5. So here in the Text we may observe a secret opposition between the Spirit
and the Flesh. The holy Spirit did move these sinners to Repentance, he stirred
up their hearts to that which is good; but instead of following the motions of
the holy Spirit, they did pursue only the Carnal, Sensual desires of their own
fleshly and corrupt hearts, therefore does the Lord threaten, that his Spirit
should no more strive with them.

3. We have the Limitation of this threatening, yet his days shall be an hundred
and twenty years. The meaning of which is not, that the age of man after the
flood should be such a space of time; for we read that many of the Patriarchs
lived a longer space of time than that is. But the meaning of it may be, that a
hundred and twenty years should be given to the World, and if in that space
they would repent and return, and make their peace with God, well and good; but
if not, his Spirit would utterly forsake them, and remediless ruin should
befall them.

The Doctrine which may be insisted upon from the words, is this; viz.

That there are some sinners so given over by God, as that his holy Spirit does
for ever cease striving with them. In the Doctrinal handling of this Point, two
things may be attended: 1. To enquire how the holy Spirit does strive with men.
2. To show that he does sometimes cease striving.

Quest. How does the holy Spirit strive with men?

Answ. 1. There are outward strivings of the Spirit, e. g. God striveth with
men in and by the Ministry of the Word; when he does afford unto them the
outward means of Grace, then he striveth with them, Ne^. 9.30. Thou testifiedst
against them by thy Spirit in thy Prophets. It is the holy Spirit that does
gift and send the Ministers of the Word, and accordingly does breath in their
Ministrations. Hence Isaiah says, Chap. 48.16. The Lord God and his Spirit
has som^^ne. And therefore it was that Stephen said to the Jews, You do always
resist the holy Ghost; As your Fathers did, so do you, Acts 7.51. You resist
the holy Ghost, says he: The Greek word signifies to resist after an hostile
manner, even as Enemies do resist one another^; they took up Arms against
Heaven: And how was that, but by rebelling against the Voice of God in his holy
Prophets? The Jews were disobedient to the Commands of the holy Spirit speaking
in the Prophets; and after that speaking in the Apostles, therefore Stephen
tells them, that both they and their Fathers resisted the holy Ghost; therefore
the holy Spirit does strive with men, in and by the Ministry of the Word: And
this is one thing intended in the Text, by the strivings of the Spirit, which
are here spoken of. Hence the Apostle Peter says, that the Spirit of Christ
preached to the Spirits in Prison, which sometimes were disobedient in the days
of Noah. Those words of Peter may well allude unto these words of Moses in my
Text Those sinners that lived before the Flood, whose Spirits are now in
Prison; that is, whose Souls are now in Hell, shut up in the Dungeon of Eternal
Darkness; there was a time when the Spirit of Christ did strive with them,
namely, in the Ministry of Noah, that Preacher of Righteousness. So likewise by
the Ministry of Enoch, and other godly Patriarchs.

Again, God strives outwardly by his Providence, as well as by his Word and
Ordinances: A^ now he striveth by mercies. By bestowing these, does the Lord
seek to draw the hearts of men after himself, Hos. 11.4. I drew them with cords
of a man. God did seek and strive to draw them to himself, by the cords of a
man, that is, by mercies and loving kindnesses, for those are the cords of a
man, even the cords which men are taken and drawn with. And thus also did the
Lord strive with these sinners of the Old World, which my Text speaks of, as
you may see by that which Eliphas speaks, Job 22.15. to 19. Have thou marked
the old way which wicked men have trodden, whose foundations was overthrown
with a flood, which said unto God, depart from us, and what can the Almighty do
to them, yet he filled their houses with good things. So that those wicked men
that were overthrown with the Hood, yet God filled their houses with good
things, and thereby did he strive with them, to see if kindness would break
their hearts. The Lord also striveth by outward Afflictions and Judgments upon
men. Hence Afflictions are called Gods contendings, Job 10.12. Job says, he
would say unto God, show me wherefore thou contendest with me. When the Lord
Afflicts a sinner, he does as it were, commence a Suit in Law against him, he
brings the Law to him, and shows him, that he has transgressed the Law. Thus
does he contend, thus does he strive.

2. There are the Inward strivings of Gods Spirit. All those common operations
of the Spirit, which sinners, yea, Reprobate sinners may be subject unto, are
the secret blessed strivings of the holy Ghost, with the Souls of men. There is
indeed an inward, powerful, effectual, saving Operations of the Spirit upon the
hearts of the Elect. I am not speaking of that, but of common works of the
Spirit which sinners may partake of. To instance a little: 1. There are some
sinners, that the holy Spirit does greatly enlighten their minds. They have
much knowledge in the things of God, they are made to understand what their
duty is, even what they must do, that so they may please God, and be made happy
for ever, Mich. 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good; And what does
the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God. They could not plead ignorance of the mind of God, the
Lord had taken care that they should be instructed, both in duties of the first
and second Table. Now all Conviction of duty is from the Spirit, yea, all
Illumination in Divine things is from him; therefore the holy Ghost is called,
the Spirit of Truth, because all truth and all discovery of truth is from him.
If a man be but enlightened, so as to understand the Fundamental points in
Religion, this is a great work of Gods Spirit. Hence the Apostle says, No man
speaking by the Spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed; and (...) no man can say,
that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.3. Because if a man
be but convinced, that Jesus Christ is the true Messiah, even the Son of God,
and Lord of all, this Conviction is however a common work of the holy Ghost
upon the mind. 2. The holy Ghost may cause terror to be in the Conscience of a
sinner: That then is a second way how the Spirit does strive inwardly, it is he
that does convince the world of sin, Joh. 16.8. All Conviction of sin and
misery, is from the Spirit. Sometimes the holy Spirit comes and reasons the
case with a poor sinner, till at last he is silenced by the Evidence and
Demonstration of the Spirit; from the which Convincements, secret, awful
terrors do arise. Hence the Scripture speaks of the Spirit of Bondage unto
fear, Romans 8.15. The holy Spirit convinces a sinner that his present condition
is miserable; so as that if he does not get out of it, he must perish to all
e^ernity. Hence dismal fears do arise in the Soul; the sinner cries out in the
horror of his heart, I am a damned Wretch for ever, if death should find me in
this estate. Now these terrible awakenings of Conscien^^^ are the mighty
strivings of the Spirit. An instance we have of this in Felix, Acts 24.25. As
Paul reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance and Judgment, Felix trembled. This
Felix had been a very unrighteous and intemperate man, and did at that time
live in uncleanness; and thence hearing Paul preach and prove, that there is a
Judgment to come, wherein all such sinners shall be punished, he even trembled.
Terror and trembling seized upon his guilty Conscience, at the sad thought of
this. 3. The holy Spirit may so work upon the heart of a sinner, as to cause
some good affections to work within him. Many have some faint, languid desires,
some cold wishes and wouldings after Grace and life, that yet never did
experience a saving work of the Spirit upon them. Now these sweet affections
and workings of heart after that which is good, are from the holy Ghost. Thus
we see in those Jews, John 5.35. Lord (say they) give us evermore of this
bread. When they heard of the bread of Life, even such Bread, that if a man
eat, he shall never dye, presently their affections were stirred, and
marvellously taken for a while, but it lasted not. So the stony ground hearer,
received the word with joy, Mat. 13.21. he was much affected with the sweet
promises of the Gospel, yet this lasted not. In this ^^^ner it was with false
hearted Jews ma^^^^ time, Hos. 6.4 O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O
Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as the morning cloud,
and as the early dew that goes away. So that they had good affections, blessed
dews, and illapses of the Spirit, which would fall upon them at c^rtain times;
early and earnest workings of heart toward God, when the good fit was upon
them, but all died away, and came to nothing at last. Yea, even Balaam himself
had his good affections and good wishes when time was, Numb. 23.10. Let me dye
the death of the righteous; let my last end be like his. Balaam in a good pang,
could wish himself in the condition that righteous men are in: Many there are
that have such Balaamitical flashes. 4. The holy Spirit may so far strive with
a sinner, as to stir up good purposes and resolutions of Soul, to be, and to do
better. As we see by them, Jer. 2.20. Thou said, I will not transgress, when,
etc: They purposed and promised, that they would no more commit such and such
sins, yet when the Temptation came, they committed those very sins, which they
had resolved against. Now good purposes are from the holy Spirit. As evil
purposes are from Satan, so good purposes are from God; and usually it is so,
that if God strive outwardly by his Word or Works, he does also strive
inwardly, by causing Convictions, Terrors, good Affections and Resolutions,
etc. This we see in them, Psalm. 78 34. to 38. When he slew them, then they
sought him, they enquired early after God, nevertheless they did flatter him
with their mouth, and lied unto him with their tongue; for their heart was not
right with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant. How common is it
for sinners in their distress to purpose, and to promise better obedience, when
sickness is upon them, when they see Death and Eternity before their Eyes, when
they see Hell gaping for them, and Devils ready to seize upon their guilty
souls; then Oh, if God will but spare them this once, it shall be seen how holy
they will be; and yet if the Lord does deliver them, they are as bad or worse
than ever they were, forgetting that the vows of God are upon them.

We come therefore in the second place, to show that the Spirit of God may
cease striving with men. This is expressed here in the Text, where God says,
My Spirit shall not strive always. Now we must not think, that this was a thing
peculiar unto those times of the old World only. But God does in the like case
deal after the like manner with sinners in all ages of the World. The Dealings
and Dispensations of God in ages of old, were to be Typical and Significative
to succeeding Generations. Hence is that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10.11. All
these things hap^^ to them for [Types] and they mere written for our
Admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are come: And therefore also the
Psalmist speaks, as you find, Psalm. 76.2. I will open my mouth in a Parable, I
will utter dark sayings of old. And yet if you observe the Psalmist, you shall
find, that therein the Penman of it recites a plain History of Gods dealing
with his people in the days of old, what mercies the Lord bestowed on them; and
when they abused these mercies, what Judgments befell them, etc. -- Why is this
called, a parable and dark sayings of old, even because there was more intended
in those Records than a bare History; for they were to be for Types and Samples
of Gods dealings toward men in after-Generations. Thus may we say concerning
the matter before us.

But then the Question will be, When is it that Gods Spirit does cease striving?

Answ. 1. When death comes, then does the holy Spirit eternally forsake a
sinner* it is otherwise with the Saints, when they dye, their Souls go to have a
full possession of the Spirit of Grace, whence in this life they are said to
receive only an earnest, and the first fruits of the Spirit. But as for a man
that is only flesh, (as my Text speaks) when he dies, even that which he has
is taken from him, those common operations and strivings of the Spirit which he
may partake of, will then leave his forlorn, forsaken soul, Thus with the
sinners my Text has reference unto; it is said of them, they were cut down out
of time, Job 22.16. They might have lived many a day, and many a year, but
death cut them down before their time; and then did the Lord fulfill this
threatening, that his Spirit shall not always strive with man So in the Parable
concerning the unfruitfu^ Fig Tree, I will dig about it, and if it bear fruit,
well; if not, then after that thou shall cut it down. Luke 13.8, 9. If once the
Lord send the Messenger of death, as it were, with an Ax, to lay the sinner
even with the ground, then there is no more digging about such an one, that is
to say, no more strivings of the Lords Spirit with him.

2. Sometimes the Spirit of God does give over a sinner, even whilst in this
life. Some there are, that the holy Spirit does cease striving with them
before, yea, long before death come upon them. This is an awful trembling
Meditation, yet a truth needful to be insisted on; you shall therefore hear
some instances for the Confirmation hereof. And what shall we say else
concerning Ishmael? Cast him out says God, Gal. 4 30. out with him says the
Lord. Now the time when Ishmael was thus marked out for a Castaway, was an
hundred years and more before his death. When Ishmael was a child, God did
mightily strive with him; he had many godly Instructions administered to him by
his Father, and many checks of Conscience he must needs have, and so strivings
of the Spirit. But when he grew up to years of discretion, being about twenty
years of age, since he despised the means of Grace used with him, God would
have the means taken from him; and by his being cast out of the Lords gracious
presence, the holy Spirit was likewise taken from him. And so for Esau, You
know how that afterward, when he would have inherited* the Blessing, he was
rejected; for he found no place for Repentance, though he sought it carefully
with tears, Heb. 12.17. Alas, he came too late. If Esau had come a little
sooner, he had certainly had the Blessing; but since he came when it was too
late, though he begged with tears in his eyes, that his Father would repent him
of what was done in blessing Jacob, and pronounce the blessing upon him, yet he
could not obtain it. Now in this there was a Mystery; it was to signify, that
if sinners do out-stand their day, then though they should seek the Blessings
of Life, and Grace, and Happiness, (all which were signified by the Blessings
which Esau lost) it will be in vain for them. Again, (not to instance further)
there was Saul, o^ whom it was said, that the Spirit of the Lord departed from
him, and an evil Spirit from the Lord troubled him, 1 Samuel 16.14, 15. The holy
Spirit utterly forsook him, and he was possessed by the evil Spirit; and this
was many years before Saul's death. And while he was yet living, he cried out,
God is departed from me; and it was said to him, The Lord is departed from
thee, and become thine E^^my, 1 Samuel 28.15, 16.

But to speak a little more particularly, the truth hereof appears:

1. In that the outward strivings of the Spirit may be removed: So the Lord
threatens in the eighth of Amos, that he would send a Famine in the Land, not a
Famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the Word of the Lord:
There shall be a Famine of the Word, says God, you shall be deprived of the
means of Grace. And so we see it was; for Acts 13.46. Paul and Barnabas said to
the Jews, seeing you put the Word from you, Lo^^ we turn to the Gentiles: So
that the means of Grace may be taken from particular persons, as it was from
Cian and Ishmael; or from a people, as it was taken from the Jews: But when God
takes away the means, his Spirit is wont to cease striving; yea, sometimes God
cease to strive with a people, or with particular persons, from that day that
he takes away their godly minister from them: The time of Gods taking his
leave of some, bears date from that very day when their faithful Minister was
removed. Again, as to Providential strivings, they may cease before death: The
Lord may take away his mercy from a sinner (as he did from Saul) or he may in
Judgment resolve* never more afflict him; it may come to that, that God will
resolve not to lose one stroke more upon such Rebellious ones. It is therefore
mentioned as one of the highest threatenings, Hos. 4.14. I will not punish your
Daughters when they commit Whoredom, nor your Spouses when they commit
Adultery; and verse. 17. Ephraim is turned to Idols, let him alone: Let him sin
and prosper, no more means shall be used with him, to stop him in his course
and career of Sin. Thus may the outward strivings of the Spirit be removed. And
hence,

2. The inward strivings of the Spirit may cease, even whilst the sinner with
whom he he has been striving, is yet in this World: For 1. There are some
sinners, that God does by a Judicial act smite their Souls with penal
blindness, Isa. 44.18. He has shut their eyes, that they cannot see; and their
hearts, that they cannot understand: So Chap. 66.4. I will choose their
delusions, says the Lord: Some there are, that instead of a Spirit of
Illumination, the Lord does pour upon them a Spirit of Slumber, and of
Delusion; yea, the same persons that once were gloriously enligtned with the
Truth, because they have resisted those striving of the Spirit, are smitten (as
the Sodomites were) with judicial blindness of mind: God has sent upon them
the efficacy of Error, that they might believe a lie and be damned, 2 Thessalonians.
2.11.12. once they had right apprehensions concerning the way to life and
happiness: but now the Spirit of Light and Truth has so left them, as that
they verily believe, that the way to Hell, is the way to Heaven; and that
damnable Heresies, are rare Truth. Hence is that, Rev. 2.24. The depths of
Satan as they speak. They pretended that they had deep Mysteries, that was
their speech, and the thought of many that did embrace those Doctrines; but
they were in truth no other but dark Satamical Delusions. 2. There are some
sinners, whom the Lord does Judicially give up to hardness of heart: As we read
concerning Pharaoh, that God hardened his heart, Exodus 10.27. That Plague of
plagues, even an hard-heart: Some are given up unto it, yea so, as that the
means of softening and awakening shall tend to harden them more; as that which
melts the Wax, hardens the Clay. Wax you know, if it be brought to the Sun, or
to the fire, it melts presently, but Clay is hardened thereby: So the Elect of
God, the Sun of the Gospel does melt their hearts, the fire of Affliction does
so ^^n; but these things harden the hearts of Reprobates, as they did the
Reprobate-heart of Pharaoh. After this manner does the Lord deal with a sinner,
when he gives over striving with him, Providence, Ordinances, Mercies,
Afflictions, Sermons, Sabbaths, Lectures, all shall make him more obdurate in
sin. Hence the Scripture speaks of some that have their Consciences seared
with an hot iron, 1 Timothy 4.2. There are some, when the time was, that they
could not commit such a sin, nor live in the neglect of such a duty, but
Conscience would be secretly stinging of them for it: But now they can live in
those evils, and no terrors of the Almighty dismay them; instead of a troubled,
terrified, they have now a seared Conscience: Thus it is with sinners that are
utterly forsaken of the holy Sprit, they have a cauterized Conscience: As dead
flesh feels nothing, so is it with Consciences of such sinners. 3. There are
some sinners, whom the Lord does give up to vile affections. Time was when they
had many good affections stirring in their hearts; they could scarce hear a
powerful Sermon preached, but they were affected with it, when as now they are
no more moved, than the stones they stand upon, or the seats they sit on; nay,
vile affections rule in them, and over them; You may read of some thus
dreadfully given up by God, Romans 1.21, 26. Because tha^ when they knew God,
they glorified him (...) God; for this cause God gave them up t^ (...)
^ffections. This was because they re^ (...) Convictions and Strivings of the
holy ^^irit. So the sinners of the old World (...) given up to vile,
dishonorable shamefu^ Lusts; and a dreadful Scripture you (...) to this
purpose, in Psalm. 81. verse 1 (...) But my people (says God) would not (...)
^ken to my voice; they regarded not the s^^^vings of his Spirit: Well, but what
(...) ^lowed upon it: Shall I read it to y^^ (...) and will not your hearts
tremble to (...) it? So I give them up to their own hear* lusts, and they
walked after their own counsels* Alas, this is the condition of some sinn^^^
when God has been striving long wi^^ them, but all in vain, he gives them up
to the power of Corruption, that they (...) be as bad as they will be. Therefo^^

4. There are some that are given up to (...) ^perateness in sin; That instead
of good p^^poses, they are desperately resolved to sin it (...) to the last,
^ome on what will; come L^^^ come Death, come Salvation, come Dam^^tion, sin
they will they are resolved; (...) him that said, Si salvabor, salvabor; and si
damnabor, damnabor: If I shall be saved, I shall (...) saved; and if I shall be
damned, I shall be damned, and that is all I care. The Prophet Geremy speaks
of some such desperate Wretches, Jer. 2.25. Thou said there is no h^^^; no,
but I have loved strangers, and after them I will go. So says a desperate
sinner, after my evil courses I will go. There are some sinners, that though
they know the courses which they take will most certainly b^ing their Souls to
Hell at last, yet they are resolved to go on therein, Ephesians. 4.19. Being past
feeling, they work out all uncleanness with griediness.

Use 1. We may see by this which has been ^poken, that there are some sinners
which outstand and outlive their day of Grace. Indeed the condition of all
such is for ever lamentable, yet some such there are: for when Gods Spirit
cease striving, then is the day of Grace ended. Its true, the revealed day of
Grace is, whilst the day of Life, and the means of Grace do continue; but the
secret day of Grace is according to the strivings of the holy Spirit, or his
Determination against the sinner, never more to strive with him. Now you have
heard that God gives over some sinners even while in this life; therefore
there are that outlive their day: So did the wretched-Jews, therefore Jesus
Christ said of them, and he wept when he said it, Oh that thou had known in
this thy day, the things that do belong unto thy peace, but now are they hid
from thine eyes, Luke 19.44. Alas, they had a day, but they knew it not until
their day was done: That was a sad word indeed, when Christ said to them, Now
are they hid from thy eyes. You will say, but who are they whose day is done?
The Answer unto that has been in part given already, in showing when it is
that the Spirit cease striving. Indeed we cannot say of this or that
particular man (except he be one that has committed the sin against the holy
Ghost) that the holy Spirit will strive no more with him: For, Who has
directed the Spirit of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor? Isa. 40.13.
Secret things belong to the Lord, and not to us. Nevertheless, there are some
that have sad cause to fear and tremble, lest thus it should be with them.

Quest. Who are they?

Answ. 1. They that have sinned away many and great Convictions of Conscience.
Oh think of it! for there are some of you that have been under Convictions. It
may be sometimes the World has awakened thy Conscience, when the truth has
been powerfully delivered, an arrow from Heaven has darted into thy Soul, but
thou have sinned away these troubles: Or it may be some awful Providence has
awakened thee, sickness upon thy self, sudden death upon others, when one of
thy Companions in sin was stricken by sudden death, and carried away to his own
place; This did a little awaken thy secure Conscience for the present, but thou
have stifled those Convictions also; Yea, and sometimes when God has left thee
to fall into some foul and fearful sin, thy Conscience has been sorely
troubled; after that thou have committed a Soul-desolating sin, thy Conscience
has been in a woeful plight, even as if thou were newly come out of Hell, yet
thou have sinned away these troubles also. I remember I have read a dismal
story concerning a man that fell into the sin of Drunkenness: And first when he
committed that sin, his Conscience was much troubled about it; but it was
suggested to him, that if he would now in despite of those Convictions, commit
the same sin again, he should be never more troubled for it: The poor Wretch
did so, and found it lamentably true; for after that, he could be drunk as often
as he would, and never troubled for it: but lived and dyed a miserable Sot: The
Spirit of God forsook him utterly, because he sinned away Convictions of
Conscience.

2. This sadly concerns those that are Revolters from Profession and Religion.
It is to be feared, that the holy Spirit will cease striving with them: This
was Saul's case, 1 Samuel 15.11. He is turned back from following me, says the
Lord. Alas, when a man has put his hand to Gods Plough, and then looks back
again, it is to be feared, that the Lord will reject him, as he rejected Saul.
If men forsake God, no wonder if he forsake them; therefore that Prophet said,
when the Spirit of God came upon him, The Lord is with you, whilst you are with
him; but if you forsake him, he will forsake you, 2 Chronicles. 15.2. There have
been lamentable instances of men that have turned away from their Profession of
Religion, and have thereupon been given up by God to a Reprobate sense. I need
not tell you of Lucian, Porphyrie, Julian; etc. And no marvel if it be thus,
for Apostates are in the way to become guilty of the sin against the holy
Ghost. It men begin to forsake the ways and Worship of God, it is to he feared
they will hardly be kept free from that great Transgression; as is evident by
the Apostles discourse, Heb. 10 25. etc. Say not now, but we are no Apostates,
we are all Christians: Well, but as there are Apostates outwardly, so there are
some that are so inwardly, there are secret deep heart-revolters from God. Are
none of you back-sliders in heart? There was a time when you looked more
diligently after your hearts than it is at this day. Oh tremble, lest the holy
Spirit should forsace you. Besides have not many of you sinned against
Religious Education? It was so with these sinners whom my Text has reference
unto: They were the sons of God outwardly, but they became carnal and profane
like the World; therefore did the Lord say, My Spirit shall not always strive
with them. They were the Posterity of such as feared the Lord, many of them,
but they did degenerate: Oh consider of it, you that are of the rising,
succeeding Generation in New England. Take heed how you sin against your
Religious Education, lest the Lord depart from you. Thou have had a Father, or
a Mother, that has wept and prayed for the Conversion and Salvation of thy
Soul full many a time; and yet thou remainest in thy natural, unconverted
estate still: Remember Ishmael, and remember Esau, they had Parents that
instructed them, and prayed for them, and set an holy example before them; but
because they sinned against that godly Education which was graciously
vouchsafed to them, therefore did the Lord reject, and his Spirit cease
striving with them. Oh! have thou slig^^ed the godly Admonitions and
Exhortations of thy Praying Parents? then thy heart has cause to tremble, lest
the Spirit of the Lord should cease striving with thee.

3. When a poor Soul is cast out of the prayers of Gods servants it is a sad
sign that the Lord has done with him. When the Lord rejected Soul, he was not
willing that Samuel should continue praying for him. So concerning the Jews,
when God was resolved against them, he said to his Prophet, Pray not thou for
this people, for I will not hear thee, etc. Jer. 11.14. The Lord by a secret
wonderful Providence, is wont to move the hearts of his praying people, in
their Supplications before him, according to what is in his own heart to do.
The Spirit of Prayer is also the Spirit of Prophecy; hence from the Spirit of
Prayer we may conjecture, how it is like to fare with sinners. Consider of it,
thou have a Friend, or a Relation perhaps, whose welfare thou have been wont to
pray for: Well, but now when thou art praying, it may be God does cast it out
of thy heart, that thou do not remember to pray for such an one; or if out of
Conscience to duty, thou do pray for him, yet thy heart does secretly misgive
thee, that God will not answer thee. This now is a dreadful sign; suppose a
poor Creature to be never so vile, yet if thou can pray and believe for him,
there is hope; but it not, it is sad.

4. They that remain incorrigible under all the Dispensations of God: So as
that neither good days nor bad days will change them, it is to be feared, that
the Lord will cease striving with them. A General that does besiege a City,
after he has tried much means, and all in vain, he breaks up siege and
departs: So does the Lord of Host deal with sinners, when he has been long
beleaguering a man's Conscience with Conviction, but he resists all, he departs
from such a sinner, and will not have one arrow more shot into his Conscience:
And the truth is, that God is not wont to leave a sinner, until he hat^ ^^^st
tried all means with him, Mich. 6.9. The Lords voice cries to the City, and
the man of Wisdom shall fear thy name: Hear ye the Rod: First of all God sees
what his Word will do: His voice cries, that is to say, the Trumpet of his
Word gives the Alarm; and it men be so wise as to hear that, it will be well
for them. But if not, then he takes the rod in hand, to see what they will do;
and if neither Word nor Rod, nor Providence, nor Ordinances, nor Mercies, nor
Judgments will do, then God gives a man over. Often so it is, that when men
are incorrigible under Afflictions, the holy Spirit cease striving with them,
then does the Lord say, Why should you be stricken any more? Isa. 1.5. Now
(says God) I see that your Disease is incurable, since the last Remedy will do
you no good. As sometimes a Physician deals with a sick Patient, after he has
used much means in vain, he resolves to try one remedy more; and if that will
not do, then he gives them over for gone, and comes no more at him: So does
God deal with the Souls of men, he uses much means with them, that they may be
converted and healed, and Affliction is the last Remedy. I Will try the remedy
more with such a sinner, says God; I Will bring Afflictions upon him, and if
that humble him not, then I Will give him over as past hopes, and past help, and
past cure, and past care.

Use 2. Let me speak to you in the words of the Apostle to the Jews, Beware
(says he) lest that come upon you which is spoken of in the Prophets, Acts
13.40. So I say, Beware lest that come upon you which is spoken of here in my
Text, even beware lest Gods Spirit should cease striving with you* and therefore

1. Take heed of quenching the Spirit: 1 Thessalonians. 5.19. Sure it is, you have had
motions and strivings of the Spirit, yea, I am persuaded, that there is scarce
a child of ten years old, but the holy Spirit has been blessedly at work in
his heart. Amongst those that are Religiously educated, it is ever wont to be
so: Oh how has the Word touched thy Soul to the quick; and then what
affections? what resolutions? what terrors? what strivings of the Spirit? Now
if you love your Souls, quench not these strivings: The motions of the Spirit
are an Holy Fire, take heed lest sin and temptation quench this fire, and
therefore above all things beware of sins against ^onscience: These will grieve
and provoke the holy Spirit to depart from you. If you thus rebel against him,
he will turn to be your Enemy. Isa. 63.10. But,

2. When God striveth, do you strive: Follow the blow, and strike while the
Iron is hot; as David did, Psalm. 27.8. When thou said, Seek ye my face; my
heart said unto thee, Thy face Lord will I seek. Do thou not feel the secret
whisperings of the Spirit saying to thee, Oh repent of such a sin, Oh practice
such a duty, Oh go alone into some secret Corner, and there go to Prayer. Now
when the holy Spirit thus moves thy heart, follow the motion: And who can then
tell, but that the Lord may be gracious to thee.

Here consider a few things:

Consider. 1. That Gods Spirit will not always strive: Oh let these words sound
in thy ears, The Spirit of the Lord will not always strive. Nay it may be, he
will strive no longer; Who knows, but that thy day may at this hour be
shutting upon thee? If thou do not now resolve in good earnest to turn unto
the Lord, it may be after this Sermon is ended, God will resolve against thee,
that his Spirit shall never strive more with thee: Think sadly on that awful
Scripture, Ezekiel 24.13. Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged,
thou shall not be purged from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my
fury to rest upon thee. God has been purging of thee, and thou wast not
purged; that is to say, he has been using means, and striving with thee, that
so thy Soul might be converted, and yet thou remainest a Carnal Creature still:
Fear lest God should say, Thou shall not be purged any more; thou shall not
have my Spirit to strive with thee any longer.

Consider. 2. That if it should be so, that Gods Spirit should cease striving
with thee, thou art then utterly undone forever: For when the Lord does cease
striving with men, he does even swear in his wrath against them, Psalm. 95.11.
Unto whom I swear in my wrath, [if] they enter into my rest. Says the Lord,
[if] those sinners enter into rest, then let me not be accounted God any
longer: Oh thou sinful Creature, if the Lord should be provoked in his wrath to
swear against thee, then as sure as God is God thou shall be damned. A man may
say a thing, and yet possibly go back, but if he swear, he will not go from his
word: So the Lord speaking after the manner of men, is said to swear against
some sinners, to show his unalterable Determination against them, when he has
sworn, he will not repent, Psalm. 110.4. Alas, this day of Grace is past, if the
holy Spirit should for ever cease striving with thee; and then no Prayers, nor
Cries, nor Tears will avail for mercy. There is a Scripture, which methinks
should strike cold to the heart of many an unconverted sinner that hears me
this day; it is that in the first Chapter of the Proverbs, and the 28 Verse,
Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me early,
but they shall not find me. This was fulfilled upon the Jews, therefore did
Christ say to them, Ye shall seek me, and shall dye in your sins: whither I go
you cannot come, John 8.21. Alas, they did not come till the door of Mercy was
shut upon them. Had they sought God early in the morning, they might have found
him, Pro. 8.17. But it was early in the evening, that is to say, presently
after the day of Grace was done that they sought, and then found him not: O
Remember Esau, he cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry, and said to his
Father, Bless me, even me also, O my Father, Genesis 27.34. But then it was too
late, and therefore all cries were in vain. Remember also how it was with the
Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 1.45. Ye returned and wept before the Lord, but the
Lord would not hearken to your voice, nor give ear unto you. They would not
when they might, and therefore when they would, God said them nay. God
commanded them to enter into Canaan, but they refused; afterward they would
gladly have done it, but then it was too late: Though they prayed and wept, yet
they had sinned away the offer of Grace, and the Lord was then become
inexorable. Thus if men come after the day of Grace is over, though they should
weep Seas of tears of blood, all would be in vain; for time is gone then. As I
remember I have some-where read of a woman that had been guilty of Adultery,
and it pleased God to terrify her Conscience, and then she cried out, Oh time
is gone! and many Ministers were sent for, to see if they could apply any word
of Comfort, but s^ill she cried out, Time is gone! what tell you me of Prayer,
my time is gone! what tell you me of Repentance and Pardon, my time is gone!
what tell me of Faith in Christ, and Salvation by him, Oh my time is gone!

Consider. 3. That whilst the Spirit of God does continue striving, there is a
day of Grace vouchsafed to you. Some poor Soul that trembles at the Word of
God, is ready to say, Alas, this is my doleful case, I fear my day is done. Say
not so, if Gods Spirit be striving with thee, thy time is not gone: If thou
have now at last a serious purpose to return to God by Jesus Christ, be of good
comfort: and in the name of the Lord be it spoken to thee, thy day of Grace is
not done, but there is Mercy and Salvation to to be had for thee, if thou will
upon gracious terms accept of it: Behold now is the accepted time, now is the
day of Salvation; therefore Improve your now, without any further put off. Take
hold of the present opportunity, lest you never see such another. But more (if
God permit) the next Lords day.

Seasons of Grace (especially the present season) are carefully to be improved
and redeemed
Col. 4.5. Redeeming the time.


THE usual method observed by the Apostle Paul in his Epistles, is, first to
discourse Doctrinally, and then Practically; and so he does in this Epistle to
the Colossians. The two first Chapters are Doctrinal, and the two last are
practical.

This Chapter then does contain matter of Exhortation unto duty. 1. We have a
special Oeconomical Precept, even a rule concerning Houshold-Government, (which
in the former Chapter the Apostle had been speaking of,) verse. 1.2. He lays
down sundry general Moral Precepts, which concern Christians, in whatever state
or relation they may stand in.

And here the Apostle does exhort. 1. To the practice of that great duty of
prayer, ver. 2. and in special that they would pray for him, verse 3, 4.2. He
exhorts unto Christian Wisdom.

And that is the scope of this verse, in which we have three things: 1. The
duty exhorted unto, namely, Wise Walking, Walk in Wisdom, that is, cautelously
and circumspectly, as it is expressed by the same Apostle, writing to the
Ephesians, chapter 5. ver. 16.2. We have the object of this duty, toward them that
are without, that is Infidels, who are out of the Pale of the visible Church.
The Church is compared to an House, hence they that are of the Church, are said
to be within, that is, within doors, in respect of that sacred House of the
Church; and them that do not belong to the visible Church, are described to be
without, that is, they are not admitted within doors, but are kept out of the
Temple.

3. Here is that which is the special work and evidence of this Wisdom, namely,
to redeem the time, which are the words, that by Gods help, we are to speak of.

Time is sometimes taken for space of time. Sometimes it is taken for
opportunity of time; it is the same with Season. It may be taken both ways
here, and especially in the latter sense; for the Greek word is not KRONOS, the
usual word for time, but KAIROS, which signifies Season or Opportunity.

The Doctrine which the words do afford unto us, is this; That it is a great
part of Christian Wisdom, timely to improve Opportunities and Seasons of Grace.

Intending to dispatch the point at this time, we shall in the Doctrinal
prosecution of it, only speak to two things, 1. What those seasons are which
ought to be improved. 2. What is implied in redeeming seasons of Grace; or when
a man may be said to redeem the time.

Ques^. 1. What are those seasons which ought to be improved?

Answ. 1. A man's lifetime in this World is to be improved. Thus Christ has
taught us by his own unerring example, John 9.4. I must work while it is day,
the night comes when no man can work. A man's life is but a season, even a day
which shall have a night follow it; and therefore it is to be improved: Yea,
and it is but a short season, 1 Cor. 7.30. The time is short. He that has
longest to live, yet has but a short time to be in this World; therefore James
says, What is your life? it is even a vapor that appears for a little time,
and then vanishes away, chap. 4. verse. 14. and David says, Behold thou have
made my days an hand breadth, and mine age is as nothing before thee, Psalm.
39.5. A man's time in this World is as nothing before God, that is to say, as
nothing in comparison of Eternity; therefore this time ought so much the more
carefully and diligently to be improved; and it may be a man's time is much
shorter than himself does think for. We read of one in the Gospel that was to
foolish, as to dream of many years, when as he had not so much as one day to
live: He said he had goods for many, not only days, but years, when as before
this next day, his Soul was taken from him, Luke 12.20. Besides, when a man's
life is once gone, it is irrecoverable, men must dye, and out of this World
they shall go, and yet they dye but once, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for men
[once] to dye: When once men are dead, the places that have known them, shall
know them no more; the eyes that have seen them, shall see them no more; and
the ears that have heard them, shall hear them no more. And thence if men do
not improve their time whilst they are alive in the World, they lose their
season for ever. When death is come, it is then too late to improve time;
therefore Hezekiah says, They that go down into the pit. cannot hope for thy
truth, Isa 38 18. When a man's body is gone down into the pit of the grave, and
his soul is gone down into the pit of Hell, he is past hope, and past help; he
cannot hope for Gods mercy, he cannot hope for pardon of sin, he cannot hope
for the salvation of his soul. Therefore lifetime is to be improved.

2. Time set apart for the solemn Worship of God, are carefully to be improved.
Christians ought to redeem time from their particular, to attend the duties of
their general Calling; they ought not to serve themselves only, but they must
look to it, that they allow themselves time also for the service of God. It is
true, that some are so much in the outward performance of religious duties, as
that they do thereby entrench upon their particular callings, spending more
time in outward Worship, than any rule of God does require, or allow them to
do: So the Heretical Euchites of old, etc. But the greatest part of men err on
the other hand, in allowing too little time, rather than too much, for the
performance of sacred duties. But it is a great point of Christian wisdom, to
order things aright about this matter; so as that neither a man's particular
calling may entrench upon his general calling as a Christian, nor yet his
general upon the particular. I say, that time must be allowed for the Worship
of God. A man may not neglect the Worship of God, either in his Family, or in
his Closet, or in the public Assemblies of his people, out of pretense that he
wants time; rather let a man deny himself time to sleep, nay time to eat and
drink, than not to take time to pray, and to serve God. Moreover, when a man is
worshipping God in any duty, such a season is very heedfully to be improved,
else the Lords name will be taken in vain; and men instead of serving and
pleasing God, will provoke him to displeasure by an heedless serving of him.
And in special, the Lords Day is a season of Grace which ought to be improved,
that is the day appointed to solemnize the Name and Worship of God in Christ
amongst men, to the end of the World, Psalm. 118 24. This is the day which the
Lord has made, we will rejoice in it: The day of Christ's Resurrection, which
was upon the first day of the week, even this very day is to be observed, in
Commemoration of the Resurrection and Redemption of Christ: This is the day,
which above others, ought to be prized and improved: It is a Market Day for the
Soul, and therefore to be redeemed. Besides, if men take hold of opportunities,
to attend there where God is worshipped, they come where the Lord himself
comes, and thence may hope for a blessing: In which respect such seasons
should earnestly be laid hold on. You read in the fifth of John, concerning an
impotent man that lay waiting at the Pools of Bethesda, and Christ finding him
there, he was healed. Had not the man layen at the Pools of Bethesda, Christ
had not found him there, and had not Christ found him there, he had not been
healed. Now the Ordinances of God are the Pools of Bethesda; if Christ find men
there, who knows but that Grace and Life may be given into their souls; but
if they be not there, they keep themselves out of the way of a blessing.

3. The time of prosperity is a season which ought to be well improve. Thus you
find David calling upon the Princes of Israel, 1 Chronicles. 22.11, 18, 19. Is not
the Lord your God with you? has he not given you rest on every side? now set
your heart and your soul to seek the Lord your God. It is (says he) a
prosperous season with you, and therefore now be looking after God, and the
things of God; and indeed this is the most commodious season. Husbandmen you
know will take the season whilst the Sun shines, and the weather is
favorable, to be gathering in the fruits of the earth: So if men would be
laying in for Eternity, if they would be laying up in store for themselves a
good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold of Eternal
Life, it will be their wisdom to improve the time of prosperity in order
thereunto. As now, if God give unto a man a time of health and strength, let
him improve it, in order to making his peace with God, and promoting the
Eternal welfare of his own Soul. Thus the Holy Ghost by Solomon does exhort,
Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy Creator; Ay, but when? When old age comes, or when
sickness or death comes, but never before that; to the Carnal heart says, and
so the Devil says, but the Lord teaches otherwise; therefore it is added, In
the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh,
when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them. The evil days of sickness, or
the troublesome years of old age will come upon you; but see that you remember
to make your peace with God, before those days come. So again, if the Lord
bestow upon a man an estate, and cause him to prosper in the World in that
respect, let him improve this, to honor God with his substance, and wisely
make unto himself Friends in Heaven, with the ununrighteous Mammon of this
World. And truly if men do neglect such seasons, they have no reason to expect
other, but that God will deprive them of them, and alter the tenor of his
glorious Dispensations toward them. As it was said to Hester, who knows
whether thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? if thou
altogether hold thy peace at this time, thou and thy Fathers house shall be
destroyed, Esth. 4.14. So I say, who knows but that the Lord has given men
health and wealth, and prospered them here and there in the World, that so they
might improve these mercies and good things, to the honor of him that gave
them, and for their own Spiritual and Eternal comfort; If therefore they
altogether neglect this season, let them look that God will blast their
estates, and smite them with sickness, yea, and that a worse thing shall befall
them. Nevertheless,

4. The time of Adversity is a season which ought likewise to he improved.
Hence this Apostle says, Redeem the time, because the days are evil, Ephesians.
5.16. The times were then as they are now. It was in the Apostles days a time
of persecution and suffering to the people of God, therefore he calls that time
an evil day. Now in this season, time was to be redeemed; the worse the times
are, the better Christians ought to be; if the times be very bad, Christians
ought to be very good. Hence also is that, 2 Timothy 4. 2. Preach the Word, be
instant in season, and out of season In season, is in time of prosperity; out
of season is a time of Adversity, when a man cannot preach, nor hear a Sermon,
without incurring danger; yet such times must be improved to be doing and
receiving good. If the times be bad, then the Lord threatens men, to deprive
them of seasons of Grace, and in that respect there is the more need to improve
them. And this is a special thing intended by the Apostle in the Text. Walk in
wisdom redeeming the time. Show your wisdom (says he) by making the best of a
bad Market. As wise Merchants, if the times be bad, will be more wary; if
Trading be dead and low they will be loath to venture upon a bad bargain, or to
let slip the advantage of a good bargain. Thus should men deal as to their
souls; as for seasons of grace, they should see that they husband them well,
especially when the Lord is threatening to take them away.

5. Times of being in company and converse with others, ought to be improved.
Such times should be improved for the receiving of Spiritual good. It is said.
He that walks with the wise, shall be wise, Prove. 13.20. If a man does fall
into the company of such as are godly and wise, he has now an opportunity put
into his hands to get wisdom; he might propound many profitable Questions,
which he is not able to resolve himself, but one that God has given a greater
measure of wisdom and understanding unto, could soon resolve him, had he an
heart to improve such an opportunity. Again, such times should be improved for
doing good, that is, by holy Conference and Exhortations unto the thing that
good is; as we see in the Context, Redeem the time, says the Apostle, and then
the very next words are, Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with
salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer every man, Col. 4.6. So then
that is one way of improving time aright, even by gracious and savoury
discourses The neglect of this is the great sin of many Professors. Alas, how
is it, as if holy Conference were banished out of the World? Christians mee^
together, and much discourse passes about this or the other matter, but it may
be not one edifying word all the while. But what says the Scripture? Exhort
one another daily, Heb. 3.13. As you have opportunity of daily converse, you
should take occasion to exhort and call upon one another, and say, How is it
with you as to Spirituals? have you got assurance yet? do you grow in grace?
How is it with your Soul, does that prosper?

6. Solitary times are also to be improved. I say, not only times of being in
Company, but times of being alone, are to be improved. Such seasons should be
made use of for Prayer, Meditation, and Self-Examination, etc. We read
concerning Nathaniel, that Christ said to him, When thou wast under the
fig tree, I saw thee; John 1.48. Though no mortal Eve beheld him, yet the Son
of God that has eyes like a flame of fire, looked upon him there: Jesus Christ
who is God as well as man, saw Nathaniel, when he was alone under the fig tree:
Indeed it is not said what Nathaniel was doing there; but it is very probable,
that he was praying or meditating, or about some such holy design, that Christ
should take such special notice of him. So concerning Isaac, we read that he
went out to meditate in the field, Genesis 24.63. He retired himself into a
solitary place, that so he might with the more freedom and convenience practice
that much naglected, and yet profitable duty of Meditation. So for Jacob, Genesis
32.24. Jacob was lef^ alone, and there wrestled a man with him until the
breaking of the day. He spent a good part of the night in secret prayer, none
being there present but Christ and he. Yea, Christ himself has taught us this,
by his own bles^ed example, Mat. 14.23. He went up into a Mountain apart to
pray, and when evening was come, he was there alone. And the truth is, that a
time of privacy is the fittest season for holy Converse and Communion with God,
because then a man may freely and fully open his whole heart to God. Men have
their special corruptions, which it is not fit the World should hear of; yea,
all that are Christians indeed, have their special and sore Temptations that do
molest them; as for loose, formal Professors, they may go on smoothly and
easily; but as for such as have taken up not only the form, but the power of
godliness, they meet with many rubs and difficulties, and strong assaults from
the great Enemy of Salvation; Now secret places are the fittest to complain to
the Lord in about these temptations; therefore times of privacy, may and must
be taken hold on by Christians for such an end.

7. The time wherein Gods Spirit does strive with men is to be improved. There
are seasons wherein the holy Spirit is blessedly at work with the heart: now
these are seasons which ought carefully to be improved. If men be to set sail,
they must take the opportunity when the wind serves: So if they would be
setting sail toward Heaven, they must observe the gales of the Spirit; they
must lay hold on the opportunity, wherein the blessed breathings of the Spirit
are afforded to them. These should be improved in order to Repentance, lest
happily the Spirit of the Lord do forsake a man, and give him up to the hardness
of his own heart for ever; as you have lately heard that with some sinners it
is so. And these seasons ought to be improved for prayer, Ephesians. 6.18. Pray
always, in every season, as the Greek phrase is, watching thereunto, etc. You
must watch when the Spirit of God stirs you up to prayer, and then upon your
knees sometimes the Lord by his Spirit secretly moves unto prayer, yea
sometimes he puts the heart into a praying frame: Now that is a season of Grace
which may not be neglected without great danger to a man's Soul.

Lastly, The present time is that which should carefully be improved: So
Eccles. 12.1. Remember [now] thy Creator. Men, especially young men, when they
are called upon to be mindful of God, and the things of God, and the great
concernments of their Souls, are apt to put it off till to morrow, or sometime
hereafter; but the holy Ghost says now. Mind this matter without any further
delays; Do not think to put off God with Excuses, or with To morrows, but the
first thing you do, make sure of an interest in him, 2 Cor. 6.2. Behold now is
the accepted time! Behold now is the day of Salvation. Satan says, and a
Self-deceiving heart says, To morrow, to morrow; but the Lord says, Now, now.
Yea, there is a double Behold added to it, Behold, behold, Now, now is the time
for you to look after your Salvation, if ever you desire to be saved. But of
this more in the Application of the point.

We proceed therefore to the second thing, namely, to show what is implied in
redeeming seasons of Grace, or, When a man may be said to redeem the time?

For Answer to that, 1. Herein is implied, An heart to receive and do all the
good that may be. Except there be an heart to receive Spiritual good when it is
offered, a man cannot be said to redeem time; as Solomon complains, Prove.
17.16. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing
he has no heart to it. Sometimes it is so, that there is a precious Sermon
Preached at a man's door; if he would come and hear, who knows how much good
might be done to his Soul: But he comes not, and yet has no sufficient reason
to excuse himself, only he has no heart to it; therefore he is not worthy to
be accounted a Time-redeemer. So again, there must be a heart to do good. As
the Apostle exhorts, Gal. 6.10. As we have opportunity, let us do good unto all
men, especially to them who are of the household of Faith. When a man does
seriously and conscienciously think with himself, How may I improve my time and
talent most to the honor of God and good men, and comfort of my own Soul, in
the great day, and does accordingly; such an one does redeem the time. Though a
man should be providentially disappointed as to actual performance, yet if
indeed he has an heart to lay hold on opportunities of receiving or doing
Spiritual good, he is a Time-redeemer.

2. Herein is implied, Wisdom to discern of Times and Seasons. As it is said of
the Children of Issachar, that they had understanding of the times to know what
Israel ought to do, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. There is no redeeming the time without
wisdom; therefore the Apostle says, Walk wisely, redeeming the time: And
Solomon says, A wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment, Eccles.
8.5. As in Civil affairs, except a man know when the Market is, how should he
take hold of the opportunity while the Market is up, to buy and furnish himself
with what he stands in need of: So if a man has not wisdom to discern of times
and seasons, he will never improve them aright; hence Christ complains of the
Jews, How is it that you do not discern this time, Luke 12.56. and again, chap.
19.43, 44. If thou had known in this thy day, the things that belong to thy
peace. Thou know not the time of thy visitation: They did not improve their
day of Grace; therefore are said, not to know their time.

3. Herein is implied, A willingness to part with those things that would
hinder from receiving or doing good. The Greek word which is here used,
signifies to buy. Now in buying there is always a parting with something; as
the Gospel speaks of the wise Merchant, that he parted with all that he had
for the Pearl of great price; So it is in buying or redeeming time, there must
be a parting with those things that would make a man lose his time. The
Original word is a Metaphor taken from wise Merchants or Tradesmen, that prefer
their profit above their ease and pleasure. So if a man would redeem time, he
must forego those things which would hinder him from glorifying God, or that
would keep him from promoting the eternal Salvation of his own Soul; yea, and
he must be content to put himself to some trouble and disadvantage, that he may
promote the Spiritual and Eternal Welfare of other men's Souls; and this is here
intended by the Apostle, Walk in Wisdom toward them that are without,
redeeming the time; as if he had said, take hold of opportunities to gain
Infidels to Christ, though it should be to your own outward disadvantage; see
that you do what you can to gain men to Christ, though you your selves should
lose by it, as to temporal concerns.

4. When a man does endeavor to make up his former losses and mispence of time
by a diligent improvement of the present season, then he may be said to redeem
time; when a man has lived and spent his time unthriftily, but now he
endeavors by double diligence to redeem, and, as it were, to buy back again
the time that is past and lost; when he is made sensible, that he has done
little for God in former times, and therefore endeavors to live much unto, and
do much service for God in Christ now, then he redeems time. As the Children of
Israel in the last year of their being in the Wilderness, dispatched more way
than in forty years before. So when a man does more for God now in one year,
than he has done in twenty or forty years before: We may say that, that man
Redeemeth time.

Come we to the Use of the point:

Use I. Here is matter of sad reproof unto those that do mispend precious time.
You shall have some that say; They do such a thing to pass away time, and such
a thing is very good to pass away time. O lamantable! as if men had more
precious time then they knew what in the World to do with, or how to bestow it!
And alas, how many are there, that spend their time exceeding unprofitably; it
may be in going from house to house, and there hearing or telling tales: Oh if
that time which is spent in vain jangling, were spent in secret communion with
God, and in faithful endeavors to promote the welfare of the Souls of men, how
comfortable, and how glorious would i^ ^e for such a man at the great Day How
would he then rejoice that ever he lived upon the face of the earth! Alas,
there be that spend their time even in sinful practices, for the which no time
ought to be allowed. There is one practice which I hear much precious time is
spent in, that I must needs bear my Testimony against: That which I mean, is
those unlawful Games of Cards and Dice: Those Games have always been condemned
by the Servants of God, as things that are in themselves unlawful. I use not to
tell you much what Fathers say, else I might say, that Cyprian, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Ambross, Chrysostom, Austin, etc. have of old condemned such
practices. Yea, in the days of Christian Emperors, there have been severe Laws
against such Gamesters. In Justinian's time there was a Law, not only that no
man should play at Cards and Dice, but that no men should so much as be present
to see others play: Nay even Heathens by the light of Nature have condemned
such practices. The Philosopher speaks against it in his Morals: An Heathen
Poet sharply inveighs against it; and Cicero in one of his Orations objects
against Antonius, that he was a Dice-player, and one that entertained such
Gamesters in his house. And amongst Reformers, these kind of Games have ever
been disapproved. Popish Authors usually plead fort he Lawfulness of them but
Protestants generally write against them. And it must needs be acknowledged by
all men's Consciences, that it is unlawful to spend much time in any
Rercreations, as is usually spent in attending those games by those that use
them. There is a secret Curse of God goes along with them: Hence it is, that
if persons be once given to this practice, they can know no bounds, but spend
day and night therein. Besides, there is therein a breach of the third
Commandment, in as much as these Games are not without Lottery; though there may
be something of Skill in them, yet there is something of Lottery. Now a Lot is
a Sacred thing, wherein the name of God is much concerned: In all Lots there is
an appeal to Providence to decide the matter in controversy. It is said
concerning a Lot, that the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord, Pro. 10.33.
Hence it is that Lots may not be used in trivial matters: Search the
Scriptures, and you shall never find that Lots were used in trivial, but only
in weighty momentous matters, which might be prayed over. Now no man, whose
Conscience is not profligate, dare pray over his Cards and Di^e. Where we may
not make a prayer in word, wen^^y not do it in act, or in signs to signify it,
as it is in a Lot. And it is a good Rule, That practice which a man dare not
pray over, let him evermore suspect it for an unlawful practice. Moreover, as
these Games are usually practiced, there is in them a breach of the eighth
Commandment, that is, when men play for money. If a man get another goods at
under price, this is Injustice, it is Theft, and a Transgression of the Rule of
Righteousness: How much more to take from another his Estate for nothing at all
in lieu thereof, but only play. Every Lawful way of getting is sanctified by
prayer, which you heard but now that these Games are not; and therefore the
estate got thereby is unlawful gain. And in this respect also, the Name and
Providence of God is abused therein: For when God has by his Providence
possessed a man of a just estate, for him now to go and make a question,
whether this Estate shall be his or another man's, and then decide the
Controversy by Dice, is unworthily to abuse the good Providence of God. Again,
this practice is of evil report, and therefore ought not to be amongst
Christians: The Scripture bids us follow the things that are of good report,
Phil. 4 8. which shows, that things of evil report in the World ought to be
avoided, by those that profess the name of Christ: Now so are these Games. You
heard how heathens by the Light of Nature condemned them, and shall Christians
take up such practices? The People of God are offended and grieved at such
things; and therefore I beseech those of you that have been guilty here, for
the Lords sake to reform this evil. Oh it is a sad thing that such a practice
should prevail in New England that once was, and ever ought to be, a Land of
Vprightness. Yet I hear, that the rising Generation, are many of them, tainted
with this vice, not only in this great Town, but in many places in the
Country: This is a sad and sure sign of Degeneracy in the rising Generation;
For twenty years ago, there was no such practice known amongst Children born
and bred in New England: And therefore that now it should be so common, does
testify against young ones that they are degenerate Plants. I have not spoken
this out of the least prejudice against any that has been guilty this way only
that so this evil might be rep^nted of, or however that I might be a witness
for God this day in this particular.

Use 2. Exh^^tion, Oh labor ^o improve present seasons of Grace: And for that
end consider seriously a few things*

1. That the present time is the only time which men can say is theirs. As for
the time past, that is none of yours, that is gone never to beseen again, Ps.
90.9. We spend our days as a tale that is told. Why? A tale that is told, can
never be untold again; so the time that is past, will never be here again. A
man may lose other things, and find them again; he may lose his estate, and
have it again, or he may lose his name and recover it again; but if he lose his
time, he shall never have it again: It is impossible that yesterday should be
here again, or that the time past should be present, and not past. As I
Remember, I have read of a poor woman, that being in great distress of
Conscience, many Ministers came to speak with her, and they could have nothing
from her, only she looked upon them with a ghastly countenance, and cried, Call
time again! Call time again! except you can bring back time again, you can do
nothing for me. This was the doleful effect of neglecting, the present season
when time was. Oh think what they in Hell would give to have chose hours, which
they have lost in sin and vanity! They would give ten thousand thousand Worlds
if they had it, that they might again have a space to repent in: yea that they
had but one hour to pray and seek the face of God, with any hopes of mercy, but
it cannot be. And for time to come, you cannot say, that that is yours, for
that is altogether uncertain: A man cannot live a moment beyond the time
appointed. One miserably cried out upon a death bed, A World of wealth, for an
inch of time, A World of wealth, for an inch of time. And another when dying,
said, If I had ten thousand Worlds, I would give them all, that I might live
one day longer. Remember the Scripture, which says, Boast not thy self of to
morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth, Prove. 27.1. Men have
not, as Hezekiah had, a promise of life for fifteen years. It may be thou have
not fifteen days, nay, not fifteen hours to live: If thou were sure thou
should live but one week, how would thou redeem the time? Yet it may be
thou shall not live one day, and dare thou then mispend thy time.

Consider. 2. The exceeding danger which is in neglecting the present season.
This is mavelous dangerous, because there is no promise for to morrow, but
only for to day, Heb. 37. [ To day] if you will hear his voice; and again,
Verse 14. Exhort one another [daily] while it is called [ to day;] and Verse
15. [ To day] if you hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Thus does the Lord
say, To day, To day, To day; but you will no where find in all the Book of God,
any promise, that, To morrow if you will hear his voice, it shall go well with
you. The Devil and a man's own treacherous heart may promise for to morrow, but
God does not so. It may be either now or never; all times will not serve for
Soul-saving purposes. Hence is that, Isa. 55.6. Seek ye the Lord while he may
be found, call upon him while he is near. There is then a time wherein God may
be found, and a time wherein he will not be found: If you delay and put off God
for the present, it may be he will not be found for the future; Oh therefore
make thy peace with God quickly, lest it be too late, Mat. 5.25. Know this for
certain, that the longer you delay your Repentance, the harder work you will
find of it; the longer any man lives in sin, the harder it is for him to turn
from sin, Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his
spots? then may you do good, that are accustomed to do evil. This very
Delusion, that man will repent hereafter, and therefore that they may venture
to neglect the present season, has been the Eternal ruin of millions of
Souls. Oh Sirs, if some of you could but speak with your old Companions in sin,
that are dead and gone to their own place, they would tell you dismal stories
to this purpose; they would say to you, Ah Fools that we were, to neglect the
present season, out of a vain Confidence, that hereafter we would repent and
turn to God: This has brought us into the place of Torment, from whence there
is no Redemption.

Consider 3. That the Lord will surely call you to an account one day for your
time. You shall all appear before the Son of God one day, and give an account
how you have lived and spent your time in this World: Men must give an account
how they have improved Talents, especially this great and precious Talent Time.
The Lord keeps an exact account how many years, days, hours, is allowed to
every man in this World, and will reckon with men for all one day. As I
remember it is storied of Ignatius, that if he did hear the Clock strike, he
would say, There is another hour gone which I must answer for. Oh if men did
think sadly of this, how would they improve their time? Did they know how great
a sin it is to mispend so much as one hour, would they spend it may be whole
days in vanity?

Consider 4 That you have lost much precious time already; and therefore it is
high time to look about you, and to consider well how you may improve the
present season, 1 Pet. 4.3. The time past of our life may suffice us, to have
wrought the will of the Gentiles. So the time past which has been misspent is
enough and too much to be lost. Alas, men spend the greatest part of their time
either in doing nothing, or in doing amiss. How much time is there spent in
excessive sleep, or in needless recreations, or in unprofitable discourses?
nay, how much time is spent in sin? All the days of a man's irregeneracy, are
days of vanity. All that time (which as to the most of you has been the
greatest part of your lives) has been utterly lost. Hence Paul speaks of his
being born out of due time, 1 Cor. 15.8. Because before his Conversion, his life
was a death rather than a life, he lost a^l that time, even as if he had not
been born into the World. An old man once said, when dying, I have lived but
seven years, because he was converted but seven years before his death, and
before that he made account he was as a man that did not live, as a man that
had no time or being in the World.

Consid. 5. Your time in this World is but short; therefore improve it, it is
pity to lose any part of a short time. Christ lived not much above two and
thirty years, therefore did he go up and down doing good, and was wonderfully
careful to improve his time to the best advantage. Who knows how soon thy
Soul may launch forth into the Ocean of Eternity? Thy time will quickly be
gone; hence Job says, Chap. 9. verse. 25, 26. My days are swifter than a Post,
they flee away, they are passed away as the swift Ships, as the Eagle that
hastes to the prey. When men ride Post you know they go swiftly, but a Ship in
the Sea has a swifter motion, and flying is swifter than that, and an Eagle is
amongst the swiftest of Birds, and the motion of an Eagle when hastening to the
prey, is more swift than ordinary: All this is said, to show how fast a man's
time does spend away. If a man has much work to do, and but little time to do
it in, he had need to bestir himself. Suppose the Sun to be almost set, yet
much work must of necessity be done e're the Sun be down; How needful is it to
improve that little time? So it is here, every man has much work of absolute
necessity to be done, many duties to perform, many corruptions to subdue, many
sins to repent of, and if all this be not done before Sun set, a man's undone
for ever, and therefore improve his time he must.

Consider 6. Eternity depends upon the well improving of a moment. According to
the Seed-time in this Life, such will the Harvest be in the World to come for
ever, Gal. 6.7, 8. Oh! Eternity, Eternity, Eternity, is a solemn and awakening
Meditation. I am persuaded, if you would when you come home, think seriously
one quarter of an hour about Eternity, it would by the blessing of God tend to
awaken you to improve your short time in this World. Remember then and often
think on it, that thou must shortly go either into Everlasting weal, or else
into Everlasting woe, according as time in this World has been improved or
neglected. Within a few days thy Immortal Soul shall be either in Eternal Joy,
or else in Eternal Torment; that after thou have been therein, as many millions
of Ages, as there are Stars in Heaven; as many millions of Ages, as there are
piles of Grass upon the Earth; as many millions of Ages, as there are sands
upon the Seashore, thou then shall be no nearer unto an end of that condition,
than thou wast at the first moment when thou did enter into it. Oh I do
beseech you for Gods sake, for Christ's sake, and for your Immortal Souls sake,
that you would think of this seriously, though it be but one quarter of an hour
together.

Quest. What shall we do that we may improve time.

Answ. I Will mention but one Rule, and that is this, Live every day, as if it
were your last day. Let me preach, as if I were never to preach more; and do
you hear as if you were never to hear more: Do nothing, say nothing, think
nothing, but what you would be willing to do, if you were to dye the next day.

If you were sure, that as soon as this Sermon is ended, your naked Souls
should appear before God the Judge of all, how then would you hear? Verily if
these truths were realized to the hearts of men, they would labor to redeem
there time, yea, they would watch and pray.

Now blessed is that Servant, whom the Lord at his coming shall find so doing.

The number of those that find the way to Life, being compared with those that
walk in the way to Destruction, is but a small number.
Matthew. 7.14. -- Few there be that find it.


THese words are part of that large and blessed Sermon which Christ preached on
the Mount; the whole Sermon is full of Heavenly matter. Amongst other things,
we have the Parable concerning the two Gates, and the two Ways; namely, the
Wide and the Strait Gate, and the Broad and Narrow Way, in this, and in the
foregoing Verse; where our Savior does compare all the men in the World, to a
company of Travelers, that are walking some one way, and some another. Thus it
is with men, they are all Traveling to another World, they are all walking
toward Eternity, but in contrary ways: Some are going toward Eternal Life;
others are going toward Eternal Death. Wherefore Christ's scope in these
Verses, is, to persuade men to enter in at the Strait Gate, and to walk in the
Narrow way.

Diverse Arguments are used to press this Exhortation, both with reference unto
the Broad, and also with reference unto the Narrow Way. As for the Broad Way,
one Argument there mentioned is, that it is a common thing to walk therein,
Many there are that walk therein; and therefore there is so much more need to
be careful about the matter. Again, because of the miserable end which that way
does bring unto, It leads unto destruction: That Is the end and issue of walking
in the Broad Way; therefore we should be sure to walk in the Narrow Way. And
then in reference to the Narrow Way it self, there are diverse Argument^tive
Considerations mentioned; 1. Because it ends in life, Narrow is the way which
leads unto life. 2. Because there be few which find it. Which are the words,
by the Lords help, to be spoken to.

That find it; i. e. That find the way to life. Which speech must not be
understood simply and absolutely; For the number of saved ones absolutely
considered, is a very great and vast number; they are said to be a great
multitude which no man can number, Rev. 7.9. There are many hundreds, many
thousands, yea, million of them, even a numberless number, like the stars of
Heaven. But this is to be understood comparatively; the number of those that
walk in the way to life is but small, compared with the other number, namely,
in respect of those that shall miss of Eternal Life. The Doctrine therefore
which may be insisted on from the words, is this.

Doctr. That the number of those that walk in the way which leads to Eternal
Life, being compared with those that are in the way to Destruction, is but a
very small number.

In the Doctrinal prosecution of this point, three things may be attended. 1.
To show what is that way of Life which is here spoken of. 2. How it does appear
that but few shall find Eternal Life. 3. Whence it comes to pass, that so few
do find Eternal Life.

Quest. 1. What is the way to life?

Answ. In general, That way which God has prescribed unto men to walk in, that
so they might obtain Eternel Life; Prove. 10.17. He is in the way of life that
keeps instruction. The instruction there spoken of, is Divine instruction.
The meaning is, that if a man does observe the Word of God, then he is in the
way of life. This way is laid out by Rule, and that Rule is none other but the
Word of Truth. Hence it is called, The Way of God, and the way of the Lord;
that is to say, the way which the Lord has appointed men to walk in, that so
they may be saved. Particularly,

1. In this way Repentance and sound Conversion unto God is implied. For men by
Nature are out of the right way, Romans 3.12. The Apostle there showing what is
the estate of all men by Nature says, They are all gone out of the way, and
verse. 17. The way of peace have they not known. That way which leads to
everlasting peace and happiness, men by Nature are estranged from it; Therefore
Repentance is necessary. And if there be a true and sound Repentance, Life will
follow. Hence it is called, Repentance unto life, Acts 11.18. and, Repentance
unto Salvation, 2 Cor. 7.10. because Repentance will bring unto Life, and unto
Salvation.

2. In the way which is here spoken of, Christ, and Faith in him is implied;
when it is said, Enter in at the strait gate, the meaning is, make sure of an
interest in Christ; therefore Christ himself has said, I am the door, by me if
any man enter in, he shall be saved, Joh. 10.9. Christ is that strait Door,
that whosoever enters in thereat, shall be saved: That strait Gate that if any
enter in thereat he live. So when it is said, Walk in the narrow way, the same
thing is intended thereby, namely, the obtaining of an interest in Christ by
Faith unfeigned in his name: Therefore also Christ has said, I am the Way, the
Truth, and the Life, Joh. 14.6. Never any man did obtain Eternal Life, but it
was in this way, even in a way of believing on Christ; and never any man did
miss of Eternal Life, that did indeed walk in the way of Faith. 1 John 5.12. He
that has the Son has life; and he that has not the Son of God has not life.
Whosoever finds Christ, finds the way to Eternal Life.

3. The way of new and holy obedience unto God in Christ, is the way of life;
Therefore the Scripture speaks of the holy way, Isa. 35.8 And a way shall be
there, and it shall be called the way of holiness, the unclean shall not pass
over it. Now this Holiness is the way to life, Prove. 12.28. In the way of
Rigteousness is life, and in the pathway thereof is no death. If a man does
walk in righteous paths, and keep in righteous holy ways, no Eternal death
shall take hold of him, but this way will lead him unto life. This which has
been expressed, is the only way to life and glory; this way has ever been the
same in all ages of the World. Hence it is called, The way Everlasting, Ps.
139.27. Lead me in the way Everlasting, that is to say, in the way which the
Saints in all ages have and shall walk in, toward life and happiness. Hence
also it is called, the good old way, Jer. 6.16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye
in the way, and see and ask for the old path, where is the good way, and walk
therein, and ye shall find rest for your souls, etc. I say, the way of
Repentance, Faith and Holiness, always has been, and is, and ever shall be the
way unto life.

We come then unto the second thing, that is, to enquire, How it does appear,
that the number of those that find the way to life is comparatively but a small
number?

Now for Answer unto that Enquiry, several things may be mentioned, which are
Evidences and clear Demonstrations of the truth of this point.

1. Because those that do enjoy the Word and outward means of Grace, are
comparatively but few. God has appointed the means and the end to go together;
therefore where he intends that end of Eternal Life, he is wont to bestow the
means which himself has appointed, in order to the attainment of that end;
Hence is that, 1 Timothy 2.4. God will have all men (that is to say, men of all
sorts, as the Context does manifest) to be saved, and to come to the knowledge
of the truth; those two go together, even Salvation and the knowledge of the
Truth. The Apostle says, that the Jews would have hindered them from preaching
to the Gentiles, that they might be saved, 1 These. 2.16. which plainly
declares, that without Preaching (according to ordinary Dispensation) there is
no Salvation This is certain, that there is no Salvation without Christ, Acts
4.12. It was Austin's saying, that he that does think that one may be saved
without Christ, it may well be questioned whether that man shall himself be
saved or no. And there is no Salvation by Christ, without Faith in him: This is
Life Eternal to know (that is, to believe on) Jesus Christ, John 17.3. And
there is no faith ordinarily, but it is wrought by the Word preached. What God
may do for Infants, or deaf persons, or the like, is another question; but we
speak concerning the Lords ordinary course of Dispensation: Hence is that, Tit.
1.1. according to the faith of Gods Elect, and acknowledging the Truth.
Ordinarily there is no faith, but it is by means of the knowledge of the truth
of the Gospel. The Apostle speaks fully to this purpose, Rom 10.14, 15. How
shall they believe on him of whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear
without a Preacher? and how shall they preach except they be sent? and then in
verse. 17. he speaks Argumentatively, So then (says he) faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. It Is true, that men may by the light
of Nature know many things about God; as that he is, and that there is but one
God, one Eternal glorious Being, who ought to be served, etc. But they cannot
know Christ by the light of Nature. God is kn^wn as a Creator by the light of
Nature, but not as a Redeemer. There is no faith without the knowledge of
Christ as a Mediator, which Mystery is not discovered, but by Supernatural
light of the Gospel; but they that have the knowledge of the Scriptures, are
comparatively but few. In the Ages of the Old Testament, there was but that one
only Nation of Israel that enjoyed the outward means of Grace, Psalm. 147.19,
20. He shows his Word to Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments to Israel: He
has not dealt so with any Nation; and as for his Judgments, they have not
known them. It Is true, that there were some few particular persons that had the
knowledge of God, who were not Israelites, but no other Nation; therefore it is
not said, He has not so with any person, but with any People, or Nation. Hence
the Lord speaking unto his people Israel, says, You have I known of all the
Families of the earth, Amos 3, 2, And while it was thus, the way of Salvation
was to be found amongst that people only: Therefore Christ said to the woman of
Samaria, Salvation is of the Jews, John 4.22. Because then a man must be a Jew,
in respect of his Religion and Profession a Jew, or else he could not be saved;
wherefore also the Scripture gives us to understand, that as for those
miserable Nations which peopled the earth in those dark days, which were before
the Sun of Righteousness did arise upon the World, they perished in their
ignorance, Acts 17.30. The times of this ignorance God winked at: The meaning
is not, that God winked at their sins in these days of ignorance, but at their
persons: He overlooked (as the Greek word properly signifies) them. The Lord
had no saving regard to them, and to their times, but suffered them to walk in
their own ways, even in the Broad Way which leads unto destruction. Now
although in these New Testament times there are many Nations that have the
Gospel, yet but few in comparison of those that are destitute thereof.
Therefore as for the way to Eternal Life, Few there be that find it.

2. This is farther evident, because the Elect of God are but few. Eternal Life
runs parallel with the line of Election, Romans 8.29, 30. All, and only those
shall be saved, that belong to the Election of Grace, 2 These. 2.13. But the
Elect are but few in number. Indeed the Elect, considered in themselves,
without comparing them with the Reprobate World, are many, (as before was
hinted at) which may be one Reason why the Elect are expressed by that term of
the World, 1 John 2.2. Christ is the Propitiation for our sins; and not for
ours only, but also for the sins of the whole World. The Elect there are
called, the whole World; the main Reason of that Expression may be, because the
Elect do consist in a great part of Gentiles, who are called the World often in
Scripture, in opposition to the Jews, formerly the only people of God. Christ
(says the Apostle) is a Propitiation, not only for our sins, who are Jews, but
for the sins of the Gentiles also, whom he calls the World. But another Reason
of the Expression may be, because of the multitudinous number of the Elect
absolutely considered; yet compare them with the non-Elect, and then they are
but very few. The word Election does import this; for to elect is to choose or
pick a few out of a greater number, Joh. 15.19. Hence the Elect are called a
Remnant, Romans 11.15. and a little flock, Luke 12.32. The Greek is, where there
are two Diminutives signifying, a little, little flock, that is a very little
flock, The Israelitish Nation was a Type of the Elect of God; hence the Apostle
calls the Elect an Holy Nation, 1 Pet. 2.9. alluding to the Israelitish
Nation, which typified the Elect. Thence also the Elect are called by that name
of Israel; Gal. 6.16. Rev. 7.4. Now that Nation when God first chose them, were
a very small Nation, compared with other Nations in the World, Deuteronomy. 7.7. The
Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because you were more in
number than any people, for you were the smallest of all people. Therefore the
Elect are but few; yea, they are but few, compared with those that are
outwardly called, Mat. 22.14. Many are called, but few are chosen; So that
amongst called ones, that is, in respect of the outward call of the Gospel,
there are but few chosen, but few of them that belong to the Election of Grace.
You heard in the first Argument, that there are but few outwardly called,
compared with the rest of the World, yet but few elected amongst such called
ones. Therefore as for the way to life, Few there be that find it.

3. This truth is also manifest, in that those things which are necessary in
order unto life, are rarely attained. To instance, Repentance is necessary in
order unto life (as but now was intimated) therefore is that Ezekiel. 18. ult.
Turn and live ye; so that there is no living without Turning. But true
Repentance is a rare thing; so rare, as that in the Prophet Jeremies time,
there was upon the matter none at all, Chap. 8. verse. 6. I hearkened and heard,
but no man repented of his wickedness; every one turned to his course, etc. No
man (says he) repented him; that is to say, they were very few, even so few,
that they seemed none at all. As Solomon speaks concerning Repentance for
that sin of Uncleanness, that he found but one man of a thousand, that repented
of it; Eccles. 7.28. And in another place he says, None that go in to her
return again, neither take they hold of the paths of life, Prove. 2.19. So it is
measurably true concerning Repentance for other sins. Again, you heard, that
Faith in Christ is requisite in order unto Eternal life. The sum of the whole
Gospel is contained in those few words, Mark 16.16. He that believes shall be
saved, and he that believes not shall be damned. But true faith is a rare
thing, therefore is that Isa. 53.1. Who has believed our report? So that even
amongst those unto whom the report of the Gospel comes, there are but few that
believe in truth: To presume is common, but to believe is rare. You have heard
also, that Holiness is required in order unto life. That Text is plain, and the
words are peremptory, Heb. 12.14. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord.
No man, be he high or low, shall see the Lord of life; and therefore no man
shall inherit Eternal life, without Holiness. But holy men and women are rarely
found, 1 John 5.19. The Apostle there says, that the whole World lies in
Wickedness. Yea, even amongst those who are Pretenders unto Holiness, there are
but few that have the thing in reality, Isa. 65.5. They say. Stand by thy self,
come not near to me, I am holier than thou: These are a smoke in my nose, a
fire that burns all the day. Mark you, they were persons that did pretend to
extraordinary Holiness, (as superstitious persons and Hypocrites are wont to
do) yet the Lord tells them, that his anger should smoke and burn against them
everlastingly. Therefore as for the way to life, Few there be that find it.

But the truth hereof will be further evident, by speaking to the third thing
propounded for the opening of the point; that is, Whence it comes to pass that
so few do walk in the way of life? We shall only mention two Reasons of the
Doctrine.

Reas. 1. Because the way of life does not suit with Nature. There must be a
Supernatural light to direct the Soul into this way, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural
man receives not the things of God, neither can he know them. And after a man
does see this way, there must be a Supernatural work of the Spirit to cause him
to venture on in it; yea, it is not only above nature, but against corrupt
nature. The way of Mortification, is the way to Heaven. Now that is a way to
which men are naturally as averse unto, as they are to cut off their right
hand, or to pluck out a right eye, Mat. 5.29. If this be so, no wonder that so
few are found walking in this narrow way. To see men swimming down the stream
is no strange thing, for that is natural; but to see them swimming against the
stream, would be wonderful. Thus it is here, when men walk in the way to life,
they swim against the stream. Hence we need not marvel if there be but few
such. And this is further manifest, because,

Reas. 2. The way to life is an hard way, even a way full of Afflictions and
Temptations on the right hand and on the left; hence Christ calls it a narrow
way, or an afflicted way, as the word intimates, a compressed way, as some
render it: Things that are dilated by pressure, are made narrow; so is this way
which you hear of, The way to the Kingdom of God is through many tribulations,
Acts 14.22. It Is like the way out of Egypt to Canaan, there was a dismal
desolate Wilderness in the way, which was a Land of drought, and of pits, and
of fiery flying Serpents, etc. So is the way to the heavenly Canaan no less
terrible. Thence there are but few that find it.

Thus you see the Truth cleared and proved from Scripture.

But some one will say, Does not God delight more in glorifying his Grace, that
in manifesting the dreadfulness of his Justice? How then can there more be
damned than saved?

Answ. True, but Grace is glorified more in the life of a few, than Justice in
the Destruction of those many millions of millions that shall perish. The
reason is, Because all men have deserved death, but none have deserved life.
And as for those that shall be saved, because they are but few, therefore Grace
is the more magnified toward them, and will be glorified in them, and by them
to all Eternity.

We come then to apply this truth.

Use. 1. By way of Confutation: This Doctrine lets us see the erroneousness of
sudry false Opinions which some men have taken up. As,

1. Their Opinion is from hence convinced of error, who have thought that the
Gentiles were saved by their Philosophy and Morality, though they had nothing
but the light of Nature to instruct them. If that were so, Christ would never
have said concerning the way to life, few there be that find it. How can that
be, if very Heathens by the dark light of nature find it? One of the Ancients
therefore said well, That some have endeavored to prove Plato a Christian,
till they have thereby proved themselves to be little better than Heathens.
There is a Book extant with that Title, de Salute Aristotelis, concerning the
Salvation of Aristotle. And an other ^ath written a Book, de Animabus
Paganorum, endeavoring to prove, that the Souls of some that dyed Pagans, are
in a state of bliss. But though I censure not any of the godly, learned Ancients,
or amongst the Reformers, that have been blemished with this error, yet it will
be found certain another day, That Philosophy without Theology; light of Nature
without the light of Scripture, will never bring the Soul to Christ, or into
that way which leads to Eternal life. There are too many bad Christians, but
there are no good Heathens. Take the best of the Gentiles, even those that
wrote most for Virtue, and try them by the Touchstone of Gods Word, and it
will be found true, that there never was the l^ast real Scripture-vertue in any
of them. They would make a show of Love and Patience, and other Virtues; but
what they had, was no more like the Scripture-grace of Love or Patience, than
the Sun which is painted on the Wall, is like to the Sun which moves in the
Firmament. Then Magnanimity, if tried by Scripture, will be found no better
than that odious and accursed sin of Pride. What shall we say, that Paul does
expressly and by name condemn that for a Vice, which Aristotle cries up for a
Virtue. So you find, Ephesians. 5.4. the Apostle there does condemn Jesting, the
Greek word ENTRAPELIA, which is one of Aristotle's Virtues. Yet it must be
acknowledged, that the Morality of the Gentiles was not altogether lost to
them; for (as some have well observed) they thereby procured Temporal good to
themselves, and present ease of Conscience, yea, and less misery in Hell than
otherwise they must have suffered. But as to Eternal Life, all these things
without Christ, were of no value.

2. This Doctrine also confuteth the Error of Universal Redemption. Certainly
if Christ had dyed for all, he would never himself affirm, that but few shall
find the way to Eternal Life. If Christ have died to save men, and yet they
fall short of Salvation, then must his blood be shed in vain, as not being able
to accomplish the end intended by him, which thing may not be imagined, Gal.
2.21. It Is a sure Proposition, That the Redemption of Christ, and the
Application of this Redemption, are of equal extent; but my Text teaches us,
that the Application of this Redemption reaches only to those that are
comparatively but a few. And shall we think that Christ would dye for those
whom he would not so much as pray for: He would not pray for the Reprobate
World, John 17.9. Surely they that are not interested in Christ's Intercession,
are not interested in his Oblation. To dye for another is an evidence of the
greatest love that can be, John 15.13. How harsh and horrid is it to affirm
that Christ loved Judas as much as he did Peter? yet so it must be, if he dyed
for the one, as much as for the other: Wherefore the Scripture plainly
intimates, that Christ dyed only for the Elect of God: Thus some understand
that place, Heb. 2.16. He took not on him the nature of Angels. So the words
are rendered; but they may be read, He takes not hold of the Angels. Says the
Apostle, Christ saw the Reprobate Angels falling into the pit of Destruction,
but he did not take hold of them to recover and save them; No, but the seed of
Abraham he takes hold of. He does not say, the seed of Adam, but the seed of
Abraham, thereby intimating, that Christ did not come to redeem all men
whatsoever, but the Elect of God, who are noted by that expression of the seed
of Abraham.

3. This confuteth their Error, who maintain that a man may be saved in any
Religion, if he be but civil, and live up to his Religion. Such a Principle as
this there is in the Turkish Alcoron; and it were well if some Christians did
not say after Mahomet in this particular. But sure it is, that there is but one
true Religion, and many false ones. And as they that are of no Religion, are
out of the way to life, so are they that are of a false one. The Jewish
Religion will not bring to life, John 8.24. You shall dye in your sins, if you
believe not that I am he, you shall dye in your sins. So that they that believe
not that Jesus of Nazareth is the true Messiah, that our Christ is the Son of
God, and Savior of the World, shall not live, but dye for ever in their sins.
This you know is the case of the Jews at this day. And as for the Mohammedan
Religion, there is no Salvation in that. Therefore you find, Rev. 9. that that
Religion is come out of the Bottomless Pit. It is said, verse. 11. They had a
King over them, which is the Angel of the Bottomless Pit, whose name in the
Hebrew Tongue is Abaddon, but in the Greek Tongue Apollyon, that signifies a
Destroyer. So then, those of that Religion are in the way to destruction. And
as for the Popish Religion, it is also Heretical and Damnable. Mr. Perkins long
since wrote a Book, wherein he proves, that a Papist living up to the
Principles of his Religion, cannot go beyond a Reprobate: And does not the
Apostle when he speaks concerning the Apostasy of the Man of Sin, teach,
that those that are deceived therewith, shall perish, and that they all shall
be damned, who are given up of God to believe the Lies and Delusions of
Antichrist, 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. Now that by the Man of sin, the Popedom is
intended, is past all doubt, to those that are willing to be convinced of the
Truth; because the description which the Apostle does there give of Antichrist,
does agree wholly and only to the Popedom, even in all the particulars of it.
Again, does not John show, that all Liars shall be excluded the heavenly
Jerusalem, Rev. 21.27. Who are the Liars there meant? Sure especially Popish
Idolaters and false Worshippers, whose Religion is a great lie. But we shall
touch a little farther upon this anon In a word, whosoever does maintain any
Heresy against the true Religion of Christ, or Faith delivered to the Saints,
cannot be saved: therefore Heresies are said to be damnable, 2 Pet. 2.1.

Use 2. If there be but few that shall find the way to life, then there must
needs be many that walk in the way to destruction. Hence is that, Joel 3.14.
Multitudes, multitudes, says the Prophet: Where are they? In the way to life?
Nay, but in the valley of Decision, in the place of Destruction, there are
multitudes, multitudes,: And Christ here says, that broad is the way, an^ wide
is the gate which leads unto destruction, and [Many] there be that go in
thereat. And the Apostle says, that there are many whose end is destruction,
Phil. 3.19. It will appear that it is so indeed, if we consider who they be
that are in the way to destruction: And this is true concerning those many
Heathen Nations which are in the World; who remain altogether ignorant of the
true God in Christ, and strangers to the Profession of the true Religion, Psalm.
9.17. The wicked, and all the Nations that forget God shall be turned into
Hell. And again, Ps. 79 6. Pour out thy wrath upon the Heathen that have not
known thee, and upon the Kingdoms that have not called upon thy name. And this
is true, not only concerning such as do willfuly refuse and reject the means of
Light and Life, as the Jews did; but also concerning those that never heard of
the way of Salvation; and are in that respect, as some speak, under invincible
ignorance, yet they are in a perishing condition: Witness that Scripture, Prove.
29 18. Where there is no vision the people perish; and that Matthew. 4.16. where
it is said of such as are destitute of the means of Grace, that they sit in
darkness, and in the Region of the shadow of death: which also might be one
reason why Christ told the Jews, that they should be cast out into utter
darkness, Matthew. 8.12. because they should be deprived of the means of Grace,
and so, as it were, damned above ground, and in the Suburbs of Hell, while they
are yet living upon the Earth* Witness also that Scripture, 2 These. 1.8. which
says, that Christ shall be revealed from Heaven, taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. So that
not only those that obey not the Gospel of Jesus Christ, that is to say, such
as reject the Gospel by positive Unbelief, as the Jews did: But likewise those
that know not God, even such as are under negative Unbelief, and thence under
invincible Ignorance, must suffer vengeance; though not for their Unbelief, yet
for their Transgressions of the Law.

Now of this sort are the greatest part of the Inhabitants of the Earth by far.
Christendom (as it is called) even the whole Christian World, is but a little
spot, compared with the rest of the World. Some have observed, that if all the
Inhabitants of the World should be divided into one and thirty parts, nineteen
of the one and thirty are Idolaters, and seven parts are Mahometans and Jews,
and only five parts of one and thirty that is so much as in name Christian.
However, sure it is, that the Christian World is little, compared with the
Pagan World: And yet amongst those that call themselves Christian, the greatest
part are in the broad way, which leads to destruction; for the greatest part
of these are indeed Antichristian: Let us set aside the Grecian, Jacobites and
Nestorians (who are said to comprehend the greatest part of them that are known
by the name Christians) as being in sundry points Heretical; and look into
Europe, America, and how few shall we find there that are Christians indeed?
For in many Places and Nations there are more Papists than Protestants, albeit
as to our Nation, through the mercy of God, it be not so. But you have heard it
proved that Popery is damnable Heresy. No doubt but that there may be some
simple Souls amongst Papists, who having the knowledge of the Fundemental
points in Religion, and living according to the light they have thereby
received, though they may ignorantly think well of the Church of Rome, God may
show them mercy: But I speak of wilful Papists, and of such as live up to the
Principles of that Religion, which is inconsistent with living according to the
Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, now these must needs perish. I would be
loath to be the Author of an harsh Censure, yet I am willing to speak after the
Angel of God: See then Revel. 14.9, 10. The third Angel followed them, saying
with a loud voice, If any man Worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his
mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the Wine of the
Warth of God which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his
Indignation, he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of
the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb. A very dreadful Scripture;
and the persons concerned in it are Papists. Now then if the Third Angel say
thus, why should not we declare the like, that so we may be amongst the number
of the Angels whom the Holy Ghost there speaks of? Besides, Idolaters cannot
be saved, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Revel. 21.8. But if there be any Idolaters in the
World, the Papists are such, when they worship graven Images, and pray to
Saints, and to Gods that cannot save them: How then should they be saved?
Again, their Doctrine of Justification by Works is a Fundamental error, as Paul
testifies in his Epistles, especially in his Epistle to the Romans (which was
not without mystery, that the Apostle writing to the Romans, should so much
insist upon that subject) besides many other Heresies by them maintained. I
remember our great Whitaker says, If one Heresy be destructive, what then are
so many as those which the Papists defend. If they (says he) shall be saved,
then we must needs be damned; but if we be in the way of Salvation, then they
are in that way to destruction? Moreover, it is an ancient and true Maxim, that
out of the Church there is no Salvation to be had: But Papists do not belong to
the visible Church of Christ. Therefore you read, Rev. 11.1. that the Temple is
measured; and verse 2. it is said; But the Court which is without the Temple,
leave out and measure it not, for it is given to the Gentiles, etc. So that
Papist are without the Temple, that is to say, they do not belong to the Church
of God; and thence also they there are called Gentiles, because those Apostate
Christians are in the same condition with the Heathen, Persecuting, Idolatrous
World; whose God is not Christ, but Satan and Antichrist. Yet if we come nearer
home, and look amongst Protestants and Professors of the true Religion; Alas,
we shall find many there that are walking in the broad way to destruction. It
is said concerning the Church of Sardis, Thou have a few names, Rev. 3.4. Some
of good judgment that look upon the Epistles of Christ to the seven Churches in
Asia, to be a Parable or Prophecy concerning the sevenfold state of the
visible Church, from Christ's first unto his last coming, conceive that our
times fall under the fifth Interval, or the Sardion condition of the Church.
Sardis might be a Type of Protestant Churches; now therein are but a few names.
Amongst Protestants there are but few that live, or that are acquainted with
the life and power of Godliness; but many that are dead, though they have a
name to live. For this is true concerning all profane ones, Drunkards,
Swearers, Liars, Unclean Persons, and such like, they shall not inherit Eternal
Life. Also this is true concerning those that are only Civil and Moral men, but
are strangers still to regenerating Grace: Yea, and thus must we say of all
Heretical Persons; and not only so, but of all that are in a state of
Hypocrisy, men that make a great show of Religion, but there is some
unmortified Lust that they love and live in, they may have a name to live, but
they are dead. Now if all these be put together, even all that are Profane, or
only Civil Moralized persons, and all Heretics in judgment, and all Hypocrites
in heart, what a vast number then are in the way to Destruction In a word,
there are many that shall perish even amongst hearers of the Word; witness the
Parable of the Sower, where we are told of four sorts of ground, that is, of
four sorts of hearers, and yet but one of them good, yea, many shall perish
amongst seekers after Life: For Truth himself has spoken it, Many shall seek,
and shall not be able to enter in at the strait gate, Luke 13.24. yea, many
shall perish, even amongst those that have instructed others in the way to
life: So did Christ say toward the close of this very Sermon wherein my Text
is, Mat. 7.23. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name, and in thy name have cast out Devils, and in thy name
done many wonderful works; and then will I profess unto them, I never knew you,
depart from me, ye that work iniquity.

Use 3. If these things be so: Oh, how then should that solomn Exhortation of
the Apostle take place in all our hearts, Phil. 2.12. Work out your own
Salvation with fear and trembling? Since there are but few saved, and many
perish: Oh how should we seek after Life and Salvation with fear and trembling?
Let me spread before you a few Awakening and Encouraging Consierations, and so
conclude.

Consider. 1. That many are miserably deceived about this matter. Men may, and
many do think themselves in the way to life, whenas they are posting to
destruction; They think themselves something when they are nothing, Gal. 6.3.
Therefore Solomon says, There is a way that seems right unto a man, but the
end the^eof are the ways of death, Pro. 14.12. Doubtless if you could speak
with those in Hell, and ask them why they were such fools as to walk in that
way which did lead them into Eternal flames, the greatest part of those forlorn
Souls would answer, We little thought it! we hoped we had been in a good way,
we never imagined, that when once our Souls were out of our bodies, that then
they must be in this place of Torment; I say many are thus deceived, and no
marvel: for,

Consider. 2. A man may bid fair, and go far toward Heaven, and yet at last
miss of that narrow may which leads unto life. Alas Sirs, alas! what have
many of you to say for to prove your Title to Eternal Life, which you pretend
unto, but what Hypocrites and Reprobates may say the same? Will you say, I am a
constant hearer of the Word, I go to hear good Ministers preach, therefore I am
in the way to life? But what says the Scripture? James 1.22. Be ye doers of
the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving your own Souls. Many cheat their own
Souls with this Delusion, because they hear the Word, they think they shall be
saved: But thou may be a constant hearer upon Lords-days, and upon
Lecture-days, and yet not be in the way to Eternal life; Few there be that find
it. Will you say, but the Word has had some effect upon my Soul, I am in some
measure changed and reformed by it? Remember that Scripture, 2 Pet. 2 20. which
tells you, that men may escape the pollutions of the World, through the
knowledge of Christ; that is, by the power of the Gospel, and yet be such, as
it had been better for them not to have known the way of Righteousness:
Therefore thou may be in some sort reformed, and yet not in the way to Eternal
life: Few there be that find it! Will you say, but I practice good duties, I
Pray, and give Alms, and Fast, and all this in secret: This is well done, yet
no more than what an Hypocrite may do, Luke 18.2. The Pharisee there says, I
fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess, etc. These could
not be public, but they were secret fasts: Therefore thou may practice
secret duties, and yet not be in the way to Eternal life: Few there be that
find it! Will you say, but Gods servants, and those that are able to judge,
think well of me, and have received me into their Fellowship, so as that I am a
member of a pure Church of Christ: But might not Judas, and Ananias, and
Saphira, and Simon Magus have said all this? What think you of the foolish
Virgins? They were members of pure Reformed Churches, not of Idolatrous,
Superstitious Churches; no, they were Virgins, and yet the gates of Life were
shut against them, Mat. 25.11, 12. The Virgins said, Lord, Lord, open to us;
But he answered and said, Verily, I say unto you, I know you not. So that thou
may be a member of a pure Church, and yet the strait gate of life shut
against thy Soul another day: Therefore this is not enough to prove, that thou
art in the way to life: Few then be that find it! Will you say, but I have
suffered for Conscience sake, and for Truths sake, I have left a dear Land, and
Fathers Houses, because I would not comply with the Superstition of the times?
If this be done in sincerity, it is well for thee; but if in vainglory, or for
any by and base respect, thou may still be out ot the narrow afflicted way
which leads to life. Did not Alexander suffer with Paul when time was, and yet
afterward, proved an Apostate? Do we not read of some Heretics in the
primitive times, that have suffered unto death in the common cause of
Christianity? Does not the Scripture intimate, that men may give their bodies
to be burned, and yet not have a spark of true Grace in their Souls, 1 Cor. 13
1, 2, 3. So then, thou may suffer, yea, suffer unto death it self in a
righteous Cause, and yet not be in the way to life: Few there be that find it!
Will thou say, but God has given of his Spirit to me? If thou have the
Converting, Sanctifying Grace of the Spirit, then thou art in the right way;
but if thou have only the gifts of the Spirit, then thou art in the broad way
still. Had not Judas gifts, whereby he was able to Pray and Preach too? Had not
Saul gifts, whereby he was able to Govern a Nation? yet neither of them in the
way to life. A man may be garnished, and yet under an un^le an spirit still,
Mat. 12 44. How garnished? even adorned with excellent gifts, so as to be able
to pray and to discourse edifyingly, and yet not in the way which leads to
life: Few there be that find it! It is one of the most solemn, awful
Meditations that it is possible for a man to think of, to consider how far one
may go, and yet fall short of Heaven at last: What sins he may forsake, what
duties he may practice, what gifts he may attain, what good he may do; what
evil he may suffer in the Lords cause, and yet his Soul be shut out of the
place of Life and Glory: Oh how should this cause fear and trembling?

Consider 3. It is possible to enter into the gave and way life. Indeed it is
hard work (as afterward may be showed more abundantly) and thence it is called
a strait gate, yet it is possible, as the words of the Text do imply. It would
be an improper speech to say, Few there be that find it, if none at all could
find it: This shows that the way may be found, yea, and by some is found:
Christ has made the the way passable, Heb. 10.20. He has consecrated a new
and living way through the vail of his flesh. Christ by his blood has set
Heaven gates open (as when Christ was dying, the vail of the Temple rent) to
true Believers on him; yea, and Eternal Life is freely offered to all where the
Gospel comes; Heaven is brought to your doors, Eternal Life is, as it were,
brought and laid at your doors, if you will accept of it, when the Gospel is
preached to you. All you that hear the Gospel this day, Men, Women, Children,
that can hear and understand, Behold, I do here solemnly in the Name of the
Lord declare to you, that you may have Eternal Life by Jesus Christ, if you
will renounce Sin, and Self, and World, and all for Jesus Christ; Oh consider
of it! And,

Consider 4. That this is a truth that concerns every one seriously to think
of. True it is, that there are some that have special cause to fear and
tremble, lest they should miss of Heaven, that is, such as are well to pass in
this World. Not many Noble, not many Mighty, are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. so not
many Rich shall be saved. It was a solemn word which Christ spoke, when he
said, Woe unto you that are rich, for you have received your Consolation, Luke
6.24. There comes to my mind a passage of Buchanans (who was King James his
Tutor) when he was upon his deathbed, King James sent to him to know how he
did, Go, says he, and tell the King, that I am going to a place, where but few
Kings shall come; meaning, that he was going to Heaven, and but few Kings shall
come there: even so but few of those that have much of this Worlds good, shall
enter into the strait gate of Life. Therefore such of you as enjoy much of the
profits and pleasures of the World, have special cause to tremble, lest happily
the Lord should put you off with a Portion in this life. Yet this truth
concerns all to think of, yea, even those that are already entered into the way
of Life. See that you go on in this way; see that you do not only work, but
work out your own Salvation; and this the rather, because there are but few
that shall be saved. Many shall seek to enter in at the strait gate of Life;
and shall not be able.

Christians ought to work out their own Salvation, and that with Fear and
Trembling.
Phil. 2.12. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling.


THE scope of the Apostle in the beginning of this Chapter, is to persuade the
Philippians unto Christian Love and Unity, unto which there is a most solemn
obtestation in the first and second Verses of the Chapter. And in order
thereunto, he does exhort unto Humility and Self-denial, Verse. 3, 4. because
Schisms and Contentions do usually proceed from the want of, or defect in those
Graces. Had men that measure of Humility and Self-Denial which would become
Christians, they would certainly live in love and peace one with another. Now
this Self-denial is urged here by the Apostle, from the highest example and
pattern thereof that ever was, namely, the obedience of Jesus Christ the Son of
God, which together with the glorious effects and consequents of it, is
described from the fourth to this twelfth Verse of the Chapter. This Verse
then, is an inference from that which is in the foregoing Verses expressed, as
we see by the first word in it, [ Wherefore, etc.] That illative particle [
Wherefore] shows, that these words are inferred from the former Discourse. It
is as if the Apostle had said, We must go to Salvation in the same way which
Christ, who is the Captain of our Salvation has gone before us. But Christ
went in a way of Obedience and Self-denial, therefore we must do so likewise.
Thus for the scope of the place.

In the words read we have two things, 1 The duty, viz. To work out Salvation;
which Salvation is here described from the subject of it, your own Salvation:
It is said to be ours not originally; so it is Gods, as in Chap. Verse. 28.
Salvation, and that of God: And David says unto God, Thou only art my
Salvation, Ps. 62.6. But this Salvation is said to be ours subjectively,
because we partake of it: It is ours in respect of Communication and Donation.
God whose it i^ originally, is pleased to make us partakers of it. 2. We have
the manner of the duty, in these words, [ with fear and trembling:] There are
two words to the same purpose used, because of the momentous greatness of this
work and duty, which is to be performed. We shall not insist upon any opening
of the words, besides what may be spoken to under the Doctrines from them:
which are these two:

Doctr. 1. That men ought to work out their own Salvation.

Doct. 2. That Christians ought to work out their own Salvation, even with fear
and trembling.

To begin with the first of these Doctrines, namely, That men ought to work out
their own Salvation.

In the Doctrinal prosecution of this point, we shall only attend two things:
1. To show what is implied in working out our own Salvation. 2. The Reason of
this point.

1. What is implied in working out our own Salvation; or, When may a man be
said so to do?

Answ. We must know Negatively, that herein is not implied, as though men had
power to save themselves. Men are able to destroy themselves; and that is all
they can now do of themselves, Hos. 13.9. Thou have destroyed thy self, O
Israel. There is a Self-destruction which every man is subject unto; but there
is no Self-salvation. Herein is the difference between man in his first, and in
his fallen estate: Adam was able to do and live, had he improved the ability
which at first God bestowed on him; but since the fall none can do so: It is
therefore given as the description of a man in his natural condition, that he
is without strength, Romans 5.6. A man by nature, has no spiritual strength for
the performance of the thing that good is; nay, a natural man cannot so much as
desire that which is good, much less can he perform it: Therefore in the next
Verse to the Text, the Apostle says, That it is God that works both to will
and to do, of his own good pleasure. So that a man cannot will, he cannot
desire, much less do, that which is truly good, except Divine, Supernatral help
be afforded to him. And therefore though the Apostle say, Work out your
Salvation, his meaning is not, as though men were able to save themselves: Nor
in his meaning, as though men could by their works merit Salvation. In a
meritorious work, there must be some proportion between the work, and thing
merited thereby; whereas there is no proportion between our Works and
Salvation, Romans 8.18. I reckon (says the Apostle) that the sufferings of this
present life, are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be
revealed. Suffering-work is hard work-passive obedience, is the hardest and
highest obedience, therefore if a man could merit by any thing, it would be by
suffering, when as we see there is no proportion between our sufferings and the
reward. Besides, to be saved by Works, is contrary to being saved by Grace:
Works and Grace are in the matter of Salvation, as opposite as two things can
be: If it is of Works, it is not of Grace (says the Scripture) Romans 4.4. and
11.6. But we are saved by Grace, Ephesians. 2.8. By Grace are ye saved, and not of
your selves, it is the gift of God. In a word, to merit is none of our work, it
is Christ's work: Though God calls us to work out our Salvation, yet not (...)
merit it, that he never called any but Christ unto. Wherefore to speak
Affirmatively.

1. Herein is implied diligence in the use ^f means to obtain Salvation. Many
times in the Scripture, when are bid to do this or that, the meaning is not as
though we are able to do those things, only that we should wait upon God in the
use of his own means, that so he might do it for us: As when God said to Moses,
Stretch thy hand out over the Sea and divide it, Exodus 14.16. This does not
show* that it was in Moses his power to divide the Sea, which no arm of flesh
could ever do; only Moses was to use the means, and then God would do it: So
the Lord says, Make you a new heart, Eze.k 18.31. whereby is not meant, as
though men could do this themselves; What man is able to turn a stone into a
piece of flesh? Who then can turn an heart of stone into on heart of flesh?
There is a Creating, and therefore an Infinite power that is required
^^ereunto: But then the meaning is, that ^^e should use the means. So when it
is said, Work out your own Salvation, the mean^ng is, do you use the means, and
than you ^^re in Gods way, and may expect his bles^ing: If you be faithful in
improving means, who knows but that God may do more for you, than ever you
are able to do for you selves? As now, Prayer is one means: This we find used,
Jer. 17.14. Save me, O Lord, and I shall be saved: And diligent hearing of the
Word preached is a mean of Salvation; therefore an Angel from Heaven said unto
Cornelius, that he should go to hear Peter preach, who should speak unto him
words whereby he should be saved, Acts 11.14. And indeed all Divine Ordinances
are means of Salvation; therefore are they called the Wells of Salvation, Isa.
12.3. The holy Appointments of God, are Soul-saving things, when he is pleased
to own them, and bless them, and to go along with them: They are means either
to begin the work of Salvation, or else to carry it on where the Lord has
already begun it: The Word and Prayer are means to begin this work, and
Sacraments are means appointed to carry it on to perfection, where the Lord
has begun to save, or brought into a state of Salvation.

2. Herein is implied, That a man do make sure of a sound, through work of
Grace in his Soul. As the Apostle exhorts. 2 Pet. 1.10. Make your calling
sure. This is implied in working out Salvation, even to make sure of effectual
Calling. In working out our Salvation is necessarily implied, the being brought
into the state and way of Salvation: Now that is by effectual Calling; Grace is
the way to Glory, Salvation begins in Vocation, 2 Timothy 1.9. He has saved us,
and called us; so that if a man be called, then he is saved, that is to say, in
respect of his state he is so. Hence Ezekiel. 18. ult. Turn your selves, and live
ye. A man begins to live, when he begins to turn; wherefore in working out
Salvation is implied, the practice of Repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10. Repentance is
there said to be unto Salvation; so that the one of these argues the other:
And true Faith in Christ is there implied, John 6.28. The Jews there say, What
shall we do, that we may work the works of God? that is, what shall we do, that
we may do that work which God requires to be done, in order to Salvation?
Jesus answered and said unto them, This is the work of God, that ye believe on
him whom he has sent, verse. 29. The Jews propound a legal Question, they would
fain have been saved in a way of doing, or by works of their own: Christ takes
them off from that, and tells them of Evangelical doing, even of Believing;
that the work of Faith is that which is necessary to be attended by every man
that would be saved.

3. Herein is implied Growing in Grace; and therefore the Text says, [ Work
out] your Salvation; Which phrase notes, a progressive motion, that we are to
go in the way and work of Christianity, as the Apostle does exhort, Heb. 6.1,
2. Let us go on unto perfection, not laying again the foundation of Repentance,
and Faith and Doctrine of Baptisms, etc. Let us not (says he) content our
selves with a state of Initiation, that we are become Christians, and so
baptized; but let us go on still, let us not stand at a stay in Christianity,
but let us go on, on still. This is implied, in working out Salvation, even
that a man shall be on the gaining, growing hand in Grace and Godliness, in
Faith and Holiness. It argues not only effectual Calling, but also a diligent
following of that Calling. As a man that would be a Workman in any Civil
Calling, must not only begin to work, but must follow his calling. So it a man
would be a a Workman in the matter of Salvation, he must follow, and go on with
the business of Religion, and of his Christian Calling, Hos. 6.3. Follow on to
know the Lord. The Apostle in these words, speaks unto such as had Grace, and
were already in a state of Salvation; yet he says to them, Work out your
Salvation. These Phillippians were, as we see in the beginning of the Epistle,
Saints in Christ Jesus; that is, they were New Testament Believers, such as had
embraced the Christian Faith outwardly, and many of them inwardly and savingly;
yet to these he says, Work out your Salvation, i. e. do it more and more. Do
not think you have Salvation enough already, but labor after more; seek after
more Grace, more Humility, more Knowledge, more Faith, more Love, etc. Thus it
was with Paul, in this Chapter he exhorts the Philippians, to work out their
Salvation; in the next Chapter he shows by his own example, what it is so for
to do, Chap. 3. verse. 12, 13, 14. Not as though I were already perfect, but I
follow after in reaching forth to those things which are before, I press
toward the mark, etc. he did not stand still, but kept going forward, being on
the gaining hand every day. Not a day that passed over his head, but he did,
and gained something in this matter of Salvation. He was a days journeys nearer
Heaven, every day than other.

4. The improvement and exercise of Grace is implied herein. The Apostle
speaks to the Thessalonians, of their Work of Faith and labor of Love, 1
Epist. chap. 1 verse. 3. When Faith and Love, and other Graces of the Spirit are
exercised, then there is a work, even Salvation-work which is attended. That
stock of Grace which the Lord bestows upon his servants, it must be laid out
for God. The Lord does not bestow Grace (nor gifts) upon men, that so they
should let them lie by them idle; but that so they might improve what they have
received, so as shall make most for the honor and interest of him that gave
it, and thereby to promote their own Salvation. As the not improving of
Talents, is the way to miss of Salvation, as we see in the Parable of the
Talents, Mat. 25. Adam had a large stock of Grace conferred upon him, the stock
of all the World was put into his hands, but he improved it not, and thence
lost the life of himself, and all his Posterity. So the improvement of Talents
is the way to further Salvation; yea, the truth is, that the more any man does
exercise Grace, the more Salvation shall he have: Degrees of Glory in Heaven,
will be according to Improvements of Grace upon earth; therefore the Apostle
says, He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and he that sows
bountifully, shall reap bountifully, 2 Cor. 9.6. and Christ says that
whosoever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have more abundance, Mat.
13.12. He that has; that is, he that improveth the Grace which he has
received; for not to use a thing, is as if a man had it not; So [ to have] is
to improve what a man has; such a one shall have much Grace here, and much
Glory hereafter. The reason is, because the exercise of Grace does bring much
glory to God; therefore Christ said to the Disciples, Herein is my Father
glorified, that ye bear much fruit, John 15.8. It Is a greater glory to God for
a poor Soul to act faith upon him, or to exercise love toward him, than all
the Creatures in the World that have not Grace are able to bring unto him. Now
the more any does (through Grace) glorify, God in this World, the more shall
he be glorified by God in the World which is to come.

5. Herein is implied, that decays in grace be repaired. It is indeed certain,
that there is no falling away from true Grace, that is, totally and finally;
Therefore the Apostle says of true Christians, they shall never fall, 2 Pet.
1.10. You shall, says he, hold on in your Christian course, till you come to
the end of your race, and shall never fall by the way, that is, not
irrecoverably. Yet it is sadly true, that there may be gradual decays, though
that stock of Grace which God bestows upon the Soul in its first Coversion
cannot be lost; yet a gracious Christian may be, as it were, in a swooning fit
sometimes. The wise Virgins slept. The lively and vigorous actings of Grace may
decay yea, a man may decay in Knowledge, in Love, in Practice, that possibly he
does not pray so often as formerly, nor hear so diligently nor keep such a
strict watch over his own heart, nor is so heavenly minded, nor so zealous for
God as once he was. A true Christian, if he be not very watchful, will be
subject to not only actual, but even habitual declensions; As we see in the
Christians at Ephesus, who had not only lost their first works, there was
actual declensions; but their first love also, there was inward and habitual
declension, Rev. 2.5. Now when it is thus, they that would work out their own
Salvation, must labor for renewing, strengthening Grace. As it was said to
backsliding Sardis, Repent, strengthen the things which remain, and are ready
to dye, Rev. 3.2, 3. So as for decaying, dying, languishing Christians, the
things which concern them, is to repent, and to seek after renewing Grace. As
David in such a case did, Psalm. 51.10. Renew a right spirit within me, and
again, Verse. 12. Restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation. This is necessary in
order to working out Salvation. If a man be going to such a place, and turn out
of his way, if ever he would come to his journeys end, he must return into his
way again. So when a man is traveling to Heaven, if Temptation draw him aside,
he must look to it, that he quickly return into the way of life again.

6. Herein is implied perseverance in the way of Grace and Salvation to the
end. The Text does not only say work, but work out, which notes an holding out
in the way of Salvation to the end. The Greek word here used, is a word of
Perfection, and implies a full and final ending of a matter. It is as if the
Apostle had said, You must never leave working about your Salvation, till you
have finished it, till you have made complete work of it. As it is said
concerning the Righteous, that he shall hold on in his way, Job 17.9. This is
implied in working out Salvation, even that a man shall not give out, but hold
out, and hold on in his Christian course to the very end. As this Apostle
says, Phil. 3.14. I press forward toward the mark of the high Calling. He was
resolved not to leave running till he come to the end of his race, even to the
mark of high and heavenly Glory which his eye was set upon. This is requisite
in order to obtaining Salvation; Therefore Christ says, He that endures to
the end, shall be saved, Mat. 24.13. If a man desire to be saved, then let him
pray to the end, and believe to the end, and keep up a spirit of Repentance to
the end, and be patient to the end, etc.

7. Another thing implied herein, is, That every man must chiefly mind the
Concernments of his [own] Soul. This is intimated, when it is said, your Own
Salvation. Alas, men are apt to mind others concernments, with the neglect of
their own. It is a sad complaint which you find, Ca^t. 1.6. They made me the
keeper of the Vineyard, but my own Vineyard have I not kept. So there are that
look after the concernments of others, but mind not at all their own; nay it
may be, that are busy in other men's matters, which do not at all belong to
them, when in the mean time, the Salvation and eternal Concernment of their own
Souls are not minded as ought to be. There was a time when Peter said
concerning John, What shall this man do? John 21.21. So men are apt to say,
This such a man should do, and this is such a ones duty, whereas every one
should think with himself, What is my duty? What is the work that I should do?
As it was with John Baptists hearers, Luke 3.12, 13. The people came and said,
What shall we do? and the Publicans said, What shall we do? and the Soldiers
said, What shall we do? Thus men ought to look to themselves, and to their own
particular duty. A man should watch over his own heart, and look well to the
frame of his own spirit; Then may he be said to work out his own Salvation. So
much for the first thing.

We should come now to the Reasons of the Doctrine: I shall mention only one
Reason at present, and that shall be taken from the high and absolute necessity
of this matter. Indeed, if it were needless, or an indifferent matter, men
might be held excused, though they should not work out their own Salvation, at
least though they should not do it with fear and trembling, (of which under the
next Doctrine) but it is a thing of the greatest concernment and necessity to
be performed. It is necessary in respect of the Commandment of God, which
requires this work to be done. There is a necessity of the Precept, hence it
was said to the Jews, that it was [necessary] that the word should first be
spoken to them, Acts 13.46. Why was this necessary? but that so the Commandment
of the Lord might be obeyed. The Lord had so commanded, that the Jews should
have the first offer of the Gospel, therefore it was necessary that so it
should be. Thus here, the Lord has commanded that men should work out their
own Salvation; hence in this Verse, doing thus is called. Obedience, This is
also a necessary mean in order to obtaining Salvation; Salvation is not to be
had without this: Hence Christ says, Labor for everlasting life, John 6.27.
Certainly, the Lord would not prescribe unto men needless labor; if Eternal
life could be had without Labor; if Salvation were to be obtained without
working, the Lord would not require men thus to do. It is true, that if God
has decreed a man's Salvation, he shall be saved, but not without the use of
means; for God has decreed, that the end and the means shall go together; we
may therefore say here, as Paul speaks concerning his preaching the Gospel, 1
Cor. 9.16. Necessity is laid upon me, and woe unto me if I do it not: So I say,
necessity is laid upon every Soul of you, to work out your own Salvation, and
woe unto you, if you do it not. Besides, men by Nature are in a lost, perishing
estate, and therefore it is most necessary for them to look and to labor after
Salvation. As if a man be fallen into a pit, it is necessary that he should
endeavor to get out of that pit; so it is here, men by nature are fallen into a
horrible pit of Sin, Guilt, Misery, Death and Destruction, and therefore
needful it is, that they should labor to get out of that woeful pit; yea, the
truth is, that other things are not needful in comparison of this, therefore
Christ said to Martha, Thou art careful about many things, but one thing is
needful, Luke 10.41, 42. Alas! thus it is with men, yea, with the most of men,
and with the greatest part of Christians also, their time and hearts are taken
up about a thousand needless things: One man is careful how he may build a
great house, but this is not needful; another is troubled about his Trading,
how he may grow rich in this World, but this is not needful; another is taking
care night and day, how he may have Portions for his Children after him, but
this is not needful; There is one thing needful, to make sure of Salvation,
that is needful to do, as Mary did, even to hearken to, and to obey the Doctrine
of Christ, which teaches the way unto Salvation; this is needful, for a man to
make sure that it shall go well with his Immortal Soul, when he shall dye, and
leave this World: Oh that is needful!

We therefore proceed unto the Use of the point; let it be a word of earnest
Exhortation. Oh make sure of your own Salvation. Consider well what you heard
but now concerning the necessity of this matter, Salvation is that which must
be had. As we say of bread. Bread must be had; so may we say of Salvation; It
must be had; you are undone without it for ever. It had been better for you
that you had never been born, than that you should miss of Salvation at last.
As the Disciples once cried out, Save us, Lord, or we perish, Mat. 8.25. So
there is no middle way between these two, but either you must have Eternal
Salvation, or else you must to Eternal Damnation.

Qu. But what shall we do that we may be saved?

Answ. Oh that there were many of you that did in earnest make such enquiries.
Observe then these Rules of Direction.

1. Take heed of thinking that you are in a state, or in the way of Salvation,
when as it is not so. Alas, it is thus with many, and this proves the Eternal
ruin of their Souls, Prove. 14.12. There is a way which seems right unto a
man, but the end thereof are the ways of death: There are that think they are
going in the way which leads unto Life, when as they are going in the way which
will bring them down into the Chambers of Death. So it was with the Pharisees:
therefore Christ said to them, that he came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance; And that the whole have no need of a Physician, but the
sick, Mat 9 13. They were righteous in their own eyes, they conceited
themselves to be whole, and thence never sought after Christ the Physician of
Souls for help and healing. This conceit was their ruin. Thus it is with
millions, they feel not their need of Christ: Every man indeed knows, as to a
general Notional Conviction, that he has need of Christ, but few that feel it.
Men see not themselves in a Christless, lost condition, and thence they perish.
This also was La^dicea's undoing, Rev. 3.17. Thou say, I am rich, and
increased in goods, and have need of nothing, and know not that thou art
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. This is the reason why
many are never saved, even because they think themselves sure of Salvation
already. Many millions of those lost Souls that are dropped down for ever into
the pit of Eternal Darkness, this which you now hear was their ruin.

2. Cast away those things that would hinder Salvation. The gate of Salvation
is a strait gate. You have heard what Christ says, Mat. 7.14. Strait is the
gate which leads unto life, and few there be that find it. Now if a man be to
go in at a strait gate, he had need throw away those things which are
Encumbrances, or he will never be able to enter. So if you desire to enter in
at the strait gate of Life, away with those things that would hinder. As now,
the World is an Enemy to Salvation, when men's hearts are set upon it, they will
be drowned in the Pit of Perdition; their end will not be Salvation, but
Destruction, Phil. 3.19. 1 Timothy 6.9. As ever therefore you desire to be saved,
take heed of having your hearts too much engaged in the World. Again, sin will
hinder Salvation, and therefore if you would be saved, cast sin out of your
hearts and lives, Jer. 4.14. O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, that
thou may be saved. Forsake sin in life, yea, and in heart too, if ever you
would be saved, yea, and sinful Company also; for sinful Companions are the
greatest hindrances of Salvation. What says the Scripture, Forsake the Foolish
and live, Prove. 9.6. Would you live, would you be saved? then forsake the
foolish, beware of profane or corrupting Company, Prove. 13.20. He that walks
with wise men, shall be wise; but a Companion of fools shall be destroyed. So
that sinful Companions will bring to destruction; and therefore whosoever desires
Salvation, must beware of such. Alas, this which I now speak of, has been the
ruin of many a Soul that has been in a hopeful way toward Heaven. Sometimes
the Word of God meets with a sinner, and he has secret purposes to forsake his
sin, and to return to God by Jesus Christ, but he falls into wicked Company,
and they entice him to Drinking or Gaming, or to some other evil course,
whereby the Convictions which were upon his Conscience are lost, and his Soul
is undone to all Eternity. The truth is, that evil Company is one of the
greatest and most ruining snares in the World, and therefore if you love your
Souls. Oh beware of it!

3. Make sure of those things which are necessary to be attended, in order to
Salvation. As now Repentance is of absolute necessity to Salvation; hence when
the Jews were pricked at the heart, by a Sermon which Peter preached unto them,
and cried out, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? that is to say, What shall
we do in order to obtaining Salvation? The first word which Peter says to
them, is, Repent, Acts 2.37, 38. There is no Salvation for impenitent sinners;
therefore Christ said, Luke 13.13. Except ye repent, ye shall perish, And that
you may see he is in earnest, he comes over with it again, Verse. 5. Except you
repent, you shall perish. The words are plain and peremptory, Repent or perish,
Repent or perish. Tell me then, and let thy Conscience answer to it, Have thou
repented of all thy sins? Does not Conscience tell thee, thou have been guilty
of some sins which never were repented of to this day? Why then be it known to
thee, if thou should dye in thy present condition, thou can not be saved.
So again, Faith in Christ is requisite (as before was hinted) in order to
Salvation; therefore when the Jailer said, What must I do to be saved? Answer
was made, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, Acts
16.30, 31. Oh then make sure of an Interest in Jesus Christ, by Faith in his
Name, that you may be saved. Ay, but men say, we cannot Repent, and we cannot
believe of our selves. Very true: Therefore,

4. Be diligent in the use of means: The want of this, is that that utterly and
inexcusably ruins the Souls of men, they will not work (as the Text requires)
about their Salvation; they will not labor and take pains in the use of means
as they should do, that they may be saved. Oh! this spiritual sloth and
sluggishness is that which kills many a soul God has given thee natural
abilities, why do thou not improve 'em? Thou have a tongue that is able to
pronounce good words as well as bad ones, why then do thou not make use of
thy tongue for good and profitable discourse? Why do thou not ask after the
way to Salvation? why do thou not take unto thee words for prayer, as well as
express, vain, frothy, loose, and it may be profane speeches? Thy legs are
able to carry thee to one house as well as to another, why then do thou not
frequent good Company? why do thou not go to houses where the servants of God
are praying together, as well as go into wicked Company, or into houses where
there is loose and lewd doings? Sinners will not do as much as they can; they
will not hear, read, pray, when they ought and might do it; but are like unto
them. Jer. 6.16. The Lord said, This is the good way, walk therein, and you
shall find rest for your Souls: But they said, We [will not] walk therein. So
God says, Forsake such a course, and such a Company. I will not, says a
wicked heart. Practice such a duty (says God) read thy Bible much) and pray in
secret every day. I will not, says a wicked sinner. Oh what a Wretch art thou,
that dare thus disobey the voice of the Lord! Ah! woe be to thee if thou go
on thus in a careless neglect of God, and of thy own Salvation!

5 Betake thy self unto God in Jesus Christ son Salvation. This Salvation is
from Heaven, and therefore go to Heaven for it. Do you not remember what Christ
said to that Woman of Samaria, Joh. 4.14. If thou knew -- thou would have
asked of him, and he would have given thee living water. Would you partake of
the waters of Life and Salvation, then go to the Lord and ask for it: The
reason why men partake not hereof, is, because they ask not for it; Do but ask,
and ask as you should do, and you shall receive; Ask earnestly, constantly,
sincerely, and you shall have Salvation. Know for encouragement, the Lord is
able to save thee, yea, and full of Grace and Compassion, willing to save all
that come unto him. Only then yon must remember to ask in season, Isa. 55.6.
Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near.

Therefore this brings to the last Direction, which is this, Improve your time,
work while it is day, John 9.4. while you have time, up and be doing: Let not
this great work of your Salvation stand still, but while you have time, labor
about it night and day, yea, every day follow this work Let not a day pass
without something done this way, get every day a step nearer Heaven than you
were before: And in special, the Lord's Day is a season which should be improved
to this end. Indeed other works must not be done upon this day; servile works
may not, but Spiritual-work, Soul-work, Salvation-work is this day to be
attended. Improve then every opportunity, Oh, let not any slip, without some
good done: And especially remember the present opportunity, to take hold of it;
concerning which you have heard more largely. To be sure this thing is your
present duty. If a man's house were on fire, his present work would be to think
how he might quench it: Oh! thy Immortal Soul is in danger of Hellfire every
moment! Thy poor Soul hangs over the Eternal flames, only by the twine thread of
a rotten life (as I may so speak) if that break, thy Soul is dropped down into
easeless and endless woe; and is it not thy present work to endeavor with might
and main, that thy Soul may be delivered from this danger, before the Pit, from
whence there is no Redemption, has shut its mouth upon thee? Jesus, that
delivers from the wrath to come, let him be thy Salvation!

We come now to the Second Doctrine; namely, That Christians ought to work out
their own Salvation, even with fear and trembling.

In speaking to this point, we shall observe the same method which was attended
under the former Doctrine.

1. To show what is implied in the Fear and trembling, wherewith Salvation is
to be wro't out. 2. The Reasons of the Doctrine.

Qu. What is implied in this fear and trembling, wherewith Salvation is to be
wrought out

Answ. 1. Herein is implied, an holy fear of God; Hence in Ephesians. 6.5. Servants
are bid to be obedient to their Masters with fear and trembling; And in Col.
3.22. Servants are bid to be obedient to their Masters, fearing God. That which
in one place is expressed by fear and trembling, is in the other place called
fearing God. Thus also, 2 Cor. 7.1. Perfect holiness in the fear of God. There
the Apostle does exhort the Corinthians unto the same duty, which here he
exhorts the Philippians unto: To perfect holiness in the fear of God, and to
work out our Salvation with fear and trembling, are the same thing. I say, an
holy fear of God, namely, lest he should be dishonored, as the Lord speaks
by the Prophet Malachi, If I he a Lord, where is my fear? and if I be a Father,
where is my honor? Mal. 1.6 This is indeed the true fear of God, when a man is
afraid lest Gods name should any way suffer dishonor by him; and when a man is
afraid of losing Gods favor, and dreads the displeasure of God as the greatest
evil. This is necessarily implied here in working out Salvation, because
Salvation stands in the favor of God. Therefore it is three times expressed in
Psalm 80. Cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved, verse. 3.2, 19. So
then Salvation consists in the shinings of the face of God, that is to say, in
his favor. And to be cast out of his favor, implies everlasting destruction.
It is said concerning Reprobates, that they shall be punished from the presence
of the Lord with everlasting destruction, 2 These. 1.9. So that to be excluded
Gods gracious presence, does infer everlasting destruction; therefore to work
out Salvation with fear, does imply an holy fear of losing the favor of God.

2. Herein is implied, a fear with respect to the service of God, that is, lest
God should not be served and worshipped after a due and acceptable manner,
Psalm. 2 11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling: Fear and
tremble, lest you should miss it in the service of God. And indeed all
acceptable Service or Worship does proceed from a principle of fear in the
heart toward God, Heb. 12.28. Let us have Grace whereby we may serve God
acceptably, with reverence and godly fear. If a man does serve God acceptably,
his service does proceed from a gracious principle of godly fear: And men
express their fear of God, in and by their serving of him; therefore the
Service or Worship of God is in the Scripture called his fear, Psalm. 19.9. The
fear of the Lord is clean, that is, the Worship and Ordinances of God, whereby
men express their fear toward him. And the true Worshipers of God are styled
fearers of him, Psalm. 115.12, 13. He will bless the house of Israel, he will
bless the house of Aaron; He will bless them that fear the Lord. Mark, here are
three sorts of persons spoken of; 1. The house of Israel, that is, the common
Members in the Church of Israel. 2. The house of Aaron, That is, the Ministers
in the Church of Israel. 3. Those that fear the Lord; that is, Proselytes to
the true Religion and Worship of God; such as did serve God in that way of
Worship which himself has appointed. Now this fear is implied in working out
our Salvation with fear and trembling; For Gods Service and Glory, and our
Salvation go together. It is the great goodness of God, that these cannot be
separated, but that in faithful attending to the one, we shall promote the
other also. A man cannot serve God aright, but that he will thereby help
forward his own Salvation; hence the Psalmist says, It is good for me to draw
nigh to God, Psalm. 73.28 It is not only good in it self, but good for me: Why?
Because in serving God, he did promote his own Eternal safety and welfare. And
those unto whom Salvation is promised, are described to be such as serve God;
and they against whom Destruction is threatened, are said to be such as serve
him not, Mal. 3.18. Wherefore,

4. Herein is implied, An awful reverential respect unto the Word and will of
God. This in Scripture is called the fear of Gods name, Mal. 4.2. There are
many that have a kind of natural, servile fear of the Divine, Infinite Majesty,
that yet do not fear his Name, that is to say, they have not a due respect to
his Word, nor do they reverence the Authority of his Command as ought to be;
but this is here included. Hence we read of fear of the Commandment, Prove.
13.13. Whosoever despises the Word, shall be destroyed; but he that fears the
Commandment, shall be rewarded; He that regards not the Word of God, shall
perish; but whosoever fears his Commandment, shall receive the reward of Life and
Salvation; hence the promise is made to such, as tremble at Gods Word, Isa.
65.2, 5. This fear of the Commandment, is, when a man dare not disobey the
Command, or go contrary to the revealed Will of God in any thing; when he had
rather venture any hazard, than to violate the holy Commandment: Thus it was
with David, Ps. 119.161. Princes have persecuted, me -- but mine heart stands
in aw of thy Word He had rather incur the displeasure ^o. Princes, than any way
go against ths Word, and revealed will of God. And ^e respect unto the Word of
God is necessarily included, in working out Salvation a^ for the Word is the
Rule of Obedienc^; which every one must observe that would be saved, 1 Timothy
3.10. The Scriptures are able to make wise unto Salvation. The written Word
shows sufficiently, both what must be done, and what must not be done; what
things a man must practice, and what he must forsake, if ever he would attain
unto Life and Salvation.

4. Herein is implied, An holy fear and jealousy, left happily a man should
miss; and fall short of Salvation. Work out your own Salvation with fear and
trembling; that is to say, since there is Salvation purchased by the Obedience
of Jesus Christ, O fear and tremble, left you should by any means miss of this
Salvation; as the same Apostle exhorts the Hebrews, Chap. 4. verse. 1. Let us
therefore fear* lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of
you should seem to come short of it. The Children of Israel (says the Apostle)
they began well, but they did not end well; They came out of Egypt, but they
held not out till they came to Canaan. Oh fear lest it should be so with you;
left after all your Professions and Reformations, and good beginnings in the
ways of God, you should at last come short of that Salvation, which is the end
of all. Thus also he speaks here in the Text. This Fear is a virtue opposed
to Security and Self Confidence; And therefore if a man does thus fear, he
takes the right way, and the right course toward Salvation; ^or Security is
the way to ruin, 1 Cor. 10.12. Let him that thinks he stands' take heed lest
he falls. None are in such danger of falling, as they that think they stand.
Self-Confidence is a forerunner of Destruction; so fear, in respect of a man's
own weakness and jealousy over his own heart, is a notable means of being
preserved unto Salvation. Therefore,

5. Herein is implied. Lowliness and Humility. Some have well observed, that
this phrase of Fear and Trembling, is used five times in the Scripture, and
always it is taken in this sense, even for Lowliness and Humility. And this
suits here with the Context, where the scope of the Apostle (as before was
intimated) is to exhort to Humility and Self-denial; and this is expressed by
saying, W^rk out your Salvation with fear and trembling. There are two mighty
hindrances of Salvation; One is Security, unto this fear is opposed; if you
would be saved, then beware of Security, but fear. Another hindrance of
Salvation is Pride, unto this Trembling or Humility is opposed. And this is
well put in, because if men work about their Salvation, they are apt to be
proud. There is nothing more natural unto man, than to be proud and
self-confident by reason of his own works. If men labor in the practice of
works of Righteousness, which are, though^ not the cause, yet the way unto life
and happinness, they are apt to rest therein; and such Souls are in the
greatest danger of ruin. There is no evil more dangerous than that of
spiritual Pride, when men rest in their Prayers and Duties and good Works;
therefore this of Trembling is fitly put in by the Apostle, when he exhorts to
work about our own Salvation.

6. Herein is implied great care and diligence in the work of Salvation. This
fear is not a fear of Diffidence, but of Diligence; It is not I say, a fear of
Distrust or despair, as if a man could not be assured of his Salvation, no such
thing is intended or implied in the word* for that is contrary to other
Scriptures, which require us to endeavor after Assurance, which shows that
Assurance is attainable; and also, contrary to the experience of Saints, who
have some of them had a full Assurance. But it intimates, that men should be
very diligent in endeavoring after Salvation; that every one should make this
matter of Salvation his main business. And not to do, as most do, who mind
other things in the first place, and look after Salvation, and the Eternal
Concernments of their Souls only in the second place. But we should remember
and do what Christ says, Mat 6.33. Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his
Righteousness, and all these things shall be added to you. Even so Salvation,
the great things of the Kingdom are in the first and chief place to be
attended. And this is implied, in working with fear and trembling.

Qu 2. But why should it be thus?

Answ. That is the second thing to be spoken to: We shall only mention two
Reasons of this point.

1. Because of the difficulty which is in attaining to Salvation. Heaven is in
the Scripture compared to an Hill, even so going toward Heaven, is going up
Hill. Now that is hard; to go down Hill is natural and easy, so it is in going
to Hell. But going in the way of Salvation, is like going up hill, or like
swimming against the stream, which you know is not easy. The way of Salvation
is a narrow way You have heard that Christ has said, Narrow is the way which
leads unto Life. Now if a man be walking in a narrow path, he had need look
well to every step that he takes, lest happily he should turn out of the right
way. The gate of Salvation is a strait gate; therefore Christ has said, Strive
to enter in at the strait gate, for many shall seek, and shall not be able,
Luke 13 24. If a man were to go in at a wide gate, that were easy, and needed
no striving about it; but to get in at a strait gate, will cost a man labor
and striving

But a little to enlarge here; there are two things especially that show the
difficulty which is in obtaining Salvation: And that therefore it is to be
sought after with fear and trembling.

1. In that there are many Impediments to hinder a man from coming into, or
from going on in the way of salvation. There are many and mighty Enemies unto
Salvation. As now the Devil is one Enemy to Salvation, his name is Abaddon, and
Apollyon, that is, a Destroyer: Christ and Satan are most contrary in Nature,
Properties and Works; Christ's work is to be a Savior of Souls, but the Devils
work is to be a Destroyer of Souls. And this is a mighty Enemy; hence the
Scripture speaks of the power of the Enemy, and the Apostle says, We wrestle
not with flesh and blood, that is, not with weak Enemies, but with
Principalities and Powers, even with strong and potent Enemies, Ephesians. 6.13. And
also a most subtle Enemy, therefore compared, not only to a Serpent, but to an
Old Serpent, Rev. 12.9. because of his exceeding subtilty. Now if a man has a
potent and p^litick Enemy to watch all opportunities against, this calls for
fear and care, lest his Enemies should be his ruin. Satan labors by fraud to
hinder the Salvation of sinners; thence sometimes he persuades them, that they
are in the way of Salvation, when as it is not so; and sometimes he persuades
a sinner, that it is soon enough, and too soon for to look after Salvation:
Thus he ruins many by Presumption. Also he labors to hinder the Salvation of
Souls by force, and thence persuades them, that it is too late for them to
look after Salvation, and so ruins them by despair. The Devil does what he can
to keep men from entering into the way of Salvation; or if he cannot do that,
then he endeavors to hinder them from going on in that way: Whence it is that
they that are brought into the sta^e of Grace and Salvation, meet with new
fears, new difficulties, new temptations, which other men are not acquainted
with, and which themselves in former times were not troubled with.

Again the World is another Enemy, which does greatly hinder men's Salvation.
Worldly Encumbrances are a mavelous Impediment; hence is that Heb. 12.10. Let
us lay aside every Weight. What are these weights but worldly Encumbrances? If
a man has weights tied about his legs, these will hinder him from making any
great progress in his way: So it is here, worldly Encumbrances are as weights
which hinder from going forward in the way to Salvation. There are the reputed
good things of the World, and in these there is a temptation and a snare to the
Soul; e.g. worldly gain and profit is an heavy snare, and that which hinders
the Salvation or many a Soul. Some that have bid fair for Heaven, yet have
fallen short at last, because of this: some that have wrought much and long
about their Salvation, yet have not been able to work it out by reason of this
snare. We read in the Gospel, of a man that came to Christ to know what he
should do that he might have Eternal Life: He was willing to work, that he
might be Saved: He came with a Legal Question, and with a Legal Spirit: Christ
Suiteth his Answer according to the Enquirer, and tells him of observing the
Commandments of the Law. The man profe^seth, that he had been diligen^ in
keeping these for many years: Christ then touches him where his greatest wound
and snare was, namely, his inordinate love to earthly things, and to try him,
the Lord bids him forsake all his worldly possessions to follow him; but then
the man g^e^h away with a sad heart, seeing that he must either miss of Eternal
Salvation, or lose the World, and of the two, chooses rather to part with
Eternal Life, then to part with his Worldly gain: Hereupon Christ said, How
hardly shall they that have riches, enter into the Kingdom of God: It is easier
for a Camel to go through a needles eye, than for a rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of God, Luke 18.24, 25. It is an hard matter for any man to be saved;
but for a rich man much more hard than for others; were it not that with God
all things are possible, it would not be possible for such an one to be saved.
So for the pleasures of the World, they are a great snare and hindrance to
Salvation. A man must forsake these so far as they stand in opposition to the
will of God, but it is hard so for to do: How hard is it for a carnal heart to
forsake the pleasures of sin? A poor Creature thinks with himself, if I should
turn into the way of Salvation, then I must never see a merry day more; here
his Soul sticks and perishes. And as for the evil things of the World, these
are also great obstacles in the way to life, e. g. The cares of that World, the
Thorney-ground hearer, though he did and suffered much in order to Salvation, he
went far, and held out long in an high and glorious Profession of the Gospel,
yet after all, the care of this world proved his ruin, Mat. 13.22. Alas, men
take more care how they shall live in this World, wherein they shall continue
but for a moment, than they do how they shall live in another World, where they
must be to all Eternity. And hence it is that Salvation is neglected, and the
means conducing thereunto are neglected: Men are not so frequent and diligent
in hearing the Word as they ought to be, and prayer in Families; but especially
prayer in secret is lamentably neglected; and the pretense is, they cannot
spare time from their worldly occasions, to attend these duties of their
Christian Calling Thus does the World eat out the heart and life of Religion.
So for the Crosses of the World, they are also a very great snare. Men would
fain have their Heaven here and in Heaven too, they would fain have their
Paradise upon Earth: But when they see that that cannot be, then they are
discouraged, and knocked off from Religion, and from Salvation. There have been
that have begun to work about their Salvation, that yet have not been able to
work it out, or to finish what they begun, because of this which you now hear.
The Lord Jesus Christ spoke an excellent Parable to this purpose, which you may
see, Luke 14.27, 28, 29. Whosoever does not bear my Cross, cannot be my
Disciple: Which of you intending to build a Tower, does not first count the
cost; lest after he has laid the foundation, he is not able to finish it. Alas
there are that enter upon Religion, and do not think what it will cost them;
and thence when they meet with unexpcted, temptations and difficulties, though
they made a good beginning, they come to a miserable end at last. Now then
inasmuch, as the Profits, Pleasures, Cares, Crosses of the World, are such
Impediments in the way to life, men had need work out their Salvation with fear
and trembling. Yet there is another Enemy more dangerous than all these, that
is, Self. The Ancient that prayed, Lord deliver me from that miserable Wretch
my self; had a great deal of reason for what he said. Self-denial is requisite
in order to Salvation, as the Apostle shows in this Context, but that is an
hard task. The first Lesson in Christianity is an hard Lesson, namely, that a
man must deny himself, Mat. 16.24. Natural Self must be denied, Prove. 3.8. Lean
not to thine own understanding. A man's own understanding, his own will, his own
affections and inclinations, so far forth as they stand in opposition to, or in
competition with the will of God, must be denied; yet there is no man that has
any acquaintance with his own heart, but finds that this is hard work, so for
Corruption, and sinful self, this must be denied; yet this is very difficult:
The sins of men are like strong fetters, which keep them from going forward in
the way to Salvation. Peter said to Simon Magus, Thou art in ( the bond) of
Iniquiny, Acts 8.23. How should a man that is bound hand and foot get forward?
Thus do the Bonds of Iniquity, the Chains of sin, keep down the Souls of men,
that they cannot mount up toward Heaven: A very hard thing it is to part with
a beloved darling Lust. Men's sins are called their members, Col. 3.9. Mortify
your members, because they are as dear, and men are as loath to part with them,
as the members of the body, life and limbs are not more dear to the sinner,
than are the vile lusts of his heart. Hence Christ says, If thy right eye
offend thee, pull it out, and if thy right hand offend thee, cut it off, and
cast it from thee, Mat. 5.29, 30. Many a man that has a lust, that he had as
lieve have his right eye pulled out of his head, or his right hand cut off from
his arm, as to part with that sin, yea, and rather too. As I remember I have
read of a miserable man, that was addicted to the sin of Drunkenness, and
thereby a disease in his eyes was cherished; and being persuaded by some to
leave his Drunkenness, because it was hurtful to his eyes; Replied, that he had
rather lose his eyes, than part with his Drunkenness. Miserable Wretch! Thus
hard is it to forsake sinful self. Yet there is that which is harder than all
this, for even Righteous-self must be denied also. The Apostle shows the
reason why the Jews miscarried in seeking after Salvation was, because they
went about to establish their own Righteousness, Romans 10.3. for a man to
Confess Sin, and to Reform, and Hear, and Pray, and Fast, and yet to renounce
all this, and to abhor himself after all, this is hard, this is hard. 2. It
appears that it is an hard thing to be saved, in that those things which are
requisite to Salvation, are not easily attained. As now, 1. You heard the last
time, that Repentance is necessary to Salvation; There fore Repentance is said
to be unto life, Acts 11.18. But the practice of Repentance is no easy work.
Indeed that which some take for Repentance is easy; that is, when a man has
sinned in words, to say that he is sorry for it, and God forgive me: But true
Repentance is not in words only, but from the heart: It is heart-work, and
therefore hard work, Joel 2.13. Rent your hearts; For a man to have his heart
rent within him, must needs be hard to endure. To have any member rent from the
body is hard, but what then is it for to have the very heart rent? Jer. 4.3.
Plough up the fallow ground of your hearts. Your hearts are overgrown with the
weeds of sin, but these must be ploughed up with godly Sorrow and Repentance
for sin. For a man to suffer furrows to be made in his heart within him, how
tedious and how terrible is it. 2. Faith in Christ is necessary to Salvation,
but it is no easy matter to believe: For a man to renounce Sin, Self and
World, and to close with Jesus Christ upon his own blessed Terms, is a hard
work: Therefore Christ has said, John 6.44. No man can come to me, except the
Father draw him: There must be drawing for it, and drawing of the Almighty, or
the Soul will never come to Christ; for sin draws, and the World draws, and
the Devil draws, to pull the Soul away from Christ, and therefore except God
by an Infinite hand draw the Soul to Christ, they will not come together. See
what the Scripture says, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. The exceeding greatness of his power
to usward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead: So that Power, Mighty
Power, Greatness of Power, Exceeding greatness of Power, is put forth in making
a Soul to believe, nay, the same power which was exerted in raising Christ from
the dead: And that was such a mighty Work, as a greater never was. When Christ
was brought into the Prison of the Grave; the sins and guilt of all the world
of God's Elect, was laid upon him, and therefore it was the mightiest work that
ever was to raise Christ out of the Grave; yet the like Infinite Power is
required to make us believe. It is as hard a matter to make a Soul believe, as
it is to raise the dead; and therefore it is a work beyond the power of any man
or creature. A carnal man once having a Daughter in despair, being asked how
she did, Tush, tush (says he) she is well enough, if she would but believe; she
aileth nothing, only she wont believe. Soon after it pleased God to strike this
man's Conscience with terror; and then he was bid to believe; what, can you not
believe now? Oh (says he) there are millions of sins I have been guilty of,
and God has let loose all the Devils of Hell upon my Soul; and how is it
possible for me to believe? Alas men that think it is an easy matter to
believe, never knew what it was. To presume is easy, or to despair is easy,
but to believe is hard. There never was any man that did believe, but he found
hard work of it. These things then show, that it is an hard matter to obtain
Salvation. Carnal hearts would be pleased well with it, if Ministers would sow
pillows under men's elbows, and tell them that they might easily get to Heaven:
But Truth says otherwise, God says otherwise.

Reas 2. For the paucity of the number of them that shall be saved. It many
should be saved, and a few miss of Salvation, yet there were cause (...) us to
fear and tremble, lest we should be of those few; how much more, when many
shall fall short of Salvation, and but few that shall attain thereunto. But of
this you have heard from another Scripture more largely.

We proceed therefore to the Use of the Doctrine: Let it be of earnest
Exhortation, and that in the words of the Text, Work out your own Salvation
with fear and trembling: So that you do not only work about, but work out your
Salvation, and that you do it with fear and trembling. And for rules of
Direction here, 1. Go to work understandingly. David prays, Give me
understanding, and I shall live, Ps. 119 144. even so, if you would nave Life
and Salvation, then labor after spiritual understanding. It is true, knowledge
alone will not save, a man may have a wonderful measure of knowledge, and yet
perish; nevertheless, the want of knowledge may destroy a man, Hosea 4.6. My
people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. He that would be a Workman as to
any Civil Calling, must have knowledge: So he that would be a Workman as to his
general Calling, must have spiritual knowledge. A workman has the Idea, Model
and Platform of his work in his head, whereby he is enabled to go to work
understandingly, that he knows where to begin, and how to go on, and where to
finish: So he that would be a Workman, as to this work of Salvation, must get a
Platform thereof into his head and heart; he must know what work of the Law,
what of the Gospel, what Preparation, what Conviction, what Contrition, what
Humiliation, what Faith, what Holiness, etc. is requisite in order to
Salvation. 2. Look well to your Foundation: As in all works, except the
Foundation be right, the works will come to nothing: So it is in this work of
Salvation. Oh therefore take heed of building upon a sandy Foundation. They
that build upon Privileges, or Gifts, or Duties, or Creatures, build upon a
sandy Foundation: But see you build upon the Rock. Remember what you have
lately heard in many Sermons, concerning the wise and foolish Builders, from
Mat. 7.24. to 28. Christ is the only safe Foundation to build upon, 1. Cor.
3.11. Other Foundation can no man lay, besides that which is laid, even Jesus
Christ: Therefore see that you build upon him, and upon him wholly and only:
Not partly upon Christ, and partly upon other things, but wholly on Christ
alone. 3. Be often examining how this work goes forward: The reason why this
work of a man's own Salvation goes no more forward, is, because the duty of
Self Examination is no more practiced: Therefore examine whether you have
Grace, 2 Cor: 13.5. and whether you grow in Grace: examine whether you have
laid a good Foundation, and also how far you proceeded in the work. Alas, some
think the work is well over, when it is to begin still; and the reason of their
mistake is, because they do not take pains to examine how matters stand between
God and their Souls. I have Read of a Heathen, that every day when night came,
would call himself to an account; and if he had not received and done some good
that day, he would be much troubled. Alas, how much do many Christians fall
short of this? 4. Allow time for this matter, and make it your work. Great
works must have time allowed to do them in. Now the greatest work which every
Man has to do in this World, is to make sure that his Soul get safe to Heaven,
when he dies and leaves this World; Therefore allow your selves time to
attend the Duties of your general Calling, every day allow your selves time for
reading the Scripture, and for Prayer in your Familes, and in your Closets
also; you can allow your selves time for other matters, nay it may be needless
matters, and very vanities; and will you not allow time to look after the
Eternal Concernments of your imortal Souls? you can allow your selves time to
sleep, and will you not allow your selves time to pray? Rather be without
sleep, nay without necessary Food, than live without Prayer, and see that you
make this business of Salvation your work. Do not think to make it a by work,
which you will mind when you have nothing else to do. But whatever be done, or
lest undone, let not this matter of your Salvation be left undone, Luke 10. two
last Verses. 5. Set about the work, (...) in your own, but in the strength of
Christ, 1. Sam. 2.9. By strength, that is, Humane* strength, shall no man
prevail: You will certainly miscarry in the work, if you set upon it in your
own strength: There are mighty Corruptions (Sons of Anak) to be subdued, there
are mighty strong Temptations to be resisted, there are great Duties to be
performed; therefore enter upon all in the name of Christ, Phil. 4.13. I can do
all things through Christ strengthening of me. Then may you be able to subdue
all Corruptions, resist all Temptations, perform all Duties, bear all
Afflictions, if the strength of Christ be engaged with you and for you. 6. Live
in love and peace amongst your selves. The Apostle in this Context is exhorting
to peace and unity, and then says, Work out your own Salvation: Why, wha't
that to the business of Salvation? Oh yes very much, for Divisions do
exceedingly hinder Salvation-work: Therefore it is that the Devil makes it his
main design to sow discord amongst Christians, because he l^^^^eth that the
work of God will never go forward as it should do, if there be Contentions and
Schisms amongst the Lords people. Alas, when it is thus, men's time and spirits
will be taken up about parties, that every one instead of working out his own
Salvation, will be studying and busying himself how he may promote the interest
of his own party and faction: I tremble to think what account many amongst us
will be able to give unto Christ another day in this respect.

Now for Motives here,

Consider. 1. The posibility which is in this thing which you are exhorted
unto. Indeed it is an hard matter for men to work out their own Salvation (as
but now was proved unto you) yet it is possible: If you will abound in the work
of the Lord, your labor shall not be in vain, 1. Cor. 15. ult. Certain it is,
that there is a possibility of being saved, for Christ has purchased
Salvation: And God freely offers it in the Gospel to all that will accept of
it, upon gracious and blessed terms. Besides, if a man be once brought into the
way of Salvation, he is then able (by the Grace of God) to work out his
Salvation. A man that has not Grace, is not able ^o give himself Grace; but a
man that has Grace, is able to get more Grace, if he will be laborious in
improving what he has, Matthew. 13.12.

Consider. 2. The momenteous greatness of this matter: It is a matter of the
highest concernment which now you hear of; and therefore you had need be
conversant about it, with fear and trembling. If a man were set about a work,
and it were said to him, if you do your work well, you shall live, but if you
do not your work well, you shall dye; With what trembling would he do it? So
it is here, if you do this work well, you shall live; but if otherwise, you
shall dye: You are about a matter of life and death, nay, of Eternal life or
Eternal death, and therefore you need be in good earnest. Of such moment is
this Salvation, that if a man should fall short of it, all the World is never
able to make him amends, or to countervail his lose: You know what Christ has
said, Matthew. 16.26. What is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole World,
and lose his own Soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his Soul? If a
man should lose the Salvation of his Soul, all the World can never make him
amends for that lose.

Consider. 3. That Salvation is not in your own hands, but depends on the good
pleasure of God: This is the motive which the Apostle makes use of in this
context, Work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling; For (says he) it
is God that works of his own good pleasure: As if it were said, Tremble to
mis God's season; if you do not work out your Salvation, it may be God's season
will be over, and then you may go to work, and all in vain. Remember what you
have heard concerning the strivings of Gods Spirit, he will not strive always:
Remember how it was with Esau: And Remember how it was with the Children of
Israel, they neglected God's season, and afterward labored in vain to enter
into Canaan. Remember how it was with the foolish Virgins, they came and
knocked and cried, and said, Lord, Lord, open unto us; but the door was shut
upon them.

Consider. 4. That except you [work out] your Salvation, you had as good do
nothing. Though you should work, if you do not work out, you do nothing. As in
running a Race except a Man hold out to the end of his Race, he loses the
Crown; O then, be sure that you so run as that you may obtain, 1. Cor. 9.24.
You may run, you may labor, and yet not obtain the Crown of Life, except ye so
run, as to come to the end of your Christian Course. You may work, and yet miss
of Salvation, except you work it out; and you must begin well, and hold on
well, and end well, if you desire happiness. O how lamantable is it for a man
to perish eternally, after he has done and suffered many things, after he has
made many prayers, and heard many Sermons, and it may be come to many
Sacraments, after all this to perish, that is exceeding lamantable! to be cast
away in the Harbors mouth as it were, to dye within sight of Canaan, to go to
Hell after the Soul has been within on step of Heaven, that is sad indeed. Now
the Lord write these things in your hearts by the finger of his holy Spirit,
and help you to work out your own Salvation with fear and trembling.

Tibi Domine.
ERRATA.
IN the Preface. Page 11. line 3. for Expect, read Respect. Page last, line
last, for 1674, read 1672.

In the Book, page 3 line 23. for will, read evil. Page 10 line 23. For And
read Sound. page 18. line 19, 20. The careless Printer, or Composer, who had
before him the first Edition of this Book, which was Printed at London, is not
to be Excused, who has made two very Nonsensical lines, after those words;
Peter was Converted before that (it should have been) time, but Satan so far
prevailed upon him, as that by the sudden surprizal of a Temptation. Page 117.
line 16. for my read thy. page 159. line 5. for Glorious read Gracious. Most of
the other Errata's being only Litteral ones, that do not interrupt the sense,
we let them pass.


