The Second Part OF South Sea STOCK. BEING An Inquiry into the Original OF
Province Bills OR Bills of Credit.

Now in Use in His Majesty's Plantations, more especially in New England; With
Some Thoughts Relating to the Advantage, or Hurt done by Emitting the said
Bills.

BOSTON: Printed for and Sold by D. Henchman, at his Shop. 1721.

The Second Part OF South Sea Stock etc.
WHEN I heard the first News of the South Sea Stock, rising to such a
Considerable height, That a Person that had one Hundred Pounds cast into that
Stock, was raised to that pass that he could Sell it out, at a Thousand, and
Eleven Hundred, per Cent. I could think no other, but the People concerned in
this New Contrivance were a company of Madmen; at least they looked like a
company of Gamesters, eagerly gaming daily, least their Chance should be at an
end; And when I heard of Men of low Degree, being advanced to their Coaches;
What could I think but the World is turning upside down; But all on a sudden
the Seal is turned; the next News is, That abundance are broke by the fail of
Stocks, It Is fallen from Eleven hundred, under Three hundred; and none cares to
buy; but all are for Selling, and where one has Gained by this Evil Trade,
many poor Families have been ruined, brought to Poverty, and turned beggars.
The Trade of the City of London, one of the finest in the World, has been very
much shortened, few Ships have been built, or fitted to Sea, during the Reign of
the South Sea Company. O fine! Common Wealths Men. sure you have been the
Heroes of year day. But into what a condition do you think have you brought
your Country? Will not they bless you in Generations to come, saying, These are
the Men that Contrived our good, and Welfare! But why do I talk of South Sea
Stock only, is not Mississippi Stock as bad, or worse, Are not Holland, and
Spain, and others, contriving to be at the same Sport? Truly, as far as I can
learn, the Greatest part of Europe, is Infatuated with the fame Spirit!

But as I am in New England, and not so much concerned with the State of
Europe, or London, but to pity it, and desire to see it better; I shall now
proceed to consider the State of my Country, as to Province Bills or Bills of
Credit, and I shall endeavor to Answer these several Questions following, Viz.

I. How came Bills of Credit first to be Emitted? and the Consequences
thereupon?

II. The Progress made therein by the General Court, and the several Heads they
have been brought out upon?

III. Whether the Postponing the Province Bills, did serve the Interest of the
Country; or was prejudicial to the Credit of the Bills?

IV. Whether there be any One Instance in the whole World, of Paper Bills being
Serviceable to a Kingdom, State or Province; were especially to these Provinces
in America?

V. If these Province Bills have; or have not been Serviceable: Whether it is
best under Our present Circumstances, to make a greater or a lesser quantity of
them; or wholly to Suppress them?

VI. I shall consider something of the State of my poor Neighbors that have
barrowed these Province Bills on their Estates; And what must needs be done for
their Re^^ef, under the difficult Circumstances they are brought into?

VII. I shall consider something of the State of my Country, what it was before
we had any Province Bills; and what it is at this day; And so s^ill wind up my
thoughts on this Affair?

I. How came Bills of Credit first to be Emitted? and the Consequences
thereupon?

For Answer,

In the Year 1690. the Colony of the Massachusetts Bay, Considering the hard
War they labored under, from both French, and Indians; Contrived an Expedition
against Canada; and the Conduct of that Affair was Committed to Sir William
Phipps, who doubtless was very hearty in that matter, and made an Attack on the
Town of Quebeck in the River of St. Lawrence; But by the Overruling Providence
of GOD, Whether by the Season of the Year, or the Storms that attended the
Fleet, or Contrary Winds, or want of a sufficient store of Powder, or the delay
of Attacking the Place; they were beat off, and their design frustrated. This
was a very heavy Stroke upon this Country, and brought them low; partly by the
loss of their Vessels, and partly by the great loss of their Men; some whole
Vessels Companies were lost, and some whole Companies of the Militia, never
heard of. And those that did come home, brought a dreadful Sickness with them;
so that abundance died after the Fleets Arrival at home; And upon this the
Country was greatly brought in Debt. This, we must all acknowledge, was a sad
and lamentable Condition we were brought into; and how to discharge the heavy
Debt, lying on the Province; was a business lay much at heart, with those that
had the Government upon them at that day, the debates then had about it I am
not now able to give you; but the result they then came to, was to Issue out a
number of Colony Bills to discharge the Debts then fallen upon them, by the
Expedition.

The Orders of the General Court follow,

At the General Court of Their Majesty's Colony of the Massachusetts Bay in New
England, fitting in Boston by Adjournment, December 10th. 1690.
(...) the maintaining and defending of Their (...) Interests against the
Hostile Invasions of Their French (...) Indian Enemies (who have begun and are
Combined in the Prosecution of a Bloody War upon the English of Their Majesty's
Colonies and Plantations in New England:) This Colony has necessarily
Contracted sundry considerable Debts; Which this C^^^t taking into
Consideration, and being desirous to approve themselves Just and Honest in the
discharge of the same: And that every Person who has Credit with the Country
for the use of any of his Estate, Disbursments, or Service done for the
Public, may in Convenient time Receive due and equal Satisfaction; withal
Considering the present Poverty and Calamities of the Country, and (through
Scarcity of Money) the want of an Adequat Measure of Commerce; whereby they are
Disadvantaged in making present Payment at desired; yet being willing to Settle
and Adjust the Acc^^pts of (...) said Debt, and to make Payment thereof with
what speed they can:

IT is Ordered by this Court, That Major Elisha Hutchinson, Major John
Phillips, Captain Pewn Townsend, Mr. Adam Winthrop and Mr. Timothy Thornton, Or
any Three of them be and are hereby appointed and Empowred a Committee for the
granting forth of Printed Bills in such Form as is agreed upon by this Court
(none under Five Shillings; nor Exceeding the Sum of Five Pounds in one Bill)
unto all such Persons who shall desire the same, to whom the Colony is
indebted, for such Sum or Sums of Money as they shall have Debentures for from
the Committee or Committees that are or shall be Appointed to give out the
same; Every of which Bills according to the Sum therein Expressed shall be of
Equal Value with Money; And the Treasurer and all Receivers Subordinate to him,
shall Accept and Receive the same accordingly in all Public Payments. No more
of the said Bills to be Printed or Granted forth than for the Sum of Seven
Thousand Pounds: And the Colony is hereby Engaged to Satisfy the Value of the
said Bills as the Treasury shall be Enabled: And any Person having of the said
Bills in his hand may accordingly return the same to the Treasurer, and shall
Receive the full Sum thereof in Money, or other Public Stock at the
Money-Price as Stated for that time: And if any of the said Bills be worn in
any Persons hands, so as they desire to renew them, returning them to the
Committee, they shall have new ones of the same Numbers and Sum's given out.

Printed and Published by Order of the Court, Isaac Addington Secr.

At a General Court for Their Majesty's Colony of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, Holden at Boston, February the 3 d. 1690.
WHereas the Committee appointed for the Granting out Bills of Credit (in the
Form agreed upon by this Court at their Session in December last past) for the
Public Debts necessarily Contracted by this Colony, in the Maintenance and
defense of Their Majesty's Interests, against the Hostile Invasions of Their
French and Indian Enemies, were Limited to a certain Sum, which is found to be
far short of what is Absolutely Necessary:

It Is therefore Ordered that the said Committee do in like manner proceed to
the Printing and giving forth of the said Bills to all Persons desiring the
same, who shall produce and deliver unto them a Debenture or Debentures from
the Committee or Committees that are or shall be thereunto Appointed, or shall
produce an Order of this Court or of the Governor and Council, for the full
Sum expressed in such Debenture or Order: Every of which Bills of the Sum of
Twenty Shillings shall be Accepted in all Public Payments by the Treasurer and
all Constables or other Receivers Subordinate to the Treasurer, in Lieu of
Money, at Twenty-One Shillings, and so Proportionably for all Bills of Greater
or Lesser Sums (no one Bill to be for a less Sum than Two Shillings, nor
Exceeding the Sum of Ten Pounds) And the Select-men of each Town may send the
Debentures of the several Persons in their Town to the said Committee by some
meet Person, who shall Receive Bills for the same, to be delivered to the said
Select-men, and by them given out to the Persons to whom they are due. And the
Colony hereby stands Engaged to Satisfy the Value of the said Bills as the
Treasury shall be Enabled. And any Person having of the said Bills in his
(...), returning the same to the Treasurer, shall accordingly Receive the just
Sum expressed in the said Bills in Money, or others Public Stock at the
Money-price as stated for that time.

Printed and Published, by Order of the Court, Isaac Addington Secr.

Before this; viz. December 10th. 1689. the Council and Representatives
Appointed Mr. E^^^kim Hutchinson, Mr. Peter Sergeant, Mr. Samson Sheaf, Mr.
John Air, and Mr. Thomas Brattle, to grant Debentures for Soldiers Wages; who
faithfully and industriously attended that Service.

Some Approved this Emission as a good thing; others said, They and their
Children would Rue the day that ever they were Invented. However so it was, the
Bills were made, the Sailors and Soldiers were paid off with them. Now for the
consequences;

It put the Country into Confusion as to their Trade. The Bills then made, did
in some measure answer the End, because they did discharge the Debt; but with
what a great loss, was it to those Poor-Men, who ventured their Lives in the
Expedition? They were forced to buy such Goods as its likely they had hardly
any need of, to get rid of their New-Coyn'd Money. And what they bought, was so
to their disadvantage, that they put off their Bills, at Twelve or Thiteen
Shillings in the Pound; so that indeed they had in effect, one third part of
their pay struck off; a thing too m^c^ at the Bottom of all the aforesaid
Stocks. The Justice of the proceedings. I shall leave to the Reader.

The other Consequence was, that it was the first step, or leading stroke, to
all the Bills of Credit, that have been put out in this Province, and not only
this Province, but the several Colonies, and Plantations, round about us; And
if I am not misinformed, One of the principal Islands in the West Indies, took
their measures, of making Bills of Credit, from a Gentleman brought up in
New England; who advised them of the great benefit, they were to this Country.
But he thought only of the beginning, and not of the End; when he gave them
that Advice.

II. The Progress made therein by the General Count, and the several heads they
have been brought out upon.

As to the Progress made in the Quantity of Province Bills; it has been
something large, I must confess; but as to the growing, or thriving of the
Province thereby, I cannot as yet see through it. After the making the first
Bills for the Canada Expedition, it being found, an easy way of paying of
Debts, several more Expeditions were contrived, the Number, and Form, of them,
is needless here to insert; but we had found a way to pay for them, by still
Issuing out a farther Number of Paper Bills; So that whether they succeeded or
not, we had found an easy way of paying for them, and shuffling the Saddle off
our own books, on to our Children; when the Debt was to be paid, it was but
raising so many Thousand Pounds to be paid in such Years to come, and the
matter was over, the Tax lay no heavier on the Subject, than before: But by the
way, I would have it considered, that part of those Taxes are yet to be raised
on the Coming Generation. In the Year 1711. the second Expedition o^ Canada was
formed, and all things seemed (...) on that Affair, the General Court of this
Province saw good to Advance Forty Thousand Pounds for the supply of the Fleet,
for that Expedition, and to take their pay in Bills on the Government, in Great
Britain. This was a considerable Addition to what Bills were out before, and
all on a Fund for Years to come. All this while the Silver and Gold, that the
Country had gotten by their good Husbandry before now, flew away, faster than
ever it came to us; and by reason of the Scarcity of Silver and Gold, for a
Medium, the Government were persuaded still to go on in the old Road, of
Issuing (...) of Paper Bills. The several Bills Emitted until this time were
upon Impost and Excise, and a Tax upon Polls and Estates within this Province,
which war a good Fund, so far, as it could conveniently run. Then it being
thought improper to strain that matter too far, or stretch the string till it
broke; a new Method was contrived, the Sum of Fifty Thousand Pounds was made,
to Let out to the Inhabitants of this Province, on their Real Estates; and they
took it up upon Interest. Mortgaging their Real Estates for those Bills, and to
pay Interest for the same. About this time the Silver being pretty well drained
from the Country* the Bills Outstanding on the former Fund, continually going
in to the Treasury, in Order to be Sunk; it was contrived to alter the Fund,
and put off the payment for a longer time, by lessening the Tax about one half.
This being not a sufficient stop, it was brought to about a quarter part, and I
think continues thereabouts to this day, the other being put off for those who
come after, in reality. Although we are told, the Impost and Excise makes it up;
yet it is plain, the first Fund was not upheld, if it had, the first Bills, I
mean those before the Fifty Thousand Pounds, had been now (if not altogether)
yet almost at an end. Every Man's hands, not being full of Paper. Money as yet,
Out comes an other Flood of Paper, A Hundred Thousand Pounds, in much like
manner, as the Fifty Thousand Pounds, upon Real Estates, to pay Interest for
the same. And here we come to a stand at present; and I hope will stand; or my
Country will be in a great measure lost. Time will not allow me, to be so
particular, as to recite the several Laws; I shall keep as near to Matter of
Fact, as my Acquaintance with these things will allow me. But to proceed,

III. Whether the Postponing of the Province Bills, did save the Interest of
the Country* (...) wa^ prejudicial to the Credit of the Bills?

And here, I do think, was such a stroke (...) to the lessening of the Value of
these Bills, that will not easily be (...) I would desire in this Case, to
bring the state of a Province, to a particular Man, and indeed, it is no other;
Although we were told, at the time of the Altering the Fund, it was only a breach
of promise made to our Selves. But I must ask their pardon, who say so, and I
will begin with the first coming out of the Bills, and say, Had there not been
Men of Substance in this Country, some that had Money, and some that had Goods;
you might have made Paper Bills till you had been blind, they would never have
fed your Bellies, nor have clothed your Backs. I pray, that would in Hundred
Thousand Pounds, in Paper-Bills have signified, to have been made, when the
Indians Inhabited this Country; so that it is plain, they have a Credit from
some Substance that the People, amongst when they are, Enjoy. And now let me
suppose, That a Man come to you, that Read this Paper, and desire you to Lend
him a Thousand Pounds, or any smaller Sum, telling you he will give his Bond,
to pay you in Twelve Months; and at the Years end, he comes and tells you, I
can pay you but Five hundred, I will pay you the other the next Year. And at
the next Years end, he comes and (...) you, I will pay but Two hundred and
fifty. I w^^l pay you the other hereafter: would you not think (...) is a
strange Man; would you not take the benefit of the Law upon him, or use some
means or other to get your Money; or at least, would not his Credit be fallen
with you; would not a Merchant, a Shopkeeper, making the same comparison, be
of the same mind. Doubtless, if you speak your Minds in this, you all agree.
Well, the same it is in the case of Paper-Bills; the Man that has an Estate,
either Money, Goods, or Lands; so far as his Estate goes, he gives Credit to
these Bills; the Country by an Act promises to take them again, at such a time,
but do not; Surely, this lessens the Man's Credit of them: I will not, (says
he) Sell so much Silver, or Gold, or Goods, or Houses, or Lands, for the Paper
Bills, as I did before. And this may serve to show that the Altering of the
Fund, has been prejudicial to the value of these Bills.

IV. Whether there be any One Instance in the whole World of Paper Bills being
Serviceable to a Kingdom. State, or Province; were especially to these
Provinces in America?

It is well known to all Persons who are acquainted with the other parts of the
World, either by Traveling, or Reading the Histories of them, That several
parts have made use of Paper Notes and Bills. And I do think on Emergent
Occasions, and in times of great straits and difficulties, they may have been
Serviceable, and in such times only. So it was with us in our first Expedition
to Canada. And could the door have been shut, that they had been paid off, and
the Fund Complied with, and no more Bills made; It might have been well. But
the opening such a door to the making more Bills, and continuing for near
Thirty Years, in my Opinion, is such a Damage, that I do think it would have
been better the Country had given Twenty per Cent. for Money, than to have let
in the following Evils. But doubtless the Country might then have borrowed
Money at Six per Cent. and their Security have been good. But if they wanted
such a Sum of Silver* or Gold now, it would be more difficult for them to come
at it. As great as some Men would have the Country to be. I understand the
States of Holland, and the Duke of Venice, have at some times* made use of
Paper-Bills or Notes but could never learn* that they made them their only
Me^^um of Exchange. And as to the Kingdom of England, t^ come to our own
Nation; there have been several Sorts of Notes used for the carrying on the
Trade of that Great Nation. The Bank of England being the Chief that have used
that practice, and held it with a steady Currency; it may be said to be the
most practicable, and beneficial of any I know of in the World. But then we
must observe that they have always had the favor of the King, and Parliament
to grant them such A^^s as support them: which we can never expect to procure,
at so great a distance And then further, That is carried on in such a manner,
that there is a considerable supply of Silver Money for the Exchange of those
Bills; and any Man desiring to Exchange the Bills he possesses, going to the
Office in Office hours, shall not have it said to him Come again in the
Afternoon (...) a quarter of an hour hence; but always Officers enough to
attend and Money to Exchange the Bills brought to them. And I am informed, That
these Bills carry with them* an Interest of at least Three per Cent to be paid
to the possession. Now I would Observe a little* now contrary this is to our
Province; no Man can Exchange the Bills at any Public Office* at any rate If
he ^^nts Money for his Bills* he must go to the Mer^hant of the Extravagant
Money, Changers, who will ^ake all Opportunity to play on a Man's necessities. ^
would take notice of one thing more on this head, and (...) the Practice of
Letting these Paper-Bills on Interest. Surely, the Masters of these Bills are
very hard with these that take them; Or else the Bank of England, are very
Generous: The one receiving Five per Cent. for their Bills of the Man that
possesses them; the other, paying Three per Cent. to the possessor. Now let a
man make the Comparison of a Single man, with the Country: Soppose a man of a
considerable Estate, whose Credit would be taken for a large Sum, should say. I
will give out my Notes, or Bonds, to such a Value, be it Ten Thousand Pounds,
more or less; would any number of men take them, and say. We will give you an
Interest of Five per Cent. for them; No surely, they would say, What will you
allow to us to take these Bonds, and Notes? But the Country are got into such a
Case, that all men almost run Mad for these Bills; there not being enough of
them to answer the Trade; nor never will if all the Paper in the Province were
made into Bills; for the more is made, the less in my Opinion, they will
produce; and its thought by many, that if the last Hundred Thousand Pounds,
which was upon the Anvil, had been hammered cut, those Bills added to the
former, would not have purchased, near so much Silver-Money, Goods, or Lands,
as these Bills now out, would have done without them.

As to the Kingdom of France, I shall advise the Reader to Consult the Public
Prints, and see how benefici^^ Paper-Money, has been to them. About Paris, and
the Seaports, they tell you, all things are so exceeding dear, that the People
are brought into great want, they cant get Food to Eat, nor Fuel for the Fire:
The People who have such things hoard them up* rather than take Paper-Money for
them, which daily falls on their hands. And at Ma^se^l^es, where the Plague
pages violently, they tell you, its owing to the Peoples eating Raw fruit, not
being able to purchase Food with Paper-Money.

As to the Plantations who have made use of the Paper Bills, I shall begin with
the most remote, viz Barbados, South and North Carolina. As for Barbados, I
have a little Inquired into the state of that Island of one who was an
Eyewitness to the proceedings there. A certain Gentleman going out of this
Country about the Year 1702. and being received into favor with the Government
in (...), Advised them of the great benefit that Paper Bills were to this
Government. They took his counsel so far, as to make Sixteen Thousand Pounds:
The Fund, as I am informed, being a Tax of Three Sh^^^^ngs and (...) Pence upon
the Negroes Heads, to be paid in Six Months time, from the coming out of the
Bills This being a new thing to the People, they so undervalued the Bills, that
they fell immediately ^o Twenty-five per Cent. discount for Silver. B^^ the Tax
being for so short a time, and no Bills to back them, they raised their value
again to be near as good as Silver-Money. But then, came forth an other set of
Bills, called Bank-Bills, to the Value, or Number of Eighty Thousand Pounds,
put out by the Treasurer of the Island, and let upon Land Security, in the same
manner as I am Informed with our Fifty, and Hundred Thousand Pounds; and the
Term they were to have it, was Five Years, at Four per Cent. These Bills being
Issued forth, soon fell in Value Forty per Cent. below Silver-Money. And the
Island was brought into a distracted Condition. Complaints were made against
the Government, the issue of which was an Order from the Queen. That whereas,
such Bills were Issued forth for the Term of Five Years; they found (...) be
paid in, in Eighteen Months; and no more be Issued out, without License from
the Supreme Powers. Which Check, I think, should make all the Plantations take
Warning lest they fall under the same fate These Bills being called in after so
sudden a manner, several persons were ruined thereby. One person I heard of,
who had taken Thirty-five Hundred Pounds of this Bank-Money, Mortgaged a
Plantation valued at Nine Thousand Pounds; and being somewhat Indebted
besides, fearing he should loose his Plantation, carried off his Coppers and
(...) when Execution was Extended. This Plantation was taken at Five Thousand
Pounds. it broke the Man's heart, and in a short time be died. His Widow and
Children came to the Ven^ue in Mourning to see the Negroes Sold and to
endeavor to save some of the best of them; but could not. I was informed of
the Man's Name, but Shall s^un giving of it to the Public; not designing to
mention any Name, or to print my discourse at any particular person whatsoever.
This step being put so suddenly to Paper-Bills, was looked upon to be the
greatest Service that could be done to that Island, at that time, by those who
were considerate Men. So much of this account received from my Friend.

As to South Carolina, the Fund I am not so able to give an account of; but
this I have heard from them, that the Credit of their Bills has run so low,
that Silver-Money has been Sold for Thirty-seven Shillings and Six Pence, and
Forty Shillings per Ounce. And North Carolina. their Bills have been so out of
Credit, that they would buy hardly any thing of the produce of the Country.

As for New England; the Massachusetts, Connecticut, and Rho^e-I^land, and
New Hampshire, they are much alike, and all governed by the Credit of the
Massachusetts; that being the Center of Trade. There is about Ten Thousand
Pounds put out in New Hampshire lately, which, if it were not for the Credit of
the Massachusetts Bills, passing with them would be little better than so many
Blank Papers.

V. If their Province Bills have; or have not been Serviceable: Whether it is
best under Our present Circumstances, to make a greater, or a lesser Number of
them; or wholly to Suppress them?

This Article I take to be of Considerable Moment, to this my poor Country, and
I could wish them the Advice of the best Men in the World, in answering to a
business of so great a concern. I know the Country (...) greatly divided at
this day in this matter; but be^^re our Paper-Money, or rather after the coming
out of some of it, we fell into a very great disorder rela^ing to our Silver
Money. When it was brought to go by Tale, evil-minded Men made a trade of
clipping, rounding, filing, and debasing the Money; and by that means, our
Paper Bills in some measure lost their Credit being equal but to that light
Money then passing. Whereas, when they came first out, the Money was at
Seventeen Penny weight. We may remember it was the same in the Kingdom of
England, in the time of the late King William, as to the debasing the Coin; but
that Wise Pr^nce made a thorough Alteration in that affair, by calling in all
the Old Money; and new-coyning it. Truly, it looked like a hard and difficult
thing, insomuch I have heard that the French King should say upon it, If this
does not undo him, nothing will. But this very thing proved the greatest
Service to the Nation of any thing done for many Generations. And I do think it
a thing of great concern to any People to keep their Coin at a steady price,
and not to waver, and make alterations. But let us a little consider of the
profit made by these Paper Bills. I will first begin with the Merchant, and ask
what he has got? I confess a Medium seems as necessary for him as any body:
but without a good Medium, you had better have none at all, and come to Barter;
which I acknowledge is difficult. But look a little into your Books, consider
what stock you began with; if you had One Thousand Pounds Silver Money at
Seventeen Penny Weight, at your first setting out; and have not no^ Seveteen
Hundred and Fifty in Paper Bills, or the value of them; you have gone behind
hand; and its time to consider whether these Bills have done you any Service?
Indeed some Men have grown rich in the time of this Paper Money; and so it will
always be, an alteration in Families, if there were no Medium at all. But the
case rightly stated is thus, Whether the Merchants in general have gained
according to the above proportion? Nextly, I Will ask the Landlords of Houses,
that put out your Money at Seventeen Penny Weight. Whether you have got the
Interest of your Moneys, making the difference between Silver and Paper, as it
now passes. Some, I am informed, built Houses in the Town of Boston, when Money
was at Seventeen Penny Weight, that do not see above Four per Cent. Rents in
Paper Bills. Considering your repairs, I do think you had as good even to have
kept your Money in your Chest. I will next ask the Userers, What progress you
have made, and whether or not the Money let by you at Six per Cent. has not
fallen in the value, near as much hitherto as the Interest came to? I will next
ask the Gold, and Silver Smiths, What progress they have made, Whether working
those Metals has not been lessened in proportion to the growing Country since
the new found Medium; or whether the Merchant has not raised the price of
Silver and Gold upon you? I will next ask the Men that live upon Salaries; as
Ministers, Schoolmasters; Whether you are better-supplyed by the Paper Bills,
or whether it has not forced you to seek for larger Salaries? I will next ask
the Poor-labourer, that works for Five Shillings per day, half Money, half
Goods, Whether he lives better now than when he received Four Shillings a day
in good Silver Money, at the rate of Seventeen Penny Weight for Six Shillings?

But unto all this it will be answered, Silver Money is gone, and how shall we
get it again? For answer, I do think the People seem to be so spirited in that
matter, they will not have it till necessity forces it upon them; I do think of
all the Plantations in His Majesty's Dominions, none so capable of having
Silver Money, as this Province, considering the great quantity of Fish, and Oil
raised out of the Sea; the Fish all Selling for Money: and a great quantity of
Ships built, which Trade to most parts of the World; and might do to many more;
and the ability of the Province to supply it self with Victuals and Clothes. I
do think none so able as this Province to be furnished with a Medium of Trade.
But after all, if the Door be not shut against Paper-money, the Door will never
be open for Silver-Money to come in Shut but the Door against Paper-Money, and
if the Silver d^n^t come in in some measure, suitable to our wants; you shall
say, I am a blind man, or a mad man, or what you please to call me. The
Quantity of Bills out in this Government. I suppose is not above Two Hundred
Thousand Pounds of all sorts; and the Fish and Oil caught every Year produces
near that Money. Now how easy would it be to get a Medium, did not the Country
in general set themselves against it. For the finishing this head, I shall
recommend to you the saying of a Great and Wise King, quoted in a late
Pamphlet, relating to a Medium of Trade, Printed in the Town of Boston, The
saying was, That its better to run through the Fire, than to walk through it:
And this I would apply to our case as to Paper Bills; not to call them all in
at once, but to call them in as they shall become due, according to the Fund
they are our upon, and come to a certain Determination, that no more be Issued
out; that so all People may know the End of it is coming; and not leave the
Poor to designing men, to make a prey of them. For Example, in this great work,
I would have consulted the Noble president of the late King William, in
altering the Coin in Great Britain, and the great Service done the Island of
Barbados, in putting a full stop to their Paper Bills. They have since had a
competency or Silver Money; whereas had their Paper Bills gone on, they had
been drained of their Silver, as we are

As to the several sorts of men before mentioned, at Merchants, Landlords,
Userers, Goldsmiths, Salary Men, and Laborers by the Day, which exceed in
number all the rest: And add to these the Husbandmen, which exceed in number
all other Trades and Callings whatsoever, in this Country. And I wonder the
most of all at them who get their living out of the ground, that they should be
so diligent in Mortgaging their Lands to make a Medium for the Merchant to
Trade on. And now one would think I should have the greatest part of these
several denominations of man, join hand in hand in putting a Seal end to all
Bills of Credit. But here lies the bane of all, These several sorts of men are
to be brought into two Parties; the man Free from Debt to his Neighbors; and
the man Involved in Debt, that he knows not how to get out. And here is the
unhappiness of all Societies of men, when ever they come together. There are
many involved in Debt, their engagements are so great, and self love so
powerful; its hard to foregoe dear Self; and here I am out-voted. Upon the
whole, I doubt not but before Seven Years have passed over our heads, if we
live to see that time, we shall see things of this nature, in another Form; for
I think the Makers of Paper Bills, are almost out of breath, for want of a Fund
to bring them out upon. There have been of late several things talked of in the
late Pamphlets dispersed about the Country. One great thing proposed has been
the building a Bridge over Charles River, and that it would be a Service to us,
to have Paper-Bills come out of the Treasury for this work. This I ^ook at to
be next to building Castles in the Air. For if we could sink Forty or Fifty
Thousand Pounds in building such a Bridge, the matter is uncertain, whether it
would answer the end. For I cannot learn of a fast Bridge over such a River,
where there is such a Stream, in the whole World; and if the project should
fail, where are your Paper-Bills then? But if the thing should take, the
Country would be but so much in Debt, and would not be supplied with a Medium,
if they should build such a Bridge every Year. They may, it is true, raise Bills
of Credit, and put off the payment for many Years. But if they should do so,
they will hardly deserve the Name of Bills of Credit; their Credit would run so
low. Some talk of Fortifying the Eastern Country, and the Frontiers, so far as
is necessary. As to that, I hope the Country will do what is necessary. But to
do that to make a Medium, I think is wholly beside our Interest. Upon the
whole, I do think we have gone as far with Bills of Credit, as out Credit will
bear; and it is time wholly to suppress them; and I do think Necessity calls for
it.

VI. I shall consider something of the State of my poor Neighbors that have
borrowed these Province Bills on their Estates; And what must be done for their
Relief, under the difficult Circumstances they are brought into?

The condition of my poor Neighbors, I shall in some sort describe, by
bringing the comparison to a Single man, which I think the true way to describe
things of this nature. I will then suppose, That one of my Countrymen is in
want of Money, his Neighbor has not more than for his own use; but the man in
want comes to his Neighbor and says to him, Neighbor. Your Credit is better
than mine, give your Bond for me, and I will Mortgage my House and Land to you,
for your becoming Surety for me, and I will be Obliged to pay you Five per
Cent. per Annum for your kindness in being Surety for me. The rich man, one
would think, should grow rich apace, and the poor man grow poor as fast. But
the rich and poor being Neighbors, and living one by the other, the rich man
is forced to forgive his Neighbor part of the Debt, or else they both fall in
Credit together; although the rich has a great advantage over the poor. And this
I take in some sort to be the state of this Province, and those who have
borrowed Money from it. We will say there is but Two Hundred Thousand Pounds in
the Province, the Province has One Hundred Thousand Pounds in their own hands,
and let it out at Five per Cent. to an hundred men, and this Money is let to
men that have Real Estates; not men of Trade, but few; not great Landlords;
they are generally wiser than to take it; if they do. will soon return it; not
to Userers, they have no need of it; not much to Merchants, because the needy
part of them have not Real Estates to Mortgage for it. But it is generally a
poor man that has a piece of Land, and wants to build a House upon it; or a
man that has a Farm, and no Stock; or his Farm not big enough to maintain his
Family; or besides his Farm he wants to be fingering of Trade, or to keep a
Tavern, or such like. But alas! the Money in turning once or twice, gets into
the hand of the Merchant, Landlord, or Userer; and the poor man that first
borrowed it, hardly ever sees it again; he cannot get so much as will pay the
Interest; what think yon will he do to get the Principal? The end is, his House
and Land goes to the Country. Well, what will the rich man do with his poor
Neighbor, he cannot make Money of him; his House and Land will lie dead,
unimproved, it will pay no Taxes; Why the rich man concludes, I Will put my
Neighbor into his House again, and take no Interest of him, provided I can
make good for my being Surety for him And the Country may depend upon it, That
all the Money they will get from these Mortgaged Estates, will never be near so
much as they delivered out, for both Interest and Principal. A few Years will
fill the Court with Petitions on this subject, and something must be done to
ease them. I would not be thought to fault the Court in this affair; but the
People who have brought this upon themselves, and I do think something must
speedily be done for their Relief. If a Committee were chosen by the Court to
set the price of the produce of the Country something higher than the Market
price; or if it were confined only to Flax and Hemp; and the Treasurer receive
it of or in the behalf of the Committee who let the Bills, at a price set by a
Committee chosen for that purpose, and ordered to set the price something
higher than the Market. Something of this nature must be done, that your Poor
Neighbor may work out his Debt, and so the rich man take up his Bonds and burn
them.

VII. I shall consider something of the State of my Country, what it was before
we had any Bills of Credit; and what it is at this day; And so shall wind up my
thoughts on this Affair.

New England in its first Settlement, was settled by men of generous principles,
and were accounted men of good Morals; but they had their difficulties in their
settling these Colonies; A vast number of Indian Enemies to encounter with. But
they were carried through those difficulties in a great measure, before we fell
into the Labyrinth of Bills of Credit. The Money they brought with them, and
had acquired by their Care and Industry, was good. The New England Shillings,
and other pieces Coined here, were as good Silver, if not better, than the
Sterling-Money of Great Britain. And the Fishing Trade brought in considerable
Quantities of Spanish pieces of Eight, and some other Coyns we had passing
amongst us; so that the condition we were in (considering the Infancy of the
Country, and the many Enemies they had to Encounter with) was as flourishing as
could be expected. The People in that day were generally good Husbands, every
man that could get a House and Land, it was generally his own, that is, It was
not Mortgaged, or Encumbered with Debts upon it. Although the House was smaller
than our Houses now generally are; ^^t the man chose rather to live in it, than
to Mor^gage it, to make a fine House. Although some had their Extravagancies
then, as well as now; yet it was not so general; a man that had Mortgaged his
Estate then, was looked upon next door to a Bankrupt. Many now living can
remember it so to be accounted. The Country when our Province Bills were made,
I do suppose had not less than One Hundred Thousand Pounds in Silver Money at
Seventeen Penny Weight, for Six Shil^^^^s, ^^nning Cash, circulating in Trade;
and at least One Hundred Thousand Pounds more, that did not circulate I do
think I could name Five Families in the Country, that had Fifty Thousand
Pounds, which they made no use of in that day. And other People, doubtless had
Fifty Thousand more, which made up Two Hundred Thousand Pounds. But since, its
well drained out of their hands. The Trade was not so great in those days as it
has been since. But what Trade they had, was carried on with much greater
advantage to the Trader, than now it is. Every honest Labourer was honestly
paid for his work, in general, without troubling his Neighbor in the Law for
his pay; and these things considered, I think the Country was very happy at
that day on Temporal accounts.

I shall now consider that the Country is at this day. Although we have a
considerable number of men of generous Principles, and good Morals, following
the Steps of their Forefathers; yet there is a Generation of men amongst us of
a selfish, contriving Spirit, who consider more their own Interest, and their
Friends, than the Public good. As to the Indian War, which was so hard upon
the Country formerly; I would hope it is pretty well come to an end,
considering the small number of Indians left, that were in Hostility with us;
and the increase of the Province in numbers of men; and the good Agreement
between Great Britain and France; the French being the Supporters and
Incouragers of the Indians, in a time of War: that I hope that matter is pretty
near come to a stand This we owe to the good Hand of Providence over us, and
not to any means of our own.

And now I come to consider the State of the Country at this day as to a
Medium, and what the Consequences of it are.

I do suppose there may be near about Fifty Thousand Pounds of the old Province
Bills yet outstanding, the Fund being altered, and the time of payment put of
for longer time; I mean those Bills which were Emitted, before any Bills were
made to lend to particular men upon Loan. Then there is one Loan of Fifty
Thousand Pounds, and another of One Hundred Thousand Pounds; all makes the Sum
of Two Hundred Thousand Pounds. This is the only Medium this Province injoys.
Indeed there are Bills of the Neighboring Provinces passing amongst us; but
then we do suppose they have as many, or more, of ours in the room of them. But
one of our Neighbor Provinces is so wise, that I am told, they are going to
shut up their Bank. I wish the rest may be so wise as to follow them speedily;
that the Generation that led* in this Error, may lead out of it; and not leave
their Children in the dark. Now I would make some Comparison of our State.
Formerly we had Two Hundred Thousand Pounds in good Cash; now we have Two
Hundred Thousand Pounds in Paper-Bills; and these ^ills have driven away our
Cash; and yet the cry is, We are richer than formerly. But it seems to me, we
have spent the Two Hundred Thousand Pounds of Cash, and are become Two Hundred
Thousand Pounds in Debt. O say some men, We are in Debt to our Selves, and so
no great matter. But I desire to know, where is the d^fference, if the Country
borrow of themselves Paper Bills, and put them out, they doubtless design to
take them in again, and if they take them, and let to the Inhabitants, they
doubtless intend to receive them again; so that the Country are Indebted to
themselves for Fifty Thousand Pounds, and the Inhabitants are Indebted to the
Country for One Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds, and this it all our Medium
of Exchange. Now this fine Medium of Exchange has cost us all our Silver
Money; and our Plate, (of which our Country was well (...) in former days) is
now flying from us (...)* I am told, That in the last Ships that Sailed this
Winter, some Thousands of Pounds worth of (...) Plate was Shipped off for Great
Britain; (...) new Plate, as fine Tea-Pots, Coffee-Pots, and sundry (...)
Sorts, made by the best workmen in Boston, and Sold at the price of Bullion.
And how comes this to be? Why, its through our fine Medium for Trade. Well, is
our Country the better, or richer for all these things Shipped off. No, but the
poorer.

Well, What has our Country for all this Silver Money and Plate?

Why, we have as good Clothes as we can get, and that's even all, or the most
part: Well, Wherein is our Country Richer, and more flourishing, than it was
formerly? Why, Our great Riches lies in great Houses, Costly Furniture, and
rich Clothing, beyond men of our degree.

Well, Is this all the great Riches you brag of? Why truly, we have nothing
more than we had formerly. The Land we had before, when we had our
Silver-Money; but since the Peace, the Country does increase; but in my
judgment, it is vastly hindered for want of our Old Medium; and every man's
thoughts are so taken up about the New Medium, That I am of Opinion that if the
Country, Owed to a Foreign Province, a Hundred Thousand Pounds; and could get
the Paper Bills Entirely, stopped, the burden would be much less than the Medium
we have now got. For as it is now, the Father is set against the Son; and the
Son against the Father; Brother against Brother; Neighbor against Neighbor; a
man cannot speak to his Neighbor against making Paper Bills, but he is ready to
fly in his face!

If he be asked Why what Service will they do you, says One*

Oh! I owe some Money upon Bond, and I w^nt (...) Money to be made to pay it;
Or I have bought a g^^^^ many Goods, and don't know how to pay f^^ them, etc.

But this (...) Money will prove dear in the End; if I mistake (...).

There was, not many Years since, a private Bank on foot in the Town of Boston,
it was thought it would have proved a greater damage than this Public Bank;
but I am of the mind if that had gone on, that this kind of Medium would have
been at an end before this time: The Credit of that would soon have been spun
out. Almost every man's cry is, Make more Money, Make enough! But every man that
has his eyes about him fees, that every time Paper-Bills are Emitted, it
raises all Commodities; That if it were possible to get out Five Hundred
Thousand Pounds, it would not fetch so much as Two Hundred Thousand Pounds now
does. Now it seems to me, the further we go, the worse it is. And for my own
part, I would be contended to pay my part of the Hundred Thousand Pounds to a
Foreign Province, (as before mentioned) rather than to continue in these broils
about a Medium of Exchange.

Some will say, It will be a dark time between these Province Bills, and Silver
Money. It^s true, we have reason to fear that; and who may we thank for it? But
yet to continue longer, and go farther, will make it darker. But I don't think
the day will be so dark, as some men make it. I observe the Countrymen are
turning good Husbands, and making their own Clothes. If Boston People would be
content to wear their Old Clothes over again, I am apt to think a few Years
would bring us to rights.

But some will say, It Is hard going back; and the Poor will be much hurt. It Is
true, the Poor are to be pitied in this day, but I hope as Providence has
provided for us plentifully this Year; So He will go on. For He who knows our
difficulties, is able and I hope will carry us through them.

Some may say, on Reading these Lines, That the Man is one that has Mortgaged
his Estate to the Country (...) is a Userer, or the like.

In Answer to which, I shall take the liberty* ^nstead of my Name

To Sign One that never Borrowed, or (...) ^ounds upon Interest, for Six (...)
Course of my Life
January 27 th. 1^^^.
FINIS.

