A DISCOURSE, SHOWING, That the real first Cause of the Straits and
Difficulties of this Province of the Massachusetts Bay, is it is Extravagancy,
and not Paper Money: AND ALSO What is a safe Foundation to raise a Bank of
Credit on, and what not, (with some Remarks on Amicus Patriae,) and a
Projection for Emitting of more Bills of Credit on the Province. By Way of
DIALOGUE, between a Representative in said Province, and a certain Gentleman,
concerned for the Good of his native Country.

By PHILOPATRIA.

BOSTON: Printed by J. Franklin, for D. Henchman, sold at his Shop. 1721.

A Dialogue, etc.
Representative. March 14. 1720, 21.

SIR, I hear that our General Court is to sit the next Wednesday, and am very
much concerned about what the Result of this Sessions will be. For the whole
Province seems to be divided into two Parties; one of them is continually
exclaiming with a grievous and bitter Cry, Our Paper Money! Our Paper money! it
is this that has brought upon us the direful Retinue of fatal Evils that we are
stooping under, and a succession of it, (if emitted) will not fail to draw a
sable Curtain over the last Appearance of our Happiness, and shut up every
Glade of light and Prosperity, to this already miserable Province. The other is
also incessantly mourning, with a Cry no less audible and bitter, Our want of a
Medium of Trade, it is this that will ruin us; The Silver and Gold is
irrecoverably gone; and Bills of Credit are grievously scanty; and unless our
Government will supply us with more of these, the Want of them will open to us
the darkest Scene, that ever this Province saw; will cut off from us every
thing that may seem prosperous, and without fail finish our destruction, by
bringing us under a series of inextricable straits and Adversities.

So that I think the great Question every where is. Who will show us Tokens for
Good? Where is the g^nuine Son, that will take this Province by the Hand, and
lead her into the Way of Prosperity.

And for the Redress of our thus strait and miserable Circumstances, many
Projections have been raised, and by the Press diffused abroad, but hitherto
s^emingly inneffectual, for the gaining their desired ^^^int.

Now Sir, pray let me have your Thoughts con^^ining these things.

Gentleman. I think this Province at present is ^^clared, by the universal
consent of the Inhabitants, to be grievously involved in Debt; and which i^
still worse, under Impossibilities of getting ont, unless some steps are taken,
which the Province are not yet come into. This Cry is too common and loud, to
be unheard by any Person in the whole Province. It is breathed out with such
Spirits and Affection, that the very Streets and ecchoing places, seem to ^
sound the moan of it. And hence every one, that ^as a true concern for his own,
and dear Country's Happiness, will be desirous to know, what measures may be
taken, to redress those grievances, which are sounding, with such a Pathos in
our ears. Many things have indeed been projected by ingenious Hands, and spread
abroad by the Press, and I think they all Center here, That the Weal or Woe of
the Province, depends upon our Emitting, or not Emitting a fur^her Supply of
Bills of Credit for a Medium of Trade. But will it not be more likely to obtain
the desired Effect, to enter into the foundation and source of our ^ttendant
Evils, prescribing something to remove their Cause, than to Converse merely
with their Superficies, with what only accidentally causes them, and project
means which will reach no further ^han that relief? It seems that the
foundation of ^ur straits is our Extravagant Consumption of ^oreign Commoditys;
and if so, the projecting a Medium to support and enliven our Trade, will be no
more than a Cordial to us languishing under a mortal disease.

R. Your Sentiments here seem to be something different, from what has been
published by others, concerning these affairs, I know that through the Country
our Paper money is generally looked upon by People as the faulty Cause of all
our straits; For this, say they has enabled our Merchants to expe^t our Silver
Money and encouraged them to bring in greater Quantities of European, and East
and West India Goods, than the Produce of our Country can possibly make returns
for; and then that their Goods Imported might not ly dormant, they have
encouraged people to take them up, giving large prizes for the produce of our
Country, if they may pay in Goods, (and in the mean time, they have raised upon
your Goods more than in proportion too) also giving long time of payment, for
the Plenty of Bills would enable them to continue Trading at a great Rate, though
they trust out in large quantities; whereby the honest Country People have been
induced to do, justl^ ^ it is to be feared the Merchants have done before them,
take up more than they can possibly pay for.

Gent. Though I agree with the Sentiments of People in this, that our paper money
has enabled and given occasion to the Merchants to do as you have bee^ saying,
and therefore conclude that it is the Instrument that has brought in our evils,
yet I cannot fal^ into their Scheme of Thoughts, who attribute the whole
Causality of them to it; but think it mos^ proper and just to distinguish
between the real efficien^ Cause of them, and that which is only accidentally
so. Here then for the true Cause of our straits, I onc^ more set down, The
extravagant consumption o^ imported Commodities.

Grandeur so naturally springs up among us, tha^ every one is ready (I suppose
by their managements, to fancy themselves the progeny of the rich and
honorable. This seems to be the unquenchable desire of every one. We all
scrable after it as naturally, and with as much Resolution and Shuffling
Sedulity as heavy bodies to the Center of Gravity. Our Gentry, yea our
Commonalty must be dressed up like Nobles, nothing short of the finest of
Broad-Cloths, Silks, etc. will serve for their Apparel, and ^utlandish slaves
almost in endless order must wait upon all their Entertainments. So that
however we (...) ^t money, we abound in Finery; If we cannot pay (...) Debts, we
can as yet, by running into Debt, get (...) wear fine Clothes; and if we be
poorer than ^^me other Places, I suppose there is no place in the ^^ole world
where in general they are so fine as (...): for Travelers will often tell us
how, at their (...) arrival among us, they have stood with open m^uths drinking
in amazement, to see the Grandeur, (^ah empty Grandeur!) of New England. Our
Buildings, how magnificent! Our Equipage, attenda^^e, and Balls, how splendid
and pompous! Our App^el, how fine and rich! Our Furniture and Tables, h^w
costly, sumptuous and dainty! and our Funerals, how ample are they! That I
suppose if a judicious T^aveller were in our metropolis making an Estimation,
by these, of its wealth, he would suppose it to be of its bigness, the richest
Town upon the whole Earth.

Not that I am going to suggest, that fine Broad-cloths, silks, etc. are not to
be improved in New England; no, Persons of public note, and Trust, and
plentiful Estates, may every where in Justice and Modesty, be allowed the use
of them, it is properly for their Service that such are made. Soft Raiment is
for such as are in Kings Houses; And the Priests Garments were, by Gods
Appointment, to be made for Glory and for Beauty. Exodus 28.2.40. But the Misery
and Iniquity of it is, the inferior sort of People will ^e clad in as costly
Attire as the Rich and Honorable. How often do we see Men, who have nothing
but just a rational Soul (and scarcely that, as one would think by their
Managements) to advance them above any of their fellow Creatures, dressing
themselves in silk stockings, and almost the very finest of Broad Cloths, or
silk Camlets? And ordinary Tradesmen's Wives (though the whole Family depends
upon the daily Labor of the Husband for Subsistence) shall be dressed in Silks
and Sattens and that not only on high holy days, but in their ordinary
Visitings. Inferior Apprentices and Servants, having just obtained their
Freedom shall be dressed like Lords of the Mannours; and in public Congresses
were it not for the different Seats they fit in, one would scarce know Joan
from my Lady by Daylight. Thus often are the most distant Indies searched with
the greatest cost and peril, for the finest Sattins, Silks or at least Chences
and Callicoes to fit up thousands of Women, who really are not worthy to be
advanced one Ace above the Dunghill for any one dignifying Quality or
Circumstance!

These things I mention as the cause of our present Straits, they are briefly.

1. We will be fine, ample and sumptuous in all our Appearances; and

2. We will not employ our selves in making our own Finery; but far fetched,
and dear bought must be the articles of our Adorning.

In short, might not I have noted for the Reason thereof, Pride and abundance
of Idleness. These sins of Sodom, which have so far prevailed in this Province,
in our great Towns especially? The Fashion that Tyranness of Fools has gained
the Ascendant among us, and drags the Age along in these unnaccountable dear
Follys.

Now Sir, if it were a thing possible by any means to open Peoples Eyes, and
give them a clear view of these things in their native Colors, I should think
that would be most serviceable to the Public.

Rep. I believe your Thoughts concerning our Extravagancys are very just; And I
also think, that nothing but pure necessity will ever retrench them; and
however Serviceable a plain detection of them might be, yet I rather think that
the greatest Service that can be done the Province at this Juncture, is fairly,
coolly, and plainly to discuss those great questions, What method shall we take
at present to help us out of our amazing straits and difficulties? Will it be
for the Advantage of this Province, to make more Paper money or not? questions
truly weighty and moving!

You have seen the wonders, the almost Miracles which our paper Bills have
already wrought, and will yet naturally bring forth, if we (the Legislators)
will but give them a being by our powerful Fiat; as these things have been
lately set before your Eyes by Amicus Patriae.

Gent. As to the innate Power of working Miracles, ascribed to our Paper Bills
by Amicus Patriae, I think it the Product of a too exorbitant Fancy. That Book
^eems to be entirely in a Party, for the cry of it is, We must have plenty of
Paper Bills; and I find no manner of Care taken in it either to support their
Credit any farther than Fancy will do it. Make the best of them. page 27. Think
them good. page 44. Or to project a surer Foundation to emit them on, so that
those who take them out may not be ruined by them; When as we are taught by
experience (and the conspiring voice of the whole Province is in it) That to
put ^ut more upon the same foot that the former Banks ^ere will not fail to
enslave us.

As to the Question you offer to be debated by me, ^t is indeed of the last
Importance to us now, I mean ^s to our Secular well being; And it is so nice a
Point, that it is next to impossible for any one to handle it without being
thought to be in a Party, which every generous Soul abhors. However, my own
Circum^tances you know are such as will be neither greatly hurt or advanced by
the emitting or witholding more Bills, any further than a public Good or evil
affects private Persons, and this will help you to believe that what is here
attempted by me has no private View at all.

And now in debating the Question proposed, that I may show you my mind in
Plain, I will lead you by perspicuous and easy steps, as well as may be
proportioned to gain my Point.

Here then I premise, that as one Member of the Body cannot, so neither can one
Person, Family, State or Country, say to another, I have no need of thee; But
Trade, or the Exchange of one Commodity for another (which cannot be carried on
without some suitable Medium of Exchange) is needful to the well being of every
People. These things, I suppose will be granted by a general Suffrage.

And now I suppose

1. That the Produce of a Country, or its movables, such as may be spared for
Exportation, (and not it is Lands or real Estate) are to procure and supply the
Country with this medium of Exchange.

The Foundation of Trade is laid in this, That one Country seldom or never
produces every individual) commodity (or a sufficiency thereof) which is
needful, or at least, convenient for it is subsistence, and ordinarily (such is
the goodness of Providence) what is wanting in one Country is abundant in
another.

And the very notion of a medium of Exchange is, that it be something of a
certain and known value, and easy of Transportation, suitable to be given to
make up the Balance, where one Species to be exchanged exceeds the other; or
to be given as a full price for the Commodity we want. Now if our Medium be
Gold, Silver, Copper, etc. it carries the foundation of its own Credit in it
self; inasmuch as the Consent of all people is, that it is intrinsically
valuable But if it be Bank-Notes etc. then it has no value in i^self but the
Foundation of its Credit, is the Bank it is raised upon; and every one who
receives it does so, not for its own sake, but for the sake of the Fund. And if
the Fund or Bank be Movables, such as Gold, Silver, etc. then this kind of
Medium is the most valuable, as being not of a wastful nature, and most safe
and easy of Carriage; and then if all the Notes of a Country be gone, and they
cannot redeem them, the worst that can be is, he that has them must take the
Fund they were raised upon, and the Country begin anew. But if the Lands, the
real Estates of a Country, be the Fund to support the Credit of its Notes (as
is the Case of this Province respecting our paper Money) it is then a most
dangerous Medium. For if their Notes be gone, and they cannot redeem them, then
the best that can be is, they who have the Notes or Bills must take the Land to
make good their Credit; and upon what Bottom will the Country stand then?

This thought seems enough to strike through the Soul of every generous
Freeholder.

And from these Considerations I conclude,

2. That the Plentifulness or Scarcity of the Medium of Exchange in a Country,
depends upon the Industry and Prudence, or Idleness and Illhusbandry of its
Inhabitants.

If the prudence and Industry of a People, be such, that they will constantly
prepare, either of the produce of, or Manufactures performed in their own
Country, for Exportation in such Plenty, as that the value of them may be more
than sufficient, to purchase every thing that they want from abroad, to consume
among themselves; then the Overplus of their value, will be constantly drawing
that which is used by the Traders for a Medium of Exchange, and make it plenty
among them. And the contrary Qualifications in any People, sc. Idleness and
Illhusbandry, will always bring forth the contrary effect, scil. a scarcity of
the Medium of Exchange among them.

For if the Import of a Country be more than the Export, (it is as plain as
that two and two will make four,) that the Medium of Exchange, must go to make
up the Balance.

And here I am obliged to dissent from the wonderful Doctrine scattered forth
by Amicus Patriae, "That the Merchants hold the Helm, and are principle
Steersmen in the common Affairs of Temporal Interest and Profit. D^dle. page 1.
And that the advancement of a Country's Wealth etc wholly depends upon Trading,
as he seems to urge, p. 18. where also to prove his Doctrine by an undeniable
Evidence, he tells us that "Tyrus was but a naked Rock spread out into the S^a,
yet by Merchandise became the Queen of the Seas, the Metropolis of the World,
etc.

Wonderful Misrepresentation! Does he think that no body knows Tire but
himself? It is indeed a rocky Island, (though not a naked Rock) that abounded
with a sort of Shelfish whose Liquor was most serviceable and excellent for the
dying of purple, that very valuable Commodity for Exportation. Yea so noted
through the whole world, were the Tyrians for the Industrious improvement of
that most profitable Trade, that the same Latin Word [ Tyrius the Adjective of
Tyrus is used to signify purple, and an Inhabitant of Tire. This the little
Schoolboy may teach us. And I remember Dr. Hylen, whose Authority every one
will allow to be great, describing the City of Tire, gives this as the reason
of its Riches and Grandeur. "^t excelled (says he) all other Cities of those
Times in Learning and Manufactures. See his Cosmog.


Holland is also mentioned by him for the same purpose, page 19. as "naturally
not affording any one Commodity of use; yet by Merchandise, etc. It is strange
if any Man should pretend to describe Countries, who is not so far versed in
History, as to know that the World has noted Holland for its exemplary, its
mavelous Industry in Manufactures, so that it is known to Historians by this
Name, The Bee-hive of Europe.

And now, whatever is pretended to the contrary by Amicus Patriae
notwithstanding, I lay this down as a principle,

That the Opulency and Grandeur of a Country depends upon the Industry and
Prudence of its Inhabitants; This is the formal Cause of it, for even Trade and
Commerce (which I allow to be the grand, the necessary Instruments of promoting
these) do depend upon it. And then I add,

3. That when once the Produce of a Country will not afford it a sufficient
Medium of Exchange, it will immediately be thrown headlong upon this dreadful
Dilemma.

Either it is Trade must be carried on by Barter; or its Lands used to supply it
with a Medium of Exchange. The Disjunction, I think, cannot be denied; for if
the Movables of a Country will not supply it with a Medium, some other way
must be found out, or Trade will utterly sink: But there can be no other way
supposed than either,

1. To carry it on by Barter, (which I suppose to be always attended with many
very burdensome Circumstances in every Place, and for many reasons wholly
impracticable in this Province.) Or,

2. That the real Estates or Lands of a Country be used to supply it with a
Medium of Exchange; i. e. by being made a Fund for a Bank of Credit. Every
Medium of Exchange must carry so much with it, as is sufficient to satisfy the
Receiver, that what he receives is as valuable as that which he parts with, and
if the Medium be a Bill of Credit, there must be some Foundation of it is
Credit, to satisfy him that he shall certainly have, as the appointed time,
that which is thereby engaged. And hence,

4. When a Country overtrades it self, its Medium of Exchange belongs to its
Creditors abroad; and therefore it is a most dangerous thing to improve the
Lands of any Country to supply it with a Medium of Exchange. It is a means
never to be used but in the last Extremity.

It seems very clear, that when a Country whose Medium is Bills of Credit,
raised on their Lands, (as our Province Bills are) has overtraded itself; so
that the Bills are got into the Creditors Hands, and cannot be redeemed, then
the Lands, which are a Fund to support their Credit, does of Right belong, and
must be delivered to those that do possess the Bills: and when this happens,
then the way is fair and plain for the Lands to be reduced into Lordships; an
Effect very much desired and sought after by many People.

And now, who wont be brought into my Conclusson, and say, That it is indeeed a
most dangerous thing to improve the Lands of a Country to supply it with a
Medium of Exchange? A Means never to be used but in the last Extremity.

But says Amicus Patriae, page 18. It is whimsical to talk of Merchants
overtrading, among the Wise and skilful; there can be no such thing.

What does he think, when a Country has imported more Goods than it can
possibly make Returns for, so that its Lands are forced to become bound over to
the Creditors for Security? Has not such a Country overtraded itself? Or does
the World mistake about Terms? And has he never heard of such an Instance as
this? Are there no Wise skilful Merchants in the Province that have done so?

Rep. But why cannot we in this Provinoe, notwithstanding our low Ebb, emit
Bills on such a Foundation as that they may be equal with Money, as Amicus
Patriae tells us the Bills are at Venice, Holland, and New York, in all which
Places the Bank Bills are kept in Credit, as he says, page 50, 51, only by
their being prudently managed by the Merchants; and then all the business in
our Province, which is now almost dead, might be carried on in a very lively
manner.

Gent. It is a piece of grand Folly or Sophistry, to compare our Bills of
Credit to those of Venice, Holland, or any other place, where they have a Bank
of Gold, Silver, etc. to support the Credit of them, when we have nothing but
our real Estates to give Credit and Currency to ours.

As to the Bills of Venice, Amicus Patriae hiself tells us page 42. That when
the Bank was erected, there was the same Quantity of Money brought into the
Treasury, as there were Bills given out, sc. Six Hundred Thousand Pounds. And
hence the Wise Author shows much of his transcendent Logic, in bringing this
to parallel the Case of our Province, where we can ta^k of nothing but making
our Lands a Fund to support the Credit of our Bills.

There are these things considerable about the Bank of Venice.

1. There was a Fund of Money brought and lodged in the Treasury equal to the
Notes emitted; and therefore every one that had, a Note, might when he pleased
have brought it into the Treasury, and taken out Silver and Gold Money for it.
This might well give them a good Credit and Currency. And if we grant that in
process of Time, when the Credit of the Bills was very high, the Bankers took
all the Money out of the Treasury, and made use of it at pleasure, as Amicus
Patriae suggests, (though I have only his bare Word to depend on for the truth of
this; however, suppose it so,) yet they are still obliged as firmly as ever, to
change any Note than shall be brought, and every one knows, that they are not
only bound to do so, but that they can do it with the greatest Ease, if it be
required of them; because,

2. The current Medium of Exchange in Venice is Silver Money, which may be
procured at any time to exchange for Bank Bills. (This I have attested by an
Eyewitness of the Fact.) And hence no body desires to have them changed.

These are Considerations truly valuable, sufficient to build and maintain the
Credit of any Bank whatsoever.

Again as to the Bank of Holland, every one that is acquainted with the
Circumstances of it, knows, that there are always masty Heaps of Silver and
Gold in the Treasury, ready to exchange every Bank Note that shall be brought
to them at any time. And now, are these two Instances fairly applicable to us?

And for the Bank of New York, I have no particular Knowledge of it, but
believe what I commonly hear, that all Gentlemen who know their Affairs will
testify, that their Bills are not one Jot better than ours were when of the
same Age; and if they continue as long as ours have done, by their Appearance,
will be no better than ours now are.

Rep. However dangerous you show it to be, for a Country to make use of its
Lands to supply itself with a Medium of Exchange, yet I perceive you allow that
it may be done in a Case of Extremity. I think the Case of this Province is
extreme difficult, vast N^mbers have their Lands under Mortgages for Money
taken out of the last Banks, who cannot get Money to redeem them. The Cry of
People in the Country is, How shall we pay our Rates if there be no Money? And
the Merchants constantly importune us for a fuller Supply of a Medium of Trade.
We have not a sufficiency of Movables suitable to put in as a Fund, on which
to erect a Bank of Credit; for our Silver Money is gone, and if I may believe
Reports seemingly well ascertained, our Plate is going after, on the same
melancholy Errand; and all insufficient too.

Gent. It seems very reasonable that a Country in Extremity should make use of
its Credit to support itself, i. e. by making its Lands a Fund, on which to
emit Bills of Credit. But in such Cases I think it stands them in hand to be
very careful,

1. Not to emit too many of them; for this will suddenly depress their Credit.
And,

2. Punctually to call them in at the time appointed, otherwise the Possessor
will think himself wronged; for I know no Difference between these Bills, and a
Bill or Bond given by a private Person. And it seems as if the postponing of
half our Province Tax had a great Hand in crushing the Credit of our Bills.

Rep. Sir, I think almost every one is ready to reflect upon Amicus Patriae,
for making a great Bustle of Words and bringing forth no Projections for our
safely emitting more Money, retorting his own proverb, Parturiunt Montes,
nascitur ridiculus Mus.

Now let me know, which way you think we may most safely emit a Quantity of
Bills of Credit, for unless you do this, you do just nothing, for I think there
will certainly be some made this Sessions.

Gent. Sir, I will freely give you my mind here, as I have already done in the
Premises.

But I will first enter a Caveat, If you emit more Paper Money, you must very
carefully provide for the support of its Credit. I know Amicus Patriae will
laugh at this, and tell us that their Credit may be kept up by the power of a
Wise Imagination, page 44. (Just like the Popish Doctrine of Transubstantiation;
Creed quod edes, et edes, say they.) And we may with the same reason say of any
other of our Affairs, Believe that they are well, and they are and shall be so.

And let Amicus Patriae say what he please about the Merchants supporting the
Credit of our Bills, by willingly receiving and highly commending them; it is a
Truth too plain to be palliated, by Fancy, That the Merchants always raise upon
their Goods more in proportion, than other Commodities are raised by the plenty
or meaness of Money. I am credibly eno^ informed, that at the last Sessions of
^he General Court, when the Bill had passed in the Lower Horse for emitting a
Sum of Paper Money, the Merchants immediately raised 25 per Cent. upon their
Goods, and the Shopkeepers had begun, on the same foundation to bid high for
them. Now for the obtaining this end, the supporting of their Credit, I propose,

1. That you put out but little at a time. Don't let us have a Glut of it, for
that will plainly depretiate it. The contingent Charge of this Provi^^e is
about 10 or 12 Thousand l. a Year, which must be made Yearly; and this Year it
is about 15 or 16 Thousand, to which If you add about 15 or 16 Thousand more,
it seems to me, that will be enough for the present.

2. That you be constant and steady in putting out a suitable Quantity. The
making much one Year and little or none another, has and always will hurt the
Credit of our Bills, by tossing the Prizes of every thing, so that no one can
make a Judgment where to fix, to the great Damage of this Province in all its
Affairs. And,

3. That you be punctual to call in the Bills at the time appointed. I can see
no difference as I said before, between our Pr. Bills, and the Bills or Bonds
of private Men; and if there be none, we may fairly argue, that they ought to
be answered, i.e. called in punctually at the time appointed. Having thus
finished my Caution, I come now to answer your Request, by saying something of
the Method wherein Bills of Credit may be emitted for the greatest Safety and
Service of our Province at this Juncture. And here my thoughts are,

1. Not by any private Bank: Unless the Bankers could bring in Silver or Gold
Money for a Fund to support the Credit of their Bills (as I believe all private
Bankers in the World do.) I fear that that Circumstance which brings this
Province into a private Bank, will hedge up our Way with Thorns; for you know,
that the Public is much more merciful to its Members, being Debtors, than
private Men are, or can be thought to be to those who are indebted to them: And
how grievous is the Cry of Oppression among our people, who have mortgaged
their Lands to the public Banks? Again,

2. Not as the two former Banks were emitted. It is a general Cry that these
Measures do and will too much entangle the prudent, and lay too great a
Temptation before those that want Guardians. And further,

3. Not to be paid in Lumber, etc. to the public. This would create such a
numerous set of Officers, as that the Stock must go in a great Measure to pay
Charges. Once more,

4. Not as was projected in the House of Representatives at their last
Sessions, sc. That he who took 100 l. should pay 10 l. a Year for the space of
Eleven Years and then be clear; and that one Man might take out two hundred
Pounds. These forms were so ea^^ that I (being on a Journey when the News of it
came abroad, and seeing with what Spirit people generally received it) have
reason to think that (at least in many places) the longest Sword would have
determined who should have the Money And now I come in the last place to give
you ^y Thoughts concerning a Bank Projected. And they are those,

1. That the General Court order the making a certain Quantity, at their
discretion, of Bil^s of Credit of this Province to be distributed among the
several Towns in the same proportion, as the Taxes are gathered; And by the
^ssessors of the respective Towns, to be in like manner distri^uted among all
the Inhabitants.

2. That the Bills be to stand out for the space of five ^ears (more or less)
and then called in by a Tax.

The Advantages of this Projection are,

1. This will be the quickest, most natural and easy Way ^f diffusing the Money
abroad, among all that have any Right ^o it; and according to what real and
just right they have.

2. Inasmuch as it will be five Years (more or less) after (...) of these Bills
are put out, before any of them are called in, (...) will b^ a good space for
those whose Lands are under ^^^tgage to redeem them in.

3. This method will be very effectual to stop the growth of (...). Whereas all
Measures, as yet p^oject^^ and (...), have had, (...) will always have a direct
(...) to blow up an almost Intolerable and unque^^iable ^re of ^arty Zeal, to
the unspeakable damage of the P^ovince ^ every Interest: for now the whole
Province, as such, being ^^gaged to stand the Loss and Gain, every particular
Man will (...) alike involved, all will share alike in the Benefit and
disad^^ntage; and hence, no private measures will ever be at^^mpted to gain a
Freedom from, or Alleviation of any Evil or ^^convenience attending these Bills
because it will plainly ap^^ar that every Man's private Inte^^st, respecting
them, will (...) promoted by advancing the public Interest, and no other way.

4. It will prevent a great deal of Charge, that all former ^bjections have
created, in paying Commissioners, travel^^g to, and attendance upon them at
their Meetings in the ^ire-Towns, writing and Recording Mortgages, etc. Besides
great deal of Expense in getting the Lands (to be put in as ^^curity for the
Money taken out of the Bank) apprised, as ^^e Law in that case directs; This
Projection will prevent ^ great deal of horrible deceit or (to be more
charitable) ^^^^vous misjudging, in the Persons by Law appointed to ^^prise
those ^ands; and also damage to the public, by send^^g the Aprisement of said
Lands to the Commissioners (who, generally speaking, are and always must and
will be, as to themselves, ignorant of the true Value) at such a Rate, tha^ the
Mortgagers, instead of taking out but half the value, a^ is designed and
pretended, may take out a great deal more than their Lands are worth; Instances
of which I suppose have often been.

6. This will encourage people to manure and cultivate dormant Lands, and raise
greater stocks of Creatures, and also to be more just in bringing in Bills of
ratable estates, all which will be a public Good; and further in some measure
to stop that perpetual and uneasy Clamor which is made by some sorts of people
in all Towns, That they are over rated; For now (supposing Bills to come out
Yearly on this Foot) the more any one is rated, the more money he will dra^
from the Bank. And hence there will always be some Money in the hand of every
one which is required to pay any Rates, and so that dreadful Question will (at
least in part) be answered, How shall we pay our Yearly Rates, which are
required in Money, if their be no Money to be had?

Rep. There are several things which I find to object against your Proposal.
(1.) What shall be done about those who have no real Estates in Towns? For we
have no Security of them for the Repayment of what they receive when the Bills
shall be called in; they may be gone, with their Estates, out of the Province.

Gent. This may be helped by having Men in every Town appointed to take Bonds
of all such persons, for the paymen^ of the Money when called in, i. e. to pay
it in the same proportion in which they took it out, scil. according to their
Rates at the time of payment.

Rep. I object, (2.) The case of those in Towns, who pay no Rates, but live
upon Salaries, (such as Ministers, settled Schoolmasters, etc.) they will be
hurt by our emitting more Bills, (because their Salaries will thereby be made
worse) and no way advantaged, because they paying no Rates, can come at none of
it.

Gent. The General Court may easily help this, by providing for such, that they
may reserve a certain Quantity o^ said Money (at the Court's Discretion) giving
in Bonds for the Repayment of it when it is called in.

Now if a small Quantity of Money were emitted on this and a like Sum on one or
two other Projections, at the Discretion of the General Assembly, they might
doubtless in ^ few Years, see which would be most effective of Good to the
Province; and that might be persisted in, which would b^ the greatest
Satisfaction to all its Well-wishers.

FINIS.

