Jacobs Vow UPON His Leaving his Fathers House, Considered in A SERMON Had in
Private, October. 15. 1722. At the Desire of a YOUNG GENTLEMAN, upon his Entering
on Worldly Business, and going abroad into the World.

By Benj. Colman, M. A. Pastor of a Church in BOSTON, N. E.

PSALM. 76.11. Vow and pay unto the LORD your GOD.

BOSTON: Printed by JAMES FRANKLIN, in Queen Street. 1722.

Jacob's Vow.
GENESIS 28, 20, 21. And Jacob vowed a Vow, saying, If God will be with me, and
will keep me in this Way that I go, and will give me Bread to eat, and Raiment
to put on; so that I come again to my Fathers House in Peace; then shall the
Lord be my God.


VERY famous in Scripture Story is the devout Life and Pilgrimage of our Father
Jacob. In this Chapter we find him beginning the world, and leaving his fathers
House. Isaac called him, and blessed him, and charged him, and sent him away to
(...), to the House of (...) his Mother's Father. He went not without a Call,
nor yet without leave, but indeed in obedience to the direction of his Parents.
Yet was he desolate and alone, save that he carried away his Father's Blessing
with him, and God and his Angels accompanied him, guarded and visited him on
his Way. At night he had out a cold and hard lodging, the ground for his bed, a
stone for his pillow, and the Sky for his covering; but in his dream he had the
visions of God, and sweet Communion with heaven.

HE saw a ladder which reached from earth to heaven, and behold the Angels of
God ascending and descending on it, and the LORD stood above it. Hereby was
represented to him the care of Providence for the Church of the Elect on earth
collectively, and for every person of them singly by themselves; and the
communion they have with heaven while here below, by the ministry of Angels,
through the Mediation of JESUS CHRIST: For HE is the ladder, by whom there is
this intercourse between heaven and earth, having reconciled all things in
himself, whether they be things in heaven, or things on earth. By him heaven is
opened to us, and the Angels of God are descending to and ascending from the
sons of Men.

GOD then said to him. I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac: the land
whereon thou lie, I give thee and to thy seed. GOD promised him a numerous
seed, and that in it ( scil. CHRIST) all the Families of the earth should be
blessed. Moreover, GOD said to him, Behold I am with thee, and will keep thee
in all places whither thou go, and will bring thee again into this land; for
I will not leave thee until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of.

WHEN Jacob awoke out of his sleep he was struck with a great awe and holy
reverence, as well he might, and indeed ought to be. He was afraid, and said,
How dreadful is this place! He set up the stones whereon he had slept for a
Pillar and Monument of that memorable event: He called the Place Bethel, i. e.
the house of God; and then made his solemn Vow in the Words of my Text; And
Jacob vowed a Vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me, etc.

IN the Words observe, 1. The Matter of the Vow, or the thing vowed; the Lord
shall be my God. 2. The Manner of it, as it were in form of a Condition; If God
will be with me, etc.


1. THE Matter of his Vow, or the thing vowed, which is plain, short, and full;
The Lord shall be my God. Jehovah, the true God, his Father's God, should be
his God. He owns Gods propriety in him, dominion over him, right and title to
him. He chooses God for his God, and makes a free submission, a voluntary
surrender of himself to him, and devotes himself to his service and glory, to
worship and obey him, as God and his God. He covenants for himself; for he had
been circumcised in his Infancy, and given up to God in Covenant; set apart for
him, by his mark put upon him.

2. THE Manner of this Vow, is something in form of a Condition, If God will be
with me, and keep, etc. But here we must observe, 1. THAT to be sure he meant
not to prescribe any terms or conditions to the Great God, which unless he
fulfilled, he should not be his God. Far be this from our Thought, as it was
from his. Suppose that God should deny him bread to eat, and raiment to put on;
suppose he should never bring him back again to his Father's house; should God
then be none of his God? God forbid. We are taught to say, and no doubt Jacob
had learnt as much, Job. 13.15. Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. 2.
JACOB certainly meant by this manner of speech, If the Lord will be with me,
etc. to express his faith in the word and promise of God just before given him,
v. 15. Behold I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou
go, and bring thee again into this land. Now says Jacob, "Seeing So Mr.
Henry.
God will be with me in the way wherein I go, and will keep, and feed, and
return me in peace; " seeing he has given me this promise and assurance, I do
(as one bound in gratitude and justice) make this my Vow and Engagement to the
Lord, that he shall be my God. He depends upon God's word to him, and makes his
vows to God. Or, 3. JACOB meant it as a prayer to the God of his Life, his
great Preserver and Benefactor, that he would be with him in his way, and through
his Life; guide, provide for him, and bless him, as he had said; and then he
subjoyns a religious promise and holy engagement to God, as meet to render for
such Benefits. Agreeably to what we read, Job. 22.27. Thou shall make thy
PRAYER unto him, and he shall hear thee, and then shall pay thy vows. And
taking it thus as a prayer and desire to God, we may observe these three things
of it. 1. THAT his first petition is for the presence of God with him, and his
favor to him, which is more than life. 2. THAT his request as to worldly
things is exceeding modest, humble and moderate. He asks only bread to eat, and
raiment to put on: He leaves it with God to choose for him convenient food: If
he have but just enough, and bare necessaries, it should content him, And, 3.
OBSERVE how his natural and pious affection to his father's house and his
native place wrought in him: So that I come again to my father's house in
peace. He hoped to find his dear Parents alive at his return; he in effect begs
this of God, that he might again see their faces. " Esau had longed (as one
notes) for the days of mourning for his father: Not so Jacob; no, one special
thing his heart was set on is, that he might see again the venerable face of
his Father, who was already blind with age.



BUT I will not detain you any longer in descanting upon the copious Text: The
sum is, If God should please to favor him in these his petitions, he should
ever hold himself most strongly engaged to cleave to him and rejoice in him as
his God.

UPON all, there is the abundant Grace and condescension of the blessed GOD to
be seen, in his allowing dust and ashes to speak to him and covenant with him
after this manner; i. e. after our own manner. As parents on earth give leave
to their Children to express their affection, reverence and duty to them after
their childish manner; so does our Father in heaven by his poor children here
on earth.

BUT I come to gather up the Notes or Doctrines from the Words; which might be
many, but I Will confine my self to three only, 1. THAT young people, as they
grow up in their parents houses, or as they leave them and go forth into the
world, should be able seriously and solemnly to enter into Covenant with God,
and make their vows to him, that the Lord shall be their God. 2. THAT upon
making this vow upon or before your leaving your fathers house, and going forth
into the world, you must earnestly implore and humbly confide in the special
presence, favor and grace of God to be with you, and keep you in the way that
you go. 3. THAT in this case, and on this occasion a gracious God permits and
allows you to bring into your vow, and humbly to lay before him, those temporal
favors and blessings which you are in the lawful pursuit of; provided it be
with a moderation of desire toward them, submission to the will of God
respecting them, and a resolution through grace to adhere to his Coveant, Worship
and Service, in the enjoyment of them.


THESE three Doctrines do I think give us the true scope of my Text; and as the
time allotted me will permit, I shall endeavor to explain and urge them upon
such of you as are growing up under our Care, or going forth into the World:
For which end they are now chosen for me.

DOCT. I. THAT young people as they grow up in their parents houser, or as they
leave the same, and go forth into the world, should be able seriously to
covenant with God, and solemnly to make their vows to him, That the Lord shall
be their God. The seed of Jacob will learn this of him.
I SHALL speak to this Doctrine under the following Heads. 1. That we are under
the vow and bond of God from our Infancy. 2. That the vow we are then brought
under is this. That the Lord shall be our God. 3. That children should be early
taught this, and often seriously admonished of it; and as our young people grow
up in their fathers houses, they should seriously prepare to take this vow upon
themselves, and make it to the Lord with holy solemnity. 4. That when they are
leaving their parents houses, and going forth into the world, may be a very
proper season for such a solemn transaction with the Holy God.


1. WE are under the vow and bond of God from our Infancy. So was Jacob from
his birth: At eight days old he received the token of God's Covenant in his
Circumcision, which was the seal of the same righteousness of faith that
Baptism now is to us, in the administration of it in the Christian Church: The
same Covenant and blessing being come upon us Gentiles by faith, which God gave
to Abraham; namely this, I will be a God to thee and to thy seed. Our Children
therefore from their Infancy are as much in the Covenant state, and the
initiating seal of the Covenant does as much belong to them, as the Covenant of
Circumcision did to the Infants under the Law. Else were your children unclean,
but now they are holy, 1 Cor. 7.14. We therefore are under the vow and bond of
God from our Infancy: And no doubt but so were the first children that were
born into the world accounted and dedicated to God; which it may be Eve meant
when she said upon the birth of Cain, I have gotten a man from the Lord; a
child for him.

2. THE Vow that we are brought under by the Covenant of God from our Infancy,
and by our Baptism then, is this in the Text, That the Lord shall be our God.
This it is, and neither more nor less; as God gave it to Abraham, and as it is
come on us, Genesis 17.7. And I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and
thy seed after thee in their generations, to be a God to thee, and to thy seed
after thee. We and our seed therefore have significantly said of and to the
Lord, He shall be my God. Jacob now said for himself, no more than what his
Father Isaac had said for him, and bound upon him, in the day when he
circumcised him. The Covenant is now given to us in the same Words, Heb. 8.20.
I will be to you a God, and ye shall be to me a people. This is the compendium,
the summary and substance of the Covenant of Grace; comprehending all the
mercy, grace, favor and blessing promised (...) God's part in the Gospel of
Christ; and all the duty and obedience required and engaged on ours. So
exceeding broad are these few words, The Lord shall be my God. The Covenant
Engagement which our Infants are brought under in their Baptism, is this in the
Text, The Lord shall be my God.

OUR Children should be early taught this, and often admonished of it by their
parents; and as they grow up should be put on a serious preparation to take
this Vow upon themselves, and make it their own Act.

IT should be the care of parents early to instruct their Children in the
Covenant Bonds to God which they are under, and to charge them with the serious
remembrance of them, and to prepare as they grow up to recognize the same. The
mother of Solomon did so by him; she taught him that he was the son of her
vows, and under a holy dedication to God.

AND as Children arrive at Years of understanding, the first thing that should
be prepared for, and seriously done by them is this, the taking their Baptismal
Covenant on themselves, and giving themselves up to God.

IT was your Parents Act in your Baptism, and they did well to bring you to God
in his appointed Way, and under his holy Bonds: they had right, power and
authority to do as they did; they did but their Duty to God and to you: they
can oblige you in other things, and cannot they in this, that the Lord shall be
your God? they can Act for you in your name to Men, and bind you for your good;
and why not to God? The Mother of Samuel vowed him to God before he was
conceived within her; and he religiously stood to her Act.

OUR Children owe it to God and to their Parents, and to the Church of Christ,
to abide by their Baptism, and join themselves to the Lord in an everlasting
Covenant, by their own Act and Deed. In this, if in any thing they obey their
parents in the Lord; and wherein can they more profanely and impiously despise
and refuse to obey them, than if they abide not by the Covenant Dedication that
they made of them to God from their Birth-Could your Parents do better for you
than they did? or can you do better for your selves than to stand to their
pious Act in your behalf, and in obedience to God who gave you to them? If they
did ill by thee you shall not be obliged by it; but if well, why should you
depart from it?

CAN there be a more direct Way to the great End of thy Being, (the Glory of
God from thee, in thy own everlasting Happiness) than thy kaprismal Decication
from the Womb, and thy early Recogaition thereof, in uprightness and with
solemnity? Thy Savior was so circumcised and preseated in the Temple according
to the Law, and at twelve Years old he went up with his parents to the
Passover: And wist you not that you too should be betimes about your heavenly
Father's Business, and careful for your own Souls Salvation? remembering your
Creator in the Days of your youth, and secking him early?

OUR baptized Children are obliged actually, formally and explicitly, to assent
and consent to the Covenant of Grace when they come to years; to choose the Lord
to serve him, and let them refuse at their peril! it were Atheism, blasphemy
and rebellion in them to reject their Fathers God and despise his Covenant; and
it were Damnation to them to do it. Yet it is fitting to put it (...) them, as
Joshua did to Israel; Josh. 24.14, 15. Now therefore fear ye the Lord, and
serve him in sincerity and in truth; and if it seem evil to you, choose you this
day whom you will serve. So Moses when he was come to (...). ((...) and
seriously (...) in the Knowledge of God and of his Covenant) (...) to be called
the Son of (...) Daughter, casting his lot among the People of God. He
renounced the Gods of the Egyptians and their Idolatries, and the Treasures of
Egypt also, and its Dignities; and as became a Son of Jacob made his Vows to
the Lord God of Israel.

HERE I will choose to propose, and make some Answer to these three Enquiries.
1. What is the meaning of this sacred Word and Act, the Lord shall be my God's
2. How should our Children come into it? 3. Why should they do so?


1. WHAT is the meaning of this sacred Word and Act; the Lord shall be my God?
I answer, briefly and in general; (for my time will not allow me to branch our
into particulars and enlarge on them)

TO say unto God that He shall be our God implies, 1. A Confession of his
rightful propriety in us, and Dominon over us, and our indispensable obligation
to be his, only and wholly, for ever to worship, obey and glorify him. 2. It
supposes to be sure a rejection and abjuration of all things besides God; our
selves and the flesh, the world and the devil, the service of Sin and Satan,
and all false Gods especially, and false Worship. 3. It implies the dedication
and consecration of our selves unto the service glory and enjoyment of the Lord
Jehovah, Father, Son and Blessed Spirit; as our Creator, Savior Sanctifier;
our Owner, Ruler, Lawgiver. Benefactor, Judge, supreme End, and Portion. 4. It
implies a free, and full, and deliberate consent and submission to the whole
will, and law and Covenant of God revealed and proposed to us in his written
Word; and that with full purpose of heart we will walk in his ways, trust in
his grace and hope in his mercy.


IN a Word, For us to say, The Lord shall be my God, is 1. To take him to be to
us all that which he is in himself unto his reasonable Creatures, and all that
which in his word and Covenant, through Jesus Christ, he tenders himself to be
unto perishing penitent Sinners: And 2. It is to hind our own Souls that we
will be to God, his grace helping us, all that which his Word requires of us;
and this from henceforth, constantly and for evermore.


WELL then. Have we ever said thus to the Lord, Thou art and shall be my God!
Can we, do we, will we say it? Or rather, have we not said it in our Baptism,
and some of us at the Table of Christ? Do we not say it in our solema
worshipping of God from time to time, in public and in private? Have we on any
singular Occasions said thus to God, under the impressions of mercies shown us,
or in the pursuit of them? or in our griefs and sorrows, fears and dangers? Or
should we not say to God as they, Josh. 24.24. We are witnesses that we have
chosen the Lord our God to serve him: The Lord our God we will serve, and his
voice we will obey? Psalm. 48.14. This God is our God for ever and ever; be
shall be our guide even to death? Psalm. 119.57. Thou art my portion, O Lord, I
said that I will keep thy word. And let our children now say, Psalm. 122.20.
Thou art my God from my mother's belly: And Exodus 15.2. He is my God, and I
will prepare him an habitation, my father's God, and I will exalt him.

2. BUT secondly. How should our young people come into this sacred word and
act; to say, The Lord shall be my God?

I ANSWER, 1. To be sure not reshly, suddenly, lightly, and without serious
consideration of the thing, and preparation for it; and some good grounds to
hope that God has given us a heart to say it in a right manner. Our danger is
rashness, and youth is prone to be sudden and confident. Let Solomor's Caution
therefore be ever kept in mind, and ly with weight upon us, Eccl. 5. 2. Be not
rash with thy mouth to utter any thing before God, and in vowing to him. Be
sensible and fearful of thy wicked and deceitful heart, and jealous over thy
self with a godly jealousy.


THEREFORE, 2. Be very serious, deliberate, solemn in a transaction of this
nature; consider of it, and pray over it, and continue in prayer: Implore the
Divine Grace to make thee upright and keep thee so; commit thy self to it, and
make trial of thy self if thy heart abide with God, if his Spirit in his
blessed Influences be with thee; and after some happy experience hereof, in a
growing humility for sin, watch against it, desires after holiness, delight in
prayer, meditation, and reading God's word, and a fixed purpose of heart
(trusting in God) to govern your self by it all your days, you may humbly
renew your Vows to God, and your Covenant with him. And 1. Do it very seriously
in secret before the Lord; and 2. Openly and solemnly before the people of God.

1. VERY seriously in secret; after much prayer, and some good time of
experience, and reason to hope that thy heart is sincere with God; as I said
before. Enter then into thy closet, and fall on thy knees before thy Father
which sees in secret: Beg of him to accept of thee in Christ, to possess thee
by his Spirit, to sanctify thee to his service and glory, to seal to thee the
pardon of sin, to shed abroad of his love in thy soul, to make thee fear
always; to search thee and know thy heart, to try thee and know thy thoughts,
and see if there be any wicked thing in thee, and to lead thee in the way
everlasting. And having done this seriously in secret, then

2. PROCEED to do it openly, in public, in the face of the World: Go to thy
Pastor, who is required by Christ to feed his lambs, lay open thy reader and
honest heart before him, receive with reverence his instructions, counsel and
advice in the matter, his admonitions and charges from God; let him receive thy
professions and lay them before the Church of Christ; and join (yea give) thy
self to the people of God, choosing them for thy people, and their God for thy
God.

THIS was the primitive way, 2 Cor. 8.5. They first gave their own selves to
the Lord, and to us by the will of God.

AFTER this manner our Fathers, in these Churches of our Lord Jesus, from the
beginning of this land, first took the Lord to be their God, and then gave
their Posterity to him; taking the Scripture for their rule and directory in
this matter; and we arise and declare it to our children, that they might set
their hope in God, and do his Commands. We would call upon them and change them
as David did his Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. And thou Solomon my Son, know thou
the God of thy father, and serve him, etc. And we take comfort in those of our
children, who in the manner before described have given, or do give themselves
to the Lord, as their God. And now I suppose I need not spend many more words
upon the third thing proposed, which is,

3. TO give some reasons why our young people should betimes prepare for this
very serious transaction with God? For surely nothing can be more just, nothing
more necessary. Had your parents never gone before you, to lead you and oblige
you in this thing, yet in point of duty and interest it had been incumbent on
you. There must needs be an eternal and unchangeable Obligation on the
reasonable Creature, to say unto the GOD that made him, to rule and govern him,
The Lord shall homy God. It is a law written on every heart of man, and graven
in our rational natures; thy Conscience bears witness to this, and thy thoughts
approve it, and render thee a law to thy self in this matter. Thy Obligation to
it is instant and perpetual, and nothing can release thee from it. Turn thy
thoughts any way thou will, you can sind nothing against what has been
proposed, but every thing is for it.

CAN any thing be more reasonable, righteous, grateful from thee, than to say
of and unto the Lord, thy Maker, Preserver, Father, Benefactor, The Lord shall
be my God? can any thing be more honorable to thee, than to be allowed this?
Can any thing be more beneficial to thee than this wise and good Act? whereby
you put your self betimes in the way of God's favor, care, grace and blessing?
Can you act better for Soul or Body? for your temporal, spiritual, or eternal
selicity? Or can any thing be more injurious and detrimental to thee, than the
neglect of God thy Maker and Judge? which he justly interprets a renouncing of
him, and will re venge accordingly, by an utter rejection of them that take him
not for their God! Why should you, a Son of Adam who was the Son of God, go out
like Cain from the presence of the Lord, and run into the everlasting
destruction from the presence of his glory. Finally, consider the dishonor and
injury done to Christ, by thee a baptized Child of his house, if you do not
early lay hold of the better Covenant, and promises in him, purchased by his
blood, published in his Gospel, and sealed to thee in the Sacraments of
Christianity: Through him it is that God is now ready to be thy God, and to
receive thee graciously and love thee freely. You despise the riches of grace
in Christ, and trample under foot the blood of the Everlasting Covenant, if
your Soul does not consent to and close with the God of Abraham, the Father of
our Lord Jesus, saying to him, The Lord shall be my God. We are under the last
dispensation of the Covenant, a dispensation of the clearest light and grace;
whereof the Holy Ghost spoke by the Prophet, In those days I will make a new
Covenant with the House of Israel. The blessings of this sure and well ordered
Covenant are importunately tendered to you and urged upon you from your
infancy, and the terms thereof explained, the way of holiness laid plain before
you; the word is nigh thee before thy eyes and in thy ears daily, and what
can thou say, or how will thou escape, if you neglect and contemn so great
Salvation.

THUS I have shown that we are under the Covenant and vow of God from our
Infancy, and that it is this in short, that the Lord shall be our God: I have
hinted the Import of this Covenant Engagement, and the reasons why, as well as
the manner wherein our Children as they grow up with us, should renew their
baptismal Covenant: It remains yet in the 4th Place, to add,

4. THAT it may be a very proper season and time, for our Children (seriously
disposed and rightly prepared (to do this, when the Providence of God calls
them to leave their father's house and go forth into the World. This was
Jacob's case in the text, and as it becomes yours, God give you his heart and
spirit. Every thing is beautiful in its season, and this Act of devotion is
truly so at such a season. For the World you are going into is an Enemy to God
and to religion; but this frame and Act of Jacob shall help to guard you
against and save you from its temptations and snares; as it did Joseph (the
beloved Son of Jacob, the heir of his grace and good Spirit) who remembered his
father's God when he was sold and carried away, and kept his Covenant, and the
God of his Father was with him and blessed him, and made all that he did to
prosper. So do thou stand to the Covenant of God, and commend thy self to his
special providential care, and Covenant kindness; and though you may not see with
your eyes the Angels of God, and his hosts when you need them, yet you may be
sure they will be near thee, to bear thee up in their arms; to minister to thee
in troubles, and to defend thee in danger, of to gather thee in their arms for
Abraham's bosom.

IN a word, 1. Nothing will so much propare you for worldly prosperity if God
give it, as thy stodfast abiding by the Covenant of God. The favors of
Providence shall come in mercy to thee, they will be used unto the service of
God and to his glory, God will be enjoyed in 'em, and a little thus sanctisied
is better than all riches. Yea, 2. This shall propare you also for all the
crosses, troubles, and afflictions that may abide you in your way; as Jacob and
Joseph well (...): You will submit to the Government of a Grout God and a
Gracious Savior in them; you will find the good of them, and a good end of
them, and God will be glorified by you. You will keep your heart and eye up to
God, and his will be on you; you will ever be looking through time into Eremity,
and your present afflictions will seem to you light, and but for a moment,
working out for you the far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.


AND so I have run through the first Doctrine, which was, That young people as
they grow up under the roof of their parents, and under the admonitions of the
word of God, and before or as they leave their fathers house and go forth into
the world, should be able and prepared seriously to renew their Covenant with
God, and avouch the Lord Jehovah to be their God.

I SHALL be shorter in the other Dectrines, which are as it were the
Application of this, and may be received by you as Directions upon it.

DOCT. II. THAT in making this Vow to God (if he incline and enable you to do
it) as you grow up in your parents houses, or are leaving the same, you must
earnestly implore and humbly confide in the special presence, favor and grace
of God to be with you, and keep you in the way that you go. If God will be with
me, said Jacob, and keep me in this way that I go.
IN which words he implores the special providential presence of God with him;
and not only so, but his spiritual presence also, and the keeping of God's
grace; and indeed commits himself thereunto, puts his trust therein, casts
himself upon it, for guidance, protection and blessing, and for influence,
sanctification, and perseverance in duty and obedience: And God said not to
him, seek to me, trust in me, in vain.

NO more will he to any of the believing, praying seed of Israel, who set him
always before them, and whose spirits are steadfast with him: Who ever eye him
in his governing Providence, ordering and disposing every thing that befalls
them; and in every thing by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving make
their requests known unto him; who rely on him for conduct, safety and success
in their affairs, and ascribe all they receive to him; who thus daily are
giving glory to him, and staying themselves on him; who thus keep up a constant
communion with God under every providence, prosperous or adverse; walking
humbly with him, and with a perfect heart before him, as the almighty and
alsufficient God. For as he once said to Abraham, so does he to every son of
Abraham by faith, Genesis 17.1. I am God Almighty, walk before me and be thou
perfect, and I will make my covenant between me and the: And again, Genesis 15.1.
Fear not, Abraham, I am thy shield and thy exceeding great reward.

WHEREFORE, commit thy self to his Providence and Grace, as thou enterest on,
and passest through an evil world of sin and trouble; beg his divine presence
with thee; trust in his grace, hope in his mercy, and keep his way, that he may
keep thee through the world, keep thee from the evil. So Isaac called Jacob in my
Context, and blessed him, committing him to the Providence and Grace of a
Covenant God; and happy is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, whose
hope is in the Lord his God, which made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that
therein is, which keeps truth for ever, and reigns God over all, to all
generations, Psalm. 146.

THE God of Jacob will be the God of every praying Jabez, and give him his
request: 1 Chronicles. 4.10. And Jabez called upon the God of Israel, saying, O that
thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that thy hand may be
with me, and that thou would keep me from evil. Thus implore and confide in
the presence of a gracious God, depend on it, ascribe to it, for thou art not
at all sufficient for thy self.

BUT I come to the third and last Doctrine.

DOCT. III. THAT as you are outring upon the Stage of this world, the gracious
God permits and allows you to bring into your Vows before him, those temporal
favors and blessings which you are in the lawful pursuit of; provided it be
done with a moderation of desire toward them, submission to the will of God
respeding them, and with a resolution (through his grace) to adhere unto his
covenant, worship and service, in the acquisition, and in the enjoyment of them.
THIS is the life and spirit of my Text, If God will be with me, and will give
me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my father's
house in peace How good is God to his Children, that he gives them leave as it
were to indent with him! Our heavenly father knows that we have need of these
things. But then how devoted should we be, and that wholly, to his will and
glory! how abstracted from the things of this life, and intent upon the
spiritual and eternal blessings of that to come; knowing that in heaven we have
a better and enduring substance. The rule to us is, to seek first the Kingdom
of God and his righteousness; and the promise is then, that God will add other
things so as shall be best for us. And to him we trust leave it, to choose and
order for us our lot; believing that we shall be fed, and being content in what
God sees fit to give us.

HERE then, I. You may bring the tempoval mercies, which you are in the honest
and lawful pursuit of, into your vows to God upon particular Occasions. The
present Circumstance of good Jacob, led him at this time to insert in the
Indenture he now signed, food and clothing, guidance and protection in this
journey, his father's life, and his own return in peace, in which was inoladed
too safety and delive:ance from his brother's anger and vowed revenge: And God
indulged him in this liberty. It was as when a son asks bread of his father;
and shall he not give it? So Jephtha vowed to God, if he would give him Victory
over his Enemies. And when Arad the Canaanite came out against Israel, Israel
vowed to the Lord and said, If thou will deliver this people into my band, I
will utterly destroy their cities. And to name no more, Hannah being in carnest
prayer for a Son, vowed to the Lord, and said, O Lord of Hosts, if thou will
indeed look upon my affliction. These are great liberties and freedoms indulged
us by a gracious God, which we must use with great caution and wisdom; for it
is easy to err in them. Wherefore,

2. IT must be with a moderation of desire after the temporal blessings, and a
submission of our wills to God with respect to them, that we may bring them
into our vows to God, when we are in the pursuit of them. Indeed Hannah's
desire after a Son seems not to have been with all that moderation which one
would choose and praise; yet her zeal for God's honor and service in the midst
of her tears for a child is obvious to observe, and her entire submission of
the thing to God, O Lord of Hosts if thou will indeed. But the moderation of
Jacob's wishes after a worldly Estate is more illustrious in my Text. Let him
be our pattern; let us be modest, and humble, and plain like him; he neither
craved nor expected great matters on earth; he willingly left the worldly
Inheritance and Lordship to Esau: If he may be but preserved abroad and brought
home in peace, if he may have the necessaries and conveniences of life added to
the spiritual blessing, (...) should satisfy him. Or if God should deny even
this we must think we have enough, that we have all and are full, if the Lord
himself will but be our God. Indeed we are then fittest to have temporal
blessings, and in the most likely way to have them, when our hearts are not set
upon them, but are intently fixed upon spiritual and eternal things, an unseen
God and heaven: And if we could so enter and begin the World, we should find it
to be so, I doubt not. But how more a thing is it, now in these ages of the
world, though the ages of more light and of better promises, to begin the world
with faith, and spiritual affections and desires. We have no rule to expect
from God in temporal things, if we cannot submit 'em to his will and subordinate
them all to his glory. Say, if the Lord will, and if it may be for his glory
from me, and my spiritual Good and everlasting happiness in him: If not, behold
here I am, let him do what seems him good.

3. YOU must add upon all, a holy and devout resolution, by the grace of God,
to adhere unto the Covenant, the worship, and service of God, in the
acquisition, in the use and enjoyment, or in the want of worldly things. And
here you have the whole Soul of Jacob and of my text, to form yours by it. He
adds therefore upon it, This stone which I have set for a pillar shall be God's
house, and of all that thou shall give me I will surely give the tenth to thee.

HERE, first he resolves to adhere to the worship of God; God should have an
Altar furnished with Sacrifices, where ever he should pitch his Tent: As for
him and his they should serve the Lord. And therefore 2. He makes the
consecration of his Estate and worldly goods with himself; the Tenth of all
that God should give him he dedicates to God, in services of piety and charity:
And that this is for ever a due and meet proportion out of our Estates, to
God's Church and to his poor together, seems much the more Evident to me from
the Example of Abraham and of Jacob, so long before the giving of the Law of
Moses.

IN this at least let us approve our selves the seed of Jacob, by fixing this
as a law and rule to our selves through our whole life; That whatever God does
with us as to this world, whether he gives us more or less of it, He himself
shall be our God; whom we will portion our selves in, and live devoted unto; to
obey him and worship him according to his word all our days, and to honor him
with a (...) and worthy part of out estate.

AND now, what remains but in a particular manner to apply my self, and all
that I have said, to the SON of this Family, who gave me these words of the
Patriarch Jacob to speak from, for his own present Instruction and Admonition.
I have done the part you desired of me as God has helped me: You must now do
your part, by the help of God, in receiving and improving what has been said.
You are sensible that you were brought under the Vow and bond of God in your
Infancy, and it is this which you have given me to speak of, That the Lord
shall be your God. You were early taught this, and have been earnestly
admonishest of it, as well at home (I suppose) as from the Pulpit. You have
something more than two years past solemnly taken this Vow upon your self and
made it to the Lord before his people; And now that you are leaving your
Parents house, and going abroad into the world you have asked our prayers to
God with you, and that this Word of God might be preached unto you; by which it
appears to me that you think the holy God calls you on this Occasion to
remember seriously and revow the Dedication and Surrender of your self to Him,
Imploring his divine presence with you in the way before you, to guide and keep
you. And now, my Son, the Lord be with thee and prosper thee. The God before
whom Jacob walked be with you, as one of his Spiritual Seed. Ask Grace of God
to do as be did. Be diligent in your lawful Business, and faithful to those
that employ you: Jacob was so. Moderate your desires after worldly wealth; as
Jacob here did. Remember your Country and the religion of it, the Doctrine,
precepts, and worship of God you have been educated in, and have found (I hope)
the presence of Christ in. Desire to return to it, by the will of God and in
his time, to serve and enjoy God in it; and be a Blessing to it. Let a tender
filial piety toward your good Mother, (under whose careful wing you have grown
up, and to (...) you are very dear) have its proper rule in you, both now and
when you are abroad. We join her and your Prayers this day to God, that you may
come again to this house in peace, and that if God please she may live to see
it. She is making her Vows with you this day to God for this mercy. You may
find God prospering you in your Affairs, as Jacob did, but let not that keep
you from returning to the land of thy Eathers and of thy kindred. Or you may
meet with hardships, injuries and wrongs, as Jacob did; let these hasten you
home, as they did him. If any Laban reproach thy longing after thy father's
house and the House of God here, regard it not. But if it please God to be with
you in your way and bring you again in peace, according to your present prayer
before him, take heed that you no not seem to forget, or at all delay the
paying of thy Vow, as Jacob did. God keep it in thy mind, and put thee in
remembrance of it, as He did him; and upon his doing so, be thou obedient to
the Heavenly motion as he was, Genesis 35. (...), 3. And God said unto Jacob,
Arise, go up to Bethel and dwell there, and make there an Altar to God that
appeared unto thee. Then Jacob said unto his household, and to all that were
with him, Let us arise and go up to Bethel; and I will make there an Altar unto
God, who answered me in the day of my distress, and was with (...) in the way
which I want.

FINIS.

