The day of a godly Man's DEATH, Better than the day of his BIRTH, SHOWED In a
SERMON, Preached, Feb. 25, 1722.

By Thomas Foxcroft, Pastor to a Church in Boston.

Act. 26 22. Having obtained help of God I continue unto this day. -- 2 Cor. 5
4. We that are in this tabernacle do groan, being burdened: -- Phil. 1. 23
Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better. Dies
mortis, aeternae vitae Natalis.

-- (...) bonorum -- Nascitur.

BOSTON in New England: Printed by B. GREEN. 1722.

TO THE READER.
THE faithful Ministers of our Lord Jesus Christ (...) built on the Foundation
of the Apostles and Prophets; and are to be followers of there in respect of
their Doctrine and Example: Preaching the great Truths of GOD; speaking His
Word faithfully; practicing agreeably themselves; and using all the wisest and
best Methods possible that their Hearers why likewise (...) Doers of the Word
--. And as it was the (...) practice of the Prophets and Apostles, (many of
them at least) to Pen and put on standing record some of their respired (...)
(whether Epistles or Sermons) to their People; that by this means they might be
able after their Decease to have them always in remembrance: So it is but a
just Conformity to those excellent patterns, when the ordinary (...) of the
Gospel (...) publish in print such Treatises (...) are agreeable to the Words
of the Wise, those Masters in Israel, and e^spire with them in (...) the (...)
glorious and blessed (...). And truly next to the holy and inspired Scriptures
those (...) are the best and most valuable (not which most (...) with wit and
learning; but) which are profitable for instruction in righteousness. and
calculated to make men wise unto Salvation, to promote the Kingdom of Christ
and (...) the great Interests of Religion. And when (...) to be the (...) of
every Christian, no well mean^ (though weak) (...) are to be despised; or of they
be so, this must (...) from (...) and cheerfully using our talent and putting
to (...), however (...). And since every (...) being serviceable are so very
short and uncertain, (...) quicken (...) to the earliest and most (...) of
there, as becomes those that expect (...) long to give (...) to the Judge of
(...). I shall not therefore ((...) some probably (...) there is (...) enough
for (...) other (...) of (...) at any time. I (...) into a (...), that Authors
are fond of their own performances; and it may be not unjustly (...), too many
write (...) to spread their own fame, than to advance the Reader's profit;
loving the praise of man, rather than the praise of God. But I can truly say,
as I have not the (...) to wise or hope to obtain Applause by any Performances
of (...); so much less can it be supposed. I am acted by such a (...) in (...)
to the Public the following plain practical Sermon; (Meditated with a special
reference to some personal circumstances of my own, though accommodated also to
further the common Education) drawn up in a very small time, without the least
(...) of it is appearing in Priest, and now Published from my (...)
untranscribed Notes, (with only some few Additions, especially toward the
(...)) whence it (...) needs be attended with (...) defects and disadvantages.
It is therefore not without some (...) that I suffer so (...) a (...), th^^
unfinished, to appear a (...) in this curious (I had about said, censorious)
Age (...) forbear making many excuses, since it is not (...) to gratify the
(...) of the Vain, but chiefly (...) and (...) of the humble; and lest I sold
(...) judgment of such as have been (...), it might for the light; (...) on the
other hand, I have (...) making many (...) to method or language where it might
seem (...) any meant (...) the (...) of such as were (...) in the Reaching. I
hope the Reader's Benefit is what (...) and really (...), above the Writer's
Credit; (...) the expected censure of captious Criti^ks, (...) my pious
Friends, who see (...) to (...) the (...) their generous approbation of a plain
Discourse. Blessed be GOD, who was pleased to own it, and give it any
acceptance and influence, when delivered from the Pulpit! May (...) Blessing
(which alone can give the Increase) (...) follow it, now it is Published from
the ^^ess; that the good impressions (...) in the hearing, man be renewed and
increased in the (...) and that it may become (...) beautiful by it is (...)
Appearance. In which petitions, I (...) Christian, (...) may full, (...) beauty
(...) GOD, for me: who (...) and less than

The least of all Saints, T. Foxcroft,
(...)
The day of a godly Man's DEATH, Better than the day of his BIRTH.
ECCL. VII. I. A good Name is better than precious Ointment: and the day of
Death, than the day of one's Birth.
THE main scope of the royal Preacher in this sacred book (written in his
advanced years, and the product of great thought, as well as long experiment)
is to correct many false sentiments, two common, th^' very foolish, concerning
the chief good, and the (...) to human happiness; and to give us plain and
(...) fallible direction in this great pursuit. Here he has laid together an
admirable variety of just and wise and useful observations; many of which run
counter to some of the received Notions of Mankind, and at first view do not a
little surprise and shock our Minds; but upon an impartial consideration they
approve themselves to our enlightened reason, and challenge our belief and
entertainment of them, as true and faithful sayings. He largely and clearly
proves the vanity of this World; the vileness of Sin; the wisdom, excellency
and manifold advantages of Religion, and the necessity of being religious in
order to being happy.

THUS in our Text, He observes to us, that the honor of virtue is preferable
to all the enjoyments of this World: and that going out of this World is to the
godly Man a greater kindness, Henry, in (...).
than his coming into the World was.

A good Name is better than precious Ointment: Under this phrase here of
precious Ointment, are comprehended all the riches, pleasures, and honors of
the present World. In a good Name is implied true solid religion; the reality,
as well as a reputation for it.

AND the Words carry in them this great truth, That a deserved good Name, or
just character for wisdom and piety, is really more valuable, than all the
pomp, and pleasures, and profits of this transitory World. A good Name is what
all, that have any sense of decency or humanity, do put a high estimate upon,
and rate even next unto Life: but to deserve a good Name is in truth more to be
valued and desired than Life it self. To be divinely Wise and Good, is
unspeakably better, than to be worldly great and rich Wisdom and Goodness are
essential to our true happiness; but wealth and grandeur are not. The meanest
Beggar, that has, and meriteth a good Name, is infinitely happier, than the
greatest Monarch upon Earth without it. Indeed the unthinking part of Mankind
do call the proud happy: and there is a vulgar saying, Better be happy than
wise; but this is none of Solomon's Proverbs; for ^e tells us, Wisdom ^s the
principal thing; and Better (says he) is a poor and wise Child, than an old and
foolish King, however great in dignity, or mighty in power. The good Man finds
in the ways of religion the most solid pleasures, and obtains the truest
honors, and durable riches. He is rich toward GOD, a Favorite of Heaven, and
entitled to an Inheritance in Light, a Kingdom of Glory; and when called out
of this World, receives an open and abundant entrance thereinto. He then leaves
behind him the Memory of the Just, which is blessed: He leaves his deceased
body to take it is sweet rest in the unactive and impassible Grave, as in a bed
of ease and honor, till the bright Morning of the Resurrection; while his
better part, the immortal Spirit within him, in the moment of his dissolution
returns to GOD, it is great Creator, Redeemer and Judge; into whose hand the
departing Saint resigned it, and by whom it is received to Glory.

HENCE from these blessed prospects of faith, the wise Preacher adds that noble
passage, (the latter clause in our Text, and which only is designed to employ
our present Meditations,) -- The day of Death is better than the day of one^s
Birth. He speaks of bodily Death, and of natural Birth. He sets these two
extreme points, one over against the other, without regarding the intermediate
space; as if there was no more in the World, (so vain a thing he judged it,)
but a time to be born, and a time to die. And (which is a paradox to foolish
Sensualists) the latter he votes the more happy period. Not indeed that Death
merely in a natural and irrespective sense, is better than one's nativity: Nor
that it is preferrible with respect to all men, the bad as well as good: No;
for to the wicked, Death is the King of Terrors; the beginning of never-ending
Sorrows; the dark entry, into blackness of darkness; the wages of Sin, and the
gate of Hell. As for them that die in their sins, it were better for such, if
they had never been born. -- The Expression then must be understood in a
restrained and qualified sense. It is not every one, but the godly man alone,
that is here spoken of, the man of a good Name, the man of Wisdom. The Day of
such an one's death, is better to him, than the Day of his Birth. Though as to
others there was Joy when Child was born into the World and where there is
Death there (...) Lamentation; Henry, in (...).
yet as to our selves (that are called to die.) if we have so lived as truly to
merit a good Name, the day of our Death is better than the day of our Birth.

THIS then is the Lesson of Wisdom, now to be explained and applied; viz.

THAT to a godly Person, the day of his Death is (all things considered)
abundantly better than the day of his Birth

DEATH in a physical consideration is a dissolution of the vital union between
Soul and Body; and so is a terrible Evil, very shocking to humane nature. And
it is yet much more horrible, considered in a theological sense, as a fruit of
the curse and the rouges of sin. Absolutely and simply considered, It is an
evil, and an awful rebuke to mankind, having no goodness or worth in it. But
relatively to Believers, and in respect of the consequent state which it is a
preface to, it is formidable aspect is changed, So or an enemy it becomes a
friend: the curse being happily converted into a blessing. So that for the
Believer to die, is Gain. The wicked indeed are great ^osers; but the godly are
unspeakable gainers by their dissolution. The advantages that accrue to them by
Death, are infinitely preferrible to those which come to them by their Birth,
and in their Life here.

THIS assertion in the Text is contrary indeed to the opinion of almost all
mankind, who look upon the day of birth as a day of joy and gladness, and
celebrate their own or Childrens and Friends birthdays with solemn feasts and
rejoycings: whereas they look on the day of death as a melancholy mournful
time, Pool in loc.
and so^emnize the funerals of others with all expressions of sorrow, and
entertain the prospect and approach of their own Death with fear and trembling.

HOWEVER it is a truth with respect to the Children of God, that their
Death-day is infinitely preferrible to their Birthday, all Circumstances and
Consequences of both considered: and this will evidently appear, if we run the
comparison in a few particulars; all which I shall reduce under those two
general heads:

1. DEATH delivers the Saints from those many Evils, which their birth was
accompanied with, or laid them open unto.

2. AT Death the Saints exchange the Gools of the present life and world (which
their birth entered them into) for infinitely better Enjoyments.

1. AT Death the Saints are delivered from the many Evils, which their birth
was accompanied with, or opened the way unto. The day of death puts an end to
all those sufferings and miseries, which their birth was the introduction to,
or attended with.

1. THEY were born in Sin: but at Death they are discharged from all sin and
moral pollution. The Saints were born in sin, as well as others. Hence that
Confession of the Psalmist, the man after GOD's own heart, in Psalm. 51. 5.
Behold, I was shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me. And
agreeably we read, in Ezekiel. 16. 3, etc. Th^^ says the Lord to Jerusalem, Thy
birth and thy nativity is of the Land of Canaan, thy father was at Amorite, and
thy mother an Hittite. And as for thy nativity, in the day that thou wast born
--, tho^ wast cast out in the open field, to the lothing of (...) person, --
polluted in thine own blood. -- And now this moral pollution adheres in part
even to the Regenerate, so long as they continue in this life. Hence that groan
and exclamation of the Apostle, (personating the Saint, as he is generally
understood) Romans 7. 24. O wretched man that I am who shall deliver me from the
body of this death! -- In Regeneration there is a mortal wound given to this
body of Sin in the Elect; but still the Principle remains in them; all their
life-long they find a law of sin in their members, warring against the law of
holiness in their minds; and after all their weeping and praying and striving
against sin, they cannot get rid of this vexatious In-mate, while in the present
world: Yea, they are often led aside, and led captive by this Enemy and Traitor
within. There is not a just man upon earth, that d^^th good and ^inneth not:
but in many things they all offend; and even when they would do good, evil is
present with them.

BUT what a happy Change will Death infer! Death will discharge Believers from
all the remains of Sin in them, will purge out every corruption, and perfectly
mortify every lust; and will bring them under a blessed Impeccability, or a
happy necessity of being completely holy. Death dissolves the earthly
Tabernacle, and so it is cleansed wholly from the Leprosy that was cleaving to
it. The body of sin is left behind with the body of flesh. After Death the
Believer shall be perfectly sinless, spotless, and unblemishable. There shall
not be the least possible vanity in his thoughts, or irregularity in his will,
or saint in his affections, either with respect to GOD or Creatures.

AND this surely argues the day of the Believer's death, to be better than the
day of his birth. For Sin is the w^^st of Evils; most subversive of the
perfection of our nature, and destructive of our real happiness. It is then a
blessed and glorious Change which is made at Death, and of ineffable advantage
to the Believer; when he is delivered from this pernicious evil.

2. THEY were (...) in a state of Ignorance and (...); but (...) of (...)
remain after Death. Man is born as the wild Asses Colt; without understanding,
like the Beasts, which perish; without the knowledge of the Holy One; having his
mind darkened, and his eyes blinded by the God of this World, the Prince of
darkness, that rules in the hearts of the Children of disobedience. This is
man's natural state. Now in Conversion the Elect are delivered out of the
Kingdom of darkness, and bro't into marvelious light. The eyes of their
understandings are opened, and the rays of divine Discoveries shine into them.
They are made to know GOD, and JESUS CHRIST whom he had sent; and have revealed
to them many mysteries of the Kingdom; which things are spiritually discerned
by them and by none else. However their Knowledge, a^ as well as Holiness, in
this life is very imperfect. But in the life that is to come, their Knowledge
shall be infinitely elevated. 1 Cor. 13. 9, -- 12. For (...) know in part, and
we prophecy in part. But when that which is perfect is come, then that which
is in part shall be done away. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I
understood as a child, I thought as a child: but when I became a man, I put
away childist things. For now we see through a glass, darkly; (...) then face
to face: now I know in part; but then shall I know even as also I am known. The
most knowing Saints in this world, are but Children in under standing. There
are a great many things which they are utterly ignorant of. A great many thing
which they know not the particular reasons nor the special ends of; and a great
many things which they know not the modus or manner of. And the knowledge, which
they have of any thing, is as (...) the degree very imperfect, scanty, and
shallow. It is of short compass; and little depth. But in the future State,
their knowledge shall be perfected, when the eyes of their bodies shall be
closed, the eyes of their Souls will be opened; all clouds shall (...) away,
all scales fall off; and no ignorance, darkness, doubt, or error about any
thing, remain in their illuminated understandings. This World (...) in
darkness; But Heaven is a Land of Light, glorious Light. There the Saints shall
see clearly into all the Secrets of Nature, the Riddles of Providence, the
Depths of Satan, the Mysteries of Godliness, the Wonders of redeeming love, and
the hidden things of the invisible Regions. They shall have bright
manifestations and disclosures made to them of the Divine Nature, Perfections,
Persons, Works, etc. and perhaps of many more Attributes, as well as Works,
than now we have any notice of. When the Saints die, they as 'twere pass out of
obscure darkness into the open light, most sweet and pleasant. A far more
glorious change they feel, than the man born blind perceived, whose eyes our
Savior opened, to behold the Heavens and the Earth, with all their glories and
pleasancies, which he never before had seen. The light arises to them with a
ravishing luster, beauty, and surprise; it breaks forth as the morning (after a
black and stormy night) fair and without a cloud; and shining brighter and
brighter, to the perfect day of the Resurrection: when it shall receive
astonishing advances; the light of the moon becoming as the light of the sun,
and the light of the sun, becoming seven sold, as the light of seven days. As
much then as Light excels darkness; so much does the day of a godly man's
death, excel the day of his birth.

3. THEY were born under the Wrath of GOD, and in a state of Condemnation: but
they die in the Favor of GOD, and in a state of (...). They were by nature
Children of wrath, even as others, Ephesians. 2. 3. The whole world is guilty before
GOD. All mankind are born under the Sentence of death, under the curse of the
divine Law; liable to the severest strokes of GOD's revenging Justice, and
being the just objects of his utter abhorrence; having all his Attributes armed
in opposition to them, clothed with vengeance, and looking with an angry
menacing eye upon them.

BUT now Believers ( being found in Christ, not having on their own
righteousness, but that which is of God by faith) die in the embraces of divine
kindness. They fall asleep in Jesus: They die there fore in a justified estate,
free from the condemning power of the law, and interested in the special favor
of GOD; being the heirs of his love, as (...) reconciled Father; having the
gladsome light of his Countenance (many times sensibly) shining into their
Souls; and every Divine Attribute speaking peace, and sweetly smiling upon
them. As much then as the Favor of GOD ( which is better that life,) is more
desirable than his Wrath, (which is worse than death,) so much preferable is
the day of a Believer's death to the day of his birth.

4. THEY were born in a state of bondage and servitude: They die in a state of
liberty and triumph Sin has degraded and sunk men into a state of the vilest
slavery and most ignominious drudgery. They are the born-slaves of Satan, he
rules in their hearts, and leads them captive in their natural Condition at his
will. Satan conquered (...) in Paradise: and all his natural Posterity are
therefore by right of conquest under his dominion: And Oh! what more deplorable
calamity, than to be under bondage to Satan, our great Adversary? What worse
plague than to be slaves to him, who was a murderer from the beginning; to be
under the power of this evil one, this bloody Tyrant, whose mercies are
cruelty, whose whole aim and endeavor is to plunge us into the depths of woe
and misery; and who is exceeding subtle, deceitful and powerful, as well as
implacably malicious, and indefatigably industrious in pursuing his accursed
designs? O wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us! I thank God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, who gives his saints the victory. In regeneration the
Elect are delivered from the power of Satan, rescued from the captive-chains he
has put upon them, and are no more led and governed by him at his pleasure.
However while in this world, he manages a war against them, and uses all
possible artifices to reduce them under his dominion, and enslave them again in
the bond of Iniquity. And sometimes he miserably foils and wounds them, and
occasions 'em no little difficulty and disturbance.

BUT when Death comes, then the Saints are dismissed from their warfare,
discharged from all their spiritual conflicts, made free indeed by the Son of
God: and enter upon a state of triumph; where they carry Palms of victory in
their hands, and wear glittering Crowns of Glory on their heads; and are at an
infinite distance from all possible injurious influences or assaults of the
malignant Powers of Hell and Earth. No fiery dart can reach and annoy them; nor
any venomous Serpent sting or hiss at them. There the wicked one ceases from
troubling; and all their Enemies are made their footstool. Thus at Death the
scene is altered; they exchange their militant State for a triumphant. They
pass out of the field of battle into the city of triumph. Indeed when their
bodies are thrown into the grave and lie under the bands of Death, they seem to
be captives, and close prisoners of war, or rather slain and killed by the
enemy; but in truth they are conquerors, yea more than conquerors. In dying
they obtain a victory more glorious than all the celebrated conquests of Coesar
or Alexander. A Mystery this! though they die in the fight, yet they overcome by
the blood of the Lamb; and ride in a triumphal Chariot, drawn by mighty Angels,
with the highest ensigns of victory, through the Territories of the Prince of the
power of the air, into the heavenly Kingdom, where they receive not a crown of
fading laurel, but a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory. And surely
this bespeaks the day of a Believers Death to be better than the day of his
Birth.

5. THEY were born in a state of Trouble, Misery and Sorrow, on outward as well
as spiritual Accounts; but at Death they are put out of the reach of all.
Innumerable Diseases and Disasters await and threaten every man, as soon as he
comes into the World. Job 14. 1. Man that is born of a woman is of few days and
(...) of trouble. Job 5. 7. Man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward.
It is as natural since the fall, which brought death and misery into the world,
for man to be in trouble, as it is for the sparks to fly upward. Affliction is
become in a sense congenial, and proper to man: Evil pursues him continually
and unavoidably, while in a state of sin or imperfection. Who can enumerate the
vast and horrid Train of Calamities, that man as soon as born is compassed
withal! There is sickness, pain, poverty, disgrace, slavery, bereavements, etc.
These things all are liable to, as soon as they come into this evil World, and
as long as they continue here. Even Believers themselves while here do often
me^ with sore trials. Many are the afflictions of the righteous. Their lives
are sometimes filled up with a course and succession of troubles; and in much
tribulation they pass the time of their (...) on earth, But now at Death,
Believers are delivered out of their suffering state. When they die they put
off their sackcloth and every token of sorrow. They rest from their labors,
fatigues, and inquietudes; never more to eat the bread of adversity, or to
drink the waters of affliction. At death all their tears and fears are done
away, and every threatening cloud vanishes; there remains no more any weak and
trembling hand, or feeble knees; no more any quivering lips or fearful heart;
no more any weeping eye, or wounded bleeding spirit, no fighting breast, no
pale face. nor complaining voice, After death they shall no more get their
bread with the sweat of their brows; they shall no more hunger (...) thirst;
neither shall the sun light on them, nor any heat. In the grave they will be hid
from the scourge of the tongue, shall no more hear the voice of calumny, nor be
trampled on by the foot of pride. There the weary are at rest, and the servant
is free from his cruel master; the prisoners rest together, and the poor are
saved from the hand of the mighty. The Saints at death pass into a safe harbor
and quiet haven, where they are beyond every rough sea, and no proud wave can
dash against them, nor any tossing tempest or rude occurrent invade them ever,
to disturb their sweet repose. This shows that the day of Believers death is
better than the day of their birth; which ushered them into a World of sin and
sorrow and vexation, and brought them on this stage of vanity, where are scenes
of care and trouble and difficulty without number.

6. THEY were born in a very dangerous and exposed condition; liable to the
damnation of H^ll, but Death puts them out of all danger. Every one is born an
heir of Hell. Every Child, as soon a born, is in danger of the Judgment, in
danger o^ Hellfire, liable to be cast into the devouring flame and everlasting
burnings. -- But now Believe^^ (having been first in their Justification
legally acquitted,) are at their death actually delivered from the wrath to
come; delivered for ever from going down into the horrible pit, and their state
render^^ eternally safe and secure. This reflection loudly proclames the happy
difference between the dea^^ of Believers, and their birth; and tells us that
the former is unspeakably preferrible to the latter.

7. THEY were born in a state of exile (...) estrangement from the blessed GOD;
but when the^ die, are admitted into his special and glorious presence Adam in
his first and innocent estate walk^d with God, and was happy in his gracious
presence and blessed fellowship, suting under his shadow with delight; and his
banner over him was love. But Adam by his disobedience forfeited and lost this
inestimable privilege, both as to himself, and his whole natural posterity: So
that all the guilty race of fallen Man are born in a state of distance and
alienation from GOD, and are under a sentence of banishment from His presence.
All men are by nature Fugitives from the face of GOD, Deserters, Aliens, and
Exiles. The Scripture in many places ascribes to them these characters. And
though the Elect are in their regeneration restored to communion with GOD, and
are said, from being afar off, to be brought nigh by the blood of JESUS: yet as
long as they abide in the Earth, walking by faith, and not by sight, they call
themselves Pilgrims and Stangers; and are said still to be absent from the
Lord. Their fellowship with GOD is but mediate, and very broken and unsettled.
But when they die, then they are called home, and received into their heavenly
Father's house; where they are no longer at the least unhappy distance from
Him, or under any hidings of His face. Then faith ends in vision, and hope
expires in fruition, and love ripens into ecstasy of joy. When they are absent
from the body, they are present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 8. and what unknown
happiness does this imply!

THUS the day of the Believers death is better than the day of his birth,
inasmuch as it delivers him from those many (...), which his birth was either
(...) with or introductory (...).

II. THE truth of the doctrine will more clearly be seen, if we compare the
Goods and Advantages of the present and future state; which will appear very
different and unequal. The glorious Excellencies and Felicities of that state
Believers die into are infinitely superior to all the Enjoyments and
Advantages that state they are born into. The latter when weighed with the
former are but as small dust of the balance. Here to hint a few things
briefly: and I shall be the more brief in some of the particulars, because I
find I have somewhat improperly prevented my self in the former part of the
discourse.

1. DEATH translates the Elect into a state of Retribution; Birth only
introduced them into a state of Probation. The present Life is their working
season, and time of preparation for Eternity: (...) are here in a state of
expectancy, upon their (...) and under discipline; this is the state they are
bort into: but Death translates them into a state of it wards; where they are
above means and ordinances and no longer wear the style of Candidates or
Probationers, but change it for that of Possessors and (...). Immediately upon
their death, comes the particular Judgment, which declares them good and
faithful Servants, and decrees to them the eternal recompenses. As much then as
the End is (...) excellent than the Means, so much does the future state excel
the present.

2. DEATH transmits Believers into a Place (...) better than the place, which
their (...) them into. They were born into this World, they die into another
and Superior World. They (...) brought forth in a vale of tears; when they
die, they ascend into the mount of glory, the everlasting ^ill of blessing.
Death transports them into a better Country, even an heavenly. Indeed the
Bodies of departed Saints are reposited in the gloomy and noisome grave, (so it
is to sense, though to faith it is enlightened and persumed by our LORD's once
lying in it where covered with the clods of the valley, they become a prey to
sordid worms; and lie undistinguished from the bodies of the wicked, till the
day, when the SON of GOD shall raise them out of the polluted earth, and
fashion them like His own most glorious body. However as to the separate
Spirits of just men, these immediately pass out of the dark valley into the
realms of light and bliss; and are lodged safe in everlasting mantions of rest
and joy, magnificence and beauty. Luke 23. 43. This day (said the crucified
JESUS to the penitent Thief on the cross with Him) shall thou ^e with me in
Paradise; -- a place this, never stained with sin, nor shaded by any sorrow; a
place designed by infinite Goodness for the everlasting entertainment of God's
Children; contrived by infinite Wisdom, created by infinite Power, and
purchased by infinite Merit: every way becoming the glory and bounty of the
great Giver, and conspiring to the happiness of the Possessors: a place all
calm, harmonious, and serene, inconceivably bright, glorious and ravishing;
which needs neither Sun nor Moon to enlighten it; for the Lamb is the light
thereof. Surely this troublesome and howling Wilderness is not worthy to be
compared with the promised Canaan, that good Land, and glory of all lands, the
perfection of beauty. Surely Heaven is a place infinitely more eligible than
this dark and filthy Earth. And proportionably more desirable to a Believer is
the day of his death, than the day of his birth.

3. DEATH unites Believers to infinitely better Society, than what their birth
introduced them into. The best company in this world are the Saints; but how
imperfect are these? and what a mixture is there of the wicked among them,
whose evil conversation must needs vex every righteous Soul? And thus it is
often, the Saints are so troubled at or by the grievous ways of bold
Transgressors, that they cry out one and another, Woe is me that I dwell in
Mesech, that I sojourn in the tents of Kedar! and their wish for the wings of a
Dove, that so they might flee away and be at rest. -- Yea, here on Earth, the
Society of the Godly among themselves, is wretchedly embittered and sour'd by
the unhappy relicts of the old Leven in them. Pride, Envy, Uncharitableness,
Ignorance, and Error do in no little degree too often disturb and spoil the
conversation of the Saints themselves. -- But there are no Jarrs, Discords, or
Misunderstandings among perfected Spirits. There are no storms in the upper and
invisible regions. The Saints in heaven are all entirely joined together in one
mind; they all speak the same pure Language, and sing one uninterrupted Song.
They are all Unity; Peace and Love, Order, and Concord. Mutual Endearments are
continually passing from one to the other among the Angels and Saints; and
charity reigns which is the bond of perfection. What a happy change then does
the Believer make at Death! And how surprising to him to go out of a humor
some, foolish, wrangling world, and find himself presently in the midst of
Saints and Angels, whose conversation is the most wise, (infinitely wiser than
that in Solomon's Court) the most amicable, peaceful, and every way charming;
embraced by them with the loudest congratulations, and receiving from them the
highest expressions of Love and Friendship. Is it not desirable then to take
our farewell of this lower world, this habitation of cruelty, this den of
Dragons; and mounting on the wings of ministering Spirits, to take our f^ight up
to the heavenly World, the region of peace, tranquillity, and happiness? --
Yea, surely! If Peter, when in the Mount with Moses and Elias, and the
transfigur'd JESUS, rejoiced in spirit, and said, It is good being here; What a
rapture then was he in, when death carried him to Mount Zion, to the city of
the living GOD, the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of Angels,
and the spirits of just men, to the glorified JESUS, and to GOD the Judge of
all?

4. DEATH advances Believers to infinitely higher Honors than any are born to
or ever attain in this world. At Death they are fixed in the most honorable
Station, and employed in the most noble and exalted services; They are care^st
in Abraham's bosom: they sit down with Christ in his Throne, and share with Him
in all His glory, ( Rev. 3. 21. Job. 17. 24.) They shine as the Stars, yea as
the Sun in the Kingdom of Heaven. And surely there can be no Dignities in this
world comparable to those heavenly Preferments. The Saints are made Kings and
Priests unto GOD and the Father; at death they put on their costly shining
robes, and their sparkling massy crowns of honor; and become Pillars in the
Temple which is above, beautiful and glorious. They have a good name, more
excellent than the name of the great ones in the earth; and none of the
Potentates of this World, none of the chief Captains or mighty men may be
compared with them. Verily Solomon in all his terrene Pomp and Glory (which the
Queen of the South so much admired) was infinitely inferior to them.

5. DEATH possesses Believers of infinitely better and greater Riches, than any
which the Sons of men are ever (...) of in this World. In Heaven there are
Treasures unknown, riches unsearchable, the true riches; out-bidding our most
raised expectations and exceeding our most extended wishes; In our parison of
which all the wealth of this world is but a trifle; a thing of naught, mere
emptiness and vanity. In Heaven the Saints enjoy GOD and CHRIST, and the
blessed SPIRIT: in whom are all possible treasures of good, and an universal
confluence of all imaginable Beatitudes. The riches of divine ^sufficiency are
expended on the Saints is Light, They have riches of glory, which no mortal eye
has seen, no ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man. 1 Cor. 2.
9.

IN a word, The Saints at death enter Life, a more noble life than this
earthly: and into a state of the most refined pleasures. They are admitted then
into the world of light, and life, and love, and enjoyment: into the world of
blessed realities, of substantial unmingl'd and immortal delights Where, what
was here their consolation, is perfected; and unknown pleasures super^dded to
enhance the satisfaction. Here they fed on corruptible things: in Heaven they
eat Angels unperishing food; the sweetest, purest and most delicious fare
imaginable, They are blessed with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus: Blessings incomparably more sublime and rich, than what this
world in it is best estate can afford. The unsparing hand of Divine Love is open
and bountiful in the communicatio^ of every desirable and satisfying Good.
without the least evil mixture or interruption. And the faculties of the humane
Soul are invigorated and widen'd to receive, to sustain, and enjoy the fullest
and most felicitating derivations of divine favor. Here in this world the Soul
is not capable of taking in, or subsisting under, what perfected Spirits enjoy.
I suppose, Adam himself in Paradise had not a mind big and strong enough, to
admit the rays of heavenly light, and bear up under the excess of glory and
felicity enjoyed above: but in order to this, even his powers needed some
further enlargement and fortification. How weak and ^^ceivible was his
understanding; how wavering and mutable his will, how corruptible his
affections and appetites? He was formed and fitted by his nature, to live in a
world of sense, to converse with earthly objects, and to feed on the dust.
Though there was an admirable rectitude in all his faculties, yet there was not
that elevation, activity, capacity, and vigor which the Saints in light have.
The natural life of man, even in his state of integrity, was a low mean animal
life, in compare with the heavenly. The life of Saints after death is more
spiritual, (...), and divine The image of GOD upon them is drawn with more
illustrious characters. The divine nature in them is raised to a glorious
perfection. Their understandings are filled with beatifical light, and their
wills with the most seraphic love. They have the supreme Truth unveiled before
them, and the supreme Good immediately prefe^ with them; and hence their own
nature being sublimated, and enabled to take in the fullest discoveries, and
bear the strongest happy impressions, ho^ unspeakably blessed must glorified
Saints necessarily be! O how rich, glorious and happy beyond a comparison or
comprehension! What a most (...) excellent, divine life do they live! -- In
heaven with all their enlarged powers they serve and glorify and enjoy GOD, in
such an exalted manner, as above our present capacity or conception. In the
life that now is, the Saints are in their infancy an childhood; but at death
their manly state arrives the infant of days commences a perfect man, an the
child dies an hundred years old, Isa. 65. 2^. Death is to the Saints a happy
transitus from minority to maturity, and advances them to a blessed height of
knowledge, wisdom, holiness and joy such as was never found in any Saint on
earth; (...) not in our first Parents themselves, even wh^ newly come out of
the creating hands of GOD with the glory of his image upon them.

AND, which unspeakably magnifies the bliss an excellency of their state, it is
eternal and immutable. The primitive paradisaical state of man we veriable and
uncertain. There was a possibility of it coming to a conclusion; as wretched
experienced has dolefully manifested. But now the blessed state of glorified
Spirits is eternal: their beauty unfading; their inheritance incorruptible,
their crown unperishable, a more enduring substance, a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory. In which respect the Saints in heaven are vastly
happier than Adam in innocence; and are as the Angels of GOD; dwelling in a
Kingdom which cannot be moved, in life everlasting. When Believers die, they do
in a most emphatical sense pass from Death unto Life. Death is the Soul's
flight into the land of the living, the ocean of divine life; even a state of
blessedness, eternally progressive.

THUS in various regards, it is made evident that the day of a godly man's
death, is better than the day of his birth. In the day of his death he is
delivered from innumerable Evils, which in the day of his birth he was either
suffering of or subject unto. And in the day of his Death, he receives
possession of innumerable and inestimable Felicities, infinitely superior to
all the advantages and blessings which that state can possibly afford, that in
the day of his birth he entered into. He had privileges in his birthday: he has
privileges in his death-day: yet the last are more than the first; and better
is the end of his life, than the beginning thereof.

BUT before I come to the Application, let me just hint here one thought
further, which is, That as the day of a Believer's death is preferable to the
day of his birth, with respect to himself, his own comfort and happiness: so it
is preferable likewise with respect to GOD, his glory and praise. Precious in
the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints. When a Saint dies, GOD
receives more glory, than he did when the man was born. His nativity and
introduction into this world, was an ordinary work of Providence; but his
departure and translation to a better world is a special work of Redemption. At
his birth, the common goodness of GOD to the Person born, to the Parents, and
World, was exercised. At his death the peculiar love and rich grace of GOD
toward the dissolved Person is displayed in receiving his separated Soul to
infinite happiness. At his birth, the Person himself could not actively praise
GOD for his goodness: at best he could only borrow assistence from others; and
sinful Men on earth were his mouth, if any at all praised GOD on his behalf, in
the day he was born: but now in the day of his death, the Saint himself blesses
GOD: he ascends to GOD in the chariot of praise, incircled with a bright guard
of shouting Angels: He enters into Zion, the city of GOD, with songs and
everlasting joy upon his head: All Saints and Scrap^s triumphantly greet him
upon his glad arrival; they exalt the LORD together and magnify his name with
thanksgiving. The whole heavens ring with acclamations of joy and loud
Hallelujahs on the blessed occasion. GOD is glorified in the Saint, whether in
life or death; yet the latter is more glorious than the former. But I shall
dismiss this thought: and now proceed to draw some useful deductions, and (...)
you in the practical improvement of the former notion or thought upon the Text.

USE, I. HENCE (...) much better than the day (...) his birth, will the day of
the godly man's Resurrection (...)!

IF the day of his death has so great a pre-eminence above the day of his
birth, how much better then will the day of his future Resurrection be! The day
of his more public espousals, more glorious coronation, and illustrious
triumphs! The day when his body shall be raised out of the silent dust in great
power and untarnisht glory; the day, when this corruptable shall put on
incorruption, and this mortal put on immortality, and Death shall be swallowed
up in victory. The day when Soul and Body (those ancient and long separated
Friends) shall be re united, and their redemption perfected; and a vast
addition thereupon be made to the blessedness and glory of the Saint. O happy
day! Bright and blissful morning, that shall never know any cloud or evening!

USE, II. HENCE how much worse is the day of the ungodly man's death, than the
day of his birth! Contrarys have contrary consequences. The blessedness in the
text is appropriated to the wise and godly. This plainly informs us of the vast
difference there is between the Death of Saints and Sinners. It is a natural
inference from the text, that the day of an unbeliever's death is worse than
the day of his birth: Worse it is indeed; for the Unbeliever ^ies in the same
miserable state wherein he was born; and this exceedingly aggravated. He dies
more under the power of an enraged Devil, and of furious Lusts; under greater
guilt, and more terrible wrath; loses all the Comforts of this life, with the
hopes of a better, and is carried down into Everlasting Torments, beyond all
relief. O how egregiously foolish then are carnal Sinners to pride themselves
in an honorable birth, a rich patrimony, beauty of body, bright endowments of
nature, and the like; since they were born in a state of sin and wrath, and
have such a dreadful doom awaiting them! O the madness that is in the hearts of
jovial secure Sinners, who are going down to the dead, and their feet take hold
of (...) but they know it not: and the fire besets them round about, yet they
lay it not to heart. Eccl. 11. 7, 8 Truly the light is sweet, and pleasant
thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun. But if a man live many years, and
rejoice in them all; yet let him remember the days of darkness, for they shall
be many Isa. 65. 20. The sinner being an hundred years old shall be accursed.

USE, III. WHAT Obligations then are Believer under to GOD for sending his Son
to be our Savio^^ It is by means of CHRIST's Obedience unto the Death, that the
day of Believers death is better than the day of their birth. Had not the SON
of GOD taken to himself humane nature, been born of woman, fulfilled the Law,
and borne the curse, a mankind must necessarily have been forever lost that
state of sin and guilt, wherein they are born None eye pityed us, to do any of
these unto us, to have compassion upon us; but we were cast out, an must have
perished, had not the LORD looked upon us, and said unto us, LIVE. Blessed be
GOD the GOD of all grace, who has so loved the work as to send forth his Son,
made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem and save his Elect. He laid help
on one mighty to save; who has for then conquered and disarmed the king of
terrors; has take away the bitterness of death of his cross, and turned this
cup of affliction, (the last which Believers shall drink,) into a cup of
blessing. O what thanks do Believers owe to GOD and CHRIST! O how precious
should the Redeemer be unto you, and how glorious in your eyes a compassionate
GOD! Take to your selves words, and sing as in 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56, 57. O death,
where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? The sting of death is sin;
and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be to God, who gives us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. Let all the saints of the most high,
join their thankful and triumphant Amen, to this Song of Joy and Praise.

USE, IV. HERE is matter of Comfort to us all under the bereavement of godly
Relatives and Friends. It has been a very melancholy dying time among us of
late; and (which is a great aggravation of the mortality, and should put the
sharpest accents upon our lamentations) the LORD seems not so much to have been
weeding up the worst, as transplanting the best. However, that these are only
transplanted; not lost and perished; but removed to another and better place,
having exchanged earth for heaven, is a consideration, which should be improved
to temper our sorrow, and qualify our mourning. The bereavement of pious and
dear Relatives and Acquaintants is one of the tenderest and most affecting
trials in the world; and calls for special supports to keep us from being
overwhelmed with tears of bitterness. Now what greater support, what greater
refreshment, than this, to consider that their death was a blessed and glorious
change to them; that they are still alive in their better part or immortal
nature, and are with GOD Well then, has Death ravished from us our dear infant
Children, that were in covenant with GOD has he taken away our pious, hopeful
young ones or elder praying and useful Relations or Friends Here is matter of
great Consolation; a reviving cordial provided, which may keep us from
fainting. If the day of their death was better to them, that the day of their
birth, (as we are sure it was) (...) then should we be dejected or impatient,
and mou^^ inordinately? Methinks I now hear the decease Godly saying to us, as
our departing Savior to his Disciples, Joh. 14. 28. If ye loved me, ye would
rejoice because I go unto the Father. And as in Lu^. 23. 28. Weep not for me:
but weep for your selves and for your children.

THE prospect of that happy Change, they have made, should check our hard
thoughts of GOD, (...) curb our uneasy resentments. This should almost (...) up
our flowing tears, and turn our pensive complain into thanksgiving Songs. We
have reason to congratulate, rather than to condole their remove. Thus, as to
our deceased Children particularly; (...) we not rejoice at their birth? Why
then do we (...) much more rejoice in their death, as a happy Translation and
unspeakable Gain to them; (...) of such (the children of the Covenant) is the
Kingdom of GOD, If we mourn immoderately, it is (...) carnal self-love, and
idolatrous Creature-(...). O when shall we learn to die to Creatures; and under
the loss of them, to weep as though we wept (...) I would not have you to be
ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow nor even
as others which have no hope: But if we believe that Jesus died and rose again;
even so them likewise who sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. -- Wherefore
comfort one another with these words, 1 These. 4. 13,etc.

USE, V. HERE is matter of Support to Believers, under all the various Troubles
of Life. What tho you meet with much Adversity, and many trials both in the
inner and outer man? Yet here is a Consideration sufficient, if duly
entertained, to alleviate all your heavy burdens, and sweeten all your bitter
Cups; The day of your death shall be infinitely better to you, than the day of
your birth; and that happy day is not afar off. Let this therefore encourage
you, and invigorate your believing Hope and Patience amidst all your
Tribulations, and wise you above all the terrors of sense. By a^ eye of faith
look through the gloomy scenes of Time, and take a prospect of your happy Exit,
that draws ^igh; which will bring on bright and never-ending scenes of glory,
and will put an everlasting period to all ^our present difficulties, doubts,
dangers and distresses. O Believer, lift up your hands that hang down, and lay
hold on eternal life: lift up your eyes and look for that blessed hope: lift up
your heads with joy; for your redemption draws nigh.

USE, VI. HENCE the Children of GOD need not be afraid of Death; nor unwilling
to die, at the all of Providence. This thought should reconcile (...) to Death,
change the visage of this last enemy, (...) teach you to look upon it as your
Friend, (ra^ter than your Foe) coming with a message of peace, and not of
terror to you; and make you welcome its approach, at what time, or in what way
soever. Why should you (...) Death with any amazement, or why should you love
Life with an fondness and delight, since the day of your death so much to be
preferred to the day of your birth, any days of your life here? Learn then to
(...) with the Apostle, Act. 20. 24. Neither count I (...) life dear unto my
self, so that I might finish my (...) with joy. 1 Cor. 5. 8. We are willing
rather to absent from the body, and to be present with the (...). 2 Timothy 4. 6.
etc. I am now ready to be offered; -- I have fought a good fight. Hence forth
there is (...) up for me a crown of righteousness. etc. Let this, Believer, be
the temper and language and earned expectation of your Soul. O take heed you do
no grieve the divine Spirit, by whom you are sea^^ to the day of redemption;
nor reflect on the fai^ and hope of the Gospel, by a servile love of life,
slavish dread of death. Be neither ashamed of (...) reproach, nor afraid for
the terror of death; seeing both are taken away by the cross of CHRIST.

USE, VII. HENCE we may infer matter caution and direction, with respect to the
celebrat^ one's Birthday.

THERE are diverse special periods of time, whi^^ have contracted a kind of
solemnity, and have usually some peculiar regards paid to them. Th^^ the
Beginning of the Year is a remarkable season and what every one takes a
particular notice of Some of the Servants of GOD have sometimes lem^z'd it by a
religious employment of it, and found their account in so doing. -- There is
likewise one's Birthday, which is to every man his New Year's day. This also
has been signalized by special respects paid to it. The anniversary celebration
of birth-days is an ancient custom. Though in sacred Scripture we read not of any
that practiced this, Genesis 40. 20. Mar. 6 21. Hos. 7. 5.
but Pharaoh, and Herod, and perhaps Jeroboam (the second) King of Israel. It
is not recorded of Abraham, of David, or any of the Saints and People of GOD,
as I remember. Yet Divires do not universally nor absolutely condemn the
custom. As to the thing it self (besure) there is no institution or command of
GOD for it. To commemorate our birth and beginning is what the duty of every
day requires: however it may be the more special work of an anniversary day,
provided all superstition and abuse be avoided. The civil observation of
birthdays, and making ^atalitial entertainments practiced by persons of
distinction, who on such occasions have the company and receive the civilities
of their Friends, as well as confer favors on their Servants and Dependents,
Henry's Expos. of Genesis 40. 20.
is a usage in it self lawful, and innocent enough if due regard be had to the
rules of christian sobriety and moderation. But to devote such days (as the
Persons before mentioned did) to perfect Idleness, Luxury and extravagant
^irth, is to bid defiance to their great Creator, to contradict the ends and
reasons of their birth, and to act as if they were sent into the world only to
serve their bellys, and gratify the lusts of the flesh. Methinks, in the
solemnization of one's birthday, retirement with fasting and prayer, were a
greater propriety than carnal feasting and merriment with others. It seems more
agreeable and proper to observe it as a time of humiliation, than of rejoicing:
at least there should be a pious mixture of humble and devout reflections upon
such a^ occasion: For what was the day, which we commemorate? Truly a day full
of unhappy circumstances, that call for a godly sorrow and shame. (...)
observes, That an eminent Person, in his Diaries as often as his Birthday
arrived, wrote this; (...) Calamitatis, i.e. A CALAMITOUS DAY unto me: A day
therefore it is for a man to afflict his Soul in. At such a time we should
seriously reflect on the guilt, pollution, misery and danger, which attended us
in the day of our Birth. It should deeply affect us to consider, what we were
born; Ignorant, sinful, miserable Creatures: Children of wrath Children of the
Devil, and Heirs of Hell. It sho^^^ deeply affect us to consider, what we are
while in natural State; a seed of evildoers, rebels against GOD, enemies of
CHRIST, hating of, and hated (...) him. It should affect us to consider, how
(while (...) unrenewed condition) we spend our years in (...) and in sin; and
all the days of our life are ((...) some sense) worse than the day of our
birth. -- It should affect us to consider, the patience and (...) of Heaven
toward us; and fill us (...) wonder to think, what Cumberers of the gro^^^ we
have been, and yet are spared, and have had (...) lives filled up with mercies.
-- It should affect us (...) consider the goodness of GOD to us in our (...).
See a Sermon on (...)
that though we came guilty, polluted and wretched, into a wretched, polluted,
guilty World, yet we were not born dead, nor born Fools and Idiots, not born
among Papists or Pagans, in a land of Darkness: but among Christians and
Protestants, in a land of light; where we were, almost as soon as born,
solemnly given up to GOD in Baptism, in the way of his appointment, engaged to
be the LORD's, and his favor entreated for us; where we were no sooner come to
any maturity, but we had Parental Instructions, as well as Ministerial; where
we have the word preached to hear, and the word written to read; in which are
brought to us the glad tidings of a SAVIOR, and the gracious offers of
Salvation by him made unto us. We should offer praises to GOD, that he has
looked upon us in our low estate; sent his Son JESUS CHRIST to purchase for us
Redemption out of the sinful state we were born in, and sent forth his holy
SPIRIT to apply the purchased Redemption to all that believe in the name of
JESUS. We should bless the Divine SPIRIT for all his strivings with us and
breathings in us. Moreover, We should solemnly examine ourselves, whether we
have been made partakers of spiritual Regeneration; whether we are born from
above and renewed in the spirit of our minds. If we find this is not our case,
then we should be solicitous it may become so; and immediately apply to CHRIST
the head of Influences, for regenerating grace, and resolve not to rest easy
till we are born again, and have CHRIST formed in us. But on the other hand, if
really we are begotten of GOD, and created in CHRIST JESUS to good works, we
should be thankful to the LORD and praise his holy name; considering what a
glorious change he has wrought in and upon us, and what blessings he does
bestow on us in the life that now is: considering also what a happy Eternity is
before us; what a blessed and glorious day, the day of our Death will be, and
what swift advances we are making toward it; every year that passes over us,
bringing us so much nearer to the day of our death, and the end of all our sin
and sorrow. -- These things we shall do well to consider on our birth-days in a
solemn manner: and therewith comfort our selves under all our troubles and
against all our fears; and thereby quicken ourselves to walk in wisdom, and as
becomes our privileges; to live holilyandserviceably, that so every year we
finish may leave us fitter and riper for heaven and to redeem the time, that if
the year advancing should be our dying year, we may be found about our work,
and finish our course with Joy.

THUS we see the right method of solemnizing our birthday, and if it be thus
employed, it will be* profitable as well as innocent practice, to observe it,
in the annual returns of it.

THE VIIIth and last USE is of Exhortation, (...) to the godly, and then to the
ungodly.

1. LET me offer to the Saints and Children of GOD, some words of counsil and
exhortation, grounded on the text. I would exhort you then --

OFTEN to make this text the subject of your (...) meditation. Study to obtain
the fullest acquaintance with the several circumstances of the day of your
birth, and also of the day of (...) death. Form a right judgment of both; get a
fixed belief of the happy difference between them; and be often entertaining
your minds with serious reflections upon the same. This will be of very
profitable consequence diverse ways; and particularly it will tend of preserve
you from envying the prosperity of the wicked; for when you mark the peaceful
end of the upright man, and consider the end of the ungodly, which is
destruction, how can you but choose with Moses, rather to suffer affliction with
the people of GOD, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; and with
the Apostle, esteem godliness with contentment to be great gain?

Furthermore, ENDEAVOR to get (...) assurance of your title to the blessed
privilege in our text. Be sollicitously enquiring, Will this be my happy case?
If GOD should now summon me to depart, am I ready to be offered; and is it
probable I shall find the day of my death better to me, than the day of my
birth? Inquire what evidences you have of a right to this blessedness: labor
to clear up your title, and get a well-grounded hope. Without this your state
may be secure yet your frame justly sad and uncomfortable, both in life and
death. Wherefore give diligence to make your calling and election sure.

Again, LET Believers possess their souls in humble patience. The saints, when
by an eye of faith they take a view of the unseen treasures and glories
reserved for them in the coming world, are apt sometimes to grow too uneasy and
discontented under the various trials they meet with here; and with inordinate
eagerness to wish for their dismission, even as they that watch for the
morning. Hence some have not loved their lives to the death; and others have
been tortured, not accepting deliverance; knowing that they had in heaven a
better and an enduring substance, and should obtain a better resurrection. --
Impatience under the delays of their departure is an extreme, that Believers do
sometimes fall into: but it is very faulty, and not to be indulged; as
reflecting too much on the wisdom and goodness of divine Providence. Be patient
therefore, Brethren, unto the coming of the LORD. For ye have need of patience;
that (...) ye have done the will of GOD, ye might receive the promise. -- And
verily since the promise is so great and precious, the Believer has need to
(...) patience and labor after it. There is danger of to multuous thoughts and
impatient wishes, when he considers, that for him to die is gain; and that the
day of his death is deferred. But let him remember also that for him to live is
Christ; and this will be the best argument to calm and quiet him.

Again, LET Believers be full of praise an thanksgiving to GOD, under the
blessed prospect they have before them. You have all possible reasons for
gratitude and praise; whether you consider the greatness of that good and
happiness which expects you; or what divine love has done to prepare you for
and entitle you to it; or how undeserved the favor; or what an astonishing
distinction is made between you, and apostate Spirits with the common herd and
unbelieving world of mankind O consider these things and praise the Lord. Bless
his holy name, and say continually, Let GOD be magnified! who has delivered me
from the power of darkness and translated me into the kingdom of his dear Son:
who crowns me with loving kindness and tender mercies: who will redeem my
life from destruction, and preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom: to whom be
glory for ever and ever, Amen. -- O awake up to sing and give praise; now
beginning what will be your eternal employment in the blessed world you are
hastening to.

Again, SEE that you live a life of obedience, and walk as becomes your
privileges and expectations. Are you the heirs of divine love; and do you look
for such things, as a translation to heaven in the day of death, and a
resurrection to glory in the day of judgment; what manner of persons ought ye
to be in all holy conversation and godliness? See then that you endeavor to
walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing: that you strive to answer your
character, and live up in some measure to the ends and bonds of your redemption
by CHRIST; being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in the grace and
knowledge of our Lord JESUS CHRIST: mourning over the deplorable remains of
that sin and misery, which you brought into the world with you; sitting loose
in your affections from all creature-enjoyments; being watchful against sin;
and very diligent that you may be found of your Judge in peace, without spot
and blameless. In aword, as you expect to be distinguished from sinners in the
happiness of your death; so let it be your care to be distinguished now by the
holiness of your life; having your conversation in heaven, and not being
conformed to this present world. The more holy your life is, the more happy
will your death be.

Finally, CAST an eye of pity on the unbelieving Crowd: and do all you can that
sinners may be brought to share with you in your blessed privileges. Look on
them, whose life is among the unclean, and whose end is to be cut off, unless
seasonable repentance prevent; look on such, I say, not with scor^ and
contempt, but with christian concern and compassion. Let your bowels yearn
toward them, when you see'em hanging over the devouring furnace nigh to
cursing; and save them with fear, pulling then out of the fire. Do all that in
you lies to recover them out of the snare of the Devil, and save their Souls
from being drowned in perdition. Instruct the ignorant, warn the unruly, and
exhort th^^ daily, while it is called, To day; lest any be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin. [ Let Heads families particularly, thus deal with their
Children and Servants; the care of whose souls is most solemn charged on them.]
But above all things, my Brethren, carry them to the throne of grace in the arm
of your faith and prayer; and earnestly plead with GOD, that they may be
brought to repentance, a^ visited with his salvation. O stand before GOD to
speak good for them, and to turn away (...) from them. 1 Timothy 2. begin. I
exhort therefore that first of all (i. e. as we say, by all means,)
supplications, prayers, intercessions, -- be made for a men; -- for this is
good and acceptable in the (...) of God our Savior. 1 John 5. 16. If any man
(...) his brother sin a sin, which is not unto death he shall ask, and he shall
give him life for them the sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death: (...)
not say that he shall pray for it. -- Surely they have hearts of stone, who can
see their fellow creatures upon the brink of destruction; and do not lift up
their fervent cries to heaven for them.

BUT the other branch of the exhortation is,

2. TO the Unregenerate. O let sinners from what has been said, be concerned to
get into the number of true Believers; that so the day of their death may be
better, than the day of their birth. O unbelievers! GOD now calls you to
repent, and turn unto him; to believe on his Son, and flee from the wrath to
come, and get ready for the hour of death. And methinks, you have had
sufficient motive set before you to engage your speedy compliance with the call
of GOD. -- Know it; die you must sooner or later: so has GOD ordained, and his
word is established for ever: The grave is the house appointed for all living;
and when the (...)-time is come, the dust shall return to the dust, and the
spirit to GOD, that gave it. There is no resisting, no evading, nor deferring.
In the many instances of mortality you have seen, more especially of late, you
have had this lesson very convincingly read unto you. And many of you have
lately been visited with Sickness; which is the beginning and presage of a
dissolution. The LORD has chasten'd you sore: but he has not given you over to
death. The sorrows of death compassed you, and the pains of hell gat hold upon
you: you found trouble and sorrow. Then (it may be) you called upon the name of
the LORD; and made vows to him in the anguish of your souls. And behold, the
LORD has dealt bountifully with you: you was brought low, and he helped you. O
consider the patience of a good GOD in sparing of you: and hearken to his
voice, both in your sickness and recovery; whereby he loudly calls upon you to
consider your latter end and so to number your days as to apply your heart unto
wisdom. O that there were such an heart in you! That you would study the ends,
and comply with the calls of Providence to you, both in your affliction and
relief: that you may learn righteousness from his judgments, and by his
goodness be led to repentance: be awakened to confess your sins and give glory
to GOD; in whose hands your breath is, and before whose eyes are all your ways.

Consider, TO prepare for death is the most important business of life. Time is
a trifle to Eternity; Earth is nothing to Heaven. The end of your being in this
world is, by serving and glorifying GOD to prepare for another. The grand
concern is to finish well, to die safely, and be lodged happily in the future
state. It matters little how it fares with you here, if you are well-provided
for hereafter. Eternal Salvation is the one thing needful. And nothing that is
gained in the ways of sin, will countervail the loss of that. Mat. 16. 26. For
what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, (...) lose his own
soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?

Again consider, HOW inexcusable you will be if you die under the guilt and
power of sin, and (...) of salvation. For the way of peace, the path of life is
plainly laid out in the Gospel. And the s^^ptre (...) mercy is held forth to
you; many invitations and the most solemn calls given you in the word written
and preached, to come unto CHRIST, that you might have life. -- Salvation is
tendered to you on the most gracious and condescending terms; the most fair and
reasonable. You have also divine help graciously offered, in order to your
compliance with the terms; and if under a sense of your own weakness (...)
unworthiness, together with the use of means, you ask the same, it will be
granted you. Finally, The holy SPIRIT has been striving with you, and divine
Patience has been waiting on you, to just astonishment. How inexcusable then
art thou, O man, who neglectest so great salvation? How shall you escape? And
what will thou say, when the Judge shall summon thee to appear before his
enlightened tribunal? Verily, those Scriptures will be fulfilled in you, to your
shame and confusion, -- How often would I have gathered you, as a hen gathers
her chickens under her wings, and ye would not? Because I have called, and ye
refused, I have stretched out my hand and none regarded; but ye have set at
naught all my counsil, and would none of my reproof: I also will laugh at your
calamity, I will mock when your fear comes.

Again consider, HOW miserable you will be if you miscarry at last. Your
natural state is unspeakably miserable: but if you die in your sins, that word
will be fulfilled in you, The last state of that man is worse than the first.
When you come to taste of Death, you will find it a bitter cup, full of fire and
brimstone, and the wine of indignation; the dreggs whereof shall be wrong out
and given you to drink. The day of your death will be a day of trouble, and of
treading down, and of perplexity; a day of slaughter and destruction by the
Lord GOD of holy in the valley of darkness. In that day when you fear comes as
a desolation, and your destruction as a whirlwind, when distress and anguish
comes upon you, then (says the LORD) they shall call upon me, but I will not
answer; they (...) seek me early but they shall not find me: They (...) call
upon me saying, Lord, Lord, open to us: (...) I will say unto them, Depart from
me ye cursed I know you not. -- In the dreadful minute, the your dissolution is
accomplished, your guilty (...) will drop down into the fiery Lake, and be over
whelmed with consuming terrors. GOD will render unto you indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish; and an horrible tempest shall be (...) portion of your
cup. Know it; the infamous S^mite, and vilest Heathen shall have a more toler
(...) punishment than you. They were born as guilt and miserable as you; but
they do not die so. The Gospel-advantages you have had, will astonishing
aggravate your condemnation; and be as oil to (...) fire, which makes the flame
more intense and ^^vouring. The condemnation of the Devil will (...) phatically
be the lot of Gospel-sinners. Mat. 41. Depart from me ye cursed, into
everlasting (...) prepared for the Devil and his angels. Gospel-^^ners are
charged with trampling under foot the (...) of GOD, and crucifying him afresh:
and such (...) read their doom in Matthew. 26 24, Woe unto that (...) by whom the
son of man is betrayed: IT HAD BE^^ GOOD FOR THAT MAN, IF HE HAD NOT BE^^ BORN.
-- And having received your doom, you will loudly curse the day of your birth,
your (...) inlet into the present evil world; you will curse every day of your
life, in which you were treasuring up so much guilt and wrath: you will curse
the day of your death, in which you were cast into ^^uter darkness. You Will curse
every minute you spend in hell: you will call to the mountains and rocks to
fall on you, and hide you from the wrath of the Lamb; but all in vain: you
shall seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire to die, but death
shall flee from you. Divine power will uphold you in being, and almighty
vengeance will plague you every moment, with plagues, that are infinitely worse
than ten thousand deaths. -- Behold! This is the portion of a wicked man from
GOD; the portion of hypocrites and unbelievers! O what dismal lessons of terror
are sounding in their ears!

AND, will you not be sollicitous to escape this dreadful misery? Or are you
made without fear? Or (...) you shift off this concern for the present, hoping
for a more convenient season hereafter? -- O do not thus flatter and deceive
your self; thou fool, this ^ight thy Soul may be required of thee, for ought
thou know! O do not put far from you the evil day: Boast not thy self of to
morrow, for thou know not what a day, or an hour may bring forth. Hear now
this, thou that dwell carelessly and layest not to heart thy latter end, who
have been often reproved and still hardnest thy neck; hear ^ow GOD threatens
such an one, (Prove. 29. 1.) (...) shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy. O tremble lest these things come upon thee (...) one day, in a moment,
Death, and Hell, and eternal Vengeance. The grave waits for thee; and hell from
beneath is moved to meet thee, (...) opens it is mouth to receive your guilty
Soul. (...) be persuaded to realise your danger, to consider (...) uncertainty
of Life, the vanity of this World, and the awfulness of Eternity. Look forward,
and (...) a prospect of a departing world; think how it (...) appear to you in
the hours of sickness and death and at the door of eternity: then it will lose
it fine show and deceitful mask, and will appear all ghastly, ugly, and
deformed; it is riches vanity it is honors false, it is pleasures superficial; and
the all your earthly hopes will perish in one moment Again, Look into the
coming world, and anticipate those distressing tho'ts and views, which you
(...) have in a dying hour. Think how awful, Death (...) Eternity will appear
unto you! How glorious a^ desirable Heaven will look! How dreadful (...)
terrible Hell will look! And how full of horn shame, despair, and confusion
your departing S^ will be! What bitter reflections, and what fearing
expectations will seize your guilty mind! O be persuaded to look forward; and
let conscience med^terror, and read to you the fearful doom of impenitent
sinners. Consider it often, and fear left (...) day it befall you; lest it come
upon you unaware in an hour that you think not. O hearken to the solemn
counsil, Job, 36. 18. Because there is (...) beware lest God take thee away
with his stroke; (...) then a great ransom cannot deliver tree. -- O (...) ye,
turn ye; for why will ye die? Consider yo^^ ways and turn to the LORD. Make
have and (...) for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before you Tremble lest
the fatal blow be given, before you are provided for a happy removal. Now in
order to this, two things are absolutely requisite; you must be interested in
Christ, and born of the Spirit. Wherefore, You must,

1. SEEK an Interest in CHRIST. If you would escape the wrath of GOD. and die
the death of the Righteous; you must get united to Jesus Christ by faith, in
whom is all your safety and happiness, and union to whom is the foundation of
all Gospelhope. He that believes on the Son, has life everlasting; but he
that believes not, the wrath of GOD abides on him, and he shall not see life.
Blessed are the dead, who die in the LORD. Them that sleep in Jesus, will GOD
bring with him. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ: in whom we
have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the
riches of divine grace. Christ is the city of refuge; and if death find you in
him. ^he Executioners of vengeance will not be able to reach or (...) you. They
that believe in Christ, have a Right to Salvation with Eternal Glory, through his
merits. But such as are out of Christ, are without hope. This made the Apostle
count all things but loss and dung, that he might win Christ and be found in
him. O let this be likewise your aim and care.

2. YOU must seek after the New Birth; that you may be meet for (as well as
have a title to) the inheritance of the ^aints in light, and be fit to enter
into the holy presence of GOD at Death. Justification entitles you to this
happiness: and Regeneration qualifies you for it. Without a divine light and
holy rectitude in the Soul, you are not capable to perform the elevated duties
and services of the heavenly state: nor to relish the spiritual enjoyments, or
delight in the holy Society there. To be carnally-minded is Death, in the
natural tendencies and necessary effects of it: you must be spiritually minded,
in order to your obtaining life and peace. To them that are defiled and
unbelieving, nothing in heaven is pure or pleasant. We may as reasonably
imagine the Swine, that love to tumble in the mire, can be delighted to lie
(...) beds of Ivory and stretch themselves upon soft couches; (...) a lifeless
Carcass to be charmed with the melody of Mu^^k; as suppose an unregenerate Soul
capable (while such) (...) being happy in heaven. He cannot be happy, unless he
(...) made so against his will and the whole bent of his nature; which is a
contradiction in terms; all felicity or pleasure ^^ing in an agreement of the
object and the appetite. In ^^der therefore to the Sinners entrance into the
heavenly kingdom, his vicious nature must pass under a renewing sanctifying
change. The honor of GOD, as well as the reason of things, requires this: and
it is become necessary, by the determinate council of GOD: who has said,
Without (...) the Lord. Except (...) converted, ye shall not enter into the
kingdom of (...) Except a man be (...) again, he cannot see the kingdom of GOD.
If then you would die a happy death. You must seek after the washing of
Regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Ghost. You must not think of going to
heaven in your present case: and how then can you ^ear to think of dying in it?
Or how (...) you think of living any longer in it? Your (...) prolonged for
this end, even that you might prepared to die: and how ungrateful to GOD, as
well as injurious to your our Soul, are you, if you trifle away your precious
opportunities? O awake out of your carnal security; shake off you slothful
frame and dilatory spirit. No (...) abuse the patience of GOD: no longer harden
your (...); but to (...) while it is called, To day, be sollicitous to obtain a
saving conversion to GOD. O strive to enter in at the (...) gate, and walk in
the narrow way, that leads unto life. Rest not in a partial work of conviction,
or a superficial work of reformation. Beware of hypocrisy: beware of formality;
(...) against a self flattering, a self sufficient and a self righteous spirit.
Content not your self with any thing short of ((...) instead of) a saving work
of grace in the heart. By (...) and in the use of all appointed means wait on
GOD, for (...) renewing influences. Beg of GOD that he would (...) in you a
clean heart, and renew a right spirit within (...) Cherish every good motion,
and improve every season of (...). Work out your Salvation with fear and
trembling: for is GOD, that works in you to will and to do of his (...)
pleasure. Repent therefore and be converted, that your (...) may be blotted
out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the LORD.
Before the decree bring forth, before the day of the LORD's anger come upon
you^ seek ye the LORD. Seek the LORD while he may be (...) and call upon him
while he is near. And all the days your appointed time be waiting till your
change comes, a daily expectation of it, and a diligent preparation for (...).
Do with your might what your hands find to do: and (...) up in store a good
foundation against the time to come, (...) when you are called hence, you may
have treasure in Heaven: and be presented before the face of GOD in Glory with
exceeding Joy. AMEN.

Two Sermons SHOWING How to Begin AND End the Year, After a Godly Sort.
Preached The former on New Year's Day, 1721. The latter on December 31. 1721.
To which is added a Discourse on Jer. xviii. 20.

By Thomas Foxcroft M. A.

Psalm. 90. 9, 12. -- We spend our Years as a tale that is told. -- So teach us
to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto Wisdom. Rev. 1. 8 I am
Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending says the Lord. 2 Cor. 8 6. We
deired Titus, that as he had begun, so he would also finish -- the (...)good
Work. Boston: Printed by B. Green. 1722.

To the Reader.
W HEN the foregoing Sermon on Eccl. 7. 1. was committed to the Press. I had
not determined any others should (...) it, and therefore gave no notice of any
thing further. But I have since likewise yielded up to my Friends several other
Discourses, which are here submitted, with all their Imperfections. (...)
public View; attributing more to their good Intentions in the Publication than
to my own Objections against it: and choosing (...) to show the Faults of my
Pen, than for the sake of my own (...) discover any Defect of Gratitude and
Civility to such as (...) pleased to hear these Sermons with so great Candor,
and with (...) much importunity to ask the Printing of them. The Sermons with
this Cover are few in number, but (I am sensible) tedious (...) length. I have
not yet learned the modish Way of Preaching or a ^oort, nice, and cursory
manner of handling Texts; nor (...) I affect it. Common Sermons, in a Popular
Audience, allow, (...) indeed require a Style more lax, and verbose, than would
(...) critical and accurate Discourses. Though, these Sermons were (...) (at
least several of them) so large in the first Composing, (...) now in the
Transcribing. The Lecture Sermon is particular much longer: nothing that was
delivered being omitted; (...) many Paragraphs inserted, that were left out for
want of time, (...) some other Enlargements made.

I shall make no Apologies for the publishing, any more than the preaching,
these Sermons: hoping, I Have been governed by (...) Views in both; and not
despairing altogether of their being ^^ful in some little degree to serve the
cause of Peace, and (...) and Holiness among us: which ('it is my comfort) I make
(...) honest Aim and Endeavor; and for which End they are (...) recommended
(together with the generous Publishers, and (...) Readers of them) to the
Divine Blessing, by the unworthy (...).

T.F.
Boston, March 26. 1722.
A SERMON on New Year's Day.
EZEKIEL. XLV. 18. Thus says the Lord GOD, In the first month, in the first day
of the month, thou shall take a young Bullock without blemish, and cleanse the
Sanctuary.
MANY and various were the Rites and solemnities to be attended under the
Ceremonial Dispensation. Most of Them were contained in the Mosaical Law of
Commandments. But here in our Text we have a new Institution; which I don't
remember to have met with before. It is the anniversary Solemnity of Cleansing
the Sanctuary by a sacrifice of atonement in the (...) of the Year. Thus says
the Lord GOD, in the first month, etc.

HERE 1. We may observe the Work assigned:

2. The Time fixed.

1. HERE is a Duty prescribed; namely, The offering a sacrifice to GOD, for
purging of the Temple. The matter of the sacrifice was a Young Bullock without
blemish. Being designed for the Honor of GOD, who is infinitely perfect, it
ought to be the most perfect in it is Kind, else we do not give him the glory
that is due unto his name. -- Moreover, This signified the complete strength
and purity that was to be in CHRIST, the dying sacrifice; and the sincerity of
Heart, and unblame^bleness of Life that should be in Believers, who are
presented to GOD as living sacrifices. The Oblation was to be of the Fattest
and Choicest; for GOD deserves our Best; and Woe to them who present unto Him
only the Halt, the Lame and the Blind, the Torn and the Sick. Should I accept
this of your ^ands? says the LORD. Cursed is the Deceiver, who sacrifices to
the LORD a corrupt thing: For I am a great King, says the LORD of hosts Mal.
1. 13, 14.


NOW the End of this offering was to make Reconciliation for the House of
Israel to cleanse the Sanctuary, to expiate for the sins of the preceding Year;
the Iniquities of the holy Things, both of the Priesthood, and the
Congregation: And also to bespeak the necessary Aids and Restraints of Divine
Grace for the Future; that they might escape former Errors and Pollutions, and
worship and serve GOD in a more holy and acceptable manner.

AND hereby They signified Their Repentance and Humiliation for what had been
amiss in Them and in Their Performances in Time past: as well as Their Vow and
Promise to be more watchful, faithful and diligent in serving GOD for Time to
come.

2. HERE is the Time appointed, even the first Day of the first Month. The work
aforesaid was to be the annual Employment of the New Year's Day. And 'twas
Employment suitable to the Day, well-fitting the season; very proper work to
begin the Year withal.

THE first Day of the first Month is a famous Day in Scripture, for many
memorable Actions and Events. 'Twas on this Day that Noah Gen 8. 13.
first looked out of the Ark, after the Flood, and had the joyful sight of the
restored World. A happy New Year's Day indeed was This. -- 'Twas on this Day
also that Moses Fx^d. 40. 2.
(the man of GOD) reared the Tabernacle for Divine Worship; according to the
Commandment of the LORD. And a good New Year's Day's Work it was. -- And 'twas
on this Day that Ezra the Priest Ev^^ 7 9.
began his Journey from Babylon to Jerusalem, on the pious Intention to set up
the House of GOD there, and to teach in Israel, the good Knowledge of the LORD.
A good beginning of the New-Year! -- And so was that in Hezekiah's Time 2 Chronicles. 29 17
, when on the first Day of the first Month, he began to repair and purify the
Temple, and set in order the Service thereof; having it in his heart at the
same Time to covenant with the LORD GOD of Israel, that his fierce wrath might
turn away from Them.

BY these and other Things, the first Day of the first Month has been
signalized, and has contracted a sort of solemnity; and challenges a special
Regard from Us, in the annual Reversion of it; not indeed a superstitious
Observation of it as holy Time, but an Application of it to some religious
Exercises, which at this Juncture are peculiarly seasonable. And accordingly it
has been the laudable Usage of many serious Christians both ancient and modern,
to distinguish this Day (in the Yearly Returns of it) by agreeable Exercises of
Devotion: Which pious Custom they have found to contribute exceedingly to the
inflaming their Zeal, exciting their Diligence, and promoting their seize
in Religion. And this Reflection (methinks) is Argument enough to recommend the
Practice, were there no Scripture-Rule to enforce it. But I doubt not, The
Precept in my Text is a sufficient Warrant. For though the Jewish Institution of
a Sin-offering on a New Year's Day be out of Date; Yet the general Reason of
the Solemnity remains in full force. Christians are still to offer spiritual
Sacrifices, though the Legal or Ceremonial be abrogated: and we have the same
occasion as the Jews had, to solemnize the Beginning of the Year, by presenting
these unto GOD. And will it not be our Reproach, to fall short of Them in Care
of our Souls, and Duty to our great Master and Benefactor?

BUT (to say no more here) surely it cannot be amiss to begin the Year with
Religion; with which every Week, yea every Day should commence. GOD in the
First and Best Being, and the supreme LORD of all our Time: Hence the First of
every period and Season belongs to Him; and therefore the First Fruits of the
yearly Revolution should be consecrated to his Glory and Service.

BY the good Hand of our God upon us, We are are now arrived to the Beginning
of another year, according to the common Account. And as it falls out in
Providence, our New Year's Day is the L ord's Day, [is Sacrament-Day with us,]
and so is filled up with religious Dutys. Thus we begin the year with GOD. --
Now the LORD keep this in the Imagination of the Though It of our Hearts, and
establish our way before Him: and grant that the Services and Entertainments of
the present Day may have a good Influence on the whole succeeding Year: that,
if we are spared this Year also, we may on the Sabbath, which will close the
year, still feel the happy Impressions of this Sabbath, and have them
abundantly increased.

THERE are special Meditations, religious Tempers, and Actions, which are
eminently suitable to preface and introduce the year withal. Wherefore I
thought, to put you in Mind of These, and exhort you to them, would be a word
in season. And the LORD grant it may be not only seasonable, but also
profitable both to You and to Me, being mixed with Faith!

MY Business now then is to direct you in, and excite you to, a good
Improvement of a New Year's Day.

THE Method I shall go in is this; (1) I shall mention and recommend some
things respecting the year past. (2) Others that respect the year beginning.

SOME think, this first Month has it is Name from ^anua (the Latin for) a Door,
because it is (as were the Door) the Opening or Beginning of a New-year. But
it is most commonly thought, it derives from Janus (a famous Person in heathen
Story, supposed to be the same with Noah in sacred History) who was wont to be
painted with two Faces, which at once saw things past and future. -- And
agreeably this Month (that wears his name) has like him a twofold Aspect, it
points backward as well as forward. Accordingly the customary Inscription of
the Year at present is Double; both the Year passing, and that advancing come
into the usual Date of things. This may give us occasion, not improperly to
take both Years under our consideration. Wherefore as proposed before,

1. I shall instance in some Dutys of Religion relative to the Year concluded;
that very properly challenge a place among the pious Exercises of a New Year's
Day. This indeed I would defer to be the Matter of our Entertainment on the
finishing Sabbath of the Year; but that I know not whether (...) opportunities
shall be continued so long; and probably some of my present Hearers will then
be gone down into the place of Silence. Therefore I shall prevent my self in
saying,

1. WE must look back on the Year concluded with Solemn Repentance for the many
Sins and offenses of it. We should begin the present Year with Penitent
Reflections on the Sins of the foregoing Year: Our own sins, that is; for we
are called (...) judge our selves, and not others. Indeed we should lay to
heart, and sigh and weep for the Abominations committed by others; because of
the Dished nor done thereby to the Name of GOD, and also th^^ we may not
partake of their Guilt and Doom, (...) that which I am now urging more
especially, ^s a deep Self-abasement and Humiliation for our own Personal
Miscarriages, particularly in the last Year. We must be sensible, that we are
daily sinning more or less in Though It, Word, and Deed, through the influence of
corruption within and temptations without. The sorrowful Experience of the most
improved Saints on earth speaks loudly to the truth of this. 'Twas the
complaint of a humble Penitent, My sins are more than the hairs of my head. Who
can understand his errors? -- Doubtless, if we strictly examine the Records of
Conscience, and take an impartial view of the frames of our heart, and the
manner of our conversation in the Year past, We shall all find we have been (some
in a greater, others in a lesser degree) making sad work for Repentance and
have heavy complaints to exhibit against our selves. In many things we all
offend. In all things the very Best come vastly short of their just
obligations. Are there not innumerable instances, wherein we can charge our
selves, either with Omission of, or Negligence in Duty, or Contradiction to it?
Cannot we justly accuse our selves of greatly m^spending Time, and frequently
foregoing desirable opportunities of doing and getting good? -- Has not a
quarter-part of the Year at least with all, and nigh half with the generality
been altogether wasted in our Beds? Truly it is a very humbling consideration,
that we have been obliged, for the relief of our impotent Nature, entirely to
lose so many valuable hours in Sleep as we have, But it is matter of more sad
Reflection, that so much preti^^s Time has by many been spent in Sleep
unneccessary in indulgence of the Flesh; or unseasonably, as in the solemn
Worship of GOD, to the dishonor of his Name, and the wounding of their own
Souls. O that all who are guilty in this point would seriously reflect, and
grievously resent their Sin! -- But then we have in many other ways lost a
great deal of our Time. It is to be feared, that some among us have in a manner
wholly fooled and squandered away the Year, having been idle every Day and all
the Day, as well as Night: Slothful and unprofitable Servants, who have ^id
their Talents in a Napkin, nay have to (...) Lord's Goods in riotous living.
Have not only done nothing at all for the honor of GOD, for the good of their
Neighbor, or the salvation of their own Souls: but have done much to the
contrary; casting off Fear and restraining Prayer before GOD; denying the LORD
that bought them, and despising their own Souls; walking after the Imagination
of the^ evil hearts; indulging themselves in vain Thoughts and vile Affections,
corrupt Communication, and wicked Deeds; being proud, passionate, covetous, or
sensual, unclean, intemperate, unjust, uncharitable, and to every good work
reprobate. Thus they^^ spent their Days in Vanity, and brought their (...) to
an end, as a Tale that is told Isa 92 9.
. A Tragical Story indeed! -- And as to others of us, who have not let the Year
altogether run waste; yet (...) great Portions of it have we thrown away in
Idleness, Folly, and Impertinence; and filled up no (...) of it (as we ought
to, and might, have done) with (...) labor and industry. If we have not (...)
stood still yet we have walked but (...); or gone in (...) round of Duties,
making no progress; and it may be, some have gone back from the LORD in too sad
and shameful degrees. -- How many of us are there, who have done but little
work this year, and got but little good, and but little improved the blessed
means and seasons of grace we have so plentifully and undeservedly enjoyed! Have
we not many of us loytered away much of our Time, and let numberless precious
Minutes, if not Days and Works, slip away in sloth and negligence, which might
have been employed to excellent purposes in the worship and service of GOD, or
in the work of our Generation? How often have we voluntarily neglected, or been
needlessly diverted from holy Duties, Christian Conversation, and various good
Works, which we have had opportunity for, and an outward Call, as well as
inward impulse to? How have Sabbaths been trifled away, and lost? How have
Sermons been forgotten or perverted? And Sacraments omitted or profaned? How
have Closet-Devotions, and Family-Religion been neglected, or carelessly
attended and shuffled over? And how have Relative Dutys been transgressed? How
have the various Providence we have passed under, been unheeded or unprofitable?
Mercies slighted and abused; Afflictions ill-resented and un-improv'd? In a
word, How have our Souls and Eternity been disregarded, the World pursued,
Sense indulged, GOD dishonored, and the Devil gratified, by the Transgressions
of the wicked, the unfruitful (...) of Christians, and the Apostasies of
Professors! For as some of the Best have lived to very small purpose, and (...)
forth but little Fruit: So many others (we may fear) have lived to very ill
purpose, bringing forth Fruit to themselves, wild grapes, the grapes of Sodom,
and clusters of Gomorrha. Have we not reason to lament, that there are some
Professors, who have this Year miserably fallen behind-hand, and gone back in
Religion, decayed in Grace, and declined in their Zeal and Activity for GOD,
Love to his House and Day, Ordinances and Ministers, and the Communion of
Saints! Are there not some, wh^ profess to know GOD; yet in works have denied
him Being disobedient, proud, profane, earthly, sensual; Careless about and
formal in religious Dutys, disorderly in their walk, gradually leaving off to
be wise and to do good, and frequently allowing themselves in those sinful
neglects or vicious practices, which (it may be) once they abhorred and trembled
at; securely venturing into the way of Temptations, and patiently suffering the
World, or the Flesh, by degrees to recover it is Dominion and le^^ them captive.
It may be there are those here present, who having begun in the spirit, have
(...) in the flesh; who little thought in the Beginning of the Year, that such
a fearful Change would come upon them so soon. And if it had then been
prognosticated, what they would be, and how they would speak, and behave
themselves before the Year's End, they would have said, GOD forbid! Be it far
from me! Am I (...) Dog, that I should do this abominable thing? -- Oh! How
treacherous and deceitful are our Hearts! How sickle and false, how variable
and unsteady a Creature is Man! Unstable, as water, carried about with every
wind, an easy Prey to every Adversary; and never able to stand in the hour of
Temptation, unless almighty Grace prevent, restrain, support, and strengthen!

O Let us all now consider our Ways, look back upon the past Year, and weep
over the manifold miscarriages of it. Thus, let the Sinner and ungodly review
his Life, and call to mind (as far as possible) and lay to heart the many sins
he has been guilty of. O let there not be occasion for the LORD, to renew that
Complaint (Jer. 8. 6.) I hearkened and heard, but they spoke not aright: No man
repented him of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? But from an humbling
Conviction that there is just ground for it, seriously put this Inquiry to your
Consciences; and accomplish a diligent search, that if possible you may find
out all that has been amiss. And when you remember all your Transgressions
Ez^k. 20, 43.
, wherewith you have displeased GOD and defiled your selves, Repent in
sackcloth and ashes, loathing your selves in your own sight, ashamed of your
folly, and afraid of the Judgments of GOD, which hang over your guilty Heads.

LET Hypocrites in Heart, that have been heaping up wrath Job 36 13.
, mocking GOD, flattering themselves, and deceiving others, by a plausible
Profession, by specious Pretenses, and external Performances of Religion; being
Saints in appearance unto Men; but Sinners exceedingly before the Lord; I say,
let these sinners in Zion be afraid Isa. 33 1.
. May Fearfulness surprise the Hypocrites! O let your Heart meditate the
Terror, and your Ear hearken to the Advice that is set before you in those
applicable and awful words, (Acts 8. 21, etc.) Thou have neither Part nor Let
in (...) matter: for thy heart is (...) in the sight of God. Repent therefore
of thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the tho'^ of (...) heart may be
forgiven thee For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in
the! ^ond of iniquity.

LET Apostate Professors consider and bewail their sad Declensions; and tremble
at that terrible word of the LORD, (Heb. 10. 38.) If any man brace back, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him.

LET the Children of GOD, whose Hearts are established with Grace, also revive
the memory of their Failing and Follys in the last Year, and renew their
Repentance for'em. Let every one make a Review, and see what has been the
ordinary Temper of his Heart, and the general Tenor of his Life: and be
greatly bumbled for his unfruitfulness, unusefulness, and many mistakes and
faults both of common infirmity and grosser aggravation; abundance whereof (no
doubt) will come to mind upon diligent self-examination, O let us all deeply
blush and mourn, in the Remembrance of what has been amiss in us. Let us be
covered with a holy confusion of face, and filled with unfeigned Contrition of
heart; and let us give glory to GOD, by the Renewal of our humble and penitent
Confessions to him.

EVEN among Christians now (as well as among the Jews of old) there should be a
Remembrance had of Sins every Year (...)
, and our Remorse for them anew excited and expressed; and fresh applications
by Faith, made to the Blood of Atonement, for the confirmed Pardon of our sins,
and the acceptance of our Repentance, former as well as latter.

THE Jews of old were to have their annual day of Atonement, notwithstanding
the daily expiatory Sacrifices preceding: and it argued the Invalidity of the
ceremonial oblations to take away Sin, that in them there was a Remembrance
again made of sins every year. The Repetition of them did infer (and was
occasioned by) their insufficiency to make the Comers thereunto perfect; as the
Apostle argues in Heb. 10. 1, 2. -- But indeed now under the Gospel, We have a
better Sacrifice Hob. 9. 23.
, which having been offered once for all Chap. 10. 10.
, is a sufficient Propitiation, not for out Sins only, but for the Sins of the
whole World 1 Job. 2. ^.
, is of unceasing and unbounded Efficacy, and needs not to be offered again:
nor need the atoning Virtue of it be more than once applied by GOD for the same
Sin. Yet this does not forbid the repeated Exercises of Faith and Repentance,
nor render a Yearly Recollection of Sins improper or unnecessary. For such were
the manifold Defects of our former Repentance (both as to the Extent and the
Intenseness of it,) that we may well renew our penitential Tears over that: And
then, tho the Guilt and damming Efficacy of Sin repented of, be perfectly put
away by a complete Remission: yet the Stain and Lust is but imperfectly done
away by Mortification and Sanctification; and moreover the Sin may remane in
many afflictive evil Effects. Now these things are matter of great Humiliation,
and may well open again the springs of Repentance, and make our hearts to flow
afresh with godly Sorrow; and quicken us to apply anew by Faith to the Blood of
Sprinkling, for the Confirmation of our Pardon, and the gracious accepting of
our Repentance past an^ present.

OF old on the New Year's day, was the Feast (...) Trumpets; when with uncommon
Solemnity the Jewish Priests sounded (as some think Godwyn's Moses and Aaron.
page 136.
) Ram's Horns in memory of Isaac's Deliverance, and a Ram's being sacrificed in
his room; which typify'd CHRIST the Mediator and Propitiatory Sacrifice. And
this blowing the Horn might typify the Preaching of the Gospel, which calls
Sinners to repent, and believe in CHRIST. I have therefore been doing but the
proper work of a New Year's day, in sounding the Gospel-Trumpet, and calling
upon you to repent of Sin and fly to the Sacrifice of Atonement.

BUT so much for the first Head; which I Have been the longer upon, because of
the singular Importance of it; and it is Influence into the other religious
Exercises of a New-Year's-Day: which I (...) proceed more briefly to speak of.

2. WE should make suitable Reflections on the several Occurrences and Events of
the Year. We should endeavor to recollect the various Providence which have
passed over us, our Persons, Families Relatives; and every remarkable
Dispensation public or private, wherein we have been any way interested: but
especially such as were of mean^ concernment to us, We should take a particular
Notice of. Here I may say, --

(1.) WE should look back on the Mercies of the Year with Gratitude and Praise.
We should reflect on the several favorable Passages of the Year; an^ remember
the Loving Kindness of the LORD according to all His Mercies, which He has
bestowed on us. We should magnify His Name with Thanksgiving, and not forget
all His Benefits. -- In general, We should adore the Divine Patience and
Goodness toward us, in undeservedly lengthening out our Abode on Earth, and
adding one Year more to the Days of the Years of our frail and sinful Lives. It
is a Fruit of the Long-suffering and Forbearance of a good GOD, that we have
yet a Standing in his Vineyard! Such barren Trees and unprofitable Cumberers of
the Ground might justly have been long since cut down, and cast (as proper
Fuel) into the unquenchable Fire. -- O let us therefore take a thankful Notice
of the Divine Patience, in sparing us to the End of another Year. -- Moreover,
in particular, let us call to mind and be thankful for those many Mercies and
Blessings, that the Year has been replenished withal, and whereby it has been
brightened and sweetened unto us.

THUS the Mercies of a Temporal Nature and external Reference should be
gratefully remembered and acknowleged. Have the eyes of the LORD our GOD been
upon us for good, from the beginning of the Year to the end thereof? Has He
crowned the Year with His goodness, and filled it with the tokens of his favor
on civil, secular, and bodily Accounts? Have we had the supports and comforts
of Life continued to us; success in our Trade and Business granted us;
Happiness in Relations and Neighbors; quiet Habitations and convenient
Dwellings; the use of our Reason, the vigor of our Senses and soundness of our
Limbs? Have we had continued Ease, Health, and Strength of Body? Or been raised
up from Sickness, and recovered of threatening Diseases? Have we been safely and
comfortably carried through any other considerable Dangers and Distresses, and
had the Divine Providence remarkably interposing for us in seasonable Succors,
Preservations, and Deliverances? -- In a Word, Has it been a Year of Peace and
Liberty, of Plenty and Prosperity with us? -- We must remember these Things;
own the Hand of GOD, and acknowledge his Wisdom, Power, and Goodness in them,
with all Thankfulness. We must adore and praise GOD as our constant Protector,
and bountiful Benefactor; and give him the praise and glory of all that, which
we have had the Good and Comfort of.

ESPECIALLY, Let us be thankful to GOD for Spiritual Blessings; Divine Mercies
relating to our Souls and everlasting Concerns. Thus, has it been a Year of
desirable Opportunities for our Souls? Have we had an uninterrupted Course of
quiet and holy Sabbaths, the free and full Enjoyment of Sanctuary-Privileges
and Entertainments; the Means of Grace in purity and plenty dispensed to us? --
We should bless GOD for such invaluable advantages.

HAS it been a Year of blessed Spiritual Experiences; powerful strivings of the
holy SPIRIT with us, and heavenly Impressions on our Souls? We should
especially bless GOD for such Mercies.

HAS this been the Year of our Conversion to GOD; the acceptable Year of the
LORD, the Year of our Redemption, and the time of Love? O let us remember the
loving kindness of GOD our SAVIOR, and rejoice in his good Work upon us!
triumphing in the Praise of his rich and sovereign Grace abounding toward us.

OR has this been a Year of our special Sanctification, and Consolation? Have
we had the great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls continually leading and
feeding us; and by his powerful Influences nourishing, and cherishing, and
maturing us? Have we been increasing with the Increase of GOD, and growing in
Spiritual Knowledge, Faith, Holiness, and Comfort? Have we had special Communion
with GOD in Ordinances and Providence? Have we received any signal answers of
Prayer; or experienced the fulfillment of Divine Promises in any remarkable
Instances? Have we been preserved from, or supported under, and saved out of
any peculiar Temptation to Sin or Error? Have we been reduced from initial
Wanderings at any time? Have we been much quickened to the Duty of our
respective Stations and several Relations; been assisted, enlarged, and
succeeded therein? -- In a word, Have we had any singular opportunities of
glorifying GOD, and serving our Generation; been spirited to improve them,
(...) had Prosperity following our pious Attempts.

VERILY, those are favors, which they can never enough be thankful for, who
have been made the happy Subjects of them. O let us every one consider what has
been our Experience in these things: and wherein we have tasted the loving
kindness of the Lord, (whether in this or that instance, and in what degree
forever) let us, with the devout Psalmist, call upon our Souls, and all that is
within us to bless the Lord; and let us magnify his holy Name with thankful
Hearts and joyful Lips. -- Thus the Mercies of the Year are to be recorded and
reflected on with Gratitude and Praise. And I might add here, not improperly;
What is the matter of our Joys and Praises, as to the time past, let it be the
Encouragement of our Hopes for the future. "Let the last Year's Experience help
to support and cherish this Year's Expectations". He that has delivered, we
may trust (...) yet deliver, and still prevent us with the blessings of
Goodness.

(2.) WE should look back on the Troubles and Trials of the Year, with humble,
Patience, Meekness, and Submission. Doubtless we have all had our Afflictions
of one sort or other, in greater or lesser degrees. And as we should recollect
our Mercies; so it is no less proper to recall our Afflictions. But then we
must beware of all carnal Regret, Repining and Impatience (which we shall be
much in danger of) under the remembrance of them. We must see and own the Hand
of GOD in all the sad Occurrences of the Year; and adore his Sovereignty,
Holiness, Justice, Wisdom, and Goodness in them: and be reconciled to all
Events, however cross and adverse.

THUS, has it been a Year of Trouble with us on Spiritual Accounts? Have we
been exercised with grievous Temptations; have we been under the awful
Withdraws of the Spirit of GOD, been left to Decays in Grace, and Falls into
Sin, which have provoked GOD to hide his Face from us, and remove our Souls far
off from Peace, and fill us with great Bitterness? Have we had but little
Communion with GOD; little Assistence from GOD, and little (...) in the Work
and Service He has been calling us unto? -- In a word, Whatsoever Soul- wants,
or Soul-(...), we have been under (...) these things we must recall to mind and
lay to heart; remembering our Affliction and our Misery, the Wormwood and the
Gall. My Soul has them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me Lam. 3. 19,
20.
.

OR, has it been a Year of Trouble with us on Temporal Accounts? Thus, Have we
met with disappointments in Trade by Sea or Land; has Business failed; have
Thieves robbed, Debtors defrauded, or Creditors oppress^ us, and the like? Have
we received unkindnesses from Friends, or met with Crosses in Relations? Have
we suffered in our good Name, and been vexed with the strife of Tongues, and
the scourge of lying (...). Have we been visited with Sickness in our Persons
or Families? Has Death come up into our Windows, to cut off our lovely
Children; to take away the Desire of our Eyes; or Lover and Friend to put far
from us, and our Acquaintance into Darkness?

IN short; Whatever Danger or Disaster we have met with, We must see that all
proceeds from the Lord, and therefore hold our Peace, and not open our Mouths
in any way of Murmuring and Complaint. Psalm. 39. 9. I was dumb, I opened not my
mouth; because thou did it. We must justify GOD in all his Proceedings,
however (seemingly) harsh or rigorous; and to the Glory of his Name acknowledge,
with afflicted humble Ezra, -- after all that is come upon us for our evil
deeds, Thou our GOD have punished us less than our iniquities deserve Ezra 9.
13.
.

3. WE should make our fervent Addresses to the Throne of Grace, in the way of
Prayer: -- Entreating, that GOD would pardon all the Sins of the Year past and
of our whole Life, and not remember them against us: that old Guilt may be
purged away, now we are entering on a New-Year. Again, That he would accept us
in all the Services of the Year; that our spiritual Sacrifices, and all the
good Deeds, which by the help of his Grace we have done, or desired to do, for
the honor of his Name, and serving of our Generation, may be accepted in his
sight. So Nehemiah prayed; Neh. 13. 22. 31.
Remember (...) O my God, concerning this also, and spare me according to the
greatness of thy mercy. Remember me, O my God, for good. -- Finally, That the
good Impressions of the Year may remane; that the Ordinances and Providence
(whether merciful or afflictive) wherein we have met with GOD, may have a
fresh and lasting Influence on our Souls; that the good Effects of them may
abide, and our spiritual Experiences not be forgotten nor become useless to us:
But that we may always reap some benefit and advantage from them. -- Such
Petitions as these, we must put up to GOD, relating to the Year past; therewith
acting Faith in JESUS CHRIST, for the application of his cleansing Blood, and
the communication of his sanctifying and comforting Spirit, for these ends. --
But, thus much may suffice to have been said concerning the time past, and the
duties reflex.

I proceed in the next place,

II. TO instance in some prospective Dutys; or Religious Frames and Exercises,
relative to the Year advancing.

THUS, in the 1st. place, We must make a serious Dedication of our selves to
the Service of GOD, with the most solemn Resolutions to live unto his Glory
more than ever. This is what a grateful sense of Divine Goodness to us in the
past Years of our Lives, as well as the consideration of Duty and Interest,
should engage us unto. I beseech you therefore, Brethren, by the Mercies of
GOD, that ye present your Bodies, a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to GOD;
which is your reasonable service: and be not conformed to this world; but be ye
transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is the good
will of GOD Rom 1^ 1. ^.
. If the LORD spare is this Year also, he will come seeking Fruit from us; and
we must give an Account unto Him. We should therefore be engaging our selves to
that Duty, which He requires, by the bonds of holy Resolutions. We must, by
lively acts of Devotion, consecrate all the Powers of Soul and Body, all our
Strength, and Time, and Talents to the use and honor of our great LORD and
Master; resolving to be His, wholly, only, and continually; resolving to redeem
the Time, to be fruitful in every good word and work; and to glorify him in all
things through JESUS CHRIST. We must particularly oblige our selves by sincere and
solemn Vows, to endeavor the Reformation of ourselves and our Families from,
and to be watchful against, all those Sins which we have been most
incidentandinclined to; to take up the practice of those Duties we have hitherto
omitted, and come into a speedy attendance on those Ordinances we have hitherto
neglected; to be more vigorous in those Performances, which heretofore we have
been too apt to trifle in: to be diligent in the discharge of those Trusts of
any consequence, which we may be now in the exercise or expectation of: and
faithful in the Improvement of all those Opportunities of doing or receiving
Good, which we may probably look to meet with, in the several Stations and
Relations we hold among Men. In a word, we should devote to GOD, to his use and
service, the whole ensuing Year, and all the days and moments of it:
unfeignedly desiring that they may all be some how improved to his Glory; and
resolving that we will live to his Praise more than ever heretofore will be
more zealous for his Interest, and more Zealous of good Works; more laborious
and constant in working out our own Salvation, as well as doing good in our
Generation: reserving no secret Lust of the mind or of the flesh to be
gratified, nor grudging any Pains, and boggling at no Difficulty, that we may
serve, please and glorify GOD, win CHRIST and finish the course of this Year
with Joy, if we should live to see the Period of it. -- But Oh! how improbable
is this, as to some of us at least? This may be the last Year of our Lives; it
may be so (...) many of us; none, but the GOD of Life, knows who will this Year
be called to die. O let us seriously entertain this Though It. -- The Conclusion of
One Year more should put us upon thinking of the Conclusion of all our Years:
And this Reflection should quicken us (methinks) to begin well the Year
advancing as not knowing but that it may be our dying Year and therefore to
resolve with holy Job, that all the days of our appointed time we will wait
till (...) Change shall come; in a daily expectation of it, and a diligent
preparation for it; doing with might what our hands find to do, referring to
the Glory of GOD, to our own or others Good. -- O let us not stir out of these
Doors, without such pious Resolves, and such a solemn act of self-Dedication.
This should be the Axis and Center of every Year's Revolution. Have any of you
had any good Purposes and Resolutions in your minds, the prosecution whereof
has hitherto been delayed? Put it off no longer. Is the House of GOD yet to be
set up in your hearts, the work to be begun? Begin it to ^ay, as Moses did, who
on the first day of the first month set up the Tabernacle. Are there things
amiss with you to be amended, Corruptions to be purged out, and things wanting
to be set in order? Begin this day to reform, as Hezekiah did, who on the first
day of the first (...) began to sanctify the House of the Lord: So will you
make this Day in the best manner remarkable, and this Year comfortable Mr.
Henry's England's Hopes. A Sermon preached on New Year's Day.
.

2. WE should be mindful of the Changes, that we are liable to; and begin the
Year with a holy Fear and Trembling, not knowing the things that shall befall
us. As to our Spiritual Concerns, we should look forward with a godly Jealousy,
a humble Self-diffidence and Self-suspicion; considering that the way we have
to go, is through an Enemies Country; and knowing how apt we are to stumble and
stray, and how easily ensnared by Temptations, which surround us continually.
Who knows what Snares the Enemy has laid for him this Year; what Temptations
may assault him; and into what Sins he may fall, to the dishonor of GOD, and
the wounding of his own Soul? Who knows, what Troubles of Conscience and
Anxieties of mind he may be left to; what decays in Grace and losses of Comfort
he may suffer? We should endeavor so to fear the worst, as to avoid Security;
and yet so to hope the best, as not to sink into Despondency. Be not
high-minded, but fear. Fear falling into Sin; fear falling under GOD's
Displeasure. Happy is the man, that thus fears always. -- Again, as to our
Temporal Concerns, we should begin the Year with very humble Prospects;
knowing, that our Times are in GOD's hand, and that he changes the Times
according to his sovereign Pleasure; knowing that the Fashion of this World
passes away; and that we have forfeited all our Enjoyments into the hands of
Divine Justice; and therefore may well look for dark and afflictive Revolutions
of Providence. Have we the World at present smiling (...) us? Are we in Health
and Ease and Esteem Business growing, Family flourishing, Relatives and
Neighbors comfortable, and every Circumstances affording very bright and
hopeful Prospects to us. Yet we should beware of securely trusting in Worldly
Enjoyments, or vainly flattering our selves with Worldly Hopes. Trust not in
uncertain Riches. Say not in your Prosperity; I shall never be moved (...), I
shall die in my nest. Say not; We will (...) into such a City, and continue
there a Year, and (...), and get gain: For ye know not what (...) be on the
morrow Jam. 4 14.
. Say not; Soul, eat, drink and be merry; Thou have Goods laid up for many
Years: since thy Soul may this night be required of thee. Boast not thy self of
to morrow; for thou know not what a day ^ay bring forth. In a little while
your Riches and Worldly Goods may take to themselves wings and fly away, and
leave you: or Death will come, and carry you away from them; and then whose
shall all these things be? In that very day all your Thoughts and Hopes about
this World shall perish, and all your earthly Comforts be taken from you. O let
the Rich and Covetous consider this; and not set their hearts on that which is
not. Let the Brisk and Voluptuous consider this; and not dwell carelessly,
putting far from them the evil day. Let such as are Young and beginning the
World consider this; and not labor to be rich nor seek great things for
themselves: but lay their Expectations and Desires low; remembering the days of
Darkness, which shall be many.

3. THERE must be a mixture of Hope, and Trust in GOD. Hope and Fear must be
kept on a Balance. Amazing Dread is to be avoided, as well as Presuming
Confidence. We must be so apprehensive of Changes, as not to grow secure: and
yet we must maintain a good Hope through Grace; not casting away our humble
confidence. We must not be so afraid of Evil Tidings, as to be dispirited and
despondent. We must not let our Fears so pr^vale, as to silence our Prayers, or
weaken our Hands in Duty, and interrupt us in our Work. We must encourage our
selves in the Lord, as David 1 Samuel 30. 6.
in his distress did; and fetch relief from the Divine Promises, when Dangers
look us in the face, or Burdens lie on our backs. We should realise the Truth
of those great and precious Promises which GOD has given us in His Word; and
look forward with Satisfaction in the Goodness, Power, and Wisdom of Divine
Providence; to the watchful Care whereof, we must in well-doing commit our
selves: entrusting GOD with all our Concerns Temporal and Spiritual, Personal
and Relative. In the fairest and most pleasing Prospects, owning His Sovereign
Dominion, and having all our Relyance on His Providence and Promises; but
renouncing all Creature-Dependencies. And in the darkest Views and Appearances
of things still keeping up a cheerful Trust and humble Hope in GOD; being quiet
from the inordinate fear of Evil; and anxiously careful about nothing: Having
our hearts fixed, trusting in the LORD, and waiting for His Salvation. We must
act Faith on all the Promises of GOD; but especially those great and precious
Promises, wherein we are assured, that the LORD is a Sun and a Shield; that He
will give Grace and Glory, and withold no good thing from them that walk
uprightly; and that all things shall work together for good to them which love
GOD. Psalm. 84. 11. Romans 8. 28.

4. THERE must be a hearty Resignation to the Will of GOD, as to the Events
that may be in the womb of Providence. We must lay our selves, and all our's,
at the foot of Divine Sovereignty; submit all that we have and are to the
Divine Dispose; and resolve to acquiesce in every Allotment of our heavenly
Father: (...) follow the Spirit of GOD in all our Affections,and the Providence
of GOD in all our Affairs, whatever He shall appoint us to, this Year See Mr.
Matthew. Henry's Life. Chap. 5. Which the Reader will do well to read often and
where he may find several Hints that are offered in this Discourse.
. We must commit our Ways to the Lord, and cast all our care on him, who
performs all things for us; steadfastly purposing to welcome the will of GOD
in all His Dealings with us, respecting either our Souls and the concerns of
our spiritual State, or our Bodies and the circumstances of our outward
Condition. We must resign all our Interests, and refer all our Cares unto Him.
We must sacrifice to GOD our Persons, Lives, Names, Estates, Families, even all
our Enjoyments, and all our Hopes; resolving to be satisfied whether it be a
Year of Troubles, and Trials, or of Peace and Joy. Come Sickness, or Health;
Confinement, or Liberty; Pain, or Ease; Poverty, or Plenty; Loss, or Gain;
Reproach and Disgrace, or Reputation and Preferment; Sorrow and Mourning, or
Consolation and Rejoicing; Death and Bereavements, or continuance of Life and
Increase of our Offspring; Crosses, or Comforts in Neighbors and Relations,
etc. In a word, whatever comes, we must resolve to be easy, and to welcome
every Occurent however evil; endeavoring after the same resigned frame as David
was in when he uttered those words, (2 Samuel 15. 25, 26.) -- If I shall find
favor in the eyes of the LORD, he will bring me again, and show me both it,
and his habitation. But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee: behold, here
am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him.

5. THERE must be the exercises of a lively Faith in JESUS CHRIST. We must go
forth in (...) Righteousness and Strength, from a conviction of our own
Unrighteousness, Unworthiness and Weakness. We must act faith on CHRIST for all
that Wisdom and Grace, which we may need in doing the Work, and bearing the
Afflictions of the Year; in fulfilling the Resolutions we have made,and
resisting the Temptations we may meet withal. We must rely on Him for His holy
SPIRIT, to accompany Ordinances and Providence, and sanctify them unto us. We
must rely on His Merits for acceptance with GOD in our present acts of
Devotion, and in all the future Performances and Works of the Year. In a word,
We must by an eye of faith have a view to CHRIST, as the meritorious and the
efficient (...) all our hopes of needful Benefits for one (...); and of
^^^fulness we must expect to receive the Blessings we ask for. We must look on
the Promises as founded in the Mediator; and desire to receive all our supports
and comforts from them, through His hand.

6. And lastly, THERE must be earnest Prayer to GOD, with respect to the
ensuing Year. There are many Errands to the Throne of Grace, many Petitions
proper to be put up on the present occasion. Here to give a (...) hints
briefly; --

AS to our selves, personally considered; we should pray that the hand of our
GOD may be upon as for Good, from the beginning of the Year to the and thereof.
We should pray with submission to the Will of GOD, that He would provide for
us, as to our outward man; that He would smile upon us in our worldly Affairs
and Concerns; that He would daily follow us with His Benefits, and crown the
Year with His Goodness; that it may be a Year of continued Health, Peace,
Liberty, Plenty, Success in our Callings, and Prosperity in all our lawful
Designs and Undertakings: and that all our Blessings may flow to us from
Covenant-Love; that we may see and enjoy GOD, and taste His special Favor in
the fruits of His common Bounty. -- Or however we must pray that GOD would
prepare us, if it is to be a Year of Trials and Troubles; whether Personal
Troubles in Mind or Body, Name or Estate; or Family-Troubles; or Public
Grievances: Whatever be the Affliction or Afflictions which Providence has
designed for us, that we may be fitted therefore; and enabled to endure them
patiently, as well as to improve them fruitfully: and to do the Duty of every
new Condition we may be brought into. -- We must pray, that the Presence of GOD
may be afforded to us, His spiritual and gracious Presence: that GOD would be
with us through the Year and keep (...) in all way we have to go: that He would
continue to us the Means of Grace, and all our precious advantages for our
Souls; and (...) us to make a wise and faithful Improvement of (...): That He
would add His special Blessing to the Means, and make them effectual for saving
Good unto us. -- Thus, Sinners Unregenerate should pray, that this may be the
happy Year of their Conversion: Yea, that this first day of the Year may be the
day of God's (...) upon them; that now the^ may be made a willing People, a
(...) People to GOD: that old things may pass away and all things become new
within them: that they may have a new Heart, and lead a new Life; and may no
longer spend their Years in Vanity, nor consume their Days in Wrath. -- So the
Saints of the most High should pray, that this may be to them a Year of eminent
Growth in every Grace, of Progress in universal Holiness, of much Communion
with GOD, and special Usefulness in their respective Places and Relations. We
should pray, that in the diligent attendence to Ordinances and Duties we may
this Year be built up in CHRIST, receive more of the Spirit in His Gifts and
Graces, as well as Comforts; and be advanced Heaven-wards: also that in the
prudent and faithful use of all our Opportunities, we may bring much Glory to
our GOD, and be Blessings to our Generation. That GOD would restrain us from
every Sin; more and more mortify our Lusts; fortify us against Temptations; and
furnish us to every good Thought, Word, and Work. That He would help us to
acknowledge Him in all our Ways, and to serve Him in all our Capacities
according to His will. That He would ordain to Himself special Ho^our from us,
and to the World special Benefit That we may be ready to all good Works; and do
even our common Actions after a godly manner, in the Name of CHRIST, as well as
for the Glory of GOD; and fill up our whole Time with Work, as the Duty of
every Day requires: that if we live to the close of this Year we may be able to
give a better Account of it, than we can of the last. -- And if this should, by
the will of GOD, be the Year of our Death, and the End of our appointed Time,
(as probably it will with some of us) that we may be found about our Master;s
work; ready to be offered, and willing to die; and may enter into our Master's
Joy. In a word, It should be our Hearts Desire and Prayer, that CHRIST may be
magnified in us, whether it be by Life or Death; and that whether present or
absent we may be accepted of (...) the Lord. Thus as to our selves. -- Again,
As to our Families and Friends, this is a proper time to recommend them to
GOD's Blessing with a peculiar solemnity. We should in Prayer seriously wish a
good Year to all our Domestics, all our Relatives, and Acquaintants, as well
as our selves. Now it is a fit Season in a more solemn manner to bless our
Household, and pray for our Relations and Friends, our Parents, our Consorts,
our Children, our Neighbors; even all that are near and dear to us: to resign
them unto GOD by lively acts of Faith, and commit them to the Divine Keeping
and Blessing by servant Prayer. -- Further, As to the Church of CHRIST in the
World; now is a fit opportunity to be more large and Solemn in our
Intercessions for this: that the Year of the Lord's Redeemed may be hastened,
and the Time of Reformation come, the Time of Refreshment from the Presence of
the LORD, and the Year of Enlargement. -- Again as to our Nation and Country,
that it may be to them a Year of Peace, and advancement in Happiness, and
Glory, So, as to the particular Town and Church which we belong to; that it may
be a good Year unto them, a Year of Tranquillity and Prosperity. That the Town
may have a Year of Health, and Success, and be made to flourish in all it is
Interests: that the Church may have (...) to it daily such as shall be (...)
the Officers and Members of it may be under the special Conduct and Blessing of
the great Bishop of Souls; walking together in the Fear and Favor of GOD, in
the Faith and Order of the Gospel, and in the Comforts of the Holy Ghost.

THUS I have in some imperfect manner gone through what was proposed; and have
set before you some of those religious Frames and Exercises, which are
especially seasonable on a New Year's Day.

AND new what remains? But that we all apply what has been said, and put these
Rules in practice. O that there were such an Heart in us! That we might every
one be persuaded and enabled thus to begin the Year with GOD; every Year, and
the advancing Year particularly.

TO excite hereunto, consider, --

1. THIS is most highly Reasonable. Every Act and Exercise, that has been
directed to, is at all times our reasonable Service; and at such a time as this
peculiarly seasonable. Indeed the Work is in general the common Business of
every Day: However, this hinders not but that it may be the more solemn
Employment of some special Days on the Year. And so indeed it ought to be. Not
only the first Day in every Week (tho this indeed especially) ought to be thus
devoted to religious Exercises: but also the Beginning of every Month, and the
Beginning of every Year are very fit seasons for the like Employment. It is but
^it and just that GOD, who is the First, should have the First, and be first
(...). The Heathen could say: A (...). Begin with GOD, whatever you do.

2. THIS will be of very Profitable Tendency; and afford us the best Prospects,
as to the ensuing Year. It Is the general Salutation of the Day, I wish you a
happy New Year. This is what (...) seriously and heartily wish you all; and in
Token of my good Wishes, I have entertained you with such a Discourse at this
Time; in which I have directed you to one of the most excellent methods to
obtain the happy Year we wish one another.

THUS to begin the Year with GOD, is the most hopeful way to render it a good
and holy, a prosperous and comfortable Year. This is a way to engage our selves
to spend the Year with GOD, in his Service and for his Glory. It is a proper
and very effectual means to keep up a lively Zeal for GOD, to keep us close to
Duty, to make us wise in the Improvement of our Time, and quicken us to an
unwearied activity in doing the Work of the Year. Moreover, This is a way to
engage the special Presence of GOD to be with us through the Year; which is the
Source of all true Prosperity, and which we have absolute need of, to direct
and protect us in all our Ways, to assist and succeed us in all our
Undertakings, to supply our Wants, and sweeten out Enjoyments, to support us
under Afflictions, and make every Event (whether prosperous or adverse) to work
together for our real (that is spiritual) Good. These Benefits are the
desirable Fruits of the Divine Presence; and what, a good beginning of the Year
has a happy Tendency to secure unto us.

LET us take he Advice then given (in Job 22. 21.) Acquaint now thy self with
him, and (...) at (...): thereby Good shall come unto thee, Let us begin the
Year with GOD; sincerely applying our selves to the Work before us, and giving
diligence therein: so shall we take a sure method to obtain a good and happy
Year, if we live; and a blessed Eternity, if we die. If we now give up our
selves to GOD in CHRIST, and continue walking with him, in all his Ordinances
and Commandments, we shall spend our Days, not under the Wrath and Rebukes of
GOD, but under his gracious Conduct, Smiles and Blessing: and should it be our
dying Year, we shall end our Days in his Favor, shall finish our Course with
Joy, and be received into the Heavenly Paradise, where there is neither
Beginning of Days, nor End of Years; where there is no more Death, neither
Sorrow, nor Crying, nor any more Pain; but an uninterrupted Eternity of perfect
Happiness and Glory. This will be our Crown and Reward. This is our blessed
Hope. O let us be looking, longing and preparing for it. And as the Apostle
exhorts, Heb. 4. 11, 16. Let us labor to enter into that Rest: -- For which
end, Let us come boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need. Heb. 3. 12, 13, 14. Take heed, brethren,
l^st there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the
living God. But exhort one another daily while it is called, To day; (...) any
of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin. For we are made partakers
of Christ, if we (...) the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto the end.

A SERMON Preached ON THE Last Day of the Year.
JOHN VII. 37. In the last day, that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood, and
cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink
I Shall for brevity's sake wave the Formality of a Preface; and immediately
take these Words under Consideration. In which we may --

I. OBSERVE the Person speaking, i. e. Jesus; The Eternal SON of GOD, incarnate
in our Nature: the great Teacher and Prophet, the true and faithful Witness;
whose Sayings are faithful sayings, and worthy of all Acceptance. -- It is He,
that now speaks: they are His words; they are gracious Words proceeding out of
the Mouth of Him that is True, and whose Lips are a Well of Life. Let us
therefore believe what is said, and be affected with it. Surely it must be
something great and good, wise and weighty, that falls from the Tongue of that
Just One, that Wisdom of GOD.

II. OBSERVE the Speech it self; which is an Invitation to thirsty Souls, to
come unto CHRIST, and drink. -- (I.)Observe the Persons invited; namely, All
those that thirst, i. e. are concerned about and desirous of the salvation of
their Souls -- He invites Such as thirst. Now this Thirsting implys several
things. As, a Sense of Indigency; Those that thirst, feel their want of
Refreshment. -- Also, an Appetite and Craving: a making out and reaching after
some suitable Good to supply the Wants of the Soul. Such as thus are spiritually
athirst, our Savior speaks to in the Text. Yea, all such. The Invitation is
general and indefinite; -- If any man. Man is the Object of this Invitation;
not Devils. O astonishing Distinction of Sovereign Grace! -- Any man that
thirsts, is invited. O amazing Extent of Divine Mercy! -- The Rock, that so
plentifully gushed out refreshing Water to the Israelites in the parched
Wilderness, was a Figure and Type of CHRIST; and every one had liberty to drink
of that Rock 1 Cor 10. 4.
. Even thus the waters of Life, that flow from the Spiritual Rock, are free for
any man that is thirsty. Not the vilest and most unworthy Person is excepted.
All that find their want, and desire a supply, are here invited. In CHRIST
there is enough for all; and the Offer takes in all. None are excluded, but
such as shut out themselves by Unbelief. No thirsty Soul need doubt of a
welcome Reception with CHRIST. -- O happy News this, ^o poor self-condemned
distressed Sinners! How should we admire the Riches of free Grace! And how
should we love and honor the Gospel, which brings to us these glad Tidings of
great Joy? -- But in the next place, (2) Observe what these thirsty Souls are
invited to; i. e. To some and drink. [1] Here is a Duty required; namely, To
come unto CHRIST. This implys an entertaining his Doctrines; a laying hold on
his Righteousness; a putting our selves under his Government; a submitting to
his Discipline, etc. This coming to CHRIST implys a believing on Him, a
receiving of Him in all his Mediatorial Offices, and a relying on Him for
Pardon, Grace, and Glory. -- We must thus come to CHRIST by Faith. We must see
and own CHRIST, to be the Fountain of living Waters. We must feel our need of
Him; We must depend on him, and seek to him (and no other) to be a Fountain of
Life unto us. The Invitation from CHRIST is, Let him come unto ME. So Mat. 11.
28. Come unto ME, all ye that labor and are heavy laden. Come to CHRIST, who
is the Fountain open; the Rock smitten; from whence issue streams, which make
glad the City of GOD. -- Go not to the World; for this Eccl. 1. 14.
is nothing but Vanity and Vexation of Spirit. Go ^ot to Philosophy; for this
Col. 2. 8
is full of vain Deceit and killing Poison. Go not to the Law; for this Heb.
10. 1.
is but a shadow, and cannot make the Comers thereunto perfect. These Things
can neither cleanse nor appease the Conscience of a thirty Sinner. Whither then
should be go, but to CHRIST? With whom are the words of eternal Life Joh. 6 68
. [2] Here is an Offer made, a Promise of Satisfaction given. Come unto Me, and
Drink: q. d. Come, and I will give you to drink: Come to Me, and you shall be
supplied and satisfied. Ask of Me, and I will give you (...) water, Joh. 4. 10.
-- O what great Encouragement is here given to poor thir^ty Sinners! Blessed be
(...) GOD and Savior for this precious Promise: and O that by his Grace we
might be enabled to lay (...) on this Hope set before us!

III. OBSERVE the Posture and Manner, in which Jesus delivered this Invitation:
He stood, and cri^^, saying, If any man, etc. The Jewish Teachers (...) to sit,
when they taught publicly: and this (...) general Custom with Jesus likewise.
But now (...) changed his Posture, (perhaps) to accommodate his Voice, and
express his Earnestness. Our Savior at this time was much moved; was fervent
in Spirit: and he cried aloud, standing up, that all might hear and mind what
he was saying: as well as to show that He was not ashamed nor afraid to
proclaim Himself, as the Fountain of Life, in the midst of the Pharisees, (...)
Doctors, his greatest Enemies. The Matter of his Speech was of infinite
Importance and the last Concern to all. He himself was deeply affected with
sense hereof; and really sollicitous that all might be under the like
Impression. This made him (...) earnest in his speaking on this occasion: this
made him stand up that all might behold and hear him. -- O the astonishing Love
and Compassion there is in CHRIST unto perishing Souls! What manner (...) Love
is this, that the SON of GOD, the LORD of Glory, should stoop to beseech
rebellious Sinners; and be so importunate with them, to come unto him, th^^ he
may supply all their wants, and make them happy for ever! -- And how amazing
the Stupidity of Sinners, that we must be entreated, urged, and importuned to
accept his gracious Offers and yield to is blessed Designs of everlasting
Kindness toward (...)!

IV. OBSERVE the Occasion, and Time, when this l^vitation was made: in the last
day, that great day of the Feast. -- The Feast here spoken of, was the Feast of
Tabernacles Joh. 7. 2.
. The Reason of this Title is Godwyn's Moses and Aaron. page 131.
, because all the time of this Feast the People remained in Tents, and Booths,
made of Boughs after the manner of Arbours. This was an Annual Solemnity, and
was kept in the Close of the Year (according to the common or civil Computation
among the Jews) when the Harvest was fully ended; ^^ence it is also called, The
Feast of Ingathering which (...) in the end of the Year Exodus 13. 16 -- 34. 22.
. One principal Design of (...) Institution was to remember the Jews of their
(...)-fathers dwelling in Tents and their unsettled (...) in the Wilderness
Pool. on Lev. 27. 34.
; to humble them by this sellection; and to call forth their Praises of GOD,
for the gracious ConductandProtection afforded to their Fathers when
tabernacling in the Wilderness, as also for the happy Settlement, the more
convenient Habitations and sure Dwellings now vouchsafed them. The Jews were at
this Feast to dwell in Tents, that (...) they might know a little by their own
Experience, that their Fathers endured; and that they might ^earn to value more
the Mercy of GOD to them in the Comforts of their own fixed and commodious
dwellings.

BUT furthermore, Another special Design of this sacred appointment was to stir
them up to a thankful acknowleging of the Divine Goodness, wherewith the Year
(which now they were come to the Period of) had been encompassed Deuteronomy. 16. 13.
. It was instituted, as a solemn Thanksgiving unto GOD for the Harvest and
Vintage newly gathered in; to put them in mind, that the Mercies they had
received were all from the Divine Providence: and that unto this they must
look, for the like supplies in the Year ensuing.

HENCE infer; We should sometimes seriously look back upon and consider the
Hardships and Difficulties our Forefathers met with, in their coming to and
settling in this Land: we should call to mind their mean Circumstances and
desolate Condition; and be very humble in our own eyes, when we remember our
low Beginnings.

AGAIN, I might observe to you, That the great Goodness of GOD to our
Forefathers in bringing them safe to this Land, planting them in it,
protecting and prospering of them, etc. should sometimes be thankfully
commemorated by us their Posterity. And the consideration of what Straits and
Hardships they conflicted with, should put an Edge on our Gratitude, and make
us very thankful for the Comforts and Accommodations we do so liberally partake
of, tho much more unworthy than our Predecessors.

BUT the Observation that I shall here most insists on, is this, That as every
Year ends, We should do something like observing the Feast of Tabernacles or
In-gathering. Gospel-Duty was of old prophesied of under this Notion; as we
read, Zech. 14. 16. It shall come to pass, that every one -- shall even go up
from Year to Year to worship the King the LORD of hosts, and to keep the Feast
of Tabernacles. -- Now it may be instructive and profitable to us, a little to
consider, and apply the Laws of this Feast. Wherefore I shall offer a few Hints
here. Thus, It was one Law of this Feast (in common with several others Deuteronomy.
16. 16.
) that all the Males should go up to Jerusalem, (and they often carried their
Wives and Families with them 1 Samuel 1. ^.
: Thither the Tribes went up, the Tribes of the LORD to the Testimony of
Israel) to worship GOD in the Place and Way of his Appointment. Thither they
went thrice in the Year: and this, that by often meeting together in one Place
they might contract a more intimate Acquaintance with, and greater Affection to
one another: and by often joining together in the same Acts of religious
Worship, they might increase their holy Communion, as the People of GOD, as
well as keep pure and entire all those Ordinances that were delivered to them,
and faithfully hand down the same to Posterity. -- Again, At this Feast they
were to appear before the LORD GOD, the GOD of Israel Ex^d 34 23.
; as just Debtors, to pay their thankful Acknowlegements to Him for the Mercies
lent them: As humble Petitioners, to ask those further Benefits they needed: As
obedient Subjects, to own his Dominion over them, and to receive his Commands:
As his Friends and peculiar People, to renew the Covenant and League of Amity
and Love between them; eyeing Him, as the GOD of Israel, even their
Covenant-GOD. Moreover, Then they were to appear before GOD, in the public
Tabernacle, or the Temple; which were instituted Types of CHRIST, the Mediator:
in and through whom GOD is well-pleased with the Prayer of Faith and Labor of
Love. -- Another Law was, that none should appear before the LORD empty Deuteronomy.
16. ^6. N^^ 8. 10.
; not empty- hearted, but with Souls full of Grace and Gratitude toward GOD:
not empty- handed, but every man must give to the needy, as he is able,
according to the Blessing of the LORD upon him Deuteronomy. 16. 17.
, a free-will-offering, in testimony of his grateful respect of GOD, his
Benefactor, and the Poor's Patron. -- Again, At this Feast they were to offer
Sacrifices in Abundance; Burnt-offerings of Praise every day, with
Meat Offerings and Drink Offerings in proportion attending them; also
Sin Offerings and Peace Offerings were added; besides the Common Sacrifices of
the New Moon, and the Offerings made continually every Morning and Evening.
Thus they were to be much in Communion with GOD, and to abound in the Duties of
religious Worship all the days of this Feast. As this Month was honored with as
many Feasts as were celebrated in all the Year besides: so there were more
Sacrifices to be offered at this Feast, than at any other Pool, and (...) 13
etc.
, because this Feast was in the Close of the Year, when it was meet to supply
the Defects of the Year past, and when they had gathered in all their Fruits;
and therefore ought to make larger Returns and Acknowlegments to GOD. Again,
These days of abundant Offerings were to be days of abundant Rejoicing. They
were to feast very cheerfully together before the LORD their GOD, Rejoicing in
the thankful sense of his great Goodness to them in the Year past, as well as
in Hope of the like Goodness to crown the Year coming on Deuteronomy. 16. 15.
. They were to express their Joy by Feasting, Thanksgivings, and Songs of
Praise; also (as some think Henry, and Jackson, on L^vit. 23. 40.
,) by carrying in their hands green Boughs of goodly Trees: which appears to
have been a usual Expression of Joy and a Token of Triumph upon other
Occasions. -- Another Law of this Feast was, that they should desert their
pleasant and secure Houses, and dwell in moveable uncomfortable Booths or Huts
for seven days Neh. 8. 14.
, which (as it was typical of the Incarnation of CHRIST, who was about this
time of Year to come into the World and pitch his Tent among men, dwelling in a
Tabernacle of Flesh Joh. 1. 14.
; so it might be for other Ends and Reasons; particularly [not to repeat those
before-mention'd] it) was designed to exercise their Self-denial, and teach
them a Contempt of the World: It might also allude to, and be intended to mind
them of, their mutable condition, being Strangers on Earth; and the Frailty of
their Bodies, that were their Souls earthly Tent or Tabernacle 2 Cor. 5. ^.
, and in a few days to be dissolved: By which mortifying Reflection, together
with their humbling Confinement to contemptible and unpleasant Booths in the
open Air for their Habitations, the Joy of the Solemnity was sutably tempered
and corrected; for which end also, that is to qualify and sanctify their Mirth,
they were to read the Law of GOD Deuteronomy. 31. 10. Neh. 8. 18.
, in a solemn manner upon this occasion.

THUS we see in part what were the Laws of this Feast of Tabernacles or
In-gathering, and in some measure the Meaning of them. Now since Gospel-Duty is
represented, in the forementioned Prophecy of New Testament Times, under the
notion of keeping the Feast of Tabernacles, this intimates what GOD expects
from Christians, even that all those Graces be brought into Exercise and
exhibited in their Lives, which were especially acted and signified in this
Feast of old. Likewise, since this Feast was observed among the Jews in the End
of the Year (according to the civil Calculation of their Year) and since it was
prophesied, that Christians under the Gospel should keep this Feast from Year
to Year, at the times appointed for this Solemnity; it seems but an
Accomplishment of that Prediction, if at every Year's End we take Occasion to
do something like observing the Feast of Booths or In-gathering. Indeed the
whole Life of Christians should be a perpetual keeping the Feast of
Tabernacles, in a spiritual and evangelical Sense. Every day we should be
worshipping as in that Feast; Going to CHRIST, the true and living Temple, with
our spiritual Sacrifices, of Repentance, Prayer, Thanksgiving, Charity, and
Obedience; Going up to CHRIST by lively acts of Faith; Going forth to JESUS
without the Camp Heb. 13. 1^.
by imitation of Him in Patience, Self-denial and Mortification; Dwelling in
Tabernacles, as in the days of the solemn Feast Hos. 12 9.
, exercising a holy Contempt of things on the Earth, knowing that here we have
no abiding City; and in Faith and Hope ascending to Mount Zion, the City of the
Living GOD, the heavenly Jerusalem; setting our Affections upon things above,
and having our Conversation in Heaven: Meditating in the Law of GOD day and
night; Rejoicing in the LORD evermore, rejoicing in CHRIST JESUS, triumphing in
his Praise; hoping in his Mercy; rejoicing in Hope of an House not made with
hands, a Tabernacle that can never be taken down, Eternal in the Heavens. Thus
the Gospel teaches Christians to live continually; and such a Life would be a
perpetual keeping the Feast of Tabernacles. Every day of such a Life would be a
day of this solemn Feast. -- However, this hinders not but that we may (in
conformity to the Jewish Pattern, and the Prophecy aforesaid) keep this Feast
at every Year's End with greater Solemnity and in an extraordinary manner.
Those Graces and Duties, holy Frames and Exercises, that have been mentioned,
are now peculiarly seasonable. Let us then look back, and look over the several
Laws of this Typical Feast; and in the Gospel-sense, put each of them in
practice. "Let this Feast See Mr. Henry's Sermon on Psalm. 65 11 Preached Dec.
31.
at the End of the Year, be kept to the Honor of that GOD, who is the Alpha
and Omega, the first and the last", the first Cause, and the last End of all
Things. "As we must begin every Day and Year with GOD, so with him likewise we
must end both. For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things." Some
are of opinion, that the Devotion of Cain and Abel, (mentioned, Genesis 4. 3.) was
their Yearly Sacrifice, their more solemn Worship at the End of the Year; when
they kept their Feast of In-gathering, honored the LORD with their substance,
and made offerings to him of the Increase of the Year, according to their
respective Occupations and Possessions. A learned Expositor Ainsw^rth.
says on the Place; "At the Year's End, men were wont in most solemn manner to
sacrifice unto GOD, with Thanks for his Blessings, having gathered in their
fruits; so the Law of Moses did command: which order (as by this appears) the
Fathers observed from the Beginning". This Feast then is of ancient Date. And
it is a famous Solemnity. 'Twas one of the three great Feasts appointed in the
Law of Moses. And it is the more famous for its being the Time of our LORD's
Lightfoot's Horae Hebraicae in Evang. Matthew. Page 19, and 22.
Birth, and Baptism; and the season, when that glorious Invitation in our Text
was given -- In the last day, that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood and
cried. -- The Last, i. e. the eighth day; which, tho some would make it a
distinct Festival, and it be not strictly one of the days of the Feast of
Tents, yet in a larger sense belongs to it,and has ever been called the last
day of it. They kept up their Tents and dwelt in them only during the first
seven days: but on the eighth day they were at liberty and met together
publicly in the Temple, to keep there an holy Assembly, (suppose) in
remembrance of their quiet and happy settlement in the Land of Canaan, after
their long dwelling in Tents and their tedious Travels in the Wilderness: and
so this eighth day was rather an Appendix to the Feast of Tabernacles, than any
Part properly of the Feast it self Pool, and Jackson, on Lev. 23. 36
. The first and the last days of this Festival were to be kept as (...); in
which they were to rest from all servile Labor, and to worship GOD publicly.
The Rule we have in Lev. 23. 35, 36. On the first day shall be an holy
Convocation: ye shall do no servile Work, therein. Seven days shall ye offer an
offering made by (...) unto the Lord. On the eighth day shall be an (...)
Convocation, unto you -- It is a solemn (...), and ye shall do (...) servile
Work therein. (...) passage, It is a solemn assembly, might be translated (...)
in lc^.
. It is a day of Inhibition, Forbiding, Forbearing, or Keeping up: All servile
Work being prohibited on said day, and the People being obliged to (...)
together for the performance of public Worship; till which was over, they were
not permitted to return Home Pool in loc.
. Or it might be rendered, a day of Conclusion or shutting up; because it was
(as it is called in our Text) the last day, the closing day of the Feast. --
This eighth and last day is called -- the great day of the Feast. Perhaps
because it was the day of the greatest Joy. On this day was to be seen most of
the Joy of Harvest. Some judge that this was more especially the Day of
Thanksgiving to GOD for the Harvest of the Year past, and had a particular view
to this Ground of the Festival Henry on Lev. 23 39.
. Agreeably on this day there used to be the loudest Acclamations, the greatest
Pomp and Show of Joy. Moreover, on this day the People were dismissed from
their Booths, and had leave to remove into their own Houses again; which
Release, was an aggravation of their Joy, and brightened the Triumphs of the
Day. It was in it self a Refreshment; but especially it might well be so to
them for this reason (...) Lev.23. 36.
, because it was a Memorial and Emblem of that happy time wherein their forty
Years tedious march in the Wilderness terminated with an Introduction into and
Settlement in the Land of Promise, where they had goodly Dwellings and fruitful
Fields: A Mercy, which ought to be kept in everlasting Remembrance, and the
Consideration whereof might well fill every Israelite with abundant Joy. --
Therefore on this last day of the Feast; there were the highest Expressions of
Gladness and Triumph; whence it is styled the great day. The several days of
this whole Feast of Tabernacles were termed Hosan^^a (...) in Text.
; because they used once on each day to compass the Altar, holding Boughs in
their hands and waving them to'n'again, often crying out, Hosanna, i. e. Save
now, I pray. But on the last day, they compassed the Altar Seven times, with
the like Ceremonies and Acclamations; whence it came to pass, that this last
day was called Hosanna Rabba, i.e. the great Hosanna, or as in our Text the
great day of the Feast. -- Upon this day also (as One (...)
observ^s) they did read the last Section of the Law, and likewise began the
first; left; they might otherwise seem more joyful in ending their Sections;
than willing to begin them. -- Upon this day there was an universal Concourse
and public Appearance of the People at the Temple; all being obliged to give
their attendence on GOD's Worship there. The day of solemn Assembly in any
Feast, used to be termed an high or great day Hammands Notes on Job.1931.
. Hence the last day in this Feast was so called; and it is called with an
emphasis that greatday, because it was eminently a day of calling assemblies.
On this day they were said emphatically to make a solemn Assembly Namb 29.35.;
(...) in Text.
. Perhaps there was ordinarily at this time a more full Congregation than upon
the first day; and therefore it might be called the great day: or it might be
so called in comparison of the six days immediately preceding, on which there
was no such holy Convocation appointed. -- But further Laghes. Harnus,. of N.
T. page.45.
, On this day

People (say the Jews, by the Institution of the Prophets Haggai and Zechariah)
were wont (and 'twas a custom peculiar to this Feast) with the greatest pomp
and gladness to fetch water [in a golden ^essel Lightfoot, Hor^x Heb. in Evang
Joh, page 124.
] from the Fountain of Siloam, and to bring it into the Temple [with the sound
of the Trumpet Hammand on Text
] where the Priests receiving the same of them, poured it out upon the Altar
together with the Wine of the Drink Offering. And, all this while the People
sang that Passage of the Prophet, (Isai.12.3) With joy shall ye drew water out
of the Well of salvation. This pouring out of water did (in their apprehension)
denote the Effusion of the holy Spirit, and they hoped at this time to have the
Spirit of GOD fall on them, as (according to Tradition) He did on the Prophet
Jonah, when he was attending this Ceremony with Transports of Joy (...) Harmt
of N. T page 45.
. -- Thus we see. why the last day was called the great day of the Feast.

Now this was the solemn Occasion, upon which the Invitation in our Text was
given. There is an Emphasis in the words, which speaks something remarkable in
the season: In the last day, that great day of the Feast, Jesus stood, etc.
There are various Grounds of this season's being chosen; which may be
conjectured at. As, --

1. OUR Savior might make this Invitation in the People on the last day of the
Feast, to b^nt man them the Insufficiency of all their Sacrifices on the
foregoing days and the Inability of the Law to make the Comers thereunto
perfect. At this Feast of Tabernacles (as was before observed) they offered a
Multitude: of Sacrifices. Every day had a certain Proportion assigned
Mutt.29.13. etc.
. On the first day of the Feast they were to offer thirteen young Bullocks; two
Rams, and fourteen Lambs without blemish; on the second day twelve Bullocks:
and so on, every day the number of Bullocks, (the most costly part of the
Sacrifice) gradually lessning; till at length it came to be but one Bullock,
one, Ram, and seven Lambs; so that on the last and great Day of the Festival,
the Sacrifices were sewer than on any other Day. Now the Account which some
Jewish Expositors give of this Dimination, is to this purpose; that the number
of Bullocks to be sacrificed in the first seven days of the Feast amounted to
seventy (...) Hor^ hebr in Job, page 122.^^^.
, according to the number of the Heathen Nations then in the known World: for
whom (as they tell us) these Oblations were made: and the Abating of the
Sacrifices (say they) signified, that there would be a Diminution of those
Nations, until all things were brought under the Government of the Messiah, who
was the Expectation and Hope of the G^^tiles Godwyn
. Whereas the single Sacrifice on the eighth day (the great Holiday as they
called it) purely respected the Israelitish Nation, and betoken'd their special
Endeardness to GOD, as a holy and peculiar People. -- The Account, which our
Christian. Expositors give of that Abatement of the Offerings, is this, "It was
to teach the Jews (says One (...) 29. 36.
not to tr^st to the multitude of their Sacrifices, nor (...) expect Remission
of Sins from them, but from the one and only Sacrifice of CHRIST. It might
signify (savs another Jackson.
) a diminishing or wearing away of the legal Sacrifices and Ceremonies. It
signified into them (faith another Wisdom's Christian Dictionary.
that the LORD was to abolish those Sacrifices, and bring in a perfect
Sacrifice in place of them, Jesus Christ once offered for all. It was hereby
intimated to them (says another Henry.
that the legal Dispensation should wax all and vanish at last; and the
multitude of their Sacrifices should end in ONE great Sacrifice, infinitely
more worthy than them all". -- And perhaps the might be one thing our Savior
had in view, when he made the Invitation, in our Text on the last day. He would
have them to know, that the Multitude of Sacrifices, they had been offering,
would not suffice; that they needed another and better Sacrifice; that He
himself was the only Sacrifice, acceptable and pleasing to GOD. Therefore on
the last day, after a vast number of Offerings had been made, He stood forth,
and called upon all, that (being sensible of the Insufficiency of the legal
Sacrifices, and considering them as Types and Shadows of Things to come) still
thirsted after something further (as necessary) to take away Sin and justify
them in the sight of GOD: These (I say) He called upon, and invited them to
come unto Him; whose Flesh is meat indeed, the great Sacrifice to be fed upon
by Faith; and whose Blood is drink indeed; the Fountain, at which only the
thirsty Soul (laboring under a sense of Guilt and Wrath) can have it is longing
Thirst quenched.

2. OUR Savior might deliver this Invitation on the last and great day of the
Feast, because then (as has been observed) was a great (if not the greatest
Concourse of the People. Much People were on this day gather;d together at the
Temple; it being a Sabbath day, and the great day, when they were no longer
obliged to dwell in their Texts; when they had taken their Fill of Mirth and
Feasting, and were now most at leisure to attend the public Worship. -- Our
Savior then would not miss or forego so special an Opportunity of doing Good:
but took occasion now to preach the Gospel unto to the People; that many
hearing, many might come to Him and be saved! Seeing the Multitude, he was
moved with Compassion toward them; and seeing how the Priests (their Teachers)
neglected them. He (who is the great Prophet) fat himself with the greater
diligence to teach the People, and deliver the Calls of GOD unto them.

3. THE People were now about to return Home and there could not be a more
proper parting Word The Assembly was that day to break up, the Congregation to
disperse, and all return to their own Dwellings. Our Savior therefore gave 'em
this Word (the best the could be) to carry home with them. It was affecting to
him, to think, that all that Assembly were soon to divide and scatter; that He
himself was never more to see their Faces on this occasion (having now begun
his dying Year) our indeed ever like to have an Opportunity again of speaking
to so great a Body of People together, at least under such Advantages. And He
might ^^^sider also, that many of those, who were now ^^^ven'd on this
occasion, were never like to enjoy such another opportunity; it being probable
that Death would prevent them.

HENCE our Savior takes his leave of the People, in the most proper manner,
with this solemn Invitation in our Text. Some it is likely there were, who had
not heard his Instructions and Exhortations in the Temple ever before; and were
never like to hear him, if not at this Time. Some that heard him before, did
not bred his Words: He now therefore renews the Gospel-Call unto them. Others
perhaps had taken some notice of his Preaching and were almost persuaded to
receive the Gospel: Now to confirm the Impressions made on such and to finish
the good Work begun in their Souls, He again preaches to them; inviting those
who had the Beginnings of a holy Thirst after GOD, to come unto HIM, and drink.

BUT finally, This might be occasioned by certain Customs and Ceremonies of the
Day, Thus, on this day the Jews delighted much in feasting, allowed themselves
to eat and drink plentifully, and to make great Mirth; which our Savior
observing, He might thence take occasion to instruct them concerning the true
spiritual Drink, and invite them thereunto Dutch Annota. in Text.
. Again, Our Savior in his Speech might have reference to the Law, and design
to call them off from their carnal Boasting and Rejoicing in that. Upon this
day they kept the Feast of the Joy of the Law; because then they ended the
Reading of the Law. Festum letitie Legis.
Upon this day CHRIST, who is the End of the Law, stood up Wilson's Dict.
; and called them off from their vain Boasting in the Law Lights. Her. heb in
Joh. page 126.
, to believe in HIM as the Messiah and Savior, who came to fulfill and abolish
the Law of Moses. Again, These words of our Savior might be spoken in
Opposition to he forementioned Jewish Rite and solemnity of fetching Water; a
Ceremony peculiar to this Feast, and performed on the last day of it. The
'forecited passage in the Prophet Isaiah, (...) shall draw water with Joy. etc.
is the chief Authority they pretend for that Custom Lights.
. This Joy, they called the Joy of the Law: for by Waters (in Isai.55.1. and
elsewhere) they understood the Law. And for this reason they drew and brought
the Waters from the River Siloam to the Temple with so much pomp and joy.
Moreover they add, that the Pouring out of the water there signified the
Effusion of the holy Spirit; and therefore the Pouring out of the Water was
accompanied with so much Gladness andSinging, because they expected the holy
Spirit would be so pleased with their Mirth and Music, as to be charmed down,
and fall upon them in the midst of the Solemnity, with his Divine Inspirations
Tremell in Text.
. -- Now to this Rite and Ceremony, accompanied with so much Folly and
Superstition, Our Savior's Speech in the Text and Context may be an Antithesis.
As if he had said; Lights.
"What, Have you so great joy only for a little water fetched out of the
Fountain of Siloam? Verily, if any man believe on ME, even Rivers of living
Water shall out of his own Belly flow unto him; i. e. in his own Soul he shall
have Plenty of the Waters of Life: He shall be filled with all the Fullness of
GOD Ephesians.3.19.
, who is the Fountain of Life. He shall be so filled with the Spirit of GOD, as
a Spring of Water, that it shall out of his heart break forth continually in
his Actions Hammand in loc.
. -- Do you imagine the Waters (spoken of by the Prophet) metaphorically taken,
do denote the Law? Nay, but they denote the Gifts and Influences of the holy
Spirit, which the Messiah shall supply Believers withal. -- And do you expect
the Giving of the holy Spirit from the Lave, or for your carnal Joy in the Law?
Behold, the Spirit is received through Faith, and comes not by the Law" Gal. 3.2.
. -- If any man therefore desire any spiritual Good, let him come unto ME,
believing on Me as the only and alsufficient Savior, and he shall receive of
the Fullness that is in me, to the supply of all his wants. -- But finally some
say (...) in Joh. P. 125 and H^mmon Text.
This Water-offering or Libation of Water, (as they call it) was to denote the
Blessing of Rain, which they then prayed for, as of special use against the
approaching Seed-Time. For they judged, that at this Feast (when they were
celebrating the goodness of GOD in the Harvest of the last Year) Divine
Providence decreed and determined what Rains there should be in the following
Year. [Perhaps this Notion might take countenance from Zech.14. 17. Where GOD
threatens such as neglect the Feast of Tabernacles, that upon them there shall
be no Rain.] However, it was their Custom at this Feast to pour out Water
before the LORD upon the Altar together with Wine; the design of this
Drink Offering was, that the Rains of the Year might bless them. At this Feast
they offered Water to GOD to engage his smiles on the Seed-Time. Even as at the
Passover they offered a (...) or Homer; to obtain from GOD his blessing on the
Harvest; and at Pentecost they offered a new Meat Offering, called the First
Fruits, to obtain from GOD his blessing on the Vintage (...)
. And this Ceremony of fetching and offering Water was accompanied with the
sound of the Trumpet, and with Singing of Voices and Instruments; with great
Vociferation and noisy Acclamations. Now in relation to this, some think,
CHRIST here is said to have cried, or (as the word properly signify's Hammand.
) Proclaimed with a loud Voice, lifted up his Voice like a Trumpet; making this
apposite Proclamation, If any man thirst let him com unto me, and drink: taking
occasion from their fetching Water out of Siloam, and offering it to bespeak
the blessing of Rain; I say, from hence, our Savior who used to spiritualize
Earthly Objects, and from all kinds of Occurrences discourse of heavenly
Things, took occasion to exhort the People (as 'twere in the words of the
Prophet Hes.10. 12
) To seek the Lord, till be rain Righteousness, upon them: and he invites them
to repair unto Him, the true and living Fountain, (as 'twere in the words of
another Prophet Isa 55. 1. etc.
) Ho, every one that thirsts, came to the waters, and he that has no money;
come ye bay and (...) yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without
price. Wherefore do ye spend your money for that which is not Bread? And your
labor for that which satisfyeth not? Hearken diligently into me, and eat ye
that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. Incline your
car, and come unto me; hear and your soul shall live. -- With many such like
words (we may suppose) He exhorted the People. It seems to be only the general
Subject of his Discourse, that is hinted in our Text. No doubt there were
considerable Enlargements, which it has not pleased the holy Ghost to put on
Record. However we must be thankful, that we have any part of what he said,
written. For it is truly a golden Passage, a good Word, and worthy of all
Acceptance. -- The Contents of it have been in some little measure opened unto
you: and the Occasion, whereon this blessed Speech was delivered has been
shown: Upon which I have made some large Remarks, suting the season; it being
now the last day of the Year, according to vulgar apprehension and account. --
It becomes your spiritual Instructors to study to discern both Time and
Judgment Ecci 8 5.
, and to find out acceptable words Ecci 12 10.
Now such, seasonable Words are wont to be. A word spoken in due season, how
good is it (...).15 23.
? How grateful and useful? -- Wherefore, this Year coming in with a Sabbath, I
took occasion (hoping I should speak a word in season) to counsil and exhort
you to begin the Year with GOD. And it falling out, that it likewise ends with
a Sabbath, I have also (through Divine goodness) an opportunity now to tell you,
How to close the Year with GOD. -- The Conclusion of the Year is a remarkable
Period; and a very agreeable Time for more enlarged Devotions, for
Self-examination; and for serious Reflections; which indeed do then very
naturally flow in upon the minds of pious and thinking Christians, who accustom
themselves to take a solemn and distinguishing Notice of such particular
Seasons. There are many religious Meditations and Exercises, that at this time
are peculiarly seasonable, which I might remember you of and exhort you unto:
but as to these things, I have prevented my self in a great measure in my
former Discourse, on the first day of the Year; wherein I spoke somewhat
largely of the Duties reflex, as well as prospective. -- This notwithstanding,
I have thought fit to say what has been already offered in the present
Discourse; and shall now add two things further, relating more especially to
our Savior's Speech in the Text; which it seems necessary to resume the
Consideration of.

I would in the first place, call upon you all to examine your selves, and,
inquire, what regard you have had (more particularly in the course of the Year
past) to the Duties required, and what Fulfillment you have experienced of the
Promise made, in our Text. And then I shall conclude with a word of
Exhortation; calling upon Sinners to hearken to and comply with the gracious
Invitation of our Savior.

1. EXAMINE your selves every one, What Regard you have had to the Duties
Mentioned in the Text; and what Fulfillment of the blessed Promise of our
Savior therein offered.

HERE are two distinct Particulars. Wherefore -- [I.] INQUIRE what Respect
you have had to the Duties mentioned. Consider what has been your general Temper
and Carriage in reference to those first and great Duties, of Thirsting after,
and Coming to CHRIST for, spiritual Good.

LET me ask you here particularly, --

1. WHETHER you have been truly and rightly thirsting? Whether a real spiritual
Thirst has been in your Soul?

(1.) HAVE you been thirsting after right Things? Have your Desires been placed
on proper Objects? Have you been thirsting after the Favor, Image, and Presence
of GOD, an Interest in CHRIST, his Righteousness, his Graces, and Comforts,
etc? Or, Have you been craving after things of a contrary Nature? Have you not
been thirsting after the Pleasures of Sin, and been drinking in Iniquity like
Water? -- Have you not been thirsting after Worldly Enjoyments, and the
Delights of Sense; panting after the Dust of the Earth; and (as was affirmed of
the King of Babylon) enlarging your Desires, as Hell, which cannot be satisfied?
Have you not been too greedy of Gain; had a Heart exercised with covetous
Practices: and gone astray, following the error of Balaam, who loved the Wages
of Unrighteousness? Or, have you not been thirsting after the Honors of this
World; been vainly ambitious of Preferments and Applause among Men? -- Inquire
whether your Heart has not thus been set up on Temporal and Earthly Blessings.
What has been your Language? That Psalm.4. 6. Mat 6. 31.
, Who will show us any Good? What shall we eat? What shall we drink? And
wherewith shall we be clothed? -- Or that Mi^.6 6. Act. 16. 30.
, Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and how my self before the High God?
What must I do to be saved? -- Inquire whether you have been thirsting after
spiritual Blessings; the things that are above and from above; the good and
perfect Gifts, that come down from the Father of Lights; the River of his
Pleasures, who is the Fountain of living Waters. -- Thus, Have your Desires
been carried out after a Righteousness, to justify you; being sensible of your
need of a Righteousness, and the insufficiency of your own? Have you been
thirsting after Grace, to sanctify you? Divine Strength, to uphold your Goings
in the way of Truth? Divine Consolations, to pacify your wounded Spirits, and
refresh your Souls in the midst of your distressing Thoughts? Have you thus
been thirsting after the Waters of Life, spiritual Blessings? -- Make solemn
Inquiry into the Frame of your Souls with respect hereunto.

(2.) HAVE you been thirsting in a right Manner and Measure? Has your Thirst
had the several Properties of a spiritual Thirst? -- Have your Desires been
Hamble? accompanied with a lowly sense of your utter Unworthiness of the least
Favor from the LORD; and a renouncing of all Creature-Dependences for supplies.

AGAIN, Have your Desires been Eager, ardent advehement? ^ake David's ^ Sum.23.
15.
, when he longed, and said, Oh that one would give me Drink of the water of the
Well of Bethlehem! Have you felt mighty Pain within, for want of the good
desired? Have you felt in your breast a mighty ardour of Love unto CHRIST and
his Benefits, because of their Superlative excellency and worth? Has your Soul
been even broken for the longing it has had to them? -- Or have you (on the
other hand) contented yourself with saint Desires, feeble and cold Velleities?

AGAIN, Have your Desires aster Spiritual Blessings been Transcendent and
Superlative; and petemptory, without any Reserve? Have these Spiritual Desires
been the Predominant, the ruling Desires of your Soul? Have other Desires been
duly subordinated to these? No Desires entertained and cherish't that stand in
Opposition to, or come in Competition with, or but what might be serviceable
into this great Desire of the Soul: Have you been willing to part with all
other things that (...) might obtain these spiritual and heavenly things? Have
you sound in your Heart a cheerful Readiness to sacrifice all earthly
Enjoyments, that you might have Righteousness, and Grace, and Peace from GOD
and a Title to the Inheritance in Light? Has nothing been able to quiet your
longing Apposite Has your Desire been so strong as to allay all worldly
Contentments, and quench worldly Desires; and dispose you to welcome the
greatest losses and severest Trials; so that you might enjoy CHRIST, and
Covenant-Blessings in him? Have you thus sought the LORD with your whole Desire
2 Ch^on 15, 15.
? Has your Expectation been only from the LORD, and have your Desires been thus
resolute, absolute, and not standing upon Terms; nor having any Reserves? Has
that been the unfeigned sense and language of your Soul, I count all things but
loss, that I might win Christ Phil.3. 8.
.

AGAIN, Have you been uneasy and (in a sort) impatient, ^ill you could get your
Desire accomplished? Hope deser'd makes the Heart sick. Prove.13. 12.
. Has it been thus with you? Have you not been able to rest contented without
those good Things you desire? And have you been longing with a holy Impatience?
Has that been the Disposition and Language of your Soul, (Psalm.143. 6, 7.) I
stretch sorth my hands unto thee: my soul thirsts after thee, as a thirsty
land. Hear me speedily. O LORD, my spirit saileth: bide not thy face from me,
lest I he like unto them that go down into the pit. And that, (Psalm.63. 1.) O
God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: my soul thir^^^ib thee, my flesh
l^ngeth for thee in a dry and thirsty land, where no water is.

AGAIN? Have your Aspirations been Constant and Abiding? Can you say, (as in
Psalm. 119. 20) My Soul breaks for the Longing, that it has to thy Judgments
at all Times? Have your Desires been unwearied and unceasing? Have you not been
tired with Waiting and Expecting? Or, Have your Desires been only in Some
particular Moods; by Fits, and Starts, and in some Pangs of Conscience?

AGAIN, Have your Desires been Unlimited and Insatiable? Would no small
Measures of Grace, no inferior Degrees of spiritual Blessings satisfy you? Have
you been unwilling to fit down with, and stop at imperfect Beginnings of
Sanctification and Consolation? Have your Desires been enlarged and
unsatisyable; never quieted, but always craving after still higher degrees of
spiritual Good, and Enjoyment? Or have they been stinted to certain Measures;
and limited, only so far as may consist with such and such Ends and Designs?

FURTHERMORE, (and I shall add only this one word, which perhaps might more
properly have been placed before) Have your Desires been Active and
Industrious? Has your Thirst put you upon diligent Endeavors to obtain the
desired Blessings? Or, have you contented yourself with idle Wishes, (such as
the Desires of the Generality are) mere, lazy, fruitless Wouldings? Many
Sinners seem wonderfully affected now and then under some awakening Word, or
rousing Providence; and perhaps express their Desires in very pathetical Terms:
but they don't proceed to suitable Efforts and Endeavors; they take no Pains,
to obtain that which they pretend so vehemently to long after. They rest in
Desire. The soul of the sluggard desires Pro^.13. 4.
but his Hands refuse to labor Chap 21 25.
. -- I appeal to you then, and call upon you to enquire, Whether this has been
your unhappy Case, or no? Have you contended your self with empty, formal,
unactive Wishes? Or, Has there been an agreeable Working a vigorous Laboring
and striving after the good Things you desire? -- The Psalmist said, O My God,
my soul thirsts for thee: and could moreover say, My soul followers hard
after thee Psalm. 63. 1, 8.
. If there be true etc fervent Desires, then the awakned Soul will follow hard
after the LORD in the Way of his Appointment. -- Let it be inquired then: Have
you been soilicitous and studious to get rightly acquainted with the
Gospel-method of Salvation by JESUS CHRIST? And have you given Diligence to
comply with the Terms? Not objecting against them, nor discouraged by any
Difficulties in the way. etc.

THUS let every one examine himself concerning the first thing, this spiritual
Thirst. If your Desires be found thus qualified; if they have been placed on
proper Objects, and been exerted in due Ways and Measures, (such as I have
mentioned) then you have truly thirsted in the sense of the Text; and are such
as CHRIST invites to come unto him; which is the subject of the next Inquiry.
Wherefore,

2. INQUIRE, Whether you have been rightly going to CHRIST, for the
satisfaction of your thirst. Unto him should the Gathering of the People be
Gen.49. 10.
Who is the Fountain of Salvation, the true Fountain of Shiloam; out of whom do
flow Rivers of living and healing Waters. Well then, inquire; Whether you have
been going to CHRIST in a right manner, to have your Thirst quenched.

HAVE you been going to CHRIST, in the way of Faith? Realizing his Sutableness
and Safficiency to satisfy all the longing Desires of your thirsty Soul; having
your whole Dependence on him, and a lively Hope in him for Mercy to help you.
Coming to CHRIST, and believing on him, are equivalent Terms Joh. 1. 12.
.

AGAIN, Have you been going to CHRIST, in the way of prayer? Have you gone
daily to the Throne of Grace, and made known your Request by Prayer and
Supplication; laying open all your Wants, and Griefs and Fears, and spreading
all your Desires before the LORD? Have you gone to the Fountain; cast your self
at the Foot of Sovereign Grace, and upon your Knees labored fervently in
Prayer, continuing therein without Ceasing, as the importunate Widow did, who
is set forth as an Example Luk.(...)
? Can you appeal to Heaven, and say with the Psalmist, (...)
Lord, all my Desire is before thee, and my Groaning is not hid from thee. -- My
heart was ^ot within me, while I was m^^sing the fire burned; then spoke I with
my Tongue. -- And now Lord, what wait I for? My Hope is in thee -- I poured out
my complaint before the Lord: When my spirit was overwhelmed within me; I
looked on my right, hand, and beheld; but Refuge failed me. I cried unto thee,
O Lord, Thou art my Portion in the Land of the Living.

FINALLY, Have you been waiting on CHRIST, in the way of his Ordinances, and
the use of Means? Have you been searching the Scriptures, attending on the Word
preached, and going from one Ordinance to another, stretching forth your hands
to GOD, and seeking the LORD diligently? -- We read (Psalm. 1^7. 9.) He
satisfyeth the longing Soul. "The longing Soul (as one observes) is in the
Original the running Soul, the Soul that runs up and down (in quest of some
desired good) from one Means to another; leaving none unattempted". Thus we
should express our longing after CHRIST, and his Benefits. We must make due
Improvement of all proper Means and follow him in every Way of his Appointment.
We must go to the Wells of Salvation, to the Brooks of Water; and lay our
Mouths to every Conduit-Pipe. If one Means will not do, then we should try
another; if the more ordinary fail, then apply extraordinary: and never satisfy
our selves in any Duty or Ordinance, unless we meet with CHRIST (the desire of
our Souls) therein, and of the Fullness that is in him, receive some precious
Gifts. -- Now let it be inquired: Had it been thus with you, in the general
Course of your Life past and particularly this last Year? Have you been going
to CHRIST, weary and thirsty, in the way of his holy Institutions; diligently
improving the Means of Grace, and religiously attending all Gospel Ordinances,
with the whole Bent of your inflamed Powers?

LET every one solemnly put these several Inquiries to himself; and thus
examine into his Temper and Carriage (this Year more especially) with reference
to the Duties mentioned in the Text. -- And if you find your self faulty, mourn
your Guilt with deep Remorse. But if you have been truly thirsting after
Spiritual Blessings, and rightly coming to CHRIST for them, Adore and magnify
him for his Grace in you and with you; to which belongs the Praise of all your
good Desires and good Deeds For it is the Spirit of CHRIST, who has been
working in you both to will and to do, of his good pleasure Phil. 2. 13.
.

Now in the next place,

[2.] LET it be inquired, What your Receipts and Experiences this Year have
been; or what Fulfillment you have bad of the blessed Promise in the Text. Our
Savior promises here, That they who being athirst come unto him, shall drink,
i.e. receive the Spiritual Goods, Influences, and Refreshments they need and
crave. -- Inquire then what Experience you had of the Accomplishment of this
precious Promise. Have you received the Blessing from the LORD, and
Righteousness from the GOD of your Salvation? Have you received the Remission
of your Sins, the Gift of the HOLY GHOST, and Earnest of eternal Life? Have you
met with CHRIST, and had Communion with Him in Ordinances and Providence? Have
you had your Wants filled, your Graces and Comforts increased?

WHAT Nourishment have you received? What growth in Grace, in Holiness, and
Virtue? Tho your Beginning (it may be) was small; yet has your latter End
greatly increased Job 8. 7.
? Have you made gradual Improvements in Piety and Wisdom, been built up in
CHRIST, and advanced in spiritual Stature? Or, have you come to a Stand, a
Pause, and perhaps declined? Have you been as a watered Garden, bringing forth
much Fruit? Or, as a parched Wilderness and an empty Vine? Has CHRIST been to
you a Fountain opened, or a Fountain shut up, as to the Dispensations of
sanctifying Grace?

AND then as to the Dispensations of Comfort, How has it been with you? Have
you been refreshed with the Comforts of the HOLY GHOST, been made to drink of
the River of Life, and had your Consolation abounding by CHRIST? Or, have you
been denied those streams which make glad the City of GOD; and gone to every
Pit for water, but come away ashamed, with your vessel empty, Your Soul dry and
thirsty? -- If this latter has been your Case, be deeply humbled in the
Remembrance hereof, mourning the Absence of the Comforter; and sollicitous to
find out the Cause, why good Things are withheld from you. But if the former
be your Case; if you have opened your Mouth wide, and had large Draughts of
living Waters, acknowledge the rich Mercy of our Lord JESUS CHRIST unto you:
Adore Him as the blessed Fountain; Admire his free and distinguishing Grace
toward you; Maintain a humble sense of your Unworthiness: Realise your
unspeakable Happiness: Envy not the Men of this World the filthy Pleasures of
Sin, and dreggy Delights of Sense Retain the memory of your former happy
Experiences, and let these whet your Appetite and raise your Expectations for
the future; make you long for immediate access to the Fountain itself' and make
you more frequent in your approaches to the Throne of Grace, more diligent in
your attendance upon the holy Ordinances of CHRIST.

LET me here apply all the foregoing Inquiries, and Counsels, particularly to
such as have this Year met with Sickness, Bere^^oments, and the like. It has
been a very sickly and dying Time of late among us, and few there are but what
have been visited with fore Sickness, either Themselves or Families, The Small
Tax
and many of us have met with bereaving Dispensations. Now let us Inquire, What
have been our Frames, Carriages, and Experiences in the Months of Affliction
that have passed over us. What was our Petition and Concern in the days of our
Distress? Did we thirst after spiritual Blessings, or bodily Comforts, most?
Was (...) Life and Health and Ease, that we desired chiefly? a Pardon, Grace
and Glory? Did we hunger and thirst after Righteousness, and our Souls pant
after GOD, the living GOD? When his Waves and his Billows called over us, was
our Prayer to the GOD of our Life? When we were in the Furnace, d^d'we ingreat
his Favor with our whole hearts? Was our Desire toward Him and the
Remembrance of his Name? Did we hope in his Word, and our Eyes fail for his
Salvation? -- Did we experience the Manifestations of his Love, and enjoy his
gracious Presence? Did He command his loving kindness in the Daytime, and was
his Song with us in the Nightseason? -- Have we come forth, as Gold out of the
Fire, purified and refined? Can we truly say, as the Psalmist did, It is good
for me that I have been afflicted: Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but
now have I kept thy Word. Beho'd I have longed after thy Precepts: Teach me thy
Statutes. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
Judgments. Are these the present Sentiments, the Desires, and Resolutions of
our Souls? Or, are our Vows forgotten, our Desires cooled, our Lusts revived,
and our former vain Conversation returned to? -- Let every one very seriously
(...) their these Questions to himself, and let Conscience give a faithful
answer. Such whose Hearts condemn them, let 'em be covered with shame, and fear
left some more aggravated Judgments sp^^lily overtake them. But let such who
have the Testimony of a good Conscience, rejoice in the LORD, and walk worthy
of the LORD to all pleasing.

THUS much for the first general Head; the Examining our selves with Relation
to the Duties and Promise in the Text.

11. LET it be a record of Exhortation to Sinners, that they would now hearken
to the Invitation of our Savior, and comply with the Duties required by been
in the Text. The Invitation of CHRIST is, If any man thirst let him come unto
me. O let every Sinner see to it, that he get his Soul instamed with a
spiritual Thirst, and go to the Lord JESUS CHRIST for spiritual Satisfaction.

(1.) LET secure Sinners laber to get their Sends inflamed with a true
spiritual Thirst, O don't he cool toward the spiritual Blessings and heavenly
Things, that are in CHRIST JESUS. Labor to see the Evil, and get a rooted
Abhorrence, of Sin, which separates between CHRIST and you, and withholds those
good Gifts from you. Labor to see the Vanity of the World, and Emptiness of all
Creature Comforts. Be convinced of the Excellency and Necessity of Spiritual
Blessings. Realise it, that these are the best of Blessings; that they only can
afford solid Satisfaction to the Soul of Man, and really supply it;'s Wants.
Remember, You are naturally in a perishing State; your Souls are as the dry and
parched Desert, or as the chased panting Heart; and without seasonable Relief
you must needs saint and die. You cannot be happy, but must be miserable, so
long as you abide in your present forlorn Condition, whether you resent it be
not; And the less you resent it, your Case is so much the more wretched and
hopeless. O labor therefore to see the woeful Indigency and Misery of your
natural State; to know your Trouble, and feel your Need: and he concerned to
obtain Help and Supply. Be in an Agony of Soul, and give no Rest to your
Thoughts nor Sleep to your Eyes, 'till you have found where and how you may
escape the doleful Misery, which is upon you. If you remane in carnal
security, there is no Remedy for you; Die you must unavoidably, and you will
perish wonderfully.

(2.) LET awakened thirsty Sinners go to JESUS CHRIST for spiritual
Satisfaction. Such of you as are under Convictions, that have your Eyes opened
to see your perishing Condition by nature, and whose Souls are inquisitive and
craving after the Waters of Life; Be directed and encourag^d to go to JESUS
CHRIST for a supply as the hunted Heart to the Waterbrooks, or the thirty
Israelites in the Wilderness to the Rock smitten.

To animate you, considers,

1. SUPPLY and Satisfaction is to be bad in CHRIST, and no ahere else. A Thirst
after Happiness in general, it is what all Mankind do conspire in, though they
exceedingly vary in their Judgment and Choice of the Object of Blessedness But
now infallible Divine Declaration, as well as constant human Experience,
abundantly shows, that nothing can satisfy the Cravings of the Soul, but a Good
that is spiritual, immortal and immutable; agreeing with the Nature of the
Soul, and proportionable to it is Necessities in our fallen State. Now all this
Good is treasured up in CHRIST, and in Him alone. There is nothing of it in the
Creature. The World is but a broken Cistern, that can hold no Water, nor yield
any true Satisfaction: and if you seek any where among Carnal Objects for
Refreshment; they will certainly deceive your Expectations. CHRIST is the
Fountain of living Waters. All our springs are in Him. All Fullness dwells in
Him: a Fullness of Sufficiency for Himself, a Fullness of Redundancy for
Believers: a Fullness of Merit and Righteousness; a Fullness of the Spirit of
Grace and Comfort; a Fullness of Glory. In CHRIST there is enough to supply all
our Wants, and to satiate our utmost Cravings. In him there is an exceeding
Abundance of all Good, above what we can ask or think. Enough for You; enough
for Me; enough for All that thirst: and infinitely more than enough. Joh. 4.
13, 14. Jesus answered and said unto her, Whosoever drinks of this water
shall thirst again: But whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him,
shall never thirst: but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well
of water springing up to everlasting life. Consider,

2. You are invited to come to CHRIST for all needful supply and satisfaction.
The Good that is Fountain'd in CHRIST is communicable; and thirsty Souls are
bidden to come unto CHRIST for it. He is not a Fountain sealed, and
inaccessible: but a Fountain opened, and freedom of Access to it is allowed
yea, Invitations to repair unto it are given CHRIST is exhibited, and offered
to thirsty Souls, in the Word written and preached: and there they are wooed
with much importunity to come unto CHRIST, and accept of him. Isai. 55. begin.
Ho every one that thirsts come ye to the Waters Wherefore do ye spend your
Lab us for that which satisfyeth not? Incline your Ear, and come unto Me, and
your soul shall live. 2 Cor. 5. 20. We are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God
did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God.

3. THE Invitation is backed with many Promises and Assurances of Satisfaction
in Case you will come. The LORD has obliged himself by the most inviolable
Promises, to make you welcome, to give you a kind Reception, and so supply all
your Need according to his Riches in Glory, if you repair unto him in the
Gospel-way of Faith and Repentance. Thus, Isai.41. 17, 12. When the Poor and
Needy seek Water and there is none, and their Tongue saileth for thirst, I the
LORD will hear them. I the God of Israel will not forsake them. I will open
Rivers in high places, etc. Rivers of Grace, Rivers of Consolation, Rivers of
living Water; But this spoke he of the Spirit, which they who believe on him
should receive Joh.7. 38. 39.
. Isai. 44. 3. I will ^our Water upon him that is thirsty, and Floods upon the
dry Ground: I will pour my Spirit, etc. Mat. 5. 9. Blessed are they which do
bunger and thirst after Righteousness: for they shall be filled. Joh.6. 35. 54.
He that believes on me shall never hirst (never want any good thing, but shall
have all things necessary for Life and Godliness) Whosoever drinks my Blood, has
eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last day. Mat. 11. 28. Come unto
Me, all ye that labor and are weary, and I will give you Rest. -- Thus you
have many great and precious Promises, to encourage your Faith and Flight to
CHRIST. And from hence you may be sure of meeting with a kind Entertainment, if
you go unto Him. He has expressly said, Joh.6. 37. Him that comes to me, I
will in no wise cast out.

4. THE Invitation is most gracious, and condescending, (...) well as the Offer
universal. The Fountain stands open for all believing Comers, to partake at
free Cost. No Exception is made against any thirsting penitent Soul, however
vile and sinful. No Personal Merit is insisted on; No Price demanded, nor any
Returns expected but those of Gratitude and Obedience. You that are utterly
unworthy, and have no Qualifications to recommend you, nor any Thing to tender
as a valuable Consideration, are notwithstanding invited to come, if you
thirst. So runs the Invitation, Isai.55. 1. He, every one that thirsts, come
ye to the waters, and he that has no Money; Come, -- without Money, and
without Price. -- And so stands the Promise, Rev. 21. 6. I will give to him
that is (...) of the Fountain of the Water of Life freely. O the abounding
Riches, and astonishing Freeness of Divine Grace! Let every Soul be transported
with this Thought; and hereby be persuaded to close with CHRIST upon
Gospel-Terms.

5. YOUR going to CHRIST is undispensably necessary to your Participation in
the (...) of the Promise. You must go to the Well of Salvation, and draw water
out of it, in the Gospel Way; Otherwise you will never partake of the Waters of
Life. If you do not drink of these living Waters, what will it profit you to
have had the Discovery and Offer of them made unto you? And you will never have
them given you to drink, unless you go to CHRIST for them in the way of Faith
and Repentance. Unless CHRIST dwell in your hearts by faith, unless you receive
him upon Gospel-terms, you will certainly miss of Satisfaction and Happiness.
Hence that Complaint of our Savior, Joh. 5. 40. Ye will not come unto me, that
ye might have Life. Hence likewise that solemn Expostulation of the Apostle,
Heb.2. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation?

O let every thirsty Sinner then be persuaded to come to JESUS CHRIST in the
way of his Appointment: Accept his Invitation, and venture your Soul upon his
gracious Offer, If any man thirst, let him come, and drink. Don't proudly stand
upon Terms; but submit to the humbling Methods of the Gospel, and comply with
it is reasonable Demands. Make no vain trifling Excuses. Say not, I have nothing
wherewith to purchase these Benefits: For they are freely tendered to you. Say
not, I am unworthy and, dare not come: For the more unworthy you are, the more
will Divine Grace abound and triumph in the free bestowment of Gospel-benefits
upon you. And the more humbly sensible you are of your own Unworthiness, the
more welcome you shall be to GospelGrace. O come then at the Master's Bidding;
see that you refuse him not Heb.12. 25.
. Come to the Wellhead; Open your Mouth wide, and it shall be filled Psalm.81.
10.
: You shall be abundantly satisfied with the Fatness of his House and drink of
the River of his pleasures Psalm.36. 8.
. But if you reject his Invitation, and refuse to come, you will ever long be
parched up with a fiery Thirst, and perish with a burning Drought. O realise
the absolute Necessary of your Coming to CHRIST, and get your Heart affected
more and more with the sense hereof. Realise the utter Emptiness of the World,
and Renounce all Creatures, as perishable Streams, s lying Vanities and Refuges
of Deceit. Renounce every Lust, as an opposition to CHRIST; and disclame all
Confidence in any supposed Righteousness of your own, as standing in
Competition with CHRIST: and say with Ephraim Hos.14 8.
, What have I any more to do with Idols? Let all the Disappointments you have
hitherto met withal, when wandering from Mountain to Hill in pursuit of
Happiness, help to drive you to CHRIST, and hasten your Flight to him for
Satisfaction; who only can flake the Thirst of your longing Soul. Realise
CHRIST's Ability and Willingness to do this: and Plead his Sufficiency. Go to
his Throne of Grace; fall down at his Foot, and beseech his tender compassions,
Come near to his Seat, and fill your Mouth with Arguments; Take to your self
Words, and tell him, That your thirsty Soul is ready to faint and famish; and
that you know not whither else to go but to him for Relief and Refreshment;
that he is able, yea has offered to bestow the same upon you; and that this
will be a glorious display of his sovereign Grace, -- Thus plead his own Glory;
plead his Promises; plead your own absolute Necessity: and Resign yourself to
his Covenant-Mercy; begging that he would take Pity upon you, and make your
perishing Soul an Instance of the glorious Triumphs of his Grace and saving
Power. -- Seek the LORD, and wait on him in the use of all proper Means,
attending on all his holy Institutions, resolving to be found in the Way of his
Blessing. -- Wait patiently and perseveringly; keeping up your Appetite, and
maintaining an humble Expectation: referring it to his infinite Wisdom to choose
his own Time and Way; but still resolving that you will expect all needful and
saving Communications from him, that you will follow him with your importunate
Solicitations and never give him any Rest, till he has satisfied you with
good Things; that (with Jacob) You will not let him go, except he bless you, --
Let not any Delay of Divine Supplies discourage your Hopes. damp your Thirst,
or check your Pursuits after them. But wait resolutely: Repair frequently to
the Fountain of Grace; Come time after time, and trust in the LORD at all
times: Pour out your Heart before him, continuing in Prayer without Ceasing;
and in due season you shall receive, if you saint not. -- Come with enlarged
Desires for it is a full Fountain, overflowing, and ever-flowing; it is Waters
fail not, but an infinite Plenitude remains, though an innumerable Multitude have
drank thereof and been satisfied. "Come away then to the Fountain, and drink
your Fill of it See the late Rev. Mr. Willard's Fountain opened page.43.
. Come as you are however vile and unworthy, -- for the Fountain is free. Come
to have all your Wants supplied here; for the Fountain is full. Come now, while
it stands open, and is accessible. Come speedily, instantly: Defer not so
important an Action one Moment longer. You have delayed too long already; and
have thereby grieved the Spirit of GOD, and wronged your own Soul.
Notwithstanding, there is still Hope that you many speed, if you come to CHRIST
(...) seek him with your whole Heart. Now is the accepted Time. But possibly,
if your miss the present season, it may be afterward too late. E'et long the
streams of Ordinances may be dried up; and the Fountain shut up the Passage to
it stopped, and an unpassable Gulf fixed between that and you. Death may soon
out you off, period all your Opportunities, and dash your Hopes in one Moment.
You may die this Year, this Month, or Week; yet this Night thy Soul may be
required of thee: and then what will become of you if not found in CHRIST, the
Fountain of Salvation! You may read your Doom in Prove.1. 24. etc. Because I
have called, and ye refused, I also will length at your calamity, I will (...)
when your Fear comes. When your Fear comes as a Desolation, and your
Destruction comes as a Whirlwind. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not
answer; they shall seek me early, but they shall not find me. O tremble lest
these Words of Terror be one day pronounced concerning you. Beware then of
dangerous and sinful Delays. If any man thirst, let him come to the Waters
now, even now while it is called, To day. Make Haste; and what thou do, do
quickly. Rev. 22. 17. The Spirit and the bride say Come. And let him that
hears say, Come. And let (...) that is ^thirst come: And whosoever will, let
him take tho water of life freely.

The Duty OF THE GODLY Among a Professing People, TO BE Intercessors and
Reformers, In a Day of the LORD'S Anger: Considered in a DISCOURSE on
Jer.xviii.20. Now Published at the desire of many, who heard the Substance of
it delivered in a SERMON, at the Weekly Lecture in Boston; Feb. 15. 1721. 2.

Neh. 2. 10. When Sanballat and Tobiah the servant heard of it, it grieved them
exceedingly, that there was come a man to seek the welfare of the Children of
Israel. Habak.3. 2, 16. O LORD, I have heard thy Speech, and was afraid: O
LORD, revive thy work in the midst of the years; in wrath remember mercy --
When I heard, I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day of trouble.
Isai.20. 8. etc. Now go, write it before them in a Table, and note it in a
Book; that it may be for Time to come, etc. Pr^fuit, qui profuit. Fugit hora:
Ora, labora.

JER. XVIII. 20. -- Remember, that I stood before thee to Judas good for them,
and to turn away thy (...) from them.
THESE are the words of Jeremiah, who (we may observe) was the last Prophet,
sent to the (...) Nation before their captivity in Babylon. He was one of the
common Priests in Anathoth. He was advanced to the extraordinary office of a
Prophet (in the days of good Josiah) when very Young: and continued a long
whole; tho not nigh so long as Hosea (the first writing Prophet, us some think)
who is said Mr. Henry's Expos. of itself. -- The Introduct.
to have prophesied near Ninety Years. And yet Jeremiah's Book is larger
considerably than his. We have reason to think that Hosea preached as much as
he, and perhaps had as many Revelations: but there was not so much of his
published, or at least not handed down in the sacred Records. Many excellent
Prophets wrote nothing, and others but little; who yet were very useful in
their day. And so in the Christian Church there have been many burning and
shining Lights, who are not known to Posterity by their Writings; and yet were
no way inferior in gifts and graces, and serviceableness to their own
Generation, than those that are; and some that have left but little behind
them, and make no great figure among Authors, yet were as valuable men as the
more voluminous Writers. Men's natural Gentus, as well as Opportunities vary;
and to this may the difference in part be owing: tho there is a special
direction of Divine Providence in this affair.

THE Style even of the inspired Writers is very curious; the Spirit of GOD
serving his own designs by the different genius and capacity of those* by whom
he spoke, at sundry times and in diverse meners. As Pan^ and Apolles, and (...),
under the New Testament are noted as very different Speakers; so were Hosea,
Isaiah, and Jeremiah under the old.

HOSEA (as Critics observe) used a Style very close and sententions, peculiar
to himself; and in some places it seems to be like Solomon's Proverbs.

ISAIAH used a Style more copious and flowing, but incomparably curious and
polite, full of majesty, and full of oratory; sometimes sublime and towering
always elegant and lively. But

JEREMIAH was less of an Orator: his manner of speaking was more familiar,
plain, and unpolished. However, there appears a great deal of holy flame and
server in his Preaching. He was a very painful, faithful, zealous Prophet. In
the nineteen first chapters of his Book of Prophecies, we have some of his
Sermons; (I suppose, in abstract; perhaps Baruck's Roll might have many of the
Enlargements) and here we find a Variety of the most pathetical Exhortations,
with the most moving Admonitions, Reproofs and Warnings. But all very little
regarded by the Men of that generation, to whom he preached. It was a great
favor to the People, that this excellent Minister so long continued laboring
in the word, and zealously affecting them. And yet it seems he had but little
success in his Ministry; which is the melancholy Lot of many of the best
Preachers in all times of the World. They had him a great while among them, but
to very little purpose. They despised his youth, and regarded not his age. They
gave him very base, harsh, and ungrateful Treatment. He seems to have met with
more ill Usage and Persecution, than any of his brethren the Prophets. He calls
himself a man of Contention to the whole Earth; and complains of his people,
saying, Every one does curse me, tho I have done no man any wrong. Neither the
innocence of the Dove, nor the Wisdom of the Serpent, could secure him from
unjust Calumny, Malice, and Ill will. As became a faithful Prophet, he set
himself to bear Witness against, and to reform, the Corruptions of the Times:
but was always opposed, and malign'd by his thankless and ungenerous
Countrymen. They despised his preaching, sought to ruin his Reputation, and
even to take away his Life. This in many places be pathetically complains of;
and particularly in our Context, which I shall read to you, and make some brief
Remarks upon. Verse 18 and 19. Then said they, Come, and let us devise devices
against Jeremiah: for the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel
from the wise, nor the word from the prophet: come and let us smite him with
the tongue, and let us not give beed to any of his words. Give heed to me, O
LORD, and bearken to the voice of them that contend with me.

Now if we reflect, we shall find, that the Occasion of the People displeasure
at the Prophet was his plain dealing with them, his faithful reproving their
Sins, and warning them of approaching Judgments. The occasion is hinted in the
introductory word, T HEN said they, etc. Which affords us this Observation;
That it is sometimes the Humor of a vain World, to be enraged at the Ministers
of GOD, for their Fidelity and holy Zeal: because they don't prophesy smooth
things, and flatter Sinners in their Carnality and Hypocrisy? but with
plainness of speech tell them their whole Duty, sharply rebuke their Sins, and
set the awful Threatenings of GOD before them; This kindles their Anger. -- But
what an unreasonable humor is this, and how very wicked? It Is as if the
Patient should fly in his Physician's face: and as if one should rudely spurn
at a Messenger from his Royal Master.

AGAIN, if we consider Who the Persons were, that thus malign'd the Prophet,
namely Professors of Religion; we may very naturally observe, That Formalists
in Religion, when their Lusts are touched and grated upon in the faithful
preaching of the Word, do usually turn the vilest Haters of GOD's Servants, and
show the most implacable Enmity to them: and this many times under the cloak of
sanctimonious Zeal and with a carnal dependence on their Temple-Privileges: For
thus they insinuated. The Law shall not perish from the priest, nor Counsel
from the Wise, nor the Word from the Prophet; Come, let us smite him, etc. As
if they should have said, He is a false Prophet, and contradicts our Teachers,
(who have the promise of GOD's perpetual presence) and therefore it is no
Injustice to oppose and persecute such a ^roubler of Israel: or he is but (...)
Prophet; and whatever becomes of him, we shall yet have others, and enjoy our
Church-privileges still.

AGAIN, We might observe, That when any are enraged at the Servants of GOD, it
is too common for them to propagate their undue Prejudices among their
Companions. -- Then said they, come let us etc. -- They called on and stirred up
one another. And by this unhappy means, the Wise Man's observation is too often
verified, One sinner destroys much Good.

AGAIN, We might note; Sinners often lay their heads together to plot against
the Just. Then said they, Come, and let us devise Devices against Jeremiah;
consult what to do and say against him.

AGAIN, It is observable; One common method of Revenge is Defamation and
Derision. They said, Let us smite him with the Tongue; heap Reproaches upon
him, and make a Laugh at him; banter, belly, and expose him. -- And thus
Jeremiah afterward complains they abused him. Chap. 20. 7., etc. I am in (...)
daily every one mocketh me. For since I spoke, -- the word of the LORD was made
a reproach unto me. -- Then I said, -- I will not speak any more in his name.
But his word was in mine heart, as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I
was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay. For I heardth defaming of many
fear on every side: Report say they, and we will report it; all my Familiars
watched for my halting saying, Peradventure he will be enticed, and we shall
prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge on him. But the LORD is with
me as a mighty terrible one: therefore my Persecutors shall stumble, and be
greatly ashamed, etc.

WE may further observe; It is often the unhappy fruit of Persons Rage and
Prejudices against the LORD's Ministers, that they despise their Preaching and
disregard the solemn Messages of GOD deliverd ^y them. -- And they said, Let us
smite him with the tongue, and let us not (...) beed to any of his words. --
They call them His words the Prophet's Persons under prejudice against
Ministers, are apt to look on what they deliver, as the word of Man, and not
the word of GOD: and accordingly turn a deaf ear to all their Admonitions;
profanely scoff at their Warnings and Reproofs; and revile them as only
serving their own Passions, when persuading by the Terrors of the LORD.

NOTE again, Sometimes the Masice and Rage of Sinners proceeds to such a
height, as to conspire he Death, and offer violence to the persons of GOD's
servants. This was Jeremiah's C^se; v.20. They free dug a pit for my soul.
They took counsel together, (as he tells us in Chap. 11. 19.) saying, let us
cut him off from the Land of the Living, that his name may be no more
remembered. -- It was a true, but infamous Character given by our Savior of
Jerusalem in his day, and was put on Record for the Jews shame and Christians
admonition; Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest
them which are sent unto thee, etc. Matthew. (...). (...). See also a like Charge
upon them by the Apostle, 1. These. 2. 15.

FINALLY observe, It Is too common among Men to require Good with Evil. Jeremiah
complains v. 20. That Evil was recompensed him for Good, And so does the
Psalmist, Psalm.109.4. For my Love they are my Adversaries, etc. And Psalm.35.12.
They rewarded me Evil for Good, to the spoiling of my soul. Some of the best of
Zion's Friends have many times been ill-requited by an ungrateful People. But
how base is such ungratitude, and how cutting to ^^ngenuous Spirits! How cruel
and barbarous, and devilish is such usage! To return Good for Good, is to act
like Men; To return Good for Evil, is to act like GOD: but to render Evil for
Evil, is to act like Brutes, and to render Evil for good is to act like Devils.
But what will not Malice, Envy, and Hypocrisy do!

THUS I Have noted several things from the People's Carriage to the Prophet. Now
let us see what was his Conduct under all this wicked and unsufferable
Treatment.

HE sadly resented their evil Carriage, laid to heart their Perverseness and
dreadful Impiety; and was a mournful; Spectator of the Judgments coming upon
them. This is implied in the Text, and fully expressed in many places. As where
he says; My Soul shall weep in secret places for your Pride, and mine eye shall
weep sore and run down with tears, because the LORD'S flock is carried away
captive, And again, When I would comfort my self against sorrow, my heart is
saint in me. -- Oh that I had in the wilderness a Lodging-place of wayfaring
men, that I might leave my People! for they be all Adulterers an assembly of
treacherous men: and they bend their tongues like their bows for Lies etc. J^r.
13. 1. -- 8. 13. -- 9. 2.

HE appealed to GOD, to vindicate his innocence (...) applied to him for
Redress of his Difficulties. He carried his Complaint to the Throne of
Grace,and opened his Cause to GOD; asserting his own Integrity and begging
Divine appearance for him v. 19. 28. Give beed to me, O LORD, and (...) to the
voice of them that contend with me. Shall evil be recompensed for good: for
they have dug a (...) for my soul: remember that I stood before thee to
speak good for them, and to turn away thy wrath from them.

WE may observe here in general, He makes his Complaint to GOD; and from hence
infer, -- When the Servants of the LORD meet with Reproaches and Vexations from
Men, especially for Righteousness sake, their Way and Wisdom is to bring their
case to GOD; to show him their trouble, and pair out their complaint before him
(...) 142. 2.
, Thus did holy (...) Hezekiah, Hannah, and others. -- The Saints know that GOD
is their chief Friend, and permits them to speak to him as a Man to his Friend:
Unto whom therefore should they unbosom themselves but to Him? -- Moreover,
they know, they may depend upon Secrecy with him: They can talk ever to him the
frowardness, and follies of their Relatives or Neighbors, which Charity or
Prudence requires them to conceal from Men. -- Again, they know that GOD is
infinitely wise and discerning, king and inpartial: that he cannot mistake
their Case or pervert their words; that he is acquainted with all their Ways,
and knows their Thoughts even afar (...) and will judge righteous Judgment. And
upon this view, they open their Cause unto him. (...) Moreover, over, they know
that GOD is able and ready to relieve the Oppressed, and hear the prayer of the
Destitute: and therefore they make him their Refuge, who is a Patron of the
Innocent: They spread all their Cures before him, and pour out their Griefs and
Resentments into his ear, and bosom. By which means, they often obtain Peace
and Ease of Mind, and refresh their oppressed Spirits. -- 'This is a Method,
which all in the present Case should pursue. But then they must see to it, that
they mourn in the'r Complaint after a godly sort. They should make their
Complaints, in a penitent and humble frame, (...) the hand of GOD, and
acknowledging his Justice, in all they meet with: Also in a meek and patient
frame; free from all sinful Passions, revengefull Motions and rancorous
Invectives: And in a durable frame; blessing such as curse them and praying for
such as despitefully use them: Finally, with hope and trust in GOD; encouraging
themselves in the LORD: as David did, in his distress when the People spoke of
stoning him, I Sam.30. 6.

But now more particularly, we may observe what the Prophet says in his
Complaint and Prayer to GOD. We have first that petition, Give bred to me, O
LORD, He had before complained that the People whom he preached unto, were
resolved to give (...) unto him. MEN would not hear the World from his mouth,
nor give heed to his Preaching: however, he trusts that GOD will have regard to
this labor of Love, and accept him in it. NOTE, It is matter of comfort to
faithful Ministers, that tho (...) and despite their Preaching, yet they may
hope that GOD will accept and (...) their Endeavors; and tho Israel be not
gathered, yet their Reward is with GOD. -- Or, Men would not take notice of his
Grievances, and do him Justice: he therefore applies himself to GOD, who is a
Refuge for the Oppressed; and refers his Cause to him, who is an upright Judge.
(...) d. Tho men will not receive my Complaints; yet LORD, do then admit them,
and judge between me and my adversaries: Hearken to the voice of them that
contend with me; hear how clamorous they are in their false Accusations, and
appear for my vindication; take notice of all their Rage and Spite, and take me
under thy Protection; Let them be blasted in their cruel Designs and Wicked
Attempts; let them be confounded and dismayed; but let not me be confounded nor
dismayed Jer.17.18.
.

AND then he backs his petitions with several Pleas. Shall Evil be recompensed
for Good? Shall such base Ingratitude go unpunished? For they have dug a Pit
for my Soul: and shall such Malice and Wickedness pass unrevenged? Thou have
seen it; for thou beholdest, mischief and spite to requite it with thine own
hand: -- Break thou the arm of the wicked Isal.10. 14, etc.
, Save me from all them which persecute me. My Defense is of GOD, who saves,
the upright in heart Psalm.7. 1, 10.
. Let them curse, but bless thou Isal (...) ^.
-- Remember,. that I stood before thee to speak Good for them, and to turn
away thy wrath from them. He humbly appeals to GOD concerning his Fidelity and
Compassion to that sinful People. Q. d. Tho I have met with many Abuses from
them; yet LORD, thou know I have faithfully done my duty as a prophet, in
preaching and praying for their good: Or as he expresses it (in Chap.17.16.) As
for me, I have not bastned from being a Pastor in follow thy Instructions;
neither have I desired that woeful day; thou know that which came (...) of my
lips was right before thee. -- Tho I have met with much Opposition, Injury, and
Discouragement from them; yet LORD, thou know, I have not ceased from my
work, nor given over my Labors among them in the Word and Prayer: but have
stood in the Gap. and done my utmost to turn away thy wrath from them. -- LORD,
remember this -- Herein he seems to refer unto some Promise of GOD, engaging
special mercy to such as tremble at his word, and espouse his cause, and
entreat his favor, In a day of wrath on a professing People. He throws himself
upon the Divine Pity, and Covenant-faithfulnes. Q. d. Tho the People forget my
Kindness to them; yet, LORD, do Thou remember and accept it. Tho I cannot
prevale to turn away thy wrath from them yet, LORD, remember that I faithfully
and compassionately endeavored it; Think upon me, my GOD, for good; according
to all that I have done for this People: and hide me under the shadow of thy
wings in the day of thine Indignation, hastening upon them. -- This is probably
the Prophet's Meaning in the Text; as may he inferred from like Expressions
elsewhere. Thus Chap. 15. 15. O LORD Thou know; remember me (...) the and
revenge me of (or rather, vindicate and distinguish me from) my Persecuters;
take me not away, but spare ine it thy Long-Suffering: Ruin that for thy sake
I have suffered Rebuke. And also, Chap.17. 14, 17. ^ave me O LORD, and I shall
be saved: for thought my Praise. Be not a terror to me; Thou art my Hope in the
day of evil. -- My dependence is upon thee and my hope in thee for comfort in
the worst of times; let thy favor rejoice my heart, when my Enemies do all
they can to terrify me; and now such an awful day of common Calamity is
inevitably approaching, LORD, in the midst of my tho'ts let thy Comforts
delight my Soul.

FROM the Text thus explained we might raise several Observations. As; That the
true Servants of GOD and Friends of Zion will be resolute and hearty in seeking
the Good of Jerusalem, tho they may be very unworthily requited for it. --
Again It becomes the Servants of GOD to be very mournful Spectators of the
Sins of a professing People, and of the Judgments inflicted, or threatened
therefore. -- Again They should labor by all possible methods to prevent
Judgments coming on a People; or if come, to remove them. -- Again, They should
keep up a cheerful Hope in GOD in the worst times and under the darkest
prospects. Finally, when they have done their best Endeavor, and yet cannot
prevale, to turn away Divine Wrath, they may humbly plead it with GOD, that
they have done their Duty; and may comfortably expect, that GOD will remember
this, and think on them for Good, according to all they have done or desired to
do; although the same may be ill resented and ill requited by men. The
testimony of a good Conscience may be their Rejoicing in the day of Evil, and
their Support under the unjust Reproaches, and ungrateful Treatment of such as
they deserve better Usage from.

BUT the only DOCTRINE, I design to insist upon is this --

WHEN a professing People have by their Sins provoked GOD to Anger, it is a
Duty incumbent on the Saints and Servants of GOD among them, to use all proper
means to turn away the Divine Wrath, and obtain a Recovery of the Divine Favor
toward them. IT is the work and office of GOD's Ministers not only to warn the
Wicked and reprove the Unruly: but likewise to admonish the Godly, to teach
them in the things of GOD, and put them in mind to be ready to every good Work,
Tit.3. 1. -- My business now is, in the name of CHRIST, and by his help, to
exhort the Children and Servants of GOD to a Duty, very seasonable at this
time, though too much neglected; I mean the endeavoring to reconcile a
provoked GOD to a sinning People, and using proper methods to put a stop to the
course of his Judgments that we may not be consumed utterly.

IN the Doctrine are several Propositions expressed, or implied. As,

PROP. I GOD is angry with his own professing People, when they sin against
Him. Sin exposes them, as well as others to the wrath and destructive vengeance
of the Almighty. An External Profession and Covenant-Privileges are no sure
Defense of a People; no Screen from wasting Judgments, if they sin against the
holy One of Israel. GOD sees Sin in his own People, as well as others: and the
Provocation in them is not at all the less; nay, it is vastly greater, being
aggravated by the Advantages they enjoy a boy^ others. -- That GOD is angry at
Sin in a professing People, might be evidenced from Divine Declarations,
Threatenings and Warnings; and from many sorrowful Examples of Vengeance, etc.
-- National Sins bring national Judgments every where. But if Israel, (the holy
Nation) sin, they shall be punished seven times more.

PROP. II. WHEN GOD's wrath is kindled against a provoking People, He is yet
reconcilable to them; ready to forgive, and to turn from the fierceness of his
holy anger; easy to be entreated, and willing to reverse the sentence of wrath,
upon the easiest and most condescending Terms. Hence when he is, angry at a
People, he often spares them a while, and only threatens and warns them, and
uses means to prevent their Ruin. And when he comes to the Extention, he
ordinarily begins with fewer and lesser Judgments, proceedings gradually, from
gentler strokes to severer scourges Psalm.78.38. Lav.26.18. etc.
. And he is represented as not knowing how at last to give the fatal Blow, and
bring total Destruction, even on the obstinately, Impenitent, See. Hos.6.4.
and, Chap. 11. 8, 9.

PROP. III. THERE are certain Means and Ways to appease the Divine Angry, when
incensed against a People. And these are Humiliation under the hand of GOD,
Deprecation of his Wrath, and Reformation of Sin, the procuring Cause thereof.
GOD has so limited the Threatening, that if these Duties be generally attended
by a People, they may expect a stop of Judgments begun. Jer.3. 12, 12. J^cl.2.
12, etc. And we have Instances of GOD's staying his Controversy, and Suspending
the Inflictions of his Wrath, upon a Peoples thus doing; tho indeed it were
only in Show and Hypocrisy. Thus Psalm.78.34. -- 38. -- 38. So. Jon.3. 8 -- 10.

PROP. IV. AMONG a prosessing People, even in times of the greatest degeneracy,
there is ordinarily a Remnant of GOD's faithful Saints and Servants. Thus at
the times, which our text refers to, tho all Religion seemed in a manner to be
lost among the Jewish Nation; yet there was Jeremiah, Barach, and some few
others perhaps, whose hearts, were right with GOD. -- So in Elijah's time, when
there was so little appearance of Religion among the People of GOD, that Elijah
complained, saying, I am left alone and they seek my Life; yet what says the
Answer of GOD to the Prophet? I have reserved to my self seven thousand men,
who have not bowed the knie to Baal. And the Apostle Paul speaking of the
Jewish Nation in his day, says, Even so at this time also there is a Remnant
according to the Election of Grace Rom.11. 3. 4 5.
. -- Abraham, when interceding for Sodom, hoped there were Fifty Righteous
within the City: which Hope of his was not only owing to his Charity (the
nature of which Grace is to hope all things, and to think all the Good it can)
but was grounded on the common conduct of GOD's Providence, in casting some of
his Elect into the most wicked places, and in the most degenerate times to
maintain a Seed to serve the LORD. And tho there was not as Abraham hoped,
Fifty of GOD's Chosen ones in Sodom, yet there was righteous Lot, and his
Family in it.

PROP. V. WHEN GOD has a Controversy with his People, it is the Duty of all his
Saints and Servants among them, to do what they can to turn away his wrath from
them, and obtain a blessed Reconciliation. In all approved methods they must do
what in them lies, to recover the Divine Favor, and secure the Divine Presence
with such a People, which is all their Safety, Glory and Happiness. They should
thrust into the Gap, and stand between an offended GOD, and a provoking People;
doing their utmost by interceding with Him to stop the Current of his
Judgments. And then likewise they should endeavor to repair the Breach, that
Sin has made; and remove the provoking Cause of Divine Wrath, by using most
diligently all proper means to effect a true and thorough Reformation among a
backsliding People. Thus there is Work, first respecting GOD, and secondly,
respecting Men; which they are called to attend.

[1.] THEY should stand before GOD, making Intercession for an afflicted
People. This was one method, which Jeremiah took to turn away GOD's Wrath, as
he professes in our Text: I stood before thee, to speak Good for them, etc.
Jeremiah as a Prophet, foretold the approaching Ruin and Deslation of Judah and
Jerusalem; and yet we find him, in all the postures of Grief and Anxiety,
praying for their Preservation, hoping perhaps the Decree were not absolute. We
do not find him out of frame as Elijah, who male Intercession to GOD against
Israel for like Jonah, who quarreled with GOD. because He delayed the Execution
of Vengeance on Niniveh. No; he was far from desiring the evil day, as he
professes, Jer.17. 15. Tho he was persecuted, malign'd, and reproached by the
People; and tho they lightly esteemed his Prayers; yet he was a fervent
Intercessor for them: for so it becemes the Children of GOD, (who is kind to
the evil and unthankful) to overcome Evil with Good, and to return Blessing
for Cursing. Indeed sometimes we find this Man of GOD passionately beging the
Divine Appearances for him against his more malignant Persecutors, and
prophetically imprecating Judgments upon them; but as to the People in general
he was a hearty and constant Intercessor for their peace and welfare; and
herein has set a worthy Example, to Posterity, which challenges universal
Imitation. -- Now to excite the Servants of GOD hereunto, I shall here briefly
represent to them some of those Obligations, which the Saints are under to make
intercession for a professing People, among whom they dwell, to turn away the
Divine Wrath from them.

Wherefore,

1. THE Command of GOD obliges them hereto. A divine Precept constitutes any
thing a Duty. Now it is in several places of Scripture expressly enjoined on
the Saints to pray for the People of GOD, especially in a day of the LORD's
anger. Thus; Psalm. 122. ^. pray for the peace of Jerusalem. So, Isa. 62. 6. Ye
that make mention of the Lord keep not (...), and give him no rest, till be
establish, and till (...) make Jerusalem a praise in all the earth. -- And in
the New Testament: Ephesians.6. 18. Praying always with all prayer and supplication
in the spirit, and because there unto with (...), and supplication for all
Saints. Heb. 13. 3. Remember them (in Prayer) that are in bonds, as bound with
them. Jam.5. 16. Pray one for another, that ye may be boaled. These are plain
Commands to our purpose, and evidently infer the Saints Obligation to the Duty
before us. It is not then a matter of Indifferency, to be attended or neglected
as Men please; but they are obliged to the doing of it, by the inviolable
Authority of GOD, their great Lawgiver and King.

2. THIS is very pleasing to GOD, The LORD loves the gates of Sion, and
desires it for his habitation. And th^^ he will be angry with his People, if
they forsake his Law, and will visit their Iniquity with stripes; yet he does
not afflict willingly. Judgment is his strange work. He delights in Mercy.
And when his anger is kindled against Israel. he does not at once utterly cast
off his People, and forsake his Inheritance. He for a long while keeps somes
Reserves of Kindness for them; sympathizes with them under their Adversity; in
his love and pity he long bears with and forbears them; and in all their
affliction be is afflicted, as the Prophet tells us, Isa. 63. 9. And in such a
case, He looks to see, if there be none to help; to call upon him in the day of
trouble; to turn away his anger, and stir up his bowels, and set his wisdom and
power o'work, to bring Deliverance. Ezekiel.22. 30. I sought for a man among them,
that should make up the Hedge, and stand in the Gep before me for the Land,
that I should not destroy it. -- If there are none to be found, the LORD is
represented as bro't to a stand, and not knowing what to do: Isa.59. 16. He saw
that there (...) man, and wondered that there was no Intercessor, -- was
displeased and amac'd astonished as it were, not knowing what method to take.
-- Whereas if any of his Saints stir up themselves to call on GOD, and stand
before him to speak good for his afflicted Israel; with this he is well
pleased. The LORD hearkens, and hears, and a Book of Remembrance is written
before him for them that fear him, and that think upon his name (...).
. The LORD takes pleasure in them, that hope in his Mercy (...) 147 11.
, and are sincere Suppliants at the Throne of Grace for his People; and the
Prayer of the Righteous is, eminently on such an occasion, his Delight Prove.15
8.
. Moses, that memorable Intercessor for Israel, is emphatically styled the Man
of GOD; and the LORD is said, to have spoken to him face to face. So, David was
much in Prayer for Jerusalem; and he is called a Man after GOD's own Heart, So,
Daniel, when interceeding for Jerusalem, had an Angel from Heaven dispatched to
him, with an Answer of Peace; approving his Serious Address to this Daty, and
pronouncing him a Favorite of Heaven. Dan. 9. 20. etc. Whiles I was presenting
my supplication before the Lord my God, for the holy mountain of my God; yea,
whiles I was speaking in prayer, even the man Gabriel, -- being caused to fly
swiftly, touched me -- and he talked with me, and said, O Daniel, -- At the
beginning of thy supplications the commandment came forth; and I am come to
show thee; for thou art greatly beloved. -- GOD is very ready to hear the
Prayer of the upright, especially when it is for his holy mountain. And when
the Saints pour out their hearts before him in such a Prayer, it renders them
greatly beloved, and very acceptable to him. -- Which consideration affords a
very strong argument to enforce the duty upon them: since they are bidden to
choose the things that please GOD, and to walk worthy of the LORD, unto all
pleasing.

3. THE Glory of GOD requires this of them. The Name and Honor of GOD is what
his Saints should be very tender of, and jealous for: This should be dearer to
them, than all other interests and concerns whatsoever: This challenges their
first care and highest regards. Now the Glory of GOD's Name is eminently
concerned in the Feace and Prosperity of his professing People, -- When the
ways of Zion mourn, and her gates are desolate; when the horn of Israel is cut
off, and the beauty of Jacob covered with a cloud, in the day of GOD's holy
indignation: when the adversaries of Zion mock at her Sabbaths; and they that
honored her, despise her; and they that pass by, hiss and wagg their head at
the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the city, that men call the
perfection of beauty, the joy of the whole earth; -- I say, when it is thus,
the Name of GOD suffers, and his manifestative Glory is eclipsed. Hence the
LORD is said to have had pity for his body Name, When he turned the captivity
of Jacob, Ezekiel.36. 21. -- Will not all the Friends of GOD then be concerned for
his suffering honor; and from this Principle, be fervent Intercessors for
Zion? This was the governing Motive with the Royal Psalmist, when he made that
Prayer for Jerusalem, Peace be within thy walls; (Psalm. 122. 7.) For he adds,
(V. 9) Because of the house of the LORD our GOD, I will seek thy Good, -- Holy
Jeremiah was swayed by this argument, and therefore made use of it to
strengthen his faith, in pleading for Zion. Jer. 14. 21. Do not abbor us; for
thy names sake do not disgrace the throne of thy Glory. -- So, Joshua, (Chap.7.
8, 9.) O Lord, what shall I say, when Israel turn their backs before their
enemies? -- And what will thou do unto thy great Name?

IN praying for Israel, the Saints show their Love to the House and Cause of
GOD; and their Desire toward the Remembrance of his Name. -- Besides, by their
prayers to GOD, they make an open Acknowledgment of their dependence on him for
needful salvations, and their belief of his ability and willingness to save
his People, etc. And thus they give him the Glory of his Sovereign Dominion,
Power, Wisdom, and Goodness. -- Moreover, hereby they discover a generous and
enlarged mind; which is an ornament and glory to Religion, and ultimately
reflects honor on GOD. -- Which Considerations speak the duty of Prayer, to be
very incumbent on the Saints, in a day of Israel's distress. The (...) Regard
they owe to the Glory of GOD, demands this of them.

4. THE Regard, which they owe to the professing People of GOD, among whom they
dwell, requires it of them. To illustrates this Argument, consider, --

(1.) THEY owe a peculiar regard to the Welfare and Prosperity of the Place and
People, where and among whom they dwell. The Public has a Right to the benefit
of their Prayers, and all other good Offices. Every one should seek the Good of
the Country and Community, where Divine Providence casts his Lot. No. man is
born to seek his own things: but to serve his own Generation, according to the
Will of GOD. Every one should be a Well-wisher especially to the Land of his
Nativity: and if it be Christian Land, all the Servants of CHRIST are under
double obligations, to concern themselves for he welfare of it. Where there is
near Relation, here should be also tender Affection. All the Processors of
Religion are very nearly allied to one another. They are Fellow-brethren by
Nature, as Men; and by religious Profession, as Christians: And it is required
of them, that they love as Brethren; having compassion one of another, being
pitiful, and courteous, 1 Pet. 3. 8. Yea, they are Fellow- members; being all
baptized into one Body, (1 Cor. 12. 13.) And the Members should all have the
same Care one for another, and every one for the whole; and whether one member
suffer, all the members suffer with it: or the Body in general suffer, all the
members in particular should suffer with it. Romans 12. 15. keep with hem that
weep. Heb. 13. 3. Remember them which suffer adversity, as being your selves
also in the body: Members of one and the same Body with them. -- Queen Esther
(of glorious memory) so loved the Jews, (then the only professing People of
GOD, and the Nation she belonged to) that when Royal Letters were written to
destroy them, she put her L^fe in her hand; and went in unto the King,
uncalled, which was contry to Law, to beg the Lives of her Nation; thus arguing
with her self, (^^th.8.6.) For ^ow can I endure to see the evil that shall come
unto my people or how can I hear to see the destruction of my kindred? -- This
Consideration was one motive of King David's noble Resolution, to seek the good
of Jerusalem: Psalm. 122. 8. For my brethren and companions sakes, I will now
say, Peace be within thee. So great was the Love of this good King unto Zion,
that of her he says, (Psalm.87. 7.) All my springs are in thee. Consider, --

(2.) PRAYER is necessary, if they would obtain from GOD the Mercies, which
they desire, and the People need. The Saints must ask, if they would receive;
and seek, if they would find. Even when GOD has promised to do great things for
his People; yet for the exercise of their Faith, and to put honor upon the
Duty of Prayer, He demands that his Favors be asked for. Ezekiel.36. 36, 37. I
the LORD have spoken, and will do it. Thus says the LORD GOD, I will yet for
this be inquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them: Some render it,
for the house of Israel, or on their behalf. The Saints are the LORD's
Remembrancers: They then should, in the Name of the House of Jacob, inquire
after GOD, and seek his face, in the day of trouble, Unless Prayer be made of
the Church of GOD in such a season, a People cannot expect the Returns of
divine Favor. Consider, --

(3.) THE Saints have a powerful Interest in Heaven, and by their earnest
prayers do often turn away Wrath from a sinful People. Long and happy
Experience testifys to the Truth of the Psalmist's Observation, Psalm.34. 15.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the Righteous, and his ears are open unto their
cry. We have heard with our Ears, and our Fathers have told us, what Answers of
Prayer they knew in their days: and the holy Scriptures tell us, what the
Prayer of Faith has done in the times of old; how it has many a time stayed the
hand of GOD, when listed up to execute vengeance.

THUS the fervent Supplications of holy Lot Obtained deliverance for Zoar, when
the LORD condemned Sodom, and the Cities about it, with an utter overthrow.
Thus Moses, being man mighty in Prayer, often prevaled with GOD by his
intercessions for the Salvation of Israel. Psalm. 106. 23. He said that he would
destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn
away his wrath. Thus when Sennacherih invaded Judah, and thought to win the
fenced cities thereof for himself, Hezekiah the King, and Isaiah the Prophet
prayed, and cried to Heaven; and the Lord saved Jerusalem from the Enemy. So
when the Jews were in Captivity, and the walls of Jerusalem broken down,
Nehemiah wept, and fasted, and prayed to the GOD of Heaven, that he would grant
him favor before the King of Persia, and incline him to smile upon his good
design to rebuild the City and House of GOD. And in answer to his Request, the
LORD so inclined the King's heart that Nehemiah has left it on record, The King
granted me according to the good hand of my God upon me

THESE Instances may suffice to show, that the Saints have a strong Interest in
the Court of Heaven; and by their Prayers do often prevale to keep off,
moderate, or remove Judgments from a People; and sometimes obtain a Reprieve
even for places ripe for Ruin and devoted to Confusion. Indeed in some
extraordinary cases, the LORD declares, as in Jer. 15. 1. Though Moses and Samuel
stood before me. yet my mind could not be toward this people. And as in
Ezekiel.14. 14. Though these three men, Noah Daniel and Job were in the land, they
should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, says the Lord God:
-- Yet these words plainly carry this Intimation, that such men have Power with
GOD, and that he will ordinarily forgive much, and forbear long, for their
sakes. Hence when the LORD is unalterably resolved to bring speedy Destruction
on a People, he bids his Servants not to pray for 'em any more; because he
would not be put to the pam of denying their ardent requests. See Jer. 7. 16.

Now since the Godly have such an Interest at the Throne of Grace; and since
GOD expects their Intercessions; and the Public has a just Title to the benefit
of them; it hence evidently follows, they ought to give themselves unto prayer
and supplication.

5. IN so doing, they will consult their own Peace and Welfare. They shall not
seek God's face in vain. If he grant the Petitions that they ask, they will
have their share in the public Tranquillity and Prosperity: The prospect
whereof should encourage 'em to Prayer. Jer. 29. 7. Seek the peace of the city,
-- and pray unto the Lord for it; for in the peace there of shall ye have peace.

BUT however, their Prayers shall return into their own bosoms, and shall not
return empty. Verily; it shall go well with praying Saints, tho it go if with a
sinning People, Such are sometimes exampled from common Calamities. GOD orders
the destroying (...) not to touch them. They are marked for favor and
protection. (Ezekiel.9. 4, 6.) And this prospect should encourage them to pray.
Zeph. 2. 3. Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of the earth: it may be ye shall be
bid in the day of the Lord's anger. -- Howbeit, their prayers shall be accepted
of GOD, and abound to their good Account in the day of the LORD. They are all
hung upon the file; and shall be remembered, and recompensed in that day when a
Cup of cold Water given to a Disciple, shall not be forgotten, nor lose it is
Reward. There is a blessed Promise in Psalm. 122. 6. Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem: They shall prosper that love thee: Which as it intimates, that they
are not Zion's Friends, who do not pray for her welfare; so it assures a Reward
to them that are her praying Friends.

HENCE from a principle of Self-Love, the Saints are strongly obliged to the
Duty under consideration. Their own Interest is a Bond upon them, and bespeaks
their diligent attendence to the Work.

6. THE Saints are many times obliged to pray for their People, when a day of
GOD's anger is passing over them, because their own sins have conspired to pull
down Judgments upon them. The Sins of GOD's own Children, which in times of
Temptation they fall into, are peculiarly offensive to the pure Eyes of his
glorious Holiness and Justice; and are instrumental, as well as the Sins of
open and daring Transgressors, to kindle a fire in Zion, and call down
Vengeance of a Place. The most zealous Magistrates the most faithful
Ministers, and even the best of GOD's people, can seldom acquit themselves from
contributing to the public guilt and misery, by their own personal sins, or by
their being someways accessory to the sins of others. Sometimes a Jonah, the
LORD'S Prophet, the best man in the Ship, may more immediately occasion the
Storm. Sometimes a good old Eli, the High Priest of Israel, may by a criminal
want of Zele, and a foolish Connivence at ways of wickedness, provoke GOD to
make a Breach upon his house, and a dreadful Gap in the Walls of Jerusalem,
Sometimes a David, King in Israel, and a man after GOD's own heart, may by
great transgressions provoke GOD to send a wasting Pestilence on his People, or
lay them open to the devouring Sword. Sometimes a Solomon, the wisest man, may
by his foolish ways provoke GOD to stir up Adversaries against Israel, and make
a breach among the Tribes of his People. Sometimes an holy Hezekiah may, by the
Pride of his heart, and a criminal Ingratitude to GOD (as well as a wicked
Manasseh by his Murders and other horrid sins) have a peculiar hand in bringing
wrath upon Judah and Jerusalem. -- Thus the most eminent and faithful Servants
of GOD may sometimes by their own Provocations help to lay open the Sluices of
divine Vengeance, and make a Gap to let In Wrath upon a backsliding People. And
it is very rare, that any of the Saints can exempt themselves altogether from
this Imputation.

Now surely it must needs be very congruous, and most agreeable to the Rules of
Equity and Propriety, that GOD's Children and Servants deeply sympathize with a
People under Afflictive visitations, which they themselves have been in a
greater or less degree Instruments of procuring to them; and to deprecate those
Judgments, which their own Sins (...) upon them

7. THE Saints should be led to this duty, by the Example of GOD's Servants in
all Ages. They have the practice of the Saints in all times of the World to
confirm them herein. Thus the psalmist in innumerable places, breaths out his
heart's desire and prayer to GOD for Israel: Thus particularly in Psalm. 102.
13, 14. Thou shall arise and have mercy upon Zion; for the time to favor her,
you the set time is come,. For thy servants take pleasure in her stones and
favor the dust thereof. -- So, Psalm.137. 5, 6. If forget thee, O Jerusalem,
let my right hand forget it is dexterity, If I do not remember thee, let my
tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief
joy. -- And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me, to tell of
Gideon, and Joshua, and Mordecai, and Nehemiah, and the Prophets, of Moses, and
Adron among the Priests of the LORD, and Samuel among them that call upon his
name; with all those other Worthies, who through faith and prayer obtained
deliverances for Jacob. -- It was a noble saying of the Prophet Samuel I
Sam.12. 22. 23.
, The Lord will not forsake his people for his great names sake: -- Moreover,
as for me, God forbid, that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray
for you. As for Moses; he had such a Sense of his Duty in this Matter, and such
an unalienable Love to his People, that he closely followed the LORD with his
continual Intercessions for them, until the LORD space unto him saying, as in
Deuteronomy.9. 13, 14. I have seen this people and behold, it is a stiff necked
people; Let me alone, that I may destroy them. And then the LORD made him an
Offer, as it follows; And I will make of the (...) Nation mightier and greater
than they. -- Yet this could not bribe the man of GOD into Silence: but he went
on to pray for his People, as we read in the following Verses. And he died
blessing the children of Israel Deuteronomy.33. 1.
. So great was his Zele for them; notwithstanding the Abuss he had received
from them: which might seem eno to have stopped his mouth, and turned his heart
from them. -- Thus we have the Saints in former ages for our Pattern. These
things were written for our Admonition and Imitation, upon whom the Ends of the
World are come. They reproach our Neglect, and countenance our Discharge of the
Duty under consideration.

FROM the Premises, I think the Conclusion is sufficiently evident, That the
Godly among a degenerate People ought to be Intercessors for them in the days
of wrath, which roll over them. But it is time for me now to turn the
Observation into an Exhortation.

Wherefore, LET me call upon them, that fear the LORD among you, to give your
selves unto Prayer and Intercession. The LORD be blessed! that (as degenerate
as the times are) we have still a Remnant among us of the S^ed of Jacob, who
have Power with GOD, and are men for the Gap; qualified to stand in the Breach;
and O that they might be more and more spirited thus to do! Let me then exhort
every Jonah, to arise and call upon his GOD; if so be that GOD will think upon
us, that we perish not Jonah.1 6.
. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem Psalm. 122. 6.
. Gather your selves together; before the fierce anger of the LORD come upon
us: Seek ye the LORD. all ye meek of the earth Zeph. 2. 1. (...) 3.
. Arise, cry out in the night: in the beginning of the watches pour out your
heart like water before the face of the LORD Lam.2. 19.
. Trust in him at all times; ye People, pour out your heart before him: GOD is
a refuge for us Psalm. 62. 8.
: And let the Priests, the, ministers of the LORD, weep between the porch and
the altar; and let them say, Spare thy people O LORD Joe!. 2. 17. 13.
! -- And then it may be the LORD will be jealous for his Land, and will speak
peace to his people and to his saints. -- Behold, it is now a day of Jacob's
Trouble: by (...) shall be arise? It is a day of darkness and perplexity and a
time of rebukes from GOD. Through the wrath of the LORD of hosts the Land is
darkened, and the cry of the City goes up to Heaven. And in such a day as this,
the LORD looks to see if their be none to help by their prayers; and does
wonder if there be no Intercessor. O let there not be occasion to renew that
Complaint of the Prophet, (Isa. 64. 7.) There is none that calls upon thy
(...), th^^ stirs up himself to take told of Thee. If the mouths of GOD's
Children are shutt, and a spirit of Prayer for Zion be wanting, it will be a
threatening Symptom. Such a stupid prayerless Frame is very criminal in it self,
a high Provocation to GOD, as well as an awful Judgment on a People; and is a
sad roguestick of Wrath to the uttermost coming upon them. As we are taught
from, Ezekiel. 22. 30, 31. I sought for a man among them, that should make up the
bedge, and stand in the gap before me her the Land, that I should not destroy
it; but I sound none; therefore I have poured out mine Indignation upon them,
etc. Whereas on the other hand When the Spirit of Prayer pr^vales among the
Godly in the several orders and degrees of men, and the Children of GOD are
awakened to cry mightily unto him, this looks like a comfortable Presage, as if
the LORD were coming to such a People in the paths of Mercy and Kindness. Hence
when GOD had designs of Love toward Jerusalem, he promised ( Isa. 62. 6, 7.)
as a Preparatory for and Earnest of approaching Salvations, that he would stir
up some to be fervent and constant in their Intercessions to him. -- Oh that
there might be this Token for Good, this happy Symptom found on us! That this
Light might dawn upon us in our present Clouds and Darkness! -- Let Moses the
Man of GOD, and Aaron his Priest, take their Censers, and stand between GOD and
his People, and make Atonement for us. Let Hezekiah the Ruler, and Isaiah the
Prophet together, cry to Heaven for Divine Reliefs. Yea, for this let every one
that is godly, pray to the LORD, in a time wherein he may be sound. Pray, Pray,
Pray, (as the Martyr said.) never more need than now. This is a
Generation-Service, which even the poorest and lowest of the People may attend.
The least and weakest may be the Pillars of a Place, and instrumental Saviors
of a People, by their powerful Supplications. They that can do little in a
Civil Capacity, may do much in their Spiritual Capacity, by their Prayers. Hear
then, ye Righteous! Consider, and act up to your Character, given in Isa. 62.
6. Ye that make mention of the LORD, or are the LORD's Remembrancers Awake up,
and watch unto Prayer. Resolve with the Psalmist, Psalm. 122. 8, 9. For my
brethren and companions sakes, I will now say, Peace be within thee. Because of
the house of the Lord our God, I will seek thy good. And with the Prophet, Isa.
62. 1. For Zions sake will I not hold my peace and for Jerusalems sake I will
not rest, until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the
Salvation thereof as a lamp that burns, Whatever you make mention of besides,
you must besure remember Zion, and not leave the Public out of your Prayers.
Let your Closets and your Families beat witness, that you pray particularly for
the Peace of our Jerusalem, as those that prefer it above your chief Joy.
Deprecate all, that destroys our Peace, and stirs up Divine Anger against us
Implore the Returns of Divine Favor toward us, and all that which is
necessary to prepare for and entitle to the same. Beg that GOD would take away
all Iniquity, which ft ins our Glory and withholds good things from us: that he
would heal our Backslidings, receive us graciously, and love us freely. Beg,
that he would pour out his HOLY SPIRIT on Magistrates, and Ministers, and on
all his People; and succeed proper means used for promoting a general
Repentance among us; that Glory may still dwell in our Land. All that have any
Interest at the Throne of Grace, are this day solemnly called upon to list up
their servent Cries to GOD, in whom is all our Help; and by their Prayers to be
emptying the Vials of Divine Wrath, which the Sins of this People are so
constantly filling up. It is time to seek the LORD till he come, and rain
Righteousness and Showers of Blessings on his People

BUT then if you would be heard in your Supplications, you must take heed how
you pray. Let me hint a few things here, by way of Direction.

(1.) YOU must pray, confessing the Public Guilt: in the first place humbling
your Souls before GOD for your own Sins, and then for the Sins of others.
Herein you have holy Daniel for an Example, Dan.9. 20. I was speaking, and
praying and confessing my Sin, and the Sin of my People Israel; and presenting
my supplication before the LORD my GOD, for the holy mountain, etc. His Prayer
and Consession you may read, in the foregoing Context. -- You have also the
Example of pious Ezra: See the 9th Chapter of his Book. You have likewise the
Example of godly Nehemiah; who when he prayed day and night, for the Children
of Israel, did also consess the Sins of the Children of Israel; his own Sins,
and the Sins of his Father's House: the Sins of their Kings. and Princes, and
Priests, and Prophets, and Fathers, and all the People. See the first and ninth
Chapters of Nehemiah's Book. And the whole Book of Jeremiah's Prophecy, as well
as that of his Lamentations, abounds with Humiliations, and with Consessions of
the sins of GOD's People. -- It has been the Temper and Practice of the Saints
in all Ages to mourn the Public Guilt, when asking for Public Mercies; to
confess the Sins of the Times and Places in which they lived; the Sins of all
Orders and Degrees of Persons; the Sins of Magistrates, Ministers and People.
It is the Character of the Godly, that they sigh and cry for all the
Abominations, that are done in the midst of Jerusalem Ezekiel 9. 4
. Even thus must you (Our praying Saints) humble your Souls before GOD, for the
Sins that are found among us; and in the name of our Rulers, and Priests, and
People of all degrees, make penitent Confessions to the LORD, if you expect to
be heard in your Supplications for the Restoring of his Favor and Pity toward
his Land.

Again,

(2.) YOU must pray justifying of GOD. You must make such humble
Acknowlegements, as those, to the Glory of GOD: -- The Lord is righteous; for
we have rebelled against his Commandment. It is of the LORD's Mercies that we
are not consumed, because his Compassions fail not Lam. 1. 18. -- 3. 22
. -- O LORD, Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us Confusion of Faces,
as at this day, because we have sinned against thee Dam 9. 7, etc.
. -- After all that is come upon us for our evil Deeds, Thou our GOD have
punished us less than our Iniquities deserve. O LORD GOD of Israel, thou art
righteous. We cannot stand before thee, because of our Trespasses Ezra 9 13, 15.
-- Let not all our Trouble seem little: Howbeit, thou art just in all that is
brought upon us; for thou have done right, but we have done wickedly Neh 9. 33.
. -- Such Acknowledgments as these you must make, with GOD's Servants of old,
when praying for this sinful People. You must, in their Name, take to your
selves the Shame and Blame of their Destruction; ascribing Righteousness to
your Maker, and sanctifying the HOLY ONE of Israel.

(3.) YOU should mix Thanksgivings with your Prayers. Thus you are directed in
1 Timothy 2. 1. So in Phil. 4. 6. In every thing by Supplication, with
Thanksgiving let your Requests be made known to God. Thus, devout Ezra, when
confessing the People's Sins, rehearsing GOD's Judgments, and imploring his
Mercies, took occasion to praise GOD for Deliverance begun: Ezra 9. 8, 9. And
now for a little space, Grace has been showed from the Lord our God, -- to
give us a little Reviving, -- our God has not forsaken us in our Bondage, etc.
So we read in Neh.9. 5. that the pious Levites, upon a solemn day of Fasting
and Prayer, began their Confessions of Sin with Thanksgiving and Praise,
saying, Blessed be thy glorious Name, which is exalted above all Blessing and
Praise, etc. And afterward they go on to celebrate particular Instances of
Divine Goodness. So likewise the 106th Psalm is a beautiful Mixture of
Confessions, Prayers, and Praises. It principally contains a History of
Israel's Rebellions and the Judgments inflicted therefore. And yet begins and
ends with Hallelujah: for we must sing of Mercy, as well as Judgment Jam 5 15.


(4) YOU must pray in Faith: humbly hoping in the Promises of GOD, and entirely
Depending on the mediation of JESUS CHRIST, for obtaining the Favors you are
asking. You must pray in the Faith of our Father Abraham, that eminent and
famous Intercessor. The LORD has given gracious Encouragement to his People to
hope, that the Prayer of Faith shall save the Afflicted (...)
. You must maintain and exercise a holy Trust in the Promises of GOD, hope in
his Mercy, and rely on his Fathfullness. I Joh.5. 14. This is the Confidence
that we have in him, that if we ask anything according to his Will, He hears
us. -- You must bring the LORD JESUS CHRIST in the Arms of your Faith, hold him
up as the expiatory Sacrifice, and the only Atonement for the Congregation; and
place your whole Affiance in his Merits and Intercession for the Audience of
your Prayers. Let your Supplications be offered up in the Name of the blessed
Mediator CHRIST JESUS. Pray in somesuch Words as those of the Prophet Daniel,
(Chap.9. 17, 18) O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant and cause thy face
to shine upon thy desolate Sanctuary, for the Lord's sake. O my God, incline
thine ear and hear --, for we do not present our supplications before thee for
our righteousness, but for thy great mercies.

5. YOU must pray fervently and importunately. It Is the inwrought fervent Prayer
of the Righteous, that avails much. They then, that would obtain the Blessing,
must wrestle with GOD, and agonize in their Prayers, for the Peace and Welfare
of Israel. You must pray, as those that have at Heart the Public Concerns; as
those that indeed desire not the woeful Day; as those that are affected with
every Token of GOD's holy Anger, are afraid of his Judgments; and tremble at
his wrathful Presence. This made Moses so importunate, Deuteronomy.9. 18, 19. I fell
down before the Lord as at the first, forty days and forty nights; I did
neither eat bread, nor drink water: because of all your sins which ye sinned in
doing wickedly in the sight of the Lord, to provoke him to anger. For I was
afraid of the anger and hot displeasure, wherewith the Lord was wroth against
you to destroy you. The Prophet Jeremiah was the more fervent in his Prayers
for Jerusalem, because the Destruction from GOD, threatened to be bro't upon
it, was a Terror to him. How pathetical and melting are his Complaints, Jer.4.
19. My bowels my bowels, I am pained at my very heart, etc. -- You must be
under the like Impressions; and from awful Resentments of the Divine
Displeasure, as well as from tender Compassions to this poor afflicted People,
you must be very earnest in your supplications for them. Beware of Formality
and Remissness in your Prayers. As Israelites indeed, you must plead hard with
GOD, and fill every one his mouth with Arguments. Take to your selves Words,
and plead as in Dan.9. O LORD I beseech thee, let thine anger be turned away
from thy City Jerusalem, thy holy Mountain: because for our sins, thy People
are become a reproach to all about us. O LORD hear; O LORD, forgive, O LORD
hearken and do, defer not, for thine own sake, O my GOD; for thy city and thy
people are called by thy name. -- Plead the Glory of GOD as Moses did, Deuteronomy. 9.
26. -- 19. And as Jeremiah likewise did, in those moving Words (in Jer. 14. 7,
8, 9, 19, 21.) which are too many to be here repeated.

(6.) YOU must pray without Ceasing. You must continue instant in Prayer, and
not faint, nor be discouraged. You must never hold your. Peace, day nor night.
You must cry mightily to GOD, and give him no Rest, till he stir up his
Strength and come, and save his People. Ye that make mention of the LORD, keep
not silence, and give him no Rest, till he establish, and till he make our
Jerusalem a Praise in the Earth Isai. 62. 7, 8.
. Thus Jeremiah stood before GOD to speak Good for his Jerusalem; which may
denote the Constancy, as well as Vehemence, of his Supplications.

(7.) YOU must pray with due Resignation to the holy Will of GOD. Though you
must be fervent and constant in your Prayers; yet you must not go about to
limit the Holy One of Israel, or prescribe to Him, either as to Methods, or
Seasons. You must entirely submit it to Him, in his infinite Wisdom, to answer
your Prayers for Zion, in what Way, and at what Time he pleases. You must
refer all to his good Pleasure, as the Psalmist, in Psalm. 51. 18. Do Good in
thy good pleasure unto Zion. You must leave it to Him to bestow what Good he
pleases; by what Means, and in what Season, he shall see fit. You must wait
patiently for the LORD, without Discontent or Despondency under delays of
favorable Appearances, As he Isa.8. 17. I will wait upon the LORD, who hides
his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look for him. It is said of him
that believes that he makes not baste Isai. 28. 16.
, does not impatiently anticipate the Time set in GOD's Counsils, but with a
fixed heart quietly waits for his Salvation. Indeed there is a lawful provoking
or calling on him to hasten; which has been practiced by the Saints, as you see
in Psalm.70. 1, 5. Psalm. 102. 13. Rev.6. 10. and else where. But this preceeded
from a Spirit of Faith in them and was not without a full Submission to the
Divine Determinations.

(8.) YOUR Prayers must be accompanied with the diligent Use of all proper
Methods, tending to engage the Return of Divine Favor: and obtain the Averting
of GOD's righteous Displeasure. Prayer, without the use of Means (when in our
power) is Presumtion, and profane Mockery of GOD. They are some of the main
Articles of Prayer; -- That GOD would direct to all proper Means, quicken 10
the diligent application of them, and follow regular Endeavors with his
effications Blessing. -- If then you would have Success in your Prayers, you
must join with them the Use of all wise and good Methods to turn away GOD's
Anger from a sinful People. Thus, You must inquire into the Grounds of GOD's
Controversy with them, and endeavor to get the same removed; that the
Provocations being taken away, his Wrath may cease. -- You must carefully call
your selves to an Account for what you have done to provoke GOD to Anger
against this People; repent of and reform all that is amiss in your selves, and
take Care to make and keep Peace between GOD and your own Souls. You must
sanctify your selves, there must be a personal Reformation of Heart and Life,
if you expect GOD to return in a way of Favor, and do Wonders among his People
Jesa. 3. 5.
. Let every Israelite, as once every Ninevite Jonah 3 9, 10.
, not only cry mightily to GOD, but also turn from his evil way; and then who
can tell that GOD will yet return and repent, and leave a Blessing behind him?
Lift up your Heart with your Hands unto GOD in the Heavens Lam.3. 41.
. List up Hands 1 Timothy 2. 8.
. Let the work of Reformation (that great Charity to the Public) begin at Home;
But let it not end there You must keep your selves from the Sins of the Times;
and you must also contribute what you can to promote a happy Reformation of the
Times; endeavor the Amendment of others as much as in you lies. -- But this
introduces the other general Head proposed; which is, --

[2.] THE Saints should jealously and resolutely labor, in their respective
Places, to promote the Reformation of a degenerate People; to suppress those
Sins, that ripen the Land for Judgments; and to propagate that Righteousness,
which exalts a Nation; that Repentance, which (according to the Tenor of the
covenant) heals up the Breach, that Sin has made, and turns away GOD's Anger
from a backssiding Generation. If a Professing People humble themselves under
the Judgments of GOD, and pray, and seek His face, and turn from all their evil
ways; then will He hear in Heaven, and forgive their Sin, and heal their Land
(...)
. But if they (...) not to him that smites them, he will punish them yet seven
times more his Hand will be stretched out still, and his Anger not turned away
(...)
; notwithstanding the earnest Intercessions of his Servants and Children for
them. The Prayers and Tears of the Saints will be but like Water spilt on a
Rock, as to any real Advantage to an evil and untoward Generation; and will not
save them from deserved Ruin, except they likewise repent, and become a willing
and obedient People Indeed the Humiliations and Prayers (...) may obtain, for
an unreformed Place, some little Respite, or Reprieve for a while from
Destruction. But unless there by a Public Repentance and tho'ro' Reformation
among a sinful People, they cannot expect the Recovery of Divine Favor. The
Inhabitants of the Land must themselves learn Righteousness from Divine
Threatenings and Judgments; else the LORD will not visit them with his
Salvation, not be appeased to them. -- Hence the Servants of GOD must use their
endeavors to find out and reform those Sins and Sinners that provoke GOD to
anger, if they would prevent or remove the Effects of his fiery Indignation. It
is remarkable, when Achan had committed a Trespass in the accursed thing, and
wrath fell on all the Congregation of Israel for it, that Joshua and the
Elders, betaking themselves to Fasting and Prayer, without suitable Care to find
out and punish the Sin they probably suspected, met with that Rebuke from GOD,
(Josh. 7. 10, etc.) The Lord said to Joshua, Get thee up; wherefore lie thou
upon thy face? Israel has sinned; I will not be with you any more, except ye
destroy the accursed Person from amongst you. Up sanctify the People, etc. This
should awaken the Saints to add unto their ardent Prayers the most active and
vigorous Endeavors, in their several Stations, and according to their
respective Capacities, to effect a blessed Reformation among us; and oppose the
growth of Vice and Licentiousness, which is too much become the genius and
Complexion of the unhappy Times we live in, to the great dishonor of GOD, the
reproach of our christian Profession. the injury of our common Welfare, and the
danger of our being laid waste by yet heavier Calamities, unless a speedy and
general Repentance Prevent. To promote this is therefore the Duty of all, and
will be the Endeavor of such as have a just Regard to the public Good.

BELIEVE it; without a tho'ro' Reformation there will be no Remission of the
crying Sins of our Land; and unactive Wishes are not sufficient to obtain the
desired Reformation. Indeed we must acknowledge and affirm constantly, that it
belongs to GOD alone (as the efficient Cause) to revive dying Religion among
his People. Means and Instruments cannot by any Virtue or Efficacy of their own,
produce this great and noble Effect; but need a Divine Hand to actuate and
Succeed them. It is only the Ministration of the Spirit, that can turn away
Ungodliness from Jacob, and cause Righteousness to run down Jerusalem's
Streets, as a River. And GOD expects to be inquired of, to be sought to by
Prayer, till he come and bestow this comprehensive Blessing upon us.
Nevertheless, he expects also, that his praying Saints use their utmost
Endeavors in the Application of all those Means, that have a Tendency to the
Revival of GOD's Work among us. You must study the best Methods or Expedients
for this End, and every one in his place, according to his Talent, put them in
Execution. You must search out the impediments or Obstructions that are in the
way; and seek the speedy Removal of them. You must stand up for God against the
Workers of iniquity, and labor to teach Transgressors his Ways. -- Prayers and
Tears are not all the Weapons, to be used in the defense of GOD's Cause among a
declining People: those are not the only Instruments, which the work of
Reformation calls for. Unactive Supplications are like be as successless and
insignificant, as prayerless Endeavors. You must not sit still, and idly
neglect the due Use of Means, looking that GOD should do the whole Work alone.
You must not fit down astonished, (as Ezra in a like case) supposing all Attempts
desperate, and in vain. No; but GOD expects, that you be up and doing; that in
the strength of the LORD JESUS CHRIST you go forth to labor, and employ all
your Opportunities with Zele and Vigor, in setting forward and carrying on a
Work of so great Importance to the Glory of GOD, to the Public Safety and
Prosperity, as well as to your own Comfort and Security. Suffer ye then the
word of Exhortation; and let every one apply himself to the diligent
performance of the Duty incumbent on him in his place.

I know, indeed the Discouragements, that lie in the way, seem not a few, nor
very small. They sail against Wind and Tide, that attempt to reduce the
exorbitant power of Profaneness and Immorality and to correct the Iniquity of
the Times. They that zealously (tho it be also with the utmost Meekness of
Wisdom) reprove the works of darkness, shall be voted precise Fools, or
Hypocrites; and be secretly laughed at by the daring Heroes of Wickedness, or
openly hufft and insulted by the more outrageous Sons of Violence. There are
many scoffing Ishmaels,and cursing Shimei's in the World, from whom you may
expect to meet with rude Affronts and unjust Measures, whatsoever methods you
take to prosecute the great Work of Reformation, whether more gentle or severe
Neither John the Baptist, by his rigid Austerity; nor our Blessed Savior, by
his free and obliging (tho most innocent) Conversation, could escape the bitter
Scoffs and Reproaches of that wicked and perverse Generation of Vipers they
lived amongst, who were always fastening their envenomed Teeth upon them.

BUT surely his Zele for GOD and Love to his Country are very remiss, who will
suffer himself to be flattered flouted, or frightened out of his just and
reasonable Duty; and beaten off this great and noble Design of reforming a
vicious Age; which is so beneficial to Mankind, and which every good Man is
therefore called to engage in with zele and courage -- O! where is your Love to
CHRIST? Where are your Bowels, toward the Souls of Sinners? Where is your
public Spirit, and regard to the common Welfare and Safety, if some
Difficulties, in the way of this blessed Undertaking, damp your Resolution, and
prevent your warm and active Engagement in it? What pusillanimous Souls they,
who dare not appear in the Cause of GOD in evil times, and hereby approve
themselves hearty Friends to their Country: but tamely yield to the Enemies of
both, without ever regularly confronting them! -- To animate you, let me lay
before you those Words of the Apostle, (I Pet. 3. 13, 14.) Who is He that will
harm you, if ye be Followers of that which is good? But and if ye suffer for
Righteousness sake, happy are ye, and be not afraid of their Terror, neither
be troubled. Let me bring you that Exhortation of the Prophet, (Hag. 2. 4, 5.
Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel; and be strong, O Joshua; and be strong all ye
People of the land, and work; for I am with you, says the Lord of hoss -- my
spirit (...) among you: fear ye not. If the Servants of GOD among us in every
Order and Degree would unite their active and Zealous Efforts and with Prudence,
Fidelity and Constancy use their Power and Interest, to restrain Sin and
promote Virtue, We might hope that a revolting People would he reclamed; and so
the dreadful Fruits of that desolating Vengeance which seems to an eye of
Reason hanging over our guilty Heads, prevented and the gracious Presence of
GOD recovered, which in this dark day is very awfully withdrawn from us -- Let
me then with all humble freedom and faithfulness call upon Christians of every
Character among us, to do their utmost for the Reformation of those provoking
Evils, which so abound in the Land. -- A word of Exhortation this, which (if I
mistake not) will be voted a word in season, by all that have understanding in
the Times: but whether addresst by a Person not so suitable, I must submit to
the free Censure of others; and shall not decline apprehended Duty for fear of
unjust Reflections. It would be proper here to consider distinctly what Duties
lie upon the several Members of a Christian Community, in their different
ranks, capacities and relations, in order to prevent the Increase of Sin, and
serve the support and Flourishing of Religion amongst them.

LET it then be a humble Address (in the first place) to all that are in Civil
Authority, or entrusted with the Administration of Justice, in one degree and
another. Honored Fathers, and Brethren, will you suffer me to be your humble,
but faithful Monitor this day? May I put you in mind to be ready to every good
Work, and call upon you to appear with greater Warmth and Vigor, in opposition
to rampant Vice, and in vindication of despised Virtue and Religion? The
Apostle pronounces the Magistrate a Minister of GOD for Good, to the Pubic:
inasmuch as he is ordained a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does Evil;
a Terror to evil Works, and an Encourager of them that do that which is good
Re^. 13. 3. 4.
. -- GOD expects from you, that you be active in your several places to promote
the Public Tranquillity and Prosperity; and in order to this, that you
faithfully use all your Ability and Interest to serve the Support and Progress
of Reformation, and practical Godliness among us, GOD expects that you be
^^tterns of good Works in your own Lives; and that you be Patrons and Promoters
of Religion and Virtue in others. GOD expects that you not only be strict
Observes, but likewise faithful Guardians and Assertors of his holy Laws (as
well as the Laws of the Land) and that you be just Animadvertrs on the
Transgressions of them, as far as your Authority extends, in your several Posts
and Districts. -- You have singular Powers and Advantages in your hands (which
are so many Talents you are accountable for) that afford you special
Opportunities to promote the good Work of Reformation among us. Your very
Example carries with it Authority and attractive Influence. And then you have a
Coercive Power, and can by the due ministration of Justice compel Men to cease
to do Evil, when others can only persuade by the Terrors of the LORD. A great
deal might every one in Authority do toward the desired Amendment of the
Times, by a Zealous prudent and impartial Execution of the Laws against
Profaneness and Immorality; and truly if our Civil Rulers do not very
vigorously engage in this Affair, it is to be feared others will but in vain
urge and persuade to Reformation. -- I know you cannot change and renew the
Heart of any, although in truth you should propose and desire this, in all your
attempts for the restraint and reformation of Offenders See the Revd. Mr.
Column's Sermon on Psalm. 51. 13. page 19. where this is urged on the Magistrate.
. However, you can do much toward amending the Lives of many; which external
Amendment (if general would by a natural and proper Efficiency prevent many
Calamities, and produce those things that are necessary to our temporal
Prosperity: and peradventure GOD would turn from the Fierceness of his Anger.
Thus; you can do a great deal (by the due Provision and careful Execution of
wise and good Laws) to guard the first Table of the Divine Precepts, as well as
the second: to reform the growing Neglect of GOD's Public Worship; to stop the
Mouths to profane Swearers and Evil Speakers; to vindicate the Honor, and
correct the criminal Violation of GOD's holy Sabbath; to suppress the visible
Pride, notorious Idleness, Intemperance and Tavernhaunting, Wantonness, and
Unchastity; and to heal the scandalous Contentions among us: which are the
reigning Evils of this unhappy day, do undermine the foundations of our public
Peace, and threaten to bury us all (with the guilty Actors) in a general
Desolation, unless there be some seasonable Remedy. -- Hear then, Ye that
tremble at the Commandment of the Lord, and let it be done according to the
Law. Arise, for this matter belongs unto you; we also will be with you^ be of
good Courage, and do it (...)
. It belongs to you to search out the Works of Darkness, and to punish haughty
Sons of Wickedness: to countenance them that rebuke in the Gate, and to
discipline with the Rod those that will not be won by the Word; by whose sins
the Land is greatly defiled, and our holy LORD highly incensed against us. And
he will be yet more dreadfully incensed, if the Leaders of this People do not
stand up for GOD against the Evildoers, and tho'ro'ly execute Judgment. Isa.
59. 14, 15. Justice stands afar off; Truth is fallen in the street, and
equity cannot enter. Yea Truth fails and be that departs from evil makes
himself a prey: and the LORD saw^t, and it displeased him, that there was no
Judgment. Sin is a public Evil; and if Vice pass uncontrolled, Religion will
soon be brought into Contempt, with your Authority; and then a Deluge of
Miseries and Judgments will be the fatal Consequence. As then you would not be
Instruments of our Ruin; as you would approve your selves the Shields of the
Earth, a Defense and Glory to us; as you would answer the Oath of GOD which is
upon you, and obtain Honor from the LORD; let us beseech you, SIRS, to do the
utmost you can, in your respective places, with a resolute Industry to
discountenance Sin, and advance Reformation. Remember and imitate Nehemiah,
that famous Reformer and excelling Ruler, who testified against those that
bro't wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath, and contended with the Nobles
of Judah, who connived at them. Remember Job, who put on Righteousness, and it
clothed him: his Judgment was as a Robe and a Diadem: He was Eyes to the Blind,
and Feet was he to the Lame: He was a Father to the Poor; and the Cause which
he knew not, he searched out, and he brake the Jews of the Wicked, and plucked
the Spoil out of his mouth (...)
. Remember how Phinchas in a holy Zele stood up and executed Judgment on the
two Criminals in the very Act of Sin: by which means he turned away Wrath from
the Children of Israel, and stayed the Plague that was begun among them (...)
. By these Examples, let every one be awakened to put on Judgment, and cloth
himself with Zele. Resolve not to bear the Sword of Justice in vain. Neglect
not giving due Discipline, from a carnal Fear, at any time: but boldly
interpose your Authority, without Connivence or Toleration, where the Honor of
GOD, and the public Good call you to do your Office; crying to the LORD (with
Nehemiah in a like case) to strengthen your hands and expostulating with your
self, as he did, Should such a man as I flee Neh.6 9. 11.
? -- It was a pityfull Excuse out of the Mouth of a supreme Magistrate once in
the neglect of his Duty, (1 Samuel 15. 24) I have sinned: for I have transgressed
the commandment of the Lord; because I scared the People -- pretty agreeable to
Pilate's Pretense for condemning the Just One, Luke 23. 23, 24. They were
instant with loud Voices, requiring that be might be crucified: -- and Pilate
gave Sentence, that it should be as they required. -- Remember Jehoshaphat's
solemn Charge and Counsil to his Judges, 2 Chronicles. 19. 9, etc. He charged them
saying, Thus shall ye do in the Fear of the Lord, faithfully, and with a
perfect Heart: And what Cause soever shall come to you of your Brethron, -- ye
shall worn them that they trespass not against the Lord, and so wrath come upon
you, and upon your Brethren: this do ye and ye shall not trespass. -- Deal
courageously, and the Lord shall be with the Good. -- Hear also the Exhortation
that speaks to you in Amos. 5. 15. Hate the Evil, and love the Good, and
establish Judgment in the Gate: it may be the Lord (...) will be gracious to
the Remnant of Joseph.

BUT in the next Place, --

THE Ministers of the Gospel are under very special Obligations, by the awful
Charges of GOD upon them, as well as by their own solemn Engagements, to put
forth their most diligent Endeavors in promoting the Conversion and Reformation
of Sinners. The sacred and the civil Orders must conspire, and conjoyn Heart
and Hand (according to the various ways of their administration and Influence)
for the Support and Propogation of Religion: as when Zerubbabel and others
began to build the House of the LORD at Jerusalem, there were with them the
Prophets of God helping them, Ezra.5. 2. Thus our Prophet Jeremiah was in his
early days raised up very seasonably to assist, and encourage Young King (...)
in that good work of Reformation which he had entered upon. As it is an
Encouragement (...) to be counteranced and preached by such pious Magistrates
as Josiah was: So it is a great Help to Magistrates in any Attempts of
Reformation to be advised and animated, and to have a great Deal of their Work
done for them, by such faithful zealous Ministers as Jeremiah was Mr. Henry's
Note on (...) 1. 2.
. With what glorious Success (through the Blessing of CHRIST) might we hope the
Work of Reformation would be carried on, by the united Labors of a wife and
zealous Magistracy and Ministry! The one reaches the outer Man, the other the
inner Man: Both combined would soon bring Religion into deserved Credit, but
make Vice and Impiety sneak into a corner, and hide it is head in darkness. --
Having then Gifts and Offices, differing according to the Grace that is given
to us, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, let us wait on our Ministering: He that
teaches, on Teaching; He that exhorts, on Exhortation; and be that rules,
let him do it with Diligence Rom.12. 6. -- 8.
. Whatsoever is commanded by the God of Heaven let it be diligently done, for
the House of the God of Heaven (...)
: For why should there be Wrath against the Land?

MINISTERS bear a public Character; and we owe this duty to the Public, to wish
and endeavor it is Prosperity in every proper way: also the Office we sustain is
of common Concernment, and has an immediate Reference to the general Good. It'^
are peculiarly obliged to be under the Rule and Conduct of a public Spirit.
Ministers are as Luminaries in a public Orb; and should study to communicate
Light and Heat to all about them. An idle, or narrow-spirited, self-seeking
Minister is a Contradiction in terms. It most highly becomes and behooves the
LORD's Ministers to be very solicitous for the Public Weal of GOD's People
every where, but especially for the Good of the Places where they live. We
should rejoice in the Prosperity of a People, and tenderly sympathize with them
in a day of Adversity. We should lay to heart the Frowns of Heaven, and mourn
the Sins of a backssiding Generation: grieved to behold our People, printing
away in their Iniquities, and perishing under the Judgments of a provoked GOD.
And from a deep Compassion to them (as well as in Fidelity to CHRIST, whose we
are and whom we serve) we should employ all our Tho'ts, and Cares, and
contribute our utmost Assistences to save a People, consuming under GOD's holy
Wrath. GOD has placed Ministers as Watchmen upon the walls of Jerusalem; and
requires that we set our selves to search into the Grounds of his Contending
with the Inhabitants of the Land; and diligently inquire what means the Heat
of his Anger; that we study to find our and bear faithful Testimony against
the Sins of the Times; that with all boldness and plainness we declare the
whole Council of GOD, and impartially exercise the holy Discipline of his House
toward Offenders. Let us hear the Apostle's Charges to young Timothy; -- These
things command and teach: let no man despise thy Youth 1 Timothy 4. 11, 12.
. Them that Sin, rebuke before all, that others also may fear. I charge thee
before GOD and the LORD JESUS CHRIST, and the elect Angels, that thou observe
these things without preferring one before another, doing nothing by
partiality, -- Neither be partakers of other men's sins: keep thy self pure ^
Tim.5. 20, etc.
. I charge thee before GOD, and the LORD JESUS CHRIST, who shall judge the
quick and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom: Preach the word, be
instant in season, out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all
long-suffering and doctrine. For the time will come, when they will not endure
sound doctrine 2. Tim. 4. begin
. -- Let us hear also what the LORD said, to young Jeremiah; -- Say not, I am a
Child: for thou shall go to all, to whom I shall send thee, and whatsoever I
command thee thou shall speak. Be not afraid of their face; for I am with thee,
says the LORD Jer 1. 7.
. He that has my word, let him speak my world faithfully Chap.23. 28.
-- In like manner the LORD spoke to Ezekiei, saying, Thou, Son of man, be not
afraid of them, neither be afraid of their words, tho briers and thorns be with
the, and thou do dwell among Scorpions: be not afraid of their words, nor
dismayed at their looks, tho they be a rebellious house. And thou shall speak
my words unto them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear. Be
not thou rebellious like that rebellious House Ezekiel.2. 6. -- 8.
. -- An Expositor ( Mr. Henry.
) on this last Place has these Notes; "Those that will do anything to purpose
in the Service of GOD, must not be afraid of the Face of Man; for the Fear of
Men will bring a snare, which will be very entangling to us in the Work of GOD.
-- "The Untractableness and Unprofitableness of People under the Word is no
good Reason why Ministers should leave off Preaching to them; nor must we
decline an Opportunity by which Good may be done, tho we have a great deal of
Reason to think no Good will be done. -- "If Ministers, that are Reprovers by
Office, connive at Sin, and indulge Sinners; either show them not their
Wickedness, or show them not the fatal Consequences of it, for fear of
displeasing them; They hereby make themselves Partakers of their Guilt, and are
rebellious like them. If People will not do their Duty in reforming, yet let
Ministers do theirs in reproving; and they will have the Comfort of it in the
Reflection, whatever the Success be". As that Prophet had, (Isa. 49. 4, 5.) I
have labored vain, yet surely my judgment is with the Lord. Though Israel be
not gathered, yet I shall be glorious in the eyes of the Lord. And as the
Apostles had, (2 Cor. 2. 14, 15.) Now thanks be to God, who always causes us
to triumph in Christ; -- for we are unto God a sweet Savor of Christ, in them
that are saved, and in them that perish -- So I These. 2. 2,etc. We were bold in
our GOD to speak unto you the Gospel of GOD with much Contention, For our
Exhortation was not of Deceit: -- But as we were allowed of GOD to be put in
Trust with the Gospel, even so we speak not as pleasing Men, but GOD who tries
our Hearts. For neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, etc.
-- It is sadly true that Sinners love to hear smooth things and hate him that
rebukes in the Gate: They abhor him that speaks uprightly Amos 5. 10.
. And when the Prophets accommodate themselves to the evil Humors of a
degenerous People, speak the Deceits of their own Heart, and do not cause
Israel to hear the Words of the LORD; as the LORD is against such Prophets that
thus Smooth their tongues, so it is an awful Sign of his Departure from such a
People, and the hastening of destructive Vengeance upon them Jer.23. 31, 33.
. But if GOD has any Reserves of Benignity and Pity for them, He will raise up
some that will dare to carry to 'em the most awful, Messages, the most
unwelcome Tidings, and to Preach the Preaching watch he has bid then whatever
it be; not sparing any Pains; not sparing the greatest of Men; nor sparing the
most popular Vices. -- Thus must every one be tempered and disposed, if he
would be found faithful to GOD, to his own soul, or to the Public Weal. We
must be bold in our GOD, and not fear the Faces of Men: nor spare their Lusts
in favor to their Persons, or from any finister Views whatsoever. Neither the
Pride and Imperiousness of some, nor the Peevishness. Rage, and Rancour of
others must break our Courage, cool our Zele, or slacken our Endeavors in the
pursuit of a Design, so really excellent in it self, and so abundantly
beneficial to Mankind, as the Intention of recovering a revolted World to GOD
and Goodness. We should patiently endure the Contradiction of Sinners as our
blessed LORD has set us an Example: Yea we should rather be animated by
Discouragements and Oppositions and in spite of all, with Patience, Alacrity,
and Fidelity Prosecute the Cause of GOD, and the Public Interest: setting our
faces as a stint, and being full of Power and Judgment by the SPIRIT of the
LORD; tho for our Faithfullness, Zele. and Activity we may by Venomous Tongues
be made the Subjects of impotent Raillery, be branded as the Troublers of
Israel, and doomed unprofitable Burdens of the Earth. But if this is to be
vile, let us (with David) be more vile than thus, and he base in our own sight
(...)
. In all our dealings with Men, let us be plain and faithful: let us do all we
can (and more than we do) if it be possible, to save a Generation from the
wrath of GOD, and impending Calamities: Let us be still more plain, more
particular, more serious [and zelous] in this great Work Mr. Will'ard (...)
. Let us pursue that solemn Charge, (Jer. 15. 19.) Let them return unto thee,
but return not thou unto them. Let us gird up our Loins, and put on the whole
Armor of GOD; not be slothful in business, but fervent in Spirit, serving the
LORD; warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom: being bold and
resolute and strong in the LORD, tho also humble and meek and wise: of some
having Compassion, and pulling others out of the Fire. If any go on still in
their Trespasses, and hate to be reformed: spurn at all the endearing methods
of Persuasion, yea laugh at the shaking of the Spear, and account our most
awful spiritual Weapons but as Stubble; yet let them know that the Irophers of
God have been among them. Let us not shun to declare unto them all the Counsil
of God; being instant in season, and out of season; Exhorting and rebuking with
all Authority; and ceasing not to warn every one night and day with tears, if
by any means we may save some; at least deliver our own souls, and keep them
pure from the blood all men, -- Now to quicken ourselves to such Fidelity
andDiligence, let us labor to get our Hearts inspired with a greater Hatred of
Sin; with a more tender Pity toward the Souls of Sinners; with a more generous
Ardour for the public Good; with a more confirmed Hope in the Mercy of our LORD
JESUS CHRIST, and a more inflamed Zele for the Glory of GOD. -- I shall only
add under this head; I would not be mistaken, as to what I have said here with
respect to those in the Ministry: it is not designed to instruct, excite or
reprove my reverend Fathers and Brethren, so much as to admonish and quicken
myself; and to let the People know what is the Duty of Ministers: that seeing
what Obligations lie upon us to be faithful and open-hearted in our dealing
with them, in this dark and degenerate day, they may not so angrily resent the
performance of our Duty, as they are apt to do.

BUT now I proceed to offer a word or two to Christians who move in a less
public Sphere, Thus I might call upon the Teachers of our Schools, the Tutors
of our Children and Youth, to use their utmost Endeavors for the propagating of
Religion among the rising Generation. You have peculiar Advantages in your
hands for this End; which GOD and the Public justly expect you improve with the
greatest Care and Diligence. You should use your Authority in reforming the
Manners of vicious Youths and Children. You should use your Knowledge and
Learning in giving them seasonable Instructions about their Spiritual Concerns
and opening to them sacred Doctrines, in the most familiar manner. You should
use your utmost Wisdom and Care to affect their Consciences with Divine Truths,
and bring them to reverence all serious Dictates, from within; to study and
conform to the practical Lessons of the Gospel; to love and practice secret
Prayer, Reading GOD's Word daily, etc. You should inquire into the State of
their Souls, and watch over their Ways: frown on the first appearances of Evil
and check the beginnings of Sin; but cherish and encourage every hopeful
Symptom. You should labor to mortify betimes their youthful Lusts; to
restrain their exorbitant Passions, and rectify all irregular Affections; to
subdue every proud, ambitious and haughty Spirit at it is first appearance; to
reduce every peevish and discontented Humor, to correct every selfish
niggardly Temper; to civilize and reform every ungenerous ungrateful
Disposition; and to kill all the seeds of Vice: On the Contrary endeavor to
implant good and sober Principles in their young minds; to bring them into the
Liking and Practice of all Theological and Moral Virtues; and form their Souls
to worthy generous Designs, and excellent Tempers; that they may be "useful
Citizens of this World, and hopeful Candidates for heaven". In thus doing,
you will show a just Concern for the Good of both the present and succeeding
Generations; and such a public Spirit, well becomes your public Capacity.

FURTHER, I might direct the Exhortation to Heads of Families, and call upon
them to walk within their Houses (like David) with a perfect heart, and like
Abraham to command their Children and Household to serve the LORD. Families are
the first Source and Seminary of the Church and Commonwealth: and upon the
well-ordering of them does not a little depend the Flourishing and Prosperity
of both. The Neglect of Domestic Government and Houshold-Piety is the Rise and
Spring of innumerable Mischiefs to a People; and speaks all Religion to be in a
decaying expiring posture among them. This is the great Wound and Disease of
this Place and People, that Family Worship and Discipline is shamefully cast
off by multitudes, and so remisly attended by the Generality; that there are so
many Tabernacles of Iniquity, so many Houses of the Wicked among us, wherein
GOD is not served; and that among the Godly themselves, there is such a
lamentable Decay of Family-Religion in all the parts of it. Family- Prayer is
too much degenerated into a Formality. Family- Instruction is not duly upheld:
and Family- Government seems to be almost lost and perished out of the Earth.
Children do not honor their Parents, and Servants do not (...) their Masters;
nor do Heads of Families take regular Methods to maintain their Authority, and
govern their respective Charges, according to the Will of GOD. They don't bring
up their Children in the Admonition of the LORD, nor command their Household to
keep his ways; but a criminal Indulgence reigns and prevales. -- Now these
Family-Disorders are very provoking to GOD, the GOD of all the Families of the
Earth, who looks down from his holy Habitation, into the Habitations of Men,
and beholds all that is amiss in our Houses, For these things among others,
Divine Justice has lately been visiting us with corro^ive Dispensations. GOD
has been distributing Sorrows in his Anger, and smiting our Houses with the
Rod. How many are there among us that may take up the Lamentation, and say, I
am the man that has seen affliction by the rod of his Wrath: my Virgins end my
young men are fallen: the Children and the sucklings thou have slain them in
the day of thine Anger. Thou have called at in solemn day my Terrors round
about, and best compassed me with Gall, and Travel: thou have covered me with
ashes, and made my Chain heavy. Thou have pulled me in pieces, and, made me
Desolate -- How great have our Family- Distresses been of late, by reason of
the Contagious Sickness spreading so swiftly through the Town, and so fatally?
The Slain of the LORD have been many: GOD has been breaking our Families with
great Breaches, with very grievous Blows. And has he not been herein pouring
our Wickedness upon us? Have not our Family- Sins drawn down these Effects of
his holy Vengeance on our guilty Heads? Should we not hearken to the voice of
his Rod, which loudly calls upon us to put away all Iniquity far from our
Tabernacles? And since he has been mixing so much Mercy with his Judgments
however severe, should we not by his Goodness be led to Repentance? After all
that is come upon us for our evil Deeds, if we go on to break his Commandments,
may we not justly fear, that GOD in his holy Providence will renew the Tokens
of his Displeasure? If young People, like the Sons of good old Eli, make
themselves vile, and their Parents, like him, restrain them not; what can they
expect but to be punished like him, and to have their Houses visited with still
heavier Judgments? Wherefore, if you would not drink yet deeper of the Cup of
Divine Fury, and when you are come out of one Fire, go into another which shall
devour you, be ^elous and repent. Get your Hearts and Houses purged from Sin,
that abominable thing, which GOD's Soul hates. Let this Family-Reformation be
vigorously and generally engaged in; and it will open to us the fairest
Prospects of a public Reformation. For the most zealous Attempts of Magistrates,
Ministers, Tutors, etc. toward the Reformation of Manners, particularly among
the rising Generation, will be but of little Significancy, without the
concurrent Endeavors of Heads of Families. The work must begin and take it is
Rise here. Salt must be first cast into these little Springs; else the waters
in general are not like to be healed. Let every Parent and Master then take up
Joshua's pious Resolution, (Josh. 24. 15.) As for me, and my house, we will
serve the Lord -- And that of David (Psalm. 101. 2, etc.) I will walk within my
house with a perfect heart. I will set no wicked thing before mine Eyes. I will
not know a wicked Person. Whosoever privily standreth his neighbor, him will I cut
off from my Family and Employ. He that works Deceit, shall not dwell within
my house, etc. Let every one resolve upon and set about Reforming his own
House, keep up a strict Discipline there, and diligently use the Influence and
Authority he has over his Children and Servants, to engage them in a real Love
and Obedience to the Law of the LORD. This is the way to form and fit them to
be Blessing to the Public, in their day and generation; this is an excellent
Medium to revive and propagate Religion in the Land; and consequently to regain
the lost Presence and Favor of GOD, and secure the same to rising Posterity:
which (methinks) should be every one's solicitous Care and Ambition.

NOW in the last place, I come to speak unto Christians at Large, to all
Professors of Religion considered in a private Capacity. Every one of the
meanest Rank and lowest Circumstances in the World, had some Occasions and
Opportunities to promote and strengthen the Interests of Religion; and in his
place should lend a helping Hand, for this Purpose, Christians in private (as
well as those in public) Stations, are indispensably obliged, for the honor of
GOD and the general Good, each of them in their respective places to be buisy
and intent in the Cause of Reformation. This is incumbent on you as Christians,
and as Subjects; as Members of the Church, and as Members of the Common Wealth.
A Regard to the Good of the World, to the Safety and Prosperity of the Land,
the Town, and N^i borhood where you dwell, should influence you to do your
utmost for the averting and appeasing of GOD's righteous Anger; and by
Consequence for the suppressing those Sins, which have inflamed the Divine
Displeasure against us. -- You must not go about to shift off from yourselves
this Work of Reformation, as if it belonged only to Magistrates, Ministers, and
other Authorities. No, it should be every single Person's Concern. It is a
common Duty, and universally obliging. Some undeed have greater Advantages than
others. However ever, let your sphere of Activity be never so small, and your
Opportunities never so few; yet you are not without your Opportunities. -- The
least Star has it is Light; the meanest Member, it is use. There are various
Ways, in which private Christians may display their zele for Religion, and
minister to it is Support and Increase. Thus, You may contribute not a little to
serve the Design of Reformation, as by your fervent Prayers, so by a bright
Example of all Virtue and Goodness. Let your Light plan so shine before others,
that they seeing your good Works, may likewise be induced to glorify GOD. --
You may also do good by serious Discourse in your friendly Converses with
others. Wherefore let your Speech be always with Grace, seasoned with Salt, and
good to the use of godly edifying: such as may manifest grace in him that
speaks, and minister Grace to him that hears. -- Again, You may be serviceable,
by brotherly Watch over your Fellow Christians, and a faithful attending the
several Duties, which ChruchOrder does require at your hands. 1 These. 5. 14.
Now we exhort you Brethren, Warn them that are unruly, comfort the
feeble-minded, etc. Heb. 3. 13. Exhort one another daily while it is called, To
day, lest any be hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin. Tit. 2. 1, 3. Speak
thou the things which become sound doctrine; -- that the aged Women be teachers
of good Things; that they may teach the young women to be sober, etc. How
narrow and inferior soever your sphere is, undoubtedly there are some within
it. some Relatives or Acquaintance, that you may use a Freedom with, who need
your Counsils, Cautions Admonitions, and the like; which you should be ready to
dispense unto them, as the Case may require -- Moreover, You may do much
Service by making prudent and seasonable Informations or Complaints to
Authority against open and daring Offenders. You should call for Civil Justice,
to be done upon criminal Delinquents; and for Ecclesiastical Discipline to be
exercised upon scandalous Impenitents. If it be an Iniquity to be punished by
the Judges, a Sin that exposes to Temporal Corrections, You must inform the
Magistrate; Go and tell Moses of it, as they, Lev. 24. 11. Or, if it be an
offense that exposes to Spiritual Censures, Go tell it unto the Church, as our
Savior directs, Mattb.18. 17. This you must do, if you would not partake of
other men's sins and plagues. Deuteronomy. 13. 6. etc. If thy Brother, or thy Son, or
thy Daughter, or the Wise of thy Bosom, or thy Friend which is as thine own
Soul offend, thine eye shall not pity him, neither shall thou spare, neither
shall thou conceal him. And all Israel shall hear and fear, and shall do no
more any such wickedness. To inform Authority is the way to wash your own hands
from the Guilt; and to put away the Evil from the Community, if Justice be duly
administered. As then you would be just to your own Souls, and true to the
Public Interest, you must be faithfully in this Matter; and especially are you
called to be so, in this time of prevailing Iniquity. -- In a word, You must
rejoice in acts I Justice, against provoking Evils among us; thankfully resent
the holy Zele and faithful Service of Pious Rulers, Ministers, and Tutors; and
do and you can encourage their hearts, and strengthen their hand in their Work.
Approve the laudable (...) of such as are diligent and faithful in their
respective Trusts: And what they do for the honor of GOD, and for the welfare
of this People, let it be accepted always with all thankfulness by you, as
becomes Saints. Don't cherish a penarious Spirit, or indulge querulous:
Behaviors toward them. Don't play the Busy Body in other men's matters,
either by words or actions: not by irregular Excursions from your proper Line
of private Duty, make a breach on public Order, and justle with others,
regularly moving in their appointed Spheres. The wild Zele of pragmatical
restless Spirits is one of the greatest Enemies to the desired Reformation, and
tends to produce inconceivable Mischiefs They are not the best Reformers, that
by an envious or over-Officious Zele are frequently transported out of their
proper Post into the Province of others; undertaking the actual Management of
Work that belongs not to them, or setting up for Inspectors, and Censors of
others Managements and making critical Remarks and perverse Comments on all
that is said or done by the Servants of the Public. Those are not the best
Reformers, that make the most tragical Outcries against the Apostasy of the
Times, and are always making Invectives against these or those, as the only in
others of it: and in the mean time considers (...) what hand they themselves
have (...) in the prevailing Disorders; nor what they can do in their own place
to bring things under a better Regulation, Reformation will never be carr^^d on
by popular Glamours or the ungoverned Emotions of an ^^gitimate Zele: But by
every man's keeping to his (...) est, and there regulating What he has advantage
for very man must first reform himself, his Family; and then do all that he may
regularly in his sphere to promote this Work in those about him The late (...)
Mr. Pemberton's excellent Discourse, enti^ul'd, The Christian fixed in his
Post, page 29.
: without interfering with others in their just and proper motions; without
envying the dignity of superiors, or uncharitably reflecting on the fidelity
of those that sit at Helm. It was a happy day in Israel, when the People took a
thankful notice of what Good David did; and whatsoever be King did, it pleased
all the People. It was a good Time, when there were of the Heads of Iss^char,
Men that had under standing of the Times, to know what Israel ought to do; and
all their Brethren were at their Commandment. But it was an unhappy Time, when
the People in the Wilderness murmured against Moses the Ruler, and against
Aaron the Priest; and found fault with almost all their Conduct and
Administrations. Such a Spirit reigning is one of the most threatening Symptoms
on a People. O let not this evil Frame be found among US. And if there he any
that indulge themselves in it, I wish that all their Complaints were turned
into Praises for the good, and Prayers for the bad. Observe the Apostles
Direction, (1 Timothy 2. begt.) I exhort therefore that first of all
Supplications, prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all
men: for Kings, and for all that are in Authority; that (under them) we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, For this is good
and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior. Take this method: and who knows
how far the Prayers of the Righteous may prevale to reform a degenerate
Magistracy and Ministry, if they must be stigmatized as such? O set your selves
to pray down a blessed Effusion of the holy Spirit; that the work of Grace may
be revived on the hearts of GOD's Children and Servants, in Places of Public
Trust; that they may be inspirited to serve their Generation with better
Fidelity, with greater Industry, and the wisest Application of all their
Powers. Brethren, pray for us: for we trust we have a good Conscience, in all
things willing to live honestly. But We beseech you the rather to do this
Heb.13 18, 19.
at this time, because our Work is now peculiarly great and difficult, our
strength is small, and an uncommon day of Temptation seems to be before us. Now
therefore I beseech you, Brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for
the Love of the Spirit, that ye strive together with us in prayers to God for
us Rom (...)
. -- They that can do little or nothing in an active way toward the desired
Reformation, may thus help together by Prayer for us (...)
. They that can do nothing further toward the preventing of Sin, may stand in
the Breach and weep in secret Places, and shine down the works of darkness by
the Light of an holy Example.

AND now upon the whole; Did all the Servants of GOD, as well public Persons,
as private People, unite their zealous Attemts, in a regular discharge of the
Duties respectly incumbent on them, together with their fervent Supplications
at the Throne of Grace: we might hope quickly to see a happy Change of the
Times, a blessed Resurrection of practical Christianity, with the joyful
Return of GOD's favorable Presence.

I shall here crave Leave to add a few Sentences borrowed, and then conclude
this long Discourse. "Here is a wide and noble Field (says one) before us, for
all good Men to show their Zele, and exert themselves in: and could but all
good. People so far agree, as to lay down their undue Heats and Animosities;
and to let their Warmth and Zele run together for a while, in this Channel; to
employ their Prayers, their Labors their Parts, and their Purses, to extirpate
that Impiety and Profaneness, which reigns amongst us, and is the occasion of
separating the Favor and gracious Presence of GOD from us; who (though He may
bear for a while in expectation of our Amendment) can never delight to do good
to a rebellious and impenitent People: we need not doubt when we have thus made
our Peace with GOD, He will heal our Divisions among our selves (which probably
are a just Judgment of GOD upon us for our other Sins, one of the bitter Fruits
of that Immorality, Unbelief and Contempt of the Gospel, which first took Root
amongst us) and incline our hearts to Peace one with another.

"LET me tell you (says eminent Divine of our own Mr. Willard's Elections Sermon
) that for the Divisions of Reuben there are great Searchings of Heart. Those
Evil Surmisings and uncharitable Jealousies one of another; those Aspersions
cast one upon another, and upon some of the best Friends of our Zion; [those
Strifes and Contention among us. in Towns, Churches, Families, etc.] are very
provoking to GOD. and like to be ruinating to our selves. See. Hos.10. 2.
Gal.5. 15. Jam 3. 15, 16. Our safety is only in Unity: Our Security in being
one for GOD, one with CHRIST, and one among our selves. O let us consider how
little GOD's Work goes forward, and how his Glory suffers, while men spend
their little Zele, in Oppositions and Invectives one against another. This
picketh out the Cement, and crumbles away the Mort^^, which is the Strength of
the Building; and when gone, with what ease may it be made to fall? To remedy
this put on Charity. Brotherly Love, and Christian Forbearance. There are
enough abroad, that watch for our Halting; we need not lay open one another's
Infirmities Devouring Beasts enough there are, which with open mouths wait to
make a Prey of us". -- It Is Pity, we should destroy our selves. As we love the
peace of our Jerusalem, let all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Clamor, and Evil
speaking be put away from us. with all Malice: and let us be kind one to
another, tender hearted pityfull, and courteous having the same Love, being of
one Accord, of one Mind: Seeking the Things, which make for Peace, and whereby
one may edify another: Following Peace with all Men, and Holiness: without
which no Man shall see the LORD. Thus shall the Breaches in our Hedge be made
up: Otherwise they will be but widen'd and aggravated. Men of a censorious
dividing Spirit, how specious foever their Pretenses of Zele for Reformation
may be, are no real Friends to this Cause; but its most effectual Adversaries.
Unpeaceable, Partyspined Reformers are dangerous Coals, fitted to kindle a
destroying Fire (...) a Place. The Spirit of holy Zele is a Spirit of holy
Love, and of Meekness, and of a sound Mind. O that such a Spirit might rest
upon us! May the GOD of Peace, who makes Men to be of one mind in an house
unite us all in the Bonds of TRUTH, HOLINESS and LOVE! May He give us ONE HEART
and ONE WAY, that we may fear him for ever, for the good of our selves, and of
our Children after us. May he turn away his Wrath from us, and rejoice over us
to do us good, with his whole Soul. May he purge away our Dross, and take away
all our Tin! May he restore us Rulers, as at the First: Counsillers and Judges,
as at the Beginning; make our Officers Peace, and our Exacters Righteousness!
May he purify the Sons of Levi, and clothe his Priests with Salvation! May Zion
be redeemed with Judgment, and her Converts shout aloud for Joy! May our
Jerusalem be called, The City of Righteousness, the faithful City, a City that
is Compact together, and fitly framed: The Habitation of Holiness. The
Perfection of Beauty, and the Joy of all the Earth! May Glory dwell; in our
Land, and peace be upon Israel, and the whole Earth be filled with the Knowledge
of JESUS CHRIST. AMEN

ERRATA.
PAge iv. line have but one, read many, P. 18. 1. 14. for their, read they. P.
20. 1. 26. read, enter into Life. P. 22. 1. 2. read, a (...) glorious. P. 42.
last line, for happy. read, unhappy. P. 43. 1. 16. for their, read, your. P.
46. 1. 12. for Lives are, read. Life is. P. 62. 1. 3. read, the Civil
New Year's day. P. 125. I last but 3. read, Wants. P. 166. I last, read,. holy.
P. 130. 1. 15. for work, read, words.

