Some further Account from London, of the Smallpox Inoculated. THE SECOND
EDITION.
With some Remarks on a late Scandalous Pamphlet Entitled, Inoculation of the
Small Pox as practiced in Boston, etc.
By Increase Mather, D.D.
THat Eminent Physician, Dr. Walter Harris, a Fellow of the College of
Physicians, entertained that Learned Society April 17. 1721. with a very
Judicious Discourse, De peste, which he has now published, with a notable
Appendix, De Inoculatione Variolarum, or The Small Pox Inoculated, (which was
part of a Praelaction De Curatione Variolarum, afterward made before the same
Society.) He takes notice, that a plain, and most Innocent way (as he calls it)
of Inoculating the Small Pox, found out among the unlearned Orientals, was now
by the good Providence of GOD brought unto us, who are a great way distant from
them, ad comparandas, si DEO placeat, Variolas tutas ac benignas, that so we
may have the Small Pox after a safe, and easy manner, in that Method, if GOD
please graciously to smile upon it. And it arrives unto us the more seasonably
(the Dr. says) because the Small Pox of the Confluent sort of late has made
fearful Destruction among People of higher as well as lower Quality in the
Nation: whereas the Inoculation duly managed, a Confluentibus Variolis
contrahendis nunquam non servat Incolumes. mireque tuetur, forever preserves
and wondrously defends People from suffering that sort of Small Pox, which has
proved so dangerous.

He gives an Abstract of the Communication from Dr. Timonius to Dr. Woodward
about this matter, which we have in the Philosophical Transactions. He adds an
Account of that Famous Doctors arriving to Great Riches as well as Learning,
and receiving his Degrees at Oxford, and Padua, and his returning to his own
Country, after many Travels abroad, and his refusing the peillous Honor, to be
Physician to the Grand Segnior; and yet coming to an untimely end in the midst
of all his flourishing Circumstances. But then the Doctor makes his
Acclamations, how much we are indebted unto him for his Goodness in first
Communicating so useful and unknown a method of safety from the Small Pox unto
us!

The Doctor informing us from Timonius, of the way wherein the Inoculation of
the Smallpox is managed at Constantinople; he prefers it before the way used
upon the Three Children of the French Consul (reported unto the Dr. by an
English Merchant at Aleppo,) which the Dr. says had too much of the Fantastic
in it; and adds, Two Incisions are enough, and the further from the Brain and
the Heart the better. But that he might confirm apud nos Saluberrimum usum
Inoculationis Variolarum, the most profitable use of the Inoculation of the
Small Pox among Us, which is found so safe and innocent (as he expresses it)
and prevails (he says) now so universally at Constantinople, as an Experience
to be relied upon has now assured them all, the Dr. goes on to relate, that the
Illustrious English Ambassador at the Port (who, he says, must be a sufficient
observer of the Danger in it, if there were any,) brought his only Son, and
Heir, the Chief Treasure he had in the World, under the Inoculation. And the
same illustrious Person, after his return home, that he might consult the
Welfare of his own Honorable Family, and that ( they are the Doctors words) by
his own Example he might animate others in so advantageous a thing to preserve
their Offspring, he brought his little Daughter a Child of but Five Years old
under the like Inoculation with two little Incisions, one on each Arm, (the
last May,) by the hand of Dr. Maitland, who had performed the Operation on the
Son before. The Success was alike happy in both of them. The Dr. says he
himself was an Eyewitness of it; that the Young Lady had the Small Pox after
the gentlest manner imaginable; so that she had no occasion to keep her Bed,
and he could not count above a Dozen Pustules in her face, and those on her
Body were so few, as not to be worth mentioning. This Eminent Physician, in
short, highly commends the Practice; but presses, That the Diet of the Patients
be thin, and moderate, forbearing Flesh, and Wine, and Spirituous Liquors; and
all hot Medicines, and Cordials. He dreams nothing of its breeding the Plague,
when he recommends it at the very Time (and in the very Book) when he is
providing against the dangers of the Pestilence.

He adds, That at Constantinople, they tried by a Second and Third Inoculation,
whether any more infection could be conveyed unto them that had once received
it: And they could never bring it for to make the least impression. And he
makes a just Remark upon it.

This Essay the Doctor dedicates to Sir Hans Sloane the President, and to the
Electors (among whom we have the celebrated Name of Sir Richard Blackmore, a
Person well-known in the World, for his Uncommon Piety as well as Erudition and
Ingenuity,) and the Censors, and all the Fellows of that Renowned Body; and
they all allowing of his Dedication, do in effect, bespeak a Reception of what
he has offered.

This is a true Extract, from the Original now in my Hands. Increase Mather.

DR. Walter Harris (as I before noted) is a Man of Great Learning and Judgment;
This Extract in English from his Excellent Discourse concerning Inoculation of
the Small Pox, I have here Published, hoping that many will be convinced and
Edified by it. And it is to be hoped that what is emitted herewith will be an
effectual Antidote against a wicked Pamphlet Entitled, Inoculation of the
Small Pox as practiced in Boston: Considered in a Letter to A. S. etc. who the
Author of it is, I do not know, only it is said it was written by one whose
Name is Douglas: No Man can in rational Charity think that the Author has the
least spark of Grace in his heart, The transgression of the wicked says within
my heart, there is no fear of God before his eyes; for in his Pamphlet there
are many impudent and malicious Lies, and the whole design of it is to jeer and
abuse the faithful Messengers of GOD, which is far from a sign of Piety. 2 Chronicles. 36.16. The Reverend Mr. Colman has published a very rational and useful
Discourse which this Douglas calls a Vain Book, and fleers at him for what he
says of the Inoculated, and many other things which he calls silly and cant.
Also the Reverend Mr. William Cooper who is known to be a Minister of Great
Abilities and Exemplary Piety, he does by way of scorn call a Young Conscience
keeper, and quoting a good passage from him, cries out, O Impiety! And whereas,
I had mentioned as one reason of my approving Inoculation, that many Eminent
Physicians in London did so, and that one of the Public Prints had those
words, Inoculation of the Small Pox is a safe and universally Useful
Experiment, for this he ^eers and derides me, saying this is either a Dream,
Second Sight, or a contrived story. As for Second Sight I never knew any that
pretended to it, except a Scotch Wench whose Name was Jennet Douglas, whether
she was related to this Douglas I know not.

It is observable that the great spite of this Man is against me and my Son;
which is the more strange, considering that no Men have been so much respected
and honored by the most Eminent Ministers in Scotland, and by several Noblemen
there, than we have been. But he is Degener a patria. If he returns to Scotland
and shall abuse the Ministers there, as he has done here without doubt the
Church there (to which such wickedness is detestable) would deliver him to
Satan, for he deserves the highest Censure. He charges those that are for
Inoculation to be guilty of Felony, and advises Dr. Boylstons Friends to bring
him to his Trial, while so many Judicious Magistrates and Ministers are in the
humor of Inoculation. Thus does he flout at Judicious Magistrates and
Ministers for which he deserves to be scourged out of the Country. But will he
charge Dr. Harris and other the Physicians in London with Felony?

While I am writing this, One has put into my hands the following Quaere, which
I think proper to be here annexed.

Suppose a Young Blade, a Practitioner in Physic should go from New England
over to Scotland, and being yet but a New Comer there, and mere stranger
(kindly cherished and brought into Practice by the Charitable Ministers there)
he should publish bitter and scoffing Satyrs mixed with gross Lies in matters
of fact upon the most Eminent Ministers there, and call them an hundred times
Contemtible Parsons, Men destitute of Probity, destitute of Piety, unable to
write any thing but what is vain, silly blundring; Men of wicked desires, and
wicked designs, whimsical and unlearned Men, and Murderers of the People, and
laugh at the People for being such Devotees to them, as to think such sorry
Conscience Keepers worthy to be consulted in Cases of Conscience, and propose
to banish them out of Scotland, that there might be no more of their Praying,
Preaching and Scribbling there: And when his hand is in propose that what the
said wicked Ministers have encouraged should be Prosecuted as Felony: But
because the Magistrates of Scotland are wiser Men then to take the Law from
him, then to scoff at them as Judicious Coxcombs, and as being in such an
humor that no Justice can be expected from them: I say, in Scotland which is
as well Governed as any Country we know under the Cope of Heaven, how would
such a New-Englander be dealt withal? I don't ask, whither the Government would
send him? But I ask how would the People (that love their Ministers, and they
deserve it) look upon such a piece of wickedness!

A worthy Person who knows Scotland very well, said lately, that if Douglas
should do by the Ministers in Scotland as he has done by those in New England,
they would put him into the Pillory, and after that the People would show other
Marks of their displeasure at him.

BOSTON: Printed for J. Edwards, at the Corner Shop on the North-side of the
Townhouse. 1721.


