Several REASONS Proving that Inoculating or Transplanting the Small Pox, is a
Lawful Practice, and that it has been Blessed by GOD for the Saving of many a
Life.
By Increase Mather, D. D.
Exodus XX. 13. Thou shall not kill.

Gal. I. 10. Do I seek to please Men? if I please Men, I should not be a
Servant of CHRIST.


It has been Questioned, Whether Inoculating the Small Pox be a Lawful
Practice. I incline to the Affirmative, for these Reasons.

1. BEcause I have read, that in Smyrna, Constantinople, and other Places,
Thousands of Lives have been saved by Inoculation, and not one of Thousands has
miscarried by it. This is related by Wise and Learned Men who would not have
imposed on the World a false Narrative. Which also has been published by the
Royal Society; therefore a great Regard is due to it.

II. WE hear that several Physicians have Recommended the Practice hereof to
His Majesty, as a Means to preserve the Lives of his Subjects, and that His
Wise and Excellent Majesty King GEORGE, as also his Royal Highness the Prince
have approved hereof, and that it is now coming into practice in the Nation. In
one of the Public Prints are these Words, Inoculating the Small Pox is a safe
and universally Useful Experiment. Several Worthy Persons lately arrived from
England inform us, that it is a successful Practice there: If Wise and Learned
Men in England, declare their Approbation of this Practice, for us to declare
our Disapprobation will not be for our Honor.

III. GOD has graciously owned the Practice of Inoculation, among us in Boston,
where some Scores, yea above an hundred have been Inoculated, and not one
miscarried: but they Bless GOD, for His discovering this Experiment to them. It
has been objected, that one that was Inoculated, died, viz. Mrs. D -- ll: but
she had the Small Pox, in the common way before, and her Friends and nearest
Relations declare that she received no hurt by Inoculation, but was by a fright
put into Fits that caused her Death. It is then a wonderful Providence of GOD,
that all that were Inoculated should have their Lives preserved; so that the
Safety and Usefulness of this Experiment is confirmed to us by Ocular
Demonstration: I confess I am afraid, that the Discouraging of this Practice,
may cause many a Life to be lost, which for my own part, I should be loath to
have any hand in, because of the Sixth Commandment.

IV. IT cannot be denied but that some Wise and Judicious Persons among us,
approve of Inoculation, both Magistrates and Ministers; Among Ministers I am
One, who have been a poor Preacher of the Gospel in Boston above Threescore
Years, and am the most Aged, Weak and unworthy Minister now in New England. My
Sentiments, and my Son's also, about this Matter are well known. Also we hear
that the Reverend and Learned Mr. Solomon Stoddard of Northampton concuts with
us; so does the Reverend Mr. Wise of Ipswich, and many other younger Divines,
not only in Boston, but in the Country, join with their Fathers. Furthermore, I
have made some Enquiry, Whether there are many Persons of a Profane Life and
Conversation, that do Approve and Defend Inoculation, and I have been answered,
that they know but of very few such. This is to me a weighty Consideration. But
on the other hand, though there are some Worthy Persons, that are not clear about
it; nevertheless, it cannot be denied, but that the known Children of the
Wicked one, are generally fierce Enemies to Inoculation. It is a grave saying
of Old Seneca, Pessimi Argumentum Turba est. For my part I should be ashamed to
join with such Persons; O my Soul come not thou into their Secret, unto their
Assembly be not thou United. I am far from reflecting upon all that are against
Inoculation. I know there are very worthy Persons (with whom I desire to Live
and Die) that are not clear in their Judgments for it, and they are greatly to
be commended and honored in that they will not act against a doubting
Conscience; yet it may be some of them might change their minds, if they would
advise with those who are best able to afford them Scripture Light in this as
well as in other Cases of Conscience.

November. 20. 1721.

That the Cause may have Two Witnesses, here are subjoyned the Sentiments of
another, well known in our Churches, of which I declare my hearty Approbation.

Sentiments on the Small Pox Inoculated.
A most Successful, and Allowable Method of preventing Death, and many other
grievous Miseries, by the Small Pox, is not only Lawful but a Duty, to be used
by those who apprehend their Lives immediately endangered by the terrible
Distemper.

But the Method of managing and governing the Small Pox in the way of
Inoculation, is a most successful and allowable Method of preventing Death, and
many other grievous Miseries by this dreadful Distemper. Therefore, it is not
only Lawful, but also a Duty to make use of it. None but very foolish, and very
wicked People will deny the Proposition in this Argument; The Assumption is all
that is disputed. But now, That this is a most Successful Method we have all
the Evidence that Humane Reason can ask for.

Men of Honor, and Learning, and Incontestible Veracity, not one or two, but a
considerable Number of them, agree in the Relation they give us, of it is being
used with constant Success in the Levant. It has been used upon vast
Multitudes, even many Thousands, and for some Scores of Years: And when
regularly used, it yet appears not, that ever one Person miscarried of it, or
had the Small Pox after it. We have sufficient Proofs that it is a growing
Practice in those Countries. If it had been unsuccessful, or been attended with
bad Consequences, it must needs have been put out of Countenance, and have
ceased long ago. Such Testimonies on the other side, as our People have been
frighted withal, are not worth a Strate. No Man of sense that considers them
can lay weight upon them: Ask us not, why we say so!

And we have an Army of Africans among our selves, who have themselves been
under it, and given us all the Assurance, which a Rational Mind can desire,
that it has long been used with the like Success in Africa. Yea, Behold, ye
yourselves have seen it. The Operation has been performed on an Hundred and
more, in the Town of Boston: And not one of them has miscarried: They have
every one of them hitherto done well. They all give Thanks to our Merciful
Redeemer for leading them into it. They would every one of them rather undergo
it again, and many times over, than suffer the Small Pox as People ordinarily
suffer it in the common way of Infection. The Story of one Dying after it, is
trump'd up with so much folly and falsehood, that it is unworthy to have any
Answer given to it. In fine; Experience has declared, that there never was a
more unfailing Remedy employed among the Children of Men.

That this is an Allowable Method, is plain; Because there can be no Objection
brought against it, but what will also lie against the use of almost all the
preventing Physic, that is used in the World. The Objector must maintain, That
it is unlawful for a Man, who would preserve his Life and Health, to make
himself Sick in a way that constantly tends to Preservation. But a very
Familiar Case will so illustrate the Matter, as to put it beyond all Dispute.
Suppose, There is a Bloody Flux prevailing in the Town where I live, which
proves Mortal to a great part of them that have it; many more than Four Hundred
perish by it in a Month. A Physician is Master of a Purge; which whosoever
takes it, is in an ordinary way, delivered from the danger of that Mortal
Distemper. An Artificial Purge seasonably taken saves him from Death by the
Natural Purge, which he is exposed unto. Will any scruple the taking of this
Artificial Purge? Surely, None but such as want a Purge of Hellebore Here the
Man makes Himself Sick, while He is well: and thinks that he is not the whole
who has no need of a Physician, while he has the Humors in him which render
him obnoxious to a Deadly Sickness. He will not think it his Duty to stay till God
send the Sickness in another way upon him; when it will be too late for him to
seek relief; But he will give Thanks to GOD for teaching him, how to make
himself Sick, in a way that will save his Life, He most properly takes GOD's
Time to fall Sick: He does it seasonably, and in the Time when GOD has
commanded him to do it.

Many Good People, who are sensible how weak their own Judgments are, will for
a Case of Conscience be much assisted by the Judgments of the most able Divines
in the Country. Now every Body knows how they concur in their approbation of
this Practice.

The Design and the Spirit, (evidently of no good Original) with which the
fierce opposition to this Practice is carried on will also go a great way
toward determining of Good People in Favor of it. The Conclusion will be
Victorious; That when People have their Lives endangered by the Small Pox
hovering about them, they not only may use the Method of Inoculation, to save
their Lives, but they even ought to do it, if they can. They keep not in good
Terms with the Sixth Commandment, if they do it not.

INFERENCES.
I. HEnce the Physicians may do well to beware, of going too far, and of taking
wrong steps, for the frighting of People from this Practice, lest they Unawares
have more to answer for than Men of their Profession should be willing to.

II. Hence, the Parents, and Masters, and Husbands and Wives, whose Relatives
have begged as for their Lives, that they might have leave to save their Lives,
by this Method, should not by their obstinate Violence hinder them from it,
least on the Loss of their Lives they have sad matter of Reflection left unto
them.

III. Hence, a People will do well, not to be too hasty in Resolves, that
should forbid their Neighbors, to do what God has made their Duty for the
Preservation of their Lives in this Method; lest they do in Effect forbid
Obedience to the Sixth Commandment. Especially, when the Bugbear of the
Pestilential Consequences, is a Falsehood, that has not the least shadow of
Reason for it, and has the Experience of all the Countries under Heaven, where
they use the Inoculation, to confute it. Nor has it ever been known of Later
Ages, that the Plague ever began any where but in the East Indies, from whence
it has always been brought unto the Western World. And when the King, and
Prince, and most Eminent Physicians in London and Dublin, and elsewhere, have
declared their Approbation of it; it seems not much for our Honor, to declare
that we disapprove it.

IV. Hence to Rave, and Rail with such bitter Execrations, as are too commonly
used, against the Ministers, and other serious Christians, who favor this
Practice, is a very crying Iniquity; and to call it a Work of the Devil, and a
going to the Devil, is a shocking Blasphemy; and much more likely to bring the
Plague among us, than the Practice, which they so ignorantly and maliciously do
charge with such Imaginary Consequences.

FINIS.
BOSTON. Printed by S. Kneeland for J. Edwards at his Shop in King Street. 1721.


