A Course of SERMONS ON Early Piety. By the EIGHT MINISTERS who carry on the
Thursday-LECTURE in BOSTON. With a PREFACE by the Reverend Dr. INCREASE MATHER,
And also closed with a Discourse lately had by Him to Young People.

Hac Casti Maneant in Religione Nepotes.

BOSTON: in N. E. Printed by S. Kneeland, for N. Buttolph, B. Eliot, and D.
Henchman, and Sold at their Shops. 1721.

A PREFACFE OF Dr. Increase Mather.
WHEN the Eight Ministers who at this time carry on the ancient and famous
Thursday-Lecture of BOSTON, agreed upon Preaching Eight Sermons on the Nature,
and Methods, and Motives, of EARLY PIETY, I did with Satisfaction Look on this
their Agreement as a Motion from GOD; And I could have no Greater Joy, than to
see my Children thus Walking in the Truth, and so zealous to Invite and
Persuade the Children of their People, to Choose the Way of Truth, and Walk with
the GOD of their Fathers.

THEY have solicited a Line or two, from my Aged and now Shaking, Hand, to
Testify my Satisfaction in what they have done, and I Cheerfully give it.

PIETY, or, the Return of a Soul to GOD in His CHRIST, and a Godly, and Sober,
and Righteous Life led upon it, is the whole Duty, and Interest, and Wisdom of
Man; And the more Early the Piety, the Greater the Wisdom and Comfort and Glory
of them that come into it. These are Things that cannot be Spoken against!

I therefore do Recommend this Book, of Early Piety, not only unto the Young
People in the Country, but also unto their Parents; Advising them to Recommend
it unto their Families, and make it accompany the Charges which they Lay upon
their Children, to know and Serve the GOD of their Fathers.

AS for me, I am now in the Eighty Third Year of my Age. And having had in my
Minority, an Opportunity to Converse with the most Renowned Servants of GOD,
who were the First Planters of this Country, and of the Churches in it; and
having been for Sixty Five Years a Preacher of the Gospel, after my poor
manner, in these Churches; Except some Years, when I have been favored of GOD
with Opportunities to Serve Him in Europe, first, when I was a very Young Man,
in Dublin, in Gloucester, and in Guer^sey, before the Year 1662. and after
words, when I was was more than Thirty Years ag^ absent from my Charge, for
Four Year^ in an A^ency for the Country: I cannot but be in the Disposition of
those Ancient Men, who had Seen the Foundation of the First House, and Wept
with a Loud Voice, to see what a Change the Work of the Temple had upon it. I
wish it were no other than the Weakness of Horace's old Man, the Laudator
Temporis acti, when I complain that there is a Grievous Decay of Piety in the
Land; and a Leaving of the First Love: And that the Beauties of Holiness are
not to be seen in our Churches, as once they were: A Fruitful Christian, grown
too Rare a Spectacle: Yea, too many are Given to Change, and Leave that Order
of the Gospel, to Set up and uphold which, was the very Design of these
Colonies: And the very Interest of NEW ENGLAND seems to be Changed from a
Religious to a Worldly Interest. On which Accounts, it is to be feared, that
awful changes are further coming on the Country; and that the Holy SON of GOD,
offended at the Apostasy, may order for it, a deep share in the Cup of
Trembling, which He is now upon giving to the Sinful Nations. I must Weep, and
I now do it with a Loud Voice, for what I see. Oh! That my Head were Waters,
and my Eyes a Fountain of Tears!

NOTHING will contribute so much, to avert the Evil Tokens, at which they who
dwell in the Wilderness may be afraid; as a Revival of PIETY, Even of EARLY
PIETY, in the Rising Generation.

MY own poor Essays for that purpose, have been Published, and Repeated, and
some of them Reprinted many Years ago. And now, I Earnestly pray to the GOD of
all Grace, that He would succeed these Holy Labors of My Sons, to serve the
same Designs of Early Piety.

I will call them, My Sons; Because the First of them, (whom also, being Fifty
Eight Years Old, the r^st esteem as a Father to them,) is by Nature so; and has
for One and Forty Years as a Son with a Father Served with me in the Gospel.
The Rest of them are such as I have Reason to Love as my Children. They are all
of them Faithful Servants of GOD; and precious Gifts of our Ascended SAVIOR
unto His Churches. They have all of them heretofore given unto the Public in
the Way of the Press Desirable Fruits and Proofs of their Abilities; whereof
some have been upon the Subject of Early Piety. And what Acceptable Words must
these Preachers bring, when they have been such Laudable Examples themselves in
their own Practice of that EARLY PIETY, which they thus Preach unto others!

I am going the Way of all the Earth, and have been many Years Longing for that
Blessed Hour, when I shall (I have a Good Hope through Grace) be received into
the Everlasting Habitations, and into that World, which has no Sin and no
Temptation to Sin in it, and where a CHRIST is to be seen in His Wondrous
Glories. But, Thou, O Lord, How Long!

AS Polycarp going to die, gave his Testimony, That he had Served CHRIST more
than Fourscore Years, and had always found a Good Master of Him! I would now
also Die bearing my Testimony for Him, who in my Early Youth mercifully Siezed
me f^r Himself, That in all my Pilgrimage I have also found a Good Master of
that Glorious LORD. But what a Good Master I shall find Him, I know not Now, I
shall know Hereafter. I shall not know, till He sent for me! -- Which, O my GOD
and SAVIOR, I am daily waiting for; -- Why is ^hy Chariot so long in coming?
Why tarry the Wheels of thy Chariot!

Increase Mather.
BOSTON, July 4. 1721.
The CONTENTS.
SERMON I. THE Pious Parents Wishes. By Dr. COTTON MATHER. SERMON II. The
Nature of Early Piety as it respects GOD By Mr. WADSWORTH. SERMON III. Early
Piety as it respects Men. By Mr. COLMAN. SERMON IV. Early Piety as it respects
Our-selves. By Mr. SEWALL. SERMON V. The Obligations to Early Piety. By Mr.
PRINCE. SERMON VI. The Advantages of Early Piety. By Mr. WEBB. SERMON VII.
Objections Answered. By Mr. COOPER. SERMON VIII. Exhortations and Directions to
Young People. By Mr. FOXCROFT. To those is Added, SERMON IX. Advice to the
Children of Godly Ancestors. By the Reverend and Aged Dr. INCREASE MATHER.
What the Pious PARENT wishes for.
By Dr. COTTON MATHER. BOSTON Lecture, 23 d. 1 m. 1721.
1 CHRONICLES. XXIX. 19 Give unto Solomon my Son a PERFECT HEART.


O BLESSED and Hopeful CHILDREN, and what Comforts to their Parents, that are
made Partakers of such a Blessing! O Blessed and Joyful PARENTS, that may see
such a Blessing Obtained for their Children! EARLY PIETY is the Glorious
Blessedness. A PIOUS MIND is that Perfect Heart, which we have in Prosecution.
There is an Unspeakable Passion in the Souls of Parents, To see their Children
Happy. Nature knows not a Passion more Vehement more Engaging. I am going to
show you, O CHILDREN, What will make you Happy: I am going to show you, O
PARENTS, How you may come to see them Happy. O set your Hearts unto these
Things; Your Life is in them. Give a Great Attention. But, O Gracious GOD, make
Thou a Good Impression upon the Hearers of them!

I Remember that on a Coin of the Emperor Constans, which we have in our
Hands, there is the Emperor drawing a Youth after him, and those Words about
him, Faelix Temporum Reparatio: Intimating, That for the Reforming of the
Times, Youth is Principally to be dealt withal. Sensible of This, the managers
of your Lectures, propose now a Set of Sermons on EARLY PIETY; Hoping in, and
Waiting on Heaven, to give an Efficacy to them.

WE find the Illustrious David a little before he died, very Sollicitous about
the Welfare of the Son, that was to Survive him, and Succeed him; To have the
Son, whom his own Eyes, and the Eyes of the People were much upon, Do worthily
after he should be Dead.

BEHOLD, First, The Method which is taken by a Father full of Goodness, that so
he might have an Happy Son, and a Son that should be like him. He Prays for the
Son: He carries him to GOD; he commits him to GOD; he entreats GOD Mercifully
to take Notice of him. No Method like to This.

BUT then, Behold, Secondly, The Blessing to be sought in this Method; the
Blessing which alone makes an Happy Son. A Perfect Heart is that Blessing. A
Perfect Heart is here desired for a Solomon: A Thing enough to make an Happy
Solomon! I observe by the way an Hebrew Elegancy in the Original. The Name of
Solomon is derived from that Word that Signifies, To be Perfect, as well as to
be Peaceable; and the very Word that is used here. It is, q. d. Lord, make my
Solomon a Real Solomon, give to my Solomon the Heart of a Solomon, let the
Heart as well as the Name of my Son, have that Perfection, which will have
Peace Entailed upon it.

I am again to tell you, That a Pious Mind, is the Thing to be Understood by a
Perfect Heart. And this is the DOCTRINE which now very strongly demands a
devout Reception with you.

THE PIOUS MIND, of a PERFECT HEART will make Blessed CHILDREN: And PARENTS
ought fervently to pour out their Prayer unto the GOD of all Grace, to pour
down such a Blessing upon their Children.

I. IT will be proper, in the First place, to declare, what that Blessing is,
which being found in our Children, they will be known to be an Offspring which
the Lord has Blessed. Children, It is a Perfect Heart that must be found in
you, if you would not incur the Doom of cursed Children. But I am again, and
again, to tell you, that a Pious Mind is that Perfect Heart. A Principle of
PIETY infused into the Heart, is that which will make it a Perfect Heart. We do
not Expect from you an absolute perfection, which the heart of no Man in this
World may pretend unto; or an Heart perfectly, completely, exactly, and in all
points Conformed unto the Law of GOD, which no Man in this World has attained
unto. Since the Fal^ of Man, there never was but ONE MAN, whose Heart in all
things complied with the Will of GOD; And HE was more than a Mere MAN. It was
thy heart, O our IMMANUEL. It was HE, who with a Perfect Heart, wrought out,
and brought in, the Righteousness, which alone you are to plead before GOD, O
our Children, that you may be Justified. Who can say, I have made my heart
clean? But then, there is a^ Evangelical perfection, which will be Expected and
Required of you. Otherwise, O^^ who was no Old Man could not have made su^^ an
Appeal to the Glorious GOD, as that, Is^^ XXXVIII. 3. O Lord, I have walked
before the with a perfect heart. The exceeding Broad La^ of our GOD, may say,
Though Noah and Jo^ stood before me, I would condemn them; they should not so
much as deliver their own souls, by the perfection of their own righteousness.
And yet both Noah and Job, had that Character, He was a perfect Man: Which
implies a perfect heart in those holy ones. Truly, such an Heart is produced,
where a Principle of PIETY is in its operation.

WHEREFORE, First, O Children, If you would be owned for Children of a perfect
heart, you must make sure, of an Hearty, Real, Thorough Conversion unto GOD.
You read of such an Excellent Thing as that; Ezekiel. XXXVI. 26. A new heart will
I give you. This New Heart will be a Perfect One. A Changed Heart, a Cleansed
Heart, an Heart with a New Biass upon it; an Heart no longer set upon the
Vanities of the World; an Heart wherein GOD resumes His Throne, and Idols are
dethroned, and GOD has the Regards paid unto Him, which have heretofore been
Sinfully paid unto Creatures; This is the Perfect Heart. An heart filled with
the Love of GOD, and set above all Things, to choose and to do the Things that
please Him; an Heart filled with the Love of CHRIST, and closing with Him in
all His Offices, and Feeding and Living on the Fullness of which there is All in
Him; an Heart filled with the Love which is due to Mankind, and which will make
one do as he would be done (...). This is the Pious Mind, which, O Children,
You must come into, if you would not perish Wonderfully. And there will be a
Perfect Heart, in this Pious Mind. There will be this to Legitimate the
Expression; A True Conversion to PIETY, is what will reach to every Faculty of
the Heart. The New Creature, in the Converts of Zion, is Perfect, in that it
has every part; though the Renovation be but in part. A Young Person brought home
to GOD, has his Understanding Enlightened; his Phantasy Regulated; his Memory
Purified; his Will Rectified; his Affections brought into Order; he gives up
his whole heart unto GOD; he reserves no Powers of his Mind, but concerning all
of them, he says, Oh! Let my SAVIOR take possession of it.

SECONDLY; As we would bring out Children to a Profession of PIETY, so we would
Exhort them to Sincerity in their Profession, Children, Get a Sincere Heart,
and you will have a Perfect Heart. Sincerity has a sort of Perfection in it.
You must have your Heart engaged in what you do about the Service of God; and
when He calls, Prove. XXIII. 28. My son, give me thy heart; your heart must
reply, My God, I am entirely thine! The Heart as well as the Name, is to be
given unto the Lord; the Heart is to be washed from Wickedness, and every thing
that is offensive unto GOD, must be banished from it. This is (...) perfect
heart. And a Young Person of such (...) Pious Mind, will Realize the Eye of GOD
upon him, and behave himself as having his very Heart Naked and Open before
Him. Walk before me and be perfect, said our God unto the Patriarch. Children,
you must Walk as before GOD, wherever you come. And herewithal, both do that
which is Right; and have a Right Aim in your doing of it. Sincerely Aim at
Offering up to GOD, an Acceptable Sacrifice; not aiming at the Praise of Man in
what you do; not merely seeking to avoid the Censures, of your Superiors, or
your Observers, in what you do.

THIRDLY. We cannot be satisfied, Except our Children Endeavor an universal
Obedience unto GOD. What is a perfect heart? A David, even one of a thousand,
shall be our interpreter. Says he, It Is to keep the Commandments, even to do
all these Things. Children, You will be before GOD, what you Desire, and Study,
and Labor to be. A Perfect Heart, and a Perfection of Obedience to God, is to
be mightily and constantly Endeavored with you. You have those two together, 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 9. My son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a
perfect heart, and a willing mind. Your heart will be perfect if your Mind be
Willing, to be, and to do, all that you find GOD enjoining upon you. A Young
Person willing to be perfect and entire, lacking of nothing in his Obedience to
GOD; willing and wishing to be made perfect in every good Work, doing the Will
of God; willing and wishing to deny all ungodliness and lead a Godly, and a
Sober, and a Righteous Life; And one, who if he might have his Will would never
Sin against the GOD that is above; One who makes it his Exercise to keep a
conscience v^id of offense toward God and man: This is one of a Perfect Heart.
Oh! may you all, with such a Pious Mind, have Respect unto all the Commandments
of God!

Finally, O, our Children, Being thus disposed for PIETY, and Resolved for the
ways of GOD, we must have you fixed in your Holy Resolutions, with an Humble
Dependence on your SAVIOR, for the Aids of His Grace. You must come to that,
Psalm. LVI. 7. My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed: It is an heart fixed
for GOD. This Fixed Heart, will be a Perfect Heart. You must not only Begin
well, but Hold on, and Hold out, unto the End. A Pious Mind will be sure to do
so; will with a Patient continuance in Well-doing, lay hold on Eternal Life.
The Apostasy of Solomon was very disagreeable to the Perfect Heart which the
Prayer of his Father begged on his behalf. But then in his Recovery out of his
Apostasy, we may hope that the Prayer was answered.

THIS, This is the Blessing, which will invest our Children with all Blessings;
all the Blessings of Goodness are Comprehended in it This the Blessing, which,
Oh! what shall we do, that our Children may be enriched with it

II. I said, What shall we do? And this is what I am going to tell you. And
now, O ye Parents, this Commandment is for you! It is required of you, To pour
out your Fervent PRAYER unto the GOD of all Grace, that He would pour down the
Blessing of a Perfect Heart, and a Pious Mind upon your Children. As for the
Genuine Children of Abraham, I know them, says the Lord; Whatever Offspring may
be given to them, they will cry to GOD, Oh! That my Offspring may live in thy
sight! Yea, they will keep crying to Him, till their Weeping Faith has received
this Answer from Him; As for that Offspring, I have heard thee! Behold, I have
Blessed it.

PARENTS, What is your main concern for your Children? PIETY in you, will make
it your main concern that they may have a Pious Mind Enlightening and Inclining
of them. If your main concern be, to get the Riches of this World for your
Children, and leave a ^elly-full of this World unto them, it looks very
suspiciously, as if you were yourselves the People of this World, whose Portion
is only in this Life. Most certainly, you are Earthly Minded ones, if your main
concern for your Children be, that they may have the fine Things of the Earth
heaped upon them, and if in your Thoughts for them you only Mind Earthly
Things. Your own heart is not Right in the Sight of GOD, if you are not
thoroughly persuaded of this, That for your Children to be enriched with a
Perfect Heart will be of more Account than for them to be supplied with Silver
and with Gold, or with any perishable Riches. You are directed, Mat. VI. 33.
Seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness. The direction is, That
you do so (...) your Children, as well as for yourselves. Oh! Seek first that
with the Righteousness of a Pious Mind they may be brought into the Kingdom of
God. We read indeed, That Wisdom is good with an Inheritance, But what Good
will any Temporal Inheritance do them, if your Children be not made Wise unto
Salvation? Parents, if you have a Perfect Heart yourselves, nothing but such an
Heart in your Children can make you easy about them. You are yourselves without
the Fear of GOD, if you can easily bear to see your Children without it. We
read, Prove. XVII. 25. A foolish son is a grief to his father, and a bitterness
to her that bare him. To see a Son taking such Courses, as a Pious Mind cannot
but abhor to take such, that if he Dye Impenitent, he must be mourned over as
another Absalom: To see a Daughter so Lewd, so Base, as a Pious Mind would
abhor to be, one of whom you must complain, Alas, my Daughter, thou have
brought me Low, and thou art one of them who Trouble me. What a Grievous
Bitterness must such a Thing be to Parents, that are not utterly Forsaken of
GOD. Parents, This is the Thing to be again and again Urged upon you. Write
after the Copy of the Beloved Man, who had an Heart after the Heart of GOD.
Lift up a Prayer, yea, a Cry that shall reach and pierce the Heavens, unto the
Glorious Lord; Lord, Give Thou a Perfect Heart unto mine Offspring. The Parents
of Old came unto our SAVIOR for their Children, that had Maladies on them, or
were seized by Evil Spirits; And He had Compassion on them. Oh! Implore this
Compassion of your SAVIOR for your Children. A Pious Mind, would relieve all
their Maladies, would rescue them from all Evil Spirits would make Lovely and
Happy Children of them.

THE Matter is to be yet more distinctly Prosecuted, with several Admonitions
of the Lord.

FIRST. I pray, What is that Heart which these poor Children of yours are born
withal? Truly, such an one as you know, that you before them were born withal.
A Sinful Heart, a Corrupt Heart, a Vicious Heart, an Heart that is a very Hell
of Wickedness. What are your Children by Nature! Such a Nature as the Poison of
the Old serpent entering into our First Parents, has brought upon them? It is a
sad Relation, which the O^^cles of GOD have given of it; Ephesians. II. 3. By nature
the Children of wrath. What is the Heart which your Children bring into the
World with them? What? But an Heart that is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked? What, But an evil Heart of Unbelief which always departs
from the Living GOD? It is the same Heart, that the People before the Flood
were infected withal; Genesis VI. 5. Every Imagination of the thoughts of the
heart only evil continually. O Wretched Heart! Who and what shall deliver your
Children from such an Heart? Or, How can you bear to see them ly in these
deadly Circumstances; thus Dead in Trespasses and Sins? A Perfect Heart will be
the only deliverance of your Children from this Wretched Heart. Nothing but a
Pious Mind, and a Sanctifying Work of God upon the Heart, can bring the Heart
of your Children out of the woeful Depravation, that Sin has brought upon them.
And O Parents, you are concerned the more to seek this Deliverance for them,
inasmuch as it is through your Mediation, that this Distempered Heart is conveyed
unto them. It Is an Hereditary Distemper; through you Loins there is made the
Conveyance of it. The best of Parents have such an Heartbreaking Thought as
this to Humble them. Eve^ the Sons of Jesse the Righteous, may say, I was
shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. Oh! What Reason have
you to do all that can be done, that the Heart of your Children may be cured of
the Leprosy, and the Grievous Diseases, which you have given them? It was a
Fair Law concerning the Man that had Wounded another; Exodus XXI. 19. He shall
cause him to be thoroughly healed. What! will not you do what you can, that your
Children may be Thoroughly healed of the Wounds, given them, whereto you
yourselves are Accessory? O Worthy to be called Parricides rather than Parents!
Entrails you may have; but Bowels you have none, if you can see the forlorn
State of your Children, and not have your Bowels bleeding over them.

SECONDLY. If once you may see a perfect heart in your Children, Oh! how well,
how well, do you see them therein provided for? Parents, If you will not
provide for your Children, what are you? Ostriches. Nay, Infidels! Nor is this
Term hard enough. You have the Brand of such in 1 Timothy V. 8. If any provide not
for his own, he is worse than an Infidel. If your Children once come to have a
Perfect Heart in them, they are well-provided for; never till then! The Hebrew
Word for peace, comes from this Root, Shalam, to be perfect. Verily, They that
have a perfect heart, have a Root of peace within them; a Root which all the
peaceable fruits of Righteousness will grow upon. A perfect peace will be that
which a perfect heart will have a Claim unto. A perfect heart is that Godliness
which has the Promise, both of the Life that now is, and of that which is to
come. It is promised unto the upright walk, which a perfect heart leads unto,
The Lord GOD is a sun and a shield; The Lord will give Grace and Glory; no good
thing will he withhold from it. It may be, you cannot lay up any great portion
of Wealth for your Children. Oh! But if you can get a perfect heart into them;
then they have a Portion, and a Goodly Heritage. Yea the Infinite GOD Himself
is their Portion. Then you may be sure, that God will be their Father, and
their Father will know what they want and grant it unto them. You may be sure,
That when Father and Mother forsakes them, the Lord will take them up. Yea,
Then you may be sure, that they are not brought forth for the Murderer: You may
be sure, That they shall be Blessed with all the Spiritual Blessings in the
Heavenly places. You may be sure, they shall have a share in the Inheritance of
the Saints in Light, and one Day come to Inherit all things. Oh! the Glad
Parents that can see their Children thus Admirably Provided for Yea, I will
bring you forth now, and say unto you, Look now toward Heaven, and tell the
Stars if thou art able (...) number them. Tell the very Great and precious
Promises of God, which glitter like Stars in the Firmament, which He has
Expanded over His Church; All These will I give unto thee, and unto thy
Offspring, says the Lord, If a perfect heart in you prepare you for it.

THIRDLY. If your Children remain destitute of a perfect heart, their Condition
is, how Deplorable, how Deplorable, how beyond all Expression Miserable!
Parents, can you see your Children in a Slavery to the powers of darkness, and
serving diverse Lusts, worse of it than any Slaves on the Coast of Barbary, and
not be in anguish to see them set at Liberty! Can you see your Children, fallen
into the cruel Fangs of Lions or of Tigers; and not with Agony call for some
help unto them! Can you see your Children fast asleep in an House on Fire over
their heads; and not fly with Agony to help them out of the Flames! This is
their very Condition. And nothing, I say unto you, nothing but a Perfect Heart
brought into them, can Save them out of it. Strangers to a perfect heart, they
Dye in their Sins; Dye, so that it had been Good for them, they had never been
born. Be you and your Children what you will, if they never have a perfect
heart produced in them, the Great GOD says upon them, as in Amos IX. 7. Are ye
not as Children of the Ethiopians unto me, says the Lord! Yea, because in the
Church State you have them Lifted up to Heaven, their Damnation will be more
Dreadful, and a Deeper and Hotter Hell will be assigned unto them, than what
shall be inflicted on the Children of Ethiopians. Your Children, have upon them
the spots that show they are not the Children of GOD, until a perfect heart
have taken away those Ugly and Filthy spots. But then whose are they? The heart
of your Children has in it, the seeds of Eternal Death, the Worms that will
never Dye. The Dispositions in the Carnal Mind of your Children, are such, that
they cannot please GOD in them: They are full of Enmity to GOD. The Holy GOD
can be no other but a Consuming Fire unto them, until they have an Heart
otherwise Disposed. GOD will be Terrible (...) to them in His Holy places; yea,
Fearful to be spoken! The Holy places themselves cannot but be Terrible,
uneasy, ungrateful to them; they will not be able to breath in so pure an
Element. Nothing but a perfect heart can Save them from the Wrath to come. They
are Fuel for the Devouring Fire and the Everlasting Burnings, until a perfect
heart has given another Temper to them. Oh! If you would not have these
Children cast into the place of Dragons, or would not yourselves be such unto
them, you must be in pain to get a perfect heart into them. They are undone,
undone; -- Till this be done for them.

FOURTHLY. The perfect heart, which is the ONE THING to be Desired for your
Children, and what should be sought after; Where is it? Whence comes it? Who
gives it? Surely, none but the GOD of all Grace can give it. It is the Glorious
GOD, who says, Ezekiel. XXXVI. 26. A new heart will I give you. If we could our
selves give a perfect heart unto our Children, and fill their Heart with the
Love of their GOD and their Neighbor, and a Zeal to do Good, what Virtuous
Parents would not presently do it with all their Heart? Lord, It should be the
First Thing that we would presently do for our Children; T^^^ make them Thy
Children. But it is Beyond us. It is Above us. A very Distinguishing stroke and
beat of a perfect heart is, a Faith in the only SAVIOR; a Flight unto Him for
His Great Salvation. But whose Gift is this! We are told, Ephesians. II. 8. Faith is
the Gift of God. And so, we are elsewhere told more than once, That GOD gives
Repentance. A perfect heart, which is always a very Tender one; it is a Stone
turned into Flesh. Who but the Almighty GOD can do such a Thing as that? Create
in us a clean heart, O our GOD. It is a Creating Work, to make a perfect heart.
None but GOD the Creator of all things, can do such a Thing. This is my Glory,
says the Lord, and my Glory I will not give unto another.

Fifthly. PRAYER, PRAYER, to the GOD of all Grace, is not this the Way to
obtain the Gift? By pouring out your Prayer to a Gracious GOD for it, you may
obtain of Him. So we are taught, concerning the Blessing of a perfect heart;
Ezekiel. XXXVI. 27. I will be enquired of on the behalf of the house of Israel, to
do it for them. [It should be rendered so.] When Parents do with unceasing
Fervor implore our Good GOD, that He would please to do this Good unto their
Children; To make them Good, and upright in Heart; it is a sign, that He will
at some time or other do it for them. Our Good GOD is willing to bestow the
Grace of a Perfect Heart, when He is asked for it. Nay, there is no Case,
wherein that Word is oftener fulfilled, than it is in This; Ask, and it shall be
given you. Not is there any Prayer more grateful unto GOD, than This. Parents,
There is nothing for which you can go to GOD with more of Encouragement and
Expectation; O Do Thou give a perfect Heart unto this Child; The Heart of thy
Children; O my GOD. I can lead you to a Word, worth more than a Rock of
Diamonds, or a Mountain of Gold! It is that Word, Luke XI. 13. If you that are
Evil, know how to give good Gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your
Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit unto them that ask Him? What a ravishing
Word is This! Quickened by it, Oh, Go now to your Heavenly Father, not only for
your selves, but also for your Children. With Tears beg it of Him; O my Father,
I long, I long for it, That my Children may be thy Servants. O my SAVIOR, if
Thou will allow of it, the Descent of thy Holy SPIRIT upon them will make them
so. O my GOD, Let thy Good SPIRIT lead them into the Land of Rectitude O SPIRIT
of Grace, do thou take possession of them. It Is very certain, That if GOD give
His Holy SPIRIT unto your Children, the Holy SPIRIT will give a perfect heart
unto them. The Holy SPIRIT will Renew a right Spirit in them; will Purify their
Heart by a Faith of His Working there; will make them the Temples of GOD. The
Holy SPIRIT will write his Laws in their Heart, and Rectify all Disorders
there, and bring all things to rights with in them. Yea, as we Read, That when
the Holy SPIRIT first fell on the Gentiles, the Spectators were astonished at
what they saw: The Holy SPIRIT falling on your Children, you will see Things
done for them, that will fill you with Astonishment; but, Oh! What
Satisfaction! Oh! What Consolation! Ask, Ask, and see what will be done for you.

BUT then, it must be Remembered, That your Prayer for the Renovation of your
Children, and their thus passing from Death to Life, must have Two Concomitants.

First; YOUR SAVIOR has told you, That Men ought always to pray, and not to
faint. Your Prayers for your Children must be, Oh! how Importunate; -- such as
compassionate Heaven uses to give no Denial to! Prayers, and Supplications,
with strong Crying, and Tears, to Him that is Able to Save your Children from
the Death, which you are Afraid will feed upon them! Oh! Plead with a
Compassionate GOD, as a Soul Wrestling with Him, and Weeping in Supplications,
that will humbly protest, Lord, I will not let thee go, except Thou Bless the
Children, and put thy fear into them! Humbly Plead with Him His Promise, and
show Him His own Handwriting; Even that Word, on which He has caused you to
hope; Isai. XLIV. 3. I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my Blessing upon
thine offspring. Do thus, until the New-born-Child shall be called a SAMUEL,
and you may say, I have asked him and gained him of the Lord. But then, The
Importunity of your Prayers must especially be expressed in the Perpetuity of
them. The Mercy of seeing your Children turned from Darkness unto Light, and
from the power of Satan unto GOD perhaps will not be presently granted you Nay,
you may see, as in the Grant of every Special Mercy it uses to be, a Sentence
of Death long written upon it, before you receive it. A GOD who waits that He
may be Gracious, will have this Mercy waited for: Bu^ the Mercy is worth
waiting for: And if you don't grow weary of calling upon GOD but still follow
Him with your Incessan^ Prayers, O you that keep Sewing in Tears you shall anon
see a comfortable Harvest You shall find, That the Lord is Good unto them that
wait for Him, unto the Soul that seek^^ Him. There will be a Month, wherein GOD
will find these Wild Children, and make New Creatures of them. It may be, O
Hezekia^ GOD will by'nd by throw thy Wicked M^nasseh into the Chains of such
Afflictions (...) such Convictions, as will compel him to See^ the GOD of his
Father. My Friend, Crying (...) thy SAVIOR, that thy Child may be fre^^ from
the Devils that have possession of it, (...) may appear Deaf unto thy Cry; He
man seem to treat thee like a Dog. But still, Ho^^ on! Hold on! Pray on! O my
SAVIOR ha^^ Mercy on my sinful Child, and let no Devil ^^tain him from thy
Service! Do so, until the hear Him say, Great is thy Faith; Be it un^^ thee as
thou will!

Secondly. YOUR Pains must accompany your Prayers. You must Instruct your
Children, you must Advise your Children, as well as Pray for them; speak to
them, as well as for them. You must Restrain them, and use all the Methods of
Prudence to keep them from the Paths of the Destroyer; use all the Methods of
Wisdom, to win their Souls, and spread the nets of Salvation for them, to see a
CHRIST formed in them. Not only Pray for the Children, but also lay the Charges
of GOD upon them: Like David who Charged Solomon his Son, and said, Keep the
Charge of the Lord thy GOD, to walk in His Ways. On! with all possible
solemnity lay upon them those Charges, 1 Chronicles. XXVIII. 9. Know thou the God,
of thy father and serve him. Take them aside, and Charge them immediately to
consider the in Ways, and look into the state of their Souls. Charge them, with
Distressed Souls, to Embrace an Offered SAVIOR with all His Benefits; Charge
them, to keep up the Religion of the Closet, and Read the Word, and seek the
Face of GOD in their daily Retirements. And Charge them; to shun dangerous
Company; to Forsake the Foolish and Live; And Remember the Bonds of GOD, that
in their Baptism were laid upon them. Yea, then cause them to kneel down by
you, and make them the Witnesses of the Weeping Supplications, with which you
carry them unto the Lord. Not only the Servants, but also the Handmaids of the
Lord, have done thus; And the Success of it on their Children has been
admirable! But then there is one thing more to be Expected from you. Parents,
Be Patterns: let your Children see in you, the Patterns of All Goodness. Be
Exemplary; with Holiness in all manner of Conversation, give them an Example of
a Prayerful, Watchful, Fruitful walk with GOD. In you let them see how they
should walk, that GOD may be pleased with them. When Elisha was concerned for a
Double Portion of the Spirit, that had been in his Predecessor, Elijah told
him, that if he saw him at his mounting up to Heaven, he should have it. This
may be, and has been, so far alluded to; Oh! if your Children may see you going
to Heaven, and may see the Heavenly Flights of your Souls, in your Contempt of
Earth, your Horror at Sin, your Value for CHRIST, and your Communion with GOD;
there would probably fall upon them, a Mighty Portion of the Spirit which you
desire for them; the Spirit of PIETY, which you have desired for them.

III. IT is now Time, for our Children to become sensible of an Inference,
which there can be no avoiding of. Certainly, O Children, you should be as much
concerned for yourselves; as you see your Parents are for you; you ought
fervently to make your own Prayer, to the GOD of all Grace, for that Perfect
Heart and Pious Mind, which our Parents are seeking for you. It Is what I am now
to press upon the YOUNG PEOPLE in the Auditory: Oh! Let it become your Hearts
Desire, and your Prayer unto GOD, that a perfect heart may be given unto you.
Fall down, Oh! Fall down before the Glorious GOD, with such a Petition as this;
Lord, Bestow all the Dispositions of a Pious Mind upon me! If any of you, and,
alas, how many of you, Lack this Wisdom, let them Ask it of GOD, and it shall
be given them. Think not to say within yourselves, That because you have
Parents who have Prayed for you, there is no need of your Praying for
yourselves. For I say unto you, That if you have not so much Tendency to a
Pious Mind as to Pray for a Pious Mind yourselves, and if the Fruits of a Pious
Mind be not found upon you, GOD will how you down, and cast you into a Fire
that never shall be quenched.

THERE is a Passage in the Psalms, which a Famous Jew, would have to be Read
thus; Psalm. CXIX. 126. It is Time to work for the Lord, for they have made void
thy Law. The Men without whose Vision the People would perish, do see a sad
Spectacle in the Rising Generation among us. They see vast Numbers of YOUNG
PEOPLE with Madness in their heart, going down unto the Dead; They see Busy
Apostles of Satan using various Arts to render the Ministry of the Gospel
Despicable, and even Detestable unto them, and so utterly to defeat the Hopes
of their being brought Home unto GOD; They see Little Foxes using more than
Little Attempts to Spoil the Vines, and Sour and Wither the Tender Grapes,
into the Grapes of Sodom Their Eye affects their Heart, and they weep in secret
places, to see the Souls of the Children ripening apace for a Wrath unto the
uttermost; and Spiritual Plagues worse than Brimstone scattered on our
Habitations. Wherefore It is Time to work for the Lord; and a very Considerable
stroke of the Work, which our Hand finds to do, is to prevail with you, O our
Exposed Children, that you get a Pious Mind and that you Do with your might
what you have to do, for the Obtaining and Expressing of such a Mind, before
your going down to the Grave, whether you are going. Children, O^ the Perfect
Heart which has been Commended unto you, don't you hear the Heart-melting sighs
of Heaven over you, Oh! That there were such an Heart in them; that they would
fea^ me, that it might go well with the Children forever!

THE Pious Mind, that would raise you t^^ that inestimable Dignity; You are my
Sons an^ my Daughters says the Lord Almighty! The Pious Mind that would fetch
down from the Throne of GOD, these Joyful Tidings (...) you, Child, Be of good
cheer, thy Sins are forg^^en thee! The Pious Mind, that would so ^dorn you, as
to procure that Applause for you, Soul, Thou art a Daughter of GOD, all
Glorious within, and the King shall greatly desi^^ thy Beauty. The Pious Mind,
that would recommend you to the Angels as the Guardia^ which would make All
things work together to your Good, and invite those Morning Stars to sing
together over you, Arise, and shine, for thy Light is come, and the Glory of
the Lord is risen upon thee! This Pious Mind, Oh! when shall this Wisdom enter
into your Hearts? When will you Get this Wisdom? It Is the principal Thing. And
it would be a Good step toward it in you, if you would esteem it so. Yea, we
should with a Glad Heart, think, we saw the Beginning of a Pious Mind in you,
if we saw you Beginning to Go and Pray and Weep unto your SAVIOR for it. This
Grace begins in the Desires of the Grace! It was a Suit once made; Neh. I. 2. O
Lord, Be Attentive to the Prayer of thy Servants, who desire to fear thy Name.
You Begin to Fear GOD, and are listed among His true Servants, when you Desire
to Fear Him. Were this Prayer made in Earnest with you; Glorious GOD, change my
Heart, and Bestow a Pious Mind upon me! Verily, That Pious Mind would be seen
dawning in you, that will shine more and more unto the perfect Day. When GOD
has wrought such Desires in the Mind of a Young Person, it is a Token for Good;
He intends (...) Blessed Answer to them.

CHILDREN, Entreat us not to leave you, or ^o Return from following after you;
until we see our GOD becoming your GOD, and until we hear you with a Pious Mind
calling upon Him for the Grace of such a Mind. On that ^assage of the Preacher,
The words of the Wise are as Goads, the Ancients urge that our Sermons ought
for to have Pungencies in them. Children, There are Pungent Things to be now
spoken to you. Oh! May Two or Three Expostulations make a strong Impression
upon you! We read indeed of a fiery Bruit, That he believes not the Sound of
the Trumpet, the Thunder of the Captains, and the Shouting. But, Oh! Foolhardy
Youths, Be not as the Horse that has no understanding; For there shall be many
sorrows to such Wicked Fools. You that now mock at Thunderbolts, may think to
mock on; But your Mocking is very near to a Catastrophe; GOD will change it
into Mourning for you; GOD will with Swift Executions bring upon you, Things
which should be trembled at.

IN the mean time, There are some awful Questions that I am to leave with you
Questions to be trembled at. I will demand of thee, O Young One, walking in the
way (...) thine own Heart; I will Demand of thee, a^^ Answer thou me. But if
you decline to Answer my Questions, The Great GOD shall from the Sacred Place
of Thunder Answer them.

QUESTION, 1. ARE you sure, that y^^ shall have any more Time, than This very
(...) allowed you, to make sure of what you m^^ in a Pious Mind be brought
unto? Is th^^ any Report more common than this; (...) Young Ones are dead. Are
not our Golgoth^ full of Graves, that reach not unto your ^mensions! Of the Six
Thousand, Four Hundred and Odd, that have Dyed in our City within Twenty Years,
(besides our very many YOUNG MEN who have dyed abroad) were there not probably
more than Three Thousand, who had not reached unto their middle-age! If you
Harden your Hearts, and refuse to Day to hear his voice, how do you know, but
the Angel of Death may stand by your Bed-sides, and with an uplifted hand Swear
by Him who Lives for ever and ever, That you shall have no Longer time to Live;
and have order to strike you down immediately? Is any of you all assured of
This; that this is not the Last Sermon that shall ever call upon you?

UNTO this Question, hear the Answer of GOD; Prove. XXVII. 1. Boast not thy self
of to morrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth.

QUESTION, II. IF you Dye in your Sins, without that Holiness of a Pious Mind,
without which no Man shall see the Lord; What will become of you! Can any
Imagination yet clothed in Flesh, form a clear and full notion of what you must
endure in the strange Punishment, reserved for the workers of Iniquity! But ^re
there not Great Plagues and of a long Con^inuance, which you must look for;
Tremen^ous things to be done unto you by the Hands ^f an Infinite GOD,
Resolving to have a Triumph of His Justice, in what He will do upon you, if you
go away unreconciled unto Him!

UNTO this Question, hear the Answer of GOD; Heb. X. 31. It is a fearful thing
to fall into the Hands of the living GOD:

QUESTION, III. IF you are the Children of Parents who have been themselves of
a Pious Mind, and who have done a great deal to bring you unto a Pious Mind;
but you remain impenitent after all; must not you receive a greater Damnation
than any other Children in the World? If you go on to Grieve and Kill your
Parents, what a Vengeance will pursue such Murderers! If you go on still in
your Trespasses what Wounds will your aggravated Impieties Expose you to! In
the Torments of Hell, ar^ there any who do under more Flaming To^tures cry out,
I am Tormented in this Flam^ then such as have a Father Abraham, and Religious
Ancestors to make a bitter mention of? How will you bear the many stripes,
which by Sinning against what you know to be th^^ Will of GOD, you will bring
upon your U^^ happy Souls! How will you bear to hear the Sentence of the
Eternal Judgment, and th^^ that were your Loving, Tender, Heart-broke^ Parents
acquiescing in it!

THE Great GOD shall Answer the Question; Prove. I. 25, 26. You have set at
naught (...) counsel; I will laugh at your calamity; when you destruction
comes as a whirlwind; when distr^^ and anguish comes upon you.

CONSIDER these Things, O YOUNG PEOPLE, Consider, lest the Glorious One
Exasperated by your Impenitency, tear you to pieces and there be none to
deliver you!

BUT, Oh! could our YOUNG PEOPLE be brought once to some CONSIDERATION!
Certainly it would be an Introduction to all Good, and what the Pious Parent
wishes for. When we read, Prove. I. 4. Of giving to the young man discretion,
the Hebrew Word, which we render Discretion, may be rendered Thoughtfulness. How
Discreet and how Pious would our Young People soon become, if they would but
grow Thoughtful, and ponder the Paths of their Feet, and Think on what is
before them!

OF a YOUNG MAN coming to be what he should be, and what, O Young People, we
wish you all to be, we read, Luke XV. 17. He came to himself. Oh! that the
Experiment might now be made among our Children, who are Exceeding Mad, and
will be so, till a Perfect Heart bring the Young ones to be Sob^r-Minded: Which
is what we now Exhort them to. It may be, my Child, a little CONSIDERATION may
bring thee to thyself; and upon it, we should soon see thee in a Right Mind,
and with a Perfect Heart coming to Bless the most High, and Praise Him that
Lives for ever and ever.

WHEREFORE, First. IN an Affectuous CONSIDERATION, Take the Wings of the
Morning, and Fly up to the Heavenly World. Consider, the Glorious Things that
are spoken about the City of GOD, and what thy EARLY PIETY will bring thee to
Enjoy in the Mansions there Walk about that Zion, the City of the Living GOD;
go round about her, consider her Palaces; and see what is done by the Great GOD
there for them who betimes take Him for their ow^ GOD, and their Guide unto
Death, and beyond it. Think, If I go up to that World, I shall se^ a perfect
Rest from every thing, that can he^^ be uneasy to me: I shall have no sorr^^
there, but all Tears shall be wiped from my Eye: Think again, If I go up to
that World, I shall find in the Alsufficient GOD, all that is Relishable and
Valuable in any Creatures here and inconceivably more; and an Admirable CHRIST
will fill me with all the fullness of GOD. Think once more; If I go up to that
World, shall Reap a full Harvest of all my patie^ continuance in well-doing;
and let me no^ never so much abound in the Work of (...) Lord, I shall then
find my Labor not (...) vain for the Lord. And then let thy CONSIDERATION lead
thee to the Etern^^ which That World will be Brightened a^^ and Sweetened
withal; the Duration (...) thy Felicity in the Everlasting Habitations the
Eternal Glory whereto the GOD of (...) Grace will call thee, when He brings
th^^ into Early Piety. Think; If I come to be Comforted in That World, it will
be with an Everlasting Consolation. The Fountains of Living Water whereto I
shall be led, will be running for evermore. My Knowledge will be Eternally
progressive; My Delight will be Eternally varied. After I have been satisfying
my self in the Eternal GOD, for as many Millions of Ages as there are now Beams
of Light in the World, I shall be no nearer to the end of my Satisfaction, than
I was the First Moment of my Entering into the Joy of my Lord.

BUT then, Go on; Let thy CONSIDERATION remove the Bars of the Pit, and uncover
the dismal Vault, and look down into the Infernal World. Consider the
Tremendous Things which are inflicted on the Despisers of Early Piety, who for
being so, shall be condemned and confined unto that Place of Torment. Visit the
gloomy and howling Regions, where GOD sets them in dark Places, who have been
Dead of Old. GOD hedges them about, they cannot get out; GOD ma^^s their Chain
Heavy: Also when they Cry and Shout, He shuts out their Prayer. GOD is as a
Lion unto them in the Secret Places; He pulls them in pieces and makes them
desolate. GOD causes the Arrows of His Quiver to enter into them, and He fills
them with Bitterness. Think; If I must go down to That World, I shall carry
with me the raging desires of the Diverse Lusts, which I am now Serving of. But
they will only help to torture me; and I shall not have so much as a Drop of
Water to gratify them. I shall be hardly bestead, and hungry, and Fret my self,
and Curse GOD, and Look upward. And when I look back unto the Earth, and
Remember the Good Things I received there; Oh! the Dimness of the Anguish I
shall have upon me, finding my self Driven into Darkness Think again, If I go
down to That World all the Pains that ever I did or could suffer by the
Mediation of my Sens^^ here, I shall have more immediately dispensed unto me
there, in very Tormenting Sentiments which a provoked GOD will compel me to;
and all those Pain little enough to punish my Crimes i^ Denying the GOD that is
Above. Thin^ once more; If I go down to That Worl^ an Almighty GOD Himself,
will take (...) into His own Hands, and make me fee such scalding Strokes of
His Wrath, (...) no Tongue is able to express, no Heart (...) able to conceive.
Immediate ^manation from an Offended, Omnipotent, Omnipresent GOD, will
penetrate like Lightenin^ into my Soul; Immediate Coruscations from GOD acting
as a Consuming Fire: GOD Himself will fight against me, with a Stro^^ Arm, and
in Great Wrath. And can (...) Hands be Strong or can my Heart endur^ when GOD
shall deal with me? But then, Let thy CONSIDERATION mind thee of the Eternity
which renders That World yet more Terrible; The Everlasting Punishment which
the Wicked Haters of GOD, and of Early Piety shall go down into. Think; If I
come to be Tormented in the Flames of That World, I know not of any Per^od for
my Torment. An Aching Tooth for one Month, how tedious would it be unto me here!
But if I lie down among the Damned, I must undergo much worse Griefs than That;
and after as many Millions of Years, as there are Leaves on the Trees, or Dro^s
in the Sea, or Sands in the Shore. I have no prospect of any Period. The
Mediator delivering up His Kingdom, I shall be left still under the Vengeance
of GOD, with no^ Intercessor for me; Laid in the lowest Pi^^ shut up, where I
cannot come forth any more.

LET the YOUNG PERSON thus Muse till^ the Fire Burns. It may be hoped, the
issue will be, He Considers and He Turns! The issue would be, that, From this
Time the Young Person with a Perfect Heart will say unto GOD, LORD, Thou art my
FATHER, Thou art my SAVIOR, Thou shall be the Guide of my Youth.

CHILDREN, Let not your Concern for a Perfect Heart, be put off; upon a
pretense, I can do^ nothing of my self; nor can I change my own Heart. Our
SAVIOR bids the Man that had a Withered Hand, Stretch out thy Hand. Instead of
making an Excuse, Lord, I cannot! He Tried it, and he Did it. Make the Trial, O
Soul upon a Return to GOD; make the Trial, whether thou can Pray for a
Perfect Heart, with Cries that shall pierce on the Heavens. And then make a
Trial, whether that Withered Hand of thine, be not so Enlivened by Him, as to
Take hold on his Covenant, and therein Lay hold on Eternal Life, and come to
those Motions of EARLY PIETY which nothing but a Perfect Heart ever comes unto.
Try, Oh! Try, whether with a Perfect Heart, thou can come to this; and set
thy Heart (yea, thy very Hand) unto such an Instrument a^ this; Great GOD, I am
willing that Thou should be my GOD. Great GOD, Thou have made me willing to
be thy Servant. Blessed SAVIOR, Thou have Conquered my Soul, and I am willing,
that thou should make me Righteous, and make me Holy: Reconcile the Great
GOD unto me, and enable me to Live unto Him.

A SERMON, Setting forth the Nature of Early Piety.
Preached at Boston-Lecture, March 30, 1720. 1.
By Benjamin Wadsworth, A.M. Pastor of a CHURCH in Boston.
PSALM XXXIV. 11. Come ye Children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear
of the Lord.


THE Title of this Psalm shows, that holy David was the Author of it. He had
been in eminent Danger among the Philistines, God Graciously and Wonderfully
delivered him; and his Heart was filled with holy Gratitude to God for this
Deliverance. He said, v. 1. I will bless the Lord at all times, his praise
shall be continually in my mouth. He stirred up himself and others too, to Bless
and Praise God for the great Deliverance He had favored him with. v. 3. O
magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together. Indeed, God the
Inexhaustible Fountain of Living Waters, is freely and Communicatively Good to
all that Sincerely Seek and Serve Him. David therefore Exhorts to such a
Seeking and Serving of God. v. 8, 9, 10. O taste and see that the Lord is good:
blessed is the man that trusts in him -- there is no want to them that fear
him -- they that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. Our Text it self
is of the same General strain, Namely, to Incite and Quicken others to Seek and
Serve God. Come ye Children (says David) hearken unto me, etc. David, by God's
Command was anointed King, (1 Samuel 16.12.) and by his Spirit was made a
Prophet, (Act. 2.29, 30.) this holy Man, this true Saint, this royal Prophet,
said, Come ye Children. He gives them the kind compellation of Children, which
notes, his tender, paternal regard to them; ( Like as a father pitieth his
children, Psalm. 103.13.) and the Disposition which was (or should have been) i^
them, viz. that they were as ductile, tractable, teachable as Children are (or
should be) ready to receive wholesome Instructions, and good Impressions on
their Minds. Come ye Children, Come, indeed its worth your while to come; well
worth your while to Hear, Learn, Observe the things I have to Teach you, viz.
to Fear God. So Children, mind what I say, it is well worth your while to come,
to come from Sabbath to Sabbath, from Lecture to Lecture, to embrace all
Opportunities, to improve all proper seasons, to be Instructed in and Quickened
to, what is for the Good of your Souls, your precious Immortal Souls which are
of more worth than a World. Well, says David, come ye Children and I Will teach
you. Teach what, why the Fear of the Lord. He would teach them to be Sincerely
and Practically Religious; to Know, Trust in, Love, Fear, Serve, Obey God, so
as to be Happy in His Favor. He would teach them what was most needful,
useful, profitable to them.

HERE we may Observe, that true Saving Graces are inseperably connected
together, they all spring from the same Regenerating, Renewing Change wrought
in the Soul; from the Image of God Renewed in, and impressed on the Heart by
the Holy Spirit. Where there is one Saving Grace, there are all Saving Graces.
Agreeably whereto we find, that the general Comprehensive Blessings of the
New Covenant, are sometimes pronounced concerning Persons, as endowed with this
or that particular Grace. Thus, Blessed is the Man that Trusts in the Lord.
Jer. 17.7. So, There are inconceivable Treasures of Goodness stored up for
those that Love God. 1 Cor. 2.9. Again, Blessed is the Man that Fears the
Lord, that Delights greatly in His Commandments, Psalm. 112.1. Therefore by
the Fear of the Lord, spoken of in our Text, we may understand Universal Piety,
even all that Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Love, Fear, Hope, Holy Obedience,
which the Gospel requires as necessary in order to our happiness. The Fear of
the Lord, in our Text, seems to be of the same extent with, Eccl. 12.13. Fear
God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. 1 Pet. 1.17.
Pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. In fear, that is, in a serious
conscientious regard to all that God teaches you, and requires of you. From the
Text thus opened, we might note, (1.) That those who have true Piety themselves
(as the Psalmist speaking in our Text, had) will be willing to be at pains, to
promote the like Piety in others. If Piety be suitably awake and active in
them, they will not grudge the taking pains to teach, exhort, incite others to
know and serve God. They Will be for provoking others to love and good works, Heb.
10.24. They will have no greater joy, than to hear that others walk in the
truth, Joh. 3 Ep. v. 4. (2.) So excellent is Early Piety, that it is not beneath
the greatest and best of Men, to endeavor the promoting it. Though David was
anointed to be King, and was a Prophet; yet he thought it not below or beneath
him, to Instruct others, even Young Ones, Children, to Fear the Lord. I
acknowledge, the Word Banime, Sons, here rendered Children, strictly taken is
not limited to Young Ones; yet since it is here rend red Children, and may well
extend to Young Ones, (though not exclusive of others) shall at present speak to
the Text, chiefly as it concerns Persons while Young. And indeed the best and
greatest Persons, in their several Stations and Capacities, should do what they
can to encourage and promote true Piety in such. Magistrates in their Places,
by encouraging Schools and Colleges; Ministers in their Places, by Public and
Private Instructions; should strive to promote true Piety in Young Persons.
(3.) Good Instructions (or teachings) ordinarily are needful in order to the
fear of God, or true Practical Piety. I will teach you the fear of the Lord.
Man is born as a Wild Asses Colt, (Job. 11.12.) He needs to be taught the right
way, in order to his walking in it. Prove. 19.2. That the Soul be without
knowledge, it is not good. Sound knowledge is needful, in order to a right
practice. He will teach us of His ways, and we will walk in His paths, Mic.
4.2. If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye do them, Job. 13.17. But the
Doctrine I design chiefly to insist on at present, is this, viz.


DOCTRINE. THAT Children, Young Persons should make it their chief, principal
care and business to Fear God, to be Sincerely and Practically Pious.
THIS, this was the thing which the Royal Prophet in our Text, was so
sollicitous to inculcate on Children, namely, to Fear God. As soon as Children
become capable of acting as rational Creatures, by deliberately considering
things, by intelligently choosing and refusing; even then (and afterward
forever) they should fear God; should make it their chief endeavor to please
Him, th^^ they may enjoy Him. This truly, is the one thing needful; all other
matters are baubles and trifles compared to this. Here Is the truest Wisdom they
can manifest. The fear of the Lord, that is wisdom; and to depart from evil is
understanding, Job. 28.28. Therefore Persons should, remember their Creator in
the days of their Youth, Eccl. 12.1. God gives them great encouragement to do
so, in saying, Prove. 8.17. I love them that love me, and they that seek me
early shall find me.

I shall now endeavor in some measure to describe the Nature of Early Piety,
showing what it is, wherein it does consist, how or wherein it should exert or
exemplify it self.

HERE therefore we may Enquire,

Quest. What Is here implied or comprehended, in Childrens fearing of God.

Answ. THEIR searing of God according to the sense of our Text, may well
comprehend in it these following things, viz.

1. THEIR believing of, and meditating on, the Being and Attributes of God. The
belief of a God of an Eternal Power and Godhead, of a being infinitely
perfect, that is the Maker and Governor of all things; is the very Foundation,
the first Article of all true Religion. He that does not believe there is a
GOD, can neither Love nor Fear Him. Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible
to please God; for be that comes to God, must believe that he is, and that he
is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him. God is indeed Infinite,
Eternal, Unchangeable in His Being, Wisdom, Power Holiness, Justice, Goodness
and Truth. He Is the Sovereign Maker, Preserver, Supreme Lord and Governor of
all Creatures: He does according to his will, in the Armies of Heaven, and
among the Inhabitants of the Earth, Dan. 4.35. God has made Men for Eternity,
and they shall be Eternally happy or miserable, according as they submit to or
rebel against, Him their Maker, Lawgiver and Judge. It Is therefore the
indispensible Duty, and undeniable Interest of all Persons Young as well as
Old, to fear and obey God. A firm belief of such things as these, is
necessarily implied in, or absolutely necessary in order to, a right fearing of
God. Children therefore cannot have their thoughts and Meditations better
employed, than on the Being and Perfections of God. Children are apt to have
their Meditations run much on empty bubbles and vanities; but when they are duly
exercised on God and His matchless Excellencies, it is the most proper and noble
Employment they can possibly be engaged in.

2. THEIR Hearty, Studious, Diligent acquainting themselves, with God's Will
Revealed in His written Word. How far those utterly unacquainted with the
Scriptures, are capable of Knowing and Fearing God; I shall not now inquire.
But those Young ones Referred to in our Text, were the Children of the Covenant,
the Children of God's Professing People, to whom He gave His Word, Statutes,
and Judgments though He dealt not so with every Nation Psalm. 147.19, 20. Romans
3.12. If Young Persons among a Professing People, would rightly Fear God, they
should Diligently Study His Will, to Direct them in it, and Quicken them to it:
For His Revealed Will, show^ what He Forbids, what He Requires, and what
Obligations they are under to Obey Him He has showed them what is good, and what
b^^ requires of them, (Mic. 6.8.) this He has do^^ in the holy Scriptures,
which are able to ma^^ wise unto salvation, through faith in Christ Jesus 2 Timothy
3.15. Timothy in his Childhood kne^ those Scriptures, and so should others also
^ven while they are Children. The Scripture are God's Law, they are Christ's
Love-Lett^^ to His People, they are the Saints Chart^^ containing the
Privileges belonging to them Children therefore should maintain a Dilige^^
Constant Practice of Reading the Holy Scriptures; of regarding them as the
light of the feet, and lamp of their paths, Psalm. 119.10. Search the
Scriptures, (Joh. 5.39.) Let the wo^^ of Christ dwell in you richly. Meditate
on Go^^ Law, night and day, (Psalm. 1.2.) Hide it your hearts, that you may not
sin against God: Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? taking heed
thereto according to thy word, Psalm. 119.9, 11. O Children, you cannot right
Fear and Serve God, unless you're acquaint with His Revealed Will. You must
Know^^ Will, else you cannot Do it; what He Forbid that you may Avoid it; what
He Requires, that you may Perform it. Study to Know God's Will, both as a Part
and as a Means, of that Fear you owe to Him: As a Part of it, for it is what He
Requires. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Know thou the God of thy Fathers. Romans 12.2. That ye
may prove what is that good, and acceptable and perfect will of God. Hos. 4.6.
My people is destroyed for lack of knowledge; because thou have rejected
knowledge, I also will reject thee. Again, Study Gods will, as a Means of that
Fear you owe to Him. Practice, is the end that should be aimed at in Seeking
knowledge. We should Study to Know God's Holy Will, with a Purpose, Desire and
Design to Do it, to conform to it. Josh. 1.8. This Book of the Law ^^all not
depart out of thy Mouth, but thou shall meditate therein day and night; that
thou may Observe to do according to all that is written therein. Mat. 28.20.
Teaching them to Observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. The
Commands of Christ should be Taught (and therefore Learnt) that they may be
Observed, and Obeyed. Therefore O Children, Prize your BIBLE as the best of all
Books; Prize it above gold, above much fine gold, esteem it sweeter than honey
or the honeycomb, Psalm. 19.10. It shows you how to get Peace with God, how to
Please Him, how to Honor Christ and get Honor in His Sight; it shows you how
to get Pardon of Sin, how to behave yourselves in every Station and Condition,
how to get a Sanctified ^^^e of Providence, how to save your Souls, to escape
Hell, to get to Heaven, and possess Eternal Glory. O^ let this best of Books,
be the chief Subject of your study and meditation. How much time is wretchedly
misspent, thrown away, lost, i^ reading Play-Books, or filthy and profane
Writings! But seriously and diligently to read and study the Holy Bible, is one
good Mean to make us wise to Salvation, holy in Time and Happy to Eternity.
Again, for Children rightly to Fear God, implies,

3. THE serious Consideration, of their naturally sinful and guilty state. If
Young Person seriously read and study God's Word, and consider what is therein
contained; they mu^^ needs see, that as they proceed from fallen Apostate Adam,
they are unspeakably vile, filthy, guilty. They were shapen in iniquities and
conceived in Sin, (Psalm. 51.5.) their hearts are deceitful above all things,
and desperate wicked, (Jer. 17.9.) their carnal minds are enmity against God,
not subject to his law, (...) indeed can be, (Romans 8.7.) Their Hearts
naturally, are a mere nest, root, fountain of Si^^ and wickedness; an evil
Treasure from when proceed evil things, viz. Evil Thoughts, Murders,
Adulteries, etc. Mat. 12.35. and 15. (...) Indeed, as sharers in the guilt of
Adam's fi^^ Sin, they are Children of Wrath by Nature, (Ep^ 2.3.) liable to
Eternal Vengeance, the U^^^ quencheable Flames of Hell. But beside this, their
Hearts (as has been said) are (...) speakably wicked, estranged from God,
enmi^^ against Him, eagerly set in pursuing Vanities, on provoking God by
actual Personal transgressions, whereby they merit and deserve greater measures
of Wrath. And while they continue in such a state, Sin reigning and tyranizing
in them, Guilt lying on them; I say, while so, they have no true fear of God
before their Eyes, ( Romans 3.18.) They have not that Fear of God which is
acceptable to Him. They that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8.8.
While they are in this state, they can yield no acceptable Service to God, nor
have they any title to His pardoning Mercy, or reconciled Favor. Truly it
behooves them most seriously to consider how filthy, guilty, odious, abominable
they are both by nature and by practice. They should see their Sickness, and so
their need of a Physician; their danger of the pursuing Wrath of God, and so
their need of refuge, Mat. 9.12. Heb. 6.18. Their rightly fearing of God,
implies,

4. THEIR turning from Sin to God in Christ Jesus. The Lord Jesus Christ, God
and Man in One Person, is the only Mediator between God and Men, (1 Timothy 2.5.)
the Only and All-sufficient Savior of Sinners, Act. 4.12. He came to save His
People from their Sins and Iniquities, ^o purity 'em and make 'em zealous of
good Works, (Mat 1.21. Tit. 2.14.) to save and deliver them from Wrath to come,
1 These. (...). 10. It Is only in and through this blessed Mediator and Redeemer,
that Sinners can obtain ^ardon of Sin, Peace, Friendship, Reconciliation with
God. God is in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. God can
be Just and the Justifier of him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3.26. Indeed the
Spirit of God must set in, with His Word, and make it efficacious to convince
the Soul of it is Sin, Guilt, Danger, and to draw it to Christ, trusting only in
His Meritorious Righteousness for Pardon Peace and Reconciliation with God.
Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3. God
must take away the heart of stone, give an heart of flesh, (Ezekiel. 36.26.) must
renew Persons in the Spirit of their minds; grant to them the washing of
Regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, (Ti^. 3.5.) Create them in
Christ Jesus to good work (Ephesians. 2.10.) They must by Faith receive Christ (Joh.
1.12.) else they cannot have peace wi^^ God. Being justified by faith, we have
pea^^^ with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5. (...) He that believes
not is condemned already -- (...) that believes on the Son, has everlasting
life and he that believes not on the Son, shall (...) see life, but the wrath
of God abides on bi^^ Joh. 3.18.36. It Is absolutely necessary (...) have a
Regenerating, Converting Change wro^^ in the Soul; to have the Soul united
(...) Christ by Faith. Oh Children, this is t^^^ one thing needful, most
needful, most profitable. Don't think it enough that you were born of Christian
Parents, that you were Baptized, Educated, Instructed in the tr^^ Christian
Religion, that hitherto you have l^^^ blameless Religious Lives to outward
appearance; all these things may possibly be true of many Hypocrites, all these
things may be true of you, and yet you perish forever. See to it therefore,
that you Heartily Repent of Sin, and Submit to Christ as Prince and Savior.
Repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, (Act. 20.21.)
are the Great Things Inculcated in the Gospel. The Scope of the Gospel is, to
turn men from darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God; that they
may receive the forgiveness of Sins, and ^an inheritance among them that are
Sanctified by Faith in Christ, Acts 28.18. Therefore Content not yourselves,
with any thing short of an Hearty Submission to the Calls of the Gospel. Don't
think 'twill be Time enough to mind your Souls hereafter; don't indulge
yourselves in any vicious Courses, in any ways of known Wickedness, thereby
Provoking God, Dishonouring Christ, Resisting the Holy Ghost, grieving your
Pious Parents and Neighbors, gratifying the Devil, and Treasuring up Wrath
against the Day of Wrath. Don't be Agents for Hell, Factors for the Devil,
hastening to, and ripening for Damnation. But penitently Fly to Christ for
Refuge, to Save you from Sin, Guilt, Wrath and Misery, seriously consider with
yourselves, how contrary your fallen Natures are to the Holy Image and Laws of
God; how frequently, basely, abominably you have broken the Holy Laws of the
Glorious God, that Good God who is the Author of your Beings and all your
Benefits: Consider the terrible, Eternal Wrath and Vengeance, which your Sins
have justly deserved; and your own utter inability to Save yourselves
therefrom; and then be ashamed of, and self-loathing for, all your offenses.
Young Persons are often apt to be very Proud, often Proud of their fine gay
Clothes, in which they appear to the view of Men; but if they duly considered,
how Dirty, Filthy, Loath some, Abominable their Sins render them in th^^ Sight
of the Infinitely Holy God; this might Justly fill them with the greatest
shame, grief sorrow, self-abhorring for their Sins. Then sh^^ ye remember your
own evil ways, and your doing that were not good; and shall loath your selves
in your own sight, for your iniquities and f^^^ your abominations -- be ashamed
and confounded for your own ways, Ezekiel. 36.31, 32. Nothing should be so great a
Grief, Load, Burden (...) you, as the Sinfulness of your Natures; an^ the
numberless Sinful Thoughts, Words, a^^ Actions that have issued therefrom.
Psalm. (...)18. -- I will be sorry for my sin. And you should as Heartily and
unmoveably, Trust Jesus Christ for Pardon. Indeed, if you do^^ Penitently
receive Christ by Faith, you a^^ not accepted of God. (Ephesians. 1.6.) You ha^^ no
True Fear of God in you; a Slavish Te^^fying Fear you may possibly have; (the
D^vils believe and tremble) but a true Fi^^ Fear of God, such as is acceptable
to Him, you have not unless you receive Christ by Faith unless you submit to
Him as the Prophet, Prie^^ and King of your Souls. This Hearty, Penitent
Trusting in, Submitting to, Christ, is a most Necessary Profitable Duty, it
should not be Delayed, but most Speedily engaged in. To day if ye will hear his
voice harden not your hearts, Heb. 4.7. Those who are not United to Christ by
Heart Purifying Faith (whatever their Outward Religious Performances and
Privileges may be) are Children of the Devil, Slaves to their own Lusts,
Enemies to God and Christ, the Subjects of Guilt, having no Pardon of Sin nor
Title to Glory, but are Condemned by the Law, and are every moment in danger of
droping into Hell. O^rest not in such a Condition, but most Speedily, and
Heartily Submit to Christ on Gospel terms, that it may be well with you
forever. As Childrens rightly Fearing of God, Implies their Receiving Christ on
Gospel terms, so it Implies,

5. THEIR having their Hearts rightly Affected to God, and Conformed to his
Preceptive Will. Indeed it Comprehends those two Extensive Duties, of Loving
God with all our Heart, and our Neighbors as ourselves, Mat. 22.37 -- 39. But
I shall chiefly confine my self to consider ^he First of these, viz. First
Table Duties; the ^atter being to be Handled by others in their
^ecture-SERMONS. Well, if Young Persons would rightly Fear God, their Hearts
should ^e duly Affected to Him, and Conformed to ^is Precepts. Prove. 23.26. My
son give me ^ine heart. They must Believe with the Heart; their Heart must be
right with God, an^ steadfast in His Covenant: They must cleave (...) the Lord
with full purpose of Heart. Under this Head I might say, 1. THEY should Love
God. True Love t^ and Fear of, God, always go together, Deu^. 10.12. They
should Love God (and that a^^ their Days) withal their heart, soul, mind a^^
strength. They should Love His Law. Psalm. 119.97. O how love I thy law! it is
my medi^^tion all the Day. They should esteem it ab^^ gold, above much fine
Gold, and count it swee^^ than the honey or honeycomb, Psalm. 19.10. They
should Love His Holy Sabbaths, House, Or^^nances, Worship, Psalm. 27.4. and
84.10. They should Love His Children, for His sake; (...) bearing His Image and
doing His Will, (1 J^^. 3.14. and 5.1.) and His Ambassadors, Minist^^ as His
Officers for their Work sake; they should Love 'em and Submit to 'em, as i^^
ploy'd by Him to watch for their Souls, 1 Th^^ 5.12, 13. Heb. 13.17. 2. THEY
should Desire to Please and Glor^^ God. They should choose the things that ple^^
God, (Isai. 56.4.) walk worthy of him to (...) pleasing, being fruitful in
every good work, (...) 1.10. They should so act, not as pleasing (...) but God
which tries their hearts, 1 These. 2. (...) Their Desire should be to Glorify
God (...) their bodies and spirits; to Glorify Him whither they eat, or drink,
or whatsoever they, (...) 1 Cor. 6.20. and 10.31. Therefore they should Fear to
Displease or Offend God, in (...) matter whatsoever; either by Omitting what He
Requires, or Committing what He Forbids. Thus should Children (as well as
others) do. Obadiah said to Elijab, 1 King. 18.12. I thy servant fear the Lord
from my Youth. Abijah while a Child had in him some good thing toward the Lord
God of Israel, 1 King. 14.1, 3, 13. While King Josiah was Young his Heart was
tender, and he humbled himself before God: He exercised an holy Love to Him,
and Fear of Him, 2 Chronicles. 34.8, 27. When Joseph was Young, he Feared God,
desired to please Him, and to shun what would Offend Him, saying. Genesis 39.9.
How shall I do this great wickedness and sin against God? Oh that there were
such an Heart, in all the Children of the Covenant; that they would Fear to
Offend God though never so strongly Tempted to it. Flee youthful lusts. My son,
if sinners entice thee, consent thou not. 3. THEY should be Thankful to God for
all his Favors to them. 1 These. 5.18. In every thing give thanks, for this is
the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you. God is their Maker, Preserver,
only Benefactor, the Guide of their Youth, the Give^ of every good Gift.
Therefore they should say, as Psalm. 103.2. Bless the Lord, O my soul, and
forget not all his benefits. They should be Thankful for all Benefits,
especially for those which bear a Favorable aspect on their Spiritual Welfare;
that they were born under the Gospel, in a Land of Bibles, Ministers, Sabbaths,
Ordinances; that they were Born of Christian Parents, under the Wing of the
Covenant, that they had a Christian Education, being brought up in the Nurture
and Admonition of the Lord. They should be Thankful, that the Lord Jesus
Christ, did take hold of their Souls (as it were) by Parental Instructions
before they could be tainted with those Errors and False Notions, which the
Children of Heathen, Jews, Mahometans Suck in (as (...) were) with their
Mothers Milk. Divine preventing Goodness in this Regard, should be Gratefully
Acknowledged. Truly, they should be Unspeakably Thankful for, and to our Lord
Jesus Christ, for the Influences (...) His Good Spirit, the Restraints of his
Grace for any well grounded hopes (if such the^ have) of Eternal Glory. Oh
Children, (...) Thankful to God for these Things, yea, f^^ his Loading you
daily with his Benefits. 4. THEY should be patient under Div^^^ Chastenings and
Rebukes. Heb. 12.5. Desp^^^ not the chastening of the Lord, neither faint (...)
thou art rebuked of him. Don't murmur (1 Co^. 10.10.) nor fret; but be patient
in tribulation (Romans 12.12.) bear the indignation of the Lord because you have
Sinned against Him; Be s^^ and know that he is God; be dumb and open (...) your
mouths, because he does it. Heb. 12. (...) We have had fathers of our flesh
which correct us, and we gave them reverence, shall we not (...) rather be in
subjection to the Father of Spirit and live? Lam. 3.27. It is good for a man
that he bear the yoke in his youth. Doubtless multitudes of Young Persons, have
had much Spiritual advantage by their Afflictions. Has not much Sin been
prevented, their corrupt Inclinations greatly checked and restrained, by the
Trials they have met with? May not many of them say, as Psalm. 119.67, 71, 75.
Before I was afflicted I went astray; but now have I kept thy word -- It is
good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. -- I
know, O Lord, that all thy judgments are right, and that in faithfulness thou
have afflicted me. Be patient therefore under Trials. 5. THEY should submit and
resign themselves to God's Providential Dispose. God's Providence governs the
World, they should consider and regard it in all they meet with; and be willing
that He should deal with them as He pleases; Learning in every state wherein
they are, therein to be content, Phil. 4.11. They should say, the will of the
Lord be done, (Act. 21.14.) It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good,
(1 Samuel 3.18.) Behold here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him, 2 Samuel 15.26. They should say to God, after the example of our Holy Redeemer,
Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done, Mat. 26.39. 6. THEY should grieve
for, and hate; th^se things that are hateful and provoking to God. They should
hate all Sin in themselves and others, hate even every false way, (Psalm.
119.128.) hate the works of them that turn aside, hate vain thoughts: they
should hate Sin with a perfect hatred, and that because it is hateful to God.
They should grieve and mourn for their own Sins, (Psalm. 38.18.) and for the
Sins of others also. I beheld transgressors and was grieved, because they kept
not thy word, Psalm. 119.158. Oh Children, you should greiv^ for your own sinful
Thoughts, Words, Actions; and for the wicked Words and Actions you hear and see
in others. Do you hear other Children speak profanely, Curse and Swear; speak
obscene filthy Words? Do they call wicked Na^^s, tell Lies, behave themselves
vicious^^ on any account? Well, don't imitate the^^ things, but mourn for them
because they provoke God, and wrong the Souls of the guilty. 7. THEY should
Choose, Trust and Delight i^ God in Christ as their Portion. Lam. 3.24. T^^ Lord
is my portion, says my Soul; therefore u^^ I hope in him. Psalm. 71.5. Thou art
my hope, (...) Lord God; thou art my trust from my Youth. They should trust in
the Lord for ever, (Isa^. 26.4.) cast all their cares and burdens upon Him;
commit the keeping of their Soul unto Him. They should delight themselves (...)
the Lord, count Him their exceeding joy; a^^ rejoice in him always, Psalm. 37.4.
and 43.4. Phi^. 4.4. They should prize the Light of God countenance above Corn
and Wine, (Psalm. 4.6, 7.) And though Creature helps fail; yet they should rejoice
in the Lord, and joy in the God of their Salvation, Hab. 3.17, 18. Oh Children,
if you have God in Christ for your Portion, it is an unspeakably greater benefit
and blessing, than to have Rich Parents, Fine Clothes, Great Estates, or any
outward temporary Enjoyment whatsoever. Oh, long after, and trust in, God, as
he, Psalm. 73.25, 26. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none on earth
that I desire besides thee. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the
strength of my heart and my portion for ever. And as Children fearings of God,
implies their having their hearts rightly affected to him, and conformed to his
Precepts; so it implies,


6. THEIR Sincere, Fervent, Constant Endeavors, that their whole Outward
Carriage and Behavior may be agreeable to God's Will, and Pleasing in His
Sight. Their Mouths, and their Hands, as well as their Hearts, should be
employed for God. Romans 10.10. Psalm. 24.3, 4. With their Bodies as well as
Spirits, they should Glorify God, 1 Cor. 6.20. If their Hearts are right with
God, Renewed and Sanctified; then from this Good Treasure within, they will
bring forth Good Things, Mat. 12.35. Indeed they should yield Universal
Obedience to God's Commands, have respect to them all. Obey my voice and do
them, according to all that I command you; so shall ye be my people, and I will
be your God, Jer. 11.4. But inasmuch as I Am to speak chiefly of First Table
Duties; I shall under this Head particularly say of Children o^^ Young Persons.

1. THEY should Pray to God in Secret. Mat. 6.6. Enter into thy closet, and
when thou has^ shut thy door, pray to thy Father with is in secret; and thy
Father which sees in secret sha^^ reward thee openly. Isai. 55.6. Seek ye th^^
Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him while he is near. Children should
very Early Pray to God in Secret; and should maintain a steady course of so
Praying as long as the^ live. Morning and Evening they should g^^ alone, pour
out their Souls to God, Confess th^^ Sins to Him, Pray that He would Pardon
their Sins for Christ's sake, that He would fill the^ with His Spirit, with
Heavenly Wisdom a^^ Grace. They should Pray to the GOD of th^^ Fathers, for all
the Blessings they need. Ps^^ 86.16. Give thy strength to thy Servant, sa^^ the
Son of thine handmaid. They should Pra^^ for more knowledge, (Psalm. 119.18.)
wisdom (Jam. 1.5.) for unwearied Supplies of Gra^^ that they may shun
wickedness and practice ^^^^ness, Psalm. 19.13, 14. and 25.4, 5. They should
Pray for all the blessings they need, both fo^^ Body and Soul, for Time and for
Eternity; a^^ as they should Pray for themselves, so the^^ should for others
too. Pray one for another Jam. 5.16. Oh Children, be not so vile an^ wicked, as
to live without Secret Prayer; done let a Morning or Evening pass, without you^
getting alone for this most profitable, reasonable Service.

2. THEY should Remember the Sabbath Day to Keep it Holy. Lev. 19.30. Ye shall
keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanctuary. Oh Children, don't Profane God's
Sabbath by Idleness, Playing, by needless speaking about Worldly matters; much
less by any thing in it self Sinful; but employ the Sabbath, in Praying,
Reading the Holy BIBLE and good Books, Learning your Catechism, Receiving the
Good Instructions of Parents and Masters; in going to the House of God, and
there Diligently and Reverently Attending on His Holy Worship. Isai. 58.13. If
thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy
day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable, and
shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor
speaking thine own words.

3. THEY should Own and Renew their Baptismal Covenant with God. God Blessed
Abraham (the Father of the Faithful) saying, I will be a God to thee and to thy
seed, Genesis 17.7. This Covenant continues under the New Testament Dispensation;
the Promise is to you and to your Children, Act. 2.39. Believers and their
Seed, are in Covenant with God. They which be of faith, are blessed with
faithful Abraham, Gal. 3.9. It was God's Command, that Abraham's Seed which
were capable of it; viz. the Males, should receive Circumcision the first Seal
of the Covenant, Genesis 17.10. So it is God's will now, that Baptism (which comes
in the room of Circumcision, Col. 2.11, 12.) should be Applied to the Children
of Believers; which Children are Disciples in the same Covenant with their
Parents. Mat. 28.19, 20. And when those Baptized in Minority, come to years of
Discretion, to be Capable of deliberately Choosing and Refusing; then they
should seriously Consider with themselves, that Agreeably to God's Will they
were Solemmly Devoted, Consecrated, Given up to God in Baptism; to be His
Covenant Servants, to Serve God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Ghost
forever; therefore they should Choose and Own this Lord God of their Fathers to
be their God. This is but agreeable to David's Solemn Charge to his Son. 1
Chro^^ 29.9. Know thou the God of thy Fathers, ^n^^ serve him with a perfect
heart and a willing mind. So Exodus 15.2. -- My fathers God, a^^^ I will exalt
him. When Children therefore come to years of Discretion; they should choose,
own, profess the God of their Father^ to be their God. They should in Secret
Transact with the Father of Spirits; and with utmo^^ seriousness and solemnity,
Personally Re^^^ the Dedication of themselves to God. As while Minors they were
given to God in Baptism; so when grown up, they should Personally, yea and
Publicly too (though first in Secret Renew the Dedication of themselves to the
Service of God; Trusting in Christ for the Pardon of their Sins, and for Grace
to yield Sincere Covenant Obedience. Isai. 44.5. (...) shall say, I am the
Lords, and another shall (...) himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall
subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of
Israel. The little ones ( Children as well as others, among a Professing
People) should Own God for their Covenant God, Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12. David was Born
in Covenant with God, and (no doubt) received Circumcision the Seal of it at
eight days old; yet when grown up, he Personally Renewed his Covenant with God,
saying, Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep
thy righteous judgments.

4. THEY should wait on God in all His Ordinances, and therefore Seriously and
Devoutly come to the Lord's Supper. They should not forsake the assembling
themselves together, (Heb. 10.25.) but Reverence God's Sanctuary (Lev. 19.30.)
love the habitation of his house, and the place where his honor dwells, (Psalm.
26.8.) Accounting one day in his courts better than a thousand, (Psalm. 84.10.)
desiring to dwell in the house of the Lord all the Days of their lives, to
behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his temple, Psalm. 27.4. They
should have earnest hungrings and thirstings after God in His Ordinances,
[Psal. 42.1, 2.] to see his power and his glory in his Sanctuary, Psalm. 63.2.
Indeed, they should walk in all the ordinances and commandments of the Lord
blameless, Luke 1.6) Therefore they should Heartily and Seriously wait on the
Lord in the Ordinance of His Supper. They should Examine themselves, and so eat
of that bread and drink of that cup: and should do it in remembrance of Christ,
to show forth His Death, till He come. They should seriously Consider the
Author, Nature, End, Use of this Ordinance; and should come to it out of Love
and Obedience to Christ; to promote His Glory and their own Spiritual Good;
they should Renew and Seal the Covenant Dedication of themselves to Him; in
this holy Institution. Indeed they should not dare to Neglect this Ordinance;
in Neglecting of it, they Disobey God, Dishonor Christ, Grieve the Holy
Spirit, Gratify the Devil, set an ill Example before Men, and Wrong their own
Souls; and how dare they bring the Guilt of these Things upon themselves?

THUS I Have given some few General hints, Showing what is Implied in Childrens,
Young Ones, Fearing of God, or being Practically Pious. We may say by way of
USE, 1. It Is matter of Lamentation, that there is (...) more of this Fear of God
appearing in the Children, the Young Persons, among this People. (...) to be
hoped indeed, that there are many Children, Young Persons among this People,
who Remember their Creator; who Fear the Lord in their Youth, and give
comfortable Evidences of their Sincere Piety. Yet it is matter of Great
Lamentation, that there are no more such. Are there not many Young Persons, who
show little if any Regard to God, to Christ, to the Welfare of their Precious
Immortal Souls? Are there not many Young Ones, who seldom if ever Read God's
Holy Word, unless (as 'twere) constrained or compelled to it? Many who scarce
Learn, or soon Forget, their Catechism, that form of sound Words? Many who give
little if any Reason to think, that they retire Morning and Evening for Secret
Prayer? Many who show little if any Regard to God's Holy Sabbath, but rather
Profane it by Playing, Idleness, Worldly and vain Discourses, Neglects of
Private and Public Exercises of Religious Worship? How Few are there
comparatively, that when they are grown up do seriously Renew their Baptismal
Covenant, and seriously Approach to the Lord's Table? Alas, how many are there,
who evidently Disregard their Baptismal Dedication to God? Though in Baptism they
have been Solemnly Dedicated, Consecrated to the Service of God; and are
Obliged with Body and Soul to Glorify God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost; yet when grown up, don't they seem Practically to Renounce the God
of their Fathers, to cast off the hope of their Fathers; and to employ their
Bodies and Souls in the Service of the Devil, and their own Lusts and
Corruptions? Nay, are there not some Young Persons, Children of the Covenant,
Baptized Ones, that are very Ignorant of Christianity; nay, some will take
God's Holy Name in vain, will Curse and Swear Profanely? Such are Guilty of
horrid Sacrilege, they Rob God, their Persons which were Consecrated to God,
they employ in the Service of Satan and the Gratifying their own Corruptions.
Surely such Things as these, ought to be deeply bewailed and lamented. All that
have at Hea^ the Cause of God, the Honor of Christ, the Good of this People;
should bewail what^ amiss among us, and Pray for the Out pou^^ of God's Spirit
for the Mending and Reforming of it. 2. THOSE of us who have passed through the
Tim^ of our Youth, should be Humble for the Sins the^ Committed. Was not much
of our Childhoo^ and Youth, spent in Vanity? If we seriously Reflect and look
Back, may not we call (...) Mind, that we were very Unmindful of Go^ of Christ,
of the Concerns of our Souls; tha^ we did not so Early, Steadily, Constan^ Read
God's Word, Pray in Secret, Devoutl^ attend His Public Worship as we should
have done? How little Good did we ge^ how little Good did we do, how much Gui^^
did we contract in our Younger Days? Indeed, so far as we were Restrained and
Influenced by the Word and Spirit of God, w^ should Bless Him for it; yet have
we no^ great Reason to be deeply Humbled and Se^ Abased, that we were not more
Early, Hea^ty, Fervent, Diligent, Constant in Seeking and Serving of God? If we
had been due^^ Studious, Diligent, Constant in Duty; (...) much greater
Progress might we have (...) in Holy Knowledge and Practical Pi^ How much
reason have we to Pray, as Psalm. 25.7. Remember not against me the sins of my
youth, nor my transgressions: according to thy mercies remember thou me, for
thy goodness sake, O Lord. 3. ALL that are concerned with Children, with Young
Persons, should strive to Encourage and Promote true Piety in them. Parents
should do so, Masters and Mistresses in Families, and ^n Schools, should do so;
Ministers should do ^o, Feeding the Lambs as well as the Sheep of Christ's
Flock. Godliness is profitable for ^he present and future life, 1 Timothy 4.8.
All, ^n their several Stations and Capacities, should Encourage and Promote
what is so pro^^table. Nothing is more Threatening to the Welfare of a People,
than to have their Young Ones generally Ignorant, Irreligious, Dis^rderly. When
it is so, it looks as though Ini^uity would soon abound, to the pulling ^own
heavy Judgments. So, nothing looks more Promising, than to have their Young
Ones generally Fearing and Serving of God. Prove. 14.34. Righteousness exalts
a nation, ^ut sin is a reproach to any people. All proper Methods therefore
should be taken, to Promote true Piety in Young Persons. Psalm. 78. -- 8. For he
established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, which he
commanded our fathers, that they should make them known unto their children.
That the generation (...) come might know them; even the children which should
be born; who should arise and declare them to their children: that they might
set their hope in God, and not forget th^^ works of God, but keep his
Commandments. When true Practical Religion is thus Propagated among a People
from one Generation to another, 'twill be Unspeakably profitable and
advantageous to them. Psalm. 103.17, 18. The mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting upon them that fear him, and his righteousness unto
childrens children; to such (...) keep his covenant, and to those that remember
his commandments to do them. Psalm. 67.5, -- ^ Let the people praise thee, O
God; let all (...) people praise thee. Then shall the earth yie^^ her increase;
and God even our own God sha^^ bless us and all the ends of the earth shall
fe^^ him.


The Nature of Early Piety as it respects Men.
By Mr. Colman. Boston-Lecture, April 6. 1721.
EPHESIANS VI. 2. Honor thy Father and Mother, which is the First Commandment
with Promise.


ON the last Lecture the Nature of Early Piety was stated and explained as it
respects the Glorious GOD; that is to say, the Duty of Young People toward Him
their Creator and Redeemer was laid before them; that which follows next in
Order, and which therefore falls to me (in the Course and Method we have gone
into) is to speak of the Nature of Early Piety as it respects Men; th^^ is to
say, the Duty incumbent upon You^^ People, by the Law and Commandment o^ GOD
their Savior, to Men, in the various Relations wherein they stand to them. T^^
which End I have chosen these Words of the Apostle, which repeat the first part
of the Fifth Commandment, Honor thy Father a^^ Mother; and refer to the latter
part of (...) saying, that it is the first Commandment wi^^ promise.

SO that we have here a Precept and Commandment directed to Young People, and
Reason given to recommend it to them, a^^ enforce it on them.

1. THE Precept, the same which was giv^^ from the beginning at the Delivery of
t^^ Law from Sinai; and HE who then spoke by Angels in Thunders from the
burni^^ Mountains, now speaks it to you, O our Children, from the mouth of His
Apostle, (the ^postle of the Gentiles) another Angel of (...) Church; and not
to you only, but to the who^^ Assembly who are included with you in the Law
which is exceeding broad; and the^^fore we hope that you will attend with gr^^^
fear and reverence, as the Parents with th^^^ Children in the Congregation of
Israel di^ when these Words were first spoken from He^ven: for in the Name of
that Great G^^ whose Voice then shook the Earth, and (...) trembling People
prayed that they might more hear it as they then did, lest they should ^ie
under the fright; in the Name of this Great GOD (I say) I bring this part of
His Law to you this day; Honor thy Father and Mother.

THE Precept in my Text not only speaks (...) to Children, but is immediately
directed to them; for so the Chapter begins, CHILDREN, ^hey your Parents in the
Lord, for this is right: Honor thy Father and Mother.

HAD I taken these Words out of the Commandment it self, as it lies in the
20th. Chap. ^f Exodus, they had been meant and directed ^s well to Parents and
Masters, Magistrates and Ministers, as unto Children; But here ^hey are spoken
and meant to You Children and Young People, in your Age of Government and
Subjection.

BUT by Father and Mother as you are to ^nderstand firstly and chiefly your
proper Parents, your Natural Father who begat thee, and thy Mother who bare
thee, so also those that may stand in the Place of Parents to thee, ^o whose
Care and Government you may be ^ommitted if you are Orphans, or by whom ^ou may
be Adopted, or being destitute and ^elpless may be cast upon by the Providence
^f GOD.

MOREOVER, though the Text here mea^s and limits the Precept strictly to
Children, and the Father and Mother, spoken of are the ^atural or legal
Parents; for Masters and ^ervants are afterward spoken to by themselves; yet I
shall take leave to speak (...) Father and Mother here in the same latitude and
extent as the Fifth Commandment in (...) Decalogue is ever to be interpreted;
And (...) by Father and Mother is here meant all yo^^ Superiors in Family,
School, Church and Commonwealth; yea every Relative you have (...) the World,
your Equals, or your Inferiou^ are to come into Consideration with you: And the
Honor here required of you takes in (...) whole Duty which GOD requires of you
(...) every Relation wherein you stand toward M^^ So great and broad is the
Commandment before you.

2. THE Reason annexed to it is of singul^^ Observation and very great weight:
which (...) the first Commandment with promise. That (...) to say, Explicit and
express; for every Commandment has a promise and a threatni^^ both implied. The
Fifth Commandment (...) the Decalogue has this singular and distinguishing
thing in it, which the Holy Ghost thin^ worthy of special remark. It is the
first ^^cept in the Second Table of the Law, and (...) a Promise added to
enforce it; which n^^ of the following Commandments have. (...) thus, It is the
first, yea the only, Commandment of the Ten with a particular Promi^^ (the
promise of a particular Mercy.) In (...) Second Commandment we find a general
Pro^ of mercy made, but in the Fifth Commandment there is a particular Mercy
specif^^ namely a long and happy Life on the Ear^^ The Mercy promised in the
Second Commandment is to all that keep the Commandments in General; that Mercy
promised in the Fifth Commandment is unto them that keep this Commandment. So
that this is Eminently the Commandment with promise, having a special Promise
annexed to the particular Duty commanded. The Promise annexed to the Second
Commandment is a general one which relates to the whole Law; but this is a
special one which respects this Commandment in particular.

NOW Children, GOD prescribes to You a ^^ecial Regard unto this His
Commandment, which contains in it the Piety which you are ^o discharge toward
MEN. You must consider it as a prime and special Precept of His Law: you must
discharge the Duties which ^re prescribed in it in obedience unto the ^reat
GOD, whose Commandment it is: You ^ust eye his Authority and act for His Glory,
(...) doing your Duty to your Parents, your Superiors, Inferiors and Equals;
you must ^e the Promise too which He has annexed to ^is Commandment; that you
may obtain ^is Favor and Blessing.

WHEREFORE (Children) mind it, both ^he Precept and the Promise mean that from
a ^ous heart and mind, from a principle of Grace ^ithin you, in a religious
manner and for ^^ly Ends; for the honor of God and for ^our own Eternal
Salvation, you observe ^^ese Duties which are this Day Preached to ^^u from
these Words.

OBSERVE therefore, that Piety toward G^^ is presupposed, and to be laid in the
Foundation of these Moral Duties which God sen^ me now to require of you; else
though yo^ carry your selves laudably toward your Parents at home, and in the
sight of all M^^ abroad, yet you will be no Examples of Ea^^ Piety, nor have
any part or lot in the thi^ for though you could say to me when I ha^^ done, as
the Young Man in the Gospel said (...) our Savior, All these have I kept and
do kee^ yet it must be said to thee again, One th^^ thou lackest; if thou do
it not from the fe^ and love of God in thy Soul, from a Principle of Grace and
Piety within thee.

I call upon you therefore, Children, to remember how you were taught the Fear
of (...) Lord the last Lecture-Day, and in that fe^^^ God now to hearken to me,
and set your sel^^^ by the help of God's Grace to observe and (...) the things
that are now to be command^ you of God: For else instead of the promi^^
blessing, you will find the Commination (...) contrary Curse, which is implied
in the Promise, executed upon you, if not in this (...) yet (which is
infinitely worse) in that wh^^ is to come.

ONE thing more let me here hint to yo^^ Children, You may and should in your
Obedience to God have respect unto the pro^^^^ and reward of God; yea unto a
present (...) temporal reward of your Piety toward M^. It has the promise of
the Life that now that it may be well with thee, and thou may live long upon
the Earth; as are the Words after my Text. "You must eye the Commandment of God
in the first place, (obey your Parents in the Lord, because He commands it, and
in all things that are agreeable to His Will; because this is right and just,
by the Law of Nature and Nations as well as by the written Word) and then have
respect unto the Recompense of Reward.

HAVING thus opened the Text unto you (...) little, and I hope in such manner
as to awaken your Attention, and if it might be to touch your tender hearts; I
now come to declare to you (our Children) how true Piety ought to be operating
in your Souls, and how it ought to be expressed in your Words, Actions and
Behavior toward MEN: and herein you are always to exercise your selves that
you may keep a Conscience void of offense toward GOD.

NOW the best and plainest Method, as well as fullest Manner, wherein I may lay
your Duty before you, is I think in these Four Heads, in which our
Boston-Catechism, or Milk ^r Babes has long since given it: FAMILY, SCHOOL,
CHURCH and COMMONWEALTH.

First then,

1. EARLY Piety will show it self in the ^eligious Carriage of Children and
Young Peo^^e in the FAMILIES whereof they are a part, and in a conscientious
discharge of the particular Duties which they owe (by the Law ^ GOD) unto one
and another in the Family. For instance, Thou art a Child of the Family or in
it, and must show Piety to thy Parent^ o^ those that are instead of Father and
Mother to thee: Thou art a Brother or a Sister in ^ Family, and have Brethren
and Sisters to she^ Piety unto: There are Servants in the Family, and there is
a Piety to be expressed them; or Thou art a Servant in a Family and there is
Piety to be expressed by the toward all in the House. Here then,

1. THOU art a CHILD of the Family, ^ in it, and thy first and earliest Piety
must ^ expressed to thy Parents, or those that (...) instead of Father and
Mother to thee. T^^ Relation and so this Duty stands first in t^^ order of
Nature; for next to thy duty God thy Heavenly Father is that which the owe to
thy Earthly Parents. Thy Father and Mother are nextly and immediately ^^der God
the Instrumental Authors of thy Bei^^ you are the Children which God has given
them; theirs is the propriety in you as f^^ as you are born, and they have the
(...) Dominion and most rightful Government (...) you, and an absolute one for
your Good your Infancy; you being altogether inca^^ble of acting for your self.
And then G^^ has implanted in your Parents that tender (...) unspeakable love,
desire, care and solicit^^ for your Good; and from the Day when ^ou were born
they have been expressing it ^^ward you in such ways and with such plea^^re, as
to oblige and bind you to render our very selves to them, and all the
reve^^nce, honor, gratitude and affection of your ^ouls, in subordination to
GOD, and the ho^our and obedience which you owe to Him. ^e how GOD has joined
piety to Parents ^ith piety toward Himself, Lev. 19.3. Ye ^^all fear every man
his mother and his father ^^d keep my sabbaths, I am the LORD. Children, ^t me
tell you, you cannot fear and wor^^^p GOD if you do not fear your Father and
^^ur Mother. Your Father in heaven will ^^cept of no Worship from you, if you
do not ^ the same time carry your selves piously ^^ward your earthly Parents.
And mind, as ^^ur Mother is named in the Commandment ^^gether with your Father,
and as in the place ^^t now quoted, the Mother is first named ^^d then the
Father; so be sure God means ^^rein especially to admonish you to honor ^^d
fear your good Mothers, whom you may (...) most likely, and in danger, to set
light by; ^t to whom you are no less bound and oblig^^ than to your Father;
only your Mothers ^^ll teach you, as by Precept so by their own ^^verence and
Subjection to your Fathers, ^^at your first Regards are to their will and
^^mmands.

CHILDREN! Your Duty to your Parents ^^so large and Copious a Subject that I
can ^^t hint at the Particulars contained in it. You must love 'em, next to
GOD, with ^ your Souls; as they do you. The Inward ^teem of your Souls must be
upon all occa^ expressed in all your Words to 'em and of (...) in all your
Actions and whole Behavior be^ them. Your whole carriage must be full high
Reverence toward them. Yea, were ^ to be hereafter Governors and Kings ^ must
continue this, as Joseph bowed hi^ with his face to the earth when he brought
(...) Sons out from between Jacob's knees; and Solomon rose up from his Throne
to meet (...) Mother and bowed himself unto her. T^^ Illustrious Examples are
recorded for (...) Admonition and Imitation, who have Pa^^ to honor.

MOREOVER, Piety requires that this y^^^ Reverence to your Parents do show it
self ^ most ready Obedience to all their lawful Commands; and any Unlawful ones
we will suppose from them. Col. 3.20. Children your parents in all things, for
this is well p^^^^ing to the LORD. That is, says one, (...) when they call you,
go where they send (...) do what that they bid you, do not what (...) forbid
you; and all as Children from a p^^^ciple of Love. Do this in the fear of (...)
Prove. 13.17. The eye that despises to ob^^ mother; the ravens of the valley
shall pick ^ and the young eagles shall eat it. Let that C^ fear lest he perish
by the Judgments of G^^ and come to the Gallows, or some disa^ End.

TO Obedience belongs your diligent and reverent Learning of your wise and good
Parents, who will be careful to Instruct you, Believe, receive, retain their
Words, Prove. 1.8. My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not
the law of thy mother. Solomon piously remembered and recorded the good
Doctrine and Institutions of his pious Parents: Prove. 4.3, 4. I was my fathers
son, tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother. He taught me also, and
said unto me, Let thine heart retain my words: keep my commandments and live.
Especially it will be your Piety, O our Young People, to regard solemnly the
way of Worship wherein you have been instituted from the Word of God: Take heed
to thy self and keep thy soul diligently and cleave to the God of thy father
and to his Ordinances; lest thou forget them, and lest they depart from thy
heart all the days of thy life; but teach 'em thy sons, and thy sons sons. Once
more,

PIETY requires thy reverend Submission as to the Instructions, so to the
Admonitions, Rebukes and Corrections of thy Parents; which to refuse is
rebellion against God and his Authority which He has invested Parents withal;
the which Parents can no more put off as they please than they can or may
Natural Affection, Prove. 13.24. He that spares his rod hates his son.
Wherefore you must needs be subject, and give reverence to the fathers of your
flesh when they correct you, Heb. 12.9. You know how God has declared the
desert of the rebellious Son, that he is detestable to Him and to men, Deuteronomy.
21.20.

AGAIN, Piety requires Children to Imit^^^ their Parents in what is Good and
Exemplary in them; and in that only. Let their virtuous and godly lives be a
living Law to you and had in great Veneration by you, as long as you live. But
carefully cover what is ami^^ in them, as becomes the children of Jap^^ whom
GOD has enlarged; and to whom (...) was reckoned for Piety that he went
backward and drew a covering over his Fathers nakedne^ Genesis 9.23.

MOREOVER, Piety requires of Children that they be just and faithful to the
Parents outward Estate; that they never (...) of it but what is given to them,
nor (...) it but rather help and serve it if they c^^^ A Child may not Steal
from his Father, (...) he that wastes him, is a son that causes sh^^^ Prove.
19.26.

ANOTHER great branch of filial Piety to requite and recompense your Parents,
to y^^ Ability when you are grown up, for all t^^ kindness and goodness to you:
This ^ the Law of God unto you, 1 Timothy 5.4. (...) them learn to show Piety at
home and to req^^^^ their Parents, for that is good and accepta^^^ before God.

BUT how can Children ever requite th^^ Parents? they may, by being wise and
pious it shall be an ample reward; Prove. 23.^ Thy father and thy mother shall
be glad, and (...) that bear thee shall rejoice: they must by defending their
parents person, or name, or memory; speaking with their Adversary in the gate,
Psalm. 127.5. They may by ministering to them in sickness, in weaknesses and in
age; with pleasure tending those who first tended us. As years and infirmities
grow upon thy Parents let thy tender and reverend regards grow toward them;
remembering how in thy helpless age they pitied and tendered thee. It is the
Commandment of God to thee, Prove. 23.22. Despise not thy Mother when she is
old. Vile and impious is the Youth that does. Deuteronomy. 27.16. Cursed be he that
sets light by his Father or his Mother! and all the people shall say, Amen.
He perishes under a universal Curse: all must consent and agree in it. Finally,
Piety will teach you to requite your Parents by contributing cheerfully to
their Sustenance and Support out of your estate if they stand in need of it.
Read Joseph's filial piety, Genesis 45.9, 10. Haste you and go up to my Father, and
say unto him, Thus says thy Son Joseph, God has made me Lord of all Egypt,
come down unto me, tarry not; -- and here will I nourish you. CHRIST teaches
you, Mat. 15.4. that the honoring your Father and Mother includes Maintenance
and Relief; and He vehemently condemns the False gloss or tradition of the
Pharisees which taught otherwise. O Child, whoever thou art, desire to be unto
thy Parents another Obed, of whom we read, Ruth. 4.15. He shall be to thee a
restorer of thy life, and a nourisher of thy old age.

ONCE more, Piety will teach Children to pray for their Parents, and to thank
GOD for the blessing they have in 'em; reverently to rise up and call them
blessed; and to desire their blessing, p^ize their prayers, see^ that their
Soul may bless them. You can^ value the blessing of pious Parents at too hig^ a
rate, nor is any pains too great to obtai^ it; as Joseph went with his two Sons
to Jacobs knees; with utmost reverence and jo^ But O fear a Parents Curse!
Micah had mo^^ religion than to make light of this; he restored the eleven
hundred shekels of silver ab^^^ which his Mother cursed. Pious Jacob tremble^
at the though it of Isaac's Curse: Whether (...) laid it to heart we know not; but
the sto^^ is dreadful to read, Genesis 9. ult. Cursed be Canaan, a servant of
servants shall he be to (...) Brethren; Blessed be the Lord GOD of Shem, (...)
Canaan shall be his servant.

I shall only add, That Piety will tea^^ Children to have a just regard to the
Wisdom and Advice of Parents, in the disp^sing (...) themselves to Callings,
into Families, or Marriage; and when God takes Parents aw^^ Piety requires
their Children to mourn (...) 'em and over them; as Joseph fell upon (...)
Fathers face, and wept upon him and kissed (...) as soon as he gave up the
Ghost, Genesis 50.1.

BUT so much of the Piety of Children to Parents; on which I have enlarged more
than I design on any other head, because it is indeed the first and greatest
branch of Early Piety toward Men, and is to be laid in the foundation of all
the following Instances. I will only recommend it further from the Example of
CHRIST; the most blessed and glorious Pattern of it. Children, When the SON of
GOD took our Nature of the blessed Virgin Mary, we read of Him that He was
Subject to his Parents, Luke 2.51. And as He hung on the Cross He cast down a
dying look upon his Mother, and said to the beloved Disciple who stood by her,
-- Behold thy Mother: John understood the meaning of that gracious endearing
word, and from that hour took her to his own home, Joh. 19.27. Thus Christ
being made of a Woman was made under the Law of the Fifth Commandment, to teach
the Seed of the Faithful to approve themselves unto Him a Faithful Seed by
their careful observance of this Commandment David was a Type of CHRIST in this
particular, that in the day of his distress he took care of his exposed
Parents, and found a shelter for them. 1 Samuel 22.3. But how glorious was the
filial piety and dying love of the Son of David, who when He was suffering
under the weight of His Eternal Fathers frowns, and crying out to Him, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me; yet found a heart and leisure to look down
upon his poor pierced Mothers Soul, and provide^ her a Son and a Home the few
days she ha^ to outlive Him. O Children, imitate yo^^ Savior in filial piety.
And you that are Parents, exact, require, constrain this Duty, fe^^ and
reverence from your Children toward yo^ or you cruelly abandon them to a
reproba^^ state; for it is awful to observe to you, a^^ both Parents and
Children have reason to thin^ of it with trembling, that among the Sins f^^
which God gave up the Heathen to a reprobate mind this is one, Disobedience to
Parents Romans 1.30. And when the worst of Men a^^ spoken of that shall come in
the last da^ these come into the numeration, 2 Timothy 3 ^ Disobedient to Parents.

BUT I must leave this Copious Head, a^^ go on to say,

2. THOU art a BROTHER or a SISTER (...) the Family (we will suppose) and have
Brethren and Sisters to show Piety unto. Th^^ are thy Companions and Equals,
and next (...) thy Parents in blood and in the bonds of Nature; and here GOD
and thy Parents requ^ thee to bestow thy next love. Be not l^^ Cain, who was of
the devil, and slew his brother; but Love as brethren, heartily and fervently,
with utmost Endearment. Be me^^ kind, and obliging in your carriage to (...)
another: Let not anger rise and rest in y^^ hearts, nor passion rage in your
looks, in yo^ words, in your actions one against anoth^^ The devil, not GOD,
(not CHRIST the L^^ of God, not the HOLY SPIRIT, the Dove) dwells in that heart
and house, where Children quarrel, give hard and ill words, call names, wish
evil, fight and strike. Tremble at Christ's words, Mat. 5.22. He that says,
thou fool, shall be in danger of ^ell fire. Bear one with another, bear much
(if much must be) one from another: Be silent; suffer wrong, answer not again,
turn the other cheek; it is thy Brother. Yet reprove him, more gently or
severely, as there may be occasion; tell him of the fault and sin in what he
says or does; and if he will not hear thee inform thy Parents of his evil
manners; bring them the report of his evil deeds as Joseph did to Jacob
concerning his brethren; and though by him thou be hated for it, God will love
thee. But be sure that you be always true one to another and just: do not belly
nor falsely accuse; nor lie and deny when you are justly accused. Finally,
Children, Pray for one another; and why should not the Children of the same
house pray with one another, and teach one another? Show to each other a
reverence and fear of God in all your Conversation together; put one another
upon fearing God and praying to Him, and on avoiding Sin: Especially let each
other see that you love and honor the Holy Bible, God's holy Sabbaths, his
Ministers and his Worshippers. And let the Governors of families teach,
require and ^ead the Children into this pious behavior one toward another. But,

3. THERE are SERVANTS in the Family and you must be very good and pious toward
them, or thou art a Servant in the family and there is a piety to be expressed
by thee toward all that are in the house. An ingenious servant is like a child
in a family, and should be in a manner treated as one; a^^ the Son in childhood
is as a servant though h^ be heir of all. The Children of the house must not be
suffered to be imperious, insolen^^ tyranical toward the meanest servant
therein and much less toward the superior servants (...) whom it may at times
and in many cases belong to direct and over rule the Children f^^ their good,
and for the good order of the Household. Abraham's Servant was a kind ^ Son to
his Master, and a kind of Father (...) Isaac: Had he begat him he could not
ha^^ spoken nor done more for him than he did. Such a servant if an equal in
years shou^^ be regarded by children as a kind of brothe^ or if their elder and
set to take care of the^ as a kind of under Parent.

BUT then the Servants in a family the^ must show piety, first to their Master
and Mistress, secondly to the Household.

1. TO your Master and Mistress your d^ty is given in our Context, in such
words (...) show the piety and religion that is to gove^^ you in all the
Service you do. Ephesians. 6.5, 7, 8. Servants, be obedient to them that are yo^
masters according to the flesh, with fear (...) trembling, in singleness of
heart as unto Christ: (stronger Words could not be put together not with eye
service as men pleasers; but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God
from the heart; with good will doing service, as to the Lord and not to men;
(how is the Precept pressed on you by being thus doubled? And yet a motive is
added, the most enforcing that can be though it of) knowing that whatsoever good
thing any man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord, whether he be bond
or free. It Is the Commandment with promise you see to Servants, and a greater
Promise than of the life that now is.

YOU see (you young people who are Servants) that GOD your Great Master in
Heaven demands and exacts piety in you toward Him; and that from this heavenly
principle you honor your Masters; 1 Timothy 6.1. Let (...) many servants as are
under the yoke (...) their own masters worthy of all honor; that the name of
God and his doctrine be not blasphemed. Also that you fear them, and be subject
to them, though they be not so pious and good to you as they should be; 1 Pet.
2.18. Servants, be subject to your masters with all fear, not only to the good
and gentle, but also to the froward; for this is thankworthy if a man for
conscience s^ke toward God endure grief suffering wrongfully. O glorious Piety!
prescribed you in this truly Divine precept. So serve and shine in the Families
where you are.

BE diligent, mind your business, redeem your time, use your best skill and
strength study to please, and study your Masters interest every way you can;
Show all good fidelity, and adorn the doctrine of God your Savior i^ all
things, Tit. 2.10. Be true and speak the truth: fear a lie, and loath it, as
you would Gebazi's leprosy. Preserve your Masters credit and reputation as far
as in yo^ lies, and keep his trust and secrets.

BE submiss, humble, silent, not answering again: keep the good Orders of the
house and especially good hours; submit to reproo^ and correction; if for your
faults take (...) thankfully as well as patiently, and if wrongfully endure the
grief: knowing that of t^^ Lord ye shall receive the reward of the Inheritance;
for ye serve the Lord Christ, Col. 3.^ So Joseph when a Servant was faithful
a^^ a blessing, and then suffered meekly for (...) fidelity and gratitude to
Man, and for h^^ piety toward GOD, Genesis 39.8, 9.

2. THERE is a Piety toward the Housh^ to be commended to young persons that
a^^ Servants in families. And this again is, either toward your
Fellow Servants, or to the Children of the Families where you dwell.

TO your Fellow Servants be loving, ki^^, courteous, obliging, grateful; meek,
gentle, peaceable; Study to be quiet and to do your (...) business: assist one
another, hear with o^^ another: give good Words and give (...) good Example:
speak to one another of t^^ things of God, admonish one another and submit one
to another, and be clothed with humility; pray one for another and put one
another on praying to God: As God has bro't you together under one roof, and
into a kind of Relation as well as Acquaintance with each other, so dwell
together as the servants of God and heirs together of the grace of Life. O what
blessings would a Family of such Servants be one to the other!

AND then to the Children of the family Servants should express their piety, as
by carrying toward them with great respect, so with a most endearing love and
tender care. Give 'em a good example: teach and instruct 'em as you may be able
and there may be occasion: reprove what you see amiss and evil in them; win 'em
from it if you can: if there be need threaten 'em to inform their Parents, and
be as good as your word if they scorn your words: praise and encourage what is
good in 'em, and put 'em upon every thing that is good and holy, ingenuous and
commendable. O the extensive Benefit which a Family may receive from a good
Servant! think not thou art a dry shrub, that God expects and that the World
can receive nothing from thee: Know it, that you may be an unknown blessing to
the World in your inferior place: desire and endeavor to be so; and God
advance thee and enlarge thy opportunities to honor Him. And let Masters and
Mistresses cherish and encourage such disposition in their Servants; reward 'em
and do 'em honor.

AND thus I have got through the first Head of Early Piety, in the Family to
which you belong, and in the Relation wherein you stand; as Children, Brothers
and Sisters, or Servants.

I shall not be so long on the remaining Heads.

II. FROM the Family let us pass to the SCHOOL. And here Children Consider, it
is your Parents that put you to School, and it is their love and affection to
you, their care and concern for you, both for your temporal and Eternal good,
that makes 'em do it: They do it in duty to GOD, that you may be an instructed
Seed to serve Him; they do it in duty to the Public that you may be blessings
in your generation; they could not answer it to GOD or Man; nor to their own
Hearts (which love you and fear God) to leave you in your natural Ignorance and
rudeness ^ they would be cruel, unnatural and barbarous to you, as well as
Irreligious toward God not to be thoughtful for your Education and instruction;
and therefore they put you under the care of Virtuous, prudent and accomplished
Persons to form you aright in mind and in manners, under the blessing of God
upon their great pains which they daily take with you; your Minds to useful
Knowledge, for that the Soul be without knowledge is not good; and your manners
to a regular practice of Virtue and piety.

NOW Children, you ought to be very sensible of the great benefit you have by,
and be very thankful to GOD and Man for the early Means of Instruction which
you enjoy: And you must be told that your Advantage and Happiness in this
respect is peculiar among the English Provinces; for your wise and pious
Ancestors made it their first and chief care to have Religion and Learning
flourish among their Posterity; to which end as they put themselves under the
watch of learned and holy Pastors, so they provided Schools (Inferior and
Superior) for their Children; and agreeably to their pious hope and endeavor
Sobriety and Literature has been the distinguishing honor of the Children of
New England unto this day.

THIS day therefore we call upon you, our Children, and Young People, as you
would be now the Children of GOD, and hereafter Men of GOD like your Fathers
who are now in Glory, religiously and diligently to improve the Means of
Education which you are blessed with. God expects it of you, your Parents
command it, your Ministers charge you; and you are wicked before God if you are
idle and negligent at School. Wisdom is the principal thing, therefore get
Wisdom, and with all thy getting get Understanding: Exalt her and she shall
promote thee, she shall bring thee to honor if thou do embrace her: she
shall give to thine head an Ornament of Grace, a Crown of Glory shall she
deliver to thee.

BUT if you are idle at School you deceive your Parents, you are base and
ungrateful to them, you do in effect ly to 'em from day to day; You say, Sir I
go to learn, but do not^ you disobey 'em and rebel against them; nay you in
effect rob 'em and steal from 'em, defraud and cheat 'em: in all this
wickedness you daily live; and is it not the way to be cursed children?

I will only add, That you must love and esteem, honor and fear, obey and
submit to your Masters and Mistresses at School, in like manner as you would to
your Father and Mother at home. It has been sometimes made a Question, to which
one owes most? to his Father for his Being, or to his Tutor for his
Institution? But there is no question to be made of this Truth, -- that the
like Piety which a Child ought to show to the One at home, he ought to the
other at School; and with a pious Reverence next to that with which thou do
remember thy Parents, remember always thy wise and learned and faithful Tutors.
The great Apostle gratefully speaks of his being brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel; from which our Children should learn to sit with humility at the feet
of them that instruct 'em, and to mention their Name^ with honor as long as
they live. God commands your pious Veneration toward them whom He has adorned,
endowed qualified and called to teach you. And let all that are (...) honored
to be Teachers of Children and Youth, use their Authority over them, and their
Interest in them, to form them (by the Grace of GOD) unto Early Piety and
religion.

BUT then you have your School-Mates, and Piety obliges you not to hinder them
in learning or tempt them to play and idleness, but rather to put them on
minding their Book, or if they need it to help them in learning it, or if they
be diligent to be admonished by their Example, or if they can inform thee to
ask of them. And you should be kind, humble, meek, grateful one toward another
as the dear Children of God, and walk in peace and love.

III. FROM the School I lead you, our Baptized children, into the CHURCH of our
LORD JESUS CHRIST. Thither your Parents carried you as soon as you were born,
and gave you up to GOD in Baptism. Your Pastors (your Parents Pastors) then
prayed over you and blessed you in the Name of the LORD, the whole worshipping
Assembly joining with them. And being thus Early taken into the Church of
Christ, you are most strongly obliged to be pious and religious betimes, and in
the fear of God to show piety to the Ministers of Christ, and to the People of
God with whom from Sabbath to Sabbath you come to worship.

AND first, If there be any Piety in you it will influence your hearts and
appear in your behavior toward the Ministers of Christ. They are Fathers by
Office, not only to you but also to your Fathers; and your pious Parents do
themselves entreat them as such, and require you to do so, for the relation
they stand in to God and his Worship, and to esteem them highly for their Works
sake.

YOUR Ministers owe and have a special regard and respect to You, the Children
and young people of their Flocks; You are witnesses for us this day that we
have so; for you are a pleasant and beautiful part ^ them; the Lambs, of whom
Christ has sai^ unto us, If ye love Me feed them. Your faithful Pastors are
therefore tenderly concerned for your Souls and zealously affected towar^ you;
traveling in birth till Christ be formed (...) you, till you are Newborn. You
therefore owe it both to God and them, that you love and reverence their
Persons and their Office^ and if you honor and fear God, or rega^^ your own
Salvation you will do so. Yo^ must account of them as Ministers of Chr^^^ and
Stewards of the mysteries of God, and wh^^ you see 'em say to yourselves, These
are t^^ Servants of the Most High GOD which show ^ the way of Salvation. You
must rememb^^ that they have Rule over you in the Lord an^ submit yourselves to
them; for they watch ^ your Souls. You must hearken to 'em in public and in
private, in GOD's house and ^ your Fathers houses. When they speak ^ you the
Word of God believe 'em fully (...) perfectly, and lay up their words in your
hearts; desire their Prayers; form yourselves by their grave and gracious
Conversation; pray for 'em, thank God for 'em; observing that they naturally
care for your Souls, and that they have no greater Joy than to see you walking
in the truth. Do not easily believe Evil of them; abhor the act of those that
would insinuate into you vile things respecting them, to spoil them of your
reverence and you of profiting by their Ministry; rebuke and avoid them that
would teach you to mock at and revile them; remember the fate of the forty two
Children that perished ^n such an action, 2 King. 2.24. Let us see that you
reverence God's Sabbaths, and fear his Word, and love his Ordinances; and never
dare to trifle and play while your Ministers and Parents are praying to God and
GOD ^s speaking to us and you; lest thou mourn at ^he last and say, How have I
hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof? and have not obeyed the voice
of my teachers, nor inclined my ^ar to them that instructed me? I was almost in
^^l evil in the midst of the congregation and assembly.

AND finally, When God takes up your Ministers by death from your heads, and
you are ^o more to see their grave faces, nor ever again to hear their gracious
words and pleasant voice, mourn humbly before God your ^ss and cry after them,
My father, my father, ^^e chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof.

BUT then besides your Ministers, you may see in the Church of God a great many
shining Gracious Saints, Excellent Christians, some Elder some Younger, whom
you ought piously to observe, love, honor and imitate; and (...) they never so
mean on worldly accounts yo^ should admire and venerate 'em for the Gra^^ of
Christ in them. This shall be your Pie^^ before God and his People, if his
Saints (...) the Excellent Ones in your eyes; and if y^^ honor them that fear
the LORD. Especially let Children call often to remembrance the (...) feigned
Faith, the bright Devotion, the shining Meekness, the strict and holy Life, of
the pious Mothers and Grandmothers, who are ^ them as Eunice and Lois were to
Timoth^ and desire to be like them in the Church ^ Christ, and show that their
Spirit is in (...) also. Emulate their Goodness, whose Na^^^ are in the Book of
Life.

AND let Parents and Tutors instill i^ young persons this reverence of holy
Minist^ and of godly People.

IV. I come now in the last place to te^^^ Young Persons how Piety should be
operat^^^ in them toward their Superiors in the STA^^ or COMMONWEALTH: 1.
toward their KI^^ their Governor, and Magistrates their (...) Fathers. 2.
toward Persons of Eminence, Wisdom, Learning, Usefulness. 3. toward Aged
persons. 4. toward the Rich and Poor. 5. to their Equals and Companions.


And First,

1. CHILDREN and Young People should be piously affected and should behave
piously toward their Civil Fathers, their Rulers in the State. Your highest
honor and fear is due to these. Fear God and honor the King go together. And
you must render to all their dues, fear to whom fear, and honor to whom honor.

YOUR KING is the LORD's Anointed, and is to his People as the Breath of their
nostrils. You read of old that Kings were called Abi-melech, the King my
Father. Such Children) think your KING to be: such King GEORGE is. Your
GOVERNOR is sent by Him and represents his Royal Person to you. Your
Magistrates are the Fathers of the Country; are of it by Birth and Education
mostly, ^ave all their Interest in it, and are its own ^^y Choice. They are
God's Ministers to us for ^ood. Piety teaches you the greatest inward and
outward Reverence before them and toward them. Your Parents owe Submission and
Obedience to them, and much more ^ou. Job was a grave, a wise and righteous
^uler, and he tells us -- that when he went ^^t to the Gate through the City (the
Gate was the ^^ace of Judicature) the young men saw him and ^^d themselves
(...) rose and stood up. Piety teaches You^^ (...), and the Elders to show this
respect (...) presence of their Governor. You must submit your selves ^ every
Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake. Gratitude demands this of you, for from
you^ Infancy you have been protected and defended, you and your Parents also,
by the good Government which God has set over you. T^ that it is owing (under
God's favor) that you were not torn by enemies, robbers or murderers from your
Mothers breasts in the ye^^ wherein you were born, or that you now enjoy one
safe and quiet night.

CHILDREN, Pray for your Rulers and Gi^^ Thanks to GOD for them, Pray for His
m^^^ Excellent MAJESTY King GEORGE: P^^^ for your Excellent GOVERNOR, who
hear^^ly seeks your peace; Pray for all that are ^ Authority, that you may lead
a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty, for this ^ good and
acceptable in the sight of GOD your Savior 1 Timothy 2.2. Never learn to despise
Government: Presumptuous are they and self-^^^led, who fear not to speak evil
of dignities, 2 P^^^ 2.10. God has dignified and put honor ^ your Rulers: Fear
thou to do 'em the l^^ dishonor. It may be they find Grace to^ faithful to
GOD, as Moses was, and like ^^muel can affirm their Integrity, and must not be
sinful then and dangerous to mur^^^ against them? Numb. 12.8. Wherefore (...)
were ye not afraid to speak against my serv^^^ Moses? Exodus 22.^. Thou shall
not revil^ gods, nor curse the ruler of thy people. He (...) represents Him as
vile and execrable, w^^ he deserves it not, he curses him. You (...) how
miserably Dathan and Abiram perished, The earth opened it is mouth and swallowed
them up, and they went down alive shrieking into the pit. One piteous and
lamentable thing in the sin and ruin of these men, was that their Wives, their
Sons, and their little Children came out in defiance to GOD and his Servant
Moses, and stood in the door of their tents with them, and went down with them.
Oh! The Children should have fled from their rash Parents that dreadful Day and
they had lived and been blessed by GOD! Let Parents, Tutors, Ministers instill
betimes into young people the principles of Loyalty, honor and subjection to
Government.

2. THERE are in the Commonwealth Persons of Eminence for Wisdom, Learning,
Virtue and various excellent Endowments, who may not be in any place of Power:
And it is the Wisdom and will be Piety in young people to observe, love, and
honor the Gifts of GOD in them, and the Image of GOD upon them. Learn of them,
desire to be such yourselves in your Generation, and beg of GOD to make you
such.

3. YOUNG People owe a Piety unto the Aged. Let the Hoary Head, found in the
ways of Righteousness, be a Crown of Glory in your youthful eyes. It is some
faint Image of Moses his shining Hair after he had been long on the Mount.
Christ does not disdain to represent his own Eternity by the dim visage of Age
with us: Rev. 1.^. His head and his hair were white as wool, (...) white as
snow. No wonder then that He (...) made it his Law to thee, Young Person, Lev^^
19.32. Thou shall rise up before the he^^ head, and honor the face of the old
man; (...) fear thy GO^^ I am the LORD. This Law (...) our God is doubtless
given with such Solemnity, because Young People are apt to despise or neglect
the Aged under their deca^ and Infirmities. But piety and discreti^^ will teach
you to bear with and cover th^^ Infirmities, to Entreat them as Fathers, (...)
speak to 'em and of 'em with decency, to (...) modest and silent often before
them, a^^ let Days speak; to consult and advise (...) them, for with the Aged
is Experience a^ Wisdom; to believe them, for they kn^^ and listen to 'em for
they love you and (...) your good; to oblige, serve and help th^^ that their
Soul may bless you; to de^ their prayers and prize their Blessing; (...) repent
of having disobliged and offen^ them and ask their forgiveness; to (...) their
heavenly walk and godly end; (...) desire their life and mourn at their de^^^
for the world loses the benefit of their ample, Faith and Prayers. Let the Age^
in behavior as becomes Holiness before Yo^ people, to command their reverence.

4. YOUNG People should behave piously toward the Rich and the Poor. Learn
betimes not to value Men merely for their rich state, their gold ring and
goodly Apparel; which are apt to take away the eyes and ^earts of simple Youth;
No, Children! let ^ur adorning be the hidden man of the heart in ^^at which is
not corruptible; the Ornament of (...) wise and gracious Spirit, which is in
the ^^ght of God of great price. Honor that ^herever you see it, whether it be
in a poor ^an or a rich. Yet where God gives riches (...) a man, and advances
him hereby in ^^tward rank above some of his Nei'bours, (...) calls you to pay
unto him a particular ^^tward respect; which at last you give (...) the
Providence of God. But be sure ^^at you never despise the poor because he is
^^or: particularly I would direct this coun^^^ and charge to the children of
the rich: (...) you humble and respectful to the poor: (...) will please God,
and honor you among ^^e people of God. Think not, young man, ^^at thy Fathers
poor Nei'bour is thy Inferior: (...) no means. Especially behave not thy self
^^oudly against him if he be Ancient; and (...) he be pious reckon him great
and rich; (...) his prayers and hear his words. Learn (...) your Parents (we
hope they will teach you) (...) be pitiful tender and good to the Poor ^^ile you
are young: love to see your ^^ents give to them, and to be the secret carriers
of their Charity. But let (...) warn you, Children, of a very cruel (...)
barbarous piece of rudeness to the poor (...) miserable, which we sometimes
have s^ with grief in our streets: I mean yo^ insulting and abusing a poor
Creature in r^ or in drink, or crazed: it is an unchrist^ and evil thing in you
to do so. Piety (...) teach you more Humanity. Fear God (...) Child, and thank
him that you art not the Miserable, nor born of him. Say, Did (...) He that
made me in the womb make him? (...) did not one God fashion us in the womb?

5. AND lastly, Young people have the Equals, their Acquaintance and Companion
and these must show piety in their Com^sation together. Be sober, grave, ch^,
religious, and as cheerful as you will. K^^^ no evil company. Walk with the
wise and wiser and make them wiser. Foolish (...) wicked Companions destroy one
anoth^^ Serve one another Souls: walk toge^^^^ toward Heaven. Watch over and
admo^^^^ one another. Speak often to each (...) of GOD and CHRIST and Holiness,
of ^ and Death and Hell; of Heaven and Eternal glories. Pray one for another
(...) Combine and meet to pray together; as (...) of you do. Show to one
another that ^ fear God; encourage and assist one ano^^^^ in every thing that
is holy and (...) and so edify your selves together, one another in love. And
honor in one another whatsoever things are honest, pure, lovely and of good
report; if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think of these things,
and emulate them, imitate them in each other.

AND thus, Young People, I have (in the plainest method and most pressing Words
I could) laid before you that Piety toward Men which is incumbent on you as
Christian Children. Thus you must honor your Parents, your Magistrates, your
Ministers, your Tutors and Masters; yea honor all men.

IN doing this you will greatly honor and please GOD, bring glory to his Name
in your early days, and secure to your selves his favor and Blessing, which is
more than Life.

ALL this you owe to your Father in Heaven: He has required it of you: He is
^our Fathers GOD and you must thus exalt Him, in a conspicuous early Piety
before ^en, which when they behold they will give ^ory to Him.

SO live, your Parents joy, your Tutors pride, ^our Pastors crown, the delight
of Mankind; and inherit their joint Blessing. The Eyes ^^t see you shall bless
you, and in you shall ^^rael bless. GOD before whom your Fathers ^alked, the
GOD which led them into and fed them in this Wilderness; the Angel which
redeemed them and their Posterity from a^^ evil unto this day, bless you, our
CHILDREN ^ the GOD of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob whos^ Name is named on you,
bless you; as he (...) promised to them that keep this Commandment; and make
you to grow into a multitu^^ in the midst of the Earth.

Sober-Mindedness Explained as a necessary Part of Early Piety.
By Mr. Joseph Sewall. Boston-Lecture, April 13. 172^
TITUS II. 6. Young Men likewise Exhort to be Sober-minded.


THE Apostle Paul having laid the foundation of a Christian Church in the
Island of Crete, left Titus the Evangelist there, to set in order the things
that were wanting, and Ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1.5. And that Titus
might the better perform the duties of his Office, the Apostle furnishes him
with several excellent Instructions respecting his Doctrine and Life. Among
others we have this direction relating to Young Persons. Young men likewise
exhort -- Exhort. The Word signifies to call unto, to beseech, comfort,
Exhort. (...) is commonly translated Exhort, as a learned Man observes. Young
Men, Juniors, Younger Persons: The Word is translated, Younge^ Luke 22.26. To
be sober-minded. The Word in the Original signifies to be sober, temperate,
chaste, wise, discreet. It is translate^ Discreet, 5. v. Context. To be of a
right a^ sound mind, to govern their affections, appetites and passions; and
therefore it is a m^^^ suitable Exhortation for such as are in the heat of
Youth, and so inclined to give the reins to their unruly lusts, and Exorbita^^
passions. In a word, It may refer either ^ to the body, or mind, and imports
a due ^^gulation of both, according to God's Word.

DOCTRINE. IT is the Duty of Young Persons to be Sober-minded.
THE Apostle under the infallible guida^^^ of the Spirit of God, gives this in
charge ^ Titus, to Exhort --. And it is writ^ for the instruction of Gospel
Ministers (...) End of the world: Here then is the Cal^ GOD to Young Persons;
Men, and Women; Be sober-minded. The Grace of God that brings salvation has
appeared to all men; Teaching us that we should live soberly, righteously and
godly in this present world, Tit. 2.11, 12.

YOU have had the Duties of Godliness and Righteousness Explained; It remains,
that we consider the duties you stand obliged to, respecting yourselves. Indeed
the Duties we are now speaking of, come under the general head of Justice or
Righteousness, and are to be referred to the Second Table of the Law. Thus for
Example, The Seventh Commandment requires the Preservation of our own as well
as our neighbors Chastity. For the Illustration of the Doctrine, I shall
consider several things implied in being Sober-minded.

I. YOUNG Persons must take care that their minds be under the governing
influence of right Principles.

WE have observed that the word signifies to be of a right mind. Thus Mark
5.15. He that had been possessed, is said to be in his right mind. Now if we
would have a sound mind in a spiritual sense, we must seek to get our minds
enlightened with the Saving knowledge of the truths of God's Word, and make use
of the Excellent Rules there laid down, for the right government of our lives.
The Apostle Peter Exhorts believers, 1 Pet. 1.13. Gird up the loins of your
mind, be sober --. Now this Girdle is Truth. Ephesians. 6.14. -- Having your loins
girt about with Truth --. This Girdle is not only for ornament, but also for
strength to the faculties of the Soul, that they may not be loosed in an hour
of temptation. And therefore unless Young Men wear this Girdle, they will be of
dissolute lives and manner. The Understanding is the leading faculty and
therefore if that be blind, there must be disorder and confusion in the whole
man Agreeably it is said of the Gentiles, that they walk in the vanity of their
mind, having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is (...) them --, Ephesians. 4.17, 18. And thus, Romans 1.2^
Their foolish heart was darkened -- And then (...) follows, ver. 24. Wherefore
God also gave the^ up to uncleanness --. And it is very observable of Young
Persons, that their ignorance their want of right judgment, prudence and
discretion, are often the causes of great irregularities in their conduct and
behavior. The Youth who yielded to the enticement of the Adultress, is called,
A young man v^^ of understanding, Prove. 7.7. If you wou^^ then discharge your
Duty toward your selves you must obey that Word, Prove. 7.4. S^ unto wisdom,
thou art my sister; and call understanding thy kinswoman. You must ask of Go^
that Wisdom which is from above, and ^^^^sure up the Word of God in your hearts
(...) the due regulation of your Thoughts, Wo^^^ and Actions. If you would
think sober^^ the great matters of Religion, and act as wise Men, when you grow
up to Years of understanding, you must not take up your Religion merely as a
Tradition from your Fathers; but should search the Scriptures, and read other
good Books, that you may understand the ground and foundation Principles on
which it is built; That you be no more children, tossed to and fro, and carried
about with every wind of doctrine by the sleight of men, and cunning
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. You should hold
fast the form of sound words which you have heard, in faith and love which is
in Christ Jesus. The Catechism you generally learn in your Childhood, is an
excellent Body of Divinity, and well worthy the study of your riper Years. A
very profitable exercise it might be for our Young People to get some good
Exposition on the Catechism, and study it with diligence and earnest Prayer to
God, to lead them into all Truth, comparing the Doctrines therein laid down,
with the texts of Scripture brought to confirm them. To the Law and to the
Testimony! Unless our Young People be well established in the Doctrines of the
Gospel, and under the government of the sacred truths there delivered; there
will be the greatest danger of their slighting, and then betraying that cause
of God for which our Forefathers came into this Land when it was an howling
Wilderness.

II. YOUNG Persons must take heed that they be Wary, cautious and deliberate.

YOUNG Men are full of heat, and therefore prone to be too quick and sudden in
the motions; rash and heady in their resolve. They are apt to determine upon
things great Consequence before they have we weighed them. Now this
precipitancy ^ oftentimes the cause of great blunders ^ their Conduct, and in
many instances th^^ have reason to repent at leisure. And therefore if Young
Men would be sober-minded they must look about them, be willing ^ take advice
of such as are of riper years (...) greater experience; and not abound in the^
own sense. And above all you should lo^^ up to God in Prayer to guide you by
(...) counsel, and commit your ways unto (...) Crying to him, as Jer. 3.4. --
My father, (...) art the guide of my youth. With the we^ advised there is
Wisdom. Such will wa^^ circumspectly, not as fools, but as wise ^ but if you
are rash, inadvertent, and lean (...) your own understanding, you will exalt
foll^.

III. YOUNG Persons must be Humble, and ta^^ heed they do not think of
themselves more high^^ then they ought.

THIS is implied in Sober-mindedness Romans 12.3. -- I say, through the grace given
unto me, to every man that is among you, not to thin^ of himself more highly
then he ought to thin^ but to think soberly --. It is the same wor^ which is
used in our text. Young People must then be Humble. You should Earnestly seek
after such a frame of spirit as the Psalmist had, Psalm. 131.1. Lord, my heart
is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty: neither do I exercise my self in great
matters, or in things too high for me. You must humble your selves, and become
as little children, mean, and little in your own eyes; or you cannot enter into
the Kingdom of Heaven. Pride is a lust of the mind, and is a Sin which easily
besets Young Persons. Isai. 3.5. The child shall behave himself proudly against
the ancient. They are oftentimes ignorant of themselves, Novices, and so prone
to be lifted up with pride, and in danger of falling into the Condemnation of
the Devil. If Young Persons have wit and parts, beauty, riches, fire apparel
and the like how apt are they to swell with pride! There is a generation, O how
lofty are their eyes ^ and their eyelids are lifted up, Prove. 30.13. Many
declare this Sin in their looks, gestures, and carriages. Thus the Daughters of
Zion were haughty, and walked with stretched forth necks. Their Pride was also
declared in the excess of their Apparel; for which reason, God threatened to
take away the bravery of their Ornaments. Isai. 3.16, -- 18. Young People are
apt to be conceited, and to magnify themselves; to be desirous of vain glory,
and ambitious of more honor and respect than they deserve. Let them therefore
be deeply humbled for their Pride, and by the Grace of God cast down their
proud imaginations, and every thing that exalts it self against God. Obey
that Command, 1 Pet. 5.5. Ye younger, submit your selves unt^ the elder: yea,
all of you be subject one (...) another, and be clothed with Humility --. The
Grace becomes you. This Garment well (...) and suits you; for Sin has made
you nake^ to your shame. It is pleasing to God; b^ the contrary is abominable
in his sight. Pro^ 16.5. Every one that is proud in heart, is (...) abomination
to the Lord --. God resists the proud, and gives Grace to the humbl^. Humble
your selves then, that God may exalt you. Beware of Pride, lest God be provoked
to leave you to some Sin which shall be a blot and stain that shall cleave to
you and not be wiped away. O remember that word, Prove. 16.18. Pride goes
before destruction and an haughty spirit before a fall.

IV. YOUNG Persons must look to it that (...) be of a Meek and Quiet Spirit.

MEEKNESS is a Grace of the Holy Spirit whereby we regulate our Anger,
according to the rules of God's Word. Now the contrary Sin, rash and immoderate
Anger, of^^^ prevails in Young People, who have a nature Fervor of spirit in
conjunction with a vi^ous disposition to this Sin. How soon do (...) observe
wrathful passions working in (...) Children! Now this is a great Sin, and (...)
to other Sins. Persons in their passion^ many times Curse and Swear and call
W^^ed names; Sins highly provoking to God, and such as all, and particularly
our Young People, should carefully avoid, and therefore shun this temptation to
them. To be angry with our brother without a cause or in an undue measure is a
Breach of the Sixth Commandment, and it leads to more heinous Violations of it.
How often do Men smite their neighbor with the fist of wickedness, when in the
heat of passion! Yea, this Sin has produced bloody effects, and proceeded to
Murder. A dreadful example we have to our purpose in the slaughter of the
Shechemites by Simeon and Levi, of which Jacob speaks, Genesis 49.6, 7. O my soul,
come not thou in their secret; unto their assembly, mine honor, be not thou
united: for in their anger they slew a man -- Cursed be their anger for it was
fierce; and there wrath for it was cruel --. Let us all then, and particularly
our Young People, obey that Command; Col. 3.12, 13. Put on therefore --
meekness, long-suffering. Forbearing one another --. O Young Men! Be gentle,
and easy to be entreated; not wrathful and revengeful. Avoid this great Sin,
and all the occasions of it, as grievous words, which stir up anger, Prove.
15.1. It is true, we may be angry and not sin; Ephesians. 4.26. Be angry and sin not
--. But then, when we are angry without cause, or in undue measure, when we
retain it, and let the Sun go down on our wrath, when we suffer our Anger to
degenerate into malice and hatred, we break God's Law and are found
transgressors: We do that which is sinful and displeasing in His sight, as well
as hurtful and dishonorable to our selves. Mat. 5.22. He that is angry with
his brother without a cause is in danger of the judgment. Such do expose
themselves to the righteous judgment of God, and also to manifold mischiefs
from Men. Prove. 25.28. He that has no rule over his own spirit, is like a city
that is broken down and without walls. How naked and exposed are such! Let our
Young People then he deeply humbled for their rash anger and passion;
particularly, if you have at any time been filled with rage at your Parents or
Masters, for giving you needful Correction. Fly to the Blood of Jesus Christ
for Pardon, and ask of God His Spirit; for the fruit of the Spirit i^ --
Gentleness, Meekness, Gal. 5.22, 23. O take heed that you do not give up your
selves to rash Anger and Passion, which is a short madness! Watch over your
hearts, and Pray to God to keep them, and to enable you to govern your Passion.
A meek and quiet spirit is an excellent spirit indeed. 1 Pet. 3.4. -- The
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great
price. O seek this Ornament, and never forget to wear it! Such a Spirit is
pleasing to God, lovely in the eyes of Men, and of great benefit to Societies.
Their well-being does very much depend upon this, that the several Members put
off Wrath, Anger, Malice; particularly, the tranquillity and good Ord^^ of
Families, do very much depend on this, that Young Men and Women take care to
govern their Passion. Where an angry spirit prevails, there will be strife, and
then confusion and every evil work. One character in the description of the
perilous times of the last days, is that, Men shall be fierce, 2 Timothy 3.3. O
fly from this Sin then, and follow after Meekeess.

V. YOUNG Persons must be moderate in their Desires and Pursuits of sensitive
Pleasures.

Beza translateth the words, Exhort Young Men that they be Moderate: And
without question, a moderation of our desires of carnal pleasures, is one thing
intended in this Exhortation; for this is what persons in the vigor and heat
of Youth, are exceeding prone to and have been often cast down by. (...) this
Age you have the highest gust and rel^^^ for, and the most Exquisite sense of
carnal pleasures. And this is a bait which Satan does frequently, and alas! how
successfully use, to take Young People in an evil net. That may often be given
as the Character of Young Men, 2 Timothy 3.4. Lovers of pleasures more than lovers
of God. They are for Play and Pastime; now this, and then the other Diversion
consume their precious time. They are ready to say with the rich fool; Soul,
take thine ease, Eat Drink and be merry; and to promise themselves that to
morrow shall be as this day and more abundant. They put far away the evil day,
and then give a loose to their sensual inclinations. Accordingly the Royal
Preacher speaks to Young Persons, Eccles. 11.9. Rejoice, O young man in thy
youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the
ways of thy heart and in the sight of thine eyes: but know the^ that for all
these things God will bring thee into judgment. By this Ironical concession,
the Wise Man intimates that the hearts (...) Young Men are set on their
Pleasures; Bu^ then he gives a check to them by calling upon them to remember
the Day of Judgment when God will reckon with them, an^ give them sorrow and
torment according (...) they have lived in sinful Pleasures. O (...) Exhorted
therefore to moderate and mortify your love of Pleasures! which has fla^ their
Ten Thousands. Fly those youthfu^ ^usts which war against the Soul. Abstain
wholly from such pleasures as are forbidden and take care to use those delights
which a^^ in themselves lawful, as not abusing them. O do not waste your
precious time, which (...) so short and uncertain, in sports and recreations,
but use them with great moderation, and in such a manner that you may be
prepared for serious Employments, and weighty Business. These Pleasures
immoderately indulged, blind the mind, stupify the conscience^ debauch the
affections, and will make yo^ carnal, sensual and brutish. They cho^^^ the
good seed of the Word; and though they (...) but for a season, yet if you live in
the^ they will drown your Souls in eternal Perdition, and bring you to that
place where is weeping and gnashing of teeth forever. Look to God then for His
Grace, and by the spirit mortify these deeds of the flesh. Surely it is better
to cut off a right hand, or pluck out a right eye, than to be cast into that
Fire which cannot be quenched. The time would fail me to mention all the
delights and pleasures whereby Young Persons are ensnared and ruined. I shall
mention some of them under following Heads.

VI. YOUNG Persons must be Temperate.

WE are commanded to add to knowledge temperance, 2 Pet. 1.6. I use the word
here in a restrained sense, for a due regulation of the Appetite respecting
meat and drink. Now this is a considerable branch of Sobriety, and a Duty
incumbent on all, particularly on Young Men. Be you persuaded then, to hearken
to the Counsel given you. Prove. 23.19 -- 21. Hear thou, my son, and be wise,
and guide thine heart in the way. Be not amongst wine-bibbers; amongst riotous
caters of flesh. For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty. There
was a Law of old which threatened death to such wicked Young Men, as persisted
in these Sins, notwithstanding the admonitions of these Parents. Deuteronomy. 21.18 --
21. If a man have a stubborn and rebellious son, which will not obey the voice
of his father --. Then shall his father and mother lay hold on him, bring him
out to the elders of his City --. And they shall say unto the elders of his
City, this our son is stubborn -- he is a glutton, and a drunkard. And all the
men of his City shall stone him with stones that he die --. You see here that
the incorrigible Youth who would not be reclaimed from such Sins, wa^ to be put
to death. And know it these sin^ of Gluttony and Dunkenness are not less
provoking to God under the Gospel Dispensatio^ than they were of old under the
Legal. No^ such works of darkness are more heinous i^ the sight of God, when
committed under the Light of the glorious Gospel. Agreeably, w^ have those
words, Romans 13.13. Let us wa^^ honestly as in the day; not in rioting and
drunkenness --. Take heed then lest at any tim^ your hearts be overcharged with
surfeiting and drunkenness. Manifold are the mischievous consequences, and
bitter fruits of this Si^ -- Wine, and new wine take away the heart, Hos. 4.11.
This Sin strangely besots and infatuate^ Men, and makes them vile. Such
excesses clou^ and enfeeble the mind, and take off the heart from all that is
good. They who drink to excess will forget the Law, and be in the utmost
hazza^^ of falling into many foolish and hurtful lusts Our Excellent Herbert
well expresses this, He that is drunken, may his Mother kill,
Big with his Sister; he has lost the reins,
Is out-lawed by himself: All kind of ill,
Did with his liquor slide into his veins.

Wine is a mocker, strong drink is raging, Prove. 20.1. If you inflame
yourselves with it, you may be left to take God's dreadful Name in vain, and to
scoff at all that is serious. Who has woe? who has sorrow? who has
contentions? who has redness of eyes? they that tarry long at the wine, that
go to seek mixed wine. Again; this Sin marreth the beauty and sprightliness of
Youth; it blasteth it, and renders it a fading flower. But what is
inconceivably more hurtful, it wounds the precious Soul, and provokes God to
withdraw even the common restraints of His Grace. This Sin quenches the
motions of God's Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 5.18. Be not drunk with wine, wherein is
excess; but be filled with the spirit. And if this be persisted in, it will
destroy Body and Soul in Hell. Drunkards are numbered among them that shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6.10. Such must be washed, and sanctified,
and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God, or
be cast out of God's Presence for ever. Let us all then, and particularly,
Young People, be Exhorted to fly these Sins. When you eat and drink, let it be
for strength, and not for Drunkenness. Do not frequent Taverns, and indulge
your selves in Night-Revels. It is a shame and scandal for Young Men, or any
others, to be at Public Houses enflaming themselves with strong drink, when
they should be in their Closets, praying to that God who sees in secret, or
attending Family Duties, or at rest in their Beds. Take heed then, Have no
fellowship with such unfruitful works of darkness; but rather reprove them.
This Sin may seem pleasant now; but know it, At the last it biteth like a
serpent, and stingeth like an adder. Thy eyes shall behold strange women, and
thine heart shall utter perverse things. Yea thou shall be as he that lies
down in the midst of the sea, or as he that lies on the top of (...) mast,
Prove. 23.32, -- 34.

VII. YOUNG People must be Chaste.

THIS is an eminent branch of Sobriety. And it is a great Duty commanded in
God's Law. The Seventh Commandment is, Thou shall not commit Adultery, Exodus
20.14. It requires Chastity in body, and mind, in tho^^ words, and actions;
and forbids all filthine^^ and uncleanness. We are now especially to consider
it as it respects Young People, and suc^ as are in a single state. It must
(...) said to Young People, as well as others, (...) in 1 These. 4.3, 4. This is
the will of Go^ even your sanctification: that every one of yo^ should know how
to possess his vessel in sanctification and honor. Take heed to your selves ^
avoid all impurity, and all means a^^ provocations thereunto. You must (...)
the Grace of God keep your selves from (...) Uncleanness in heart speech and
behaviou^. If you would be Sober-minded, you must (...) the inward lustings of
the heart subdued and mortifyed. That these are a breach of the Seventh
Commandment we are told, Mat. 5.28. And thus our Savior also assures us, that
out of the heart proceed evil tho'ts, murders; adulteries, fornications; --
These are the things which defile a man, Mat. 15.19, 20. And therefore there
must be great care to abstain from lustful thoughts, and impure imaginations.
We must take heed we do not entertain, and defile our minds with filthy
speculations, and burn with unclean desires. But on the contrary, we must
mortify evil concupiscence, lest we be led aside of our own lust and enticed.
You must also take care that you do not yield any of the parts of your Bodies
as instruments to uncleanness. The Countenance and outward Gestures are the
index of the Mind, and therefore you must take care that these be grave and
modest, that you be not light and wanton in your looks and gestures. We read of
a wicked person that winketh with his eyes, speaks with his feet, and
teaches with his fingers, Prove. 6.13. The eye is a window at which much Sin is
let into the Soul, and therefore if you would preserve your Chastity, you must
make a Covenant with your eyes, as Job did, Job 31.1. and take heed you be not
as they who have eyes full of Adultery. Again, You must look to God to keep the
door of your lips, and refrain from that evil Communication which corrupts good
manners. Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth.
Col. 4.6. Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt. Let your
tongues be employed in singing the Praises of God, and not in singing filthy
Songs. O do not turn your Glory into shame, by employing the powers of Speech
to such vile purposes! And the^ take heed you do not listen to the corrupt
communications of others. Again, Take heed and beware of all wanton dalliances
and impu^^ touches. To be sure then you must take heed and beware of all gross
Acts of filthiness whether alone, or with others. Be exhorte^ to fly that
heinous Sin of Onan; for which the Lord slew him, Genesis 38.9, 10. Mr. Po^^ has
these words upon the place; Tw^ things are here noted (says he) The Sin i^
self, which is here particularly described (...) the Holy Ghost, that Men might
be instructed concerning the nature, and the great evil of this Sin of
self-pollution; which is such, that it brought upon the Act^ of it, the
extraordinary Vengeance of God and which is condemned not only by Scripture,
but even by the light of Nature, and the judgment of Heathen, who have
expressly censured it as a great Sin and as ^ kind of Murder. Whereby we may
sufficiently understand how wicked and abominable a practice this is amongst
Christians and in the light of the Gospel, whi^^ lays greater and stricter
obligations (...) us to purity; and severely forbids all filthiness of flesh
and Spirit. And Young Persons must keep themselves pure, and not allow
themselves in any Acts of filthiness with others. They must take heed to
themselves that they do not Entice others to this great Sin: And if they are
Enticed, must answer as Joseph replied to the impure solicitations of his
Mistress; Genesis 39.9. How can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God.
You must avoid the Company of such, as you would persons that have some deadly
infectious Distemper; and not consent to be with them, or to give them an
opportunity to repeat their solicitations. Prove. 5.3, -- 12. This Sin
committed between Single Persons, is a great breach of God's Law, and not to be
accounted a light matter. Yea for Persons that contract an intimate
acquaintance with a purpose of Marriage, to come together before it be
consummated; is not to be accounted a small Sin: No! It is a dishonor to God,
and scandal to Religion, and as such to be carefully avoided by all, and
particularly by our Young People. A more heinous Transgression of the Seventh
Commandment it is for Persons to commit this Sin where one or both are in a
Married state: An horrid Violation this is of the Marriage Covenant, which God
calls His Covenant, and accordingly was of old punished with Death. Lev. 20.10.
And the man that commits Adultery with another man's wife, even he that
commits Adultery with his neighbors wife, the adulterer and the adultress
shall surely be put (...) death. A great aggravation of this Sin it (...) for
Persons near a kin by Consanguinity (...) Affinity, to commit this Sin
together. Of thi^ great Sin of Incest we read, Lev. 18.6, -- 18 Nor can
Marriage make this lawful; for al^ Marriages contrary to the Law of God, a^^
null and void. God does not join such Persons together. Again, It is an high
aggravation of this Sin when Violence is offered i^ the Commission of it. As
Amnon forced (...) Sister Tamar, 2 Samuel 13, 14. An hor^^ Crime! There are other
Violations of (...) Seventh Commandment, which it might we^^ fill one with
horror, to think that any shou^^ be guilty of. But I pass them over in silen^^.
O that such Abominations may never be committed in our Land! Let us all, and
particularly our Young People be Exhorted to (...) this great Sin of
Uncleanness in all the Degrees, Kinds and Branches of it. This is ^ youthful
lust; a Sin which such as are in (...) heat and strength of Youth are
peculiarly d^pos'd to, and in danger of. Prove. 7.6, 7, 8, 9, ^ -- 21, 22, 23,
24, -- 26. For at the win^^^ of my house I looked through my casement, (...)
beheld among the simple ones, I discerned an^ the youths, a young man void of
understanding passing through the street near her corner, an^ went the way to
her house, In the twilight in (...) evening, in the black and dark night: And
be^^^ there met him a woman with the attire of (...) harlot, and subtle of
heart. With her much (...) speech she causes him to yield, with the flattering
of her lips she forced him. He goes after ^er straightway as an ox goes to
the slaughter, (...) as a fool to the correction of the stocks: Till ^ dart
strike through his liver, as a bird hastes (...) the snare, and knows not that
it is for ^is life. Hearken unto me now therefore, O ye ^hildren, and attend to
the words of my mouth. Let ^ot thine heart decline to her ways, go not astray
(...) her paths. For she has cast down many wounded: yea many strong men have
been slain by her.

AND that you may be Excited to fly this ^in, Consider the heinous Nature, and
dreadful ^onsequences of it: It imprints an especial mark of dishonor and
infamy on the Body, ^ Cor. 6.18. -- He that commits fornication, ^nneth
against his own body. It consumes the ^ody, Prove. 5.11. wastes the Estate,
ver. ^. It corrupts and infatuateth the mind. ^os. 4.11. Whoredom and wine take
away the ^^art. It is a wound to our good Name, Prove. ^ 33. A wound and
dishonor shall he get, and (...) reproach shall not be wiped away: It has
^oth a natural and moral tendency to shorten ^fe. Joh 20.11. His bones are full
of the sin of (...) youth, which shall lie down with him in the dust. ^ob
36.14. They die in youth, and their life is among ^^e unclean. In a word, It
destroys the precious Soul, and Exposes to dreadful Judgments in this World,
and that which is to me. Heb. 13.4. Whoremongers and adulter^s God will judge.
Such may hide their Sins ^^om Men; but they cannot escape the Righteous
Judgment of GOD, nor the Vengea^^ of Eternal Fire, unless they Repent, and
(...) to Christ^^^. This Sin persisted in, will shut (...) out of Heaven, and
provoke God to cast (...) down where the Worm never dies, -- 1 Co^ 6.9 -- Be
not deceived: neither fornicators -- (...) adulterers, nor effeminate, nor
abusers of themselves with mankind. ver. 10. -- shall i^ the kingdom of God.
The wise M^^ speaks of such who are given up to this (...) as abhorred of the
Lord, Prove. 22.14. (...) mouth of strange women is a deep pit: he (...) is
abhorred of the Lord, shall fall therein. (...) we have then been Guilty of
this Sin, in (...) degree or kind, we should be deeply humbled in the sight of
God, and go to the Fountain which is set open for sin and uncleanness to the
Blood of Christ which cleanses from (...) sin. We should ask the Holy Spirit
to (...) us from our Filthiness. And Cry to God (...) Create a clean heart
within us. And that (...) may be preserved from this Sin, we should (...) the
Company of unchaste and wanton Person. Observe a Decorum in our Garb and Dress ^
well as look and gesture; 1 Timothy 2.9. (...) like manner, that women adorn
themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobri^^^. Again, We must
avoid the Sin of idlen^^^ which leads to this, and many other Si^. One of the
Sins of Sodom was abundance (...) Idleness. -- We must be diligent in some
^^ful Calling --. And when it is need^^ use that remedy which God has provid^^
1 Cor. 7.2. Nevertheless, to avoid fornication, (...) every man have his own
wife, and let every woman have her own husband. And then take care that we
preserve Conjugal Fidelity, and Purity.

VIII. YOUNG Persons must be Frugal and Thrifty.

YOU must Avoid Prodigality and Profuseness, and take heed you be not as the
Prodigal Son, who wasted his substance with riotous ^^ving, Luke 15.13. If your
Parents have left you an Estate; Or you have other ways ^otten it; you must
consider this is a Talent which God has lent you, and which he requires you
to employ in His Service, and for His Glory. Take heed therefore that you do
^ot waste it to gratify your Ambition, or sensuality. Do not affect to make a
greater ^ow than your Estate will bear. Do not consume what God has given you
upon your lusts. Particularly, Beware of the Sin of Gaming which is a breach of
the Eighth Commandment. The money which is lost by Gaming is vilely cast away,
and that which is gotten by it, is dishonestly gotten, and ^ust be restored, or
it may be a Moth to your whole Estate. In a word, see to it that you ^o not
waste your Estates, or what may be given you by your Parents, in unlawful
Recreations and Pleasures, or by the immoderate use of such as are in
themselves innocent and lawful.

I may say; That Young Persons must take ^eed and beware of carnal Confidence
and Presumption. Do not presume on God's Mercy, while you persist in Sin: Be
not so presumptuous as to Promise yourselves a more convenient season for
working out your Salvation, when God says; To Day, if ye will hear a Voice,
harden not your hearts. Do not imagine that God will always strive with you, or
tha^ it is in your power to Repent. Such va^^ and impious Imaginations are
Repugnant to Sober-mindedness, and prove pernicious t^ many Young People, who
by Presumption hope, and so perish.

APPLICATION.
USE, I. IS this the Duty of Young Men: Then such as are of riper years should
be Sober minded.

MIDDLE-Aged and Elder Persons should take care that their moderation and due
reg^lation of their Appetites be Conspicuous It is your Duty to be Examples of
Prudence^ Meekness, Temperance, etc. Thus you should teach Young Persons
Sobriety by your well ordered Conversation.

USE. II. LET us look back upon the Sin^ and Follies of our Youth, and be
deeply Humble^.

THE best of us have abundant reason to lament the sinful follies and
miscarriages of o^^ Youth; for Childhood and youth are vanity Eccl. 11.10. Let
us reflect upon them wit^ deep abasement, mourn after a godly sort upon the
account of them, and fly to the Gra^^ and Mercy of GOD in JESUS CHRIST for
Pa^don and Cleansing. Who can understand h^^ Errors? Lord cleanse us from
secret faults. Remember not the sins of our Youth, nor our transgressions,
according to thy mercy, remember thou us, for thy goodness sake, O Lord. If the
Lord should mark iniquities, the iniquities of our Youth, we shall not be able
to stand. Let us then deprecate His entering into Judgment with us, and have our
entire dependence on Jesus Christ for Righteousness. Unless your Sins are
covered they are all remembered by God against you, as if committed but
Yesterday. We had need therefore be Earnest with God to blot out our
Transgressions according to the multitude of His tender Mercies. And if we are
Converted ourselves we should strengthen our Younger Brethren and Children. The
Remembrance of the Temptations and Sins of our Youth should excite our Tender
Compassion toward our Young People, and quicken us to do our utmost to Preserve
them, or Recover them, if fallen into Sin.

USE, III. LET our Young People be Exhorted to be Sober-minded.

I Beseech you, suffer the Word of Exhortation which is now given you in the
Name of the Lord. Do your Duty toward yourselves in the Exercise of a regular
Self-love; Govern your Appetites and Passions according to the Rules of God's
Word. And for this End, O Young Man! Know thyself: Learn from God's Word how
you were made in your First-Parents, and how vile and wretched you are by the
Fall. Reverence thyself: Consider the excellent powers and faculties with which
God has endowed you. GOD your maker teaches you more than the beasts of the
earth, and makes you wiser than the fowls of heaven, Job 35.11. Be ye not then
as the horse, or as the mule which have no understanding. You have a precious
immortal Soul within you, capable of Knowing, Glorifying and Enjoying God
forever. O do not make it a slave to brutish lusts and vile affections; Do not
Mar and Destroy God's Workmanship. The Loss is you^ own if you do, and who can
declare how great a Loss this is to Lose your Soul forever? B^ sensible that
you have not so much as the seed^ and principles of Grace in you by nature, an^
Cry to God to renew you in the Spirit of your minds, that being born of the
Spirit, you may be enabled to discharge these duties from a gracious Principle,
and with a sincere aim at God's Glory. Put on Christ, and make no provision for
the flesh to fulfill it in the lusts thereof. Learn (...) Him who was meek and
lowly; harmless and undefiled. Walk in the Spirit, and you shall not fulfill
the lusts of the flesh.

AND now, Let us Cry to God to Pour out His Spirit upon us, and upon our
Children, that by the Grace of God which has appeared to us we may be taught
To live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world.

The Great and Solemn OBLIGATIONS to Early Piety.
By Mr. Prince. Boston- Lecture April 27. 1721.
PROVERBS XXIII. 26. My Son give me thine Heart.


THIS Book is called the Proverbs; because it is a Divine Collection of the
Proverbs, i. e. the wise and pithy Sentences of Solomon the Son of David King
of Israel. The great design in general is to bring the Sons of Men to know
wisdom and instruction, to perceive the words of understanding, and also to
receive the instruction of wisdom justice and judgment and equity. In
particular, To give subtilty to the simple, and to the young man knowledge and
discretion. Thus He tell^ us Himself in the 4 first verses.

AS King Solomon excelled all the Earth i^ Wisdom; so He was Renowned also for
hi^ excellent Sayings. It is said He spoke thre^ Thousand Proverbs -- And there
came of a^ people to hear his wisdom, from all the Kings (...) the Earth that
had heard of his wisdom, 1 King. 4.32, -- 34.

IN these excellent Proverbs He dispens'^ His Wisdom. Like Moses, His Doctrine
dropped as the Rain on all about Him: His Speed distilled as the Dew; as the
small Rain upon the tender Herb, and as the Showers upon the Grass, Deuteronomy. 32.2.
In this respect tha^ Prophecy of his Father David was accomplished in Him,
Psalm. 72.6. He shall com^ down like Rain on the mown Grass, and as the showers
that water the Earth. And on this account in seems to be that when the Queen of
Sheba had seen His Wisdom, and the sitting of His Servants, and the attendance
(...) His Ministers; she cried out to the King in admiration, 2 Chronicles. 9.3, --
7. It was a tru^ report which I had heard in mine own Land of thy sayings and
of thy wisdom: Howbeit I believed not their words, until I came, and (...) eyes
had seen it; and behold, the one half of the greatness of thy wisdom was not
told me For thou exceedest the fame that I heard: Happy are thy Men, and happy
are these thy Servants, which stand continually before thee and hear thy wisdom.

HAPPY were they that continually stood before Him and heard these wise and
excellent Proverbs proceed from His Mouth! Happy are we that have them copied
out and set before us; that we may continually read and study them. But most
happy those that carefully Observe and Follow them. By receiving these
instructions of Wisdom; we shall become Wise like Him that gave them: They will
give even subtilty to those that are simple, and to the Young Man Knowledge and
Discretion.

AND indeed in the midst of all His Speeches, we may plainly observe, that this
most Wise and Foreseeing King had a singular view to the Rising Generation. He
clearly saw of what Importance it was to Instruct the Youth in the Principles
of Wisdom, and that these were the likeliest and the fittest to learn them.

THE Grown up in Years had spent a deal of Time: their season of Service would
soon be over, and they were so thoroughly fixed and riveted in their several
Ways and Principles, that they were not so like to learn or receive
Instruction. The Good had received it and were wise already; and 10 had less
the need to be Taught than others: He need not take abundance of pains with
these, for they would hear and increase in l^^^ing, and of their own accord
aspire (...) higher degrees of Wisdom and Knowledge. The Bad had received such
ill and deep Impressions from their long continuance in their sinful courses,
that there were little hopes of their harkening to Him. They are estranged from
the womb, they have gone astray ever since they were born --, and they are like
the deaf adder, that stops her ears, which will not hearken to the voice of
charmers, cha^^ they never so wisely, Psalm. 58.3, -- 5.

THE Tender Youth were the most fit and apt to Learn, and the easiest and
likeliest (...) receive Instruction: They were the springing Supports of the
Rising Age: and if these could be imbued with Wisdom; How Wise and Happy would
be the next Generation? King Solomon sees it; and therefore He continually
fixes His Eye upon them: H^ shows a singular regard and view to them in His
Wise Speeches and Immortal Writings.

IT seems indeed as if the Books of the Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, were written
chiefly for the Instruction of Youth. For the Book of the Proverbs begins thus
-- My So^ hear the instruction of thy Father, etc. Prove. 1.8. Throughout the
whole Book He is continually recurring to this peculiar expression. My Son, My
Son; and a Learned Man observes that He repeats this Title Twenty Three times,
to show, that the main E^^^ his Writing was the Instruction of (...) Ones. And
the Book of the Ecclesiastes ends with such words as these -- And further, By
these my Son be admonished: of making many Books there is no end, and much
study is a weariness of the flesh: Let us hear the conclusion of the whole
matter; Fear God and keep His Commandments, For this is the whole Duty of Man,
etc.

THIS Great and Renowned King condescends to be a Preacher to Children. He
speaks to every Child about Him, when He says, My Son: and He calls upon them
by this endearing Term in our Text; to express His tender Affection, and engage
them to Him.

BUT we must here remember, that Solomon was a Divinely Inspired Preacher: and
He does not speak so much in His own Name, as in the Name of God that employed
and moved Him. It is in the Name of God, and to God Himself that He requests
the Youth to give his Heart. The Wise Man does not speak these Words in His own
behalf; but in the behalf of God, whose Messenger he was. And indeed, if we
judge aright (...) they are the Words of God Himself by this Inspired Preacher.
Like as the Apostle* tell^ us, that He and other Ministers were Ambassadors
employed by Christ and that by them even God and Christ entreated Men to be
Reconciled to God, 2 Cor. 5.20. It is God our Heavenly Father who does here
most earnestly desire this Gift from Youth and Children to be Presented to Him;
and to whom it is most especially and principally due.

IN the Name of God I require you therefore now to yield Obedience to this
Great and Important Doctrine.

DOCTRINE. THAT Youth and Children must give up their Hearts to God in their
Early Days.
AS this Great and Royal Preacher did: so I now apply my self to the Youth and
Children round about me: I though most unworthy, speak by the same Authority: I
am the Minister of God unto you: I am come with the same design: I deliver you
the same Message: It is the Word and Voice of God Himself: And in His Name I
plainly tell you, yea and God tells you by me, that you must now give up your
Hearts to God in your Youthful Age.

BUT for Illustration I shall endeavor these Two Things, 1. TO show you what
it is to Give up your Hearts to God; And 2. WHAT are those Great and Solemn
Obligations you are under to it.


THE First of these I shall be very Brief upon: Because the Nature of Early
Piety, both as it relates to God, our Neighbor and Our-selves has already been
Explained and set before you. The Latter I shall more Largely Treat of; it
being my peculiar Province, to set before the Children of our People, the Great
and Solemn Obligations they are under to be Religious in their Youthful Age.

First. WHAT is it to give up your Hearts to God.

NOW to give up your Hearts to God, is to give up yourselves to God entirely
and for ever through Christ, and with all your Hearts.

1. IT is to give up your selves Entirely to God.

YOU must give up your selves and all you have entirely to Him in your Early
Days. You must give up your Bodies and all its Parts and Members, and
especially the Tongue to God. You must give up all your Senses to Him: your
Strength and Vigor, and your Health and Beauty. You must likewise give up your
Spirit, Temper, and all your various Appetites and Passions to Him. And to be
sure you must also give up your most Precious Souls, with all their Faculties,
Abilities and Powers to God: Your Imagination, Understanding, Reason, Judgment,
Conscience Affections, Will and Memory; And in Fine, you must give up all your
Knowledge, Wit and Ingenuity; and all the Treasures and Endowments of your
Minds: You must entirely give them all to God without the least Reserve.

AND For what Ends and Purposes must you give them to Him?

I answer, you must give them all to God, to be Sanctified, Possessed and
Governed by Him. You must give them up to be His own Inheritance and Propriety.
You must give them up, to live and move and act for God and to be improved
entirely for His Intere^^ and Service. You must give up your selve^ to seek and
know Him, and to adore and serve Him. You must entirely give up you^ selves to
God, to be Disposed of as He see^ Good, to study to know His Mind and Will and
to do and suffer what ever He require of you. You must give up your selves, to
de^^ all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and
godly in this present world Tit. 2.12. You must give up your selves; that i^
Eating, Drinking, or whatever else you do, you may do it to the Glory of God, I
Cor. 10. 31. And Finally, you must give up your selves to God; To have
Communion with Him and Enjoy Him: To be filled with all Hi^ fullness, and to be
made completely like Him.

AND in giving up your selves to God you must also give up all you have. You
must give up your very Lives and all your Power of Speaking, Though It and Action.
You must devote your Studies, Learning, Interest, Honor and Repute to God;
your Recreations Pleasures, Affairs and Time (...) and to by sure whatever you
esteem and value, (...) must give up to God. In short, you must give Him all
you are possessed of, can Suffer, Do, Enjoy or Have: You must keep nothing from
Him: you must entirely Resign and Devote them to Him: and you must give them
up, to be subordinated and improved for His own Glory, and to be Disposed of
according to His Sovereign Pleasure.

2. YOU must therefore give up your selves to God for ever.

GOD will have you for His own forever; or not at all. He would have you be in
an Eternal Subjection to Him. He would have you be the Eternal active
Instruments of His Glory and Honor. God would have you yield Eternal Adoration
to Him. He would have you to be the Eternal Objects of His Delight and Love:
and He would have you to be forever Happy in the Service and Enjoyment of Him.

YOU must therefore give up your selves and all you have to God, for ever. You
must make such an absolute Devotion of yourselves to God; as never to have the
least pretense or right, to free your selves again. You must give up yourselves
entirely to God in an Everlasting Covenant, never to be broken. And this O
Children you must do in your Early Days.

3. YOU must give up your selves to God in Christ.

CHILDREN! out of Christ God wont accept you. God has indeed an unalienable
Right and Propriety in you: you must needs be His own forever: and He will
Eternally use you for His Glory. But out of Christ He Will surely make you the
miserable Instruments of the dreadful Glory of His Power and Justice; and not
the happy Instruments of the Glory of His Grace and Mercy. You are both by Life
and Nature most abominable and guilty Sinners; and out of Christ God utterly
abhors you and is angry with you; He cannot accept, He cannot Forgive you, He
cannot be Reconciled to you. But in Christ His Son, our Mediator, and in Christ
alone, God is Reconcilable to such sinful Children, and He is ready to Forgive
you and Receive you. 2 Cor. 5.18, 19.

YOU must therefore give your selves to God in Christ; or He Will cast you off.
You must in the first place go to Christ the Son of God and your Mediator. You
must present and give your selves to Christ; that He may give you unto God. You
must plead with Christ to Accept and take you for His own: and you must not
doubt but He Will receive you; since He was so much displeased with those that
hindered Children from coming to Him, and said let them come, for of such is
the Kingdom of God, Mar. 10.13, -- 16.

CHILDREN, you must not therefore Doubt but Christ will Accept and Bless you
upon your coming and giving up yourselves unto Him. And then in Christ, you may
with an holy Confidence give up your selves to God. Christ will become your
Mediator; and in Blessing you, He Will take away the guilt and curse of Sin, He Will
purge you from it, and He Will make you through His Blood a most acceptable offering
unto God. Christ will readily introduce you to Him: He Will be pleased to make
such a Present unto God, and God Himself will be pleased to Receive it.

4. AND Lastly, YOU must thus give your selves to God with all your Hearts.

THIS Giving up yourselves to God must not be a mere formal action; but it must
be an hearty Offering and Devoting of yourselves to God. It must be Done in the
Heart, and from thence it must Proceed; or God will not Regard you. Your Hearts
must be given up to God: Or you are not entire or sincere in your Devotion to
Him. And if you give up yourselves to God, without your Hearts approving and
concurring; your Offering is but the Sacrifice of Hypocrites, which is an
abomination to Him.

NO! your Hearts are the Principal and most Peculiar Things which God Regards;
and they indeed include and contain all others. The Preacher therefore does not
say the Hand or Head, but Heart; Because by the Possession of the Heart God has
all the members of the Soul and Body devoted to Him; and without the Heart God
values not the Rest. To give to God an Outward show of Piety, is but a mocking
of Him, unless your Hearts go with it. Give your Hearts, and you give Him all:
Give Him not your Hearts, and you really give Him nothing, whatever else you
seem to give Him.

YOU must be sincere and hearty therefore in your giving up yourselves; or you
Do not Truly give yourselves to God. You only make an Outward show: But God
Beholds your secret Enmity and Aversion to Him. You must not only give up
yourselves entirely and forever to Him; But you must also do it without
Reluctance. You must do it freely, and with full consent of Soul. In Fine, you
must set your Heart and highest Love on God: And from your highest Esteem of
God and your earnest Desire to Enjoy and Serve Him you must Give your selves
unto Him.

AND thus have I briefly shown you what it is to give up your Hearts to God:
And this you must take care to do in your Youthful Age. This is your first and
great and most incumbent Duty. You must not allow yourselves to Live an Hour,
no not a Moment till you have given yourselves to God. As soon as you were
capable of Knowing Him you should have given yourselves to Him And if you have
not done it yet; you must do it now, and without the least Delay.

AND in order to convince you of this most incumbent Duty, we now Proceed more
largely to Consider.

Secondly. WHAT are those Great and Solemn OBLIGATIONS you are under thus to
give your selves to God in your Early Days.

IT is very likely many of you Think, that this is a matter of very great
Indifference. Multitudes among you seem to think so, by your lewd ungodly
Lives, and by your light and vain Behavior in the House of God. You seem to
think as if you were not under any Obligations to be Religious in your Youthful
Age. Or at least you think, your Obligations are but trifling things, and of
little Force and Moment. Many of you seem to be entirely careless whether you
give your Hearts to God or no. You exceedingly neglect Him, and you rather set
your selves against Him: You give up your Hearts to Earthly Things and
Pleasures, and to Youthful Lusts and Vanities, and not to God. Alas, you little
think what Great and Solemn Obligations are lying on you to Devote your Hearts
to God in your Early Days!

YOUR Obligations are the most Great and Solemn that can be Though It of: And if
you be'nt Obliged to give your selves to God, you are obliged to nothing. And
your Obligations are so exceeding numerous, that I cannot mention nor conceive
them all: nor can I now express a thousandth part of those I might conceive:
For I can Think of Nothing, but it is an Obligation on you to be Religious.

EVERY Attribute of God is an Obligation on you to give your selves unto Him.
Every Work of God you see, presents an Obligation to you. Every Mercy you
receive, and every Affliction which you meet with; yea every Good and every
Evil which you hear of in the World. Every Thing contained in the Word of God;
and every Thing you Have, or are able to Do for God is an Obligation on you to
give your selves unto Him.

BUT I must confine my self to a Few.

1. THERE is a GOD, a most Glorious and Sovereign God; and therefore you are
obliged to give your Hearts unto Him in your Early Days.

THIS Argument and Obligation rises from the Being, Nature and Perfections of
God. And I begin with this, because it is the First Foundation of all Religion.
Now I need not g^ about to prove that there is a God. I believe you are
sensible, that this Glorious Sun, and Moon and Stars, and even You yourselves
could not be made without Him. I shall only now con^ide^ briefly who and what
He is; and you will clearly see yourselves obliged to give your Hearts unto Him
in your Early Days.

1. HE is most Glorious and Perfect in Himself: and therefore you are Obliged
to give your Hearts unto Him in your Early Days.

YOU have learnt already that there is b^^ One only True and Living God: and
that He is a Spirit of Himself, and for Himself Of Himself; i. e. He is the
first Cause, He is Self-existent, or He Existeth Live and Acts of Himself
alone, and from no other: and For Himself; i. e. He is the highest End, He
Lives and Acts Supreamly for Himself alone, and in subordination to Himself,
for other Things.

GOD is absolutely Perfect: a most Pure Spirit; without Body, Parts or
Passions, and Free from all Composition. And you have also Learnt; that He is
Infinite, Eternal and Unchangeable in His Being, Wisdom, Power, Holiness,
Justice, Goodness and Truth. God is without Beginning, and He can never have an
End. He is Immense and Omnipresent. He is always present in every Place; and He
always views every Thing Present, Future, Past and Possible. God is Omniscient
also, i. e. He always sees and knows whatever has been, is, and will come to
Pass. Yea, God entirely sees whatever might have been, and whatever can be. He
is an All-wise and All-mighty Being. He is immutably the same from Everlasting
to Everlasting. He is Independent, Supreme and Sovereign, Self-sufficient,
All-sufficient, and in Himself alone is Infinitely happy.

SUCH a Glorious Being is surely most worthy of our highest Love and
Admiration. If any Thing should be Loved or Admired by you for its Excellency
or Perfections; surely God must be so. Every Divine Perfection is most worthy
of your highest Love, Delight and Wonder; and every Divine Perfection is a
great and indispensible Obligation on you to give your hearts to God. I might
easily show how they are, if I had Time to run into particulars. But in
general, How highly should you reverence and fear Him? How profoundly should
you adore and worship Him? How earnest should you be to know Him and to be
acquainted with Him? How desirous should you be of the Favor, Love and
Friendship of so Great a Being? How ready should you be to serve Him? and how
heartily should you resign your selves unto Him?

OH Vain Youth and Children, How inexcusable is it that you should refuse your
Hearts to this most Glorious and Perfect Being, and give them up to perishing
and em^^^ Things and Pleasures!

2. GOD is the Infinite and Sovereign Fountain of Being, Life and Goodness: and
therefore you are obliged to give your Hearts unto Him in your Early Days.

GOD alone is infinite in all Perfections: He has an infinite source of
Goodness in Him. He is the only Living and Self-Existent Being: and therefore
He is the Infinite and Sovereign Fountain of Being, Life and Goodness unto
others. And as God is Infinite in Life and Goodness; so He is Infinitely,
Bountiful and Liberal. He is an Eternal Fountain full and overflowing, and that
can never be exhausted or diminished. As God can make you to Live for ever; so
He is freely communicative of Eternal Life unto you. He is infinitely exuberant
in Goodness and Happiness: and He is more full and abounding in them to you
than the Sun itself in warmth or Light unto the World.

HOW much are you then obliged to give your hearts to Him, who is the only
Infinite and Sovereign Fountain of Life and Goodness. They all depend upon his
Sovereign Will and Pleasure, and from him they must proceed. To be sure you all
desire to live for ever and be happy: and how inconsistent is it to refuse your
hearts to Him from whom alone they flow? But this brings us to the Second Head.
viz.

II. GOD has made All Things for His own Glory and He has made You to Glorify
and Enjoy Him for ever: and therefore you are Obliged to give your Hearts to
God in your Early Days.

THIS Argument and Obligation rises from your Creation and the Ends thereof.
And surely this is the most inviolable Obligation on you to give your selves to
God; from whom you have entirely received your very Life and Being, and that
you may thereby answer the Ends of them.

BUT here are these two Particulars.

1. GOD has made you and all other Things: and therefore you are Obliged to
give your Hearts to God in your Early Days.

WE observed before that God is the Sovereign Fountain of Life and Being: And
now, that He is the actual and universal Creator. Before He made the World, it
entirely depended on His Sovereign Will and Pleasure whither or no to bring it
into Being. But first He willed it and spoke the Word; and then the whole
Creation in a moment sprang from nothing. He brought this lower World into a
beautiful Order, and made every Kind of Creature in it in Six Days time. God is
the Creator and Former of all things.

AND God having therefore made all Things in the World, He has an absolute
Right and Propriety in them. They are the Things of God; And therefore it is
Just and Right they should be Improved for Him. Youth and Children, you are
therefore Gods by Right of Creation: And so are all other Things in the World.
Surely then, you are indispensably obliged to Give yourselves and all you have
to God, whose Due you are. You must be devoted to God, you must Live to God,
and you must improve every Thing for God; or you profanely rob Him of his Right
and Due.

BUT then, as the Crown of all his Works in this World below, He made and
formed Man. He formed a most beauteous Body of the Dust of the Earth, and He
breathed into it a Soul, a Spirit Immortal. In every succeessive Age, as the
Children of Men have Died, God has wonderfully made and raised up others. How
devoutly does the Psalmist admire His Creator for so Glorious a Work, in Psalm.
139.14 -- 18.

YEA it is now, but a little while, that you came out of the Creating Hands of
God. Youth and Children! the very Name you ^are Reminds you of your late
Creation. We call you Young -- which is as much as to say, you are but newly
made, you are but newly come out of the Hands of God. The Preacher therefore
mentions this as a peculiar Obligation on you to Remember God in your Early
Days, Eccl. 12.1. Remember now your Creator in the Days of your Youth. It is as
if he should say -- Your very Youth should put you in mind of God: He has but
just now bro't you out of nothing into a wonderful Being: and this wonderful
Work which God has so lately accomplished for you, should lead you to Him.

CHILDREN! will you refuse your Hearts to Him that made you? and almost as soon
as ever you are come out of his Hands? -- O ^ase Ingratitude!

YEA in some respects you are even Now in the Forming Hands of God. God has not
brought you yet to your full maturity either of Soul or Body. He is now a
Building up your Bodies every Day: and in a few Years Time you expect He Will
raise you to your Perfection of Strength and to your Hight of Stature. God is
also gradually increasing the Powers of your Minds: and you hope it will not be
long before He Will bring you to your ^trength of Reason and Understanding? You
plainly see that God is even Now a Forming ^ou: He is carrying you on to the
Perfection of ^ife: and will you now deny him your Hearts, even while he is a
making you? -- I wan't Words to describe such a vile Injustice, such an horrid
Ingratitude. But

2. THE End of God's making all Things, i^ His Sovereign Glory; and of His
making You is to Glorify and Enjoy Him for ever: an^ therefore you should be
entirely Devoted to Him

GOD always acts in perfect Wisdom: and before He Creates or Forms, He first
propose^ an End that moves Him. His own Glory mu^^ needs be the Sovereign End
of all His Works The Glory and Honor of God were the great Design He pursued
in every Thing He ha^ made: and therefore this is one of the highest
Obligations on you to give up your selves and all you have to God. Surely the
gre^^ Intention of God Himself in the Creation (...) Things should direct and
govern you. Surely you should exactly conform to the Sovereign Design of Him
that made them.

REMEMBER then, that God has made a^ Things firstly for Himself and for His
So^^ reign Glory; and if you don't devote you^ selves to God, you don't comply
with the Design of your great Creator. If you do^^ Improve your selves and all
you have for the Glory of God; you live and act in a bold opposition to His
Design and End in making them: you presumptuously abuse the Thing of God which
he has made for His Glory: an^ you vilely pervert them from the Ends (...)
proposed, to ends of your own.

BUT in a peculiar manner God has bro't you out of nothing and Formed you, To
Glorify and Enjoy Him forever. This was God's great Design in Creating and
Forming you; To Glorify and Serve Him with the highest Delight, and to Enjoy
Him for ever. These are the Two great Ends of God in making and sending you
into the World: and don't you think that they oblige you to mind them? Can you
imagine, you may be allowed to neglect the very Ends for which God has so
wonderfully made you and sent you into the World? Can you dare to cross them,
or live in a contrariety to them? Oh how horrid and heinous is this, and how
incensing to your Sovereign and Almighty Creator!

III. GOD takes a Sovereign and Providential Care of all His Works, and a
Particular Care of you: and therefore you ought to be Devoted to God.

THIS Argument rises from the Work and Design of Providence. God having Created
the World, He does not desert; But He continually exercises a Sovereign
Providence over ^t, and every thing He has made. And God having bro't you out
of nothing, and made ^ou to show forth His Praises; He takes a Particular Care
of you, that you may answer the End of your Being. Children! You are the
Peculiar Care of Providence; and therefore you ought to be Devoted to God.

AND in this Care of Providence there are these Four Things;

1. GOD is your Continual and Entire Preserver, and of all Things else: and
therefore you should be Entirely Devoted to Him.

GOD Upholds the whole Creation by a constant act of His Power and Wisdom: and
thi^ if possible continually increases His Right and Interest in it. There is
nothing in all the World, but always needs His supporting Hand. If God withdrew
the Exercise of H^^ Sovereign Wisdom, they would quickly ru^ into the last
Confusion. And if God with held the Exercise of His Sovereign Power they would
immediately vanish to nothing God continually bears up the Pillars both (...)
Heaven and Earth. He continually support and upholds them, and every thing in
them both in their Being and Order. Heb. 1.3. They entirely depend upon God to
Preserve them. An^ to be sure He Sustains them for the same Design for which He
has made them. He upholds them, that they may accomplish the Glorious End of
their Almighty Creation.

AND in Particular God is your Great Preserver. You entirely and constantly
Depe^^ upon Him for the continuance of your Life (...) Being. As God has
granted you Life and Favor: so it is His Visitation that has Prese^ved your
Spirit, Job 10.12. God is you^ Constant and Supreme Supporter and Defender. He
continually holds your Souls (...) Life, and Protects your Lives from mu^^tudes
of Evils that would soon Destroy them. God has All along been your Great
Preserver: And He Now Upholds you and Bares you up from sinking into nothing,
Death and Misery. If God had not continually Protected and Upheld you; you had
long before this Time gone down with multitudes of other Children into the
Rotting Grave. You had been before this Time Consumed to Ashes; or the Worms
had now been Feeding on you, as they are on others. And if you have not given
yourselves to God, you had now been suffering with multitudes of other wicked
Children the Vengeance of Eternal Fire.

AND now Consider Children! How great and constant are your Obligations to
Devote yourselves and Live to God, in whom you Live and Move and have your
Being, Acts 17.28. Every Hour God upholds your Lives, He adds the more to your
great and multiplied Obligations. And every Hour you neglect to give your
Hearts to God, you dreadfully increase your Guilt and Sin, against Him. O
Sinful Children! How contrary do you Walk to God! While God is Heaping
Obligations on you, you are most ungratefully affronting and abusing Him. What!
would you have God Preserve His Creatures, that you may abuse them to His
Dishonor? Or would you have God uphold your Lives, that you may Sin the more
against Him? -- How inexpressibly black and horrid is this extreme Ingratitude
and Impiety!

2. GOD is the Sovereign Observer of all Things, and He takes a Particular
Notice of you: and therefore you should be entirely Devoted to Him.

GOD must needs Observe the Things H^ has made, To see if they answer the Ends
o^ His making them. He must needs Observe i^ they are Improved, or Abused, and
Perverted, from His Service and Honor which (...) Created them for.

BUT in a peculiar manner, the Eye of God is upon the Children of Men, the
Master-piec^ and Lord of His Work in this lower World Prove. 5.21. For the ways
of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all his going^ Yea, He
Pondereth the Hearts of Men. Prove 21.2. O Youth and Children! The peculiar Eye
of God is always upon you; Both (...) see what you Want and what you Do, w^^^
you Have and How you use or abuse it. Go^ does not barely see you, as an
unconcerned Spectator, but He takes peculiar notice of you as your Sovereign
Lord. He Observes you Wants that He may Pity you and Supply them. He Observes
your Sins and Danger^ that He may Warn you of them, and S^^^ you from them. He
Observes your Trouble^ that He may Support you under, and Deli^^ out of them.
He Observes your Du^^^^ that He may Quicken and Help you to the^ He Observes
your Prayers, that He may gi^^ them an Answer. He Observes your (...) that He
may Bring them into Judgment. H^ Observes your Obedience, that He may Reward
and Bless you. And He Observes your Faults, that He may Chastize and Punish
you. Jer. 32.19. And Chap. 17.10. Now Children! What a Great and Solemn
Obligation is this upon you, To give up your Hearts and Lives to God! When the
Glorious and Watchful Eyes of God are always on you, and He carefully Looks
both to your Hearts and Actions. When He Views and Ponders all your Ways: And
when He looks to see How you use or abuse His Creatures. When He looks upon you
with a Gracious Eye of Love and Favor, if you be entirely Devoted to Him; but
with a dreadful Eye of Anger, if you Live and Walk in your own Devices.

3. GOD is the Supreme and Sovereign Lord and Ruler of all the World, and in a
peculiar manner your Sovereign Lord: And therefore you should be entirely given
up to Him.

GOD has an absolute Right to Govern the Things he has made, and which he
continually upholds by a Sovereign Act of his Power and Wisdom. He has an
Eternal Right to Give his Creatures, what Laws he Pleases, and to Rule them as
he sees Good. And as God has such a Right, he is infinitely capable of
Maintaining and Improving it, according to his Sovereign Pleasure. God
therefore Orders and Rules the World and all Things in it as he Pleases. Psalm.
103.19. His Kingdom rules over all. Ephesians. 1.11. And He works all things after
the counsel of his own will.

AND among the Rest You are also Subject to his Laws and Government. God is
your Sovereign Lord and King: And his Sovereign Will and Pleasure is to
Control and Govern you. He has given you Laws to Guide you in your Obedience
to him: And his Laws are strictly Holy, Just and Good. Mic. 6.8. He has showed
the O man what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do
justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. And as God gives
you Laws, so he Actually Rules and Governs you according to his Sovereign
Pleasure. Dan. 4.35. And he does according to his will in the army of heaven,
and among the inhabitants of the earth; and none can stay his Hand, or say unto
him what do thou.

AND how strongly are you then obliged to Devote your selves and Live to God?
It is the highest Justice, that you should entirely yield obedience to His
Sovereign Laws and Government. Youth and Children! Can you think your selves
exempted from the Sovereign Will and Government of God? Can any of you Think
that God gives you Leave to Trample on His Supreme Authority, and Rebel against
Him? Or can you possibly Imagine that you may Reject His Laws, abuse His
Creatures, and Resist Him as you Please, and God not Resent it? -- O No! Vain
Youth! GOD will some time or other make you dearly Know that He is your
Sovereign Lord and Ruler; and that you shall not harden yourselves against Him,
and go unpunished.

4. AND lastly therefore, GOD is the Righteous and Sovereign Judge and
Rewarder, and He Will Judge and Recompense you just as you deserve: and this is
another Great and Solemn Obligation on you to be devoted to Him in your Early
Days.

IT is most fit and necessary, that He who made, upholds, Observes and Rules
the World, should also Judge it. God best only knows the Good and Righteous
Ends for which He made it: and He knows best how far they have been perverted
or advanced. The Great and Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth must needs take
care to maintain the Glory of his Authority and Power, and do Justice to
Himself. And therefore God must Judge the World.

AGREABLY to this we find in Act. 17.31. That He has appointed a Day wherein
He will Judge the World in Righteousness, by that Man whom He has ordained,
even Christ; whereof He has given assurance unto all men, in that He has
raised Him from the Dead.

AND let me tell you, O Youth and Children! God will surely Judge You with he
rest of Men; and He Will give you your just Deserts. If the Judgment does not come
before you Die, as there is none on Earth is certain but it may come to Night;
yet after Death then comes the Judgment, Heb. 9.27. Your Souls will then
immediately be Judged by God, and either Doomed to be Bound and Reserved with
Devils in Chains of Darkness or Transported with the Saints to Paradise, till
the Resurrection of your Bodies and the Judgment of the Great Day. Then your
Bodies shall be raised from the Dead, and your Souls shall join them; and ye
shall see the Son of Man sitting on the Right Hand of Power and coming in the
Clouds of Heaven, Mat. 26.64. And, When the Son of Man shall come in His Glory
and all His Holy Angels with Him; then shall He sit upon the Throne of His
Glory, and before Him shall be gathered all Nations, Mat. 25.31, 32. For we
must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ; that every one may receive
the Things done in his body according to that he has done whether it be good or
bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. The son of man shall come in the Glory of His Father with His
Angels; and then He shall Reward to every man according to his works, Mat.
16.17. Then the Dead Small and Great shall stand before God: The Books of God's
Remembrance and Omniscience shall then be opened: and the Dead shall be Judged
out of those Things which were written in the Books according to their Works.
The Sea shall give up the Dead therein, and Death and Hell shall deliver up the
Dead in them: and they shall be Judged every one according to their Works. And
whosoever shall not be found written in the Book of Life shall be cast into the
Lake of Fire, Rev. 20.12 -- 15.

AND Oh! Youth and Children! How greatly does this oblige you to Devote your
selves, and Live to God? Oh! How subject and obedient should you be to Him that
is your Sovereign Judge; and who now observes you, that He may hereafter Judge,
and give you Righteous Judgment? You may Rejoice O Young Man in thy Youth, and
let thy Heart cheer thee in the Days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of
thine Heart and in the sight of thine eyes; But know thou that for all these
things God will bring thee into Judgment. Thus the wise Man tells you in Eccl.
11.9. and in the following Chapter, and the two last verses, Let us hear the
Conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God and keep his Commandments; For this is
the whole duty of man: For God will bring every work into Judgment, with every
secret Thing, whether it be good or whither it be evil. And Prove. 24.12. If
thou say, Behold we knew it not; Does not He that pondereth the Heart
consider it? And He that keeps thy Soul, does not He know it? and shall not be
render to every man according to his work?

IV. GOD's wonderful. Grace and Kindness to you is a vast and infinite
Obligation on you^ to give your Hearts to Him in your Early Days.

I might have reduced this under the Two last General Heads: But This Kind of
Obligation is so peculiar, and so exceeding vast and comprehensive, that I
think it best to be considered by it self. It contains Ten Thousand times Ten
Thousand Obligations in it, even as many as are your Sins and Mercies. Every
Mercy is a great Engagement to you: And I had as good go to Reckon the Spires
of Grass, or the Sands of the Sea shore as the Mercies of God. But in General,

1. GOD Has been wonderfully Kind and Gracious to you: And therefore you are
under the highest Obligations to give up your Hearts to God.

GOD has been wonderfully Kind in your very Creation. God has not made you
Brutes, but Reasonable Creatures. God has made you Capable of Knowing, Loving,
Serving, Enjoying Him, and of being Beloved and made Happy in Him for ever. God
has given to many of you healthy and comely Bodies: And He has given you all
most Precious and Immortal Souls. He has given you your Understanding, your
Wit, your Memory, your Vivacity, your Easiness to Learn, your Tongues, your
Utterance, your tunable Voices; and all your other Natural Indowments.

GOD has been also very Gracious to you in the Circumstance, Time and Place of
your Bir^^, He has bro't forth many of you of Rich and Honorable Parents: And
what is a Thousand times a greater Privilege, God has made many of you to come
of those that are Virtuous and Godly. The most of you are Born in His Gracious
Covenant: a distinguishing Favor. Yea God had been graciously providing for
you before ever He made you. He had planted His Gospel in this Age of the World
and in these Ends of the Earth; and He had bro't the most of your Parents into
the Bonds of the Covenant. He has made the Lines to fall to you in pleasant
Places, and has given you a goodly Heritage, Psalm. 16.5, 6.

GOD has been gracious to you ever since you were Born. He has Fed you,
Clothed you, nourished you, and has made you to increase and grow. He has
tenderly watched over you both by Night and Day. He has ordered it that the
most among you should be Baptized and have a Good and Happy Education. He has
advanced you in Knowledge, Understanding, Learning: And to many among you He
has graciously continued one or both of your Parents alive; and where they are
Dead, he has graciously raised up Friends to take care of you, to Cherish,
Protect, Advise and Guide you.

GOD has been wonderfully Gracious in multitudes of Temporal Blessing and
Comforts. How often has God defended and saved you in the midst of Dangers? How
often has God delivered you from Sickness and other Afflictions? How many
Temporal Benefits has he daily bestowed upon you? You know not the Number. GOD
has given to many of you the invaluable Mercies of Strength and Health, and
though you may yet be insensible of so great a Privilege; yet God has granted
you to live in a Place of many Precious Civil Liberties.

BUT above all God has been wonderfully gracious to you, in what he has Done by
Christ for your Eternal Salvation and Happiness. When you were Condemned, Lost
and Perishing Sinners; God from His Astonishing and Sovereign Grace has given
his only and Eternal Son to Dye to Redeem you. Herein he has shown his
Astonishing and Sovereign Love; that when you were ungodly, Christ Dyed to save
you. And when Christ has Dyed to purchase your Eternal Redemption; God has sent
forth His Spirit to Convert you and bring you to it. Romans 5.5, -- 8.

GOD has distinguished his Grace, in bestowing on you a multitude of Spiritual
Privileges, and Advantages. He has allowed you the means of Grace and Eternal
Life. He has given you the knowledge of Christ and his glorious Gospel. The
Things which he has hidden from multitudes of the Wise and Prudent of the
Earth, He has revealed to you. He has given you his blessed Word: and to every
one among you I may say as the Apostle in 2 Timothy 3.15. And that from (...)
child thou have known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise
unto Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus. God has also granted you
the pure Ordinances of his House and Worship. God has given you most excellent
Catechisms, and Trained you up in the most material Truths of Revealed Religion.

GOD has sent you multitudes of Instructions, Warnings, Councils, Examples,
Encouragements, Corrections. He has given you the hearing of a great many
Sermons. He has given you the privilege of multitudes of Prayers. He has
innumerable Times made you the Offers of Grace and Salvation: He has earnestly
Solicited you to accept and embrace them. He has often set Eternal Life and
Death before you, and urged you to the Choice of Eternal Life and Happiness.

AND in Fine, GOD has given you a great many powerful Convictions of
Conscience, and the workings of his holy Spirit; To open your Eyes and to turn
you from Darkness to Light and from the power of Satan to God; that you may
receive the forgiveneess of your Sins and Inheritance among all them which are
Sanctified through Faith in Christ. Acts 26.18.

2. GOD is Still very wonderfully Gracious to you: and therefore you are
exceedingly obliged to give up your Hearts unto Him in your Youthful Days.

NOTWITHSTANDING all your daring Sin and Contempt of God, He is yet upholding
and sparing you from your deserved Punishment. The Devils are your malicious
Enemies; and as roaring Lions they would fall upon you and dreadfully torment
and devour you, but that God continually restrains them. 1 Pet. 1.5. Though you
have constantly abused the Riches of God's Goodness; He is yet continuing them
unto you. You are yet the amazing Monuments of his Mercy, Patience and
Forbearance. O that you might now be led to Repentance by them!

GOD continues to you multitudes of Temporal Blessings. You can look on
nothing, you can think of nothing, but you behold a Mercy of God's bestowing:
and He still preserves your most Precious Lives, whereby alone you can enjoy
and relish them. He keeps you every moment from dropping into Hell, while you
are abusing His Patience. And He is filling your unthankful and unfruitful
Lives with a great variety and abundance of Delights and Comforts.

HE continues to you multitudes of Spiritual Advantages. The means of Grace,
and the hopes of ^^ory: His powerful restraints on many violent Lusts: and the
lively helps of His Spirit to inlighten, awaken, convert and comfort you, and
lead you in the way Everlasting.

YEA God is even at this very moment using Means to save you and bring you to
Eternal Happiness. He grants you this very Opportunity of hearing the Things
that concern your Everlasting Peace and Welfare. He now brings Me to Preach the
words of Eternal Life unto you, to You, O Youth and Children; and he brings You
now to hear them, that your Souls may live.

GOD takes not any Pleasure in your Death and Destruction: He delights not in
your Ruin and Misery: He is loath to give you up and Destroy you: He had rather
you should turn from your Sins and be Saved, and He greatly desires it. He
commands me to tell you as in Ezekiel. 33.11. Say unto them, As I live says the
Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn
from his way and live: turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways: for why will ye
die O house of Israel?

IN Fine, God is Ready to Receive and Forgive you. He is ready to be Reconciled
Eternally to you: and to enter into an Everlasting Covenant of Grace and
Friendship with you. He is ready to make you His Children for ever, and to give
you a right to all the Privileges of the Sons of God. He is ready to Bless you
with all Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly Things in Christ. He is perfectly free
and ready to save you and make you happy for ever. After all your heinous Sins
and slights of his Grace and Mercy; God now repeats his compassionate calls and
tenders to you. He Invites and calls you, as in Isai. 55.3. Incline your ear,
and come unto me: hear and your soul shall live, and I will make an everlasting
covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David.

YEA God and Christ now Entreat and urge you to be Reconciled to God. For God
has committed to us his Ministers the word of Reconcilation: Now then we are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us; we pray you now in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God. -- We then as workers together with
them beseech you also that ye receive not his Grace in vain. For he has said I
have heard thee in a time accepted, and in a day of salvation have I succored
thee: Behold now is the accepted time, Behold now is the Day of Salvation. 2
Cor. 5.19 -- 6.2.

3. ALL these Mercies flow from God's Absolutely Free, Sovereign and
Distinguishing Grace: and this is a vast Obligation to Give up your selves unto
Him.

YOU deserve not the least of these Mercies. You deserve to be entirely and for
ever banished from the Favor of God and all his Goodness. You were Born full
of Sin and Enmity to Him: and Hell was your deserved Portion as soon as ever
you came into the World: And ever since, you have hardly done any thing else
but forgotten, neglected, slighted, and rebelled against Him. You have abused
His Mercies disobeyed His Voice, dishonored His Name, and cast His Authority
under your Feet. Alas! You have hardly done any thing else but abounding and
growing in Sin, Repeating your Affronts of your Great Creator, and deserving a
severer misery. Oh! How exceeding great are your Sins and Guilt under the
invaluable means you have enjoyed! and how Wonderful is the Forbearance and
Long-suffering of God!

HOW Distinguishing is His Goodness and Patience to you! How many Millions of
Children have never enjoyed your Mercies? How many Millions have perished and
are perishing in the Heathen World? Oh how many Millions of other Children are
now in the Grave and in Hell who came into the World since you, and were not
such heinous Sinners; while God preserves you from going down into the Pit, and
from the dreadful place of your Torment!

AND now O Children! How innumerable and vast are your Obligations to be
Devoted to God? What could God have done more for you than He has done? Would
you have Him to have given you Heaven and Glory against your Wills? Why he has
sent his Son to Purchase them for you; He has Offered them to you; He has used
all the means you can devise, and more, that he might bring you to the happy
Possession. If you yet refuse Him your Hearts, when he has done so much to
Deserve them, and at the same time give them to the vile Pleasures of Sin or
the Trifles of the World; How great and inexpressible is your Guilt and
Ingratitude? You deserve a thousand times greater Punishment than Gomorrah or
S^dom; and if you Die in your Sins, God will surely give it you. I beseech you
therefore (Children,) by the Mercies of God, that you present your Bodies (and
Souls) a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God which is your
reasonable service, Romans 12.1.

V. YOU still Continually and Entirely Depend upon God for all that is Good:
And therefore you are under the highest Obligations to be Devoted to Him.

YOU cannot Live or Subsist a moment longer without the Continuance of His
supporting Goodness and Power. You cannot have any Comfort or Mercy that you
Want, unless God Bestow it. You cannot have any that you Possess continued to
you, unless God continue it. You still entirely Depend upon God for every
Mercy, both for Soul and Body, for Time and for Eternity. You still Entirely
and Continually Depend upon God, to Defend and Preserve you from multitudes of
Temporal Evils: Yea, to keep you out of Hell and Eternal Miseries.

AND surely Children! Such a state of constant and absolute Dependence upon God
is one of the strongest Obligations. When you still continually Depend upon God
both for Being. Preservation and Happiness, for every Thing you want and for
every Thing you have; can you yet Refuse to Live to God: You most ungratefully
and madly Sin against your own Happiness and Mercies.

DO you not Reckon it a vast Obligation upon you to be Devoted to your Parents,
because your Dependence is on them to keep and support you and contrive for
your Comfort, and when you come of Age to give you a Portion? And how vastly
greater is your Obligation to be Devoted to God your Heavenly Father? When your
Parents as well as yourselves have an Entire Dependence upon Him both for the
Preservation of Life, for a Temporal Subsistence and Comfort, and for an
Eternal Inheritance.

BUT I must not Enlarge.

VI. YEA the very Light of Nature, Reason and Natural Conscience Oblige you to
be Devoted to God.

CHILDREN! You are Born into the World with a Sense of this Great and
Fundamental Duty. It naturally rises from the Power and Light of your Minds:
And is one of the First Dictates of Reason.

GOD Himself has set up a shining Light in you to Lead you to Him. The Wise Man
therefore tells us, Prove. 20.27. The spirit of man is the candle of the Lord:
searching the inward parts of the ^elly. This Spirit of Man is his Reasonable
Soul and Conscience: And it is the Candle or Light of the Lord. God has kindled
it, inspired it and set it up in you; to show you your Duty, and to help you to
Discern and Judge of yourselves and your Actions: And this Heavenly Light shows
you, as soon as ever you come to Know any Thing of God, that you should be
Devoted to Him. It clearly and strongly Convinces you; that this is a most
important and indispensable Duty. And when you Refuse to give up yourselves
unto God; This Light of your Consciences clearly Discerns it, It shows you your
Wickedness, and Terribly Reproves and Threatens you. You may often neglect it
and desparately Try to Quench and Destroy it: But it Burns so strongly, that it
can never be entirely Extinguished. It is the Faithful Deputy and Witness of
God: The Eternal Judge which He has set up in your Souls: And it will never
utterly Leave you.

CHILDREN! The very natural Light of your Reason and Conscience oblige you
therefore to be Devoted to God. It plainly and irresistibly shows you this
Duty. In the name and stead of God, it Peremptorily requires you to do it. It
solemnly warns you to refuse it at your Peril. If you are devoted to God; it
approves and rejoices you: But if you keep your Hearts from Him; It will
accuse, convince and reprove you: and it will more or less dreadfully condemn
and punish you, Romans 2.14, 15.

VII. THE Word of God which is His Revealed Will and Law does in a more
especial manner Oblige you to Devote yourselves is Him.

THE Word of God as you have Learnt is contained in the Holy Scriptures: And
the Apostle assures you in 2 Timothy 3.16. All Scripture is given by inspiration
of God and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in righteousness. It is an Express Revelation of the Mind and Will
of God concerning the Children of Men, and of the way of our Eternal Salvation
and Happiness. It is an abundantly clearer and fuller Discovery than the Light
of Nature can possibly yield us. God has sent it, Oh Children to You: And it is
a vast addition to your Obligations from your natural Reason and Conscience to
be Devoted to God.

O YOUTH and Children! Here is the Will of the Great and Sovereign GOD expressly
Revealed and Proclaimed to you. And Every Thing Revealed in His Word Obliges
you to give yourselves to Him. It is even Firstly Revealed and Written for this
great End and Purpose. Psalm. 78.5 -- 7. For he established a a testimony in
Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, which He commanded our fathers; that they
should make them known to their children: That the generation to come might
know them, even the children which should be born: which should arise and
declare them to their children: That they might set their hope in God, and not
forget the works of God; but keep his commandments:

IN General, All the Instructions and Truths contained in the Scriptures are
both a means and engagement to Lead you to God. All the Counsels and
Exhortations in them: All the Warnings and severe Reproofs: All the Commands
and Institutions: All the Gracious Promises and Terrible Threatenings: All the
Instances both of Sin and of Goodness, and especially of Early Religion: All
the Examples both of Judgment and Mercy: And in Fine, all the Gracious
Invitations and Directions that are given in Scripture, are Designed as a means
to Bring you to God; and are Great and High Obligations on you to give
yourselves to Him.

IN Particular, GOD therein Expressly Requires and calls you to give up your
Hearts to Him in the Time of your Youth. Thus it is Expressly Required in the
Text: And surely, when God has once Expressly Required it, it is enough to Oblige
you: He has Declared His Will, and He need say no more.

HOWEVER I shall mention a few more Places; that the Revealed Will and Command
of God may appear more clearly, and come with a stronger Influence on you.
Psalm. 34. 11, -- 14. Come ye children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the
fear of the Lord, etc. Prove. 8.32, -- 36. Now therefore hearken unto me, O ye
children: for blessed are they that keep my ways, etc. Exodus 22.29. Thou shall
not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits, and -- the first born of thy
sons shall thou give unto me. Prove. 3.9. Honor the Lord with thy substance,
and with the first fruits of all thine increase. Mat. 6.33. But seek ye first
the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added
unto you. Eccl. 12.1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth --.
Prove. 24.21. My son fear thou the Lord --. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. And thou, Solomon my
son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and
with a willing mind: for the Lord searches (...) hearts, and understands all
the Imaginations of ^^e Thoughts: If thou seck him, he will be found ^f thee;
but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee ^ff forever. 2 Timothy 2.22. Flee also
Youthful Lusts: But follow Righteousness, faith, charity, ^eace with them that
call on the Lord out of a ^ure heart. Psalm. 148.12, 13. Both Young Men and
Maidens, Old Men and Children. Let them Praise the Name of the Lord: for his
Name alone (...) excellent, his Glory is above the earth and heaven.

VIII. YOU are under the highest Obligations ^o give up yourselves to God;
Because it is of ^he Highest Importance and Necessity to You.

THERE is nothing in the World of greater Moment or Necessity. There is nothing
of greater Importance to the Glory and Honor of God, the Good and Welfare of
Others, or Your own Salvation and Happiness.

THE Glory and Honor of GOD your Creator ^s highly concerned in the Devotion
of yourselves to Him. In the very Giving up yourselves to God, you do Greatly
Honor Him: And in Refusing or Neglecting it, You ^o exceedingly Dishonor Him
in the Eyes of Men and Angels. And then a Life of Obedience and Service whereby
God is greatly Glorified, does entirely depend upon the ^evoting your selves to
Him. If you resign your selves to God, you will live to His Honor; But if you
refuse to give your selves (...) Him, you will continue to dishonor Him and
Rob Him of His Glory.

AND as the Glory and Honor of God, so the Good and Welfare of Others Require
and Oblige you to be Devoted to Him. God requires you to Promote the Welfare of
Others: And if you give up your selves to God; in subjection and subordination
to Him, you will be devoted to the Service of Men. With an Holy and Ardent Zeal
for His Honor and Glory; You will earnestly Labor to promote their Temporal
and Eternal Welfare.

BUT especially the Devoting your selves to God is of the greatest Importance
and Necessity to Your own Salvation and Happiness. Children! You are by Nature
in a state of Sin: You are condemned by God to Eternal Misery: You can never
deliver your selves: And if you give not up your selves to God through Christ,
you can never be saved. There is no other way to be saved from Hell and Eternal
Misery: And if this be entirely and heartily done and continued in, you shall
surely be saved from them. And surely the^ this Great Law of Necessity and
Self-Preservation which is one of the First Laws of Nature, oblige you to be
Devoted unto God. And the^ unless you give your selves to God, you can never be
Happy: For you can never have (...) share in His Favor, and you can never
enjoy Him; who is the only suitable and Perfe^^ Happiness, and Satisfactory
Portion.

IX. YOU are under the highest Obligation (...) be Devoted to God; Because it
is most highly pleasing both to God, Angels and Men.

IT is most highly Pleasing to God: For in this you Obey and Honor Him, you
are in the way to be Saved and Happy, to do Good in the World, and to answer
the Great Ends of your Being. God beholds you with singular Delight and
Pleasure: He highly approves, esteems and commends you: and He very dearly
loves you. Prove. 8.17. I Love them that love me, and those that seek me Early
shall find me.

AGAIN, It is most highly Pleasing to the Glorious Angels. Those Pure and
Heavenly Creatures are most entirely devoted to God: They are perfectly Happy
in their conformity to Him; and they exquisitely desire and delight to see You
so too. They are extremely displeased at your Living without God in the World:
But when you Repent and Give your selves to Him; the glad Tidings are carried
to Heaven, and then there is Joy over you among the Angels of God, Luke 15.10.

AND then this is also most highly pleasing to the Best and Greatest of Men.
King David himself esteemed the Saints to be the most Excellent in the Earth,
and in them was his highest Earthly Delight, Psalm. 16.3. And the Divine Apostle
tells the Elect Lady, and so will all your Pious Ministers speak to your
Parents, as in 2 John 4. I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy Children
walking in truth, as we have received a commandment from the Father.

TO be sure, your Early Devotion to God will be exceedingly delightful to your
Religious and Sollicitous Parents. It will be their Great Honor and Joy; as
your neglect of Piety will be their most sensible Disgrace and Sorrow. Prove.
10.1. A Wise Son make to a Glad Father: But a Foolish Son is the Heaviness of
his Mother.

CHILDREN! Your Early Piety will be abundantly Pleasing both to God, Angels and
Men; as your continuing in Sin does extremely Offend them. And this does
therefore highly oblige you to be Devoted to God.

BUT These Things will be more largely Handled in the Next Discourse concerning
the GREAT ADVANTAGES of Early Religion.

X. YOUR Baptismal Devotion is a Great, (...) Solemn and most indispensable
Engagement on you ^o give up your Hearts to God in your Early Days.

IT is a wonderful Grace of God that when you were vile, abominable and sinful
Wretches, and could do nothing for His Service; that yet He was Free to receive
you into (...) Gracious Covenant, and take you into His particular Care. And it
was a distinguishing Kindness of God, to bring you forth in th^^ Age and Place
of the World; and of Believi^^ Parents, whom He had brought into a peculiar
Relation to Himself, and into the Bonds of the Covenant: And that as soon as
yo^ came into the World, they solemnly Offere^ you up to God to be His own for
ever. They did it by His Divine Appointment: They did it in Baptism, as a
Public Seal of the Covenant: And then God was pleased to receive you into it,
and to take you into His Gracious and Peculiar Care.

AND indeed your Parents have offered No more to God than what was His own
Before; Being just come out of His Creating and Forming Hands, and made to
serve and enjoy Him. But God having made you Their Children, the Children of
His Covenant People, He would have them to offer you to Him; that You might
also be bro't into the Covenant with them, and have the Benefits of it. If
they, had not done it; they had been Unkind and cruel as the Ostriches of the
Wilderness. For God had told Abraham the Father of Believers, that the Man
Child who receives not the Seal of the Covenant; That Soul should be cut off
from His People, having broken His Covenant, Genesis 17.14. Yea if your Parents
had not thus given you to God, they had grievously Sinned and run the desperate
Hazard of being Destroyed themselves; as Moses had like to have lost his Life
for neglecting to apply the Seal of the Covenant unto one of his Children,
Exodus 4.24, 25.

AND now, Children Consider, How Solemnly you were then offered up to God.

DESCENDING of Sinful Parents, you were conceived in Sin, you were born in
Iniquity, and bro't forth in Pollution and Sorrow. You were sinful, impure, and
loathsome in the eyes of God. You were the Children of Wrath, and condemned to
Hell. You were in a perishing and helpless Estate: and if you had died in that
state, you had been miserable for ever. But God then pitied you; and your
Parents pitied you, and came and offered you to Him. Here they bring their poor
crying Infants in Swaddling Clothes, to give them up to God. Men and Angels look
on and behold the Transaction. Prayers are earnestly made for you by the
Public Assembly: And they are the Eye and Ear-Witnesses of your being Devoted
to God. You are openly presented to receive the Mark of His Children: And the
Name of the Great GOD, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost is solemnly pronounced and
put upon you; as a Seal of your being taken into His Holy Covenant, and a Sign
that He accepts and challenges you to be His Peculiar People. Being offered up
by Believers in the Seal of the Covenant, He takes you into His peculiar Care:
And through the State of your Infancy, He secures your Salvation.

AND now O Children! God has graciously taken Care of you: He has dealt as a
kind Father to you: He has nourished and kept you: He has guided and brought
you to Years of Choice and Discretion: He has bro't you to this present
Occasion: He offers you Eternal Life and Happiness: He repeats the Offer^ He
moves you to Embrace it: And you having enjoyed the Benefits of His Gracious
Covenant; He now expects and Requires you to perform the Duties. When He
received you into it, He received you to be His peculiar People, and He then
laid you under the solemnest Bonds to be devoted to Him.

IF you Refuse to give up your Hearts to this Covenant God; you most wickedly
violate and profane His Covenant: You cast down His Honor with contempt on the
Ground: And as you unhappily Forfeit the great and de^^rable Blessings of this
most excellent Covenant; so you miserably Intail on your selves the dreadful
Execrations and Curses that are denounced against the Violaters of it. And for
your Awakening, I desire you to Read those awful Chapters, the 28 and 29 of
Deuteronomy; where you will most livelily see the solemn Obligations you are
under to Keep the Covenant of God.

XI. THE Desires, Labors, Prayers and Expectations of your Pious Friends and
Relatives, are vast Obligations on you to give up your selves to God in the
Days of your Youth. And

XII. AND Lastly, Your Knowledge of all these Things, the Inculcations of them
on you, the Convictions of your Conscience, and the Strivings of the Holy
Spirit of God.

BUT your Obligations are Innumerable, and I must draw to a Close. I shall only
briefly represent the PARTICULAR OBLIGATIONS you are under to give up your
selves immediately to God in the Days of your Youth, without any Delay, and so
come to a Conclusion.

AND Here I must tell You

THAT the Service of God is the very Design of your Beings, and of all your
Mercies.

IT is therefore the constant and whole Work of your Lives; and all these
Obligations are Now and always upon you, and oblige you Now as much as ever to
be Devoted to God.

TILL you give your selves up to God, you therefore Live and Continue in the
sinful Violation of them all, and a daring opposition and rebellion against Him.

YOU thereby dreadfully Grow in your Guilt and Wickedness, and Increase the
Wrath and Curse of God upon you.

YOUR Early Devotion to God is necessary to Prevent and Avoid abundance of Sin
and Evil; and to Obtain and Do abundance of Good in the World.

THE Present Life is the only space or Season of giving up your selves to God.

AND the Time of Youth and even this very Day may be your only Opportunity.

THE Spring and Prime of your Lives is certainly the Fittest and most suitable
Season: most Easy and Pleasant for you, and most Honorable and Delightful to
God.

AND Lastly, If you now Refuse to give up your selves to God, there is the
greatest Danger and Likelihood that you Never will do it; but go on in your
Sin, grow more averse to Religion, and dreadfully increase your Guilt in This
World, and your Eternal Doom and Torment in the Other.

FROM all these Considerations and Reasons, you are indispensably Obliged both
in Duty, Interest and Wisdom, NOW immediately to Devote your selves to God in
the Days of your Youth, and without any Delay.

BUT, a Few REFLECTIONS, and then I have done. And 1. FOR those that are of a
Younger Age -- Oh How Great, How exceeding Great must then be Your Sin and
Wickedness; if after all, you refuse to be Devoted to God! How exceeding great
and extreme is your Folly and Madness! And how inexpressibly severe will be
your Future Punishment? Oh! How many Millions of Great Obligations do you
contemptuously Sin against and violate! and Every one of them is a Fearful and
Higher Aggravation of your Guilt and Misery. 2. FOR the Elder Ones among us --
And what an Awakening Word is this to those that are of a more Advanced Age,
and yet have never given up themselves to the God that has made and preserved
them! Every Moment of your Lives, you have proceeded in the Breach of all these
Great Obligations. Oh! what an inconceivable Measure and Height of Iniquity are
you by this time risen unto! While you have refused to be Devoted to God, you
have never done One acceptable Thing to Him in all your Lives. You have all
this while been doing nothing else but continually Sinning against Him. And Oh!
what dreadful Stores of Wrath have you by this time treasured up to your selves
against the Day of Wrath, and the Revelation of the righteous Judgments of God,
who will render to Every Man according to his deeds? Romans 2.1, -- 6. 3. FOR us
All; and so to CONCLUDE. Oh! then Let us Continually Remember the many Great
and Solemn Obligations we are always lying under to be Devoted to God. We are
His own already by Ten thousand times ten Thousand Obligations. If we have
refused to give up our selves to Him; we have most wickedly violated and sinned
against them all. And Oh! How prodigiously vast and amazing is the Sin! God
Himself even seems to be astonished at it; in Isai. 3.2. Hear Oh Heavens and
give ear O Earth: for the Lord has spoken; I have nourished and bro't up
Children, and they have rebelled against me!


AND can there be a greater Sin, more Complicate and Comprehensive, more
Heinous and Provoking? And yet, Alas, there is This One greater than all; and
that is your Persisting therein. By Persisting in your Refusal to be Devoted to
God, you do daringly Justify all your past Sins in the sight of God and the
World: And every Moment you Persist in your Sins; you implicitly approve them,
you Repeat their Commission, and so continually Redouble the Guilt of your Sins
and the weight of your Punishment.

OH then, Let us seriously Think upon those Awful Words in Prove. 1. from the 20
to the End: And then let us delay a moment no longer; But now Immediately give
up our selves with our Hearts to God. and then Faithfully serve Him, and we
shall Enjoy Him For Ever. AMEN.

The Peculiar Advantages of Early PIETY.
By Mr. John Webb. Boston-Lecture May 3. 1721.
PROVERBS VIII. 32. Now therefore hearken unto me, O ye Children: for blessed
are they that keep my ways.


THAT which I shall endeavor at this Time, by the help of God, is to set
before our Young People, the peculiar Benefits and Advantages of Early Piety.
You have already heard the Duty in the several great Branches of it excellently
explained unto you: And your Obligations unto it Strongly inculcated. That
therefore which offers it self next to our Consideration, is the Singular
Benefits and Advantages of Remembering our great Creator in the Days of our
Youth: And as this has fallen to my Lot, I have made choice of these Words of
Divine Wisdom, as an Introduction to the present Discourse. They are found
among the Proverbs of Solomon, the Son of David the King of Israel. And as the
general Design of this book (as was excellently observed unto you the last
Lecture) was to form the Manners of Youth, or to Teach them betimes how to Fear
and Serve God aright; in which their highest Wisdom and Happiness consists: So
I take this to be the more particular Design of the Words now read unto you.
This seems to be very evident from the manner in which they are delivered. Now
therefore hearken unto me, O ye Children: etc. These Words (as I said before)
are the Words of Divine Wisdom, or the Words of JESUS CHRIST, the Essential
Wisdom of the Father; in whom are bid all the Treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge, (Colos. 2.3.) and they are spoken to Children. Chiefly to Those that
are Children in Years, as well as in Understanding. And they contain an earnest
Exhortation to the most important Duty, backed with the most forceable Motive
that could (...) though it of. The Duty you are exhorted unto is to hearken now to
the voice of your Great Savior, i. e. to learn those Lessons of Early Piety
that you have been already instructed in: And to learn them Now; to day;
instantly; without making one Moments delay in this matter of infinite Concern.
And the Singular Encouragement you have unto the Duty, is a most gracious
Promise of Blessedness in case of Obedience, as in the Words to be insisted on
-- For blessed are they that keep my ways. The Original Word in this place for
blessed, is a most comprehensive Term; and as Critics observe, includes all
kind of Happiness in it. Hence the meaning of these Words is, That all Those
who hearken to the voice, or keep the Commandments of their Great God and
Savior from their Youth up, shall be every way blessed of Him. They shall be
blessed with all Outward Blessings as far as is needful for them; but
especially with all spiritual Blessings, in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.
They shall be blessed both in their Souls and in their Bodies. They shall be
blessed in this Life, at Death, and forever in the World that is to come. They
shall be very remarkably blessed in all these, and such like respects. This,
Children, is the glorious Encouragement you have from these Words of your
Savior, to be religious now, in the Days of your Youth.

HENCE the Doctrine I shall insist upon from the Words is this, namely,

DOCTRINE. ALL those who hearken to the voice of Christ, or become truly Pious
and Religious in their Childhood and Youth are, and shall he h^ppy and blessed
in a very peculiar and Distinguishing manner.
Or more briefly thus.

THE Early Convert has many very peculiar and distinguishing Privileges and
Advantage^ belonging unto him.

IN the Prosecution of my present Design I have nothing to insist upon but the
Proof of this Point. And this I shall endeavor i^ a very plain and familiar
Enumeration of several of those blessed Privileges and Advantages that are, and
shall be the distinguishing Crown, and Glory, and Happiness of the Early
Convert. I say, several of these Benefits and Advantages: For it is impossible
for me, or for any man living to say how many, or how great and excellent they
are.

I shall therefore only Select some few of the most remarkable of them; and
enlarge upon them as the Time will allow.

AND here I earnestly call upon you, the Young People of this numerous Assembly
to give your present most serious and devout Attention. For I am now speaking
unto you in the Name of the Lord; And I hope in His Fear, and with a most
tender Concern for the Eternal Salvation of your precious and immortal Souls.
And then besides, what I have to offer unto you, may, if carefully attended
into, prove Instrumental (by the Grace of God) to instill high and honorable
Tho'ts of Early Religion in you; and so be an happy means to persuade you to
the present most delightful Exercises of it. For Happiness (no doubt) is the
Mark you are aiming at. Your sprightly, vigorous, and active Powers ^re in the
full pursuit of such things (whatever they be) as you hope to reap substantial
Profits and Pleasures in the Possession of. Your Tho'ts and Contrivances, your
Labors and Endeavors are, that your Lives may prove a most delightful Scene
unto you. And when the striving Spirit of God is at work on your tender
Consciences, and you begin to entertain any serious Tho'ts about your Souls and
another Life, you are ready to flatter yourselves presently with the Hopes of
complete Eternal Happiness in the World to come. Now I hope (by the help of
Grace) to make it evident before I conclude, That a Life of true Religion
entered upon, and persevered in from your Youth up, will more effectually
answer all your rational and immortal Desires after Happiness than any other
Methods you can propose or prosecute. There is no other Course of Life attended
with so many high and honorable; with so many peculiar and distinguishing
Advantages, as this is. This you will quickly see in the process of this
Discourse. But before I enter into the particulars of this most delightful
Subject, I shall, as a Foundation to all the rest, briefly observe this in
General unto you, Namely,

BY an Early Conversion to God, you will come early into the Covenant of His
Grace; and so betimes obtain a Right and Title to all the great and invaluable
Privileges that are contained in it. Every Sinner from the first Moment of his
true Conversion is taken into Covenant with God; into that Covenant of His,
that is in all things well-ordered and sure. Now this Covenant comprehends all
possible Blessings in it. It includes all things that pertain to Life and
Godliness: Every thing that i^ needful for your present Support and Comfort;
and all that is necessary to render you completely and eternally Blessed in the
World to come. God has graciously Promised His Covenant Servants, (and He Will be
as good as His Word) that he will give Grace and Glory; and no good thing will he
withold from them. (Psalm. 84.11.) This Happiness therefore in general, have all
the Saints from the Lord: But the Early Convert enjoys it with a remarkable
Emphasis. He comes first into the Possession of it, which is a Signal Favor of
God unto him. And then besides, all the distinguishing Privileges of it fall to
his happy Lot and Portion.

THIS you will plainly see, as I name the several Particulars unto you. And
here in naming of them, I shall (for the help of Memory) observe this easy and
most natural Distribution of them. And ^ay, I. WHAT the special Benefits and
Advantages of Early Religion are in this Life. II. WHAT they are like to be in
a Dying Hour. And then, III. WHAT Good we shall reap from it, in the World to
come.


I. I shall begin with the Special Benefits and Advantages of Early Religion in
this Life and World. And these I shall consider, 1. In Outward Regards. 2. In
Inward and Spiritual Respects.


1. EARLY Religion is frequently attended with many Outward Privileges and
Advantages in this Life. The Apostle Paul observes unto us, (in 1 Timothy 4.8.)
That Godliness is profitable to all things, having the promise of the life that
now is, as well as of that which is to come. And in these Words he (no doubt)
refers to that Promise of our Blessed Savior in Mat. 6.33. Seek first the
Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto
you. All these things, i. e. Food and Raiment and the other necessaries and
conveniences of Life, spoken of in the preceding Context. And though this
Promise. of Outward Blessings as the Reward of Obedience is not (perhaps) so
large and extensive in these Gospel Days, as it was under the Old Testament
Dispensation: Yet we may reasonably expect from hence, to be some way or other
Gainers by Godliness even in Outward Regards. And the Early Convert has the
fairest Prospect of any before him, to be a Gainer by it in these two Respects.

1. BY being Religious betimes you take the most proper and direct Course you
can to get and establish a good Name, Credit and Repution in the World, among
all those whose Value and Esteem is worth a having. True Piety imparts a real
Glory to those that embrace it. It inspires them with such Noble Principles and
Virtues that are the distinguishing Honor and Ornament of those that have
them. Hence it is the wise Man observes, That the righteous is more excellent
than his neighbor. (Prove. 12.26.) And among these the Early Convert has vastly
the Pre-eminence. Grace is beautiful in all; but it is eminently so, in such as
are Godly betimes. It appears more pure and unmixed in them. For they have not
so many of the Scandalous out-breakings of Sin and Corruption to Tarnish and
Eclipse the Glory of it, as those that make longer Delays in Religion, usually
have. It is therefore the Crown, and the Laurel of the Youth. It makes his
face to shine, beyond all the Charms of the most ruddy Complexion: And is a
greater Ornament unto him than the rich^st Pearls, or the most costly Array.
Hence all Those who know how to prize and value Men and Things according to
their true worth, will account you, the Excellent in the Earth. Your Name, will
be much set by, by all the wise and good, the sober and virtuous that shall
have any Knowledge of You. And while the vain and extravagant Youth is the
shame of his Age, and the Grief of all that have the best Interests at Heart,
your godly and wise Rulers and Ministers, your pious and prudent Parents and
Neighbors will look upon you with Pleasure and Delight. Such precious Sons of
Zions (as you will then be) will in their Esteem be comparable to fine gold: And
they will account you the Riches and Glory of your Country. And as they see you
grow up and improve in Grace and Virtue, they will look upon you as the hope of
future Time; and so be able to dye with the greater Comfort in the Prospect of
being succeeded by such as are like to do worthily in their Day and Generation.
This is the Honor you will have from the Saints. And then, as to the rest of
Mankind, though their Credit and Esteem is not so much to be regarded; yet such
of them as have any of the Remains of Morality in them cannot but reverence that
Sobriety, Temperance, Wisdom, Prudence, Justice, Meekness, etc. that will adorn
your Conversation in the World. And even the most profligate Wretches upon
Earth, that are lost not only to Religion; but even to Moral Honesty it self;
and that are ready upon all other Occasions to express their Hatred against you
and the ways of Godliness; will yet (if they have any important affair to
manage, that requires the Exercise of Moral virtues, such as Prudence, Justice,
Integnity, Fidelity etc. in those they Trust it with;) I say, They will sooner
commit it into your Hands then into the Hands of their merry Companions that
are equally vicious with themselves. And this is a plain Evidence that
undisguised Virtue commands secret Respect wherever it appears. -- And thus
good understanding gives favor in the eyes of men, Prove. 13.15. Now such an
established Reputation in the World is the greatest of all Outward Advantages.
It will put many an Opportunity into your Hands to Do and Enjoy good here which
otherwise you will certainly miss of. And hence it is Solomon truly observes unto
us. Prove. 22.1. A good name is ^^ther to be chosen than great riches, and
loving favor rather than silver and gold. But then,

2. THOSE that are Virtuous betimes have the most rational Prospects before
them of coming to the Possession and Enjoyment of a sufficiency of the good
Things of this Life. There is not only a Moral but Natural Tendency, in the
Exercise of many Christian virtues, to get and secure to ourselves, as much of
this World as our State and Circumstances in it may call for. Solomon observes
unto us in Prove. 10.4. That the hand of the diligent makes rich; while he that
deals with a slack hand becomes poor. And then by moderate Expenses,
Temperance, Frugality, and the like, the Virtuous Man keeps what the Idle
Spend-thrif^ prodigally throws away. Hence then, as length of Days, are said to
be in the right hand of wisdom; so are Riches and Honor said to be in her left
hand. (Prove. 3.16.) But suppose the Covetous Worldling should by his extreme
Parsimony, or by sparing more than is mete, by Rapine and Theft, by Bribery,
Extortion, Cheating, and the like evil Courses, amass to himself a larger
Possession then you are ever like to come fairly at: Yet herein you will
(undoubtedly) have the Advantage of him. viz.

You Will have a better Right and Title to the Little you lawfully possess. You Will
not only have a Natural or Civil Title unto it (which is more then the cheating
Miser has:) But you will have a Covenant Right and Title unto it which (...) more
than any wicked Man has to the lea^ of his Enjoyments. For Godliness (as I said
before) has the Promise of the Life that now is, as well as of that which is to
come. (1 Timothy 4.8.) And as you will have the best Title to what you possess. So,

YOUR Enjoyment, which is the End of Possession, will (in all Probability) be
more sweet and pleasant. You wont have those stings of Conscience, which
usually attend an ill gotten Estate, and a guilty Mind, to eat out the Comfort
of what you have. And then besides, It Is likely you may be favored with a more
healthly Constitution, which is the very soul of all Outward Enjoyment. For
Temperance, and Frugality are Friends to to the Health of the Body; while
Intemperance, Unchastity, beastly Sensuality, Luxury, etc. disorder the Frame
of Nature, corrupt the Juices of the Body, consume the Flesh, wast the Spirits,
breed loathsome Diseases, -- and so either cut short the Days, or fill them up
with pain and anguish. And to these I shall add,

THE Religous Man has the peculiar Blessing of God upon all his Outward
Possessions whether more or less: So that if there be any thing real to be
enjoyed in them, the Saint shall have the Comfort of them if God s^^ it to be
best for him. And hence the Ps^^ mist assures us in Psalm. 37.16. A little that,
righteous man has is better then the riche^^^ many wicked. But after all,
suppose y^^ should be reduced to the lowest Circumstances in the World, and
have nothing that you ca^ call your own in it (as it must be confessed, has
sometimes been the case with very eminent Saints; and hence we read of such as
and poor in this world, but rich in faith, Jam. 2.5.^ I say, suppose this
should be your case; yet by being strictly religious you will find your account
even in this Life. God will give you Contentment with your Outward State and
Condition. And he that is contented in this reaps the proper fruit of
Possession: And Enjoys himself with far more ease and freedom, though he lie with
Lazarus at the Gate, than a wicked Dives can do, in his rich Apparel, faring
Sumptuously every Day.

AND thus, Children, you see, that even in Outward Respects, the Early Convert
has the most rational Prospects before him, of being the Happiest Man; even in
this Life and World. And I have the rather enlarged upon this Head, because One
great Objection which Young People have against Early Piety, is a groundless
Conceit that as soon as ever they become truly Pious and Virtuous they must
instantly abandon all that is pleasant in this World: Whereas if you will but
imparnally consider what has been said it may have to convince you that the
Early Convert takes the most proper and Rational Course of ^^y to lead a quiet,
and peaceable, and happy ^^se, even in this World. But now these Outward
Advantages are the least article in the Saints Inventory. There are innumerable
other Privileges and Advantages you will obtain a Title unto by the Early
Dedication of your selves unto God, the least of which (if laid in the Balance)
would weigh down this whole World, with all that is desirable in it. And these
are the Benefits I shall now direct my tho'ts unto. Hence,

II. EARLY Religion is attended with many peculiar Spiritual Privileges and
Advantages in this Life. All such as Devote and give up Themselves to God in
their Childhood and Youth, shall from this Time forward be invested with all
Spiritual Blessings in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. To instance here in
some few of these inestimable distinguishing Privileges.

1. THE Early Convert is blessed with an Early Adoption into the Number of GOD's
Children. Every one that is Renewed and Sanctified by the Spirit of God,
immediately becomes a Son, a Child of GOD by a most gracious Adoption, John
1.12. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of
God, even to them that believe on his name. Hence Those that are first
Converted unto God, have the peculiar Honor to be first invested with this
Privilege. And how great the Dignity and Advantage of this is will appear if we
briefly consider what it is to become a Child of God; and what distinguishing
Privileges such are Favored withal.

AND here briefly;

TO become a Child of GOD is to be taken into the nearest Relation to God that
any Creature is capable of. The most glorious Angels in Heaven have no higher
Title than to be called the sons of God. (Job 38.7.) Nay to be called the son
of God in an appropriate sense: i. e. to be the only begotten Son of God -- His
well beloved Son -- the Son of His Love, etc. is the most intimate and exalted
Relation that the Second Person in the Ever-Blessed Trinity stands in unto God
the Father. How amazing then is the infinite Condescension of the Great God
toward such sinful, polluted Worms of the Dust as we are, that He should
Advance us to the Dignity of Children by a gracious Adoption! It is an Honor
done us, that simply considered, is infinitely greater than if we had been born
of a David, of a Solomon, or of any of the most Splendid Monarchs that ever
swayed a Scepter in this World.

AGAIN, To become a Child of God is to be made like unto God. By a gracious
Adoption you will have the Image of the Heavenly Adam livelily enstampt upon you,
(1 Cor. 15.49.) That Image of His, which consists in righteousness and true
holiness, (Ephesians. 4.24.) This Image you will be changed into from Glory to God, even
as by the Spirit of the Lord, 'till at length you shall perfectly be
transformed into His Likeness, as far as your Nature and Capacity will allow
of, (1 Cor. 3.18. 1 John 3.2. compared.) And how glorious is the Dignity of
this! To bare a Resemblance to earthly Majesty makes a splendid appearance in
the Eye of the World. But unspeakably more glorious in the Eyes of GOD, Angels
and good Men is the least Saint, being made a partaker of the Divine Nature, (2
Pet. 1.4.)

AND then besides, To become a Child of God, is to be enabled to live a Life of
God in this world. Those that are the Children of God are the Followers of
their Great God and Savior; and imitate Him in all His imitable Perfections.
(See Ephesians. 5.1.) And this is the most noble and divine Life that can possibly be
led by us. For as God is the Original of all Excellency and Perfection; so a
Conformity to His blessed Image and Example will exceedingly refine our Nature,
and vastly exalt us above the common Level of Mankind. Thus you see what it is
to become a Child of God: And how honorable the Relation is.

AND now the distinguishing Privileges of it are no less wonderful and
glorious. For by being a Child of God, You have His Fatherly Compassions always
extended toward you. Psalm. 103.13. Like as a Father pitieth his Children; so
does the Lord pity them that fear him. His watchful Eye will ever be upon you,
His tender Care over you, and His bountiful Hand open unto you. And then
besides, You may repair unto Him at all Times as Children to their Father. You
may make Him your Refuge in every Time of Trouble: You may open all your wants
and Griefs unto Him: You may cast all your Burdens upon Him: And beg all
needful supplies from Him. All this you may do with the Liberty and Freedom of
Children; And be assured, That His Ear will ever be open to your Requests. For
the Eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his Ears are open to their
Cry, (as in Psalm. 34.15.) And to these I shall add, By virtue of your Adoption
you will obtain an unalienable Right and Title to the Inheritance of Children --
An heavenly Inheritance -- the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. And that
which will be the crown and glory of all is, you will be made a joint Heir with
Christ of this Inheritance. Romans 8.16, 17. The Spirit it self bareth witness
with ours, that we are the Children of God. And if Children then Heirs; Heirs
of God, and joint Heirs with Christ. These Things I have but just named unto
you. But however by these hints you see what the Dignity and Benefit of
Adoption is. Well then might the Apostle John break forth into those Admiring
Expressions, at the Consideration of (...), 1 John 3.1. Behold! what manner of
Love ^^e Father has bestowed upon us, that we should (...) called the sons of
God. And now, Dear Children, By an Early Conversion to God ^ou'l not only
obtain this blessed Privilege of adoption; but you will have the Honor to ^e
the first in it -- The first of your Age and Day --. Your Early Conformity to
the Image of your Dear Savior, will make you the firstborn among your
Brethren and Companions. Now the Birthright has ever been accounted (...)
Singular Privilege. The Excellency of Dignity belongs unto it. And the
firstborn have ^sually had distinguishing Honors conferred upon them. And in
particular it has been Customary for the Father of the Family to ^ive a double
Portion to the eldest Son in it. and after this manner will your heavenly
Father honor the Early Convert at last; as ^ou may hear before I conclude the
Discourse.

2. BY an Early Conversion to God you will be ^^e first in obtaining Pardon, Peace
and Reconciliation with God in and through Christ. A Per^^^ is no sooner
Converted from the Error of (...) ways to the wisdom of the Just, but he
obtains the free Remission of all his Iniquities. The Debt that he owed to
Divine Justice is now paid, his Bonds cancelled, and an Act of Indemnity past
upon him. Hence you read in, Romans 8.1. There is therefore now no Condemnation
to them that are in Christ Jesus who walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit. And being thus justified from the Guilt of all his Sins, he obtains
Peace and Reconciliation with God. His former Enmity against God is no^ in a
great Measure removed, and Gods Anger turned away from him. And therefore from
hence forward, We hear the blessed Proclamation of Peace between them as in,
Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by Faith we have Peace with God. And this
Peace is bro't about and Concluded only in and through the Lord Jesus Christ; as
in the place but now mentioned. And hence it is Christ is called our Peace,
(Ephesians. 2.14.) And we are said (...) obtain forgiveness through his blood according
(...) the Riches of his Grace, (Ephesians. 1.7.) and t^^ he reconciled by his Death,
(Colos. 1.21, 22. And now this Pardon, Peace, and Reconciliation is an
unspeakable Privilege to all that a^^ in the happy Possession of it. This will
appear, if you do but consider on the one han^ what a dreadful Thing it is, to
lie under the Guilt of all your Sins, and so both to be a^^ Enemy to God, and
to have Him for your ^^censed Adversary. Every such Sinner is under the Wrath
and Curse of God; and (...) made liable to all Miseries in this Life, (...)
Death it self, and to the Pains of Hell for ever. He is liable to Vindictive
Horrors of Conscience in this World, and to endless, insupportable Vengeance in
the World to come. And so on the other hand, the greatness of this Privilege
will appear, if you do but consider, what the happy Effects of Pardon and and
Reconciliation with God are. These are Peace in a Man's own Conscience; an
Interest in the Favor of God which is better than Life; and a sure Title to
eternal Salvation. Hence the Pardon of Sin has obtained the name Redemption,
Ephesians. 1.7. And hence it is the Pardoned Man is expressly called a blessed Man,
Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is he whose Transgression is forgiven, whose Sin is
covered. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputes not Iniquity, and in
whose Spirit there is no guile. And now, Children, since Pardon, Peace and
Reconciliation with God, are such a blessed Advantage to all that have an
Interest in them, it must needs be an Additional Privilege to come Early into
the Possession of them. By this means, you will enjoy more of the happy fruits of
them, and for a longer Time than others. You will have your Pardon to show,
while other Vain Youth carry about their Chains of Guilt with them. You Will be
able to call God your Father and Friend, while they cannot but look upon Him as
their Enemy and Avenger. Your Title to Heaven will be secure, while their Title
is to seek. And while They hang over the Lake that burns with Fire and
Brimstone, by the slender threat of Life only, you will have a Crown of Glory
i^ reserve for you. And in a word, there is nothing now but this momentany Life
that can stand between you and the perfection of Happiness And now judge how
great this Privilege of Early Conversion is.

3. ANOTHER present Advantage of an Early Dedication to God is this, You Will
hereby escape innumerable Sins, Snares, Temptations, and Sorrows, that others
unavoidably involve^ themselves in. You all of you know, That Childhood and
Youth are said to be vanity, Eccl. 11.10. There is no Age of Mankind more prone
to Sin, or show more of sinful Levity than Youth: Nor is there any Age
encompassed with more ensnaring Temptations than this Age. And therefore, when
the Young Man gives loose to his Corruptions, and walks i^ the ways of his
heart, and in the sight of his ou^ eyes, you see what fearful work he quickly
makes of it. He runs into the way of every Temptation, and his Feet are
presently entangled in the Snares that Satan lays for him. He has no Bridle
upon his Lusts, and therefore gives himself over unto Lasciviousness, (...)
work all uncleanness with greediness. Hence there is no Sin so Infamous, so
Vile, or Disgraceful, but you may oft-times behold the Young Man void of
understanding, Vigorous i^ the pursuit and practice of it. And by this Means he
many times brings a blot upon hi^ Name which he can never wipe off in this
World: And, always dreadfully dishonours the Name of God, grieves his Pious
Parents and Friends, and makes the most amazing work for an after Repentance.
And therefore if ever the profligate Wretch be brought to a true sense of the
evil of his ways, and so obtains the mercy of God after he has wasted away the
best of his Days in Sin and Vanity; his Repentance is usually attended with
unspeakably more Grief, and Sorrow and Anguish of Soul. His bones are broken,
and heart deeply wounded with the Sins of his Youth. And these make him to go
Mourning and Limping to his Grave. But now an Early Conversion to God, will (by
divine Grace) prove a most effectual Remedy against all these Evils. It will
fill you betimes with Hatred of Sin; It will make you watchful against
Temptations unto it: And when you are assaulted by them it will enable you to
say with that gracious and renowned Young Man, How can I do this great
wickedness and sin against God? (Genesis 39.9.) And thus by escaping the Sins of
Youth you will prevent the doleful Sorrows and Agonies of an after Repentance for
them. And Now this Advantage, though a negative one only, is worth more than all
the positive Blessings this World can afford. And it is the Singular Happiness
of an Early, Serious, and Devout Dedication to God.

4. BY entering betimes into the Service of God you will find the Duties of
Religion more easy, sweet, and delightful unto you, than otherwise you will
(probably) ever find them to be. There is (indeed) a great deal of Labor, and
Pains, and Cost to be expended in a Life of Religion. Many of the Duties of it
are attended with uncommon Difficulty. They are directly contrary to Flesh and
Blood. And there is nothing our Corrupt Nature more reluctates at, than at the
tho'ts of them. Such are the Duties of Self-denial, of bearing the Cross, of
forgiving and loving our Enemies, and the like. Hence it is the way to Heaven
is compared to a strait gate, and a narrow way. And hence it is, we are called
upon to strive, even to Agony, that we may enter in at it, ( Luke 13.24.) But
however, the Service is not so difficult, but there is a real Pleasure and
Delight to be met withal in it. The Work many times carries its own Wages in
it. Hence the Psalmist observes, That in keeping God's Commands there is a
great Reward, Psalm. 19.11. Now the Early Convert bids the fairest of any for
this Reward in Duty. For as he that sets out late in the Service of God; and
begins his work either at the Sixth or Ninth or Eleventh Hour, has a great deal
more Work to do, and less time to do it in: more numerous and powerful Lusts to
subdue, and less measures of Grace to make head against them: so it is
frequently seen that such drive on more heavily in their Work than others. The
Service of God which should be their Delight is too much a toil and a burden
unto them.

BUT now as to the Early Convert, he loses comparatively but little of his
Time. He begins his Work in the Morning of his Day. And by a diligent
Prosecution of it he inures himself to the Service of Christ. And this (by the
Grace of God) renders the Yoke of Christ easy and his burden light unto him.
Custom in Duty habituates it unto Him. An^ what is habitual is easy and
pleasant unto us. Hence he that sets out first in the Service of God usually
runs the ways of God's Commands with a more enlarged heart. He finds the ways
of Wisdom to be ways of plesantness, and all her paths to be peace. He takes
inexpressible Delight in the most difficult Duties of Christianity; and can
deny himself, take up the Cross, forgive an Enemy, and the like, with greater
Cheerfulness, than others are wont to gratify their sensual Desires and
Appetites withal. In a word, by a long course of Obedience to the Commandments,
it will become your Me^t^and Drink, to do the will of your heavenly Father. And
now, Children, This is an Advantage highly worth a seeking after, and will
unspeakably more than recompense your Early. Diligence in the Work of your Lord.

5. THE Early Convert is like to make the richest Improvements in Grace and
Holiness. As Natural Habits are confirmed and strengthened by ^epeated Acts; so
are the gracious Habits of a Sanctified Mind. Hence the sooner you begin the
Exercise of Grace, the more time you are like to improve in it. And if you are
but industrious in this Improvement you will quickly find that as your Days are
Multiplied your Graces will be upon the thriving hand. They will every Day grow
more lively, and vigorous and active in you. You will hereby obtain a more
complete and entire victory over your unruly Lusts and Corruptions. The longer
you maintain the War against them (provided you are vigilant and resolute in
it) the less head will they be able to make against you, and the less
Disturbance will you meet withal from them. By a constant levelling at the Root
of Sin, the Habits of it will by degrees grow weaker and weaker in you. And
hence many that at their first setting out in the ways of God, have found their
wicked Lusts and Passions very exorbitant and unruly, have (by the Grace of
God) in continuance of time brought them into very great subjection. Their
towering Pride has been battered down into the lowest Humility: their raging
Anger, that was will not furiously to break bounds upon every frivilous Occasion,
has been softened down into a Dovelike Meekness: and this under the highest
personal Affronts: their revengeful Spirit has been melted down into the most
kind and benevolent temper: and their selfish Disposition changed into the most
self-denying frame. And so with respect to every other vile Lust and Affection.
And then as to the several Graces of the Spirit (which are comparatively but
weak and feeble at the Sinners first Conversion) these by long Experience and
Diligence in the Work and Service of God do exceedingly grow and improve,
strengthen and increase themselves. Your Faith which at first appears but weak
and tottering, and ready to fail upon every new Difficulty or Temptation, will
by long experience and exercise grow more fixed and steady, more uniform and
lively in exerting it self upon the proper Objects of it; and so upon Trial
will be found unto praise and honor and glory: As Abraham by being strong in
Faith gave Glory to God. Your slender hopes will by the same means strengthen
and increase, and become as an Another sure and steadfast cast within the vail.
Also your Love to, and Delight in God and Christ, and the things of His Kingdom
will enkindle into an holy same, and become more vigorous and active by a
frequent Meditation upon those Glorious Objects, and by the larger Experience
you will have of the Divine Goodness unto you. Your filial Fear and Reverence
of God will increase by your more frequent and near approach to His most awful
Sacred Majesty. Your Submissions to the Divine Will, the oftener they are made,
the more lowly and entire will they prove. Your Patience by frequent Exercise
under Trials, will at length come to have its perfect work. -- And so may it be
said of every other Grace. The more time you improve, and the oftener you are in
the Exercise of it, the more will you strengthen the Habit, and invigorate the
several actings of it. And thus (if God spare your lives any considerable time
in this World,) you are like to be the greatest proficients in the School of
Christ, to make the largest Improvements in Grace and Holiness, and by this
means to grow up to strong men in Christ Jesus, while others that set out later
in the Day will remain but Babes in Christ, in compare with you. And this is
another singular Privilege of Early Conversion, and a mighty Encouragement unto
it. And as a necessary consequent upon this,

6. THE sooner you begin in the Service of God, the more Work you are like to
do for Him; and so bring the greater Revenue of Glory to His Name. The Glory of
God is the great End for which we were all made. And ^ince this was the
principal End of your Being, it must needs be your highest Wisdom, Perfection
and Happiness to answer it in the best manner you can. For the Glory of any
Creature is to answer the Original Design of it. Now the most effectual course
you can take in order to this, is to begin Early in the Service of God, and to
persevere with Diligence in it. For observe, if you do but Devote your selves
to God in your Childhood and Youth, God will put many Opportunities into your
hands to serve Him, which He will not favor others withal; and He will help you
to improve many more which vain Youth forever carelessly let slip. And by this
means you will become Plants of Renown in the Vineyard of God: And the longer He
spares you in it, the more of the precious Fruits of Righteousness will you
bring forth, which are by Jesus Christ to the Praise and Glory of God. And what
a Distinguishing Crown of Honor will this be upon your Heads? It will render
you lovely and desirable in the Eyes of your Great God and Savior. Hence,

7. Lastly, BY setting out Early in the Service of God you will experience more of
the Special Favor of God, and of the Substantial Comforts of true Religion
while you live. The Early Convert is the Darling Child in the Kingdom of Grace
God has indeed an astonishing Love for all that are Conformed in any good
Degree, to the Image of His Son: but He seems to have a very peculiar
distinguishing Affection for all those that seek and serve Him from their Youth
up. This is plainly intimated unto us in those words of Divine Wisdom, (Prove.
8.17.) I love them that love me, and those that seek me early shall find me.
And then besides, our blessed Redeemer gave no small proof of it, when He fixed
upon John the Youngest of all His D^s^iples, as His beloved Disciple, (See Joh.
21.7, 2^.) And as the Early Convert is a favorite Child of God; so (no doubt)
God will make more signal discoveries of His Fatherly Affection unto him. Your
Great Savior (if you seek Him betimes) will suffer you with John to lean upon
his Bosom, while others shall be honored only with the Privilege of sitting at
the Table with Him. He will take you more frequently into the Chambers of His
Delight; and show you more of the Riches and Honors of His Kingdom. He will
give you greater quiet and tranquillity in your own Minds; and a more
established Peace in your Consciences. He will multiply the comforts of the
Holy Ghost unto you; and so Anoint you with the oil of joy and gladness above
your fellows. And hence you will sit under the shadow of your Savior with greater
delight; and his fruit will be sweeter to your taste. You will enjoy abundant
more of it, and for a longer season than others. In a Word, By your Early
Devoting your selves to the Fear and Service of God, you will make wonderful
Improvements in a Life of Communion with God, and so reap the first Fruits of
the Heavenly Canaan in greater plenty while you are here in the Wilderness.
below. And now, dear Children, what a Glorious Privilege is this? Don't you
account it your Honor and Happiness to be the Darlings of your Earthly
Parents? Is not a special Interest in their Love, and their constant Smiles
upon you reckoned among the greatest of your Earthly Comforts? They are
certainly thus esteemed by every dutiful and obedient Child. But what is all
this to an Interest in the more peculiar Love of God, and the more abundant
Joys of the Holy Ghost? Is not one Smile from our Heavenly Father infinitely
more to the pious Soul than all the Happiness this World can afford? How
transcendent then is the Dignity and Happiness of being His Favorite Children?
And thus upon the whole, you may plainly see, That a Life spent in the Service
of God is the most profitable and pleasant Life in the whole World. And
consequently that those who begin and end the Day of Life with God, make the
best and wisest Provision for themselves in time, as well as to all Eternity.
And thus I have past through the First general Head under the Doctrine; and
considered several of the special Benefits and Advantages of Early Religion in
this present evil Life and World.

II. I proceed now more briefly to show, What the Singular Advantages of it are
like to be in a Dying Hour. Death you are sensible is Advancing apace toward
us all: Toward those of you that are in your Childhood and Youth, as well as
toward those that are of riper Years. We read in, Genesis 3.19. Dust thou art and
unto Dust shall thou return. And according to this Decree, the Apostle asserts
(in Heb. 9.27.) It is appointed unto men once to dye --. What man therefore is
he, that lives, and shall not see Death? And since Death is thus unavoidable,
and is attended, at the same time, with the utmost of natural Horrors: (As
every one knows that has had any realizing Apprehensions concerning it.) I say
since it is thus, it must needs be a point of the highest Wisdom in us to think
seriously of the Evil Day before it comes: And to make the speediest and best
Provision against it that we can: That so when we come to Encounter Death, The
Prospect of it may not Affright us into Everlasting Horror and Despair. Now the
most proper Course you can possibly take, not only to prevent this Anguish and
Distress in your Conflict with Death: But also to overcome the Fears of it, and
so be able to meet and embrace it, as an absent Child would do, the Messenger
that was sent to Conduct him to his Fathers House, is to begin a Life of
Religion Now while you are in the Morning and Flower of Youth. For besides a
constant habitual preparation for Death, which is an unspeakable Privilege,
you will enjoy all your Days, you will reap these special Benefits by it, when you
come to meet the King of Terrors, and to look Death steadily in the Face.

1. YOU will be able to Reflect and Look back with greater Comfort upon your
past Life and Conversation in the World than otherwise you would do; or than
many other dying Saints are enabled to do. You will not have the Sins of Youth:
At most you will not have so many of them to come to your Remembrance, and
Distress you in a Dying Hour, as otherwise you will have. For do but consider,
How is it possible, that a poor Prodigal that returns to God after he has
consumed the biggest part of his Time and Talents in the Service of Sin and
Satan, should find his Account in the midst of the Agonies of Death, as the
Early Convert is like to do? Death (indeed) will eventually prove gain to every
true Penitent. But then the Aggravated Sins of Youth will afford a most
melancholy Prospect unto him, that has wasted away the best of his Days in Sin
and Vanity; and will in all probability extort such a mournful Petition as that
in a Dying hour, Psalm. 25.7. Remember not the Sins of my Youth, nor my
Transgressions: according to thy mercy remember thou me, for thy goodness sake,
O LORD. And this will very much damp the Joys and Comforts of his last Minutes.
Whereas on the other hand, The Early Convert when he comes to lie upon a Death
Bed, may first look back and take a Prospect of his past Life, and then look
upward, and Appeal to God in the Language of holy Hezekiah, Isai. 38.3. --
Remember now, O LORD, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in Truth,
and with a perfect heart, and have (by thy Grace) done that which is good in
thy sight. And who but they that have had the happy Experience of of it, can
tell how great the Consolation in it is?

2. YOU will (doubtless) enjoy so much the more of the Comforts of the Holy
Ghost at Death, by how much the sooner you set out in the Service of God. God
will never forsake any of His Children in their greatest Extremity. He^^ afford
them His Enlightening, Supporting, and Comforting Presence in their most dark
and disconsolate Hours. Hence that in Psalm. 112.4. Unto the Upright there
arises Light in Darkness. i. e. The Light of Divine Consolation and the Joy of
the Lord will refresh them in their deepest Distresses. May we therefore
imagine, That the Early Convert shall miss of it in his last Conflict with
Death? Or, Is it not much more reasonable to suppose, That since he set out
betimes in the Work of his Lord, and has patiently born the heat and the burden
of the Day, and is now come weary to the End of his Labors, that therefore his
most Compassionate Lord has a more refreshing Cordial to revive his spirits
withal, now the shadows of the Evening are come upon him? See how David (one
that feared the Lord from his Youth) comforted himself with the Hopes of this
aforehand; (and doubtless he experienced much more when he came to the Trial
than he had hitherto conceived of) Psalm. 23.4. Yea though I walk through the valley
of the shadow of Death I will fear no evil: for thou art with me, thy rod, and
thy staff they comfort me.

3. THE sooner you begin to Live to God, the brighter are your Evidences for
Heaven like to be in a Dying Hour. You Will then have this convincing Proof of the
Sincerity and Uprightness of your Hearts which a later Penitent will want,
namely, That you renounced and abandoned your Sinful Lusts and Pleasures for
the sake of your Great Savior, when you were in the midst of the Strongest
Temptations to pursue and gratify them; And were in the best condition for the
Enjoyment of them. And then besides, It Is very probable, the Holy Spirit will
give in a more clear and ample Testimony to the Truth of your Graces. And by
this means you will have the most ravishing Prospects of Happiness and Glory
before your Eyes: And so pass through the Shades of Death in the Chariot of
Praise. And then,

1. Lastly, YOU will hereby leave a more honorable Name behind you at Death.
The wise Man assures us, That the Memory of the Just is blessed, (Prove. 10.7.)
But among these the Name of the Early Convert will appear in a brighter
Character; with fewer stains upon it; and with more noble Embellishments which
will exceedingly recommend it to those he shall leave behind. These are the
distinguishing Privileges and Honors of Early Religion in a dying Hour. And
now, Children, were these the first Fruits you were ever like to reap of your
Early Conversion to God, (which you abundantly see, from the preceding
Discourse, are not so: But suppose it were so, yet) such Singular Privileges
alone in a Dying Hour would more than recompense the most diligent Labors of
the longest Life. But I must now Dismiss this Second general Head; and pass on
more briefly to say,

III. WHAT the Special Advantages of Early Religion are like to be in the World
to come. And here I shall mention but these two only, 1. IF you Dye Young (as
who knows but you may) you will certainly be Admitted into the Kingdom of
Heaven; while the wicked and profane Youth that Dies in his Sins shall be cast
down into Hell. Christ will gather the Lambs of His Fold into His own Bosom,
while the Seed of evil Doers shall be rejected and excluded forever. And this
will be such a distinguishing Glory, that Eternity it self will be short eno'
to declare the Blessedness that will most certainly follow upon it. But then,
2. SUPPOSE you should live any considerable Time in the World, then afterward
you will be advanced to higher Degrees of Glory in the World to come. The
Rewards of Heaven, indeed, are not of Debt but of Grace, as they respect us.
And therefore he that has spent the most Time, and done the most Service for
God in his Day, cannot by any Des^^^ of his own lay claim to the least Degree of
Heavenly Glory. But however, such are the Sovereign Determinations of Divine
Grace, for the Encouragement of Early and industrious Piety, that God will
Reward every man in the World to come, according to his works. (See Romans 2.6.)
i. e. God will render unto him, not only according to the Quality of his works
in general, but in proportion to the Quantity of them. This is plain from the
Parable of the Talents; as you find it recorded with the Explanation of it in,
Mat. 25.10. -- 30. Hence its evident, That Those who begin first ^^d do most
for God in their Day and Generation, shall be exalted to the highest Degrees of
Glory in Heaven. The chief Seats in those blessed Mansions above are prepared
for them, and stand ready to receive them. And therefore as they pass out of
Time into Eternity, They shall be advanced to those Thrones of Glory; and from
thence shall they Shine forever and ever, as Stars of the first Magnitude in
the Firmament of Glory. And what a Transcendent Privilege is this! The chief
Seats of Honor and Dignity among Men, are very much sought after, and prized
by the Men of this World. But the least Degree of Heavenly Glory is infinitely
more excellent than all the Glory of the World put together. There is such
Immensity in it, That Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither has it entered
into the Heart of Man, to conceive of it, as it really is. How Surprizingly
great then will the Honor and Happiness be, not only to be Admitted to the
Glories of Heaven; but to be Advanced to the highest Degrees of that Glory?
Verily, Heaven it self will forever ring with the loudest Acclamations of
Praise from such as shall be the Objects of this distinguishing, eternal Favor.


THUS I have passed through the several particulars at first proposed. And I
might have enlarged upon every one of them to very great Advantage would the
Time have allowed.

BUT since it will not I will finish the present Discourse will this brief
Reflection upon the Whole. viz.

SINCE the peculiar Advantages of Early Religion are such as we have heard,
Those of you that are in your YOUTHFUL DAYS should improve the Consideration of
them as a most powerful Argument, to Seek, and Serve God, the God of your
Fathers, without any farther Delay. It is not possible you should have any more
alluring and persuasive Motives to the Duty than are contained in the Things
that have already been set before you. I have therefore nothing farther to
offer at this Time to enforce the Advice upon you. But shall Conclude with my
earnest Wish and Prayer to that GOD, with Whom is the Success of all our
Labors, that He would be pleased graciously to bless this, and all the other
Endeavors of this kind, which (I trust) are Sincerly Designed by His Servants,
for your highest and best Good. AMEN.

Objections Answered.
By Mr. Cooper. Boston-Lecture May 11. 1721.
MATTHEW. XIX. 22. But when the Young Man heard that saying, he went away
sorrowful.


AN Essay to promote early Piety, to teach Young People that Fear of the Lord
which is the Beginning of Wisdom, and that good Understanding which all they
have who do God's Commandments, must needs be allowed to be very Noble and
Worthy. In Prosecution of such a Design, our young people have had in several
Discourses the Duties of early Piety explained, their Obligations to it laid
down, and the Advantages of it set forth. The Part assigned me toward this
Work, is to consider the Discouragements, reply to the Objections, which may
arise in the Minds of any of them against being early Religious, and which
Satan, (who to be sure will do all he can to Counterwork us) will not fail to
call before them. The Text I have read, and only propose to take Rise from,
will appear, I hope, not altogether improper to the Occasion, if we consider
the Story which it relates to, and is a part of. There was a hopeful, sober,
well inclined Young Gentleman (as he is by some called) of a plentiful Estate,
and in some public Post, who came to CHRIST and Addressed Him upon a most
serious and Important Case: Good Master, what good thing shall I do, that I may
have eternal Life? This Young Man was Instructed in and did believe the
Doctrine of eternal Life; and was concerned how he might obtain it: He was
sensible there was something to be done in order to the obtaining of it; and
was desirous to know what it was that he might do it. He applies himself for
Information about this Matter, the best that could be; to the fittest Person,
even to our Lord JESUS CHRIST, who is the great Teacher come from God, who
alone has the Words of Eternal Life; and who is Himself the Way, the Truth, and
the Life; and after a very fit Manner, with Humility and Earnestness. Mark
says, that he came running, and kneeled to Him; and by the Question it self as
he here puts it, he seems to be in good earnest: Good Master what shall I do,
etc?

IT was a lovely sight this to behold. It is truly a blessed sight to see any
Persons seriously concerned about their Souls and another World, sollitously
inquiring how they may get to Heaven. It is especially a lovely sight to see
Young Persons so concerned, thus inquisitive. A lovely sight this! but alas!
how rare among the Young People of the present day? It is too rare among Young
People of every Quality, who are generally apt to think, it is time eno' yet
for such an Enquiry; but especially among such as rise up in the World in
superior Circumstances with respect to outward Rank and Estate, who having
mighty notions about this World, do but little regard the things of another;
whose earthly Inheritance too often takes off their eyes and hearts from the
heavenly.

OUR Savior in Answer to the Question of ^his Young Man, says to Him, If thou will en^^r into Life, keep the Commandments. There ^s one way of Salvation for
Old and Young, ^iz. the way of Faith, Repentance, and holy Obedience. They that
don't walk in the Way of God's Commandments, are certainly out of the Path of
Life. This is the Way that God has marked out, and there is no thinking of any
other. And blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may have right
to the tree of Life, and may enter in through the gates into the holy City, Rev.
22.14. Young Persons are as much bound and obliged to keep the Commandments of
God as others are: Nor must they think that the Heedlesness and
Inconsiderateness of Youth will excuse or justify them, when they wander out of
the Way thereof. No: It is expected from them, that they take heed to their way
according to God's Word; they must bear the Yoke, the Yoke of God's
Commandments, in their Youth, if they would see Life, obtain Happiness here and
hereafter. Christ says to this Young Man, If thou will enter into life, keep
the Commandments.

THE Young Man asks of Him again, Which? He might have concluded all: For there
is the same Authority enjo^ning one as another, and every Command of God is
equally obliging. But he asks, we'll suppose, for a more full and particular
Information; that he might know which were of the greatest Importance, and
which he must have a more especial Regard unto. And we should all of us
endeavor to get as clear and distinct (...) Knowledge of our Duty (...) we
can. We should desire to know what is good, and what the Lord our God does
require of us.

CH^^^T in^^^nceth to him in several of the (...) of the Second Table. Jesus
(...) s^^lt do no Murder, thou shall no^ commit^d Aultery, thou shall not
Steal, thou shall not bear false Witness, honor thy Father and thy Mother: And
thou shall love thy Neighbor as by self. Our Savior instanceth in second
Table Duties only, not as if they were of greater Importance than the first,
but (as one lays upon it Henry in loc.
) because though first Table Duties have in them more of the Essence of Religion,
yet second Table Duties have in them more of the Evidence of it; and to teach
us that though a mere moral Man comes short of being a complete Christian, yet an
immoral Man is certainly no true Christian.

[THESE Commandments which our Savior ^ere instanceth in, and so recommends to
the Young Man as necessary for him to observe and keep, our Young People have
had explained to them in those Discourses which opened the Nature of Early
Piety as it relates to others, and unto themselves.]

THE Young Man replys, All these have I ^ept from my Youth: what lack I yet? It
had been happy for him indeed if he could have ^ightly and truly made such an
Answer as ^his, All these have I kept from my Youth: ^ut it was a confident
boasting that discovered ^is great Ignorance and Conceit. Had he known the
Spiritu^^^y and Extent of the Divine Law, that it not only forbids the outward
Acts, but the inward Lusts and Motions of the heart, he would never have
answered ^hus, but on the contrary would (...) said with Concern and Shame, and
Grief, (as the best of us have reason to do before God) "all these have I
broken from my Youth". However, according as he understood the Law, it is
thought, he said true. Take them externally, and in the literal sense, and he
might have kept the Commandments. He might be unreproveable with respect to
them before Men, though he could not be before the All-seeing, Heart-searching
God. He was free from any gross Violation of them; And it was a happy thing
that he could so speak. It is truly a Favor of God to any, which they should
think of with Thankfulness to him, when their Youth has not been stained by any
scandalous Sins. But we must not think this sufficient; we must not stop here;
for mere Morality will never carry any to Heaven. It is not enough for you,
Young Persons, that you be blameless in your outward Carriage and Conversation,
but you must become really, inwardly practically religious and godly. Many
cannot say for themselves what this Young Man d^d; and yet as far as he went,
he did not go far eno'; he was not altogether (...) Christian, but was like to
come short of Eternal Life.

CHRIST therefore, in Answer to his further Inquiry, What lack I yet; tells him
what he must come up to, if he would approve himself a Christian indeed and so
make sure of Eternal Life. Jesus said unto him, if tho^ wilt be perfect, go and
sell that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
Heaven; and come and follow me. Religion indispensably requires this of every
one of us that we do resolvedly and practically, prefer Heaven before Earth, a
Part in Christ before all the Wealth and Riches in this World, so ^s to be
willing and ready to part with our ^ll in this World, for Christ and Heaven, if
He should call us thereunto: Upon no less Terms can any of us now be the true
Disciples of Jesus Christ. To prove this Young Man therefore, and see whether
he was indeed so set for Heaven and Eternal Life as he seemed to be, Christ
gives him this Command of Trial, Go, sell all thou have in this World, and give
it to the poor, and follow me, and take up with a Treasure in Heaven instead of
all. At this it was that he went away sorrowful. He could not comply with this
Motion. Could not come up to these Terms. He Objected against this as an hard
saying, and was discouraged by it from following Christ, and any more seeking
after Eternal Life. If Religion would cost him so dear as this came to, he must
even have done with the Tho'ts of it. This Saying of Christ was such a
Discouragement and Objection as he could not get over; it proved a fatal
Hinderance and Impediment to him.

BUT it is now time for me to dismiss the Text and Context, and to apply my
self to that single Part assigned me in the present Work, which as I told you
before is to consider and reply to some Discouragements and Objections which
Young People may have against being Religious in their Youthful Days.

Obj. I. IF I am Religious in my Youthful Days (may the Young Person think and
say) I shall debar and deprive my self of those Pleasures and Delights of Life,
which Youth is the proper Season for the Taste and Enjoyment of.

TO this I Answer,

1. RELIGION does not wholly debar you of and restrain you from the Delights
and Pleasures of this Life. I deed you must not make Provision for the flesh,
to fu fit the Lusts thereof. You must not give Appetite and Sense its full
Swinge. Nevertheless, there is not a total Restraint laid upon you. It is not
criminal for you to be cheerful and merry in Conversation. Young people may use
the Divertisements and Pleasures of life, such as are proper to their Age, so
as they do but keep within the Bounds of Innocence and Moderation. Religion is
not such a sower ill^aturd thing as you may imagine it to be. It does not give
a total Prohibition of earthly Pleasures, but allows of, yea directs to the
sober and moderate Use of them. Eccl. 9.7, 8, 9. Go thy Way, eat thy Bread with
Joy, and drink thy Wine with a merry heart; for God now accepts thy Works.
Let thy Garments be always white; and let thy Head lack no Oinment. Live
joyfully with the Wise whom thou love, all the days of the life of thy
Vanity, which he has given thee under the Sun: for that is thy Portion in this
Life, and in thy Labor which thou take under the Sun. Use this World you
may, so you do not abuse it. Religion would only direct and lead you to such a
Use and Enjoyment of earthly Pleasures and Delights, as may be without Offense
to God, and Hurt to your selves.

2. THE Pleasures which Religion requires you to deny yourselves in, and
abandon; What are they? They are mean and base at best; suited only to the
Inferior Part of Man. They have in them more of the Beast than the Man; and the
Bruit Creatures may have a more exquisite Sense of them than we have. And what
are these to a rational Soul? To us, whom God has taught more than the Beasts
of the Earth; and made wiser than the Fowls of Heaven? They are false and
deceitful; have in them the Show of Pleasure only, and not the Substance, the
Appearance and Name rather than the Thing; The Fruition of them does not answer
the Expectation. Solomon ran a prodigious length in Sensualities, in the
Pursuit of forbidden Pleasures. He proved his heart with Mirth, and gave
himself to know Madness and Folly; whatsoever his Eyes desired he kept not from
them, he withheld not his Heart from any Joy. Well, and what Satisfaction did
all this afford him? Why truly none at all. He said of Laughter it is mad: and
of Mirth, what does it? Eccl. 2.2. Again, they are vanishing and perishing.
The World passes away, and so do the Lusts thereof. The Pleasures of Sin they
are but for a Season, and a very short Season too. They will perish in the
using. They are easily disturbed and dashed, and quickly over and gone. Once
more, They are destructive and deadly. Bitter Sweets! They please and gratify
now, but they will fling and torment hereafter. The Fruit and End of them is
Death. Prove. 9.17, 18. Stolen Waters are sweet, and Bread eaten in secret is
pleasant. But he knows not that the Dead are there; and that her guests are
in the Depths of Hell. So then the Pleasures which Religion requires you to
abandon, are such as you have little Reason to be fond of: However the corrupt
heart may find some Reluctance in refusing them, yet (as one aptly uses here
the Words of Abigail to David about his denying himself the Satisfaction of
being revenged on Nabal) afterward it shall be no G^ief unto you, nor Offense
of heart, 1 Samuel 25.31.

3. THE Delights and Pleasures which are to be found in the Ways of Religion,
are Incomparably better that those which you m^st deny yourselves in and
abandon. There is this Commendation given of Wisdoms Ways, Pr^v. 3.17. Her Ways
are Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace. They are not only
pleasant Ways, but Ways of Pleasantness, in the Abstract; as one observes upon
the Place. There is such Pleasantness no where else to be found as in these
Ways. The Delights that are to be met with in the Way of Duty and Religion are
such as the greatest Sensualist cannot boast of. The Pleasures of Piety do
exceed the Pleasures of Sin and Sense, in the Subject of them; the Soul the
better and more noble part. In the Object of them; an Infinite God, a glorious
Christ, all spiritual Blessings in heavenly Places. And in the Properties of
them; they are true and solid, pure and substantial, rational and sublime,
durable and lasting, not so easily dashed and broken by the little Accidents
and sudden Changes of this life, and the longer the Enjoyment is, the higher
the Pleasure rises.

WHAT are the poor and beggarly Pleasures of this life, to the Testimony of a
good Conscience, Joy in the Holy Ghost, Delight in God, and Communion with Him?
Such as abandon sensual Pleasures for spiritual Delights, and holy Joys, they
only exchange Dirt and Trash for Gold and Pearls, leave the Garlic and Onions
of Egypt for the Milk and Honey of Canaan. O our Young People! If you did but
once experience the Pleasures of true Piety, they would put your Mouths out of
taste to the Pleasures of Sin and Sense; having tasted of this new Wine, you
would not ask for the old, because the new is better. That pious Youth, Mr.
Thomas Beard, who died at about Seventeen Years of Age, (whose Life is
published, and recommended to Young people by the late Mr. Henry, and is in
some of your hands) could from his own happy Experience write down such lines
as these, There is nothing of Delight in the World comparable to what I have
found in the Enjoyment of God. One Hours, yea one Moments Communion with God,
is far beyond the sensual Delights of a whole Life. I have met with true and
solid Comf^rt, and Soul satisfying Joy in the Way of Duty and Religion. O taste
and see if it be not so.

Obj. II. THE Work of Religion is very hard and difficult; and I fear that if I
make a Trial I shall find it insuperable, and not be able to go through with it.

Answ. WE would deal plainly and truly with you, and let you know the worst
beforehand, that so you may sit down and count the Cost before you begin to
build, and may so set out as that you may not turn back discouraged by meeting
with what you did not expect: We do therefore acknowledge it to you, that it is
no easy thing to be a true and thorough Christian. Those that are most
acquainted with practical Religion, and the Power of Godliness, know this. The
Christan Life is compared in Scripture to running a Race, to wrestling, to
fighting, and the like; all which imply Difficulty, Opposition, Hardness, and
the great Need there is of Skill, Activity, Strength, Resolution and Patience.
Religion does not consult your carnal Ease, and Pleasures. There are many
laborious Duties for you to perform, many Temptations to resist, Corruptions to
mortify, and Conflicts to endure. A few lazy Wishes and faint Endeavors will
never carry you to Heaven. You must watch and be sober, watch and pray, watch
and work; you must gird up the Loins of your Minds, and put on and manage the
whole Armor of God, press on, and fight through. You must overcome the World,
the Flesh, and the Devil, and take the Kingdom of Heaven by an holy Violence.
Nevertheless, though the Work of Religion be thus hard and difficult, you should
not object against it, you may not be discouraged from it on the Account hereof.

For,

1. IF there is any Truth in Religion, the Difficulty that attends the Practice
of it, cannot be allowed to be a reasonable or sufficient Objection against it.
If there be a God that made you, that has a Right to rule you now and to judge
you hereafter. If you have Immortal Souls within you, that must Live forever
either in a World of Happiness or in a World of Misery. If you are hastening
either to Heaven or Hell; and it is like to fare with you in the other World
according as you have Lived in this: I say, if these things be true which
Religion teaches, (as they certainly are, and as you do believe that they are)
why then surely no Pains can be judged too much to take, no Difficulties too
great to be undergone, in an Affair of so high a Concern. Can you think any
thing too much for to save your Souls, to escape Hell and obtain Heaven? Oh
what Pains will Men take, what Difficulties will they go through, what
Hardships will they endure in prosecuting Matters of far less Concernment; in
Affairs that relate only to the Body and the Life that now is? What Trouble
will Men be at to get the Riches, or the Honors, or the Pleasures of this
World? Compassing both Sea and Land for them. What a Folly then, what a Shame
is it for you to make such an Objection in this Case? Wherein, if in any thing
at all, Necessity is laid upon you, and Woe to you if you do not comply? One
would think there is nothing so difficult, but it should be readily and
willingly entered upon and engaged in, if the Salvation of the Soul, and the
eternal Welfare of that, be at all concerned in it.

2. THE Difficulty that attends the Practice of Religion and Godliness can be
no sufficient Objection against it, because The Way of Sin and Wickedness is
attended with as much or more. It is really so, that there is many times more
Self-denial undergone, and Pains taken, in the Service of Sin and Lust, than
the Practice of Religion calls for. Prove. 13.15. The way of Transgressors is
hard, Jer. 9.5. They weary themselves to commit Iniquity. There is no worse
Slavery than to Live in the Pursuit of base Lusts. How is the Sinner in the
Gratification of them, carried by Violence and Headlong, contrary to the
Dictates of his Reason, and the Checks of Conscience? How is his Time consumed
therein, his Estate often wasted, and his Body enfeebled? How many Thousands
die Martyrs to their Lusts, and are burnt with as keen a Fire (though not so
honorable) as that the Martyrs were fried in? Sometimes the very Contrivance
of Sin gives sufficient Uneasiness and Trouble; but more especially the
Reflection on it. How does the Sinner start and recoil at his own Actions when
he thinks them over? One of the greatest Troubles in this World is for a Sinner
to look within himself, and remember what he has done. The Scripture speaks of
the Condition of Sinners in this World as full of Uneasiness and Disquiet.
Isai. 57.20, 21. The wicked are like the troubled sea when it cannot rest,
whose waters cast up mire and dirt: There is no peace says my God unto the
wicked. Such often dissemble their Condition, and make an appearance of
Satisfaction; but God who is acquainted with the secrets of all hearts, knows
what horror rages in their Breasts.

3. WHATEVER Difficulty attends the Practice of Religion and Godliness, the
Grace of God can enable you thereunto notwithstanding. You are not left to
struggle with the difficulties of Religion in your own single Strength, but God
is ready to afford you His Help and Assistance, through whom strengthening of us
we can do all things. You have not only the Outward Arguments of Religion to
encourage you to encounter the difficulties of it, but the Promise of His Holy
Spirit to help and assist you. Ezekiel. 11.19. I will put my spirit within them,
and they shall walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments and do them. He is
ready to do this for all that sincerely and in good earnest apply themselves to
Him. Wherefore instead of objecting against, or being discouraged from Religion
by reason of the difficulties that attend the practice of it, you should only
be quickened thereby, according to the advice of the Apostle, Heb. 4.16. to
come boldly to the throne of Grace, that you may find grace to help you in time
of need.

4. THE greatest difficulty will be in your first setting out in the Ways of
Religion. What in Religion may seem hard at first, through the Corruption of our
Nature, and our former Accustomedness to Sin, afterward Use and Exercise and
the Grace of God will make easy. When once you are well entered in the Service
of God, you will find it perfect Freedom; and in a little time you will be able
to attest to the truth of that, 1 John 5.3. His Commandments are not grievous.
Christ's Yoke, (says One) grows easier and smoother, when we have born it upon
us; though perhaps at the very first putting on, the flesh will strive hard to
fling it off. I remember to have read in the Life of Mr. Philip Henry, that he
once in Preaching from those words, Mat. 11.30. My yoke is easy, after many
things insisted on to prove the Yoke of Christ an easy Yoke, at last appealed
to the Experiences of all that had any time drawn in that Yoke, and then gave
in his own Testimony after this affecting manner. I, said he, will here witness
for one, who through Grace have in some poor Measure been drawing in this Yoke,
now above Thirty Years, and I have found it an easy Yoke, and like my Choice
too well to change.

Once more here,

5. THERE is that Sweetness and Pleasure accompanying the Practice of Religion
and Godliness, and that glorious Reward following it, that far outweigh all
its Troubles and Difficulties. I might here show, if my present Limits would
allow, how that in all the several Acts, Instances, and Duties of Religion,
even those that seem the hard Lessons of Christianity, there is a Sweetness and
Pleasure to be found, not only to support but delight the Soul. Her Ways are
Ways of Pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace.

AND then, what a blessed Hope is set before you in the end to invite and
animate you? All the Difficulties of Religion will be abundantly compensated by
a glorious Recompense of Reward in the next World. Religion proposes so great a
Reward to you, as that if you should spend your whole Life in Labor and Toil
for it, it would be worth the while. It is the most noble that Man's Nature is
capable of; set forth to us in Scripture by many chosen Comparisons, as
particularly by a royal Throne, a glorious Kingdom, and a glittering Crown.
Rev. 3.21. Him that overcomes will I grant to sit with me on my Throne, even
as I overcame, and am set down with my Father on his Throne. Luke 22.29. I
appoint unto you a Kingdom, as my Father appointed unto me. Rev. 2.10. be
faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of life. There is nothing
greater aspired after by the ambitious Children of Men than a Crown and
Kingdom; and they will wade through Fields and Seas of Blood to obtain one; and
yet they strive but for a corruptible Crown. The Crown and Kingdom which Christ
sets before you in the Gospel, is not like the Crowns and Kingdoms of this
World, troublesome, thorny, tottering, fading things, but easy, steady, safe,
and that shall never fade away. And now, O Young Man, shall not this so tempt
and fire your Ambition as to make you think all Difficulty light and
inconsiderable that may lie in your way. Will not this, think you, countervail
for a few days labor and difficulty?

Obj. III. BUT Religion will expose me to many Troubles and Sufferings: It is
through much Tribulation that we must enter into the Kingdom of God: And all that
will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer Persecution.

TO this it may be answered, that

TROUBLES and Sufferings are to be met with out of the way of Religion. The
Ungodly (besides Inward Troubles which are the (worst) are liable to the same
outward Afflictions that others are; such as Bodily S^cknesses and Pains, the
Deaths of near Relatives, Disappointments, Losses, and Impoverishments, in
their outward Estate. With respect to such things as these, we are told, All
things come alike to all, there is one Event to the Righteous and to the
wicked, Eccl. 9.2. So that as to the common and ordinary Afflictions of this
Life, you will be exposed to them out of the way of Religion as well as in it.

AS to any Extraordinary Sufferings purely on the Account of Religion, such as
the loss of Liberty, Estate or Life, (though indeed we should be ready to part
with these in the Cause and for the Sake of Religion, should we be called to
it, yet) you are not sure you shall meet with any of these. Bonds and
Afflictions don't always abide the Saints. God don't call every one to resist
unto Blood. Thanks be to God! Our Lot is cast in a Place and Time of Liberty
and Peace, wherein the Churches have Rest and are Edified!

BUT suppose the worst, that you should be called to any such Sufferings on the
account of Religion; the Sufferings can be but very short. The sharpest
Sufferings of the present Time, they are bu^ ^or a moment, 2 Cor. 4.17. And
then where God calls His Saints to extraordinary Sufferings, he usually gives
them extraordinary Supports and Consolations under them. Some Suffering Saints
have said, As the Sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our Consolation also
abounds by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5

MOREOVER, the greater your Sufferings are here, the greater will be your
Reward in Heaven: They will work out for you a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of Glory. And I reckon, says the Apostle, that the Sufferings of the
present time, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be
revealed in us, Romans 8.18.

AND then, let it be considered by you, that if you do not become Religious,
you expose yourselves to the endless and Insupportable Miseries of the next
Life, which the most exquisite Torments of the present Life, are but faint
Resemblances of.

SO that upon the whole of this matter, it will be your Wisdom, Young People,
to make Moses his Choice, who when he was come is Years, chose rather to suffer
Affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin for a
Season. Heb. 11.24, 25.

Obj. IV. BUT I shall be reproached, derided and scoff^d at, especially by my
old Acquaintance and Companions, if I should now set up for serious Religion.

TO this I Answer,

THAT it is no Disgrace to be derided and mocked at, but to deserve to be so.
The best of Men have been so* Such as David, and Job, and Jeremiah, and Paul,
and others of whom the World was not worthy. And I might Name a Greater than
these, even our Lord JESUS CHRIST, a great part of whose Sufferings were the
Derisions and Mockings that He met with.

THE Jests and Scoffs you may meet with, will be so far from a Disparagement to
you, that they will be your Honor; and while they deride and mock you, others,
the wiser and better Sort, will esteem and reverence you, and give you their
best Regards.

YOU had better be derided by others, than have your own Conscience reproaching
of you; and it is no Matter in whose Eyes you are contemned, so as you are but
great in the Sight of the Lord.

THE Reproaches wherewith some, that sit in the Seat of the Scornful may
reproach you, for your turning into the Way of Godliness, will fall upon
themselves, will turn to their Condemnation and sorer Punishment, in that Day
when Sinners must account for all their hard Speeches; but they will turn to
your Advantage and Blessedness. For our Savior has said, Blessed are ye when
Men shall revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you
falsely for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your Reward in
Heaven.

AND it will not be long before those who now deride and censure you, will
openly applaud and commend you, as the only wise and happy. We fools counted
their Life Madness, and their End to be without Honor, how are they numbered
with the Children of God, and their Lot among the Saints? So that the
Reproaches you may meet with should be far from discouraging of you, they
should rather make you more Resolute in the Ways of God. You should Answer the
Scorners, as David replied to the Taunt and Reproach of Michal the Daughter of
Saul; It was before the Lord -- And I will yet be more vile than thus, 2 Samuel
6.21, 22.

Obj. V. RELIGION is no Friend to Prosperity: I must look to be poor and low in
the World, if I become religious; for I observe the most are so that are
Religious.

I may reply here,

THAT it is a most foolish and absurd thing, to be Influenc^d by external
Motives, and temporal Considerations, in matters of spiritual and eternal
Concernment. What, I beseech you, is a Man profited, if he gain the whose
World, and lose his own Soul; or what shall a Man give in Exchange for his ^oul?

IT is true indeed, that the godly in the Earth, are often the poor of it, and
Brethren of l^w Degree: But then they are in that State, in those Circumstances
which Infinite Wisdom sees best for them, and in which their spiritual and
eternal Welfare is most promoted, the best secured. And the Soul is the Man;
that is best for Us, which is best for our Souls. If the Wicked have more of
this World, they have need eno' of it; for it is their Portion: But deliver me,
O Lord, from the Men of this World, which have their Portion in this Life!

HOWEVER the Objection is not true neither: For Religion is a Friend to outward
Prosperity. Godliness is profitable to all things. The Blessing of Temporals is
in the Covenant; (as was showed you under the Head of Advantages, and therefore
I will pass it here.)

BUT at last, Piety is the best Prosperity. The Merchandise whereof is better
than the Merchandise of Silver, and the Gain thereof than fine Gold. Her Fruit
is better than Gold, and her Revenue than choice Silver.

Obj. VI. RELIGION is no fashionable thing; there are but few that really mind
it, of any Age or Quality; why should I be almost singular?

I Answer,

SERIOUS Religion, and strict Godliness, is but an Unfashionable thing in the
World. The more's the Pity! But yet it is of Infinite Concernment to us that we
heartily embrace it.

LET none urge this Objection, unless they are willing to loose the Favor of
God, the Happiness of Heaven, and their own precious and immortal Souls out of
Genteelity, unless they are willing to be damned and go to Hell for Fashion's
sake; This I hope you will account too great a Complement.

WE should let no Example influence us contrary to what is our Duty and
Interest. We should not follow a Multitude to do evil; nor be conformed to this
World. The broad Way is never the better for being crowded. Hell will be never
the pleasanter for the Company that is in it.

RELIGION is never the worse in it self let who will, and as many as will,
sl^ght it. Sooner or later most Men testify to the Wisdom of it Vid. Dying Men's
Living Words. Published by Dr. Lloyd.
. Do you not observe, that they who care not to live the Life of the Righteous,
yet desire to die their Death, and to have their last End like theirs? Of the
thousands whose Deaths we have seen or heard, what one Person, ever recommended
an Irreligious Life (to those that stood about him, ready to gather his last
breath) as Desirable; and did not rather warn them from it as Mischievous and
Ruinous? What one Man in the World ever repented of a good life, when he came
to die; and did not rather, with Tears for his own Miscarriages, and with all
the Arguments imaginable exhort to it? That Person in a dying hour shall wish
himself no Man, that has not been a good Christian.

Obj. VII. IF I am Religious in my Youthful Days, I shall die Young. This is
what Satan has sometimes buzzed in the Ears of some seriously disposed Young
Persons to affright and deter them. To it I say,

THAT though Piety does not secure a long Life in this World, yet to be sure it
never shortened any ones Life in it: It is more likely to prolong it. For it
keeps us from those Vices and Excesses which shorten Men's Lives. And it has the
Promise of it, 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the
Promise of the Life that now is.

THE Irreligious, they to be sure, have no Reason to expect to live long in the
World, Eccl. 8.13. It shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall ^e
prolong his Days, because he fear^th not God. And we do see that many Ungodly
ones die young. Job. 36.14. They die in Youth, and their Life is among the
Unclean.

THEY that desire to live long in this World, the best Course they can take for
it is, to become practically Religious and Godly. Psalm. 34.12. What man is he
that desires l^fe, and loves many days, let him depart from evil, and ^o
good. Solomon therefore makes use of it as an Argument to persuade us to be
Religious, Prove. 4.10. Hear, O my Son, and receive ^y sayings, and the Years of
thy Life shall be many.

MANY a Young Convert has attained to the Character of an Old Disciple, as well
as well as Mnason spoken of Acts 21.16. How many of the Saints on Scripture
Record, died in a good old Age? And we have some alive among Us at this day,
who can say in David's Words Psalm. 71.17, 18. O God, thou have taught ^e from my
Youth and hitherto I have declared thy wondrous Works. And NOW I am old and
gray headed.

BUT suppose you (...) d^e Young, you may yet have a Sufficiency of Life? That
Promise, Psalm. 91.16. With long Life will I satisfy him, and show him my
Salvation, may be fulfilled to one who dies in Youth. For it is the Nature of
Grace to wean the Soul from this Life, to raise it above it, and to fix it upon
another. Hence there have been found some Instances of gracious Young Persons,
who have been not only willing, but desirous and glad to leave this World. And
he that has lived so long in this World, as to become fit for a better, and
willing to leave this, He has lived long eno', and dies full of days.

AND then, (if you be Gracious) the days you lo^se on Earth, will be gained in
Heaven; there you will have Length of days for ever and ever.

Obj. VIII. IF I begin to be Religious now, it may be I shall not continue so:
Many have Apostatized from good Beginnings; and it were better never to have
known the Ways of God, than wickedly to depart from them.

I Answer,

THE Apostasy of some from good Beginnings has been very sad and awful. And Woe
indeed to them who having beg^n in the Spirit do end in the Flesh! But this
should not discourage nor deter you from entering upon the Ways of God; but only
serve to take you off from Self-Confidence, and put you upon more humble and
earnest seeking that Grace of God, which shall be able to make you stand, to
confirm you unto the End.

THERE never was a true Convert, that totally Apostat^z'd. Being confident,
says the Apostle, of this very thing, that he which has begun a good Work in
you, will perform it unto the day of Christ, Phil. 1.6.

THAT Proverb that is so often in the Mouths of profane ones, A Young Saint
makes (...) old Devil is false and malicious. No! The Young Saint will more
likely prove an Angel when he is old in respect of excelling Knowledge and
Sanctity.

THE Young Hypocrite will prove an old Apostate; but the serious Youth, the
longer he exper^ences Religion, the better he will like it* and the closer he
will stick to it. And the Grace of Christ, in him and with him, shall be
sufficient to make him finally Victorious over all Difficulties, Temptations
and Dangers.

Obj. IX. IT is time eno' for me to be Religious: I am Young, and have many
Years before me.

THIS it may be, is the most common Objection, and prevails most on our Young
People, to cause them to defer and put off the great Work of Religion and
turning to God; and so would have required a more full and large Answer to have
been given to it, but that the happy Labors of my Re^erend Brethren in the two
Discourses immediately preceding this, (wherein the Special Obligations to,
and Pecu^or Advantages of Early Religion are excel^^tly Argued with you) do
spare me the Pains.

I shall therefore only take the Liberty to ask you that make such an Objection
as this, that it is I me eno' yet, two serious Questions.

1. HOW know you that you shall have any other Time than this afforded you?
Have you any Lease of your Lives? Have you made a Covenant with Death, and an
Agreement with Hell, that you know shall stand* Is not the shortning and
prolonging of your Life in the hand of God; of that God whom you can now so
easily forget and neglect? Do not the most die Young? Are you not altogether
Uncertain when Death may be Commissioned by the Great God to fetch you out of
this World? May you not be cut off while you presume upon hereafter? Don't you
think that there are many now in the Chambers of utter Darkness, who presumed
upon that hereafter which they never enjoyed?

METHINKS the Providence of God silences the Objection at this Time, when the
Angel of Death stands with a drawn Sword over the Town, and threatens to come
up into our Windows, and enter into our Palaces, to cut off the Children from
without, and the Young Men from the Streets. Preached at a Time when the
Smallpox was got into the Town. A Distemper which (though frequent in other
Places) is the Terror of us in New England. Scarce a Quarter part of the Town
('it is though it) have had it. And none of the Youth under Nineteen or Eighteen
Years of Age. It has since spread into many Families.


2. HOW can you expect to find Acceptance with God hereafter, if you neglect to
seek and serve him now? The Hereafter you depend on ^ay never come; but if it
should, is God ^ound to accept you then? Must He needs (...) up with the Refuse
and Dregs of your ^^me, when you have served the World, the ^^esh and the
Devil, with your Flower and ^ime? May He not then justly say, Go to the ^^ds
you have chosen and served.

WE would not discourage the Repentance (...) Endeavors of Sinners that are
come to (...) last of their Time; and the Mercy of GOD in CHRIST is such as may
prevent a ^^al Despair then: But verily it is (as one ^lls it) an Extraordinary
Act of Sovereign ^ivine Grace when such are accepted.

OH then! do not run all Hazards with ^espect to your Souls and another World,
(...) you will do if you hearken to that Sug^estion, that it is Time eno' yet.
But resolve ^y the Help of God, that you will not defer ^^tting about the Work
of serious Religion (...) longer. Don't think of a more Convenient ^ason. To
day, while it is ^all'd to day, harden ^t your hearts. Be speedy and instant as
he ^as, Psalm. 119.59, 60. I thought on my ways, (...) turned my feet into thy
testimonies. I made ^^ste and delayed not to keep thy Commandments.

I shall Name but one Objection more.

Obj. X. IF I had a mind to be Religious, yet there are so many different Paths
in Religion, that I should be at a loss which to take: some cry up this Way,
others that, so that I know not which to choose and fall in with.

Ans. I am afraid they that Object after this Manner, only pretend the
Differences in Religion to excuse their declining that which really they hate.
For they are only the lesser Matters wherein Christians differ: And is it
reasonable on the account of these to forsake those great and necessary things,
wherein all are Agreed.

WE are not aiming, in our present Design, to bring you over to the Interests
of a Party. No: The Piety which we principally press on our Young People, is,
what all true Christians own to be necessary; what all Good Men though of
different Persuasions on lesser Accounts, are United in, what all People when
they come to Di^, do advise, and commend, and bear their Testimonies to.

THE Use you should make then of these Differences in Religion, is not to throw
of all Religion; but to be Inquisitive after Truth And for this End, you should
diligently study the Word of God, and humbly seek His Spirit to lead and guide
you. I will add too, that you should not be backward to consult and advise with
the Faithful Minister^ of God. For the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and
they should seek the Law at his Mouth: for he is the Messenger of the Lord of
Losts, Mal. 2.7. Your Ministers all of them, would be glad to afford you what
Light, Direction, and Help they can; and I am sure you should not neglect them;
to take Counsel, and receive Light, from those who may not be supposed so able
to give it you, nor to have the like Concern for you, and that aim only to
bring you over to their own Party and Interest.

AS to what Way of Worship, and Form of Ministration you should attend on, I
will only say this unto you; Choose that which (after humble Study and Prayer)
you seriously and conscienciously judge to come nearest to the Holy Scriptures,
(the only Rule and Standard of Faith and Practice) and the most likely to
promote the Power of practical Godliness in your Lives, and so the Salvation of
your precious Souls in the End.

THUS I have made some Reply to the most Considerable Objections which any of
you may ^ake against being Religious in your Youthful Days. It had been easy to
have carried these things the length of several Sermons, but I was willing to
take up as few Pages as possible, and hope what has been offered may be
sufficient for the present Purpose.

CONSIDER now, DEAR YOUNG PEOPLE, of what has been said; and the LORD give you
Understanding in all things!

THE LORD help you over all the Blocks and Bars that lie in your Way; and by
His special Grace, effectually determine your Thoughts and Hearts for Himself
and Service, and bring you into a serious and delightful Walk in the Ways of
Piety!

MAY you be so Wise, as Early to choose the good Part, which cannot be taken
away and may your after Course be agreeable to your Early Choice! That so you
may say in the End, as the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.30, 31. I have chosen the Way of
Truth. I have stuck unto thy Testimonies.

Exhortations and Directions to Young People.
By Mr. Foxcroft. Boston-Lecture, May 18. 1721.
In the 2d. Epis. to Timothy, the 2d. Chap. and 22. Ver. Flee also youthful
Lusts: but follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity, Peace [or Union] with them
that call on the Lord out of a pure heart.


WE are still on the excellent Theme of Early Religion. In the Course of this
Lecture you have already had the Nature of early Piety defined, and the several
Parts distinctly illustrated; the Obligations stated; the Advantages
represented; and many Objections obviated. The Business now allotted Me (as the
Conclusion of the whole Matter) is to make some Application or Improvement of
the foregoing Discourses, in a Use of EXHORTATION and DIRECTION. And though
indeed in Them there may have been offered Something of this Tendency; Yet if
we consider the vast Weight, as well as Reach of the Argument, (together with
the remaining Cold, and careless Unconcern about it, visible in too Many of our
Young People,) It will sufficiently appear, that the Task assign^d Me is not a
Pleonasm or superfluous Addition.

AS to the Passage of holy Scripture now read; I shall not stay in showing the
Connection, nor in opening the Contents hereof. It may suffice to say, We have
here an Address to a Young Man, and an Exhortation to Early Piety. I have
chosen the Words only as an agreeable Foundation or decent Introduction to that
part of the Subject, which falls to Me; and the Prosecution whereof I shall now
immediately apply my Self to.

THE Method, I propose to go in, is this; I. I shall speak to the Secure and
thoughtless Sinners among our Young People. II. TO the Thinking and Awakened.
III. TO the Penitent and Regenerate.


I shall endeavor with all [decent] Plainness of Speech, as far as I can, to
adapt my Exhortations and Counsels to the respective Cases of each Rank; which
being very unlike, they call for a distinct Consideration and different
Management.

THE first Sort of Young Persons to be exhorted are the habitually SECURE and
Insensible. Too many (I Am afraid) there are of this unhappy Character among our
Young People, (as well as Elder,) notwithstanding the repeated solemn Calls,
Warnings and Excitations they have had from time to time. Therefore there is
Need of this Address to the Secure. And O that we might succeed in these our
last Attempts! --

LET every unconcerned unconvinced Young Man now before the Lord, consider I am
particularly speaking to Him, in the Name of GOD; that GOD who searches the
Heart, who expects you take heed how you hear, and will one Day call you to an
Account: In His great and dreadful Name (I say) I am now speaking to you. O
consider this, Young Men and Children, and dare not to turn away your Ear, nor
harden your Heart: but hearken to the Voice of GOD, and see that ye refuse not
Him that speaks from Heaven. Hearken to the Counsel which is brought you, and
send Us not back to our Master with that melancholy Complaint -- Who has
believes our Report? We have labored in Vain. -- Yet, be it so, our Judgment
is with the Lord and our Reward with God!

BUT, let me entreat you to suffer the Exhortation. Be persuaded then, Oh
Sinner! to s^ake off carnal Security, and seek after religious Convictions.
Awake, Awake, O Sinner! Awake, Thou Sluggard! Rise from thy Bed of Sloth. How
long will thou slumber? Will thou not bethink and bestir thyself? When shall it
once be? O Sinner, open thine eyes to behold the Light; open thine Ear to
Discipline. Rise out of the Dust, shake thy self, and no longer fold thine
Hands to Sleep. Do this now, my Brother, and deliver thy self; Give not sleep
to thine Eyes, nor slumber to thine Eyelids. Escape for thy Life; Escape to
the Mountain, lest thou be consumed. Deliver thy self as a Roe from the Hand of
the Hunter, and as a Bird from the Snare of the Fowler. Go to the Ant, thou
Sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise. Awake thou that s^^ep^st, and arise
from the Dead. Knowing the Time, that now it is high time to awake our of
S^eep, therefore cast off the works of Darkness. --

BUT (as the Prophet speaks, Jer. 6.10, 11.) To whom shall I speak and give
warning, that they may hear? Behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they
cannot h^arken: Behold, the Word of the Lord is unto them a Reproach; they have
no Delight in it! And indeed when I consider how powerful an Orator Satan is,
and how great the Deceitfulness of Sin, and the infatuation of Self Love; -- I
am almost tempted, in Despair of Success, to desist from the present Attempt to
awaken the Secure; and to break off in the words of the Prophet aforesaid, -- I
am full of the fury of the Lord, I am weary with h^lding in; I will pour it out
upon the Children abroad, and upon the assembly of Young Men together. --

BUT when I consider again the Wisdom and the Power of CHRIST (whose
Ambassadors we are, and on whose Blessing we have leave to depend for
Prosperity in our sincere Endeavors,) my Hopes revive; and I cannot but
reassume, and proceed in His Name and Strength to press the Exhortation. And O!
that He, who can make dry Bones live, would now breath in his Word; and speak
to the Heart and Conscience of every one, while the Word is sounding in your
Ears.

BUT what Arguments and Expressions shall I choose? O that I might be directed
to such, as shall affect and penetrate deep! GOD is our Witness, whom we serve
in the Gospel of His Son, that our Hearts Desire and Prayer for you all is,
that you may be saved. -- Now therefore, as though God did beseech you by Us, we
pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God: And as workers together
with Him we ^eseech you, that ye receive not the Gospel of God in vain. In the
Bowels of JESUS, and by all the Compassion you owe to your perishing Souls, we
beg you, yea we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that you now, even
now without any further Delay, bethink your selves; and let such Considerations
as these, which follow, be of weight with you, (if the hardness of your Hearts
will permit your taking them in,) to hasten your seeking after sound
Convictions. -- I shall endeavor only to hint Things, a few Things; and leave
you to enlarge on them in your retired Meditations: because otherwise I forsee
I shall be tedious.

I. Then, CONSIDER the great SINFULNESS of your present Security. Great is your
wickedness herein; your Guilt is very obvious and prodigious. Your carnal
Security implies the blackest Ingratitude, the basest Disingenuity, the vilest
Injustice, Rebellion, and Presumption. It bewrays a secret Infidelity, and
proceeds from accursed Principles. It is a manifest Disobedience to the
preceptive Will of God. It is a slighting the Threatenings of His Law, a
contemning the Promises of His Gospel; and opposing the gracious Designs of His
Word and Ordinances and Providence. It is a high Contempt cast on the blessed
GOD; it is a dishonorable Reflection on His Wisdom and Love in CHRIST; it is a
Reproaching His Justice, Holiness and Truth; it is a Defiance to His Infinite
Power; an abuse of His Mercy, and a mocking of His Patience! it is an insolent
spurning at His Favor, neglecting His Service, misimploying the Time and
Talents. He has given you, and a preferring the Devil before Him. -- Further,
It is a denying the Lord that bought you, and trampling under foot the Son of
God. It is also a resisting the Holy Ghost, and doing Despite to the Spirit of
Grace.

YOUR Security then is a heinous Iniquity. And what is an unspeakable
Aggravation hereof, it immoveably fastens upon you the Guilt of all your other
Sins. O secure Young Man, labor to see what horrible Guilt lies upon you! And
let the Time past suffice to have been spent in this dreadful Wickedness. Now
awake to Righteousness, and sin not.

2. CONSIDER the absolute INEXCUSABLENESS of your sinful Security. You have no
Plea in the World to cover your Guilt. Your Security is willful and chosen. It
is against many Calls and Cautions both in the Word and Providence of God; you
cannot therefore plead, you have not been duly warned and called; God and Men
are Witnesses to this -- You cannot plead invincible Ignorance of the way of
Salvation, the necessity of Conversion, the need of Convictions, and the
methods in order hereto: for Light is come into the World, and you choose
Darkness. -- You cannot plead insuperable Difficulties in the way: for Grace is
offered, Grace sufficient; and you refuse it. -- You cannot pretend want of
Encouragement; for great and precious Promises are set before you. -- You cannot
pretend want of Helps to assist you; For you have all needful Means of
Conviction and Awakening. -- You cannot have the Face to pretend want of
Leisure; that you have no Time to attend the necessary care of your Soul; being
engaged in other matters of higher Importance; For there is nothing of equal or
comparable Moment with that: or being as a Servant in a continual Hurry of Care
and Employment, and not at your own dispose: for you may, you should in this
Case, redeem Time from your Bed and Table, and otherwise; as knowing you have a
Master in Heaven whose Service must not be dispensed with on any score
whatever. -- You cannot be so absurd as to pretend any Unfitness of the present
Time, or say that you are too Young, to concern your self about the grave
Matters of Religion: For that which is at all Times your indispensable Duty,
and so necessary to your present (as as well as future) Safety and Comfort,
cannot be begun too soon. Besides, How many Others no fitter by Nature nor riper
in Years than you, have early sought and aright improved Convictions, to their
saving Repentance? -- What then will you say, when God shall arise? How will thou answer it, O Young Man, when God shall bring thee into Judgment, that thou
have not remembered thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, but walked in the
ways of thine own Heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes? Verily you have no
Clok^ for your Sin. Every Mouth shall be stopped. Behold, Heaven, Earth, and Hell
shall bear Record against you; yea your own Conscience will be instead of a
Thousand Witnesses, and strike you into silence and confusion. Whoever remains
Graceless in the Day of Grace, will be found Speechless in the Day of Judgment.

3. CONSIDER the extreme FOLLY of your present Security, and the Madness of
Continuing therein. O how unreasonable is it! It Is a Prodigy of Madness, as
well as Wickedness. He is unworthy the Name of a Man, that allows himself in
it. O that you could see what a sottish, stupid, blind and mad Thing it is! I
have not Words or Thoughts big enough to reach the Height of this Folly. Your
carnal Security and Ease is most irrational and absurd in it is Nature, Grounds
and Motives. It ^s an open Contradiction to all genuine Principles of Reason,
an offering Violence to all the Laws of Prudence and the Dictates of regular
Self-love. He might well be called a Fool, who said to himself, Soul, Take
thine Ease. -- Let me here offer a few Hints, to illusttrate this Point a
little.

YOUR Security is unreasonable, in that it is without all Ground; or stands on
a deceitful Bottom. It is chiefly owing to careless Inadvertence, or wild
Presumption, or wicked Infidelity. Your present Ease and Quiet is altogether
false and delusive. It is mere Forgery and Fiction; a lying Vanity, and empty
show of Peace: And is as different from true solid Rest of Soul, as a killing
Lethargy from the sweet and refreshing Sleep of Health: And at best it is but
for a Moment. O the stupidity then of your beloved Dreams!

BUT your Folly will be more glaring, if we consider what a MISERABLE State it
is you are secure and easy in. Your Misery is great upon you. The Miseries of
your present State are dreadful and astonishing. You are at a Distance from the
Blessed GOD, and are under His Wrath and Curse, in your Person and Enjoyments
and all the Work of your Hands. -- You are at War with GOD, in an active, as
well as passive Sense: The carnal Mind in you is Enmity against God. -- And you
are at War with your selves; innumerable hurtful Lusts are in you, which war
against the Soul, and with one another. And you are under the vilest Servitude
and Bondage; possessed by the Devil, chained down to the Earth, and sold under
Sin. You are also in a State of the utmost Poverty and Indigence. It was the
just Character of secure Laodicea and belongs to you. Rev. 3.17. Thou art
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked. You have no Interest
in GOD as your Portion, in CHRIST as your Redeemer, in the Holy SPIRIT as your
Comforter: You are without Grace, Mercy, and Peace, at present and without all
Right to Glory and Happiness hereafter. -- And (which exceedingly aggravates
all your Miseries) You are altogether unable to deliver yourself out of this
deplorable Condition; and are also UNWILLING to accept of Deliverance. O
amazing Stupidity and Indolence this! What a Riddle is here? Senseless and
quiet under such a pressing Load of Evils! Hear O Heavens; and be astonished O
Earth! Surely thou art more foolish than the Beast that has no understanding
and have not the Knowledge of a Man: To la^guish away an insensible Life in
such a Miserable State! Nothing more unreasonable! Nothing so unaccountable!

EXCEPT it be, that you are fearless amidst innumerable DANGERS that threaten
you; which are as awful, as the Miseries actually present are s^rrowfu^; and
call for the most awakened Resentment and Horror. Oh what a dark and dreadful
Prospect is there before you, secure Sinner! God has threatened to punish the
Men that are at Ease from their Youth and settled on their Lees. -- You are
daily liable to, and may well expect, OUTWARD and temporal Judgments, which may
soon end or much embitter your Life; for the whole Creation is armed against
you: And though through infinite Divine Patience you may prosper in your
Wickedness, yet this will be only in Judgment, and for a Moment.

BUT you are especially in danger of SPIRITUAL Miseries. Your Security exposes
you to all manner of Snares and Temptations to Sin the most gross and criminal;
and even invites your subtle Enemy to take advantage hereby to pursue his
malicious Designs, to your eternal Ruin. Mor^over you are in danger of ^^sing
the Means of Grace, at least the saving benefit of Them. Yea^ if you
voluntarily and studiously r^main Secure, you are in danger of being finally
abandoned of GOD, judicially ha^den^^; and so of growing worse and worse under
the Means of Goodness. Abundance of sad Examples hereof Scripture and
Observation afford us.

FINALLY Remember, You are in hourly danger of ETERNAL Miseries. Beyond and
after all the former Evils, there are unknown Plagues in Reserve for
unregenerate Sinners in the coming World, which you are every moment in the
utmost Hazard of. If you die unconvinc'd and impenitent, you will immediately
be punished with an Everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord. And
die you will shortly: You may die in Youth; you may die speedily, perhaps
suddenly, without Warning and without Relief. You have abundant Reason to fear
lest this be your dreadful Portion: For it is what the Word of GOD threatens to
rebellious obstinate Sinners. Prove. 29.1. He that being often reproved,
hardens his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy. And
the Providence of GOD is ever and anon presenting us with awful Executions of
this Threatening upon others: And you may reasonably expect the same Treatment
from vindictive Justice. It is a wonder of infinite Patience that you have been
spared hitherto: But how much longer Divine Compassion will reprieve you, is an
Uncertainty of trembling consideration. And if you should (as you have Ground
to fear you shall,) be snatched away unexpectedly, and hurled down suddenly
into the horrible Pit and devouring Fire, how will the sad Surprise amazingly
aggravate your fearful Doom; even as the Midnight Cry is the more terrible to
Us, as we start out of a pleasant Dream!

NOW reflect on these Things, O secure Sinner! Think of the awful Hazards you
incur: and see your egregious. Folly. Surely Madness is in thy Heart! Were you
not blinded by the God of this World and under the power of strong Delusions,
methinks, it could not be that you should thus despise your own Soul, and
expose your self to such dreadful Risques. How ^ad were it in a Man to sleep
carelessly on the Top of a Mast, or the Brink of a Precipice! Much more is it in
you to indulge your guilty Slumbers, over the Flames of Hell, and under the
loud Thunders of Heaven. It is Folly in the Exaltation, thus to sleep in the
midst of so many and such Dangers. Surely such deserve the Character of Sottish
Children; and you may well lie down in your shame, and Confusion cover you,
when you think of your astonishing Stupidity and Temerity; which declares you
more foolish than the silliest Worm, that by a natural Instinct studies
Self-preservation.

REMEMBER, it is one Point of Prudence to take a Prospect of Futurities, to
view Things in their last Result as well as present Aspect: and it is a Maxim of
Wisdom, that Evils in Reversion (however distant) do challenge the same notice
and should alike affect us, as if actually present. Hence the Wise Man
observes, Prove. 22.3. A prudent Person foreseeth the evil and hides himself:
but the simple pass on and are punished. It is the Folly and Ruin of ma^y Young
People, that they are so easily deceived with present Appearances, and will not
look forward to the End of Things; will not realize future Dangers, and govern
themselves by the serious Thoughts of Invisible Realities.

REMEMBER, It is a Point of Prudence to improve the first convenient Season for
the accomplishing Affairs of Weight and Necessity; and not to forego a present
Opportunity on the presumption of another or better hereafter. But now, how
contrary to this Principle is the Conduct of secure Sinners? It is certain,
Repentance is a matter of absolute Necessity; which must be seasonably minded,
or you are undone for ever. And you are sure of no Season but the present. And
yet how do you let slip one Opportunity after another? You will sleep on
securely to day and defer till to morrow, though you cannot promise your selves to
live 'till then. On what Distraction is it thus to depend on a remote
possibility, and venture your everlasting Concerns on so great an Uncertainty!

REMEMBER, It is a Point of Prudence to choose the fittest Seasons. And now as
to the Work of Repentance, the Time of Youth, the present Time is the best
Opportunity for it. By an Early Conversion the great Ends of Repentance are
most promoted, which are the Glory of God, and our own Peace and Welfare. This
Thought should animate you to an early seeking after Conviction which is a
necessary Medium to Conversion. The Reasons that should move you to seek
Convictions at all have the same Force now as ever to engage you, ^ay are more
obliging now in the Days of your Youth.

IN the Time of Youth Convictions are to be attained with greater Facility.
Youth is the Age of Discipline and Tractableness, and Tenderness. Now natural
Conscience is m^st wakeful and sensible and the Strivings of the Spirit
ordinarily most effectual. Now you are clogged with fewer Impediments, and so
Convictions will have easier Admission.

AND besides at this Age your Convictions will be lighter and more easily
borne. If Repentance be delayed, you will not be brought to it without more
Pa^^s and Groans; more Tears, and Terrors. The longer you sleep in carnal
Security, the opening of your Eyes will grow more Difficult, and the Scene more
terrible; more of Hell must be flasht in your Face, and there will be more
amazing Aggravations of Sin to rack the Conscience, and rend the Heart; and
consequen^^y greater Horrors will tak^ hold of you. The Stings of Sin will be
more in Number and greater in Smart; the wounds of Spirit deeper and the
workings of Conscience more violent afterward than in Youth. Delays will not
mollify the Anguish but double the Torment of painful Convictions. It is
wretched f^lly then to let go the present Season: It is contrary to right
Reason which teaches us the Wisdom of Prevention; and forbids our doing that,
(however grateful at present,) which will lay a Foundation for after-Sorrow and
Regret. How great then is your Madness, O Sinner, in that by your present
Security in the days of Youth, you are making Work for a bitter Repentance
hereafter, and taking an unhappy Method to render your Conversion more dolorous
and difficult, if you do at length obtain Mercy.

AGAIN, If Convictions are betimes begu^^ and entertained, the work will sooner
be over. Ordinarily Young Converts are not so long as others under preparatory
Terrors. As the Agonies of the New Birth in such are more tolerable; so they
are more transient, and such have fewer After pains.

THESE Things abundantly show that the Time of Youth is the special Season for
Repentance. Don't ^^en put it off on the vain Dream of a more convenient
Opportunity hereafter. Behold now is the Day of Salvation. Be wise therefore
and improve the present Day, for the seeking Convictions. Perhaps (as you have
heard) this may be your only Opportunity: But supposing it may be so, yet
surely it is the best. The present Season is attended with peculiar Advantages:
And there are no Objections occurring now, but what will equally lie against a
future Season; when it becomes present; nay will then be much enhaunced and
more invincibly embarrass you. Every Moment's Continuance in Security puts
(...) farther off from Convictions, and is a nigh^ Approach toward incurable
Obstinacy. ^^nally, Remember, if you perish at last, your ^estruction will be
of your self. You choose ^eath and invade Damnation. You will be ^stly charged
with Self-Murder. And is not ^is the Height of Phrensy?

THUS Y^ung Men and Brethren, I have own you in some little measure, how
foolish ^ur present Security is, and how extrava^ntly mad it will be to persist
herein. O that ^ou could be brought to see and realize these Things; and that
seeing how your Conduct ^terferes with all Rules of sober Reason, ^ou may blush
to act any more so inconsistent^y! O remember, and show your selves MEN.
^evere^ce the Character you sustain of rational Creatures; and think it beneath
the Dignity of your Nature to be so foolish, sottish and ^^pid, as heretofore.
We Young People are ^ery apt to indulge a sinful Self conceit, and ^^ked Pride;
more of us (it may be) perish (...) this Lust than by any other; and here we
^ant a Check and had need study Mortification. But there is a commendable
Self-conceit and lawful Pride; which 'twere well if we (...) more of it in us:
I mean a proper sense (...) our real Excellency as reasonable Beings; ^^st
value for the noble Powers we are en^^^d with, and an Ambition to do things
^^thy hereof: A holy Scorn and Aversion ^all that looks like or leads to Sin
and Folly, as a Degrading our Nature, and laying our Honor in the Dust. O let
such a Principle be cherisht in us. Let us be too proud to liken our selves to
unclean Devils by (...) or level our selves with untaught Brutes by Stupidity.
Not a Few there are indeed, who take a Pride in carnal Security, and vainly
boast of a resolved Bravery, as wise and heroic in them. Tell them of such and
such a thing that they have been warned about; they turn it off with a Smile
and Brag, that for their Parts they never heed, they mind not what is said to
'em, nor ever thought on it since; and so glory in their Shame. These Fools in
Israel hate Instruction and despise Wisdom. But so do not ye, My Brethren! The
Wisdom o^ the Prudent is to understand his Way, and to look well to his Goings;
and Happy is the Man that fears always: But he that hardens his Heart, shall
fall into Mischief; and at his End shall be a Fool.

HEARKEN unto Me therefore, O ye Children! Hear Instruction, and be wise, and
refuse it not.

TO Such among you as are now a little apprehensive of the Guilt and Folly of
your Security; and begin to inquire, How You MAY OBTAIN SPIRITUAL CONVICTIONS,
and get out o^ your secure State?

TO Such (I say) I wo^'d offer a few Words by way of Counsel and Direction.

AND here in the first place,

LET Me caution you to beware of all the Causes of Security, and Impediments of
Awakening. Watch against every Thing that ^ends to nourish Sloth, and to
prevent your ^esiring, or Obtaining Convictions. You must learn the Causes of
Security, and not be ^gnorant of the Devices of Satan: You must watch and guard
against them.

TAKE Heed then of affected Ignorance. It ^s the Ruin of Many, They shut their
Eyes against the Light that shines about Them, or ^^rn away their Face; whereby
their foolish heart is darkened, and Satan keeps his Goods (...) peace. --
Beware of false Reasonings and Pre^^^ices. Shut your Ears against all the
Ca^^ls and Objections of an evil Heart of Unbelief, which is Enmity against
GOD, and is not subject to his Law. Take heed you don't entertain wrong and
abusive Apprehensions concerning GOD; as being full of Revenge and inexorable;
which will tend to damp all Thoughts of a Reconciliation; or as so full Grace
and Pity that He cannot be disposed to ^amn His own Creatures, however Sinful;
which will tend to harden you from the Fear of GOD. Beware of Misconceptions
concerning CHRIST; as if His Satisfaction had taken ^way the Obligation of the
Moral Law as a Rule, removed the Necessity of Repentance and Personal
Obedience, and purchased a Dispensation for Wickedness. -- Beware of light
Thoughts of Sin, as not being so evil, and ^^tensive to GOD, as it is
represented. -- Take ^ed of loose Thoughts about the Scriptures as to their
Divine Original, or just Translation. -- Beware you don't dis-believe or make
light of unseen Eternal Realities. Suffer not your depraved Senses to be Judges
between Things present and Things to come. Hearken not to their false Reports,
and flattering Promises about Worldly Objects. Beware of a^ immoderate Esteem
of the World; lest this engross your Thoughts and Cares, Desires and Joys; and
fatally divert you from minding your Everlasting Concerns; as was the case of
the unhappy Young Man, of whom we read, Mat. 19.16 -- 22. -- Also abandon evil
Company. Forsake the foolish, and live. Break off from your drunken Clubbs, or
merry Meetings, and leave the Company in which you are won^ to have your
Riotings, your Chambering, and Wantonness, and evil deeds of darkness. Depart,
I pray you, from the Tents of these wicked vain Persons, and touch nothing of
their^ lest you be consumed. Follow not their vicious Practices, nor listen to
their ill Devices.

FURTHER, Beware of deceiving your self with a comparative Righteousness. Young
People are very apt to take the measure of their own worth on Religious
accounts (as well a^ others) from such as are inferior to them; and to swell in
their own Conceit when they behold others more profane and wicked tha^
themselves. They trust in themselves that the^ are righteous, and despise
others. They ar^ pur^ in their own eyes, if a little more refin'^ than the
looser Rabble. And therefore are secure and easy; and with the vainglorious
Pharisee can say, as in Luke 18.11. God, I thank thee, that I am not as other
men are! O take ^eed, that you don't depend on a mere comparative Righteousness.

FINALLY, Let the Children of the Kingdom, ^^e Posterity of godly Parents,
beware of ^usting in the Privileges of their Birth, and Education. Don't
presume on your Covenant-^elation to GOD, or your natural Relation to ^e
Friends of GOD. Don't depend on your baptism: This alone profits nothing.
Don't rest in your Parents Prayers for you: ^alue them, but don't over rate
them. All ^he Interest they have in Heaven will not purchase a Dispensation for
you! If you repent ^ot, you must perish even as others, who are ^he Seed of the
Wicked and Aliens from the Commonwealth of Israel. Verily, though Noah, Da^iel
and Job (and Abraham and Moses with them,) were ^^^ne Ancestors and Advocates;
yet they should ^eliver neither Son nor Daughter that abides im^^itent. If thou
sinnest against the Lord, the ^ope of thy Fathers, think not to escape the
Ven^ence, which awaits the Children of Disobedience: Nay a most heavy
Vengeance, aggra^ated by the Advantages you enjoy, which (...) many and great.
Beware then of trusting (...) your pious Parentage, and the Privileges ^ereof.
-- Receive these Cautions, O Secure ^inner, and improve them.

BUT further let me now Advise you more directly in the following Particulars.

1. ENDEAVOR to furnish your self with suitable measures of KNOWLEDGE in
Spiritual Things. If you would awake to Righteousness, you must get the
Knowledge of GOD; as is intimated 1 Cor. 15.34. Without Knowledge (which is the
Spring of rational Operations) the Heart cannot be good. Illumination is a
necessary Antecedent to Convictions; tho^ Conviction be not a necessary
Consequent of That; For alas, many very knowing Professors, yea Preachers of
the Gospel, are real Slaves of Satan: yet none can become the true Servants of
GOD without Christian Knowledge. You must therefore endeavor to get acquainted
with the Things of your Peace, and know the Mysteries of Godliness. You must
lear^ to know your own Selves; what you were a^ first created in Adam, what you
are since Apostate; what you are still capable of being. You must endeavor
after the clearest apprehensions of GOD, absolutely and relatively considered;
and of CHRIST the Redeemer; and the Holy SPIRIT the great Teacher, Sanctifier
and Comforter. You must understand the Terms of Salvation. You must know the
Rule of Duty; together with the Grounds and Reasons of it. You must get
acquainted with the Divine Threatenings and Promises, etc.

IF you are not duly informed of these Things, no wonder that you are secure
and im^^^^ent. If then you would obtain effectual Convictions, before all
gettings get understanding, and search for Knowledge, as for hid Treasures.
Labor after a teachable frame of Spirit; Use the Means; and cry to the GOD of
Knowledge for Instruction. Thus you are exhorted and encouraged to do, Prove. 2.
Begin. ^o Prove. 8. Begin. which Scriptures turn to, and ^ead at your leisure.

2. PERSUADE your self to MEDITATE; Commune with your own heart seriously and
often ^^out the solemn Truths tending to Conviction. Simple Speculation without
practical Reflection can never have any warm and sensible Effects (...) your
hard Heart. Barren Knowledge only ^uffeth up the fleshy Mind. It is Musing
makes the Fire burn. David witnesses, (Psalm. 119.59.) (...) considered -- and
turned. The Prodigal Son's Repentance began here, (Luke 15.17.) When he ^^me to
himself, he said, -- I perish -- I will arise and go to my Father, etc. It is
the want of serious Consideration that ruins Multitudes. Israel does not know,
my People does not consider; therefore they have forsaken the Lord. (Isai. 1.3,
4.) If Men would but bethink themselves, it may be they would repent. (1 Kin.
8.47.) What is the Reason, that in times of Sickness or imminent Hazard,
Conscience recovers some sense, Sinners are more concerned than at other Times,
and Fearfulness surprises the Hypocrite? It is because now they are
Considerate. They look about them, and take a fuller view of Things; and are
therefore more affected. As Faith is necessary to make spiritual Things
evident: so is Considera^^^^ to make them efficacious. This gives

Truths Weight and Warmth, and applies them wirh power to the Soul; and is the
leading step toward Conversion.

LET Young People be persuaded then to give themselves to Meditation. Learn to
fix your Thoughts and contract a Habit of Thinking, sober serious Thinking.
With the Reason that becomes Men, and the Solicitude that becomes Sinners, set
your selves to meditate on Divine and Spiritual things; especially those Truths
which most tend to awaken you to Repentance.

O think on the Guilt, Pollution, and Misery of your natural State. Think on
the Evil of Sin in its Nature and Consequences. Think on the Sins of your past
Lives; consider 'em in their Quality, Number, and aggravating Circumstances.
Think on the infallible Knowledge, infinite Purity, and inflexible Truth,
almighty Power and exact Righteousness of that GOD, whom you have provoked by
your Sins. Think on the Reasonableness and Perfection of His Precepts, the
Dreadfulness of the Threatenings and Greatness of the Promises annexed thereunto.
Think on your absolute Inability to fulfill the Law, to expiate for Sin, or
endure the Curse. Think on the blessed Provision, made for you in JESUS CHRIST.
Think on the Greatness of the Salvation purchased by CHRIST, and proposed in
the Gospel; the Freeness and Grace of the Offer; the Condescension of the
Terms; and the Assistance tendered you. Think how much it cost the Son of GOD,
even His own most precious Blood, to procure this Redemption for you. Think
much of CHRIST and Him crucified, of CHRIST and Him glorified. Think
particularly on the Agonies of His Soul, which was exceeding sorrowful even
unto Death; under a Sense of Sin and Apprehension of the Wrath of GOD; and
endeavor after some Imitation hereof. -- Meditate on the Vanity and Meanness
of all Earthly Things. Think on the Certainty and Awfulness of approaching
Death, Judgment and Eternity. Think on the Glories and Joys of Heaven; the
Miseries and Pains of Hell: And the infinite Folly you are guilty of in not
taking a timely Care to secure the Former, and avoid the Latter.

THESE are some of the Things, which you should meditate upon, and a due
Consideration whereof would have a rational Tendency to impress your hard Heart
and awaken you out of your sleepy Insensibility.

O Sinner, I beseech you then, Think on these Things sadly in the fear of GOD.
Set your Heart unto all these Things, give thy self wholly to them. Let your
Meditations be voluntary and chosen, free and unconstrained. Let them also be
leasurely, frequent, and solemn. Take Time and take Pains, and be diligent in
the Work.

THIS is a Duty of vast Importance; and therefore must not be trifled in, much
less neglected. This also is what you have a natural Capacity for. You can thus
meditate if you will. You don't want Ability; nor do you want Opportunity. And
this is the best Use of your thinking Powers. Your Thoughts are generally
buisy: And what can you employ them about, that is of greater Weight or Value
than the Subjects before mentioned? Your Minds are very apt indeed to run upon
your worldly Affairs, Pleasures, Profits, Honors, Friends, etc. But alas! how
foolish are you in this? Since those other Meditations, recommended above, are
incomparably more necessary, excellent, delightful, and beneficial: And in
themselves are no greater Toil and Labor.

WHAT Excuse then can you frame? What Pretense to palliate your Neglect of holy
spiritual Meditation? Verily thou art inexcusable, O Man, whoever thou art,
that live in the omission hereof. Be exhorted then, to dismiss your vain
Thoughts with shame and Regret for them; and to overcome your natural Aversion
to spiritual Meditation, and speedily set about this great Work. O that I could
persuade you THIS NIGHT to retire and spend a little Moment in serious. Debates
with your own Heart on the Sin and Folly of present Delays in the Affairs of
your Soul! And henceforward to accustom your self, now and then to separate
some small Portion of your Time [tho' 'twere but a few Minutes in a Day] in
solemn Consideration of some awakening Truths; possibly this might be blessed
to your saving Conviction: And methinks, This were but an inconsiderable Thing
to do for your Soul. -- There can be no rational Expectation of your thorough
Awakening, 'till you can be brought to sober Thinking. But if I could persuade
you to this, (so necessary, so cheap, so reasonable a Duty,) and you would
engage in it in Earnest, it would be a hopeful Omen of your Conversion. O
therefore deny not this much to you self, deny it not to GOD, if you will deny
it me. I have told the Truth: Consider what I say, and the Lord give you
understanding! 2 Timothy 2.7. or if you put me to conclude in harsher Terms, they
shall be still the Oracles of GOD. Psalm. 50.22. Now consider this ye that
forget GOD, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

AND so much for the Second Direction; which I have been the longer upon,
because of it is singular Importance in the present Case.

3. YOU must with great Industry and Care improve all proper OUTWARD HEL^^s and
MEANS, conducible to Spiritual Conviction.

(1.) WITH a view to this End, Diligently read the Holy Scriptures, and other
pious Books. Don't mispend your Time and endanger your Soul by conversing with
idle, lewd, profane Authors; which tends only to exalt Folly and alienate you
more from the Life of God. But read Religious Composures; Books of Devotion,
practical Sermons, pious Lives, etc. particularly such as are most suited to
the Case of the Secure. Choose with Caution: Peruse with Deliberation and
Diligence.

MORE especially be conversant with the blessed BIBLE. Give your self to
reading in the Law of the Lord, which is perfect, converting the Soul, making
wise the simple. Read your Bible frequently; Look into it Day and Night; and
that with a reachable and obedient Spirit: with attentive Consideration: with
firm Belief: and a wise Application of what you read, to your own Soul, by way
of Trial and of Charge. -- Observe these Directions in Reading your Bible; and
this will probably be a successful Means of your Awakening. The Apostle tells
Timothy, who from a Child had known the Holy Scriptures, that they are
profitable for Doctrine, for Conviction, for Correction; and able to make men
wise to Salvation, (2 Timothy 3.15, 16.)

(2.) ATTEND on the Public Ministry of the Word. The common Catechism (that
excellent Form of sound Words which you will do well to study much, and ought
to hold fast in Faith and Love; This, I say,) teaches you, that the SPIRIT of
GOD makes the Reading, but especially the Preaching, of the Word an effectual
means of Convincing and Converting Sinners. -- The Truth of which Doctrine has
been (through the Riches of Divine Grace) confirmed in innumerable Instances. --
Attend then on the Word Preached. Look on the Public Ministry, as a Divine
Institution. Realize the special Presence of GOD with His faithful Ministers.
Let every one so account of them as of the Ambassadors of Christ, and Stewards
of the Mysteries of God: and when they speak according to the Law and to the
Testimony, receive their Message not as the Word of Man, but as (what it is
indeed) the Word of GOD. -- Let me here advise you, to be careful (though not too
curious) in the Choice of the Ministry, you commit your Self to the Conduct of.
Beware of an Ignorant Ministry; or a Ministry that is merely Speculative; or
that is Superficial, and at best only throws a few Squibbs at grosser Sins, but
seldom (if ever) touches on more hidden spiritual Sins; nor attempts to lay
open the Misery, Guilt and Danger of a Natural state, and show Sinners their
need of CHRIST for Righteousness and Strength, etc. Choose not a Ministry of
either of these dangerous Characters. But fix your self under a Skilful and
Orthodox, a Godly and Experienced, a Practical Scriptural and Searching
Ministry; which preaches JESUS CHRIST, and shuns not to declare the whole
Counsel of GOD, and studies to commend itself to every Man's Conscience in the
sight of GOD.

AND having chosen well, also improve well. Be swift to hear; and take heed how
(as well as whom) you hear. Attend with Constancy, Reverence and Diligence, as
an humble Learner. Lay aside all superfluity of naughtiress: and receive with
meekness the ingraffed Word, which is able to save your Soul. Receive the Truth
in the Love of it; Mix the Word with Faith; Hide it in your Heart, and labor
to press it on Conscience, both in the hearing, and afterward.

UNDER the Conduct of these Rules make Use of the Word preached, as
instrumental of Conviction and Repentance; and it may be 'twill work
effectually in you; as it did in them, of whom we read, in 1 These. 2.13.

(3.) ENDEAVOR to improve Awakening Providence for this End. Thus, Are you
under Afflictions your self? Labor to get your Heart suitably affected. Don't
set God's Judgments at defiance, nor harden your self against Discipline.
Solomon sometimes observes, that the Rod gives Wisdom. And Elihu before him; If
they be bound in Fetters, and be holden in cords of Affliction: then he shows
them their Work and their Transgressions, that they have exceeded. He opens
also their Ear unto Discipline, and commands that they return from Iniquity.
-- Afflictions by a natural Efficacy tend to soften and humble. When GOD's Hand
is upon you then, take this Opportunity to press after Convictions. In the Day
of Adversity consider. Hear the Rod, and who has appointed it. Receive
Correction; set in with Providence, and work together with GOD. Thus Manasseh,
and thus the Prodigal Son improved their outward Afflictions to their inward
Humiliation and Repentance.

LET me add here; Observe, and Study to affect your self with the Death of
other Young People; and the sad Outcries of the Impenitent in their last
Moments. Look on what befalls others, as a Warning and Call from Heaven to you,
and let it strike an Awe upon you. -- Let the Sudden Deaths which you have seen
or heard of at any Time alarm your Fears and rouse you out of your Security. --
And when it is a Time of Spreading Mortality, when Death rides in Triumph in
our Streets, (and GOD only knows how near such an awful Season may be!) This is
a loud Summons to every One; especially to Young People who are most exposed to
Infectious Diseases; a loud Call (I say) This is to Us to turn unto Him that
smites. We should wisely observe, resent, and improve such Dispensations; and
study to affect our Hearts, that we may tremble at the Arm of the LORD
stretched out and humble our selves under His mighty Hand. This GOD expects.
See Joel 2.1, etc.

(4.) ANOTHER good Help to be made Use of, is religious Company and Conference.
He that walks with the Wise shall be wise: But a Companion of Fools shall be
destroyed. ( Prove. 13.20.) The Fruit of the Righteous is a Tree of Life; and He
that wins Souls is wise ( Prove. 11.30) I have before directed you to desert
(as ruinous) the unnecessary Company of Vain Persons. I now farther advise you
to betake your self to the Society of the Awakened and Converted; whose pious
Example and Discourse, serious Counsels and Reproofs, may be blessed of GOD for
your Conviction. The Apostle speaks of Some, who do not obey the Word, as if
they might be won by the good Conversation of their Associates. Some have been
wrought upon, this way, whom the Word did never reach. Resolve then to be a
Companion of them that fear the LORD. Acquaint your Self betimes with the
Godly; and perhaps their holy Communion may be a Savor of Life unto you. As
live-Coals kindle those that are dead: So to converse with lively Saints may
have a warm and enlivening Influence upon you. Light may break in upon you, as
a Flame from a sparkling Fire!

THESE are the external Helps, which you are advised to use.

4. HEARKEN to the lowest WHISPERS of CONSCIENCE; observe and cultivate the
least Beginnings of Conviction. Hoist and spread the Sails when the Wind begins
to blow. Open all the Powers of your Soul, to the Divine Breathings; and
cherish the faintest Impulses of the HOLY SPIRIT. In the use of Means, wait and
watch for Convictions; embrace 'em at their first Offer or Approach. When Light
flashes in upon you, don't let your Heart rise in Opposition, or your Mind
divert and start away. But whatsoever good Thought is at any Time darted into
you, immediately close with it and fasten it, as a Nail in a sure Place.
Whatsoever devout Affection begins to stir in you, don't go to stifle and
smother it, but carefully nourish it. Back the first Motions of the SPIRIT with
lose Consideration and agreeable Ejaculations: By which Method a little Spark
may happily kindle into a living Flame, and a small Ray of Light prove the
Dawning of the perfect Day.

5. SEEK to GOD by PRAYER, for Convictions. Prayer indeed should precede,
accompany and follow the Use of Means, and Endeavors: And it is an excellent
Means it self. Pray to GOD then as for Pardon and other Mercies, so for
Conviction and Repentance which is the Gift of GOD. Beg of GOD that He would
send His HOLY SPIRIT to convince you of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment.
Realize it that GOD only is able (and that He is graciously willing)
effectually to enlighten and awaken you; and in the belief of this, cease not
day and night Crying to GOD, that He would open your Eyes and turn you from
Darkness to Light. Beg that He would not suffer you any longer to trample on
Conscience, to resist the SPIRIT and be easy in your Bondage. Beg that He would
not leave you to your own foolish Heart and trifling Endeavors in see^ing
after Convictions: Beg that GOD would ^^ake you out of your false Peace and
Security, and inspire you with a just concern for your perishing Soul; that He
would give you seeing Eyes, hearing Ears, and a contrite Heart.

BUT if you expect to obtain the desired Blessing, you must be diligent, and
constant, in seeking it. -- Use your self to transient, ejaculatory Prayer on
all proper Occasions, which will wonderfully tend to fix your Thoughts and warm
your Heart, and perhaps may be the means of lasting Impressions. -- Keep up a
stated course of more solemn Prayer: and in the Name of CHRIST importunately
beg for the teaching and convincing Influences of the Divine SPIRIT. Look to
your own Spirit, and watch over your Senses, when calling upon the LORD. Don't
hurry over your Prayers, and hasten to rise from your Knees. Make a solemn
Business of this Duty. Retire into some secret Place, and devote some Time to
the performance of it. Content not your self with a few broken Petitions, put
up when in Company with others, or in your Bed: Nay, but thou, when thou
prayest, enter into thy Closet, and shut the Door, and pray to thy Father who
sees in secret. Make Conscience of doing this, Morning and Evening at least:
And endeavor to be fervent in Spirit, and continue instant in Prayer without
ceasing. Cold Formality, and Remissness in Prayer drive away the Holy SPIRIT.
And I believe there is not a more common and fatal Impediment to Conversion,
than the Neglect of, or Negligence in Closet-Duties. Beware then hereof.

THUS I have given you some imperfect Advice, What Methods to take in Order to
Conviction. And now O Secure Sinner, We Charge you before GOD and the LORD
JESUS CHRIST and the Elect Angels, that you observe these Things. But know it,
if you will not hear: all these Words which I testify unto you this Day, are on
Record, and will rise up in Judgment against you; which GOD forbid!

IT is Time now to hasten to the SECOND Branch of the Exhortation.

HAVING spoken to the Secure: I am now to Address those among our Young People
who are under some CONVICTIONS and AWAKENINGS.

SOME of this Sort, I persuade my self there are here present before the LORD.
Sure I am, there has been enough said for the Conviction of every considering
Sinner. And I hope there are not a Few, who are enquiring the Way to Zion, with
their Faces thitherward.

UNTO such I shall therefore now offer Something by way of Counsel and
Direction. The LORD, who knows who they are, make it a word in Season to them
that are weary!

NOW in the First place, Let me exhort you to be THANKFUL to GOD for your
present Troubles and Convictions.

SEE the Hand of GOD in Them. Look on your present Trouble of Conscience as the
Work of the SPIRIT, whether common or special. They are GOD's Terrors, His
Arrows. They must not be imputed to Satan, to your Selves, or to Distemper of
Body, as the original Cause. No; For it is the Hand of GOD, which thus writes
bitter Things against you, and makes you to possess the Iniquities of your
Youth. Own and Adore GOD herein. Also see the Mercy of GOD unto you, Prize your
Convictions, and be thankful. Don't resent your Trouble as a Misery and
Unhappiness; It is ten thousand Times more eligible than carnal Security, which
is the broad Road to Hell.

CONSIDER; This Trouble of Conscience, is the Method of the Divine SPIRIT with
all that are brought home to GOD; though there are very different Degrees of it.
He humbles before He exalts. Moreover, This seems requisite in the Reason of
Things, as a necessary Preparatory to saving Faith. For CHRIST will not be
precious to any, till Sin and Wrath become bitter and burdensome to Conscience.
-- And then hereby you are brought nigh the Kingdom of God, and may take
encouragement from the Invitations of the Gospel; which are peculiarly directed
to such as labor and are heavy laden. -- Your present Trouble is a Symptom of
intended Mercy. It is wholesome Discipline you are under. It is the SPIRIT of
GOD that is wounding of you, and you need not fear a Lance in the Hand of Love
and Tenderness. O don't regret your Case then; but be thankful to GOD, that you
are not left to such a Spirit of Slumber, as many others about you are, and as
you also deservedly might have been. Don't envy the secure their quiet and
ease, which is false and groundless, and makes them the Objects of Scorn and
Pity, rather than of Envy.

2. BE careful to PRESERVE your present Convictions; and watch against all that
threatens you with the loss of them, or miscarriage under them. You are in
great Danger: For the Devil hates to see you under this Trouble; He is afraid
of losing a Subject, and gnasheth his Teeth for Vexation. And be sure he will
use all his Art and Strength to recover and secure you in his own Possession.
He will make use of the World without and a deceitful wicked Heart within to
accomplish his malicious Designs upon you. The Flesh, World, and Devil are in a
cursed Concert to rob you of your present Convictions, or defeat the end of
them. This speaks your Danger, and loudly calls upon you to Watch and Pray that
you enter no^ into such Temptations, as may endanger you.

SEE then that you don't Espouse any flattering and stupifying Principles. a
vast Variety whereof there is, agreeable to the Tendencies of corrupt Nature
and the Dictates of the carnal Mind; which Sinners in their Distress often
eagerly imbibe, whereby they are ^ull'd into Security, and drowned in
Perdition. Watch against all such Opinions. Be careful therefore what Books you
read: Beware also what Teachers you repair to in your Troubles. There are many
spiritual Mountebanks as well as natural, that poison sick Souls, as others do
sick Bodies. From such withdraw thy self. -- But, Don't decline a Faithful
Searching Ministry, because you cannot sit under it with a quiet easy
Conscience; as the Apostle has foretold some would do, (2 Timothy 4.3, 4.) Neither
date to hide or deride the Convictions of the Spirit, as the manner of some is;
nor treat them as unwelcome Guests, by flying from them, or resisting of them.
-- Again, Beware of a delaying Frame. Don't elude Conscience by idle Excuses.
Take heed you don't betray your Soul into Rum by pretended Resolutions of
future Repentance. Take heed you don't abuse the Doctrines of the spiritual
Impotence of Humane Nature, and of the Difficulty of Repentance and Obedience;
and make them a pretense for sloth and present delay. -- Take heed you don't
presume on the Patience of GOD, and because you are Young put far from you the
Evil Day, and apprehending no present Danger be tempted to leave your
Conversion as a matter of future concern, and suffer good Disposions to wear
off and die away from Time to Time. -- Again, Have a Care of proud Self
sufficiency, and of undue Confidence in the Means of Grace, without a proper
Respect to the supreme Efficient; whereby you will dishonor and affront the
HOLY SPIRIT and provoke Him to suspend His Divine Influences; whereupon the
most promising Means and best Endeavors will be insignificant; and you will
necessarily return to former Security. Again, Beware of making rash Resolutions
in your own Strength; whereby you will forfe^t the Aids of Divine Grace, and
provoke GOD to leave you to the power of Satan, as a just punishment of your
Pride and Presumtion. Again, Take heed of indulging any secret Lust, or
persisting in any known Way of Wickedness; which will offend the HOLY SPIRIT,
and must needs defile and cloud and harden Conscience. Again, Beware of a
Self-righteous Spirit. "Take heed of valuing your own Tears in the room of
CHRIST's Blood", of advancing your own Performances into the place of His
meritorious obedience, and setting your own Prayers in the room of His
Intercession. If you indulge such a legal Pharisaical Spirit, you may perhaps
pacify Conscience hereby, but you will only inflame the Wrath of GOD yet more
against you, and provoke the Spirit to leave you. Again, Beware of
Discouragement. As you must not give Way to false Hopes, so neither to
Despondencies. Don't take up any desperate Conclusions, as if there was no Hope
nor Help for you; this will check and chill Convictions, weaken and obstruct
the Motions of the Spirit; and tempt you to abandon your self to sullen
Melancholy or sottish Security. Finally, Beware of all worldly Enticements and
Entanglements. Endeavor to get above the Frowns and Flatteries of the World.
Take heed lest you fall asleep on the soft Pillow of external Ease, Pomp and
Pleasure. Be blind to the deceitful Smiles, and deaf to the tempting Charms of
a vain World. And take heed lest the Cares of this Life choke the Word, and you
lose your Convictions in a Throng of worldly Fears, Projects, and Employments.
Multitudes do drown in the Sea, or bury in the Earth, or barter away in the
Shop, or let one care or other suppress and shift off the Convictions they
receive in the House of GOD. Unhappy Business has slain its Ten Thousands. Take
heed lest being careful and cumber'd about many Things, you forget and forfeit
the one Thing needful.

FURTHER Beware of Evil Company. This was cautioned against before as tending
to keep Sinners secure; and now as tending to make Sinners secure. And indeed
those under Convictions have as much need of being warned against this
Temptation, as those in Security. For how often do vain Companions persuade the
convinced Sinner off of serious Resolutions, and laugh him out of a pensive
Frame, or hector away his Troubles? O save your self therefore from this
untoward Generation. Have no Fellowship with the unfruitful Works of Darkness.
Resolve with the Psalmist, and say; Depart from me, all ye Workers of Iniquity,
for I will keep the Commandments of my GOD. -- And also Beware of being
infected by Evil Examples. Others Security is, no Doubt, a common Temptation to
Young People. They see their Companions, and alas! too often their Elders,
Their Parents (it may be) or Masters and Mistresses, These they observe are
light and vain; and this prompts them to shake off awakening Thoughts and
Fears. Beware O YOUNG MAN, of this too common Snare. Let neither Fear nor Love
of any betray you into an Imitation of their Security. Dare to be singular in
that which is good. Don't give Way to a vicious Shame or false Modesty, which
may tempt you to sinful Compliances with others.

FURTHER, Beware of carnal Counsels in the day of your Distress. Unbelieving
Friends are some of the worst Counselors in this case. The best Advice that
such miserable Comforters ordinarily give is to heave off trouble some
Impressions, to enjoy ones self, and Friends, and the Comforts of Life, etc.
And what Numbers of Young People have fatally miscarried under hopeful
Convictions by hearkening to such unhappy Advice? O stop your Ears against the
baneful Counsels of carnal Acquaintants. Consult not with Flesh and Blood, My
Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent thou not. Let the Counsel of the Wicked be
far from you. Listen not to the ungodly Whispers or Clamours of Men of corrupt
Minds, however you may be related to or dependent on them. In a word, Harden
your self against the Flouts and Scoffs of them that are at Ease in Zion. Put
on Courage and Resolution; for want whereof Conscience is not seldom overawed
and born down against it is own Light and Bent.

THUS I have cautioned you against some of the many Wiles whereby Satan uses to
divert or pervert Convictions begun in Young People. O study the various
Policies of the Enemy. Be not ignorant of his Devices, lest he get an Advantage
against you. Learn where his strength lies, and where your Weakness; the
Delilah's Lap you are in danger of sleeping in; and be upon your Guard. Be
jealous over your self, and fear lest there be some hidden Temptation, which
through your Ignorance or Carelessness may secretly undermine and evacuate your
present Convictions and so perhaps work your Ruin. Consider; your Great Judge
keeps an exact Memorandum of all the Motions of His SPIRIT, and your
Entertainment of them; and will one day call you to an Account for them; and
how will you answer it, if you quench your Convictions? If you do thus, verily
your Guilt and your Folly will be great. This will be to add Rebellion to Sin.
Hereby you will fight against GOD, disobey His Voice, abuse His Patience and
affront His HOLY SPIRIT. You will impiously and basely fly in the Face of your
Great Physician and despise the only Remedy. You will hereby provoke the
grieved Spirit to forsake you; which is a Judgment (I fear) not a few of the
risen Youth of this degenerate Day are under: And you will highly gratify the
unclean Spirit, and invite his Return into his old Dwelling with more strength
and company than Ever; and so your last State will be worse than the first,
more miserable and more dangerous. You will then be in danger of growing worse
and worse, and treasuring up wrath against the day of Wrath. You will be in
Danger of sudden Destruction, and (...) greater Damnation.

HOWEVER, at the best, if you reject or ^ose present Convictions, you will be
laying (...) for dreadful Remorse and Horror, and will ^^y dear for your Folly
in the days of your ^^rious Reflection, if ever you are Converted.

LET these Considerations deter every Awa^en'd Sinner from a Relapse into
Security, and ^^ery thing that tends to, or borders upon it. ^hatever you do,
besure keep Conscience wake; Quench not the Spirit by Neglect, or ^esistence,
or any undue Methods. Now He (...) making a Visit of Conviction to your
Cons^^ence, be tenderly careful, lest by any ill ^reatment or a want of
suitable Entertain^ent, you cause Him to remove from you ^spleas'd and grieved.

3. LABOR to promote the VIGOR and ge^^ine Efficacy of your Convictions.
Endeavor (...) all means to cherish and quicken every ^^od Motion: Lay your
self open to the ^onvictions of the SPIRIT, and let them ^^ve a free and full
Operation in you. ^on't be content, that they should stand at a ^^use, much
less languish and decline. Don't (...) to limit the Holy One, either as to the
^^easure or Duration of your Troubles. Take ^^ed you don't deceive your self
with only a ^eming and partial work of Conviction. See ^^at your Convictions be
true and sound, ^^m right Principles and Motives. And endeavor to fasten, and
perfect them every Day, that they may rise into a clearer Light and stronger
Flame, till the Sun of Righteousness shine upon you with Healing under his
Wings, and the Day dawn in your Heart. Endeavor to get forward into the Work
of Humiliation and Contrition; else your Convictions will be of no real benefit
to you. Rest not till you are got into a state of Evangelical Repentance. --
Which brings me to the last Thing under this Head, --

4. LABOR after a true and thorough CONVERSION to GOD. Rest not in your
present State: but seek after the washing of Regeneration, and the Renewing of
the Holy Ghost. Don't stop at Convictions and imperfect Beginnings of
Repentance: but labor after an unfeigned Close with CHRIST, and complete
Conversion to GOD. Peter's Advice to them, who were pricked in their Heart was
that; REPENT, and be Baptized in the Name of CHRIST. -- Paul^s Advice to the
trembling Jayler was that; BELIEVE on the Lord JESUS CHRIST. Be exhorted then
to return to GOD in the way of Repentance; and hasten to CHRIST in the way of
Faith. -- Otherwise you can never find Rest to your troubled Soul. -- Otherwise
all the weary steps you have already taken toward your Salvation will be lost
Labor. Thou are not far from the Kingdom of GOD: and will you suffer your self
to perish on the very Borders of Canaan? To go to Hell by the Gates of Heaven,
as the foolish Virgins did, This is dreadful indeed, and how bitter will be the
Reflection? -- Now this you are in danger of through the Temptations of Satan,
and the Treachery of an evil Heart that is ready to side with him.

BE Exhorted then to work out your Salvation with Fear and Trembling. STRIVE to
enter in at the strait Gate; for many shall seek to enter in and shall not.

AND what Thou do, do quickly. It is a matter of Life and Death, and
requires Haste. No Advantage is to be gotten by Delays. A great deal of Good is
lost hereby. Your Troubles are needlessly prolonged; and many Evils incurred.
And besides, thereby you do forfeit the Grace of GOD, without which you can
cannot improve your Convictions (admit they be continued, which is uncertain) to
effectual Repentance. Behold, NOW is the accepted Time. Yet a little while is
the Light with you; walk while ye have the Light, lest Darkness come upon you.
Now believe in the Light, that ye may be the Children of Light.

BUT let no Man deceive Himself. Beware of mistaking the Nature or the Signs of
Conversion. Remember; Conversion does not lie in, nor is evidenced by a visible
Profession and Form of Godliness; a reformed Life and moral Virtue: or inward
legal Terrors and transient Qualms of religious Melancholy: or some volatile
Sparklings of devout Affection^ some sudden Starts of Desire or Plashes of Joy:
or a dead Faith, and presumtuous Reliance on the Merits of CHRIST: nor is a
seeming Peace and Serenity of Mind, after great Terrors of Conscience and an
apprehended Work of Conviction, any Argument of saving Conversion. -- Too many
there are, who deceive themselves with these Things; judging their State good,
either upon wrong Principles, or false Evidences. There is a Generation that
are pure in their own eyes; and yet are not washed from their filthiness, Prove.
30.12. But the Day is coming when the Searcher of Hearts (who cannot be deceived
and who will not be mocked) will judge the World in Righteousness: and Self-Deceit
in this matter will prove of undoing Consequence. -- Be jealous then over your
own Heart, that you don't deceive your self with a partial or superficial Work
of the Spirit, instead of a true and thorough Operation. Be careful that you
don't mistake the true Characters of the Regenerate; that you don't content
your self with any Thing short of them; neither rashly apply 'em.

USE all proper Means conducive to Conversion. Attend on the Ordinances of GOD,
especially the Word Preached, which is the ordinary Vehicle of sanctifying
Influences. -- Study the Gospel: Meditate much on the Promises of GOD, whereby
awakened Sinners are made Partakers of the Divine Nature; and on the Blood of
CHRIST, which only can purge your Conscience from dead Works to serve the
living GOD. -- Discover your Case, and go for Counsel, to some tender,
faithful, judicious, experienced Christians; and particularly the Ministers of
the Gospel, whose Business as well as Delight it is to show you the way of
Salvation and assist you under your spiritual Troubles. -- But see that you use
these and all other Means Dependently, with an Eye to CHRIST as the Head of
Influences, without whom the best Means will be ineffectual. -- And use them
Diligently. Use all appointed Means public and private. Improve all proper
opportunities, and spare no Pains. Let Heart and Hand be engaged, and make a
Work on it. Content not your self with lazy Wishes, or cold Attempts; which is
the next Reason of many Sinners failing of the Grace of GOD. (See Prove. 21.25.)

YET do not rest in the bare Use of Means, or think to obtain the desired End
by your own ^olitary Endeavors. But open your Case to GOD in Prayer: Carry your
Complaint to the Throne of Grace; and beg for converting Influences from above.
Have all your Expectation from GOD in and through CHRIST. Pray in the Name of
CHRIST; Plead His Merits, His Power, and gracious Promises: Plead earnestly.
And pray humbly: GOD resists the proud, but gives Grace to the humble.
Acknowledge your own utter Unworthiness. Adore the Sovereignty of Divine Grace,
and submit to the Methods of Divine Wisdom. Be content, that GOD should take
His own way in bringing you Home to Himself, though it be through great Terrors
and Sorrows: and be willing to wait His Time. Resolve humbly to take no Denial;
and Give Him no rest. Though there be long Delays, yet wait patiently for the
LORD; supporting your Hopes by that word of Promise, in Joh. 6.37. Him that
comes to Me, I will in no wise cast out. All that ever obtained Mercy, sought
for it on this Encouragement; -- It may be the LORD will be gracious. Go thou
also, and seek the LORD while He may be found. Ask, and Seek, and Knock, with
unceasing Hope and unfainting Importunity. Thus draw near to GOD, and He will
draw near to you, (Jam. 4.8.) And will send forth Judgment unto Victory, Mat.
12.20.

Finally, HAVING thus sought to GOD for Help, Now take another Step; Make the
TRIAL whether Quickening and Regenerating Influences are not commanded from
above for you Remember How, when CHRIST directed the Man with a withered Arm to
stretch forth his Hand, he immediately attempted and was enabled to do it. Now
Imitate this great Action. In the Belief and Hope of Divine Assistance TRY to
lift up thy Soul, and stir up thy self to lay hold on GOD and do the Acts of a
Soul returning to the LORD. Up and be doing. Set thy self in the Strength of
CHRIST to go through the whole Process of active Conversion. Give not Sleep to
thine Eyes, 'till thou' have endeavored this: And leave not Trying, till you
find the Symptoms of a thorough Work of Repentance toward GOD and of Faith
toward our LORD JESUS CHRIST wrought in you: -- What this implies, you have
been told already in several of the preceding Sermons; to which I must refer
you.

AND so I have finished my Address to the awakened Youth. And now the good LORD
keep this in the Imagination of the Thoughts of your Heart, and prepare your
Heart unto Him! I hope I leave some of you inspired with never-dying
Resolutions to be waiting on the LORD in the Methods now directed to.

THE Third and last Branch of the Exhortation is to the REGENERATE, the
Converts of Sion.

SOME such (We trust) there be among our Young People, as bad as the Times are:
Yea Many (through the Grace of GOD) do we behold walking in the Truth. I hope I
speak to not a Few Such at this Time. Now, Ye that fear GOD, give Audience.
Hear the the Exhortation, which speaks to You as unto Children.

1. BE counseled to endeavor after a well-grounded HOPE and ASSURANCE of your
good Estate.

I begin with this Advice, because to Me it seems to lie in the Foundation of
such other Counsels, as are to be given the Regenerate. Wherefore Brethren, the
rather give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure, 2 Per. 1.10. Rest
not in Uncertainties: But labor after the Assurance of Faith. To this End;
Study your own Hearts, and be much in Self-examination. Try your Selves by just
Rules; and be deliberate, prudent, impartial, prayerful, and frequent in this
Work. And cease not till you come to a rational Satisfaction about your
Regeneracy: Which will be a mighty incentive to Duty; will enable you to take
the Comfort that belongs to you; and will be a great Support and Defense in
Hours of Temptation. For want of that, Many lose the Comfort, and neglect some
of the Duties of Early Piety; which is sad.

2. STUDY THANKFULNESS to GOD, the GREATEST Thankfulness. Give GOD the Glory of
your Conversion. Beware of ascribing too Much to Means, Instruments, and
Endeavors. Let him that Glories, glory in the LORD. See His Efficiency; and
Adore His Wisdom, Power, and Grace, which have abounded toward You. And let
your Heart and Mouth be filled with admiring Praises.

TO excite your Gratitude and Wonder, Often look back on your natural
Condition, and take a View of the Guilts, Miseries, and Dangers of it. Consider
also the superlative Excellency of the Work wrought upon You; and the
Blessedness of the State you are brought into; a State of Justification,
Adoption, and Sanctification, and of habitual Preparedness for a glorious
Eternity. Consider the special and unnumber'd Advantages of an Early
Conversion; and what a far more exceeding glorious Prospect it affords you. And
consider, How God has made you to differ from innumerable Others. Remember
also what Provocations you gave the HOLY SPIRIT (while under His Hand) to
forsake you. These Reflections bespeak your thankful Admirations. Wherefore
take with you Words, and say as in Mat. 11.25, 6. I thank Thee, O Father,
because Thou have hid these Things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed
them unto Babes: Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy Sight.

3. KEEP up a very HUMBLE Frame of Spirit. Remembering what you were before
Conversion: Remembering what Humiliations you passed through in Conversion: And
Considering what you are at present; still at a Distance from GOD; still a
Dependent on free Mercy for all you need; still a sinful Creature, doing little
for GOD, often rebelling against Him, and in all Things coming short of His
Glory; still feeble and impotent and without His special Help will become an
easy Prey to every Temptation; still in danger of such Apostasies, as may
blemish your Name, gall your Conscience, and procure the Hidings of GOD's Face.
-- O remember these Things, and let them check all the Tendencies of a corrupt
Heart to spiritual Pride. Be not high-minded; but Fear. -- I think fit to add
here; don't proudly murmur if you do not presently obtain those Joys, you
looked for, If you meet with Temptations, and Troubles within and without, yet
don't repine. You are not now dealt with unjustly: Nay all is in Love to you.
GOD is now training you up to live a Life of Faith. Perhaps He is (by His
present Methods) ripening you for great Consolation; or preparing you for great
Usefulness hereafter. Beware then of every murmuring, and of every
Self-exalting Thought.

4. BRING forth Fruits MEET for REPENTANCE, and walk in Newness of Life. As ye
have received CHRIST JESUS the LORD: So Walk ye in Him. Put on the Livery of
CHRIST; take upon you the Badges of Christianity; make an open Profession;
order your Conversation aright, and show forth the Praises of Him who has
called you out of Darkness. For ye were sometimes Darkness, but now are ye
Light in the LORD: Walk as the Children of Light. Flee Youthful Lusts: And live
soberly, righteously, and godlily.

5. SEE that ye walk CIRCUMSPECTLY. Walk by Rule, the Gospel-Rule. Study it;
govern your selves according to it in the whole Work of Obedience, as to Matter
and Manner, Principles, Motives, and Seasons. The Scriptures were written to
give the Young Man. Knowledge and Discretion. And Young Men are directed to
cleanse their way, by taking Heed thereto according to God's Word, Psalm. 119.9.

THEREFORE keep the Rule over before you: and exercise your selves always to
keep Consciences void of Offense. It was David's Resolution in his Early Days,
(Psalm. 101.2.) I will behave my self wisely in a perfect way; And it should be
yours. -- Youth is apt to be Heady, Venturous, and Inadvertent, which often
betrays into sad Mistakes and Miscarriages. But be not you so. Be wary and
vigilant. Reverence Conscience, consult much with it, and be obsequious to all
it is genuine Directions. Look well to your goings. Look about you, and take
Example from the Wise, and Caution from the Foolish, and take Heed lest you
fall. Be ever sensible of Dangers; keep up a jealous Watch over your Hearts,
and a strict Guard over your Senses, Appetites, and Passions. Keep your selves
from your own Iniquity. Suppress the first Motions of Lust. Fly the very
Occasions of Sin; the goodly Hebrew Youth thus secured his Integrity. Remember
Young Dinah's Folly and Fall; and don't needlessly run into the way of
Temtations. Be careful with whom you contract year Relations; take heed how you
dispose your selves in Apprenticeship, in Marriage, etc. -- Be careful in the
Choice of a Calling, let it be One that has fewest spiritual Snares, and will
afford you most Advantages for your Souls; and therein study to order your
Affairs with Discretion, so as not to hurt your grand Interests. -- Be careful
in choosing your Place of Abode; Endeavor to settle where you may have the best
Opportunities and Accommodations for promoting the Glory of GOD, and your own
Spiritual Good. -- Be watchuful over your selves in all Conditions; Some of you
are born to Riches and Honor, Others to Want and Meanness. Let the Poor and
Afflicted among you watch against Discontent at the Disposals of Divine Wisdom
and Goodness; and against envying at the Prosperity of others; Begin now you
are Young to learn the Art of Contentment; and this will have a happy Influence
upon you all your Days. And those that are Prosperous, and live in Ease, and
make a Figure in the World; Let such be thankful, and humble, and self denying,
Heavenly minded, and Fruitful in every good Work: and thus you will be prepared
for whatever Changes there may be in the right Hand of the Most High. -- Again,
Be circumspect in all matters of lawful Liberty; in which case Young People
especially are very apt to offend, and as hard to be convine'd and reclaimed.
Take heed then to your selves in all Things (of an indifferent Nature,) that
you act agreeably to the Laws of Charity, by the Rules of Decency and of
Expediency, and under the Restraints of Christian Sobriety, and with a just
Deference to the wise Counsels and Cautions of Parents and Superiors. -- See to
it that your Diversions be well principle'd and well regulated. Let them be
such as are of good Report among Us; let them be seasonably entered on and
timely broken off; moderately pursued; and well intended, to fit you the better
for serving GOD, and your Generation, which should be your primary Delight and
Satisfaction.

FURTHER, Be very Circumspect as to your Company and Conversation. Be careful
in choosing your Associates. Don't degrade your selves with Nebuchalnezzet to
herd with the Beasts. Let a vile Person be contemned in your Eyes: but honor
them that fear the Lord, and with David be a Companion of such, as keep the
Commandments of GOD, who are most likely to be Friends to your Souls, whose
Fruit is a Tree of Life. You may visit wicked Persons, as their Physicians: but
not as their Companions, lest you catch Infection from them. Take such for your
Associares, as may be Assistents to you in the Affairs of your Souls; and for a
Special Friend I would advise Young People to choose One, that is of more
Experience than themselves, and so capable to direct them; and one that is
something more advanced in Age and Rank, whose Presence may carry some Awe with
it, and whose Admonitions may be of more weight. -- And as you should be
circumspect in choosing your Acquaintants; so likewise in using of their
Society. Be wise and wary in your Visits, that these be not a fruitless
Mispense of Time. And in your occasional Conversation at all Times endeavor
wisely to introduce and keep up profitable Discourse; and in your talk of
Secular Affairs, let your Language be such as may discover a godly simplicity,
and show that the spirit of this World has not the Ascendent over you. This is
to walk in Wisdom. But if in Conversation your study is to please Men by
appearing Worldly-wise, or facetions, and entertaining, rather than to approve
your selves to GOD by being grave, pious and edi^ying, certainly now you walk
not Circumspectly, but as Fools. -- Let Young Professors then be exhorted to
make their Acquaintance and Converse together as spiritual and profitable as
may be.

AND here I might add; Let such Young People as live in the same House or
Neighborhood, by mutual Agreement oblige themselves to special watch and care
over each other. Speak often one to another. Comfort your selves together, and
edify one another, even as also ye do. And watch over each other in Brotherly
Love. Be faithful Monitors every one to his Brother; and let every one be ready
to hearken to friendly Counsels and Reproofs. When the Righteous smite thee,
let it be a kindness; and let the wounds of a Friend be as excellent Oil.

THUS I have shown Young People in several Instances how they are to walk
Circumspectly. And O that you would all be persuaded to endeavor it. In order
to this, Consider how you are obliged by your Profession and Engagements thus
to walk. Consider also what Dangers and Difficulties attend the Christian Life,
arising from inward Corruption and outward Oppositions; which call for the
exactest Care and greatest Watchfulness. You are setting out in a World full of
Snares, and in an uncommon Day of Temptation; and without the greatest
Circumspection you will be in imminent Hazard of such Falls into Sin, as will
wound Conscience, disturb it is Peace and defile its Purity. Moreover, Consider;
You are under the most critical Inspection. The jealous Eye of an All-seeing
GOD is upon you continually; who will be highly provoked if you are secure and
negligent; which should awe you, methinks, into the strictest watch over your
Hearts and Ways, that you may walk before Him unto all well-pleasing. Again,
The Eyes of Men are upon you. Good People have their Eye upon you; Their Desire
is toward you, their Delight in you, and their Expectations from you great.
This should by a Principle of Ambition lead you to be careful in your Walk. But
further, Wicked People look on you with an evil Eye: These watch for your
Halting; They Will be glad to see you careless, and they wish for your falling.
This would rejoice (as well as harden) them exceedingly. Again, The Devils keep
an envious Eye over you; they observe you narrowly; they are continually
longing and laboring to ensnare you; if you are secure and heedless, you
expose your selves to their subtle Devices; and if you fall by them, they will
triumph over you, insult and vex you.

BUT in the last place, Consider the many Encouragements you have to be walking
Circumspectly. You have an unerring Rule to lead you: You have, to animate you,
the Example of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and of many Saints who were holy and wise
in Behavior from their Youth: And you have all needful Assistance tendered
you: And the Promise of great Rewards, which will by vast Excesses more than
Counter-balance and compensate for all the Cares and Pains of a circumspect
walk. In a word, This Christian Vigilance and Prudence is the Strength and
Beauty of the Soul. Therefore keep your Heart with all Diligence, that none
take away your Crown. Watch and Pray, lest ye enter into Temptation. He that
trusts in his own Heart is a Fool, but whosoever walks wisely shall be
delivered.

6. LET Young People study to ADORN the DOCTRINE of GOD your Savior in all
Things, and to walk worthy of the holy Vocation wherewith you are called. Ye
are the Children of the Day; and we exhort every one of you, that you would
walk worthy of GOD who has ^^lled you unto His Kingdom and Glory, and order
your Conversation as becomes the Gospel of CHRIST. Let your Light shine before
Men: And study to be real and visible Ornaments to your Profession. For this
End; Guard against all Affectation, that your Good be not evil spoken of. Pu^
away all Childish Vanities, and endeavor to be Manly and Discrete in your whole
Deportment. Abstain from all appearance of Youthful Lusts, that the Word of GOD
be not blasphemed. Endeavor to be Exemplary in all those Things, which are
acceptable to GOD and approved of Men, lovely, venerable, and praiseworthy. A
bound and excel in all Instances of Piety and Devotion. Show a profound
Veneration of all that is sacred; Be strict in observing the Sabbath; Signalize
your selves for a very reverent Regard to the holy Scriptures, and to the
Ministers of CHRIST, as Stewards of the Mysteries of GOD. Speak with Awe of GOD
and holy Things, and exhibit the utmost Gravity in the Worship of GOD, a
visible Alacrity in His Service and a well-ordered Zeal for His Glory. And be
of catholic Principles and a generous Spirit as to the disputable Points and
lesser Circumstances of Religion. And further Endeavor to excel in all Social
Virtues and Relative Duties. Distinguish your selves for eminent Justice and
Uprightness in your Dealings; Gratitude to Benefactors; Brotherly Kindness;
Charity to the Poor; Peaceableness, and Forbearance, a forgiving Spirit, and
Patience under Injuries and Affronts; Meekness under Reproofs; Mildness in
Disputes; Tractableness and Submission to the Advice of Superiors: Dutifulness
to Parents; Obedience to Masters, Fidelity to all Trusts; Modesty in Apparel,
in Speech and Demeanor, etc. Again, Study to excel in all more solitary
Virtues; Self-denial, Weanedness from the World, and Mortification to sensual
Pleasures; Frugality, and Temperance in Sleep, and Diet; Chastity, Purity, and
Reserv'dness; Application to good Business and Industry therein, etc. You
should endeavor to exceed and out shine others in these moral Qualifications
and Deportments, as well as in the Instances of more vital and essential Piety.

Finally, BETIMES begin to study Usefulness. Aim at being public Blessings in
your Day. Young Converts are the Seed and Hope of the next Generation, as old
Disciples are the Defense and Delight of the Present. Therefore begin Early to
get fit for your Master's Use; get furnished for and ready to every good work;
cherish a public Spirit in your selves betimes, and do what little Services you
are capable of in your respective Spheres now in the Days of your Youth. Shine
as Lights in the Family, in the School or College, in the Church, and in the
Commonwealth: Shine as Bright as you can in your several Orbs, and study to be
Diffusive Blessings. Particularly endeavor to promote the Conversion of other
Young People of your Acquaintance; and take all proper Methods to cultivate
good Beginnings in one another; according to the Advice before given.

IN these and other Ways Young People should study to honor the Gospel, and
adorn their Profession. This you should be led to from a Principle of
Retaliation, considering how the Gospel has been the Means of Advancing you to
great Happiness and Dignity: And also from a View to the Glory of GOD, which
will be abundantly promoted by such Carriage: and also from a Regard to your
own Credit and Interest; Which Consideration should inspire you (Methinks) with
Heroic Resolutions. But further this is what the Word of GOD expressly enjoins
as the Duty of Young People; particularly in the 2d. Chapter of the Epistle to
Titus; which excellent Portion of Scripture you will do well very frequently to
consult.

BUT to add only one Word; and I will Conclude, --

7. LET Young Saints endeavor to GROW in Grace. Furthermore then we beseech
you Young Men and Brethren, and exhort you by the LORD JESUS, that as ye have
received of Us how you ought to walk and to please GOD, so ye would abound more
and more. Don't rest in any present Seize: but study to make Progress in
Virtue and all Goodness. "Diligent Tradesmen at their first setting up have
their Minds intent upon improving their Stock". Herein let not the Children of
this World be wiser than you. Let not the Truth of Grace content you: but
aspire after a gradual Rise. It was the Apostle's Exhortation to Young Timothy,
Thou therefore my Son, Be STRONG in the Grace that is in Christ Jesus. --
FOLLOW after Righteousness, Faith, Love, etc. -- There must be a Patient
continuance in well-doing, and studious Endeavors to perfect Holiness in the
fear of GOD.

GROWTH in pure and practical Religion is the chief Blessing on this side the
Heavenly Places: This is to grow in conformity to CHRIST, who has left us a
perfect Example of Early Piety. This is to be changed into the Image of GOD
from Glory to Glory. This is the way to grow in the Favor of GOD; and in the
Comforts of the HOLY GHOST; in Usefulness to the World; in Ripeness for Heaven,
Assurance of Salvation, and a Capacity for more exalted Degrees of future Bliss
and Glory. Surely then the thriving Christian is the wisest, the noblest, the
richest, and happiest Creature out of Paradise. To flourish and increase in
Holiness is infinitely preferrible to the highest Advances in the wealth and
wisdom of this World, and Honor among Men.

AND now That is what GOD demands and expects from you. He looks for much
Fruit: And O how pleasing to Him will be the fair and rising young Trees,
spreading out and hanging full of early ripe Fruits! -- And moreover That is
what you are under the strictest Engagements to study, and have special
Advantages to pursue. Now in the Days of Youth, you have fewer Hindrances, and
greater Opportunities; and perhaps you have a long Time of growth before you. O
Improve your singular Advantages: And fail no^ the LORD of His righteous
Expectations. How shameful will it be for you to be outgrown by later Plants,
than your selves? How ignominious to be ourstript in the Christian Race by
others that set out after you? And this will be the Event perhaps, if you are
idle or trifling present. You will defeat one great Design of your Early
Conversion, by slack and sluggish Endeavors in Youth. O therefore follow
Holiness now with active Zeal, cheerful Vigor, and resolute Perseverance.
Covet to excel, and strive to outrun, to outdo, and out shine others. This
is a laudable Emu^ation, a happy Contention, which GOD will ^rown with
Approbation and Success. O begin betimes to aim at and reach after an eminent
Proficiency in Religion.

AND for this End; Maintain a humble Sense of your Need of further
Sanctification, and mourn under the Relics of Corruption in you. -- And be
much in the Exercise of Grace. Repeated Acts corroborate the Habit. ^t is
perhaps a Day of small things with you ^t present: But if you are diligent and
constant in the Exercising of Grace, you will make gradual Improvements toward
Perfection. Be faithful in a Little; and unto him that has shall be given, and
he shall have Abundance. -- Industriously use all proper Means. Observe all the
Ordinances of GOD; and that with a View to and Desires of Growth in Grace. As
new born Babes, desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby.
Carefully attend on the LORD'S Supper, which is a Means (when rightly used)
ad^itably effective of Increase in Grace; but is too much neglected in these
unhappy Times of Apostasy. Be frequent in devout Meditation, and solemn
Self-Examination. Learn to do all common actions after a godly Sort; have your
Conversation much in Heaven, by often contemplating on it, and by making it the
main Scope and Design of your Actions. Keep the holy Example of CHRIST ever in
your Eye. Be also Followers of them, who through Faith and Patience inherit the
Promises. Frequently renew your holy Resolutions.

Finally BE much in Prayer and the Exercise of Faith, which p^rifyeth the
Heart. Live dependently on GOD in CHRIST. In the humble Sense of your own Wants
and Weakness, have all your Reliance on the Father of Lights and seek to Him
through Jesus Christ for all needful Aids and Recruits of Grace continually. The
Life you now live in the Flesh let it be by the Faith of the Son of GOD, in
whom it has pleased the Father all Fullness should dwell: Trust in Him (and in
His Name pray to GOD) for confirming and quickening Influences; and for a
Blessing on Ordinances and Providence, that all may work together for your
spiritul Good. They that thus wait on the LORD, shall renew their Strength:
They shall mount up with Wings as Eagles. They shall grow as the Lilie and cast
forth their Roots as Lebanon, and their Leaf shall not wither.

NOW our LORD JESUS CHRIST Himself, and GOD even our Father, who has Loved us,
and has given us everlasting Consolation, and good Hope through Grace, Comfort
your Hearts, and stablish you in every good Word and Work: And We pray GOD your
whole Spirit and Soul and Body be preserved blameless unto the Coming of our
LORD JESUS CHRIST; that the Name of CHRIST may be glorified in you and ye in
Him. Faithful is He that has called you, who also will do it. To Him be Glory
both Now and for Ever.

AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA in this last Sermon.
PAge 3. Line 28. for believes read believed. p. 16. l. 27. for it may e, r.
it be not. p. 10. l. 22. r. full of. p. 10. l. 22. for ^^^ices, r. Advices. p.
38. l. 22. r. Dispositions. l. 32. for Again, r. Particularly.

MANTISSA.
WHEN the Eight Sermons on EARLY PIETY, which are here Exhibited, were coming
abroad; the Ministers who Preached them waited on their Venerable Father Dr.
INCREASE MATHER, with a Request, that he would permit Some Discourse of His on
that Important Subject, though never so short an One, to be Ushered in by Theirs;
which he might Let fall as a Mantle to us, now GOD is quickly taking him away
from our Head. In answer to their Desire, (though he has already Cultivated the
Subject in several Treatises, especially, his, Call to the Rising Generation,
which have been formerly Published, and some of them have had several
Editions;) he Preached the short Sermon, that is now to fasten the Nails, that
have been in the preceding Essays.

IT must be Considered, That this is a Sermon of most uncommon Circumstances;
Being of One who is in the Eighty Third Year of his Age, and who may say,
Au^^^te Senem Juvenes, quem Juvenen^ Senes audierunt: And as at this very Great
Age, the Servant of GOD Preaches, (which he has done all his Days) without
Using any Notes, thus also he does it sometimes almost without Writing any. Nor
could we have come at this particular Sermon, if we had not been beholden to
the Pen of a pious Gentlewoman belonging to his Flock, who gives us this Copy
of what the Ready-Writer took from him, as he delivered it.

THE Circumstances mentioned, Oblige us to Conclude, Now these are some of the
LAST WORDS, to be Expected from a Faithful Servant of GOD, Finishing his
Testi^^^y, to those Ways of Early Piety, whereof GOD has made him an Eminent
Instance as well as a Renowned Preacher. (...) what we have now to Wish for the
Rising Gene^^^^^n, ^s, That they may Receive his Testimony, and Walk in the
Good Ways of those that have gone before them.

Advice to the Children of Godly Ancestors.
Given July 9. 1721. And taken in Shorthand, by One of the Hearers.
By Dr. Increase Mather.
I SAM. VIII. 5. They said unto Samuel, Thy Sons walk not in thy ways.


WE have in this Chapter the Children of Israel weary of the Theocracy which
they had been under a long time; and asking for a King after the manner of the
Nations. The Reason they give for it is. That the Sons of Samuel did not walk
in his ways. Samuel was grown Aged, and made use of his own Sons for his
Assistence in the Government; hoping that they would walk in his Ways; but they
did otherways. Wherefore the Elders of Israel came in a whole Body to Samuel,
and complained to him of the ^ll Government of his Family.

It Is a Sad Observation, which we have ^ow before us,

THAT the Sons of Good Men do not always walk in the Good Ways which their
Fathers have walked in.

WE shall consider this DOCTRINE in several Propositions.

THE First Proposition. All Good Men do walk in the same way. It is that which
is called the way of Good Men, Prove. 2.20. Walk in the way of good Men, and
keep the paths of the righteous. It is also called the Old Way, and the way
that is holy, (Jer. 6.16.) It is likewise called, The way Everlasting, (Psalm.
139.24.) because Good Men have always walked in that way; from the beginning of
the World Good Men have always chosen to walk in that way; Chosen that Way of
Truth, laying the Judgments of GOD before them.

Particularly First; IT is the Way of Piety. They have always like Samuel
Worshipped God and Him only; and have been careful not to take the Name of GOD
in vain; and have Sanctified the holy Sabbaths of GOD: Yea, Sanctifying the
Sabbath is indeed so great a part of Piety that it is put for all Religion,
(Isai. 58.13.)

Secondly, IT is the way of Righteousness. They are conscienciously careful to
observe the First Table of the Moral Law, and the Second Table also. Therefore
Paul could say, Acts 24.16. Herein do I exercise my self to have always a
Conscience void of effence toward God and toward Men. Thus it was with Samuel;
he was upright, he could appeal to the People as in the 12th. Chapter of this
Book; Have (...) wronged any Man? And they all said, No, thou have wronged no
Man. But then his Sons, they were very unrighteous; they did run after Filthy
Lucre, they took bribes; they perverted Judgment; which was quite contrary to
what their Father did.

Thirdly, IT is the Way of Prayerfulness. Thus Samuel said to the People; God
forbid that I should cease to pray for you. Good Men are Praying Men. Psalm.
24.6. This is the generation of them that seek him. They that seek the Face of
GOD are the Generation that belong to Him Yea, there is not one Godly Man in
all the World but what is a Praying Man. Psalm. 32.6. For this shall every one
that is godly pray unto thee. As for those that are Prayerless, they are
mentioned among the workers of Iniquity, (Psalm. 14.4.) If they are Prayerless
they are so to be accounted. Thus we see in short, the Good Ways, that Good Men
are forever found walking in; The ways of a Samuel!

PROP. II. THE Children of Godly Men have peculiar Advantages to serve the God
of their Fathers, and walk in the Good Ways which their Fathers walked in:
Diverse Advantages which other Children in the World have not. As now,

First, THEY have the Scriptures; they have the Word of God to direct them in
the way of Life and Salvation. As is said concerning the Jews, Romans 3.1, 2.
What advantage has the Jew? much every way; chiefly in that unto them were
committed the Oracles of God. They had the Holy Scriptures. Thus it was said of
Timothy: he was advantaged in that respect above others, 2 Timothy 3.15. From a
Child thou have known the Holy Scriptures which are able to make wise unto
Salvation. They have also the Word of God Preached unto them; as the written
Word of God, so the Gospel Preached unto them: That is a great Advantage; the
Preaching of the Gospel is the ordinary means by which true Faith in the Lord
Jesus Christ is wrought in the Souls of His Elect. Romans 10.27. Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. In that regard, the Children of Godly
Men have special Advantages to know the God of their Fathers.

Secondly; THEY are the Subjects of Parental Instructions, they are taught by
their Parents how they ought to serve God. Thus the Lord required his People of
Old; Thou shall teach thy Children diligently my Commandments, Deuteronomy. 6.7. And
in Psalm. 78.5, 6. it is there said, They should teach their Childdren from one
generation to another. And the Lord said concerning Abraham, Genesis 18.19. I know
Abraham, that he will teach his Children to keep the way of the Lord. Now they
that are the Children of Abraham will do the Works of Abraham. So we find the
Servants of God have always done. David, he taught his Son Solomon and his
other Children. He said, Psalm. 34.11. Come ye Children, hearken unto me, I will
teach you the fear of the Lord. And his Son Solomon says, Prove. 4.3, 4. I was
my fathers son, he taught me. So did his Godly Mother too, she was careful to
Instruct him. We read how his Godly Mother Instructed him. Prove. 31.2. What? my
son, and what? the son of my vows? Said she, I have Vowed and Prayed to God
many a time for thee, and will thou not hear the Counsel of her that has so
often Prayed for thee and Vowed and offered many Sacrifices to God on thy
behalf?

Thirdly. THE People of GOD, put up many Prayers for their Children, that God
would give them His Grace; they Pray at that rate, 1 Chronicles. 29.19. Give unto
Solomon my son a perfect heart. Thus Abraham Prayed for Ishmael, and God said,
concerning Ishmael I have heard thee. Their Advantages are Peculiar in that
respect, in that they are Prayed for. Lastly, They have the Blessing of their
Parents; which is not a light thing. The Blessing of a Father is not to be
despised; it ought to be regarded. We see Esau as bad as he was, yet when he
saw he was deprived of his Father Blessing, be Wept, and made a great and
bitter Cry upon it. Verily, it is a Considerable, a Valuable Thing for Children
to have their pious Parents, imploring and pronouncing of Blessings upon them
in the Name of the LORD. So that the Children of Godly Parents have Advantages
which other Children in the World are Strangers to.

PROP. III. MANY Children of Godly Parents, do prove Godly too, and walk in the
Good Ways of their Parents; yet it is too often sadly otherwise. Some well
Observe, God has so cast the Line of Election that for the most part it runs
through the Loins of Godly Parents. The 2d Epistle of John is, to the elect
lady and her Children. If so be the Mother is elected there is more Hope and
Encouragement that the Children belong to the Election too. We read, Psalm.
103.17. The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them that
fear him, his righteousness unto childrens children. Thus Paul says concerning
Timothy, [2 Timothy 1.5.] I am persuaded says he, that Faith is in thee; that thou
art a true Believer; when I call to Remembrance the Faith that was in thy
Grandmother Lois, and thy Mother Eunice. Thy Grandmother was a Godly Woman,
thy Mother an holy Woman; therefore I cannot but Hope the more for thee.
Doubtless, if an account of it were taken, it would be found that the greatest
part of such as belong to God have descended from Godly Parents.

PROP. IV. BUT still the Grace of God is Sovereign. It is not engaged to any
Particular Family; He is free in the Disposing of his Grace. He says, Exodus
33.19. I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on
whom I will show mercy. So that many Children that descend from Godly Parents
are not Godly but much otherwise, this is a sad Truth. And now, will First,
Show the Proof of it; then inquire whence it comes to pass. For the Proof of it,

1. WE find in the Scripture Particular Families, many of them did degenerate
from the Faith of their Forefathers. Let us look back as far as Adam's Family,
and we shall find it so. Adam had a Godly Son whose Name was Seth, now the
Posterity of that Godly Son in process of Time did Degenerate and became as the
rest of the World, Genesis 6.2. The sons of God saw the daughters of men. The Sons
of God, that is to say the Posterity of Godly Seth; they did Degenerate and
became like the rest of the World. Noah had a Godly Son, scil. Shem, but this
Man's Posterity did sadly Degenerate; Notice is taken of it, that they became
Idolaters, [Josh. 24.2.] In Abraham's Family there was an Ishmael that would
Scoff at his Brother who was a Godly Man. In Isaac's Family was an Esau who was
a profane Person. So says the Apostle, Take heed lest there be among you a
profane person like unto Esau that for a mess of pottage sold his birthright.
In David's Family; How many wicked Sons sprung up in that good Man's Family! An
Amnon, who Committed Incest with his own Sister; An Absalom that Murdered his
Brother Amnon, and after that would have Murdered his own Father to have gained
the Kingdom! Is it not said of Nabal, who was a drunken Sot, that he was of the
house of Caleb? [1 Samuel 25.3.] A sad thing that so vile a wretch as Nabal was
should descend from such an house as Calebs was! Josiah was a Godly Man; yet
his Children all of them bad! God said to one of them, Did not thy Father do
judgment and justice! But thine heart is for thy Covetousness.

2. IT is true concerning whole Generations. Sometimes whole Generations have
Apostatized from God and become exceeding Sinful in his Sight; So when Joshua
was Dead it is said, Judge. 2.10. There arose another generation which knew not
the Lord, nor the works which he had done. A whole Generation did Degenerate
from the Piety of their Fathers that had gone before them. I planted thee a
noble Vine, but how art thou degenerate, says the Lord? Jer. 2.25.

BUT now Secondly; Whence is it that godly Men sometimes have very ungodly
Children! For answer; First: The Children of godly Men are born Sinful, as well
as the Children of other Men. They have Original Corruption in them as much as
others have. Hence David says, Psalm. 51.5. I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin
did my mother conceive me. Yet David's Mother was a Singular good Woman; a very
holy Woman. David when he prayed to God, says, Remember the Son of thine
handmaid: his Father Jesse also was a very holy Man; the Jews call him, Jesse
the Righteous: And have such an Opinion of him, that they Hyperbolically say,
the Angel of Death could find no Sin, but that of our First Parents, to charge
him with. The Son of a godly Father, and a godly Mother, yet was conceived in
Sin and shapen in Iniquity. Such are as apt to Sin as the Children of ungodly
Men; they are apt to tell lies as scon as they are born: when they commit a
Fault they are apt to tell a Lie, because of the Corruption which is natural to
them; yea, they are Inventers of evil things, Romans 1.30. They are apt to commit
such Sins, as never any did before them. They are apt to do amifs and to fall
in with the Ways of Sin.

Secondly. THIS comes to pass from the Malice of Satan, that does what he can
to corrupt the Churches. Among the Wheat there springs up a world of Tares. How
comes this to pass? Why says the Text, an Enemy has done it. The Devil is that
Enemy; the Devil is an Enemy to Purity in Churches; he would have Churches to
be like the rest of the World: Therefore he sows Tares in the Lord's Field. He
does it, in the Degeneracy that he Labors to introduce among the Children of
the Covenant.

Thirdly. IT comes to pass from the removal of Eminent Servants of GOD. Thus
when Moses was going to be taken away, I know, says he, after my Death there
will be great changes among you. Thus Paul, when going from Ephesus, says,
after my Departure there will come grievous wolves among you. And how often is
it said in the book of Judges, while the good Judges continued, things went
well, but when those good Judges were dead, and removed out of the Way, they
presently Degenerated, and became like the rest of the World; became guilty of
such Sins as others in the World were Guilty of. Thus we see the Doctrine
cleared in the Particulars that have been mentioned.

APPLICATION.
I. HENCE we see, Men ought not to set their Hearts inordinately upon their
Children. Indeed they are apt to do so; apt to promise themselves much comfort
in their Children. We see it in Abraham, says he, Lord, what wilt give one,
seeing I go Childless? And it is threatened as a Judgment, such a Man shall die
Childless. We see it in Rachel, Give me Children or else I die: God gave her
Children, and she died for it: And when her Soul was departing, she called his
name Benoni, that is, the Child of my Affliction. Indeed when the Children of
the Faithful die in their Infancy, there is cause to Hope they are Saved
because of the Covenant of GOD; the Covenant of Grace which they have not
Violated. But when they Out Live their Infancy, and become Wicked and Vile, the
case is much otherwise. Wherefore Parents who know not how their Children may
prove, should not set their Hearts inordinately upon their Children. Who knows,
but that Child thou art so fond of may prove to thee as Esau did to Rebecca and
to his Father? He was a grief of Mind to them both. And Rebecca said, I am
weary of my Life because of the Daughters of Heth.

II. IF the Children of Good Men may prove ungodly, no wonder that the Children
of ungedly Men do so. Children are more apt to imitate their Parents in that
which is Evil, than in that which is Good. Jer. 7.18. The children gather wood,
the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough to make cakes to the
queen of heaven. Abominable! To make cakes to the queen of heaven; to Worship
the Moon! yet when Parents did so, the Children did so too; and no wonder they
did. The Samaritans that succeeded those that were carried Captive, they
Worshipped graven Images and Served other gods; as their Fathers did, so did
their Children, and their Childrens Children; as did their Fathers so do they
unto this Day, 2 King. 17.41. Those Children that did mock the holy Prophet
Elisha, that said, go up thou bald head; go up thou bald head; thou say thy
Master Elijah is gone up to Heaven; do thou go after him; would these Children
have done so, if they had not seen the Iniquity of their Fathers? Doubtless
their Fathers were guilty of the like Iniquity.

III. WE may see by this, it is not in the power of Parents to give Grace to
their Children. They may give them what they have of this World; but that is
all. To have Grace given to them, it is a thousand times better, far more
desirable than to have a portion of this Worlds Goods. But this is more than
they can Give. They cannot give them Sanctifying Grace; they cannot give them
true Repentance; that is the Gift of GOD, not of their Parents. They cannot give
them Faith in JESUS CHRIST; no that, none but GOD can give. A godly Man can no
more make his Children godly than he can Raise the Dead out of their Graves: It
is none but God can do it: He alone must have the Praise and Glory of it.

IV. IT is not safe for Children to build upon having an Abraham for their
Father. Mat. 3.9. Think not to say within your selves we have Abraham for our
Father. This is a Foundation not to be built upon, thou may have a Father as
good a Man as Abraham, and yet Perish for ever in thy Unbelief. How was it with
one who died and went to Hell, and when in Torments there he cried out, Father
Abraham have mercy on me! This Child of Abraham in Torments, adds, I have five
Brethren alive in the World, O that one might go from the Dead, and tell them
what a terrible place Hell is, that they may not come into this place of
Torment. Why? Is there any Charity in Hell? No, but they know if their Brethren
come there it would be worse for them, an aggravation of their Misery!
Therefore hebeg'd, O let not them come here! Well then, you that are the
Children of Godly Parents, I shall Speak a Solemn Word unto you. If thou Live
and Die in thine Impenitency thou shall have the most terrible Witnesses
against thee. Thy Father, and thy Mother that Loved thee so Dearly, that has
wept and prayed for thee so many times, thy Father, and thy Mother, they will
Condemn thee, they will Justify GOD in Condemning of thee: they will join with
the LORD in passing a Sentence of Eternal Condemnation upon thee at the Last
Day; and say, like the Angel in the Revelations, Thou art Righteous in that
Thou have so Judged: Thus it will be said at the Last Day: Thy Father, and thy
Mother will say, Lord I Concur with Thee, thou art Righteous in passing a
Sentence of Eternal Condemnation upon this Child of mine; I warned him many a
Time to Repent and turn to God, but he would not, so that Thou art Righteous in
all that is come upon him.

V. THE Children of Godly Men should be careful that they themselves be Godly.
Now the Children of New England are (or, once were) for the most part the
Children of Godly Men. What did our Fathers come into this Wilderness for? Not
to gain Estates, as Men do now, but for Religion, and that they might leave
their Children in a hopeful way of being truly Religious. There was a famous
Man that Preached before One of the Greatest Assemblies that ever was Preached
unto, Seventy Years ago, and he told them, I have lived in a Country Seven
Years, and all that time I never heard one Profane Oath, and all that time I
never did see a Man Drunk in that Land. Where was that Country? It was
New England! New England! New England! But, Ah, Degenerate New England, what
art thou come to at this Day? How are those Sins become common in thee, that
once were not so much as heard of in this Land? A sad thing it is! Well then, O
turn to GOD, you that are Children of Godly Parents. Remember that God calls
you to it. Now He calls you to it in a Solemn Way by a grievous Disease, He has
sent into this Town, which how far it may proceed we know not. Is not God
Speaking to you Now? It will be a wonder it that the Slain of the Lord are not
very Many e're this Disease be over. Children, You are concerned to turn to
God, to make sure of a CHRIST. Then you shall be happy; nothing else can make
you happy; you cannot be sure of your Lives: You may make sure of a CHRIST. If
you make sure of Him, you will be happy whatever befalls you.

WELL, What shall we do to make sure of This? A few Solemn Words let me speak
to you, and so I leave you.

1. SEEK to God betimes. You read, Prove. 8.17. They that seek me early shall
me. O that there may be many Early ^eckers of God, many that set themselves in
good earnest to Seek Him. When you Seek God, plead with Him the Relation
wherewith you are Advantaged, as sometimes Jacob did, O God of my Father
Abraham, O God of my Father Isaac; my Father and my Grandfather, did seek thy
Face; they were thy Servants; O let me be so too. And remember the Solemn
Exhortation that David gave to his Son Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. Thou Solomon my
son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and a
willing mind, if thou seek him he will be found of thee, but if thou for sake
him be will cast thee off forever. Say not, we cannot Convert our selves; Well,
but don't do that which will hinder your Conversion? Don't hearken to Evil
Counsel. We read in the Scripture of Ahaziah, after the Death of his Father,
the house of Ahab were his Counselors to his destruction. Remember that
Scripture, Prove. 13.20. He that walks with the wise shall be wise, but a
companion of fools shall be destroyed. O let not any of you be a Companion of
such; if you love your Souls beware of Vain Company: For there is nothing more
destructive to the Souls of Men than that. If thou choose to follow them, they
will be thy ruin, they will u do thee forever.

2. WAIT on God in the use of His own Means, that He would be Merciful to you.
Therefore Give diligent Attention, even an Earnest H^ed unto the Word of GOD,
when it is Preached unto you. Don't set your selves to sleep at Sermons. I
remember, there was a Man Died in this Place many Years ago, who Died in
doleful Despair; this Man when Dying said to me, Sometimes I set my self to
Sleep on purpose when you have been Preaching, and do you think there is any
Mercy for me? Yes, there was Mercy for him if he Repented; but he Died in
doleful Despair. Take heed of setting your selves to Sleep, when you should be
Hearing as for your Lives, as for your Souls. And then also, Cry to God that He
would have Mercy on you, do as Paul; when in the Pangs of the New Birth it is
said of him, Behold he prays! Doubtless Saul prayed many a time before that; he
was a Pharisee; the Pharisees often prayed; but he did not pray in Earnest, now
he prayed in good Ear est, as if his Soul was concerned, as indeed it was. Pray
as for thy Life and Soul, and God will hear and answer thee.

Lastly. DO not Quench the Spirit of God. It is complained of the Jews, Acts
7.51. They Resisted the Spirit of God. That is a dangerous thing; to vex the
Spirit of God; to grieve the Spirit of God! God has said, My Spirit shall not
always strive. Dr. Preston speaks of a Man, that had been guilty of a great
Sin, and was troubled very much that he had been guilty of such a Sin; he goes
to a vile Companion, that gave him this wicked advice, than which Satan himself
could not have given him worse; Go thy way, commit that Sin again, and thou
shall be never troubled more; that poor Wretch did so, and he was never
troubled more; God gave him up to a reprobate mind, to hardness of heart.
Remember Saul; it is said, The Spirit of the Lord departed from him. And, woe to
them, if I depart from them, says the Lord. If you Sin against the strivings
of God's Spirit, you may provoke him utterly to depart from you; But then, woe
unto you! Think of an awful Scripture which I shall leave with you, for I knew
a Man many Years ago, whose Conversion to God was promoted by serious
Meditation on that very Scripture; Ezekiel. 24.13. Because I would have purged
thee, and thou would not be purged, thou shall not be purged any more, till I
cause my fury to rest upon thee.

NOW, may the GOD of our Fathers mercifully preserve the Children of
New England, from that Apostasy, which may provoke Him to cast them off for
ever. May He be with them, as He was with their Fathers, and help them to w^^^
in the Good Ways of their Fathers, and in that Faith and Order of the Gospel
which they walked in; and may He never Leave them nor Forsake them.

THE END.

