Silentiarius.

A brief ESSAY On the Holy Silence AND Godly Patience, that Sad Things are to
be Entertained withal. A SERMON at Boston-Lecture, On the Death of Mrs. Abigail
Willard, And the Day before her Interment; who Expired September. 26. 1721.

By her FATHER.

Whereto there is added, A SERMON on, The Refuge of the Distressed, which was
Preached on the LORD's Day (...).

BOSTON: Printed by S Kneeland, 1721.

Introduction.
IF I may not only Get Good, but also Do Good, by the Sorrows which are the
Things appointed for me, with what a wonderful Satisfaction must I come to say,
Lord, In Faithfulness have thou afflicted me! He was an Happy Man, who could
say, GOD has caused me to be Fruit^ in the Land of my Affliction. It Is in a
pursuance of this Happiness, that these Thoughts in a Duy of Trouble are
Published, for the Service of my Fellow-Travellers, through a Wilderness, a Land
of Darkness, and fiery Flying Serpents.

Cotton Mather.

The Silent Sufferer.
BOSTON-Lecture, 28 d. VII. m. 1721. The Day before the Interment of my
DAUGHTER, with her Infant.
LEV. X. 3. And Aaron held his peace.


BUT the silent Saint shall now speak aloud unto us: Even i^ holding his Peace
he shall now speak aloud unto us: A D^ Man shall now speak unto us. It shall be
done, I will not say, Miraculously, (...) but I hope, it will be done
Remarkably, and very Proftably. The very silence will have in it a Voice to be
greatly hearkened to. And if I declare to you, That my Design is, to strike my
Hearers Dumb, it will be a Kindness for theme Indeed an Angel once brought it
as a Rebuke to a good Man, for something amiss in him, Thou shall be Dumb and
not able to speak. But I am now to propose it as the Glory of a good Man, Thou
shall be Dumb, and hold thy Peace, not willing to speak. When and How and Why
to hold ones peace, truly it is a Thing the People of GOD should be
well-acquainted withal.

BEFORE I go any further, I am to tell you, when this Duty of silence is to be
Studied. It must be our study To hold our peace, when we have sad things
befalling of us. The season of the Duty is, when we meet with grievous
Occurrences, with heavy Calamities. How and Why the Duty is to be attended, you
shall be told, after I have informed you who it is that gives us the Pattern of
it.

IT was Aaron, an Eminent Minister of GOD, yea, the High Priest of Israel. Sad
Things befell the Family of this Excellent Man. Two of his Children were taken
from him; yea, with very awful Circumstances taken from him. GOD Struck them
Dead, with Fire from Heaven. A Fire from Heaven had lately consumed the
Burnt-Offerings of the Brazen Altar. GOD required, That this Fire should always
be kept alive with a perfetual Fuel, and be the only Fire employed in all their
Offerings. But the Two Sons of Aaron, who Officiated in the Priesthood under
him, imagined (as the Jews interpret the matter to us) that this Fire was only
for the Burnt-Offerings: For the Altar of Incense they imagined, they might
fetch their Fire elsewhere; and they did so. GOD was offended; and by striking
them Dead, on the very First Day after the Service of the Altar began, and
after the Seven Days for the Consecration were finished and they were to offer
Sacrifices for themselves and the People, He gave a Lively Intimation, that
Life was not now to be obtained or expected from that Service. No, it is our
JESUS alone, who is the Truth and the Life.

THE Conduct of Aaron under the sad Things which befell him and his Family, is
now to be observed. The Saint of the Lord has this Reported of him; He hold his
peace. A Good Report! The Consideration which produced this Holy silence in
him, was in the Message, which his Brother brought from GOD unto him. The Lord
said, I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh unto me; and before all the
People will I be glorified. The Glorious GOD would be considered, as the
Dispenser of the sad Things which the Man of GOD met withal, and would
accordingly be Glorified.

AND now, may a DOCTRINE Worthy of all Acceptance, be by all of us duly
Accepted of.

SINCE it is the Glorious GOD, who is the Doer of all that in the sad Things
which we meet withal is ^ne unto us, it becomes us to Glorify Him with an an
HOLY SILENCE under them.

I call to mind, that when David as well as Aaron, had sad Things befalling
him, he gives this Account of his Conduct under them, Psalm. XXXIX. 9. I was
dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou did it. I am very much of the
Opinion, that when that Servant of GOD so Behaved and Expressed himself, he
doubtless had in his Eye, the Story of Aaron, which I now have in mine: A Story
which he could not but be wellapprised of. So then having the Advantage of thus
calling in David as well ^s Aaron to support my DOCTRINE, it may now be said,
those Two Bright Stars, David and Aaron, shall now appear in Conjunction; and
by your Observation of them, you shall understand how to Steer in the Darkest
Hours that sad Things may bring upon you. Under sad Things, the Great Thing
with which we are to Glorify GOD, is PATIENCE; PATIENCE. The Thing required of
us, is that, Jam. I. 4. Let Patience have its perfect work. I don't Remember
that the Hebrew Language, has any Term for Patience, but that of silence. The
Description which the Old Testament gives of Patience, is To be Dumb, and not
Open ones Mouth. There are some, who so read, Psalm. LXV. 1. Silence is praise
to thee, O GOD. Our GOD is never more Praised than by our silence. Our silence
under sad Things, will be a most notable Praise to our GOD. This, This, is the
Grace to be now spoken of! And in speaking of it,

I. WE are to lay down the Maxim, which does command, and may even compel, the
Holy silence, that is to be preserved under sad Things befalling of us. The
Maxim is this; The Glorious GOD is He who does all that is done unto us, in the
sad Things we meet withal; Whatever Afflictive Thing is done unto us, the Great
GOD says, I am now to be Sanctified and Glorified as the doer of it. Of every
thing that proves a stroke of Adversity unto us, we must make this Confession,
Lord, Thou do it. It was demanded. Hab. II. 20. The Lord is in his Holy
Temple; let all the Earth keep silence before Him. The demand shall now be, The
Lord is in thy Adversity, O Child of Earthly Man, do thou keep silence before
Him. Whatever sad Things we meet withal, we have not the Right Thoughts of the
Righteous, if we do not think, It is the Glorious GOD who has done all that is
done unto me. Indeed the sense of this, That we have to do with a Glorious GOD,
in all the sad Things which we meet withal, it is to be one Ingredient of the
Holy silence wherewith we are to Glorify Him. It is not an Holy silence, but a
Stupidity; yea, a Profanity, if our Patience have not the sense of a Glorious
GOD, for the Principle of it. Come then, Under our sad Things, this is the
First Thing to be Labored for. Be sensible of this, that in all the sad Things
which befall us, there is the Providence of a Glorious GOD at Work; A Glorious
GOD performing the Thing that is Appointed for us. It Is a Maxim never to be
doubted of. Job. V. 6. Certainly Affliction comes not f^rth of the Dust,
neither does Trouble spring out of the Ground. No, All our sad Things, as well
as our glad Things come from Above. The sad things which we suffer from and on
the Earth, are not of a mere Earthly Original. The Disputers of this World,
have in all Ages disputed on that Obscure Problem, the Origin of Evil. And in
the Enquiries after it, there have been those who have not enquired wisely
concerning this matter. The Ancient Pagans had a Notion, which the Manabees
afterward licked up, of a Good GOD, who Created a Good World, and covered it
with a Shell of His Protection; But then Another God who broke the Shell, and
made all Evil to break in at the perforation. This Notion prevailed very
particularly with the Magians in Persia. But our Glorious GOD, speaking of the
Persian affairs takes Occasion to make this Challenge; Isai. XLV. 7. I form the
Light, and I create Darkness; I make Peace, and I create Evil; I the Lord do
all these things. Man, if sad things involve thee in the Darkness of much Evil,
Behold the Lord, who is the doer of all these things. The Universal, the
Everlasting, the most Operative Providence of the Glorious GOD, is to be
considered, as the Original of all the sad things that we meet withal. There is
not an Atom in the World, about which the Providence of GOD is unconcerned; Not
an Atom so made in Vain, as to be left from under the Influence of that
Omnipresent Providence, that Omnipotent Providence. Whatever comes to pass, we
must evermore make that Confession; Psalm. CXXXV. 6. Whatever the Lord pleased,
that has he done in Heaven and in Earth, in the Seas, and in all deep Places.
All things are disposed, all things are managed, by this Mavelous Providence;
A Providence which does Mavelous things without Number: A Providence which
watches over Insects as well as over Angels; Over the Worm as well as over his
Brother Man who treads upon him; Over the Stars of Heaven, and over the Stones
of the Field. The very Sparrows are under the Divine Providence. Our SAVIOR,
who has now the Government of it, has told us; Matthew. X. 29. One of them shall
not fall to the ground, without your father. It Is the Glory of the Providence,
it is the Grandeur of it, that no little Thing, no, not the least in the World,
is Exempted from it.

WE will Suppose the sad things that befall us, to appear never so much in the
shape of mere Accidents; yet, GOD forbid, that we should come into the
Philistean Language, It was a chance that bappened unto us. To tell of a
Fortune; it is what becomes not the Mouth of a Christian. These Accidents, like
the stormy Winds, do but Fulfill the Word of GOD. Yea, we will suppose Enemies,
Rational and even Designing Agents, to bring our sad things upon us: But still
these Enemies are no other than Instruments. Ah, Thou Troubler; Thou art no
more than the Axe or the Sarce; no more than the Rod or the Staff; without the
Hand of our GOD, thou could never do any thing at all unto us. These are but
Second Causes. When GOD gives Quietness who can cause Trouble! This then is the
Upshot of the Matter. We are to Realize the Providence of the Glorious GOD in
all the sad things that we meet withal. Whenever any sad things befall us the
very First Thought rising in our Minds must be this: Lord, Thou did it ^
There is a Providence of GOD in this things The thing had never befallen me, if
the Providence of GOD had not ordered it!

II. AND now, for the Effect of the Maxim. What is that Holy Silence, which is
to be maintained, when the Glorious GOD shall inflict sad things upon us (...)
The Apprehension of our having to d^ with a Glorious GOD, in the sad thing
which we meet withal, must restrain all expressions of Impatience with us. Thus
it is, that we are to hold our peace. The Thing which we are now asking after is
this; what are those expressions o^ Impatience, which are to be refrained when
there is danger lest our Spirits become Impatient under sad Things be falling
of us? Now,

First. THERE is an Holy silence with regard unto Men, to be maintained, when
we are Concerned with Men, Injured by Men, in the sad Things which we meet
withal. It Is indeed in such Cases, that we are apt most of all to fall into
expressions of Impatience, and speak Un^visedly with our Lips: It Is when Men do
Hurt us, Wrong us, Abuse us; when Men do such Things unto us as would even
provoke a Stone to speak. Now in such Cases, what should be our Sentiments!
Though it may be a Messenger from Satan that buffets us, yet Remember, there are
Messages from GOD unto us in the Buffetings. And the Wards are best beard in
Quietness. An Holy silence is needful, that we may listen to His Lessons. Under
the sad things which we may suffer from Reproaches, we have been taught thus to
think of a Calumnious Backbiter, 2 Samuel XVI. 11. The Lord has bidden him. Yea,
under sad things which we may suffer even from Robberries themselves, we must
not forget, who gives us to the spoiler! We have been taught so to think; Job
1.21. The Lord has taken away. Being thus aware of this, that if any Man be
Abusive to us, it is GOD who stirs up the Adversary, let us go on to think; I
have deserved from GOD, all the sad things which this Man does unto me: And if
GOD thus bring me to Repentance, they are good things which are done unto me.
Go on to think; My GOD would have me scoured by the Dirt cast upon me, and more
shining in the Excellent Things that are most contrary to the approbrious
Things, which are spoken of me: When works of Iniquities prevail against me,
it is to purge away my Transgressions. Go on to think; My GOD will put me upon
the Exercise of a Forgiving Spirit unto them who have offended me, that so I
may have the sweeter assurance of His having Forgiven all my Offenses unto Him.
Under the Impression of such Sonthments, Oh! Let an Holy silence, be now kept
inviolable with you. Now for an Imitation of the meek and lowly JESUS; of Whom
we read, Isai. LIII. 7. He was oppressed, and He was afflicted, yet He opened
not His mouth: He is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before
the shearers is Dumb, Yo He opened not His mouth: The meek and Lovely JESUS; of
Whom we read, 1 Pet. II. 23. When be was Reviled, He Reviled not again; when He
suffered, He Threatened not; but committed Himself to Him that judges
Righteously. For be^n all expressions of Impatience; all Ebullitions of
Intemperate Passion; Immoderate Pas^^on; all unseemly vo^iting of ^^oler, and
casting up of bitter G^ll^. Don't speak falsely, no, nor too Hardly and Harshly
neither, of those that have wounded you. Let there come nothing from you that
shall be outrageous, nothing that shall be revengf^^, or (...) any Intention to
Render Evil for Evils My Friend, Set a watch before thy Mouth, Keep the door of
thy Lips. Be advised of this; To suffer many sad Things (...) such as have been
insufferably Abus^ to us, but be after all able to say, Through the help of a
dear SAVIOR, there has not been all this ^hile so much at One Impatient Word
Extorted from me! Verily. This were a Greater Favor of GOD, than there would
have been in it, if the sad Things had never been met withal.

Secondly. THERE is an Holy silence with regard unto the Glorious GOD, much
more to be maintained, when sad Things are met withal. Being satisfied of this;
Lord, Thou art the Doer of all! All Expressions of Impatience, are from this
Moment forbidden unto us. Be sure we shall Express too much Impatience, if our
sad Things cause us to fall into Wishes to have our Death hastened upon us. A
Job tired with sad Things, may cry out, O thus GOD would grant me the Thing
that I long for! Even that it would please GOD to destroy me; that He would let
loose His Hand, and cut me off! A ^ired Elies may Wish, O Lord, Take away my
Life! A tired Jonas may Wish, O Lord, I beseech thee, take my Life from me. But
they spoke too much. It would have been better for them to have beld their
Peace, been Dumb, and not so have opened their Mouths. Let all such Rash Wishes
of a Soul out of Breath under the L^ads lying upon it, be Suppressed. There is
a Faulty Impatience in them. Nor is this all the Caution to be inculcated. The
Holy silence must be yet further extended. It must lay a Restraint upon all the
Complaints which may express any Impatience under the sad Things we meet
withal. There must not pass from us, the least Whisper of any thing, that shall
not breath a sweet Submission to, a sweet Acquiescence, in, the Will of GOD,
sending sad Things upon us. Our Holy silence is to be kept in such Things as
these.

First. NOTHING must be spoke Amiss concerning the Glorious GOD; Nothing spoke!
No, Nothing so much as Thought amiss; under all the sad things which it shall
please Him to lay upon us. This Holy silence must reach not only unto our
Words, but also unto our very Thoughts. Our Thoughts may be as audible as the
loudest cries in the Ears of the Lord of Hosts, who knows our Thoughts a far
off. The Words of our very Minds, as well as of our Lips, under all our sad
Things must be such, that this Report may be made of us; Job 1.22. In all this
be sinned not, nor charged GOD foolishly.

MORE particularly,

First. ALL Impatient expressions of Rebellion against the S^v^reignty of the
Glorious GOD: These must be Restrained with an Holy silence, when a Sovereign
GOD shall do sad Things unto us. If sad Things be done unto us, we must by no
means dispute the Dominion of the Glorious GOD over us; by no means dispute his
Absolute Authority to do what He will with us, and give none account of His
matters; by no means dispute His Absolute Prerogative, to do what He will with
His own. Let our sad Things but carry us down to the House of the Potter. Under
our sad things, let us ly in the Dust before the Glorious GOD, and as Clay
before the Potter, not go to strive with our Maker, if He break the Potsherds
of the Earth to pieces at His Pleasure. With an Holy silence we must Subscribe
to that; Job IX. 12. Behold, He takes away; who can hinder Him^ who will say
unto Him, what do thou?

Secondly. ALL Impatient expressions of Reflection upon the Righteousness of
the Glorious GOD; These must be Restrained with an Holy silence, when a
Righteous GOD shall do sad things unto us. When sad things are done unto us, We
must not admit the least suspicion of any Injustice in the Dealings of Heaven
with us. Admit no suspicion, That we are unjustly dealt withal, or meet with
hard measure, or are not indeed Punished less than our Sins deserve. Admit no
suspicion, That we should be Unjustly dealt withal, if we were much more
severely Punished, and visited with Great Plagues, and of a long continuance,
yea, thrown into a Devouring Fire, and Everlasting Burnings. If we Groan under
our sad things, yet, Oh! Grumble not! Our sad things would be no more than we
are worthy of, if they were a Thousand times worse than they are. An Holy
silence must be enjoined; with such a Reprimand as that; Lam. III. 39.
Wherefore does a living Man complain, a Man for the Punishment of his Sins?

Thirdly. AN Holy silence must Restrain all Impatient Jealousies, about the
Faithfulness and Compossion of a Glorious GOD; when sad things are done unto
us. The Infliction of sad things upon us, will make a time of Temptations with
us: Temptations to grow Jealous of what the Dispensations of GOD are tending
to. It Is a Dark time and the Hour and Power of Darkness fall upon us. When the
Night arrives, then the Lions ^ore. Our sad things bring Temptations with them;
Temptations to say, I shall one day perish by the hand of this Misery; 'twill
be an undoing Misery. It will be too h^rd for me! Temptations to say, GOD
counts me for His Enemy; I now suffer from Him the strokes of an Enemy; it is
not my Salvation, but my Destruction that is now to be looked for! Temptations
to forget, that our sad things are all ordered by a SAVIOR sitting on the
Throne of GOD, and aiming at the Cure of all that is Irregular in us, and at
the Restoring of GOD unto His Throne in our Souls, and at the preparing of us
for the Spiritual Blessings of the Heavenly Places. If we are Tempted in and
from our sad things to say, what will imply our Forgetting of such things as
these, we ought now to silence these Jealousies. Instead of saying as we are
Tempted now to say, All these things are against me, let us with an Holy
silence keep unto that Conclusion; Genesis L. 20. GOD has meant it unto Good.

IN a Word; Under sad things befalling us, there must be nothing heard from us,
but the Language of PIETY; Nothing but what shall speak a Soul entirely
Swallowed up in the Will of GOD A Soul approving the equal Ways of GOD in all
that is done unto us; A Soul persuaded that our SAVIOR has Thoughts of Peace,
and not of Evil, in all that is done unto us.

BUT then, Secondly. A Shame of the Sin that has brought our sad things upon
us; This belongs to that Holy silence, wherewith GOD is to be Glorified under
them. The Confusion which Repentance is attended withal, it has an Holy silence
in it. Repentance is thus described; Ezekiel. XVI. 63. That thou may Remember,
and be Consounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy Shame. A
true Penitent is thus exhibited unto us, Lam. III. 28, 29. He sits alone and
keeps silence; because he has born it upon him; he puts his mouth in the
Dust. The frame of a true Peniten^ is that; Ezra. IX. 6. O my God, I am
ashamed. I blush to lift up my Face unto thee. And, I Blush to open my mouth
before thee. Under our sad things there is a Repentance called for; A
Repentance that will not leave us a Word to say for our selves; but cast us
into the Confusion of an Holy silence before the Glorious GOD, against whom we
have sinned. The most agreeable Voice of Lamentations is that, Let us search
and try our Ways, and Return unto the Lord. But in this Return unto the Lord,
there must be an Holy silence caused by the Confusion arising from what we find
in our searching and our trying of our Ways. We are told, That if we would
speak aright, we must say, What have I done? But then having so spoke aright,
there must follow an Holy silence, from the shame of what we have done. If ^^d
things befall us, we are to-hear an Holy GOD saying unto us, Thy Way and thy
Doings have procured those things unto thee; this is thy Wickedness. Under sad
Things, let us Examine our selves, What have I done to procure these things?
What Wickedness, either in point of Commission, or of Omission, have I been
guilty of? Oh! Let us Loath and Judge our selves before the Glorious GOD, and
with an Holy silence let us take to our selves the shame of our Miscarriages,
^y which we have provoked His Majes^y to inflict such sad Things upon us. ^hen
sad Things befall us, we may say, My GOD will Humble me. Under these Humbling
things, it will become us to take a Catalogue of Things Required and Forbidden
in the Commandments of our GOD. Examine the Trespasses, wherein we have Denied
the GOD that is Above. With the deepest Humiliation Confess, Lord, I have
nothing to say for my self I can make no Excuses for my Rebellions. Oh! I abhor
my self, and I Repent in Dust and Ashes. The Holy silence, which our sad things
call us to, is that of a Mouth lying in the Dust. Of the poor Man Convicted of
being in ill Terms with Heaven, we read, Match. XXII. 12. He was speechless.
This we are now to be, upon the Conviction under which we are to ly, with no
other Moan but this, I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against Him.

Thirdly. THERE is a Death to all things here below, in which we are to
maintain that Holy silence that our sad things are to be born withal. Of the
Dead, we read, They go down into silence. They that are gone down into the
Grave where the Dead are lodged, are in the Place of silence; have it said of
them, They are silent in the Grave. It Is a Description of Death; Psalm. XLIV.
17. A Soul dwelling in silence. Now, before we come to the Natural Death, which
lies in the Destruction of the Commerce between the Heart and the Brain, there
is a Moral Death, to be pursued and obtained; A Death upon our Vicious
Appetites; a Death wherein we shall have our Lusts Mortified; a Death in which
we shall be Dead with CHRIST, and have nothing but a CHRIST left Alive unto us,
in regard of any strong Relish in our Souls. To be Dead, is to be Dumb. The
Errand of all our sad things that come upon us, to render us Dead unto all
Things here. For just as far as we Die to these things we Live unto GOD; It is
the Dethroning of these Things, that Restores GOD unto His Throne in our Souls;
and by This we Live; in this is the Life of our Spirit. Our Faithful SAVIOR
sends Killing things upon us; perhaps they are without a Metaphor so. He Loves
us, when He Kills us. It Is that He may Kill our violent passions for Creatures,
and that He may Quicken and Compel in us the Dispositions of a Soul Returning
unto GOD; and that our Soul may be disposed, for the pursuit of that
Satisfaction in GOD alone, which we vainly have expected from Creatures
heretofore. Under our sad things there is to be endeavored the Holy silence of
those who are Crucified unto the World, and who have the World Crucified unto
them. A Man hanging on a Cross; This Man, is Free among the Dead, and has
little to say, unto any thing that this World has to offer unto him. Yea, this
World, with all the Enjoyments of it, must be as a Crucified thing unto us; a
Dead Carcass whereof we shall have little to say, expressive of any Value for
it. Christians, Under the sad things that befall you, Die, Die, to the Comforts
of this World. Let your Sentiments of them grow as cold as may be: And what are
the Sentiments of the Dead concerning them. Yea, Die also to the Troubles of
this World. I must complain of it, That many who seem to be pretty far gone in
a Death to the Comforts of this World, are not got so far as they should be in
a Death to the Troubles of this World. But, my Friends what are the Resentments
of a Dead Man upon all the Hard things that may be spoke of him, or may be done
to him (...) He says nothing upon these things. Even such an Indifferency must
be approached unto. Oh! Could our dear and kind SAVIOR see us thus Dead, under
all the sad things that He sends upon us! -- I say unto you, He would show
wonders to the Dead.

THUS I have described unto you, the Holy silence, wherewith GOD is to be
Glorified under all our sad things, which a Glorious GOD may send upon us.

BUT now at last, you shall have leave to break silence, and a leave to speak
shall be allowed unto you. It Is now to be supposed, That you will speak nothing
but what it will well become you to speak. And you shall have an Allowance,
yea, a Direction to speak. Though an Holy Silence becomes you under your sad
things, yet there is a sottish silence which is very misbecoming. There is a
speaking, which will be very consistent with the Holy silence which under your
sad things you are called unto. It was the Remark of the Psalmist; Psalm. XXXIX.
2. With silence I remained as Dumb; I wholly held my peace; not mentioning of
any Good; my grief was then renewed. There are some Good things to be mentioned
under our sad things. We must not now be so Dumb with silence as wholly to hold
our Peace, and forbear the mention of those Good things. Our Grief will be
Renewed, Increased, Inflamed, by such a silence. Yea, Because you are concerned
with GOD, in all the sad things that you meet withal; For that very Cause, you
are now to speak some Things which He will be pleased withal; speak such Things
as may answer the Intention of His Dealings with you.

Particularly,

First. CHRISTIAN, since the Glorious GOD is the Doer of what is in any sad
things done unto thee, be not so Dumb, do not so hold thy peace, as to have thy
Mouth not open in the Voice of Supplication. It Is a Thing Enjoined and Expected
by our GOD, when sad things are inflicted, Jam. V. 13. Is any among you
Afflicted? Let him Pray. O thou Afflicted, It will be no Trespass upon the
Rules of the Holy silence imposed on thee, under thy sad things, to speak and
Pray, Lord, show me wherefore thou contendest with me. Speak and Pray, Lord,
Let the things which for the present are not joyous but grievous, afterward
yield me the peaceable Fruits of Righte^sness. Yea, since we have had that
permission from our Gracious GOD, Call upon me in the day of Trouble, and I
will Deliver thee; Even Lift up thy Voice for this also. Speak and Beg and Ask
humbly for a seasonable Deliverance. If no sad things will bring thee to the
Use of thy Voice, but thou continue Prayerless under them; -- All this come
upon thee; and ^et thou bast not made thy Prayer unto (...) Lord! -- Alas this
is not an Holy silence; No, It Is a Dumb Devil that seems to have his Operation
in it.

Secondly. SINCE the Glorious GOD is the Doer, of what is in any sad things
done unto thee, be not so Dumb, do not so hold thy peace, as to have thy Mouth
not open in the Voice of Sacrifi^ing. In all thy sad things GOD puts thee upon
parting with some Enjoyments. Now, for the Voice of a Sacrificer! Now say with
him, Jon. II. 9. I will Sacrifice unto thee, with a Voice. All the sweet
things, which thou b^st lost, in and by the sad things that are come upon thee;
use ^n Holy silence, as to any Remonstrances against the proceedings of GOD in
depriving thee of them. Sacrifices use to be carried on silently. Instead there
of speak, and say, Lord, I Resign; Lord I Submit; Lord, I Offe^ up unto Thee,
whatever thou will ^ ^^ase to call for; I Forego, whatever thou wi^^ have to be
denied unto me! Come, Initiate thy self at the Royal (...) Upon all thy sad
things use the Language of a Noble Sacrificer. Heaven hears not a more
grateful, Melody! If a Priest be struck Dumb, his Priesthood will not be well
carried on. The Displeasure of GOD seems to set a Mark upon him.

Lastly, IT will be very consistent with an Holy silence, under thy sad things
to speak still at that rate; Psalm. XLII. 8. In the Night. His Song was with me.
My Brethren, there are Songs which GOD (...) Maker gives unto us, for the
Night, which your sad things, bring upon us. To intermit those Lovely Songs,
will be no Holy silence. One of the songs I will now utter in your Hearing.
Whatever ^ad things befall me, I have a Glorious CHRIST left still unto me! A
CHRIST who Reconciles me unto GOD, who pleads the Causes of my Soul; who
undertakes to heal all that is amiss in me; who orders my whole Condition for
me; who will make all things work together for my Good; who will carry me well
through the Valley of the shadow of Death; who will bring me to all the Spiritual
Blessings of the Heavenly Places; And while I have such a CHRIST concerned for
me, Happy, Happy am I; I never can be miserable! Go on, O Suffering Believer,
and Soar, and Sing at this rate; Whatever sad things befall me, while I feel a
Glorious CHRIST Possessing of me, and Conversing with me, and I can by the
precious Thoughts of Him have a CHRIST always Dwelling in me; and I can find in
a CHRIST all that was Amiable and Valuable in the Creatures that are taken from
me; so long I cannot but be Comfortable. In all my Darkness, I have a wondrous
Light arising to me. O Believing Sufferer, While thy sad things thus drive thee
as a Dove to the Clef^s of the Rock, thy SAVIOR says, Let me hear thy Voice!
And sweet, sweet will be this Voice of thine unto Him.

THE PIETY of an Holy silence, yet speaking such things as these, is to be
particularly Exemplified, on the Sorrowful Occasions, when like Aaron the
Priest of the Lord, we have our CHILDREN taken from us; the Desire of our Eyes
taken away with a stroke. Such Occasions do now exceedingly multiply, in a
City, the cry whereof goes up to Heaven. My Brethren, Allow me to tell you,
That on such Occasions; though we are to hold our peace, yet we are to make
mention of the Lord, and not keep silence, as to the satisfaction, which we
find Him afford unto us.

OUR Affection to our Children makes us desirous to have them Live, that they
may taste the Comforts of this Life, and those Good Things, which we would as
far as we can help them to. But now, speak such a thing as this. A Glorious
CHRIST fetches away these Children to a World, where they are feasted with
Comforts, which this mean and vain World could never yield unto them. They are
Comforted in the Paradise which they are gone unto.

WE have seen Lovely Qualities in our Children, by which they have been
mightily Endeared unto us. But now, speak such a thing as this. There could be
no Beauty in our Children but what^ (...) may see to Endear a Glorious CHRIST
infinitely more unto us: (...) Altogether Lovely One! Thou did give all that
was Beautiful in them; and thou (...) so made them a thousand times more
Beautiful than they were before.

THE Delight we have taken in Communion with our Children, makes us wi^h to
have them with us. But now, spe^ such a Thing as this. In Communion with a
Glorious CHRIST, I can find such things to delight my Soul, as the most
pleasant Children upon Earth could no^ enrich me with.

Having spoken such agreeable Things, now, Sir, it is time ^o hold your peace.

. IT becomes me to do so, who have this Day, a DAUGHTER, (...) together with
her New born Daught^r, (...) waiting to be Buried out of my Sight, whom others
as well as I, could not but always with much Affection Look upon.

IF I should sp^ak of the Singular Goodness and Sweetness in her Temper, which
rendered her Universally Beloved, or of that E^rly^ Piety, which most of all
bespoke, I will not say, the Praises for her which belong to the Woman that
fear^ the Lord, but the Praises of Him who called her out of Darkness into His
Mavelous Light: I might fall into the Indecency of speaking, what might be
more properly published by another.

IT will be no Tresp^ss upon the silence proper for me, to mention a
Circumstance of her Death, which may serve the Cause of that Early Piety, that
she was an Instance of.

SHE Entertained the Approaches of her Death, with a most humble Resignation to
the Will of her Glorious LORD, and Acquiescence in it: Though not without the
Remainders of that Fear, that, she said, had all her Life held her in Bondage.

SHE had not the Raptures of a Joyful Assurance, which some that had been once
Related to her, Enjoyed in their Dying Hours and Agonies. Though she said, That
in the Religion of the Closet, she had found the Spirit of GOD making His
Gracious Visits to her Soul, with some Comfortable Assurances of His Love; Yet
she said, That she was not now without some Distress upon her Mind;
complaining, that the Affairs of this World had so Enfeebled her Walk with GOD,
as to impair the Light of His Countenance upon her. But still she kept in the
strains and at the Acts, of that Substantial PIETY, which lies in Soul a
groaning after a Deliverance from Indwelling Sin, and Longing after a
Conformity to GOD, and laying hold on a SAVIOR, to fulfill all the Good
Pleasure of His Goodness.

HAVING Renewed the Consent of her Soul, over and over again, unto the Gracious
proposal made by her SAVIOR, for her Espousal to Him; and being asked, whether
she desired that her SAVIOR would make her Holy as well as Righteous, and so
fill her Soul with the Love of GOD, that GOD should be forever Dwelling and
Reigning there, she did with a Raised, and a more than common Ardor, make this
Answer to it; Oh! more than Life it self! That Favor of GOD is better than
Life!

AS her End approached, she had her Good Hope through Grace growing upon her. And
the very last Thing she spoke to me, was with Repetition to assure me, That her
SAVIOR had given her a Comfortable persuasion of His Receiving her to the
Glory of GOD.

BUT she left with me her Desires, That I would go on to inculcate upon the
Young People in the Place, that Early Piety, wherein (as All, and even the most
Watchful and Fruitful Children of GOD always declare, when they come to dye)
her poor Endeavors to Walk with GOD, she said, had Nothing in them to be
Repented of, but that they had been so poor, and that she had no more abounded
in them.

SHE was Born, June 14. 1694. But when she takes her Flight, she leaves yet
Surviving, Two GRANDFATHERS; the Venerable Dr. INCREASEMATHER, in the Eighty
Third, and the Honorable Col. JOHN PHILIPS, in the Ninetieth, Year of their
Age; Longing for their Orders to come away unto that World whither an Offspring
so endeared unto them, is gone before them: And where they shall be present
with the Lord.

HAVING Related thus much, and so far discharged my Duty, I shall now hold my
Peace, which is the Duty now remaining for me.

The Refuge of the Distressed.
BOSTON, 24. d VII. m. 1721. When my DAUGHTER was lying at the point of Death.
ISAIAH XXXVIII. 14. O Lord, I am Oppressed; Undertake for me.


THE Wis^st Course, the Only Course! It was well done, O Servant of the Lord:
Whither, whither else could thou have gone for Help? Where else could
thou have applied thy self with any comfortable Expectation? An Imitation of
this Holy Example, is the Thing I have to propose unto my Hearers. In such an
Evil World as this present World, we cannot be without frequent and many
Occasions. But at this Evil Time, the Occasions multiply exceedingly. Lord, How
are the Things increased which trouble us! Many, many are the Loads that we
feel Oppressing of us. The Wounds given to many, in the Deaths which take away
the Desire of their Eyes with a Tragical Stroke; And the Weary Nights that are
appointed for many more in the Condition of our Families; These are some of the
many Things, that cause us to groan, Lord, I am Oppressed under what is done
unto me. How often are we distressed, until we even Cry out of our Oppression?
Whither shall we Look in our Distresses, but unto Him alone, who can Support
and Rescue us? Lord, whither shall we go from thee! Thou have the Words of all
our Help!

THAT Religious and Renowned Prince Hezekiah was visited with a terrible
Sickness. I know not, whether it was in the Time, while Jerusalem was actually
besieged by Sennacherib, or whether it was after the miraculous Raising of the
Siege, by the Angels, and the Thunders of Heaven. If this Calamity befell him
after his remarkable Deliverance from his Adversary, it was, as Jerome notes, To
Chasten him, left his Heart should be listed up, too far, post incredibiles
triumphos et de media Captivitate Victeriam. Let it be how it will, after his
Deliverance from that Calamity, he composes an admirable Song, which expresses
his Dispositions and Circmstances, while it was yet upon him. In this very
thing, there is a pattern given to all Good Men, that have endured Great
Afflictions, and Received Great Salvations. O ye Men of Great Experiences, You
ought to Commemorate what you have Experienced; you ought to prepare and
preserve Memerials of what you have met withal; you should at least leave these
Memerials with your own Families, that they may learn to place their Hope in
GOD.

I dismiss that Admonition; and proceed unto One Article of this Excellent Man's
Behavior in the Time of his Calamity. This was, an Earnest Supplication unto
GOD. We have Two things before us. First; We have his Condition, O Lord, I am
oppressed. The Word properly means, an unjust Hardship, wherein, as we say,
Might overcomes Right! But we must not imagine, That our Saint would cry out as
one in that sense Oppressed by GOD. The Word then is to be taken in the
Improper meaning; It is as much as to say, My Affliction is too heavy for me;
and my Distemper handles me with a sort of Tyranny: I am overthrown, I am
overwhelmed, I have no way to help my self.

Secondly, WE have his Petition, Undertake for me. The word signifies, To
mingle. It leads us to a Suretiship, in which Parties are mingled; the one acts
for the other, yea, the one becomes the other. It is, q. d. Engage for my Help.
It also signifies Comfort me; Refresh me, Ease me, give me some Rest. Some
Interpreters translate the Word, Weave me up. He had just before said, I have
cut off like a weaver my Life. Now he says; Extend the Web of my Life; Let it
not be cut off, till it be fairly and fully finished.

The DOCTRINE before us, what else can it well be, but this?

GOOD Men Distressed and even Oppressed with Affliction, may and should go to
GOD, and cry to Him, who is the Helper of the Oppressed, that He will undertake
for them.

UNDER all press^res of Affliction, our Course must be to Fly unto GOD, as our
Undertaker; Make our Prayer to GOD, that He will Undertake to relieve us in,
and redeem us from all the Oppression that is upon us. I am to speak some Good
Words this Day; Words by which may be made Glad, the Hearts that are stouping
with Heaviness.

I. SOMETIMES we are so Distressed, as even to be oppressed in it. Our
Affliction may be such, that we may call it, an Oppression too. We may be so
Afflicted, that we may have cause to cry out, O Lord, I am Oppressed,

BUT what sort of Distresses, are they that may be styled Oppressions. Why;

First. ALL Distresses, that lie very heavy upon us, may be counted
Oppressions. When an Affliction Sinks us, then there is a kind of an Oppression
in it. If an Affliction be such a Burden upon our Spirits, or upon our
Interests, that we cannot easily subsist under it, we may now cry out, O Lord, I
am Oppressed! He was an oppressed man, who could say, Psalm. CXIX. 107. I am
afflicted very much. Sometimes an Affliction befalls us, that has in it more
than ordinary matter of Sorrow; that Sorrow, by which our Hearts are broken
within us. And sometimes we labor under a variety of Affliction: Many
vexations, and confusions do at once break in upon us. We faint, we fail, we
cannot keep up a comfortable Temper. Then we may say, O Lord, I am oppressed. So
might he, that could say, Psalm. LXXXVIII. 7. Thy wrath lies hard upon me, and
thou have afflicted me with all thy waves. So might he that could say, Psalm.
XXXVIII. 2. Thy Arrows stick fast in me, and thy Hand pr^sses me sore. Consult
the Gr^ans of Afflicted Job; In them you often have a Paraphrase on our, O
Lord, I am oppressed. It is Paraphrased, when he says, Oh! That my Grief were
thoroughly weighed! For now, it would be heavier than the sand of the Sea:
Therefore my words are swallowed up. There may be Oppression in our Affliction,
without any of the least Injustice in it. It is enough, if there be Extremity
in it, if there be Se^crity in it, if it be Insupportable; if we cannot well
encounter it. We may now say, O Lord, I am Oppressed.

BUT, Secondly; There are those which are Oppressions without a Figure;
Oppressions in the strict import of the Term; And these are Oppressions that
have Injustice in them. We are Oppressed, when we are unjustly and unfairly
dealt withal. The Injured are the Oppressed. There is that which is called,
Psalm. CXIX. 134. The Oppression of Man. This Oppression always carries
Injustice in it. There is the Gain of Oppression. There is a Leviathan, who is
eminently esteemed, The Oppressor. It Is the Man who uses Extortion in his
Dealings; the Man, who takes Advantage upon the Necessities of other Men, to
compel them unto unconscionable Difficulties; the Man, who detains the hire of
the Laborers, and the Just Dues of the Necessitous, till they make a Cry. We
read of such an one, Hos. XII. 7. He Loves to Oppress. There are Oppressions in
all Cruel Usages. Every Cruelty, though to the most abject of Creatures, is an
Oppression. A Slave barbarously dealt withal, may say, O Lord, I am oppressed.
They also that are Abused, and Sandered, in their Names, and unjustly
Reproached; these may say, O Lord, I am oppressed. Unjust Representations made
of Men, are Oppressions upon them. A Man, who is treated as an Offender, when
it may truly be said, This man has done nothing amiss! This man may say, O
Lord, I am oppressed. When Affront, Contempt, Indignity is cast upon a Man, who
deserves another manner of Treatment, he is an oppressed man. And if the man
who is unrighteously dealt withal, be basely deserted, by those that ought to
appear for his defense and service; If he be deprived of Remedies to defend
himself the oppression then becomes yet more notorious and conspicuous. God
will look upon it! But that I am to tell you, in the Second Proposition.

II. THE Oppressed, What shall they do? Where shall they go? But make their
Complaint unto the Lord; Solicit the Lord, that He would undertake for them.
So we are taught, by Psalm. CII. Fit. A Prayer of the Afflicted, when he is
overwhelmed, and pour^th out his complaint before the Lord. Several things are
now to be Enquired.

WE will Enquire, First; HOW the Oppressed must make their Complaint unto the
Lord?

WE will Answer; First; Be sure, You may not complain of any Oppression in the
Lord. Of the Glorious Lord, that Acknowledgment must be Eternally made, Psalm.
XCII. 15. There is no unrighteousness in Him. Whatever Distresses come upon us,
we must Acknowledge; The Lord is Holy in all his ways, and Righteous in all his
Works. Whatever may be our Afflictions, we must Acknowledge, Lord, Thou do
^unish me far less than mine Iniquities deserve. Indeed, One that was under a
vast confluence, and contrition of Troubles, broke forth into that Expression;
Job X. 3. Is it Good unto thee, that thou should oppress? But the Good GOD
may truly say; I cannot oppress. Oh! Let us humble our selves before the awful,
absolute, infinite Sovereignty of the Great GOD. The Sovereign GOD may de what.
He will, with all the Works of His Hands. It Is no Oppression in the Potter, to
do what He will with the Clay. The Great GOD would not oppress us, though He
should utterly Destroy us; and; unto whom shall He give an Account of His
matters? But then, Let us add the Consideration of our own exceeding
Sinfulness: Consider, how much we have by our Sins, made our selves worthy of
the forest Plagues; Consider that Expostulation; Lam. III. 39. Why should a
living Man complain; a Man for the Punishment of his Sin? After this, when we
complain to the Lord, O Lord, I am oppressed; Yet never Complain of the Lord.
Confess before the Lord, O Lord, If my Distresses and Afflictions do oppress
me, yet thou art not chargeable with any Oppression. Thou art Just, in all that
is come upon me. Though Man may use Injustice toward me, there is not the least
Injustice, in the Lord, who has ordered all.

Secondly. YOUR Complaint unto the Lord, under your Oppression, must be your
Prayer to the Lord, that He would undertake for you. It must be an Address to
the Lord, that you may be helped under your Oppression, by His undertaking for
you.

BUT what is contained, in this Comprehensive Desire, Undertake for me. It
contains in General, a Desire, that GOD would go thorough with all that shall
beneedful for our Succor. He that undertakes a Business, must perform it, and
go thorough with it. Now there are several things needful to be performed for
the oppressed People of GOD.

First. MAY GOD Undertake for us, That we may be strengthened and comforted
under our Oppressions. If GOD undertake for us, we shall have the Assistance of
God; God will assist us to bear our Oppressions with Patience. If God undertake
for us, we shall Continue and Persevere in the Ways of God under our
Oppressions, and not step aside into any Sin, though we are broken in the Place
of Dragons. If God undertake for us, we shall be kept from Heartbreaking
Despondencies under our Oppressions; our Hearts will be revived with the Great
Consolations of God brought home unto them. We read, Psalm. LV. 22. He shall
sustain thee. When we pray, Lord, undertake for me, we are to present such
desires as these before the Lord: Lord, Let none of my Distresses be too hard
for me. If I must be Distressed, yet let me not be Forsaken. Do not suffer me
to be Tempted above what thou will make me able to bear. Visit me with thy
Spirit; let thy Spirit visit me with thy Promises under my Distresses. O
strengthen me, and Comfort me.

Secondly. MAY GOD undertake for us, That we may get Good by our Oppressions.
If God undertake for us, our Oppressions will be made Beneficial, Advantageous,
and Serviceable unto us; and we shall reap out of them the best of Benefits. If
God undertake for us, our Oppressions will bring us nearer to God, and make us
liker to Christ, and the Things which press us down, will but Raise us up to
the most Heave^ly elevations. It GOD undertake for us, our Souls will thrive
under our Oppressions, more than the Israelites did under their Egyptian ones;
we shall be gainers by our Losses. We read, Heb. XII. 11. The chastning
afterward yields the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness. When we pray, Lord,
undertake for me, we are to present such Desires as these before the Lord:
Lord, Let my Distresses prove Kindnesses to me. Let me find that thou have in
Faithfulness distressed me; and that all the Fruit shall be to take away my
Sin. Let me be made better, by all the Evil that befalls me; and let me be made
Wiser by the Rod of thy Correction.

Thirdly. MAY GOD undertake for us, That we may be Saved out of our
Oppressions. The Great GOD, is the GOD of Salvations. If once He undertake for
us, we shall have Salvations from our Oppressions. The cry of the oppressed is,
Arise and save us. We read, Psalm. CVII. 6. They cried unto the Lord, in their
Trouble, and He delivered them out of their Distresses. When we pray, Lord,
undertake for me, we present these desires before the Lord; Lord, Bring me out
of my Distr^sses. Let me see thy Salvations. I am Thine, Save me.

THIS is what we have to do. But now,

WE will Enquire, Secondly. Why the oppressed should thus make their Complaint
unto the Lord.

WE will Answer. It should be done for these Reasons.

First. THERE is the Hand of GOD, in all our Oppressions. It is the Hand of
GOD, that lays them on. Though the Blessed GOD can be no Oppressor; yet we can
suffer no Oppressions without the Will of GOD. All our Afflictions are ordered
by GOD. It was a word spoken once to one, who cried out, I am Oppressed; Job.
V. 6, 8. Affliction comes not forth of the Dust, neither does Trouble spring
out of the Ground; I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause.
Whatever Distresses may Afflict us, and Oppress us, it is the unexceptionable
Providence of GOD, that has brought them upon us. If it be the Oppression of
Man, that is grievous unto us, even this also is not without the Providence of
GOD. No Man can wrong us, but it may be said, God has bidden him. We read, Job.
XXXIV. 29. When He gives Quietness who can make Trouble? Well then; Since we
have to do with GOD, in all our Oppressions, what shall we do, but make our
Complaint unto GOD? Yea, GOD sends our Oppressions upon us, on purpose to
provoke and produce our Complaint unto Him. He says, In their Affliction,
surely they will seek me Early. The same Hand that lays our Oppressions upon
us; whither shall we look but unto that Hand, either to moderate them to us, or
to deliver us from them?

Secondly. THE Faithful GOD is Engaged for our Help in all our Oppressions. The
very Nature of GOD, this is full of Mercy, full of Pity. There is in the very
Nature of GOD, a Compassion for the Oppressed. We read, Lam. III. 32. Though He
cause grief, yet will be have compossion, according to the Multitude of His
Mercies. Hence it comes to pass, that when Sinful Men have brought sad
Oppressions and Confusions on themselves by their Sins, yet if they make their
Complaint unto the Lord, He soon says, Though I have brought such things upon
them, yet I earnestly remember them still, and I will surely have mercy on
them. It Is therefore also one of the Titles, by which the Lord has made Himself
known unto us; Psalm. IX. 9. The Lord will be a Refuge for the oppressed. And,
Psalm. X. 18. He will judge the oppressed. Yea, And there is the Promise of GOD
for it. GOD has Promised, That when the Oppressed bring their complaint unto
Him, they shall not seek His Face in vain. Thus we read; Psalm. XII. 5. For the
oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, says
the Lord. Oppressed Believer, why art thou cast down? why is thy Soul
disquieted within thee? Go tell the Lord, all that lies as a Distress upon
thee; Thou will find him ready to take notice of thy Distress, ready to do thee
Good.

Thirdly. NONE but GOD can help us in all our Oppressions. We read, Jer. III.
23. In vain is salvation expected elsewhere; Truly in the Lord our GOD is the
salvation of Israel. It is in vain to ask, any one else but the Lord only to
Undertake for us. If Creatures do undertake any thing for us, without GOD they
can Accomplish nothing for us. They are all Physicians of no value. We read,
Job XXI. 4. As for me, is my Complaint unto man? If it were so -- It Is in vain
for us to call, O Friend, undertake for me. We have no way left, but to call, O
Lord, undertake for me. All other Undertakers will be miserable Comforters.
They will effectually put us off, as the King did the poor Oppressed Woman; If
the Lord help thee not, whence can I help thee! GOD is the only Refuge of the
Oppressed. When any Oppression is upon us, we must make that Conclusion; My
Soul, wait thou only upon GOD; for my expectation is from Him alone. He only is
my Rock and my Salvation.

APPLICATION.
AND now, What are your Oppressions, what are your Exercises, O ye People,
every one of you? Behold, a Lovely, the only Method of Relief! Oh! Let all
Oppressed People, repair to the Glorious GOD, as their Great Undertaker. Make
your Complaint, and your Prayer unto GOD, that He would Undertake for you.
Where else will you go? What can ye do without me, s^^th the Lord! If your vain
Imaginations propose this way, and that way; and indeed Fallen man has sought
out many Inventions; There are many ways to get off the heavy Burdens, which we
feel Oppressing of us; Behold, I show unto you, a more excellent way. Spread
before the Lord, all the Oppressions, and all the Distresses, that encumber
you. Cry unto Him, O Lord, I am oppressed, Undertake for me! This is the way to
come at that Happiness; Isai. LIVE. 14. Thou shall be far from oppression, for
thou shall not fear it. To call upon GOD, O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for
me: This is the way, to see a glad Period put unto your Oppressions. The
Experience of the Pious in all Ages have proved this way. Thousands and Myriads
have been the Instances of those, who have been able to say, This Poor one, was
Oppressed, and lamentably distressed, but he cried unto the Lord, and the Lord
saved him out of all his Troubles. To call upon GOD, O Lord, I am oppressed,
Undertake for me: This is the way to Ease and Change the Oppressions
immediately. The Afflictions may remain, but they shall cease to be
Oppressions. We shall be able to stand, and walk, and look cheerfully under
them. If we were of Sorrowful Spirits, yet having poured out our Souls unto the
Lord, we shall now be no more sad. We shall be upheld when we have cast our
Burdens on the Lord. When Peter cries out, Lord, save me, the outstretched Arm
of the Lord, will save His Threatened Servant from sinking in the Black waves
which threaten him. This admirable way, of dealing with all our Uneasinesses, I
must recommend it universally, recommend it wonderfully.

I. THIS must be the Method of Relief, when you meet with sharp Scourges from
the Hand of Heaven, upon any of your Enjoyments. Whatever Oppression or
Affliction lies upon you in any of your Enjoyments, Oh! mourn unto the Lord;
Lord, I am oppressed, Undertake for me. This is the Direction, Jam. V. 13. Is
any afflicted, let him Pray. So we are directed; Psalm. L. 15. Call on me in the
day of trouble. Are you Oppressed with any Malady? Go to that Lord, who is the
Lord our Healer. Ask the Healing Influences of Him, who is the Lord of our
Life. It was a gross Error in him, who sought unto the Physicians, and not unto
the Lord. Under all your pains, cry out, O Lord, I am oppressed, Undertake for
me. Add that cry; Psalm. XLI. 4. Lord, Heal my Soul; for I have sinned against
thee. Are you Oppressed with any Poverty? Go to that Lord, who by His Blessing
does make rich. Ask to be Blessed and Fed by that Lord, who says, that if you
Trust in Him, and do Good, verily you shall be Fed. Whatever Straits may be
upon you, cry out, O Lord, I am oppressed, Undertake for me. Plead that Bond:
Heb. XIII. V. He has said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Are you
brought low, by the Death of those in whom your Life was bound up? Do you
stoup, and shrink, as under a dismal Oppression, because those that were as the
very Staff of your Life, are taken from you? Is the Lamb that has been unto you
as a Daughter going from you! Go to that Lord, who has taken your Friends from
you, and who is infinitely Better than all Friends. Ask that you may find him
so. Cry out unto Him; O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me. Take with you
those words also; Psalm. XXV. 16. Have merry on me, for I am desolate and
afflicted.

II. THIS must be the Method of Relief, when you fall into the Hand of the
Oppressor. You read; Eccl. V. 8. Thou see the oppression of the poor; He that
is Higher than the Highest, regards it, Let Him that is Higher than the
Highest then hear from thee, O oppressed Neighbor. Though thou art never so low,
and mean, He will regard the Oppression. Do any Defraud you, and fraudulently,
or violently withold from you, what you have a Rightful Claim unto? Do any
misuse you? Do any Revile you? Are you falsely Accused? must you lie under the
Load of a False Accusation, and the unjust Clamours of unreasonable Persons?
Fall down at the Foot of the Holy GOD. Own that He is Just in all. Beg that you
may get Good by all. But cry out, O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me!

I will be yet more particular. We read, Gal. VI. 2. Bear ye one another
burdens. Alas, Men make Burdens for one another; By their Base Humors they do
so. Sometimes Relatives make themselves very Burdensome to one another. We may
have Relatives whose vile, froward, morose Carriage may be so Burdensome unto
us, that we can do nothing, but as Jacob did, when Laban, and when Esau, were
abusive to him. Do so; and cry unto the Lord; O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake
for me! We have cause to say, as Psalm. LVI. 1. Be merciful to me, O God, for
Man daily oppresses me. Who can tell, what will be done; when the multitude of
your Oppressions, brings you to cry out, Where is GOD my Maker.

III. THIS must be the Method of Relief, when your Fears, your Cares, your
Employments are too many for you. They that are afraid, how it may fare with
such as are gone far from them, and ve^ ly n^ar to them: The Desire of their
Eyes traveled out of their Sight; Their Friends abroad. Their Hears about
them, how oppressing are they! They^ly down with them; they rise up with them.
Oppressed Hearts Cry out, O Lord, I am oppressed, Undertake for me! Add that
Cry; Psalm. LXI. 2. From the End of the Earth will I cry unto thee, when my
Heart is Overwhelmed. Some are in the Park, what Steps to take, in weighty
Affairs before them. They have Darkness on their paths. They are at a mighty
Less, what to do. Their Agony, their Oppression is unspeakable. Distressed
Minds, cry out, O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me! Add that cry, Psalm.
XXVII. 11. Teach me thy way, O Lord; and lead me in a plain path. Some have
more Wark to do, than they can well do; they are over wrought; Heavy Tasks are
imposed on them; They have many to serve; many Obligations to answer. Weary
Men! cry out; O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me! Put in suit that word;
Isa. LXI. 10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee, I will strengthen thee, I will
help thee, I will uphold thee.

IV. THIS must be the Method of Relief, when Troubles of a more Spiritual
Original are upon you. When the Philistines of Hell, with their Temptations are
upon you. Are you under Temptations; Temptations to Infidelity, Temptations to
some Impurity, Temptations to any Impiety? Do your Temptations press hard upon
you and throw your Souls into a Flame, into a Sweat, into an Intolerable
Agitation; You may complain, as Psalm. LIVE. 3. Oppressors that seek after my
Soul have risen up against me. The Devils armed with our Lusts, are the worst
Oppressors in the World; Worse, worse than any on the Coast of Barbary; They
are Oppressors that seek after the very Life of our Soul. But unto whom will
you make your Complaint? O cast your selves into the Dust before the Lord, and
from thence cry out unto Him, O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me. You may
lay to Heart your Oppression, as worse than that wherewith we read, the
Egyptians, and after that, the Nations of Canaan, sometimes oppressed the
People of GOD. You may say with him, Psalm. XLIII. 2. I go mourning because of
the oppression of the Enemy. But then, Let the Temptations that oppress you,
Quicken your cry unto Him, that said, Behold, the cry of the Children of Israel
is come unto me, and I have seen their oppression wherewith the Egyptians
oppress them. Cry out, as under a Rape. Cry out, O Lord, I am oppressed,
undertake for me! Add that cry, Psalm. CXIX. 122. Be surety for thy Servant for
Good; Let not the proud oppress me. Lord, none so proud, as the Devils, and the
Lusts, which exact from me, the Homage which is due to thee alone. GOD will
break in pieces, the Temptations, that cause the cry of the poor to come unto
Him, and He will hear the cry of the Afflicted. If the Battle go hard, cry to
GOD in the Battle.

V. WE must not break off until the Suretiship of our LORD JESUS CHRIST be
clearly set before us; the Suretiship in which is laid up all our Salvation. Of
our SAVIOR we read, Heb. VII. 22. Our JESUS made a Surety. Oh! Give a great
Attention!

KNOW it first; That you have such Loads lying upon you, as will sink you into
Eternal Wretchedness, if they be not seasonably taken off. Your Sins, your
Sins, are such mountainous Loads. In your Natural State, what are you, but a
People laden with Iniquity! The Guilt which is lying upon you, or a being bound
over to suffer the Punishment of Sin: It Is a Load enough to break the back of
an Angel. Ah! Were you not horribly Dead in Sin, you would cry out; as Psalm.
XXXVIII. 4. My Iniquities are as an heavy Burden, they are too heavy for me.
And the Rule of Sin reigning over you, how full of Oppression is it! Sin puts a
most Oppressive Drudgery on the Sinful Children of Men. Obedience to Sin, it is
a L^ad, and a Yoke that cannot be born. Ah, Did you feel it, as it is, you
would cry out; Romans VII. 24. O wretched one that I a^, who shall deliver me!
Sinners, That you were but sensible of the ^a^s that are upon you! Loads that
are pushing of you to Death!

BUT Know it, Secondly; That a Glorious CHRIST has Undertaken to take off the
Loads, of the Sinners that Sigh and Seek unto Him. Indeed, there was a Day
wherein the Great GOD laid upon Him the Iniquities of us all. In that black Day
we read, Isai. LIII. 7. He was oppressed. When our SAVIOR had the Load of our
Sin lying upon Him, and was making Satisfaction for our Sin, He cried out, I am
oppressed, I am sore broken. What an Heaviness was there then upon Him! All
this was to Save us out of our Oppression; It was to pay a Ransom for us! And
if we will now Personally Apply our selves unto this Glorious CHRIST we shall
have Him for our SAVIOR. The Bond of our Iniquity, will be removed, be
cancelled; And no Iniquity shall have Dominion over us. What an Invitation has
this Glorious Undertaker for oppr^ssed Souls given unto us! Matthew. XI. 28. Come
to me all ye that Lab^ur and are heavy laden, and I will give you Rest.
Oppressed Sinner, Thus Invited by the ^trong Redeemer, see thy Oppression, and
cry out unto Him; O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me. My Sins will
oppr^ss me, will Destroy me, except Thou be my Surety for Good. I put my self
into thy Hands; Oh! Be Thou my Surety and my SAVIOR. The Effect of this Faith
will be, that a Glorious CHRIST, will Undertake for thee. But, Oh! What a
Strong Redeemer will thou find Him! His Office is that, Psalm. LXXII. 4. He
shall break in pieces the Oppressor; He shall save the Soul of the Needy. He
will Execute this Office wonderfully for thee.

I have done. You are no doubt aware of it, that some very Afflictive Things in
my own Condition, especially on the score of my call this Day to the Sacrifices
of a Jepthah, and in the Condition of some very nearly Related unto me; have
led me to these Meditations.

I will only observe to you, these Two Things upon it.

THE One is; That it is a Consolation to me when I am o^ and much oppressed,
and become a Man of Sorrows, it is o^dered by a Gracious GOD, that some of His
People fare the better for my S^rrows; I can truly say, This renders my
Oppressions in some Degree welcome to me, in that I perceive He makes them
Useful to the People, unto whose Edification my All is Dedicated.

THE Other is; That I can assure you, a poor Oppressed Servant of GOD, having
the view of a CHRIST concerned for him, and feeling a CHRIST possessing of him,
and conversing with him, finds enough and enough to comfort him, in the
Multitude of his Thoughts within him. Upon the precious Thoughts of a CHRIST,
he is kept from fainting under any Oppr^ssions; The Fatigue of them Vanishes;
He can mount and soar and Sing the Songs, which GOD our Maker has provided for
the darkest Night, that is ever passing over him.

FINIS.

