Mr. Dickinson's SERMON Preached at the opening of the SYNOD AT PHILADELPHIA,
September 19. 1722.

A SERMON Preached at the opening of the SYNOD AT Philadelphia, September 19.
1722.

Whererein is considered the Character of the MAN of GOD, and his Furniture for
the Exercise both of Doctrine and Discipline, with the true boundaries of the
Churches Power.

By Jonathan Dickinson, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Elizabeth-Town.

Isai. VIII.20. To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not according to
this Word, it is because there is no light in them.

BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet, for S. Gerrish, at his Shop in Cornhill. 1723.

A SERMON Preached at the SYNOD at Philadelphia.
2 Timothy III.17. That the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto
all good Works.


THERE has no one thing had an equal hand in the many Heresies, Schisms,
Convulsions and Confusions, which the Church of God has always labored under,
with HUMANE INVENTIONS and INSTITUTIONS, in the Affairs of Gods House.

HENCE the first rent in Christ's seamless Coat, and the continued successive
Feuds among the ambitious Clergy, that rendered the Church rather, literally, an
Army with Banners, than the Spouse of the Prince of Peace.

HENCE the Man of Sin, with all his Pagan Idolatry, Antichristian Hierarchy,
Theatrical Pageantry, and Bloody Cruelty.

HENCE numerous Sects and Factions among Christians, and even among
Protestants, too commonly flaming with begotted Zeal and uncharitable Asperity,
one toward another.

HENCE the weak are wounded; Infidelity strengthened; and Religion its self,
with all its blessed and peaceable Doctrines, is become a subject of Debate,
instead of a Rule of Faith and Life. And I may add to all this, --

It Is a bold invasion of Christ's Royal Power, and a rude reflection upon his
Wisdom and Faithfulness, for proud Worms to make any Addition to that perfect
Pattern, which he has given us: For how artfully soever this Mischief may be
painted over, with the fair Colors of Apostolic Tradition, Antiquity, Order
and Decency, The hand of Union and Communion, The well Government or greater
Good of the Church, or whatever other Pretense; it may be justly challanged
with a WHO HAS REQUIRED THIS AT YOUR HANDS. Since he who is faithful him that
appointed him, as Moses was in all his House, has given us a complete Rule for
Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, sufficient to make the Man of God perfect,
thoroughly furnished to all good Works, as we find in our Text, in which is
notable

1. AN honorable Compellation given to a Gospel Minister. The Man of God. The
meaning whereof, I shall hereafter find occasion to consider.

2. THE only Rule and Standard of a Ministers whole Work and Duty. That by
which he may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works; fully
acquainted with the Will of God, and directed unto the discharge of every part
of his Office. That there is no Rule wanting for his Guide, no Law for his
Observance, no Rubric or Ritual for his Worship, no Foundation for his Faith
or Hope; but what is there fully provided for* Nor any room left for political
Inventions or Institutions, in order to the full and faithful discharge of his
whole Trust. And this comprehensive Rule (as we may see in the foregoing Verse)
is the SACRED SCRIPTURE* All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, and is
profitable, etc. that the Man of God may be perfect, etc. -- But that I may
more distinctly explain the Words, I shall consider them as consisting of these
two Propositions.

I. THAT a Gospel Minister is a Man of God.

II. THAT the Holy Scriptures are every way sufficient to make him perfect in,
and thoroughly furnish him for, the whole Work of his Ministry.

Prop. I. A Gospel Minister is a Man of God. -- This dignifying Title, though
most frequently given to the Prophets and Inspired Teachers, is applicable to
the ordinary Ministers of the Gospel, in these respects.

1. IN that they have their Mission and Commission from him -- They have their
Commission not of man, nor by men; but from Jesus Christ, and God the Father,
who raised him from the dead Gal. l.1.
. And no man may take this honor to himself, but he that is called of God as
was Aaron Heb. V.4.
-- Though a mediate Separation to the Sacred Office, be the instituted Means
to propagate the Ministry through the succeding Ages of the Church; yet the
Office it self is immediately from Christ, who has ascended on high, to give
gifts unto men, and continue Pastors and Teachers in his Church, till we all
come in the Unity of the Faith Ephesians. IV.10, 11, 12.
. And God who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, has given to us
the Ministry of Reconciliation 2 Cor. V.18.
. -- Thus a Minister is a Man of God, by him appointed and authorized; and by
him allowed to be put in trust with the Gospel. 1 These. II.4.

2. A Minister is a Man of God, in that he is engaged in the immediate Service,
and employed in the Sacred Things of God. -- He who commands the Service of
innumerable Legions of Angels, has been pleased to dignify poor Dust and Ashes,
with the Character of his Servants, and betrust them with the great Affairs of
his Kingdom. That by their Ministry, (how contemptible soever in the eyes of
the World) He may break down the strong holds of Sin and Satan in the Hearts of
Men, rescue Sins miserable Captives, advance the Kingdom of his Grace, and
erect Trophies on the ruins of Satan's Interest in the World. -- And as he has
honored them with this awful Trust, so has he set 'em apart to it, and sent
'em to preach in his Name the Gospel of the Kingdom, to instruct the Ignorant,
to awaken the Secure, to comfort the Mourners, to detect the Self-deceivers,
refute the Erroneous, discover the deceitfulness of Men's Hearts, lay open the
Devices of Satan; and both by Doctrine and Discipline, earnestly pursue the
rescue of Sinners from Destruction, and their Reconciliation unto God. -- Thus
are they Men of God, Men separated unto the Gospel of God, Romans I.1. Laborers
together with God, 1 Cor. III.9. And Ministers according to the dispensation of
God, which is given to them, to fulfill the Word of God, Col. I.25. And this
Appellation belongs to the Gospel Minister.

3. AS he represents God, and acts in his name and stead, in the discharge of
his Ministry. -- Such are the riches of free Grace, and such the wonders of
Divine Condescension, that injured Justice is stooping to treat with Rebels
about a Reconciliation, and for that End he who is in Christ reconciling the
World unto himself, has committed unto his Ministers the word of Reconciliation
2 Cor. V.18.
; and commissioned 'em in his Name, to propose the Treaty of Peace to poor
Sinners; and to press upon 'em both the sweet Allurements of the Gospel, and
terrible Thunders of the Law, as powerful Incentives to their compliance with
offered Mercy.

AND as God graciously condescends to treat with Rebels, so also to bring them
into his Family, and to deal with 'em as Children, and for that End has made
his Ministers Rulers over his Household, to give every one their Portion of Meat
in due season Luke XII.42.
And has given them charge of the Affairs of his House, as Stewards of the
Mysteries of God 1 Cor. IV.1.
-- Thus then they are Men of God, as they are Ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech us by them, as they pray us in Christ's stead, to be
reconciled to God. 2 Cor. V.20. And as they are Stewards of the manifold Grace
of God. 1 Pet. IV.10 -- Thus I come to make some brief Reflections upon this
Proposition.

AND I must first apply this Truth to you, My Reverend Fathers and Brethren,
whose Character I Have now been considering. Suffer the most unworthy of your
Number and Order, to stir up your pure Minds by way of Remembrance.

1. ARE we Men of God, this teaches us the Sacred Dignity of our Office and
Character. -- The Service of God is an Honor that the brightest Intelligences
of Heaven are ambitious of. What cause have we therefore with ravished Souls,
to admire and adore that Grace of God, which dignifies such worthless Worms
with the Character of his Ambassadors? What cause of an holy Emulation to walk
worthy of so high an Honor; that God ben't dishonored, our Persons contemned,
the Ordinances by us dispensed slighted and disesteemed, nor our Labors
fruitless, by a licentious Walk, or by base sordid mean Spirits or Actions.

2. ARE we Men of God, this teaches us, that we must render an account of our
Stewardship unto him. We watch for Souls, as these that must give an account
Heb. III.17.
. And blessed Lord! what a dreadful Account shall we have to give, if at last
exposed to that Reprimand, Thou slothful Servant* -- May the consideration of
this Account always dwell in our Hearts, and invigorate our Ministerial Duties.
May we obtain Grace of God to be faithful, and so discharge the Ministry
committed to us of the Lord, as to give up our Account with joy. May we be
among those blessed Servants, whom our Lord when he comes shall find so doing,
and then see that desirable fruit of our Ministry, many that shall be our
crown and rejoicing in the day of our Lord Jesus. But I now turn me to others.

3. ARE Ministers Men of GOD, How worthy are they then to be most seriously
regarded, in those most weighty and important Affairs, upon which they come
unto you in the Name of the Lord. -- Our business with you is of most awful
Concernment; It is to pray you in Christ's stead to be reconciled to God 2 Cor.
V.20.
. It is, if possible, to check your carreer for Hell, and pluck you as Brands
out of the Fire; It is to labor with unwearied Diligence to have Christ formed
in you. And with what fervor of Affection, and agony of Soul, do we come unto
you, warning every Man, and teaching every Man in all Wisdom, that we may
present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus Col. I.2^.
-- And now dear Souls! what must be the fruit of our Labor and Travail for
you? Will you be prevailed with to accept of Christ, and his Salvation? This
will be to the Glory of God, and the Crown and Rejoicing of your faithful
Ministers in the day of Christ, as well as your own Salvation. Or must we
preach to the Wind? Must all our affectionate Addresses be as Water spilt upon
the Ground, that cannot be gathered up? Must we still have occasion to lament
over you, that we have labored in vain, and spent our Strength for naught? You
shall then know, whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear, that the Men of
God have been among you Ezekiel. II.5.
; and that God resents your barrenness under the Means of Grace, as a great
indignity to him; and will punish your impenitence in Sin with greater
Condemnation, than if you had never heard the joyful Sound. And now I come to

Prop. 2. THAT the Holy Scriptures are every way sufficient, to make the Man of
GOD perfect in, and thoroughly furnish him for, the whole Work of his Ministry.
-- For the illustrating this Proposition, let us take a short view of the Man
of GOD, in the discharge of the several Duties of his Function, and we shall
find full and complete Furniture from this Sacred Treasury, for every part
thereof.

IF we consider him as a Teacher and Instructor of poor ignorant Souls, in the
way to the Kingdom of God. Laboring to store their dark Understandings with
the knowledge of the Doctrines and Practice of Christianity, and to unfold the
Mysteries of Salvation. The Scripture is profitable for Instruction 2 Timothy
III.16.
. Thence may he bring to the Sinners view, his fallen State and native Misery,
with the blessed Remedy provided, and glorious Salvation exhibited. Thence may
he show the Sinner the dreadful Perils of Impenitency, and his last Necessity
of accepting offered Mercy. Thence may he mark out the path of Life, and
discover the many Precipices, Errors and Mistakes, to which the poor Pilgrim is
exposed in his way to Heaven. In a Word, Thence may he be furnished with
whatever is necessary for Faith or Practice, and out of these Treasures may he
bring forth things new and old. There is nothing Needful, nothing Lawful to be
added. But if an Angel from Heaven preach any other Doctrine, let him be
accursed Gal. I.8.
.

IF we follow the Man of GOD into his Study, what is the business of his
private Meditations, but to consult the Sacred Oracles, that he may know what
is the good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God? Whatever additional Helps
may come into use, they are profitable only as being subservient to his clearer
understandig, and better improving the Contents of this blessed Book; out of
which he may be furnished with Addresses agreeable to every Circumstance of his
Flock, and qualified to show himself approved unto God, a Workman that need not
be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth.

IF we consider the Man of GOD as presiding in, or performing any part of
Divine Worship, the Pattern in the Mount is his Directory, even unto every
Tack, Pin, and Fillet of the Sanctuary, not one Nail may he drive in the
Tabernacle, but according to that Pattern; the least deviation from which, though
it may have a show of Wisdom and Will Worship, yet will render the Worship in
vain. In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of
Men. Mat. XV.9.

IF we further consider him in the Pulpit, thence addressing us in the Name of
the Lord. He has no business there with enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, with
flourishes of his own Parts or Learning, or with the Authority of any Men or
Churches, how ancient, pious, or famous soever. But whatever he delivers, must
have the sanction of a THUS SAYS THE LORD. -- He must keep exactly to the Law,
and to the Testimony, if he speaks not according to this word, it is because
there is no light in him Isai. VIII.20.
. They are the very Words of the Royal Commission, whence he has his Authority,
that he teach Men to observe whatsoever Christ has commanded him Mat. XXVIII.20.
.

LET us still go on to consider him as a Ruler of Christ's Haushold, holding
the Scourge of Discipline in his Hands, to awe Men from scandalous Courses, and
chasten obstinate Offenders. And what perplexed or difficult Cases soever, or*
whatever crafty or perverse Delinquents he may meet with, he may by a diligent
Search, and prudent Application, find sufficient Directions from the
Scriptures, without the assistance of any Humane Canons or Constitutions
whatsoever. And indeed I cannot see any place such can have in the House of God,
since we have but one Lawgiver, who is able to save and destroy ^am. LI.12.
.

IF we yet continue our view of the Man of GOD, under the various metaphorical
Appellations he obtains in Scripture. As a Steward, out of this Treasury must
he provide every one their Portion of Meat in due season. As a Watchman, he
must hence take the Trumpet, to sound the Alarm to poor secure Sinners. As an
Ambassador, he has here full Orders and Directions, how to negotiate the
weighty Affairs of Christ's Kingdom. And to sum up all in a Word, he is hereby
thoroughly furnished unto all good Works.

AND now I come to the main thing intended, to make some Improvement of this
Proposition.

I. WE are hence instructed, that the Man of GOD has no Power or Authority to
make any New Laws or Constitutions in the Affairs of God's House; or to make
any Additions unto, or Alterations of those Laws, that Christ has left us in
the Divine Oracles. This being an Affair that has caused much Struggle and
Debate; and that has been (as I observed before) throughout all succeeding ages
of the Church, the source of innumerable Mischiefs and Confusions. I shall take
liberty to be something particular upon this head, and consider what it is to
make New Laws; and as I pass along, disprove our Claim to that Authority.

1. THEN the devising and imposing any PART or MODE of Worship that wants a
Divine Institution, is a Legislature that we have no just claim to. -- There
are indeed several circumstantial Appendages to the Worship of God, such as
Time, Place, etc. that are not, nor is it possible they should be, particularly
provided for in the Word of God. Wisdom is therefore profitable to direct, and
determine these things, conformable to those general Rules, that require all
things to be done to Edification, Decently and in Order.

BUT then to Institute any new PART of Worship, or to bring any thing into Gods
immediate Service, not expressly instituted by Christ, is a bold Invasion of his
Royalty, who is Head over all things to his Church Ephesians. I.22.
; and whose Prerogative it is, to give Laws and Ordinances to his House. And no
pretense of Innocence, Indifferency, or the like, will legitimate our thus
setting our Thresholds by Gods Thresholds, and our Posts by his Posts Ezekiel.
XLIII.8.
. What more Innocent, what more Indifferent, than the cleanly Ceremony of
washing Hands before Meat? Yet when Religion comes to be placed in it, and it is
made a Decree of the Sanhedrim, Gods Commandment is transgressed by this
Tradition. Mat. XV.3.

AND no less faulty is the Invention, and Imposition of any Unscriptural MODE
of Worship. For God has shown us the form of his House, and the fashion
thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the
forms thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof Ezekiel. XLIII.11.
. That Gods Worship wants not to be decked with Ornaments of Humane Invention,
nor the gaity of uninstituted Rites, to render it pleasing and beautiful in his
Eyes: But on the contrary, is it not haughty Arrogance for vile Dust to
suppose, he can worship God in a way more decent and orderly, than he himself
has contrived? And is it not an assuming Christ's Prerogative, to enjoin as
Terms of Communion, any Modes of Worship, that he neither requires nor
warrants? -- In whatever guizes or disguizes this impleaded Practice may
appear, with whatever specious Pretenses it may be palliated; let it appear
with the hoary head of Antiquity, with the Authority of never such great Men or
Churches, or with never such a show of Religion or Devotion; it will come under
the same Condemnation with Ieroboam's Feast, that it is devised of our own
Hearts 1 King. XII.33.
. And I cannot see, but that the most plausible Arguments by which this can be
patronized, may be urged with as fair a show in justification of Nadab and
Abihu; of Uzzah, or Ahaz's Damascene Altar.

2. THE forming and imposing any New Acts or Constitutions, in the Government
or Discipline of the Church, I take to be an unwarrantable Legislature. -- That
I may clear this something particularly, I shall premise these three things.

1. THAT Christ has appointed a Government or Discipline in his Church. Christ
has not left his Church to be a Garden without Enclosure, a City without Walls,
or a Vineyard without a Hedge; nor has he left his Disciples to be Lambs in a
large place, an ungoverned Mobile; that (as when there was no King in Israel)
every one should do what is good in his own eyes, take his swing in sinful and
licentious Courses; to the scandal of Religion, profanation of sacred
Ordinances, and destruction of his own Soul. -- But that Offenders may be
reduced, rotten Members cut off, Scandal restrained, and the Church edified;
Christ has constituted an Ecclesiastical Regiment, and for that end appointed
his own proper Officers, Laws, Ordinances, and Censures. The Necessity of which
is manifest, from the Constitution of the Church, which consists of barren, and
fruitful Branches; of Sound and Unsound; Tares and Wheat; Sheep and Goats; and
must therefore quickly become a Babel, if without Discipline. The truth of
which is also abundantly evident from many places of Scripture, particularly
from Mat. XVIII. from 15 to 20 Verse, Tit. III.10. and I.13. 2 Cor. II.6. 1 Timothy V.20. cum multis aliis.

I don't now design a Dispute upon the controverted Modes of Church Government;
but will venture to say with due deferrence and respect to those otherwise
minded, that the Presbyterian Government appears to me the most conformed to
the Laws of Christ, of any whatsoever; and does, for ought I know, as exactly
quadrate with the Rule, as may be hoped for in this state of Imperfection.

But I go on to premise,

2. THAT there are some External Circumstances of Discipline, that are not set
down precisely, or expressly provided for in the Word of God; but are left to
the prudent Conduct of Church Governors. To exemplify this, we in these Parts
manage the Discipline of the Church in Sessions, Presbyteries, and Synods; and
have doubtless the Divine Warrant for our so doing. In order to this, there
must be Time and Place appointed for such Conventions, and some Order and
Method for carrying on our Consultations decently, and without Confusion: And
in this case there being only general Rules left us in the Scripture, it
necessarily belongs to us to consult and agree upon such Methods, as may best
subserve the great Ends of Discipline, the Glory of God, and the Churches Weal.
-- The Synod at Jerusalem mentioned Acts XV. does indeed give us considerable
Light, even in this case; but leaves many necessary Circumstances to be
provided for, by Humane Wisdom and Prudence. But then,

3. ALL the Substantials of Government are left upon Record in the Word of God,
and are unalterable by any Humane Authority. -- As Christ is sole King and
Legislator to his Church, it is an incommunicable Jewel in his Crown, to give
all the Laws and all the Ordinances thereof; and it would therefore be an
egregious Reflection on his Faithfulness, to suppose any Case that can possibly
occur unprovided for. It is a worthy saying of a venerable Synod Vindication of
Presbyterial Government, p. 4.
, Christ as a King now sits at Gods right Hand, and is made head over all
things to his Church, which Church is called the House of God, and who should
appoint Orders for the Government of the House, but the Lord of the House? And
to say that he has not ordained how his House should be governed, i^ to make
the Master less faithful in his own House, than his Servant Moses was. -- These
things premised, I reassume the Proposition, That it is an unwarrantable
Legislature, to make any Acts or Constitutions for the Substantials of
Church Government.

IT is an excellent Saying of the Bishop of Bangor, worthy to be printed in
Letters of Gold, and transmitted to latest Posterity Sermon before the King,
March 31. 1717.
. And in this Sense therefore, his (Christ's) Kingdom is not of this World, that
he has in those Points left behind him no Visible Humane Authority, no
Vicegerent that can be said properly to supply his place, no Interpreters upon
whom his Subjects are absolutely to depend, no Judges over the Consciences and
Religion of his People. For if this were so, that any such absolute Vicegerent
Authority, either for the making New Laws, or Interpreting old ones, or judging
his Subjects in Religious Matters, were lodged in any Man upon Earth; the
Consequence would be, that what still retains the Name of the Church of Christ,
would not be the Kingdom of Christ; but the Kingdom of those Men vested with
such Authority. -- The truth of this will appear most manifest if we consider,

THAT whatever Acts or Constitution, can be devised, must be such as Christ has
already made, or such as he has not made. There is no place for making Acts
already made; and it is a daring Usurpation of Christ's Throne, and rushing upon
the Pikes of that terrible Threatening, Rev. XXII.18. to make new ones that he
has not instituted. Again,

WE can make no Constitutions, but what must be either binding and obligatory,
or not. If not, such chimerical Acts can be of no further use, than as a
subject of Debate, and bone of Contention. If binding, we exercise a kingly
Dominion and Authority, and make our selves Lords over Gods Heritage, contrary
to our Lords express Command, Mat. XX.25, 26. and 1 Pet. V.3. Moreover,

IF we make any Laws for the Discipline of the Church, they must be made either
by Authority derived from Christ, or by our own Authority. I Am sure it is
imperious enough to claim such an Authority of our own, and I challenge the
World to produce any such Dedimus potestatem from Christ, or the least lisp in
the Bible that countenances such a Regal Power. I add,

WHATEVER Constitutions can be formed for Church Government, must be either of
a Religious Nature, or merely Humane Politics and Prudentials. Now it is a
ruled Case, that (...) Religion is of Divine Original, and we have no Authority
to put the Stamp of Religion upon the most innocent and indifferent thing in
the World, as I have already proved from Mat. XV. And as for merely Humane
Politics, the horrible Confusion they have already brought upon the Church,
would make 'em appear with but a very indifferent Aspect, in the eyes of all
serious and thinking Persons, if we had not been forbid to set our Thresholds
by Gods, and our Posts by his.

THESE, among the many Reasons that might be assigned, make it appear, that no
Pretense whatsoever can justify this usurped Power.

IF never so many, and never so famous Churches have set us this Copy, we may
not write after it.

COULD we make Acts never so innocent in themselves, and never so agreeable to
the State and Circumstances of our Churches, the Law-making Faculty would still
be an Usurpation.

LET us make never so many Pretenses to found such Constitutions upon the Word
of God, all the Churches in the World may put in the same Plea, and even the
Papal Hierarchy and the Canons of Trent, pretend to the same Foundation, and
have as much claim to this Legislative Authority from such Pretenses, as we can
have; that is, none at all.

But I Will hasten forward, and consider,

3. THAT any authoritative obligatory Interpretation of the Laws of Christ, is
a Law-making Faculty that we are not entitled to. -- It Is true the Ministers of
Christ have Commission to Interpret his Laws, and it concerns them with utmost
application to study his Mind and Will, that they may declare his whole Counsel
to his People. But then these having no claim to Infallibility, can have no
Authority to impose their Interpretations; nor is any Man absolutely obliged to
receive them, any farther than they appear to him just and true. The Reasons of
this are obvious.

WHATEVER Subjection is either required or performed unto such Interpretations,
must be in obedience either to God or Man. Obedience to God it cannot be, when
our Consciences (whether Regular or Erring, it is the same thing) tell us, that
God requires no such thing at our hands. And if we owe any Obedience to Man in
this case, it must be because he has an absolute legislative Power, and is Lord
over our Consciences. But who is he that judges another Man's Servant? since to
his own Master he must stand or fall Romans XIV.4.
. Besides,

THIS Power to impose Interpretations of Scripture, must necessarily blend
Light and Darkness, Truth and Falsehood together; oblige us to believe greatest
Contradictions, and build our hope of Salvation upon the most contrary
Foundations. --

To exemplify this.

THERE are some that Interpret the Scriptures in a Popish, some in a Protestant
Sense; some in an Arminian, some in a Calvinist Sense; some (to instance no
more) in an Arian or Socinian, and blessed be God, the most in a contrary
Sense; and all these have an equal claim to impose their Interpretations. And
must we believe them all? Must we believe that we are justified by Works ex
condigno, and yet that we are justified by Faith alone, without the Works of
the Law? Must we believe the Decrees of God Absolute, and yet Conditional? That
our blessed Savior is a mere Creature, and yet that he is essentially God,
coequal, and coeval with the Father? and a hundred more like Contradictions,
that may be collected out of the Interpretations of Scripture, among these
different Sects.

IF we consider this with relation to Discipline, the Consequence is the same.
-- The Keys of Discipline belong to the Pope, say the Romans; To the Patriarch
of Constantinople, say the Greek Churches; To Prelates, say the English Church;
To Presbyters, say most other Reformed Churches; To the Community in
conjunction with the Presbyters, say our Congregational Brethren. And which of
these must we believe? I answer, none of 'em all. For though we agree in
Principle with some of these, it is because we esteem their Interpretations
just, and agreeable to the Mind of Christ; and so its Christ's Authority, and
not theirs, that we found our Faith upon.

THERE are two plausible Objections lie in our way, which I shall therefore
endeavor to obviate.

IT may be objected, How can Ministers be said to represent Christ, to preach
in his Name, and by his Authority; and yet their Hearers not be obliged to
receive their Doctrine; but at liberty to follow their several Sentiments, and
(oftentimes) erring and misguided Consciences? But the Answer is easy.

THE Ministers of Christ do come to us in his Name, and by his Authority, when
they preach nothing but what is contained in his Word, and we are under
indispensible Obligation to receive the manifest Truths of God by them
preached, not as the Word of Man, but as (it is in truth) the Word of God 1
These. II.13.
. But they have no Commission to teach us to observe any thing, but what Christ
has commanded them See Mat. XXVIII.20.
. And when they teach any other Doctrine, they come in their own Names, and not
in Christ's. -- So then, we are to esteem them as Christ's Ambassadors, and with
awful Reverence to attend their preaching, as if Christ was speaking to us by
them, when we are convinced that they declare the Counsel of God: But are not
bound to an implicit Faith, against contrary Convictions. It concerns them
therefore, to justify their Interpretations of Gods Word, by clear Scripture
Evidence, to the Conviction of their Hearers; and thereby lay 'em under
Obligations to Observance and Obedience.

IT may be further objected, That this Doctrine will destroy all Discipline.
For if we have no power to impose our Interpretations of Christ's Laws, neither
have we Authority to impose any Censures, founded upon such Interpretations. To
which I answer:

THERE can be but two Cases in which Censures should be administered, the one is
Scandal, the other Heresy. And I cannot see any imposition of our
Interpretations, by Regular Discipline, in either of these.

IT is but what the Light of Nature teaches, and all the different Sects of
Christians are agreed in, that evident and notorious Scandal, unqualifies Men
for Salvation. For us therefore to declare that the Unrighteeus shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, That wicked and profligate Persons are unmeet for
the Kingdom of his Grace or Glory; or to seclude such Criminals our sacred
Fellowship, (which is, for ought I know, the highest Church-Censure) gives no
handle of Complaint, nor is any imposition upon Conscience, unless Conscience
be made an Umbrage for Licentiousness and Impiety. We impose no Interpretation
upon the Delinquent, by barring him our Communion, for Obstinacy in notorious
Impiety.

AND as for Heretics the Rule is plain, -- Tit. III.10. being Obstinate, they
are to be Rejected. And what imposition upon their Consciences can this imply?
-- Though we have no right to impose our Opinions and Interpretations upon them,
we have an undisputed claim to reject theirs, and even to judge 'em Impious and
Wicked, (when they are so) such as render the Heretic unfit for Communion in
Sealing Ordinances.

But to make this Case, if possible, a little plainer:

THOUGH some plain and comprehensive Creed or Confession of Faith (for
distinguishing such as receive, from those who reject the Faith once delivered
to the Saints) may be useful and necessary, since the worst of Heresies may
take shelter under the express Words of Scripture. Yet we are by no means to
force these credenda, upon any of differing Sentiments.

WE may not so much as shut out of Communion, any such Dissenters, as we can
charitably hope Christ will not shut out of Heaven: But should open the Doors of
the Church as wide, as Christ opens the Gates of Heaven; and receive one
another, as Christ also received us, to the Glory of God Romans XV.7.
.

AND though we ought to reject both the Heresy, and the Communion of those, who
deny what we esteem the Fundamental Truths of our holy Religion; yet even these
essential Articles of Christianity, may not be imposed by Civil Coercions,
temporal Penalties, or any other way whatsoever.

THESE things having been thus distinctly considered, I Will give you the sum of
what has been said under this Inference, in the Words of Monsieur De la
Pilloniere Answer to Dr. Surpe's Accusation. p. 66
If you mean by that KINGLY Word NEW Laws, no more than outward REGULATIONS in
matters indifferent, about appointing for your selves and those who agree with
you, Time, Place, etc. of Public Worship, and other like things, which may
conduce to ORDER and DECENCY; I confess thus far it is no invasion of Christ's
Regal Power. But if by the power of making NEW LAWS, you pretend to a power of
adding the least tittle to the FAITH that was once delivered to the Saints, or
of encroaching by way of INTERPRETATION, or any other way, upon that Freedom
with which our Redeemer has made us Free; then you arrogate to your selves more
than the Apostles themselves did, and instead of his Messengers and SERVANTS,
you become in part, the Usurpers of his Throne, and the LORDS of his People.
But I hasten to a Conclusion, and shall add but this Reflection more.

II. WE are hence instructed, how great are our Obligations to adore and praise
the Grace of God, in committing unto us his blessed Oracles, wherein are
contained every thing necessary for our Salvation. -- A Privilege by which we
are distinguished from many of our Fellow Creatures, who sit in darkness and
see no light; and are under a necessity to perish for lack of Vision, while we
are under the happy Influences of the Meridian Sun of the Gospel. God therefore
justly expects from us, that we have lasting Impressions of his Goodness upon
our Hearts, and that our grateful Reflections thereon, actuate us to a careful
Acquaintance with, and diligent Observance of his Will revealed in his Word. He
expects that we revere his Threatenings, and thereby take warning to flee from
the Wrath to come; that we obey his Precepts, and study a conformity to his
blessed Laws; and that we comply with his Invitations, and embrace a tendered
Savior upon his own Terms. -- And O! that we might be sufficiently alarmed
with the dreadful Prospect of having this precious Privilege, by our
Unthankfulness for, and Misimprovement of it, rise up in Judgment against us,
and render our state more intolerable, than that of Tire and Sidon, Sodom and
Gomorrah, in the Day of Judgment, according to the Threatening, Mat. XI.23, 24.
For how shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation?

FINIS.

