Mr. Walter's SERMON ON Regular Singing.

The sweet Psalmist of Israel.

A SERMON Preached at the Lecture held in BOSTON, by the SOCIETY for promoting
Regular and Good Singing, And for Reforming the Depravations and Debasements
OUR PSALMODY labors under, In order to introduce the proper and true Old Way
of SINGING.

Now published at the Desire of several MINISTERS that heard it, and at the
Request of the SOCIETY aforesaid.

By THOMAS WALTER, M. A. Minister of a Church in Roxbury.

Psalm. 100.2 Come before his Presence with Singing.

Psalm. 147.1. Praise ye the Lord; for it is good to sing Praises to our God;
for it is pleasant, and Praise is comely.

BOSTON: Printed by J. Franklin, for S. Gerrish, near the Brick Meeting House
in Cornhill, 1722.

To the Honorable Paul Dudley, Esquire One of His Majesty's COUNCIL for the
Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, and One of the Justices of
the Superior Court.
SIR,
THE Frequency and the Flattery of DEDICATIONS, have rendered them nauseous to
the present nice and carping Age, when almost every one (one time or other)
stands in the Capacity of a PATRON, or even he who is fittest for it, is
overloaded with Praises. This gives a ready Disgust to the Reader; while he
entertains the Prejudice, either of their being too Common, or too Fulsome: And
which Circumstance carries in it the greatest Odium, is not easy to be decided.
But this shall never hinder me from making a Dedication, till such time as the
World can prove, that the Abuse of any Thing forbids the Use of it.

MUST not Merit be owned and applauded where we find it, because the most
undeserving have had their Elegies? And must Gratitude never be made Public,
because some have given Thanks, where they have scarce received?

BUT this is not so much the Design of this Dedication, as to request the
Favor of your reading over the following Sheets with your usual Candor, and to
accept them as a Mirror, (though I confess but a dimm one) in which you will see
something of the sweet Psalmist of Israel, and so far, an eminent Part of your
own Character.

SIR,

THIS Sermon (with respect to its Publication) is the First Fruits of your
Young Minister, who claims a Pastoral Care from you, though of a different Kind;
and who thought it his Duty to make you the Present of his first Productions.

THE Society for promoting, ^^^^lar Singing are to be applauded for their good
and generous Design: God will honor them, and I hope our Churches will not
fail to do so too. I am glad to hear of the Attempts made in another County in
prosecution of the same noble Design, and that the Reverend Mr. Brown of
Reading has justified and put Respect upon their Undertaking, by preaching a
Sermon at a Singing Lecture there. I would sain hope it will not be long ever
the Ignorant will be convinced, that they have mistaken Novelty for Antiquity,
and will be brought to own, that the present Depravations of our Tunes, which
they now so pertinuciously adhere to, and unreasonably insist upon, can lay no
manner of Claim to their beloved Title and Denomination of, THE GOOD OLD WAY.

Now, Sir, I hope, that the prefixing your Name to this Discourse, will add
Authority to the weight of Argument there laid down, and be of no small
Advantage to the forementioned Design, which I am confident will yield you some
Satisfaction.

MAY the God of Israel increase your Excellent Gifts and Parts, especially the
divine Skill of singing the Songs of Zion, and may this be a blessed
Preparative to your joining the sweet and everlasting Choirs above! May you
improve in that glorious Exercise in the Church on Earth, which shall never
have an End in Heaven!

THIS is the hearty Prayer and Desire of him who is,

Honored SIR, Your most Humble And Obedient Servant, THO. WALTER.

The sweet Psalmist of Israel.
2 Samuel XXIII. 1. -- The sweet Psalmist of Israel.


I MUST humbly make my Apology for ascending the Desk at this time, and entering
upon a Service, which I know would be much better performed by many of my
Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry, in this Place. And this not only for my
self, but for those, who have, as it were, broken through Order and Superiority,
and descended to so low a Choice, as that of the Person now addressing this
worthy Audience. Their Excuse and mine is this, That not the Character of a
Divine, so much as that of a Psalmist is under our present Consideration: Not
the Preacher, but the Singer carried the Vote, which laid him under Obligations
to comply with their Request.

WHEREFORE that Justice in some measure may be done to the Divine Science of
Music and Verse, I shall have done with Prefaces and Apologies, and as in my
poor Manner I am able, illustrate, confirm and improve the Text under
Consideration.

THE last and dying Words of Men use to be of Weight and Importance with the
Survivors; and by them are wont to be esteemed awful and full of Authority. How
regardless soever we have been of the Sayings of wise and good Men, while they
have been with us; yet that very Circumstance of their leaving this World,
gives Solemnity and Authority to what they deliver at their Departure out of
it. Who knows not, that a Man a dying is able to make a greater and deeper
Impression upon us, than any of the Living? For as Time is drawing to a close
with them, so do they speak with a more than humane Emphasis, and discover such
an experimental Air, as cannot fail to touch the Hearers with the most lively
and affecting Sense of what they would communicate to them. As their Minutes
are then contracted and grow very precious, so their Discourse to the Living
grows massy and full, it even fills up Time it self, admitting no Vacancy of
Moments unreplenished with a Treasure.

THE four Verses following my Text are worthy to be transcribed as such, and
may serve as a glorious Introduction to our Discourse upon the Sweet Psalmist
of Israel; viz. David's Character as a sweet Singer, the Honor done him by God
in the Record hereof, and the blessed End a Servant of God, famous for this
Skill, may be able to make.

THIS sweet Psalmist of Israel said with a more than mortal eloquence -- The
Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his Word was in my Tongue. The God of
Israel said, the Rock of Israel spoke to me: He that rules over Men must be
just, ruling in the Fear of God; and he shall be as the light of the Morning,
when the Sun rises, even a Morning without Clouds; as the tender Grass
springing out of the Earth by clear shining after Rain. Although my House be not
so with God, yet he has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all
things and sure: For this is all my Salvation and all my Desire, although he make
it not to grow.

HERE we have verified the Fable of the expiring Swan singing her own Elegy;
but with this Difference, that our dying Psalmist tunes his Voice to Notes of
Joy and Triumph, and not to the Keys of Mourning and Sadness. These are David's
last Words, this his dying Song, which better than a Monument of Brass, will
consecrate his deathless Fame to all Posterity.

BUT who and what was he, that composed and sung this divine Song? -- It was
David the Son of Jesse, and the Man who was raised up on high, the anointed of
the God of Jacob. Even the Son of a common and inferior Man in Israel, but
exalted to the Regal Dignity and Charge over that great and holy Nation, by the
anointing of the God of Jacob. The last Words of so great a Man, and so
distinguished in the Honors conferred upon him by Heaven, must command in us
the most serious Attention and the highest Regard imaginable. They are the rich
Legacy of a dying Prince, and to be received and laid up as an inestimable
Treasure.

BUT this is not all of the noble Character of David, which does thus extort
from us a Regard and Reverence to this his concluding Speech and Song. He that
spoke it, was not only a Godlike Prince, preferred by God himself before all
the great Personages of Israel to the Inheritance of the Kingly Power and
Honors; but he was THE SWEET PSALMIST OF ISRAEL.

THIS Part of his Character comes under our present Consideration. Here
therefore two Things are to be spoken to, which will comprise the whole of our
present Discourse.

I. THE Character of holy David. II. THE Honor done him in the Record of it.
I. THE Character of holy David: The sweet Psalmist of Israel. He was a
Psalmist, which Title contains in it two things, namely, First, That as a
Divine Poet, he composed Sacred Songs, and Hymns. Our Psalter is the greatest
Part of it, made up of Divine Places of Poesy written by this Man of God, who
derived his (...) not from Parnassus, but from Zion the Mount of God. Not the
fancied Muses of the Heathen, but the Holy Ghost dictated his Song; nor needed
he a Draught from the muddy Source of Heli^^^, who had drank so plentifully of
the still and pure Stream (as the almost Divine Milton expresses it) slowing
fast by the Oracle of God. Nor were the Subjects of his Verse less Divine, than
his Inspiration. Not sorry Trifles and empty Fables, but the glorious Themes of
divine Love, and Wisdom, and Power, and Majesty; not the impure and carnal
Conceits of the profane Greeks and Romans, but the blessed and holy Oracles of
JEHOVAH, and the caelestial Loves of Christ and his Church, were sung by him in
his immortal Strain. Finally, the Design and End of his Psalms were consecrate
and pious, even to the great and good Intentions of the Glory of God, and the
Instruction and Benefit of Men.

BUT then, Secondly, The Title of Psalmist carries in it not only that of a
Piet, but of a Musician also. Not only the Psalms, but the Tunes to which they
were to be set and sung, were his. And the best both of Jewish and Christian
Interpreters and Expositors do give Countenance to this Conjecture. But be this
as it will, that his Skill both in Vocal and Instrumental Music was famous, is
allowed upon all Hands. Whether or no he composed the Tunes, as well as the
Psalms, which he frequently sent to the Pracentor or Chief Musician, with his
Orders for having them sung or played, may admit of some Dispute. But that he
had a thorough Understanding of this sweet and divine Science is a matter past
all doubt. The Syriac and Arabic Versions do favor our first Conjecture, and
do intimate the Improvements he made in this Part of the Divine Service. They
render the Words, Qui suaves reddidit Cantus Israelis; Who made the Songs of
Israel sweet. He raised them to a greater Perfection and Sweetness, than had
ever been in Israel before. But to put this beyond all Dispute, we are in the
Sacred Oracles informed, that David did invent Instruments of Music, which were
profanely imitated, and prostituted to the Designs of Debauchery, by the wanton
Israelites, in the Days of the Prophet Amos, Chap. 6. Verse 5. They invent to
themselves Instruments of Music like David. We also read, that he separated or
set apart to the Services of Vocal and Instrumental Music, the Sons of Asaph,
(...); appointing to every single Musician and to each Quire their Parts in the
joint Performance of the Melodies and Anthems of the Temple. Whether for the
Voice, or for Instruments, such as the Cymbal, Psaltery, Harp, the loud
sounding or Treble Horn; their Disposition and Appointment was by the King's
Order. 1 Chronicles. 25.1, 1, 6. And this he did, not merely by Virtue of his Kingly
Authority, but as he was the Chief Master of the Temple-Music, his superior
Skill therein rendering him the fittest Person in all Israel for that Office.
But of this enough.

DAVID was the Psalmist of Israel; that is of the Church of God, which wears
this Name and Title, with which the Patriarch Jacob was dignified, when he had
wrestled with the Angel of God in Prayer, and overcame: in this glorious
Instance becoming the Head and Representative of them that seek the Face of
God. Psalm. 24.6. He became thenceforward the Father of the Generation of
wrestlers in Prayer, the Prince of them that prevail with the Almighty God of
Jacob. Israel is a most proper and just Appellation of the Church Militant on
Earth, who through holy Violence, strong Faith, and ardent Importunity, maugre
all the Opposition of Hell and Earth, take the Kingdom of Heaven by Force.
Math. 11.12. O that in this sweet Exercise of Singing, as well as the more
laborious one of Prayer, we might make such Improvements and Progress, as to
deserve the honorable Name of Israelites indeed!

FOR the Use and Benefit of the Church then did David compose his Psalms, with
Tunes adapted to the Subject Matter of them. It is a very profitable and good
Note of Peter Martyr upon our Text, Quicquid Pi^ Doctrine habent, id
intelligunt non suum, sed Ecelesix esse. A good Man calls the Gifts and Talents
Heaven endows him with, not his own, but the Church's. With whatsoever Skill
the Father of Lights instructs us, it is not designed by God, nor should it be
laid out by us, for our private Use, Profit or Glory; but for God and his
Church. And a faithful Servant of God beholds all his Accomplishments, whether
Natural, Moral or Divine, under no other Notion or View, than that of so many
Consecrations to God, or Talents for the Improvement of which he is accountable
to him. The Glory and Honor of God, the Good and Edification of the Church, is
that to which they are to be ultimately and at all Times referred. And this is
here recorded to the everlasting Honor of King David, with respect to his
religious Improvement of his extraordinary Poetical and Musical Abilities.
Which hints a severe Reproof of the Licentious Poesy and Music of the present
Age.

FINALLY, He was a SWEET Psalmist; in both the former Respects, even of his
Music and his Poesy. And this is what must come under a more large and distinct
Consideration. We are now therefore to discourse of Divine Music, and Divine
Poesy: The latter relates to the Subject matter of the Song, the former to the
Manner and Form of the Tune, to which it is to be set or sung. Wherefore

1. MUSIC considered alone and in it self, is a sweet and pleasant Science. The
Charms of Music are a most celebrated Subject among the best Writers. And they
are so various and so sweet, that it is equally impossible to number them, and
sufficiently to admire them. There is scarce any thing in the whole Creation of
God, so wonderful and astonishing, as the Doctrine of Sounds and Harmony. We
shall attempt a Discourse of the Sweetness of Music under the two following
Heads.

1. MUSIC is in its own Nature sweet and pleasant. 2. IT is sweet and pleasant
in the various Effects it produces in the Souls of Men.
1. MUSIC is in its own Nature sweet and pleasant. There is a twofold Sweetness
and Pleasancy of Sounds and Musical Notes, according to the best Writers. There
is, in the first Place, a Natural or Physical Sweetness in the Notes of Music.
When a single Voice or String of an Instrument so equally and justly vibrates
the Air, as to give forth a Sound agreeable to the Organ of the Ear. Being free
from all Jarr or Asperity, it strikes the Auditory Nerves in such Manner as one
Unison String percuss'd or struck, causes the other to shake and tremble. When
the external Air is thus vibrated, the same or a like Vibration is effected in
the internal Air reposited in the Cavity of the Organ, and this communicates
its even and just Motion to the Nerves aforesaid. In this Sense, even the
unaffected chirping Notes and smooth Warbles of the very Birds of Heaven, those
Lord Roscommon's 148 Psalm.
Idle Musicians of the Spring, who are by their Creator, the Author of all
Music, inspired with an harmonious Instinct; I say, in this Sense, even their
artless Lays do serve to please and recreate us.

BUT then Secondly; There is a Mathematical Sweetness and Pleasancy in Sounds.
This is no other than the Doctrine of Concords, to which there are required
more Sounds than one, so proportioned and distanced in certain Intervals, as to
create a pleasant Harmony and Agreement. The Pleasure arising from this
Mathematical Sweetness or Agreement of Sounds, is a more Intellectual Pleasure;
that from the Physical Sweetness, a more Sensual. Hence not only all Men, but
the very Brutes too are capable of receiving a Delight in a single pleasant
Sound or Voice, but none of the Brutal Race, nor all of the Humane are capable
of relishing the Melody arising from the harmonious Agreement of a Diversity of
Sounds. This requires a tuneful Soul, as well as a good Ear. As a late
Anonymous Poet well expresses it -- For Man may justly tuneful Strains admire,
His SOUL is Music, and his Breast a Lyre.
Music the mighty Artist, Man can rule,
So long as that has Numbers, he a SOUL.


HERE let it be observed, that the Lowness and the Height of Sounds in the
Gamut or Scale of Music, is not caused by the Strength and Force, but the
Frequency of the Percussions, Strokes, or Tremors of the Air. And when the
Numbers of Tremors or Percussions of the Air caused by two Sounds, are
proportionable, there is an harmonious Agreement of those two Sounds; but if
disproportionate, a Discord is produced. Thus an Octave or Eighth to a graver
Sound, gives the Air two Percussions or Tremors to the others one. So they
coincide every other Tremor; and one to two is proportionate. The like may be
said of all other Chords. A Unison, or two Notes on a Pitch, is when two Sounds
give the Air an equal Number of Pulses or Strokes, and therefore so coincide in
every Pulse, as to become but one and the same Sound. -- So that the
Proportions that please the Eye in any Visible Objects, are found to please the
Ear in Audible Objects. And when two Concordant Notes of different Heights are
Sounding, were the Sight of our Eyes so strengthened and rendered so acute, as
that we could accurately inspect and discern the Particles of vibrated Air, we
should see the Tremors, or Vibrations of the Air proportionate in Arithmetical
Numbers. -- But while I am thus wading in the depths of Philosophy, I had
almost forgot the chief Thing I first aimed at, when I mentioned the
mathematical Sweetness of Sounds, and that is as follows.

THE Music of the Temple, as it was under the Management and Direction of our
Sweet Psalmist of Israel, was a Chorus of Parts. The Singers and the Players
upon Instruments, were divided into THREE Sets or Quires. One for the Bass,
another for the Medius or inner Parts; the third for the Trebles or Altus's.
Mr. Ford, in his Preface to his Exposition on the Psalms, has done to my Hand,
what I might have attempted; even to prove that Music in Parts (in spite of
popular Ignorance) is as Ancient as the Times of holy David. -- I shall
translate into this Sermon, what he says upon this Head.

THE Modulation (says he) of the Voice only, or upon an Instrument only, or
both together, ( Psalm. 71.22. and 98.5. and 33.2, 3. and 147.7. and 149.3. and
57.8, 9.) was generally and for the most part performed in three Parts,
according to the Number of Concords in the Octant For a Tone or Sound is either
1. Low, which is Grave, and is called the Bass. Or 2. Middle, which is commonly
called the Medius, or Tenor. Or 3. High, which is called the Alt.


THESE with their Octaves and Variations, comprise the whole of all Music, and
all of them were sound in their Worship. [Sheminith] A Noun Adjective Feminine,
signifying [an Eighth] is used to design or signify the Eighth Voice, or Eighth
Tone in Music, or Eighth Modulation of the Voice, which in descending may be
called the lowest Tone. Therefore Tremellius and Junius render [hhal
hassheminith] 1 Chronicles. 15.21. Psalm. 6.1. By these Words, [To a grave and low
Symphony] that is, to a Bass Note and Key. And because in 1 Chronicles. 15.21.
[becinoroth] or [with Harps] is added, we may gather thus much, that Ethan or
Jeduthum lead upon the Bass, or had the Regulation of the lower Parts, and that
the Bass was played upon that Instrument. And therefore he was the Master and
Moderator of that Part, which we call the Bass, or at least of something
analogous to it.

2. [Hhalmah] A Noun signifying the Age of Virginity is used in the Plural
Number for a Musical Tone or Sound at the Height of a Female Voice, which is
an Octave above that of a Man. Wherefore [Hhal hhalamoth] 1 Chronicles. 15.20. Psalm.
46.1. [With Psalteries on Alamoth.] Junius and Tremellius render [To an acute
Symphony] or to the Alt. Now, since these Tunes upon Alamoth were played upon
the Psaltery, and since it is as certain, that this Part is assigned to the Son
of Corah, it may be concluded, that Heman was the Master and Moderator of the
Altus or highest Part. I know not why the Opinion of Pythagoras being the
first, that in Opposition to Aristoxenus, reduced the Scale of Music to the
Measure of the Octave, may not from hence be refuted; and why we may not
suppose, that, since learned Men have fully proved the Derivation and Stealth
of all Arts and Sciences from the Jews to the Gentile Philosophers, this among
other Pieces of Learning, came to Pythagoras the same Way. And without doubt
the Divine Music performed to Jehovah in his Temple, was in a great Measure by
Divine Inspiration, as well as the Architecture of the Tabernacle (in it self a
more Mechanical Part) was in Model and Idea given to Aholiab and Bezaleel.
Exodus 31.3. I have filled him with the Spirit of God, in Wisdom and in
Understanding, and in Knowledge, and in all manner of Workmanship.


3. Asaph therefore was the Master of the Medius or middle Quire, and the
Instrument used by them was that of the Cymbal.

UPON the whole, this Author gives us a general Rule of judging to what Part
and Keys every Psalm was designed, from the Name of the Master of Music, from
the Instrument on which it was to be played, or the initial Words of some other
well known Divine Song in use at that Time; which the Reader may learn, if he
diligently observes the Inscriptions, etc. of the Psalms, and compares them
with what has been said above.

BUT it is Time to pass on to the Second Particular, which is,

2. MUSIC is sweet and pleasant, if we consider the various Effects it is
capable of producing in us. There is something in Music, which is congenial to
the Soul, and which for this Reason makes a ready Passage into its inmost
Recesses. It has a Power to strike it after the most agreeable Manner, and to
affect it with the Sense of a strange and admirable Pleasure. There is a
certain secret Sympathy between the Soul and Harmony, which made a Philosopher
mentioned in the Margin, define it, An Harmony. Verily, the Joy arising hence
is truly refined and sublime! The ingenious Cowley well expresses the Powes
Musicians may exercise over Men: Thus they our Souls, thus they our Bodies win,
Not by their Force, but Party that is within.
So when two Brethren Strings are set alike,
To move them both, but one of them we strike.


BUT let us come to the Theological Consideration of the Point, and show the
blessed Influence and Effects of Harmony upon the Soul, as it is helpful to
Devotion, either to excite, assist, promote or preserve it.

1. IT creates a most Hessed Serenity and quiet Calm in the Soul of the
Worshipper. He that would worship God aright, ought to possess a quiet Mind,
free from the Disturbance and Agitation of Passions. So when the Soul of holy
David was disquieted in him, he knew not how to apply himself to the sweet
Exercise of Singing in the Temple. Psalm. 42.11. and 43.4. His Thoughts within
him were tumultuous, and various Passions haunted his Breast, while he was
revolving in his Mind the Oppression of the Enemy, his Absence from the House
of God, and other afflictive and distressing Themes; he became hereupon wholly
unfit for religious Exercises. So the Jews in the Babylonish Captivity hung
their neglected Harps upon the Willows, when they remembered Zion, and their
once glorious and happy State, amidst the Insults of their barbarous Enemies.
Say they, How shall we sing the Lord's Songs in a strange Land? Psalm. 137.4.
Which is a sure Proof how driving Passions, such as Anger, Grief, Hatred, Fear,
etc. do ruffle the Soul, and wholly indispose it to the Exercises of Religion
and Devotion. Any further Proofs from Scripture are needless. All that I shall
Remark upon these Instances is this, when they were so unfitted for Devotion,
as that they had not the Inclination or Power to play upon their Harps, their
very Harps, (...) they used them, would have been their Cure, and have allayed
the very Passions, which forbad them to play.

LET us now consider the Ch^^^s of Music; how do they soothe the Soul to Rest,
and reduce it to an heavenly Quietude and Temper! How do they allay the turbid
Passions, and chase the Disturbers out of our Breast! Music has a natural
Tendency to this. For as it is capable of being so ordered, as to raise and
increase tumultuous Passions in the Soul; so no less to allay and quiet these
Disorders. The Story of Timothous, who with his Harp changed the Temper of
Alexander, as often as he pleased to change his Notes and Keys; either Dryden's
Ode.
to swell his Soul to Rage, or enkindle the softer Passions, or to lull it into
a total Calm. The Stories also of Pythagoras, Asclepiades, and others mentioned
by Gronovius and Kircher, are a full Proof of the Power of Harmony, either to
raise or to calm the Passions. The Thracian Orpheus taming wild Beasts, and
disarming them of their Fury, is, if we moralize the Fable, Dictus ob hoc
lenire Tigres, rabidosqe Leones. Hor. Ars Poet.
no other than his subduing the fierce Tempers and Passions of that brutal and
savage People of Thrace, reclaiming them to Civility, and making them
Manageable by his Music.

BUT if Music alone can by its natural Force and Charms work these Effects,
what may not Divine Harmony, under the Influence and Cooperation of Heaven, be
able to produce in the Soul of the Worshipper! Psalm. 43.3, 4. Send forth thy
Light and thy Truth; let them bring me to thy holy Hill, and to thy
Tabernacles. Then will I go to the Altar of God, unto God my exceeding Joy: (or
the Gladness of my Joy) Yea, upon the Harp will I praise thee, O God, my God!

2. MUSIC is of good use to suspend and cure the evil and malign Influences of
Satan on the Soul. Besides our natural Passions, which are oftentimes turbid
and troublesome, and so do unfit the Soul for Devotion, Satan may be permitted
to interpose his Agency and Influence, to increase and heighten these Disorders
of the Mind. When we give way to sinful Passions, Satan finds an easy Passage
into the Soul. He usually makes his Entrance through a Storm, and like a true
hater of Peace and Harmony, takes a malicious and cruel Pleasure, in his
Mansion of Discord and Uproar. Had we not upon Sacred Record the Instance of
Saul, etc. I believe we need not go very far to seek Instances enough of
Persons agitated and acted by the Furies of Hell. But to go no farther than
that of Saul, 1 Samuel 16.14. The Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an
evil Spirit troubled or terrified him. His Servants gave very proper Advice in
this Difficulty, etc. That a sweet Musician or Harper should be found to play
before the King upon his seizure with the satanical Paroxism. Ver. 23. And it
came to pass, when the evil Spirit from God was upon Saul, that David took an
Harp and played with his Hand; so Saul was refreshed and was will, and the evil
Spirit departed from him. His Terrors vanished, the (...) fled precipitant from
the Harmony, and his burdened Hand strait grew easy and sweetly composed. An
heavenly Light darted into his Soul, and all was calm and bright, serene and
joyous. Or to use the Words of the sweet Cowly, -- His Harp did Saul' s wild
Rage control,
And tune the barsh Disorders of his Soul.


What the Hyperbolizing Pindar said to his Harp,[Ton aicmaton keraunon
shennucis] thou quenchest the raging Thunder, may with much better Justice be
ascribed to the Harp of David, which wrought mightier Essects and more amazing
Feats, which could still a louder and more angry Thunder than that of the
Firmament, and silence and put to flight a raging Damon.

BUT it must be Music with the Consort of the holy Spirit, even the religious
Music of the Soul, joined with that of the Voice, which must work these blessed
Effects in the Soul of him, who is preparing himself to call upon God, and to
approach him in the Exercises of Devotion, and holy Communion. When these go
together, not only does the evil Spirit depart, and cease to disturb us (as in
the Case of Saul) but the holy Ghost, that heavenly Guest will return, and
inspire us and fill us with all Joy and Consolation. That Music is of use in
this Matter, not only to cure the evil Influences and malignant Impressions of
Satan, but also to prepare our Souls for the Entrance of (...) holy Ghost into
this his spiritual Mansion and living Temple may be argued from the Manner of
Prophesying used by some of the Prophets. Thus Elisha, 2 King. 3.15. But now
bring me a Minstrel, and it came to pass, when the Minstrel played, that the
Hand of the Lord came upon him. The Note of Tremellius and Junius Vid. Jun. and
Tremell. in Locums. P. 182. N. Eng. Edition.
is very just and good. By the help of this Music, the Soul of the Prophet,
just before discomposed and roiled at the sight of the wicked King of Israel,
was composed and calmed, and so prepared to deliver the heavenly Oracle; and
they that heard it were by its Sweetness better prepared for the Reception of
it. And those Words, The Hand of the Lord came upon him, the forementioned
Expositors, by a Metonymy, interpret of the Prophetic Exergy and Rapture, into
which the Prophets were cast, when the Spirit visited and took Possession of
them; in a Word, the Gift of Prophecy. And here I cannot forbear transcribing
the Words of Bishop Beveridge upon this Subject of Music, which may at once
illustrate this and the following Head. Says he, Private Thoughts.
Music exercises at once both my Body and my Soul, etc. it calls in my Spirits,
composes my Thoughts, delights my bar, recreates my Mind, and so not only fits
me for after Business, but fills my Heart at the present with pure and useful
Thoughts; so that when the Music Sounds sweetliest in my Ears, Truth commonly
flows the clearest into my Mind. And hence it is, that I find my Soul is become
more Harmonious, by being accustomed so much to Harmony, and so averse to all
manner of Discord, that the least jarring Sounds either in Notes or Words, seem
very harsh and unpleasant to me.

THAT there is (says he) something more than ordinary in Music, appears from
David's making use of it, for driving away the evil Spirit from Saul; and
Elisha for the bringing the good Spirit upon himself. From which I am induced
to believe, that there is really a sort of secret and charming Power in it,
that naturally dispels from the Mind, all or most of those black Humors, which
the evil Spirit uses to brood upon, and by composing it into a more regular,
sweet, and docible Disposition, tenders it the fitter for the Holy Spirit to
work upon, the more susceptive of Divine Grace, and more faithful Messenger,
whereby to convey Truth to the Understanding, etc. -- My Spirits are thereby
made the more nimble and active, and by Consequence, the fitter to wait upon my
Soul, and be employed by her, in whatsoever Business she is engaged.

THUS far he; and this is not the only Instance of the Use of Music in
Prophesying; (which Word, by the Way, is not to be restrained to what we call
Prediction, or the foretelling future Events by the Revelation of the Spirit of
God, but comprises also in its Meaning, the Power or Faculty of uttering any
sort of Divine Discourses, by virtue of an Impetus or immediate Power from the
holy Spirit) I say, this is not the only Instance of the Use of Music in order
to Prophesying. The forementioned Saul meeting a company of Prophets with their
Music in the prophetical Exercise, is a further Confirmation of the Argument
before us. 1 Samuel 10.5, 6. After that, thou shall come to the Hill of God,
where is the Garrison of the Philistines, and it shall come to pass when thou
art come thither to the City, that thou shall meet a company of Prophets coming
down from the high Place, with a Psaltery, and a Tahret, and a Pipe, and a Harp
before them, and they shall Prophesy. And the Spirit of the Lord will come upon
thee, and thou shall Prophesy with them, and shall be TURNED INTO ANOTHER MAN.

BUT to have done with particular Instances, let me add, that not only single
Persons have occasionally made use of Music, as a fit preparative for the
Reception of the Spirit of God, but the stated Quires of the Church of Israel
in their Ordinary Worship, proposed no less Benefit from this divine Science,
according to the Appointment of God. So the Sons of Jeduthun, Gedaliah, Zeri,
etc. under the Hands of their Father Jeduthun, prophesied with an Harp to give
Thanks and to Praise the Lord. 1 Chronicles. 25.3.

UPON the whole we may conclude, that Music is not only a Means provided by the
God of Nature and the Author of all Religion, to dispel and drive away the evil
Influences of Satan, but also to prepare the Soul for the Reception of the
Inspiration of the holy Spirit. Nor will the Objection of any thing Typical or
Extraordinary in these Matters take away the Use of that which then had a
natural Subserviency and Tendency to produce these good Effects, and prepare
the Soul for the sublimest Performances in Religion and Worship. But

3. MUSIC happily serves to fix the Mind upon religious Objects, abstracting
the Soul from every Diversion. It sweetly sixes the wandering Spirit, making us
retire within our selves, and be wholly employed in the present holy and
delightful Exercise. It reduces the Mind to such a sweet Composure, as that all
our Attention is fastened upon the Subject of our Devotion. This Fixedness of
Soul is a necessary Preparation for our Entrance upon any Religious
Employments, especially those of the Temple. So we find holy David addressing
himself to the Worship of God. Psalm. 57.7, 8. My Heart is fixed, [or prepared;
a fixed Heart is a prepared Heart.] O God, my Heart is fixed; I will sing and
give Praise. Awake my Glory, awake Psaltery and Harp; I my self will awake
early. Divine Music, under the Conduct and Influence of the blessed Spirit, the
Author of all inward and spiritual Harmony, is an effectual Remedy for those
desultory, loose, and vagrant Frames of Spirit, which the most devout
Christians oftentimes experience, and as often bewail. It collects the
scattered Powers of the Mind, and so unites them, that the Soul with unwonted
Vigor and Strength mounts as on the Wings of Eagles, pursuing the glorious
Flight, till she is gotten beyond the View of mortal Things, and enters the
holy of holies above. Then is she raised and transported beyond the Limits of
Time and Sense, and is seated in the Lap of Eternity; where she dwells upon
everlasting Themes, and becomes a sharer in the sweet and uninterrupted Blisses
of Angels and glorified Saints.

4. MUSIC is of good Use in Religious Worship, to excite and improve suitable
and proper Affections, according to the Diversity of Subjects, about which it
is employed. The God of Nature has, beside the Intellectual and Volitive
Faculty, implanted in the Soul of Man, diverse Affections and Passions. These
are so many Ministers to the superior Powers of Understanding and Willing. And
by Consequence, as these two are the prime Faculties of the Soul, which ought
ever to be first in Exercise in our religious Approaches to the Divine Being,
(the Intellect being the Power of spiritual Apprehension, Knowledge and Faith,
and the Will the Principle of Divine Love, and all Devotion,) I say, as those
two Faculties are primarily and principally employed in all religious
Exercises; so these Affections and Passions be of subordinate Use, and are
subservient to the same Designs of Religion and Devotion. For it was a gross
Mistake in those Philosophers, who asserted them to be but the Foibles or
Weaknesses of the Soul, and naturally Sinful. No, they are naturally and
physically Good, and when they have been endowed with the Sanctification of the
Holy Ghost, they are of great and noble Use in Religion. This may serve to
illustrate that of the Apostle Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23. where he prays, that the
God of Peace would sanctify them wholly, and preserve their whole Spirit, Soul
and Body, etc. That is, not only the superior Powers of the Mind, such as the
Intellect and Will; and the inferior and mechanic Powers of the Body; but also
the passionate and affectionate Part, which is of a mixed Nature, partly Animal
and partly Spiritual. Now when these are sanctified, they become capable of a
most excellent Use and Improvement in Religion, especially in all the
devotionary Parts thereof. They are as it were the Wings of the Soul, whereby
it is carried forth in all the Acts of holy Joy and Transport; Contrition and
Mourning; Fervency and Zeal, and the like. But now what is more suited and
adapted to excite and preserve these Affections in their due and proper
Exercise, than Music and Harmony? Whether the religious Soul be wholly employed
upon Subjects of Contrition and Penitence, Sorrow and Mourning, Music can
furnish it with melancholy and graver Airs: Or, if it dwells upon Themes of
Joy and Praise, the loud and sprightly Notes of the more cheerful Keys shall
raise the Soul to GOD, the Author of all good, and the Object of all our high
Praises. And so of the rest. Wherefore we frequently find the sweet Psalmist of
Israel sending his Psalms and Odes to the Chief Musician, to be set to these or
those Tunes then practiced in the Church of Israel. And the Inscriptions and
Titles of the Psalms do hint to us his Directions to the Master of Music in
this Matter. Although the Tunes then in Use, and their Names and Keys are now to
be reckoned among the Res deperditoe, lost in the Ruins of Antiquity.

BUT now we have been discoursing of Music, as it is able to excite and
preserve proper and suitable Passions and Affections, and to assist the Soul in
the due Exercise of them, agreeable to the Variety of Themes or Subjects about
which it is conversant; we are by a natural Transition to pass on to the
Consideration of Music in its Conjunction with Divine Poesy. Wherefore,

2. AS MUSIC in it self and seperately considered is Sweet, so much more does
it deserve that Character, when considered in its Conjunction with DIVINE
POESY. Music joined with Numbers is in a transcendent Degree Sweet, Kircher
Vid. Kircher. De Art Magna Consoni and Dissoni.
in his Book entitled, The great Art of Concord and Discord, among the Four
Things requisite to move and affect the Soul, reckons that as a principal one,
viz. efficacious and pathetical Words joined with the Harmony or Music. Thus
the Phrygian Music, of which such mighty and wonderful Effects were boasted by
Antiquity, was a sort of enthusiastic Harmony, or speaking Melody. Which though
it is to be added to the Catalogue of the lost Sciences, yet is it in some
Measure imitable, by suiting and adapting Tunes to the Subject Matter of the
Song.

HERE therefore in general a good Version of the Psalms is to be pleaded for,
where moving Words and moving Sounds go together Vid. Quintilian Inst. Orat.
Lib. 6. Cap. De Divisione affectuum and quomodo movendi.
. Dr. Woodford's Words in his Preface to his Paraphrase on the Psalms may be
here recited, and if he speaks wrong, let his Fellow-Poets answer for him.

How miserably, says he, have the greatest Part of Translators been overseen,
whilst all their Pains has been bestowed to compose a few ill contrived
Cadences, putting themselves to an unimaginable Torture to make those
Conceptions intolerable by the straitness of Verse, which else might have done
well enough in looser Prose. To them are we beholden for the low Esteem Poesy
now has amongst us, though at the same time they have not only rendered that
ridiculous, but humbled Divinity, which supplies the Poet with his noblest and
most lofty Subjects. You may in the Psalms see Divinity flourishing upon the
Root of Poesy, and that again loaded with the generous Productions of Divinity:
both so inseparably united each to other, that like Stock and Cyon they make
but one Plant, and leave it hard to be judged, whether the Author were the
greater Divine or Poet. And hence the: Title of Vates comprehended both those
sublime Functions of a Divine and a Poet. Thus far he. Now we are on the Head
of good Words joined with good Music, let me take Notice of a very great Fault
in our Version of the Psalms, observed to me by a Minister once in a private
Conversation: Said he, How ill that grave and mournful Psalm 137. suits with
the Meter, which is a perfect Set of Jingles.
And what he says, is much more moderate and tolerable than that bitter and
sarcastical Expression of Cowly, Preface to his Pindaric Odes.
that such Translators seem to him to revile him worse than Shimei. But to have
done with a Topic, which may incur Displeasure, I am bold to affirm, that there
is no Prose so intolerable as ordinary Verse.

WHAT we are now more especially to speak to, is this, that if we descend to
the particular Subjects of Divine Poesy, it will at first Thought be granted,
that the Words and Matter of our spiritual Songs, suited and set to a proper
Music, convey a wonderful Charm into the Soul of a religious Worshipper. The
sweetness of these in their Conjunction is truly Ineffable!

To be brief;

EVEN Contrition and Sorrow for Sin, are sweet Subjects of Music to a penitent
Soul. To confess our Sins in a Psalm, O how sweet is it! The Music gives a
refreshing Vent to our pressing Grief, and relieves the Agonies of the Mind.
While the Soul is pouring out it self in the most melting Strains, it conceives
the sense of the Love of God, and the assurance of a Pardon and Interest in his
Favor. The kindly Contrition is mixed with an holy Joy through the Love of God
shed abroad in the Soul!

AGAIN, The Themes of Sorrow and Mourning through Losses and Trouble and
Afflictions, may by a good Use of Music, and Psalms, be converted into the most
glorious Strains of Piety. The Vanity of the World and all its fading Joys, the
tossing Inquietudes and bitter Crosses of a Christian, as they ought not to
hurry him into a criminal Anxiety or Murmuring, Discontent, or Diffidence; so
he can calmly turn them into a Song. And as he believes there is an Harmony of
Justice Wisdom and Mercy in all the Dispensations of Providence, how discordant
and uncouth soever they may appear, so his Soul and his Voice afford you a
lively Emblem of his sweet Resignation to, and harmonious Acquiescence in them.

BUT to proceed; The Precepts of our Duty are a fit Matter for a Psalm, and O
how sweet is it with holy David, to make the Statutes of God our Songs! Psalm.
119.51.
Holy Resolutions and pious Vows sent up to Heaven in the pleasant Conveyance
of Music and Psalms, O how Sweet is the Exercise! Nothing can more engage and
dispose the religious Mind to the Performance of those Vows, than this sweet
Manner of Uttering them. Psalm. 116.12. to the End.
Thus to make Religion and the Laws of God the Theme of our Songs, argues an
enlarged Soul running with Vigor and Alacrity the Ways of his Commandments!
With an holy Cheerfulness and a certain Strength of Joy he sings, O how do I
love thy Law, it is my Meditation all the Day; thy Testimonies are Wonderful,
therefore does my Soul keep them! Psalm. 119.97.129.


Once more, OUR Prayers are sweetly and gloriously conveyed to Heaven in the
Chariot of Music and Praise! when we turn our very Supplications into Joy,
through a strong Faith and Assurance of an Answer. When we sing the Promises, the
Benefits, the Mediator, and the God of the New Covenant, and mix a grateful
Variety of Praise and Prayer. Such a Saint, is he in Heaven, or is he on Earth?
Indeed the Matter of his Song is Prayer, and so belongs to one on this side
Heaven; but his Soul and his Voice would make you think him actually there, in
the full Possession and Fruition of what he is praying for!

LET me add; The Triumphs of the Redeemed are best sounded forth in the Song;
of Zion! Psalm. 97.8. Psalm. 146. and 147.12, 13. and 148.14 and 149. Psalm. 14.7.
Isai. 52.7, 8, 9. and 51.3.11. and innumerable other glorious Prothesies of the
Victories of the Church.
Their glorious Victories over Sin and the World, Death and Hell, through the
Blood of the Lamb; as on Earth they begin these Songs of Triumph, and raise
their Notes in Proportion to the Progress and Greatness of them; so when in
Heaven they shall commence perfect and complete Victors, they shall tune their
Harps to loud and everlasting Strains of Joy!

Finally, ADORATION and Praise of God the Father, Christ the Redeemer, and the
holy Spirit the Sanctifier of the Church, and the Applier of Redemption to it,
are a sweet Song that shall never have an End! The Perfections, the Bounties,
and the Grace of the Everliving JEHOVAH, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, the
Fountain of all Good, and Life and Happiness, are inexhaustible Themes of
Praise. CHRIST the Redeemer, the glorious and incomprehensible God-Man, the
Sacrifice for the Sine of the World, the Purchaser and Sender of the HOLY
GHOST, the glorified Head of the Church, and the Author of Eternal Life to all
that believe, are a Subject of everlasting Hellelujahs! Rev. 4.8. to the End
and 5.9. to the End. A glorious Representation of the Quires and Antiphonies of
the heavenly Wership, where they answer one another in the sweet Echees of the
Praises of God and Christ. God grant me may one Day join them!


EVEN the Mercies of common Providence ought to fill our Mouths with the
Praises of God; but the vast and infinite Bequests of the Kingdom of Grace, and
the Hopes, Pledges and Foretasts of the Blessings of the Kingdom of Glory, O,
how should they rouse and constrain us to call upon our Souls and all within
us, to bless and praise his holy Name, and upon our Glory, (that is, our Voice)
to awake and join in the eternal Consort!

O how sweet, how sweet is Praise! How pleasant and Psalm. 147.1.
comely to sing to our God! While I have Breath, O Lord, my God and my
Redeemer, I will employ it in celebrating thy Name and thy Praise!

BUT it is high Time to pass to the Second Thing to be observed in the Text,
which I must but just touch upon, and which I wish were to be enlarged upon by
a better Pen.

II. LET us consider the Honor done to David the sweet Psalmist and King of
Israel, in this Record concerning him. The Mention of him as the sweet Psalmist
of Israel, and the Tradition of this his Character to the latest Ages of Time
in the History of Scripture, is to be reckoned among none of the smallest
Honors done to this Man of God. Here

1. GOD himself has put a great Honor upon him in this Record. And he is most
assuredly the best Judge of Honor; yea, he is the Fountain from whence all
true Honor derives; and his Approbation and Testimony is the highest Dignity
that can be conferred upon Mortals. God himself has here made his Name, as a
sweet Singer, venerable and great, by allowing it a Place in his own Word and
Oracles, which are the Register of the Worthies of Israel.

BUT this is not all the Honor done to King David, and so to all that have
improved themselves in this Divine Art of Music and Psalmody, that he is there
mentioned with Applause and Respect; but the Manner of this Record is a very
honorable Circumstance. This Part of his Character seems to be put upon a sort
of Parity with his Regal Dignity and Imperial Glory. The Man who was raised on
high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, THE SWEET PSALMIST OF ISRAEL! The sweet
Psalmist of Israel, and the anointed of the God of Jacob, are not unworthy of
one another. The great Services this Man of God performed for the Church in the
Capacity of a Psalmist, are esteemed worthy to be enumerated with the Kingly
Honors conferred upon him by the God of Heaven, and the glorious
Administration of his Kingdom. Nor is King David the only Person to whom Heaven
has done the Honor of a Record in the Lists of Fame: The Scriptures afford us
such a Number of these Instances, as the Time would fail us to mention Ever
from Jubal the Father of all such as handle the Harp and Organ, to Genesis 4.21.
Rev. 14.1, 2, 3.
the hundred and forty four thousand, who sung before the Throne a new Song,
and could learn to play upon there Golden Herps. Moses and Miriam, Asaph and
Haman, and a Multitude of those who excelled in this sweet and heavenly Skill,
are honored by God with a Record in his Word. But to conclude this Head, Not
only in this World will God put all possible Marks of Respect and Honor upon
them; but in the other he will applaud and reward them before Men and Angels;
exalting them into the highest Quires of them that sing the Praises of God to
all Eternity.

2. THE Church of Saints and Angels will honor them. The Saints revere them as
Leaders of the Quire, and do not fail to make an honorable Mention of them, as
Restorers of the Worship of God, the Promotion and Perfection whereof lie very
near their Hearts. Upon the Consideration of these their Services to God and
Religion, their Names are not only had in Respect by the Churches of Christ
while they live, but shall be had in Remembrance, and diffuse a sweet Odor, be
as an Ointment poured forth, to all Posterity. The Churches shall bless them
after they are dead and gone, and remember all their laudable Essays to render
their Worship of God, sweet and beautiful, orderly and edifying. Then shall it
be said of the Church, This and that Man was born of her, who excelled in the
heavenly Exercise of Music and of singing of Psalms. These were they who first
taught us to sing the Songs of Zion, and after the best Manner to chant forth
the Praises of our God! Thus do the Church of Saints honor them, as they are
an Honor and Ornament to the Church.

YEA the Church of Angels, who always rejoice in the good Improvements of the
Church on Earth, conceive no small Delight and Satisfaction in the Essays of
the Children of Men to imitate their Hallelujahs, and bring them as near as
possible to the same heavenly Perfection. They being Witnesses of our Worship,
and ever present in the Assemblies of the Saints, are highly gratified to
behold us striving to bear a Part in their Quire. They look upon us with Honor
and Respect; and as by the Gospel we are brought to join Heb. 12.22.
the innumerable Company of Angels, that sing the Praises of God; so the Day is
hastening, when they shall not disdain in the fullest Consort to unite with us
in sounding forth the Songs and Melodies of the heavenly Zion: taking us into
an everlasting Partnership in their caelestial Music and Harmonies.

FROM the whole we learn the Honor due to a sweet Psalmist, and which God and
Saints and Angels shall pay them upon the score of so fine and religious an
Accomplishment. Let me only observe here, that as not only the greatest and
most worthy Persons mentioned in the Scripture History were fond of this Skill,
and esteemed it none of the smallest of their Acquisitions and Honors; so also
great Men of all Ages have had this Science in Veneration. Among the Heathen,
as Quintilian informs us Vid. Quint Instit. Orat. Lib. 1. Cap. 16. De Musica
and ejus Laudibus. P. 69. Duces maxims and Fidibus and Ti^iis ceriniss. ibid.
, Men most famous for Wisdom, yea and of the severest Morals, did in no small
Measure cultivate this Divine Art. Such were Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, etc.
Yea says he, not only the greatest Philosophers and wise Men, but Princes and
great Captains did not disdain to play upon Musical Instruments, and sing to
them with their Voices. Such were Lycurgus and others which he there mentions.

BUT what is more to our Purpose, there have not been wanting (as History
informs us) Instances of some of the greatest Princes that have ever been in
the Christian World, as well as the Pagan, who had this Art in the highest
Esteem and Honor. Witness the great Names of Constantine, Theodosius, and
Justinian, Charles the Great, and others. Some of which have composed Hymns of
Praise to Christ, and all of them were famous for their Performances of Music
in the Assemblies of the Christians. Not to mention any of a more modern Date,
who have not thought it beneath their Grandeur, but to be their truest Glory,
to be lifted and numbered among the Singers of Israel!

THERE remains still One Exemple more of a Sweet Psalmist, which is so great
and so glorious, that it is impossible Music and Psalmody should derive any
further Honors from its Professors and Admirers, than what it has from His
Practice and Approbation thereof, and that is our blessed Lord and Savior
JESUS CHRIST. Of whom it is recorded by some of the Evangelists, that at the
Institution and Celebration of the Eucharist or holy Supper, He Matt. 26.30.
Mark 14.26.
sang an Hymn with his Disciples. I have often thought how melodiously and
divinely Sweet, that blessed Man, who was more than a Man, and who knew all the
infinite Varieties, and even unsearchable Melodies, that lie hid in the Nature
of Sounds, performed his Part in the Consort. And then how suddenly and
insensibly are we rapt and carried away in our Thoughts to Heaven, to behold
him there at the Head of the immortal Quires of the Saints and Angels above! --
But the Theme is too Sublime, the Thought too Vast to be indulged by a mortal
Quid, and it is not lawful to utter freely upon it; deserving rather to be
adored in profound Silence, than to suffer through our rude and unhallowed Essays
to describe it! -- All I shall add is this, Behold the Son of God as a sweet
Psalmist, and allow the Character from henceforward to be truly great and
honorable!

BUT we must hasten to make a brief Application of the Words.

APPLICATION.
USE I. WHAT a pity and what a shame is it to abuse so sweet and heavenly an
Art to the base Ends and Designs of Impiety, Vice and Debauchery! To commit
such a Sacrilege, as to prostitute our Glory Psalm. 57.8.
to the Devil, and serve the Interests of Hell through the Means of this heavenly
Science! Verily, Such Music shall finish in everlasting Weeping, Wailing and
Gnashing of Teeth!

USE II. HOW ought we to labor after the Character of holy David. I hope and
trust, My Brethren, that your good Exemple will in this Regard, be of good
Influence to the Churches of Christ in this Land, that they may also use all
possible Endeavors to restore banished Music to its ancient Seat in the Temple
of God. That they may be stirred up and encouraged to come into this noble and
pious Design of rescuing the divine Science of Psalmody from all the
Disadvantages and Encumbrances, it now labors under, and of reducing it to its
primitive Form and ancient Perfection. All completely conducive to Decency and
good Order, and in the End to the Glory of God.

SIRS, Consider God will honor and bless you. For they who honor God, he will
honor them 1 Samuel 2.3.
. They who have been much employed in advancing the Glory of God, and the
Edification of his Church, shall never want Testimonies of Respect and Honor
from him.

AND the Churches of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Angels above will honor
you; your Names shall be precious and sweet with them. And, as we said before,
we that are truly sollicitous and careful to excel in the Performance of our
Part in the Songs of the Temple here on Earth, viz. to improve in the external
and mechanical Skill of sweetly modulating the Voice, and the internal and
spiritual Skill of true Devotion of Soul, shall not fail of an exalted Seat in
the glorious Choirs of Heaven.

WHEREFORE, let us above all labor after the inward Harmony of Piety and
Devotion of Mind. Studying to make Melody to the Lord in our Hearts. In the
harmonious Vehicle of our Voices sending up to Heaven the inward holy
Sentiments and Dispositions of our Souls. Such an Agreement of Non Vox, sed
Votum; non Musice Chordula, sed Cor: Non Clamor, sid Amor, psallit is Aure Dei.
Heart and Voice is a sweet Symphony in the Ears of God, and with such
Sacrifices of Praise he is well pleased!

USE III. Last. WE may from the Doctrinal Part of this Discourse infer the
infinite Sweetness of the Songs of the heavenly World. The Ecstasies that our
hoarser Harmony here below is able to cast us into, are well known; but O the
Perfection of the Songs above! O the ineffable Sweetness of the Anthems sounded
forth by Saints and Angels! What mortal Tongue can describe them! Who in the
present State of Imperfection can conceive the ravishing Echoes of their Music!

THERE the Saints shall be possessed of Bodies, and bodily Organs, which shall
be perfectly fitted and adapted to all the Designs of Harmony and Praise. This
glorious Advantage shall accrue to them from the Resurrection of the Just.

THERE also shall they be endued with bright and enlarged Minds, to indite
Words which it is not possible for Man in our State of Darkness and Mortality
to utter. Mysterious Themes! Incomprehensible Music!

THE God of all Grace grant, that You and I may another Day hear and join them!
That we may experimentally know what is past our present Comprehension; That we
may faithfully perform our Part in the Songs of the Church here below, and at
length may be introduced into the eternal Temple of God above, to sing his
Praises for ever and ever!

O, Let every Thing that has Breath, praise the Lord! While I live will I
praise the Lord; I will sing Praises to my God while I have a Being! AMEN.

FINIS.

