QUESTION Whether GOD is not Angry with the Country for doing so little toward
the Conversion of the Indians?
This is spoken to in the following Discourse by the Reverend and Learned Mr.
SOLOMON STODDARD of North-Hampton.
ROMANS VIII. 19. For the earnest expectation of the creature waits for the
manifestation of the sons of God.


PETER tells us that in Paul's Epistles there be same things that are hard to
be Understood, and this verse and three following may well be accounted of that
number. There are two Interpretations of this Text and Context, arising from
the differing Exposition that is given of the word Creature. Some by creature
do understand the frame of the visible World, consisting of the Celestial, and
Elementary Regions, the Heavens with the goodly furniture of Stars, and the
Earth with its ornaments, and the other Elements. And so they say that the
creature; do by a fixed Instinct desire that original perfection wherein they
were created which shall be restored to them at the Time of the manifestation
of the Sons of God; that is, at the day of Judgment: it follows, v. 20. For the
creature was made subject to vanity not willingly, but by reason of him who
has subjected the some in hope. The Earth is under a curse, Genesis 1.17. and the
Heavens by their influence do infect the Air: the creatures are subject to be
ab(...) of man, and are made subject to the lusts of ungodly (...) so serve, as
it (...), to the good of man and the glory of God v. (...) of God. That is,
that the creature shall be delivered (...) this sorrowful estate, and be
brought into a better Condition; some of all (...) ^all be presented after the
day of Judgment, to (...) Monuments of the Power and Wisdom and Goodness of
GOD. It follows, (...). The Creature does, as it were, long to be delivered
from that Vanity and Bondage: They do wish, even long for the time, when some
of every sort shall be delivered.

There be same things that may be objected against this: One is, that the frame
of Nature will be destroyed at the day of Judgment: Psalm. 102.25, 26. speaking
of the Earth and the Heavens, he says, They shall peris^ (...), yea, all of
them shall (...) all like a (...) change (...), and they shall be (...) This
also is against it, that these Heavens, and the Farth seem to be the place
where (...) men shall be punished; 2 Pet. 3.7. The Heaven and the (...) by the
(...) against the (...).

But there is another Exposition of this Scripture: The foundation of it is
that by (...) is meant the (...), it may (...) the (...). so we read of every
(...): so in the Gr^ the meaning is every Heathen Magistrate: They did not
discern Christ explicitly, but they desired the Felicity which is to be had
(...) in Christ: therefore Christ is called the desire of all (...). The Period
was (...) coming, when the Gospel was to be Preached to the Geatiles; now the
time should be of manifesting the Sons of God. This was done among the Jews,
who all pretended to that Title, by the Apostles Preaching to them. It follows.
For the (...). The Gentiles had been (...) by (...) into a m^ estate of
Ignorance and Idolatry, and vile Courses^ so that it seemed impossible they
should ever be happy. Though it may be understood of God that deserted them, and
left them to themselves; they were in a (...) of servitude to their lusts. This
cames in a (...) it follows, in hope, because the Creature it self (...) from
the ^age of Corruption, into the glory(...) Children of God. There was some ^e
that they (...) the re^ of the Gospel, when the Jews (...) with it. It follows,
(...) For we know (...) (...). It is very (...) Gentiles are very forward to
receive the Gospel. While (...) it, the (...) World is as it ^re in p^gs of
(...) Christ's time till now; ready to bring forth the Son of God, when the
Apostle shall preach to them, Acts 28.28. (...). I don't take upon me to
determine for this latter interpretation; but supposing it right I observe this
Doctrine,

DOCTRINE,
WHEN the Jews rejected the Gospel, God sent it to the Gentiles, and they
received it. Though there were (...) among the Jews that waited for Redemption
(...) Jerusalem, (...) the Jews rejected him. This was foretold in the Old
Testament, Isa. 53.1, 2. Who has believed (...) report? And those words are
applied to Israel by Paul. Isai. 65.2. compare Romans 10.21. To Israel he says,
as day long, I have stretched (...) hands (...) saying people. And long before
by David, Psalm. 2. and (...). When Christ was here on earth, be foretold that
the Jews would reject him; Luke 1^. 1^. They all with (...) excuse. Matthew.
12.56. They (...) they (...) the (...). And presently upon it, God sent it to
the Gentiles, and they received it; the Gentiles were under great prejedices by
reason of their Education; they had been nursed up in darkness, and addicted to
all serts of Wickedness; yet they gave great Entertainment to the Gospel, it
was foretold that they would do so. God has promised the heathen unto Christ,
Psalm. 2.8. I will give the heathen for (...) Inheritance. And Paul reckons many
promises together, Romans 15.10. Rejoice ye Gentiles, (...) people. Ver. 11.
Praise the Lord all ye Gentiles. 12. There (...) and he that shall rise is
reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust.

These promises were abundantly fulfilled, as we have an account in the Acts of
the Apostles and in Epistles written to several Churches of the Gentiles. This
was represented, Rev. 6.2. It sell out as it was foretold: Psalm. 110.2, 3. God
sent forth the red of his strength out of Zion, and made multitudes (...) in
the day of his power.

1. Reas. Because it was (...) of old. God out of singular love to Abraham
comforted him (...) the nations of the earth should be blessed in his seed, God
delighted in his obedience, and promises that as a reward of it, Genesis 22.18.
Abraham offered his son to God, and God rewarded him, giving a Son that should
be the Savior of Mankind. So God promised it to Christ, as the reward of his
Service; the Service that God called him to, was very great, it was a mighty
undertaking to lay down his life for Sinners; for the Beloved Son of God to
bear the wrath of God! And God promised a large Kingdom as the reward of that
Service. Isa. 33.12. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and
he shall divide the spent with the stren^: because be poured ^t his soul unto
death. Isa 49.6. It is a light thing with me that thou should be my servant
to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will
also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that (...) may be my salvation
unto the end of the earth. And long before, He made a promise by Noah, Genesis
9.27. God shall enlarge Jap et, and he shall dwell in the tents of She^; he
shall be incorporated with the Church. There were promises also to the
Posterity of Hom. Isa. 39.24. In that day shall Isrect be the third ^th Egypt,
and with (...), etc. God remembered these promises, and showed himself faithful
to perform them.

2. It was much for the Honor of Christ. God has made him a King as well as a
Prophet and a Priest, and will give a great Kingdom to him. The Honor of a
King is in the multitude of his Subjects, and for his Honor he shall be King
of Nations. He suffered a great deal of Repreach upon Earth, and God will make
his Name great from the rising to the setting San. Psalm. 72.17. Men shall be
blessed in him; all nations shall call him blessed. Dan. 2.44, 45. In the days
of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never be
destroyed. etc. That is greatly for the Honor of Christ, that all Nations
(...) ascribe their Redemption to him. Rev. 5.9. Thou have re^^^emed us to God
by i^ blood, out of all nations. And ver. 12. Worthy (...), and riches, and
wisdom, (...) and (...).

2. It was very much that One Nation should not ingross the Mercy of GOD. God's
Mercy is his Own, and He has the liberty to bestow it where he pleases: but
there seems to be a condecency in it that He should offer this Grace to all
Nations. If Grace had been offered only to the Jews, they would have swelled
with Pride; and the poor Gentiles would have been discouraged. God is the
Father of all Nations, and it seems most suitable that his Mercy should
expatiate it self, that he should show the extensiveness of it: that the
Praises of God may refound from all Lands. Romans 3.29. Is he the God of the Jews
only, is he not also of the Gentiles? yea, of the Gentiles also.

USE. I Of Warning. That you don't reject the Gospel. The Jews rejected it, and
God gave it to other People that brought forth the fruit of it. Now we have the
Opportunity, God offers the Gospel to our Nation and unto this Generation; this
will be a foundation of eternal Life, if we don't reject it. Let it be your care
to receive it: some People have not the offer of it. Do not as the Jews did!

There were two things that made them reject it,

1. A spirit of Slumber. They enjoyed a great deal of ease and outward
Prosperity, and fell into a slumbering condition, Romans 11.8. they wanted to be
awakened to work out their salvation with fear and trembling: they set their
hearts upon the World, Mat. 22.5. One had bought a piece of ground, and another
had bought five yoke of Oxen, and they must be excused, Luke 14.18, 19. A
woldly spirit will ruin many men; the reverse to this is (...) of many, 2 Cor.
4.18. The love of the world besots many; they (...) like to get but little of
the world, yet they loose their Souls for the sake of it: The seed of the
Gospel is choked with the care of the world, Mat. 13.22. Worldly affections eat
out their Religion. They say, It is good to be here; they do it seek that City
that is to come.

2. They were Blinded. Romans 11.7. besides their natural blindness, they had a
vail upon their bearts, that was the law; they thought that would save them,
Romans 10.3. They went about to establish their own righteousness; they drunk in
a conceit that that would do. They thought they did not need the Blood of a
Redeemer, they thought the blood of Sacrifices would serve the turn: so, many
among us are blinded with a proud conceit of their own excellency; their eyes
are fixed upon that, they don't see their need of Christ, they don't see the
glory of Christ. An hundred Arguments wont convince them; say what you will to
them, they think they must have something to commend them: they are strangers
to the Freeress of God's Grace, and they are washing of themselves to make
themselves clean, and they are adorning of them to make themselves fine and
beautiful; You cant beat them out of conceit of themselves. They think they are
something when they are nothing, Gal. 6.3. They prise their (...), and that is
an hindrance, to their prising of CHRIST.

USE, II. Of Examination. Whether GOD is not Angry with the Country for not
preaching the Gospel to the Heathen? That GOD is (...) with the Country, and
has been these threescore years, has been evident by His sending Epidemical
Discases and Devourers; And it greatly becomes us to enquire into the Causes of
God's Anger: many things index are satisfied in are the cause of Anger: if God
is not angry for this; yet there is cause enough of Anger. But we have special
Reason to enquire whether he is not angry for this; because it is taken notice
of in England, and we are reflected on in Print, that we have little care of
the Heathen; it was miles notice of above Forty Years ago. Another creation for
enquiry i^. I hat God has made them a terrible scourge to (...) that by their
joining with the French; and in this present Wa^: These Wars have been very
expensive, and bloody, and have made many Towns desolate, and many times the
affliction carries the token of the sin; by the Punishment, sometimes Men may
learn the (...). They are instruments to punish us, it may be we have not done
our duty to them.

1. CHRIST Commands us to Preach the Gospel to them. The Country is not lest at
liberty, whether they will cause the Gospel to be preached unto them; it is not
a matter of indifference, whether they will do it, or neglect it. I readily
acknowledge that the Indians have showed a very br^tish and settish spirit;
that where a people lived among them that made a great profession of Religion,
they did not enquire into it whether the Doctrine that they professed was
(...), or not. They plainly manifested that they had very much of literated the
light of Nature: and made no tolerable use of their natural Conscience, that
taught them that there was a glorious GOD, that made the World, that was to be
worshipped and served; and that their Souls were Immortal. But that is no
excuse or us; the command of Christ to his Disciples was, To French the Gospel
to every Creature, Mark ^6.15. And to Go and teach all Nations (...) them in
the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. This
Command was not given to the Apostles alone, but to their Successors also
throughout all generations, for i^ follows, v. 20. L^, I am with ye^ always,
even unto the end of the world. Hence it is evident, That it is the Mind of
Christ, that Christian People as they have Opportunity, do in all Generations,
Labor to Christianize the Heathen. It is Expec^ed from those that are in
Authority, who have Power to send Preachers, and to Maintain and Sub^st them in
doing their Work; to take Effectual Care that the ^ospel be Published. In the
Time of the Jewish Church, this was not so required; for the Ordinances of God
at that time were fitted only for One National Church: The Ceremmonial Law was
as a partition wall between the Jews and Gentiles, The Church State was fitted
to One Nation: and yet the Jews did take a great deal of care to Proselyte the
Heathen and to bring them to (...) knowledge of the True God. And there were
many Proselytes ^ong them as (...). And the Jews that after the Captivity were
Dispersed among the Gentiles, did bring many of them to the Profession of the
True God, as we find in the (...) of the Apostles. And when the (...) Princes
had Subdned the Ed^ites, they Compelled them to be Circumcised, and to make a
Profession of the true God. But now we are under an Express Command to Teach
all Nations.

2. We (...) to the Honor of JESUS CHRIST. We make a Profethos of Honoring
him we know that He is Worthy of Honor, Rev. 5.12. (...) is the Lamb that was
stain, to (...) (...), and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and
glory, and (...). It would have been well worth the while, for us to have
honored Christ in this way. A Spirit of Love to Christ, would have put us upon
it to have Advanced his Honor in this way. People are wont to be concerned for
the Honor of their Princes. An Ancient Grecian was wonderfully ^ffected when
he saw Alexander sit on the throne of (...). This is one of the Honors
Promised unto JESUS CHRIST, (...), P^al. 72.17. And that (...) (...), Psalm.
2.8. (...), Phil. 2.(...) And it would greatly have becomed us to have laid out
our slves for the Accomplishment of these (...). We owe more than this to Jesus
Christ. And it would have been a great Consolation, to see there Indians, who
had Worshipped the Devil, meeting together to Praise and Glorify CHRIST, and to
hear them Discoursing of the Wonderful Love of God, in sending his Son to Die
for us. David rejoiced in that Men should abundantly utter the memory of his
great goodness; and sing of his Righteousness, Psalm. 145.7. And if a Spirit of
Love to Jesus Christ had flourished in us, it would be the Joy of our Hearts,
to see Congregations of Indians waiting on God in his House, joining in Prayer,
and hearing the Gospel, and Celebrating the Memory of the Death of Christ.

3. We ought to have done it out of Love to Mankind. Christ Jesus Died For the
Saltation of Sinners, and it is a great thing to Save a Soul from Death, Jam.
5.20. It is matter of Humbling to think of the Damnation of Men, and to see Men
go Ignorantly on in a way of Destruction. Our Hearts should yearn toward these
Poor Heathen; it becomes us to Commiserate their Condition. It is a doleful
thing to think, that from generation to generation, they go down to Hell. We
know that none is able to bear it, to dwell with dev^ring Fire, To dweil with
everlasting Burnings. And we should not think much of it, to be at some Expense
for to Redeem Men from Destrustion. It is very great kindness to help Men to
Heaven. It will be as intolerable for these Heathen to bear the Torments of
Hell, as for any of us to bear them. And as we dread to go to Hell our selves,
it should be awful to us to consider their Damnation. Love and Pity calls for
it, that we should help them out of their Danger. We should pity (...) in
Misery, much more Men: Tho they be Brutish Persons; yet, they are of Mankind,
and so objects of Compassion. It is an act of Love to our own nature to seek
their Salvation: If we can further that, we shall do them great Service.

4. The Profession of those that Adventured into this Country was, that it was
their principal design, to bring the Indians to the knowledge of the true God
and Savior of Mankind, and the Christian Faith; as the King declares in the
Charter: The like is expressed in the Charter for Connections. And it would
have been the Honor of the Country, if they had answered that Profession.
Indeed we gave the Heathen an Example; and if they had not been miserably
besotted, they would have taken more notice of it. But we have done very little
to Answer our Profession. Some few pious persons, of their own accord, have
taken some Pains, and had some Success. And some Money that has been
contributed in England for the furtherance of that Design, has been faithfully
expended that way: But the Country has been at very little Cost for the
Conversion of the Heathen. Many Men have been more careful to make a booty of
them, than to gain them to the practice of Religion. It puts me to a stand to
conjecture what Excuse can be made for this Neglect. The Poverty of the Country
will be no Apology for this Omission. We have great cause to be humbled, that
we have answered our profession so poorly.

5. We our selves have been pitied, when we were in the like condition. The
English Nation was formerly under heathenish darkness, as these Indians; they
worshipped several Idols, ^T^s^^, Woden, Thor and Frea. But there were those
that pitied them, and brought the Gospel among them; -- (...) in Britanis,
(...) Our Fore fathers in this Nation were given up unto as brutish a Service
of the Devil, as any Nation under the Sun. It is therefore an Effect of (...)
that the Day has dawned on us poor Gertiles (...) 3.5. -- 1c. (...) Medit on
the Glory of CHRIST. p. 23.
and though it was mixed with some Errors; and it was about Two hundred Years
before they were all brought to a steady Profession of Chrissianity, and soon
after they declined to Popery; yet the issue has been such, through the over
ruling Hand of God, that we have cause to count it the greatest Mercy, that
ever the Land did enjoy. Hereby God has laid a foundation for the Salvation of
many Thousands of Souls; and God has raised up many Men that have been the
glory of the Nation, and many that have suffered Martyrdom for the Faith of the
Gospel. And what ever Declensions there be at the present; yet the Gospel is
professed, and there is great Opportunity to come to Eternal Life. We should
have been so sensible of this Mercy of God to us, as to pity these Indians, not
knowing but that God may have glorious Churches among them, and that in length
of time, many of their Posterity may be glorious Witnesses unto Christ, and
that His Kingdom may flourish among them.

6. The Examples of Others may make us A^amed. Besides what has been done by
the English formerly in sending Preachers into Germany, there is at this day a
great deal done in the East Indies, by the Germans and Danes for the
Propagation of the Gospel. Worthy Men are sent over; many are brought to the
Profession of the Faith; the Bible is Printed in their own Language; great
Contributions are sent over to advance that Work; and the Name of Christ i^
renowned among them; and the people that have been in Darkness have seen great
Light. And it is matter of Shame, that when others are carrying the Gospel many
thousands of Miles, from their own Country; We suffer them that dwell among us,
and that are Bor^erers to us; to lie in Darkness, and Afford them very little
Help for their Deliverance.

7. The Activity of Papists for the spreading of their Religion, may greatly
ashame us. The Spaniards, have done a great deal to bring the Indians in Peru
and Mexico to their Religion: And the Portagueze. to bring the Indians in
Brazil, and the Indies, to theirs. And the French, are diligent in Canada, and
else where, to gospellize them. And do we fit still, without any hearty
Endeavors for the Salvation of the Heathen among us? It may be said, they do
them little service to bring them from one error to another; to take them out
of the Pit. and lead them into a Snare. But however, they therein make
Conscience to advance their own Religion; run great Ventures, and endare many
Hardships, in order to it. And is it not a Shame to us to be backward to
promote the true Religion? If (...) Zeal, and Prid^, and vain glory, have a
mighty influence upon them; it might be expected that Love to God, and the
Souls of Men, should stir up us to Propagate the Truth. We have abundantly more
Reason to lay out our selves for the Truth; than others have, for their Errors
and Superstitious doctrines.

3. If they should embrace Religion, it would be a means to make them live more
comfortably in this World. It is observable, that many Nations, when they were
in their Heathenism, lived miserably as to this World. So the English, and the
French, and others; But since their embracing the Gospel, they are got into a
flourishing condition. God leads them in ways of wisdom, to follow Husbandry,
Trades and Merchandise, and to live honorably and plentifully. They have good
Honses, handsome Clothing, and comfortable Diet; they live more like Men than
they did in former Ages. It is said Christ is worthy of Riches, Rev. 5.12. God
bestows them on Christ two ways, one is in giving Riches for the maintaining
the Ordinances of Christ; the other is in giving Riches to the Professors of
the Christian Religion. And it is very hopeful, if the Indians did once embrace
the true Religion, they would by degrees, leave off their ^ild and base way of
living; learn Trades, improve Land; and govern themselves as civilized Nations
do; they would relinquish this Savage way of living that they have been
addicted unto.

9. If they should embrace Religion, it might provoke us to (...). We make an
high Profession; but yet Religion runs low, and Iniquity does abound. There is
a great deal of Pride, Drunkenness, Injustice, Prophanness, and Korais^ in the
Land. And we need to say as David; Will thou not revive us again? Psalm. 85.6.
It is the conjecture of one learned Writer, that the Christians in America will
Indianize and became that Gog and Magog spoken of, Rev. 20. I hope that will
prove a Mistake. But if the Indians were prevailed with to receive the Gospel,
it is hopeful, their Zeal may provoke us. If we observe a (...) of Faith, and
Love, and (...) in the^; it may make us ashamed, and provoke us to Emulation.
Paul hoped that the Conversion of the Gentiles would provoke the Jews to
Emulation, Romans 11.12. Its hopeful, if Religion should prevail among them, it
may be a (...) to Revive it among us.

USE III. (...) for that it is a very desirable thing that the Heathen be
brought to the Faith. There be many Promises of the Conversion of the Gentil^
Isa. 47.6. And it has been Graciously Accomplished many times (...). Nations
are brought to Receive the Gospel, so they do it with Sincerity: and so they
will be Blessed for ever, Act. 26.18. Private ^ersons may help it forward, by
their Prayers, as well as others; We should Pray for the Conversion of the
Indians.

1. That will be for (...), than only to make Peace. If they continue in their
Heathenism, there will be occasion of contention: There was abundance of
Trouble between Israel and the Heathen that were about them: if they continue
Heathens they will be apt to fall in with the Papists; if they continue
Heathens, they will carry it Provokingly; if they be contentious, they will be
ready to run to Arms, and avenge themselves by making War: But if they be
brought to Religion, then there will be Hopes of a Durable Peace: The People of
Ekron fell out often with Israel; but when they were Converted, they were
Serviceable and Helpful to them; Zech. 9.7. Ekron shall be as a Jebusite.

2. That will be much better, than to Destroy them. Some men it their Rage,
meditate nothing but utter Destruction; They th^^^ Firebrarnds, (...) and
Death. They are like Edom, and the (...) that said, Let us (...) them off from
being a Nation, that the Name of Israel may be us m^re in Remembrance, Psalm.
83.4. These men (...) a Bloody Spirit: It Is much better to convert them: Then
they will do good, they will serve and glorify God, they will help to enlarge
his Kingdom, and be a benefit to their Neighbors.

BOSTON of the MASSACHUSETTS:

Printed by B. Green, August 9th. 1723. And Sold (...) Samuel Gerrish at his
Shop near the Old Meeting house.


