Mr. Foxcroft's SERMON After the Funeral OF Dame Bridget Usher.

The Character OF Anna, the Prophetess, Considered and Applied.

In a SERMON Preached after the funeral Of that Honorable and Devout
Gentlewoman, Dame Bridget Usher; Who deceased at Boston, N. E. May 25th, 1723.
Being a Widow of a great Age.

Published (with some Enlargements) at the Desire of the honored Executors to
her Will.

By Thomas Foxcroft, M. A. And a Pastor to the Old Church in Boston. With a
Preface by the Rev. Mr. Wadsworth.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, MDCCXXIII.

PREFACE.
BECAUSE all Men are Sinful, therefore they are Mortal. For as by one Man Sin
entered into the World, so Death has passed upon all Men for that all have
sinned. But, Eternal Praises be to the Ever-living God, that, As by one Man's
disobedience many were made Sinners, so, by the Obedience of One shall many be
made Righteous. Our blessed Lord Jesus Christ, God-Man-Mediator, is the Only
One, by whom sinful Men can be Saved. He saves, in Justifying Persons by His
Righteousness; in Renewing and Sanctifying them by His Spirit. Praises be to
His Great Name, that from time to time there are many such Triumphs of His
Grace. We have ground to hope (so far as we can judge) that Several lately
removed from us by Death, were such.

Particularly, that Aged Handmaid of the Lord Madam Bridget Usher, upon whose
Death the following Sermon was Preached. I never heard to the contrary, but
that from her Youth up, her Life was Sober, Virtuous, Religious. Ever since I
have known her (which has been many Years) she has had (and I think justly) the
Character of an holy, blameless, close Walker with God. She was firm and
steadfast in the Faith, even to the end. She so walked, as to adorn the Doctrine
of God our Savior. She was watchful, not only over her Actions, but over her
Words too; far from that backbiting, reviling temper, which too shamefully and
commonly appears in many. She was very ready to promote and encourage pious
savoury Discourse^ a thing too much neglected by many Christians. She was a
wonderful Example of Christian Patience under great Pains and Bodily
Afflictions. She was a careful, constant, diligent Attender on God's public
Worship and Ordinances; and would not suffer small Inconveniences or
difficulties to keep her therefrom, as too many are apt to do.

AS her Outward Carriage was commendable, courteous, religious; so her great
Solicitude was (as appeared from Discourse and Conference) to be a Christian
indeed, to have Faith Unfeigned, to have Integrity and Uprightness of Soul
before God that tries the Hearts.

After a long and holy Life, she died in the Lord, and rests from her Labors,
and her Works follow her. Let us follow her, so far as she followed Christ. To
be sincerely and practically Godly and Religious; is our indispensable Duty,
highest Honor, and greatest Interest. Let us be most studious and careful to
lead such a Life; for we know not how soon we may be called to an Account by
our Glorious Judge, who cannot be deceived and wont be mocked.

That the Sermon published herewith, by my dear and worthy Colleague and
Fellow Laborer in the Work of the Gospel; may be Instrumental of quickening
Persons to an holy Life, which is the best Preparation for Death; is the Prayer
of him, who writes this short Preface,

Benj. Wadsworth.
Boston, N. E. July 20. 1723.
ERRATA.
PAge 23. line 4. for in, read, is. Lin. 13. for Collection, read, Concourse.
P. 38. l. 33. after better, add, and the oftener the better. P. 39. l. 28. for
this, read, His. P. 53. l. 22. read, the pious.

The Character of Anna, the Prophetess, Considered and Applied.
LUKE II. 37. She was a Widow of about Fourscore and four Years, which departed
not from the Temple --.
THEY are some of the excellent Proverbs of wise Solomon, -- That, The Memory
of the Just is blessed: That, A Woman which fears the Lord, she shall be
praised: -- And that, The hoary Head is a Crown of Glory, being found in the
way of Righteousness.

THAT is the just Character of all Saints, which we find given of some Women,
(Act. 1350.) Devout and Honorable. And none (...) ^^norable than the Aged
Saints, the Old Disciples. These sacred Pieces of Antiquity are truly beautiful
and glorious: they should be venerable in our eyes, and ought to have a double
Reverence paid them. Great is the respect, which GOD has put on his aged
Saints. Special Honors have been done them many times in Providence, both
living and dying: and the Regards shown them in holy Scripture, are not small
no^ common.

THE ancient Women as well as Men, have had singular Honors do^e them. These
Mothers in Israel have always been much esteemed and reverenced in the Church:
Many of them have their Names recorded* and their virtuous Lives celebrated in
Scripture story: and in Divine Providence many times signal Favors and
Dignities have been conferred upon them.

TO pass over other Things, that might be mentioned, -- I shall only cite two
famous Instances. We may justly esteem it a superior Glory to the female Sex,
That GOD sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, and this by a miraculous
Conception: by which means He has in a great measure wiped off the Reproach,
that was fallen upon that Sex, upon account of the Woman's being first in the
Transgression.

BUT another thing, whereby this Sex has been not a little dignified, is the
extraordinary Honor (...) upon godly Anna, in her being employed (together
with devout Simeon) to (...) public Testimony to the holy Child Jesus: An
account of which we have before us, in the Chapter containing our Text.

OUR Lord Jesus Christ being made under the Law, humbled himself to attend and
observe all the Institutions and Ceremonies of it. He was circumcised, on the
day and in the manner appointed. Afterward at the time prescribed, when he was
about Six Weeks old, His Parents brought Him to Jerusalem, (being a Firstborn
Son) to present Him to the Lord, and offer a Sacrifice, according to the custom
of the Law.

NOW, at the time when the Child Jesus was presented in the Temple, there came
thither (by the direction of the Holy Ghost) a certain Jew, named Simeon, a
just and devout and (probably) an aged Man, waiting for the Consolation of
Israel: who, seeing the Child, the Lord's Christ, (as it had been revealed to
him, He should do before his Death) He took him up into his venerable Arms,
with the greater Affection and Joy, with loud Thanksgiving and Praise, and with
public Declarations and Predictions, upon the solemn and glad Occasion. [See,
Ver. 25, etc.]

AND then (that one of each Sex might bear witness to Him, in whom both Men and
Women are invited to believe, that they may be saved) there came in also at
that happy juncture a godly aged Woman, to help make up a harmony of
Confessions, and join with Simeon in a Testimony to the holy Jesus: -- which
was not only a Reputation to the Child, and a Comfort to his Parents, but also
an^ ^^nour to that venerable Matron. A high Privilege and Favor 'twas she
partook of! And it is a double Honor put upon her, that Record was made of
this; so that wheresoever the Bible comes in the whole World, there is this
told for a Memorial of her. -- But it is still a greater piece of Respect done
her, that in the account thereof, we have not only her Name mentioned, but a
very honorable Character given of her; and this rather more large and
particular than that given of Simeon, though an eminent Man in Jerusalem, it is
supposed.

HER Name is called Anna; which in Hebrew is Hannah, and in English is often
abbreviated into Ann. It signifies Gracious, or Gratified, Answered, Comforted.
The Woman in our Text, according to her Name, was both gracious and gratified.
She was strong in the Grace of the Lord. Great Grace was upon her. She was
highly favored, and sweetly comforted, when she saw the Holy Jesus presented
in the Temple.

Further, WE have her Parentage mentioned. She was the Daughter of Phanuel: A
Man of Note, we may suppose; or, his Name signifying The Face of God, it might
be bro't in to remind us of Jacob's Penuel or Phanuel Genesis 32. 30.
; that now (as one observes) the mystery of that should be unfolded, when in
Christ we should, as 'twere, see God face to face, and our Lives be preserved.

Again, WE are told the Tribe she belonged to which was that of Asher; one of
the Ten (...), that revolted (under the Conduct of Jeroboam) from the House of
David, and from the true Worship or God, and that were afterward carried into
the Assyrian Captivity. But though the Generality were in the defection, yet many
particular Persons continued in their Allegiance to David's Family, united
themselves to Judah, and removed their Habitations thither, to express their
Zeal for the true Line of Succession, and to enjoy the true Religion, the pure
Worship of God. The pious Woman in our Text, was (probably) the remote
O^^spring of one that did do so, according to that ancient Prophecy, Jer. 50.
4. In those days -- the Children of Israel shall come [to Jerusalem] they and
the Children of Judah together, going and weeping, -- to seek the Lord their
God.

Further, WE have her Age, and her Circumstances described. She is said to be a
Widow, and she had long been so. She lived in a married State but about seven
years; and that it seems was in her Youth. It Is said, She lived with an Husband
seven years from her Virginity; which denotes her tender Age as well as
undefiled Chastity. Her Husband dying, and leaving her a young Widow, she spent
all the Remain of her Life in a solitary State, never marrying again; which the
sacred Historian seems to take notice of to her Commendation. For, in some
Cases, this may be a wise part, and very praise worthy. (See the Apostle's
Judgment, 1 Cor. 7. 8, and 40.) Yet there are other Cases, wherein it is
advisable to marry again. (See 1 Timothy 5. 14. 1 Cor. 7. 9.) What Anna's Case
was, and what the Motives or Reasons of her abiding in a single State, it does
not appear. But so it was, and it seems to be commended in her, that she
continued a Widow to her dying Day. -- And she lived to very advanced Years.
It Is said, she was of a great Age: She was a Widow of about fourscore and four
Years. Some take it, she lived so long a Widow, which must make her to be
upwards of an hundred. But others reckon it from her Birth, and call it the
measure of her Life, not the duration of her Widowhood. Which seems rather the
more probable: For it is unlikely that a Woman so very old, should be capable
of fasting and praying at that rate as she is said to have done. And supposing
her to be but Eighty four Years old, this were a great Age; what but very few
attain to; and which seldom permits any extraordinary Fastings and Devotions;
such as we may think that godly Woman was eminent for.

BUT again, in the Description of Her, we may observe, She is styled a
Prophetess. By which some think is meant, she had the Spirit of Prophecy, and
was inspired to foretell future Events. But this Title is very ambiguous, and
often used in a different Sense in both Testaments. Deborah that judged Israel,
is called a Prophetess: Which, for ought appears, only bespeaks her to be a
Woman of eminent Holiness and Prudence, and Knowledge in the Law, whereby she
was singularly qualified for judging of the People, though not endowed with any
miraculous Gifts and Graces Pool's Annota. on Judge. 4. 4.
. And perhaps nothing of extraordinary Inspiration is intended when the Word is
applied to Anna. It may only mean that she was a Mother in Israel; a wise
Woman, knowing in the Scriptures, and dispensing her Instructions, Counsels and
Blessings to all about her, as a Mother to her Children, or a Prophetess to the
People. It was perhaps her special Employment to teach Children, and she might
make it her business to instruct the younger Women, which the Apostle makes a
special Duty of aged Matrons. (Tit. 2. 3.) She was a Teacher of good Things:
Not a public Preacher, but a private Instructor; full of godly Discourse at all
times, and (which is the least that can be meant) applying her self to instruct
those about her. Like another Bathsheba, of whom ('it is thought by many) her Son
Solomon designs those words as part of her excellent Character, Prove. 31. 26,
29. She opens her mouth with Wisdom, and in her tongue is the law of
Kindness. -- Many Daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.
-- Anna might be called a Prophetess on the account of her pious Discourse,
whereby her lips fed many. For godly Counsels and Exhortations are oft-times
(as well as Predictions) called Prophecies. Prove. 31. 1. The words of King
Lemuel, the Prophecy that his mother taught him.

Furthermore, Another Excellency of this Woman celebrated in our Text, is her
uncommon Piety and Devotion. It Is said, She departed not from the Temple, but
served God with Fastings and Prayers night and day.

IT IS the Fear of God that crowns and completes the Character of the virtuous
Woman. No doubt, Anna was in her general behavior as becomes Holiness, --
sober, grave and temperate in all things, just and honest, true and faithful,
charitable and peaceable, and sat an Example of moral Virtue in all the
Instances of it. But it is only her Piety toward God, that is expressly
mentioned* all the rest being of little account without this, and being
necessarily comprehended in it.

IT IS said of Her, She departed not from the Temple: which implies at least her
constant attending on the public Worship of God. The Generality of Expositors
think it means no more. Not that she had her Habitation in the Temple, but only
gave her Attendence there constantly at the times of Divine Service. Thus the
Priests were bid, (Lev. 10. 7) not to go out of the door of the Tabernacle;
that is, during the appointed time of their holy Ministrations. So it is said of
the Disciples, Luke 24. (...). They were continually in the Temple, praising
and blessing God: that is frequently, and always at Temple-hours of Worship; as
the Sacrifice offered Morning and Evening is called the continual Burnt
offering. It may be explained by, Act. 5. 42. where it is said, DAILY in the
Temple, and in every House, they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ.
-- Even so Anna kept close to the Public Worship, was daily in the Temple at
the hours of Prayer, Morning and Evening. -- It is said, She departed not from
the Temple, with Fastings and Prayers worshipping night and day See the
Original.
. Some think it is Public Worship is still spoken of. She strictly observed the
Weekly Fasts of the Church, as well as attended the daily Prayers. In our
Savior's time, some tell us, the Jews were wont to have two stated and common
Fasting days every Week See Pool's Annota. on Luke 18. 12.
. And the Disciples of John, as well as the Pharisees, are said to fast o^t
Mat. 9. 14.
, that is, twice in a Week. -- Others think that latter Clause relates to her
private Conduct, and understand it of her voluntary occasional Fasts and
retired Worship Dr. Whitby refers it to this. See his Appendix to Mat. 6. 16.
-- So likewise Mr. Henry, and others.
. She was in Fastings and Watchings often (as it is said of the Apostles, 2 Cor.
11. 27.) and as it is said of Epaphras ( Col. 4. 12.) She labored always
fervently in Prayers. She not only observed the stated hours of common and
daily Prayer, but in her Retirements prayed night and day. She abounded in all
private Acts of Devotion: Fasting and Prayer being put for the rest, and
including Meditation, Reading, etc. Religious Exercises filled up her whole
Life almost; she having little worldly Business and Care to take her off, or
being past Labor.

Note (says Mr. Baxter) "It is not proved that she deserted all outward Calling
or Labor in the World, on pretense of Religion, while she was able for it: and
if it be done but when Age or Sickness disableth one, it is lawful and well. --
Again, It Is another Note of his on the place, She was not of the sick mind of
the profane nominal Christians, that cannot abide long Prayers and religious
Strictness'. No, but she gave her self to Prayer (says Mr. Henry on the place)
was always in a praying Frame, frequent in pious Ejaculations, large in solemn
Prayers, and very particular in her Intercessions". And if she had a Family, we
may well conclude, she also worshipped God with all her House, and thus prayed
to God always, as is said of devout Cornelius. Like one that is a Widow indeed,
(whom the Apostle describes in 1 Timothy 5.) She trusted in God, and continued in
Supplications and Prayers night and day. She was very frequent in her
Devotions, like the Psalmist, who said, Morning and Evening and at Noon will I
pray to thee; and at Midnight I will arise to give Thanks to thee: Seven times
a day I will praise thee.

THUS, this devout Widow lived a Life of Prayer; and to help her Devotion, she
was much in Fasting. She led a Life of Mortification, used her self to all
proper acts of Discipline and Self-denial, and often employed those hours in
Fastings and Prayers, which others generally waste in sleeping and feeding and
diverting themselves. -- We may well then conclude Her to be an uncommon Saint,
one of high Seize in Grace and Knowledge. For The diligent band makes
rich. And indeed (as our famous and apostolical Hooker was wont to say) such
extraordinary Favors, as the Life of Religion, and the Power of Godliness,
must be attained and preserved by the frequent use of such extraordinary Means,
as Prayer with Fasting: But (he adds) if Professors grow negligent of these
Means, iniquity will abound, and the Love of many wax cold. -- Our Anna was
doubtless a very improved Saint, having so long and so diligently used the best
of Means; and so uprightly. For she was an Israelite indeed; in singleness of
heart, fearing God, and whatsoever she did, doing it, as unto the Lord.

IN all, she served God. She fasted to the Lord, and worshipped God in Spirit
and in Truth. There was a real and an intended Homage to God, in her Fastings
and religious Exercises public and private. She glorified and pleased God. She
made this her governing Aim; and this made her Prayers and Fastings turn to so
good Account, and come up for a Memorial before God. -- The Pharisees (as one
Henry in lo^.
observes) fasted often, and made long Prayers, but they served themselves, and
served diverse Lusts, their own Pride and Covetousness particularly, in their
Fastings and Prayers: But this Good Woman not only did that which was good, but
did it from a good Principle, did it with a good End; aiming at the honor of
God; doing the will of God from the heart; with good will, doing service to the
Lord, abounding in his work, and not being weary of well-doing.

AND O! how happily, how abundantly was this pious Woman in the issue
recompensed for her long attendence on the Temple, and unwearied Services and
Devotions, -- by the Favor of seeing the Messiah come, and the Honor of
bearing an early Testimony to Him! As follows in the 38th verse, And she coming
in at that Instant (while Simeon had the Child in his Arms, prophesying and
praying over him) she gave Thanks likewise (in like manner, just as Simeon)
unto the Lord. -- It might be read, She confessed, or gave her Testimony, to
the Lord, professed her Faith in the Lord Jesus: This, at least, is implied.
It Is added, And she spoke of him to all them that looked for Redemption in
Jerusalem. There were those then in Jerusalem, who looked for the Redemption of
Israel by the Messiah. In the most degenerate Times and Places God has usually
a Remnant among his professing People, whose Hearts are upright toward him,
who seek him diligently. Even so then at that time, though so dreadfully
corrupted, there was a Remnant according to the Election of Grace, as the
Apostle speaks, Romans 11. 5. There was a devout Simeon, and a praying Anna, and
some others, waiting for the Consolation of Israel. And those the Holy Ghost
takes more notice of than of all the Jewish Doctors, all the Scribes and
Pharisees, whose Names are ^^rish'd, while those Just Ones are had in
everlasting Remembrance, and what they said and did (...) on durable Record, to
their Praise. The (...) of the Just is blessed; but the Name of the Wicked
shall rot, Prove. 10. 7.

THERE were a ^ew Names in Jerusalem at that time, and (...) seems, but a few.
For Anna, as it should seem, knew them all, knew where to find them, or they
where to find her. She spoke to all them which (...) for Redemption, in
Jerusalem. She told (...) the good and great News of the Messiah's being come,
and instructed them concerning Him. -- This may teach us what the Saints,
especially aged ones, should make the grand Subject or Topic of their
Discourse, even Christ Jesus. We read, Mal. 3. 16. Then they that scared the
Lord, spoke often to one another, and the Lord hearkened and heard, and a book
of remembrance was written before him for them that scared the Lord, and that
thought upon his Name, -- and doubtless spoke of what they thought upon. The
Saints should comfort themselves together, and edify one another, and exhort
each other daily. And they that have Understanding in the mysteries of the
Kingdom, should be ready to impart their Knowledge to others. They that have got
an Acquaintance with Christ themselves, should do all they can to bring others
to be acquainted with Him. Thus did holy and zealous Anna.

AND so I have gone through the whole Account here given of this gracious
Widow. But it is only one single branch of her excellent Character, that I have
pitched upon to be the more special Subject of our present Meditations; and
that is, her constant devout Attendence at the Temple.

YOU need not (I presume) be told the solemn occasion, which determined my
thoughts at this time Being before the Administration of the Lord's Supper.
to such a Subject; it being known to all, what repeated Bereavements have
lately befallen us, in the Death of several excellent aged Women Particularly
Mrs. Martha Dasset, who died suddenly, and went to Rest on the Lord's Day, Mar.
17. -- And, D^me Bridgit Usher, who finished her long Pilgrimage on Earth, May
25. --
of our Communion; who were, as in general exemplary for their Virtue, for
their Religion, their Knowledge in Divine Things, their edifying Conversation,
their great Freedom from the too common Vices of Speech, and the like: So more
particularly remarkable for their most diligent and reverent Attendence at the
House and Table of the Lord. They were Patterns of Constancy to the Public
Worship, and a readiness to hear the Word, in season, and out of season, upon
the Lord's Day, and all other Occasions: and (which was pretty singular in
them) they practiced (even to the last) the good old Way of writing after the
Minister. They Were swift to hear; and by this laudable (but now too
unfashionable) Method, took care to hear for the time to come, as the Prophet
speaks. Of them we may say, as Luke of Anna, They were Prophetesses; were
Widows of a great Age, which departed not from the Temple, (and as we trust)
served God with Fastings and Prayers, night and day.

BUT it is Time now to come to the Observations, that I particularly intended to
discourse upon, from the Text. We may take occasion to observe --

I. PUBLIC Worship is part of that Homage we owe to GOD, and what has been the
usual Practice of His People in all Ages.

BY the Temple in our Text, is meant the Place of God's solemn and public
Worship, in Jerusalem.

IN that Age and in every Generation, the People of God have had their stated
Assemblies for religious Worship: And they have generally had some public and
settled Places of Convention. -- In the beginning of times, even in Abel's
days, we read of open and social Worship. The Patriarchs, in one age and
another, we find erecting Altars for this Purpose. The Israelites in the
Wilderness and in Canaan, had their Tabernacle (called, the Tabernacle of the
Congregation) for the name of the Lord. In Solomon's days, and afterward, they
had their Temple at Jerusalem, and Synagogues through all the Land. -- And in
the times of the Gospel, Christians have ever had their Assemblies for public
Worship; and have generally had their appointed Places or Meetinghouses for it.

YEA, the very Heathens have been wont always to pay some public Homage to
their Deities.

INDEED, I think, the worshipping God publicly is to be referred to the head of
natural Religion, in the first place. Though there be positive Appointment of
Gospel Churches for the maintaining and carrying on the public Worship of God;
yet this public Homage is founded in natural Reasons principally, at least is
supported by them. There are special Ordinances administered in
Church-Societies, which are purely grounded on the Institution of the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is absolute Head of the Church, and to whom supremely belongs
the Regulation of the House of God: But public Worship in the general, is a
Dictate of Nature. Natural Light tells us, that as we are God's Creatures, and
made for His Service, we do (by consequence) owe Worship to Him: And also that
seeing we are formed for Society, we ought (as we have opportunity) to worship
God in a social Way. -- God is the Author, Benefactor, Lord and Judge of
Communities, as well as of particular Persons: Therefore worship in Societies
is due to God. -- Further, The Interest we have in each others Welfare as
Members of the same Body, (and which we are jointly to pray for, and give
Thanks for, and endeavor the Promotion of) does afford another and good
Argument. The Law of Nature does oblige Men to combine and convene in
ecclesiastical Societies and Assemblies, for mutual Edification, as well as to
unite in civil Communities for mutual Security, Strength and Order.

BUT I would not enlarge here. Some further Hints may be given under the next
Observation: Which is, --

II. GOD's Public Worship ought to be constantly and diligently attended.

WE should be ambitious of Anna's excellent Character, of whom it is said, She
departed not from the Temple night nor day. We should love the House of God,
the place where His Honor dwells. We should desire to dwell there always; take
all Opportunities to come into God's Sanctuary, and constantly wait upon him
there in all the Ways of His appointment.

HERE I shall only consider the Reasons of the Doctrine, or show the
Obligations lying on Christians to be constant and diligent in their attending
on the public Worship. They are various and numerous: But I shall endeavor to
reduce them all under the following Heads. Now then, consider --

1. GOD requires this of us in His Word.

THE revealed Will of God is the Rule of Man's Duty. That then must be of the
greatest Weight with us in every case; and whatsoever that prescribes to us, we
must attend and observe.

NOW it is evident, that God in His Word requires us to frequent his House, and
wait on Him in public Worship diligently. It is plain, God required this of the
Jews. And it is as plainly demanded of Christians. That Prophecy which looks
forward to Gospel times, is a declaration of God's preceptive Will, and
Expectations concerning us: Isai. 2. 3. Many people shall say, Come ye and let
us go up to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will teach (...) of his ways,
and we will walk in his paths.

WE have an Apostolic Canon expressly forbidding and rebuking Negligence in this
Matter. Heb. 10. 25. Forsake not the assembling yourselves together as the
manner of some is. This Prohibition of Negligence implies a Demand of Diligence
and Constancy in attending upon God's Worship. It directs Christians to keep up
public Assemblies for religious Purposes, and requires all to frequent them.
-- That ancient Command is not yet out of Date. Lev. 19 30. Ye shall keep my
Sabbaths and reverence my Sanctuary: I am the Lord. We must show a due Respect
and Reverence to the House of God; and in taken hereof, it is our duty
constantly to frequent it. The Reverence required is to be understood in
Opposition (...) contemptuous Neglect, as well as careless Attendence. We
implicitly (...) the Church of God, by needless Absence from it; as well as by
profane Behavior in it. Eccl. 5. 1. Keep thy Foot when (...) g^^st to the
House of God, and be -- ready to hear -- the Word read and preached there every
Sabbath.

BUT ^arther, The weekly Revolution of the Lord's Day calls for our frequent
attending on his Public Worship. God has instituted a holy Sabbath, which
returns once every Week, and is to be solemnized partly, yea principally, by
Public Worship. The Sabbath is not to be devoted to mere Idleness; nor to be
employed in private Duties only, but in public Exercises also. -- One End of
the Sabbath is to acknowledge God as the common Creator and Benefactor of
Mankind. And this End is best attained by a public Appearance and joint
Worship. Now to accommodate this, one certain Day is appointed to be the
Sabbath. And this divine appointment does very evidently bespeak the Sabbath to
be designed peculiarly for public Worship. For, what need is there of a public
Day for private Worship? Every Man might have chosen his own Time for this, and
suited the Day to his own Affairs. But God has seen meet to fix the Sabbath on
one particular Day and common Season: And why has He done so, but that we might
assemble together; and might know when to assemble ourselves, without the
constant Trouble of agreeing upon the Time? -- This Sabbath (as I said) returns
every week. The Seventh part of our Time is devoted to it, by the Fourth
Commandment: which also obliges all to keep the Sabbath, and to observe it
carefully. Remember the Sabbath to keep it holy. We must no^ forget the Sabbath
at any time, nor wilfully neglect any of the Duties of it. -- By virtue of this
Precept therefore, we are bound to give our constant Attendence on the public
Worship, one day every Week. Thus often at least there must be a holy
Convocation. Thus often we are, without Fail, to worship God publicly, if we
can.

MOREOVER we may observe, The Lord Jesus Christ has instituted particular
Churches, which are Societies for Worship, united and agreeing to walk together
in the Faith and Order of the Gospel. Now the Nature, Ends, and Occasions of
these Societies call for their frequent Convention. There are Duties and
Ordinances of a public Nature, to be observed by Christians; which cannot be
attended by us in our own Closets or Families, but require a general Meeting of
the several Members of the religious Body. And these Things we are called upon
to attend with Frequency.

THUS, Prayer is one Part of public Worship, and a Church-Duty (...) Tim. 2. 1.
(...)
Hence God's House is called an House of Prayer, Isai. 5. 7. And how often are
we bidden to pray without ceasing, to pray always, etc. Wherefore Prayer should
be made without ceasing of the Church, unto God Act. 1^. (...).
Every Church should with one accord continue in Prayer and Supplication as in
primitive times Act. 1. 14.
.

AGAIN, Singing of Psalms and Praising of God, is another public Du^y; and what
we are bid to be frequent in. Heb 13. 15. Let us offer the sacrifice to praise
to God continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving Thanks to his Name.
Ephesians. 5. 19, 20. Speaking to your selves in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual Songs,
singing and making Melody in your heart to the Lord; Giving Thanks always --.

AGAIN, Preaching the Word is a public Ordinance. It supposes the presence of
some to hear, and requires a Convention of the Flock to be fed with Ministerial
Instructions. Now this Work is to be diligently attended by Gospel Ministers. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 2. I charge thee before God --, Preach the Word, be instant in
season, out of season, etc. So 1 Timothy 4. 13. Give attendence to Reading, to
Exhortation, to Doctrine. And if Ministers must be diligent in preaching, the
People should be diligent in attending.

YEA, Christians are expressly required to be diligent Hearers of the Word. Jam.
1. 19, 20. My beloved Brethren, let every man be swift to hear; -- and receive
with meekness the Ingra^^ed word, which is able to save your souls.

AGAIN, The Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper are public Ordinances.
Baptism is so. Though in some extraordinary cases it has been and may be
administered not in a public Congregation: yet (I presume) it is expedient that
it should ordinarily be dispensed in Public, in the Face of the Church. The
Nature, Ends, and Uses of Baptism speak it proper and requisite that it should
be openly administered and received. Now the Calls and Occasions for this
Ordinance are frequent: and therefore religious Assemblies for the
Administration of this (among other Ordinances) should be frequent. -- Again,
The Lord's Supper is a public Ordinance. Christians must come together in the
Church, into one place, when they would eat the Lord's Supper. (1 Cor. 11. 18,
20.) It is a common Feast, and one Instrument of the Communion of Saints, with
one another as well as with Christ. 1 Cor. 10. 16, 17. The Bread which we
break, is it not the Communion of the Body of Christ? For, we being many, are
one Bread and one Body; for we are all partakers of that one Bread, or Loaf;
the visible sign of Christ's Body, and emblem of the Union and Fraternity of
His People. Now this Ordinance is of standing Obligation, and to be frequently
celebrated in the Church of Christ. 1 Cor. 5. 8. Let us keep the Feast. 1 Cor.
11. 26, 28. As often as ye eat this bread and drink this Cup, show ye the
Lord's Death ^ill he come. Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat. This
Ordinance is to continue in the Church 'till Christ's second and personal
Coming at the day of Judgment. 'Till then it must be kept up and observed in
the Christian World. And every real Christian ought to attend upon it
diligently. -- It should be celebrated frequently; as seems to be implied in
the Apostle's repeated Phrase, As often a^ ye eat, etc. Besure the Nature and
Designs of the Institution call for a frequent Administration. It is a Feast;
and we should often seed upon our spiritual Food, for our Soul's nourishment
and growth in Grace. Whenever the Feast is made, we are invited to come; and if
we carelessly neglect it, we are guilty of turning our backs on God, and
slighting his Kindness. It is the Memorial of Christ's dying and redeeming
Love: which we are obliged in Gratitude to be often commemorating in all proper
ways. It is called the Communion; being a special Means of sweet Fellowship
with God and near Access to Him. Now we should, be much in Communion with God,
frequent in our religious Visits and Approaches to Him. And therefore we should
be often at his Table, in his House -- Frequent Participation of the Lord's
Supper is then the Duty of Christians; and it is to be continued in to the end.
Show ye the Lord's Death, 'till He come; that is, 'till He come to judge the
World, or (which is all one) 'till He call you away by Death.

THUS I have made it appear, that by many Divine Precepts (direct of oblique)
we are required to give our Attendence on the public Worship constantly and
diligently. -- We may now proceed to another Argument. Wherefore let us
consider --

2. A constant devout Attendence on public Worship is very honorary and
pleasing to God.

IT is peculiarly well-pleasing to God. Psalm. 87. 2. The Lord loves the Gates
of Z^^ more than all the dwellings of Jacob. The Prayer of the Upright in His
Delight. He takes Pleasure in his Saints, in their Persons, and their sincere
Performances. These are compared to pleasant Fruits, and to Spices that are of
a sweet smell Cant. (...). 16.
There is a special per^ume in public Duties. Here is a Union of the Graces of
many together, a confluence of Pious Breathings; and their united Devotions
like some Pillar of Smoke or Cloud of Incense) go up f^^ a Memorial before God.
It Is like a Collection of many Waters, emptying themselves out of various
Rivulets into one common Channel, which makes a pleasant, a mighty and flowing
stream. Or it may ^e compared to a Consort of Music. A single instrument well
tuned and well handl^d, will make a pleasant sound: but to the musical Ear, a
Consort will afford vastly greater Delight. Even so a Conjunction of the Graces
of a devout Multitude in public Worship, will make a very grateful Harmony in
the Ears of our God. When a whole Choir of holy Souls send up their concurring
Prayers and Praises to Heaven, With what a mighty Force must they needs ascend!
How loud the Sound, and how sweet the Melody to the Lord!

HENCE there are special Promises and Encouragements given to Social Prayer.
Mat. 18. 20. Where two or three are met together (^aith Christ) in my Name,
there am I in the midst of them. Exodus 20. 24. In all places where I record my
Name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee. -- And that of the Apostle
refers especially to public Worship. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 3. I exhort that first of
all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks, he made for
all Men. For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God. -- Now it is the
Duty of Christians to choose the Things which please God, and to walk before Him
to all well pleasing: and therefore it is incumbent on them diligently to attend
the public Worship, which is thus dear and delightful to Him.

AND further, It is also peculiarly honorary to God. Public Worship duly
performed, contributes more to the Honor of God, and the Credit of Religion,
than any private and unseen Devotions. Public Worship is the most open
Testimony to the Being and Perfections and Providence of God. It Is a visible
Homage to God, whereby we glorify Him with our Bodies as well as Spirits; and
honor Him with our Lips, as well as sanctify Him in our Hearts. Hereby we
confess and acknowledge God and Christ in the face of the World: and in the
^ight of all Israel, do avouch Him to be our God, and our common Benefactor,
profess our selves his willing Subjects, submit to His Ordinances, own our
Dependence upon Him and our Obligations to Him. -- It is a manifest Approbation
of Religion, and a public Condemnation of Vice and Infidelity. It affords the
most conspicuous Example. The more open our Worship is, and the more Company
joins in it, so much the more exemplary and valuable it is; carrying in it the
most illustrious Testimony for God, a magnificent Homage, and a most powerful
Influence to preserve a Sense of His Existence and Excellence and Beneficence
in the minds of Men; to strike an awe upon them, and prom^te the belief and
practice of Religion in the World. And so it necessarily brings a greater
Tribute of Glory to God. Hence it is the Duty of Christians to attend on His
public Worship. This is implicitly required in that sacred Injunction, Man. 5.
16. Let your Light so shine before Men* that they may see your good Works, and
glorify your heavenly Father. And that Exhortation is more express, Heb. 10.
24, 5. Let us consider one another to provoke unto Love, and to good Works: not
forsaking the assembling of our selves together. -- By duly frequenting the
public Assemblies, we honor God before others, and take one method to do good
to others, by our Example. By this means we make our Light to shi^e before Men,
which by a natural efficacy tends to engage them in an imitation of us.
Whereas, if our Religion ^e confin^d to our Closets and private Houses, the
Candle is hid under a Bushel; and though it may perhaps burn bright within, yet
it does not shine out and give Light to our surrounding Neighbors. -- If the
public Assemblies fall, Religion cannot long stand, but will be in danger of
being lost.

THESE Reflections abundantly show us what an Aspect the public Worship of God
has upon his Glory; what an Influence to the promoting of his Honor. And
hence it is of the highest Obligation upon us. ^Tis the chief End of Man to
glorify God: And devoutly to Worship Him in His public Ordinances, is one
special way of putting honor upon him. And this certainly should be a
prevailing Argument with us, to be frequent and diligent in attending public
Worship. Nothing is more reasonable than that we study to glorify God in all
things, and give Him the highest Honor, the best Homage we are capable of: and
therefore that we be constant and diligent in our public Attendence on Him;
which carrying in it the appearance of Love to Him, and Zeal toward his House,
and being of happy Tendency as it sets a good Example to others, it must be
voted signally subservient to the Glory of God. With what Force and Impres^^^
(...) ^^en should those Exhortations come, which we have in the inspired
Psalms! Give unto the Lord the Glory due to his Name: bring an offering an^
come into his Courts. O worship the Lord in the beauty of Holiness. Exalt ye
the Lord our God, and worship at his holy Hill. O magnify the Lord with me, and
let us exalt his Name together. I will declare thy Name among my Brethren; in
the midst of the Congregation will I praise thee. O that Men would praise the
Lord! Let them exalt him also in the Congregation of the People, and praise Him
in the Assembly of the Elders.

BUT thus much for the Second Reason of the Doctrine.

3. WE might draw an Argument from the gracious PROMISES of God to such as do
their Duty in this matter.

I mentioned several Promises before, as Evidences of public Worship's being
acceptable to God. Here I mention them, as an Argument of it is being incumbent
on us. I shall add in this place but two other Promises; and they are great and
precious ones. Isai. 56. 6, 7. Such as join themselves to the Lord, to s^^ve
him, and to love the Name of the Lord; every one that keeps the Sabbath from
polluting it, and takes hold of my Covenant: Even them will I make joyful in
my house of Prayer: their Sacrifices shall be accepted upon min^ Altar -- The
other place is that; Isai. 58. 1^, 1^. If thou -- call the Sabbath a delight,
the holy of the Lord, honorable* and shall honor him, not doing thine own
ways, nor finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words: then thou
shall delight thy self in the Lord. -- I will feed thee with the heritage of
Jacob thy Father.

THESE and many other Promises there be to such as are conscientious
Sabbatizers, and therefore strict to the public Worship. Now these words of
Promise are so many Bonds to Duty; Bonds as well as Motives; not only
Invitations, but Obligations to it. The Inference is natural and reasonable, of
our Duty from God's Promises. For, as one observes well, "There seems to be
little difference betwixt what a Superior positively commands, and what He
Kindly encourages". We should resolve then with them, Neh. 10. 39. We will no^
^orsake the house of our God.

4. I might draw another Argument from the constant Inclination and Tendency of
the New Nature in real Christians.

THE Fruit of the Spirit is Love: Love to God, to his Name, Worship, and
Service; Love to his Day, to his Ministers and People: A Delight in the
Communion of Saints; A Zeal for the public Good; Resentment of public Evils,
etc. All which gracious Dispositions have a tendency to bring us to the House
of God frequently: and they are all to be put into the Character of a devout
Soul. David speaks the common Language of real Saints, when he says, How
amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! I have ^^ved the Habitation of
thy House. I was glad, when they said unto me, Let us go into the House of the
Lord. Our feet shall stand within thy Gates, O Jerusalem. -- Because of the
House of the Lord our God, I will seek thy Good. If I forget thee, O Jerusalem,
let my right Hand forget her Cunning. Let my Tongue cleave to the roof of my
mouth, If I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief Joy; which is builded as a
City, whither the Tribes go up, the Tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of
Israel.

THESE are the Dispositions of a renewed Soul; and they are the fruits of the
Spirit. These divine Principles and Passions are inspired from above. And they
are not implanted in vain: but must be improved and pursued into agreeable
practice. This is the Temper and Conduct of real Saints; and becomes so by the
direction and operation of the Holy Spirit.

WE may hence then very well form an Argument for public Worship, and strongly
infer our Obligations to a diligent Attendence on it, as we would approve our
selves the true Children of God, and not forfeit the Character of Christ's
Disciples.

BUT let us consider in the next place, --

5. OUR Duty is enforced and recommended by many worthy and warranted Patterns
of it.

WE have the best Examples (worthy of all Imit^^ion and Regard) to quicken,
direct and encourage us in this matter. I shall only instance in the Example of
Christ and His primitive Disciples.

WHAT more engaging Consideration is there than the Example of our blessed
Lord? Whose practice it was, in the days of His Flesh* to appear at the public
Worship in season and out of season, sometimes hearing and sometimes teaching,
in the Temple and in the Synagogues* and herein He has le^t us an Example, that
we should follow his Steps, and walk as he also walked.

THE Apostles and primitive Christians were zealous Imitators of Christ in
this: Of whom we read, Luke 24. 53. They were continually in the Temple,
praising and blessing God. So Act. 2. 42. They continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in breaking of Bread and Prayers. They
continued daily with one accord in the Temple (ver. 46.) So Act. 9. 41. We
read, that the Churches were edifyed, walking in the fear (the Worship) of the
Lord. So we read of some (Act. 11. 2^.) That a whole year they assembled
themselves with the Church at Antioch; where the Disciples were first called
Christians. And it seems to be spoken of as the Custom of the primitive
Christians to assemble every first day; Act. 20. 7. Upon the first day of the
Week, when the Disciples came together to break Bread, Paul preached to them.
And therefore the Apostle John calls the first day the Lord's Day (Rev. 1. 10)

NOW these Things were written for our Ensample. And we are called upon to be
Imitators, Heb. 6. 12. Be ye followers of them who through faith and patience
inherit the Promises. So 1 Cor. 11. 1, 2, Be ye followers of me (^aith Paul) as
I also am of Christ. Now I praise you, Brethren, that you remember me in all
things, and keep the Ordinances, as I delivered them unto you; For (as it
follows ver. 23.) I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto
you.

BUT now in the next place, --

6. THE Evidence of our Duty will shine with a more convincing Light, if we
consider the frequent, returning Occasions there are for public Worship. There
are public Occasions often calling us up to the House of God. Thus are there
not public Mercies, which we share in continually? And do not these demand
public Thanksgivings from every Member of the Body, and that frequently* Again,
Is there not continual occasion for public Prayers? Are there not public
Judgments to be deprecated? Public* Wants to be prayed over? And the Cases of
public Persons to be commended to God? And should we not therefore frequently
meet together for solemn Supplications and Intercessions? Again, Is there not
occasion for public Confessions? Is there not public Guilt, to which every
particular person's Sins do add, which calls for public Humiliations? And
should we not therefore frequently assemble to offer up our joint penitent
Acknowledgments to God, our Lawgiver and Judge? Again, Are there not religious
Covenant-Transactions, that demand public Meetings, and which need to be often
repeated? Finally (in a Word) Have we not frequent occasions to inquire at the
Oracles of God, to know our Duty; and do we not continually want new Supplys of
Grace and Strength to do our Duty? We should often go then to the House of God;
where He makes the brightest Discoveries and most blessed Communications of
Himself unto His Children.

THUS, Necessity is laid upon us, by a constant succession of various
Occasions, calling us to the House of God continually. How unreasonable then
must we be if we neglect that, which there is so much need for! The Reasons of
public Worship never cease; the Occasions for it are continually recurring. We
ought then most diligently to attend it.

BUT yet further to excite us to our Duty, let us, in the next place, --

7. CONSIDER the Advantages and happy Consequences of a diligent Attendence on
God's public Worship.

THESE are very many and very valuable: So that our Interest makes a strong
Demand upon us, and loudly pleads for the discharge of our Duty.

THERE are many great and glorious Benefits to be had in and by the devout
Worship of God in His House. Hence those Expressions of the Psalmist, Psalm. 5.
7. As for me, I will come into thy House, in the multitude of thy Mercy. Psalm.
27. 4. One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may
dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of my Life, to beh^ld the Beauty of
the Lord, and to inquire in his Temple. So Psalm. 6^. 4. Blessed is the Man whom
thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy
Courts; we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy House. Psalm. 84. 10. A
day in thy Courts is better than a thousand: I had rather be a Doorkeeper in
the House of my God than to dwell in the tents of Wickedness. -- O that we all
had more of David's Spirit! More of his just Sentiments, and devout Affections!

THE Blessings, the Comforts, the Glories, that are to be seen and received in
the House of our God, are innumerable and invaluable! O let us consider, what
it is we turn our backs upon, and how we neglect our own Interest, while we
needlessly absent our selves from the Assemblies of the Saints.

IN the Temple and Worship of God, we enjoy ^^estimable Honors and Privileges.
It is a signal Honor to have our Feet planted in the Courts of the Lord. David
thought it more honorable to be (...) P^rter in the House of his God* and ^it
in the very lowest Seat among his public Worshippers, than to be a Prin^e and
dwell in Palaces of Wickedness.

GOD is peculiarly present in the Congregation of the Righteous: And a high
honor it is to dwell in his Presence, to approach his sacred Majesty, to stand
before him, and worship at his Footstool.

IN his House we are admitted to approach the Throne of Grace; and God is
present to hear our united Prayers and Praises. And there we have God speaking
to us in his Word, and entertaining us at his Table, and confirming his
Covenant with us by visible Seals! There we ^it before Him, as his People, are
treated as his Domestics, as those that are in a special sense of his Family,
have his Name called upon us; have the King ^itting with us in his banqueting
House, and his Banne^ over us is Love! There we behold as in a glass the Glory
of the Lord, and are changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, as by
the Spirit of God. Strength and Beauty are in his Sanctuary; and we see his
goings there. O what Honor from God is here!

AND what signal Blessings are to be enjoyed and received in the House of God!
Here there is the most profitable Company, the most beneficial Employments,
together with the best and most satisfying Entertainments. Here we are in the
way of all manner of Blessings!

HERE many Benefits often accrue to Sinners, to unregenerate Souls. In God's
House is exhibited and held forth a blessed Savior, with all his saving
Blessings, to every Sinner present. And here it pleases God ordinarily to meet
his Elect, and begin his good Work in them. Here He graciously (by his Word and
Spirit) convinces and converts them, opens their eyes, and turns them from
darkness to light; from the power of Satan unto God: causes them to behold
wondrous Things out of his Law and Gospel: brings them to a fight of their Sin
and Misery by Nature, and of their Remedy by Christ* to a sense of their need
of Christ, and to a saving closure with him. In a Word, Here Sinners are
brought to know the Things of their Peace, and to acquaint themselves with God;
and are begotten by his word of truth. Psalm. 87. 5. Of Zion it shall ^e said,
This and that Man was born in her. -- O what Blessings are these: Worthy of all
Acceptance! Infinitely worth all the Pains that Sinners can be at (and loudly
calling upon them) to come unto the House of God for them.

BUT further, Here are many Benefits accruing to the Saints and Children of
God. Here Believers are edified in Knowledge, Grace, and Comfort. We read
(forecited Act. 9. 31.) Then had the Churches rest, and were edifyed, walking
in the Fear of the Lord, and in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost. Hence those
expressions of the Psalmist, Psalm. 84. Blessed are they that dwell in thy
House. -- Blessed is the man, whose strength is in thee: -- They go from
strength to strength; every one of them in Zion, appears before God. By the
Word and Ordinances of God the new Creature begotten here, is maintained,
cherished, and invigorated. Here all the Graces of the Divine Nature in the
Saints do receive Vigor and Nourishment: and they that wait on God renew their
strength, so that they mount up, as with Eagles Wings, and have their
Conversation in Heaven.

THE public Worship of God, if duly attended, has a natural Efficacy, to
promote our Holiness and Heavenly-mindedness. The very calling us out of our
Houses, and taking us off from our Secular Affairs, and engaging in religious
Exercises, even these Things have a tendency to wean us from the World, and
make us spiritually minded. -- Again, The Presence of our Fellow Saints is
profitable to us in the Worship of God. This has a natural influence to unite
our hearts in brotherly Love; to dispose us unto a becoming Reverence and
Solemnity; to awaken our attention, to strengthen our Faith, and to inflame our
Devotion. The union of many devout Souls in a joint presence, mutually raises
and enlivens their affections. As the Collection of many dispersed Rays into a
narrow Compass, gives them a greater strength and heat; or as the laying Coals
of Fire together in a body, makes them burn the fiercer: Even so the
Concurrence of a Multitude in the Solemnities of God's House, tends to kindle
and diffuse a common Ardour in the worshipping Assembly. The grave Faces, the
serious Airs, and reverent Gestures, the solemn Voices and Example of our
Fellow-worshippers, all conspire to warm our Hearts, and compose us to a like
serious frame and carriage, by a natural efficacy.

BUT then there is also a supernatural Influence and Presence of the Holy
Spirit, our supreme Teacher and only Sanctifier; from whom the Saints often
receive blessed Discoveries of God, and special Communications, when waiting on
him in his House. Here they receive increase of Knowledge, and fresh supplies of
Grace in the use of holy Ordinances: new Recruits of Strength, to fortify them
against Temptations, to enable them unto Duty, etc. I might observe, 'Twas,
when they were all with one accord in one place, assembled for the Worship of
God, that there was such a mavelous Effusion of the Holy Ghost upon the
Apostles, as we read of, A^t. 2. 1.

FURTHER, How often in the Assemblies of the Saints, are there the most
refreshing Comforts derived to pious Souls! Here the Lord meets his People, and
speaks Peace unto them. They see him in his power and glory in his Sanctuary.
They sometimes ^it under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit is sweet
unto their taste. They are abundantly satisfied with the fatness of his House,
and made to drink of the River of his pleasures. Here he regales them with the
bread of Life, and with wine of Consolation.

HERE are those Exercises, as well as Entertainments, that afford the truest,
the sweetest Pleasure and Satisfaction to the spiritually minded. Here they
sing the Songs of Sion, and celebrate the Praises of their God and Savior.
Here they pour out their Souls in humble Prayer, and are permitted familiarly
to unbosom themselves (in all their troubles) to their chief Friend and mighty
Helper, the blessed God. Here they preach or hear the Word of Christ, which is
better to them than their necessary food, sweeter also than honey, and rather
to be chosen than fine Gold. Here also they are admitted to faederal
Transactions with God, which are the most awful, and yet joyful acts of
Devotion. Here they sit down at the Table of the Lord; where they are brought
nigh by the blood of the Lamb, and behold the King in his beauty. Here they
feast upon the Memorials of Christ's dying Love, have their nearest and most
delightful approaches to God, and have their whole Souls sometimes drawn out in
ardent breathings and elevations heavenward. Their Hearts are inspired with
devout Fervours: and O how sublime, how sweet, the pleasures of true Devotion!
We read of the primitive Christians, They gladly received the word; and they
continued daily with one accord in the Temple, being steadfast in the Apostles
doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread and prayers; and did eat
their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God. How often are
the Saints enlarged and carried out in Communion with God; and made joyful in
his house of Prayer, by gracious answers of Peace, so that they cannot but say,
It Is good being here! Hither they come (it may be) with their various burdens,
their griefs, or fears, their doubts and temptations; as Hannah of old in the
bitterness of her Soul came to Shiloh, or as Asaph in his darkness and
perplexity went into the Sanctuary of God: And here (like them) they receive
help from above, obtain light and peace many times, so that they go away with
their countenances no more sad, and with their Mouths full of cheerful Praises.

IN a word, Here our Lord commands the Blessing, even Life for evermore. This
is the Blessing out of Sion, the Blessing out of the house of God. This is the
Benediction pronounced (from the Priests lips) upon the Congregation of the
Lord: And if there be any Sons of peace among them, it comes down and rests
upon these devout Souls. This Blessing is on the head of the Just. In the house
of God they have Him by his witnessing Spirit, saying Amen to ministerial
Benedictions given in his Name. Here he seals them to the Day of Redemption.
Here they often receive blessed Assurances of their title to Heaven, as well as
are trained up and advanced in their meetness for Heaven; being inured to the
Employments and anticipating the Enjoyments of it. So that we may say with
Jacob, Verily, this is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of
Heaven.

WE may well then conclude with the Psalmist, That it is good for us to draw
near to God: And truly, the nearer the better. A devout and diligent waiting
upon God in his house is the sure way, and ordinarily necessary, to our
obtaining those rich and great Blessings. Thus runs the Promise Draw nigh to
God, and he will draw nigh to you, Jam. 4. 8. So Prove. 8. 34. Blessed is the
man that hears me, (says Christ) watching daily at my Gates. Psalm. 92. 1^.
Th^se that be plan^ed in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of
our God. And the more frequently, and diligently we do attend on the public
Worship, the greater Benefit we shall (by a common blessing) receive. The
oftener we come to the house of God, the better prepared for it we are like to
be. Every opportunity duly employed, will serve to confirm our Souls, to
quicken and strengthen our Graces, and improve our Comforts.

IN a word, Waiting on God in his Ordinances is the way to obtain those
spiritual Blessings we need: And the more diligent and constant we are in the
Application of proper means, the more likely we are to secure the desired End.

NONE are got above the need of outward Helps and Means, whatever Proficiency
they have already made in Knowledge and Grace.

THE Benefit, the Success of Ordinances is absolutely in Christ's gift.

WE have ground to hope for this Blessing to prosper us in the regular use of
the Means at one time as well as another: And at all times, his Institutions as
means, have a like aptitude and tendency to the blessed End.

FROM these Reflections then it appears, that we may look for a more abundant
Blessing to be upon us, the more constant and diligent we are in our serious
attendence on the public Worship of God.

NOW, what a strong Incentive to our Duty is here, and what an irresistible
Argument is brought us? For every regular Motive affords a good Reason, and
infers our just Obligations to a Thing. When Interest and Duty meet together
and unite in their Demands, there is a double Bond upon us: And I would here
add; None can rationally imagine but that, what has such an Aspect upon our
present and future Well-being, and so great a Tenden to our real Happiness, as
a close Adherence to the public Worship of God thus apparently has, must needs
be our very important Duty, and bound upon us by the Laws of our own
Constitution. For Self-love is a fundamental Principle in human Nature. Every
thing has an innate and invincible Conatus or Endeavor and Propensity toward
it is own Perfection and Welfare: And every regular Exercise of this natural
Passion is undoubtedly our proper Duty.

BUT in the last place, I shall only add this one Hint further, to enforce all
that has been said, viz.

BY a frequent, steady and devout Attendence on the Worship of God in his
House, we shall imitate and hold a correspondence with the blessed Congregation
of Saints in the upper world, who are continually praising God and serving him
in his temple above day and night, and shall go no more ^^t. By worshipping God
aright here, we begin the Employment, that a blessed Eternity is to be spent
in. And by Temple-Worship, in a particular manner, we do resemble and have
Communion with the glorious Society above, where Millions perhaps at once join
their melodious Songs, and pay their exalted Devotions together. By this means
there is a Harmony between Heaven and Earth; yea, in some sort, a Heaven upon
Earth. Churches walking in the faith and order of the Gospel, are so many
little Emblems of Heaven: and every pious Soul, when joining in the public
Assemblies, may justly look upon himself as transported into the very suburbs
of the Heavenly Jerusalem; it being the nearest Resemblance and Approach to it
in this World. In the ardours of his Devotion, the pious Soul mounts up, as
upon Eagles Wings, and by faith joins with the innumerable Company of glorified
Spirits; mingling his humble praises with their triumphant adorations, and
having sometimes Joy unspeakable and full of glory. -- Although indeed, it is a
Joy that a stranger intermeddles not with, and a Glory which the carnally
minded know nothing of.

BUT thus I have somewhat largely (much more largely than I at first intended)
shown our manifold Obligations and Inducements to be very constant and diligent
in the practice of public Worship.

AND now, to apply in some general hints, what has been said:

HENCE much Compassion is due to such pious Souls, as love and long for the
House of God, but are denied the advantage of public Worship, either wholly or
frequently. Such are truly to be pitied and prayed for, and (as there is
opportunity) visited and comforted See a Sermon, by my Rev. Father and Collegu^
Mr. Wadsworth, on Psalm 122 1. Where you will find most of the Heads of
Application, that I only hint at, pathetically enlarged upon.
.

AGAIN, Hence it is a fault and folly in Christians (for the sake of worldly
Accommodations) to settle, and content themselves in such places, where the
public Worship of God cannot be enjoyed; where they forsake God, and forget his
holy Mountain.

AGAIN, Hence it is the important duty of every Place and People destitute of
God's public Worship, to seek after the Settlement of Gospel Ordinances among
them.

AGAIN, Christians should quicken and exhort and call upon one another (as
there is occasion) to go up to the House of the Lord. Heads of Families should
command their Household to keep the way of the Lord. Parents should bring their
Children betimes (as soon as can be convenient) with themselves to the House of
God, and should reach them an early Reverence and Esteem for his public Worship.

AGAIN, Great is the Folly and Impiety of those, who despise or lightly esteem
the public Worship, or any part of it; who count the public Attendence in God's
House a Burden, and the Sabbath a Weariness, and his Table or any of his
Ordinances contemptible. Some there are who altogether absent themselves from
public Worship: others that come to it but seldom; and Multitudes that attend
it very carelessly; or very defectively, omitting some of the main duties of it.
-- But how great is the folly and guilt of all such! O that they might be
brought to Conviction and Reformation; and no longer let any foolish Lusts, or
carnal Reasonings, or small Inconveniences, detain them from the House of God,
or hinder them from their Duty in any Instance!

BUT again, What has been said, suggests matter of Humiliation to us all; in
that we have no more affection and zeal toward the House of God; that we are
no more thankful for the Sanctuary-Opportunities we are so happily
distinguished withal above most in the World; that we bring forth no better
fruit; and that we are so disposed upon any trivial pretenses many times to
tarry away from the public Worship. O what a heavy Account, have multitudes of
us to give up to God, of our abused or neglected Privileges!

FURTHER MORE, What has been said may serve to encourage and comfort such as
are careful duly to attend upon and to maintain the public Worship of God.
Surely these shall receive the Blessing from the Lord, and Righteousness from
the God of their Salvation! They take the best method to secure their own
Happiness, as well as to promote the Glory of God; and herein approve
themselves Men of Wisdom and good Understanding. -- And O how happy is the
People, how happy the Places, that abound with Persons of such an excellent
Spirit, and among whom the House of God flourishes, and his Children like
Olive-plants stand round about his Table. Happy is the People, that is in such
a Case. Surely Salvation is nigh to such a People, and Glory dwells in their
Land. Peace will be within their Wails and Prosperity in their Palaces. This
they have ground to hope for, from that Promise, in Jer. 17. 24, etc.

Finally, LET what has been said, excite us all diligently and devoutly to
frequent the public Worship of God, and not depart from his holy Temple. Let us
all be firmly persuaded of our Duty, and Interest, and innumerable Obligations,
in this matter. Let none neglect the House of God out of Profaneness. Take heed
lest there be any profane Person among you, as Esau, despising
Gospel-privileges. Let none neglect the public Worship out of spiritual Pride,
as thinking themselves wiser than their Teachers, or better than their
Neighbors, and of too high Seize to stoop to the common forms of
Worship. Let none neglect public Worship from a mistaken notion as if they
could perform their Devotions as acceptably, and get as much Good, at Home, as
in the Church of God. This will appear a mischievous Error, if what has been
said before be impartially weighed. O let there not be occasion to complain, as
to any of us, Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a Fool to get wisdom,
seeing he has no heart to improve it. -- Let us consider how inexcusable an
unnecessary Absence at any time from the House of God is; how dangerous
frequent Absence, and what a sad symptom of a carnal mind it carries in it. And
let us not indulge at any time those frivolous and scandal^^s Pleas (as One See
the Monitory Letter to such as absent themselves from Public Worship.
well calls them) which are too commonly made use of by many, in excuse of
their profane Absence from public Worship. Those little pretenses of Weather,
Indispositions, want of Clothes, or Distance, and the like, will not justify us
at the bar of God. These Evasions only speak our Pride and Sloth and
Lukewarmness. They are Refuges of Lies, and will afford us no cloak for our
Sin. Let ^ot then a little inconveniencie, a seeming indecency, or any such
slight occasions, keep us at home, when called to the House of God. But
notwithstanding these sorry Objections, these tri^^ing difficulties, let us
take all Opportunities to wait on our God in his Sanctuary; bringing with us as
many of our Household as we conveniently may. Let us as often as we can attend
the Occasional Meetings for public Worship, as on Lecture-days, Fast-days, etc.
But especially let us be constant on the Lord's Day; and not content our selves
with one part of it, as the manner of some is, but make Conscience to attend
both Morning and Evening-Exercises, if possible, as becomes those to whom
sacred Time is precious, and God's Altars amiable. And let us attend all the
parts of divine Service: coming seasonably, that we may not miss the Prayer (or
any branch of it) which usually begins the public Worship; and ^arr^ing
patiently, that we may not miss the Benediction, which usually concludes it.
And let none content themselves with the standing Exercises only, without
attending those more solemn and extraordinary parts of public Worship, the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper. They that neglect these, are very
defective in their Worship and Christianity: and such are now solemnly called
on to repent of and reform their criminal Delinquencies. If we would be
accounted righteous before God, we must walk in all the Ordinances and
Commandments of the Lord, without any blameable Omissions. And (I might add)
without any blameable mixture of humane Inventions. Let us adhere steadfastly
then to that way of Worship, which we find to be most Scriptural; and stick
close to those Assemblies, in which we impartially judge is the most of true
Gospel Order and pure Religion. -- But then let us not satisfy our selves with
enjoying pure Institutions and right Methods of Worship and Discipline: there
must be in us a clean Heart, and a right Spirit; else bodily Exercise will
profit us little. We must be sincere and serious, as well as regular and
frequent and abounding in our Worship. Let us then be careful in our
Preparation at all times, and watchful in our Attendence, fervent in Spirit,
serving the Lord: and whatever we do, do all in the name of Christ. So shall we
secure the great and good Ends of our public Worship, and our Souls shall be
^at and flourishing in the Courts of the Lord.

BUT it is time now to come to the other Observations from the Text; which I
must give only a few Glances upon, having extended my Discourse already beyond
the usual Limits. Wherefore --

III. WE may observe, it is mentioned here in COMMENDATION of Anna, that she
departed not from the Temple: and it affords us this Lesson, That it is a
commendable thing, in Aged Persons especially, to be constant and diligent (as
they are able) in attending upon the public Worship of God; and it is what they
should study to be exemplary for.

IT is a Duty, incumbent on them, in common with others. However established
and improved in Grace they may be, yet they are not above the need of
Ordinances: and however advanced in Years, they must never think themselves
past them, as ^it only for young Beginners. It is expected of them that have
dwelt in the House of the Lord, that they still bring forth Fruit even in old
Age, (Psalm. 92. 14.) That they continue their Attendence on public Ordinances,
and grow in their Fruitfulness under them.

MOST commonly Aged Persons have singular Advantages and Accommodations to
attend God's House with a greater frequency than others; I mean particularly,
in respect of freedom from Business, and worldly Avocations. They have
ordinarily more Leisure, and fewer Impediments from the World. And having thus
special Opportunities, it is peculiarly incumbent on them, to be living a Life
of Devotion and Communion with God; and therefore to ^it loose from the Cares
and Business of the World, as well as to be weaned much from the Diversions and
Conversation of it. Indeed Elder Persons, as well as Younger, should have some
Calling or Employment, in which they ought to spend part of their Time, for the
serving of their Generation, and not devote themselves (as the manner of some
is) to Sloth and Ease; which often betrays them into many foolish and hurtful
Lusts. However, It is not expected of the Ancient, nor is it commonly needful,
that they attend their secular Affairs with that Industry and Application,
which is both lawful and commendable in younger People. Persons in Years may be
allowed more Relaxations, and may in some cases exchange a difficult or
inferior Calling, for a more easy and honorable Employment. Nevertheless, in
their serving of God and working out their own Salvation, it is incumbent on
them and becomes them to be eminently zealous and industrious. The ^igher their
Life is to a Period, the more should they abound in the work of the Lord, and
in the Communion of Saints. Heb. 10. 25. Not forsaking the assembling of our
selves together, as the manner of some is; but exhorting one another: and so
much the more as ye see the day approaching.

THE House of God is an Emblem of Heaven, whither aged Saints are hastening to
take up their everlasting Abode. How amiable then should God's Tabernacles be
to them; and his Worship how much their Delight, how constantly their Business*
(...) beautiful to them should be the Feet of those, that bring the Tidings of
Salvation and preach the good Word of God! How pleasant his Sabbaths; and how
glad ought they to be, when called upon to go up to the House of the Lord!
There they should be waiting for the Salvation of God! And not depart from his
Temple!

IT is expected of aged Saints, that their long Experience of the Sweetness and
many Benefits of God's public Worship do inflame their Zeal and Love to his
House.

AND then who should be Examples to others* if not the aged Saints? These
surely are in an eminent degree obliged to be exemplary. They should study to
be living Rules to their Juniors; bright Patterns of all Piety, and Virtue;
particularly of a love to and diligent attendence at the house of God. It is
required of the Aged, that they be in behavior as becomes Holiness, and that
they be Teachers of good things by pattern as well as precept. (Tit. 2. 3.) A
steady and zealous Attendence upon the public Worship and Ordinances of God's
house, is one instance of good Behavior becoming Holiness, in aged Saints
especially; and is one of those good things, which they are required to teach
the Younger, and lead them into by their own inviting practice. Example is
generally more attractive and engaging than bare Instruction. The Example of
Aged Persons carries a peculiar Authority and Impression with it; their Juniors
being led, by a principle of Reverence and Esteem, to the Imitation of them.
When therefore Aged People are careless and indifferent about the public
Worship, and omit any Duties or Ordinances of it. They set an ill Example, that
will probably prove infectious and ins^aring, especially to younger Ones, to
their Children, and Servants, and others. It is then a very aggravated
mis-behaviour, and double Guilt in aged Persons, to neglect the House of God,
or the Table of Christ. In them it seems to be an open condemning the Divine
Appointments, and giving a Judgment in favor of Irreligion, upon long
observation or experience: whence it often proves a stumbling and Temptation to
younger People. It is therefore a very unseemly, unnatural, and criminal thing
in them. Hence then aged Persons should beware they don't set an ill example in
this matter: but on the contrary, let their Light so shine before others, that
they may (by the winning Pattern) be induced in like manner to glorify God.
Elder Christians should go before others, and lead by their example in a
diligent, reverent and early attendence on the public Worship: Thus they will take
one happy method to propagate the spirit of Devotion, and a Love to God's
house, unto coming Generations.

Finally. IN a word, It behooves aged People, to be very frequent, and double
their diligence, in attending on public Worship, in order to redeem the many
Opportunities they have lost in the course of their Lives, to repair former
Defects, and make amends for past Neglects, if it might be. Omissions are a
grievous Article of Guilt, in the Saints Accounts; Past Unprofitableness will
lie heavy on a gracious heart, and be most sensibly resented by the most
faithful Servant; And his Inference is, Then let me redeem and improve the few
days to come, with so much the more Zeal! Let me lose ^o more of this short and
expiring Life; Let me fill up the poor remains of it with more and better
works. Mr. Colman's Sermon on the Duty and Honor of Aged Women. p. 32.
O Let this be the disposition and language of us all, and particularly of the
Aged Disciples among us. Remember Brethren, the Time is short; and walk
circumspectly, redeeming the Time. And knowing you must shortly put off this
your Tabernacle, consider what manner of Persons you ought to be in all holy
Conversation and Godliness. You that look for Heaven in a little while,
methinks, should be very spiritually minded, have your Conversation much in
Heaven, and give your selves to Prayer and Devotion. With good old Simeon and
Anna, you should be dwelling in the Temple of the Lord, and waiting for the
Consolation of Israel.

BUT this may suffice for the Third Observation. Another Note may be, --

IV. THERE have been Aged Persons, and devout Women in particular, very
exemplary for a Spirit of Devotion, and a most unwearied At^endence at the
House of God.

IN every Generation God has had some, that have faithfully adhered to him,
publicly owned and worshipped him. Some of all Ages, some of both Sexes; Old
and Young, Male and Female. My Text leads me only to take notice of the
Ancient, and the Female. Anna is the Instance in our Text, who was a Widow of
great Age, and departed not from the Temple. And in the Chapter preceding, we
have another famous instance in aged Elisabeth, of whom that excellent
Character is given, she was righteous before God, walking in all the Ordinances
and commandments of the Lord blameless. -- And how many may we suppose were
Aged Women (besides Mary the Mother of our Lord) among the Daughters of
Jerusalem, that followed Jesus to his Cross; concerning whom we have that
honorable Record, Act. 1. 14. They continued (with the Brethren) in prayer and
Supplication with one accord. -- Also among the honorable Women and devout
Greeks, of whom we read, (Act. 17.) that they received the word with all
readiness, and searched the Scriptures daily, -- We may suppose not a few were
Aged Ones. -- No doubt they were chiefly ancient Matrons, that composed the
Women's Meeting, to which Paul preached; as we read, Act. 16. 13. On the
Sabbath we went out of the City by a Riverside, where Prayer was wont to be
made, and we sat down and spoke to the Women, which resorted thither. We read
of Mark's pious Mother, at whose house many were gathered together praying,
Act. 12. 12. Furthermore, How celebrated is Timothy's Grandmother Lois, and
his Mother Eunice, for the unfeigned Faith, that dwelt in them, and which (no
doubt) was expressed in all Worship and Devotion. Again, What a notable Woman
was Priscilla (one in Years Probably) whom we find attending the Public
Assemblies, and in private instructing Apollos a public Teacher; whom the
Apostle calls his Helper in Christ, and unto whom says he) not only I give
Thanks, but also all the Churches of the Gentiles. Again, we read of the Elect
Lady (with her Sister) walking in the Truth, and beloved of all them that have
known the Truth. -- So we read of ^^^be, a Servant of the Church; whom the
Apostle commends to the Christians at Rome, that they should receive her in the
Lord, as becomes Saints.

BUT what shall I more say? For the time would fail me to tell of Eve (the
Mother of all Living) and Sarah, and Rebekah, and Deborah her Nurse; of Miriam,
who presided in an Assembly of pious Women of Israel, leading the Song in the
praises of God, as afterward did Deborah that judged Israel; so likewise
Huldah, the Prophetess, who is said to dwell in the College at Jerusalem; and
Naomi, and Hannah, and Bathsheba, and many other holy Women in old time, who
trusted in God, and continued in Supplications and Prayers; who brought forth
fruit in old Age, and were still flourishing in the Courts of the Lord.

IN all Ages of the Church there have been some such; Daughters that have done
virtuously; and aged Mothers in Israel, that have excelled in Virtue and been
shining Patterns of vital Piety and Devotion. In Church History we meet with
many Instances, worthy to be added unto those which the Scripture-Story
presents us withal.

AND no part of the World (I believe) is capable of furnishing out a better
History, than New England, the place of our happy Abode; which (through the
Grace of God) has hitherto been very highly favored and honored in this
Regard. From the beginning to this day, our pious praying Mothers (who always
make up a considerble part of our Congregations for Worship) have been in no
little degree the Strength and Beauty of our Churches.

BUT alas! How is the Glory departing from us, in this respect as well as
others! The first stock of godly Men and Women is long since extinguished.
Their Successors fell short of them abundantly, both in number and worth; as
the present Generation does even of them. Yet (blessed be God) there is still a
remnant among us, in whom the power and life of Religion is visible; some aged
Women as well as Men professing Godliness, whose grave Faces and good
Deportment in the House of God and at his Table, add no little beauty and
solemnity to our worshipping Assemblies. -- May they still live, our Glory and
Joy, our Strength and Safety! And the Lord God of our Fathers make them a
thousand times so many as they are; and bless them as He has promised, saying,
Even to old age I am He, and even to hoar hairs will I carry you and deliver
you! Isai. 46. 4.

BUT I hasten now to the last Observation from the Text; which is --

V. AMONG other Saints, the aged Handmaids of the Lord do particularly deserve
a Name in Israel; are to be highly esteemed and honored, and their Memory
reverenced after their Decease.

WE are required to honor all them that fear the Lord, but especially the aged
Saints. These are, while living, to have a peculiar Respect shown them.
Whatsoever, Infirmities natural or moral may attend them, yet they are worthy
of double Honor from us. Lev. 19. 32. Thou shall rise up before the hoary
Head, and honor the face of the old man, and fear thy God. So 1 Timothy 5. Rebuke
not (magisterially) an aged Person, but entreat him as a Father, and the elder
Women as Mothers. Honor Widows that are widows indeed, who trust in God, and
continue in prayers night and day, and are well reported of for good Works.
Such aged Women must be honored, valued, reverenced, and (if poor) well
maintained. Especially the Children of such should put this Honor upon them.
Hence the Apostle adds, If any Widow have Children or Nephews (Grandchildren
or other near Relations) let them learn first to show Piety at home, and to
requite their Parents, for this is good and acceptable before God. -- The fifth
Commandment requires Children to honor their Father and Mother, and that
however aged. It is great Impiety to neglect, or any way disregard our Parents
especially in their advanced Age. Hence that Caution, Prove. 23. 22. Hearken to
thy Father that begat thee, and d^sp^se not thy Mother when she is old. Our
gracious Mothers are of great price in the sight of God: And they deserve to be
of high Esteem with us. We should honor their hoary heads; study to make their
age easy to them as much as possible; wish for the lengthening out of their
pious and useful Lives; and not be weary of them nor contemn them (as the
manner of some is) although they should outlive their Serviceableness. Our
blessed Savior has set us a bright Example of filial Duty to our aged Parents,
who seeing his poor widow-Mother standing by his Cross (as he was dying) said
to his beloved Disciple, Behold thy Mother! And from that hour, that Disciple
took her to his own home, (Joh. 19. 27.) The very light of Nature, and the
custom of most civilized Nations teach us to honor Old Age, especially when
crowned with Virtue: And particularly to honor it in our own Parents. Hence
the Apostle passes that severe Sentence upon Children that do not show Piety at
home, That they have denied the Faith, and are worse than Infidels. Thus then
we are obliged to put honor upon aged Saints, and particularly our aged
Mothers while living. They are also to be honored after their Decease.

THUS, the Death of such is to be lamented. The Loss of any real Saint is to be
considered and bewailed: But especially the Loss of elder Christians. Yea, the
Death of aged Women that fear the Lord (whatever slighty thoughts some may have
of the Loss) is to be resented: And the Death of such aged Women as have done
good in Israel and been eminently useful in their places, does challenge a
great Lamentation: Such as that was over Deborah (Rebekah's Nurse) whom Jacob
buried under an Oak, and called the Name of it Allon-Backuth that is, The Oak
of Weeping, in memorial of that aged godly Woman, and in allusion to the great
Mourning over her there. Genesis 35. 8. So we read concerning. Do^cas, when she
died, The Saints and Widows stood about her weeping for their Loss, and
extolling her piety and good Works. Acts. 9. 39. -- When such godly Women die,
they are not to be slid into their Graves with Silence and Contempt. Though
full of days, and gathered as a Shock of Corn in it is season, Yet their Death
is to be lamented. This is part of that Crown of Glory, which God has decreed
to the hoary Head found in the way of Righteousness. -- O that this Church then
may suitably resent and improve the repeated Strokes of this nature, which we
are from time to time called to mourn over: Let us feel our Losses, and lament
them with a godly Sorrow.

THEY are also to be had in Remembrance, and their Memory to be blessed. They
are to be remembered with Love and Honor; and being dead, yet with Abel to be
still spoken of with Praise. This is part of the Duty required in the fifth
Commandment. This is what the Evangelist sets us an Example of. Godly Anna (of
whom we have such an honorable Mention here) doubtless was deceased long before
the Gospel of Luke was written; though her Death be not expressly taken notice of.
The deceased Children of God are not to be soon forgotten. Especially eminent
Saints whether Men or Women, their Names should live with us, after they are
dead; and their Memories be dear and precious to us. As to their Infirmities
and Blemishes, these indeed ought to be buried in oblivion and silence: But
their Virtues and Excellencies are to be remembered and spoken of with honor.
The Dead may be praised (as they deserve it) with good Authority, the inspired
Historian having set us a pattern; as well as the royal Prophet (long before)
in his funeral Encomium on his Brother Jonathan. And how full of Elegy is the
Eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews; wherein we have the Apostle celebrating the
Names of many ancient Worthies, and summarily rehearsing their Story: Among
whom we find several Women (mentioned or referred to) as aged Sarah; the Widow
of Sareptha; and the Shunammite, who was (probably an aged as well as) a great
Person.

AND did not our Savior decree that honor to a Woman (Mark 14. 9.) Verily I
say unto you, Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached throughout the whole
world, this also that she has done, shall be spoken of for a memorial of her!
He recommends this Woman's Piety to the Applause of his People in all
succeeding ages; and by his direction, the memory of it is perpetuated in the
sacred Records, which of all the Trumpets of Fame, will sound the longest as
well as loudest. Though the honor of Christ is principally designed in the
Gospel, yet the honor of his Saints and Servants is not altogether overlooked.
The memory of this Woman was to be embalmed; not by dedicating a Church to her,
(as One Mr. Henry.
remarks,) or keeping an annual Feast in honor of her, or preserving a piece
of her broken Box for a sacred Relic: but by reserving a Record of her Piety,
in the Archives of the Church, and making mention of it in the preaching of the
Gospel: whereby Honor redounds to Christ himself, who in this world, as well as
in that to come, will be glorified in his Saints, and admired in them that
believe.

Finally, AS their Memory is to be preserved and reverenced, so their exemplary
Piety is to be imitated by Survivers. The Dying of old Christians should be the
Quickening of young Ones. As the old Stock of Professors goes off, there should
be a fresh Supply out of the succeeding Generation, that the Cause of God may
not ^ink, and the work of Christ fail, for want of Hands to support and
prosecute it.

LET it then be a brief Address to the rising and standing Generations among
us, in the Words of the Apostle, (Heb. 6. 12.) Be ye followers of them, who
through faith and patience do inherit the promises. Let us endeavor by a
diligent Imitation of them (as well as we can) to fill up the Vacancies that
are made by the removal of one and another of the passing Generation. Let the
Daughters of Zion particularly be exhorted, to study a Conformity to the
excellent Patterns, which you have seen in the holy Lives of some of the devout
Mothers in Israel. Let our young Women preserve a great Esteem for the aged
Handmaids of the Lord; improve them while they live; lament them when they die;
and as you rise up in their room, labor to make good their ground, stand in
the gaps, and repair the breaches; that there may be as little miss of them as
possible. Seek God betimes. Seek first the Kingdom of God. Flee youthful Lusts.
Follow Holiness, and adorn your selves with good Works, as did the holy Women
in the old time. Wherein they followed Christ do you follow them. Whatsoever
you have seen virtuous, pious, and praiseworthy in any gone before you,
diligently imitate the same. Cry to God for a double portion of that good
Spirit which was in them, and give him no rest, till it be fallen upon you.
With God is the residue of the Spirit. Ask and ye shall receive.

TO conclude, Let all the Servants of Christ among us send up their fervent
Cries to the Throne of Grace, in behalf of the rising Generation, that God
would pour out his Spirit from on high upon them, that they may be a godly
Seed, a Generation of his praise. Beg of God, that He would graciously close up
the Breaches made in our Walls by the removal of the Prudent and the Ancient,
the Honorable and the Devout, of both Sexes: That He would raise up of our Sons
and our Daughters to be Nazarites, separated and sanctified ones, in order to
repair the Losses, and bind up the Wounds we are at present bleeding under:
That our Sons may be as Plants grown up in their Youth, and our Daughters as
Corner-Pillars, polished and prepared for the Temple of God. That the Lord
would appear in his Glory, and build up our Sion; strengthen the bars of her
Gates, and bless her Children within her.

THUS shall the Generation going off, lay down their hoary Heads in the Grave,
with Comfort, seeing a hopeful Progeny coming on, to take and fill their places.

THUS shall the Throne of Christ endure among us, and our Candlestick not be
removed.

THE Beauty of the Lord our God will be upon us, and Glory dwell in our Land.
Wisdom and Knowledge will be the Stability of our Times, and the Fear of the
Lord our Treasure. Happy is that People, that is in such a case: Happy is that
People whose God is the Lord!

PRAISE the Lord, O Jerusalem: Praise thy God, O (...)!

PRAISE the Lord, all ye People; both Youngmen and M^^^^ens, Oldmen and
Children: Let them ^^aise the Name of the Lord; for his Name ^^one is
excellent. AMEN, AMEN.

FINIS.

