AN EPISTLE IN TRUE LOVE, Containing A Farewell Exhortation To Friends Families.
Which I desire also may be read in their Monthly and Quarterly-Meetings,
throughout this Nation of ENGLAND.
Dear Friends,
WHO have retained your Integrity, Love, and Life in the precious Truth, and
are making it your chiefest Interest to exalt the same in the Earth: To all
such is my endeared Love, (...) blessed Fellowship of Life and Peace, (...)
Almighty God on your Behalf, (...) may stand fast in that Liberty wherewith
Christ has set you free; taking good heed that you be not again entangled with
the surfeiting Cares of this uncertain World, lest your Understandings be
darkened, and you thereby be incapable of answering the End for which the Lord
raised you up: For although you, who I am at this time drawn forth in
Exhortation to, may not be concerned in a Doctrinal Testimony; yet, my dear
Friends, you who have known an Overcoming by the Blood of the Lamb, and His
Power, to you it is given, not only to Believe, but to be as Pillars in GOD'S
HOUSE. And I must say, That there is a great Work for you to do in this Day of
outward Ease; and, were I not pressed in Spirit, in a Sight and Sense I have
had of the State of the Churches, I should at this time have been silent: But
now for the Lord's sake, and the Churches Reformation, I entreat the Faithful,
to come up to the help of the Lord, against the Mighty.

IF any enquire, what I have seen in the Light of the Lord, so mightily to
obstruct the Prosperity of Truth in the Faith, I do with Sorrow answer, It is
the SPIRIT OF THE WORLD, PRIDE, and COVETOUSNESS, (...) EASE, with
SELF-INTEREST.

(...) that there may be a Regulation, (...) the Lord's Love and Mercy is (...)
the real Cause of this Epistle.

AND the way to Promote, and, I hope, in the Lord's Time, to Effect it to God's
Honor, and the Benefit and Enlargement of the Churches, is,

First, For the Faithful (who are as Pillars) Fathers, and Mothers in the
Church, carefully to observe the Operation of God's Holy Spirit, and thereby
you will be enabled to set up an Holy Discipline, in your own Families; being
often Inward, attending upon the Wonderful Counselor. So shall you be
enlarged, in due time, to gain upon each Church which you belong unto: For,
dear Friends, if ever there was need for the Seers to be inward with the Lord,
in deep Mourning, the Husbands apart, and their faithful Wives apart, it looks
to me to be in our Day. For, Oh! How is the Care and Counsel of the Lord, which
was conveyed to us through our faithful Elders, with respect to Gospel Order,
slighted; and thereby a Libertine Spirit got up, both in Habit and
Conversation: And it is to be feared, that those Worldly Spirited Ones rather
serve themselves, than the True and Living GOD.

AND that such may be provoked to return to the LORD with unfeigned Repentance,
I am at this time concerned, to recommend the excellent Method which Joshua,
that brave Captain under the great King of Kings, took, when he had led the
Children of rael into the Promised Land, and divided unthem their Lots, after
he had powerfully and wisely gone in and out before them, until, by the
Strength of the Lord, they had fought their Battles, and subdued their Enemies,
taking Cities from them, till they were grown a Rich and numerous People, and
possessed of Vineyards, and Olive-yards ready planted to their Hands: Then this
blessed Servant of the Lord, who, no doubt, had a clear Sight of the Danger
they were in, of forgetting the Lord, the true and living God, by whose
powerful Arm their Fathers were brought out of the House of Bondage, according
to his Promise made to his faithful Servant Abraham. I say, This Wise Leader in
Israel commemorates the Mercies, Victories, and wonderful Deliverances of God
to them, without the least Ostentation, or desire of Honor, Name, or Fame in
the World, or amongst (...) in a lively powerful Exhortation, expresses,
himself in these Words:

NOW therefore Fear the Lord, and serve him in Sincerity and Truth, and put
away the Gods which your Father, served on the other side the Flood, and in
Egypt, and serve ye THE LORD. And if it seem Evil unto you to serve the Lord,
choose you this Day whom you will serve, whether the Gods which your Fathers
served, that were on the other side of the Flood; or the Gods of the Amorites,
in whose Land ye dwell: But as for ME, and MY HOUSE, We will serve the Lord,
Josh. 24. ver. 14, 15. -- But, Ver. 21, 22. If ye forsake the Lord, and serve
strange Gods, then will he turn, and, do you hurt, and consume you, after that
he has done you good. And the People said unto Joshua, Nay, but WE will serve
the Lord.

Dear Friends, Observe what Influence this lively Zeal, and Godly Resolution
had upon the People; so that there appeared a Willingness in them to put away
those things which grieved the Lord, and hindered them from serving of him fully
and freely, saying, God forbid that WE should forsake the Lord, to serve other
Gods.

AND now, my Dear Friends, whom God has blessed with a large (...) of Grace,
by the which you have been enabled to make a good Confession to his Name and
Truth, in Holiness of Life in this Land, where my Lot is now fallen, to Travel
up and down in the Love of God for no other End than that an Increase of Love
and Faithfulness may be known in the Gathered Churches of Christ. In order
thereunto, I beseech you look into the true State of the Churches, and see if
you, with me, cannot behold a great Declension from the Primitive Plainness,
Simplicity, and Sincerity which Truth led our faithful Elders into. Oh! the
Testimonies they have left us, of the Care they had to order their Conversation
in Words, Habit, and Deportment, so as to answer the Witness of God in all Men
with whom they had to do.

AND now with Sorrow I lay before you, That in my late Travels, I saw too many
taking up a Fleshly Ease, by letting an Earthly Carnal Mind prevail; even to
the neglecting the Assembling themselves together, to Wait upon the Lord, and
Worship him in Spirit and Truth.

THIS I know is the Cause of Grief to you faithful Elders; but that you may be
blessed with Peace here, and leave a sweet Memorial to after Ages. let it be
your Care, in each Church, to stir up the Negligent to a lively Commemoration
of the Mercies of God; and with due Care to use your Christian Authority, in
the Management and Settlement of your own Families, in that decent Order, we,
through the Mercy and Wisdom of God, have been Established in. And for your
Encouragement therein, the Lord will be unto you a (...) and a shield, and
Grace, and Glory, and no good Thing will be withold from such, who, in the Love
of God, diligently Labor, Hope, and patiently Wait for to see Sion's
Righteousness go forth as Brightness, and her Salvation as a Lamp that burns;
that the Gentiles may see her Light, and all Kings her Glory.

OH! I have to say, such sound Pillars, keeping faithful to the End, shall be
crowned with Glory, Honor, Immortality, and Eternal Happiness for ever and
ever.

AND if I may yield you a little Hand of Help, it is farther in my Heart to
leave this Farewell Exhortation, to all Fathers and Mothers, Masters and
Mistresses, especially of the Younger Sort; those who have in any Measure
tasted of the good Word of Life, and of the Powers of the World to come: That
all such be very careful, to walk worthy of the Vocation whereunto they have
been called, in Honesty, Sobriety, and true Humility, having your Minds girded
with the Girdle of Truth: So shall your Conversation answer the Witness of God
in the Hearts of your Children and Servants, and also to such who do not yet
profess with us, with whom you may be concerned. For, Dear Friends, your
Candles have not been lighted by the Lord, to be put out again, or you to hide
the Light thereof from your Families or Neighborhood, under a Bed, or under a
Bushel. Therefore I desire you may arise, and trim your Lamps, and be watchful
that your Lights may be kept shining, and Lamps burning: For it is not enough
carelessly to retain a Knowledge of what the Lord has done in times past; but
that there be a daily waiting upon, and supplicating the Lord, for the renewing
of his Love and Life, that thereby you may be kept alive to him, and may be a
sweet Savor of Life unto Life in your Families and Neighborhood: So will the
Lord be glorified; and your Souls, that are thus renewed, keeping under the
Power of the holy Cross of Christ, in the whole Management of your
Conversation. You, I say, shall then enjoy a serene Quiet, when the Lord is
pleading with Backsliders, and the Wicked among the Children of Men.

AND Friends, this know, That the Day of the Lord's sifting the Churches
hastens on apace: And my fervent Labor is, That all those who make mention of
the Name of the Lord in this holy Way, may so demean themselves in true
Self-denial, as that, when proved by Divine Wisdom, they may be found of that
sound Wheat, that not one Grain of it may be lost.

AND, in order that it may be so, I entreat all, whom the Lord has blessed
with Families, that they carefully observe the Appearance of the Grace of God,
in every of its Operations and Drawings. And whatsoever the Lord thereby
concerns any one to do, let it be done with the utmost Diligence. So will
Parents be good Examples to their Children, Masters to their Servants: For the
Heads of Families are, or ought to be, the Lord's Ministers under him, ruling
their Families (...) the Power of Love, by which they have known a being turned
from Darkness, to the true Light, Christ Jesus: For surely, it is by this Power
of Love, that we are enabled to order our Families rightly, both in Life and
Manners. Therefore I would desire, That all may see to the discharging of their
Duty aright, as in the Sight of an all-seeing God.

AND for the Encouragement of the Lord's People in this Practice, in the Power
and Wisdom of God, I see clearly, and am constrained to leave it behind me,
That the Lord requires a Godly Care in Families to be observed amongst his
People; and I have seen it to be the only Expedient for a right Reformation,
and Regulation in the Churches: For let me tell the Backslider, with the
Covetous Earthly Minded, and those who are Lovers of Pleasure more than God, it
is high time for such to Repent, and do their first Works, taking blame to
themselves for their Unfaithfulness, and the Evil Example they have been unto
their Families; either in trampling upon the Testimonies of our Faithful
Suffering Elders, by Paying of TITHE connivingly or willingly; or any other
Evil that the Testimony of Truth is against: and for the future, redeem the
Time, by doubling their Diligence, lest they should have Cause to Repent when
it is too late, and then Horror will be their Portion in a Dying Hour.

AND this farther I have to leave to the Unfaithful, for the clearing of my
Conscience in the Sight of God; That if his Love will not prevail, neither
Immediately, nor Instrumentally; the Lord will be Clear when he Judges, as he
was in the Destruction of the Old World, together with the Cities of Sodom and
Gomorrah; it having been the way of the Lord, to let those who are afar off,
hear what he has done, in order that they may be Warned, that HEARING and
FEARING, they may be saved whilst Mercy is offered.

AND that this may be the Choice of all, is the sincere Desire of One, who is
made willing to spend and be spent for the Peace and Prosperity of the Church;
and that all, who profess to be Members thereof, may be so Taught of the Lord,
that they may come to be Established in Righteousness; and, by holding out to
the End, may receive an Immortal Crown of Glory, which will never fade away.

THUS as I have in great Tenderness, and for the Ease of my Spirit, left a
little Family exhortation to my Friends and Brethren in this Lord: It now
remains with me, to leave a Token of Love to their tender Children in the
City of London, and elsewhere.

OH! Children of Believing Parents, in whom is Innocence, and upon whom the
Spots of this World have not yet prevailed: My love in Christ is great to you;
believing assuredly, that the Call of the Lord is unto you, that you may be of
his Heritage and Sanctuary, in order to place his Name in the midst of you: For
YOU has he chosen, above all the Families of the Earth to show forth his
Praise, and declare his Wonderful Works to the Children of Men: Therefore my
Desire is, that none may frustrate the Lord in his gracious Intention; but that
his glorious Work may be carried on, both in particular, and in the general, to
his Praise and the Churches Comfort. That it may be so, I desire you to take
the following Exhortation.

First, AS you grow up to Years of Understanding, so as to know Good from Evil
be sure you choose the Good, and refuse the Evil: And if at any time you should
transgress your Parents, Masters or Mistresses Commands before you cover it not
with a QUIBBLE, or LIE; For although you ought not by any Means to disobey your
Parents, yet if any, so want of due Care, at any time, should; I may be the
Fault committed, may be no great Sin in the Sight of God; but if covered with a
WILFUL LIE, a grievous Sin is committed for which you must know Sorrow, if
Favor with (...) come to witness.

THEREFORE, Dear Hearts, Fear God a doing and speaking Truth in all things; for
(...) once way be given to Lying, and an Habit of it got into, such lose the
Favor of God, and forfeit their Credit with good Men.

THE next Evil I have to warn the Youth of, is, To beware of an high proud
Mind, from whence Desires after the Glory of this World do proceed, which bring
in a Train of unnecessary Cares and Troubles: So that it may easily be seen,
the proud Man and Woman never want Misery, because they seldom have a settled
quiet Content; and the chief Reason is, They go far from God, the alone Author
of true Content: For, as says the Scripture, the Lord beholds the proud afar
off: And that Man or Woman, who grows big with Conceit of themselves, can
scarcely satisfy their Eyes with seeing, nor their Appetites with craving.
Hence it follows, What shall I Eat? What shall I drink? Wherewithal shall I
deck and adorn my self? Nay, says the incessant Seeker after the Fashions, of
this World, Which is the newest Fashion, Cut or Dress? All this is but Vanity
and Vexation of Spirit. I take these to be like those the Prophet spoke of,
when he speaks complaining of Israel, saying, Israel is an empty Vine, he
brings forth Fruit unto himself. Oh you Children of Believers! that you may
not be of this Number, neither seek (...) come up in Imitation of those, who
follow the foolish Fashions of this World, lest you grieve God and your tender
Parents, whose Love and Zeal for the Truth, cannot admit of any such sinful
Liberty: Therefore I beseech you, let your Conversation be without coveting
those things: And do not seek to prove the Patience of your tender Parents, by
your Mumuring and Reasoning, by bringing Examples on this wise, Such Friends
Children have their Clothes made after this Fashion or the other: Urging your
Parents by your Reasoning, for that which has no Reason in it; to wit, PRIDE,
giving them no Rest until you have obtained your Ends. Oh! Let such fear in
time, for those things border near upon wilful Disobedience; and it is to be
feared, the next Step those will take, will be into the wide World of
Wickedness.

THEREFORE I entreat Young People, who have in any Measure been guilty of the
abovementioned Evils, be humbled before the Lord, strip your selves of all
your vain Attire, Repent that ever you gave Way to the Reins of your vain
Minds, to be drawn out after the Glory of this World.

THERE is also another dangerous Snare, which the Enemy seeks to catch Young
People in, that is, The Fellowship and Friendship of those, who do not profess
with us; by which some of our Youth, in giving way to frequent Walking and
Conversation with them, have been captivated into unequal Marriages by Priests,
who, with Sorrow it may be spoken, mind their Gain more than the Happiness of
the Youth they thus couple together: For Ministers for God ought to give every
Parent their Right, in disposing of their Children: The want of which has
brought many a hoary Head with Sorrow to the Grave; as also occasioned many a
distracted languishing Family in the Protestant Nations. And I must say to all
such who have been privy to such hidden theivish Matches, I do not see how they
can Answer it to Almighty God, or to such wronged Parents.

NOW, dear Friends, Be warned, take the Apostle's Advice, Be not unequally
yoaked, a Believer with an Unbeliever, 2 Cor. 6. 14, Such Doings, though they
may be sweet in the Taste, yet we have seen it bitter in the going down, viz.
That those, who, for want of Watchfulness, have been prevailed upon to an
unequal Yoaking, afterward coming to a Sight of their Youthful Folly, and
having Children, how bitter has it been to such Parents, when they could not
have them brought up in that Faith where they believe Salvation is most surely
to be obtained: The strife that has thereupon followed, has many times caused
great Distraction between Husband and Wife, betwixt whom nothing should be but
LOVE.

AND that all Young People may be preserved, out of this, and all other Evils,
shun had Company as infectious both to Soul and Body, and let your spare Hours
be spent in Religious Company, or Retirement, reading or meditating on Heavenly
Subjects; of which you are blessed with Variety. So shall you come up in fevour
with God, and all Religious People: Which that you may, is the Sincere Desire
of my Soul.

AND now a few Words to those Young Men and Women, who like brave noble Joseph,
from your Childhood have feared God, and obeyed your Parents, resisting
Temptations, both inwardly, and outwardly: To you is God's Love large, upon
your Heads is the Blessing of Joseph. Oh! you blossoming Boughs, whose Ripe
Fruits will be Holiness unto the Lord; you who have been afflicted to see your
Brethren and Sisters miss their Way in the aforementioned Evils, praying for
their Return; and when any of them do return, meet them with Joy. It is you
whose Branches shall spread over the Wall of all Opposition, and, in the Power
of the Lord, shall be ennabled to tread upon Scorpions, and overcome evil
Spirits; for the Lord is calling to the Sons and Daughters of Sion, to arise
and work; yea, thresh the World of Wickedness, and he will make their Horns
Iron, and their Hoofs as Brass, they shall go forth in his Name, as silver
Trumpets to the Nations* which yet lies in Idolatrous Darkness; and their
Wisdom shall confound the Wisdom of the carnally wise Men of this World, and
bring to naught the Understanding of the Prudent; for it is the Lord's Will,
the Earth should be filled with his Living Knowledge: Therefore you faithful
Sons and Daughters, keep in Humility, out of all SelfConceit, and the Lord will
be with you, as he was with your Faithful Elders; and you shall be a Royal
Diadem in the Hand of our God: To whose Powerful Production I leave you,
sincerely supplicating the Lord, that the Prodigal may be brought Home, and the
Faithful may be preserved to the End of Time, that in the End we may all Rest
in those glorious Mansions, where the Wicked cannot trouble; but our weary
Souls shall be at Rest, praising the Lord God and the Lamb, World without End,
Amen.

So, in an Earnest of this future Bliss, I rest at this Time, in my small
Measure, your faithful Friend, and well-wishing Sister,ELIZABETH JACOB.
Written in the City of Worcester, the 5th of the 9th Month, 1712.
BOSTON: Reprinted by J.FRANKLIN (...)


