Useful Remarks. AN ESSAY UPON REMARKABLES IN THE Way of wicked Men. A SERMON
on the Tragical END, unto which the WAY of Twenty-six Pirates (...) them; At
New Port on Rhode Island, July 19. 1723. WITH An Account of their Speeches,
(...) and Actions, before their (...)

Deuteronomy. xiii. 10. All Israel hear and fear, and shall do no more any such
wickedness. NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. GREEN. 1723.

REMARKS ON THE Way and End of the Wicked. After the Execution of the Pirates.
29 d. V. m. 1723
JOB XXII. 15. Have thou marked the Old Way, which Wicked Men have trodden?
IT seems, there has in all Ages been such a Way. And the Way is in Ours as
much trodden as ever. Yea, we have newly seen a formidable Exhibition of the
Way, and of the End which the Way will bring unto. But there are things to be
Marked in the Way. There are many Remarkables in the Way. It may be a thing of
Good Consequence, yea, it is a thing of the Last Importance, for us to take
notice of them. We will this day Mark the Way that Wicked Men have trodden. And
indeed; this will be one proof that we do not take the Way. To Mark the way
which Wicked Men do take, is a Step which Wicked Men do not use to take. It Is a
Step that would have a Tendency to bring them and keep them out of that way
This made Eliphaz afraid that Job had failed in this point. He Feared, That Job
had been tainted with this Impiety, To Forget that the Most High God, whose
Throne is in the Heavens did mark the Ways of Men, or take any cognizance of
what they did in the world. This produced a Fear in him, That Job did not Mark
the Ways of Wicked Men. For this Forgetfulness is one art and Cause of their
wicked Ways

But the DOCTRINE which I have now before me is this.

If we Mark the Ways of (...) men, which is indeed, an old Way, we shall find
in it some things that are truly Remarkable.

It seems orderly and requisite for u^, in the first place to Satisfy a more
General Enquiry; The Subject which our Discouse is anon more Particularly to
insist upon, is first in a more General way to be Enquired after. What it the
way of Wicked Men? I answer, you may be sure It Is a way of Wickedness; It Is a
Wicked Way. It Is the Way that is not good. We read, Psalm 1^9. 24. See if there
be any wicked Way in me. We read, Prove 8. 13. I hate the Evil way. We read,
Psalm. 1. 6. The way of the ungodly shall perish. This is the Way trodden by
wicked Men. But you have not yet a Sufficient Answer. The Question, what is the
Way which Wicked Men have trodden? Will not be answered without some Account of
the more Distinguishing Steps, which they take in their Way. Kn^w then. The Way
of Wicked Men, lies both in Wicked Opinions and in Wicked Practices. There are
those Opinions, which are called, 2 Pet. 3. 17. The Error of the Wicked. False
Opinions; Those Wrong Thoughts, which will hinder men from the Acknowledgments
of God, which He has made necessary for us. There are those Practices, which
are called, 2 Pet 2. 2 Pernicious Ways. Vile Practices. The Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, which are inconsistent with a Godly, and Sober, and Righteous
Life in the World. Yet more particularly. The Way of Wicked Men, is to Forget
God, and the End for which God creates them and preserves them; the Errand
which God sends them to appear among Mankind upon. Their Way is to feel no Want
of, to see no worth in an admirable Savior; to feel no Distress about an
Interest in Him; to be careless whether they be ever Saved from their Sins, or
no. Their Way is, to Propound an Happiness in the Enjoyment of this World, and
be very Earnest, Vehement, Violent in Seeking after worldly possessions:
Regardless of any Higher Portion. Their Way is, t^ make Light of Sin; to
Entertain Temptations to Sin with Easy Compliances; and to have but a short and
small Regrett for it, when they have Sinned. I will give you a true Survey and
Report of the Road; The Way which Wicked Men have trodden, is thus described;
Ephesians. 2 2. 3. Ye walked according to the course of this World, according to the
prince of the power of the Air, in the L^sts of the Flesh, fulfilling the
Desires of the Flesh and of the Mind. Finally, There is no need of my
Traveling a great way from my Text, that I may point out unto you, the Way
that Wicked Men have trodden. Lo^k back no more than Two Verses, and you will
see; Their Way is this: Thou say^^t, How does God know! It Is to be insensible,
that they have the Eye of God upon them in their Way. It Is to be unmindful, that
God is acquainted with all their Ways; knows every Word uttered by their
Tongues; knows their very Thoughts afar off It Is to act, as not Expecting that
God will ever call them to any Account of what they have done in their Lives.
This is their Way And, My Friend, If this be thy Way, then thou art in the Way
that Wicked Men have trodden. Woe to thee, Thou art one of them. Of every one
who makes this his Way, I must faithfully tell you, in such Terms as those; Job
34 8 He goes in company with the workers of Iniquity, he walks with wicked
men.

We are now ready to proceed upon our more Special Enquiries. And these will be
no more than Two.

I. What is there to be Marked in the Way that Wicked Men have trodden; or,
what shall we find Remarkable in the Way of wicked Men! Many Remarks are to be
made upon it. I will Single out a few, that will be as Useful, as they are
Obvious.

First. We may Mark this in the Way that Wicked Men have trodden; It Is an old
Way. It is a just observation, which a famous and an accute Scotch Expositor
has upon my Text; That Sin is a very Old Trade in the World. We read, Joh. 8.
44 It was from the Beginning. Sin was committed in the very Beginning of the
World. The World had not been begun long before the Way of Sin was taken up.
It Is true, the Way of Sin is not so old, as the Way of Truth Our Excellent Caryl
has well Expressed it; Though man quickly went out of the Way, surely, his First
step was not out of the Way. He went Right before he went Wrong; he stood
before he fell. But then, the way of Sin is very old. In the Sinful ways of
men, to seek after a Felicity in things under the Sun, here it is that it has
been said, There is no New Thing under the Sun. It Is no New Thing for men to Sin
against God. And though men are Inventers of Evil Things, yet there is rarely any
sort of Sin committed in our days, but what was committed in the Days of old.
Indeed, we read, Jer. 6. 16 Ask for the old paths, where is the Good way, and
walk therein. There is a Good old Way. And it is the oldest Way. The Greatest
Antiquity is to be pleaded for that Way. But then, there is an ^ll way, that is
also an old Way. The Way o^ Sin, is a very beaten Way It was trodden, as here
we find in the Old World, and long before the Flood. It was that Way, that the
Flood rushed in upon the world. One gives this Paraphrase on my Text. Have thou
marked the Way of the old World? An Old Way; Very near, very near, as old as
the World. The very first man, that was born into the World, proved a wicked
man. Of Wicked men in our Days, We read, Jud. 11. They have gone in the way of
Cain. The Nature of Man was betimes depraved with corruption. Ah, Mankind, How
Early did thou rise, and corrupt all thy Doings? Men have naturally taken the
way of Sin, ever since our First Fall from God. And, how Quickly did we fall!
Man in Honor, How few Nights did thou continue so? The Way of Sin is more
than five Thousand and seven Hundred Years old. It is no Apology ^or an Evil
thing; It Is no more than what others have done before me. The via trita, is not
always via tuta. It may be an old Way, and yet not a safe Way. It may be an old
Way, and yet be the Way that Wicked men have trodden. Sinners, what
undesireable Company, will you find there, if by Wandering from the way of
understanding, you go down to the Congregation of the Dead. You are going in
the Old Way, and the Sinners who trod that way in old Time, will be your
Companions, in the End of the way. You will have your Souls gathered with Cain,
and the Monsters of the old World; with the Sodomites, and with Achithophel,
and with Judas, and with the Wretches that a Great while ago, walked in that
way of Sin that you have chosen. Oh! poor Comfort, in having such
Fellow Sufferers!

Secondly. We may Mark this, in the Way that wicked men have trodden; It Is an
Hard Way; a way full of Trouble. We read, Prove. 13 15. The way of Transgressors
is hard. Though it be a Broad Way, yet it is a Rough One. A Very Troublesome way.
The way lies all through the Valley of Achor What we render, A way of wickedness,
is in the Hebrew Original, A way of Grief It Is a Grievous Way. A Wicked man, His
way is always Grievous. Of them that walk in this way, We read. Romans 3. 17. The
way of peace they have not known. In the way of Piety, there is a Glorious
Peace to be Enjoyed. Great peace have they that Love that Way; and if they were
always in it, there would be nothing to offend them: nothing but what they
might be (...) from it. There is a Peace belonging to them, who walk according
to the Rule that lays out the way of God, and of Holiness (...) of Mind, in a
Faith of the (...) and Faithfulness, and in an Assurance of the Di^ine Favor;
A Calm within, whatever St^rm there may be abroad. But, alas, There (...)
Peace, says my God unto the wicked. You may Mark this, Wicked men find their
L^sts perpetually Enslaving of them; their (...) throwing them into perpetual
Dis^rders; their (...) by the Justice of God, made their (...) and so there are
many Sorrow^ to the wicked. And you may Mark this, Wicked men carry about also
a Guilty Conscience with them* a Conscience that keeps them in a continu^^
Une^siness; a Conscience continually Scourging of them, and roaring in their
Ears, The Great God will one day dreadfully Punish thee for these Miscarriages.
Oh! It Is a Sad thing to walk in the way that wicked men have trodden. Mark it,
Sirs; It Is a Walk in the Valley of the shadow of Death!

Thirdly. We may Mark this in the way that wicked men have trodden, They are at
more Pains in their way to Damn themselves, than G^dly men are, in a better way
to Save themselves. Wicked men take a great deal of Pains in their way; they
find it a Laboriotes Way. The very term for wickedness, in the Greek Language
of the New Testament, implies, (...) in it. A Labor to hasten on a (...) With
less Labor has many a (...), laid h^ld on Eternal Life. Of a wicked (...) we
read, Psalm. 7 14 Behold, he (...) iniquity. Ah, Silly Soul; With less Travail,
and less Anguish, many an one has been (...) again, and had the Image of a
Glorious (...) in him. Indeed, ^here is no getting to Heaven with u^ a taking
of Pains for i^. We are to Strive, that we may Enter the (...) a^e; It requires
Agonies to be an Over(...) and make ^^re of Heaven. But you may (...) this:
That many a Sinner is at more Pains, to plunge himself into the lowest Hell,
than many a Saint is to secure a share in the Good Things of the Heavenly
Places. He runs down to the ^^mbers of Death, more eagerly, than any Christian
runs in the Race which ends in the Heavenly Mansions. A wicked man does more to
Please the Flesh, and the World, and the Devil, than a godly man does to Please
God He serves the Destroyer with more Industry, than one who yet finds
Acceptance with Him, uses in serving the only Savior. He is more Industrious
to get himself put off with a Portion in this Life, than one who yet attains
unto it, is to attain unto a better and lasting Substance in Heaven. He will
waste his Estate, he will ruin his Health, he will venture his Life, and all
that he may be the sooner and the deeper drowned in an horrible Perdition. Many
an one, who never did so much for it, yet arrives unto the Salvation of the
Soul Of wicked men, we read, Jer. 9 5 They weary themselves to commit iniquity.
You may Mark this; Many an one with a Patient continuance in well doing,
arrives less-tired unto the Glory of Heaven, than a wicked man arrives to a
Lodging in the place of Dragons, which he has been all his Days working for.
Oh! the Fully, Oh! the Madness, of wicked men! When they are in the Place of
Torments, with what corroding Indignation will they look back upon it!

Fourthly. There is this to be Marked in the way that wicked men have trodden;
Men are Deceived all the way; it is a very Deceitful way We read, Prove. 11. 18.
The wicked works a deceitful work. A wicked man is drawn into his way, with
many Promises which the Tempters make unto him. The Promises deceive him; his
Temptations have imposed upon him; he meets with Disappointments of all his
Expectations. He Promised unto himself, such Satisfactions as he never meets
withal. He is Promised, that he shall find Contentment in his way; but his way
never, never brings him to it. It is Promised unto him, That when he has
acquired such and such Good Things, they will Stay with him; His mountain shall
be strong. Lo, These things make to themselves wings, and flee away, and leave
him destitute; leave him distracted. It is Promised unto him, that he shall
have a Long time yet in his way; Goods laid up for many Years. Lo, This Night
thy Soul is required of thee! When a man takes the way of Sin, it may be said
of him, as Isa. 44. 20. A deceived Heart has turned him aside.

And you may Mark this one Deceit more, than which there is hardly any more
frequent, in the Way of a wicked man, He is deceived about the Nature, and the
Period of his Way. He is not apprehensive, what he is a doing, and where he is
a going. He apprehends no other, but that he may take this Way, and yet not
miss of Everlasting Blessedness. It is as we read, Prove. 14. 12. A way that
seems right to a man, but the end the way of death. Poor Sinner; Thou art a
Self-deceiver! The man dreams, that he is in the way to the City of God; and
that a Merciful God, will easily forgive all the False steps he has taken in
his way, upon his bare saying, Lord, Have Mercy upon me! The Dream is anon
found, a most fearful Delusion, The Chains of Darkness anon laid upon him,
Undeceive him. O dreadful Way of being Undeceived! Oh! how dreadful, to be so
late Undeceived!

Fifthly. There is this to be Marked in the way that wicked men have trodden;
The Way grows more Dirty; Men grow worse and worse, the longer they go on in
the way. We read, 2 Timothy 3. 13. Wicked men will ^ay worse and worse. Men rarely
keep at a Stand in the way of Sin. It Is a way, wherein the Sinner Knows not
where he shall s^op As men in a right way grow stronger and stronger in it;
They find the Way of the Lord Strength unto them; the Longer they are in it,
the Stronger they grew; they gain the more Strength to do, what is to be done
in the Way. Thus, in a Bad Way, the Inclinations and Resolutions of Wickedness,
these grow Stronger and Stronger. Sin gains the more Strength, by being
persisted in. We read, Heb. 3 13 To Day, -- l^st hardened through the
Deceitfulness of Sin. You ought with a trembling Soul, to Mark this thing; The
Longer any one does continue in Sin, they grow the more Hardened in it; The
Hearts which to Day were Hard enough, grow Harder by to Morrow. They are daily
Provoking the Holy One, to withdraw His Grace from them. He is Provoked every
day, as the Psalmist Expresses it. On the Withdraw of that Grace, Oh! the Hold
that Satan takes of them! Oh! the Work that Satan makes with them! At first the
Heart of the Sinner will Smite him, for a lesser Transgression. He Conquers, he
Smothers, he keeps under, he gets over, the Relu^^ancies of a (...) Heart He
goes on to greater and greater Degrees of Impiety At length, he Marks at Fear,
and like an Horse rushing into the Battle, he rushes upon the Grossest
Abominations. Riot, Rev^ls, Debauches grow familiar with him. Horrid (...) and
the Language or Fiends, proclaim his (...) Hell B^wdy, and Filthy Songs, enough
to infect the very Air, they are uttered in, are the finest of his Vocal Music.
Dishonest Gaming becomes no little part of his Business. He is well acquainted
with the (...) of the Harlot. It is not long before his Impiety improves into
Malignity. He forsakes he abhors, the Churches of God. And those whom he takes
to be Useful Servants of God, he derides them, he Slanders them, he ^^bels
them. His Throat is an open Sepulcher for them; when he speaks of them, he
shows how glad he would be to have them in their Sepulcher. They are now almost
Ripened for a Terrible Destruction from God. Their Iniquity is almost full The
Vengeance of God now quickly seises on them. O You that are in the Way of
wicked men; Little do you foresee, what Wickedness you will be left unto.

Sixthly. There is this to be Marked in the Way that wicked men have trodden;
Men often begin to Repent of the Way, and yet they hold on their way. In the
way of Wickedness, there often occurs, this wretched Conduct, Psalm. 78. 34, 36.
They returned and enquired Early after God; -- But they lied unto Him. A
Gracious God often Checks the Sinner in his way; A Flaming Sward gives a Check
to him, in his way that is perverse before God Perhaps, the Candle of the Lord
within him, gives unusual Blazes and Scorches: Compels him to be bitterly
sensible of his Condition. He falls it may be into some unusual Miscarriage,
and his wounded Soul falls a bleeding upon it. Some Uncommon Dispensation of
God, it may be, awakens him to Consider his Ways, dwakening things fall out,
upon him, or before him. Now, he begins to wish, O! That I might lead a better
Life! He Bewails his former Follies. He Cries out of them as Cursed Follies. He
Resolves that he will no more abandon himself to such Follies. He makes his
Vows to God, and says, I will no more Transgress! He begins a Reformation;
begins a Course of Religious Duties. His best Friends hoped, Surely we shall
now see a Glorious Conversion to God! But what comes of all this? All wears off
in a little while. His Vows do signify no more than the Green Wyths, or the New
Cords upon Sampson. It may be said, as in 2 Pet 2. 22 The Dog is turned to hi^
own Vomit again; and the Sow that was washed unto her wallowing in the ^ire.
The Good Motions, the Good Purposes, in the Soul of the Unhappy Man, They are
all Vanished! His Vices (...) Head again He quickly becomes as V^cious as he
was before. Yea The Evil Spirit returns with Seven worse than what was before.
O Case that calls for bleeding Lamentations! Mark this; The Way of wicked men,
has now and then some Interruptions in it: There are some feeble (...) toward
Repentance in it. But still, after all, they go on still in their Trespasses.

Seventhly. In the Way that wicked men have trodden, there is this Thing that
calls for a Mark upon it, When men in their Way grow Wicked Overmuch,
oftentimes they Quickly Perish from their Way. We read, Eccl 7. 17. Be (...)
ever much wicked; why should thou die before thy time? Some there are that
are wicked Overmuch: They are so far gone in Wickedness, that they have
Out-sinned the Day of Divine Patience. The Long-suffering God will now bear no
longer with them. The wicked ones bid intolerable D^fiances to Heaven in their
Blasphemies Monstrous Undutifulness to their Superiors is expressed by them.
They Mark the Ministers and Messengers of God, with outrageous Insolenci^^.
They grow so dangerous to Humane Society, that there is no Enduring of them
They fall to hatching such Mischief, that the Children of God are compelled to
Complain unto their Father of them. The Wretches are now probably near the End
of their Way. There is a direful Symptom of wicked and wretched Ones, hastening
to their End; in Prove 29. 1. He that being often Reproved, hardens his Neck,
shall suddenly be destroyed and without Remedy. Oh! That some Ungodly Ones
would lay to Heart, these Thunders of God!

Eighthly. In the Way that wicked men have trodden, there is this Thing that
calls for a Mark upon it, God by Wonderful Ways does bring out, the most Secret
Wickedness in their Way. In the Way of wicked men, there are many things done,
for which they flatter themselves with an Eternal Secrecy; for, as we read,
Ephesians. 5 17. They are things that are done of them in Secret But the Crimes of
wicked Ones are not Concealed from God; Can any hide himself in Secret Places,
that I shall not see him, says the Lord? Let never such Arts of Concealment be
used for the Covering of their Crimes, I, even I, Know them; and am a Witness
of them, says the Lord And the Glorious God has astonishing Ways to bring out
the Secret Wickedness in which wicked Men do indulge themselves. God fulfils
that word upon them, Numb 32. 33. Be sure your Sin shall find you out. He makes
the Accomplices of Wicked ones, to bring out one another. God leaves Wicked
Ones to fresh Villainies, which bring out all their former ones. God so
Terrifies them, as to make them bring out themselves; their own Tongues to fall
upon themselves. Odd Circumstances fall out, that no one could have thought of;
and these bring them out. Yea, A Bird of the Air shall carry the Voice and that
which has wings will tell the matter: the Spirits of the Invisi^le World will
be Concerned in it. Oh! Let the Sinners in Zion be afraid, and let the
Hypocrites thereof be surprised with Fearfulness, that what they have done,
will not always be kept Secret Repent Seriously, Repent Sincerely; That is the
only way for the Covering of Iniquity.

Ninthly. In the Way that wicked men have trodden, there is vet One thing more
to be Marked; That is, The End of the Way. It Is a Way that will be terribly
Punished in the End; It will be Bitterness in the Latter End. We are called
upon, Psalm. 37. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the End
of that man is peace. But we are now to be thus called upon. Mark the Wicked
man, and behold the Evil one, and his Evil Way; for the End of his Way, is to
ly down in desperate and eternal Sorrow. Sinners, You are warned of God; Prove
13 21 Evil pursues Sinners. The Warning that God has given you, is, The wicked
shall not go Unpunished. Nay, There is a strange Punishment reserved for the
Workers of Iniquity. O Mark the Way, which the Righteous God has taken with
wicked men, and Mark the Destruction which their Way does bring upon them.

Wicked men have been Punished in all Ages. They were so when their Foundation
was Overthrown with a Flood. They shall be so, when God shall make this World
of theirs, and for them, a Fiery Oven, in the Day of His Anger. In every
Generation a multitude of Wicked ones, are most Remarkably Punished by God.
Yea, their Punishments are such as carry in them Remarkable Signatures of a
Judgment from God. At Last, it comes to that; Mat. 25 46 The Wicked shall go
away into everlasting Punishment O amazing Punishment! O tremendous Punishment!
Mark this, O all you that Forget God. You will find it a fearful Thing to die
the Second Death; to fall into the Hands of the Living God.

II. And now, methinks, there should be another Enquiry; In what Manner, To
what Purpose, are we to Mark the Way that Wicked Men have trodden? How are we
to Observe what is to be Marked in the Way of wicked men? But I may now surely
leave it unto You, my Hearers, to answer this Enquiry You are not at a Loss how
to answer it.

First; Have you Marked the way that wicked men have trodden? Certainly you
will Shun that Way The Bias of your Souls, Oh, how can it now be any other than
th^se (...) Psalm. 119 128 I hate every false way The Choice and the Voice of
your Souls will now be that; O m^ dear Savior, Do thou rescue me from every
Wicked (...) from all the (...) of the Destroyer S^ew me (...) Way, Teach me
thy Pathe^; O my Good (...) Reduce my Soul, and Conduct me in the (...) of
Righteousness for thy Names sake.

Secondly; Have you (...) the Way that Wicked men have trodden? Certainly You
will do what you can, to (...) from that way. Ah, how can you bear to see your
Friends, going on in a Way, that will carry them down unto the Dead? Think on
that Word Jam. 5 20 He that Converts a Sinner from the (...) of his way, shall
save a Soul from Death. Especially, Your Children, -- to them you ^we this
Compassion. No greater Joy, than (...) see them Walking in the Truth No greater
Vexation, or Abasement, than to see them take another Way Oh! Teach them Oh!
Charge them! Oh! Cry to God for them! Do all you can to Reclaim them, and
Preserve them from every Evil Way Lay the strongest (...) upon them, to Keep
the way of the Lord.

Lastly; I have one thing more to move, It Is this; My Friends, Mark Your Own
Way. Mark the way which you are Your selves treading of. You are so advised:
Prove. 4. 26. Ponder the Path of thy Feet. Oh! Bring your selves under a strict
Examination Put this Question to your selves, What is the Way that I am in? Am
I in the Old way that Wicked men have trodden? Or, Am I in the Way of Good men?
Unquestionably Happy, Happy might be the Fruits of this Question well thought
upon!

But that which at this time I principally aim at, is; To Confirm the
Observations that has been offered, and Quicken the Dispositions that have been
advised, with some Solemn Remarks upon as tremendous a Spectacle, as ever our
sorrowful Eyes have looked upon. The Way that Wicked Men have trodden, has
newly terminated in a Tragical Execution of Death, on such a Number of
Criminals, as our sorrowful Eyes have never before seen together, with hands
clapped at them, hissed out of their Place. The Glorious GOD Expects, that we
do the best we can, to make this a Profitable and a Serviceable Spectacle; and
that our Foolhardy Sinners, Knowing the Terror of the Lord, may be Dissuaded
from going on still in the^ Trespasses it ^as a thing once imagined concerning
some surviving Impenitents, If One went unto them from the Dead, they will
Repent. O Impenitents, that in the Way which Wicked men have trodden are
hastening down unto the Dead, there are now to Come unto you Twenty Six in a
Crew together from the Dead, who with an Hoarse but Loud Voice, terribly call
upon you, to Repent of your Sins and not Persist in such Crimes as have brought
them to what they are now come unto. If you will not hear the Warnings of your
Faithful Pastors, hear the Roarings of Twenty Six terrible Preachers, that in a
Ghastly Apparition, are now from the Dead, calling upon you to Turn and Live
unto GOD.

It was the Hand of the Glorious GOD, which brought these Criminals, to Die in a
Place, where His Faithful Servants took uncommon Pains, for their Instruction
and Conversion; And it may be, [ Who can tell?] there were some ^lect of GOD
among them, who may have their Salvation in this astonishing way accomplished
But how much will it add unto the Displays of Sovereign and Mysterious Grace,
if You that have had their Dying Words and Groans and Pains before you, may
find the Means of Your Salvation in them!

Oh! Take a due Notice of what you have seen in the Way which these Wicked men
have trodden, and in the fearful End which their Way has brought them to! and
let it not be said of you, Go tell this People, you see indeed, but perceive
no^, and very little Regard what you see.

Have you not particularly Marked This in the Way of the Wicked men; That the
Way of Piracy and Robbery, and of the Outrage us Wickedness whereto the Pirates
and Robbers abandon themselves is a say which the Holy GOD appears as a Swift
Witness against; a Way wherein the Sinners bring a Swift Destruction upon
themselves; a say wherein the Car^es in the Flying Roll gone forth against
them, do very Swiftly overtake them? How many Thousands of the Sea-Minsters,
who have been the T^rror of them that (...) the Sea, have been Swiftly Cut off.
and Strangely Exterminated, and what a Strange ^unishment has been hastened on
the Workers of Iniquity? They that would not behold the way of the Vineyards,
nor take to any way of Honesty and Industry, for Living ashore, have gone to
make their Depredations on the Waters; But how has their Portion been Cursed in
the Earth; and what a Remarkable Curse of GOD, has been upon them? On this
Remark will you not Conceive the utmost Horror of running into the Paths of
the Destroyers Oh! Rather Die, than go With, or do Like such Wicked men. My Son,
If such Sinners Entice thee, Consent thou not unto them. No, Rather Die than do
it! But then, Look upon all the Ways of Unlawful Gain, which are trodden by
Wicked Men, as the Ways that have Destruction and Misery in them. Abhor the
Ways; Avoid ^he Ways: Be terrified by that word, which you have now again seen
so Amazingly Verified; Jer 17 11. He that gets Riches and not by Right shall
leave them in the midst of his Days, and at his End shall be a Fool. Hear, Hear
the Cry from the horrible Scaffold unto you. Oh! Let not the Lust of the Eye
poison and pervert you! Oh! Let not the insatiable Thirst of Riches draw you
into indirect Methods of coming at them! Oh! List not your selves among them
who will be Rich, but madly drown themselves in Perdition, by their Attempts to
be so! Look for a Confounding Blast from GOD, upon all Unlawful Enterprises.

Go on, and Mark the Dying Lamentations of the Wicked Men, at the End of the
Way which they have trodden.

Among the dolorous Ejulations of the Dying Pirates, how often do you hear them
Confessing; My Grieving and Leaving and Scorning of my Parents, has been that
which has brought the dreadful Vengeance of GOD upon me! Shall this Confession
make no Impression on You, O Wicked and woeful Children, who break the Hearts of
your Parents, with your Ungodly Courses? You cannot but know, that it Kills
your Distressed Parents, and makes their Hearts even to stoop with Heaviness,
to see that you are Irreclameable from your Enormities, and that none of their
Commands or Counsels, will prevail with you, to Reform your Disorderly Living.
O Murderers of your Parents, Can you think, that you shall Escape Unpunished?
Will you not hearken to the Voice of our Parents; The LORD will do something
worse than Slay you, for this Disobedience! It Is a Sign, that GOD has a Terrible
Thing to do upon you. Wretches, Leave off your Impieties, and be no longer an
Heaviness unto your Parents; Or GOD will do a Terrible Thing upon you:
Something which the Ears of them that hear of it shall tingle at!

How many of the Dying Pirates do you hear Crying out, My Profanation of the
LordsDay, was the Inlet of all the Wickedness that has brought me to this Evil
Day! Having Marked this in the Way of the Wicked men, Oh! Resolve to spend the
Sabbath well, and fill it with the Exercises of agreeable Devotion. Despise not
this Rest of GOD, left the Holy GOD for ever shut you out of His Rest; Shut you
up, where there is no Rest, but the Smoke of their Torment ascends for ever and
ever.

How many of the Dying Pirates have you seen Mourning at the Last, because of
their giving themselves up to the Vice, about which you are forewarned of GOD,
At the last it will bite like a Serpent and sting like an Adder? Their
Excessive Cups have been worse than Rats-ba^e in their Bowels, when GOD has
come at length to put His Cup of Trembling into their Hands. Having Marked this
in the Way of the wicked men, Will you not have done with the Intoxicating
Bottel? and the Pot wherein your Death will be met withal? What will you bring
all sorts of Woes upon your selves, and go Staggering on to Ruin, with a
Shameful spewing upon all your Glory?

How many of the Dying Pirates have you seen wringing their Impure, Filthy,
Unchaste Hands at their Death, and with an unutterable Dolor declaring that
they found the Stings, which the Abominations of Unchastity left upon their
Souls, to be More Bitter than Death? Having Marked this in the Way of the
Wicked men, will you make your Hearts like Ovens, that shall have Irregular
Desires ever Burning in them, till GOD make your Souls like a Fiery Oven, by
the Scorchesof His Anger there? Will you Prostitute your Bodies to detestable
Actions, till GOD cause your Carcases to come under a speedy Putrefaction?
Shall the Spirits which entered the Swine of Old, hurry you down into the Deep?
Why will you take the Coals in your Bosom, and anon have that Epitaph upon you;
They died in Youth, because their Life was among the Unclean!

When the Pirates have been going to draw their last breath, with what Remorse
have they looked back on the Oaths which they had in their Impious Breath
belched out, with a Contempt and Challenge of their Maker? When their Mouth has
been going to be stopped, with what Remorse have they thought, how full their
Mouth has been of Cursing? Have not their Last Speeches most sadly Bewailed the
Vile Speeches, with which they have discovered Souls full of Rottenness? Has it
not began Hell above ground unto them, and caused them to gnaw their Tongues
for Pain, to think. What their Tongues when Fired of Hell, have shot up against
the Heavens? In their Imploring the Mercies of the Great GOD, how has it
Confounded them; To Think, How hid^ously have I Offended and Blasphemed the GOD
whom I now make my Cries unto! When they have apprehended themselves just
falling into the Hands of Devils, how has it Confounded them to think, These
Tormentors are they, whose Language I have been used unto? Having Marked this
in the Way of the Wicked men, Will you not now Keep your Tongues from Evil?
Verily, If you desire Life, and love many Days, that you may see Good, you will
do so!

Have you not heard the Dying Pirates, pouring out their Complaints of the Evil
Company which had Entangled them, and Crying out, This Evil Company has brought
me, to what I once little thought of ever coming to? Having Marked this in the
way of the Wicked men, Will you not Forsake the Foolish and Live? Are you
willing to have your Souls gathered with such Sinners, as you n^w associate
withal? Oh! Depart from the Tents of the Wicked men, lest you Perish in all
their Sins! Continue not the Com^anions of Fools, if you would not be Destory'd
among them.

Finally, Have not the Dying Malefactors, left the World Earnestly Commending a
Godly Life and pressing the practice of a Religion that should have something
more than mere Morality in it. Earnestly Commending a Serious, Daily, constant
Worship of God, and the Religion of the cl^set? Yea, Earnestly Commending of
Early PIETY, and Exhorting Young People betimes to Return unto GOD? You must
needs have Marked this. But, Oh, what Effect shall the Remark have upon you!
Children, Will you not Begin Immediately to Live Religiously; and will you not
from this time say unto GOD, Thou art my GOD and Savior, and the Guide of my
Youth? Oh, Take not up, first with a Lifeless Religion, and then the
Irreligious Life which That will bring you to. And whereas, it has been Marked
concerning some of those who have lately Perished, That they had sat under the
Means of Grace; but having refused the O^^ers of a SAVIOR often and often made
unto them, a Righteous GOD left them in the Hands of the Destroyer; so they
were given up to Confirmed and Increasing Wickedness, in which they have
Perished Wonderfully Oh! Presently, Come into the Ways of Wisdom, and Work
about your Salvation with a Fear and Trembling, lest this prove also your
Condition. Mind the Story, lest you make the Story! And ^et Heaven see this
Issue of what you have seen; Surely, I have seen the Young Wanderers bemoaning
themselves; and saying, Alas, How much have I hitherto been (...) a Bullock
unaccustomed (...) the Yoke. O my SAVIOR, Turn thou me, and I shall be turned,
For Thou art the Lord my GOD. LORD, I Repent, I Repent: (...) ashamed, Yes, I
am Even confounded, (...) those things which have been the (...) of my Yo^th.
And I hope to be delivered from them. When it is come to this, it will follow,
These are pleasant Children; I will Surely have Mercy on them, Says the Lord.

An Account of the PIRATES with diverse of their Speeches and Letters. Who were
Executed at New Port on Rhode Island, July 19th 1723. Faithfully Collected, by
Another Hand.
A Number of men, gathered, by the wonderful Providence of God from several
Parts of the British World; From England, from Wales, from Scotland, from
Ireland, from the ^sle of Man, from the Massachusetts, (in New England,) from
Rhode Island, from Connecticut, from New York, from Pensi^vania, from (...)
form Barbados, Taken. By a Man of War, on June, 10 th were brought into this
Harbor, on June 11 th. Thirty of them brought into Prison June 1^ th (Seven
more on July 11 th.) One of these Dyed, ((...) on July 5 th,) all the Rest were
Tried on July 11 and 12. Eight were Cleared, TwentyEight were Found Guilty of
Piracy and were Condemned to Die; Two of there were Reprieved. Twenty six were
Executed, This day.

While they were in Prison, most of them seemed willing to be Advised, about
the Affairs of their Souls. They are Advised to Endeavor to be so Affected
with their Sinfulness and Misery, as to Feel their Absolute Necessity of an
Interest in the Lord Jesus Christ; and to strive to be so Satisfied about the
Alsufficiency of the Lord Jesus Christ and His Readiness and Willingness to
Receive into His Favor the Chief of Sinners; that they might be Persuaded to
commit their Souls unto His Care; And to cry Mightily unto the God of all
Grace, that for the sake of the Lord Jesus Christ, He would, by His Holy
Spirit, make them willing to Receive Christ for their Savior, as He is offered
in the Gospel And they were told, that if they did believe in the Glorious
Redeemer unto the Saving of their Souls and the pardon of all their Sins; They
would Love Christ much, and would show their Love to Christ by showing their
concernment for the Salvation of the Souls of their Fellow Sinners, and would
Earnestly Desire, that others might be brought unto Christ, For Salvation* And
they would be willing to warn other Sinners to Keep clear from those Paths of
Destruction, that had brought them so far into Ruin. Accordingly they did,
Several of them, give Solemn Warnings to others* and some Desired, that their
Awful Warnings might be Published unto the World, for the Glory of God. Some of
their Affecting Admonitions may be mentioned: One, with his own Hand Wrote the
Following Expressions.

HAving a great desire to leave these few advices behind me, to all Young
People, or Others: God Grant they may be of that Use, and Warning to you, as I
could Wish! Remember, they are the Words, of a Dying person, Sealed with his
Life, and ought to make a great Impression in your Hearts. Think, it is one,
who not many Months ago, as little thought as any of you, of coming to this
Ignominious Death, that in this manner Speaks to you. God's Will be done, I
Humbly resign my self to it, well Knowing it is Sin and the Neglect of the
Service of God, that has occasioned it. And O that it may Please the Great and
Glorious God of Heaven and Earth! To give every one of you Grace, to Avoid the
Snares I have fallen into.

Youths, Early Fear God, and Honor and Obey your Parents; They know better
what is for your Good and Interest, than you your selves. Let not the Vain
Notion of Rambling contrary to their Will, take any Root in your Heart and
Mind. This was the first Unhappy Step, which hindered the Perfecting of a Work,
the Foundation whereof was so laid, as might have Placed me in a Station of
Life, nothing Inferior to some of the most Desirable. Think not, when you come
to Act on the Stage of the World for your Self, that it is enough you lead, (as
some term it) a Moral Life, that it is enough if you deal upon the Square with
your Neighbor, Give Alms and do good Offices. Alas too many sit down
Contentedly there. But add to this Religious and Virtuous, and your Account
will end fair. Whatever you do, Neglect not the Public and Private Worship of
God, and your Undertakings will always Prosper. Always Choose good Company. And
if you can, rather your Superiors in all things than Inferiors, such as Live in
the Fear of GOD. By them you may Learn good Things, and greatly Advantage
thereby. Live Soberly, and let not yourselves be overcome with Strong Drink.
Fly all Temptations, all Opportunities and Importunities, tending that way.
Alas it is a Sad thing, a too reigning Vice among Men, the Inlet of Numberless
Sins and Evils, the Ruin of a great many Families, And what is it it has not
been the Cause of? Then you ly open to the Snares and Temptations of the bitter
Enemy of the Souls of Men. Beware of the Abominable (...) of Uncleanness, if
you Value the Love of (...), and your Reputation in the World. Oh! how many of
all Sorts of People Follow that Road, tho'tless, where it may at last hurry
them. Laugh at it and think it no Crime. Suffer not, Suffer not the least Spark
of that Infernal Fire of Lust, to hover about your Heart and Mind, much more to
settle there. For it will too soon Kindle, and too soon be your Master. Take
care against Spending your time Idly on the Sabbath Day, in staying a^ Home, or
Walking, or any other Diversions, though they may seen to you, of no great
Moment, Repent of this in Time, and Diligently Frequent your Proper Places of
Divine Worship, Respect your Fastors and Teachers, and Remember whose Servants
they be, and pay the just Deference due to the Rulers, set over you by God. If
you fall into any Difference with your Friends or Relations, God Almighty
Prevent you from rashly leaving them. Stay in your Place and Station
Contentedly, and be Thankful to God for all things that happen to you. And
whoever shall Read these Lines, and finds any thing therein Affecting his
Conscience, shun them as with alacrity, as you would an Eminent Danger before
your Eyes: Think on them as the Cause, of what the Unhappy Author, through the
Just Judgment of God, is brought to by them. For Doubtless, the great
Innumerable Sins and Transgressions, of my Life, have brought me to this
Untimely End. And that these Sins, by the Justice and Will of God brought me to
fall into the Hands of Pirates. And although, it was with the greatest
Reluctance, and Horror of Mind and Conscience I was Compelled to go with them,
of which there may be yet Living Witnesses; And that During my Continuance with
them, I can say my Heart and Mind Never Joined in those Horrid Robberies,
Conflagrations and Cruelties Committed, so much as some have, whom God in his
great Wisdom, yet suffers perhaps, to Commit more; for which Restraint, Most
Humbly, and from the Bottom of my Soul, I Acknowledge and Confess the Wonderful
Mercy of the Gracious God to me, a Poor Miserable Sinner, altogether
Undeserving of it. Yet Alas! I Committed too much, and ought rather to have
Dyed than in the least Complied with their Compulsion, Give not ^our Minds to
that Scandalous Abominable Vice of Swearing and Lying, Scandalous in the
Society of Men, and Crying Sins before the Great and Glorious God. And Oh! That
this may be a Warning to all People. That the Ever-living Gracious God, would
be pleased to set this home to your Hearts. Oh that he would be Graciously
Pleased to Sanctify, this great Tremenduous Judgment, now before your Eyes, so
many Poor Souls as you see brought to an Untimely End, through Sin. And Oh that
it would Please him, in his great Mercy, that it may be the last, among the
Children of Men: Is the Humble Sincere Prayer of

John Brown.


Another had these following things written from his Mouth,

I Do stand here a sad Spectacle unto you all this Day. I pray God it may be a
Warning unto you. The first Counsel which I offer unto you (especially unto
Youths) is, Seek the Lord Early, while He may be found; spend not your blooming
Years in such things as gratify the sinful Flesh: Let God be your first
Monitor, lest the Adversary of our Souls Intercept between God and us: Oh that
this sad Example and dismal Execution which you see upon us poor condemned and
dying Sinners this Day, may be sanctified unto you all; especially in the first
Place, that you mavn't resist the (...) and motions of God's Holy Spirit,
whilst the Day of Grace lasts. Secondly, Do not Profane the Holy Name of your
God, by Cursing and bad Imprecations against your holy Maker and Redeemer.
Thirdly, Do not Profane his holy Sabbaths, by spending the Day in Illness, or
other lascivious Courses, which Youths are prone unto: It is pleasing unto the
Flesh, but desstructive to the Soul in the sight of God. Fourthly, Let not
loose the Reins of your Lusts to gratify the Flesh, which is a heinous and
crying Sin in the sight of God. If any of you have been guilty hereof, or of
any Thing herein included, I would pray you to Repent of each of them
instantly, before God's indignation be poured out upon you, and that you be
left unto your selves: Oh then your Case will be miserable. Fifthly, I beseech
you and each of you, to mind the Admonitions and sweet Instructions of your
natural Parents, lest you grieve their Hearts, and their Sighs go up to Heaven
as Witnesses against you. Sixthly, Covet not any thing appertaining or
belonging to your Neighbor; so as to have a lustful Concupiscence after their
Lives, Goods or Estates. Oh, these are the Things which ly burdensome and
heavy upon me a poor dying Sinner, I have lived lasciviously, and spent the
chief of my Time wantonly and foolishly, as if there had been no God to call me
to Question for all my Miscarriages, or Misimprovements of Time; these lie
heavy and burden some upon my Soul; were it not for the Blood of Christ, What
would become of such poor, miserable, dying Sinners as we? But our Comfort is,
that the Fountain which was open to Judah and Jerusalem, is still sufficient to
cleanse from all unrighteousness; Oh that we all may be washed and cleansed in
this Fountain, so as that we may appear spotless and blameless before the great
Bar of God, so as to receive that Blessed Sentence of, Come ye Blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before the Foundation of the
World. The chief thing that induced me to make my Escape, was the frailty of
the Flesh, being afraid to Die. But now I desire to submit unto the Hand of
Providence, Forgiving all my Adversaries, Persecutors, and Slanderers, as I
expect Forgiveness at the Hand of God, into whose Hands I commit my Spirit.

Another of these Criminals, gave these following Admonitions for the Benefit
of Survivors:

I Do earnestly warn all the People of this Land, the Young People especially,
and in particular, the Young People of RhodeIsland, -- against all Wickedness
in general, and particularly against Sabbath-breaking, which I take to have
been my First Crying Sin: Against Drunkenness, which I think, was the Second
great Sin I fell into: Against Uncleanness, Unchastity, and running after Lewd
Women: Against Cursing and Swearing, and mispending precious Time And as for
Sea faring Men, my earnest desire is, That they may be kept from falling into
the Hand of the Pirates; and if they be taken by them, that they may not Turn to
them, and if they be so Wicked as to Turn to them, I Warn them against
increasing their Wickedness by abusing any whom they shall Take, as I have
done. As for my self, in respect of what is to come, I hope to find Mercy at
the Hands of God, for the sake of His own dear Son, the Lord Jesus Christ.

On the Day before they were Executed, Letters were Wrote for diverse of them,
to some or other of their Relations, in which they desired such Passages as
here follow, might be inserted:

ONE of them in a Letter to his Brother, says, I earnestly entreat you, Dear
Brother, to bring up your Children in the Fear of Almighty GOD: And having
desired him to write to his Wife, and Children, having four of them, he adds, I
pray God to be a Husband to my dear Wife, and a Father to my dear Children; and
that she may bring them up in the Fear of GOD; and that she and they together
may be for ever happy in Heaven, I advise your Children (Dear Brother) and
Charge, my own dear Children, ^ot to go astray from God or lead a wicked Life,
at many have done, and I my self.

Another in a Letter to his Brother says, I entreat you and all other Young
People, to avoid all bad Courses, especially neglecting Prayer to God, Profane
Swearing and Cursing, Hard-Drinking, and Sabbath-Breaking. I (...) not without
Hopes, that after all I shall enter into a happy State at Death for the sake of
Christ. Don't you however delay from Time to Time, to turn to God and get fit
to Dye.

A Third in a Letter to his (...) says, I earnestly desire you to bring up your
Children in the Fear of God, that they may not go astray from Him as I have
done: I pray God that my Dear Fr^ther (meaning his Sister's Husband) who goes
to Sea, may be Preserved from falling into the Hands of the Pirates; and that
if he does fall into their Hands, he may have Grace, to overcome all their
Temptations to be one of their Number, be they never so great. I must thank my
self for it, that I am brought to this untimely dismal End. I beg that it may
be a Warning to all Young People to keep themselves from all Bad Courses
especially from Sabbath-Breaking, Drinking to Excess, and Blaspheming the Name
of God. And I beseech all that are Servants, to keep with, and be faithful to
their Masters; for if I had been Dutiful to mine, it is likely, I had not been
brought to the untimely End, which (...) am now come to.

A Letter of another to his Father has these Passages in it: Please to remember
my Love to my Brother and Sisters, and let my Brother know, that I earnestly
desire, he will bring up hi^ Children in the Fear of God. And I would have my
Uncles and Aunts Warn their Children, against all Sin, especially the Sin of
Sabbath-Breaking, lest it bring them to Ruin as it has done me.

Another in a Letter to his Mother, Addresses her thus: The News of my being
under a Sentence of Death, I believe is very sinking and dreadful to you. I
pray that God will support you under your Sorrows and sanctify them to you. I
hope I shall receive from GOD the Pardon of all my Sins, for the sake of His
dear SON and the only SAVIOR of Sinners. I pray GOD to help me to believe in
Christ, Repent of all my Sins and fit for Death. I am sorry to think, that I
was so circumstanced while among the Pirates, as to want the Opportunities
which I had before, of Benefitting my Soul, and fitting for Eternity. And in a
Letter to his Brother, He thus bespeaks him, I earnestly beseech you to seek
the Lord for your self and yours, while He may be found. Don't regl^ct to bring
your Children up in the Fear of God. I hope you will as far as you can, and
may, keep them from going to Sea. Let them take Warning by me not to go astray
from God while Young. Let my Death stir you up to make your Peace with God, and
fit for your own Death without Delay. I hope you will take the best Care you
can, of our Aged Mother while she is Living, and at her Death.

Fitz-Gerrald put this Paper into the same Hands, on the Day of his Execution.

Young Men,
I Desire you all in General to take Warning by me; for you see what a Greedy
Eye brings a Young Man to. Beware how you Disobey your Friends. Beware of
Drunkenness, for it is the Inlet of all other Sins. I must Confess that I was
not Guilty of Murder, nor of Striking Men as others were: But of all other Sins
I was Guilty, of which I ask God Pardon. I have been guilty of Offending and
Denying Thee the God that is above, in Profaning thy Holy Name and Sabbath, and
Polluting of thy Ordinances, and also committing all the Injuries we were
capable of, upon our Neighbors Bodies or Goods in a manner. I Desire you all
to Obey your Parents, give a good Ear to the Preachers of God, this Slighted
have I; Shun Theft, Drunkenness Swearing, EvilSpeaking, Lying, and all Evil
Frays. So I leave you to GOD and the World: And I hope I am Provided for a
better World, and a Glorious Heavenly Kingdom.


Another Desired, That Masters would not be Harsh and Severe to their Servants,
and that Servants would be Dutiful to their Masters, and Diligent in their
Business. Another Desired, That Parents, would be Careful, To bring up their
Children well, and that Children would not Grieve, nor Sinfully leave their
Parents. Diverse of them lamented their Disobedience to their Parents, and their
Profanation of the Name, Day and Word of God and their ungodly company
Keeping; and warned Young People, To Keep clear from those Crimes. The most of
them could Acknowledge, That they had Lived some Part of their Time, under the
Means of Grace: And they did not Accept the Offers of Christ, And God left them
to Leave Him, and get Abroad into the wild World, and then they Quickly got
into the High Road to Wickedness and Misery, and were guilty of Grievous and
Various Violations of all the Holy Commandments of God, They Ran as far as they
could from God, and strove as far as they could, To Keep all Thoughts of God
out of their Minds: They cast off Fear and Restrained Prayer before God: They
Blasphemed His Name and Profaned His Day; so that some of them scarce new when
it was the LordsDay, (while they were one the Seas:) They Ran away, some of
them, from their Parents. They gave up themselves, To Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
Dishonesty, Evil Speaking and Covetousness. And the most seemed to have no
Thought of Returning from their wicked Courses.

Thus Far had they gone from God! But when they were brought into Prison, They
Quickly seemed Thankful to God, for His Mercy in bringing them thither. And
they set and kept up something of Daily Religion, for the most Part, among them
and seemed Serious and Reverent, while Reading and Hearing their Prayers, and
the Holy Scriptures, and the most Awakening Books of Piety, and Singing Psalms;
And were Thankful for the counsels that were offered, and very Desirous of the
continuance of all Advantages, that could be Afforded, as long as they could be
continued. And wished that they had spent their Past and Lost Time, as they had
spent some of their last Days, And wished for more Time, and Feared that they
should not have Enough Time, To secure the welfare of their Souls. But seemed
willing, to submit into the Divine Will, Trying to Hope in the Mercy of God,
and Resign their Souls into the Merciful Hands of the Almighty Savior. So it
was with several of them, though all of them did not seem always alike Affected
and Concerned. Never was there a more Doleful Sight, in all this Land, than
while they were standing on the Stage, waiting for the stopping of their
Breath, and the Flying of their Souls into the Eternal World; And Oh! How Awful
the Noise of their Dying Moans! But they are Gone! Where be they? That None of
their Surviving Friends may be overwhelmed with Irregular and Immoderate Grief,
and that no Others may be Hardened in their Impenitence, Why may it not, on
this Occasion be considered, That Though True Repentance be Never Too Late, If
it be True and Rea^ Repentance, Yet Late Repentance i^ so seldom True, and
commonly to be Suspected, Unless there be Remarkable Evidences of the Sincerity
of it. But if they Sincerely Repented of all their Sins, Believing in the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, with all their Hearts, At the last, They are Now Blessed.

But if all People, and Especially Young People, in this Land, are not, by
th^se Tremendous Dispensations of God, Excited unto (...) Endeavors, To make
Haste and make Sure, about Giving themselves unto the REDEEMER of Souls, and
Striving to Live as Recom^s them that are given to the LORD GOD; What Dreadful
Things may be speedily Expected?

The Names, Ages, and Places of Birth of the Pirates, Executed on Friday, July
the 19th 1723 at N Port Rhode Island.
Charles Harris, Thomas Linnicar, 21 Lancast, England. Daniel Hyde, 23
Virginia. Stephen Mandon, 29 London. Abraham Lac^y, 21 Devonshire Engl. Edward
Lawson 20 Isle of Man. John Tomkins 23 Glocesish, Engl. Frances Laughton 39
New York. John Fitz-Gerrald 21 C Limb Ireland. William St^dfield 40 Lancaster
Engl. Owen Rice 27 South Wales William Read 35 Lond-derry-Eng. William Flades
25 Rhode Island. Thomas Hugget 24 London. Peter Cues 32 Exon in Devon. William
Jones 28 London. ^dward Eaton 38 Wreaxam Wales. John Brown 29 Coun Derham Eng.
James Sprinkly 28 Suffolk England. Joseph Sound 28 Westminster City. Charles
Church 21 Marg. Par. Westminster. John Waters 35 County of Devon. Thomas Powed 21
Weathersfield Con Joseph Libbey Thomas Hazel John Bright
THE END.

