Mr. Colman's Election Sermon, May 29th, 1723.

David's dying Charge to the Rulers and People of Israel.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable The Lieutenant GOVERNOR, the COUNCIL
and GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the PROVINCE of the Massachusetts Bay in New England.

May 29th. 1723. Being the Day for the Annual Election OF HIS MAJESTY's Council.

By Benjamin Colman, Pastor of a Church in Boston.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green, Printer to His Honor the Lieut.
GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, 1723.

At a COUNCIL held in the Council Chamber in Boston, on Monday, June 3 d. 1723.
Ordered, THat PENN TOWNSEND and JOHN APPLETON, Esqrs; give the Thanks of the
Board to the Reverend Mr. BENJAMIN COLMAN for his SERMON preached on the Day of
Election of COUNSELORS, and desire a Copy thereof in order to its being
Printed.

J. WILLARD, Secr.

To the HONORABLE, William Dummer Esquire Lieutenant GOVERNOR and Commander in
Chief, in and over His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England. And to the HONORABLE, His MAJESTY's COUNCIL and the GENERAL
ASSEMBLY.
THE following Sermon is a serious and humble Address to Your Honors on the
behalf of Posterity laying before You the Charge and Commandment of the Great
GOD by Whom You rule, That You piously and faithfully use your best Endeavors,
under His Blessing and by the Favor of our Gracious King, to leave those Civil
and Religious Privileges which we now enjoy for an Inheritance to our Children
after us.

THE short and compendious way to this, is here laid before You from the Word
of GOD, namely, A religious seeking for and keeping all his Commandments.

IF GOD favor us it shall go well with us, the Royal Favor of our King to us
being from HIM, and so all the Wisdom and Success of Your Counsels. It is with
GOD also to make all our Enemies (secret or open) to be at peace with us, or to
turn their mischeivous Counsels into foolishness.

PIETY is big with Blessings to the Public, and also to every Person. But
especially are pious Rulers a singular Benefit and Glory to any People. They
are an Image of CHRIST in his Offices and Government; the Prophet and Prince
are united in them; and Men shall be blessed in them, all People shall call
them blessed.

THE Fathers of this Province came hither to seek for and to keep all the
Commandments of God, and (by His will and grace) to leave these into their
Children after them, for ever. So the General Court in effect told King Charles
the Second, in their Address to him in the Year 1661. We supplicate Your
Majesty ( said they ^ee the H^story of New England; by the Reverend Mr. Ne^. p.
332.
) for Your gracious Protection of us, in the Continuance both of our Civil and
Religious Liberties, according to the Grantees known End of suing for the
Patent, conferred upon this Plantation by your Royal Father. Our Liberty to
walk in the way of the Gospel, with all good Consciences according to the Order
of the Gospel, was the Cause of our transporting our selves with our Wives, our
little ones and our substance, from that pleasant Land, over the Atlantic
Ocean, into the vast Wilderness, choosing rather the pure Scripture Worship with
a good Conscience in this remote Wilderness, than the pleasures of England with
Submission, to the Impositions of the then so disposed, and so far prevailing
Hierarchy, which we could not do without an evil Conscience. -- We are not
seditious, as to the Interest of Caesar; nor schismatical, as to matters of
Religion. We distinguish between Churches and their Impurities. -- We could not
live without the Public Worship of GOD nor be permitted the Public Worship
without such a Yoke of Subscription and Conformity, as we could not consent
unto without Sin. That we might therefore enjoy Divine Worship without human
Mi^tures, without offense to God, Man and our own Consciences, we with Leave,
but not without Tears departed from our Country, Kindred and Fathershouses,
into this Patmos.

SO dearly did our Fathers purchase, and thus highly did they prise, those
Charter Privileges, and Religious Liberties, which some among us are too ready
now to make light of. Let us, my Fathers, as zealously affect the Preservation
of them, as they did the Acquisition of them; That so our Posterity may be in
some manner beholden to us as we are to our Ancestors; and that Your Names may
live in the Annals of these Churches, as Theirs do, after a peaceful and happy
Death.

IT is a master of great Thankfulness to GOD, and ough^ to be observed unto his
Glory, that we see the Body of our Rulers, and so many of the Men of Estate
among us, so well principled and established in the Cause of God among us. It
is a singular Mercy to us, our Ornament and Defense, that we see so many
laudable Examples of Sobriety and Temperance, Frugality and Diligence, Charity,
Humility and Devotion, in the Houses of our Superior People. And here also we
shall find some of the best Instances of strict Family-Government, and a
careful Institution of their Children in the Principles and ways of our
Fathers. You cannot better express a faithful Love to GOD, your Country, your
Children, and your own Souls, than in so doing

AND now that I am speaking of this good Spirit for the Public and for
Futurity, as the singular Duty and Ornament of the Rulers of a People; give me
leave to add -- That it was this which built our College even in the Infancy of
the Colony, and which has supported and endowed it to this day. GOD has from
time to time raised up kind Friends and generous Benefactors to that Society,
both from among our selves, and also from abroad. We have our living
Benefactors with us, and we see the Children of Those that are deceased. We
hope that Posterity will not forget the Kindness of God which they have shown;
and we trust that GOD will remember it for good to Them and theirs.

BUT I owe unto GOD and to my Country a very particular and most grateful
mention of the late bounties of the Worthy and Pious Mr. THOMAS HOLLIS of
London unto our College; to ask the Praises of my People to the Blessed GOD,
whose the Mavelous Work is; and to ask their Prayers to GOD for so great a
Benefactor to Us and to our Children. GOD has put it into his heart to lay a
great Foundation this last Year for the Glory of CHRIST, and the good of our
Posterity, even for ever; if it please the Divine Providence to crown his
Design and Desires with a Blessing. Ten of our Sons, the poorer and the more
prompt and pious, are to receive (...) T^n Pounds each, toward their Education
for ^^e Service of CHRIST in the Work of the Ministry among us. And moreover
the LORD has enlarged his heart to give us no less than Eighty pounds per Annum
for the Maintenance of a Professor of Divinity in the College; where a very
worthy One is Established, who is reading Lectures to the S^udents every week,
in public and in private; to their great Spiritual Advantage (we trust) and
for their Improvement in sacred knowledge.

THE Sons of New England must for ever acknowledge Mr. HOLLIS for a Father to
them; and I trust that GOD means to give Him in many of them a better Name than
of Sons and of Daughters; besides that Everlasting Name among the Children of
GOD that shall never be cut off. Yea the Churches of New England will
gratefully own Mr. HOLLIS to be made by GOD a Nursing Father to them, while His
Professor shall (by the will of GOD) from Generation to Generation be feeding
our Sons with the Sincere Milk of the Word, and they these Flocks of our Lord
Jesus Christ with the same.

THUS it pleases GOD to be speaking in His gracious Providence concerning our
Posterity, concerning the College and these Churches, for times to come; if we
will be seeking for and keeping all His Commandments; which is the thing that
our pious Friend and Benefactor has at heart in all this Bounty to us.

AT the same time GOD has pleas^d to inspire several very Reverend Ministers in
London, with a natural and earnest Care for our Interest, Civil and Religious,
even as if They had been born of us, or we of Them. Such is the fervent and
tender Solicitude, which they express for the weal and flourishing of our
Country, our College, and our Churches; and lest we or our Posterity should
lose our precicious Liberties. They know us not, nor can have any Benefit by
us; but they are known to CHRIST, and are His Servants, and seek His glory; and
for JESUS sake they wish our Good, Temporal and Spiritual: Because of the House
of the Lord our GOD they seek our Good. Now while GOD moves thus the Hearts of
distant Friends, who never saw us, to seek the Preservation and Propagation of
Religion and Learning to our Posterity; shall not we our selves much more feel
this Concern for our selves? to keep those good things committed to us, and to
leave them for an Inheritance unto our Children after us, for ever?

I have thus cast into a new Form, and by way of Preface said, some of those
things which I omitted, when the Time and my Strength failed me in the Delivery
of the following Sermon: Which that it may be accompanied with the Divine
Blessing to them that read it, is the Prayer of

May it please Your HONORS, Your most Obedient Humble Servant, Benjamin Colman.

An Election SERMON.
I. Chron. XXVIII. 8. Now therefore in the sight of all Israel, the
Congregation of the Lord, and in the Audience of our God, keep and seek for all
the Commandments of the Lord your God: that you may possess this good land, and
leave it for an Inheritance to your Children after you, for ever.
THESE are some of the last Words of David, the King of Israel, the LORD's
Prophet, and the Father of his People. He spoke them to an assembly of the
Princes of the Tribes of Israel, their Captains and Officers, whom he had
summoned together to receive his last Will and Charge. The Subject whereon he
now discoursed them, was as became a dying King and Saint, the Worship and
House of GOD among them; that this might be their Care after his decease, and
that with Religion the Favor and Blessing of God might be entailed upon them,
and on their Children after them.

THE Aged King had been very weak and like to die before this, but seems to
have some little revival, some return of vital warmth and heat, and thus he
improved it; he would once more see his Nobles and Officers about him, and give
them his last Char^^ and Blessing, and take his last leave of them. So it
became the King of Israel to die.

WHEN this illustrious Assembly presented themselves before him, the King stood
up upon his feet, ver. 2. God strengthened him for this last and noble Act of
his life He had a Message from God to deliver to them, and it became him to
show this reverence. He also honored as well as loved the noble Persons whom
he spoke to; and they were worthy of this respect from their King: the Princes
of the people of the God of Abraham; his Brethren and the People of his God.

ACCORDINGLY he bespeaks them with affection and respect, Hear me my Brethren
and my people. Humility becomes and adorns even Kings themselves. It is a truly
royal Robe wherewith they should be clothed. Nor should it be put on only as a
grave-cloth when they come to die, and must be laid in the dust.

THE King inform^d his Nobles here of his own good will and desire to have
built the Temple of God; an house of Rest for the Ark of his Covenant, and for
the Honor of his Name; but that God had forbid him and had reserved that great
and good Work for his Son after him. He informs them however how he had
prepared and made ready for the building; that God had chosen Solomon for his
Successor in the Kingdom, and had promised concerning him that he should build
his House; had promised to be his Father, and to establish his Kingdom for
ever, if with a filial piety he continued in obedience to him. This is the
short and summary of the King's Speech, to the Words of my Text -- Now
therefore in the sight of all Israel, the Congregation of the Lord, and in the
audience of our God; keep and seek for all the Commandments of the Lord your
God; that ^e may possess this g^o^ Land, and leave it for an Inheritance to
your Children after you, for ever.

THESE Words are a very grave and solemn Charge, whereof we may consider, 1.
The matter of it; that they should keep and seek for all the Commandments of
the Lord their God. The knowledge and observance of God's Commandments is the
sum of God's Charge and Will left with his People. They must set themselves to
keep his Commandments even all of them; and in order (...) this they must seek
for them all, to know the whole of their duty, "What they knew they must be
sure, to keep, and they must seek for what they knew not.

2. This Charge is delivered with much Solemnity. In the sight of all Israel,
the Congregation of the Lord, and in the audience of our God. What could be
said more solemn?

1. Says the King, I charge you in the sight of all Israel. As if they were
all here present, and witnesses of what I say: that Israel whose Princes and
Officers you are, and as whose Representatives you here stand; as in the sight
and hearing of all Israel, to whom the Words which I now speak will soon come.

Moreover, 2. Consider ye that this people is the Lord's Congregation. The
greater therefore was the trust and charge of these Princes, the Heads of this
Congregation of the Lord; who would be the greater Witnesses for or against
their Princes, if they should seek and keep the Commandments of God or not do
it. But if it were awful to be charged as in their sight,

How much more was it for them to consider, 3. That it was in the audience of
God Himself that they were now spoken to. In the sight of all Israel, and in
the audience of our God. HE is present with us, said the dying King; I speak to
you in His Name; HE sees and hears us; He is a witness, and so are his
Congregation of what I say to you; and as you fear Him or tender his favor,
regard what I say unto you. -- To all this Solemnity in the Words, we must yet
further observe in 'em,

3. An Argument referred unto, and a Motive added.

1. Here is a great Argument, Reason or Motive referred unto. Now therefore; so
begins my text. It refers to the preceding discourse of David's: q. d. Since I
have by the direction and favor of God, made such provision for the building a
House to his Name and Worship, and since God has chosen Solomon to build it,
and promised to be with him in it; and to establish his Kingdom for ever-if he
and you be constant in his Commandments* Now therefore I require and charge you
in the sight of all Israel and in the audience of our God that ye keep and seek
for all the Commandments of the Lord your God, etc. As you regard God and his
Worship, value his favor, or fear his anger; and as you would have Church and
State remain in a flourishing condition; see that you be observant of the
Lord's Commands even all of them. The House of God in Israel, and the Kingdom
in the House of David depended on it.

2. There is a Motive added in the close of the Text: That ye may possess this
good land, and leave it for an Inheritance for your Children after you, for
ever. Before they were moved from the Honor and Glory to the Name of GOD; here
they are moved from their own and their Children's temporal welfare. They were
possessed of a good land; they held it by the promise of GOD upon their
Obedience to Him; they would desire to keep the possession they had of it, and
that their Children should inherit it after them; But then they must needs seek
for and keep the Commandments of the Lord their God, if they would have a
peaceable and quiet possession of their pleasant land secured to them, or to
their Children after them.

THESE are the Arguments and Motives with which the duty required in the text
is enforced.

I shall now name some Doctrinal Observations.

I. THAT the People of God in general, the Rulers of a people in particular,
and every single person belonging to the Congregation of the Lord, are under
the strict charge of GOD to seek and keep all His Commandments.

II. THAT as every Superior in the state or in the Church, is under this Charge
himself, so it is his duty to lay it upon all that are under him, and to leave
it as his dying Charge with them.

III. THAT we should every one of us seriously consider, that it is in the
sight of all the Lord's people, the Congregation of the Lord, and in the
Audience of our GOD, that we are under this Charge.

IV. THAT the Church, Kingdom and Worship of CHRIST among us, the House of our
GOD, depends on our religious seeking and keeping of GOD's Commandments.

V. THAT this is the way to keep possession of this good Land which the Lord
our God has given us, and to leave it for an Inheritance unto our Children
after us.

I. THAT the People of God in general, the Rulers of a people in particular,
and every single person among them, are under the strict Charge of GOD to seek
for and keep all His Commandments.

SO they are charged, and this is the Charge in our text. And here I shall say,
1 This is the Charge of the Lord our God. 2 We are all under it. 3. The Rulers
of a People are so in an especial manner.

1. THIS is the Charge of the Lord our God, that we keep and seek for all His
Commandments* We have his Commandments in his Word. They are the Laws,
Statutes, Testimonies, and Judgments of the Lord our God; and in short His
Covenant with his people. Moses and the Prophets have han^ed them down to us;
and CHRIST (the Eternal Son of GOD, and Lord of all the Holy Prophets) has
confirmed and ratified them. Moses bespeaks the Church for ever in the 4.
Chapter of Deuteronomy. Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, as the Lord
my God commanded me: ye shall not add unto the Word which I command you,
neither shall ye diminish ought from it: And what Nation is there so great,
that has statutes and judgments so righteous, as all this Law which I set
before you? Now, says the text.

1. WE must religiously keep the Commandments of the Lord our God. Laws are
made, and Gods laws are written to us, to be observed and kept. A Commandment
implies Obedience. We must needs be subject to the Power that is over us, to
give laws and to judge us by the laws, both for wrath and for Conscience sake.
The law is to rule and govern us* To keep the Commandment is to do it; to
observe and obey it with our hearts and in our lives. We must keep it in our
minds and hide it in our hearts, that we may not sin against it, transgress and
break it, in though it word or deed. We must therefore keep our Souls diligently
that we may keep God's word. The keeping it implies care, diligence, constancy
and pleasure. Faith, fear, love, reverence, esteem of the word, and desire to
ple^se and glorify God, do all meet in every act of acceptable Obedience to
God. Deuteronomy. 10 12. What does the Lord thy God require of thee? but to fear the
Lord thy God, to walk in his ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy
God with all thy heart and with all thy soul; to keep the Commandments of the
Lord, and his statutes, which I command thee this day.

2. WE must keep all the Commandments. So the text requires. Our Obedience must
be universal. What body of Laws is there but Obedience is equally required to
them all. What single Law was ever given, but to be obeyed? The same Authority
enacts one and another of them. Every word of God is pure; all his Commands are
holy, just and good. He that breaks one law is a transgressor, and liable to
the Judgment. He that offends in one point is guilty of all, Jam. 2.18. He
might as well offend in another point: He offers indignity to the Power that
made the whole law. Obedience in some things will not excuse disobedience in
others. Exodus 24.7. All that the Lord our God shall say to us, we will do and
be obedient.

3. IN order to this we must seek for them all. Keep and seek for all the
Commandments of the Lord your God. We must be careful and inquisitive to know
the Commands, if ever we would keep them. We must seek the knowledge of them
with desire and care and pains. We need not seek jar for the Commands; which we
have in our hands and before our eyes: Deuteronomy. 30.11, 12. This Commandment which
I command thee this day is not hidden from thee, neither is it far off: but the
word is very nigh to thee, in thy Mouth and in thy heart; that thou may do
it. Yet neither must we grudge any pains or labor that is necessary unto our
getting the knowledge of God's will. It is highly worth the most diligent and
laborious seeking. Prove. 2. beg. My son, incline thine ear to wisdom, and apply
thy heart to understanding; cry after knowledge and lift up thy voice for
understanding; seek her as silver and search for her as for hid treasure; so
shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, etc. We must therefore search the
Scriptures which are written for our learning. We must read therein daily; read
it in our Closets, read it in our Families. We must seek the law at the mouth
of Gods Ministers, whose lips must preserve knowledge, Mal. 2.7. It was the
honor and blessing of Levi, and a Blessing to Israel; Deuteronomy. 33.10. He shall
teach Jacob God's judgments, and Israel his laws. We must be waiting daily at
God's Gates, and at his doors. We must seek unto God by Prayer for his light
and his truth; that he would teach us his statutes and lead us into all truth;
Psalm 119.34. Give me understanding and I shall keep thy law; yea, I shall
observe it with my whole heart. Thus we must seek for, if we would keep the
Commandments of God.

4. AND lastly, This is the Charge of the Lord our God to us: Now therefore
keep and seek for all the Commandments of the Lord your God. The Lord is our
God, and it belongs to Him to charge us. He has made us, made us to obey him,
made us to be ruled and governed by law: He has given us his Charge, as our
King and Lord, and as our Father in heaven. His Commands are his charge to us,
and then he has charg^d us to keep, observe and do them. Agreably to what we
read, Eccl. 8.2. I charge (...) thou keep the Kings Comman^ment. The Lord is
our King, our Savior and our Judge, (...) we are under his charge His Charge
to us is like that, 1 Timothy 6.13. I change thee before God -- that thou keep my
Commandments without spot; unrebukable. It is m^st good for us to be so
charged; m^st kind and good in God, that he has laid so strict a Charge upon us
to mind our duty and pursue our happiness. But it should be also exceeding
awful to us to be so required and commanded by God; and we must diligently and
obsequiously set our selves to know and do what the Lord our God requires. 1
Kings 2.3. Keep the Charge of the Lord thy God; to walk in his ways, as it is
written in his law.

BUT this for the 1st thing; that this is the Charge of the Lord our God that
we keep his laws.

2. ALL the people of God together, and every single person by himself, are
under this charge of God. So is the text directed, and so are all the
Commandments of the Holy Word.

1. TO all of us together, as a people of God, and as the Lord's Congregation.
Hear O my people and I will speak! Hear this all ye people, both high and low,
rich and poor together. 2. To each Individual; to every single person; who are
as much meant and spoken to as if they were named. For every one is equally
known to God, observed by him, and will be bro't into Judgment. So the Covenant
of the Lord was with the Children of Israel, with all together, and with every
single person apart: Deuteronomy. 29.10, -- 20. Ye stand this day all of you before
the Lord your God, your Captains, Elders, Officers and all the Men of Israel;
your little ones, your wives, and the stranger that is in thy Camp; from the
hewer of thy wood unto the d^awer of thy water; that thou should enter into
Covenant with the Lord thy God and into his Oath, and that he may establish
thee to day for a people unto himself, and to be unto thee a GOD: Neither with
you only do I make this Covenant and this Oath; but with him also that is not
here with us this day; lest there should be among you Man or Woman or Family or
Tribe, whose heart turns away this day from the Lord our God; and it come to
pass when he hears the Words of this Curse that he bless himself, saying, I
shall have peace: -- the Lord will not spare him, but the anger of the Lord and
his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and the Lord shall separate him unto
evil out of all the tribes of Israel, and all the Curses that are written in
this Book shall come upon him. Thus awfully is a whole place or people, and
every particular person under the Commandment and Charge of God^

3. THE Rulers of a people are in a particular and peculiar manner, under this
Charge of God to keep and seek for all his Commandments. To them David speaks
in the text, and by them to all Israel: And unto them Moses delivered the
Charge and Covenant of God, that they should see it kept by all under them. As
the least and lowest in the Congregation are not overlooked by God, so the
highest and the greatest are especially observed and commanded by him.

SO is the King upon the throne, and the Law to him is, Deuteronomy. 17.19. That he
have a Copy of God's Law with him, and that he read therein all the days of his
life; that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of
his Law.

HOW much more then are all Ministers of State, Governors, Judges and Officers
commissioned by the King, under the Law and Charge of God; to observe his Word
themselves, and see it reverenced and observed by those that are under them.
They are to go before their people, leading them by their Example, influencing
by their Reputation and interest, and constraining by their Authority and
power, to a reverend observance of the Will and Worship of God. To this end
Moses gave Joshua a Charge before he died, and commanded the Levites; and sent
out his Summons, Deuteronomy. 31.28. Gather unto me all the E^ders of your Tribes and
your Officers, that I may speak all these words in their ears, and call beaven
and earth to record against them. So Joshua called for the Heads and Elders of
Israel to Shechem, and they presented themselves before the Lord, and he set
them a Statute and an Ordinance. So Solomon spoke to every Governor in all
Israel, the chief of the fathers. And to name no more, So Jehoshaphat commanded
the Levites and Judges in his day; -- Let the fear of the Lord be upon you,
(said he) with whom there is no Iniquity nor respect of persons; and he charged
them, ^^ying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord, faithfully and with a
perfect heart; lest wrath come upon you and on your Brethren: deal c^uragi^usly
and the Lord shall be with the good. -- These are the Commandment and Charges
of God which Magistrates and Ministers are yet under, according to the glorious
Gospel of the blessed God, made known unto all Nations for their Obedience.

LET our Rulers therefore suffer the Word of Exhortation, and the Admonition
from God to them, that They eminently among the People of God are under his
Commandment and his Charge to seek for and keep his holy Commandments. And it
is fit that they should be so charged by God for his Glory, whose Ministers and
Servants they are, and for the Good of Mankind, whereunto they must Minister
according to his Will. It is the peculiar Honor of God to command them, and to
be obeyed by them, as also to judge and punish them; and it is a peculiar
Honor to them to be Examples of Obedience to God. Psalm. 97.7. Worship him all
ye Gods. The Principalities and Powers above do so, and how much more should
those on Earth? Eccles. 5.8. He that is higher than the highest regards, and
there be higher than they.

BUT as a personal Subjection and Obedience to all the Commandments of God is
the duty of Rulers, so are they obliged also, both in their Legislative, and
also in their Executive capacity and trust to seek for all the Commandments of
the Lord; That they be all of them made known to the people under their care,
and enjoined on them, and that none be suffered in the Violation of any of them
This is the Duty of their place, and they should voluntarily but with Solemnity
come under this Bond upon their Souls; as the Rulers of Israel did, Neh. 9.
ult. We make a sure Covenant and write it; and our Princes, Levites and Priests
seal to it.

BUT I come to the Second Observation:

II. THAT as every Superior in the State or in the Church is under this Charge
of God himself, so it is their duty to charge it upon all that are under them,
yea and to leave it with them as their dying charge.

SO David did in my text; and the record of it leaves him as a standing and
teaching Example; whether we consider him as a Father, as a Prince, or as a
Prophet, or as one full of Days, and dying.

SO Parents and Governors of Familys should charge their Children and household
after them to seek and keep the Commandments of God. So did Abraham; of whom
God said, I know him that he will command his Children and his household after
him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord. So did Joshua; who declared
before all Israel, As for me and my house we will serve the Lord. And the 101st
Psalm stands an everlasting record of David's Rule and Government of his own
house: I will walk in my house with a perfect heart; my eyes shall be upon the
faithful of the Land that they may dwell with me; he that walks in a perfect
way he shall serve me.

I have said before, and have exhibited several illustrious Examples, how
Rulers should require and constrain their Subjects to keep the word of God. For
this they are invested with their Legislative and Executive powers; and are
Ordained of God; to be terrors to evil doers and a praise to them that do well;
to defend the Name, the Word, the Day, the Worship and Ordinanc^s of God from
profanation; and that all under t^^m may lead a peaceable and quiet life, in
godliness and honesty.

BUT if we consider David as a Prophet his Example is a law and rule also unto
the Ministers of Religion. And none are more obliged than they to lay the
Commands and Charge of God before others; and to require all in his name, even
the highest with the lowest; to charge them that are rich in the world and them
that are poor together, in His Name who is the Maker of them both; to speak,
rebuke and exhort with all Authority, and without partiality. Wherefore in
Obedience to my text I magnify my Office this day; and being called by the
Rulers of my People to speak unto Themselves in the Name of the Great GOD, by
Whom they rule; I do in His fear and from His Word lay before Them their Duty,
to God and this People; both that they keep the Commandments of God themselves,
and charge theirs after them to do so too; yea, and as far as in them lies, to
bind their Successors to a faithful adherence to the Cause of God. And herein
you must needs obey your Ministers as those that have this Rule; and submit
your selves, as unto them that watch for your Souls, and must give account unto
God.

BUT then lastly it is to be considered, That whoever we are, Rulers,
Ministers, Parents, Masters; within a little time we shall have served our
Generation, and the time will come that we must die; And if while we live we
lay the Charges of God upon them that are under us, and who are like to survive
us; so when we are Old and gray headed, if God spare us to old age; or when the
Day of our Death comes on, as it surely will in a short time; Then let us like
Jacob and Joseph, like Moses and Joshua, like Samuel and David (by the Grace of
God) leave our dying Testimony to the good ways of God, our dying Prayers for
the Church and Kingdom of Christ in the midst of us, and our dying Commandment
to our Children and Families, that after our Decease they still seek for and
keep all the Commandments of the Lord our God.

NOTHING can be either more humane or more pious than this Care for Posterity;
Nothing more worthy of us either as Men or as Christians, than this desire to
perpetuate the Religion of God, his Worship and Obedience to Him, in succeeding
Generations. God has therefore most strictly enjoined this upon his professing
People: Witness that famous place of Scripture, Deuteronomy. 6.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Hear O
Israel, The LORD our God is One LORD. And thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might. And these Words
which I command thee this day shall be in thy heart: And thou shall teach them
diligently unto thy Children; and shall talk of them when thou sit in thine
house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when
thou ris^st up: And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thy h^nd, and they
shall be as frontlets between thy eyes: And thou shall write them upon the
posts of thy house, and on thy gates.

YOU see here that the Care of God is for his own Glory, as in the present so
also in the Coming Generation; and that he therefore commits them to us as our
special Trust, and charges us with them; that as the Prophet speaks, Isai.
59.21. His Word which is in our mouth may not depart out of the mouth of our
seed, nor out of the mouth of our seeds seed, even for ever.

SO David died, and these were his lust Words, who was the Anointed of the God
of Jacob, and the sweet Psa^mist of Israel! The Spirit of God spoke by Him, and
the Word of the LORD was in his tongue; and He expired speaking the Words which
Isreal's Rock and GOD had spoke to him. He breathed out his Soul in that Prayer
to God for his People and for his Son, 1 Chronicles. 29.18, 19. O GOD of Abraham,
Isaac and Israel our Fathers, keep this for ever in the Imagination of the
thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their heart unto thee! And
give unto Solomon my son a perfect heart, to keep thy Commandments, thy
Testimonies and thy Statutes.

NOW as this has been the noble, generous and enlarged View of Patriarchs and
Prophets, for the glory of God and the good of Souls in all times to come; so
let me observe to You (and give the Praise to God) that the Fathers of this
Country did eminently inherit this great and good Spirit, and herein approved
Themselves like Judah, ruling with God and faithful with the Saints. They
governed their Houses strictly, they taught their Children diligently, they
endeavored earnestly to instill early into them the highest Reverence of Gods
Name, his Word, his Day, his Ordinances, and his Worshipers; They set up
Schools, they founded a College, for a succession of Pastors in the Churches
and to seek a godly Seed for Christ in this place of their Sepulchers, as long
as the Sun and Moon should endure. So they approved themselves the Children of
faithful Abraham, the Friend of God, whose Everlasting praise is in the
Churches, that He commanded his Children and Household after him, that they
should keep the Way of the Lord.

I go on to the third Doctrinal Observation.

III. THAT we ought every one of us seriously to consider; that it is in the
sight of all the Lord^s people, and in the Audience of our God that we are so
charged, taught and warned, to keep and seek for all his Commandments.

THESE are two weighty Motives and powerful Arguments to quicken and excite us
unto the discharge of the duty incumbent on us. They should sink deep into our
hearts, and yet ly uppermost too in them, and be ever in our memory, that in
the sight of all Israel, and in the audience of our God, we are bound, and have
bound our selves, to seek and keep all God's Commandments.

1. IN the sight of all the Lord's people we are so bound, are so charged and
have so promised. All the people of God are witnesses for and against one
another, that this charge of the Lord is laid and lying upon every Order, and
upon every Person among us. So Magistrates are Sworn, in the sight of all the
Lords people, even as Moses gave Joshua a charge before all Israel, when he was
placed at the head of the Congregation of the Lord: Numb. 27.23. And as
Jehojada gave to Jehoash the Testimony when he put the Crown upon his head, 2
King. 11.12 So our Kings are under a Coronation Oath, to seek and keep the
Commandments of the LORD and to govern by his Word. And all our Rulers are
sworn to observe it and rule by it. And they should always remember it, that
all the People are witnesses of the Oath of God which they are under. It was a
Solemnity that not only put honor upon Joshua before all Israel, but which
also was to impress him with an awful and reverend sense of his Duty to God and
his people. Said God to M^ses, Take thee Joshua and set him before Eleazer the
priest and before all the Congregation, and give him a charge in their sight,
He was charged with the People of the Lord; they were put into his hand, as
sheep into the hand of a shepherd; and therefore it was done in their sight and
presence: As to express their own Consent and Subjection to the Government, so
to be witnesses of his Sacred Promise and Engagement to rule them in God's fear
and by his word.

IN like manner Ministers are Ordained publicly, and solemnly charged before
the Congregation of the Lord, 1 Timothy 6.11, 12. Thou O man of God, follow after
Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness; fight the good
fight, lay hold on Eternal life; whereunto thou art called, and have professed
a good profession before many witnesses. Men ought to regard the presence, the
knowledge, the testimony and witness of Men. The more Witnesses we promise any
thing before, the more we bind our selves to do it. Therefore our solemn and
religious Engagements are required and given in the sight of all the people, in
the Congregation and Assembly; who are the Lord's witnesses now, and will be so
hereafter.

AND so it is with all private Christians. Whatever Charges from God, or Vows
to him you come under, you do it publicly and before many Witnesses. You
worship God in Assemblies, you confess Christ before Men, You are preached to
in the great Congregation, and with them you join in prayer; you Covenant with
God publicly; the Assembly saw your Baptismal Consecration to God, and they
have heard your good Professions and Engagements to him: The Solemnities of
Zion are all open and in the face of the world. The least person in the
Congregation, that is come under the Covenant of God, stands bound and engaged
in the sight of all Israel, the Congregation of the Lord and his witnesses: for
we are all Witnesses against our selves, and for one another, That we have
chosen the Lord to serve him, Josh. 24.22.

But then,

2. IT is in the Audience of our GOD himself; which is more than the sight of
all Israel, that we are charged to keep and seek for his Commandments, and have
bound our selves to do it. Have men seen and heard, much more has GOD, Genesis
16.13. Thou Lord see me. He is always and every where present; especially is
he so in religious Assemblies and in the more solemn Assemblies of (...). We
are charged before HIM, whose eyes run to and fro' through the earth, beholding
the evil and the good; before Him whose eyes behold, his ey-lids try the
Children of men. We are charged before HIM who fills Heaven and Earth with
his presence, and from whose presence and Spirit the^e is no flying: before Him
who searches the heart and trys the reins, and will make all the Churches to
know that he does so; and will bring every work into judgment with every secret
thing. So we read in the words after my text --, for the Lord searches all
hearts, and understands all the Imaginations of the tho'^s.

O how awful should this consideration be to us? according to what we read,
Psalm. 139. beg O Lord, thou have searched me and known me. Thou know my down
sitting, and my up-rising; Thou understandest my thoughts afar off. Thou
compassest my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways. For
there is not a Word in my tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether.
Thou have beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me. Such
knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is High and I cannot attain unto it.
Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? Or whither shall I flee from thy presence?
If I ascend up into Heaven thou art there! if I make my bed in Hell, behold
thou art there! --

HOW awful should it be to Magistrates, to consider, that they are sworn before
and by the great GOD! and that He stands in the Congregation of the mighty;
be judges among the Gods; and that he will arise to judge the Earth, for he
shall inherit all Nations, Psalm. 82.

HOW awful should it be to Ministers to remember their Charge from God, and in
his Name and Presence. 1 Timothy 5.21. I charge thee before God, and the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, 2 Timothy 4.1. I charge thee before God, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing
and Kingdom.

HOW awful should it be to the Lord's People to remember the Words we use in
receiving their Covenant Engagements and Profession; -- You do as in the
presence of the Great GOD profess and promise --. If we receive the witness of
men, the witness of GOD is greater: So if the presence of many witnesses on
earth is great, how much greater is the single eye and notice of God? Josh.
22.22. The Lord God of Gods, the Lord God of Gods He knows; and Israel he
shall know. But how small a thing is Isreal's knowledge, in comparison of His
who is Isreal's GOD?

IF it were only a Stone that stood by, that has neither eye nor ear nor
tongue, yet it were eno' in the presence of GOD. As Joshua took a great Stone
and set it up by the Sanctuary of the Lord, and said unto all the people, This
stone shall be a witness to us; for it has heard all the words of the Lord
which he has spoken to us; it shall be for a witness unto you lest you deny
your God. There needs no witness before Him; the very Stones shall be witnesses
and bear witness for him; if he please these shall cry out; and so shall these
Walls and these Seats; and so shall the Council Board, the Seats of Legislation
and those of Judicature, for they have heard all our Words to God, and his to
us.

NOW let these Motives sink down into our hearts; It is in the sight of all the
Congregation of the Lord, and in the Audience of your God, that you are charged
and that you promise and profess to keep and seek for all his Commandments.

NOW Vow and Pay unto the Lord your God: He cuts off the (...) of Princes and
is terrible unto the Kings of the Earth. With Him is terrible Majesty. Let his
Dread fall on the Greatest and on the least. May the Fathers of the
Congregation ever cleave to the Lord, and this People religiously cleave to
Them: According to what we read, Neh. 10.29. They clave to their Brethren, the
Nobl^s; and entered into a Curse and into a^ Oath to walk in God's law; and to
observe to do all his Commandments, his statutes and his judgments.

I shall conclude this Head with two very different Reflections; the one more
pleasant to make, the other more melancholy.

ON the one hand it ought to be the Joy of the Province, and a matter of
special Thanksgiving to GOD in our Churches, that we see your HONOR, ( The
Commander in Chief at this day) steadfastly abiding in the Communion of these
Churches. God make you always a true Son and a kind Father to them. It is Your
Happiness and Ours, that You serve and We enjoy a KING the Equal and righteous
Protector of his Kingdoms and Provinces in their different legal
Establishments, for religious Order, Worship and Discipline. This Liberty of
Conscience our Fathers sought, and ask^d and had a Royal Charter to assure them
of, and to secure it unto their Children after them. The GOVERNOR, who is now
absent from us, honored and endeared Himself to many of us, and very justly,
by his zealous Declarations at all times and in all places, for the
Preservation of our Liberties both Civil and Religious. And it is yet our
Happiness to see almost all our Counselors and Judges willingly under the
Bonds of GOD in our Churches* May He always inspire them with a wise and
sincere Zeal for His Name and Truths, as they are professed in them. Thanks be
to GOD we yet see so much our Counselors as at the first, and our Judges as at
the beginning.

BUT then to pass another, most just but more melancholy Reflection: -- What
fear and trembling may well fall upon us, and what shame and confusion of face
cover us, collectively or personally considered, that we have no more observed
and kept, that we have perfidiously and presumptuously broken and transgress^d,
the Commandments of the Lord our God! What shall we say after this? that we
have forsaken the Lord's Commandments? after that we have been so bound in his
Audience, and in the sight of all his People! Therefore might he be justly
angry with us and consume us! therefore shall he be just^fied when he speaks
and clear be when he judges! Therefore do the Confessions and Supplications of
Daniel, Ezra, and Nehemiah belong to us! O my God I am ashamed, and blush to
lift up my eyes unto thee my God! O Lord, the Great and dreadful God, keeping
the Covenant and Mercy to them that love him, and to them that keep his
Commandments! We have sinned and have comm^tted Iniquity and have done
wickedly, and have rebell^d; even in departing from thy Precepts and from thy
Judgments! Neither have we hearkened to thy servants the Prophets, which spoke
in thy Name to our Kings, our Princes and our Fathers, and to all the People of
the Land! O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto thee, but unto us Confusion of
faces, as at this Day! --

I go on to the Fourth Observation:

IV. THAT the Kingdom of Christ, his Church and his Worship among us depends
upon our religious keeping and seeking for all his Commandments.

Now therefore, says my text; i. e. that the Temple of God may be built, and
his Worship settled* and the Throne in the House of David be continued among
you; that the Kingdom may have peace and that the House of God may be more
glorious than ever; that Israel may be blessed by its God both in Church and
State, both in it is Temporal and Spiritual Interests; keep and seek for the
Commandments of the Lord your God. There can be no Religion among a People, nor
any Peace to them, without this. This matter first belongs to Ministers and
Magistrates, and then to all the people. As they said to Ezra, We also will be
with thee. Every Order, Rank and Degree among a people must unite and agree, be
one in this thing; every one acting in his place; and we all need one another
in it. High and low, rich and poor together. What can inferior people do, if
the Superior will not lead in the fear of God and obedience to him? If the
Foundations are out of course, what can the righteous do? and what can Rulers
do without the people? the Head walks and works by the hands and feet. In a
Building all hands must set to work: especially if the building be a Temple of
God, or if it be the repairing it, or cleansing it, or restoring it, it needs
many hands, it deserves every hand. Let not the Religion and Worship of God,
his Kingdom and Interest fall through us, or in our hands. All lies at stake, in
our Religion. Wherefore let us rise and act together, with a united force; as
Joab said bravely to the Men of Israel in a day of danger; when the Battle was
against him before and behind; 2 Samuel 10.12. Be of good Courage and let us play
the men for our people, and for the Cities of our God. God calls us to bestir
our selves in our respective places, according to our different talents,
powers, interests, to minister for his Service and Glory; for the defense, for
the reviving, for the propagating and perpetuating of Religion and his Worship
among this People; and he says to us in our places, as David did to Solomon in
his high station, in the 10th and 20th Verses of our Con^ext; Take heed now,
for the Lord calls thee to build his House; be strong and do it: fear not nor
be dismayed, for the Lord God, even thy God, will be with thee; he will not
fail thee nor forsake thee; and behold the Courses of the priests and Levites
even they shall be with thee.

TRULY the Lord our God is with us if we are with him; as the Prophet of the
Lord once said to Asa and to all Judah. If he give us a heart and spirit to
stand by his Truths and Ways, his Cause and Interests among us, he will stand
by us in the support and defense of them; but if we forsake him and these he
will forsake us. So has he covenanted and threatened. Wherefore let us beg of
Him above every thing, a united heart to fear his Name, to love his Ways, and
to cleave together in them. Let us show a zealous adherence to the Word and
Worship of God. There we must seek for the Laws of the Kingdom of Christ, and
the Ordinances of his House. There our Fathers sought them, and have left them
to us to keep; have left us to the Law and to the Testimony.

BUT it is time I come to the fifth and last Doctrine, which is the other and
concluding Mot^ve:

V. THIS is the way to keep possession of this good Land which the Lord our God
has given us, and to leave it for an Inheritance unto our Children after us.

SO says my text; Now therefore in the sight of all Israel, the Congregation of
the Lord, and in the Audience of our God; keep and seek for all the
Commandments of the Lord your God; that ye may possess this good Land and leave
it for an Inheritance for your Children after you, even for ever. I will only
under this Head consider and compare the State of Israel in Canaan, and ours in
New England; and improve the Dealings and Promises of God to them for our
warning.

1. CANAAN was a good Land, and so is ours. This Epithet good is the common one
wherein God was will not to speak of Canaan. I suppose there was not at that time
a more pleasant and fruitful spot in the whole World. It is described as a Land
flowing with milk and honey: A land of brooks of water, of fountains and
depths, springing not only from the Valleys but also from the Hills: A Land of
wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees and pomegranates, a land of
O^^-olive and honey; a land whe^ein bread was eat without scarceness, and there
was no lack of any thing; a land the stones whereof were Iron and out of whose
Hills they dug brass, Deuteronomy. 8.7, 8, 9. Again, It was a land that drank w^ter of
the rai^s of heaven; a land which the Lord himself cared for, to water it from
above; which his eyes were always upon, from the beginning, etc. 11, 12
Finally, part of it lay on the Sea, and it had its lakes; and it sucked of the
abundance of the sea, it is riches by trade; and of the treasures hi^ in the
sand, the fish which they drew from the bottom, Deuteronomy. 33.19. And now you may be
ready to think that I have been describing our own Country; which is as likely
to be as rich and opulent one as ever the Land of Canaan was, if our Sins do
not hinder it.

2. GOD gave Canaan to the Children of Israel, and the same God gave this good
Land which we now possess un^o our Fathers. The God of Israel is the One living
and true God, and there is no other but He. He the God of Abraham is our God.
The knowledge of Him, his Covenant and his Worship is come to us by his Word.
He gave the Land of Canaan by promise unto Abraham for his natural Seed by
Isaac; and with a mighty hand and an out stretched arm he bro't them into it.
They got not the land in possession by their own arm, neither did their own how
save them; but his right Hand and his Arm, Psalm. 44. Init* He divided the Sea
before them, he led his people through the Wilderness, he smote great Kings and
slew famous Kings, and gave their land for an Heritage, etc. And although God has
never done the like since, or assayed to go and take him a Nation from the
midst of another nation, by temptations and signs and wonders, by a stretched
out arm and great terrors, as he did for the Children of Israel; yet the
presence of God with our Fathers, (a poor scattered and persecuted people, and
but a handful that sought rest and a quiet enjoyment of the Gospel) was very
remarkable in bringing them into this Land, making room before them, and
driving out the Nations that before possessed it; whose Good and no hurt to 'em
our Fathers sought. Indeed we cannot say, that God gave them a subdued and
improved Land for which they did not labor, neither Cities and houses to dwell
in ready built for them, nor Fields and Orchards to eat of which they planted
not: But God it was that gave them Wisdom and Courage and Strength, a heart to
subdue a waste Wilderness, and to fill it with Towns and Villages as it is this
Day. They built for God with one hand, and held the Weapons of War in the
other, and did bravely, and prosper'd, for God was with them and fought for
them; and gave them rest.

3. WE enjoy all the spiritual-Priviledges and Advantages of the Church of God
in Canaan; his House, Worship and Ordinances; for which it was that God severed
Canaan from the rest of the World, and for which it was that our Fathers sought
and settled this land. It was that they might seek and keep all the Commandments
and testimonies of the Lord, and enjoy the pure Worship and Ordinances of the
Gospel without molestation, and leave the quiet possession of them to their
Children after them. This was their Errand hither, and this their Enjoyment
here, and this their Legacy to us. This was the Re^t they so't, and this made
it a Canaan to them; though otherwise a dreadful Wilderness. For this they left
their pleasant Native Land, and passed the wide and dangerous Se^s, and planted
these Churches of our Lord Jesus; wherein the God of Abraham and Israel is
worshipped in spirit and in truth. So that I may say to you as Moses did to
Israel; What people is there that has God nearer to them, or more among them,
than this people of New England? or what Nation have statutes and judgments
more righteous, or the Ordinances of God more pure, and a more spiritual
Worship than this people? What people have the Lord's Sabbath* and Covenant
more shown to them? or the good knowledge of the Lord more and better taught
among them? We have the Ark and Sanctuary of God with us as much as ever it was
in Canaan. Wherefore blessed of the Lord is our Land, not only for the precious
dews of Heaven over (...), and for the deep that coucheth beneath; but more
especially for the knowledge and Good will of him that dwelt in the Bush: He
gave his word to Jacob, his Statutes and Judgments to Israel, he has not done
so by every People.

4. IT is and should be our care to keep possession of this good Land, and of
these spiritual and invaluable Privi^eges which the Lord our ^o^ has given us.
Nature and Grace do both teach it.

1. AS to the Soil and Land it self. GOD has given it to our Fathers and we
ought valiantly, and diligently to defend it from Enemies. Our fathers got it
in possession by the special Providence of God: Not by their own arm and (...),
that could not have saved them from the surrounding Salvages; but it was God's
right hand did it, because he had a favor to them; and a purpose of glory to
his Name in these Churches, in these ends of the earth. Now as Jephthay said
unto the Messengers of the King of the Children of Ammon, when he sent to
challenge a part of the Land of Israel; Judges, 11.23, 24. Now the Lord God of
Israel has dispossessed the Amorites from before his people, should thou
possess it? -- Whomsoever the Lord our G^d shall drive out before us them will
we possess. The French all along behind us do so; and I wish there were not
reason to call them, as there is, the Natural Enemies of our Provinces and of
our Religion. Our Salvages to the East are poisoned by them, and used by them
as bloody Instruments of War upon us. They would drive us, if they could off
the Land, into the Sea. They distress and straiten, weaken and diminish us in
our Borders; as the Remnants of the Canaanites did sinful Israel from time to
time; and they are like to be a dreadful Scourge unto our Children after us. We
must therefore fight the Lord's Battles, by his help, and defend the Soil; and
in fighting for that we also do for the Church and Altar of God among us. --
For,

2. WE have our Civil and Religious Liberties also which are the glory of the
Land, to defend and secure as far as we are able. I am sorry there should be
any among us, I would hope there can be none of us, who bear with grief or
ill will our spiritual or Charter Privileges. Our Fathers dearly deserved and
purchased them, by their Estates and by their Lives spent in this Service to
Christ and to their King; the subduing this Wilderness and the planting these
Churches at their own cost. The Government that then was, the King and his Wise
Council, justly though it so, and gave the humble Privileges which they modestly
asked for. None therefore ought to envy to their Posterity what they enjoy and
value; without any breach upon the Rights and Liberties of others. They that
choose to come and live among us for their own worldly advantage, ought
willingly to leave us in the quiet Possession of the dear Purchase of our
Fathers, or of the Royal Favor and Bounty to them. At least we owe this Duty
to God, to our Families and to our Children after us, to endeavor by all just
and righteous ways to keep possession of our Privileges, both spiritual and
religious --.

I add therefore,

5. IT should be our earnest desire and prayer, our diligent care and
endeavor, to leave this good Land, under it is present privileges Civil and
Religious, unto our Children after us, for an Inheritance, even for ever. We
can possess it but for a little while. Our Fathers, where are are they? and our
Ministers that were before us? They are gone and we are going after them to the
grave! O might it be to Heaven the Celestial Canaan, where many of them are! We
are entered into their labors: They wro't for us: We must work for our
Posterity, and the Glory of God among them. Our Privileges were dear to our
Fathers; these they left us; and counted that they left us a goodly heritage.
This let us leave to and desire to see entailed on our Children after us. Let
this be our desire, that these Churches and the Worship of God in them may be
enjoyed by posterity; and that the rising Generation may know and fear, and
serve the Lord God of their Fathers; may seek and keep all his Commandments.

For,

1. GOD only can defend and secure to us our Land, our Churches; our civil and
religious Rights He gave them to us; in whose hand the hearts* of Kings are. As
Nehemiah teaches us to give God the glory; Neh. 2.8. The king granted me
Letters according to the good hand of God upon me. In his hand too are the
hearts of Enemies, and he can turn them; and can chain them up, and defeat
their Counsels. We may and we should look to the God of Heaven as Nehemiah did,
and pray to him and trust in him: Neh. 1.10, 11. Now these are thy servants and
thy people; O Lord I beseech thee let thine ear be attentive to the prayer of
thy servants, that desire to fear thy name; and prosper and grant them mercy.
Some may laugh us to scorn for these words, as some did them, Neh 2.19. But
would we seek now and keep the Commandments of the Lord our God as Nehemiah
did, we might answer with his words, -- The God of heaven he will pr^sper us,
therefore we his servants will arise and build.

2. LET it be seriously remembered, considered, realized and believed by us,
that God has promised his people to defend them in the possession of their Land
and of their Religion, and to leave it unto their Children after them; if they
will keep the Charge of the Lord, and seek for and keep all his Commandments.
The safety of God's people is in his Name and Promise; and this has been his
Promise. Deuteronomy. 4.1, 40. Now therefore hearken to the Statutes and Judgments of
God to do them, that you may live and possess the Land; and that it may go well
with thee and with thy Children after thee; and that you may prolong your
days. This Promise, or if you will this Motive to Obedience, is often repeated
and urged by the Holy Ghost; Deuteronomy. 12.28. Observe and hear all these Words,
which I command thee, that it may go well with thee and with thy Children after
thee for ever; when thou do that which is good and right in the sight of the
Lord thy God. To give the utmost force unto this Promise God has confirmed it
to his people with an Oath; Deuteronomy. 28.1, 9. If thou shall diligently hearken
unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe and do all his Commandments, --
then the Lord shall establish thee an holy People unto himself as he has SWORN
unto thee. Again, the Promise is, Lev. 26.11, 12. If ye walk in my statutes and
keep my Commandments, I will set up my Tabernacle among you, and my soul shall
not abhor you; and I will walk among you and be your God, and ye shall be my
people. These are the Prom^ses of God to his People, and his Covenant with
their Children after them, if they will seek and keep his Commandments. And
these Promises are true and faithful; He keeps Covenant and Mercy with his
servants that walk before him with all their heart: He will save Zion, and will
buil^ the Cities of Judah, that they may dwell there and have it in possession:
the seed of his servants shall inherit it, and they that love his Name shall
dwell therein, Psalm 69 35, 36.

3. ON the contrary, God threatened his People of old, if they were disobedient
and impenitent, if they would not seek and keep his Commandments, and his
statutes, that they and their posterity should perish quickly from the good
land which he gave unto them. The promise and the threatening agree and do
mutually confirm one the other. They are put together in the Word of God and we
must not separate them. Deuteronomy. 30.15, -- 20. See I have set before you this day,
life and good, death and evil, In that I command thee this day to love the Lord
thy God, to walk in his ways, etc. that thou may live and multiply, and the
Lord thy God shall bless thee --: But if thine heart turn away, so that thou
will not hear, -- I denounce unto you this day that ye shall surely perish; ye
shall not prolong your days upon the Land. The like Threatening we have, Deuteronomy.
4.26. I call Heaven and Earth to witness, that ye shall utterly perish from off
the Land; ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall utterly be
destroyed; and the Lord shall scatter you among the Heathen. Heaven and Earth
have seen these Threatenings fulfilled on the People of God; particularly on the
Jewish Nation. And these things h^pned to (...) Ens^mples, and are written for
our Admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come. Read the Fulfi^ment of
the T^reatning on them, and the Improvement which we should make of it. Deuteronomy.
29.25, -- 29. They forsook the Covenant of the Lord God of their Fathers, --
and the anger of the Lord was kindled against their Land, to bring upon it all
the Curses that are wri^ten in his Book: And the Lord r^oted them out in Anger,
and in Wrath, and in great Indignation, and cast them into another Land, as it
is this Day. The secret things belong unto the Lord our God; but those things
which are revealed unto us, and to our Children for ever; that we may do all
the words of this Law.

AS therefore we value our Earthly Inheritance, and would leave it to our
Children after us; or as we value our Spiritual Privileges and desire that
these may continue with them; and yet most of all, as we would be seeking a
better Country, that is the Heavenly Canaan, for our selves and Ours; let us
receive the Exhortation now bro't to us in the Name of GOD, -- O seek for and
keep all the Commandments of the Lord your GOD.

LET me plead with you from the Love we owe to GOD, our Selves, our Children,
and our Country. If we have any Concern for His glory from us and ours; if we
regard our own and their Welfare, Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal; if we seek
the Good of others, as well those that are living with us, as theirs who shall
come after us; Let us be observant of the Divine Will and Law, made known to us
for our Good; and teach it diligently to our Children.

DO this in Obedience, Gratitude, Fidelity to GOD, that your Children may know
and love and serve Him, and be to Him for a Name a praise and a glory. Deuteronomy.
4.9. Only take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget
the things which thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all
the days of thy life, but teach them thy sons and thy sons sons. Deuteronomy. 31.13.
And that your Children, which have not known any thing, may hear and learn to
fear the Lord your God. After our selves, our Children are the best and
greatest things which we have to render unto God: They are living and spiritual
Sacrifices like our own souls; a reasonab^^ Service, holy and acceptable through
Christ. They belong to GOD by Covenant as well as we, and we must show them his
Covenant, and do our best to Establish them in it; that we may leave them as
well under the Blessings, as the Bonds of it.

LET us do our part (and surely we have a part to do, one and other of us in
our places) that Religion may not die with us or rather before us; but that it
may survive with ours after us, and outlive them, and flourish more yet in
their times who are not yet born. Like David let us be serving our OWN
Generation by the Will of God, and like him let us also provide for that to
come. This was his Consolation and Joy as he fell asleep and was gathered to
his Fathers, that he had prepared with all his might for the House of God which
his Son should build. He had the happy prospect of this; that the Name of God
in Israel was like to be still greater, and the Worship of God more Solemn and
glorious in his Sons days than it had been in his. This abiding and increasing
Glory of God, in the Church, through his means, after his Decease, was David's
Crown in Death; and a brighter Diadem it set before him than that earthly one
which he was laying down.

YOU know not what Services you are doing to God and men, while you are
Educating your Children religiously. They will (you hope) teach their Children,
and they theirs, the Word of God, down to many Generations. This is the Spirit
of all the Faithful, Psalm. 78.4. We will not hide them from their Children,
showing to the Generation to come the Praises of the Lord, and his Strength,
and his wonderful Works that he has done; That the Generation to come may know
them, even the Children that shall be born, who shall arise and declare them to
their Children.

YOUR Children also may come into those places of Trust, and public Service,
which you little think of, and be of great use in the World; for which you
should be now furnishing them, according to the Grace of God given to you. One
instructed Child may be an accomplished Instrument of unknown Good to many,
whether he serve in the State or in the Church. So Jacob taught Joseph the fear
of God, and God carried him to the Government of Egypt, to save all the
Countries round about and the Church that was in his Fathers house. So the
Parents of Moses privately taught him the Religion of God, and laid the
foundation of all the great Services which he did for God and his People. He is
a Benefactor to the World, who educates his Children laudably We cannot leave
the World a better Legacy than well disciplined Children.

BUT if we neglect our Children, we not only rob God and his Church of them*
but as it were Sacrifice them to Moloch. So impious are we to God, and
barbarous to them. Besides the present Injury to the world from us, the Misery
will be to our selves and ours in the Day of Judgment. We shall be found as
guilty in that day, as if we had literally built the High places of Tophet, in
the valley of the son of Hinnon, to burn our sons and daughters in the fire,
Jer. 7.31. We shall ly open to that dreadful Charge, Ezekiel. 16.20, 21. Thou have
taken thy sons and thy daughters which thou have born unto me, and these have
thou sacrificed to be devoured: Is this of thy Whoredoms a small matter? that
thou have slain my Children -- I leave it to your Bowels to make answer unto
such a Challenge.

MIND how Ezra's love to God wro't? and the love of the pious Jews with him to
their Posterity; Ezra 8.21. Then I proclaimed a Fast to afflict our selves
before our God, and to seek of him a right Way for us and for our little ones:
So we fasted and besought our God for this, and he was entreated of us. This
was as those that loved God and their Country, desirous that their Children
should be happy in the knowledge of God and of his ways. God seeks this godly
seed too and their Prosperity: Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that there were such an heart in
them, that they would fear me and keep my Commandments always; that it might be
well with them and with their Children for ever.

Finally, LET the Children and Posterity of New England be admonished and
charged from all that I have now said, in the Audience of the God of their
Fathers, and in the sight of all his People, to adhere unto these good ways of
the Lord, and to that Way of his Worship, in which they have been Instituted
from the Word of God in these Churches. If you can find the WORD of God more
kept to, in Worship* in Practice, in another Communion, I am well content that
you prefer it. But if you are not likely to find more of the sincere Word and
pure Institutions of Christ in any other Communion, then abide were you are;
and hold your selves bound in Conscience to do so. This is a just and true
Principle of the Protestant Religion, and the very Basis of the Reformation
from Popery; and it will stand for ever; As the Word of the Lord endures the
same, (the only Rule of Faith and Practice, Worship and Manners) while one
Generation goes and another comes.

YOUR Fathers sought, and found Grace to keep the Commandments of God.
Practical Piety was their Glory in the sight of God and Man. And being Dead
they yet speak to us, and charge us as David did his S^n; Kn^w thou the God of
thy Fathers* and serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind; If
thou seek him he will be found of thee, but if thou forsake him he will cast
thee off for ever. The Grand Legacy of the Fathers of this Country to their
Posterity is the Bible. It is the best and rich^st that they could leave us.
Let us pr^se it and keep to it, and it will keep us.

LET none seduce you from that. However zealously any may seem to affect you,
it cannot be well, if they would draw you from this One Principle of these
Churches. On this Rock Christ has built his Church; and on it stands ^ll pure
Religion and undefiled before God, our Father.

ONLY let your Hearts be right with him, according to his Word. If ye be
willing and obedient ye shall eat the Good of the land. It will avail us
nothing to be right in Principles of Order, and Worship, nor yet in Doctrines
of Faith, if we are not gracious in heart and holy in life before him. Our
Fathers walked with GOD, and trusted in Him, and were not confounded. And he
will be the same to us, if we are such toward him. Only his free and special
Grace can make us so. Seek this of him; and wait on him for it in his appointed
ways. You shall not seek this in vain. He will give the holy spirit unto them
that ask him. The Promise is sure unto all the seed. They are a praying Seed,
and instead of the Fathers shall be the Children.

I will only add, and leave with you, that Word of Promise, Isai. 44 1, -- 5
(which may it please God to speak to us; and fulfill on ours after us) Yet now
hear* O Jacob my servant, and Israel whom I have chosen! Thus says the Lord
that made thee, and formed thee from the womb, which will help thee: Fear not,
-- For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty and floods upon the dry
ground; I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my Blessing upon thine
Off^pring: And they shall spring up as among the grass, as w^llows by the
water. Courses: One shall say I am the LORD's; and another shall call himself
by the Name of Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand to the Lord,
and surname himself by the Name of Israel. Amen and Amen.

FINIS.

