Mr. Colman's Sermon On Isaiah I. 10. Come now, and let us reason together,
says the LORD.

GOD deals with us as rational Creatures: And if Sinners would but hearken to
Reason they would repent.

A SERMON PREACHED at the Lecture in Boston, February, 7.1722, 3. And now
Published at the desire and request of One that heard it.

By Benjamin Colman.

Micah vii. 18. Who is a GOD like unto Thee? that pardons Iniquity.

Hosea vi. 4. O Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do
unto thee?

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green, for Daniel Henchman, 1723.

GOD deals with us as rational Creatures: And if Sinners would but hearken to
Reason they would repent.
ISAIAH I. 10. Come now, and let us reason together, says the LORD:


WE have here the Great and dreadful GOD, bespeaking his sinful and wretched
people, in the most gracious and merciful manner that can be imagined. He is
earnestly calling them to Repentance and Reformation; Wash ye, make you clean,
put away the evil of your doings, etc. He is assuring them of the ready and
full pardon of all their Sins upon their Repentance, how heinous and aggravated
soever they were: Though your sins be as Scarlet, etc. He proposes therefore to
reason the Case with them, that he might effectually convince, affect and
persuade them; Come now and let us reason together, says the Lord.

LET them hear GOD what he has to say to 'em, and GOD is ready to hear them in
their turn, if they can have any thing to answer, any reason to give, why they
should not repent.

WAS ever any any thing so Good, condescending and compassionate? So righteous,
equitable and reasonable? as a Father to his erring Son, rather than as a Judge
unto his provoking, arraigned, judged people! Come now and let us reason
together, says the Lord.

JUST before he had been decking himself with Majesty, and arraying himself
with glory, and speaking with the utmost severity and terror: ver. 2. Hear O
heavens, and give ear, O earth; for the Lord has spoken ver. 10. Hear ye the
word of the Lord ye people of Sodom and Gomorrah! But how sweetly does the
style here change into the mild and softer words of Grace, mercy and
compassion! Come now and let us reason together says the Lord, etc.

IT may be the people of Judah might be ready to object against the vehemence
and severity of GOD by his Prophet, as too much and hard and unreasonable. That
they were a sinful People they might be ready to own, but not to that degree
nor so universally as they are here charged and arraigned, they might be ready
to hope. And though there might be much amiss in the Worship they rendered to
GOD, yet they might look upon the slight poured thereupon, ver. 11, 12, 13, to
be in a very unreasonable Excess. Wherefore to obviate and answer such a rising
and reasoning in their hearts, GOD speaks in the Text; "Come now, and let us
reason together, let us debate the matter fairly, let me convince you of my own
Justice and Equity, righteousness and goodness, if words will convince you.
"Thus religion has reason on its side, and the GOD of heaven condescends to
reason the Case with them that contradict him, and find fault with his
proceedings.

To this purpose and after this manner we often find the gracious GOD stooping
to reason the Case with his poor people, against themselves. Isa. 5.3. And now
O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge I pray you betwixt me and
my Vineyard. And in the 43. Chap. 26. ver. Put me in remembrance, says GOD; Let
us plead together, declare thou, that thou may be justified. What fair play
is here for their lives! did ever a Judge bespeak thus a Prisoner at the Bar!
or could a fellow Mortal, a fellow worm, say more to a Criminal that stood for
his life? The 18th Chapter of the prophesies of Ezekiel is all in this strain;
particularly, v. 25. Hear now, O house of Israel, is not my way equal? are not
your ways unequal? And to name no more, the Holy One leaves it to the
Conscience of his people to accuse him if they could and acquit themselves:
Micah 6.2, 3. For the Lord has a controversy with his people, and he will
plead with Israel; O my people, what have I done unto thee? testify against me.
These passages, some of 'em, do even exceed the Words of my text in
graciousness. They are a high and glorious Comment on them. They shine like the
Sun in their own brightness, and no words of man can add to them.

To come now to my Text, and raise some Doctrinal Observations from it.

I. GOD deals with us as rational Creatures and treats us in the most
reasonable manner. Come now and let us reason, etc.

II. IF Sinners would but hearken to reason they would repent. Wash you, make
you clean * put away etc; come now, and let us reason together.

III. GOD reasons therefore and argues with men for this very end to bring 'em
to repentance. Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your
sins be as scarlet, they shall be as wool, etc.

PROP. I. GOD deals with us as rational Creatures, and treats with us in a
reasonable manner. Such he made us, and accordingly he treats us.

1. HE made us rational Creatures. GOD made Man a living Soul; he made him in
his own Image; he made him but a little lower than the Angels, an Intelligent
and immortal Spirit as they are. Genesis 1.26. And God said, let us make man in
our Image, after our likeness, and let him have dominion. It is the Soul of man
that does especially bear the Image of GOD. In this it is that he resembles the
Great Father of Spirits; even as the Offspring resembles the Parent. Act.
17.28. For we are his offspring. "The faculties of our Souls are to us as the
clearest looking-glass wherein to see GOD. By these it is that we become
capable of conceiving of GOD's Spiritual Nature and Perfections, Providence,
Government and Judgment. We are Minds. As the Angels of Heaven are
Intelligences; so Man is a Spiritual Intelligence, Job 32.8. There is a spirit
in man, and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives him understanding. There is
a Soul in man endued with a principle and power of reasoning; and this Mind
needs to be enlightened by the Spirit of GOD. In our natural state we are taught
more than the beast of the earth, and are made Wiser than the fowl of heaven;
but in Regeneration the Understanding of man is divinely Illuminated from above
to discern the things of GOD. The Spirit of Man is the Candle of the LORD;
Prove. 20.27. Of his lighting within him and setting up there, to give light to
the house. Such a light within is Conscience; a most noble faculty, GOD's
Deputy. The Father of Spirits is the Father of this Light. He lights every
man that comes into the world, Joh. 1.9. We feel this power of thinking,
reasoning and arguing in our selves. My thoughts cause me to answer, said
Zophar: I am full of matter, said Elibu, and the Spirit within me, constrains
me. We are made rational Creatures, Intelligent Beings.

2. Accordingly GOD deals with us; treats us and carries toward us. This is
right and just; and necessary to the most perfect Being. He governs and orders
all his Creatures according to the nature he gives them. The Creatures that
have not reason for their own Conduct, he rules them by Instinct. Those that
have reason are capable of moral Government, and accordingly he governs them by
daws given to them.

1. OUR holy and glorious Maker has written his Law in us; and it was written
very fairly in man at first. Yea there yet remains very legible upon the heart
of man much of the will and law of GOD to him, and he that will but look within
himself, and attend to the voice of his own Reason and Conscience, cannot but
read it there. Hence we read of the very heathen that they retained the Truth
in unrighteousness, Romans 1.18. They did not govern themselves by the dictates
of their own reason and Conscience, but rebelled against the same. That which
might be known of God was manifest in them; for God had showed it unto them.
That is, his own Essential Attributes and Perfections, from whence they might
and should have argued their relation to him, his Expectation from them and
Will concerning them; their Duty and Obligations toward him. They were left
without excuse in their acting contrary to this light of nature and trampling
under foot their own Reason; becoming vain in their Imaginations and darkning
their own foolish hearts. Indeed this is essential to a rational Creature to
have the Law of GOD written on his Mind and Conscience; for Reason in us is
this Law; and it is given man for his Government and Conduct.

2. SINCE our fall GOD has written his Law, mind and will to us in his Word.
This became necessary for the recovery of man from the Ruin his Apostasy had
bro't upon him. The light of reason was woefully obscured, and the law written
upon his heart dreadfully obliterated, by the corruption of the Soul, and the
Ascendency that lust had gained; so that a Revelation from GOD became
necessary, and that he should write the great things of his law in tables of
stone, which he had before written in the table of the heart. And accordingly
GOD has done so; and we have his Book in our hands, to read it with our eyes,
and know his Mind and Will for our Salvation; that we may do it and be blessed.

1. GOD has given his Word to inform our Understandings in what is right and
good. He has showed thee; O man, what is good and what does the LORD thy GOD
require of thee. The Commandment is a lamp, and the law is a light; and all
that is written by the Inspiration of GOD, is written for our learning, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures may have hope. The way of man is
not now in himself, nor is he a sufficient Law unto himself; therefore is the
glorious Gospel of JESUS CHRIST, according to the Commandment of the Everliving
GOD, made known to all Nations for the Obedience of Faith. This only can make
us wise unto Salvation: this Wisdom from above; the word which is near unto us,
in our hands, lips and hearts. Nor are we to be wise above what is written.

2. THIS written word of GOD is given to command our wills, and Conscience to
embrace and obey the truth and duty, therein proposed to us. It addresses with
a full and absolute authority to this Imperial faculty within us, being the law
of the Supreme Majesty of heaven to us. Deuteronomy. 4.1. Now therefore hearken, O
Israel unto the statutes and judgments which I teach you to do them. And the
more effectually to command our souls it addresses powerfully,

3. TO our hopes and fears, and unto every passion of our Souls by them to work
on us. To our hopes by the most constraining promises; and to our fears by the
most dreadful threatenings. It sets before us a blessing and a curse, Deuteronomy.
11.26. A blessing if we obey the Commandments of the Lord our God, and a curse
if we do not. Our souls move upon these Motives if either reason or sense be
hearkened to. And because we are drawn by love and urged on to a thing by
desire; therefore the sure Word of GOD addresses to these Affections in us,
that we love the LORD our GOD with all our hearts and with all our Souls, and
seek him with our whole desires. In like manner, whatever other passion and
affection is common to man, and which are the Avenues to his Soul, those ways
has the HOLY GHOST taken in his inspired word by one or other of them to
surprise or force our Souls. It sometimes therefore moves our anger and
indignation, sometimes our hatred, sometimes our grief or shame.

THUS GOD deals with us as with rational Creatures, and according to the nature
and faculties he has given us: Wherein as he puts honor on Man's reason, so he
shows how great a Sin it is in man to violate his own Reason and offend against
it. We ought to use the Reason GOD has given, yea and to reverence it: It is
the rule and law of the Eternal and perfect Infinite Mind inscribed on us and
for us: we should reverence it as the Wisdom of GOD, as indeed it is.

PROP. II. IF Sinners would but hearken to reason they would repent. If men
would but govern themselves by reason and act rationally, they would not
continue in Sin. For,

1. RIGHT reason is a Divine Law to Man: the law of GOD in us, the voice of GOD
to us. It is the Eternal and immutable rule of truth, goodness and
righteousness. There can be no transgression of it, nor Deviation from it
without Sin. It is the law and light of Nature; the Law that Angels act by, the
Rule of all GOD's perfect Acts and Works. "There are certain Rules of moral
"goodness, wherein all Understandings are agreed, and in acting according to
which ever Intelligent Being attains its true perfection. It is the Glory of
GOD that he always acts according to the most perfect Reason, and this is the
Crown of Angels, and the unchangable Rule of Man's arriving at the honor and
happiness for which he was created.

2. IF reason had been hearkened to, Man had never fallen from GOD, or sinned
against him. Had he attended to the voice of his own upright Conscience he had
preserved his Integrity. Had Eve stood by her own wise and just Answer at first
to the Tempter, and accordingly detested his motion to her, she had trod him
under fool and broken his head with her heel. But she listened to the Tempter's
Answer, and suffered her mind to wander from the words she first spoke in the
Wisdom of GOD. Genesis 3.2, 3. And the Woman said unto the serpent, -- God has
said, ye shall not eat of this tree, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
Indeed it may seem that Eve did not act according to the Dictate of right
reason in answering the Serpent at all; yet her Answer was according to the
Dictate of right reason, full of Gratitude, Righteousness and Resolution; and
had she stood by it she had baffled the tempter, and preserved her self and us.
But presently she abandoned her Reason, and prostituted her Conscience,
listening to the Devil and to the lie which he gave to GOD, and looking on the
fruit with a lusting Eye. Had she not left her reason, she had not lost her
self.

3. MAN's recovery to GOD depends now upon his attention to the voice of reason
and Conscience, upon the Discoveries, proposals and Call of the Gospel to him.
Let the Sinner consider these, and use his reason and hearken to his own
Conscience, and he will turn unto GOD. Let him think of his ways, his folly and
sin, his Interest and duty; which the Convictions of the HOLY SPIRIT bring
every one to do that repents; and he will turn his feet to God's testimonies.
So the Prodigal came to himself, and reasoned rightly with himself, and arose
and came to his Father, Luke 15.17. He had in all his riot acted madly and
irrationally, an absurd and irrational part; but now he came to himself, to the
use of his Understanding, to a sober reasoning with himself, he straitway left
his vicious Courses. This Exercise of reason and acting upon it is a thing very
pleasing to GOD; as it is to a wise and good Parent to see a foolish,
passionate and obstinate Child bethink himself and humble himself. Job 33.27.
He looks upon men, and if any say I have sinned, and perverted that which is
right and it prositeth me not; he will deliver his soul from going down into
the pit, and his life shall see the light. In a word, The End of the written
and preached Word is to reclaim men from sin, and to recover them from guilt
and hell by bringing them to repentance; and this by informing and enlightening
their minds and awakening their Consciences. It may be said of the whole word,
its use, design and end, as it is of the Book of Proverbs in particular, Prove.
1. Init. That we may know wisdom and instruction, to perceive the words of
understanding, to give knowledge and discretion, and that we may attain unto
wise Counsels. Grace restores the Exercise of reason and brings Sinners to
repent. The Prophet therefore thus addresses them; Isa. 46.8. Remember this,
and show your selves Men; bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors. i. e. Use
your reason, review your actions, look 'em over and over, do it deliverately,
calmly, seriously; consider the nature of your evildoings, the issue and
Consequent of them; and you will be no longer transgressors; you will repent of
your past transgressions, you will trangress no more.

But here it is necessary to say,

1. FALLEN-MAN could not by any natural light have discovered whether GOD would
admit or decept of his repentance; or what kind or degree of repentance he
would require; or how any sort and degree of it could procure favor with GOD,
or prevail to obtain his most gracious pardon. The reason of Man could carry
him no further than a peradventure as to these things; and as his Interest
would lead him to wish it possible for GOD to forgive Sin; so a general notion
of the goodness of GOD might possibly lead him to think it probable, or to
presume on it as certain that there is forgiveness with GOD, upon a Sinner's
repentance. But at last the bare Reason of Mankind could never afford us any
certain Information about GOD's forgiving Sin; and our guilt would forbid us to
build any hope upon a rotten Conjecture.

2. THE mere force of natural reason can never prevail upon any truly to
repent. Let a Man's own Reason and Conscience do it is best by its self alone to
convince and persuade him, a corrupt nature bears it down with violence; or let
a mere Man or Angel reason with us in the wisdom of GOD, and with all the art
and power of moral svasion it will not suffice. For Reason in Man is depraved,
corrupted, enfeebled, inslaved by the Fall: It is woefully darkened, obscured,
clouded and eclipsed by the Apostasy; and there is, 1. A wicked Rebellion in
the Soul of man against that light of reason that remains therein. Ephesians. 4.18.
Having the understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God through
the Ignorance that is in us, by rea- of the blindness of the heart. Thus the
light that is in us becomes in a manner darkness, and the poor light that is,
is resisted, sinned against, and quenched by the violent lusts and passions of
Men. Besides, 2. There is a wretched Impotency in man to act up to the light of
Reason within him. It cannot and will not attend to its voice in every case; nor
can it easily know the true judgment and determination of reason in every case;
but through the Corruption that is in the world through lust, many things occur to
biass and mislead men from judging according to right reason; Often Education
does so; and being miss-taught in our early days, we easily imbibe errors,
false reasonings and prejudices against the truth; and often where we are well
Instructed at first, yet our lusts corrupt, bribe and pervert our Judgment; and
the law in the members wars against the law in the mind and leads into
Captivity to the law of sin in the members. It is not therefore in the power of
mere Reason to prevail upon a sinner to repent. But

3. GOD by his powerful Spirit and Grace, when he renews a Soul unto
repentance, brings it to attend and hearken unto the voice of reason and
Conscience. He renews the Mind of man and enlightens it; gives it a new and
true sight of things; a discovery of truth by a divine Illumination, brings it
to reason justly, and he that was once darkness is now light in the Lord. It is
to the restored Soul as it was with Nebuchadnezar, who had lost his reason and
been like a Brute Creature; but at once his reason returned to him, his honor
and his brightness, and excellent Majesty was added to him, Dan. 4.26. Again,
In renewing a Soul to repentance, the Divine Spirit renews life Conscience, and
restores its fidelity and authority; to challenge and rebuke for sin, to
require and command us in the Name of GOD. He renews the Will also, obediently
to follow the dictates of the enlightened Mind; and he renews the Affections, so
that these govern themselves in their actings and exercise by the rules of
right reason; and so the Souls love and hatred, desire and aversation, hopes
and fears, joys and griefs, are directed unto right Objects, and proportioned
to them in just degrees and measures, regulated by the will of GOD revealed to
us, and for his glory. By all which,

4. GOD makes that discovery of himself, of sin, of his will and grace for our
Salvation, that the Soul cannot resist but most freely falls into the exercise
of a gracious repentance. 1. GOD shows the sinner something of his own Majesty
and Holiness; his right to command him and give law to him, the perfect
righteousness and sanctity of all his laws, and his power and resolution to
judge him according to his Law. 2. GOD shows him hence the moral Evil of Sin,
the rebellion that is in it against his Authority, the Enmity in it to his
holiness, the presumption and insolence, ingratitude and baseness there is in
it, and its aursed Malignity, guilt desert and obligation to punishment. 3. GOD
shows the Sinner the natural Evil, (i. e. the Curse) which is the fruit of sin;
the Evil that pursues it, the wrath and vengeance that is due to it, and hangs
over the sinners head. The sinners eyes are opened to behold the troops of
present outward evils and miseries, Judgments and Calamities, which Sin brings
upon men in this life, and which are concluded in bodily death. And the sinners
eyes are yet more intently fixed up on the Threatening and Infliction of
Spiritual, inward and Soul miseries. He has felt Spiritual Death, and he fears
and apprehends Eternal Death. He is bowed down under a cursed Nature, and feels
the plague of his own heart; his woeful Impotence to what is Good and Holy, yea
the aversation, enmity and loathing in his cursed Nature to it. He realises the
second Death, an Eternal damnation and perdition, in the fire of Hell, and
under the burning wrath of a holy GOD for ever. And now at last, 4. GOD shows
the sinner a way of deliverance from the guilt and curse of sin, and from its
rule and power. He shows him the Savior, which is CHRIST the LORD; what he has
done to save him; how glorious the Salvation by him is, both in the manger of
the Impetration of it, and in its affects; and how the Attributes of GOD (his
Wisdom, truth, holiness, justice, grace and mercy) are together glorified and
exalted in the Justification of the repenting Sinner. GOD shows the Sinner that
there is but this one way of Salvation for him, and that there is Salvation in
no other; nor on any other terms, but those of the Gospel, namely, faith in our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, repentance toward GOD, and obedience to the Gospel. Upon
all, 5. The Holy Spirit effectually impresses on the Conscience of the awakned
Sinner the Necessity of repenting, and the Importance of it; and causes the
sinner to see his own perishing state, and the infinite felicity and glory of a
pardoned state and hereby He conquers, constrains and brings over the Soul to
an infinite desire of Grace to repent, and turn from all Sin to GOD; which
desires when created by the Spirit of GOD in the Soul are by his power and of
his mercy bro't into act, and fulfilled in the Soul. Sometimes this is effected
more deliberately and in form; step by step; sometimes more suddenly, as the
light that struck Saul down on the way, and the Voice that called to him, set
him instantly a trembling, enquiring, praying and determined him for CHRIST.
Sometimes the sinner is wro't upon effectually by the Word alone, sometimes by
the rod together with it; and usually the Judgments both of GOD's mouth and of
his hand concur in his effectual Calling.

THUS GOD in renewing a Sinner to repentance brings him to attend and hearken
to the voice of Reason and Conscience enlightened by the revealed word. Hence
the Work is GOD's, if men do repent; and the fault is man's if he do not repent,
and GOD is every way justified whether men repent or not. The Sinner is of
himself wilful and obstinate; shuts his eyes and stops his ears, blows out the
candle of the LORD within him, will not use his reason, will not hearken to, nor
consider of the things that are spoken by the Lord unto him. If he would but
hearken to his own Reason and Conscience, judging by the Word he would repent.

I come now to the third, and last Proposition, which is.

PROP III. THAT GOD condescends to reason and argue with men for this very end,
to bring them unto repentance. Come now and let us reason together, etc.

1. HE reasons in the Word and by it. The sum and substance, scope and argument
of the written Word is this. This is the thing proposed in the whole Revelation
of GOD's will, his Law and Gospel. The Doctrines, precepts, promises,
threatenings, history and examples of both Testaments, agree and concur in this;
the reducing Sinners unto GOD by JESUS CHRIST, to a state of Grace and pardon
here and of glory hereafter. The scope of the Holy Scripture is to command,
persuade, invite us to be saved; and to deter, affright and earnestly dehort us
from the ways of sin and death. The whole of Divine Revelation to us conspires
at last in those words of the prophet, Ezekiel. 18.23, 31. Have I any pleasure at
all that the wicked should die, says the Lord God? and not that he should
return from his ways, and live? Cast away therefore all your transgressions;
whereby ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit; for
why will ye die, O house of Israe?

2. GOD reasons with sinners unto this purpose by his providential dealings
with them and toward them. These have a voice, and cry to us, and the men of
wisdom will hear the same. These back and confirm the Word, call it to mind and
fix it in the memory; strike the low sense of feeling: Put forth thy hand now
and touch his bone and his flesh. First by his Goodness, GOD would lead the
sinner to repentance; and then by his Judgments he would excite and drive them
thereunto. And while he chastens by his rod, he teaches the Soul by his Spirit,
out of his Law. As Absalom set Joah's field on fire to bring him to him, after
he had once and again sent to him, but he would not come; so GOD sends
Judgments and Corrections when he cannot prevail by the more gentle methods of
lenity and mildness Indeed this is a harsh way of reasoning, but a necessary
one, and too often ineffectual; I have stricken them but they have not grieved.
But it is a proper and effectual way sometimes; He opens their ear to
discipline and commands that they return from iniquity. Proud and obstinate
sinners will not be brought to the foot of GOD without this severity.

3. GOD reasons with sinners by his Ministers in the Word preached. Ministers
argue and reason the case with sinners in GOD's name and stead, from his Word.
So Paul reasoned before Felix of temperance, righteousness and the Judgment to
come, till his guilty Soul was filled with trembling; and again in a more mild
and svasive manner of speech he almost persuaded Agrippa to be a Christian. By
the preaching of the Word it is that GOD addresses, applies, appeals to and
reaches the hearts and Consciences of men; while the Preacher opens and applies
the Doctrines, precepts, promises and threatenings of the Word. 2 Cor. 5. ult.
Now then we are Ambassadors from Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we
pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God, etc. Romans 12.1. I beseech
you therefore Brethren by the Mercies of God, that you present your Bodies a
living sacrifice. We should choose out our Words to reason with men; to plead
with them on GOD's behalf; and as Elibu said to Job and his friends, so should
those that hear the word be able to say to their Ministers, Job 32.11, 12.
Behold I waited for their words, I gave ear to their reasons, whilst you
searched out what to say. Paul was a rational preacher, and a powerful one:
Acts 17.2. As his manner was he reasoned with them out of the Scriptures on the
sabbath days, opening and alleging that Christ must needs have suffered and
risen from the dead, Acts 18.4.

4. GOD reasons with sinners by every Occasional Monitor and Admonition to
them. Be it by more private persons, or in a more private way: Be it in a
brotherly Conference, or by disputation of friends; in whatever is said that is
good unto the use of Edifying and fitly spoken, a word dropped in season to us;
as we are bid to exhort one another daily, and to teach and admonish one
another. But especially the Authoritative Instructions, reproofs and counsels
of Parents, Tutors, Masters and Mistresses, or any Superiors under whose care
and watch we are placed, these should be esteemed GOD's Reasoning with us. Job
13.6. Hear now my reasonings, and hearken to the pleadings of my lips.

5. GOD reasons with sinners by the voice of Conscience within them. This is a
power that has light and authority, is endowed and commissioned to plead for
GOD. We must judge within our selves what is right and good; in many Cases. And
if our heart condemn us God is greater than our hearts. Thus in reading and
hearing the word, and under Providence both gracious and judicial, the
Consciences of men are touched and awakened; and they rise up and speak to the
sinner for the bringing him to repentance.

6. And lastly, GOD reasons with sinners by his Holy Spirit, striving with
them. From of old we know that he strives with man. And he only can reason
effectually, convincingly, with man. He is the Divine Teacher come from CHRIST,
to work sayingly on the Souls of Sinners by Ordinances and Providence. He can
reach the Conscience, command the Soul, and speak with Authority. None teaches
like him; none can enlighten, sanctify, convert and save a Soul beside him. He,
the former of the Spirit is the Searcher of it; and the mind, the will, the
affections and Consciences of men are under his immediate notice and
cognizance. He is the Divine Author of Grace in us, the Father of
spiritual-light and giver of it. He is the Convincer of sin, and the Comforter
of penitents. Effectual Calling is his blessed Work, whereby convincing us of
our sin and misery and enlightneng our minds in the Knowledge of Christ, and
renewing our wills, he does persuade and enable us to embrace Jesus Christ, as
he is offered to us in the Gospel. Psalm. 143, 10. Teach me to do thy will, thy
spirit is good, lead me into the land of uprightness. The weapons of our
warfare are mighty through him, to pull down strong holds cast down Imaginations
and every high thing, and to bring into Captivity every though it to the Obedience
of CHRIST. To this end he waits and reasons and strives long with Souls, and
does it strangly; he overcomes the wills and hearts of men, but offers no
Violence to them; making them willing in the day of his power.

THUS GOD deals with us as with rational Creatures in his Endeavors to bring
us to repentance; and would sinners hearken to the reasonings of his Word and
Spirit in their hearts they would repent; and for this End it is that he
reasons with them.

USE,

AND now to apply what has been said, briefly, See

1. THE Condescension and grace of GOD to us, as well as his Equity and
righteousness, and let it affect us with Admiration, thankfulness and love;
that he should reason with worms, with rebels and traitors, to reduce them to
himself, to their duty and happiness. And O the patience and forbearance of GOD
to us! how long suffering is he in his waiting on us, and pursuing with his
gracious Reasonings!

2. O see and be astonished at the Obstinacy and hardness of man, and what an
unreasonable, untractable, incorrigible Creature he is become: That he should
need to be so reasoned with, and be no more prevailed on by the Reasonings of
GOD with him. Surely we are more brutish than the very beasts, have not the
understanding of a man, and have lost their Instinct of self-preservation. As
our Context has it, Hear, O heavens! and give ear, O earth! for the Lord has
spoken: I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me. The ox knows his owner, and the ass his masters crib: but Israel
does not know, my people does not consider.

YE fools and blind, -- as our LORD said once to some; besotted and desperately
mad; blinded by Satan, and led by him at his will, lest the light of the
knowledge of the glory of GOD should shine unto them. If our Gospel be hid it
is hid unto them that are lost. And what a Hell will the reason and Consciences
of Sinners create unto them in the most direful reflections on their own
obstinacy and frenzy through the days of Eternity! Mark 9.44. Where their worm
dies not, and the fire is not quenched. Prove. 1.24. Because I have called and
ye refused, I have stretched out my hand and no man regarded, but ye have set
at naught all my counsel, and would none of my reproof; I also will laugh at
your calamity, and mock when your fear comes.

3. THE Use may be to congratulate the penitent on the wisdom he shows, the
good understanding he manifests. The fear of the LORD that is wisdom, and to
depart from evil is understanding. The penitent Sinner acts a wise part. He
hearkens to GOD in his Word; he attends to the voice of his own Conscience; he
fears and turns from Sin; He inclines his ear to Wisdom, and applies his heart
to understanding; he understands the fear of the Lord, and finds the knowledge
of God; now he regards discretion and his lips keep knowledge: He forsakes the
foolish and lives, and walks in the way of understanding.

4. HOW willingly, fervently and unweariedly should Ministers reason with
Sinners, laboring their Repentance and Conversion to GOD: from Sabbath to
Sabbath, from house to house, in season and out of season, reproving rebuking,
exhorting with all long-suffering and doctrine; beseeching, entreating in the
meekness and gentleness of CHRIST. They should be apt to teach, and fervent in
spirit; and mighty in the Scriptures, skillful in the Word and Doctrine; to lay
before men the guiltiness and misery of their natural state, to open aright the
cursed nature of Sin, to display before them the riches of free Grace from the
doctrines and promises of the Gospel, to draw the Beauties of a Crucified JESUS
before the eyes of Sinners; to reason with them, upon the Necessity and Benefit
of a timely repentance, and to set the Threatenings of GOD in Array against the
Impenitent. But O what knowledge, wisdom and divine Learning, both in the
letter and spirit of Scripture, both in the Word and saving Work of GOD, is
necessary hereunto! What application also and diligence in study, in prayer, in
Watching over and labors with our own hearts! Prove. 11.30. He that wins
souls is wise, and the fruit of the righteous is a tree of life.

5. LET every one reason with himself. Stand in awe and commune with thy own
heart; hear GOD's reasonings, and use thy own reasoning faculty. Use it while
he continues to speak to thee; to strive with thee; for this will not be
always. Should not our hearts burn within us, while he is speaking to us on the
way? Consider what he says, and the LORD give you an Understanding; an eye to
see, an ear to hear, and a heart to perceive, and retain his words.

Wherefore to conclude all,

1. O hearken to the Reasonings of GOD! Hear and your soul shall live. Hear him
for his own sake, that he may have glory from thee. Hear him for thy own sake,
for it is in tender pity to thy poor Soul that he argues with thee. Hearken to
him for CHRIST's sake, for it is Wisdom's Voice, He whose Delights from
Everlasting were with the sons of men: Prove. 8.4, 5. Unto you O men I call, and
my voice is to the sons of men; O ye simple understand wisdom; and ye fools, be
ye of an understanding heart. Hear, for I will speak of excellent things; and
the opening of my lips shall be right things.

2. O beg of GOD this understanding heart; beg of him an Obedient ear and will;
pray for a tender Conscience, and for holy Affections: beg of GOD to give thee
his Holy Spirit, and to renew a right Spirit within thee; entreat him not to
leave thee, nor to cease striving with thee.

3. GIVE up thy self to Him, to be taught and ruled by him, enlightened and
sanctified and led by him. Yield an unfei'ned Assent and Consent to all he
says; and say, -- All that the Lord our God has said unto us, we will do and be
Obedient. Yield up thy whole Soul to his blessed Word as to a Mould to receive
the blessed Form it would stamp upon thee. With Mary sit at JESUS feet to hear
his words; and say with Saul when the Light from Heaven struck him, and the
Voice from Heaven called to him; Lord, what will thou have me to do?

FINIS.

