AN ANSWER To a Late PAMPHLET, ENTITLED, A LETTER to a Friend in the Country,
attempting a Solution of the Scruples and Objections of a Conscientious or
Religious Nature, commonly made against the new Way of receiving the Small Pox.
By a Minister of Boston. Together with A Short History of the late Divisions
among us in Affairs of State, and some Account of the first Cause of them.

By JOHN WILLIAMS.

Hos. 9. 7. The days of (...) are come, the days of recompense are come, Israel
shall know it: the prophet is a fool, the (...) man is mad, for the multitude
of thine Iniquity, and the great hatred. BOSTON: Printed and sold by J.
Franklin, at his Printing House in Queen Street, over against Mr. (...) School.
1722.

TO THE Worthy SELECT MEN Of the Town of Boston, Together with my Neighbors
that have so learned and believed that the Doctrine of Inoculation is not
contained in the Law of Physic.
GENTLEMEN,
I Offer this Treatise also as a Sign of (...) Duty and Respects to you, with a
^^sire that what is amiss in the Town may be mended, that there may be Peace in
the Churches of Him who is the Prince of Peace.

To show the evil of Inoculation, I shall offer you the following Testimonies
against it, and leave them to your Consideration.

One of my Neighbors informs me, that he saw a Doctor in Germany whipped out of
Town, for inoculating the Small Pox into five Persons.

A Master of a Vessel also, (whom I wish a good Voyage to Ireland if gone)
says, That he saw a Doctor at Alexandria, for inoculating the Small Pox into
Eight Persons, tried before their Senate, and being found guilty, was sentenced
to be mounted on an Ass, and at the Corner of every Street to be bastinado'd on
his Fe^et, in his way to the Place of Execution, where a Scaffold being built,
he was executed.

Doctor Robert Richards, Member of the College of Physicians in London (who
has allowed me to use his Name) declared to me before Witness, That in the
second Act which Queen Anne signed were these Words, That if any mortal or
contagious Disease shall come into this Kingdom, the College of Physicians
shall immediately assemble, and consult of proper Medicines to cure it, in
order to prevent its spreading: And if any Doctor, Quack, or any other Person,
shall do any thing that may spread it, they shall suffer Death. Now by this
Time I hope it appears, that if any Person will be so hardy, as to go on in a
Practice against Reason and Law, the Grand Jury will not be at a Loss to find a
Bill against them.

Your Humble Servant, John Williams.

AN ANSWER, etc.
Honored SIR,
I Have not taken Notice of some Paragraphs, as if I affected Contention; but
am wiling to set things in a true light, that you may know where we differ in
Judgment.

You say, One great thing urged against this Practice is, that it is not lawful
Sir, it is the great Scruple with me; and solve this with a Thus faith the
Lord, and all other Objections will fall; which till you do, suffer me to
dissent from you in Judgment, though not in Affection.

You say, To make my self sick in such a way as may probably serve my Health,
and save my Life, and with such a design, is certainly fitting and reasonable,
and therefore lawful.

Reply. I deny it to be fitting or reasonable, because it is a going out of
God's Way, inasmuch as it is not contained in the Law of Physic, either natural
or divine* and therefore unlawful.

Again, you say, There is the Fuel of this Distemper in my Body, and it only
wants the Spark to set this Fuel a burning; Why may I not let it in by
Incision, when it may be easier, and of less Danger.

Reply. Because its not God's way, but its a mixing of humane Inventions with
the Rules of Physic. Lev. 10. 1. And Nadab and Abihu took either of them their
Censers, and put Fire therein, and put Incense thereon, and offered strange
Fire before the Lord, which be commanded them not. Now an Action must be right
with respect to the Method of doing it, as well as with respect to the end or
event, or it corresponds not with the Sixth Commandment, but is a breaking of
all the Law and Commandments. Now to propose to do something in Obedience to
one Commandment, which does Violence unto the rest, cannot be allowed to be the
keeping of that.

Again, you say, In this way we receive it in a natural way; (which I deny, for
it is Anti-natural,) and if we receive it in either way, it is still the Work
of God.

Reply. I distinguish between the Works of God, as they are good or evil. Now
the Work of God may be considered good, as he wills it, and by his Power
effects it; but as Actions may be considered evil, so he willingly permits it.

Again, you say, What is there of the Hand or Power of Man in this Work after
the Incision is made, and the Matter applied. Answer. There is the dressing of
the Incision Seven or Eight Days. And Sir, if you think the Patient is under
the Hand of God after the Incision is made, why cannot you as well let him stay
till God sees meet to bring the Distemper upon him. You allow that the cutting
the Incision, and putting the Matter in, is the Hand and Power of Man; which is
as much as to say, (what I should be loath to say) That you set your Maker to
work, by making the Incision for Him; and so you make Inoculation partly in the
Hand and Power of Man, and partly in the Hand and Power of God: But I tell you,
Sir, the Action is entirely humane, as not agreeing with the Law of Physic,
either natural or divine, and an Intrusion upon the incommunicable Attributes
of God, who has said, I kill, and I make alive, I wound, and I heal..

Again, you say, Should this Town be to suffer an Inundation, from a Righteous
God for the Punishment of their Sins, would any think it to be a Criminal
Evasion to save their Lives by a Boat or a Plank?

Sir, the Simile I conceive reaches not the Case. I distinguish between a doing
what is lawful to prevent any Sickness that is sent as a Judgment upon a
People, and a voluntary Act of our own in putting forth our Hands to reach the
Judgment to our selves, that so by this Means we may avert the Stroke of
Heaven, by turning of it out of the ordinary way of Providence. But now I shall
state the Case of this Similitude, and I think more adapted to the matter in
hand. Suppose the Water should be kept out of this Town by Floodgates, and upon
the Approach of some very high Tide, which would overflow or break down the
Gates, a Man should open the Gates a little so as that the Water might come in
gradually to prevent its breaking down the Gates, if notwithstanding the Flood
should be greater than he expected (as sometimes in the Case of Inoculation)
and overflow the Town, if he can have neither Boat nor Plank to save his Life,
will it not be just upon him for his presumptuous Action? Now God has as many
ways to punish a People, save one (to wit, by the Small Pox, which you say is a
Blessing when received by Inoculation) as he had before: Therefore prepare to
meet thy God, O Zion, (in a way of Duty) and do not go into the Inventions of
the Heathen, whom the Lord cast our before thee.

Again, Is it unlawful to use Means for our Preservation from a desolating
Judgment, especially if at that time God shows us a way to escape the Severity
of it?

I answer, I shall keep evermore the Distinction (which is laudable and good)
between God's showing us the way of Self-preservation, and his permitting of
Man to go into his own by-ways, which never entered into God's Heart.

Again, you say, Some object and say, It Is originaly from the Devil* (which is
too true to make a Jest of.) You answer, If it is a Method of Safety, and a
Benefit to Mankind, as hitherto it appears to be, how came the Devil to be the
Author of it, who is a Murderer from the beginning. I answer, the Devil has
many ways to advance his own Ends, for he is an old Sophister, we know. And
now, Sir, if I may be suffered to speak my own digested Thoughts; with grief of
Heart I do seriously believe its a Delusion of the Devil; and that there was
never the like Delusion in New England, since the Time of the Witchcraft at
Salem, when so many innocent Persons lost their Lives, and afterward some of
them that were instrumental in taking their Lives away, made a Recantation. And
that this People may see their Error and recant, is the sole Reason of my
putting of Pen to Paper and Prayer to the God of Truth, that this People may
see their Error. Now I will show you how Satan may advance his Interest and
that in his own old Way, Genesis 3. 1. And he said unto the Woman. Yea, has God
said, ye shall not eat of every Tree in the Garden? Verse 4, 5. And the Serpent
said, ye shall not surely die, (in this new way.) For God does know, that in
the Day ye eat thereof, then your Eyes shall be opened. Now Satan had a double
end in this; as first, The breaking of God's righteous Law; and secondly, the
eternal Ruin of Mankind; but the Temptation was the Fruit of the Garden, which
no question was alluring unto the Senses, when the Exercise of Grace was
suspended. Now, Sir, as I humbly conceive, Inoculation is the thing proposed,
the brave alluring yellow Apple, which is so successful in the Event, even
Life, as several of your Order have set forth. But Satan may have another end
in it, to wit, the making the Means of Grace unsuccessful, in bringing the
first Venders and Abettors, and Promoters of Inoculation, which every Body
knows were certain Ministers of this Town) into Contempt; though now some of our
Country Ministers have imbibed this Doctrine too; one of them, last Sabbath Day
was Two Weeks, in his Prayer used this Phrase* Some of our People are gone out
to meet the Rod, and to kiss it. Out! Whether are they gone out! Out sure
enough! Not out of God's Blessing into a warm Sun; No, no: They are gone out of
God's way of waiting upon him all the Days of their appointed Time, until their
Change shall come. But as for Five of them (within this Three Weeks) they are
gone out indeed; out of the World! And now the Devil and-all the Promoters and
Admirers of of Inoculation cannot deceive us; for we have followed them to
their Graves, and they will not return, until the Heavens be no more. 2 dly,
You say, to meet the Rod. Sir, where did you meet with this indigested Phrase
for your People that have put themselves into a way to have the Small Pox, and
to prescribe both the Disease and the Time when. I wish you would make your
Bible more the Rule of Prayer as well as of Practice. 3 dly, You say, and to
kiss it. Ay, so you might, had not God lately made you to know, that it is
dangerous meddling with Ege Tools, and showed you that you are Fools that will
be meddling. May you sport it with the Holy one of Israel? May you not see your
selves pourtrayed in Hos. 5. 5. The Pride of Israel does testify unto his face;
therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their Iniquity; Judah also shall
fall with them. Has not God spit in your Faces? and will you not be ashamed?
Mal 2. 3. Behold, I will corrupt your seed, and spread Dung upon your Faces,
even the Dung of your (...), and one shall take you away with it. Verse 7. For
the Priests Lips should keep Knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his
Mouth; for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Verse 8. But ye are
departed out of the way: ye have caused many to stumble at the Law: ye have
corrupted the Covenant of Levi, faith the Lord of Hosts. Verse 9. Therefore
have I made you contemptible and base before all the People, according as ye
have not kept my ways, but have been partial in the Law.

But to return and show how Satan may be carrying on his old Work by this new
way. The Town daily resents your Abuses, and many blacken your Character, which
you ought to preserve as sacred; and they say, If you are so defective in your
Morals, how shall we believe you, when you speak of divine Things? And so you
have accrued unto your selves an odious Character in the Minds and Mouths of
too many, ay very many, of your Hearers and Contributers. They are prejudiced
against your Persons, and consequently against whatever you teach. I have many
times to my Grief heard People say, that if you understand your own Trade no
better than you do Morals, we are in a bad Condition. And they allude unto Gal.
3. 4. Have ye suffered so many things in vain, (to withdraw from the Principles
and Practice of the Church of England, and now to bring in the Practice of the
Heathen?) And Verse 3. Are ye so foolish, having begun in the Spirit, are ye
made perfect in the Flesh? They say, as in Verse 1. O foolish Ministers, who
has bewitched you, that you should not obey the Truth? And with Jer. 5. 26.
For among my People are found wicked Men: They lay in wait, as he that sets
Snares to catch Men, (that is, by Inoculation, with which they infect their
Neighbors.) They set a Trap; they catch men. I shall conclude with Job. 5. 20.
They were confounded because they had hoped; they came together and were (...).

And now, Sir, with a real desire that Satan may not take any Advantage against
you, to hinder the Success of your Ministry, by raising Prejudices against your
Person, and also against your Doctrine. (which I have reason to fear, since you
have imbibed this new Doctrine, as some call it,) I rest with real Respects,

Your unworthy Servant, JOHN WILLIAMS.

OUR Town seems to be chased in their Minds, against some of the Ministers of
the Gospel, for their intermedling with things which do not belong to their
Function; and do say, that there is not that Care taken to keep them in their
proper Sphere, that they may be useful to the People.

And now I must go back, and call over old things. You may remember when this
Governor came first, he proposed to make Money, 100000 l. upon Loan, and 50000
l. was made before, which was let out to Men upon Mortgages at 5 per Cent. so
that it must pay 6300 l. Use. The next Year the Governor moved to put a stop
to the Run of it, and said. That there should be no more made, for it would not
be good Times till Silver was the Medium of Trade. Many ignorant Men, that
could not see with the same Eyes as some Gentlemen did, thought we were in a
bad Condition; for they said, Here is not enough Money in the Country of that
Species to pay Use and Principal too: (It may be they did not understand
Arithmetic.) This put a stop to Trade; and many People were drove to
Hardships, and feared it would be worse, even that their Estates which were
mortgaged would be forfeited; for nothing else would redeem them but Silver at
6 s an Ounce, Seventeen Penny Halfpenny Weight; which was the Occasion of great
murmering among the People. About this time there came into the Pulpit a great
Orator, and his Text was, Two Brethren mending their Nets. He went on, and told
the People of the Hardships their Forefathers underwent for the Gospel; they
went to the Clam-banks for a Livelihood And, says he, Are your Nets broke; I
hope they will mend, I am told things begin to mend already. Now I take Notice,
that had we went to the Clam-Banks for Food, there was no Money to pay our
Taxes, nor to buy a Bottom of Twine to mend our Nets withal. But by and by he
says, I charge you that you do not mutiny; and God have bid me charge you, that
you do not mutiny.

Now this Digression caused several Thoughts to arise; as first, That he lacked
to see the Time when Silver should be forced in upon upon us by Necessity; and
perhaps he might desire to hear the Silver to gingle in the Box. Again, 2 dly,
The Transport that he was in, in charging the People not to mutiny; to see how
he had left his Text: Or whether he spoke from an Impulse on his Mind, for we
had heard nothing of Mutiny, nor like it before. And this sort of Discourse put
me in mind of a young Scholar I knew in England, who told my Brother, that he
had studied an excellent Discourse but could not tell what Text to put to it.
Says my Brother to him, Pray leave it with us in the Country; for we have more
Texts here than excellent Discourses. Now, whether this was a Discourse put to
a Text, or a Text applied to this Discourse, I will not pretend to determine:
But I have observed more such Doings and laid them up in my Budget.

The next thing I observed was, Supplications by the Ministers, That God would
teach this People to lead quiet and peaceable Lives. This put me farther into a
Consternatian; and I could not tell what they meant by repeating it twice a Day
so long together, as though it was an Article in our Creed that must not be
omitted. I considered whether they were not set to work by some Persons, and
whether this was not an Implicit Charge upon us, that we were not a peaceable
and quiet People. Now the Minister's could not leave off this Form of Words in
their Prayer, until the honorable Assembly had declared us a loyal and
peaceable People, by rejecting the Bill against Riots and that against the
Liberty of the Press, and afterward in their Answer to the Governor's Speech.
It apear'd plainly to me, that there was no need at all for the Law against
Riots, except it was to oblige Mr. D -- y the High Sheriff, and Mr. Y -- s the
Governor's Kinsman to keep the Peace; for we know they both broke the Peace
soon after that Bill was proposed to the Assembly, and we know also that they
were for having the Bill pass: Nor was there any need of the Law against
Libels, unless it was to punish a certain Clergyman for writing News from
Robinson Cruso's Island: But I will tell you what came into my mina, These Men
want to make their Neighbor's live quiet and peaceable Lives, that they may
live quarrelsome and turbulent Lives; just as some Folks would make other Men
honest, that they themselves may be Knaves.

Again, It is observed, that the Ministers are generally of a contrary Party to
the Bulk of the People, with respect to the public Affairs here in this Town;
and so there is an ill Understanding between the Ministers and the People, as
some have complained. I do not think all do oppose them because they would be
of a Party against them; yet it may be some may do it for as little Reason as
the Countess of Pembrook gave to the Duchess of Portsmouth, when she came to
her and said, Madam, What is the reason that you endeavor to hinder your Son
from marrying my Sister? The Answer was, The only Reason is, Madam, because she
is your Sister,

Again, the Ministers complain, that this People in the midst of Judgment are
not bettered thereby, but wax worse and worse: Here is great Divisions among
us. Now we say, that several Ministers have set up the Doctrine of Inoculation
in Public, and think we do not do well that we do not believe it and practice
it, but on the contrary, set light by their Advice: And indeed, we have reason
so to do; for they prove it not from the Word of God to be our Duty; and till
they do, let them resent it how they will, we cannot comply with them; and so
we differ in Judgment, as they did in Ahab's Time. And now the Dispute is no
longer, whether there is Animosities and Contentions between the Ministers and
the People but it lies here, to know where the Fault is. The Ministers say, it
is because they are opposed and set light by. The People say, they oppose and
set light by them, because they teach that which is not good but evil unto
them. And we read in Prove. 19-27. Cease my son to hear the Instruction that
causes to err from the Words of Knowledge, And the Case seems pour rayed in I
Kings 18. 17, 18. And it came to pass when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto
him, Art thou be that troubles Israel: And he answered, I have not troubled
Israel, but thou and thy Father's House, in that ye have forsaken the
Commandments of the Lord, and thou have followed (...). Now we do believe, that
you are the People that broached and carried on by persuasion, even that which
is the breaking of the Commandments of the Lord, and have taught us the
Tradition of Men to our own hurt, even inoculation. Now these things (together
with many more which are in the People's Minds, and in my Budget also,) have
disturbed the People to that Degree that it makes them inquire after your
Commission: And they find in Matthew. 18. 18. your Commission is, Teach all
Nations. Mark. 16. 15. Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel. And we
cannot find, by comparing it with our Annotations, any allowance for Ministers
to make Parliament Men and the like. Your work is divine, your Master is the
God of Peace, your Lord the Son of Righteousness and Peace, and the Spirit of
Peace to lead in the way of Peace: And the Promise in Psalms 84. 11. is to such
as walk uprightly. And in 2 Cor. 5. 19, 20. we find, that the Words of
RECONCILIATION are committed unto you, and you are to pray us to be reconciled
unto God. Now if Ministers will be Party-(...), and undertake to lead the Van
in other things, which are not in their Commission, they may expect no Blessing
on their Endeavors, nor indeed but little Success; for it is in God's way that
he has proposed his Blessing. Teach them to observe all things which I command
you; and to, I am with you to the end of the World. Amen. Math. 28. 19. And the
Psalmist annexes a Blessing unto them that walk according to this Rule; Mercy
and Peace be upon them. Now, had not the Ministers went out of their Sphere,
both in England and here too, People would not have opened their Mouths against
them for being the Starters and Promoters of Division. We have not forgotten
the Confusion that arose in Sacheverill's Day, when he went out of his Sphere,
though he was as learned a Man as any of you, as I have heard; yet the Land will
not clear him from being a designing Man: But be his design what it would, he
was the Fomenter of much Division, as well as you. Now the People are afraid,
the Ministers do affect a Rule over them in Temporals, as the Pope of Rome does
temporally as well as spiritually, rule and determine things. Jer. 5. 31. The
Prophets prophecy folly, and the Priests bear Rule by their means; and what
will ye do in the end thereof. And some say we are Priest-ridden; others say
that they will not be Priest-ridden; others say we are not Spaniards to bear
this Priest-riding; others say they are Englishmen, and are not used to be
Priest-ridden. And we will not mind what they say, but when they are in the
Discharge of their Master's Commission; (and I wish the People would do that,
seeing there is such Heart-burnings,) And that was it we called them to, and
for that we will pay them; and for those superfluous things which their Master
nor we never set them about, we will not thank them for: For suppose a Prince
should send an Ambassador to a foreign Court, and give him his Instructions
what he shall do, and what he shall negociate; if he should through a great
Opinion of his own Parts, (...) from a Willingness to please the Court,
negociate upon or abort any thing that was not in his Credentials, shall not
his Master blame him for his Conduct. Now Gentlemen, if you take a View of your
Actions, you will be of the same Opinion with us, That you have breached almost
all the Things that have stirred up Strife; and being broached, have blown
them, tip unto that Height that they now are in. I am informed, that there was
a certain Gentleman in our Town, tied his Horse at the Door of one of my
Neighbors, and went into his House, and tarryed some time: In the mean time
some Body put a good quantity of Tar on the Saddle; and the Gentleman came
forth and rode home without perceiving the Tar, and so spoiled his Breeches.
Now by good Consequence it is inferred, that it was a mistake, and that the Man
thought it was Dr. B -- u's Horse. Now the spoiling of the Gentleman's Breeches
is laid unto some of our Ministers Charge: Not that it is supposed any of them
did lay the Tar upon the Saddle; (for I would put the Saddle upon the right
Horse,) but in a remote Sense they were; as thus, They found out the Practice
of Inoculation in History; (though it would have been well for this poor Town, if
at that time they had been studying Divinity.) 2 dly, They put the Doctor upon
it, and encouraged him in it, and persuaded People to come into the Practice. 3
dly, By this means the Man was incensed against the Doctor, and (as he thought)
acted a Piece of Revenge upon him, which was to soil the Saddle and spoil his
Breeches. Now it is thought, that the Ministers that have so highly promoted
Inoculation, should make a gathering for this Gentleman; if not fourfold, yet
at least enough to satisfy him for the Loss of his Breeches.

Object. But this was a riotous Action, and you say we are a quiet and
peaceable People.

Reply. So we are a quiet and peaceable People, genarally speaking,
notwithstanding this Instance and one or two more to the contrary. Yea, our
Ministers did say in their Address to the King, (if I am not mistaken,) that we
were a loyal and peaceable People, even to a Man. And now I would ask the
Ministers the following Questions.

Quest. 1. Whether we may not distinguish between complaining under Oppression,
and being a mutinous People?

Quest, 2. Whether this People have not learned to live quiet and peaceable
Lives; and whether your keeping up this Prayer, That God would teach us to live
quiet and peaceable Lives, be not an implicit bearing false Witness against thy
Neighbor?

Quest. 3. Whether by your Credentials you ought not every Sabbath Day to have
made Supplications for our Brethren at the Eastward, who are in jeopardy of
their Lives in the High Places?

Quest. 4. Whether the Business that our Brethren are gone upon is not of
Importance, since they are to apprehend those that are Enemies to the King, and
to the King of Kings.

Quest. 5. Whether by your Silence you do not give People reason to think, that
you are much in Alliance with those that are for a Peacable War?

Quest. 6. Whether the secret Mysteries of State be in your Credentials?

Quest. 7. Whether your Credentials have not Matter enough for all your
Strength and Parts, without running into other Men's Bounds? Psalm. 139.6. Such
Knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot attain unto it.

Quest. 8. Whether your Prayer so long kept up, was not the Motive of the
Governor's complaining to the best of Kings, against as good Subjects as ever
a King ruled?

A certain Gentleman of the learned Seminary of Cambridge, says, He wonders
that John Williams's Book do sell so well; for all the Arguments he brings
against Inoculation might be turned against Tobacco.

Reply. I suppose you may spare time enough from the Pulpit to turn them
against it; for I know of no Call you have to preach every Week; and the
smoking of Tobacco being a tender Article with me, I should have looked upon
my self obliged to have returned an Answer to the Reverend Mr. G -- e.

He further goes on to say, He would have our Mob come up to Cambridge, and
pull down the College, and turn the Students down into Father Williams' s
Cellar, to learn Logic, Physic, and Divinity.

Reply. Has the Man forgot that he was born in (...) where it was never known
that there was (...) two Mobs, and one of them was in (...) to pull down a
wicked Bawdy House; and the other only mob'd for Bread, when they could get
none to eat, while Capt. B -- r had a great quantity in Store and would not
sell it, but intended to send it out of the Country. But Sir, Why would you
have the College pulled down? I am not of your Mind: Let it stand, and more
and more flourish; but I am grieved that any that are educated there, should be
so dull Scholars, as not to learn Meum and Tuum.

Again, you propose, That all the Scholars that are at Cambridge should come
down to learn the Liberal Arts of me, in my Cellar.

Reply. I suppose there is room enough in my Cellar to hold you all; for I
understand there is none there now but your self, and you will be my only
Pupil. And as for my teaching you Divinity, its like you have enough of that
already, unless you could have had a Call to the New North Meeting House. And
as for Physic, my teaching you will signify nothing; for unless I could
install you with the Title of Doctor of Physic, you must expect to follow my
Steps, and give Advice gratis, which I suppose you will not admire. And then
with respect to Logic, a small quantity of that will do, provided you always
remember to supply the want of it with good Store of Sophistry. However, I will
give my Pupil the following Maxims that I have received in Logic, and let him
take them or leave them, as they will best befit the Employment he goes upon.

1. For a Man to put that into the Major Proposition, which is the Subject in
Discourse, is begging the Question, and it will render the Argument
sophistical. 2. To put that which is so drawn from the Major, into the Minor,
is, by those that understand Logic, accounted a Lie in the Sight of God. 3. To
draw a Conclusion from the Minor that is thus drawn, is with a design to
deceive.
Again, To put that which is not expressed or employed in the Major into the
Minor, is a Lie before God: And to put more into the Conclusion than is in the
Minor, is with a design to deceive.

Because some Ministers frequently (in their Pulpits) turn aside from the Duty
of their Calling, I shall give the Reader some Paragraphs of a long and noble
Letter of Advice, wrote by the Pastors and Professors in the Church and
University of Geneva, to the National Synod of the Reformed Churches of France,
assembled at (...), 1614.

Note, This I have taken from a Book I have now by me, wherein there is much
more to the same purpose.

Honored Brethren,
THERE were some other Heads upon which we could and would have enlarged, and
communicated to you our Thoughts; but we shall at present forbear, being
overborn with Grief and Horror, caused by the fall of that eminent Mr. Jeremy
Ferrier, Pastor and Professor at N^smes, who revolting from the Truth, was
excommunicated July 14th, 1^^^.
Apostate, who having for many Years together abused those excellent Gifts of
God, and that Place of Honor he held among you, and was particularly supported
by you, does now serve as a sorrowful Spectacle of the direful Vengeance of God
Almighty. We have heard and read what has been spoken and written of him, and
we cannot guess at any other Ground of his depravation, than his pragmatical
intermeddling with mundane Affairs; from which we take this Freedom to entreat
you for God's sake, strictly to inspect into Vocations and Employments, that
they be not mixed nor confounded, to the detriment of the one or the other. The
Ministerial Function is expressly limited by the Word of God, as to its Laws,
Ends. Means and Actings, being altogether different from, yes, and totally
contrary to the secular Government. And we conceive there is no such Difficulty
in the Matter, but that Ministers may be kept within the inviolable Bounds of
their most holy Calling, and yet be useful to the Public, without those little
Arts of Subtleties and Surprisals, which abut at no other Mark than temporal
and carnal Profit. Besides that, its a very rare, thing to find a Man capable
both of the one and the other Calling: There is this grand Mischief in it, that
Flesh and Blood seeing in the holy Ministry nothing but what is mean and
humble, despicable and painful, difficult and dangerous, and contrariwise,
meeting in the management of secular Affairs, with Food and fuel enough for
Pride, Ambition and Covetousness, (the Grounds of all Envys and Jealousies,)
and with Means and Helps to carry on Designs of Self-Advancement and
Domination, as Tricks, Crafts, Dissimulation, it will be almost impossible to
hinder the spreading of this Contagion, which creeps insensibly into the
greatest Wits, and seizes upon them at unawares, and not as an affected and
approved Vice. But for God's sake, most dear Brethren, we beseech you to
consider, whether it were not better that your temporal Affairs should suffer
some Inconveniences, than for your spiritual ones to be contaminated. If the
necessity be absolute, peremptory and indispensable, then let them go about
such secular, political Affairs with Regret and Grief, troubled at their
enforced Distraction from their Heavenly Calling, lamenting as the Spouse in
the Caticles, that they have made me keeper of the Vineyards, but my own
Vineyard have I not kept. No Man going to War, intangles himself with the
World, that so he may the better please his Captain that has insisted him.
That Commination is very dreadful, the Priest shall be the People; and that
Lamentation exceeding dolful, All this evil and mischief is from the Prophet
and the Stones of the Sanctuary are lying at the four Corners of the Streets.
Let us, most dear and honored Brethren, give up and resign our selves to the
conduct of true Wisdom, speaking to us from the Word of God, which is, to
forsake our own.

By the Synod of Vitre, 1617, all Ministers are forbid to vent in their
Pulpits, their private Sentiments of State Affairs, it being contrary to the
Resolutions taken up in our General Assemblies. And Consistories, Colloquies,
and Provincial Synods, are injoined to have a watchful Eye over such Pastors as
so do, and to inflict upon them all the Censures of the Church; yea, and to
suspend them from the Ministry: And the same Punishment shall also be laid on
them, who in their public Sermons clash only against another upon these
Matters.

The National Synod of Alez, 1620, did straightly forbid all Ministers to treat
of State-Matters in their Sermons and public Discourses, on pain of being
suspended the holy Ministry; because the only Subject of their Sermons and
public Preaching, should be the holy Word of God; and the venting of State
Matters by them, exposes the Gospel of our Lord Jesus unto Contempt. And the
Provinces shall take special Care that an Account hereof be given by their
Deputies; as also what may be foisted if of this Nature into their Writings and
printed Works.

BA


SOme have objected unto me, What if the Minister have provoked God to send
down his Judgment upon us, what have you to do to write against the Ministers?

Reply. Ministers are Men, and but Men. 2 dly. They are Brethren as well as
their Hearers, are they not? And how read ye, Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall not hate
thy brother in thy Heart, but in any wise reprove thy Brother, and not suffer
Sin upon him.

Object. But they are good Men.

Reply. If they keep in their proper Sphere, where God has set them, and not
meddle with other Things, it would be well for this People. The Apostle said, I
determine to know nothing among you, but Jesus Christ, and him crucified. 2dly,
Good Men have cried. How read you, 1 Chronicles. 21. 1. Satan stood up against
Israel, and provoked Dated to number the People. Now Inoculation is abominable
unto us, as the King's Word was abominable unto Joab; and I have proved already
that Inoculation is displeasing unto God; and therefore he has smote this
People. Inoculation as it has been carried about this Town by the Doctor, and
by his Dictators and Abettors, has not only a natural Tendency to infect
People, not a few, when the inoculated Persons go about the Town with their
Incisions running Six or Seven Days before they are sick, and as many Weeks
after they are well; but its a during Temptation unto the righteous and jealous
God: And for all they have seen the Angel of the Lord stand with his drawn
Sword in his Hand, they do not say, We have sinned and done wickedly in thy
Sight. Neither do they say, Do away our Iniquity, for we have done very
foolishly. And no^ we may not expect a Nathan to come with a Message from God,
to go and tell these Ministers, They are the Men that have introduced this
Evil. Isai. 8. 6, 7. Forasmuch as this People refuses the Waters of Shiloah
(...) softly, and rejoice in Re^in and (...). Now therefore, behold the Lord
brings upon them the waters of the river, strong and many. Now while the
Ministers rejoice in the Knowledge they have from (...) Constantinople, and the
Levant, we are mout^ing to see our Desolution, and that through their means; though
they may be of the same mind as Paul was, who thought he did God good Service
in persecuting the Church; but I believe they are as much mistaken as he was. I
pray God they may see their Mistake, as he did, and then they will be brought
to cry out, What have we done? And they will run into the Congregation, and
make a suitable Atonement, and stand between the living and the dead: Then may
we hope that God will they the Plague. Numb. 16. 4^, etc.

But, now Gentlemen, why do I sit here, burning of Candle, while my Neighbors
are in bed and asleep, knowing that Sleep is sweet to the laboring Man. I do
therefore now declare unto you all who have imbibed the Doctrine of
Inoculation, Choose you one from among you with whom you can entrust this
Matter; and let it come to a fair Debate, that we may know at last who is for
God and who is for (...). And as I suppose you are weary of the first Argument.
I shall advance another, which I propose for the Preliminary of the Debate. And
Moderators being agreed on on both Sides, I will, God willing, (...) you, on
whom I depend for Assistance. The Preliminary Argument is, If Inoculation of
the Small Pox be not of God, then it is of the Devil. But, It is not of God.
Therefore, It is of the Devil.

FINIS.

