A Vindication OF THE Ministers of Boston, FROM THE Abuses and Scandals, lately
cast upon them, IN Diverse Printed Papers.

By Some of their PEOPLE

Matthew. XXV.40. -- Ye have done it unto me.

BOSTON in New England: Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Gerrish, at his Shop
near the Brick Meeting House in Cornhill. 1722.

A Vindication, etc.
1. THE Sacred Oracles, of our Blessed SAVIOR, every where charge us, to treat
the Ministers of Religion with a becoming Esteem and Veneration. The APOSTLE,
beseeches us to know them, that labor among us, and are over us, in the Lord,
and admonish us, and esteem them very highly for their Works sake. Nor is this
inculcated upon us, as a Duty only; but recommended to us, as our Interest. And
the reverse is, a sure Method to bring the Blessed Truths, which they deliver,
into Contempt and Ridicule; and banish all serious Religion out of the World. A
finished Stratagem of the Devil! To this purpose one of our very Reverend
DIVINES well expresses himself! As a corrupt, ignorant and vicious Clergy, is
one of the darkest and most comprehensive Infelicities, under which the Rulers
of the darkness of this World, hold it putrefying, yea, the grand cause of all
the Corruption, in which Mankind lie generally languishing and perishing: And
it is not for nothing, that when the Kingdom of our GOD comes on, this must be
one Introduction or Concomitant of it; Thus says the Lord God, behold I am
against the Shepherds, and I will cause them to cease from feeding the Flocks,
for I will deliver my Flock from their mouth. So the Reverse of this, is, a set
of Good Men inspired with an holy Zeal to do good, who like Angels, flying
through the midst of Heaven, Preach nothing but the Everlasting Gospel, with the
true Spirit of it unto them who dwell upon the Earth: Certainly such Men are
the Stars whom GOD calls by their Names, they shine as Lights in the World, in
their benign Influences; the Blessings of the People that enjoy them are
wonderful! are wonderful!

2. BOSTON may boast of almost an unparalleled Happiness in their MINISTERS;
some of us, have traveled to other, and diverse parts of the World; and we
sincerely prosess, we never saw the Place that excelled BOSTON in this respect.
GOD has indulged to this People a very Candid, Learned and Religious set of
Men, who in all things unbiassedly consult the good of their respective Flocks;
nor do they intermeddle with other Men's Affairs more than what is proper to
their Function. It Is this endears them unto us, and makes us rejoice in them;
and offer our thanks to GOD for the Gifts and Graces that shine so visibly in
them. And we thought our Neighbors were all sensible of the invaluable
Blessings of GOD to us, in this Regard: But to our Astonishment, we see some in
this Place so daringly Frofane, as to Libel and Lampoon these holy Servants of
our Blessed JESUS; and others so foolishly fond of their Invectives, as to
countenance and promote them; and this, among sober Persons, and Members of our
Churches.

3. OF late, there has been Published, (it may be spoken to our dishonor)
several detracting and scandalous Pamphlets, tending to render the MINISTRY
Vain and Ridiculous. In these, this Sacred Order of Men has been Strangely
represented, and horribly animaverted upon. Many things have been charged on
them, of which they been entirely Innocent, and many things that it is their
Glory they have spoke them, have been most maliciously perverted and
equivocated. And now, who should the Authors of these be, but STRANGERS OF
ABJECTS, which inhances their Folly, and makes their Impudence the more brazen
and flagitious. Above all, we wonder at a Weekly Paper, which has been, and is
now, Published, either designedly, to affront our Ministers, and render them
Odious; or else, it has hitherto, wretchedly deviated from it is ultimate
Intent, and been notoriously prostituted to that Hellish Servitude. We know no
Nation under the Sun, that has so openly and assiduously insulted the MINISTERS
of their GOD; and been so strenuous, in their Endeavors, to make them
despicable and detestable to their People, as the Authors of this scandalous
Libel.

4. THAT the World may see this Representation is just, we will recite a few
Passages (as a Specimen) from their Writings, passing over the many indirect
and scandalous Glances at them. In the Writings of John Williams (Tobacconist)
The Ministers have generally revolted from the good old way, and have set up a
way that their Fathers know not of, neither entered it into their hearts, to
allude unto Jr. 5.23. They are revolted and gone. Again, Defective in morals,
-- The causes of Divisions. -- People are afraid the Ministers do affect to
Rule over them, in Temporals, as the Pope of Rome does Temporally as well as
Spiritually rule and determine things --.

In the Learned Taliacotius, The Infatuations in this Country seem always to
have proceeded from some of those who call themselves the Sons of Levi. They
are represented as Men of WICKED DESIRES -- and impious, ignorant and
brasenfaced. Prob Fides! Oh Impiety! Oh Brass! In the Reflections on the Town
Meeting, Aug. 11. 1721. It is thought by three parts of this Town that its
better they were a-foot with a good pair of Shoes on their Feet, and a Staff in
their hands. -- Incendiaries of Strife and Division. In the Courant, No. 23.
Most of the Ministers are for it and that induces me to think, it is from the
Devil. No. 25. The Instruments of mischief and trouble both in Church and
State, from the Witchcraft to Inoculation --. Formerly there were many grave
and wise Ministers, but now there are few. *** But it is needless and endless to
quote, the Passages are so notorious and numerous.

5. THESE Reflections upon and Abuses of this Sacred Order of Men, are
sufficient, to make the most professed Libertine blush. Who is there that can
see all this, the MINISTERS, by whom they expect to be brought home to CHRIST,
thus audaciously insulted, thus vilely trampled upon, and impiously buffoon'd,
by the profane Sons of Corah, and tamely and silently bear it. It Is this
amazes, and alarms us, and we think it a Duty indispensibly incumbent upon us,
more thoroughly to enquire into the Characters of our MINISTERS, whether they
are worthy of these Barbarous Reflections, yea or no? We cannot answer the
neglect of this; if we should, our Consciences would one Day, as a Flaming
Witness flush our Guilt in our Faces. We are their People, and hope by their
precious Ministry to be brought home to GOD, and Everlasting Life; and
therefore we are bound to appear in their Just Vindication; and rescue our
Children, and our Neighbors from the deadly Poison, which these Children of
the Old Serpent would infuse into them. And here first, We cannot but admire
the Moderation, and consummate Patience of our PASTORS, amidst these outrageous
and provoking Abuses and Scandals. They shine with an Unshaken Constancy, and
still go on to Minister in those very parts of their Office, that ten Thousand
difficulties have conspired to obstruct them in. Their Discharge of their
Public Ministry is too well known, to need a Report of ours, and their Prayers
and Sermons proclaim them, to be Workmen that need not be ashamed. Their
Printed Labors are incontestable Testimonies of their Abilities; and speak an
excellent Spirit breathing in them. Their nine Lectures upon Early Piety,
Preached in so remarkable a Time, that it plainly should, GOD was with them:
These (if nothing else) recommend them to the Love and Esteem of all good
People; and we do not wonder to see the Devil so earnest in his revenges upon
them. Their Pastoral Visits are wisely, painfully and faithfully managed; and
if we enquire into their more private Conversation, we find them shining
Instances, of the most refined Virtue and Religion. They are always ready to do
Good, and Rejoice in all Opportunities for it. Never are they addressed by any
in Affliction, but they administer Comfort, and the Afflicted find the Bowels
of a Father in them; and their Liberalities are also truly extraordinary. We
never enjoy their Company, but their Savoury and Entertaining Discourse
evidently discovers an Internal Source of Goodness in them; and the Blame
centers upon ourselves, if we grow not better and wiser by it. Some of them
have great names in distant Lands; and foreign Countries have a great
Veneration for them. But to conclude their Praises, they are more precious than
the fine gold; than the golden wedge of Ophir.

6. BUT now, what is there can justify the virulent and unwearied Endeavors of
these Wicked Men to make them Odious? The only pretext they have is, That the
MINISTERS have intermedled with Civil Affairs, and gone out of their Line; and
the only Instance they can give of this, (for the others are only groundless
Surmises, or open Calumnies) is this, When the Smallpox was first breaking
into the Town, and every one foresaw and feared a dreadful Mortality; these
good Men were apprised of a safe Method, which they by the ordinary Blessing of
GOD, hoped might be an Instrument of saving many Lives. This Method came to
them with very authentic Recommendations; nor was ever, any Remedy attended
with a more uninterrupted, and remarkable Success than this. This they
communicated to the PHYSICIANS; urging them, (not to put it into practice, as
the News-Letter declares, but) to meet together, and consult how far, or
whether at all, it might be practiced; and desiring they would proceed with
mutual Assistances, each to the other, as GOD should direct them. And to do some
justice by the way to that eminent Person, the Learned Dr. COTTON MATHER,
Fellow of the Royal Society (who to his honor) was the principal Instrument,
in promoving this Method among us: (and who now disdains to draw his generous
Pen for his own Vindication, against the many foolish Pamphlets that are
pointed at him; and who changes not his Temper for all their inviduous
Calumnies;) we will here transcribe the Words with which he concludes his
Address to the Physicians; Dated, June 6. 1721. I will only say, (writes the
DOCTOR) that inasmuch as the Practice of suffering and preventing the
Smallpox, in the way of Inoculation has never yet, (as far as I have heard)
been introduced into our Nation; where there are so many that would give great
Sums, to have their Lives insur'd, from the dangers of this dreadful Distemper,
nor has ever any one in all America ever yet, made the trial of it (though we
have several Africans among us, as I now find, who tried it in their own
Country) I cannot but move it be WARILY proceeded in. I durst not yet engage,
that the Success of the trial here will be the same, as has hitherto been in
the other Hemisphere. But I am very confident, no person would miscarry in it,
but what must most certainly have miscarried upon taking it the Common way. And
I would humbly advise, that it be never made, but under the management, of a
Skilful Physician, who will wisely prepare the Body for it before he performs
the Operation. Gentleman, My request is, that you would meet for a Consultation
upon this Occasion, and to deliberate upon it, that whoever first begins this
practice, ( if you approve that it should be begun at all) may have the
concurrence of his worthy Brethren to fortify him in it --.

Thus the Doctor.

WE appeal to the whole World, whether this Gentleman went out of his line, or
did any thing, but what became a Minister, a Christian, or a Gentleman, in his
address. And this is all the blame, they do with any Color charge upon him,
and which has given Life to so many monstrous, and bitter Invectives against
him. But to return from this Excursion. The Physicians never met, nor consulted
about this Method, according to the desires of the MINISTERS, till one of them
began the Experiment upon his Family. He had just reason to apprehend them in
danger of being Infected the Common way: and here, I cannot omit to observe the
happy juncture of Affairs that united, to render this his Attempt Innocent and
Blameless The worthy TOWNSMEN had taken the Guards off the Infected houses, and
in effect proclaimed the Infection so prevalent, that 'twould be in vain, to
strive to suppress it. By this act the Nurses were commissioned, to air
themselves, who had been stifled, for a considerable Time, by a close
Confinement with the Sick: Liberty was declared to them to walk the Streets;
and now as the necessities of the Sick urged, these Infected persons might go
to our Doctors upon any occasion; and any heedless or headstrong Neighbors
run in to visit their contagious Friends; which must necessarily render their
Families very obnoxtious to the distemper. This clearly evinces the eminency of
the danger his Family was in; and in a great measure vindicates his procedure.
But notwithstanding, a mighty Storm was raised, and a saucy Libel published,
which among other things demanded an answer to a Case of Conscience. Six
MINISTERS of BOSTON undertook to give a proper answer to the Demand, wherein
they did some justice to the Gentleman that that Paper had unjustly reproached.
After this, the MINISTERS were silent for several Months, till at length the
constant Success of the Experiment encouraged Some of them to publish their
Sentiments on this subject, especially what related to the case of Conscience.
And here, we think it very strange and rediculous, to see the Satyrists play
the Divine, and deny that it falls under the Cognizance of our MINISTERS, when
so many People pretend CONSCIENCE in the matter. This is to boast of their own
Divinity, as if they were the only proper judges of what is the part of a
Divine, and to Counterpoint their own Skill and Judgment to that of our famous
Professors. But we will not ask who go out of their line now? This is a full
History of the crimes charged on the Ministers, wherein they have gone out of
their line: That is to say, When they saw their People dying about them, and
their dearest Friends they had, Gasping for their Breath, they did not cast off
all bowels of compassion, and be content that no further trial should be made
of a Method, that they apprehended would deliver them from their danger.

7. WE will not on this occasion enquire, how far our Practitioners and late
Libellers have gone out of their line. But this we remark, that if any Person,
of any Profession, had been apprised of a safe Method to preserve his
Neighbor's Life, in a Time of common danger, and had not communicated it to
him, he had approved himself to be of a very un-natural, and un-christian
Temper. And our MINISTERS especially, who are Sluring Patterns of Charity,
would have appeared with a distinguished Blackness, had they neglected this good
Office to the Flocks entrusted with them. How very unjust and wicked then are
the Obloquies and Outrages which have been for this Cause heaped upon them. The
famous Mr. Thomas Thacher was not reviled, for going out of his line, when he
Published a Sheet of Directions, relating to the Small Pox, Forty three Years
since. And several eminent MINISTERS in the Country, have practiced Physic,
and several do so at this Day, and we could never hear them reviled for going
out of their line: And possibly, there are among the MINISTERS of BOSTON, such
as the best Physicians in the Land, need not be ashamed to advice withal.

8. AFTER all, We have often heard that Maxim, That a Power to do Good not only
gives a right, to the doing of it, but makes the doing it a Duty. And we humbly
conceive, if it were more regarded, the World would many ways reap the Benefit
of it. And to us it is very evident, that he that sees his Neighbor exposed to
any great danger, and can relieve him; not only has a Right, but should look on
it as his Duty, to do so.

9. Now this being all the Crime, that is with any Shadow of Reason charged
upon our Ministers, we cannot but look upon it, as the greatest inhumanity and
blacken ingratitude to treat them in such a manner as they have been. We ought
rather to value and esteem them; love and thank them, for their Goodness; and
bless GOD for making them the Instruments of so much Good to us, and to our
Families. We are sure the great Success of the Practice, which they hoped so
well of, has caused many among us to wish, that instead of such base Methods,
as have been taken to oppose it, a regular management of it had been agreed
upon; and some are of Opinion, that our Ministers may say to their wasted
People, what the Apostle did upon the Shipwreck, Sirs, You should have hearkened
unto me, and not have gained this Harm and Loss.

10. BUT we will not enter into the Controversy, what we observe is, that
according to this way of treating the Ministers, which is now in Fashion, it
will come to this; If in a Time of common Distress, they with great Modesty
offer their Opinion for the Common good, they shall be censured, for going out
of their line. If on a Day of Public Thanksgiving, they mention Public
Mercies, as those of a good Government, etc. or if they rebuke the growing Sins
of the Times, and put any notorious Transgressors in mind of the awful
Threatenings, pronounced in the Holy Writings against them; it shall be deemed
going out of their line; yea, their Warning of the wicked shall be ridiculously
called, a Cursing of them. If this impious and Satanic Custom prevail, we shall
involve our selves into a thousand pernicious Evils. Our Children will imbibe
the Poison, and perish like the Children of Bethel; and our Elder People will
pine away in their Iniquities. Our Reprovers and Prophets being Silenced,
Iniquity and every Abomination will break in among us, and bear down like an
irresistible Torrent, all Virtue, and Religion before it. And what is mostly to
be deprecated, all manner of Spiritual Plagues will follow this our degeneracy;
and the Town grow ripe for a Wrath unto the Uttermost. We read, They mocked the
Messengers of GOD, and misused his Prophets, until the Wrath of the Lord arose
against his People, and there was no Remedy. In what a deplorable Condition
should we be, if Heaven should pronounce this direful fate upon us; or, if the
intolerable invectives read among us, against our Holy Ministers, should
provoke GOD to deprive us of these Invaluable Blessings, and punish us with a
Clergy, that should be Salt without Savor, and Clouds without Rain, as we have
seen in other Places.

11. IN the mean time, we commiserate the deplorable State of those, who
signalize themselves by their Malice and Mischief against these faithful
Servants of GOD. We have seen a Conspicuous blast from Heaven attending such,
and GOD has so remarkably revenged the Iniquity, that none but such as are
given over to a penal hardness of heart, can hide their Fear and Trembling. And
when we consider, the meekness of our Ministers under these Abuses, imitating
their Glorious Master, who remained as dumb under the Shearers. We cannot but
the more deprecate the fearful condition of these Revilers, and earnestly call
upon our dear Friends and Neighbors, to depart from the Tents of these Wicked
Men, least they perish with them. And we encourage our selves, that all our
virtuous Neighbors will unite, to discourage these Wicked Libels. But whether
this will be taken well by them, or no, sure we are, it will be acceptable to
our Blessed Savior, who is greatly offended at them who wrong His faithful
Servants, and calls from Heaven, Why persecute ye me?

12. However, Our Beloved Pastors, We beseech you not to be in the least
discouraged in your faithful Services; We, who hope, to be part of your Crown
at the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, earnestly entreat you to go on very
cheerfully and courageously in the Service of your great Master. You have many
Cordial and Sincere Friends among us, who love and esteem you the more, and
Pray and Plead the more with Heaven for you, because of these Cruel Enemies,
And we doubt not, but that Our Blessed Savior (whose you are, and whom you
serve) will still honor you to do great Service for Him, and rescue your
Opportunities to do good, from the malicious and wicked Attempts of your
Adversaries; and at length, appear to your Joy and their unspeakable Shame and
Confusion.

To close all, By what we have said, We suppose that we shall be accounted, (by
some) Busy Inoculators, and would have none to write on the Subject, but such
as approve the Practice; but we would not be so misrepresented, but would have
every one (if he sees cause) that has Leisure and Capacity to instruct his
Neighbors, to improve his Talent, provided he does not stuff his Composures
with scandalous Reflections, such as we have, and every Christian and Gentleman
will declare against. We are of opinion, that Persons may differ in their
Sentiments about this Practice, without declaring themselves Open Enemies to
one another, and neglecting Christian and Civil Conversation; and may
notwithstanding, Unite in all those things which tend to promote the Common
Good. We may with more reason be angry, that two Persons do not Look alike,
than that they do not in all things Think just alike. We are of opinion, that
in such Cases as these, Every Person ought to Act according to his own Light;
and we should not Unchristianly Censure and Condemn one another for the Use or
Neglect of it, but preserve a due Esteem and Veneration for each other, and
perform all Christian and Neighbourly offices notwithstanding; which, that we
of this Place may do, we shall not be wanting in our hearty Endeavors, and
sincere Addresses to the Throne of Grace --. To which every Friend of the
Public will add his AMEN.

^ Boston, January 30th, 1721-2.

