Sober Remarks ON A Book lately Reprinted at Boston, Entitled, A MODEST PROOF
of the Order and Government settled by CHRIST and his Apostles in the Church.

In a Letter to a Friend.

If any Man consent not to the Words of our Lord JESUS CHRIST: He is proud,
knowing nothing. From such withdraw thy self. -- O Timothy, keep that which is
committed to thy Trust; avoiding profane and vain Babblings.

1 Timothy 6. Solis Canonicis Libris debetur Fides; Caeteris omnibus Judicium.

Luther. Surge Veritas! Ipsa Scripturas tuas interpretare, quas Consuetudo non
novit nam si noscet, non esset.

Tertull. BOSTON in New England: Printed for Samuel Gerrish, and Sold at his
Shop near the Brick Meeting House in Cornhill. 1724.

A TABLE of the Chief CONTENTS.
Page 3. Remarks on a Passage in The Modest Proof etc. referring to Aerius:
with some hints relating to the Fathers.

Page 5. Remarks on a Passage relating to the first Reformers; proving that
they were for the sameness of Bishops and Presbyters.

Page 11. Remarks on a Passage relating to Non-Resistance and Passive Obedience.

P. 12 Remarks on our Author's Account of the Office of Deacons; proving that
preaching and Baptising are no parts of their Office.

P. 16 Calvin vindicated.

P. 17. Our Author's Arguments for a Difference of Order between the 12
Apostles, and the 70, considered.

P. 20 That CHRIST at his Ascension left no other Officers in Commission
besides his Eleven Apostles; none at least that had any Concern with the
Gentiles, -- proved.

P. 21. That the Apostles had some sort of Jurisdiction over ordinary Pastors
Confessed; and some Hints touching the Necessity of it in the Infancy of the
Church.

P. 22. That the same Reasons do not hold now, for a superior Power in some
Ministers over others, briefly shown.

P 23 A Concession made by our Author, applied to the Destruction of his whole
Argument for the Continuance of that Power in the Church.

P. 25. Our Author's 1st Scripture Proof for the Continuance of it in the
Church, taken from the Commission in Mat. 28.19, 20. examined.

P. 34 His 2d Text, 1 Cor. 12.28. Apostles, etc. set in the Church, considered.

P. 36 His 3d Text, Ephesians. 4 Our Lord gave Apostles, etc. for the Edifying the
Body of Christ, -- till we all come unto a perfect Man, -- considered,

P. 41. His 1st Argument for Bishops being the Apostles Successors, from the
Apostleship's being called an Episcopacy, Acts 1.20. Examined.

P. 43. His Argument from the Apostles conferring upon others the Apostolic
Power in their own Time; examined.

P. 45. His Argument from the Episcopacy of Timothy. --

P. 49 His Argument from the Episcopacy of Titus. -- And from the Angels of the
7 Churches -- examined.

P. 52. Brief Remarks on some Passages in our Author, relating to the Records
of the ancient Church, and Catalogues of its Bishops, etc.

P. 53. Calvin again vindicated.

P. 54. The Presbyterian Proofs of the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters, from
several Texts, vindicated.

P. 62. The Presbyterian Argument for Ministerial Parity, from
Scripture-Precepts enjoining it; vindicated.

P. 69. The Argument for Ordination by Presbyters, from 1 Timothy 4.14. vindicated.

P. 72. Two Objections of our Author's against the Temporariness of the
Apostolic Power over Pastors, answered

P. 73. His Conclusion imitated, and his short Expostulation returned, with
some needful Alterations and Additions.

N. B. The Reader is desired to observe the Advertisement at the End etc.

Sober REMARKS On a BOOK, Entitled, A Modest Proof of the Order and Government
settled by Christ and His Apostles in the Church; In a Letter, etc.
SIR,
I HAVE received and read the Book you lately sent me, entitled, A Modest
Proof, etc; in which the Author's professed Design is, to represent to the
World what was the Primitive Model or Form of Church Government; what was
settled by our Savior and his Apostles, in this point, and that from what is
recorded of the Matter in the Books of the New Testament. Page 1.

I observe the Book is said to be Re printed at Boston, etc. I don't remember,
that I ever saw any former Edition, nor had I opportunity to peruse this, till
you were pleased to put your Book into my hands, desiring my Thoughts upon it.
And in return to you, I must say, after an impartial unprejudiced Perusal, I am
far from thinking, that the Gentleman has made a just Representation of the
Form of Church Government settled by our Savior and his Apostles; or, that he
has been able in any measure to prove his own Model from what is recorded in
the Books of the New Testament. I can by no means join with the Publisher, who
in his Preface is pleased to call the Author's Arguments convincing; and yet I
am sensible the Book is, for the most part, plausibly written, and seems likely
enough to draw unwary Persons into the same unhappy Mistakes, that the Author
himself labors of. I should therefore have thought it a piece of good Service,
if upon the Book's first coming forth, any Body had presently followed it with
a suitable Answer. And I suppose, an Answer would have been given to it, with
convenient speed, if it had not happened in this, as it often does in other
cases of the like nature, that even those who wish the Work done, are loath to
be themselves the doers of it, and wait and hope that some other Person of
better Capacity, or more Leisure, will undertake it. -- But now since the Book
has been suffered (whether for this or for any other Reasons) to pass for
several Months without any Answer, perhaps some may be disposed to question
whether it be expedient to take notice of it, at this distance of Time, and at
such a Juncture.

However, Since (I observe) the Book is recommended as proper to be put into
the hands of the Laity; since (you tell me) Numbers of Copies have been
industriously dispersed through the Town and Country; and this Author (I hear)
is gloried in as unanswerable; and some unwary Readers (as I said) it is
probable enough, may be captivated with the specious show of Scripture-Argument
he brings: Upon these Considerations, I cannot but incline to agree with you in
thinking it convenient, and not yet out of season, to defend our selves, and
put into the hands of the Laity some just and proper Remarks on the Treatise
lately recommended to them. For, it is better to run the hazard of a few severe
Censures, than by a criminal silence to betray so important an Interest as we
are engaged in, and tamely suffer any of our too unthinking Children or
Neighbors to be seduced from what we look upon to be the Order of the Gospel.
Therefore, although I might very well excuse my self from the Task you urge me
to, by pleading the better ability of others to undertake it, and the pressure
of my own Affairs, which require my utmost Diligence and Application; yet being
sensible that others will be ready to make the same Excuses, I am not willing
that the consideration of any private Inconveniences should discourage me from
attempting to do a public Service.

In compliance then with your repeated Desires, I shall endeavor now (in the
fear of GOD and by His Help) to point out, and confute the most considerable
Errors in the Book you sent me: I say the most considerable, because I don't
intend to wast my own Time, or exercise your Patience with Remarks upon every
thing of smaller Consquence, that is liable to exception in our Author; but
shall only take notice of such Passages as seem most likely to lead his Readers
into wrong Notions, in matters of importance: of which sort I shall mention
four or five, before I come to that, which is the great Design of the Book.

THE First is in Page 2d. Where he says, That the Church, however otherwise
disquieted, -- yet heard little or no noise made for above 1400 Years about
this point of Church Government, save that one AERIUS started a Debate, but had
so few to second him, that it died with himself and left his Name on Record
among HERETICS. -- Here it is worth while to enquire, WHO it was that ranked
him among Heretics for his opinion about Church Government? Why truly
Epiphanius was the first; who is generally observed to have been too warm in
his Temper, and rash in his Censures, though otherwise a worthy good Man. -- And
then was it only for this opinion, that he condemned Aerius? No indeed; but he
charged him with Heresy in another Point (which may well render that Father's
Judgment suspected.) It was his asserting the Unlawfulness of praying for the
Dead. Aerius appeared against this Superstition; and Epiphanius (a Defender of
it) therefore called him a Heretic. -- The Truth is (as one Tong's Defense,
etc. Page 30, 31.
observes) these two Heresies of Aerius concerning the Parity of Bishops and
Pressbyters, and the Unlawfulness of praying for the Dead, are much of the same
Nature; and Epiphanius's Confutation of them both, equally Learned and
Satisfactory: for it is observable, that in the same place where he condemns
that monstrous Heresy of the Identity of Order, He fairly confesses, That by
the two Orders of Presbyters and Deacons all Ecclesiastical Offices might be
performed -- What need then of the Prelate, so fiercely contended for? To this
I shall only add the Words of Learned Bishop Stilling fleet, who says, If
Aerius was a Heretic for holding the Identity of Order, it is strange that
Epiphanius should be the first Man that should charge him with it; and that
neither Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, nor Evagrius, before whose time he lived,
should censure him for it And why should not Jerome have been equally
animadverted upon, who is as express in this, as any Man in the World? -- "As
to the matter it self (says the Bishop) I believe upon the strictest Inquiry,
Medina's Judgment will prove true, that Jerome, Austin, Ambrose, Sedulius,
Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact, were all of Aerius's Judgment,
as to the Identity of both Name and Order of Bishops and Presbyters in the
Primitive Church Iren. page 276, 277.
-- To these, it is certain, the Bishop might truly have prefixed the Names of
Clement of Rome, and Polycarp, two of the most ancient and venerable among the
Fathers. But at this rate so many of the Fathers (and those too of the highest
esteem and note) will be branded with Heresy, that we shall never know
hereafter, when we may lay any Stress upon the Judgment and Authority of
Fathers. It was therefore honestly and wisely done by our Author, not to meddle
with them in the present Controversy, but to found his supposed Proof wholly
upon the Scriptures, of whose Authority there can be no suspicion. Scripture
Evidence besure is sufficient; and will be convincing to us for ever. And if
our Author's ill Success in this Attempt, don't prove too great a
Discouragement, I hope that others of his own Church will (for the time to
come) imitate the good Example he has set them, in keeping close to the
Scriptures; and not make the Fathers their Refuge on all occasions and place
their confidence in them; who can by no means be allowed to be a certain
foundation to build upon, Since (as Dr. Sherlock, Preserv. against Popery.
justly observes) they many times contradict themselves and one another; So
that (he tells us) it has often made him smile, with a mixture of Pity and
Indignation, to see what a great noise Roman Disputants make among Women and
Children and the meanest sort of People, with Quotations out of Fathers and
Councils; whom they pretend to be all on their side". -- But were the Authority
of Fathers of ten times greater weight than it is, yet but very few, even among
the Learned, (especially in this remote part of the Earth) ever had any
opportunity fully to inform themselves, what their Judgment was. And I can
never think it wise or safe to put a Controversy of any importance, on such a
Foot, as that a few Learned Men may contradict one another at pleasure, and all
the World beside want either Learning, Books or Leisure, to examine thereby who
speaks the Truth, and who denies it

I shall only add, with respect to the foregoing Passage, that as all the
Fathers abovementioned were plainly of opinion, that Bishops and Presbyters
were not two distinct Orders, nor invested with any different Powers, by Divine
Institution; and as many other Fathers might have the same Sentiments, who have
not lest their Opinions upon Record about it; and as scarce any Body of great
Antiquity (except such whose Writings are known to have been shamefully
corrupted) so much as seems to be otherwise minded; so it is very certain, that
almost the whole Christian Church, both Protestant and Popish, were of the same
opinion, about the time of the Reformation.

WHAT the Mind of the Romanists then was, may be learned from Bishop Burnet's
History of the Reformation, which tells us Vol. 1. page 366.
, That it was the common Style of the Age, to reckon Priests and Bishops as the
same Office: -- and from Dr. Willet's Synopsis Papismi Page 269, 272, 281.
Edit. Anno 1630.
, where he proves from the Papal Decrees, that the Romanists held all Ministers
indifferently to be the Apostles Successors.

Again, THAT the Protestants, whether of the Church of England, or of Foreign
Churches, were all agreed in the same Opinion, is no less certain, whatsoever
our Author may suggest to the contrary.

AS for the Church of England, the Generality of it is Bishops and Divines, from
the beginning of the Reformation, for a long while ('it is well known) expressly
disclaimed the Necessity and Divine Right of Diocesan Episcopacy; and owned the
Foreign Churches, who were without it, to be true Churches of CHRIST.

IN the Days of King Henry the 8th, when Things were tending to a Reformation,
The Book entitled, The Institution of the Christian Man (which was compiled by
the Body of the Clergy, approved by both Houses of Parliament, and Published by
the King's Command) expressly says, In Novo Testamento nulla mentio facta est
aliorum Graduum aut Distinctimum in Ordinibus, sed Diaconorum vel Ministrorum,
et Presbyterorum sive Episcoporum: That is, In the New Testament, there is no
mention of any other Degrees or Distinctions in Orders, but of Deacons or
Ministers, and Presbyters or Bishops. -- In the Reign of King Edward the 6th,
Archbishop Cranmer, in his Answer to the King's Questions (approved by the
other Bishops) has these Words, The Bishops and Priests were at one time, and
were not two Things, but both one Office, in the beginning of Christ's Religion
See Stillingf. Iren. page 392.
. -- Upon the Revival of the Reformation, at Queen Elizabeth's coming to the
Crown, the learned Bishop Jewel Apol. part 2. chapter 3 div. 5.
delivers the like Acknowledgement; not as his own private opinion, but as the
Sense of the Church of England. In St. Jerome's time (says he) there were
Metropolitans, Archbishops, Archdeacons, and others: but Christ appointed not
these Distinctions of Orders from the Beginning. These Names are not found in
all the Scriptures. This is the Thing we defend. St. Jerome says Sciant
Episcopi, etc. Let Bishops understand, that they are in Authority over Priests
more by Custom, than BY ORDER OF GOD'S TRUTH: and that they ought to govern the
Church in common. Again, Jerome says, Idem est, etc. A Priest is the same with
a Bishop; they are both one thing; and the Churches were at first governed by
the common Advice of the Priests. -- The Bishop cites Erasmus, saying, Id
Temporis idem erat Episcopus, Sacerdos, and Presbyter: These three Names
(Bishop, Priest and Presbyter) were at that time (Jerome's) all one. -- He also
alleges that of Austin, Secundum honorum vocabula, quae jam Ecclesiae usus
obtinuit, Episcopatus Presbyterio major est. The Office of a Bishop is above
the office of a Priest (not by Authority of Scriptures, but) after the Names of
Honor, which the Custom of the Church has now obtained -- Thus Bp. Jewel.

YEA Archbishop Whitgift himself, speaking of the Government of the Church of
England, by Bishops in his Time, says Tract. 17. chapter 2. Vid. Let. Adv. p. 13.
, It is well known, that the manner and form of Government used in the Apostles
time, and expressed in the Scripture, is not now observed; but has -- been
altered: -- neither do I know (says he) any learned Man of a contrary Judgment.

AND indeed at the Reformation, Prelacy was established in the Church of
England, on a very different Foot from that of Scripture Institution. For not
only in King Henry the VIII's Reign, but likewise in King Edward the VI's, the
Bishops took out Commissions from the Crown, by which they were to hold their
Bishoprics only during the King's pleasure, and were empowered in the King's
name, as his Delegates, to perform all the parts of the Episcopal Function: and
Archbishop Cranmer, (that excellent and pious Martyr) set an Example to the
Rest in taking out one of them Burnet's Hist. Reform Abridg. Edit. 4 page 274.
. So that in those Days, they made them no other than the King's Ministers, as
Dr. Heylen himself confesses Hist. Edw. VI.
.

I think these Things are sufficient to satisfy any Man, that the Church of
England never pretended Diocesan Episcopacy to be of Divine Institution, before
the Reign of King James the First. And even in that Reign, matters were not
carried so high, as to deny the Validity of Ordination by Presbyters. For when
some that had been ordained by mere Presbyters, offered themselves (in King
James's time) to be consecrated Bishops in the Church of Scotland, Dr. Andrews
(Bishop of Ely) moved this Question, Whether they should not first be
Episcopally Ordained Presbyters, that they might be capable of being admitted
into the Order of Bishops? But Archbishop Bancroft (a most rigid Assertor of
Episcopacy) answered, There was no need of it, since Ordination by Presbyters
was Valid. The Bishop of Ely yielded; and immediately without repeating their
Ordination as Presbyters, they were consecrated Bishops Hickman's Apol. page
38. cited by Mr. Pierce, Vind. part 1. page 167.
. -- Thus we have seen what was the Judgment of the Church of England, from the
very beginning of the Reformation, down to the Reign of King James the First,
and during that Reign also. -- The Claim of Apostolical Institution, or of
Divine Right, was what King James himself (whether out of Policy, which he
called his King Craft, or out of his insight into the Scripture) would not
suffer them to pretend in his time; as our famous Mr. Davenport observes
Church's Charter. page 79.
.

I shall only add here; I cannot learn whether there has been even in England,
to this very Day, properly any public and express Assertion of the Divine
Right of Prelacy, either by Parliament or Convocation. I think no such thing
can be found either in the Thirty nine Articles, or in the Homilies, or in the
Form of Ordination, or in the Common Prayer Book, etc. -- And it is memorable,
that the lower House of Convocation took occasion ( December. 11. 1702) to send
to the upper House a Declaration for the Divine Right: but it gave Offense.
They were accused of ascribing too much to Episcopacy: and many of their own
Body Dissented, upon this ground, that, however true the Doctrine might be, yet
they questioned the LEGALITY of asserting it, being apprehensive of the danger
of making any Declaration of that Nature, in Convocation, without a Royal
License. -- Upon this the Assertors begged the Bishops to take the Doctrine into
their mature Consideration, and to support it, and discourage the contrary. But
such was their Lordship; wise Caution, that they would not comply with their
Desire, and even refused to satisfy them, that they did not dissent from them
in this point. -- And I know not whether since that time there has been any
public and legal Establishment of the foresaid Doctrine.

AND now, as to the Judgment of the Protestants of Foreign Churches, Dr. John
Reynolds (the Oracle of the University in his Day) shall be my Voucher, who
tells us in his Answer to Sir Francis Knowles, That they who for this Five
Hundred Years have been industrious in Reforming the Church, have though it that
all Pastors (whether called Bishops or Presbyters) have, according to the Word
of GOD, like Power and Authority. Besides Bishops, and Professors, and other
learned Reformers and Martyrs of our own Nation; he instances in the Waldenses,
Marsilius, Patavinus, Huss, Luther, Calvin, Brentius. Bullinger, Musculus, etc.
And afterward he avers it to the common opinion of the Reformed Churches in
Switzerland, Savoy, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Hungary and Poland. This
of Dr. Reynolds's is a very comprehensive Testimony Vid. (...)'s Def. part 1.
page 89.
. And yet our Author is pleased to say (Page 3d) That at the Reformation the
greatest and most considerable part of the Reformed Church, retained the
ancient Order and Government: which indeed is very true, it rightly understood;
but if he means (as, if he intends any thing to his purpose by it, he must
mean) to persuade his Readers, that the greatest part of the Reformed Churches
retained Bishops, as an Order of Men by Divine Institution distinct from and
superior to Presbyters. This I think is a great Mistake, as has been already
(I suppose) sufficiently proved. -- However it is a Mistake which I have
observed (with some surprise) several of the Episcopal Writers boldly running
into; the reason of which, I presume is. That in some of the Foreign Protestant
Churches Titular Bishops were, and still are retained. I hope therefore, if not
to hinder this Misrepresentation from being obtruded on the World any more, yet
to prevent its being a Snare to some, by proving from their own Authentic
Writings, that those Foreign Churches (though they keep up the Name; yet) look
upon a Bishop as nothing more than Primus inter Pares, a sort of standing
Moderator among his Brethren; and that they allow no Power to a Bishop (as of
Divine Institution) which they deny to Presbyters.

THE Truth of this will be as clear as the Sun to any Body, that will be at the
pains to consult the Harmony of their Confessions. It would be tedious to cite
Passages from them all. I shall therefore only mention the Words of the
Confession Ha^m. Conf. Sect. 11. Ex Helv.
set foremost, (with which all that retained a nominal Episcopacy do agree)
which are full to my purpose, and run thus; -- Data est omnibus in Ecclesia
Ministris una and aequalis Potestas sive Functio. Cerre ab Initio Episcopi and
Presbyteri Ecclesiam communi opera gubernarunt: nullus alteri se prae^ulit,
etc. The Power or Office given to the Ministers of the Church, is the same and
equal in all. Certainly in the beginning the Bishops and Presbyters did with a
common Consent and Labor govern the Church. One did not lift up himself above
another, nor usurp a greater Power or Authority: -- Notwithstanding for Order's
sake, some one of the Ministers called the Assembly together, propounded the
matters to be consulted upon in the Meeting, also gathered the Sentences (or
Judgments) of the Rest: and finally took Care, as much as in him lay, that
there might arise no Disorder -- So that it appears very plainly, that those
Churches abroad, which retained the Name of Bishops after their Reformation,
yet acknowledged no Superiority, or Distinction of Powers and Orders, among the
Ministers of CHRIST.

I shall only subjoyn here a Testimony or two. Dr. Stillingfleet in his Iremcum
(Page 411.) having enumerated many Protestant Cities and Places, whose Church
Government is in the hands of Superintendents, adds upon it, -- All these
acknowledge no such thing as a Divine Right of Episcopacy but stiffly maintain
Jerome's opinion of the primitive Equality of Gospel Ministers. -- And in the
Account of Denmark for the Year 1692 (said to be written by the Lord
Molesworth) I find these Passages; There are (says he) Six Superintendents in
Denmark, who take it very kindly to be called Bishops and my Lord. -- There are
(he adds) also Four in Norway. These (he observes) have no Temporalities; keep
no Ecclesiastical Courts; have no Cathedrals, with Prebends, Canons, Deans,
Subdeans, etc. But are only Primi inter Pares; having the Rank above the
inferior Clergy, and the Inspection into their Doctrine and Manners. And the
Bishops in Sweden are in the like Condition. Writers speak very diminutively of
their Power. The Author of the Present State of Europe for the Year 1705.
observes, They retain little more than the Name, and a bare primary sort of
Superiority over the other Superintendents; the Establishing of the Lutheran
Religion having deprived them of the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, which they
exercised before the Reformation Vid. Anderson's Def. page 189, 190.
.

IN fine, Let me add a Hint relating to the Church of Scotland, which is too
excellent a Branch of the Reformation to be omitted. Great Pains have been
taken by some to make the first Reformation there look as if it had been
Episcopal; because for a while there were Bishops; and because there were
Superintendents appointed for the Direction of the Church Affairs. But if we
look into the History of those Times, we shall find that the Bishops were
obtruded upon the Church, by the Court; and the Superintendents were only a
temporary Expedient, for the necessity of the Day, appointed by such too as
were most Anti-Episcopal in their Judgment. And (what is worth observing) the
Superintendants and Bishops were both in subjection to the Assembly of
Ministers. -- So that notwithstanding them, it appears that at the Reformation
the Church of Scotland was Anti-Prelatical. They that would see this matter
argued, may consult the Learned Mr. Jameson's Nazianzeni Querela Part 1. Sect.
8.
; with a late Book entitled Memoirs of the Church of Scotland Page 46. -- 81.
, where it is particularly debated, and set in the clearest Light.

I have now said enough (I suppose) to refute our Author's Mistake, when he
insinuates. That the greatest Part of the Reformed Church retained Prelacy.

THE next Passage I shall take notice of, is in the 5th Page, where our Author
says, Perhaps at the bottom it is none of the least Prejudices against
Episcopacy, that they of that Persuasion have generally asserted the JUST
RIGHTS and PREROGATIVES of PRINCES. -- and accordingly have maintained the
Doctrines of NON-RESISTANCE and PASSIVE OBEDIENCE etc. -- Now, This is a
Conjecture, I believe, the Gentleman had much better have let sleep in his own
Bosom; for, as he had no occasion to expose it, so I think it will be far from
doing him or his Cause any Service. In short, I know of no judicious
Dissenters, that plead for the Doctrine of Resistance, any further than it must
be asserted by all, who can heartily thank God for our glorious Deliverance
from Popery, and arbitrary Power by the late King WILLIAM of blessed Memory; as
well as for the present happy Settlement of the British Crown in the
illustrious House of HANOVER: and thus far I am sure the Church of England
has, and still does generally concur with us in asserting it; unless
OCCASIONAL PERJURY, is much more practiced by some sort of Persons, than ever
Occasional Conformity was by others. If therefore our Author strains his
beloved Doctrines of Non-Resistance and Passive Obedience, so far as to strike
at the Revolution and present Settlement, I suppose the Church of England will
boast little of such a Defender, and her Rival-Government (as He is pleased to
call it) will less envy her such a Champion. But if the Gentleman holds these
Doctrines in such a limited Sense, as is consistent with his being a Loyal
Subject to his present Majesty, King GEORGE; then the Dissenters and He are
much better agreed in the Point of Civil Government, than He seems willing to
have the World imagine; and there appears no just Foundation for the
abovementioned Censure. Though I must confess, I cannot but close with another
Remark, that follows it, viz. It Is certain, there is too much of a CARNAL and
WORLDLY Spirit, that keeps this Debate (about Church Government) so long alive:
and there is little hope it will die, till Christians be more animated with the
true Spirit and Temper of the Gospel. -- But on which Side the Fault lies
chiefly, GOD knows. I would humbly say, in this Case, as David to his Father
Saul, Let the LORD be Judge; and judge between Me and Thee!

I shall take Notice of one thing more (though it comes in here a little out of
Place) before I proceed to that which is the great Point in Controversy;
because I would not be interrupted in the consideration of that, by turning
aside to examine any incidental Passages foreign to it. The Thing I refer to is
what our Author tells us, Page 12. " That the DEACONS, whose Ordination we have
an Account of in the 6th Chapter of the Acts, were invested with some share of
the Apostolic Office* particularly of Preaching and Baptising, as well as
managing the Public Stock of the Church. Now I might here observe the
Limitation of this Episcopal Deacon to Preaching and Baptizing; and might ask
the Reason, Why he may not likewise be allowed to administer the Lord's Supper?
For it should seem, They whose business it is to dispense one Seal of the
Covenant, must certainly have Authority to dispense the other too. If not;
where is the Rule or Reason, for the Division of them? -- But not to insist on
this. -- One would a little wonder how our Author should fall into this
unaccountable Notion, since he himself tells us (in the foregoing Page) " That
the OCCASION, DESIGN and MANNER of Instituting this New Order is FULLY set down
in the same Chapter; and there is nothing there concerning either of these,
that can give a Man the least Suspicion of such a Thing. What then he founds
his opinion in this matter upon, seems to be what he mentions presently; That
he soon after finds Philip preaching and baptising at Samaria, and Stephen
disputing and doing great Wonders and Miracles among the People. And because he
finds one Deacon disputing, and another preaching and baptising, He thence
unadvisedly concludes, it cannot be doubted, but that they and all the Rest, of
whom we have nothing upon Record, were invested (by virtue of their Ordination
to the Office of Deacon) with Authority to preach and baptize; notwithstanding
that, from the full Account we have of the occasion, design and manner of their
Institution, nothing more evidently appears, than that the whole and only
Business, they were ordained for, was to serve Tables -- Now, if this Reasoning
will serve the Turn, it would be the easiest thing in the World, by an Argument
exactly parallel to destroy the foundation of our Author's Distinction between
Bishops and Presbyters, and all he has built upon it, together with it; and so
dispatch all the Remainder of his Book in two or three Sentences

FOR if we may trust him, page 46, he finds James the Just, who (some suppose)
might be one of the 70, advanced to the APOSTOLIC Order. From whence (to
imitate his way of arguing) it cannot be doubted but that this James, and all
the Rest of the 70, were by virtue of their Commission (Luke 10) invested with
the Apostolic Power and Authority; notwithstanding that from that Chapter in
which we have a full account of the occasion, design, and manner of sending
forth the 70. nothing more appears, but that the whole Business they were
commissioned to, was only to preach the Gospel, heal the Sick, and cast out
Devils. And so, by our Author's own method of reasoning, the 70 will be of the
same Office and Order with the Apostles; and the whole Design of his Treatise
will be superseded. -- But not to insist on the Destructiveness of this
Argument of our Author's to his whole Book besides: the plain Truth of the Case
is this; That, after the Ordination of Philip to the Office of a Deacon, it
pleased GOD to advance him (and he might do so by others of his Brethren
likewise, for ought we know) to an Office of greater Usefulness and Honor, and
send him to preach the Word and Baptize; for which he had the Warrant of the
Holy Spirit, which enabled him to cast out Devils and heal Diseases, in
testimony of his Mission from GOD (Act. 8.6, 7.) But surely this is no Warrant
to Deacons in our days, (who are not under the immediate direction of the same
Spirit) to presume to do the same things.

THE Office, which Philip was promoted to, was that of an Evangelist We read
(Act. 21.8.) of Philip the Evangelist, which was one of the seven, that is, one
of the seven that were appointed to serve Tables, Act. 6. Philip, who was
originally a Deacon in process of time, and it is like pretty soon became an
Evangelist. Having for some time used the Office of a Deacon well, He purchased
to himself a good Degree, and merited a higher Station in the Church. Our
Author owns the Deacons to be inferior to Presbyters; to the seventy and others
of their Order (as he speaks) who he says go by the name of Prophets in a
Gospel sense, Ministers of the Word: Pastors, and Teachers, and Evangelists --
All these he makes to be but various Appellations of the same Order of Men,
that is, Presbyters; as will appear to every one that reads his 13th and 14th
Pages, however inconsistently he may afterward express himself. He makes these
Teachers and Evangelists to be a distinct Office and Order from the Apostles
and from the Deacons: inferior to the Apostles, and superior to the Deacons, as
in the Pages referred to. Now this Gentleman lays it down for an indisputable
Maxim elsewhere (page 13, and 56) That although all Apostles were Presbyters and
Deacons; the superior Office or Order including the inferior; yet not vice
versa. Every Teacher (he tells us) was not an Apostle: We may add; Nor was
every Deacon a Teacher, by the same Rule, the inferior Order or Office not
including the superior. According to his own Principles then, at the time when
Philip is styled an Evangelist, he must be a Presbyter (or of the Order of the
seventy; and so superior to a Deacon. And it is more that probable, that Philip
received his preferment before his going abroad, and dispensing the Word and
Sacraments in Samaria. What though there is no mention made of any second
Ordination he had for this End? Yet since he is expressly called an Evangelist,
and did the Work of an Evangelist; our Author's own Principles will oblige him
to suppose, that the Deacon did not of his own Head, take upon him to execute
the higher Office of an Evangelist or Prophet; but was empowered by some new
Commission from the Apostles, (who had before ordained him a Deacon) or else
that he had an extraordinary and immediate Call from GOD. And let him choose
which of these he will, it is equally destructive to the Pretenses of his
Episcopal Deacon, who (by virtue of an Ordination to this inferior Office only)
presumes to Baptize and Preach: Works, no ways belonging to his Office, and
what truly a Presbyterian Deacon (However despised by the Adversary, and
however they should scoff at him for any such Pretenses) might perform as
warrantably as the Church of England Deacon. I have some where met with this
Saying of a High-flying Worthy, That a preaching Bishop is a prating Coxcomb.
Methinks this might with much more propriety be applied to the preaching
Deacon; a thing which the Scriptures know nothing of. I am sure there is no
Countenance for it from the Case of Philip. Much less from the Case of Stephen,
the Proto-Martyr; for, suppose him to have done all that Philip did, we must
conclude then he had the like Preferment, and did not act in the Capacity of a
Deacon (or an Officer inferior to a Presbyter) but of a Minister of the Word,
as well as Philip. -- Yet since Stephen did nothing but what (considering the
extraordinary Gifts and Graces which many other Believers besides Ministers,
had in those Days; I say, since he did nothing but what) a common Christian, in
the like case, might have done, the Argument from him appears so much the
weaker and more groundless.

I Am sure the History of the Primitive Institution of Deacons, in the 6th Chap.
of Acts, makes very clearly against the preaching Deacon. The Evidence there
against him shines so bright at the very first View, that it is a wonder how
any who are not Slaves to an Hypothesis, can ever lisp a Word in his Favor. It
is very obvious, The Apostles (who had hitherto sustained that Care chiefly)
judged the serving of Tables an intolerable Burden to them, and what they could
not attend without neglecting too much their better and more proper Work, the
Ministry of the Word. It is not Reason (say they) that we should leave the Word
of GOD, and serve Tables. And therefore they instituted an inferior Order of
Men, to attend THIS BUSINESS (of serving Tables) that so the Preachers of the
Gospel (being discharged from this heavy encumbrance) might give themselves
continually to Prayer and to the Ministry of the Word; which being essential
parts of the Ministerial Office, they durst not delegate these (however
difficult) unto others to perform for them. From whence we may very reasonably
conclude, when Philip was sent by the Spirit to preach and baptize, that he was
unloaded of his former cares and labors as a Deacon, in order to his more
closely attending to his new Work: and some other Person, doubtless was
ordained (if there were occasion for it) to serve Tables in his stead.

AND yet further to confirm my point, we may observe, that the Apostolical
Directions concerning Deacons, exactly Harmonize with the Tenor of the
Institution. In 1 Epist. to Tim. 3 Chap. the Apostle gives some Rules about
Deacons, and states their necessary Qualifications (^^^^^ing with Acts 6.3.)
none of which have any special or immediate Reference to the Work of Preaching:
although in the same Chapter where the Apostle is describing the other Order of
Men, the Bishops or Presbyters, he sets it down as one essential stroke in
their Character, that they be apt to teach (able to teach others, and by sound
Doctrine both to exhort and convince the Gainsavers, as he elsewhere explains
himself) which we may well assure our selves, would have been prescribed as a
necessary qualification of a Deacon likewise, if it had been the Will of GOD,
that Deacons should ordinarily be Preachers of the Word. But in stead of that,
He only requires that those of this Order should be Men of Piety, Prudence,
Gravity, Temperance, Generosity and the like. -- I hope therefore none of our
Deacons, that are Ordained (as I wish they all were when they have first been
proved) will be drawn to doubt, whether they be of Apostolical Institution,
only because they are not called upon to Preach; since it is plain it never was
the Will of GOD they should, but that they give themselves to the Ministry of
Tables, the Lord's Table and the Poor's; as the Church of England in her
Ordination, having reference to this special Office, explains it; declaring
there, That it appertains to the Deacon's Office to assist the Presbyter in
distribution of the Elements, gladly and willingly to search for the Poor the
Sick and Impotent, that they may be relieved: Praying that they may be modest,
humble, and constant in their Ministration See the Contin. of Pool's Annotat.
on Phil. 1.1.
.

But thus much for the Deacons.

I proceed now to consider with our Author, the Order and Government settled by
CHRIST and his Apostles in the Church. In which the Gentleman's principal
design is to prove, that there were two distinct Orders of Gospel Ministers
instituted by CHRIST himself; a Superior Order now commonly called Bishops,
invested with Authority to govern the Church, and ordain proper Officers in it,
as well as to preach the Word and administer the Sacraments: and an inferior
Order, commonly called Presbyters, who are instituted only to preach the Word,
and administer the Sacraments, and had no power of Ordination or Jurisdiction
committed to them I say this is his principal design; for as to the Order of
Deacons, which was instituted by the Apostles, he well observes, page 13 That
there is no debate about them; save in the point that has already been
considered; viz. Whether the Deacons were by their Ordination invested with
Authority to preach and baptize, which (I suppose) I have sufficiently proved
they have not.

IN prosecution of what I have said to be our Author's great Design, he refers
us to the Mission, first of the Twelve, Luke 9. and afterward of the Seventy,
Luke 10. Upon which he truly observes page 10. That they were both sent forth
with the SAME Commission, and the SAME Power to preach the Gospel, to cast out
Devils, to heal Diseases, and almost in all things with the same Instructions
concerning their Conduct. And yet he tells us, page 11. That it is most certain
they were two distinct Orders of Gospel Ministers.

BUT upon what, the pretended Difference of Order between them can be founded,
I must confess it is not easy to me to conceive. Yet to confirm this Point by
Testimony, he tells us, page 10. That Calvin scruples not to call the 70, in
Dignity less than the Apostles, next in Office to them, etc. But it must be
observed here that in this he imposes on his Readers; for Calvin is there
describing Evangelists; of whom he affirms roundly that they were inferior to
the Apostles; but he mentions the 70 only transiently and speaks doubtfully of
then subordination to the Twelve. Per Evangelistas, eos intelligo, qui quum
dignitate essent Apostolis minores, etc. Quales fuerunt Lucas, Timotheur, etc.
ac FORTASSIS etiam septuaginta Discipuli, quos secundo ah Apostolis loco
Christus designavit. He only says of the 70 Disciples, that they were appointed
after the Apostles, (referring to the time of their Mission, not the degree of
their Dignity; as seems evident from the scope of the place) and that perhaps
they were inferior to them.

AND whereas our Author mentions two Instances of a difference in the Mission
of the 12 from that of the 70, viz. Their more solemn Inauguration to their
Office, and their being particularly called Apostles, etc. I would observe, as
to the first Article, that it does not appear to me, but that the Inauguration
of both was equally solemn. What though we do not read of our Savior's praying
in so solemn a manner before his sending out the 70, as before the Mission of
the 12, yet that argues little; for there were many things that Jesus did (as
the Evangelist John remarks) which are not written. And then having sent our
the 70, as our Author owns, upon the same Errand, and with the like Powers,
it is highly probable the manner of their Mission was equally solemn. But then
suppose there was no such solemn Prayer before the Mission of the 70, as we
read preceded the Mission of the 12, that makes no difference; since we cannot
be sure that our Savior's Prayer on the night before did immediately and
peculiarly refer to their Mission; because, I suppose we sometimes read of our
Savior's making like solemn Prayer, when no remarkable Events followed, nor
any known extraordinary occasion was the Ground thereof.

AND now as to his other Instance, that the 12 were particularly honored with
the Title of APOSTLES, in Distinction from the 70, this may possibly be a
mistake; for when we are told, Luke 10.1. After these things the Lord appointed
OTHER 70 ALSO and sent them out, (with the same Instructions and Powers) it may
be very well read, other 70 Apostles, although it is not so expressed. And indeed
our Author is pleased (in page 19.) to say of the 70, that they were CHRIST's
Messengers and Ambassadors, so far as their Commission extended. Now he over
and over confesses their Commission was the same with that of the 12; and
therefore (according to his own Rule) the honorary Title of Apostles belonged
equally to them. And here it is worth while to observe, That however diminutive
he may make the name of Disciples to be, it is no other than what the Eleven
were distinguished by, when they received their Commission. Mat. 28.16. They
are called, The Eleven Disciples.

HE offers two Arguments further to show that the 12 and the 70 were two
distinct orders of Gospel Ministers. First, That they are never numbered
together, but in two distinct Classes --.How often (pray) are they numbered so?
We don't find the 70, spoken of above twice, that is, at their Mission, and
upon their Return: and this separately or by themselves; the 12 not being
mentioned in the Story. We don't any where (that I remember) find the 12 and
the 70. mentioned in the same-place, and numbered in two distinct Classes. And
as for the Apostles being still called 12 and not 82; that is easily accounted
for: inasmuch as the Mission of the 70 was a temporary and occasional thing;
and we never read of any second Mission, or further employment of them, as
Apostles or Preachers, after their Return from the Mission we have an Account
of. Whereas the other 12 were still employed on every occasion, and generally
were with their Master, as his special Attendants.

AND now for his second Argument, (which he boasts will put the matter out of
all dispute) What a solemn Work (says he) was there, at the translation of one
from the number of Disciples, that he might be reckoned with the Eleven, and
succeed to Judas his Apostleship? And again, pa. 41. he bids us remember, that
the WHOLE SEVENTY could not fill up the Chair of ONE APOSTLE, etc. But there is
no weight in this, if we consider what were the necessary qualifications of an
Apostle, viz. an Immediate Call, extraordinary Gifts, having been an Eye
witness to the Life, Sufferings and Resurrection of CHRIST, etc. and that
CHRIST at his Ascension left none other Ministers in Commission but the Eleven.
For as to the 70, they were not in Being then, as Ministers of the Word; their
Commission having expired long before, and not being renewed as was that of the
Eleven. And then, I suppose, it is uncertain, whether Matthias was of that
number, were they still in Commission. So that, putting these things together,
it appears, that Matthias's succession to Judas in the Apostleship (however
solemn Work there was about it) affords no manner of Argument for a Difference
of Order between the 70 and the 12.

AND truly whatever Distinction between them may be pretended, sure I am, it
could not be that which our Author would fain prove between Bishops and
Presbyters. For neither the 70, nor yet the 12, had any power given them at
their first Mission to ordain Officers, or to govern the Church; nor indeed
could they: for at this time there was no Gospel Church to be governed, or to
have Officers settled in it.

TO this purpose Mr. Sage (a considerable Writer, of the Church of England)
says, It is most obviously observable, in the Evangelical Records, that the
Christian Church was not (could not be) founded, till our Lord was risen,
seeing it was to be founded upon his Resurrection. (He goes on) Our Martyr
Cyprian (as appears from his Reasonings on diverse occasions) seems very well
to have known, and very distinctly to have observed, that the Apostles
themselves got not their Commission to be Governors of the Christian Church,
till after the Resurrection. And no wonder, for this their Commission is most
observably recorded. Joh. 20.21, etc. Vindic. of the Princ. of the Cypr. age.
Chapter 6. Sect. 5. Vid. Anders Def page 78.
.

NOR does it appear that the Commission of the 70 ( Luke 10) was any thing more
than temporary; for though our Author is pleased to speak of them once and again,
in such a manner as seems to intimate, that they are often mentioned in the New
Testament: yet I don't remember, nor can I find that we ever read any thing of
them, after their Return from this Mission; as I hinted before.

AND indeed, I cannot tell whether the Twelve would, by virtue of their
Commission at this time, have had any Authority either to baptize or preach,
after our Lord's Ascension, if their Commission for these things had not been
renewed. For CHRIST himself thought it needful, to give them a new Charge to
teach and baptize, at the same time that he committed to them the Powers of
Government and Ordination, just before his Ascension. To this purpose Mr. Sage
adds to what he says above, No such thing is any where recorded of the Seventy
(as the Renewal of their Commission;) nothing more certain than that their
Commission which is recorded, Luke 10. did constitute them only temporary
Missionarys and that for an Errand which could not possibly be more than
temporary. That Commission contains in its own bosom, clear evidences, that it
did not install them in any standing Office in the Christian Church, which was
not yet in being, when they got it. Could than Commission which is Luke 10. any
more constitute the 70 standing Officers of the Christian Church, than the like
Commission recorded Math. 10. could constitute the Twelve such standing
Officers? But it is manifest that this Commission did not constitute the Twelve
Governors of the Christian, Church; otherwise what need of a new Commission to
that purpose after the Resurrection? Presumable therefore it is that S. Cyprian
did not at all believe that the 70 had any Successors, Office-bearers in the
Christian Church, seeing it is so observable, that they themselves received no
Commission to be such Office-bearers. Thus Mr. Sage.

AT least thus much is certain, that without further Powers given them after
our Savior's Resurrection, the Apostles themselves must never have gone to the
Gentiles. For in our Lord's Commission to them Matthew. 10, they are expressly
charged not to go into the way of the Gentiles, but only to the lost sheep of
the house of Israel. From whence it will follow either that the 70 had a larger
and more honorable Commission than the Apostles had at first and so were
superior to them; or that the Commission of the 70 was but temporary; or if it
were perpetual, yet that it never was extended by CHRIST beyond the
Circumcision I think no fourth supposition can be made; so that one or other of
those three must be allowed. And which ever our Author thinks fit to grant, it
will be the confusion of his Scheme Besure he will not be willing to grant the
first, that the seventy had a larger and more honorable Commission, and were
superior to the Apostles. And I think no body ever yet supposed it. Nor will
the second please him better; for if the Commission of the seventy was but
temporary, and expired upon their return to their Master, then it will follow,
that CHRIST left not two but only one Order of Officers in his Church, at his
Ascension If therefore he should chose the third supposal (which at first view
seems most favorable to his cause) that the Commission of the seventy did not
expire, but that it was confined to the Circumcision, yet neither will this
serve his Turn. For if the Commission of the 70 was not extended by CHRIST to
the Gentiles, then we have no concern at all with it, nor did CHRIST leave any
other Officers in Commission at his Ascension, that had any thing to do with
the Gentiles, besides his Eleven Apostles; but to them he committed the whole
Care of discipling all Nations, preaching the Word, administering the
Sacraments, governing the Church, and ordaining others to assist and succeed
them in this important Charge; and promised for their encouragement, to be with
them, and their Successors in it always, even to the end of the World. Now if
CHRIST, at his Ascension, left no other Officers in Commission besides his
Eleven Apostles, or no others in Commission that extended unto the Gentiles,
then all that our Author advances, under his first head, concerning the
Commission of the seventy comes to nothing. For whether that Commission was
temporary, on whether it was restrained to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, we are alike unconcerned with it. And so likewise all the pains he
takes under his second head, to show how the Office of the Apostles and the
Office of the seventy, were distinguished from each other, will be found to be
labor spent to no purpose. For since we never read that CHRIST extended the
Commission of the seventy to the Gentiles, it will thence follow, either that
he suffered their Commission to expire, or that he left it confined to the
Jews: And take it which way you will, you can find still but one Order of
Officers instituted by CHRIST himself, with whom the Gentile Churches have any
thing to do.

AS to the most of what the Gentleman says besides under his second general
head, I have no controversy at all with him. For I readily, acknowledge what he
asserts pa. 17, That the Commission given by our Savior to the Apostles after
his Resurrection was unlimited and universal, not only in respect of power to
discharge all acts of Religion, relating either to ministry or government; but
also in respect of place, not being confined to any particular Province, but
sent to the whole World.

AND (though some of the Instances he gives, will not bear scanning, yet) I firmly
believe as he says, pa. 22, 23. That it appears the Apostles had (some sort
of) Authority over other Pastors and Teachers in the Church, from several
Instances of their exercising of it, in several respects and ways, recorded in
the sacred History. And I will venture to say further, that during the
Infant-State of the Christian Church, before the Canon of the New Testament was
completed, (without which the uninspired man of GOD could not be thoroughly
furnished unto every good work) it was absolutely necessary, that some kind of
Jurisdiction, over the uninspired Pastors of the Churches, should be committed
to such men as the Apostles, who being under the immediate Conduct of an
infallible Spirit, might be able as often as occasion required, with all
Authority to charge and direct the other Pastors how to behave themselves in
the house of GOD. A notable Instance we have of this, 1 Timothy 3.14, 15. where
notwithstanding the singular advantages Timothy had had to inform himself about
the Work of an Evangelist, by his intimate acquaintance with the Apostle Paul,
and frequent attendance upon him; yet the Apostle is afraid, that if he should
be hindered from coming to him as soon as he desired, Timothy might be at a
loss how to discharge the Trust reposed in him; and therefore he writes unto
him the solemn Charges, Exhortations and Instructions of that Epistle, that he
might know how he ought to behave himself in the Church of the living GOD. And
not satisfied with this, he followed it with a second Epistle on the same
Design afterward.

NOW, if it be evident that the Apostles had some sort of Jurisdiction over
other Pastors; and if it be also evident that there was an absolute necessity,
at that day, that some such men as they should have such Jurisdiction; it may
very naturally be inquired, Whether there is the same necessity since, that
some of the Ministers of the Gospel should have a like Authority over others
throughout all Ages? And, Whether the Scriptures teach us that this is the Will
of GOD?

AS to the first of these Inquiries; it is very obvious on two Accounts, That
the same Reason does not hold in the nature of the thing it self, for a
superior power in some Ministers over others now. For first, there are no
Officers in the Church in these later Ages, under the Conduct of an Infallible
Spirit, to issue out directions and commands to others on emergent occasions.
Nor indeed is there any body on this side Rome that pretends to it. Now it is
thought by some of great name and judgment, That the higher Degree of Authority
and Sway, which the Apostles had above others, was owing very much to their
extraordinary Gifts of Infallibility, of discerning Spirits, and the like,
which were peculiar to them. And indeed there is the greatest difficulty (as Mr.
Baxter observes) to discern how much of their power over Presbyters or Bishops
was merely from the Excellency of their Gifts and Privileges, and how much
might be (if any was) from their Supremacy of Office and Imperial Authority.
Nor, secondly, is there the same Need that there should be any such infallible
Rulers in the Church now, that there was in the Apostles days; because the
Canon of Scripture being now completed, every Minister of the Gospel has an
infallible and perfect Rule to direct him in his Administrations. To this
purpose our Author (page 33, 34) acknowlegeth, as that the Gospel-Doctrine
being once sufficiently attested and confirmed by miraculous operations, there
was no further need of continuing them; So, that some Things peculiar to the
Apostles, such as, their being infallible Guides in delivering the Doctrine of
the Gospel, their unlimited Commission, etc. had a particular Respect to the
first planting of the Gospel, and the erecting and constituting of the
Christian Church in the World: which when performed, these extraordinary Powers
ceased. -- Since therefore the same Reasons don't hold good now for a
superiority of some Ministers over others, we have no ground to believe that
such a superiority ought to continue still, unless the Scriptures teach us
notwithstanding, that it is the Will of GOD that this superiority should be
standing and perpetual in the Church. And this is what our Author endeavors to
prove under his third Head.

BUT before the Examination of his Argument here, I must premise, that he and I
are agreed, that the Apostles were invested with some Powers that were
extraordinary and temporary, and expired with their Persons; and that therefore
in these they could have no Successors.

Again, WE are agreed, that the Apostles were invested with other powers that
were ordinary and designed to be perpetual, in which they were to have
Successors, who should possess them throughout all Ages. And with an eye to
their Successors it was that their Lord promised to be with them always to the
end of the World.

NOW since we are both agreed in these two things, (and have (I think) the
concurrence of all the World both Conformists and Non-conformists with us in
them,) the only thing that remains to be disputed is, Whether that Jurisdiction
which was exercised by the Apostles over other Pastors, was one of their
ORDINARY POWERS, in which they were to have SUCCESSORS? Or, Whether it was a
power only EXTRORDINARY and TEMPORARY, in which they were to have no
Successors, and to expire with their Persons?

NOW here the force of truth has constrained our Author to make an
acknowledgement, which is in effect at once to give up his whole cause. For he
himself in his 33d page, reckons the Jurisdiction the Apostles had over all
Churches (and by consequence over the Pastors of them also) among those Powers
that were extraordinary and temporary, and expired with their Persons: By doing
which, he has (I say) in effect at once given up his whole cause; for hereby
he has cut himself off from all possibility of proving, by the Instances he
gives, any ordinary power of Jurisdiction in the Apostles over other Pastors.
For supposing he had given ten thousand Instances, in which the Apostles
exercised an Authority over other Pastors* yet all these might be, for ought he
or any man else can tell, not by virtue of any ordinary power, they were
entrusted with, in which they were to have successors; but only by virtue of
that extraordinary Power in which they were to have no Successors, by which he
acknowleges it was, that they had a Jurisdiction over all other Churches. So
that here I might very fairly withdraw my hand from the Table; for the
Gentleman has himself put it out of his own power to prove any thing by the
Argument he makes use of. And yet I suppose it was not want of thought but
force of truth, and unavoidable necessity, that drew him into this
Acknowlegement so fatal to his own Argument. For any man that will be at the
pains to examine the Instances he has given of the Apostles Authority over
other Pastors, and will then carefully look over the Epistles to the
Corinthians, Philippians, Timothy and Titus (to mention no more) will presently
find many Instances just like the most of those given by our Author, (nay some
of his may be taken into the number also) in which the Apostle Paul exercised
an Authority over Timothy, Titus, Epaphroditus, and others, whom Episcopal
Divines account Bishops. Now this observation being so very easy, forced our
Author upon this unhappy Dilemma, either to affirm that the Apostle exercised
an Authority over such as Episcopal Divines account Bishops, by virtue of his
ordinary Power [for no man is able to give me any tolerable Reason, why his
Government over Bishops should be grounded on an extraordinary Power, and yet
his Government over Pastors be by virtue of his ordinary Power] that was to be
perpetuated in the Church; which would be to set up an ordinary Officer in the
Church by divine Institution superior to Bishops; a thing contrary to the
declared sense of our Author and his Brethren: or else, to avoid the ill
consequence of this, he must say, that this Authority of the Apostles over all
Churches and Pastors was one of their Extraordinary Powers; which sort of
powers he elsewhere acknowledges expired with their persons and that they had
no successors in them. And this latter inconvenience he has thought fit to
choose, though it be no less destructive to his own Argument, than the former,
as I have shown above.

I have now said enough (I suppose) to satisfy every intelligent unprejudiced
Person of the weakness and Inconsistency of our Author's Proofs of his own
Scheme. However I am content to follow him still longer, with Remarks upon some
further Passages, in which he more and more weakens and perplexes the Cause he
pleads for.

Page 35. he says, That no part of the Apostolic Office is more necessary to
be of perpetual duration in the Church, than their authoritative Inspection
over the ordinary Pastors. That he has as yet proved no necessity of this from
the Scriptures, has been I suppose convincingly shown. And that there is no
necessity of it in the nature of the thing it self (to omit what has been said
already) any man may satisfy himself, if he will but impartially inquire,
whether the Ends of Government are not as well answered, the Interests of
Religion as effectually promoted, and the Church as well guarded against
Errors, Schisms and Corruptions, in those Countries, which acknowledge no
Superiority in Pastors one over another, as in those two Kingdoms, that are the
only Protestant ones, in which such a Superiority is held to be of Divine
Institution?

OUR Author now attempts to produce some further Proofs of his Scheme from the
holy-Scriptures. Several Texts he brings to prove that the Apostolic Office (he
must here especially point at the power of universal Inspection over Churches
and Pastors, or else he says nothing to the purpose) was not extraordinary and
temporary, but designed to be standing and perpetual.

IN the first Place, He draws an Argument from the Commission in Matthew. 28.19,
20. Where CHRIST enjoins the Apostles to teach all Nations, whom they should
disciple, to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded them, and gives
them a Promise to be with them to the end of the World. This he calls their
full and last Commission: by this therefore they must stand or fall, and the
Gentleman must despair of his Cause, if this will not support it.

NOW there is nothing contained in this, but what is the work of ordinary
Ministers or Pastors. Teaching and baptizing, which are the undoubted work of
Presbyters, are here expressly mentioned: but indeed we must interpret this
Text, in the utmost Latitude, so as to take in all ministerial Powers, of
Ordination, Discipline, and Government, as being necessarily implied. Here Is
the grand Charter for our Office, and all the Power that any can justly claim,
must be here included. And the whole of the Power here implied, belongs to all
those, unto whom the Commission extends. Now it was given (our Author owns) not
merely to the Apostles, but also to their Successors: and so the Promise
annexed, is to their Office, not to their Persons only. And the Office they
were authorized to, by this Commission, was not to expire with them, but to
continue unto the end of the world.

WE must note, The Apostles may be considered under a double notion, as having
either ordinary or extraordinary Powers. This Commission was given them, in one
or other, or both, of these Capacities. So far as it could relate to them in
their extraordinary Capacity, it must be only Personal, and a Patent for Life,
expiring with themselves; or at most continuing only through the Age of
Inspiration and Miracles. But so far as it related to them in their ordinary
Character, it was designed to be perpetual, and the Promise belongs to their
Successors in common with them. -- That it relates to them under the latter
Consideration more especially, is evident from the Tenor of the Commission,
which prescribes only Work that is ordinary; and from the Tenor of the Promise,
which looks to all future Ages, and therefore supposes their perpetual
Duration. But in these things the Author and I are agreed.

ALL the Dispute here is, Who are the true Successor, of the Apostles; and so,
who may lay Claim to this Divine Commission and Promise? Now there are two
things which may suffice to decide the Case: viz. The nature of the Work laid
out in the Commission, and the Character of the Apostles in their ordinary
Capacity. And by both of these Rules (I presume) it must be concluded that
Presbyters or ordinary Pastors are the Apostles true Successors. For the Work
here assigned is what (as I before observed) properly belongs to Them; who have
ever therefore repaired to this Commission, to vindicate themselves, in the
ministerial Acts of preaching, baptising, etc. -- And then if we consider the
Apostles in their ordinary Capacity, it will appear they were most properly
Presbyters, or Ministers of the Word, and could be Bishops only in the
Presbyterian Sense Be sure they were not Bishops after the English Form, nor
intended so to be: for according to this, our Lord must have assigned to each
of the Apostles his distinct Province, his particular Post, or Charge, to act
and rule in, with a mutual Independency; seeing they are the approved
Principles of that Model, That all Bishops are equal, and have no Eminency of
Power one above another: So likewise that every Church must have its particular
Bishop, and that there can be in a Church but one Prelate at a time. Whereas if
we reflect, we shall find, that a Plorality (even no less than 11 or 12)
presided together over the Church in Jerusalem at the beginning; and that the
Apostles tarried there a considerable Time, (as the sacred Story assures us,
and if some ancient Church-Histories may be credited, it was no less than the
space of several Years) taking Care of that Church (which called for peculiar
Regards from them) in it is Infant State: at least it may be believed they
ordinarily resided in and about Jerusalem for a while; perhaps only when there
was uncommon occasion, issuing out upon particular Missions, and then returning
to Jerusalem; as seems very probable from the Instance we have, Acts 8.14 -- 25
And now in managing the Affairs of that Church, the Apostles acted, either with
an equal or an unequal Authority. And take it which way you please, they could
not be Bishops after the Diocesan notion. For if they all acted with an equal
Authority; then they could not be Bishops, for this very pertinent Reason,
because there can be but one Bishop in a Church Neither again could they be
Bishops, suppose 'em to have an unequal Authority, because all Bishops are
equal, and none subordinate to others. Now they must be either Bishops or
Presbyters. And since they were not the former, What must we conclude?

SO then it appears by the Character they must bear, while ruling in the Church
at Jerusalem, that the Apostles were Presbyters, in their ordinary Capacity --
In the Root and Principle, they were only Presbyters: the other parts of their
Character were only additional, or occasional and circumstantial. Our Author
himself makes no Exception here, save as to their power of Superintendency,
which he makes to be one of the essential and perpetual or ordinary Powers of
an Apostle: but since he has not as yet been able to prove this, we may safely
adhere to our Opinion, That the Apostles, considered in their ordinary
Capacity, were but Presbyters: and so consequently all that truly sustain the
Character of Presbyters or Gospel Ministers, are the Apostles true Successors;
and hence, by an easy Inference, appear entitled to the Commission and the
Promise given of old to the Eleven Disciples, by our blessed Lord.

Briefly; WE may set the matter in this Light: Either this Commission does
belong to Presbyters, or it does not.

IF you assume in the Negative, or say, it does not: then it cannot easily be
made out, that Presbyters have any Divine Mission at all, or any Warrant to
minister in holy things. I have before proved there is but one Commission for
the sacred Minister, standing or in force; which is that same we are speaking
of* and that CHRIST at his Ascension left no other Officers in power, but his
Eleven Apostles. Hence then such as have no Interest in this Commission, can
have no Claim to any part of the Office instituted therein, nor may pretend to
Preach any more than to exercise the powers of Discipline and Orders.

BUT if you assume in the Affirmative, and say that Presbyters are concerned in
this Commission; then I inquire, How far? Does it belong to them in whole, or
in part?

IF you say in the whole; then it follows there can be no ordinary
ecclesiastical Officer superior to Presbyters: since they are invested with the
highest Commission in the Church, and with the one only Commission for the
Ministry. The pretended Prelates can act only by virtue of this Commission, and
they that act by one and the same Commission, must certainly have equal and the
same Powers Different Powers, or various Degrees of Power, must be founded in
distinct Commissions.

IF any say, in part only; then I inquire in what parts and degrees, and who
are sharers with them? Our Author resolves the Question, by giving Presbyters
the power of Doctrine, and putting into the hands of Bishops the powers of
Ordination and Jurisdiction. But then I demand a Rule for dividing what GOD has
united, and distributing the several parts of this Office into different Hands.
Why should not Presbyters (if they succeed to the Apostles, in any proper sense
or degree) have one part of their ministerial Power as well as another? What is
the Reason or Ground for any Discrimination in the matter? Nay, Is it not
contrary to the very nature of a proper Succession, that two distinct Officers
should share the ministerial Powers of the Apostles between them, and that in
unequal Degrees too? Division here makes an essential Alteration. Whatever
Office is made up out of some other Office, and partakes only of a part of the
essential Powers belonging to it, must needs be different from it, and must be
called a new Office. And this is the very Case we have before us. The Presbyter
(stripped of any of the essential and ordinary Powers of the Apostolic Office) is
a Creature of another Order, and quite a new Species; as much as the Deacon was
though the Former has not (as the Latter has) any Divine Institution to support
and countenance him, and therefore is to be rejected as an Unscriptural
Officer, having no proper Title to the Commission and Promise made to the
Apostles; however he may pretend to be derivative from them.

INDEED, Supposing our blessed Lord had instituted the several powers which the
Apostles had, as 'twere by halves, (the power of Government separately, and the
power of Doctrine by it self) in distinct Commissions, both whereof were to be
standing; then we might perhaps have reasonably argued those Powers capable of
existing separately in distinct Subjects: and at this Door, the mere preaching
Presbyter might come in, and be looked upon as a regular Officer; and not
simply new, although he had differed from his Predecessors, the Apostles; looking
at their Office in Complexo, and taking their Powers all together. Or again,
Supposing the Apostles (in the name of their ascended Lord) had instituted this
new Officer, the mere preaching Presbyter, (assigning him out of their Office,
only the power of Doctrine; as they appointed a distinct Office of Deacons,
devolving on them the Ministry of Tables only) there would (in this case too)
have been sufficient Foundation for the simple Presbyter or Preacher, and we
might have looked upon his Credentials as very authentic.

BUT now I cannot learn that this mere preaching Presbyter has any manner of
Warrant, upon either of these Hypotheses.

IN short then, If there be any such Officer of CHRIST, as a Presbyter, or
Minister of the Word, he must stand upon that (single) Commission given the
Apostles at the Ascension of CHRIST; and so by good Consequence must succeed
them in all the ordinary and continuing parts of their Office. I ask then, By
what Rule do any distinguish the Power of Doctrine and the Power of Government
from one another, and deny the latter to the Order of Presbyters? -- To bring
this matter to a point, I would argue thus. The power of Government belonged to
the Apostles either in their ordinary or extraordinary Capacity. If only in
their Extraordinary, then no Body among their Successors has any just Pretenses
to it. If in their Ordinary, then they who succeed them in the power of
Doctrine, are the Order, to whom alone that other Power also of Right belongs:
since they who are in any degree properly Successors to the Apostles, must
succeed them in the whole of their standing Character, as I have proved before.
Moreover, I would add here, the Key of Discipline and Rule must needs belong to
such as have the Key of Doctrine, for this very significant Reason, Because the
Latter is the greater Honor, and more worthy Badge, of the Two; I don't say in
mine and my Brethren's Opinion, but in the Judgment of no less a Person than
the inspired Apostle, as you may see, 1 Timothy 5.17. Now why should the less
honorable Power be denied them? Here then I demand again, What Warrant (or
Color of Reason) have any to deny Presbyters the Power of Government? Where is
the Scripture that runs a Line of Distinction between Bishops and Presbyters?
Where shall we in all our Bible find the place, that assigns different
Successors to the Apostles, and disperseth the ministerial Powers, united in
them; committing to one this, and to another that, as distinct Officers in the
Church?

BUT now before I pass to our Authors other Proofs, I think it proper here a
little to anticipate him, and bestow a Reflection or two, upon one declamatory
and very harsh Passage of his, referring to this matter; which we have, in page
44. Either (quoth he) Bishops (Diocesan, that is) must be THE TRUE Successors
of the Apostles, or else they have no Successors AT ALL, and the Apostolic
Order and Office is QUITE extinct; and the Church is TOTALLY deprived of the
prime and chiefest Office instituted by CHRIST for its Edification, good Order,
and Government; and finally, There is now no such Order of Men extant in the
World, to whom that LARGE and AMPLE Commission which CHRIST gave only to his
APOSTLES, does belong: and with this, the Promise falls too. -- Who now can
forbear admiring the Zeal of this Gentleman, and his wonderful Reasoning here!
But suffer me to expostulate a little with him upon it. -- What! Is there no
possible way for the Apostolic Order to continue, but in the Persons of
Diocesan Bishops! Must the Apostles be denied any Successors at all, if his
idolized Prelacy be denied! Has he not taught us to distinguish between
ordinary and extraordinary Powers in the Apostolate! And if presbyters do
succeed to the Apostles in their ordinary ministerial Powers (as he has not
proved they do not) are these no Successors at all! While the Gospel is
preached, and there are those in the world, whom himself ( page 19.) calls
Christ's Ambassadors, can he say the Office is quite extinct! And how can he
say, The Church is totally deprived of the chief Office instituted by CHRIST
for its Edification, so long as we have the benefit of the Apostolic Writings,
by which (being dead) they yet speak.

AND finally, Does he complain, That except Bishops be allowed to succeed the
Apostles, There is now no such Order of Men extant in the World, to whom that
LARGE and AMPLE Commission, which CHRIST gave ONLY to his Apostles, does
belong! What means the Gentleman by this?

IF he would bear the world in hand, that the Commission, which the Apostles
received, was given to them only, and in distinction from Presbyters; this is
as gratis dictum; a Point that needs proof, after all that he has said upon it.

AND if he would insinuate here, that the Commission given the Apostles, does
in its large and ample Extent descend to their Successors; then surely he
designed only to amuse his Readers, and he contradicts himself t'boot, having
forgotten what he had before conceded, (in page 33.) That the unlimitted
Commission was a thing peculiar to the first Apostles, extraordinary and
temporary: in saying which, He in effect confesses himself, that there is no
Order of Men extant in the World, (and therefore not his Bishops) to whom that
AMPLE and LARGE Commission does belong: and since he contends, notwithstanding,
that Bishops are true Successors of the Apostles, how evidently does it appear,
He allows there may be true Successors to the Apostles, (empowered by the same
Commission with them) who yet are not vested with the same Plenitude of Power
that they exercised, or an Authority of the same ample Extent with theirs! --
And now if the Power of Government granted in the Apostolical Commission, may
come under any Limitations, or be confined to a particular Charge; since our
Author presumes to shrink it up within the narrow Bounds of a Diocese, (He says
not, whether great or small) I may as safely and warrantably contract it a
little more and reduce it within the Compass of a single Church or
Congregation. And in this, I have to bear me out, many Divines of Name in the
Church of England it self, who maintain, that Extent of Power over several
Churches, nay, and having Presbyters in subordination too, are not (one nor
other) of the Essence of Episcopacy. This was the opinion particularly of Dr.
Maurice (a strenuous Defender of Prelacy) who upon this head observes to us,
That Milles the martyr was a Bishop, though he had not so much as one Christian
in his Diocese: and he acknowleges, He never yet heard of any men, who made it
essential to a Bishop, to have a plurality of Congregations under him See
Tong's Def. page 115.
. So Saravia (a prime Leader in the notion of the Divine Right of Prelacy)
professes, We measure not a Bishopric by the number of the Clergy, or by the
amplitude of the Diocese; for the Bishopric may be included in one small
Parish alone See James. Naz. qu. pa. 218.
. And it is well known how Dr. Hammond, (a very learned prelatist) maintains,
That all the Presbyters we read of in the New Testament were Bishops, and that
there was no inferior Order of Ministers instituted by CHRIST or his Apostles;
but that this was afterward brought into the Church.

HENCE then, according to these Principles, Episcopacy and Presbyterian Parity
are very well reconcilable: for I know no difference between a Congregational
Bishop, and an Independent Pastor; save that the latter may want the Episcopal
Consecration, which they speak of, and make necessary to the Authority of the
Episcopal Degree. But surely that can afford no plea for the Distinction
between Bishops and Presbyters; because there is no solid proof of any Rule in
the sacred Scriptures, for this Consecration of Bishops, as different from the
Ordination of Presbyters. I will boldly affirm, They may turn over all the
Leaves of their Bible, as long as they have Eyes to see, and not be able to
produce a Scripture-Canon for any thing more than Ministerial Ordination. Nay
in the, Very Directory for Ordination, ( Tit. 1.) the Apostle makes no
Distinction in the least between Presbyters and Bishops, but rather makes them
the very same, as I shall show by'n'by. -- However we will not quarrel and part
here: Nay, and moreover I will for once grant them, That Bishops are the true
Successors of the Apostles; deriving from them the power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction; this, I say I will grant them, if they will but hold to those two
Principles, (which we find them sometimes allowing us,) viz. That every
Congregation may have its own partieular Bishop; and then that all Bishops are
upon the Level, having equal and independent Authority.

YEA, If they will allow these two things, I will grant them further, That the
Promise, annexed to the Apostles Commission, does belong to Bishops; and so the
horrid consequences we may hope will be prevented, which our Author conceives
would follow, if Bishops be not the true Successors of the Apostles.

THUS at last, I think, we are led into a way, to perpetuate the prime Office
instituted by CHRIST for the Church Edification, good Order and Government, and
to secure the great Promise made to the Apostolical Order, by a regular
Succession of Bishops too: and yet consistent enough with the Presbyterial
Model.

AND so it appears, the first Text, that our Author brings to support the
prelatical scheme, proves of no subserviency at all to his purpose, but much
the contrary.

I have been drawn to a greater length in the consideration of this Text,
because I perceive the Gentleman lays peculiar Stress upon it; referring us
frequently and with great assurance to the Commission there: and because I
think as to this he is in the Right; for I believe, we have here (to use some
of his words) the Hinge, on which the whole Controversy in this matter depends
And verily, if Presbyters are absolutely shut out of this Commission, I shall
despair of finding any other Establishment for them, in the whole Bible. Or if
Bishops have by virtue of this Commission a Right of Jurisdiction over
Presbyters, or any Power but what Presbyters have as well as they a Title to,
this would decide the Case with me: and I should think it almost needless to
take the pains to examine any other Scripture-Proofs he has to bring. But being,
after the most impartial search into the matter, strongly convinced of the
contrary, I shall proceed to the other Texts he brings, and see whether they
can afford any new Light to the Argument.

THOUGH I would premise here one Thing, as a Principle, not to be disputed; viz.
That this first Text, as containing the Gospel-Charter or Commission for the
Ministry, must therefore be admitted the grand RULE to us in interpreting other
Texts, relating to the Controversy. All must be reduced to this Standard; and
no Construction of any Scripture be allowed, that makes it militate with this
first and grand Text. We must note; All Corporations are to model their
Government by their Charter, and by the Instructions of their original Founder:
no Laws are to be enacted repugnant to these; and all Laws already made, are to
be interpreted in a sense plainly consistent therewith --. As then we may
justly reject any Decrees or Ordinances of Men, that pretend to alter, limit,
or add to the standing Powers of the Divine Commission aforesaid: So we may
reasonably suspect that Exposition of any Text, which makes it to interfere
with this. And hence, though some particular Texts could be produced, that might
by a witty Turn be made to look favorably toward the Distinction between
Bishops and Presbyters: yet if this Distinction cannot consist with the Royal
CHARTER, or cannot be deduced from it by any rational Inferences, we must
necessarily look out for some other sense of those Texts, and reject the former
Construction as certainly erroneous.

I shall only add here what one well observes; This being a Question concerning
a very great Power, extending to a great Number of Persons, and producing great
Effects, a matter of great Distinction, and Dependencies, ought to have clear
and positive Warrant from the Word of GOD, and be very plainly legible in the
Commission there. Mere Names, Titles, Suppositions, and fine Probabilities,
will not all make a Foundation strong enough, to bear the weight of a structure
so high and towering, as our English Prelacy.

WELL, we will now examine our Author's other Scripture-Proofs, and see what
weight they will bear to have laid upon them.

HIS second Text is, 1 Cor. 12.28. Where the Apostle Paul tells us, GOD has
set some in the Church, first APOSTLES, secondly PROPHETS, thirdly TEACHERS. --
Here, by the way he inserts in a Parenthesis this observation, That what
follow, are not distinct Offices from these, but extraordinary Gifts conferred
upon them. But I believe his Observation will not hold good, as to all the
Articles in the following Enumeration; For what will he make of the Helps and
Governments, mentioned there? Do not these mean distinct Officers? I am sure
many learned Interpreters judge so: and among others, some of the Church of
England. Particularly, Dr. Whitby (from Dr. Lightfoot) says on the place, That
the Helps here were Deacons, or such Officers as took Care of the Poor: and by
Governments, he tells us, are almost generally understood the Rulers of the
churches planted by the Apostles.

HOWEVER, Supposing them to be (what he calls them, page 14.) only various
Powers and Gifts, wherewith the Gospel-Officers were endu'd; how will this
serve his Cause! Nay, it will very much hurt it. For, to whom shall we refer
these Powers? Surely not the Apostles only, but as well to the Prophets and
Teachers, joined with them. Whence it will necessarily follow, That Teachers
have the powers of Government belonging to them; and therefore the power of
Ordination also, since these two are inseperably united, in the Episcopal
Scheme. And accordingly Dr. Hammond on the place (agreeing with our Author in
his Interpretation of Governments) does expressly ascribe and appropriate these
ruling Powers (as his Phrase is) to the Teachers spoken of, whom he makes to be
the Pastors of particular Churches planted by the Apostles. -- We will not
dispute then with our Author, whether the Apostolic Degree be perpetual, or
not; but let him enjoy his opinion about it, and make as much of it as he can:
provided he will but concur with those his Brethren, (and let us quietly enjoy
our opinion) That the Teachers or Pastors of particular Congregations have
these ruling Powers belonging to them.

YET, it would make one smile to see how he lays stress upon the word SET, and
to read his Descant on it; when if we consider the place this monosyllable
bears in the Text, it must needs be of little weight in the present Argument,
as referring indifferently to all that follows; and consequently taking in (not
only the Apostles, etc. but likewise) the extraordinary Gifts and Powers there
enumerated, as set in the Church, and so (according to him) immoveably fixed as
the Ordinances of Heaven: which, how ridiculous would it be to pretend! In
short, This Gentleman must allow the power of working Miracles, the Gift of
Interpreting, and the Diversities of Tongues, to be but temporary, even although
they are said to be SET in the Church: and now the Apostolic power of universal
Inspection might be but in the same sense set in the Church, and have a respect
(like the rest of those extraordinary Powers) only to the first planting of the
Gospel, as himself expressly owns, Page 33, 34.

SO that it is egregious Trifling to use this Scripture, as a proof of his
Scheme: and his Distinction here between Offices and Gifts, is nothing to his
purpose, though (as you have heard) it is much to mine. And as for his Admonition
(under this head) to such as presume to mutilate and deform the mystical Body
of CHRIST, by depriving the Church of any of the sacred Offices set in it by
GOD; we humbly trust on our part no such Censure is due, however it was pointed
at us; and therefore let the Bestower of it, and his Brethren, take it among
themselves, who presume to robb the Presbyters in the Church of a great part of
their Ministerial Powers, and commit them to other Officers uninstituted by
CHRIST, to the no small damage of his Church in its Beauty, Integrity and
Purity. -- But I forbear; as supposing Re-criminations however just, will do
but little Service to my Cause.

TO go on with our Author: In the third place, He argues from the 4th Chap. to
the Ephesians, where we are told, That our Lord gave some Apostles, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, -- for the edifying the
Body of Christ; till we all come -- unto a perfect Man, -- That we henceforth
be no more Children tossed to and fro, etc. -- Now he boasts he has here an
uncontestible Testimony, in favor of his Scheme, taken from the Ends for which
these Offices were instituted; with an express Declaration how long they were
to continue, that is, to the End of the world. -- But this is very easily
answered. It Is granted, That the Apostles, and others must certainly accomplish
the Ends they were given for, some way or other. And there are two ways,
agreeable to the twofold Capacity they sustained, Ordinary and Extraordinary.

IF you consider the Apostles here, in their Ordinary Capacity, the Case is
very plain: their Order does actually continue; and they do properly in their
Successors, serve to the Edification, good Order and Government of the Church,
and will do so to the End of Time. Which Successors are Gospel-Teachers or
Elders. For since our Author has not yet been able to prove, That a Superiority
over other Pastors was one of the ordinary and standing Parts of the Apostolic
Office, it thence follows, that Presbyters may well enough be looked upon, as
Successors to the Apostles, and we have no Reason to think any superior Order
to them was to continue in the Church. For, as he truly observes, page 42. The
Question between us is only concerning the Ordinary Powers of the Apostles, in
which alone they could have Successors. And he himself (as I took notice
before) acknowleges, That a Jurisdiction over all Churches and Pastors was one
of those Extraordinary Powers, of which he says (as expressly as I can) at the
foot of page 41. That they expired with themselves, and that they have no
Successors in them.

IF then, on the other hand, you consider the Apostles in their Extraordinary
Capacity, you have our Author's own Confession, that in this they had no
Successors; nor were to have any: and so their Superintendent Power being
extraordinary, was not to continue in after Ages, nor is it obligatory to us.
For (he says, page 32.) if the Institution of the Apostles was extraordinary and
temporary in any part, it is so far as it was of this nature, no Rule or
Standard now. Nevertheless (I would add) After a sort and in an improper sense,
even the first Apostles may be said to continue, that is, In the blessed
Effects of their Ministry; and to be still serving the Church of CHRIST, by the
Apostolical Doctrine, and the standing Rule of Faith delivered to us in the New
Testament; which, as Men infallibly inspired for that End, they wrote, and
published, to be handed down to Posterity, and spread through the world, for
the common benefit of mankind. And these Apostolical Writings have been
preserved to this day, and will (I trust) be to the world's End continued, the
great Instrument of the Conversion and Edification of Souls, under the Conduct
of the Spirit of GOD, and of his Ministers, as in subordination to him, Workers
together with GOD, and building upon the Foundation, which those
Master Builders have laid. So that, in this qualified sense, the Apostles may
be said, even in their extraordinary Capacity, yea, and by their Superintendent
Power too, in the lasting Effects and Influences of it, to continue, for the
work of the Ministry, till we all come, etc.

BUT here I have two Remarks further to make; one on the Author's way of
Reasoning upon this Text; and a second, Upon the Objection he raises, with his
Answer to it.

HERE then I cannot but take notice, How remarkably this Gentleman, in his
manner of arguing from this Place (for his pretended Bishop) agrees with the
Popish Doctors; who from the very same Text (as Dr. Whitby observes) do argue
for an infallible Guide thus; -- CHRIST (say they) gave Apostles, Pastors, and
Teachers, that Christians might not be tossed to and fro with every wind of
Doctrine; which End could not be compassed but by infallible Guides. Moreover,
GOD gave such Pastors to serve to these Ends, till we all come to the unity of
the Faith, which will not be till the last days of all. Wherefore, till the End
of the World, the Church must be provided of them, and by them be secured from
being Children tossed to and fro. Thus the Papists argue. And perhaps They have
as much Truth on their side, as our Author. Besure their Argument seems to be
as well founded and as plausible, for a perpetual Succession of infallible
Guides in the Church* as his for a perpetual Succession of Apostolical
Superintendents. But since the INFALLIBLE CHAIR is expressly renounced by this
Gentleman himself, and that consistently with the Text we are upon; Methinks,
it is pity he did not proceed (as he might have done, upon equally just Grounds)
to reject the EPISCOPAL THRONE together with it. However, we will do it, though
he hasn't; as firmly believing, that Infallibility and Superintendency were
both alike peculiar to the first Apostles (to speak in his own Dialect) and
being equally designed only to serve the Infancy and first Constitution of the
Church, they were not to continue.

THE other Thing I mentioned, may now be considered. He is aware, it might be
objected to him, That in this Text (viz. Ephesians. 4.11.) more Officers are
mentioned than he pleads for; and therefore, to keep clear of the opinion of
many Dissenters, That the Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists here spoken of,
were extraordinary Officers, He is forced to say, That these different
Designations do not import different Offices, but different Exercises of the
same Office, (page 38.) -- But here, how obvious and natural is the Reflection,
That by this Principle there is but ONE SINGLE Order in the Gospel Ministry;
which is the Thing I am pleading for, and to allow which, is for him entirely
to give up the Argument. If Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and
Teachers, do all import only one and the same Officer, under various
Denominations, as our Author seems positively to assert, then I say there is an
End of the Controversy, and what need we stay any longer upon it! -- However,
let us see how he illustrates the matter by an Example, saying, That an
Apostle, Presbyter, or Deacon, might be a Prophet, Evangelist, Doctor or
Teacher: -- In which, I doubt he still more and more involves himself, and
disparages his Cause.

For observe,

1. There Is a Fallacy in this Instance, in that one thing which should be in
the Predicate, He puts into the place of the Subject, namely, an Apostle. If he
would speak consistently with the Account he gives before, of these different
Designations, and give a parallel Instance, It must run thus, A Presbyter or
Deacon, (or a third Person, if he could find out such an one; let him say, a
Bishop, if he will) might be an Apostle, Prophet, Evangelist, Pastor or
Teacher. For Apostle is one of those Designations in the Text; all which just
now he said, imported only different Exercises of the same Office.

BUT if any will attempt to excuse him from the Charge of a Fallacy, by saying,
He meant to except the Apostles out of that Number, and spoke only of the other
Designations that follow; though it happens not to be so cautiously worded: then
let me argue upon the matter thus, -- Either all the Designations here do
import distinct Offices, or they all of them do not.

IF all do imply distinct Offices; then these are all either ordinary or
extraordinary, and take them in which sense he will, he must distort his own
Scheme. Nay further, if any should say for him, They are BOTH (some being
Ordinary, and others Extraordinary) and to be taken in sensu diviso; I doubt
this Distinction would not help him neither: for I believe, by the same Rules
that any of them can be proved Extraordinary, we must conclude the Apostles
particularly to be so. And then what becomes of the Bishop, our Author's
pretended Successor to the Apostles!

BUT, If all these Designations do not imply so many different Offices, then I
argue thus, -- Either they are some of them proper Offices, and others only
different Exercises; or else they are all but Exercises of one Office.

IF he choose to say the Former; then I ask, How many, and which of them are
Offices? He Will doubtless say particularly Apostles, and Prophets, which ( page
14.) he says, is the name that the order of the 70 go by. But then I demand, By
what Laws of Interpretation, he can support this Construction? Where is there
any Color of Distinction in the Text, between These and the Rest that follow?
Does not the Enumeration run thus, some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers! So that there is no mark of
Distinction between the two First, and the Rest: and moreover, by the same
Rule, that the two First, viz. Apostles and Prophets, may be distinguished one
from the other, may also the two next, Evangelists and Pastors, be
distinguished, and called different Offices. Yea, and by parity of Reason, If
he calls Evangelists and Pastors one and the same Officer, I may as well call
Apostles and Pastors the same. According to him, a Presbyter might be a
Prophet, Evangelist, Pastor or Teacher: and I will add upon as good Grounds,
That he might be an Apostle too, as far as the ordinary Power of an Apostle
extended; which was only to govern the Church, ordain Officers, preach the
Word, and administer the Sacraments: for (I say again) he has not yet proved,
That a Superiority over other Pastors was one of the ordinary powers of an
Apostle. -- And by the way, This would have served as well for an Answer to one
of his former Texts, that is, 1 Cor. 12 28. For there is as much Reason to
suppose the different Designations in that, as in this, to import only
different Exercises of the same Office. -- But thus much for the first Thing I
observed in our Author's Instance.

2. OBSERVE a very palpable Self-Contradiction (if not also another Fallacy) in
what he affirms here of the Deacon, viz. That He (as well as a Presbyter or an
Apostle) might be a Prophet, Evangelist, Doctor, or Teacher.

Here Is a plain Contradiction to what he says elsewhere. For, those several
Designations, he expressly tells us ( page 14. and again, pa. 21.) belong to the
second Order of Ministers, viz. Presbyters. And then, in page 58. he says, The
Apostles instituted a 3d Order, of Deacons, who it is certain was inferior to
Presbyters, as these were to the Apostles. -- Yet here, page 38. He affirms,
That a Deacon might be a Prophet, Evangelist, Doctor, or Teacher. -- Now let
any one reconcile these Things, that can. If Deacons may wear all the
distinguishing Titles, and do all the peculiar Works of Presbyters, I cannot
imagine how any Distinction of Order can be supposed between them. At least, if
so, it cannot be apprehended that Deacons are the Inferior Order of the two.
For, though some particular Names and Works may be common (as our Author
observes, page 55.) where Offices are acknowleged to be distinct: Yet it is
ever the Superior Office includes the inferior, (as, all Apostles were
Presbyters and Deacons,) but not vice versa; to use his own words in page 56.
According to which Principle of our Author's, a Deacon cannot be inferior to a
Presbyter, if he may be a Prophet, Evangelist, etc. for what more can we
suppose a Presbyter to be? What destinctive Character does a Presbyter sustain?
What Superior to these? Unless he will grant that a Presbyter might be an
Apostle.

IN Fine, There appears to be another Fallacy, in our Author's varying from the
Enumeration in the Text, by saying DOCTOR or Teacher, instead of PASTOR or
Teacher. It seems plainly to be a designed Alteration. For, first, He knew well
enough, that Doctor here was a superfluous word, since it is synonimous with
Teacher: However, because of the Gingle of the word, he supposed the changing
of Pastor for Doctor, would not be readily minded. And then, He knew, if he had
asserted, A Deacon, or an Apostle, (both which he was speaking of) might be a
Pastor; [that is, A Minister of the Word and Sacraments, settled in a particular
Church, or Place that had received the Gospel; for so he defines a Pastor; page
14. and 25. compar'd] all the World would have derided the Absurdity, and every
one seen the notorious Opposition, that this would have carried in it, to his
own Scheme: according to which, as the Apostles had an unlimited Commission,
and a Jurisdiction over Pastors; So the Deacon is confined to Preaching and
Baptising, not being authorized to administer the Lord's Supper; which every
Pastor has certainly power to do: and hence neither an Apostle nor Deacon could
be a Pastor. It was then wittily done of him to change the Phrase of his Text,
and put Doctor instead of Pastor. However, The Wit (I believe) will hardly
atone for the Fallacy.

THUS I have fully and impartially considered the Three great
Scripture-Arguments he brings.

AND now upon the whole, Who can forbear pitying his Cause as desperate, that
needs the help of such little Tricks and Windings and Double-Dealings to
maintain it; and the Man, as very forgetful at least, and not a Master of his
own Scheme, that commits such egregious Blunders and Self Contradictions!

WELL; Our Author having (as he thinks) established his Point, viz That
Authoritative Inspection over Churches and Pastors, was one of the ordinary and
continuing parts of the Apostolic Office, in which they were to have
Successors; He comes now in the 4th and last place, to show, that BISHOPS are
the true Successors of the Apostles, and that in Them is the Apostolical
Government over Pastors and Teachers continued in the Church. Now to illustrate
and confirm this, he observes to us, Page 43. That the Apostleship is (in Acts
1.20.) expressly called an Episcopacy; and hence the Apostles were properly and
actually Bishops. -- Says he so? Why then, at the same Rate of arguing, We may
infer that Presbyters are Bishops too; because in another Chapter of the same
Book, (viz. Act. 20.) The Elders of Ephesus are expressly called Overseers or
Bishops. Yea, by the same Rule, we may argue that the Apostles themselves were
properly and actually Presbyters; inasmuch as two of them, Peter and John,
expressly call themselves so. The Apostle John in two of his Epistles, salutes
his Friends, under no other Name, than that chosen one, The Elder --. Possibly
he was the oldest Apostle now living, or the only one surviving, of that
extraordinary Character: and this aged Servant of the Lord, willing to
countenance the continued and standing Ministry, assumed only the more ordinary
and common Title of Elder: though, being now the first and most eminent
Minister in the Church, he styles himself emphatically, THE Elder. -- And then
the Apostle Peter, exhorting the Presbyters (1 Epist 5 1.) styles himself
(...), Consenior, or FELLOW Presbyter; as if he claimed no Superiority over
them and stood upon a Level with them. -- But where now do we find these or any
other Apostles calling themselves Bishops? Doubtless we should have been told
of it, if they had done so. Besure if the Apostle Paul had called himself a
Fellow-Bishop, in writing to Timothy or Titus, there had been Noise and Rattle
enough about it. -- But what does the Gentleman intend, when he affirms, That
the Apostles were actually and properly Bishops? If he means, that they were
actually Diocesan Bishops, and had particular Charges or Provinces to rule in;
this will contradict what he says elsewhere, when he assigns them an unlimited
Commission. Or if he means that the Jurisdiction they (every one in common)
exercised over all Churches and Pastors, was a proper Episcopacy, as his Phrase
is; then I inquire, whether his limited Prelate be not improperly styled a
Bishop; and how he can be called a true Successor of the Apostles! -- But it
may be he only meant in general, That they were Bishops, as being a superior
Order to Presbyters and exerting Authority over them. If so; then he trifles
strangely, and abuses his Reader with the Ambiguity of a word, which He puts
one Construction upon, and the Presbyterians another. He uses the word. Bishop,
in the modern Ecclesiastical Sense, as importing an Officer superior to a
Presbyter: but We affirm, this is not the ancient scriptural Sense. Let them,
who say it is, produce any place in the Bible, where the word is so used, if
they can. It is to be found 6 or 7 times in the New Testament: but it every
where makes so evidently against the Prelatical Sense, that the wiser and more
sober Prelatists generally shun all Places where the Word is used, as being
nothing to their purpose, but rather tending to the Confusion of their Cause.
And when they come to answer our Arguments from such Places, they will not fix
on any positive Sense contrary to our's, but only study Evasions; and act like
cowardly Soldiers flying from a powerful Enemy, who trust to their Heels, not
to their Weapons: or if any have more Courage, and resolve at all Adventures to
stand it out, how often do they charge upon one another, and fly in each
other's Face! -- To Instance in one Text, Phil. 1.1. Where Paul salutes the
Saints at Philippi, with the Bishops and Deacons. One Party of them says, Those
were Diocesan Bishops; and here they take quite different paths: One says, They
were the Bishops of the neighboring Citys, met for some Consultation at
Philippi: Another says, No; They were not at Philippi, but with Paul. Again,
One says, These Bishops were Pastors and Rulers of Churches, and had no
Presbyters under them; no such inferior Order being instituted by the Apostles:
but then another says, There was such an Inferior Order, and would have it
denoted here by the Deacons. Yet further, There Is another Party, who say, These
Bishops were nothing but Presbyters; simple Presbyters, not having power of
Jurisdiction; which the Apostles in their times reserved to Themselves; and so
there was no such Officer as a Prelate between the Apostles, and the
Presbyters, Finally, There are some of them, who hold, That by Bishops here are
to be understood both the Bishop and his Presbyters; for that the Name was then
common to both Orders, and the higher Rank includes the lower. -- What
Contention and Confusion is here among the learned Advocates for Prelacy! You
see this one Text has so gravel'd 'em, that they know not which way to turn
themselves, nor how to come off: they cannot agree among themselves upon any
tolerable Evasion, and they seem ashamed of one another's sophistical Attempts.

BUT I now return to our Author; who to confirm the Point he is upon, viz. That
Bishops are Successors to the Apostles in their power and Authority over
Pastors, proceeds ( page 45.) to offer another Argument, taken from the
Apostles conferring upon others the Apostolic Power, in their own Time, which
(says he) they would never have done, if they had not concluded it was to be
transmitted from them to others in a continual Succession, to the End of the
World. I might make several Remarks on this Passage; but I shall confine my
self to the main Thing, that is, to inquire into the Truth of his Hypothesis,
That Apostles did actually confer Apostolic Power on others. -- It is not
enough to say there were other Apostles, besides those Eleven, which CHRIST
left in Office at his Ascension. For our Lord might afterward raise up as many
as he pleased: but if their Call was immediate, their Mission from CHRIST
alone, without the Intervention of Men, or their Qualifications extraordinary
And peculiar, it affords no Argument at all of his designing a perpetual
Succession of an Order of Gospel Ministers, superior to ordinary Teachers.
Hence then our Author must instance in such as received the Apostolate in an
ordinary manner, by a human Call and Ordination: or else his instances are
foreign to the purpose, and prove nothing.

NOW in Page 45 and 46. He offers several Instances; but such as will hardly
bear an Examination He first instances in Matthias: But will he say this
Apostle was called in an ordinary manner? Nay, Does he not own himself, It was
by the DIRECTION of GOD, that Matthias was received into the Number of the
Apostles? And were not the Circumstances and the Requisites, that are mentioned
( Act. 1.21, 22.) as necessary to qualify him to be joined with the Eleven
Apostles; I say, were not these things extraordinary? It would then astonish
one to think, any Man in his Wits should offer such an Instance as this in Plea
for Bishops being the true Successors of the Apostles! -- The Instance of
James, is exceeding impertinent; since it appears very plainly the Author
himself believed him to be one of the Twelve; and therefore to have his Call
immediately from CHRIST. And as for what he insinuates about this Apostle's
being Bishop of Jerusalem, nothing that he refers us to for proof, will bear
him out in this fond Conceit. The next Instance he brings is Paul; but with
what propriety I cannot imagine; especially since he himself confesses, that he
was immediately called by CHRIST. -- His last Instance is Barnabas, who (he
tells us) was called in the ORDINARY manner; that is, He had not an immediate
Divine Call, but the Apostles conferred his Apostolical Power upon him. But how
does that appear? Sure I am, we read of no such Thing in the place he refers us
to, Act. 4.36. Nay, we have very sufficient Grounds to conclude, that Barnabas,
when he received this new Name from the Apostles, was no more than a Teacher or
Evangelist. We don't hear of his doing any thing more than preaching the Word,
for a considerable Time after this. Nay, not till after (what we read of, Acts
13.) his Separation (together with Paul) to a special Ministry, by the hands of
certain Teachers, at the Direction of the Holy Ghost: After which indeed we
find him called an Apostle, ordaining Elders, etc. Here then, There are two
Things our Author must grant. 1. If Barnabas was an Apostle really, and
separated to his Apostleship in an ordinary manner, it must be at this Time:
whence it will follow (contrary to his darling Principle) That the Power of
Ordination is not the peculiar Privilege of an Officer superior to Presbyters
or ordinary Teachers; but that Teachers may ordain Teachers, yea Bishops and
Apostles too. Or else 2. He must own Barnabas's Call to be immediate and not in
the ordinary manner: so consequently the Instance not at all to his purpose. --
The matter of Fact, which our Author brought these Instances to prove, was,
That the APOSTLES themselves conferred Apostolical Power on others. But I
believe every unbiased Reader will be of opinion, that all his Instances are
impertinent, and will vote the Gentleman wholly beside his Cushion. -- And now
having thus sap't the Foundation, hence the Argument he builds upon it in favor
of his beloved Prelacy, by natural Consequence falls to the Ground, and turns
to nothing.

BUT moreover, to enforce what he had said relating to these Apostles, our
Author proceeds to instance in some others, who were raised from among the
ordinary Pastors, to the Apostolical or Episcopal Order; and endu'd with
Authority over Churches and their Pastors.

Page 47. HE instances in Timothy, and endeavors to prove, That He was Bishop
of the Church of Ephesus. -- But how does he prove it? Why, because he had
committed to him the several Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction. But this is
of little weight; unless he can further prove, that Timothy had a PARTICULAR
and fixed RELATION to that Church; at least that he had the SOLE Power in
himself; that he was commissioned to ordain and govern ALONE, and the
Presbyters there absolutely excluded: Since otherwise, by the same Rule, and
way of Reasoning, we may as well conclude that Timothy was to be sole TEACHER
at Ephesus, and none to preach but he; because he is exhorted to give himself
to Reading, to Exhortation and Doctrine; to preach the Word, to he instant in
season, out of season. It Is not enough to say, Timothy had these and those
Powers, and was to do this and the other Thing: but it must be proved that the
Elders of Ephesus had not the same Powers, and could not do the same Things,
(even though they had the same Qualifications) that they might not lay on Hands,
might not reprove one another, as there was occasion, and the like. And then,
It must be proved that Timothy had those Powers, and exercised them, in the
Capacity of a Bishop; not as one having extraordinary Authority, and by virtue
of extraordinary Gifts; much less as being an Elder: and that he had not the
Assistence of the other Elders. -- Particularly it must be proved, That he had
the sole Power of Ordination, and acted singly herein, if ever the Prelatists
would gain their point. But now how improbable is this? Seeing all the
Ordinations we read of were performed by a Plurality of Ordainers: and
especially seeing, if Paul was concerned in the Ordination of Timothy, he took
the hands of the Presbytery with his own: for we cannot suppose but that
Timothy would follow the Pattern of his own Ordination, and not assume more
Power than the Apostle himself claimed.

MOREOVER, It is observable, by the same way of Reasoning that our Author makes
use of here, to prove Timothy's Episcopacy, the Papists do infer Peter's
Supremacy from other places of Scripture (as Mat. 16.19 Joh. 21.15.) Where
CHRIST gave Instructions, Charges and Powers to the Apostles; using the
singular number, and directing his Speech to Peter in particular, even when the
other Apostles were by. And indeed, I think, if the mere Form of Expression is
any thing to be built upon, the Papists may as well pretend, that what CHRIST
here said to Peter, was personal and peculiar to him, as the Prelatists
appropriate to Timothy what Paul says in his Epistles to him about Government
and Ordination. For perhaps Timothy might differ little more (if any thing)
from the Rest of the Presbyters, than Peter did from the Rest of the Apostles.
Now the Apostles acted among themselves in a constant Parity; notwithstanding
the seeming peculiar Powers given to Peter. And the Case at Ephesus might be
the very same.

FURTHERMORE, I would observe; If what our Author affirms be true, that Timothy
had a Power over the Presbyters of the Church of Ephesus, it is a Truth, that
will rather hurt than help his Cause. For it is a plain Case, that the
Presbyters of the Church of Ephesus were of the Episcopal Order. These are they
to whom the Apostle said, Act 20.28. The Holy Ghost has made you Bishops, or,
(as in our Translation) Overseers. And in the 1st Epist. to Timothy, 3d Chap.
Paul very evidently ascribes to these Elders the power of Government. They were
to be such as ruled well their own Houses, having their Children in subjection
with all Gravity, -- for this remarkable Reason, because if a Man know not bow
to rule his own House, how shall he take Care of the Church of GOD? Which
passage, the learned Dr. Hammond (whose Authority perhaps may go as far with
some, as our Author supposes Mr. Calvin's will with others) paraphrases thus;
For sure he that cannot rule so much a less Province, will be unfit to be made
a Governor of the Church of GOD. Now the Episcoparians agree with the
Presbyterians, that the Powers of Government and Ordination go together. Since
therefore these Presbyters had the Former, they must of necessity have had the
Latter also. Hence if Timothy had a Power over these Presbyters, as our Author
affirms, he must be forced to grant one of these three Things, (neither of
which will please him nor serve his Cause) Viz. Either,

(1.) THAT that Power in Timothy was only temporary and extraordinary; and he
(so far) an extraordinary Officer, as the Presbyterians generally say he was.
-- Or,

(2.) THAT there is an ordinary Officer in the Church Juperior to Bishops;
since the Episcoparians reckon all that have the powers of Government and
Ordination to be Bishops. For which Reason, Dr. Hammond puts that Construction
upon 2 Timothy 2.2. Appoint them as Bishops in the several Churches UNDER THEE. --
Or else,

(3.) HE must allow such Officers, as he thinks inferior to Bishops, to have
the Powers of Government and Ordination; which is one of the main Things
Presbyterians contend for.

BUT now in the last place, I would observe; Our Author makes some
Acknowlegements elsewhere that evidently subvert the Doctrine of Timothy's
Episcopacy. Page 25. He confesses Paul's Jurisdiction over Timothy, when he
mentions what Paul said of him, That He served with him, as a Son with his
Father, in the work of the Gospel; being obsequious to Apostolical Orders;
going whither he was sent, and coming when called, etc. And elsewhere our
Author observes, That the Apostles had Jurisdiction over all Churches; whence
it follows that Timothy an Officer in the Church of Ephesus, must be in some
Subjection to Paul. And if he was subject or subordinate to another, then
certainly he could not be a Diocesan Bishop; since such a Bishop must have a
Fullness of Power in his particular Province, and be exempt from the
Jurisdiction of any Ecclesiastical Superiors: Much less could he have Apostolic
Power, as our Author pretends; because (as he justly observes, page 17) All
Apostles by their Commission had equal Power, and there was no Superiority of
one Apostle to another.

IN a word, If (after all) this Gentleman will maintain that Timothy had and
exercised Episcopal Power over the Presbyters of Ephesus, (though he dare not
venture to say, under what Designation, as his Phrase is) then he must
necessarily grant one of these Things -- Either,

(1.) THAT Timothy had an absolute independent Power, and was not under the
Apostles Jurisdiction. -- Or,

(2.) THAT the Power, which the Apostle exercised over him, was extraordinary;
and so the Apostles only temporary Officers. -- Or,

(3.) THAT the Apostolical Power was not properly and simply Episcopal, but of
a different Kind: and so the Apostles an Order distinct from Bishops. -- Or
else,

(4.) THAT all Bishops have not by Divine Right an Equality of Power, but may
be in Subordination to one another.

LET him choose which he will of these Postulata, he must needs commit violence
upon one part or other of his Scheme; and what he has built up with one hand,
pull down with his other.

I know not of any way now left our Author to take in defense of his Doctrine,
but to say, That Timothy was the Apostle's Substitute, or Delegate; not acting
properly in his own, but in Paul's Name, governed by Apostolical Instructions
and executing Apostolical Orders. -- And indeed, if we compare what our Author
says of Timothy in his 25th page with what he says in his 49th page he will
appear to be of this Opinion. -- But neither will this help his Argument at
all. No Plea can be gathered from it, for Bishops being Successors of the
Apostles, though we suppose the Delegation to Timothy to be matter of Fact:
because it cannot be proved, but that Timothy was an itinerant Missionary,
having no particular Relation to the Church of Ephesus: because it cannot be
proved, but that the supposed Trust committed to him was a temporary and
transient Assignation; one of those extraordinary Expedients, which the
peculiar Occasions and Necessities of that Day called for; having a particular
Respect to the first planting of the Gospel, and the erecting and settling the
Christian Church in the world: the Powers relating to which our Author himself,
( page 33.) owns were temporary and extraordinary. -- Furthermore, As I have
had occasion once and again to observe, He confesses that the Apostles
Jurisdiction over all Churches was but temporary, and needful only for the
primitive Times; and if so, I cannot see how a limited Jurisdiction of that
nature should be necessary in aftertimes. If Paul's Jurisdiction over all
Churches was extraordinary, then it seems to me that the Jurisdiction he is
said to exercise over the Church and Pastors of Ephesus, in particular, by the
mediation of Timothy (which was specifically the same with that) must be
likewise extraordinary Timothy's pretended Episcopacy could be no other than
the Exercise of Apostolical universal Jurisdiction, under a particular
Application: and this particular Trust must cease together with the
extraordinary Power that was the Foundation and Source of it. -- Moreover, It
is not unworthy of Consideration, That in the exercise of this supposed
Episcopal Government, Timothy had an inspired Apostle to direct him: And now
will any imagine that the Bishops, Timothy's pretended Successors, do not want
some Higher Authority to supervise them, as well? Or are Presbyters the only
Persons that need to be under the Conduct and Regulation of Superiors!
Methinks, our Timothies as much need a Paul to inspect them, as the Presbyters
want a Timothy to govern them. And since there is no more any Paul with his
extraordinary Powers, we may safely conclude that Timothy his supposed
Delegate, has long ago taken his final Leave of the World.

BUT now to proceed with our Author.

Page 48. HE instanceth in Titus, and says, That the like Power and Authority
(with that of Timothy) was conferred on him, over the Churches in Crete. But
here the like Difficulties arise too: and if the Case of Both was the same, the
same Answer may serve for both. -- I shall only observe, that the Elders to be
ordained by Titus in every City, were to be blameless as the Stewards of God,
that is (says Dr. Hammond) as those that had the Government of GOD's Family
entrusted to them. Now since the Elders or Presbyters, were to have the power
of Government, they were to have that of Ordination likewise; and so were to be
Bishops, according to the opinion of the Episcoparians. Hence if our Author
assert Titus's Episcopal Power over them, He will entangle himself in all the
inextricable Difficulties, which I have cast in his way, under the former head.

THUS you see the two Instances of Timothy and Titus, which our Author thought
would afford convincing Arguments for a settled Prelacy in the Church, do
conclude nothing at all in favor of it. It was therefore ingenuously done of
Dr. Whitby, to desert his Brethren, by making those Concessions, which we find
in the Preface to his Commentary upon Titus. "As to the great Controversy
(says he) whether Timothy and Titus were indeed made Bishops, the one of
Ephesus, the other of Crete; I confess I can find nothing of this matter in any
Writer of the first three Centuries, nor any Intimation that they bore that
Name --. (He adds afterward) I confess, that these two Instances, absolutely
taken, afford us no convincing Arguments for a settled Diocesan Episcopacy."

I come now to our Author's last Instance, viz. The Angels of the seven
Churches of Asia, which (he tells us) were Persons of the Apostolical and
Episcopal Order. But his Argument here, is as weak and unconcluding as any of
the Former. For there is no Evidence at all, nor any Shadow of Reason to
suppose, that those Angels were Diocesan Bishops, or such as had Authority over
Presbyters. There is nothing in the Word Angel, that will yield any
Demonstration of it. Whether you consider the Etymology of the Name, or the
Style of the Apocalypse, there is nothing to forbid our taking it in a
Collective Sense, for the Body of the Clergy or Presbyters. And if we look into
the Epistles to those Churches, we shall find many Expressions that favor this
Construction: but not a word (that I can see) countenancing the Episcopal
Opinion. Nay, if we should allow every Angel to be a single Person; the utmost
you can suppose him to be, is a Senior Pastor in a Church; or the Moderator of
a Presbytery, approved by some who are in their Judgment and Practice very
Anti-prelatical. There is not the least Hint given, as if these Angels had
Jurisdiction over any inferior Ministers; much less the sole power of
Government, and a Negative upon Pastors and Churches: without which Things,
there can be no rational Inference (from those Angels) in favor of Diocesan
Bishops. It Is indeed one of the most noisy and blustering Arguments made use of
on the Episcopal side, but perhaps equally shallow, and senseless.

THUS I have faithfully examined all the Instances, our Author has thought fit
to mention, for the proof of his Point, That the Apostolic Power over Pastors
is continued in the Church, in the hands of Bishops. And I am apt to flatter my
self, that I have disarmed him of all his supposed Precedents, have beaten him
off from his strong Holds, and turned most of his own Weapons upon himself.

NOW it remains to consider the Replies he has made to the Scripture-Proofs,
which Presbyterians bring: but before I pass to that, let me look back a
little, and consider an incidental Passage or two of our Author's, under the
former head.

AT the bottom of page 48. (speaking of Timothy and Titus) he says, I will not
contend but that in the EXERCISE OF THIS POWER, they might have taken the
Advice and CONCURRENCE of the faithful Pastors in these Churches, and concerted
Affairs with them: and not done things in an arbitrary and despotic manner. To
this I cannot answer better than in the words of Mr. Pierce Vind. part. 3. chapter
1. pa. 39.
. As to our part, we do not condemn all manner of precedence or pre-eminence.
If the Episcoparians had only asserted it to be both lawful and useful, that
among Presbyters who are, by the first Institution, all equal, there should be
one for Order's sake, placed above the rest, and called the Bishop; we should
not upon that account have contended with them, or separated from them. Who
knows not that the foreign Churches, that are under Presbyterian Government,
have, in their Synods and Classes, Moderators, Prolocutors, etc which are by
Experience found necessary? And if men had been entrusted with those Offices in
our Churches, not barely upon occasion, but for life, or as long as they
behaved themselves well in them, I hardly think any Quarrel would have risen
upon this head. Nay, so earnestly did our Ministers desire Peace, that if our
Bishops had been obliged to govern their Churches, with the Consent and
Assistance of their Presbyters, they would have born with it, rather than have
been deprived of the Public exercise of their Ministry. For they thus
considered with themselves; that it was enough for them, if they preserved
entire the power they received from GOD, and left the Consecration whereby the
Presbyters are made Bishops, as a useless thing, to those who were satisfied
with the Lawfulness and Expediency of it. This then is our Judgment, that the
distinction our Adversaries make between Presbyter and Bishop is groundless,
being no where made in the Scripture; and that CHRIST is alone a Monarch in His
Church; and that He has never appointed a Monarchical Form of Government to be
practiced in it; since we no where find any such thing taught, either by CHRIST
himself, or by his holy Apostles, to whom he gave special Commission and Power
to plant, and settle, and govern his Church, in his name. Concerning whom
therefore, (to borrow our Author's words, page 50, 51.) we cannot entertain the
least doubt in our minds but that they would be most faithful and exact, in
settling that Order, and Instituting those Officers in all fully constituted
Churches, which their Lord had appointed; and would be careful to leave the
Church, at their Death under the same Order and Government, furnished with the
same Offices and Ministers, which CHRIST himself her Lord, had instituted and
appointed for her Edification.

AND now, since our Author is fully persuaded as well as I, that the Apostles
were faithful, exact, and careful in modelling the Church according to Christ's
own appointment; I cannot see, that it would have been any great Confirmation of
his Cause, if he had brought forth the Records of the Ancient Church, and
Catalogues of its Bishops, which he speaks of, pa. 51. [Nay, although the Bishops
may be there ( as pa. 43. he tells us they are) frequently called Apostles; and
again, the Apostles styled Bishops; nay, further, although he could make it
appear, as evident, as himself supposes it is, that many of the Ancients were
of opinion, That in the Apostles was instituted the Episcopal Office, and that
in the Bishops the Apostolic Office was continued; This (neither) could not
serve him much.] For if they speak not according to the Institution of Christ,
and his Apostles, we may safely venture to say, That so far as they are
inconsistent with it, there is no light in them. Whereas, on the other hand, if
we find them conformable to it, however they may deserve Commendation, yet they
will add no weight or force at all to our Savior's or his Apostles
Institution. -- Much might be said to this matter, but since our Author only
gives a transient Hint upon it, and seems presently to retract it, by
ingenuously confessing he has taken a step out of the Line he had set himself,
I shall add nothing further in Reply to it, but the following Passages from a
Learned Dissenter. "We deny not (says he) that many of the Fathers seem to
make a great difference betwixt Bishops and Presbyters: but this does not
overthrow out Hypothesis. For if they are the same in Scripture, the sayings of
the Fathers cannot make them otherwise: and yet (he adds) few or none of the
Ancients say they are distinct Orders; much less that they are so by. Divine
Right: but some of them acknowledge the contrary It is not therefore their using
the name of Bishop in a sense distinct from that of Presbyter, no, nor
requiring Presbyters to be obedient to their Bishop, that will prove a
Superiority of Order Jure Divino; for we grant that it was the early Practice
of the Church to choose one of the gravest and wisest of the Presbyters, and
constitute him a sort of President over the Rest; and that where there were
many Presbyters in a particular Church, commonly the Eldest or Worthiest was as
Pastor, and the other his Assistants: but still we know, thas the Parson of a
Parish and the Curates are of the same Order; and every Bishop in England is
equal in Order to the Archbishop of Canterbury, although they take an oath of
Canonical Obedience to him. The same we say of the Distinction betwixt Bishop
and Presbyter in primitive Times. This is a sufficient Reply to all the
Antiquities, this Gentleman could have alleged.

IN the next place our Author, pa. 52, produces the Testimony of Calvin,
concerning the form of the ancient Church; but to what purpose I cannot well
imagine: for I think it will be far from doing him any service. The form of
Government which Calvin speaks of in that Chapter, (which is in the 4th and not
in the 1st Book of his Institutions, as the Reader may be in danger of
misapprehending, from our Author's way of citing him) is not, as he expressly
tells us, the Order delivered in the pure word of GOD; of which he had created
in the foregoing Chapter; but only a sort of Image of it exhibited in the form
of the ancient Church. In which, notwithstanding Calvin's charitable Opinion,
that the ancient Bishops with a sincere study endeavored to preserve GOD's
Institution and had no mind to frame any other form of Church Government than
what was prescribed by GOD in his Word; yet it is plain from the very Words
recited from him by our Author, that he thinks they had something at least, in
this matter disagreeable to the Word of GOD, something wanting in their Order,
and something in which they erred. And as for the three Orders, he he brings in
Calvin speaking of, they are not as he represents them, Bishops, Presbyters and
Deacons; but teaching and ruling Elders. His own words you may see in the
Margin Quemadmodum tradidimus triplices ministros nobis commendari in
scriptura, ita quicquid ministrorum habuit vetus Ecclesia, in tres Ordines
distinxit: nam ex ordane PRESBYTERORUM partim eligebant Pastores ac Doctores:
reliqua pars Censura Morum et Correctionibus praerat. DIACONIS commissa crat
cura pauperum, etc. Lib. 4. C. 4. Sect. 1.
. Indeed in the next Section he acknowledges, That in every City the Elders or
Presbyters chose one of their own number, to whom especially they gave the
title of Bishop; but then he says, that he had no Dominion over his Colleagues,
but only (as the Consul did in the Senate) acted the part of a Moderator among
them; and executed what was decreed by common consent, and was himself subject
to the Assembly of his Brethren. Sic alios dignitate antecedebat, ut fratrum
caetui subjiceretur. Moreover he adds, that this was brought in by human
Consent, according to the Confession of the Ancients themselves, and brings
Jerome for his Voucher.

OUR Author now proceeds page 54. to consider some passages of Scripture, that
are commonly objected against what he has advanced. And, First, Those Passages
from which it is alleged, that the Names of Bishop and Presbyter are
promiscuously used in the Scripture, and therefore signify but one and the same
Office. To this he says, it is answered by SOME (for he seems not very forward
to espouse the Answer himself) that whenever Bishops are named, we are to
understand Bishops properly so called, and not Presbyters, which they make
appear from the Texts brought in favor of a Community of Names. How well, we
shall see presently!

THE first text mentioned is in Act. 20. where the Apostle Paul having sent
from Miletus to Ephesus, ver. 17. and called the Elders of the Church, so
charges them, ver. 28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and unto all the
Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you OVERSEERS (or, Bishops, as the
same word is elsewhere translated) to feed the Church of God, etc. -- Here it
is as plain as any thing can be, that the same persons who are called Elders or
Presbyters ver. 17. are called also Bishops ver. 28 and were such Officers as
there were more than one of in a Church; and therefore could not be Bishops
properly so called in our Author's sense. To this our Author answers that They
say (it must be only by guess; for there is no foundation for it in the Text)
that the Apostle called both Bishops and Presbyters unto him. and that the
Clergy of all the Cities thereabout were there; so that what he says, ver. 28.
was principally directed to the Bishops, and by way of reflection to the
Presbyters. If we should grant this were true, yet still their Names are used
promiscuously. But it is so far from being true, that it is directly contrary
both to the letter of the text and the circumstances of the Apostle.

For,

1. IF the Clergy of all the neighboring Cities had been there, the Apostle
(we may conclude) would have said Flocks and Churches, and not Flock and
Church. And

2. THE Apostle was now hastening, if possible, to be at Jerusalem on the day
of Pentecost, ver. 16. and therefore would not call at Ephesus himself, lest he
should be detained too long; but sent for the Elders of the Church to come to
him at Miletus: which makes it the most unlikely thing in the world, that he
would tarry there till the Clergy of all the Cities about Ephesus could be
called together. So that it appears plainly both from the manner of the
Apostle's Expression, and from the great haste he was then in, that none but
the Elders of the Church of Ephesus were there present; whom the Apostle calls
Bishops of the Holy Ghost's making. To all this our Author has nothing to
oppose, but a mere Guess, which he seems not willing to take the Credit of to
himself; and which if allowed, will not serve the turn he uses it for. Before I
dismiss this Text, I would observe further, that the Apostle charges these
Elders to feed the Church. etc. Now feeding being a metaphor taken from the
business of a Shepherd, implies government as well as instruction. So that from
this Text it appears,

1. THAT the same Persons were called ELDERS and BISHOPS.

And

2. THAT in one Church there were several ELDERS all ALIKE concerned in the
Government of it; And therefore according to the Episcoparian Scheme, invested
with the power of Ordination also, and all other Powers that belong to the
highest Office in the Church. So that this Text proves an Identity of Office as
well as name: To which I will add,

3. THAT in all probability this charge was given to those Elders, in the
presence of Timothy, who appears from ver. 4. to have been one of the Apostle's
attendants in this Voyage. And if so, had the Apostle been of our Author's
opinion, that he was the Bishop of that Church, it is very strange he should
take no notice at all of him, as concerned with it; nor give any charge to the
Presbyters to pay due respect unto their Bishop (whose Youth might tempt them
to despise him) as well as to take heed to all the Flock.

THE next Passage mentioned is that in Titus, Chap 1. where after the Apostle
has laid down some of the qualifications of the Elders whom he left Titus to
ordain in every City, he gives this reason ver. 7. for insisting on those
qualifications: For a Bishop must be blameless as the Steward of God, etc.
which would be no reason at all, unless the Apostle intended the same Officer
by the Bishop in the 7th ver. which he did by the Elders before. To this, I
cannot find that our Author says any thing, which has so much as the least
tendency to take off the force of it. But he says one thing to perplex himself
and his Cause, viz. That there were Presbyters before at Crete, and Titus was
to ordain some of them Bishops; whereas he had said before pa 48. That an
Episcopal Power and Authority was conferred on Titus over the Churches in
Crete. From which two passages laid together one would think, that Titus was to
ordain Bishops, in some of the Cities in Crete, inferior to himself; whereas
the Scheme of our Author and his Brethren is, That there is no superiority or
power of one Bishop over another. Besides, as Critics observe, the original
word here rendered to ordain, will not bear such a sense: it signifies plainly
to constitute and appoint. And so here it must needs mean the Ordination of
persons to the office of Presbyters; and not the advancement of Presbyters to
be Bishops. Presbyter or Elder here is the Capacity, to which persons were to
be ordained; and not from which they were to be promoted.

IN the next place he tells us that 1 Timothy 3.2, -- 7. is to be understood of
Bishops properly so called, that were to be ordained to preside over other
Cities, as Timothy did over Ephesus. But this will not serve his turn; for Timothy
was to abide at Ephesus, ch 1. ver. 3. and not to travel from City to City to
ordain Bishops. Besides, if the Apostle had known any middle sort of Officer,
called a Presbyter, between the Bishop here mentioned, and the Deacon described
afterward, in the same Chapter, it is very strange he should give no character
of him, when he is so carefully instructing Timothy, how to behave himself in
the House of God, that he might know what manner of person to put into this
Office also, if there should be occasion for it. And therefore we cannot but
conclude, that a Bishop and a Presbyter were the same thing in the Apostle's
account, and that he knew no other ordinary Officers in the Church, but Bishops
or Presbyters and Deacons.

THE last Text he mentions is Phil. 1.1. Paul and Timothy the Servants of Jesus
Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus, which are at Philippi, with the
Bishops and Deacons. From this text we gather that the Government of the Church
at Philippi was not lodged in the hands of a single Person, or a Bishop,
properly so called, in our Author's sense; but in the hands of a plurality or
Presbytery; and that there was no middle Order in the Church of Philippi,
between the Bishops and Deacons here mentioned.

TO this our Author answers, first. That these words may be understood of the
Bishops of Philippi, and other neighboring Cities, who were wont to convene
and meet together.

MY reply is, 1. That this Epistle is written to a Church; that therefore when
it says to the saints which are at Philippi, it is to be understood of the
Saints that dwelt there and constituted that Church. And in like manner ought
the Bishops and Deacons to be understood of those that did belong to that
Church; unless there were some apparent reason to the contrary.

2. THAT there is no Intimation in this Epistle, that it was to be delivered to
an Assembly of Bishops convened at Philippi; that therefore there is no Ground
for such a Supposition, but it is a mere Guess to serve a Cause that needs such
Helps.

3. THAT it is a Guess not only without Foundation, but against the express
words of the Epistle it self. For the Apostle calls those whom he wrote it to,
Philippians. Chap. 4.15. Ye Philippians know also, etc. Now it would be very
absurd to call an Assembly of Bishops, met together from the neighboring
Cities, Philippians, only because they happened to hold a meeting at Philippi.

4 OUR Author's Guess cannot be right, nor yet the Hypothesis which it is
designed to serve, because the Apostle takes no notice of any middle Order in
his Salutations. For had there at that day been three Orders of Officers in the
Church, and had there been such a convention of Bishops of the neighboring
Cities at Philippi, it cannot be supposed, that the Deacons who are the lowest
Order would have been present, and the Presbyters who are superior to them, not
so. And if the Presbyters had been present, certainly the Apostle would not
have saluted their Inferiors, without taking any notice at all of them.

WELL, If a bad Guess will not destroy the Argument founded on this Text, perhaps
a forced Construction may do the business better; for our Author says,
secondly, That this Text may mean that Paul, and the Bishops and Deacons that
were with him, salute the saints that are at Philippi. As if it had run thus.
Paul and Timothy the servants of Jesus Christ, with the Bishops and Deacons, to
all the saints in Christ Jesus, which are at Philippi.

I readily agree with our Author, that this Answer is not obvious to every one.
For it is a wonder to me, that any man, that has re'd the two Epistles of the
same Apostle to the Corinthians, should ever make it. In both those Epistles,
the form of Expression used in the Salutation, is exactly Parallel both in the
Original, and in our Translation, to the form of Expression used here. And yet
I believe the greatest Zealot for our Author's cause (when he is not out of
temper) will hardly be able to persuade himself, that the Salutation, in the
first of those Epistles, ought to run thus; Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ,
through the will of God, and Sosthenes our Brother, with all that in every place
call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord both theirs and ours, unto the
Church of God which is at Corinth, etc. Or that the true Construction of the
Salutation in the ^d Epistle is, Paul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of
God, and Timothy our brother, with all the saints that are in all A^haia; unto
the Church of God which is at Corinth, etc. I think, I need not mention the
reasons why I suppose no Body will be ambitious of the Credit of finding out
such a new way of reading the two last mentioned Salutations. And why the order
of the Salutation in the Epistle to the Philippians should be so inverted, as
it is manifest, the same form of Expression ought not to be, in any other
place, where it is used by the same Apostle I believe no reason can be given,
but such an one, as it will be though it prudence not to expose.

OUR Author has now done with the Texts of Scripture, from which, he says, we
allege that the Names of Bishop and Presbyter are used promiscuously. And upon
the whole concludes, that if he should grant an Identity of names, yet it will
not follow, that there was an Identity of Offices; because names are common in
Scripture, where Offices are acknowleged to be distinct. But he should have
remembered, that something more than a bare Identity of Names is argued from
diverse of these Texts. And since he has been no better able to prove, that in
all these places we are to understand Bishops properly so called, and not
Presbyters; he might have though it it worth his while, to have endeavored an
answer to what we argue from the Texts, besides a promiscuous use of Names. For
from Acts 20 27, 28. we not only prove, that the names of Bishop and Presbyter
are used promiscuously; but also that the Government of the Church at Ephesus
was committed to a Plurality, and not to a single Person; and that therefore
all these Presbyters had a power of Ordination also; (since the Powers of
Government and Ordination go together, our Adversaries themselves being Judges)
from whence it follows that Presbyters properly so called have a Right by
Scripture to all those Powers, which Bishops now claim as peculiar to
themselves.

AGAIN; From 1 Timothy 3.^, 3.4. etc. We argue that the Apostle knew of but two
Orders of Officers in the Church. For it would be very strange, when he is so
sollicitous, that Timothy might know how he ought to behave himself in the
House of God; that yet he should not give him any account of the Qualifications
necessary for one Order of Officers that belonged to it. And it would be much
stranger still, that he should be so very particular, in setting down the
Qualifications of one sit for the Office of a Deacon, which is on all hands,
allowed to be the lowest Order and yet omit all mention of an Officer of higher
Degree and more importance.

SO again, (to mention no more,) we say, it appears from Phil. 1.1. that there
were but but two orders of Officers in that Church. For it would be no way
consistent with the Decency observed on all occasions by the Apostle, to have
saluted the Deacons by name, and to have taken no notice at all of one of the
Orders superior to them, if there had been more than one that were so. And we
say moreover, that it farther appears from this Text, that the highest Order
here mentioned was such as there might be more than one of, at the same time,
in the same Church; and that therefore they could not be Bishops, in the sense
of our Adversaries; for of them there can be but one in a Church at once.

THESE things lie plain and obvious to every Eye in these Texts, and are much
more than a bare Identity of Names; which is also demonstrable from some of
them, as has been shown above. And though our Author is pleased to make light
of the Argument from the Identity of Names to Identity of Offices, and many of
his brethren have treated it with a great deal of contempt and insult: yet, I
suppose, if the matter be duly weighed, it will be sound much easier to laugh
at it, than to answer it

INDEED it must be acknowledged, that all* the Names of the Offices of the
Christian Church, admit of a twofold acceptance: being sometimes used in a
common, and sometimes in an appropriate sense, by the sacred Writers. Thus for
instance; Apostle sometimes signifies any Messenger, and sometimes it is more
strictly taken for one of the Twelve, immediately sent forth by our Lord. So
Bishop, in its common acceptance, signifies an Overseer, and Presbyter
signifies an old man; but they are both of them often used in a more
appropriate sense, to denote those Officers, to whom the Instruction and
Government of the Churches were committed. So again, Deacon, in its common
sense intends any servant or minister: but in its stricter use is appropriated
to that Officer, whose business it was to serve Tables. And it is generally
easy enough to discern from the sense, when these words are to be taken for the
proper Names of the Officers sometimes denoted by them; and when they are to be
taken in the common sense, only to intend something that may be as well
expressed by them, as by any other words of the like signification.

NOW this Observation easily accounts for the difficulty, objected by our
Author, that the Apostle and Pastors are frequently called Deacons; Upon which
he truly says, That it cannot thence be argued, that the Apostles and
Presbyter's Office was one and the same with the Deacon's. The reason of which
is, that the word Deacon in those Places is used in its common sense, according
to the original signification of it, before it was appropriated, as a name of
distinction, to any particular Order of Officers in the Church. And this our
Translators were aware of; and accordingly, as the sense directed them, have
very well rendered it Minister, in those places.

BUT notwithstanding this, it is certain (as has already been observed) that
this, and the other names of the Offices in the Christian Church, are often
used in the New Testament, in a more strict and appropriate sense, to denote
certain Offices, which by these names were distinguished from each other. For
common sense will teach us that there must be (at least) as many distinguishing
names, as there were distinct Offices in the Church; and that distinction of
names must be as early as the distinction of Offices: otherwise Christians must
have been unable for some time, to express themselves in some Cases, either in
Conversation, or in Writing, without an unintelligible Ambiguity. Unless
therefore our Author can prove, that the Scripture Offices were not
distinguished in the Apostles days, by the names given them in Scripture; but
by some other names, best known to himself, and not to be met with there; he
must allow us to conclude, that wherever we meet with these names, evidently
used in a strict appropriate sense, there we are to understand certain
Officers, distinguished by these names from Officers of any other Order, and
that could not be distinguished from other Orders, either in speaking or
writing, without these distinguishing names, which custom had appropriated to
them.

AND still further, where we find two of these names (though evidently used in a
strict sense, yet) indifferently applied to the same Office, and never find
them applied to any other Office, or any other names applied to that Office in
an appropriate sense; there we must be allowed to conclude, that both these
were names, which custom had given to one and the same Office; and that it was
well enough known at that time from all other Offices by either of these names.

NOW this is exactly the Case, with respect to the names, Presbyter and Bishop.
For where they are used in the most strict appropriate sense that can be, we
find them both applied indifferently to the Order of Officers, unto whom the
Instruction and Government of the Church was committed. And we never find
either of them applied, in a strict and proper sense, to any other Order. Nor
do we find the name Deacon, ever applied to this Order, but where it is
manifestly used in the common, and not in the appropriate sense of the word.
And therefore we very justly conclude, that not two, but one and the same
Office, is intended by both these names; and that this Office was sufficiently
distinguished in the Apostles time, by either of them.

FOR it would be the most unreasonable thing in the world, to imagine, that
there could be two distinct Offices, to which these names belonged, and yet the
names be certainly used promiscuously; and never so used, as that any
distinction of Offices can be collected from them; nor any other names given us
by the sacred writers, to distinguish these Offices by* not the names of any
other Office given in an appropriate sense, to the Office, to which these two
names are, in such a sense promiscuously applied; nor lastly, either of these
names ever given, in an appropriate sense, to any other Office, but that of
instructing and governing the Church.

BUT if we should let all this go for nothing, and take our Author's own
Account of the matter, it will be found to make strongly for our Opinion. For
after he has told us, that the Apostles and Pastors are frequently called
Deacons; and yet that it cannot thence be argued, that the Apostle's and
Presbyter's Office was one and the same with the Deacon's: the reason he gives
for it is, That the name of the Genus is usually given to the species; the
superior Office including the inferior. All Apostles were Presbyters and
Deacons: though not vice versa; that is, though all Presbyters and Deacons were not
Apostles. So that according to him a superior Office might be called by the
name of an inferior: but an inferior Office might not be called by the name of
a superior, If therefore we can find the same persons, that are called
Presbyters (and that certainly were Presbyters in fact as well as name)
immediately after called Bishops, it will follow, from our Author's own way of
reasoning, that Bishops were not an order superior to Presbyters. Now for an
Instance of this, I will only refer him to the above mentioned, Acts 20. where
those that are called Elders or Presbyters of the Church of Ephesus, ver. 17.
(and who were certainly Presbyters properly so called, because there were more
than one of them in the same Church) are called also Bishops, ver. 28. as has
been before observed.

NOW, In the next place our Author comes to answer the Arguments bro't by us
for Presbyterian Parity, from several Texts; such as Matthew. 20.25 The Lords of
the Gentiles etc. and the parallel places. Though it is to be observed; he grossly
misrepresents us, when he insinuates, that we plead this Text, or any of the
others mentioned by him, as condemning all Imparity among Church. Officers, or
a superiority of one Order above another or the like. For, we allow of the
Distinction betwixt Officers of an ordinary Character, and Others invested with
extraordinary Powers: So likewise we distinguish between one ordinary Officer
and another, and assert a difference of Order between Bishops and Deacons. But
what we make use of this Text for, is to prove a Parity of the Apostles among
themselves, and so of Presbyters or Bishops among themselves.

I cannot give into his opinion, That this Text forbids only that Power and
Jurisdiction, which is exercised with imperious Bitterness and Domination: but
must beg leave to think (till I can obtain better Light) that it condemns and
inhibits all manner of Superiority and Dominion whatsoever, in the Case it
relates to. And when our Author is pleased to say, It is not interpreted to any
such purpose, by any judicious Person of either Persuasion; he commits a grand
Mistake, and betrays his want of Reading or Memory. For Some, I am sure, and I
suppose Most, of the best Expositors, and other Writers, on the Anti-Episcopal
Side, do maintain, That not only Tyranny, but Dominion it self is here spoken
of and forbidden Nay and there are Divines of note in the Church of England
too, that agree to this Exposition. Dr. Whitaker says, It is not Humility in
the Domination, that is required; but the very Domination it self is forbidden
Le Pontif. Ques. 1. Cop. 3.
. Dr Willet says, Our Savior here forbids, that there should be any
Prince-like and pompous Pre-eminence among Ecclesiastical Persons Synops. p.
270.
. So Dr. Whitby, in his Notes on the Place, expresses himself thus; I do not
think Christ only forbids here such Dominion as is attended with Tyranny --:
And he adds several weighty Reasons to enforce his Opinion; As (1.) Because St.
Luke (in repeating this Passage) uses Words which will bear no such ill sense.
(2.) Because Governors (whether among Jews or Gentiles) were not always guilty
of this Maladministration. And (3) Because Christ does not oppose to their
Government, a just Dominion, but a Ministry only, etc.

UNTO these, may be added two Arguments further. As (1.) It is not likely that
our blessed Lord (who always paid and taught such a Reverence to the Civil
Magistrate, should at once brand all the Kings and Governors in the Gentile
World, as a Crew of Tyrants and Oppressors, without any Exception or
Distinction. For (as one Anderson's Def.
observes) what could have been the Effect of this, but to produce in his
Followers an utter Aversion to Monarchy, and to turn 'em all into Republicans?
I wonder then how our Author came to hit upon such an unhappy Construction of
our Savior's Words. Had he been of the Principles of Those, who (he says) are
for curbing the power of Princes, it would not have been so great a Surprise,
to see him stumble into such a Mistake in his Zeal and Precipitation: But for a
Gentleman, who professes himself of the Persuasion of Those, that assert the
just Rights and Prerogatives of Princes, as the surest Foundation of a
Kingdom's Tranquillity and Happiness; for him, to put such a sense upon our
Savior's Words, as must have a tendency to inflame the minds of Christians with
very strong Prejudices against the Government of Kings and Princes, seems to be
a very unaccountable piece of Forgetfulness and Mistake. -- But further, (2) I
may argue from the occasion, upon which the Words were spoken by our Savior.
'Twas briefly this; The Mother of Zebedee's Children came with her Sons to our
Lord, worshipping him, and desiring a certain Favor of him, viz. That her two
Sons might sit, the one on his right hand, and the other on his left hand in
his Kingdom Now We cannot reasonably suppose, This Woman had any thing in View
but a just Dominion; not Tyranny and Oppression; but barely Power and
Authority: which, no doubt, she hoped her Sons would manage worthily --
However, our Lord sees fit to reject her Desire; and takes occasion not only to
forbid his Apostles the tyrannical and corrupt exercise of Authority, but even
all Principality and Dominion it self, among themselves. And as Junius Tom. 2.
Contra Bellarm.
observes, Instead of the Dominion desired, he enjoyne them a humble Ministry
and Service. And whereas it had been objected by Bellarmine, That Bishops are
not here forbidden to exercise a Dominion like that of godly Kings, but only
like that of tyrannical Kings, who know not GOD: Junius replies, We deny that
there is any such Restriction, neither can it be proved.

THIS might suffice: but since our Author has taken a pretty deal of pains in
making critical Remarks on the Text, to expound it out of our Service, if
possible; I shall do him the Justice, particularly to examine all he has said.

1st then, HE observes, That it is only a Secular Dominion, that our Lord
forbids, etc. Where, by the way, He seems to retract what he had said just
before, when he denied any other Dominion to be condemned, but only that which
is exercised with imperious Bitterness. He has done well to correct himself, as
he seems to do, when he here interprets it of secular Dominion; which being
mentioned without any Limitation or Qualification, we must suppose him to allow
it forbidden to the Apostles entirely, whether exercised with Bitterness or
not. Now this, methinks, is a good Advance toward the Condemnation of his own
Bishops, who so much affect State. Dignities, and sometimes sustain Civil
Offices; therein approving themselves true Successors of the Apostles, while
dreaming of an Earthly Kingdom. It was what so offended good old Latimer, that
he is said in a Sermon to have advised King Edward VI. to unlord all the Lordly
Bishops, and remove them from all their temporal Offices and Employments, that
they might follow their spiritual Plough. Tail. -- Wise and just Advice, it
should seem! For their frequenting the Court, attending the Council Table,
sitting in Parliament, being sometimes Regents of the Kingdom, or Ambassadors
abroad, and the like, must needs take them very much off from their more proper
Work, as well as very little suit with their Ecclesiastical Character. Hence
the Wisdom of a Church of England Parliament saw fit once to pass a Vote, That
no Bishop should sit in Parliament, nor bear any sway in Temporal Affairs; and
that no Clergyman should be in the Commission for the Peace. The Apostle
observes upon this head; No man that warreth, entangleth himself with the
Affairs of this Life; requiring Timothy, as a good Soldier, and Bishop of the
Church of CHRIST, not to engage himself in any secular Negotiations: So Dr.
Whitby notes on the Place; and moreover observes to us, That the Apostolical
Canons (so called) declare, Those Bishops ought to be deposed, who immerse
themselves in worldly Affairs. -- But I seem to have forgotten, that our Author
and I have no Dispute about these Things; since he fairly confesses, that our
Savior forbids his Apostles and Ministers to exercise Secular Authority.

HOWEVER, I don't agree with him, that this was all. I presume this do'sn't
reach the utmost meaning of our Savior's. For, though he might have some View
(as our Author observes) to the Jewish opinion of a Temporal Kingdom, and
design partly to remove that Mistake; yet the Generality of the most approved
Interpreters that I have seen, do suppose our Savior's Words also to have a
Reference to their Ecclesiastical Capacity, and to forbid their Affectation of
Pre-eminence and Authority one over another in the Church. -- And it is very
observable that our Lord used often, in his Replies unto others, to have a
meaning beyond the Drift of the Question put to him, and different from it.

2. OUR Author observes; That Dominion, which the Lord, of the Gentiles
exercised, was over their Subjects; not one over another. But how weak an
Insinuation is this! Who knows not, How the Kings of the Gentiles have
exercised Lordship, not only over their Subjects, but ever and anon also over
other Princes round about them! What mean Imperial Dignities, and petty
Sovereignties! -- I think our Text may be so turned, and perhaps not unfairly;
The Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, i. e. The People: and
they that are Great, (such as Emperors) do exercise Authority upon them, that
is, upon inferior Princes. But (says our Lord to his Apostles) it shall not be
so among you. It is the Dominion of one Apostle over another, that is here
forbidden: as seems evident from what is added, Whosoever will be chief among
you, let him be your servant. And this is but agreeable to the Scope of the
Woman's Request to our Lord, That her Sons (two of the Apostles) might have the
two highest Posts in his Kingdom, and sit above the other Ten; who are
therefore said to be moved with indignation against the two Brethren, when they
heard it. Moreover, it will be clearer still, if we consult the parallel Texts
mentioned by our Author, (Luke 9.47. and Chap. 22.24.) where we find the
occasion of our Lord's giving these humbling Rules to his Apostles is said to
be the Rising of a Strife and Reasoning among them, which of them should be
accounted the greatest. -- Nothing then can be more evident, whatever the
Superiority condemned here by our Lo^^ might be, than that it was such an one,
as was to be exercised by the Apostles over others of their own Number, and
has no respect to a Superiority over any other Order: and therefore must
necessarily be understood in a Presbyterian Sense; unless our Author will join
the Papists, and maintain Peter's Supremacy: but then he will have the whole
Protestant world against him, even his own Episcopal Brethren, who constantly
make use of these very Texts in writing against the Bishop of Rome, who
pretends to be St. Peter's Successor, and claims to be ecumenical Primate! Now
if the Romish Primacy is unlawful by virtue of these Texts, I believe any man
will be hard put to it to give me a tolerable Reason, why the English Prelacy
should not be as well accounted unlawful too; for I think it has been
sufficiently proved, that Presbyters, or Pastors, are the true Successors of
the Apostles: and therefore, since there was a perfect Equality among the
Apostles themselves, it follows there should be the like among ordinary
Ministers, who succeed them, and a Superiority of one Pastor over another must
be esteemed forbidden by our Savior in these Texts we are considering.

VERY groundless are the Consequences that our Author draws from the
Presbyterian Interpretation of our Savior's Words. This will not (as he
insinuates) destroy the power of Ministers over their Flocks: for, it is only
the Dominion of one Minister over another, that we suppose forbidden. Neither
will it destroy the power of Synods and Councils, if they keep within their
proper Limits, and assume not, what the inspired Apostle disclaimed, A Dominion
over the Faith of others.

3. HE observes, That Phrase in Luke, He that is greatest among you, plainly
implies a Superiority of Power: -- But I pray, why not rather an Eminency of
Gifts and Personal worth, as is attributed to those Apostles, of whom we read
They seemed to be Pillars. And how will he reconcile such a Construction, with
what he asserts elsewhere, viz. That all the Apostles were equal!

MOREOVER, He argues from the Example of CHRIST ministering to his Disciples,
which he proposes to their Imitation, That the Command of ministering takes not
away the Superiority and Power, since none will doubt, that Christ was Lord and
Superior. But there is no weight in this, if we consider the nature of the
Argument from CHRIST's Example; it being taken a Majori. When he urges his own
Example, in taking upon him the form of a Servant, and humbling himself to the
meanest Offices for his Disciples, in order to shame them out of their foolish
Ambition to appear in the Form of Princes, and to Lord it over one another; I
say, in thus urging his own Example. He only argues from the greater to the
less: As if he had said, If I, who am your supreme Lord, have stooped to
minister unto you, How much more should you my Disciples, who are
Fellow Servants under one Master, submit your selves one to another, and be
ashamed any of you to strive after Superiority and Pre-eminene over one
another! -- We may illustrate and confirm this Paraphrase, by our Savior's own
words elsewhere, (Joh. 13.14, 16.) If I then your Lord and Master have washed
your Feet, ye also ought to wash one another feet. -- The servant is not
greater than his Lord. --

BUT further,

4. HE argues from our Savior's Instituting Ministers of different Offices and
Degrees; first, Apostles, then the 70, etc. that it cannot be though it he condemned
a Disparity among Gospel Ministers. -- To this I answer, That here is either a
Fallacy, or a mean begging of the Question.

NO Body disputes an Imparity or Distinction of Order among Gospel- Officers;
though we deny it among Officers of the same Kind, and particularly among
Bishops, Pastors or Teachers.

HE argues from the 70, who have been long ago discharged; and Evidence
brought, that CHRIST left them not in Commission at his Ascension: or however,
that they were not a distinct Order from the Apostles.

BUT if none of the former Objections will bear, He has another in Store --

5. HE adds, If our Lord had designed to forbid all Disparity among the
Ministers of the Gospel; It Is like, he would rather have stated the Opposition
between Them, and the Ministers of Religion under the Mosaic Dispensation, and
not the Lords of the Gentiles.

BUT to this the Answer is easy. Our Savior chose this Comparison to meet more
fully with the carnal Notion, our Author just now mentioned, of an Earthly
Kingdom and Civil Dominion, which the Disciples (with the Jews) dreamt of; as
well as at the same time to reprove their Ambition of Superiority to one
another.

IT might be added, (as I find a Learned Man Anders. Def. pa. 84.
observing) that our Lord did not state the opposition 'twixt Them, and the
Jewish Priests, because the Disciples did not as yet think of any other
Church Government than what at present obtained among the Jews, and CHRIST did
not find them ripe for receiving any Intimation thereof; but though it it enough to
give them a general Rule to be observed by them afterward, which (when it was
to be put in practice) they would easily conceive the meaning of, after their
Understandings were opened, and all Things brought to their Remembrance by the
Holy Ghost. This Thought is suggested to us by Mr. Dodwel (that celebrated
Champion of the Church of England) The Apostles themselves (says he) do not
seem to have known any thing concerning the Government of the Church, till
their Separation from the Synagogues: They were by Birth JEWS, and zealous of
the Law and Customs of their Fathers, and if our Lord (before that) had
ravealed any thing to them which looked that way, that is, a Change of
Government, they had been in hazard of revolting from him, instead of obeying
him. And therefore our Lord dealt cautiously with them, and would not put new
wine into old Bottles, nor while their Minds were yet alienated, bear in new
Revelations upon them concerning Facts, from which They would have had an
Aversion. --

THUS I have (I hope) removed all that our Author has offered to invalidate our
Objection against Prelacy from our Savior's Rule in Mat. 20.25, 26. -- And have
vindicated the Parallel Places therewith.

YET I would take particular Notice of the last Text our Author mentions, that
is, 1 Pet. 5.2, 3. Feed the Flock of God, which is among you, taking the
oversight thereof (or acting as Bishops over it,) not by constraint, but
willingly, not for filthy Lucre, but of a ready mind: neither as being Lords
over God's Heritage, but being Ensamples to the Flock. He brings in this, as a
parallel place, but I do not remember at present, that I have known it to be
improved by any of our Persuation, to the same purpose with the other Texts: So
that it seems not fair and ingenuous Dealing in him to mention it as so
alleged. However since it falls in my way, I will observe upon it, with our
Author, That Lording over GOD's Heritage is here expressly discharged or
forbidden. From this Text it is plain that Gospel-Bishops are not to be Lording
Bishops; are not to exercise Princelike or Masterly Dominion over their Flocks.
CHRIST will have no such Government, either of Ministers over Ministers, or of
Ministers over their Flocks: The Apostle disclaimed it, 2 Cor. 1.24. Not for
that we have Dominion over your Faith, but are Helpers of your Joy. So, 1 Cor.
3 5. Who is Paul? And Who is Apollos? But Ministers, by whom ye believed! 2
Cor. 4.5. We preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the LORD, and our selves
your SERVANTS for Jesus sake. Hence (as Dr. Whitby observes Notes on Mat. 20.25.
) are they so often styled Ministers, and their Work a Ministry to the Saints:
And therefore, says he, All the Office any man can have in the Kingdom of
CHRIST, can only be a larger Ministry to others. The Office of Ministers is to
reveal the Will of CHRIST. He will allow them no such Power over others, as to
rule them by their own Will, in an arbitrary way; to set up themselves for
Lawgivers or Dictators, expecting that the People should entertain all their
Doctrines with an implicit Faith, and yield a blind Obedience to all their
Decrees and Canons. -- This is indeed Lording over GOD's Heritage. And would to
GOD there had been less of this Domineering Spirit in the Christian World! I am
sure there ought not to be (to use Dr. Whitby's Notes on Ephesians 4.4.
phrase) any such Magisterial Guides in the Church.

OUR Author consents to the Discharging of this Domineering in Ministers over
their Flocks; yet he well observes, The Pastor's Power and Authority over them,
is expressly asserted (Heb. 13.7, 17.) where they are called Rulers, and the
People commanded to obey them. Yea, He might have observed, That the same is
asserted in our Text, 1 Pet. 5.2. where the Presbyters are exhorted to feed the
Flock of God, taking the oversight thereof, etc. Here Is a plain Text for the
spiritual Jurisdiction and ruling Power of Presbyters. It Is couched in two
Words. FEED the Flock; (...); a word, which (as one Tong's Def. pa. 21.
observes) the Defenders of the Hierarchy contend, does not signify barely to
Feed, but to provide Food as the Governor of a Family, and it is often used for
Government, and sometimes for that of Princes: but however, it certainly
signifies the Office of a Pastor and is a good Argument that the Pastoral Power
is vested in Presbyters. The other word is (...), Taking the Oversight,
Performing the Episcopal Office, or doing the work of Bishops. So then
Episcopal Jurisdiction belongs to Presbyters. If this Text does not prove it, I
despair of of ever understanding the Meaning of Words. -- The Power of Orders
is with the like Clearness attributed to Presbyters in other places of
Scripture; notwithstanding what our Author has said to the contrary.

IN the 3d and last place, He comes to consider a Text brought for Presbyterian
Ordination, viz. That of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not the Gift --
which was given Thee -- with the Laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery. We
judge it evident from this Place, That Presbyters have a Right and Power to
ordain Presbyters. And I think, nothing he has said does at all disprove it. As
for Jerome's acknowlegement, that Ordination belongs, if not solely, yet
chiefly, to Bishops; this don't at all move me: because it is well known, that
whatever Jerome thought peculiar to Bishops, he thought to be so, rather by the
Custom of the Church, than by Divine Appointment Magis Consuetudine, quam
dispositionis Dominicae Veritate, etc. Hieron. in Epis. ad Tit. cap. 6.
. And what though Jerome, and several of the Latins, interpreted the Presbytery in
our Text, to be the Office of Presbyters, as Calvin has done since; yet
Chrysostom and other of the Greek Fathers (who must be supposed to understand
their own Language at least as well) do interpret it of the Consistory; not of
the Office of Presbyters. And so the word is always used elsewhere in the New
Testament. Instances of which you may find, Luke 22.66. Acts 22.5 etc. Where
the word cannot be understood of Office, but must intend the Consistory or
Community of Presbyters. And in the latter Text, it is rendered, The Estate of
the Elders, Ordo Seniorum, The Council of Presbyters. And indeed Critics tell
us, that the Presbyterate or Office of Presbyter is (...), and not (...) the
word used here, which they say always signifies the Consistory.

BUT our Author objects, that if we should grant that the Presbytery is to be
understood here, of the Meeting of Presbyters, yet it will not prove, that they
had full power and authority to ordain; for here (says he) at the most they did
but concur and assist in the ordination of Timothy, as is evident from 2 Timothy
1.6. Where the Apostle calling on him to stir up that Gift, says of it, which
is in Thee, by the Putting on of MY Hands.

TO which I answer; If we take this to refer to Timothy's Ordination (which is
questioned by many) although it appears from hence, that the Apostle laid on
hands, as well as the Assembly or Council of Presbyters, in the Ordination of
Timothy: yet that gives us no more grounds to suspect, That the Presbyters had
not full power and authority to ordain by themselves, than it does to suspect
whether the Apostle had power to ordain by himself. For the Apostle plainly
attributes as much to the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, in the
first Epistle, as he does to the putting on of his own hands, in the other;
which it would be very unreasonable for him to do, if the Presbytery had not
had the same power with himself in that Case. And if instead of the hands of
the Presbytery, in the first Epistle, it had been said, that Timothy was
ordained by the laying on of the hands of the BISHOP, (notwithstanding the
mention of the Apostle's hands also in the second Epistle,) I question not, but
our Author would have triumphed in it, and though it the Text decisive. Whereas now
he tells us, it is certain that Apostles did ordain without the Concurrence of
Presbyters; but he reads not that ever Presbyters ordained without an Apostle
or Bishop: And without a warrant or precedent to be found for it in Scripture,
he knows not how any can be fully persuaded in his own mind. I cannot tell
whether it will help our Author under his doubts, or perplex him still more, to
mention what some have observed, that the Scriptures are wholly silent about
ordination by a Bishop; that indeed they sometimes speak of ordination by the
Apostles, and the Apostles sometimes call themselves Elders or Presbyters; but
they read not that the Apostles are ever called Bishops in the New Testament;
or that the laying on of hands, either without an Apostle, or with one, is any
where ascribed to any person that is called a Bishop in the word of GOD. This
Observation may perhaps draw some weak persons into doubts about the validity
of Episcopal Ordination.

BUT the truth of the Case is, (as has been, I hope, abundantly proved, in the
preceding pages) that Bishops and Presbyters are one and the same Order by
Divine Institution; and that they succeed the Apostles in all their ordinary
Powers, of which that of Ordination is one; which is warrant enough for
Ordination by Presbyters, and the very same warrant which those have for it,
who are now, by Custom, and humane Constitutions, dignified and distinguished
with the Title of Bishops. But if our Author must have a precedent as well as a
warrant for Ordination by Presbyters, and such a Praecedent too as no Apostle
was concerned in; I might with as good reason insist upon his giving an
Instance of such an Ordination, by any person, or persons that are any where
called Bishops. However, if he will please to read Acts 13. begin* and then
consider what he himself understands by Prophets and Teachers, (page 36, 38.)
and what he takes to be the design of prayer and Imposition of hands (pa. 12.)
I hope he will find a Praecedent to his heart's desire, in which no Apostle,
(nor Diocesan Bishop) was otherwise than passively concerned.

I thought now to have drawn to a Close; but I must beg leave to take Notice
here of a Passage or two in our Author's CONCLUSION; wherein he seems to intend
something New of Argument.

Page 61. HE observes, We cannot find in all the New Testament the least
Insinuation, that after a short Time the Apostolical Power over ordinary
Pastors was to cease: which is the same Argument that Dr. Scot brings and
builds much upon; who speaking of the Apostolic Office says, Men must prove
it is repealed by the same Authority that established it, before they presume to
renounce it; for (says he) The Obligation of Divine Commands is dissolvable
only by Divine Countermands: so that though GOD had not declared he instituted it
for Perpetuity; yet till he declare the contrary, the Institution must bind and
prescribe to all Ages and Nations. But methinks, this admits of an easy Answer.
For what need is there of an express Repeal or formal Inhibition, where the
Reason of the Thing cease, as is apparently the Case before us! I think it
has been sufficiently proved, That the Apostolic Power spoken of, was founded
in peculiar and extraordinary Ends and Designs, respecting the Infancy of the
Gospel Dispensation; That there is nothing in the Nature and Reason of things
requiring the Continuance of it, nor the least Intimation given in Scripture,
to move us to think it any other than Temporary. But after all I have said, I
don't know whether our Author and his Brethren will be convinced. If not, I
wish they would go to School to an eminent Divine of their own Church, and a
great Ornament of it, though he was not in Communion with them in these Notions;
I mean the Learned Dr. Barrow, who freely declares his Judgment, That the
Apostleship, as such (strictly speaking) was personal and temporary, and in all
respects extraordinary; conferred in a special manner, designed for special
purposes, discharged by special aids, endowed with special privileges, as was
needful for the propagation of Christianity and founding of Churches: That the
Apostles did not pretend to communicate it: That they did indeed appoint
standing Pastors and Teachers in each Church, but not constitute Apostles: and
that (as says Bellarmine) Bishops have no true Apostolical Authority: That
this in its Nature and Design was not communicable to others, etc. Thus Dr.
Barrow in his Treatise of the Pope's Supremacy, page 73, etc. whose works are
published by Archbishop Tillotson; and so perhaps we have the Sentiments of
this eminent Doctor also here expressed.

Now further,

Page 62. OUR Author argues against the Presbyterian Principle, from its
dangerous Consequence to Religion, as if it opened a Gap to all Errors, and led
to the Subversion of the whole Gospel Ministry. -- This, I suppose, he might
think would give us an alarm, and make us look to our selves, and beware how we
attempt to shake Episcopacy, lest Presbytery should unhappily fall with it. But
I see no Cause for such a Fear. Besure I can see no ground to apprehend any
more danger in our affirming the Apostles Authority over Pastors to be wholly
and absolutely extraordinary, than in our Author's affirming their unlimited
Commission was so. Neither am I able to discern how it may any more, or on any
better grounds, be improved against the Office of a Presbyter: Nor indeed how
it can at all be so improved, with any show of Reason. For the Necessity of a
Gospel Ministry may be evinced by many Arguments of a moral Nature: The Ends
and Grounds of it being manifestly such as agree to all Ages of the Church to
the End of the World. And then there is the clearest Scripture Proof imaginable
that it was designed to be perpetual. We have the same Evidence for the
perpetual Duration of the Pastoral Office, as we have for its first
Institution: whereas no solid Arguments have as yet been brought to support the
Episcopal Claim, either from Reason or Scripture. So that the Presbyterians
Renouncing of this, cannot in the least tend to serve the Design of those that
are for entirely casting off a standing Ministry: and if such have nothing
better to say in Defense of their Principle, than what our Author has
suggested in their behalf, we see no occasion for much Fear from this Quarter.

AND now having finished what I designed, that is, having shown the Weakness of
our Author's supposed Demonstrations, and the Inconsistency of his Account with
the Scripture-account of these matters; I shall only add, by way of Conclusion,
some of his own Expostulations (with a little alteration, turned upon himself
and those of his persuasion) in the Spirit of meekness and Love; and calmly
inquire (with him) what is the ground of all that Noise and Clamor, Hatred and
Prejudice, raised against them who are of the principles, as to the Point of
Church Government, which I have been defending?

IT IS evident we own CHRIST JESUS to be sole Lord and Lawgiver to his Church;
that he has Power to establish Order and Government therein, and to institute
what Offices he pleases in his spiritual Kingdom. These are the Things we
earnestly contend for.

WE are fully persuaded, that He, who is of infinite Wisdom and Goodness, has
disposed all Affairs relating to the Government of his Church, in the most
excellent Method, to promote the Edification and Salvation of his People. And
therefore we cannot consent, that the Foolishness of Men should intermeddle and
alter the Constitutions of Divine Wisdom.

WE plainly find but one Order of Officers, the Eleven Apostles, left in the
Church by CHRIST himself at his Ascension into Heaven: and one Order more, the
seven Deacons, instituted afterward by the Apostles under the Conduct of the
Spirit of GOD. These two Orders are unquestionably of Divine Institution; but
more we cannot find to be so. We desire to preserve to each of these, all the
ordinary Powers they were entrusted with by Divine Appointment; and not to
thrust either of them into Employments, which the wisdom of GOD never allotted
to them. We are far from saying that either of these Offices was temporary. We
only affirm, that the former of them had some Powers at the beginning, which
were extraordinary and temporary, and expired with the Persons they were
committed to: but that as to their ordinary Powers, they have been, and shall
be succeeded, to the end of the World, by Presbyters or Bishops, whom we every
where find in Scripture to be one and the same Order.

AND now let any impartially judge, who do most truly assert Christ's Kingly
Office, and the Prerogatives of his Crown: WE, who plead for his Institution,
and closely adhere thereunto, and to the Offices which he has appointed in his
Church; without increasing their Number, or adding to, or taking any thing away
from, the ordinary Powers, he committed to either of them. Or THEY, who make
bold with his Institution, to alter it as they please: who have set up more
Offices in the Church, than were appointed by CHRIST and his Apostles; who call
upon those to preach and baptize, whose only Business, by Divine Appointment,
is to serve Tables: and who have cashiered Vid. Auth. page 40.
in a great measure CHRIST's prime Officers and Representatives, and the
Churches principal Guides, and have deprived the Church very much of the
Benefit of these Pledges of her Lord's Care and Kindness, the Pastors and
Teachers, which he gave her, when he ascended up to Heaven: who have entirely
wrested the Power of Government, and would take that of Ordination also, out of
the Hands of perhaps Ninety nine in an Hundred of Those to whom CHRIST himself
by his Commission gave them; and this only upon a false and groundless
Supposition, that the Apostles Authority over Pastors was one of their ordinary
Powers, and inherited by Bishops, as an Order of Men by Divine Right superior
to Presbyters, and succeeding to the Apostles. The Falseness of which I have
already showed; and shall now represent briefly of what dangerous Consequence
it is to Religion. -- To deny Presbyters the power of Ordination, is in effect
to deny the validity of all the Administrations of Those, who are not under the
Episcopal Form of Government; or who, if under it now, yet derive the
Succession of their Bishops from such as were ordained by Presbyters: which is
to number far the biggest part of the Protestant Churches, and in all
probability the Church of England it self, among Aliens from the Commonwealth
of Israel, and Strangers from the Covenants of Promise, who have no hope, and
are without CHRIST, and without GOD in the World! -- To allege Vid. Auth. page
39.
that Bishops are the true Successors to the Apostles, or else they have no
Successors at all; and that Presbyters succeed only to the Seventy, having no
Claim to the Commission given to the Apostles at our Lord's Ascension, or to
the Promise annexed; This surely is to make the Rule and Standard of our
Religion uncertain and unfixed, and opens a Gap to all Errors and Confusions.
To put Ecclesiastical Government into Lay-Hands, and To set up new Offices
paramount to those that CHRIST has appointed, and to alter any of his holy
Institutions, What intolerable Presumption is it? -- At this Rate and upon the
like Pretenses, Papists set up several more Officers, particularly Cardinals,
and paramount to all, the POPE, claiming Apostolical Power and Infallibility,
pretending to be CHRIST's Vicar, the great Monarch and visible Head of the
Church Catholic; from whom all other Ecclesiastical Ministers derive their
Authority; Necessary (say they) for the deciding of Controversies, for
preserving the Unity of the Church, and rendering the New Testament Church,
conformable to the Church of the Old Testament, which had a High Priest above
all.

NOW if any thus principled could but gain such an Ascendent over the Populace,
as to inspire them with this unhappy Notion, and thereby influence them as much
in favor of the Romish Papacy, as they have been for the English Prelacy; what
should then become of Order in the Church? GOD forbid! That any such wild
Caprice should ever sieze on a Protestant People! But I make the Supposition to
represent thereby the dangerous Consequence of that Principle, That there are
by Divine Appointment Bishops of a distinct and superior Order to Pastors and
Teachers; always necessary for the Good of the Church, and without which the
Apostles have no Successors at all, nor is any Church rightly constituted. For
it may be improved very much in favor of Popery; and I think can be defended
by no Arguments, but what unhappily make against the Protestant Reformation --.
And there may come an unhappy Juncture when the Papacy may come to be thought
as needful as Prelacy. For alas! If the Truth may be told, it is greatly to be
feared, that the power of Pastors, and the strict Discipline commonly used in
Presbyterial Churches, is become intolerable to too many carnal Libertines,
whose Language is that, Come, let us break their Bonds asunder, and cast away
their Cords from us: and that not a few, who with an uncharitable and bitter
Zeal contend for the Episcopal Pre eminence, have too much of the Roman Leaven
in them; are too sincere Friends to the Papal Supremacy, and only want a
favorable Opportunity to vent their Minds, and throw off the Mask: Or at least
they may be supposed in no little danger of contracting a Reverence and
Affection to it; since this furious Zeal for a difference of Order among
Gospel- Ministers, seems to tend by a natural Efficacy to beget favorable
Thoughts of a Distinction and Subordination among Bishops likewise, and to
prepare the Mind to embrace the Notion of a supreme Bishop; and so to pave the
way for their Return to a humble Submission to the Pontificate of Rome.

HOW will they be able to answer to GOD and their own Consciences for it? Who
have combined together to propagate Doctrines so unscriptural in themselves; so
uncharitable and unmerciful in their Consequences, and in their tendency, so
fatal to that Order settled by CHRIST in his Church; and who have left no Stone
unturned in their restless Endeavors, to bring the sacred Ministry of
Presbyterian Bishops and Pastors into perpetual Contempt, and have
industriously set themselves to oppose and frustrate all their Gospel
Administrations; and not only to alienate the minds of poor simple People from
those their Rightful Governors and Pastors; but with Noise and Clamor, and
bitter Invectives have too often endeavored to inspire them with the highest
Rage and Fury to commit the most horrid Outrages on their sacred Persons, as
good Service done to GOD; and all upon no other account, but their firm
adherence unto the Institutions of JESUS CHRIST.

I will now only add my sincere wishes, in the very Terms of our Author's own
concluding Collect: -- Father, forgive them; they know not what they do: Lord,
lay not this Sin to their Charge; But mercifully open their Eyes: that they may
see the Evil of their Ways, and may be converted to the Way of Truth and
Godliness, Peace and Charity, Unity and Order; and be eternally, saved, through
Jesus Christ our Lord.

THUS, Sir, I have in some measure performed what I undertook at your Request;
have made my Remarks upon the most material Passages in the Book you sent me;
and I suppose nothing that might be likely to lead unwary Readers into any
considerable Mistakes, has escaped a sufficient Notice. The Discourse has
swelled a great deal beyond my Expectations: and yet I have waved much of what
might have been said under several Heads: and have past over diverse Things in
our Author, not unexceptionable, as being of lesser Consequence. Though I must
confess, I have been now and then almost insensibly drawn to debate some more
minute Particulars, than I though it at first to trouble you with any Reflections
upon; and have set too great a Task to your Patience; but I trust your Candor
will overlook and excuse this, and all other Imperfections of my Performance. I
have almost wholly confined my self to the Defensive part, or at least not
meddl'd with any thing (that I remember) but what our Author has unavoidably
led me into; because I was not willing to give any unnecessary Provocation. For
which Reason also, I have hardly at all allowed my self to address the
Passions, or to write in the declamatory Strain at least not so much as some
might perhaps reasonably have expected on this occasion; especially since our
Author had set me an Example, by mixing so much of Harangue with his Arguings:
for I am sensible it is no easy matter to write in this Method, without saying
such Things as some would think, however true and just, yet grievous to be
born, and touching too near. I have studied to preserve a due Moderation, and
Temper; which the Laws of Civility and Christianity oblige to: and endeavored
that nothing might fall from me, that could give offense to any, but such as
will be offended at whatever thwarts their own Opinion; of which Sort of
Persons there are (it may be) too many in all Parties. It had been easy to have
been tart and severe in several places, where it may be there was sufficient
provocation given: but I am none of those that love to be always dealing in
Satyr. And if any Expressions have happened to slip from me, that may seem a
little too warm or harsh, I shall be sorry for it.

WHAT Occasion there may be for making any thing of this Nature public, you
are in better Circumstances to judge than I. For, as I have written at your
Desire; so my Reasons for it are owing very much to your Information. I
therefore leave the Matter wholly to your Prudence: assuring you, that as I had
rather my self suffer, than that the Truth should for want of a suitable
Defense: So on the other hand, I am unwilling to expose my self needlessly to
the Ill Will and Abuses, that may possibly arise, if you publish to the World
these Papers, which come from,

SIR, Your Sincere Friend, etc.
December. 30. 1723.
Advertisement.
THE Reader is desired carefully to observe the following Corrections and
Additions, and to put them in the Margin with his Pen; several of them being
material.

PAge 4. Line 4. from the bottom: For, Had, read Have. p. 5. l. ^. For Thereby,
read Tho'ro'ly. p. 7. line last but one. After etc. Add -- Unless it may be
though it contained in the Preface to the Book of Ordination, where there is a Hint
that seems to carry such an Aspect; but I believe will appear too slender a
Foundation, to build much upon, in the present Case: especially if we remember
Who were the chief Compilers of that Book; and what Reason we have (from what
has been already observed) to conclude, They were of the Judgment, That Priests
and Bishops are by GOD's Law one and the same, and that the Episcopal Dignity
is rather by Custom, than by Divine Institution. -- Page 8. line. 12. After
Point, put this Mark. And at the bottom of the Page, Vid. Calamy's Abridg. Vol.
1. p. 637. etc. -- l. 25 r. To be the. p. 11 l. 15. For as well as, R. And. p.
12. l. last but 3. Read, Who (He observes some suppose) p. 14. l. 26. For
Prating, r. Preaching. p. 16. l. 18. For are, r. were. l. 26. For Have not, r.
were not. p. 18. l. 32. For necessary Qualifications of an Apostle, r.
Necessary Requisites in that Case. p. 21. l. 8. R. In a Commission. p. 22. l.
8. R. ^o soon as. p. 23. l. 8 from bot. R. But to expire. p. 24. l. 11. Blot
out, other. p. 25. l. 24. Blot out, Universal. p. 26. l. 1. Read, Of the
ordinary Power. l. 13. For Or, R. And. p. 29. l. 9. Blot out, Were. l. 31. For
Disting. r. Divide. p. 35. l. 26. For Universal Inspection, R. Inspection over
Pastors. p. 38. l. last, dele They. p. 44. l. 19. Blot out, His. p. 48. l. 20.
R. and because. l. 27, For Furthermore r. Particularly. p. 52. l. 36. R. that
the. p. 62. l. 2. R. Ministerial Parity, from several Texts, in which it is
commanded. p. 65. l. 2. R. Savior. p. 67. l. 16. R. Deny Imparity.

Lesser Escapes are left to the Candor of the Intelligent Reader.


