A Brief Discourse CONCERNING Regular SINGING, Showing from the Scriptures, The
Necessity And Incumbency thereof IN THE Worship of GOD.

1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done Decently, and in Order.

Psalm. 33.3. Sing unto the Lord a New Song, Play (or Sing) Skilfully with a
loud noise.

Res Ipsa Loquiter.

BOSTON, N. England, Printed by B. Green, Jun. for John Eliot, at his Shop at
the South End of the Town. 1725.

PREFACE. To the Reverend Mr. Peter Thacher, Moderator, and the honorable
Council of Churches, Patrons of Regular Singing, this Book is humbly Dedicated.
THE great Obstruction that Regular Singing has of late met with from a great
Number of Persons, who being Ignorant of the Use and Excellency thereof,
Vehemently decry it, and Violently Oppose it; (from whence has ensued great
Contention and Discord among us;) has Occasioned the following Discourse; which
is only the fruit of or few spare Hours. Since the Writing hereof, I have seen
several Tracts about Singing, viz The Accompilshed Singer; the Sweat Psalmist
of Israel; and, A Discourse about the Reason^bleness of Regular Singing: which
I had never seen before These being made by Men of great Learning, may seem to
render the ensuing Discourse useless; but though it be vastly inferior to them,
yet being on a something different Subject, and showing the Necessity of
Regular Singing in the Worship of GOD: I know not but it ma^^ (...) of some use
to the Unlearned (for whom it it is designed;) For Moon light is serviceable to
those that are benighted. If it may be of service to inlighten those that through
Ignorance decry all Rule, and applaud Singing by Rote as the good Old Way; and
if it may help to Reconcile Differing Minds; and for the future prevent
Disorder in the Worship of GOD; GOD will herein be glorified, and my end will
be obtained: and I shall Rejoice, who desire to be for ever found a Friend to
Peace and Truth, and a Mourner for the contrary.

Jan. 23. 1722, 3.
A Brief Discourse Concerning REGULAR SINGING.
I. CHRON. XV. 22. the latter clause: He Instructed about the Song because he
was Skillful.


THAT Singing of Psalms is a part of Divine Worship, to be performed by the
People of GOD, in their Public Assemblies, not Including singing in Private.
where they meet to Worship Him, is a truth Generally Received; and the
Practice of the Reformed Churches makes it fully Evident. That this is not only
a Modern Practice, but was in use among the People of GOD in Elder Ages, is as
evident, the Worship of GOD both in the time of the Old Testament Dispensation,
and the New was not performed without it. In this Chapter we have an Account of
a Grear Solemnity in the time of the Old Testament; It was that of David's
bringing the Ark of GOD from the House of Obed Edom, to the Place he had
Prepared for it And among other things there mentioned, we are told in the 16
verse, that David spoke to the Chief of the Levites, to appoint their Brethren
to be the Singers, etc. And in the Succeeding verses, we have an Account of the
Manner of that Performance. In the verse wherein the Text is, it is said, And
Ch^naniah the Chief of the Levites was for Song. Then follow the Words to be
Insisted on, viz He Instructed about the Song because he was Skillful. In the
Words we may observe, First, Something Employed, which is, 1st. That Psalmody is
a part of Divine Worship, which ought to be performed Regularly Instruction and
Skill Imply Rule. 2ly That it ought to be practiced in Public Conventions for
the Worship of GOD. The Exercise the Text Relates to was in such a one.
Secondly, Something expressed, wherein observe First, A Person Instructing
about the Song, who had the oversight thereof, viz. Chenaniah. Secondly. The
Reason why he had the oversight thereof, viz Because he was Skillful. From
Hence arises this Doctrinal Truth.

DOCT. That to the Right or Regular Performance of the Duty of Singing Psalms,
in the Public Worship of GOD, Good Skill is Necessary, and Required in (at
least some of) them that Perform it

I say [some of them] because we find here an Instructor, whence it follows
that some were Instructed; All are not capable to lead herein. It cannot be
Expected that whole Congregations should be Skillful; but it is Necessary that
there be some and such a Number (at least) as may Govern the Psalmody, and be a
Sufficient Guide to the Unskillful that the Service may be Regular, and
becoming so Sacred an Exercise, and a pleasing Offering to the GOD of order,
who requires as in 1 Cor. 14. ult. Let all things be done in order. The Levites
in a peculiar manner ought to be well skilled herein.

THERE are Two Propositions contained in the Doctrine.

First. THAT Singing of Psalms as a part of the. ^lick Worship of GOD, is of
Divine Institution, and a Duty ^ncumbent on all the People of GOD. Secondly.
THAT It ought to be Performed Regularly, or with Skill.
First THAT singing of Psalms as a part of the Public Worship of GOD, is of
Divine Institution, and a Duty Incumbent on all the People of GOD.

THE Truth of this Proposition is abundantly Evident from the Scriptures.
Especially the Psalms of David, which were D^ctated by the Spirit of GOD.
Indiced and Penned for the use of the Church of GOD in all Ages, to be S^ng in
the Praises of GOD; And some whereof were Composed in Particular for the
Sabbath Day, sco Psalm. 92. Title: And in the 100. Psalm. we are Directed and
Commanded to Enter God's House with praise. And David (the sweet Psalmist of
Israel, as he is Styled in the 2 Samuel 23.1.) not only Indicted the Psalms (most
of 'em) and Sung 'em for his own Comfort and Sollace; but also Published them
for the Service of GOD in the Church; And withal appointed the Singers and the
Tunes fitting them, see 1 Chronicles 16 4 5 as the Titles of Sundry Psalms make
Manifest. And King Hezekiah, that good King and great Reformer Practiced
agreeably, as may be seen in 2 Chronicles 29.30 And this was not only an Old
Testament Service but also Commanded and Practiced in the New, see Ephesians. 5.19.
Singing and making Melody in your Hearts to the Lord. And Col. 3.16. Singing to
the Lord etc And our SAVIOR with his Disciples Practiced it, as in Matt.
26.30. and Mark 14.26. And when they had sung an Hymn, they went forth, etc.
But this is a truth so Generally Received, and Practiced by Christians of all
Den^minations, (almost) that I need not insist thereon. I therefore proceed to
the Second Proposition which I mainly intend which is.

PROP. the Second. THAT Singing of Psalms ought to be Performed Regularly, or
with Skill

FOR Illustration and Comfirmation of this Proposition, I shall Inquire.

First. WHAT is here meant by Skill, or what it is to Sing with Skill?
Secondly. WHY this Skill is Necessary in Psalmody.
First. WHAT are we here to understand by Skill, or what it is to Sing with
Skill?

Ans. BY Skill in General is meant, Good Knowledge (from good Instruction and
Experience) in any Art or Science: a good understanding of the Rules thereof.
Skill Implies Rule and there is no Art without it. He that is acquainted with
the Rules of any Art and by Practice h^s gained Experience may be said to have
Skill, see Exodus 31.3. and Chap. 35.31. 1 Chronicles 22.15. and Chap. 28.21. But
more Particularly, And

First Negatively, THE Skill in Singing is not here to be understood of the
Grace that is another Subject.
Required to be in Exercise in the Performance thereof; for those that are most
Unskillful in the Vecal part may Exercise Grace therein: and the Gracious part
appertains to those Saints that were to be Instructed, as well as to the
Instructor, and might be better Performed by 'em. Nor could he that Instructed
others furnish 'em with that Grace in the least measure. Those that by Natural
Impediments are Rendered incapable of Performing that Duty or Exercise with
Skill, may yet do it with Grace, and be accepted of GOD therein: and are not
faulty when they do their best as those are, that have Power and Means to
attain Skill, but Neglect to Improve them.

BUT Secondly and Affirmatively, BY Skill here is intended.

FIRST. KNOWLEDGE of, and Ability to Manage the Tunes, in which the Psalms are
to be Sung according to the Rules thereof; so as there may be Concord, Harmony
and good Melody therein, Psalm. 33.3. Play Skillfully, or do well in Playing, or
rather Singing i. e. Make good Music or Melody, and in this the Skill of
Chenaniah was Employed. Singing Implies Harmony and Melody. Every Pleasant
Noise or Voice is not Singing in this sense; Ephesians. 5.19 Making Melody etc. Isa.
51.3. Thanksgiving and the Voice of Melody, by which is meant Harmony, and a
Sweet Musical utterence of the Holy Song. In this Knowledge is more
Particularly Employed or Included.

First. AN Acquaintance with the Rules of Music, the different Keys and the
various Tones, Notes or sounds therein; the Chords and Discords, how to Rise
and Fall Gradually, or pass from Chord to Chord in an agreeable manner, how to
keep Time, and to make proper Closes, and the like.

Secondly. A Musical Ear, or an Ability to distinguish between the different
Sounds in Music: A Quick Perception of what is Disagreeable, Jarring and
Immusical. This the Unskilful discern not, and therefore it is that they are so
in Love with, what they Ignorantly call the Good Old Way, and even Idolize it,
while they Reject and Decry the Real Good Old Way of Rule and Order. But of
this more hereafter.

Thirdly. A Tuneable Voice, which may be Managed in an Agreeable manner, by the
Direction of the Notes, to the making good Music or Melody. This to some is in
a manner Natural; while others acquire it with great Pains and Diligence in
Practice, but is Necessary to that Skill we are speaking of. As in any Craft,
though a Man may have the Knowledge of all the parts and particulars thereof; yet
Except he can use his Hands Ingeniously to do the Work of it, he cannot be said
to be Skillful therein: So Knowledge of the Rules and the Notes and Characters
of Music will not render a Man Skilful, Except he can Govern his Voice to make
agreeable Sounds. Good Knowledge of Rules with an agreeable Dexterity to
Practice them makes an Artist, and such as have attained these may be said to
be Skilful indeed.

SECONDLY. BY Skill here may be intended, an Excellency therein, and a
Superior Degree of Knowledge thereabout. In the Sacred Music there were
Levites appointed for several Duties, and some to Ply and set them forward and
to be over the Rest. 1 Chronicles. 15.21. and these ^^^e such as Excelled in the Art
of Singing, to whom Sundry Psalms were Directed and Entitled, that by their
care and direction they might be Sung Excellently unto the End. There were in
Israel some Levites Singers that attended thereunto, and had no other charge;
(see 1 Chronicles. 9.33.) as Aynsworth on Psalm 4. has noted. Though Skill be
neceessary in all, in some Degree yet not alike in all; those that appoint the
Tunes, and lead therein should be capable to suit them to the matter of the
Psalms Sung, whither of Prayer, Confession. Lamentation or Praise; some of the
Tunes are more Cheerful, and suited to Psalms of Praise; others more
Melancholy, and suited to Psalms of Prayer, Confession, etc. which should be
Regarded. This is manifest by the Titles See Aynsworth on the Titles of these
Psalms.
of the Psalms (many of 'em) in some of which the Tunes were Directed, or at
least the Particular Keys on which they were Composed, as in Psalm 46. Title; a
Song upon Alamoth which signifies Virgins, and this Psalm seems to be sung by
the Virgins at Solomon's Wedding, and on the Treble also, because shrill like a
Virgins Voice, And Psalm. 9. Title, To the Chief Musician upon Muth-Labben; this
as Referred to the Music seems to be a Tune on the Middle Key, viz the Medius,
or Tenor, or Counter. Tenor, and Psalm 12. Title -- upon Sheminith, or upon the
Eight, or as the Chaldee Expounds it, the Eight Stringed Harp, or after the
Eight, this is Referred to the Bass, being Grave, Solid etc. David when he
fetched home GOD's Ark, appointed some Levites with Harps upon the Eight, for
the Honor and Service of GOD, as in the verse before the Text. These things
point out to us, that Rules were observed, Skill used, and a great Degree
thereof Necessary to an agreeable Singing of the Praises of GOD. And here by
the way it is worthy our Notice, That the Levites were Leaders in this Holy
Exercise, and these (many of 'em) Excelled in Skill and Instructed others;
which shows that the Ministers of the Gospel ought to be Skillful herein, and
should Instruct and lead their People; which might be preventive of the
Contentions and Differences that arise thereabout. I come now to the Second
Enquiry which is.

Secondly. WHY is such Skill Necessary in Psalmody? or why ought it to (...)
Regular, and Performed with Skill?

Ans. RULE and Skill are Necessary, First, In Regard to Order and Decency. This
of its own Nature brings some circumstantial Dignity and Comeliness to Divine
Actions, as a Table and Cloth at the Communion, a Pulpit and Cloth or Cushion
to a Sermon a clean and bright Basin for the Water at Baptism, and the like.
This is Required in all the parts of GOD's Worshiip. As there are particular
Rules given in the Scriptures in Cases that Require them, so there are Rules
that are more General: some things in the Worship of GOD are Directed, (as to
the Substance thereof) by particular Rules, but the Circumstances attending 'em
are Directed only by General Rules; such as the Rules of observing of Order,
Decency and the like and these are left to Discretion, see 1 Cor. 14.40. Let
all things be done Decently, and in Order. Now without Rule and Skill, it is
Impossible there should be either Decency or Order, as will appear under the
next Particular, which has a near Relation with this viz. That Rule and Skill
are Necessary.

Secondly. TO Prevent Discord and Confusion, in the Exercise of Singing. These
are contrary to GOD and to all Religion, as in 1 Cor. 14 33. God is not the
Author of Confusion, etc. It is for Order's sake that the Psalms are put into
Meter. The Hebrew Poe^^e was doubtless accommodated to their way of Singing,
and agreeable to Rule and Art: and our Psalms are therefore Metrically
Translated, that they might be adapted to the Rules of Psalmody. The Lines are
measured by Syllables, which Requires so many particular Sounds, directed by
the Notes both as to their Length, and their Musical Rising and Falling. Now
when Men are void of Skill herein, and unacquainted with the Rules thereof, it
is Impossible they should agree to make one Sound, or an even Sound; such an one
as is discribed and was practiced in 2 Chronicles 5 13. which is made by Rising and
Falling of the Voice coincidently and in Union altogether, and duly keeping
time, in ^^olation of Voice by which means a whole Congregation may be ^^^d to
make but one Sound. Where there is no Rule, Men's Fancies (by which they are
governed) are various; some affect a Quavering Flourish on one Note, and others
upon another which (because they are Ignorant of true Music or Melody) they
account a Grace to the Tune; and while some affect a quicker Motion, others
affect a slower, and draw^ out their Notes beyond all Reason, hence in
Congregations ensue Jarrs and Discords, which make the Singing (rather)
resemble Howling: And their drawing our the Notes to such a length is the
occasion of their Tittering (...) and down, as if the Tunes were all composed
of Quavers, and make 'em resemble Tunes to Dance to. Further, The want of Rule
and Skill is the reason why every Congregation almost has a different way of
Singing. So that when Persons are occasionally abroad, and joy with a
Neighboring Congregation in the Worship of GOD, they are o^ (...) incapable of
Singing with 'em. Thus it is often at Lectures, and especially at Ordinations,
where People of many Congregations Meet together, their ways of Singing are so
different, that it is not easy to know what Tune is Sung, and in Reality there
is none: It Is rather Jumble and Confusion, Although they all, doubtless, intend
some Tune or other, and it may be, the same yet they ^iffer almost as much as
(...) every one Sang a different Tune. This I have often observed all which is
owing to the want of Knowledge of the Rules of Singing and of Skill to improve
and ^^^ge 'em. Some indeed may imagine that Singing by (...) random, is as
Harmonious as Singing by Ru^e, but this proceeds from their Ignorance. For as
(...) in all Arts and S^^ences whatsoever, when Persons ^ave Learned the Rules,
and by practice gained Experience, they see with new Eyes, as it were, and
things that before seemed to 'em to be Acure and well done, now appear to be
only Bungle, so it is in this case. As Persons by practice in any Craft, obtain
a Curious eye, and also become Handy and Expert in doing the work thereof; so
by practice in Singing they obtain a Monce^ Ear, and perceive the difference of
Sound, and find, that (...) be only Jars and Diseord, which before they
^^^cemed good Music or Melody, and are made capable of Striking any Note
agreeable to its Peace and Sound. They no^^ find, that Rule excels Rote and
Random, as far as light excels darkness. As in Writing or Printing, without the
Stops or Pauses the sense would be destroyed, and the true meaning not
understood, and the most Rational Discourse appear Nonsense; so, without the
use of Notes in Psalmody there will be only Jars and Discord: Hence appears the
Necessity of Rule and Skill. But.

Thirdly THEY are Necessary in order to Harmony and Melody In order to these,
Skill and Rule are highly Necessary, because these are not Adjuncts, but of the
Essence of Singing: where these are wanting, there is no Singing, and these
require great Skill, Playfords Introduction.
. "Music is an Art Divine and Excellent, by which a true Concordance of Sounds
or Harmony is produced. There is a vast Mystery therein. It is (as Augustine
intimates) the gift of GOD himself, and (...) Representation of the sweet
Consent and Harmony, which His Wisdom has made in the Creation, and also in
the Administration of the World. It is founded even in Nature it self; for
there are but Seven distinct Sounds in Music (or in Nature) which are repeated
through the several Keys, as they stand in the Scale of Music, every Eighth
being exactly of the same Kind, in Nature, and Coincidence of Sound. There are
likewise As to the Parts of Music; but as to the Nature thereof, there are but
Two, Flat and Sharp.
Three distinct Keys, or Septenaries, in which all the Parts of Music, be they
never so many are contained; so that if more be added, it is but the
Multiplication of one of these; These are mainly founded in, or chiefly
composed from the Trial of the greater Concords of Notes, in the Three
Septenaries, agreeing in one Harmony; so that one and the same Tune placed in
these three, (or more) Keys may vary (i. e.) by falling in one Key, and at the
same time Standing, or Rising in the other, yet there will be an exact Concord
and Harmony, perfectly void of all Jars and Discord, if agreeably placed
according to the Rules of Descant or Counterpoint in Music: and being Sung
thus, in Consort, there will be extraordinary good Music, and a charming
Melody, delightful to the Ear, and to the Heart very Ravishing. As there are
but Seven Sounds in Nature constituted, so I doubt not, but the Art of
Modulation, or Managing of the Voice, so as to produce a true Concordance of
Sounds, was not from Satan, but from the GOD of Nature; and why might not the
Inspired Psalmists at first have it of Divine Inspiration? This is certainly
admirably adapted to the Praises of GOD. As there is a glorious Harmony in all
his works, so in this part of Divine Worship, agreeably performed, it is showed
forth. We Read, Psalm. 145.10. All thy works shall praise thee, O Lord; and thy
Saints shall bless thee. By the works of GOD Praising Him, may be Meant, that
the glorious Harmony there is in all the works of Creation and Providence,
abundantly manifest and show forth the Glory of the Divine Wisdom; Power and
Goodness. And by the Saints Blessing Him may be Meant, their Singing his
Praises on that account (for we bless GOD when we Praise Him) in which,
agreeably performed, there is a Concordance of Sounds, and a Harmony produced,
which Naturally tends to Raise the Spirit in Devotion. and how agreeably, while
we Meditate the Harmony that there is in the works of GOD, have we a Harmony or
Melody in our Devotion or Religious Acknowledgment of GOD on that Account? And
indeed it is the Harmony (...) Melody of Singing, that makes it differ from
Speaking (...) Reading the Psalms; and this makes the Exercise Resemble Heaven
it self. See, Rev. 5.9. with other places of Scripture of like Import. In this
Mystery of Musical Harmony there is, as Mr. Sunpson has observed, a Resemblance
and Emblem of the Supreme and Incomprehensible Trinity. His words are, All
Sounds that can possibly be joined at once together in Musical Concordance, are
still but the Reiterated Harmony in Three (for to the Three greater Concords,
all the other in each Septenary are Referrible) a significant Emblem of that
Supreme and Incomprehensible Trinity, [Three in One] Governing and Disposing
the whole Machine of the World, with all it is Included parts, in a perfect
Harmony. And in the Harmony of Sounds, there is some great and hidd^ Mystery
above what has been yet discovered fully, by the most Philosophic and
Inquisitive Minds, that have been most Industriously searching into the most
Artful, Wis^ and Skilful operations of the Creator, in the works of N^^ace.
That this Harmony and Melody springing from Ar^s Vibrations of the Air, with
Specifications in their ^o^^^, and with Coalitions and Impressions, to the
Surprise and As^^^^^ ^ilent of Philosophy; is to be endeavored in our Puis^^^^
Singing of Psalms, arid is Required in the Worship of GOD, is evident from the
fore quoted Text, Psalm, 33.3. and Isdi. 51.3. But I pass to the fourth and last
Reason which is,

Fourthly, RULE and Skill are Necessary to make the Service Reasonable. GOD
Requires of the Reasonable Creature, a Reasonable Service, Romans 12.1. [which is
your Reasonable Service,] by which is intended such a worship of GOD, as is
most agreeable to Reason, and most agreeable to so excellent and pure a Deity,
by the Verdict and Sencence of Right Reason, Now in Singing without Rule there
cannot be such ^n exercise of Reason, as in a Regular performance thereof. In
performing any Action, or Duty according to Rule, there is an exercise of
Reason in the very Act and Manner of Performance; and the Person so acting can
render a Reason, why he so performs it. As GOD is Infinite in Understanding, so
He has given us Understanding, in a measure agreeable to out Natures and
Beings, and requires us to exercise Reason in all things; and as He has made
RULE the measure of our Duty, even in the Superficial Part thereof, so He
requires us to Conform thereunto; and herein there is a Necessary. Exercise of
Reason. GOD requires us to show but selves Men Isai. 46.8. Show your selves
Men. That is by ^^ing Reasonably: But while we in any thing act at Random, or
de all by Rote, It looks rather like Instinct, or uncertain Experiment, by
which bruit Creatures act, than like Ratic^al Paul says, in 1 Cor. 4.15. I
will Sing in the Spirit, and with Understanding; therefore Reasonably. Thus
Singing appears to be a Reasonable Service, and cannot be agreeably performed,
without Rule and Skill.

THUS having spoken briefly to the Doctrinal part; before I pass to the
designed brief Application, I shall endea^^ur to Answer a few Objections
against Regular Singing.

Object. 1. SOME have objected, That in the Church of Israel An^ ^^nental Mu^ck
was in use, which Required Skill and Art, But in our Vocal Singing there is not
the like Necessity.

TO which I Answer,

1. IT IS Easier by practice to Order and Govern an Instrument, according to the
Notes, than it is for the most of Man to Modulate their Voices; which makes
Skill in Vo^^^. Necessary As in Instrumental Music. But,

2. IN the Church of Israel, Vocal Music was in use, as well as Instrumental,
else to what End, were the Psalm Metrically composed, which are Divine Songs:
The Title of one being, To the chies Musician, a Psalm or Song. And others of
the like Import: And they were Sung by David, and others of the People of GOD.
And Instruments could not Articulate the Sounds of the words of the Psalmist;
in 2 Chronicles. 29.30. it is said, They praised God, in the words of David and
Asaph. Hence that Objection appears invalid.

Object. 2. IF the Tunes (as the Psalms are) were of Divine Inspiration, or had
we the Hebrew Tunes; then it were Reasonable to conform to them and endeavor
after Skill; but since we have not those, we have no Rule at all: nor do we see
Rule necessary.

Answ. THOUGH we have not the Notes of the Hebrew Psalm Tunes, (which might for
ought I know be divinely Inspired) (as some of the Titles of the Psalms seem to
Intimate) Or, the Prophets and Sacred Musicians that directed them, were at
least assisted, with the Divine Concourse and Influence, Exodus 31.2, 3. Yet
this is no just Bar to our way of Regular Singing, or just Objection against
our Tunes, or the Skill of our Composers, or Masters of Music. If the Hebrew
Tunes had been Necessary for us, they would, no doubt have been preserved, with
the Psalms for our use; but the Hebrew Metres differ from the Metres of other
Languages, which makes it inconvenient for us to use their Tunes, if we had
them; which those who are Skilled in the Languages, do well know. And when the
Psalms were first Translated into English Meter, fit to be Sung, Persons of
Skill in Music, Composed Tunes to fit the Version; some of which Tunes are
affixed to our Psalm books, and the Singing of them according to the Notes in
our Psalmbooks, is by some commonly called, The New Way of Singing. And though
the Hebrew Tunes have not been Preserved, as we know of; yet the Skill, and
general Rules of Singing, have doubtless been Retained (as well as of other
Arts and Sciences, Logic. Philosophy, and the like) from Age to Age, 'till
now: several of which are plainly discerned in the Scriptures, (as in the Book
of Jeb, and some of the prophets, and more in the New. Testament:) And this is
a sufficient Warrant for us to improve our Skill in composing and using Tunes
for Psalms, which comes under the general Rule, and Command of Singing them
with Decency and Order.

Obj. 3. THIS way of Singing, seems to be derived from the French, and looks
like Popery; and it seems to be Introductory there unto.

Ans. 1. SUPPOSE the Popish party to use it that is nothing to us, nor it is a
just bar to our use of it; if we must forbear the use of any thing in the
Worship of GOD, on this score, we must forbear preaching or Believing the
Doctrine of the Trinity, and the Hypostatical Union, with many other Important
Doctrines, of Christianity, which they Believe, Preach, and pretend to Practice
agreeable to, but do not.

2. THE thing is not true in Fact: for there is no English, or other Popish
Church, that Sing Mass, as we by our Notes Sing Psalms. And it may as well be
Objected, that all Singing, is Popery because they Sing Mass, and the like,
though in a Vastly different way of Singing: Singing of Psalms Regularly, in
Grave, Solemn Tunes, was from GOD, before Popery appeared.

3. WHILE these People, that thus object, pretend a mighty fear of Popery, they
Really embrace it, in one of its Main Tenets. It Is a Popish Tenet, that
Ignorance is the Mother of Devotion; and this they greatly Affect, and wilfully
continue in; decrying all Rule and Learning, and due Means of Knowledge;
affecting only a blind Ruleless Performance of Devotion. I mean, as to the
Vocal part of it, in which yet, Exactness, and Rule and Skill are Required, as
has been proved.

Obj. 4. THE fourth Objection I take Notice of in some, is against the Tone
used in Singing by Rule; and the particular Syllables Mi Fa Sol La, used in
Learning; some calling it a Negro Tone, others ^c squeaking Tone, unbeeoming
the Worship of GOD, and the Syllables, Fa Sol La Mi, are the great obstacles to
them.

Ans. THIS is a most Foolish Objection, not worthy the Answering; but since
it is made I shall briesly Answer it thus: Whether it be a Negro Tone or no, I
am sure it is an English Tone, and a Solemn Musical Tone; a Clear, Smooth, Even
Preasant Tone; and by their pretending [Mi, Sol, Fa, La,] to be unbecoming the
Worship of GOD, they must mean either that those Syllables are in that form
Sung in the Worship of GOD, or else that the Singing of Tunes only, is a part
of GOD's Worship. If they mean ^^e first, it is what is not intended or used in
the Worship of GOD. If they mean the second, it shows their great Ignorance,
that Imagine a Tune only, a part which is only an Adjunct of Divine Worship.
But that those Syllables as pronounced, are not unbecoming the Worshippers of
GOD, appears in that among other Syllables the Psalms in English do abound with
them see Psalm, 27.10. and Psalm. 89.26. to 30. also Psalm. 42.5.3. to 11. and in
many more.
as in the words, My Farther, -- My Soul. -- My Law, -- which are the same
Sound with Mi Fa Mi Sol Mi La. But to proceed.

Obj. 5. and last, I shall take notice of is this, The Apostle directs us, as
in Ephesians. 5.19. and Col. 3.16. To make Melody in our Hearts to the Lord, and to
Sing with Grace in our Hearts, etc. and this is Sufficient whether we Regard
Rule or no, as to the External Part.

Ans. THE Apostles Intention here is not to Abrogate that Skill or Rule, which
Skill is supposed or Implied in the words Singing and Melody; but to show that
there withal it was Necessary to Exercise Grace in order to Divine acceptance.
And I may say here about Singing with Grace and Skill as our Savior said in
another case, These ought ye to have done, and not leave the other undone.

I Now Proceed to the APPLICATION.

AND the First use is of Information. Hence we learn ^st, That it is the Duty of
all Christians to Labor after the Attainment of Good Skill, in Psalmody, or
Regular Singing. If Singing of Psalms be a Duty Incumbent on all Persons
Capable thereof, and Skill be Required in the Performance of it, as has been
showed; then it Necessarily follows, it is the Duty of all to Labor after the
obtainment of it, and to Pray to GOD for it. Where a Duty is Imposed and
Enjoined and Rules given therefore, the Persons on whom the Duty is Incumbent,
ought to acquaint themselves with the Rules thereof, or else they cannot
perform the Duty in an Agreeable manner, and to Acceptance. We are Required to
Sing the Praises of GOD, see Psalm. 96.1, 2. and Col. 3.16. and to do it with
Skill or by Rule as the Text Implies, and as in Psalm. 33.3 Play (or Sing)
Skillfully, that is agreeable to Rule, which Skill Implies; hence it appears to
be the Duty of all to Labor after Skill and to Pray for it.

2ly. HENCE it appears that such as oppose Regular Singing are greatly to
blame; these discover great Ignorance and Folly, and are the Authors of Great
Disorder and Confusion in the Worship of GOD; which is greatly displeasing to
Him. To do thus is to Debase the Rational Nature, and to Act below the Powers
and Faculties with which GOD has Endowed us. If Skill and Rule be decryed in
one thing, they may as well be so in another, 'till all Learning and Religion
be Justled out, and all Rules and Precepts about the Worship of GOD (as much as
in us lies) made void; and so a People favored with the Word and Laws of GOD,
and Rules how to Serve and Glorify Him, shall become like the Blindest and most
brutish of the Heathen and those that know not GOD.

3ly. HENCE we see that when a People have deviated from, or have lost the
Rules of Psalmody, it is their Duty to become sensible of their Error, and to
Reform. Reformation is always, and in all cases a Duty, where there has been an
Apostasy or Deviation from the Rules by Scripture required to be observed, Jer.
3.6, to 22. Isa. 55, 7. In matters of great weight and moment a more earnest
endeavor is required, and proportionably some though a less, in those that are
less. see 2 Chronicles 29, 30, 31. Chapters, and 1 Cor. 14.26, to 34 But in as much
as Reformation usually meets with great Obstruction, either from the Ignorance,
or Willfulness and Incorrigibleness of Men, in an Evil way, there ought to be
abundance of Courage, Prudence and Caution in them that attempt it. But here a
Question naturally arises, which is;

Quest. WHO should be Leaders in such a Reformation?

IN Answer to which I would say, That as in all other things that need
Reformation, so in the present case the Heads or Rulers of a People should lead
and go before others. In the Chapter wherein the Text is, the Psalmody was
appointed by the King, (and there is the like Reason in Reformation) and as I
conceive 'twas appointed by David not only as the Psalmist of Israel Inspired;
but also as their Chief Ruler. The Persons to have the oversight thereof were
the Levites. It is easy here to make the Application: but as to the Practical
part, the Younger sort of Men under such a Superior conduct, seem to be most
fit to lead next. Their Voices are most agreeable, and Inclinations stronger
then Old Men's. And by the Scriptures it seems as if they were most Improved.
Lam. 5.14. The Elders have ceased from the gate, the Young Men from their
Music. Which could not be meant of Wanton Songs, but Sacred Music, otherwise
it was not matter of Lamentation that they ceased. And as Old Men, in whom the
Daughters of Music are brought low, as in Eccle. 12 4. seem less capable, so
they seem to be more Indisposed thereunto, as good Old Barzillai said to King
David 2 Samuel (...). 35. Can I hear any more the Voice of Singing-Men and
Singing Women? These also were such as were Employed in Singing the Songs of
Sion, see Ezra. 2.65. and Neb. 7.67.

But I Proceed to the Second Use which is.

USE 2. Of LAMENTATION.

THAT Music which in it self is Concord, Harmony, Melody, Sweetness, Charming
even to As Histories give an Account.
Irrational Creatures; Chears the Spirits of Men, and tends to Raise them in
Devotion, and in the Praises of GOD, and was Instituted by GOD as a means of
Divine Worship, which is a Terror to 1 Samuel 16 23.
Evil Spirits, the Delight of the Holy Angels, and will be the Everlasting
Employment of those Seraphims, and the Gloryfied Saints, should be an Occasion
of Strife, Debate, Discord, Contention, Quarrelling and all manner of Disorder.
That Men, the only Creatures in the Lower Creation, that are Accomplished with
Reason and apt Organs to Praise GOD with should Improve them so to Dishonor
Him; and that in stead of an Angelick Temper in Men, which they are capable of,
and is Required of them, and Especially in this Matter; there should be Rather
a Cynick Disposition, and an Improvement of such Noble Organs to Ba^k, Snarl
a^, and Bite one another, that in Stead of one Heart and one Voice in the
Praises of our Glorious Creator, and Sovereign, Preserver, and Redeemer and
most Bountiful Benefactor; there should be only Jangle and Discord, and
Slurring and Reviling one another; that those Tongues with which we should
Bless GOD, and speak kindly to, and of one another, should be Employed to Curse
Men, even our Neighbors and Brethren; this is, and shall be for a Lamentation.
Now, although in the present Differences and Contentions about the Mode or Vocal
Part of Psalmody, we must Conclude, and may believe, there is the busy hand of
Satan Instigating People thereto, thereby to promote every other evil work; yet
we must acknowledge the hand of GOD herein; and whether we are not thus lest to
contend about the Superficial or Exterior Part, as a Just Punishment of our
Formality in the Duty of Singing is what calls for our Serious Consideration.
And whether it be not a sad Sign that GOD is withdrawing His Presence and Glory
from us, may also be considered. And whether, while we thus contend about the
Vocal part of the Duty, there be not a Total Neglect of the Spiritual and
Gracious parts and so instead of Glorifying GOD by offering Praise, as in Psalm
50. ult. we do not by our pretended and only formal Praising of HIM greatly
provoke Him to Anger?

USE 3. IS of Caution to those who are Improving fit Opportunities and means to
Learn the Rules and Skill of Psalmody, that they, while they delight in the
Voice of Singing, do not forget that which should be their main end, as in all
other things, as 1 Cor. 10.31. so especially in this, viz. The Glory of GOD:
while you please your Selves with the Voice of Melody, Charming Concord,
Harmony and Sweetness of Music, you be not like the Organs in whose Pipes,
through the help of Artificial Lungs, the Wind makes a Pleasant Sound; and being
well Managed by a Skillful Hand, there is a Pleasing and Delightful Harmony,
which yet is a Lifeless Instrument, and it is Pipes are made of the Basest of
Metals. There is certainly something which you propound as your end in
Learning to Sing, if it be not to make you the more capable in an agreeable
manner, to Sing the Praises of GOD, it is a wrong end. A Pleasant and Strong
Voice with Ability to Modulate the same, is the Gift of GOD, and a Tallent that
should be Improved to the Glory of his Name. And though the Singing of Tunes is
no part of Divine Worship, yet the Singing of Psalms in good Tunes will if
Rightly Performed. Promote true Devotion, and the Persons thus Employed, are
Advantaged to a Devout Meditation on the Glorious Perfections of GOD, and the
Glorious Harmony that there is in his Work of Creation and Providence; the
Concordance of Sounds is a Representation of the rest of his Glorious Works,
while the parts of Music contained in or chiefly founded on a Trias of Notes
of the greater Concords in Music of a threefold Key, agreeing as one, are
Significant Emblems of the Glorious and Incomprehensible Trinity. There is
doubtless something of Zeal in your Hearts, while you engage in these
Exercises; O let it not with your Voice Evaporate in the Air! but while your
Voices are lifted up and seem even to Reach the Clouds, let your Thoughts and
Affections (...) could higher; and like the Glorious Seraphims Flame wi^^^
(...) to GOD, and with desires of obtaining and Admittance into that Holy
Plaint, where these Glorious Seraphims. with the Glorified Saints Join, in one
Caelestial Quire, to sing Everlasting Hallelujah's, saying as in Rev. (...) 3.
Blessing, Honor and Glory and Power be unto him that sits on the Throne,
and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

THE Last Use is of Exhortation to all Persons to Endeavor a Devout
performance of the Duty of Singing of Psalms. As Skill is necessary to an
agreeable performance of the Exterior or Vocal part, so Grace is much more
necessary to a Right performance of the Interior Spiritual part. It was the
complaint of GOD concerning his People of Old, Isa. 29.13. This People draw
nigh me with the Mouth and Honor me with the Lip, but their Hearts are far
from me. It is to be feared, that as to a great Number of People among us (and
especially in this time of Temptation) it may be said of their Singing, as the
Phylos^pher said of the little Singing Bird, called the Nightingale, viz. that
it was Vox et piaeteria inh^l. Voice and nothing else; their Throats like the
Pipes of the Organs, being filled with Wind make a P^^sant Sound, but their
Hearts are no ways engaged in the Praises of GOD Where it is thus it must needs
be very displeasing to Him. Man's Heart is the object of GOD's Eye in an
especial manner; and in all our Religious Performances, the Devotion of the
Heart is Expected and Recalled: and in our Psalmody when we make a Joyful
Noise, and Sing aloud, it must be unto the LORD, as in Psalm 81.1. and Psalm.
95.1. and 100.1. And when we Sing Skillfully, and so do well in Singing, it
must, still be to the LORD, see Psalm. 33.3. Ephesians. 5.19. and Col. 3.16. GOD is
the only Object of all Religious Worship, and Requires, as in John 4.24. That
we worship him in Spirit and in truth. But when we give Him only the Service of
the Lip, Throat or Voice, it is only a Mock Service and unworthy so Glorious and
Jealous a GOD, it is an high Affront to His Holy Majesty, and instend of an
Offering or Service well pleasing to him, and whereby he may be Glorified, as
Psalm. 10. ^lt. It will highly provoke him to Anger, and ex. pose ^i ^b his
Wrath and Indignation. As the Cries or Prayed of Israel, because Hypocritical,
and not to GOD, are calse^^ ^^^ling, as in Hosea 7.14. so may our Singing be
terr^^ (...) when our Hearts are not engaged in the Praises of GOD. Wherefore
it highly concerns all Persons to Endeavor the Performance of this Duty in a
Devour and Gracious manner: Singing (...) the Lord with Grace in their Hearts,
and so making Melody to Him. Whatever our Thoughts are as to the Mode or Vocal
part, whether the Old, or the New way (as they are called) be most pleasing to
us, it would be our Wisdom and a Manifestation of our Christianity-to deny our
Selves, and our own obstinate wills, which are apparently the chief cause of
Contention in these things, and Condescend (at least) so far one to the other,
as to keep come alike i. e. to begin and end the lines all together, which if
we did, there would not in most of the Tunes commonly Sung, be so wide a
difference as is by some Imagined, many of the lines being near alike; if we
all Sincerely Endeavor to Exercise Grace in Singing, and to perform the Vocal
pa^^on the best manner we could, our Services would be accepted of GOD. And I
doubt not but Regular Singing would soon have a better Relish with the most of
our People, and be complied with, and so our differences would end in a good
and lasting union, and our Jars and Discords in a sweet and delightful Concord
and Harmony. So let it be! Amen. 1 Timothy 1.17. READER.

Here Is Wholesome Food; Praise GOD; Fall to it;
And Pray the Heavenly Donour Bless the Cook.
What the Musician was the Operator.
Believe't; This Book deserves (...) Imprimatur.
Dorch. April 16. 1723. J. Danforth. N. Eells.


