A DEFENSE Of a Book lately reprinted at Boston, ENTITLED, A Modest Proof of
the Order, etc. In a REPLY to a Book entitled, Sober Remarks on the Modest
Proof, etc. With some Strictures on J. Dickinson's Defense of Presbyterian
Ordination, by way of POSTSCRIPT.

ALSO ANIMADVERSIONS UPON Two Pamphlets, The one entitled, An Essay upon that
Paradox, Infallibility may sometimes mistake. The other, The ruling and
ordaining Power of Congregational Bishops or Presbyters defended, etc.

A DEFENSE Of a Book lately reprinted at Boston, ENTITLED, A MODEST PROOF OF
THE Order and Government Settled by Christ and his Apostles IN THE CHURCH IN A
REPLY To a BOOK entitled, Sober Remarks on the Modest Proof, etc. In a LETTER
to a Friend.

Number. 16.10. -- And seek ye the Priesthood also. BOSTON: Printed by T. Fleet,
1724.

A Defense, etc.
SIR,
I HAVE read the Sober Remarks on the Modest Proof, etc. whereon you ask my
Opinion: And since all your Desires have with me the force of Commands, I now
transmit to you my Thoughts and Observations on that Performance.

IF that Author took the Title for his Text, I find him following a Method too
common, in leaving it as soon as mentioned, and all along keeping at a Distance
from it far and wide; and that therefore the Adjective is by no means
applicable to the Animadversions.

HE was doubtless in this misled by a vulgar Error, which often runs through
the Conduct of Humane Life, the not observing the Distinction founded in
Religion, [2 Cor. 7.1.] between Sins of the Flesh, and Sins of the Spirit; in
such as do not consider, that Envy and Malice, Heretical Opinions and
Inclinations, for Schism and Sedition, are as heinous Provocations in the sight
of Heaven, as the fruition of the forbidden Pleasures of the Animal Life. Hence
some with a seeming Solemnity worship God at Meeting, but Mammon in the Heart
and Closet; abhor Idols, yet love Sacrilege; forbear Swearing, but strongly
incline to Lie and Overreach; and observe the Saturday Evening with a Jewish
nicety, and on the succeeding, fall into all the Works of the Gentiles, that
can be contained within the Veil of Hypocrisy.

THIS Observation might be run through every Precept of the Second Table, though
I shall for my Purpose only instance in that which relates to Riot and Excess;
where we may take Notice, that besides drinking to a Debauch, there is another
kind of Intemperance flowing from the bilious Ferment of the Passions, and the
Fumes of Enthusiasm and a heared Fancy.

HAD the Author of the Remarks duly observed this, he could never have prefixed
so improper an Epithet as that of Sober unto them. I don't indeed know that he
is a (...) in the grosser Meaning of the Word, yet I think there is no
Proposition in Euclid more demonstrable, than that the Guilt of Intemperance
taken in the last Sense is chargeable upon him. And to show you that all the
Symptoms and Disorders of that Vice are applicable to him, and that by
Consequence his Remarks could not be Sober ones, I shall represent him unto
you, as appearing really to be under all the Signatures of the Crime of
Intemperance.

WE may discern a Person to be under this Disorder by these Marks and Signs.

First, THAT his Head is full of delirious Visions and Delusions imagining
chimerical Existences.

Secondly, THAT he is so tenacious of his Opinions, that he is full Proof
against Conviction by the clearest Evidence, but thinks himself privileged to
affirm or deny at his pleasure, without any other Satisfaction than his Word.

Thirdly, THAT he is very inconsistent in his Talk, and apt to contradict
himself, as well as others.

Fourthly, THAT he is soon angry, and often very quarrelsome, even without
Provocation.

And,

NOW it these Spots are remarkably discernable, in the Remarker's Countenance,
I hope is will be granted, that these Remarks will not be allowed the
Performance of a Person under a sober Character: And that they evidently appear
in him, will be clear and manifest by observing.

First, THAT his Head seems giddilly to swim (as if there was a Vortex in his
Brain) with delirious Visions and delusive Phantoms, his Fancy representing to
him Images that are mere Chimeras, which never had nor ever could have any real
Existence; thus by a sudden Whirl, Saints and Sinners instantly change Places
in his vertiginous Imagination, and by the nimble Powers of Transformation,
(...), by his own Confession a worthy good (...), is changed into an Heretic,
and (...) the Heretic in the Opinion of the Ancients, becomes an Orthodox
Divine.

THUS the Visionary paints on his Fancy, Cardinal Wolsey, Archbishop Cranmer,
and Superintendant Spotswood, in a Geneva Dress, holding forth to Independent
Congregations: For this is the certain Consequence of his affirming, that both
Papists and Protestants were against Episcopacy at the Reformation; whereas it
is undisputable Fact, that this was the Government of the Church in England,
since the planting of Christianity in it to this very Day, excepting the
Anarchy from 1641, to 1660. and that the Church was reformed by Bishops, who
afterward became Martyrs under their Episcopal Characters; who must in the
Remarker's Judgment been Fools, or Knaves, or both, to have practiced even unto
Death, so contrary to the Principles he dreams they had.

AND as for Scotland, there is nothing clearer in History, than that the Church
at and after the Reformation there, was governed by Superintendants, whose
Office was so far from being an Anti-prelatical Creation, as the Remarker
fondly imagines, that it differed in nothing from Episcopacy but the Name; and
it is not to be disputed, but that the Reformation not only in Britain, but in
all Monarchical Governments, was carried on by Praelates; as in Denmark and
Sweden, and indeed every where, save in a few Republican States, such as
Holland and Geneva, where their Church Government was framed to their Plebean
Schemes. No Man whose Head was not strangely turned, would imagine the Fathers
on the Remarker's Side, who all with one Breath condemn his Opinions. Though with
equal Manners and Assurance that he provokes unto their Judgment, he dispises
it, and contemns the Authority of Antiquity, for this very good Reason, because
it testifies against him. In fine, who but a silly Dreamer could have feigned
himself an Apostle, or rather some body of a superior Character, in giving and
taking away Commissions at his pleasure, and which have no Foundation but in
Fancy, to be sure not in the sacred Pages. It is with difficulty that he will
allow Stephen to be a Preacher, though I think we have a good long Sermon of his
Acts 7. But as to Philip, the Instance is so flagrant of his preaching and
baptizing, that there was no other way to condemn the Episcopal Deacon
following that Practice, than by framing a new Commission for Philip: For he
would not allow the Powers for his Practice were contained in his Diaconate;
however we call upon him and his Brethren for a sight of an authentic Copy of
that Commission upon Divine Record, which because we are sure they cannot
produce, we cannot but firmly adhere to our Opinion, that the second Commission
is an imaginary Fiction. And since so good Men would not be found in these
Ministerial Functions without a Mission, we must conclude that they discharged
them in the virtue of that which they received, at the imposition of the
Apostles Hands, Acts 6.6. But this will be anon more fully considered; this
Instance with the foregoing being only here adduced, to discover the Disorders
the Remarker was under, having his Head full of delireous Visions and
Delusions, imagining chimerical Existences, and therefore could not with any
Truth or Honesty prefix the Epithet of Sober to his Remarks. Nor could he, if
we consider

Secondly, THAT he is so tenacious of his Opinions, that he is full Proof
against Conviction by the clearest Evidence, but thinks himself privileged to
affirm or deny at his pleasure, without any other Satisfaction than his Word.

TO prove this Charge upon him, I shall make it appear, that he has without any
Ground denied the Distinction of the three Orders of New Testament Ministers,
with their proper Functions and Administrations, as retained in the Church of
England; and without any Proof introduced Officers and Offices into the Gospel
Ministry, not founded in Scripture, and Strangers to the Church of Christ, in
its best and purest Times. Now for the evincing of this Charge, wherein lies
the Merits of the Cause, and whereon the Hinge of the whole Controversy turns,
I shall proceed gradually, and make it good in every one of those Orders.

FIRST then, to begin with the lowest, that of Deacons, we must consider that
Office in the Reason of its Institution, and the Exercise of it; it is plain
they were appointed to take some Charge and Care from off the Apostle in the
(...) Offices of the Ministry, as their Name imports, part whereof was to
distribute the Elements at the Celebration of the Lord's Supper, as well as to
supervise the Churches Treasury, and supply the Poor; but these Services do not
seem to include all that was implied in their designation to this Office, and
that for these two Reasons: First. For these only there seems no necessity for
so great a Solemnity as an Ordination by the Apostolic Hands. And secondly,
Because we find some of them actually employed in more sacred Functions, for
which they doubtless then received their Power and Orders. For we don't find
they received any for those sacred Ministrations at any other Time: Now since
they could not preach without being sent, and that it don't appear they were
sent at any Time but this we are upon, it must be granted, that either they now
received their Powers for the ministerial Functions of Preaching and Baptizing,
or that they acted without any, and were intruders on the sacred Function. But
this is impious and absurd, therefore they were now ordained to those Parts of
the Ministry, they afterward discharged with so much Diligence and Success.
And now let us view what those Parts were, in the exercise whereof we find any
of them; for from their Practice, we may well conclude that of all the rest.
There are but two of those Deacons, whose Acts are more particularly taken
notice of by the sacred Historian, One of then, as has been already hinted, we
find has left us an excellent Sermon Acts 7. and the other we know preached so
successfully, as to gain many Converts, whom he also baptized, Acts 8. And
besides these, we don't find any other Act. of their Ministration in holy
Things: For though they assisted indeed at the Lord's Table, yet we don't find
that ever they consecrated the Elements, or ever were vested with the Powers of
Absolution or Censures, but rather the contrary is implied Acts 8.14, 18. For
that after the Samaritans were baptized by Philip the Deacon, the Apostles
Peter and John went from Jerusalem to Samaria to confirm the new Converts.

NOW let us see how the Church of England Deacon comes up to the Institution
and the Exercise of the Office; after he is recommended, tried, approved and
found meet for it, he is solemnly ordained by laying on of Hands, invested with
Power to serve Tables, provide for the Poor, to preach and to baptize, but not
to administer the Lord's Supper; as that implies the Act of Consecration, nor
remit or retain Sins, in our Savior's Sense of those Words, but as for the
dissinting Deacon, if ever, he is very rarely ordained, and to be sure never to
the Offices of preaching and baptizing; and pray now who comes nearest to the
primitive Institution, and the manifest Acts of that Office? the Church of
England, which desires to obey Divine Commands, and be guided in her Conduct by
Divine Examples, and in this Instance comes as near the Pattern as is possible
for Imitation, or those who sacrilegiously mutilate this Office, and deprive it
of the best and most useful Parts thereof: And therefore who that was sober and
in his Senses, could have expressed his Virulence against the preaching Deacon,
as the Remarker has done, to say no worse in Language like his Cause, and
therefore evident it is upon the whole and must be owned, that those Remarks on
this the lowest Office in the Evangelical Ministry, betray a Mind full of
Confusion and Disorder, and therefore that they could never be the neat Produce
of a sober Man, nor they ever justly claim an Epithet they have no Title to.
From hence let us proceed,

Secondly, TO the next Order, that of Presbyters, and see if there be any more
Marks of Sobriety on the Remarks on their Order than on the former; and here I
think it will be obvious to every Eye, that the further he goes, the further he
staggers from the Truth, until he falls into gross Absurdities, from whence he
cannot recover himself, from these Reflections.

THE Author of the Modest Proof had alleged with a great deal of Reason, that
Presbyters were Successors to the Seventy Disciples, who by many Marks of
Imparity by him there adduced, and not yet disproved, were in an Office
inferior in Dignity and Power unto the Apostolate. Now he seems extremely
concerned to expunge this Notion, and blots several Pages, to blot (...) the
Seventy's Commission; and so fiercely contends against the Perpetuity of it,
that upon the Supposition of its continuing, he would grant Presbyters to be
their proper Successors. Now upon this Concession we will join Issue with him
and give up the Cause, if we don't make appear, that the Seventy's Commission
continued after the Time he affirms it determined; and that the Grounds he goes
upon are absurd, suppositious and contrary to Fact and the Reason of Things, he
affirms but without Proof, that their Commission is not now in being, inasmuch
as it expired with themselves, or rather at their Return unto our Lord, and
that it was limited only to Judea. Now if these Premises be not true, the
Conclusion that he would draw from them must needs be false; and that there is
no Truth in either of those Pretenses, will be clear as Light, from the
following Considerations on each of them.

First, THAT that Commission having never been formally revoked, and the
Reasons whereon it was granted continuing, it must also continue as long as
they do.

Secondly, SO far it is from being true, that it was revoked at their Return,
that they were then furnished with new Powers for the Exercise of those
Functions it authorized them unto.

First, I say the Seventy's Commission having never been formally revoked, and
the Reasons whereon it was granted continuing, it must also continue as long as
they do. There is a profound Silence in the Gospel about the Revocation of that
Commission, not the least Inuendo that glances that way, no Account of the
Time, Place, and Person, when, where, or by whom it was taken from them, and
they discharged from that Service; and therefore he must have a hardy Front,
that would affirm this Commission to have been formally revoked. And that it
was not virtually so, is still, if possible, more evident, for the Reasons of
its first Institution continuing, it must be of the same Duration with them;
Now these Reasons we have Luke 10.2. The greatness of the Harvest, and the
fewness of the Laborers, and since the Harvest will continue until the last
Conflagration, so must the Laborers, and by Consequence their Commission for
it. The Remarker therefore must be guilty of this absurd Supposition, That the
Harvest is over, since the Laborers Commission to work therein, is according
to him, annulled; unless he will still more absurdly suppose, that there is a
Harvest and no Laborers in it. But since both these Suppositions are false in
Fact, and blasphemous Imputations on the Wisdom of its Master; and that
therefore the Harvest will continue to the last period of Time, so must the
Laborers Work, and their Commission for it, run in a Line parallel to that
Duration. Add to this,

Secondly, THAT it is so far from being true that the Seventy's Commission was
revoked at their return to our Lord; that they were then by him furnished with
new Powers for the exercise of though Functions it authorized them unto. Of this
we have an incontestible Proof Luke 1^.18, 19. where we are told, that even
after their return from their first Progress, that our Lord said unto them, I
(...) Satan as Lightning fall from Heaven, behold I give unto you Power to
(...) on Serpents and Scorpions, and over all the power of the Enemy, and (...)
shall by any means hurt you. I demand therefore to what purpose were these
extraordinary Powers conferred, if not to assist them in the Work of their
Ministry? for as private Christians they were useless to them, having no direct
tendency to promote Faith and Repentance in themselves: The Remarker must
therefore either go upon this blasphemous Supposition, that our Lord did in
vain bestow upon them these Powers, and for no wise End or Use, or confess to
the Truth that they were endowed with them, for the better enabling of them,
successfully to discharge the Functions contained in the Commission they had
received from him; the Conversion of the World to the Faith and
Acknowledgements of their Master, by their Doctrines, attested with Miracles.
Nor will it follow here, that because Miracles are ceased, therefore their
Commission has likewise: For they are two different Things, Commission or
Authority whereby to act, and Extraordinary Gifts whereby to make their acts
Successful, and persuade the World that their Commission was Divine; and
therefore it must be granted, that the Reason of the one ceasing, and the other
continuing, though the one has ceased, the other must continue.

UPON the whole, now I appeal to the common Sense of Mankind, if the Remarker
can be said to be in his Senses, when he affirms, that the Seventy's Commission
is expired, or that such a Remark can be called Sober, any more than the
Second, That their Commission was limited to Judeae. It is owned, that in their
first Mission, they were to go unto Places whither our Lord himself would come,
Luke 10.1. But even then not exclusively of others; it is no where said to
these Places only, or as it was once to the Apostles, That they should not turn
into the way of the Gentiles, Matthew. 10.5. Nothing of all this, much less is
there any restraint laid on them after their return: For as their Work
concerned Mankind in general, so must needs their Commission be of universal
Extent; and not a Word to be found that confines them to any Place or Nation.
But because the Remarker can find no such Limitation to the Circumcision in the
Seventy's Commission, his Eyes reel back to the Apostles first Commission,
Matthew. 10.5. and would argue it from thence, but how unfairly. They were two
distinct Commissions, and therefore it is all precarious Reasoning from one to
the other. Nor will it follow upon the Supposition, that the Seventy were to go
out unto the Gentiles, and that the Apostles before they went to them, were to
make the first Offers of Salvation unto the Jews, that therefore the Seventy's
Commission was more honorable than the Apostles, any more than that the
Remarker, who, for ought I know, may be a Native of Britain, and now upon his
pretended Ministry in a far distant Country, is more honorable, than that
public Scandal and avowed Enemy to Christianity, that denier and derider of
the Divinity of the Son of God, his Brother Pierce, whose Books and Quotations
he is so fond of. No, the Apostles had the greatest Honor in beginning their
Ministry amongst the once peculiar People of God, before they made any tender
thereof to those who were Aliens from that Commonwealth. But since he knows it
is denied him, that the Seventy were superior to the Apostles, either in Power
or Character, he is resolved to bring them upon a level; and since he cannot
find, he will make, 82 Apostles, by a new Creation of Seventy at a Time; and
rather than fail in this attempt, impiously charge the Inspiration Luke 10.1.
with an Omission, and the Translators, for not enlisting a Word that was not in
the Original, and in spite of both, add the Word Apostle, that it may run, as
it does in his Head, and be read Seventy Apostles. But what would the Remarker
get by it, if we should allow his fictitious Reading, and false Supposition to
be a true one? nothing surely but the ruin of his Cause, by subverting that
Foundation whereupon he designed to erect it, the expiration, of the Seventy's
Commission. For now by his own Confession, and Pleading too, it must be
perpetual: For he has freely and frequently allowed, that the Apostles
Commission, with regard to their ordinary Ministrations in the Word and
Sacraments, is perpetual, and to continue to the end of the World: Now if these
Seventy be Apostles, as he would have us believe, their Commission according to
him must continue to the end of the World, and then what has he been disputing
about all this while, and contending that the Seventy's Commission is expired;
and yet very consistently with himself, that it is not expired, but is to
continue to the end of Time, because they were Apostles. Or we may observe him
Reasoning after this ridiculous manner, as they were Seventy Disciples, their
Commission is spent and ceased, but as they were Seventy Apostles, it will last
as long as the World. There is no eviting such Consequences as there will
naturally flow from this new Hypothesis, which I will allow him the Honor to
be the Author and Inventor of, and all his own; and as such I have only argued
upon it, for I don't believe the Seventy to be a whit the more Apostles, for
his dubbing them, nor that any of them ascended to that superior Order, but as
they were advanced by the immediate call of Heaven, or mediately by a
Consecration to the Apostolate. Add, that it was the Opinion of the primitive
Church, as it is of the best part of the present, that the Helpers and
Fellow Laborers of the Apostles, of whom we have frequent Mention in the Acts
and Epistles, such as Joseph called Barsabas, Mark, Luke, Apollos, Rufus,
Niger, and Matthias and Barnabas, before they were made Apostles, were of the
Number of the Seventy. Who would know the Truth of this, may consult Eusebius.
Lib. 1. Cap. 12.

AND now to sum up the Evidence of this Charge against the Remarker upon this
second Head, in his denying the continuance of the Seventy's Commission, but to
make amends in translating them to the Apostolate, and all upon his bare Word
without any Proof.

IT has, been made appear, that the Seventy's Commission never was formally
revoked; and that the Reasons whereon it was granted continuing, it must also
continue as long as they do, and that again it was so far from being true that
it was revoked at their return, that they were furnished with new Powers for
the exercise of those Functions it authorized them to; and that moreover it
does not appear that their Commission was confined to Judea, especially after
their first return, and their new Endowments, and that he is guilty of the
greatest Profanity in his impious Attempts to add unto the Scripture, and
create Apostles at his pleasure. It must be granted, that the Remarks are so
far from being a sober Performance, that they are an undeniable Evidence of an
intractable Person, incapable of Conviction, and resolved to maintain
Paradoxes, I therefore appeal to the World that this is his Case, and in
consequence thereof, that he ought to allow Presbyters to be Successors to the
Seventy. since he seemed to lay the Stress of the Dispute, upon the Point of
their Commission being perpetual, and not limited to the Circumcision.

BUT if he will further wrangle and say, that if we will not grant him that the
Seventy's Commission did determine at their return to our Lord; yet we cannot
deny but that it expired with themselves, for since according to us, they were
mere Presbyters, they could not ordain others, and transmit their Succession;
and their Master had left the World but no Power to perpetuate that Order. Yet
however he may like it, we will deny him the Favor even of that Supposition,
and affirm and prove it too, that the Succession to the Seventy was continued
in the Presbyters, who were ordained to that Office by the Apostles, and the
Bishops their Successors, and will be to the end of the World. For the Reason
of their Commission continuing beyond their Lives, even to the end of the
Harvest, their Commission must also be supposed to do the same, and must
actually therefore have been continued, and contained, and confirmed, in the
last Commission given to the Apostles, Matthew. 28.19, 20. John 20.21, 22, 23.
the higher Order and Power including the two lower Orders and their Powers. For
the Remarker confesses this to be the Evangelical Charter for the Gospel
Ministry. And by this also the Apostles first Commission was not only confirmed
and continued, but enlarged with regard to Place, and powers of Government and
Ordination. For Mr. Remarker acknowledges that this last Commission must be
thus interpreted, to include Government and Ordination, as well as the Ministry
in the Word and Sacraments, Pages 19 and 25.

IF it be asked, What are the Offices of those Presbyters we here contend for?
I answer, besides preaching and baptizing, the administering the Sacrament of
the Lord's Supper, and absolving Penitents.

IF it be further demanded, By what Divine Warrant they are vested with such
Offices? I answer, That we are willing to have our Practice regulated by the
primitive Pattern, as we find it in the Scriptures. And

First, THERE we don't find that ever meet Deacons did consecrate the Sacrament
of the Lord's Supper, or had the Powers of Absolution. But,

Secondly, WE find that the Brethren that were settled Presbyters at Corinth,
did administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, 1 Cor. 11. (For, there was
there in Fact, an Administration of that Sacrament, and by Consequence
sufficient Powers for it; the Reprehensions there concerning only the irregular
Approaches of the Communicants) and did absolve the incestuous Person upon his
Repentance, 2 Cor. 2 7. For who could absolve, but those who had laid him under
Censures by Excommunication? 1 Cor. 5.12. And therefore,

Thirdly, THAT it must be Presbyters who can affix both Seals of the Covenant
to the Pardon, that can absolve Penitents, especially in Cases of Relapses
after Baptism, and that can affix one of them; all which Powers are conferred
upon and conveyed unto them by the imposition of Episcopal Hands. This will be
made evident upon my bringing home upon him the forementioned Charge, with
respect

Thirdly, TO the highest and most venerable Order of Christ's Church Officers,
the Apostolate, and to which must needs succeed the Episcopate, taken in its
proper present Sense The Remarker has here indeed perplexed the Case, and
endeavored to darken Counsel by Words without Knowledge, Job 38.2. But I shall
trace his Windings, and fish him out. But to do him Justice, I must show
wherein he yields, and my self, wherein against all Reason, he does not.

BE it known then that, by this own Concessions, we are upon this Head agreed
in these Articles.

First, WE agree, that the Apostles were honored with extraordinary Powers and
Privileges, and amongst them, with an unlimitted Jurisdiction over all the
Churches, which was to expire with themselves.

Secondly, WE are agreed, that the Apostles last Commission, Matthew. 28.19 and
20. empowered them and their Successors, not only to the Ministrations of the
Word and Sacraments, but to the Government of the Church, and to the Ordination
of Ministers.

Thirdly, WE are further agreed, that the Powers of Government and Ordination
are annexed.

Fourthly, HE will doubtless grant with me, That in Fact, whatever it may be as
to Reason, the Government of Praelates and Presbyters are two different sorts
of Government; that is, the Government of a Praelate over a Diocese, wherein
are many Presbyters and Congregations, is not the same with that of a Presbyter
over a single Flock. And I wish we were agreed as well about the

Fifth Point. THE Discussion whereof determines the Controversy, whereby I
affirm, what he denies, That the Power of Ordination was annexed to the
Government of Praelates, taken in its proper present Ecclesiastical Sense, and
not to that Government that mere Presbyters have over their single
Congregations.

Now there is no other way to be determined in this Point, but by Facts and
Precedents upon sacred Record, and the Reason of Things For to run out into
wild Excursions, and impertinent: Quotations, (which make up the bulk of the
Remarks, and whereof if stripped, there would remain nothing of a real
Argument,) is to fall from solid Reasoning, and run wide of the Question. And I
appeal to both these for the Proof of my Assertion, and venture the Cause upon
the Arguments formed on them. The clearest and most unexceptionable Facts and
Precedents of what kind of Government was annexed to the Power of Ordination,
by and after the Apostles, upon the sacred Records, are contained in St. Paul's
Epistles to Timothy and Titus, and Christ's unto the Asian Angels, Rev. 1.20.
and Chap 2.1. etc. I mention St. Paul's Epistles first, because first wrote. To
proceed the more methodically, I shall

First consider the Nature of a Praelates Government as a Diocesan Bishop.

Secondly, That with such a Government Timothy and Titus were vested.

Thirdly, That to them vested with such a Government, was committed the Power
of Ordination.

Fourthly, That the Asian Angels were vested with the like Government, and in
just Consequence had the Power of Ordination.

Fifthly, That to them vested with such a Government, was committed the sole
Power of Ordination, exclusive of mere Presbyters.

Lastly, That the Reason of the Institution of the Episcopal Order continuing,
it must also be of the same Continuance.

THE clearing these Points, must needs determine the Controversy.

First, LET us consider the Nature of a Praelates Government, as he is a
Diocesan Bishop; and upon enquiry we shall find, that it implied at its first
Institution, as it does now, the giving Instructions to those Presbyters and
Deacons that are within the Verge of his Inspection, concerning their
Behavior, and the exercise of their Offices, the prescribing Rules for a
decent and regular Performance of public Worship, taking care that their
Doctrines be Sound and Orthodox, encouraging and promoting those that are
faithful and diligent, as on the contrary punishing with Censures or
Suspension, the contumacious and disobedient; inspecting also into the
Conversations of the People within their Jurisdiction, that they be as becomes
their Profession, and if not, being liable to his Judgment and Correction.
These are some Instances of the Praelatical Government of a Diocesan Bishop.
Now let us see,

Secondly, Whether Timothy and Titus were entrusted with such Powers and
Authority, and if their Government be found Praelatical in these Instances, I
hope it will not be denied, that they were in the present proper Sense of the
Words, Diocesan Bishops. Now that in Fact they were vested with such a
Government, will be clear by having recourse to the Epistles to them, where
Records thereof are preserved. For there we shall find them endowed with these
Powers and Charges, to inspect into the Presbyters Conduct, and if it be not
becoming the Gospel and their Character, they were to censure and suspend
(...), 1 Timothy 19 and 20. Tit. 3.10. To direct the Method for Divine Worship, 1 Timothy 2.1 -- 9. To take care that the Presbyters preached sound Doctrine, 1 Timothy
1.3. and rebuke them sharply, and even stop their Mouths if they did not. 1 Timothy 4.6, 7, and 11. Tit. 3.9, 10, and 11. And to prefer the deserving, 1 Timothy
3.13. and Chap. 5.17. And many Rules are given not only for the Government of
their Ministers, but of their Congregations also, 1 Timothy 5.2 -- 17. Chapter 6.17,
18, and 19. Now these were all proper Acts of a Praelatical Government, over
several Presbyters and Congregations, and not over a single Fleck, as is here
evident from the several Instances of Timothy's Rule over Presbyters, and is
undeniable from Crete's being a place where were many Cities, in every one of
which Presbyters were to be settled; it will therefore follow, they were
Diocesan Bishops, in the strict proper present Sense of the Words.

Thirdly, WE are to observe, that to those very Persons thus vested and
entrusted with the praelatical Powers and Government of Diocesan Bishops, was
committed the Power of Ordination. It was no other than Timothy adorned with
all those Signatures of Rule over the Presbyters of Ephesus, that was to lay on
Hands with Caution, and as he found the Candidates qualified for sacred
Services, 1 Timothy 5.21, 22. It was no other, than this very Titus, in whom we
have found such legible Characters of a Diocesan Bishop, that for this very end
was left in Crete, to ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1.5. And it is to no
purpose for the Remarker to allege, that they had those Powers of Government
and Ordination as endowed with extraordinary Powers or Gifts. This is petitio
Principii, or in his own decent Expression, a mean begging of the Question; for
as we know, he will hardly believe us, even although we prove, so he may be
assured that his perhaps and may be's are of no weight with us; for we will
never take his Word for any thing he don't make appear. And it is ridiculous
for him and his Party, who are so Clamorous for Scripture Proofs and Examples,
for every thing that is to be done about sacred Things or Persons, to go upon
bare Suppositions in Things of the highest Moment. For nothing extraordinary
either of Powers or Gifts, appears in the whole Case; nothing but what Diocesan
Bishops with their ordinary Powers may and do ordinarily perform. And it is
most unjust, and against all the Laws of Reasoning, to put us upon the proof of
these Negatives, That they had no Assistance, that they did not all this as
Presbyters, etc. We deny all these groundless Surmises, and therefore the Proof
belongs to him the positive Affirmer, which because there is no Ground to go
upon, we are assured it can never be done. We are now further for the
Confimation of our Point,

Fourthly, TO evince, that the Asian Angels were vested with a like Government,
and in just Consequence had the Power of Ordination. That they were vested with
a praelatical Government appears from hence, that several of them were
threatened and condemned by our Lord, for suffering or not restraining the
Doctrines of Balaam, the Nicolaitans and Jezebel, Rev. 2.14, 15. and 20. which
plainly implied, that they were vested with a coercive ruling Power over these
Churches: For if they were only senior Pastors or Moderators, as the Remarker
dotes, how could they be culpable and made criminal for not doing, what was not
in their Power to do? For as such they could only give their own private
Judgment and Vote, but not restrain the Actions, with the Toleration whereof
they are charged. So that the Remarker must either blasphemously feign our Lord
to bring an unjust Charge against those Angels, accusing them of what they were
not guilty, and punishing them for what they could not help, or confess the
Truth, that their Accusation and threatened Punishment was just, because they
had not exerted their praelatical Powers in censuring and restraining
licentious Doctrines of seducing Teachers, within their several Jurisdictions;
and that though they were constituted Guardians of the Purity of the Christian
Faith, they had been remiss in their Charge, and permitted the Corruption of
it, to the Dishonor of its Author, and the Scandal of their own Characters.
This is the only good and true Account that can be given of that Matter; as for
the Remarker's Dream, that every Angel was a Company of Presbyters, it is
hardly worth while to awake him out of it, by any serious Observation on so
remarkable a Fable. He may with much more Reason allow all the Presbytery that
ordained Timothy to be in St. Paul, than all the Presbyters that were in the
lesser Asia to be in seven Bishops. But I shall not follow him in his
Wild-Goose Chase, but proceed to observe, That since those Angels had committed
to them the praelatical Power of Government, they must also have been vested
with the Power of Ordination; for we find these Powers annexed, as in the
foregoing Instances of Timothy and Titus, and since it plainly appears they
were vested with the Powers of the one, there is no reason to deny them the
Power of the other. And by just Consequence in both they were Diocesan Bishops.
Having then found so many Prelates in their Diocesses, let us now see whether
there were any Coadjutors appointed to assist them in their Ordinations, or to
the making them the more valid: And upon a due enquiry we shall find,

Fifthly, THAT to them vested with such Powers of Government, was committed the
sole power of Ordination, exclusive of mere Presbyters. For in Points of so
great Consequence, we must go upon certain Facts and Precedents, and not upon
mere Conjecture, supported by no Reason; and when nothing of this Nature
appears or is affirmed, it is intolerable Boldneness to conclude it
confidently. When St. Paul says, I charge Thee to lay Hands, I left Thee to
ordain, without the least mentioning of Presbyters to assist, it must
necessarily follow, that the sole power of Ordination was committed to them
only, since we have no Warrant or Precedent for the necessity of Presbyters
Concurrence, unless it be in that often mis-interpreted Text, The laying on of
the Hands of the Presbytery, whereby is meant even in the Judgment of those who
were not in every thing the greatest Friends to the Episcopal Order, the Office
which was transferred on Timothy, at his Ordination by St. Paul's own Hands.
And therefore what Assurance must it be in mere Presbyters, to assume to
themselves the greatest Power in the Church, that of Ordination, and pretending
to perform that Action not only without a Bishop, but in opposition to him. For
neither of which Practices is there any Foundation in the Word of God, or any
Examples of such a Practice there. And now to sum up the Evidence,

IF from Facts and Precedents upon the Divine Records, if it appears that a
Praelatical Government of Diocesan Bishops consists in their Advancement above,
and Rule over Presbyters and their Churches, that Timothy and Titus were vested
with that Government, that the sole power of Ordination was committed to them
vested with those Powers of Government, that the Asian Angels were vested with
such a praelatical Government; and that therefore to them also the sole Power
of Ordination was committed exclusive of others the Proposition must be
granted, namely, That the Powers of Ordination was annexed to the Government of
Praelates, taken in its present Ecclesiastical Sense, exclusive of mere
Presbyters.

Secondly, I argue the Truth of this Proposition against the Remarker from the
Reason of Things. He allows the Necessity and Being of Praelacy during the
Times of Inspiration, before the Canon of the Scripture was finished, and
during the Infancy of the Church, and all those Reasons now ceasing, he says,
there is no further Occasion for it, and that the Church now wants no such
Governors, inasmuch as the Affairs of Religion will be as well provided for
without them; an Instance whereof is the state of Religion in this Country, as
he says. Now if the reverse of all this be the Truth, as it is demonstrable, so
then the Necessity of Praelacy still continues. And

First, IF there was a Necessity of Praelacy in the Times of Inspiration, it is
much more Necessary it should continue, that ceasing: For the infallible
Conduct, of the Spirit, was sufficient to guide the Church in all its Duties
and Ordinances, whereas now there is a necessity for a settled Government and
Laws. And it is more than probable, for that very Reason a Praelacy was
instituted, to keep the World within the proper Bounds of their Duty, and
direct their Practice, and their Conscience in more doubtful Cases.

Secondly, THERE is as much if not more Reason for Praelacy; to be sure, more
clear Instances of it after, than before the finishing of the Canon of the
Scripture. However, the Gospels were writ before the clearest Marks we have of
the establishing Praelacy, and there is nothing in the Epistles or Revelation
that tends to subvert it, but much every way to confirm and establish it. And

Thirdly, AS to the Infancy of the Church, if that be a good Reason for it, it
still holds, especially in this Country, where the Church is in its infant
State. But why should it be so necessary for Infant, and so needless for Adult
Christianity? When Persons grow up, they often grow unruly, and very much want
to be kept under Restraint and Government. And

Lastly, AS to Appeals to his own Country, and the state of Religion in it,
what could have been brought as a more fragrant Evidence for the Necessity of
another kind of Government than what is in it, than the Disorders and Disputes,
the Contentions and Confusions that are among them, for want of one to whom the
dornier Resort is to be made, and the Hydra of Heresies which ought to be beat
down by the Crosier.

ADD therefore the Reason of the Things to the Facts and Precedents we have for
Praelacy, and upon them both, I think I may venture to appeal to the common
Sense of Mankind, for its agreeing to the Truth of the Proposition. I cannot
pass from this Head, without animadverting on some Cavils, that the Remarker
has at two Texts adduced by the Modest Proof, for the perpetuity of the
Apostolate. 1 Cor. 12.28. Ephesians. 4.17. He may set his Teeth and grin at the Word
Set in one of those Texts, yet there is an observable Emphasis on it, as if it
denoted the Stability of that Institution in the Divine Intention. And as to
his imperious Demand, By what Laws of Interpretation we construe what follows
the three Words first named, (whereby we mean the three Orders we contend for)
of Gifts, and the Exercises of them.

I answer, By the acknowledged Laws of interpreting Scripture by Scripture, for
as to Presbyters and Deacons, he himself acknowledges their Continuance, and
that the Apostles shall continue as long as the World. The Texts are express
and we have no Account of any other Office of a standing Nature: And therefore
all those Designations that are delivered in abstract Words, must be applied to
the three Orders which are expressed in concrete Terms.

LET us here again view his Vanity, and observe him glorying in an imaginary
Conquest over those Concessions in the Modest Proof, That though the Apostles
were vested with an unlimitted Jurisdiction, yet thy only transmitted a
limited one. But notwithstanding of this, they have true Successors both in
Government and Ordination. For these are Truths, and even reconcilable to our
Apprehensions. Suppose a great Prince has several Sons, and several
Principalities, and to each Son he gives a Principality, and all the Power
whereby he governed it, certainly each Son succeeds the Father in the whole
Power over his respective Principality, though not in the whole of the Power the
Father had over all the Principalities. This is the very Case; St. Paul, for
Instance, and so by a Parity of Reason, the same is to be said of the rest of
the Apostles, gave his Son Timothy, as he calls him, the Government of Ephesus,
as he did Titus that of Crete, with full Power to govern those Places, as he
would do was he present. And now who can deny but that Timothy succeeded Paul
in the whole Power he had over Ephesus, though not in the whole of the Power he
had over all other Churches; and the like of (...), and all others whom the
Apostles constituted Bishops in their respective Diocesses. And has not Mr.
Remarker acknowledged all this? Yea verily, all the Difference is, that he
contends this limited Jurisdiction should necessarily be contracted to a
single Parish, whereas we deny that Necessity, and have proved that it was not
thus originally so bounded.

BUT though it is thus evident that the Government settled by Christ and his
Apostles in the Church, was founded in an Imparity of Officers, or rather in a
proper Diocesan Episcopacy; yet since often the Distance is wide between
Possession and Right, I don't affirm there is such an inviolable and essential
Connection between the Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction, that they must
always be found in an actual Conjunction. For the Ordinations of a Bishop
unjustly expelled his See, are good and valid, wherever he is, and to whose
Character the Faithful will always every where pay their do Regards.

NOR do I measure the Episcopal Power of Ordination by the extent of
Jurisdiction, for that Power varies not by Accidents or Circumstances: And
therefore let the Remarker make as little Logical a Diocese for a Bishop as he
can, we cannot admit his independent Pastor to usurp it, or sustain so much as
the very lowest Office in the Gospel Ministry; and that for the Reason we have
been upon, becuuse he has not been ordained by a Successor to the Apostles, in
whom always according to the original Institution, the powers of Ordination and
Jurisdiction over a plurality of Presbyters and Churches either in Fact or
Right, that is a capacity or plenitude of Power for such a Government, are
connected; the Fact he disowns, and the Right he disclaims, and therefore from
neither can he make any just pretense to a valid Ordination.

I shall now under this second Head subjoin some Defenses of the Answers, that
were made to the Objections which the Remarker and his Party commonly urge
against Episcopacy. First, as to that of Acts 20*17, and 28. those were
certainly present at that Meeting at Miletus with St. Paul, among whom he had
gone preaching for three Years in Asia, and these were undoubtedly Bishops
about, as well as the Elders of the City of Ephesus unless we will admit these
three Absurdities, First, that St. Paul traveled three Years preaching only in
Ephesus, which who can believe, who considers not only the Impropriety of the
Expression, but the greatness of his Work, and the extent of his Commission?
Secondly, that the Country Bishops were so difficult of access and stiff, that
they could not so easily be convened as the Ephesian Elders; for the Remarker
seems to hint such a thing, when he says, The Apostle was in have, and could
not wait for them; which who can believe of so good a Man? And Thirdly, That
Timothy, whom we have proved by all the Marks of a praelatical Power to have
been a Bishop, and whom the Remarker says was present, was still an Elder and
no more; and therefore unless we will grant these Absurdities, we must
conclude, that there were Bishops present as well as Presbyters. Secondly, As
to Ti^. 1.7. as it was necessary that Titus at his first Residence in the
Island, should ordain Elders in every City, so as the number of Christians and
Congregations in each City increased, it was necessary he should ordain Bishops
to preside over the Presbyters and Churches that were in each City. For it is
most probable that in the dawning of the Gospel, when there were so few of
those Lights the Bishops, that one Bishop not only ordained Presbyters but
Prelates too, though Antiquity tells us Timothy was a Metropolitan.

Thirdly, All this to be replied and applied unto 1 Timothy 3.2 -- 7. And however
strange the Remarker may think that St. Paul did not express himself in
Language significant to his Apprehensions, it is much more strange that he
should fault the Conduct of an inspired Apostle. However for his Satisfaction
in this Point, I remit him to St. Chrysostom. whom he will find giving a very good
Reason, why there is little said to or of Presbyters, where Bishops were
present, or mentioned, in Hom. 11. on 1 Timothy 3. Edit. Savil. Tom. 4. P. 289. A
peri Episcopoon eipe tauta kai tois Presbuterois armottei tee gar Cheirotonia
monee Uper bebeekasi kai touto monon dioikousi pleonektein tous Presbuterous.
Implying, That the same Rules given to Bishops, may be applied to Presbyters,
excepting only the Case of Ordination, which was peculiar to Bishops.

Fourthly, As to Phil. 1.1. it is certain that Philippi was a chief City of
Macedonia, Acts 16.12. round which were doubtless a great many Churches and
Bishops, who might be denominated from the Metropolis; I say doubtless, because
it is past all doubt but that these People were mightily increased in Numbers,
and exceedingly commended for their Piety and Virtues by St. Paul in that
Epistle, and as the Exigencies of the Churches required, the Governors
unquestionably often met to consult about the common Concerns of Christianity;
for they were desired to strive together for the Faith of the Gospel, v. 27.
And therefore it was no greater a Solocism in St. Paul, to write to the Bishops
at Philippi, than it would be to write to the Bishops at London, in the sitting
of the Convocation, though we know there is but one Bishop of London. And
notwithstanding all he has said against the Translation offered in the Modest
Proof, there is nothing in the Original that hinders it being exactly so
rendered; unless it be the Cause of Episcopacy. The Case indeed may be
otherwise where the Original will allow, but the Sense will not suffer the
Translation, lest it should suffer.

Fifthly, As to what he trifles about the Identity of Names, I observe first,
That it is certain great Personages are sometimes styled from the lowest
Offices they sustain; and yet it must always be allowed without any Diminution
to their Characters, to which higher Appellations are likewise due. Secondly,
That it is a very laudable Attempt in many great Divines (though faulted by our
Remarker) to reconcile their proper Names to their Offices; though after
different Methods, yet all concurring in the same general Design, of bringing
the different Orders to their respective Appellations, according to the
Distinctions we find founded in their Nature Thirdly, That the Remarker is
resolved to have two of these common and promiscuous Names, as he calls them,
and appropriate them to one Office, and like an Ambidexter, with one or other
of them repel the Force of any Argument.

Fourthly, That when a Bishop is mentioned, is always understood one of the
highest of the sacred Order, who is also a Presbyter and Deacon. When a
Presbyter is mentioned, one that is also certainly a Deacon, and who may by
some peculiar Circumstances appear to be also a Bishop. And when a Deacon is
mentioned, the lowest Order of Church Officers, but by a narrow inspection in^^
Times and Circumstances, and the Occasions of mentioning him under that
Character, may be actually at the same time, not only a Presbyter, but a
Bishop. And this for the Identity of Names. Sixthly, As to that of Matthew.
20.25. it is certain our Savior's Answer was pertinent to the Petition, and
there is nothing that appears in either, intended of Church Authority; for the
two Apostles imagining that their Master was to be a Temporal Prince, were
willing by their maternal Advice and Request, to bespeak Advancement in that
Kingdom; and therefore not a Bishopric, but some Principality or secular
Dominion. The Argument therefore in this Instance, is wide of the Case and
impertinent.

Seventhly, As to 1 Pet. 5.23. it is certain, that whatever Defects of Ingenuity
or Knowledge Mr. Remarker discovers, he is sure to make it up in Malice, here
insinuating, that the English Bishops are consecrated Lords Bishops, as
Successors in, or Partakers of that Temporal Kingdom the Brethren dreamt of;
whereas the Title of Lords proceeds only from the Munificence of Princes, as
the Rewards of the Bishop's Piety and Services, and for the greater Honor and
Reverence to their Character; and the Temporalities are bestowed for the
support of their Dignity, and to enable them for Acts of Charity and
Hospitality; and therefore our English Bishops would be equally Christ's
Bishops, if they were no Lords and had no Lands; though for the Reasons given, it
is just and necessary they should be the one, and have the other, and be
treated with Decency and good Manners.

Lastly, As to 1 Timothy 4.14. I am willing to be determined by the Author he has
appealed unto, whose Words on the Place I shall set down in his own Language,
to avoid the Insults that have been given on this Occasion, and also the
Translation for the sake of those who understand not the Original.

O^ peri Presbuterous p^esin (...) ta^ta alla peri Episcopous (...) gar de
Presbuteroi to^ Episcopo^ ^^eirotenou^ Chr. in Loc. He does not speak here of
Presbyters, but of Bishops, for Presbyters did not ordain the Bishop. Or I
refer him to his own abused Calvin, who understands it of the Office. I say his
own abused Calvin, for that though in most things he is on his own side, yet
because he had frankly confessed a known Truth, that Episcopacy was the
primitive Church Government, he brings him in talking this Nonsense, p. 53. Out
of the Order of Elders, they chose preaching and ruling Elders; whereas there
is not a Word of those Elders in the Place he refers to, but the three Orders
of Ministers which the ancient Church retained, according to the Scriptures.
And p. 17. he translates Secundo loco, the Time of their Mission. I call upon
him therefore to confess, that either he designed to abuse that Gentleman in
the Translation, or that he did not understand his Language, and so could not
help it.

He had better let Dr. Scott been at rest, for he has raised a Ghost he can
never conjure, nor all the Dissenters in the World ever answer the Doctor's
Argument. For there being only a ceasing of the Apostles extraordinary Powers,
but no Repeal of the Institution of the Apostolical Order; and the Reasons
whereon it was founded manifestly continuing, it can never be allowed to be
discontinued, which would also suppose a violation of the Divine Promise, that
it should continue to the end of the World: And all Dr. Barrow's Specialties
relate only to the Apostles peculiar and extraordinary Gifts and Privileges;
the not observing of which Distinction, (only when it can serve a turn) is the
Prot^n pseudos that runs through the Remarks.

And now I hope what has been said is sufficient to convict him of having this
Symptom of Intemperance upon him, That he is tenacious of his Opinions, against
the clearest Evidence, and that he affirms and denies any thing at his
pleasure, and without any Proof but his bare Word. I proceed to the

Third Charge that he has upon him, that Sign of Intemperance, that he is full
of Inconsistencies, and not only contradicts others, but himself: And as to the
former part, I think I have made it appear, that he has very inconsistently
with Truth or Manners, contradicted the best and wisest of Men, and that he
contradicts himself, since perhaps he will not take my Word, I hope he will
take his own, and believe his dear self, when he talks at random after this
manner, p. 48. It cannot be proved but that Timothy was an itinerant Missionary,
having no particular Relation to the Church of Ephesus; and then tacks about
and denies it all, p. 56. and says, Timoth^ was to abide at Ephesus, Ch 1.23.
and not to travel from City to City. I leave him when he is sober, to reconcile
himself with himself, and go to the

Last Sign I mentioned of his being inflamed with Intemperance, and that is his
being soon angry, and very quarrelsome without Provocation; else, why
occasional Perjury? the modest Gentleman he was snarling at, had said nothing
to raise his Choler, unless it was insinuating, that Monarchy and Praelacy
mutually support each other, and that Schism and Sedition are near akin; and I
verily believe this was the Case, and he was touched in the tender Part; for
neither he nor any of his Party are willing to hear this sad Truth, That
Presbytery was hardly any where ever established, but on the Ruins of Kings or
Kingdoms. None but an angry Non-con C -- b would have given the Name of prating
Coxcomb to a Bishop or Deacon, and that merely because he performs his Office
according to the Powers of its Original Institution. And why so angry with My
Lords the Bishops? Is the Plumb green because it is so high? Sure they ought to
be treated with Deference and Distinction, on account of their Titles that are
of Regal Creation. But I must quit his Company, lest I also should seem to grow
angry at his intolerable Insolences.

But here perhaps the Remarker may allege, I have mistaken him, and that by
Sobriety he meant Modesty and Integrity; I shall therefore represent him to you
in the Drese of those pretended Characters, that it may be known what right he
has to wear them: And I have reserved this View of him to this Place, being
unwilling to mingle with the Dispute, what did not originally concern it.

Now if to appeal to the venerable Order of Bishops (for so most of them were
whom he cites to vouch for him) to condemn their own Powers, and confess
themselves bold Usurpers upon the Rights of Presbyters and People, as holding
an unlawful Office, by as unwarrantable a Tenure; or if to summon Persons of
the most unsuspected Veracity, to affirm as Truth, what they knew to be false,
and e contra; or if to put them to the Torture to speak against their
Knowledge; or if lastly to pervert and wrest their Words to a Meaning, the
direct contrary whereof they were designed to express, be modest and sincere;
then the Remarker is the Man he pretends to be; for this is his very Case, and
has been his labored Practice. That herein I do him Justice, I shall produce
those Evidences he has had the Modesty to call upon as Witnesses to his Opinion.

First then, let us hear what was the Judgment of Clemens Bishop of Rome on the
Case; he, to show that the Terms whereby the Offices of the Christian Ministry
are expressed, had been used of old, cites Is. 60.17. in these Words, (but in a
different Edition of the Septuagint from what is now in use) Katastesoo tous
Episcopous autoon en dikaiosune Kai tous Diaconous autoon en Pistei. I will
appoint them Bishops in Righteousness, and Deacons in Faith. And accordingly
accomodating the Terms of the Jewish to the Christian Hierarchy, says, To gar
Archierei idiai leitourgiai dedomenai eisi, kai tois iereusin idios o topos
prostetaktai kai Lenitau idiai Diakoniai epikeinto. Ep. ad Cor. Cap 40. Oxon.
1677. The Chief Priests, says he, have assigned them their particular
Functions, the Priests their proper Places, and the Deacons their peculiar
Ministries.

The next is Policarp, whom Eusebius, Lib. 4. Cap. 14. out of Iren. Lib. 3.
Cap. 3. tells us, was Upon Apostoloon en tee Ecclesia en Smurna O Episcopos
katastatheis, Appointed Bishop in the Church of Smyrna by the Apostles; who in
his Epistle to the Philippians, Sect. 13. Edit. Oxon. 1709. highly extols St.
Ignatius's Epistles, which he sent to that People with his own, recommending
them as exceeding Useful both for Faith and Practice. Now in these Epistles we
find these Expressions, Too Episcopoo upotassesthe oos too kurioo. Be subject
to the Bishop as unto the Lord. Aideisthe kai ton Episcopon Umoon oos Christon.
Reverence your Bishop as you would Christ. Epist. ad Trall. S. 2.3. Edit. Smith
Oxon and Ep. ad Smyrn. Aneu tou Episcopou meeden prattein, Nothing to be done
without the Bishop. A

Third is Jerome, who in Ep. ad Ev. says, Ut sciamus Traditiones Apostolicas
sumptas de veteri Testamento quod Aaron and Filii ejus atquae Levitae fuerunt
in Templo, hoc sibi et Episcopi et Presbyteri, et Diaconi vendicant in
Ecclesia, That we may know the Apostolical Traditions concerning the Old
Testament, what Aaron and his Sons were in the Temple, the same were Bishops,
Presbyters and Deacons in the Church. Which exactly accords with St. Clement
above, as he does with him in his Comment on the forecited Text of Isaiah, and
thence infers, Principes futuros Ecclesiae Episcopos nominavit, the future
Princes of the Church are there called Bishops. A

Fourth is St. Augustine, Bishop of Hippo, whose Complement to St. Jerome the
Remarker perverts, mis-translates, and leaves out a part of the Sentence which
would explain the whole. The Sentence is in Ep. ad Hieron. Quanquam secundum
honorem vocabulorum quae jam usus obtinuit, Episcopatus Presbyterio major fit,
multis tamen in rebus Augustino Hieronymus major est, Although Episcopacy be
greater than Presbytery, according to the Honor of Words now in use, yet Jerome
is greater than Augustine. Which is only designed as a Commendation of St.
Jerome, but not a Disparagement to his own Order. But now let us hear himself
upon the Point, in Ep. 42. ad Fratr. Madaur. Edit. Basil 1556. Christiana
Societas per seeds Apostolorum, et successiones Episcoporum, certa per Orbem
propagatione diffunditur. The Christian Church is spread over the World through
the Apostolical Sees, and the succession of Bishops therein. And of what value
this Succession was with him, we may see Ep. 165. where he says, Si ordo
Episcoporum sibi succedentium considerandus est, quanto certius et vero
salubriter ab ipso Petro numeramus. If the Order of Bishops succeeding one
another be considerable, we take the surest and the safest Way, who reckon from
St. Peter, and then gives a List of the Roman Bishops; so that he who was so
hearty for a Succession of Bishops, was far from being a Witness that there
were never any at all. A

Fifth is St. Ambrose Bishop of Millain, the Commentaries on the Epistles which
go under his Name, say in Epist. ad Ephesians. Cap. 4. Timotheo um a se creatum
Presbyterum Episcopum nominat. He calls Timothy a Bishop who had been a
Presbyter. And in Ep. ad Tit. Titum Apostolus consecravit Episcopum, the
Apostle consecrated Titus a Bishop. And nothing can be more express to the
Purpose than what he says in Lib de Dignit. Sacerd. Cap 3. Aliud est enim quod
ab Episcopo requirit Deus, et aliud quod a Presbytero, et aliud quod a Diacono.
God requires one thing of Bishops, another of Presbyters, and another of
Deacons. From whence it follows, that if they were three kinds of Church
Officers in his Judgment accountable unto God, that he thought they discharged
three distinct Offices.

Sedulius is of the same Opinion with Jerome, whom we have produced on the side
of Episcopacy, and Primatius the same with St. Chrysostom, whose Judgment on
the Case we have seen. And on 1 Timothy 3. he gives the same Reason as Chrysostom.
why Presbyters are not named. E^^ in Episcoporum ordine comprehendit quia
secundus, That Order as next unto it, is comprehended in the Episcopate.

Theodoret on 1 Timothy is so plain for Bishops being the Apostles Successors,
that he says those who are now called Bishops, were at first called Apostles;
and Theophilact in Arg. in Ep. ad Tit. Edit. Loud. 1636. O Titos con Episcopos
tees K^eetees Magalees, That Titus was Bishop of the great Crete.

As for Epiphanius's Testimony concerning Aerius, rather than admit it, the
Remarker will give him up to the Papists, though many learned Men have defended
him from allowing any more than commemorative Prayers. But supposing him in an
Error in one Point, will it follow, that all he says is false? if that be
admitted as a Rule, the Remarker's Testimony must never be allowed in any Case;
for I appeal to the World, that I have detected him guilty of a great many
Errors. But besides this Testimony, we have St. Aug. condemning that Heretic,
for this very Reason, Quod asseverat Presbyterum ab Episcopo nulla differentia
debere distingui. Aug. Lib. de Heret. Because he acknowledged no difference
between a Bishop and a Presbyter.

And thus have we the Sense of those Fathers upon the Dispute, whom the
Remarker has had the modesty to affirm to be on his side of it.

And by the way I would observe, that notwithstanding his learned Criticism
upon the Word Presbuterion, that in the Language of the Greek Fathers
Cheirotonia Presbuteriou stands for the Decree or Order of Presbyterat, as is
plain Eusebius. Lib. 6. Cap. 20. speaking there of Origen's being invited to
dispute, though he had not as yet obtained the Decree of Presbyterat, expressly
there called Cheirotonian Presbuterion.

But to make a just Improvement on the ^^marker's pretense to this Virtue, I
would subsume, that it amounts to no less than a Demonstration, that Episcopal
Government is of a Divine Original, and that upon these Reasons:

First, That in Fact it being found in the primitive Church, no Time can be
assigned but the Apostolical when it begun.

Secondly, That it was so far from being set up by the secular Power, that it
was the Government of the Church in the heat of the fiercest Persecutions,
wherein the Bishops especially, were in a manner sure of a Crown of Martyrdom.

Thirdly, That if Episcopacy was not coeval with Christianity, it would be a
Miracle that at one and the same Instant, the Government of the Church should
become universally prelatical, for so we find it every where established where
Christianity was planted. And

Fourthly, That it would be no less Wonderful, that there should be no Envy or
Ambition among any of the Presbyters, as not to complain and remonstrate
against the Praelates Encroachments on their Privileges, before the Heretic
Aerius, nor any of them have so much Goodness and Resolution, as not to assert
their own Authority against those unreasonable Usurpations upon their Powers,
had they esteemed them such.

And therefore upon the whole, it must be granted, that whether by Miracles, or
(which is most evident) by Christ and his Apostles Episcopacy was established,
it is every way of a Divine Original.

But as if it was not criminal enough to break open the Monuments of Antiquity
and bring forth those Reverend Persons to disown their avowed Principles, and
deny their kown Practice, he has the Sincerity to apply to others of a later
Date, for the same purpose; and even where the Fallacies lie more liable to
Discovery. Thus he fastens upon Bishop Jewel, to extort such Confessions from
him as may speak his Sense: St. Augustine as quoted by him on this Head, has
been already vindicated from his Calumny and Cavils; St. Jerome (unfairly cited
by him) is brought in by the Bishop saying, Omnes tamen Episcopi quicunque
sunt, sunt Successores Apostolorum, Apol. p. 167. All Bishops whatever are the
Apostles Successors. And giving his own Sense of the matter, and that of the
Church he was defending, he says, Varios in Ecclesia esse Ordines Ministrorum,
alios esse Diaconos, alios Presbyteros, alios Episcopos, quibus institutio
populi, et Religionis cura et procuratio commissa est, Apol. p. 25. Edit. Land.
1692. There are several Orders of Ministers in the Church, some Deacons, some
Presbyters, some Bishops, to whom the cure Souls, and the care of Religion is
committed. Thus Bishop Jewel. With the same degrees of Integrity would he
impose upon the World in the Instance of Archbishop Whitgift, who in the place
he refers to, only denies the extraordinary Powers of the Apostles to be
continued; but for what of their Power is continuing, let us hear himself in
his Dispute upon this very Point with Cartwright, where he tells him, Forasmuch
as you greatly contemn Authority, and would have all things proved by
Scripture, let me hear a Word of the same that does but intimate these Offices
to be temporal; the place it self seems to import a continuance of these
Functions unto the coming of Christ, for he says, Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some
Apostles, etc. I am persuaded you cannot show any like place which does so
plainly import the abrogating of them, as this does make for their continuance.
A. B. Whitgift's Defense of the Answer to the Admonition, Tract 4. Pages 229,
230.

He mistakes the Principle Archbishop. Bancroft went upon, which was, that the
Episcopate contained in it self the inferior Orders, and therefore he looked
on such as had only Presbyterian Ordination to be mere Lay men, and in this he
had Precedents in the extraordinary Cases of Ambrose made Bishop of Millain, at
the Instance of the Emperor Valentinian, and Nectarius of Constantinople, the
like Instance of Theodosius, without going through the intermediate probational
Stations.

Though Henry the Eighth as an arbitrary Prince obliged the Bishops to take out
Royal Licenses for the exercise of their Spiritual Authority, yet surely they
derived that from no King but Jesus: And though Archbishop Cranmer rather
yielded too far to the Humor of that King, though for a good End, the better to
promote the Reformation, yet Mr. Strype, in his Life tells us, that being asked
if a Bishop can make a Priest, replied, We read not that any other not being a
Bishop, has since the beginning of Christ's Church ordained a Priest.

If a perverse Slander be a Sign of Integrity, the Remarker has it upon him, in
affirming the Irenicum to have been wrote by any Bishop of Worcester, and as to
what is or can be made of it, stands all for nothing, for the reason of this
Promise, that when the Remarker shall act the ingenuous part of the Dean of St.
Paul's, who by the Unreasonableness of Separation, consuted the Rector of
Sutton's Irenicum, by expressing his Sorrow for wasting his Time in writing the
Remarks, in the penitential Signals of a public Retraction, taking some Pains
to refute his own Quibbles, and unravel the Sophisms which he studied for
disguising the Truth, and deceiving the World, we will never after that charge
upon him the Disgrace of having been the Author of that scandalous Performance.

If the Remarker will read A. B. Spotswood's History of the Church of Scotland,
from p. 153. to p. 160. and Petries on the same Subject, from p. 232. to p.
380. he will find, (contrary to the false Position he has laid down) that the
Scotch Superintendants had power of Ordination, which they called Admission, of
Visitation, Translation, Deposition, holding Diocesan Synods, receiving
Appeals, judging Divorces, injoining Penance, and in a Word, doing every thing
that is properly Episcopal.

And if he will read Father Paul's History of the Council of Trent, from p.
573. to p. 687. he will find, that the Pope's Legates there used all their
Endeavors to overthrow Episcopacy; which wicked Design however the Gallican
Bishops chiefly as strenuously opposed, and maintained Episcopacy to be Jure
Divino; so that had the Pope then obtained his Ends, Presbyterian Government
would have been set up in all the Popish Countries and the Pope been Moderator,
and would still if he could, so that in him indeed Presbytery has a Patron and
a Pillar, and the Remarker a Friend to his Cause, though that is not the only
Point wherein they meet.

But finding no Friends a home, the Remarker lays aside all his modest
Pretenses to their Suffrages and with an Air of Assurance would look for some
Countenance abroad, but for all his Confidence, he needs not be so sanguine to
think that he is much in the Favor of any there; for I might produce the most
considerable of the foreign Divines, pronouncing solemn Anathemas upon the
rebellious Separatists from the English Episcopal Communion, and make it appear
that they stand condemned Schismatics by the Judgment of Calvin, Bezs,
Amyrould* Claud, Le Blanc, etc. only in hopes of his becoming a Penitent, I
would not increase his Sorrow, by saying now, what they have said upon this
Subject.

But one remarkable Testimony is worth our Observation, and our Pains to bring
it out to Light, because it has been industriously concealed, and now not very
commonly known, and that is of Mr. David Blondel, the Coriphaeus of all the
Parity Men, who having been employed by the Westminster Assembly to write his
Apologia pro Hieronymo, concludes it in Words to this purpose; By all that we
have said to assert the Rights of the Presbytery, we do not intend to
invalidate the ancient and Apostolic Constitution of Episcopal Pre-eminence,
but we believe that wheresoever it is established conformable to the ancient
Canons, it must be carefully preserved, and wheresoever by some heat of
Contention or otherwise it has been put down or violated, it ought to be
reverently restored. Which Passage being destructive to his Employers Design,
upon their vehement and restless Importunity, he was prevailed upon to put it
out. So prevailing oftentimes is Party Affection and Interest over Truth. Now
that this is Fact, we have the Testimony of Dr. Peter Du Moulin in his Letter
to Dr. Durell, to be seen in the last Page of the 4th Vol. of the Memoirs of
Literature, written by Monsieur La Rocque, wherein Du Moulin says he had the
certain Account of this Affair, not only from Primate Usher, but from Mr. David
Blondel himself, in a Letter to his Brother.

And now upon the whole of the Remarkers pretenses to those Characters of
Modesty and Integrity, however some may call evil good, yet Vice and Virtue are
of unalterable Natures, and it is in vain to vail one with the Appearance of the
other; for upon drawing aside the Curtain, the unmasked Spectacle will be seen
in its proper Habit. And therefore to finish this Head, it must be granted me,
that if he is abandoned to such an insensible State, that he feels no Horror or
Relenting at the Injuries and Indignities he has offered to some of the
greatest and best of Men, what all the World besides himself, and such whom
Demonstration cannot convince, will allow me, that he has assumed Characters he
has no Right in, or any just Claim unto.

I shall conclude, by an Answer to all his cornuted Dilemma's, with the Story
of the Man who had the unhappy Dilemma put to him, to kill his Father, abuse
his Mother, or be Drunk; whereupon he chose the last, because, as he thought,
the least of the Evils: And when he was under that Disorder, became guilty of
both the other Crimes. If the Story is a Fable, the Moral is plain; that a
Person in the Remarker's Frame, would be guilty of the most unnatural
Parricide, in destroying the Fathers the Bishops, and in spite of all the Ties
of Gratitude and filial Reverence, prostitute the Honor of his Mother the
Church of England to his vile Lusts and Passions, and expose her to Contempt
and Scorn. The Inference therefore is easy, that whoever would avoid being
involved in the Guilt of (...) Effect, must keep at all possible distance from
any Advances to the original Cause. For nothing is more certain, than that as
soon as any one starts from the Center of Unity, he is liable to be carried
round the Circle of Error, until he falls over the Precipice from whence there
is no recovery, unless by wise Reflections, assisted by Divine Grace, he is
brought to himself, and back again to his first Principles, from whence he
unwarrantably receded.

Thus, Sir, have I endeavored to answer if not your Expectation, yet your
Desires, whereby I have the Satisfaction of approving my self

Your sincere and faithful Friend.
May 20. 1724.
Postscript.
THE Adversaries to the Book I have been defending, offer themselves Evidences
of its not being so contemptible a Piece as they would represent it; since with
all the Efforts of impotent Malice, they fly from every Quarter to hiss and
spit their Venom on it: For as I was concluding my Letter, the Press was
delivered of a misshapen Production, sprung from the disordered Brain of one J
Dickinson, who with the same degrees of Assurance, as when Canting from his
Tub, would commence an Advocate for Presbyterian Ordination; proceeding on the
Principles peculiar to that Side, equal Pretenses to the Modesty and Manners
they are equal Strangers to. Though it must be owned, these Scribblers have their
singular Talents, and that the Remarker as much excels in Craft and Quibble, as
the Defender does in Vanity and Confidence, and therefore there must be some
Difference in dealing with them.

Having then treated the Remarker as he deserves, I shall now Remark on the
Defender, with respect to things peculiar to him; and shall not repeat what I
have said to the Instances where they fall into the same Ditch, in climbing
over the Hedge designed to keep them out of the Pastoral Charge. For like the
Herds of other Animals, if one breaks loose, all are prone to follow the Tracks
of the first Transgressors.

To detect his Fallicies, and prove the Truths he has denied, and illustrate
those he has obscured, I shall first animadvert on his Preface and
Introduction, and then on what the bold Pretender lisps on every Head.

The Preface gives the Idea of the Man, and discovering his Petulence and
Ignorance, plainly snows the narrow View he has, of what Extent and Order the
Mystical Body of Christ has been in all Ages, and is in the present; else how
could he have suggested that the Best and Brightest Part of the Catholic
Church is an upstart Sect? We will here allow him all the Club of Socinians,
Antinomians, Muggletonians, and Deists in the English Nation, joined in a
Confederacy with all the Presbyterians there, and upon a fair Poll contend,
that they all together are not One to Ten, who are hearty and strenuous
Assertors of Episcopacy there, and that all the Sectaries in the World, are not
One to Twenty in the Catholic Church, who maintain it in all its Powers and
Rights.

And however far Zeal and Charity may be the Objects of those Persons Envy, who
are of his Size of thinking, yet we cannot allow it to be an Excess of one, or
a Defect in the other, to deny the English Separatists the Favor of sorouding
themselves under the Covert of Foreign Churches; for the one oppose Episcopacy,
and the Men of Learning and Conscience in the other condemn them for it. But
here with respect to all, the Maxim holds universally true, That if the
Premises are just, Consequences make themselves, which such are to look to as
are affected with them. Nor does any thing that is or can be said upon the
Subject, Unchurch any Protestants who have proper Ministers and Sacraments,
neither does it Unchurch them if they have not, for they never were nor are
they now any Parts of the Catholic Church.

The Government will doubtless resent the advancing that seditious Position,
that the Doctrines of Passive Obedience and Non Resistance, whereon is founded
its own Security, are Jacobite Principles, and ought to be exploded.

Pass we now to the Introduction, a mere jingle of Words, without Sense or
Signification, unless in some Strokes, where it was well if they had had none.

I have in my Reply to the Remarker, given the Sense of those venerable Persons
on the Case, whose Voices the Defender has the Assurance to solicit for him,
and shall only add, that the Reason why Dissenters are so fond of Aerius, seems
to be, that he being branded for an Arian as well as Schismatic, they are
willing to pay a Deference to his Opinions in Doctrine, as well as in
Discipline.

The Author of the Modest Proof would have supposed some difference betwixt
Popery and Presbytery, by alleging, that though Episcopal Rights had deen early
usurped upon by the Papal Hierarchy, yet that they had not been disputed by the
other for 1400 Years together; but this the Defender will not grant, but infers
that because there were Papal Usurpations on that Order, therefore Presbyterian
Government was set up at Rome before that Period.

But supposing the Defender and the Pope agreed not only in that Point, but in
that of Infallibilility, yet I do not conceive him so incapable of Error, as to
have had any Occasion for the Exclamation, Have I mistaken this Author all this
while? Yet he has; and it is impossible for him, or any that would defend his
Principles, not to go on in an endless Mistake; and particularly he errs in the
Instances he has brought here of his being infallible.

For however near the Nature of the Stygian, the Waters of Geneva Lake may be,
and however swift the Geneva Raven in its Flight, yet Thanks to the Glorious
Head of the Church, it was preserved from being poisoned with their pestiferous
Influences: And therefore it will not follow, that there are no real Bishops in
the Northern Kingdoms, though Bugenhage was improved as an Instrument of the
Reformation in Denmark, where we are assured there are two Archbishops and
thirteen Bishops, any more than that contrary to known Fact and the Truth of
History, there were no Superintendants in Scotland, where Knox was improved as
a like Instrument.

Having thus accounted for the Truth and Sense of the Preface and Introduction,
let us now listen to what he lisps from the

First H^a^, and here he begins with the Remarker's Iniquity of adding to the
Scriptures, creating Apostles, and giving Commissions at pleasure, and
therefore let them both stand to the same Correction I have already given that
Wickedness. And I shall only further observe, that either some evil Genius must
have culled out for them both, that Passage of Mr. Sage, (whose drift there was
to prove a Truth that the Apostles had not at the time he was upon, received
their last Commission for Government) or that they must be judicially hardened,
to have read that Book unto that Passage, and not have dropped the Pen out of
their trembling Hands, struck with the strength and light of the Arguments,
adduced there for Episcopcy. But rather than yield that the Seventy's
Commission was continued after their first return, they will renounce their own
Friends, and deny Mr. Henry to be their Oracle, who in Luke 10.19. says, He
repeated, ratified and enlarged their Commission.

But under this Head there are some Strokes peculiar to the Defender, which
must not escape their just Rebukes; as that the Apostles were no Gospel
Ministers, while blessed with their Master's Presence upon Earth, and that in
that Interval there was no Gospel Church. Upon this Point I desire a Resolution
of these Queries; Might not Believers in the Messiah the Lamb of God come to
take away the Sins of the World, especially when baptized in that Faith, be
accounted Members of the Gospel Church? and was our Savior's Ministry so
unsuccessful, as to gain no Converts to the Faith of this Article? Were not
those who in so many Words are said, Luke 9.6. to have went through the Towns
preaching the Gospel, Ministers of the Gospel? And is the Doctrine of the
Resurrection the only Article of the Christian Faith? If the Defender answers
consistently with the Principle he here advances, he must be concluded to be
far removed from, and preach another Gospel than that of Christ.

Another grand Mistake he here labors under, is with respect to the Deacons
Office, part of which, it is readily granted, was their being charged with the
Church Stock, and the care of the Poor; but here he strains the Point unto so
high a Pin, that he would have it to be the only thing they were ordained to,
and for this purpose would feign these Suppositions.

First, That the primitive Church was so immensly Rich in respect to what it is
at present, that there was a necessity there should be ordained Treasurers for
the Charge of their Wealth, though according to him, the Church Stock is since
fallen so low, that there is no Occasion now for those ordained Officers, page
13.

Secondly, That they had their Lazarettos and Hospitals, where the Poor were
set at Tables, and whereat these Treasurers were to serve.

Now that there is no just Foundation for these Fancies, will appear from these
Reflections.

First, Though some sold their Possessions for the good of the Community, yet
it is plain the chief Support of their Poor, was from Collections among the
Churches, who, according to their Abilities, ministered to each others
Necessities. But what were they to the Riches and Revenues of the Churches
every where at present? And even in the Meetings in this Country, large Sums
are often collected, under the Color of charitable Uses; so that if there was
Reason to have Officers ordained for the Charge of them then, it must be owned
there is much more Reason now. But,

Secondly, What a groundless Fancy is it, that in the wandering persecuted State
of the Church, there should be such Attendance given to the Poor at Tables, and
that by ordained Ministers? But the Defender seems utterly ignorant of the
Nature of those Tables, which were such where the Eucharist was celebrated; and
for his Instruction, I refer him to the Opinion of the Ancients concerning the
Deacons Office about them. Thus Just. Mars. Apol. 2. p. 92. Oikonomos
Eucharistei Diakonos didoasis ekastoo toon parontoon metalabein. The Master
consecrates, and the Deacons distributes to those that are present. Thus Ignat.
Ep. ad Trall. p. 48. Edit. Voss. Ou gar broomatoon kai potoon eisi Diakonoi all
Eccleesiai Theou uperetai. They are not Deacons of Meat and Drink, but
Ministers of the Church of God. And therefore here we are to observe, what I
have made appear in dealing with the Remarker, that besides these lower Offices
of the care of the Churches Stock and Poor, and Attendance upon the
Eucharistical Tables, they were ordained for the Superior, of preaching and
baptizing. Nor will the Defender's shift, here avail him, that the Deacons
preached as Evangelists, for that is a plain Tautology, and no more than they
preached as Preachers, Evangelist being the Greek of the English Gospeller, and
both mean a preacher of the Gospel. So that if the Defender would speak Sense,
he must say, they evangelized or preached as Deacons. Tired theerefore with
these lisps, let us hearken to what is uttered from the

Second Head, From (...) the Defender breaths nothing but the Vanity and
Vapors of an empty, Skull, for the Defense of which, from being cracked, (if it
is not so already) he will have occasion now to hold up his Shield; for by his
Mr. Hereboord's leave, one of the meanest of the Tribe of Praelatists, will
undertake to answer his Herculean Argument by another ad Hominem, though it
equally affects all the Parity Tribe.

They are bold and insolent Intruders into the Enclosure wherewith our Lord has
fenced his Vineyard, who usurp the Ministerial Function without being ordained
to it by a Successor to the Apostles, in whom, by the original Charter, the
Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction over a plurality of Presbyters in
Churches, are annexed either in Fact or Right, as I have explained these Words
in my Reply to the Remarks; but Jonathan Dickinson was never ordained by any
such Successor.

Ergo, Jonathan Dickinson is a bold and insolent intruder, etc. and no Minister
of the Gospel at Elizabeth-Town; and therefore in the mentioned Reply he will
find a full Answer to his Sophism, which supposes, that there is but one single
Office contained in the Commission, and one single Part of the Gospel Ministry.
For there I have made it appear, that by the Explanations given of that
Commission, by the Practice of those who acted by it, and who being under the
infallible Direction of the Spirit, understood it fully; that there were
several things contained in it, and several Offices warranted by it, as the
Powers of Preaching, administering the Sacraments, Ordination, and Government,
by proper Officers, and that though all that discharged any of those Functions,
acted by virtue of this Commission, yet that all were not authorized thereby,
to do all that was contained therein, and I instanced that Deacons by virtue
thereof, did preach and baptize, but not consecrate the Lord's Supper, nor
meddle with the Powers of Absolution and Censures, which Presbyters did; but
not Ordain, because not vested witht the Episcopal Powers of Ordination and
Jurisdiction

So that there being several Parts of the Gospel Ministry to be discharged by
several Officers, his Argument is lost, and is no more than they that are
authorized by the same Commission, to the exercise of the same Parts of the
Gospel Ministry, have the same Office and Authority: But now for want of a
Minor, there is no Conclusion, and so the frightful Spectre vanishes. But yet
after this vain fit is over, we may observe him coming into Concessions enough
to give up the Cause, or Contradictinos enough to overthrow it. For he
confesses that our Lord did maintain the Symmetry and Proportion, between the
Jewish Synagogue and the Christian Church; and he has brought in Dr. Burnet
telling us, who were the Officers there, a Bishop, Presbyters and Deacons; from
whence it necessarily follows, according unto him, that those Officers are to
be continued in the Christian Church. And here he has given us the very thing
we contend for. For by Presbyterian Government he doubtless means a Government
that ought to be, and he says that having Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, is
an exact Description of this Government, which is all we plead for; and
therefore we are only now to agree upon the Propriety of the Name, which after
so free Concessions, he will not surely be so ill natured, as to deny to be
Episcopal; since so excellent a Government ought to be denominated from its
most excellent Title.

In my Reasoning with the Remarker, I have fully replied to what the Defender
has offered under the Third Head, though he has here one peculiar Stroke, in
denying St. Paul the Honor of being an Apostle, for before his Conversion he
had not seen our Lord, and the Defender expressly says, none could be admitted
into the Apostolate, but such as had seen Jesus before his Death. He indeed
afterward owns him as an Apostle, but that however, involves him in a
Contradiction Proceed we now to what he says from the

Fourth Head, And since this chiefly relates to Facts, I must clear them from
his Misrepresentations; for doing this I shall appeal to Scripture, Reason, and
Authorities. The Instances are chiefly of James Bishop of Jerusalem, Timothy
Bishop of Ephesus, as Titus of Crete, and the Angels or Bishops of the seven
Churches in the lesser Asia; as for Matthias, it is granted his Call to the
Apostolate was immediate, though probably his Consecration to it, was by the
Apostles; and still the Probability advances in the Apostle Barnabas, whose
Call does not appear to have been immediate.

To begin therefore with James, there are just Grounds from Scripture, as well
as Authorities from the Ancients, to conclude for his being above twenty Years
resident Bishop of Jerusalem; for when St. Paul, three Years after his
Conversion, went to Jerusalem, he found none other of the Apostles there, save
James, Gal. 1.18, 19. And St. Jerome says, in Loc. Hic autem Jacobus Episcopus
Hierosolymorum primus fuit cognominatus Justus. This James, Sir-named the Just,
was the first Bishop of Jerusalem. Eleven Years after this, or fourteen after
his Conversion, Gal. 2.1. St. Paul goes again to the General Council held at
Jerusalem, whereof we have an Account, Acts 15. and where, after hearing the
Case brought before it, this James decides the Controversy, v. 20. And St
Chrysostom. in Loc. gives the Reason, Episcopos even tees en Jerosolumon
Eccleesias. He was then Bishop of the Church in Jerusalem. Nine Years after
this St. Paul goes again, the last time he was at Jerusalem, computed to be
Anno Dom. 58. and finds James still there, Acts 21.18. And Chrysostom. in Loc.
repeats what he had said before, and in Hom. in Ev. Johan. he says, Oti Jacobos
ton Thronon elabe toon Jerosolumoon That James had his Throne at Jerusalem. And
Eusch. L. ^ C. 14. Prooton tees en Jerosolumois Ecclesias ton tees Episcopees
encheiristheenai Thronon. That he was the first who held his Episcopal Throne
at Jerusalem. All which, I hope, will amount to a Rational Evidence, with any
but the Defender and his Associates, that James was Bishop of Jerusalem.

Come we now to the Instance of Timothy, whom the busy Mocker had almost men
ioned under the Style of a Primate. If the Sting in the Tail be not Devil, be
that as it is, he thereby designed a Hail King, and to treat that venerable
Character, with an Air of Impiety, and the flouting Sneer of a Scorner; for
nothing incenses them more, than the flaming Evidences that are produced of
Timothy's being vested with prelatical Powers, and therefore I shall now take
off the Exceptions he has seign'd against them.

And,

First, Will it follow, that because Timothy had been with Paul in several
Places, that he was not afterward settled at Ephesus? when the Words he
ironically cites, do plainly prove he was, any more, than because Jonathan
Dickinson has been sometimes at a schismatical Seminary, and other Places, that
therefore he is not now settled a pretended Pastor, at Elizabeth-Town,

Nor,

Secondly, Is there any more Evidence from Acts 20.25. of Timothy's not being
Bishop of Ephesus, than there is from thence, of Jonathan Dickinson's not being
the Defender of Presbyterian Ordination? And,

Thirdly, I believe Jonathan would look on any one of his Brethren with a
jealous Eye, who should offer at the exerting any prelatical Powers, in
censuring his Manners, (for which by the way, there are just Grounds for some
others to do it) or charging him with unsound Doctrines, (which indeed don't
seem very Orthodox) and that he would ask the Question, Who made thee a (...)?

Fourthly, It Is plain, if Jonathan cannot pray better than he pleads, though it
even be a very bad Cause, he has great need of a Common Prayer Book, as an
Instrument under the Conduct of the Spirit, to help his Infirmities.

Fifthly, All Commissions are exclusive of all but those to whom they are
granted; to convince M. A. Jonathan of this, suppose his Deacon Tom should step
up into his Stall, and allege, that M. A. Jonathan's Ordainers, did not by
Name, exclude him form the Pastor's Office, and that he thought it a Duty upon
Occasion, to exhort and teach; I suppose M. A. Jonathan, for the recovery of
his Desk, would soon reply, Though you was not excluded by Name, yet you was by
the Nature of Commissions, which exclude all to whom they are not given; and
though as a Christian and a Parent, you may privately exhort your Neighbors, and
teach your Children, yet preaching in the proper Sense, is the peculiar Duty of
Gospel Ministers.

Lastly, All Accusations are not slanderous and evil Reports, for I have
brought some very true and just ones against the Defender, and such as it is
the Prerogative of Bishops to take Notice of, and punish such Persons of evil
Report, as it was of Timothy, not as an Evangelist, and so an extraordinary
Person, as he dreams: For the Defender pretends to be an Evangelist, or
Preacher, and I am well assured, he is no extraordinary Person, unless it be
for Impertinence and Presumption.

The next Instance is Titus, whom the Defender, upon his bare Word, desires us
to believe never returned to his See, after his Journey to St. Paul; but he has
so often falsified his Word, that we cannot but disbelieve every thing he says:
However, he has not here been carried on with his usual Assurance, to deny what
we plead for, that Titus discharged the Episcopal Office, while he was at Crete.

We are at last come to the Company of Angels, at the sight of whom the
Defender's Head is filled with Apocaliptick Visions, which want a new
Revelation to explain them, and would from them infer, that because sometimes
the Discourses in Rev. 2. respect those Angels and their Churches, therefore
they must always do so; and gives this as the only Reason for it, because the
plural Number is sometimes used there: Now if this be a good Argument, I have
ten to one of such against him, where the singular Number is used ten times to
once of the Plural, and therefore however great a piece of Wit and Gallantry he
may esteem his profane Ribaldry on that Chapter, an Atheist of an equal Talent
with him at burlesquing Scripture, has much more room to reply upon him, from
the other Number. However, it is plain the Defender is an utter Stranger to the
Idiom of Scripture Language, where an Anallagy of Numbers is observable, as 1 Timothy 2.15. She shall be saved in Childbearing, if they continue in the Faith.
In treating with the Remarker on this Point, I have accounted for the Sense of
the Word Angel, and that I have justly done it, I have the Concurrent Opinions
of ancient and modern Divines, thus Aug. Ep. 162. Divina voce sub Angeli nomine
laudatur praepositus Ecclesiae. The Governor of the Church is praised by the
Voice of God, under the Name of an Angel. Thus Occumen. in Cap. 2. Apoc.
Asteras de tous Angelous tous toon Eccleesioon ephorous kalei. He calls these
Angels Governors of the Church Stars. And for the Moderns, Bullinger Conc. 6.
in Apoc. Angeli sunt legati Dei, Pastores Ecclesiarum. The Angels are the
Messengers of God, the Pastors of the Churches. And he says of Polycarp, one of
those Angels, Ordinatus ab Apostolis ab ipso tanquam Johanne Episcopo. That he
was ordained by the Apostles, even by John himself. Paraeus in Loc. says,
Eosdem Angelos vocat quia sunt legati Dei ad Ecclesiam. They are called Angels,
because they are Ambassadors of God to his Church. And he is very industrious
to find out the very Persons who were those Angels or Bishops. Nay Beza, Annot.
Cap. 2. 1 Apoc. says, Angelo Proestoti quem nimirum oportuit in primus de his
rebus admoneri. To the Angel that is the President, who must first have Notice
of this Charge. And it is worth observing, that Mr. Brightman, the Inventer of
the Defender's Fable, founded it upon the single Particle Kai in Verse 24.
which is wanting in the most ancient Greek Copies of the New Testament.

And thus for the Episcopal Instances, that still do, and ever will stand
impregnable, against all the Attacks that are made upon them by saucy puny
Scriblers.

We are now to enter upon a new Logical, I wish I could say, Rational Scene;
where by Mood and Figure, the Defender would argue all the Gospel Ministry out
of the World. But previous to the Enquiry into the Nature of his Paralogisms.
we are to observe, that a Word got into his Head, which he could not get rid
of, and therefore without knowing its Meaning, sets it down several times in
(...), and that is the Word Coordinate, which means Equality, and not
Identity; so that he has more Powers than he thought of; for if he is Bishop
and Presbyter, and they are Coordinate, he has two distinct Powers, though
according to him, equal, and thus though all his Powers are Coordinate to his
Brethren's, yet they are not numerically the same; the Powers he has are not
the indivual Powers another has, though they may be equal or Coordinate.

Having remarkt this Blunder, I am further to observe, that in my Reply to the
Remarks, I have accounted for the Community of Names mentioned in the
Arguments, and how to appropriate them, and thither I refer him. It remains
therefore, that I demonstrate, that by his way of Reasoning, he has gratified
the Enthusiasis and Libertines, in that by his Craft, he would clear the World
of Priests. In order to this, I must set down some Positions, which he has
either expressly granted, or must confess to.

First, He affirms it to be just arguing from a Community of Names, to a
Co-ordination of Powers; that is, if he means any thing, that he who has any,
or all of those Names, is the same Officer, under all or any of those different
Designations.

Secondly, He will doubtless grant, but in Case he should not, since he has not
mentioned them with the other Names, I shall prove, that Deacon is a Name of a
Gospel Minister. Thus 2 Cor. 3.6. Col. 4.7.17. 1 Thessalonians. 3.2. the Words Minister
or Ministry, are in the Original Deacon, or Deaconship.

Thirdly, Page thirteenth he gives the Reason why Deacons are not now ordained,
and that for want of Church Stock; though I think he don't want a sort.

Now from these Positions, I will, by his way of Reasoning, prove upon him
these two things.

First, That there is a Church-Stock at Elizabeth-Town, and that he is
responsible for it, as he pretends to be the Deacon there.

Secondly, That to relieve him from his fear of Refunding, I will by the same
way of Reasoning prove, that he is no Deacon there, nor any where else, nor a
Minister of the Gospel at all, and so not at the Place he pretends to be.

First, By his way of Reasoning, I prove there is a Church-Stock at
Elizabeth-Town, and that he is responsible for it, as he pretends to be Deacon
there: Thus by his way of arguing,

Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons are a Community of Names for Gospel Ministers,
from whence it is just to argue, a Co-ordination of Powers. I suppose he means
an Identity of Offices, if he has any meaning.

But Jonathan Dickinson says, that the Community of Names with their
Coordinate Powers, that is an Identity of Offices, if his Words have any
Signification, are applicable to him:

Ergo, Jonathan Dickinson is a Gospel Minister in all its Offices. Again,

Deacons were ordained to the Care of the Church-Stock, where there was enough
to be taken care of.

But Jonathan Dickinson was ordained to the Office of a Deacon, that being one
of the common Names of a Gospel Minister.

Ergo, Jonathan Dickinson is chargeable with the Churches Stock, which he must
answer for.

But lest as an Insolvent he should think of running, I will relieve him under
that Apprehension, and by his way of Reasoning prove, that he had nothing to do
with their Stock nor Church, and that he is no Minister of the Gospel at all.
Thus,

Deacon is one of the common Names of Gospel Ministers.

But Jonathan Dickinson for want of Church-Stock, was not ordained Deacon.

Ergo, Is no Gospel Minister, nor has any thing to do with Church or Stock.

And this Rule of Reasoning will universally hold with respect to all the
Gospel Ministry, which Jonathan Dickinson has now syllogized out of the World,
by his ridiculous arguing from a Community of Names, to an Identity of Offices;
which he falsely calls a Co-ordination of Powers.

And now at last we are come to his Expostulatory Conclusion, wherein he sums
up his idle Tales with the same Appeals to Belief, as if he was vending them to
his credulous Audience; but what little regard they deserve, I appeal to the
World in the following Particulars.

First, The most observing Part of Mankind, must and do grant, that the
Contempt wherewith the Dissenters have treated the Episcopal Character, and
Sacerdotal Powers, has given Occasion to the Libertine to call in Question the
Truth of all revealed Religion; and to conclude that Priests of all Religions
were the same, and no Truth in any.

Secondly, That as the Papists first encouraged the English Conventicles, by
sending their gifted Emissaries to hold forth amongst them; so have they always
promoted these Separations, with a Design to divide and weaken the Church of
England, the chiefest Bulwark in Christendom against Popery, well knowing, that
their Idolatry can never be introduced, but at the Breaches made on that
Church, by Schism.

Thirdly, That it is a very daring Assurance in the Defender, whereby he would
dive into the Political Reasons of State, whereby Presbytery is established in
North, as well as tolerated in South Britain. I hope he will not affirm it has
ever been determined, by the Legislature, that it is a Jure Divino Government:
Nay, the contrary seems to be, and doubtless is, the fixed Opinion of the
Legislature. For the King and the Officers of his Government are Members of the
Church of England, and under the strongest, the most solemn and sacred
Engagements so to be; so that whatever Insults are offered, by the Dissenters,
to the Church, are direct Affronts upon the Legislature, and their Sentiments
of Things of the highest Consequence, and is no less than to call in Question,
whether they be Members of a Church from which a Separation is groundless, and
which with their usual Modesty and Duty they deny; and the Members of the
Church, with a becoming Behavior, and the strongest Evidence, maintain and
prove.

Fourthly, That it is in the Dissenters own power, to put in Tune the jarring
String, they are always harping on, and whence yet they say they cannot bear the
displeasing Sound of unchurching Protestants. It has been already hinted, that
nothing that can be said, does Unchurch any that have true Pastors and
Sacraments, and that those who have not, are not organized Parts of the
Mystical Body of Christ; for whether they will own it or no, these things are
clear and demonstrably true.

First, That the Notes of a true Church, are the Orthodox preaching of the
Word, and the regular Administrations of the Sacraments, by Persons fully
authorized for those Functions.

Secondly, That from the Holy Scripiures, we are to learn what Doctrines are
Orthodox, what the Nature of Sacraments, and also (there being now no immediate
Mission from Heaven) what the Powers of Preachers and Administrators, and who
are vested with them.

And since it is the last of those that has been now under Consideration, I
appeal to the unbiassed and disinterested Part of Mankind, who they are who
appear to have the true and only Title to those Powers.

From all which the Inference is natural, that it as much concerns every one as
his Salvation amounts to, to be well assured that he is within the Pale of the
true Church, and sits under the Means of Grace, and that at the great Audit, he
shall be owned by Christ, to have been a Member of his Mystical Body upon Earth.

ANIMADVERSIONS UPON Two Pamphlets, The one entitled, An Essay upon that
Paradox, Infallibility may sometimes mistake. The other, The ruling and
ordaining Power of Congregational Bishops or Presbyters defended. Which may
serve as an APPENDIX to the Defense of the Modest Proof.
In a LETTER to a Friend.
SIR,
I Received the two Pamphlets you sent me, and your Desire that I would make
such Observations on them, as may be of Service to the Public; though I am
willing to undergo any tolerable Difficulties, for the preventing or removing
Mistakes, yet I abhor dealing in Scandal, and find a strong Reluctance in
encountering a dirty Scoundrel, such as the Paradox maker, who seems possessed
with one of the Furies of FORTY ONE, breathing the true Spirit of the Party,
and that Day. His Jargon being indeed a Compound of Bombast and Billingsgate.
He has told us how he came by his Pedantry, in the Collegians handing him Books
he knew not the Use of, and we can account for his Oratory, from the Scurrility
of his Temper, the Nature of his Principles, and the Manner of his Education:
So that he writing neither like a Scholar nor a Gentleman, he and nine Tenths
of his Reveries, are properly to he answered by one equipped in a Porter's
Armor, namely his Language and his Club.

But lest, by what remains, he should impose on such as can Reason at no better
rate than himself; I shall, overlooking all his Rant and Ribaldry, apply my
self only to the exposing the Falsehoods he would advance, with respect to
Episcopal Succession; the maintaining whereof is the sum of the Book, he has
the Assurance to write against: And then take hold on the Impartial Hand that
writes the Appendix to the Sober Remarks.

In replying to whatever has the Face of Argument in this Rhapsody of the Son
of Martin, alias Belial, I shall prove,

First, That the Gospel Ministry was founded in an Imparity of Officers, or
rather a proper Episcopacy.

Secondly, That neither Idolatry nor Heresy, supposing them universal in all
the visible Members of the Church, do invalidate the Offices and Functions of
the Priesthood.

Thirdly, That there are undeniable Evidences, from Fact and Reason, that the
Chain of Succession, in Episcopal Government and Ordinations, was never broke;
and that the most impious Absurdities follow, upon Mar-Prelates Supposition,
that ever it was, or could be broken.

First I affirm, upon the highest as well as clearest Evidences, that the
Gospel Ministry was founded in an Imparity of Officers, or rather a proper
Episcopacy. This must be granted, if the Acts of the Apostles are allowed to be
Authentic, for these show them to have been invested with a Superiority over
some Brethren, Presbyters and Deacons, Acts 6.2, 8. 14.11, 12.22.12, 25.13.5.
And while the Epistles to Timothy and Titus are allowed to be Canonical, they
will continue, and contain Demonstrations, that those who ordained Presbyters,
had a Jurisdiction both over them, and their Churches. 1 Timothy 1, 3, 5, 19, 20,
22. Tit. 3.10. And therefore, until Atheism has disproved the Authority of the
sacred Register, wherein those Testimonies are preserved, the first Particular
must be concluded certain. I proceed then

Secondly, to evince, that neither Idolatry nor Heresy, supposing them
universal in all the visible Members of the Church, do invalidate the Offices,
and the Functions of the Priesthood. I say visible Members, for to bring those
that are invisible into the Argument, is to go wide of the Case: For an
invisible Church can have only invisible Privileges, and when it loses them,
or if it is capable of losing them, cannot be known to us, and therefore the
Dispute can only refer to the visible Church; and in that we are to observe a
vast Difference betwixt even gross Idolatry, and a total Apostasy, the one of
which does, though the other does not, destroy the very Being of a Church. Thus
though the Church of Rome believes the Apostles Creed, probably in the same
Sense, and upon the same Arguments with us, yet in as much as it worships the
true God, under improper Representations, it cannot be excused from the Charge
of Idolatry: Which, however, is still a Crime of another Nature, than a full
denying the God that is above, and the Lord that bought them, for this quite
destroys the Relation of God in Covenant with any People, but the other puts
them only so far out of Favor, as they are capable, yet still with a
Preservation of their Being: For none who have been admitted into the Peculium,
are excluded from the Privileges of it, until they have explicitly renounced
the Advantages of being in it. Thus Aaron's Accession to Idolatry, did not
vacate his Commission of being High Priest, nor the People's repeated Idolatry,
deprive them of peculiar and distinguishing Blessings, Neb. 9.18, 20. And while
that Polity stood, the Priesthood remained, even until our High Priest did
abrogate that Economy, with all its Rites, and Offices. And even in the early
Times of Christianity, we find Churches overspread with great Corruptions, as
those of Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.11. 5.7, 11, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21. and those in Rev.
Chapter 2 and 3. and for them reprehended, but their Being and Existence, was never
on that score denied. And now granting his Argument, all the strength it can
have, and that for the sake of the invisible Members, the Privileges of the
visible Church were continued, I have the same Evidence on my side, that our
Lord had an invisible Church, through all the Ages of Christianity, for the
sake whereof, he preserved the Covenant Privileges, to that which was visible.
This he must grant, unless he confesses that the Gates of Hell had a greater
prevalency over the Christian, than the Jewish Church, which is a Supposition
too absurd, either to be asked, or allowed: And here we may observe the partial
Spirit of the Party, who allege, that Idolatry, or Heresy, unchurches all, but
such as they are; for according to them, the most flagrant Impieties will not
unsaint any, on their side. I come now

Thirdly, to evince, that there are undeniable Evidences, from Fact and Reason,
that the Chain of Succession, in Episcopal Government and Ordinations, was
never broke, and that the most impious Absurdities follow, upon Mar-Prelate's
Supposition, that ever it was, or could be broken.

First, we appeal to Fact, that as the Gospel Ministry was founded in
Episcopacy, so by all who have wrote the History of the Church, from the Acts
of the Apostles, to this Time, we have an Account of the Churches being
universally under Prelatical Government, as from Eusebius, Socrates, and
Evagrius Scholasticus, until about the Year 600, and from thence, every Country
where Christianity was planted, can produce Registers of their Bishops, and we
challenge the Dissenters, to assign a Time, after the Apostles, when there was
no Episcopacy, or when it discontinued in the Christian Church, or to produce
any Instance of a National Church, that ever was under the Government of mere
Presbyters before Calvin, or even since, but some very few that follow him, in
other of his rigid Notions. The Instance of the W^lders^s, can be of no Service
to them here, unless they prove that their Ecclesiastical Affairs were carried
on in a Parity, which they may, after their usual way affirm, but must, as they
always do, sail in the Proof. Come we from Fact,

Secondly, To Reason upon the Case, and I argue against the maintainer of that
Paradox, that the Chain of Succession, can, and has been broken, from these two
Arguments.

First, If it is, the Christian Religion is an Imposture. And

Secondly, Suppose it true, there are now no proper Ministerial Powers therein.

First, If the Chain of Succession is broke, the Christian Religion must be an
Imposture, for the Author of it affirmed, that he would be with it until the
end of the World: Now if he was not so, but by withdrawing his Presence, let it
be broken, he failed in his Promise, the Consequence whereof is, to disbelieve
every thing he said; for no Reason can be assigned for the Faith of one
Article, more than another, which equally depends upon the Veracity of the
Assertor, and if the one be found false, the other cannot be proved true; and
so with our broken Chain, there is an end of Christianity. But,

Secondly, If we suppose a single failure in this Point, it will make it
impossible, that there can be now any proper Ministers of the Gospel; for when
the Succession was interrupted, and the Chain broke, there must either have
been some Power lodged in the Community of Christians, to soulder it again, or
the Original Author must have made a second, or there must now be none.

The first as false, cannot be proved, for in Fact those Powers were originally
left with proper Officers, and not with the Faithful, in common, Matthew. 28.16
ad fin. John 20.19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Nor can any Laws of Necessity, warrant an
Intrusion, upon what is the peculiar Prerogative of a Divine Power to
institute, namely, to appoint Persons to discharge the Sacerdotal Functions,
Numb. 16.40. 1 Samuel 13.8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.2 Sam. 6.6, 7.2 Chron. 26.19, 20,
21, 22. Heb. 5.4, 5.

Not the second, unless they will condescend upon the Time, Place and Persons,
when and where this new Chain was forged, and to whom committed, and who those
are that are now linked in it; and prove that either our Lord came from Heaven
to renew it, or delegated some by an audible Voice, or the Power of Miracles to
vouch for their Commission to that Purpose, which cannot be done. And therefore,

Thirdly, It will necessarily follow, that upon supposing a Breach in the
Succession, there has not been any Gospel Ministry since the Moment it
happened, nor is there at present, nor can be for the future, without a new
Revelation for it.

To sum up then the Evidence upon the Argument, since it appears from the
Divine Records, that the Gospel Ministry was founded in Episcopacy, and from
the same, that neither Idolatry nor Heresy are able to invalidate the
Sacerdotal Powers, that in Fact the Episcopal Succession has continued
uninterrupted through all the intermediate Ages from the Apostles Times to
ours, and that the most impious Absurdities follow up (...) the denial, the
Consequence is unavoidable, that the Son of Martin, who would mar Prelacy, and
consequentially subvert the Foundations of Christianity, must be a Son of
Perdition.

Having thus accounted for what is material in that Libel, I turn to the
Appendix, writ indeed in a softer Strain, but superior to the other in the
Arts of Sophistry, for the one is one continued Rhodomantado, but the other now
(...) our View, has more of Cunning and Design; the Author often varies Shapes
and Characters, to avoid the Stroke he might be subject to, under any one; for
now he personates an Independent, and anon a Ruling Elder, which is exceeding
disingenuous and unfair, to oblige us to enter the Lists with an Enemy in
Masquerade. It Is true indeed, all the Sectaries militate under the same common
Standard of Schism and Rebellion, but then it would be fair to distinguish
their Squadrons by their proper Ensigns.

However, we must take him in his way, (an Expression often used ironically by
him) and for his Conviction, as well as that of others, I shall set down some
Preliminaries, which may give a just turn of Thought to those who have been
under an unhappy Biass in the Controversy, and then give the true Sense of the
Texts he mistakes or misapplies. As to the Preliminaries, I shall

First explain the Nature of the Commission given to the Apost^^^.

Secondly, consider the Nature of the Gift conferred in Ordination.

Thirdly, enquire whether the Apostles were mere Presbyters, or whether they
were not vested with proper Episcopal Powers.

First, As to the Nature of the Apostolical Commission, which is on all Hands
agreed to be the Grand Charter for the Evangelical Ministry, in all its Powers
and Offices, it is delivered in such general and yet so few Words, that it is
by all confessed, to contain more in its Nature than is expressed; for taking
in both Places where the Commission is mentioned, Matthew. 28.19, 20. John 20.21,
22, 23. we find nothing to be expressed in both of them, except the Powers of
Preaching, of Absolution and Censures, and dispensing one of the Sacraments;
but then the other Sacrament must also surely be meant, as well as there must
be included therein the Powers of Ordination and Government, and therefore the
Intent and Purport of this Commission, must be gathered from the Practice of
the Apostles, as they understood and explained it in their acting by and upon
it.

By virtue whereof we find in Fact, that they ordained Deacons, besides some
lower Offices to preach and to baptize, that in some Churches they settled
Presbyters, as at Corinth, who had the Powers of both Sacraments and Censures,
1 Cor. 5.5, 7, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 2, 6. and that Diocesan Bishops, in whom the
Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction over a Plurality of Presbyters and
Churches were annexed, were settled by them, in their respective Sees, is
evident from the Instances of Timothy and Titus, and the Apocalyptical Angels,
and is made fully to appear in the Defense of the Modest Proof. So that if
following the Explanations given of this Commission by Apostolic Practice be
warrantable, the Assertors of Episcopacy are undoubtedly right. Let us now

Secondly, Consider the Nature of the Gift conferred in Ordination, and thereby
is unquestionably meant the Office and the Power whereby to discharge it, and
not the Holy Ghost, which never was, nor is it possible to be, in the Power of
Man to bestow; for though indeed its Influences are conveyed by its glorious
Author, through Means and Instruments, as the Word, Sacraments and Imposition
of Hands, yet no Creature in a proper Sense, can be said to confer it; and
therefore the Expression must be taken in a metaphorical Meaning, let it be
used by whom and on what side soever. For though it is said the Holy Ghost was
given at the laying on of the Apostles Hands, Acts 8.17. yet it is not said
they gave it; and though our Church retains our Savior's Form in its
Ordinations, and the Ordainers desire the Ordained may receive the Holy Ghost,
yet do not say that they bestow it; their Action indeed is the Conduit of its
Conveyance, but its self must flow from the Fountain of it.

Thirdly, Let us enquire whether the Apostles were mere Presbyters, or were not
also vested with proper Episcopal Powers; and here the Instances are plain and
numerous to prove them so vested, as in their Ordination of Deacons, Acts 6.5,
6. Elders in every City, Acts 14.23. and Bishops, 2 Timothy 1.6. Tit. 1.5. And
it is granted on each side, that the Apostles were vested with Jurisdiction over
the Presbyters and the Churches too.

Having thus adjusted these Preliminaries, I shall now take hold on the
Impartial Hand, if it is not too nimble or ill-natured to be taken in its own
way; and all that is offered will be fully replied to, by setting a few Texts
in their true Light.

And First, As to 2 Timothy 1.6. I will take him in his own way, by condemning
Calvin's Institutes, and admitting his Comment on the Text that Timothy was
ordained by a College of Presbyters; but then he must grant also, that those
Presbyters were either Apostles, or mere single Presbyters, and Paul presiding
among them in either Case: If the first, our Point is gained; for the Apostles
were not only Presbyters, but Bishops also in the full and strictest Sense of
the Word, by the third Preliminary; and this will save the Credit and the
Evidence of the first Epistle to Timothy for Episcopacy, and be exactly
agreeable to the Practice of the Church of England; if the second, its plain,
that Paul alone conferred the Gift, that is, the Office and the Power of
executing it, which is there its meaning, by the second Preliminary, and that
the Presbyters only gave their Assent, it being impossible in the Nature of the
Thing, that the Presbyters could have any other Influence on the Act; for
taking him in his own way, if the Gift conferred was the Holy Ghost, (which by
the way I do not grant) and if Paul alone did not conser it, then every single
Presbyter did that as well as he, and every one has Power to give it, which is
contrary to his own Scheme, which confines it to the Apostles; and it will
follow, that the more ordaining Presbyters there be, the more of the Holy Ghost
the ordained shall receive; and in that Case, who would not covet to be
ordained by an Oecomenical Council of them, and with such vast Collations of it
such a Person might be fitted also to be Pastor of the Oecomenical Church, and
in Proportion, those who had fewer Ordainers, had fewer Shares in this Gift or
the Holy Ghost, and proportionably would be of less use to the Church. Or if by
Gift be understood the Office and the Powers for its Execution, as seems most
evident, then if Paul did (...) alone confer it, it will follow, that each
ordaining Presbyter conferred a Part, or the Whole of his Gift; if a Part, it
would gratify the Public, to condescend upon what Part, or how many there must
be to make up the Whole; if each Ordainer conferred the whole Gift, then in
proportion to their Number, must the Offices be multiplied, and then instead of
one, there might be a dozen or more Offices conferred, according to the Number
of Ordainers. From these Reflections therefore, and the Absurdities that flow
from them, it must be owned, that if there were Presbyters who laid their Hands
with Paul's on Timothy, that it could be only to express their Consent; so that
whether that Place refers to the Presbyterate or Episcopate, he is extremely
silly who affirms this to be an Evasion, it being demonstrable from the very
Nature of the Action, that it could be for no other End. A Second Text is Acts
13.1. where he says, we shall find Paul and Barnabas separated to their special
Ministry among the Gentiles, by the Hands of certain Prophets and Teachers at
Antioch, who were neither Apostles nor Diocesans, but has he proved it? no,
that is an unusual Method with the Writers on that side; however, we cannot
believe them, when the Assertion appears plainly false, as it does in this
Case. For in that Text we find Persons there of a superior Character to mere
Presbyters, and yet only said there to be Prophets and Teachers; for it is
certain Paul and Barnabas were Apostles, and as such of a superior Character
to mere Presbyters, and no Reason can be given to question it in the others,
for Bishops not being always mentioned under the Title of their highest Office
and Order, it will not follow, that though sometimes named under the Character of
their lowest Order, that they have no higher; and therefore it will follow,
that if Paul and Barnabas were (notwithstanding their being called there
Prophets and Teachers) really Apostles or Bishops that the others were also
really such, though with them also mentioned under inferior Characters.

As to 1 Timothy 5.17. he here acts the disingenuous Part* in not being positive
which of the Expositions he is for, whether he takes the Eliers for the same or
one, as he words it, or for two kinds of Presbyters. I am ready to think he is
so far in the right, as to be for the former, and that he allows 1 These. 5.12.
to be a good Comment on that Text, the Sense whereof according to him, must be,
that part of your Office which is Doctrinal, is more to be honored, than that
which is Ruling; or you are to be honored as a Ruler, but with half the Honor
of a Teacher. Now this silly Exposition can have no Consequence, unless he can
prove our Bishops to have renounced their Powers of Preaching, when they were
vested with the Powers of Ruling; and since this is false in Fact, it remains,
that since to their Powers of Preaching, there are added the Powers of Ruling,
and both Offices joined, the honors annexed to them must be also, and then it
will follow, that they are to be honored with all the Honors due to all the
Offices.

Upon the whole therefore, since it is thus evident, even upon the Appendix
maker's own way of arguing, that Paul alone conferred the Office, with the
Powers to execute it, the Presbyters only assenting to it, that those who
separated Paul and Barnabas, were Persons of a superior Character to mere
Presbyters, and that Bishops who Rule well, and Labor in Word and Doctrine,
are to be held worthy of more than double Honor, because if there is a
Complication of the Offices, there ought to be of the Honors annexed to them:
The Consequence is plain, that the Appendix maker has no less mistaken his
Argument than the Remarker, and to borrow his own decent Expression, Confusion
must equally cover them both.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 1. dele 2d Comma. p. 6. l. 4. r. Independent. l. 14. insert have
between Judgment and been. l. 21. insert of between being and an. l. 31. r.
Plebeian. p. 8. l. 1. r. delirious. p. 12. l. 1. r. Suppositions, and dele the
Comma. p. 16. l. 11. for enlisting r. Englishing. p. 27. l. 4. for Remarkable
r. Romantic. l. 32. r. Boldness. p. 28. l. 23. dele if. p. 29. l. 1. for was
r. were, and begin l. 23. with the Word then. p. 30. l. 18. r. flagrant. p. 31.
l. 25. r. they. p. 32. l. 17. r. limited. p. 34. l. 7. for a Man r. Men. l. 24.
for Timothy r. Titus. p. 35. l. 24. r. Solecism. p. 38. l. 26. add the Word
down after conjure, p. 40. l. 29. r. Dress. p. 42. l. 5. r. Polycarp. l. 24. r.
atque. p. 44. l. 17. r. Primasius. l. 27. r. Theophylact. l. 29. r. Megalees.
p. 54. l. 4. r. Transgressor. l. 5. r. Fallacies. l. 11. r. Petulance. p. 56.
l. 13. r. Yes. p. 57. l. 17. r. Episcopacy. p. 60. l. 13. dele Comma between
empty and Skull. p. 62. l. 1. r. Contradictions. p. 67. l. 9. r. Analogy. p.
13. in the Appendix, l. 1. r. this.


