GOD's Face set against AN Incorrigible People.

A SERMON Preached at the Public Lecture in Boston, Thursday July 30. 1724.

By Thomas Foxcroft, One of the Pastors of the Old Church in Boston.

With a Preface by the Reverend Mr. Cooper.

BOSTON, N. England, Printed by B. Green, for John Eliot, at his Shop at the
South End of the Town. 1724.

TO THE READER.
THAT the best People may soon degenerate, is a Truth abundantly evident from
the Cautions, Threatenings, and Histories of the Word of GOD, without appealing
to the Experience of all Ages. And that this People have sadly done so, cannot
but be owned by every one who knows any thing of New-England's first Ways, and
has his Mind at all exercised to discern things of this Nature. It is also as
evident that GOD has been restifying against our Apostasy, and punishing us
therefore, in a Series of various and very awful Judgments. Our first days, as
they were our best in respect of P^^y, so also of Prosperity. Our Fathers
indeed met with their Trials in their day; their GOD did prove and chatted
them: But still He was remarkably present with them; the Hand of his Mercy, and
the Arm of his Power, were often made bare, for their Deliverance; and his
Salvation was openly showed in ^he sight of the Heath^n. They trusted in him,
and were not confounded; they cried to him, and were delivered. He answered
them by terrible things in Righteousness upon their Enemies. They have told us
what GOD did for them in their day, in the time of old; and we should speak of
it to our Generation, and to those that shall come after us, that our Fathers
GOD may be exalted.

BUT as there has been a visible Alteration in our Carriage to him of later
Years, so there has been a signal Change in the Course of his Providence
toward us; which may cause us to take up this mournful Lamentation, Oh that it
were with us as in Years past, as in the days (...) God preserved us: When the
Candle of his Providence shined upon our heads, and by his light we walked
through darkness! For though there are not wanting many Instances of the
underserved Favor of GOD to us, and some gracious Answers of Prayer
(particularly in the late remarkable Successes against the Enemy, and in the
return of fruitful Seasons, after a threatening Drought) which it would he a
criminal Ingratitude and Stupidity in us not to take a thankful Notice of; yet
it must be said. We have not such ^o^ed Appearances of GOD with aim for us, as
our Fathers had; and the Tokens of his Displeasure are to be read in deep and
fiery Characters: It must be a sleepy, or rather dead Eye, that does not see
them, and a hard heart that is not affected with them.

NOW that which GOD expects of us is, That we be HUMBLED, that we FEAR, and
turn our feet to walk in his Law, and is his St^t^tes, which he has set before
us, and before our Fathers. This is the Call of the present day: Highly
reasonable in it self, and of the last Consequence to us: For it is the only
likely Way to obtain the Removal of the Judgments, under which we are
languishing, and the Return of GOD's Favor to us in which our whole Happiness
is bound up. This the Nature of the Duty, the Commands and Promises of GOD in
his Word, and the Experiences of the People of GOD do abundantly prove.

AND this is what we are called to in the following Discourse; wherein the
Nature of this Duty is plainly and fully described, and, as ^ Motive to it, the
fatal Consequence of our Incorrigibleness under Divine Judgments is awfully
represented. The Lecture Day before that on which it was delivered, was turned
into a day of solemn Fasting and Prayer, particularly on account of the War,
and the Drought which was then prevailing: And the Author well Judged it proper
to follow that day with such a Discourse as this. And I desire heartily to
bless GOD who led his Servant into such a Subject, and assisted his
Preparations on it; gave the Sermon such Acceptance and Influence in the
Delivery, and has inclined him to publish it.

IT comes abroad (at the Desire of some pious and well-dispos'd Persons who
heard it) just as it was preached; without transcribing or altering much: only
he has (as he was desired) enlarged the first Proposition under the first
Doctrine, by adding what he delivered some time ago from the same Text on a
Fast Day; which has swelled the Discourse something beyond the Dimensions of a
single Sermou. And though I know it was not the design of my dear and worthy
Brother, in asking me to preface this his Sermon, that I should give any
Encomium of him or his Performance, which, (as he does not need it from any
one, so) it would not be decent for me to go about; yet I will take the Liberty
to say, that as the Subject is important, and very seasonable for this People
at this day, so it is handled in such a manner as evidently shows the
Breathings of a pious Spirit, and a hearty Concern for the great Interest of
this People; and, I think, it cannot fail of being highly acceptable to every
true Lover of Religion, and sincere Friend of our Zien. And as to my putting a
Preface to it, (which some perhaps may think needs an Excuse) I shall only say,
That this my Brother and I, are not only united in the Bonds of Friendship and
Intimacy, but in carrying on alternately the last Turn in the Thursday-Lecture:
This made me think with him there would be but a Propriety and Harmony in it,
if I submitted to the Desires of Him, and the Publishers, to accompany it to
the Press with my humble and earn^st Prayers to the GOD of all Grace, that He
would make these seasonable and pungent Words, as G^ads, and as Nails fastened
by the Masters of Assemb^es, and given by that one Shepherd the Lord Jesus;
that they may stimulate all that shall read them, to the great and necessary
work of Humiliation and Reformation, which is so loudly called for. For if
after all we remain an unhumbled and an unreformed People, what can be
expected, but that we should come at last with Horror to subscribe to the
Truth and Dreadfulness of this awful Threatening, Behold I will set my Face
against you for evi^! But if we humble our selves, and Fear, and walk in God's
Law, Then may we hope that GOD will cause his Face to shine upon us, and save
us: That he will visit us with his Favor, and make us glad according to the
days wherein he has afflicted us, and the Years wherein we have seen evil: That
we should call, and He would answer us: That he would be our Arm every Morning;
would arise as a strong Man after new wine, plead our Cause for us, go forth
with our Armies, bring us forth out of Darkness into light, set our feet upon a
Rock, and put a new Song in our Mouth, even Praises to our God: That we should
possess this good Land which the Lord gave to our Fathers, and leave it, with
the Advantages we enjoy in it, Civil and Religious, as an Inheritance to our
Children after us for ever. To this I would put my humble, and fervent A MEN.

William Cooper.
BOSTON, Sept. 9th. 1724.
ERRATA.
Page 6. line last, for In, Read, Under. P. 8. l. 5., R And humble as Job. P.
15. l. 26. R. Of the Ninevites. P. 18. l. 12. dele His. P. 30. l. 16. R.
Sometimes. P. 43. l. 3. from bott. R. Time.
GOD's Face set against AN Incorrigible People.
JER. XLIV. 10, 11. They are not humbled even unto this day^ neither have they
feared, nor walked in my Law, nor in my Statutes, that I set before you and
before your Fathers, Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel,
Behold, I will set my Face against you for Evil --


JEREMIAH was called early to be a Teacher in Israel, an inspired Prophet: And
he continued long, even from the Days of good Josiah, through all the
succeeding wicked Reigns, down to the Jews Captivity, and for some time after
this. He is commonly styled the weeping Prophet. He was a mournful Spectator of
the Sins and Sorrows of the Jewish Nation, then the only professing People of
God. In his Book of Prophecies we have many melancholy Chapters concerning
them; besides the Book of Lamentations, which was (as one calls it) his Elegy
upon Jerusalem's Funeral. He was sent to warn ^acksliding Israel of the
desolating Judgments, that were coming on them, except they Repented: And he
lived to see a great part of his sad Predictions accomplished upon them: for
the People turned not at his Reproof. As became a faithful Prophet, a Lover of
Zion, and one jealous for the Lord, he set himself to bear Testimony against
the growing Degeneracies of that unhappy Day, and to reform the Corruptions of
the Times. How painful were his Endeavors! How fervent his Applications to
Conscience! How impartial his Rebukes! How loud and plain his Warnings? How
pathetic and moving his Exhortations! A wise, and zealous and powerful Preacher
he was. And yet (O how sorrowful the Thought) it seems he had but very little
Success in his Ministry. He lived among a People that hated to be Reformed, and
that would not be healed. Nevertheless the Prophet, in preaching the Word, was
instant in season and out of season; rebuked, reproved, exhorted with all
Long-suffering, and Doctrine. After Jerusalem was made desolate, and the Body
of the Nation were carried Captive to Babylon, He remained Prophesying to the
small Remnant, that were suffered to abide still in the Land. And when this
ungrateful wicked Remnant deserted their own Land, and compe^'d Jeremiah to go
down with them into Egypt; He still attended the Duties of a Prophet, and did
the best Services he could for his Countrymen there.

THIS forty fourth Chapter of his Book, out of which I have taken my Text,
begins with an awakning Sermon, which Jeremiah preached to the Jews in Egypt.
Wherein the Prophet first reminds them of those desolating Judgments, that were
brought upon Jerusalem and upon themselves. Then he observes to them the
procuring Cause of their Miseries, viz. Their own Wickedness. In the next
place, he puts them in mind of the Warnings they had had, and the Pains that
God had taken with them to bring them to Repentance; upbraids them with their
former Obstinacy in their own Land, and with the fatal Consequents of it;
upbraids them with their continued Impenitency and repeated Idolatries now in
Egypt, and expostulates with them upon the Unreasonableness and Madness of
their Conduct; and finally threa^ens them with a total Destruction, for their
incurable Stubborness and Impenitence.

MY Text takes in part of the two last Heads. And in it we have a Charge and a
Th^eatning.

First, HERE is a Charge upon the Jews. They are not humbled, even unto this
Day, neither have they feared, nor walked in my Law. etc. They were not humbled
for their Sins, is they ought to have been, and as God expected; nor afraid of
his Judgments; neither did they turn from their evil ways unto God's
Test^monies, notwithstanding all the Methods used with them to that end. This
is the Charge advanced against them, the Complaint sighed over them,

THEN a Threatening follows. Therefore, thus sa^h the Lord of Hosts, the God of
Israel, Behold, I will set my face against you for Evil. They had set their
faces to go into the Land of Egypt, in a daring Contradiction to the revealed
Will of GOD, and had hardn'd their faces against GOD, in ways of Rebellion and
Wickedness: and therefore GOD will also set his face against Them, in ways of
Judgment, to punish them for all their Iniquities.

WHAT may be further needful for the Explanation of the words, may be given in
speaking to the Doctrines that I design to treat upon, which are these. (1.)
GOD expects it of a People under his Judgments, that they humble themselves,
and fear, and walk in his Law. (2.) It is sometimes the sad Case of a People
under Divine Rebukes that they continue, notwithstanding all, unhumbled, and
unreformed. (3.) GOD observes their Conduct under his Judgments, and marks
against them all their Obstinacy and Impenitency. (4.) When a People are
finally irreclamable, GOD will set his Face against Them for Evil.

DOCT. I. GOD expects it of a People under his corrective Hand, that they
humble themselves, and fear, and turn their Feet unto His Testimonies, to walk
in his Law.

HERE are Three comprehensive Articles of Duty, which might all be profitably
expatiated upon.

PROP. I. A People under GOD's Judgment's should humble Themselves. The
Complaint in our Text, They have not humbled themselves, shows GOD's
Expectation of it from them; and this must be founded upon the strongest
Reasons, and the Demands of his own Law. The Call of GOD to an afflicted People
runs in such Language as that, Jam. 4.9, 10. Be afflicted, and mourn, and weep;
let your Laughter be turned to Mourning, and your Joy to Heaviness. Humble your
selves in the sight of God. It is expressly required by many Divine Precepts,
that we humble our selves under GOD's Judgments; which speaks it our
indispensable Duty. And then the Nature and Reason of things bespeak it at out
hands. The Calamities we are groaning under, do loudly preach to us of the
Power of GOD, of his Holiness and Justice, his Displeasure at us for our Sins,
etc. which are so many grounds and motives of Humiliation. Hence it is but our
reasonable Service, and a just Comportment with our State and Circumstances.
Moreover this will be our Safety and Interest. If we are truly humbled, it will
dispose us to seek to GOD, and to engage in a saving, through, and lasting work
of Reformation; and so give ground to hope for, and prepare us to receive the
Salvations, which GOD has promised to a reforming and repenting People. GOD
will not forget the humble; the Poor of the Flock shall trust in Him: They
shall trust in Him, and ly down in in Safety. They shall rejoice in the Holy
One of Israel, and shall tread down the Haughty under their feet. When once a
People are brought to humble themselves under GOD's Judgments, it bodes
Deliverance, and presages the return of good Times. According to that of the
Apostle, 1 Pet. 5.5, 6, 7. Be clothed with humility: for GOD resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble. Humble your selves therefore under the
mighty hand of GOD, that he may exalt you in due time: Casting all your care
upon him, for be cares for you.

BUT here the Inquiry arises, What is that humbling themselves, which GOD
expects from a People under the Rebukes of his Providence. To which I answer,
it implies something inward, in the Heart, and something external, in the Life.

1. IT may be considered as internal, in the Heart; and so it implies many
gracious Dispositions and Actings of Soul. And indeed it is this inward
Humiliation, that is principally intended. For GOD looks at the Heart chiefly.
The Sacrifices of GOD Psalm. 51.17.
are a broken Spirit, and a contrite Heart. To this Man will I look, says the
Lord Isa. 66.2.
, even to him that is Poor, and of a contrite Spirit. The Lord sees not as Man
sees 1 Samuel 16.7.
: for Man looks on the outward Aspearance, but the Lord looks on the Heart.
And if we be not of a humble Spirit, we do not truly humble our selves in the
sight of GOD. To humble our selves outwardly, and in the fight of Men only,
will not suffice: we must humble ourselves in the sight of GOD also. The Heart
must be humbled: and this includes a variety of religious Frames, and devout
Affections; which I shall endeavor to sum up in the following heads.

First, IT implys, as the foundation of it, a deep Conviction of Guilt, the
fruit of a through Self-examination, and impartial Self-judging. Under the
Judgments of GOD, it becomes a People to judge themselves. We should search our
Hearts, and try our Ways, to find out the provoking Evils, that are the unhappy
Grounds of GOD's Controversy with us. GOD expects to hear us inquiring every
one, (as in Jer. 8.6.) What have I done? We must be very accurate, impartial,
and through in this Inquiry; willing to know the worst of our selves, the most
of our guilt. And wherein we have done Iniquity, our Hearts must condemn us,
our Consciences accuse us, charge upon us our Sins, and read our Doom to us
from the Law of GOD.

IN the next place, being thus convinced and condemned in our selves, there
must be a deep Self-abasement, Shame, and Remorse of Conscience, an holy
Indignation at our selves, and a humble Submission to the Will of GOD.

THERE must be a godly Shame and Self-abasement, under the sense of our guilt
and vileness. As becomes self-condemned Malefactors, we must be filled with
Shame, and Confusion, at the remembrance of our Faults. When we remember our
evil ways, and our doings that have not been good, we must loath our selves in
our own sight Exo. 36.31, 32.
for our Iniquities, and for our Abominations: and be ashamed, yea, even
confounded for our own ways. We must not rest in the visible Signs and outward
Expressions of shame: but (...) inner Man must be sutably affected and abashed;
the Heart blush; Pride within be mortified, and every self-exalting Thought
subdued. Knowing every man the plague of his own Heart, we must be vile in our
own eyes, and as Job when he said Job 42, 6.
I abbor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. As Asaph, when he said Psalm.
73.22.
, So foolish was I, and ignorant; I was as a Beast before GOD. And like Ezra,
when he fell down on his knees, and said Ezr. 9.5, 6.
, O my GOD, I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to Thee, my GOD; for our
Iniquities are increased over our head, and our Trespass is grown up unto the
Heavens.

MOREOVER, there must also be a godly Sorrow, and Remorse of Conscience; a
spirit of holy Mourning, and true Contrition of Heart. This is required. Jer.
2.19. Know and see that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou have forsaken
the Lord thy GOD. And (as it follows, Chap. 6.26.) Make thee Mourning, as for
an only son, most bitter Lamentation. The Apostle Peter, after the denial of
his Lord, is an Instance of this; of whom it is said, Mat. 26.75. He went out,
and wept bitterly. And now the Call of GOD to us, to every one of us, is in the
words of our Savior (Luke 10.37.) Go, and do thou likewise. It was prophesied
of some, Ezekiel. 7.16. They shall be like Doves of the valleys, all of them
mourning, every one for his Iniquity. The Apostle gives that Character of the
Corinthians, (2 Epist. 7.9, etc) Ye sorrowed to Repentance; ye sorrowed after a
godly sort. For godly sorrow works Repentance unto Salvation not to be
repented of. Such penitent Mourners must we be, if we would approve our selves
truly humbled. Our Sorrow must be inward and unfeigned. We must be pricked at
the Heart; our Spirits wounded; our Souls melted into penitential Tears. Joel
2.12, 13. Now says the Lord, Turn ye even to Me with all your Heart, and with
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning: and rent your Heart and not your
Garments. We must afflict our Souls: our Hearts must be rent and broke with a
mighty sense of Sin, and as 'twere ground to pieces with a prevaling Sorrow:
especially at a time when we are bewailing not only our own personal Sins, but
also the Sins of others and of the Land, our Hearts must indeed be full. A
great and deep Sorrow becomes us, proportionable to the grounds and occasions
of grief that are before us, and which are (alas) at this day how very
plentiful! Very numerous, and great! Yet the mournful Penitent must keep his
Resentments and Passions within due Bounds; remembering the Apostle's Caution, 2
Cor. 2.7. Lest perhaps such a one should be swallowed up with overmuch Sorrow.
-- And as (...) Sorrow must be hearty and deep, so it must be universal and
impartial. Indeed if it have the former Qualifications, it will have the
latter. We must mourn after this godly sort for all our Sins: We must not
flatter any favorite Vices in our selves. While we pretend to humble our selves
for one Sin, (a Sin, which perhaps through satiety, or some evil effects felt, is
become grievous and irksome to us) we must not rejoice in another, that is more
agreeable to our Humor, or appears to be more for our worldly Advantage; as it
may be the manner of some is. No, but we must repent of all our Sins, without
any exception. Our Hearts must be broken for, and broken off from our most
beloved Lusts. -- And as there must be no Partiality, with reference to our own
Sins, so neither as to the Sins of Others.

Each (says one) must mourn the Sins common to all; and the gross Trespasses of
each sort must be bewailed by every sort. Ezekiel. 9.5. Set a mark upon the
foreheads of the men that sigh, and that cry for all the abominations that be
done in the midst thereof. We must bewail all the Sins of our Familys; all the
Sins of the Town and Land we live in, and of the Nation we belong to. No
consideration of Interest may bias us to tenderness in any point, to spare any
particular Sin, and except it out of our Lamentations. No pretended Reverence
to our Forefathers, or to the Characters of our Rulers or Ministers; no regard
to the Interest of any sort of Men, or to the Fashion and Custom of the
multitude, nor fondness for a Party, etc. ought to have any Influence in the
matter. We must not cover the Sins of others, any more than our own. No
sinister Views, no private Affections, or the like, may lessen our Resentment
of their Miscarriages, or dispose us to palliate, and excuse, or extenuate
them. Hear in what strains the Prophet Daniel bewails the public Guilt. Dan.
9, 7, 8. O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto Thee: but unto us Confusion of
face, as at this day! to the Men of Judah, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem,
and unto all Israel that are near, and that are afar off: to our Kings, to our
Princes, and to our Fathers; because we have sinned against Thee.

AND now in consequence of this Shame and Sorrow for Sin, there must be an holy
Indignation at ourselves. We must conceive a Displeasure at our selves, like
the Corinthian Penitents, in whom the Apostle commends this Self Indignation as
a fruit and argument of their godly Sorrow. 2 Cor. 7.11. Behold, this self-same
thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you;
yea, what clearing of your selves; yea, what Indignation; -- yea, what Revenge!
If we are truly penitent, our Hearts will be hot within us, in resentment of
our Follies: a holy, Anger at our selves will kindle in our Breasts, and
Conscience will stir up it self to scourge and smite us.

FURTHER MORE, where there is a true Humiliation under GOD's Hand, there will
be a cheerful Submission to his Will in all the afflictive Dispensations that
befall us. This is made one sign and character of a due Humiliation, Lev.
26.41. If then their uncircumcised Hearts be humbled, and they then accept of
the Punishment of their Iniquity; then will I remember my Covenant with Jacob.
etc. So Lam. 3.27, etc. It is good for a Man, that he hear the yoke in his
youth. He sits alone, and keeps silence, because he has born it upon him.
He puts his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be Hope. Ezekiel. 16.63. That
thou may remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more;
because of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee, for all that thou bast
done, says the Lord. We must never open our mouths in any way of Murmuring or
Complaint. We must not stout and brave it against GOD; nor exalt our selves
against the Lord, and despise his Chastnings, and strive with our Maker; as
they did, of whom we read, Isa. 9.9, 10. They say in the pride and stoutness of
heart. The Bricks are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones: the
Sycamores are cut down, but we will change them into Cedars. Far from us be
such a Spirit and Carriage. The Temper and Conduct of holy Job becomes us in
all our Afflictions, who said (Chap. 40.4.) Behold, I am vile! What shall I
answer Thee? I will lay my hand upon my Mouth. So the Psalmist said (Psalm.
39.9) I was dumb; I opened not my mouth: because Thou did it.

AND as there must be a meek and patient Submission to GOD under all his
dealings with us; so where there is this, there will (and ought to) be a
thankful Notice taken of the Mercies mixed with Divine Judgments and a due
sense of our own Unworthiness. That will be the humble disposition and Language
of our Souls, Ezr. 9.13 After all that is come upon us, for our evil Deeds,
Thou our God have punished us less than our Iniquities deserve. And (Genesis
32.10.) I am not worthy of the least of all the Mercies, and of all the Truth,
which thou bast showed unto thy servant.

IN a word, there will also be the exercise of Faith and Hope in GOD, through
Jesus Christ, for the Pardon of Sin, the removal of the Grounds of GOD's
Controversy with us, and putting a happy Period unto it. The humble Centurion
had great Faith, Mat. 8.8. Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under
my Roof: but speak the Word only, and my Servant shall be healed. So had holy
Job, who said, (Chap. 13.15, 16.) Though He stay me, yet will I trust in him:
but I will maintain my own ways before Him. He also shall be my Salvation: for
an Hypocrite shall not come before Him. We read of some who said, Ezr. 10.2. We
have trespassed against our God, and have taken strange wives of the People of
the land: yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing. We must not
mourn, in any case, as they that have no Hope: tho perplexed, yet not be in
Despair. It is good that a Man should both hope and quietly wait for the
Salvation of GOD. Trust in the Lord at all times, O ye People, pour out your
Hearts before Him: GOD is a Refuge for us, through Jesus Christ. Fly for
refuge, to lay hold on the Hope set before you. Isa. 50.10. Who is among you
that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, that walks in
darkness, and has no light? let him trust in the name of the Lord, and stay
upon his God. Thus said the Church of old, Isa. 26.8. In the way of thy
Judgments, O Lord, have we waited for Thee. So the Prophet Micah, in the
Church's Name, Chap. 7.7, 8, 9. Therefore I will look unto the Lord: I will
wait for the God of my Salvation: my God will hear me. Rejoice not against me,
O mine enemy: when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the Lord
shall be a light unto me. I will hear the indignation of the Lord, because I
have sinned against him, until he ylead my cause, and execute Judgment for me:
I^ will bring me forth to the sight, and I shall bebold his righteousness.

THUS I have mentioned some of those inward Affections and Graces which are
implied in the Humiliation required. We must thus put on humbleness of Mind.
Our Souls must be humbled within us. Unless we have such gracious Tempers
reigning in us, it may be complained of us, as of him of old (Dan. 5.22, 23.)
Thou have not humbled thy HEART: And the GOD, in whose bands thy breath is, and
whose are all thy ways, have thou not glorified.

But further,

2. IT implys something External, in the Life, and Actions: Outward Expressions
agr^ealde to our inward Impressions.

THUS, It implys proper Acts of Mortification and Self denial. There must be a
kind of pious Self-revenge, and Self-affliction for Sin. We must inflict proper
Severities upon our selves, in a way of just Correction for our follies. I do
not here mean any such absurd Discipline, as the Popish Penances, the going on
a Pilgrimage, the macerating our Flesh unreasonably, the mutilating, wounding,
or whipping of our Bodies, etc. Yet I mean a treating our Bodies (the Instruments
of Sin) with something of Austerity, as well as an afflicting our Souls by a
more spiritual and rational Discipline. We must labor to crucify the Flesh, to
mortify the Members that are upon the Earth, that the Body of Sin may be
destroyed, that hence forth we may not serve Sin. We must endeavor to pluck
out the right eye, and to cut off the right hand; must deny our selves, and
take up our Cross; abridge our selves of many lawful Gratifications, as well as
of all sinful Extravagances. The Apostle commends such a Conduct in the
Corinithians (among other things) as a fruit and argument of their true
Repentance. Forecited 2 Cor. 7.11. Behold, this self-same thing that ye
sorrowed after a godly sort, what Carefulness it wrought (...) you; yea, what
Indignation; yea, what Zeal; yea, what Revenge! They took a holy Revenge on
themselves for their Sins, by agreeable acts of Discipline. So should we on our
selves by solemn Fastings and Watchings, and by a daily course of Abstinence,
Self denials, and Mortifications. In a time of public Judgments, if a People
would humble themselves aright, it becomes them to observe many solemn Days of
Fasting and Humiliation. That is the Call of GOD to them, Joel 1.14. Sanctisy
ye a fast, call a solemn assembly, gather the elders, and all the inhabitants
of the land into the house of the Lord your GOD, and cry unto the Lord. And as
it follows in the next Chapter, Turn to the Lord with all your Heart, and with
Fasting, and with Weeping, and with Mourning. Thus Josiah humbled himself, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. Thine Heart was tender, and thou did humble thy self before
GOD, and did rend thy clothes and weep before me. So we read of Ninevites,
(Jon. 3.5, 6.) So the people of Nineveh believed GOD, and proclaimed a fast,
and put on sackloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them. For
word came unto the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his throne, and he laid
his robe from him, and covered him with sackloth, and sat in ^shes. And besides
these extraordinary Mortifications, there should be more common and continued
Self-denials, in general practice among such a People. In the day of Trouble we
thou would deny our selves in the use of many lawful Liberties; retrench our
unnecestary expenses; and lay aside our Gallantry; cloth our selves with
Humility, and be modest and lowly in our whole Appearance. Surely it very ill
becomes a Poor and an Afflicted People to affect Gaiery and Pomp in their
Apparel, Luxury at their Tables, Mirth and Jollity, and great Delicacy of
Living, or the like. Hear how the Prophet complains of and rebukes this in
GOD's People of old, Isa. 22.12, 13. In that day did the Lord GOD of Hosts call
to weeping, and to mourning, and to ba^dness, and to girding with sackcloth:
and behold, joy and gladness slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and
drinking ^ine. Against all such we have that solemn Woe denounced, (Amos 6.) Woe
to them that are at ease in Zion, -- that lie upon Beds of Ivory, and stretch
themsetues upon their Couches, and eat the. Lambs out of the Flock, and the
Calves out of the Stall; that chant to the sound of the Viol; that drink Wine
in Bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief Ointments: but they are not
grieved for the Affliction of Joseph.

FURTHERMORE, the Humiliation required implies a due Confession of our Sins to
GOD. There must be a most hearty Confession of Sin, in all the Instances, and
in all the Aggravations of it; an open and ingenuous and full Acknowledgement
of our Offenses unto GOD. This is every where in Scripture represented as the
Duty of an afflicted People, and the Property of selfjudging Penitents. Lev.
26.40, 41. If they shall confess their Iniquity, and the Iniquity of their
Fathers; if then their uncircumcised Hearts be hunbled, -- Then will I remember
my Coveno^, etc. Thus Ezra confessed, weeping, and casting himself down before
the house of God Ezra 10.1.
. So Daniel made confession of his sin, and of the sin of his people, when he
set himself to seek by Prayer with Fasting, for the holy Mountain of his God
Dan 9.20.
. So we read of the Children of Israel Neb. 9.2.
, when they assembled themselves with Fasting, they stood and confessed their
Sins, and the Iniquities of their Fathers. Thus should we confess our Sins to
God, and should do it with the deepest Humility and Incurvation of Mind.

AGAIN, There must be an express Justifying of GOD's Providence in all that
befalls us. Thus we read of some, 2 Chronicles. 12 6. They humbled themselves, and
said, The Lord is rightecus. We must acknowledge to GOD our utter Unworthiness
of the least Mercy at his Hands, and subscribe to the Justice of his
Proceedings with us, in any Punishments already inflicted, or that he may see
meet to bring upon us. That must be our humble Language, (in the Words of some
of GOD's People of old, (...) Isel (...) Neh 9.33. E^ra 9.15. Dan. 9.7.
) If Thou, Lord, should mark Iniquities, O Lord, who should stand! Thou art
just in all that is brought upon us: for Thou have done right, but we have done
wickedly: O Lord God of Israel, Thou art rightcous: behold, we are before Thee
in our Trespasses; for we cannot stand before Thee, because of this. O Lord,
Righteousness belongs unto Thee; but unto us Confusion of Faces, as at this
day.

MOREOVER, there must be much and servent Prayer. This is the natural Effect of
a due Humiliation. Thus we read of Manasseb, 2 Chronicles. 33.12. When he was in
affliction, be besought the Lord his God, and humbled himself greatly before
the God of his Fathers. So the Psalmist, Psalm. 35.13. I humbled my soul with
fasting, and my prayer returned into mine own bosom. When we humble our selves
to GOD, we should seek his Face; deprecate the Continuance of his His Frowns,
and entreat the Return of his Favors. We must seek Reconciliation with GOD;
casting our selves down at his feet, and from the Dust crying to him for
pardoning Mercy, and Deliverance. That is the Direction given us, Hos. 14.2.
Take with you Words, and turn to the Lord, and say unto Him, Take away all
Iniquity, and receive us graciously. We must pray as the Church of old did,
Isai. 33.2.63.15.64.5. etc. Deuteronomy. 9.26, etc. Jer. 14.7, etc.
, O Lord, be gracious unto us; we have waited for Thee: be Thou our Arm every
morning, our Salvation also in the time of trouble. Look down from Heaven, and
behold from the habitation of thy Holiness and of thy Glory: where is thy Zeal
and thy Strength, the sounding of thy Bowels, and of thy Mercies toward us?
Are they restrained? Behold, Thou art wr^th: for we have sinned. But now, O
Lord, Thou art our Father: we are the Clay, and Thou our Potter, and we are all
the work of thine Hand. Be not wroth very sore, neither remember iniquity for
ever. O Lord God, destroy not thy People, and thine Inberitance. Look not unto
the stubborness of this People, nor to their Wickedness, nor to their Sin. O
Lord, though our Iniquities testisy against us, do Thou it for Thy Name sake. O
the Hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in time of trouble^ Why should Thou
be as a Stranger in the Land? Why should Thou be as a Man astonished; as a
mighty Man that cannot save? Yet Thou, O Lord, art in the midst of us, and we
are called by Thy Name: Leave us not. Host Thou utterly rejected Judah? Has
Thy Soul loathed Zion? Why have Thou switten us, and there is no Healing for
us? We acknowledge, O Lord, our Wickedness. But do not abbor us, for Thy Names
sake, do not disgrace the Throne of Thy Glory. Are there any among the Vanities
of the Gentiles that can save us! Art not Thou He O Lord our God? Therefore we
will wait upon Thee --. In such strains as these (the most devout and fervent)
did the Prophets and People of GOD in old time call upon GOD in their days of
Trouble. And these Prayers were put on Record for the Use and Imitation of
succeeding Ages. Jam. 5.10 and 13. Take, my Brethren, the Prophets, for an
Example --. Is any among you afflicted? Let him Pray. Psalm. 50.15. Call upon Me
in the day of Trouble; I will deliver --. When we humble our selves to GOD, we
must call upon Him: and we may do it with a holy Confidence, in the Name of
CHRIST. We must improve the Mediator in all our Addresses to Heaven, and bring
Him in the arms of our Faith; holding Him up as the expiatory Sacrifice, and
pleading the Atonement of His Blood, which is sufficient both for the
Priesthood and for the Congregation. Let us therefore come boldly unto the
Thron^ of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace to help in time of
need. ( Heb. ^. 16.) And let us continue in Prayer. Isai. 62.6, 7. (...) that
make mention of the Lord, keep not silence; And give Him no rest, till he
establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.

IN fine, The Humiliation required, implys a fincere Consecration of our selves
to God, and solemn Vows of Reformation and Obedience for the future. Surely it
is meet to be said unto God, I will not ^f^end any more: if I have done
Iniquity, I will do no more, (Job 34.31, 32.) That is the genuine Language of
an Ephraim bemoaning himself, Hos. 14.8.
, What have I any more to do with Idols! That is the proper Language of
backsliding Children humbling themselves Jer. 3.22. Isai. 26.13.33.22. Psalm 80
18.
, Behold, we come unto Thee: for Thou art the Lord our God. O Lord my God,
other lords besides Thee have bad dominion over us: but by Thee only will we
make mention of thy Name. For the Lord is our Judge, The Lord is our Lawgiver,
The Lord is our King. -- We will not go back from Thee: quicken us, and we will
call upon Thy Name. Thus the^ must be a resolute renouncing of Sin, and dev^ng
our selves to GOD. We must cast away e^ry Idol of Jealously; and allow of no
Competitor with GOD, nor seek to any other Savior, nor own any other Lord. We
must yield our selves to GOD, and join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual
Covenant. Thus we read how the People of Judah in Asa's time, when humbling
themselves for their Sins, They entered into a Covenant to Jeek the Lord God of
their Fathers, with all their Heart and with all their Soul; and they swear
unto the Lord; and all Judah rejoiced at the Oath; for they had sworn with all
their beart, and sought Him with their whole desire, (2 Chronicles. 15.12 --.) So in
Nebemiah's time, we read, that the People, and the Priests, and the Nobles
entered into a Curse, and into an Oath, to walk in GOD's Law, and to observe all
the Commandments of the Lord their God, Neb. 10.29.

THUS I have confider'd the Nature and Manner of a People's humbling
themselves, under the Judgments of GOD; which was the first Thing. I shall be
shorter in speaking to the other two Articles. Pass we now to the next.

PROP. II. A People under Divine Judgments should Fear. They should fear GOD,
and tremble at his Judgments, and be afraid of Sin, the procuring Cause.
Sometimes Fear is put for Religious Worship, and sometimes for the whole of
Religion. But as it stands in the Text, I think it is to be taken for that
Passion of the mind, called Fear. There should be a holy Fear of GOD, and his
Wrath; a Trembling at his Judgments, and a follicitous Care to obtain his
Favor. We read, Psalm. 65.8. They that dwell in the uttermost Parts, are afraid
at thy T^kens. The Psalmist said, My flesh trembles for Fear of Thee, and I am
afraid of thy Judgments, (Psalm. 119.120.) So the Prophet, (Hab. 3.16.) When I
heard, my Belly trembled: I trembled in my self, that I might rest in the day
of Trouble. We should stand trembling before GOD under the apprehension of
present and impending Dispensations of his Wrath: but more especially under the
sense of whatsoever provoking evils have kindled the Lord's Displeasure, and
made Him threaten a Departure from us. Ezra 9.4. Then were assembled unto me
every one that trembled at the words of the God of Israel, because of the
Transgression of those that had been carried away; and I sat astonished until the
Evening-sacrifice. So, Chap. 10.9. All the People sat in the Street of the
House of God, trembling because of this matter. The Apostle mentions this as
one thing in his Description of the Corinthians Repentance; forementioned, 2
Cor. 7.11. Behold, this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a godly sort,
What carefulness it wrought in you; yea, what clearing of your selves, (that
is, What concern and endeavor to get acquitted from the guilt of Sin, and to
escape the Judgments of GOD) Tea, what Indignation at your selves; yea, what
Fear, what an awe of GOD, what a Reverence of his Majesty, and Dread of his
Wrath! Such a Fear is one Cause and Fruit of Humiliation. In the Prophet's
description of the true Penitent, these two Characters are joined, Isai. 66.2.
To this Man will I look (says the Lord) even to Him that is poor and of a
contrite Spirit, and trembles at my Word. If there be in us a humbling Sense
of our Provocations, there will be also an awakened sense and trembling
Apprehension of the dreadful Wrath of GOD hanging over our guilty Heads.
Moreover there will be a Fear of Sin; a Caution and Self-jealousy; a Distrust
of our own Hearts, a sense of their Treachery, and a dread of turning again
unto Folly; of relapsing into those Sins, which have been the occasion of so
much forrow and anguish to us.

SUCH a Fear there ought to be in us at all times, and particularly under the
Divine Judgments. Isai. 8.13. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts Himself, and let Him
he your Fear, and let Him be your Dread. Where there is a due Humiliation,
there will be this godly Fear: and where there is such a Humiliation and Fear,
there will be the last thing in the Text, as the Effect thereof, viz.
Reformation and Obedience. But this brings me to the other Proposition.

PROP. III. A People under the Divine Judgments, should turn their Feet unto
God's Testimonies, to walk in His Law. In the day of Adverfity we should
consider: Confider GOD, and be afraid: consider our selves, and be abased:
consider our ways, and repent: consider GOD's Statutes, and turn our feet unto
His Testimonies: consider our professed Humiliation, and bring forth Fruit meet
for Repentance; for saking the Sins we pretend a shame and sorrow for: consider
the Vows we make in the time of our Distress, and set our selves daily to
perform them: consider the Calls of Providence, and hear the Rod, and turn at
GOD's Reproof; who chastens us for our Profit, that we may be made Partakers of
His Holiness, and who expects that we be reformed by these Things. If we are
indeed humbled, this will be one speedy and visible Effect. Where there is a
broken Heart, there will be a reformed Life. Reformation and Obedience (faith
an Expositor Poul's Annot.
on the Place) are the first fruits of true Humiliation. GOD accounts those
not humbled, but herdned, who are not reformed, and become obedient to His
Will; let their pretended Attrition, or Contrition be in outward appearance
what it will. This is the Repentance GOD calls for, even a through and universal
Change of Heart and Life. This is the Fast, which He has chosen Isa. 58.6.
, to loose the bands of Wickedness, -- to turn from our evil ways, to make our
Doings good, and to walk in His Law. The Fear of the Lord is to depart from
Evil: and this is the Love of GOD, that we keep His Commandments. -- Deuteronomy.
10.12. And now Israel, What does the Lord thy GOD require of thee, but to fear
the Lord thy GOD, to walk in all his ways, and to love Him, and to serve the
Lord thy GOD with all thy heart, and with all thy soul? So Mic. 6.8. He has
showed thee, O man, what is good: and what does the Lord require of thee but to
do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy GOD? This is what GOD
calls us to by his Judgments: and the Promise of Salvation is suspended on this
Condition, 2 Chro. 7.14. If my People which are called by my Name, shall humble
themselves, and pray and seek my Face, and turn from their wicked Ways; then I
will hear from Heaven, and will forgive their Sin, and will beal their Land.

WE see then what is the Duty and Business of the present Day. We in this Place
and Land are an afflicted People, groaning under a variety of awful Judgments.
And from the Premises, we may learn what Tempers and Deportments do become our
Condition. Surely it becomes us to be a self-humbling, a trembling, and a
reforming People. O that we may be found such! Let us every one personally
humble our selves, and fear, and reform and be obedient. And then in our
several places lay out our selves to promote such a Disposition and Conduct in
all about us. This would be a sure Token for Good, and afford the most
defirable Prognostic of a happy Change of Times approaching. Blessed be GOD,
the GOD of all grace, that there are found among us a number of such as tremble
at his Word, and at his Judgments, Men of a humble and contrire Spirit, Men of
Prayer, and Men of a holy Conversation. These surely are the Strength and
Security, the Riches and Beauty of the Land. The Lord add to them daily, and
make them a thousand times so many more as they are! The Lord revive his work!
Help, Lord, for the Faithful fail! -- It Is to be feared such Persons are but
thin sown among us, and the number continually lessening: and that this People
in general have the Complaint in our Text too deservedly lying against them, --
Ye have not humbled your selves, even to tha^ day, neither have ye feared, nor
walked in GOD's Law. -- But this leads me to another Observation from the Text.

DOCT. II. IT is sometimes the sad Case of a of Divine Judgments; but remain
secure, unhumbled, and unreform'd notwithstanding all.

THUS the Jews in our Text had met with a long Train of very desolating
Judgments; but yet all was (...) little to make them weary of Sin, and willing
to turn to GOD. They would not be reformed by these things, but did still go on
in their Trespasses, and walk contrary to GOD. And this is the sad State and
Case of many others in the World, besides the Jews. It is often the just
Character and Reproach of a people now, as well as then, that they do not
humble themselves, and fear and walk in GOD's Law, although he visits their
Iniquities upon them, and brings them low by one Judgment after another.
Judgments rather harden, than melt them. All the methods of Discipline are lost
upon them. They will not receive Correction. They will not be instructed; they
will not hear the Rod; but stop their Ears, and refuse to return.

SOMETIMES they are Stupid under the Tokens of GOD's Displeasure, and remain
insensible under all the means used to awaken them out of their spiritual Slun^
(...) Epiraim is a Cake not turned: strangers have devoured his strength, and
he knows it not; Yea, gray Hairs are sprinkled upon h^, yet he knows it
not. The Stork in the Heavens knows her appointed Times: but Israel does not
know the Judgment of the Lord. GOD pours on them the fory of his Anger, and
the strength of Battle; and it sets them on fire round about, yet they know
it not; and it burns them, yet they lay it not to Heart. His Hand is lifted
up, but they will not see. They are a foolish People, and without
understanding, which have eyes, and see not; which have ears, and hear not. A
revolting and rebellious Heart have they, even a Heart of Stone, that will not
relent and they harden their faces as a Rock. Are they ashamed, when they
commit Abomination? Nay, they are not at all ashamed, neither can they blush.
They are Brass and iron, Yea, as the very Adam^nt.

OP if they be not thus altogether insensible, yet ^ey are unsubdu'd and
inflexible, very resolute, and mad on their L^sts, even as the untamed Horse,
or unbroken Mule, that has no Understanding. They reject the Counfil of GOD
against themselves; and say in the Pride of their hearts, like those (in our
Context) who said unto Jeremiah, As for the word that thou have spoken unto us
in the name of the Lord, we will not bearken unto Thee: but we will certainly
do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our mouth. Or they say in their Despair,
There is no hope, but we will walk after our own devices, and we will every one
do the imagination of his evil he^.

MANY times they proudly assert their own Innocence, against all the
Convictions offered them: They will not see and own their Iniquity. They call
Evil Good, and Good Evil, and put Darkness for Light, and Light for Darkness:
or deny the Charge of Guilt, and stand upon their own Vindication. Thus our
Lord reproved the Pharisees, Luke 16.15. And he said unto them, Ye are they
which justify your selves before men; but GOD knows your hearts; for that
which is highly esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of GOD. Many
times it is the unhappy Case of a People, that every particular Person shifts
off the Blame from himself, and imputes the Cause of Divine Judgments to the
Sins of others, and so looks on himself as unconcerned in the Calls to
Repentance.

MANY times they Scoff at GOD's Messengers, and laugh at their solemn Rebukes
and Warni^s, and turn all into Banter and Ridicule. We read of Scornful Men
that ruled in Jerusalem, who made Lies their refuge. So we r^ad of the Jews,
They ^ocked the Messengers of GOD, and despised his Words. And again we read,
They laughed them to scorn, and mecked them. Thus the Pharisees derided our
Savior's Counfils and Admonitions: and so the Athenians mecked, when Paul
rebuked their Superstition, and warned them of a future Judgment.

MANY times they murmur at the Providence of GOD, and are enraged at their
Reprovers, and cannot beat the Means that are used to bring them to Repentance.
Under the Divine Chastnings they charge GOD foolishly, and complain as if his
ways were not equal. Their Hearts rise against GOD, and are hot within them.
They rage and fret themselves, as Bullocks unaccustomed to the Yoke. And they
hate him that rebukes in the gate. They cannot endure to be told of their Sins.
They spurn at Reproofs, and fly in the face of such as deal plainly withthem,
and abbor him that speaks uprightly. They are a rebellious People, lying
Children. Children that will not hear the Law of the Lord: which say to the
Seers, see not; and to the Prophets, Prophe^y not unto us right things, speak
^to us smooth things, Prophesy Deceits: Leave o^ your present Course of
preaching: Trouble us ^o more with harsh Rebukes, and terrible T^nings. -- Many
times this is the Language of Sinner^. They would fain stop the mouths of their
faithful Monitors, and put out the Eyes of their watchful Seers. They love
Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds are evil. Their Hearts are
fully set in them to do Evil, and they go on frowardly in the ways of their own
Eyes. And if any one stand in their way, to check them in their wild Career,
they take it heinously. They say to their Reprovers, Get you out of the way,
and let us alone. Sometimes they banter, and scorn, and deride them. Sometimes
they brow-beat, and hector, and revile them, They lift their Horn on high, and
speak with a stiff Neck. They swell and rage, they huff and threaten. Amaziah
is an Instance of this; who being reproved by a Prophet, it came to pass as he
talked with him, that the King said unto him, Art thou made of the King's
Counsel? Forbear; Why should thou be smitten? (2 Chronicles. 25.16.) And
sometimes they proceed to Persecution and Violence. Thus wicked Ahab took
Micaiah, (who had prophesied Evil of him) and put him in Prison, there to be
fed with Bread of Affliction, and with water of Affliction. And good Asa
himself was once wroth with Hanani the Seer, for reproving him, and he put him
in a Prisonhouse; for he was in a Rage with him, because of this thing. And
thus the Jews devised Devices against Jeremiah, and smote him with the Tongue,
and dug a Pit for his Soul, and hid Snares for his Feet.

THESE are some of the Signs and Fruits of an unhumbled Spirit and rebellious
Heart: which are too often visible among a People under Divine Judgments.
Sometimes such evil and malignant Tempers reign among them, and are almost
epidemical. This shows the greatest Contumacy and Incorrigibleness. Where this
is the Case, they are truly and emphatically a stiffnecked Generation, a
crooked and perverse Nation.

BUT this is not always the Case even where a People may be said to be
unhumbled. Sometimes there may not appear such a proud, passionate, impatient,
inflexible Spirit among a People under Divine Judgments, and yet they may be
unsubdu'd and impenitent. Sometimes Sinners are pretty patient of Reproofs from
men: they do not mock, or rage, and brave it as others do, but give their Ear
modestly and calmly: yet they go on still in their own way. Somethey patiently
bear Divine Rebukes. Under Afflictive Providence they are quiet and silent,
and seemingly penitent: but still nothing is reformed. Or it may be some
Reformation is produced, and Humiliation pretended; yet notwithstanding it may
be truly said of them, They are not humbled, neither have they feared. They may
be said to humble themselves, in no better sense, than it is affirmed of Ahab,
who fasted, and lay in sackloth, and went softly; and yet the Statutes of O^ri
were kept still, and none of the Sins forsaken, for which all that mourning was
pretended. In their Affliction, they perhaps keep days of Fasting and Prayer,
and call solemn Assemblies, to seek GOD, and to humble themselves in his ^t:
but still they are not humbled. They do not fast aright; they don't fast to
GOD, even unto Him. GOD is near in their mouth, but far from their Reins. They
inquire with a false Heart, and all their Humiliations are but Pageantty and
Pretense. They make a specious show (it may be) of Self-abasement, of
Mortification, and Devotion, but the Reality is wanting. They put on a demure
Countenance, disfigure their Faces, and hang down their heads as a Bulruth (for
a day,) they lie down in their shame, and spread Sackloth and Ashes under them:
They have a Flow of Affections, and cover the Alta^ with Tears, and pour out
their Prayers with a seeming Ardour, causing their voice to be heard on high.
They make heavy Complaints of the Wickedness of the Times, and make very
plentiful Confessions of their own Sins, together with very solemn
Protestations of Repentance: they plight their Vows to GOD, and make
Resolutions of Amendment for time to come. They ask of Him the Ordinance of
Justice as a Nation that loved Righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinance of
their GOD. --. And yet after all, there is nothing but the thin shadow of a
Fast; nothing but the empty Appearance of Humiliation; nothing but the bare
Promise of Reformation. Their profuse Tears dry up, and all their seeming
Devotion soon expires, as a vapor: They forget their Vows, and turn from the
holy Commandment. Sin revives; unmortify^d Lusts awake in them; by which they
are enticed and overcome. Thus it happens to them according to the true
Proverb, The Dog is turned to his own Vomit again; and, The Sow that was
washed, to her wallowing in the Mire. So the Apostle complains of some among
the Primiti^ Christians, 2 Pet. 2.22. And thus GOD oft^ complained of the Jews
of old. Psalm. 78.34 -- 3^ When he slew them, then they sought him: a^ they
returned and enquired early after GOD. A^ they remembered that GOD was their
rock, and (...) high GOD their redeemer. Nevertheless, the did flatter him with
their mouth, and they lied un^ him with their tongues. For their heart was
(...) right with him, neither were they steadfast in (...) covenant. Jer. 8.5.6.
Why then is this people Jerusalem slidden back, by a perpetual backsl^ding they
hold fast deceit, they refuse to return. I hear^ en^d and heard, but they spoke
not aright: no m^ repented him of his wickedness, saying, What ha^ I done?
every one turns to his course, as t^ horse rusheth into the bastel. Hos. 6.4,
7. O Ep^rai^ what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I (...) unto thee?
for your goodness is as a morning-clou^ and as the early dew it goes away. But
they li^ men have transgressed the covenant: there ha^ they dealt treacherously
against me. Chap. 7.14, And they have not cried unto me with their hea^ when
they ^wled upon their beds: they assem^ themselves for corn and wine, and they
rebel again me. They return, but not to the most High: (...) are like a
deceitful how.

NOW, is this sometimes the Case of a Peo^ under GOD's Judgments? Let it then
put upon Inquiring into our Case. We have be and are at this Day, under the Rod
of Div^ Providence. But what is our Frame and Dep^ meant? Are we truly humbled?
Do we (...) GOD? Do we walk in his Law? Or are secure, impenitent, and
^nreform'd? Let us inquire into these things. It is an Inquiry of vast
Concernment to us: and therefore we should in good carnest examine our selves.
If we think our selves something, when indeed we are nothing, we deceive our
selves, and if we deceive our selves, Iniquity will be our Ruin. If ye will
inquire then, inquire ye.

But thus much for the second Note.

DOCT. III. GOD observes a People's Conduct under his Judgments, and marks
against them all their Obstinacy and Stubb^rness.

THIS is implied in the Complaint, which he makes in our Text, -- They have not
humbled themselves, neither have they feared, etc. And this Note may be
confirmed from another passage in the Prophecy. Je^ 8.6. I hearkened and heard,
but they spoke not aright: no man repented him of his Wickedness. So, Job
32.27. GOD looks upon Men, (when they have done amiss, and are under his
Chast^) to hear, if any say, I have finned. He diligen^y observes all Mankind,
and their several Carring^s, especially in Affliction and Distress. His Eyes
run to and fro, in the Earth, beholding the Evil and the Good. His Eyes are
open on all the ways of Man. He compasses our Path; He trys our Hearts, and
weighs our Actions. He observes Men's Conduct at all times, in all places, and
under all his dealings with them. Particularly, he observes how they carry it
under his Rod; what their Tempers and Deportments are; whether they are duly
humbled for their Sins; whether they are afraid of his Judgments; whether they
turn from their evil Doings, etc. He takes notice if they neglect these things.
If they are impenitent, obstinate, and irreclaimable, he marks it against them.
He critically observes this Misconduct in a People in general, and in every
Person in particular. His Eye is upon every one of whatever Rank, Age, or
Condition; taking an exact notice of their Thoughts, Words, and Actions under
his Afflicting Hand, and noting all down in His Book of Remembrance.

NOW this O servation is in order to Judgment upon their Conduct, and the
suting GOD's further Dispensations to their Case. For He does not act therein
as a careless, indifferent Spectator of Human Affairs, but as the Lord and
Judge of the World. Hence we read, Jer. 17.10. I the Lord search the Heart, I
try the Reins, even to give to every man according to his ways, and according
to the fruit of his doings. The Lord is a GOD of Judgment. He is righteous in
all his ways, and all his Works are done in Wisdom. He concerts the best
methods for managing his Providential Government, and be ordinarily observes a
Rule in his Dispensations toward a People. Infinite Wisdom and Justice
proportions the Punishment to the Provocation, so that commonly a People's
Sufferings are greater or lesser according to the kind and degree of their
Sins. Now in order to this, a right Judgment must be passed on Men: and to this
an accurate Inspection of them is necessary. Hence GOD is represented as taking
the most critical observation of us. His Eyes behold and His Eyelids try the
Children of Men.

AND is it thus! How watchful then should (...) be over ou^ selves at all
times? Particularly in a day of Adversity, how ought we to consider our ways,
to ponder the path of our Feet, and take heed to our selves; giving diligence
lest any man fail of the grace of GOD; walking circumspectly, not as Fools, but
as Wise; redeeming the time, because the days are evil: laying to heart the
Judgments of GOD, and studying to improve them to our Repentance and
Reformation; afraid of further Judgments, unto which Impenitency will expose us!

BUT this leads me to the last Observation from the Text, viz.

DOCT. IV. WHEN a People are finally obstinate and irr^clamable, GOD will set
his face against them for Evil.

SO stands the Threatening in our Text. They are not humbled, even to this day:
Therefore says the Lord, Behold, I will set my face against you for Evil.

1. GOD will set His Face against them. It imply's Resentment and Displeasure
in the superlative degree. GOD will turn away his Favor from such a People,
and His Jealousy will burn against them. His Soul will depart from them. His
Soul will loathe them, neither will (...) spare, neither will he repent. He that
made them, will have no Mercy upon them; and he that formed them, will show
them no Favor. He will cast them off; cast them out of his Sight; cast them
away from his Presence. He will withdraw his directing and protecting Presence,
and no more be their Guide or Guard: his sanctifying Presence, and will take
away his holy Spirit from them: his Symbolical Presence (in the end) and will
take away his Kingdom from among them, remove their Candlestick out of its
place, and put out their Light in obscure Darkness.

HE will l^th their Persons, and turn to be their Adversary. He will reject all
their pretended Services, and cast them back as filth in their faces. Their New
moons and their Sabbaths his Soul will have: and when they spread forth their
hands, He will hide his Eyes from them, Yea, when they make many Prayers. He
will not hear. When they fast, He will not regard them, and when they offer an
Oblation, He will not accept them; for he remembers their Iniquity, that they
loved to wander, and would not return from their ways; They refused to hearken,
and pulled away the Shoulder, and stopped their Ears that they should not hear.
Yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant-Stone, lest they should hear the Law:
therefore it is now come to pass, that as GOD cried, and they would not hear;
so when they cry, He will not hear. He will cover himself with a Cloud, that
their Prayer should not pass through. He will not regard their Affliction, but
in anger will shut up his tender mercies, and ^e favorable no more. Nay, He
will laugh at their Calamity, and mo^k when their Fear comes.

2. HE will set his Face against them for Evil. He will not only withdraw his
Favor from them, but will pour out his Indignation upon them. He will not only
reject their Prayers, and deny them an Answer of Peace: but will answer them in
terrible things by Righteousness. His Heart is turned from them, and his
Presence gone, which is the Safety and Happiness, the Strength and Glory of a
People. His Face is set against them, and Woe to them that are in such a Case.
Who knows the power of his Anger? It is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living GOD. When GOD is angry with a People, and cau^eth his Fury
to rest on them, all manner of Evils will break in upon them, as a Flood, or as
a consuming Fire. When GOD sets his face against a People, and forsakes them,
Iniquity will abound more and more, until Wrath comes upon them to the
uttermost. Their misery will be great upon them; and the very Blessings that
may be spared to them for a while, will be turned into Curses, and become a
Snare to them.

IF a People are finally impenitent, GOD will thus set his face against them
for Evil. He may bear long with them, but he will not ^ear always. He is a GOD
gracious, and longsuffering: but if his Patience be abused, and his Grace
turned into wantonness, it will kindle his Anger,' and he will punish at last.
If a professing People forsake the Lord, then he will turn, and will do them
Hurt, after that he has done them Good; and if they finally forsake GOD, He
will be angry with them till he consume them utterly.

THAT GOD will thus set his Face against a People for Evil, if they are
obstinately impenitent, appears from the many awful Threatenings in the Word of
Truth. Thus 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you, while ye be with him; and if
ye seek him, be will be sound of you; but if ye forsake him, be will forsake
you. How plain and peremptory and solemn are those Me^es in the Twenty sixth
Chapter of Leviti^, where GOD says to his People, -- It ye will not hearken
unto me, but will break my Covenant, I also will do this unto you, I will
appoint over you Terror, Consumption, and the burning Ague: and I will set my
Face against you and ye shall be slain before your Enemies. And if ye will not
yet for all this hearken to me, then will I punish you seven times more for
your Sins: and I will break the Pride of your Power; and I will make your
Heaven as Iron, and your Earth as Brass, and your Land shall not yield her
Increase. And if ^e walk contrary unto me, and will not hearken to me, I will
bring seven times m^re Plagues upon you, according to your Sins, and will send
wild Beasts among you, which shall rob you of your Children, etc. And if ye
will not be reformed by me by these things, but will walk contrary unto me,
then will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times
for your Sins, and I will bring the Sword upon you, that shall avenge the
Quarrel of my Covenant: I will send the Pestilence among you, etc. And if ye
will not for all this hearken unto me, but walk contrary unto me, then I also
will walk contrary unto you in Fury; and I, even I, will chastise you seven
times for your Sins. And my Soul shall abbor you, and I will make your Cities
wa^, and bring your Sanctuaries into Desolation, and I will not smell the
Savor of your sweet Odours, etc. Thus GOD threatened the Jewish Nation of old.
And in like manner he threatened Israel's evil Neighbors, the Heathen Nations
bordering upon Judea, as in Jer. 12.17. If they will not diligently learn the
Ways of my People to swear by my Name, I will utterly pluck up, and destroy
that Nation, says the Lord. And it seems to be a standing Law of his
Providential Government, that, Jer. 18.9, 10. At what time I shall speak
concerning a Nation, or a Kingdom, to build and to plant it: If it do Evil in
my sight, that it obey not my Voice, then I will repent of the Good wherewith I
said I would benefit them. And a like Text we have relating to Gospel Times,
Isa. 60.12. The Nation and Kingdom that Will not serve Thee [or will not submit
to Christ's Sceptre] shall be utterly wasted. -- Now GOD is true, that has
thus threatened. Has He said it, and will He not do it? Yea surely; though the
Sentence be not speedily executed, yet it shall not always be delayed. Though He
be slow to Anger, yet He will be true to His Threatenings, and not one Iota of
them shall fail.

WE may confirm this Argument from the many known Examples of Divine Vengeance.
There have been sad and lamentable Instances of a People's being ruined by
their Iniquity, and Provoking GOD to Anger, till He has set his face against
them to destroy them. Many Citys and Countries, that were once lifted up to
Heaven, have long since been bro't into Desolation for their Sins. Great
Babylon, which in its day, was the wonder of the World, the glory of Kingdoms,
has long since been totally and irrecoverably destroyed, as when GOD over ^rew
Sodom and Gomorrha. So Jerusalem, that was the Beauty of Jadea and the Joy of
the whole Earth, The place which GOD once chose for his Habitation, where he
had his Temple; and whither the Tribes went up, the Tribes of the Lord unto the
Testimony of Israel; where were set Thrones of Judgment, the Thrones of the
House of David; within whose walls were Peace, and Prosperity in all her
Palaces; a Place (if any ever in the world) lift up to Heaven; yet even this
place is long ago sunk down to Hell, laid desolate, buried and lost. The Jewish
Nation, for crucifying the Lord of Glory, were rejected of GOD from being any
more his People, and their City, and Land made an utter Desolation. And the
like Fate has befallen many places fince, that in the early ages of
Christianity were flourishing and populous. Many famous Churches, that were
once the beauty and glory of the Christian World, are long since for their
Apostasy and Impenitence, reduced to Shame and Ruin; become the Habitations of
Cruelty, the Seats of Barbarity, and Idolatry, and are pined away in their
Iniquitys. -- Now these Examples do read loud Lectures to us upon our Text, and
afford clear Conviction of the ^rine before us. And we may expect that GOD will
deal alike with others that are alike guilty. For GOD seems to have one Rule of
dealing with a professing People, and the Measures of Providence are usually
the same. Indeed, He reserves a Sovereign Liberty to Himself, as to the
Circumstances of his Dispensations, in which there is often a Variety. Some
have gentler discipline than others; some have a longer space to repent, than
others, etc. However, in the general, there is one stated Rule, according to
which GOD in his Providence impartially proceeds, especially with a professing
People. Hence He sends backsliding Jerusalem to self-ruin'd Shiloh, to view his
Judgments there upon his rebellious People; and puts them in mind of the Ruin
of the Ten Tribes: that by comparing Cases, they might draw proper Conclusions
for their own Instruction and Conviction. As we have it, Jer. 7.12 -- 15. Go ye
unto my place, which was in Shiloh, where I set my name at the first, and see
what I did to it, for the wickedness of my people Israel. And now, because ye
have done all these works, says the Lord, -- Therefore will I do unto you --
as I have done to Shiloh. And I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast
out all your brethren, even the whole seed of Ephraim. -- All these Judgments
happened to them for Ensamples: And the Record of them was made for our
Learning and Admonition, upon whom the Ends of the World are come. As one
says, GOD writes his severe Truths with the Blood of his disobedient Subjects,
and makes their ruinous Heaps to proclaim Knowledge and Counsil to the rest of
the World. Sodom's Ashes, Shiloh's Fire, Jerusalem's Desolation, are Uses of
Instruction and Warning to all the Inhabitants of the Earth. They fell by their
Iniquity, and such as tread in their wicked steps, may expect to fall by the
like Judgments. For GOD is uniform, and of a piece with Himself in his judicial
Proceedings. It Is a Rule of Justice, Ut Parium par sit Ratio; That the equally
guilty should be punished alike. Luke 13.3. Except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish.

AND now, as to the Reasons and Foundations of GOD's judicial proceedings with
any People, especially a professing People, they seem to be very clear and
obvious. The Honor of his own Name calls for such a Conduct toward an
impenitent People. His Glory is especially concerned in the matter; the Glory
of his Holiness, and of his Faithfulness, and Wisdom, etc. He seems bound in
Honor to those Attributes, to witness against the Apostacys of his People, by
inflicting Judgments upon them. Otherwise His Name will peculiarly suffer by
their Wickedness and Impenitence. Hence He tells Israel of old, Amos 3.2. You
only have I known of all the Families of the earth: therefore I will punish you
for all your iniquities.

IN a word, The Honor of Divine Justice requires the punishing a sinful
People, and destroying them, if finally impenitent. Will not the Judge of all
the Earth do right? Is there any Iniquity with GOD? Will he not render to every
Man according to his Work? And to every People according to the fruit of their
Doings? Verily He will render a Reward to the Proud. There is no
Unrighteousness in Him. As He is oblig^d in Justice, He will not let a
rebellious People gounpunish'd. Indeed as to Individuals or particular Persons,
there may possibly be some Exceptions, during the present State: Some Sinners
may have almost all their Punishment reserved to the future World: But if we
consider Men as united in Society, and making up distinct Provinces, Kingdoms
and Nations, we shall find the Conduct of God's Providence toward them is
vastly different in this particular. National Guilts infer National Judgments.
God exercises a Government over Men, as they coalesce into distinct Communities
Psalm. 22.28. For the kingdom is the Lord's: and he is the governor among the
nations. And his Government is infinitely wise, and good, and just, and holy.
He governs them by Law and Rule: And He judges them according to their doings.
Now methinks, we must have very odd notions of Things, if we imagine that human
Societies, as such, have any reference to the future State, or can be judged in
another World. Hence, if ever God punish them, it must be in the present State.
Divine Justice seems more concerned then to punish Nations, than Persons, in
the Life that now is.

GOD can punish whole Nations as easily as particular Persons. He has National
Judgments; Punishments of a public Aspect and general Concern. And if a People
fin, they lay themselves open to such Judgments. And if they are finally
impenitent, Divine Justice calls a^oud for their utter Destruction. When a
People are obstinate and irreclamable, after a long ^me of Trial and much
waiting upon them, God represents himself as weary with repenting, and obliged
to proceed to their Destruction. Jer. 15.5, 6. For who shall have pity upon
thee, O Jerusalem? or who shall bemoan thee? or who shall go aside to ask how
thou do? Thou have forsaken me, says the Lord, thou art gone backward:
therefore will I stretch out my hand against thee, and destroy thee: I am weary
with repenting. -- He may very justly do so. For exceeding aggravated is the
Provocation that such a People offer unto God; very great the Affronts they put
upon Him. It is the highest Instance of Stubborness and Rebellion against God,
to be incorrigible, and unhumbled, under very humbling Dispensations, and not
afraid of the Consequence. It is in effect a bidding Defiance to God, a
challenging his Vengeance to do it is utmost. It Is the highest Insolence and
Contempt of God, and must needs be extremely provoking to Him. He may well
therefore set his Face against such a Rebellious People. Shall not God visit
such a Nation as this?

MOREOVER, It defeats the Design of Providence, in afflictive Dispensations.
The great End ordinarily is to bring a People to Repentance: and for this
purpose, Divine Judgments are ordinarily for a long while tempered with much
Mercy, that by the Goodness of God we may be led to Repentance. It his method
to try a People by less and lighter Judgments at first; and if these are
ineffectual, he brings greater and heavier. And if after all they will walk
contrary to God, and will not be reformed by these Things, but defeat his
gracious Design by a persevering Impenitence; how reasonably, how justly may
his abused Patience turn into flaming Indignation? His Anger may well burn
against them, and his Fury be poured out like Fire, to consume them utterly!
When a People have out-stood all the Methods of Reformation, they are
completely ripe for Ruin. They have filled up the measure of their Iniquity:
they have provoked GOD to the last degree. And (...) should he not set his Face
against them for Evil, to cut them off, and to make an utter End Shall not my
Soul be avenged on such a Nation as this, says the Lord. Behold I am against
Thee; I will make thee vile, and will Set thee as a Gazing-Stock. I am weary
with repenting. I will surely destroy thee; neither will I repent any more, nor
shall mine Eye spare Thee, faith the Lord.

BUT now to apply this Doctrine in a few Hims.

USE 1. THIS affords a sad Progn^stick to a People that have long continued
Impenitent under a Course of o^^ictive Dispensations.

IT tells us, They are like to have the blessed GOD set his Face against them.
If they are resolved upon Sinning, He is resolved upon Punishing. GOD is
jealous, and the Lord revengeth: the Lord will take Vengeance on his
Adversaries, and He reserveth Wrath for his Enemies. Though He be slow to Anger;
yet He will not at all acquit the Wicked. How miserable then are a People,
secure and stupid under many Judgments, like to be in the Issue! They must
expect the Continuance and Aggravation of their Calamities. There Is no prospect
of any Period to their Troubles; unless GOD is pleased to have done striving
with them: and that is the most formidable Judgment in the World. Indeed
sometimes Sovereign Divine Grace is exalted and triumphs in the Conversion of a
Person or a People, after they have long stood it out against all means. Isai.
57.17, 18. I was wroth and smote him; I hid me and was wroth: and be went on
frowardly in the way of his heart. I have seen his ways, and will heal him. But
this is an extraordinary Case. If we consider the common Course of Providence,
and the constant Tenor of the Covenant, They both (with united voices) read
Lectures of Terror, and speak sadly, to such a People. From hence We may learn,
What we have to fear, if we do not repent, and turn to GOD. We have sinned: and
GOD has a Controversy with us: Though hitherto he has dealt very tenderly and
compassionately with us; in wrath remembering Mercy. But if we go on still in
our Trespasses, we must expect GOD will heap on us more severe and heavy
Judgments, than ever yet we have felt. We may expect fearful Tragedies to be
acted on the Stage, before GOD has performed His work, whether it be of Mercy
or of Vengeance.

USE 2. WHAT has been said may help to account for those dark Appearances of
Providence, wherein GOD seems to be setting his Face against this People, at
this day.

WE are fallen by our Iniquity: GOD has visited our Sins upon us from time to
time, by Scarcity, by epidemical Sicknesses, by War in our Borders, Piracies at
Sea, etc. By various Judgments we have many times been brought low. And how are
our common Calamities grown and aggravated at this day! It is in many respects
a time of Jacob's Trouble. It is particularly a day of Battle and War, wherein
we are frequently made to bleed by the Sword of the Wilderness: and a scorching
season, wherein GOD is withholding the Rain of Heaven, and making the Rain of
our Land powder and dust. Our distress and perplexity is great on these
accounts, and others. And GOD seems to be threatening us with greater
Calamities. The present Aspects of Providence upon us in our most important
Interests, how frowning are they! Above all the too sensible Withdraw of the
Spirit of GOD from among us, affords the most awful Symptom, that GOD is
setting his Face against us.

AND what is the ground of all? Why, because we are not humbled, even to this
day. The People turns not to Him that smites them: and therefore his Anger
is not turned away, but his Hand is stretched out still; notwithstanding the
many days of Humiliation we have solemnized. I desire to lay my hand on my own
Breast in the first place: but suffer me to say, Doubtless we have in general
too much reason to condemn our selves, as the faulty Causes of our own
Distresses: It is because we are still unreform'd, that GOD will not put an End
to his Controversy with us.

USE 3. LET us see and admire the Patience of GOD toward us in this Land.

O the Riches of the Patience, and Forbearance of GOD; who, though He has not
suffered us to go unpunisht, yet has debated with us in measure, and stayed his
Rough Wind in the day of the East Wind. A great many Mercies have been mingled
with his Judgments. He has not rewarded us according to our Iniquities. He
has not in anger shut up his Bowels, but is long-suffering to usward, not
willing that we should perish, but that all should come to Repentance. Indeed
He is awfully contending with us by various Judgments, avenging the Quarrel of
his violated Covenant; and is making progress in his Controversy with us: yet
He takes but very slow Steps, and makes many Pauses, giving us a Space to
repent, and waiting to be gracious. Surely He is a GOD slow to Anger,
long-suffering, and abundant in Goodness and Mercy. Surely it is of the Lord's
Mercy, that we are not consumed. O let us realize the Divine Lenity and
Forbearance toward us, and give to GOD the Glory of his infinite Patience.

USE 4. WHAT has been said warns us to beware of continued Impenitency, and
calls upon us to humble our selves in the sight of GOD, lest He be provoked to
abandon us utterly.

RETURN thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and I will not cause my Anger
to fall upon you; for I am merciful, says the Lord, and I will not keep Anger
for ever. Turn, O backsliding Children! Circumcise your Hearts to the Lord,
lest my Fury come forth like Fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of
the Evil of your Doings, says the Lord. Be ye not stiff-necked, but yield your
selves unto GOD, that the Fierceness of his Wrath may turn away from you. He
will not turn away his Face, if ye return unto Him. He will not hide Himself
for ever. O Jerusalem, wash thine Heart from Wickedness, that thou may be
saved. How long shall thy vain Thoughts lodge within thee? How long will thou
refuse to humble thy self before me, says the Lord. How long will this People
provoke Me? Do they provoke Me to Anger, says the Lord! Do they not provoke
themselves to the Confusion of their own Faces! Do ye provoke the Lord to
Jealousy! Are ye stronger than He! O foolish People, and unwise! Shall Briars
and Thorns be set in array against devouring Fire! Verily He is a jealous GOD,
with whom we have to do, and He is a strong Lord. Who knows the power of his
Wrath? Who can stand before Him, when once He is angry? Why then should we
incense him yet more, by a persevering Impenitency! He is jealous for his great
Name, which is pecu^iarly concerned in our Conduct, and in the ma^nner of His
Dealings with us. And He will have Honor from us, in our Repentance, or in our
Ruin. He has been for many Years witnessing against our Apostasies, and trying
of us, by more mild Exercises of his Rod. But if we continue unhumbled, we must
expect more severe and terrible Dispensations of his Wrath. O why then should
we any longer harden our Hearts! Have we not smarted enough already! Why should
we oblige Him to inflict heavier Judgments upon us! O let us not be so
egregiously foolish! Remember, Divine Corrections are ordinarily Progressive,
and do commonly rise in proportion to a Peoples Guilt. And should we not
tremble then to think of going on still in our Provocations* Verily GOD has
not yet done with us. He has not shot all his Arrows yet: the worst are still
behind: and there seems to be a sharp and terrible one at this day upon the
String!

O let us then fall down at GOD's feet, and humble our selves, and cry mightily
to Him, and turn every one from his evil way. Who can tell if GOD will turn and
repent, and turn away from his fierce Anger, that we perish not! O let us not
dare GOD, and force him to take more rigorous Methods with us. It is high time
for us to awake out of our carnal Sleep; to look about us, and see if there is
any way to escape, that we be not consumed. O let us make Have, and not delay;
but as the Holy Ghost says, To day if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your
Hearts. Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my Soul depart from Thee; lest I
make thee desolate, a Land not inhabited. Who is He that will love Life, and
see good Days? Let him eschew Evil, and do Good. For the Eyes of the Lord are
over the Righteous, and his Ears are open unto their Prayers: but the Face of
the LORD is against them that do Evil.

FINIS.

