London, 26th of the 3d Month, 1724. Sir WILLIAM KEITH,
IN my last of the 25th of February, by the Beaver, enclosing an Agreement made
with the Lord Baltemore, for the quieting of the People of both Provinces in
their Settlements on the Borders, I wrote my Sentiments freely in some Points
relating to thy self and the Government, since which, I have, with the
Principal of the Trustees and other Friends, considered more closely of the
Province and our Interest there, which seems of late to be under some
Discouragement, and to have suffered by Irregularities, which it is high Time
should be remedied; and it may be worthy of thy own Reflection to consider,
whether much of thy late Conduct, together with so apparent a Neglect of us,
might not give us too much Reason to doubt whether thou did look upon thy
self to be any longer accountable to us, or whether thou have not entertained
an Opinion, that since my Husband's Decease, the Circumstances of the Family
had put it out of our Power to take any new Measures with that Government: But
I must take this Opportunity to let thee know, that we could long ere this have
found Means to convince thee to the contrary, had it not been for our tender
Regard to thy Family and the Hopes we had conceived that thou would have made
the best Application of thy known Abilities to the Interest of thy
Constituents: And to the Intent that thy future Management may be more to our
Satisfaction, I shall now give thee some further Instructions, which I shall
expect thou wilt punctually observe, together with those formerly given thee with
thy Commission. And in the first Place,

As I have with the Trustees made a farther Nomination and Appointment of
Persons to manage our Proprietary Affairs there, by the Names of Agents or
Commissioners, thou art to assist those Commissioners with the Powers of
Government, in all Cases where necessary or requisite for advancing our just
Interest, and especially to see the Authority of the Courts and Laws exerted
against those who on any Pretense invade or detain our Rights from us: And if
in any Case there should be Occasion to use the Powers of Legislature thou art
to apply thy best Endeavors to procure the Assistance of the Assembly to join
with thee in passing such further Laws as may on such Occasions be wanted. And
here I cannot but take Notice of thy Imprudence and great Mistake in a Point of
this Nature, as mentioned in thy last Letter to me.

As in all the Changes of the Governors there, the Dependence of the
Proprietor and his Family has been chiefly on their Friends in the Council,
whose Recommendation alone was (as thou must needs remember) the first and
chief Step to thy Advancement to the Place thou enjoys, we must still rely on
their Advice and Assistance, as our principal Security, and more especially
upon such of them as were confided in by my late Husband; but as thy Measures
with the Council (as I have been assured by diverse Hands) have been new and
singular, it is now absolutely required, that thou reform them as follows, viz.

That no Person be called to that Board, and admitted a Member of it without
being first proposed and approved of in a Council impartially and equally
convened, consisting of at least two Thirds of the whole Number of acting
Members, after which he may be admitted at the next Sitting. But as that
Country was principally settled by those of our Profession called Quakers, it is
expected, that at least one hal^ of the whole Number shall be of that
Profession: And if any Person has been called to that Board, without having
been first approved as aforesaid, that he be excluded till such Time as he
shall be approved, and that the Number of Acting Members resident in the
Government, consist not of less than Eight, nor of more than Twelve at one Time.

The Powers of Legislature being at present lodged solely in the Governor and
Assembly, without so much as a Negative reserved to the Proprietor when absent,
it is of the highest Importance for our Security, as well as for that of the
Country, that Matters of Legislation should be carried on, with the most mature
Advisement and Deliberation: For it never was intended, that every new
Governor should with an Assembly Annually chosen, proceed to make what new
Laws they should think proper, to be transmitted directly to the King's
Ministers, without any other Check. It has therefore been the more surprising
to see thee (from whom it could have been least expected) to be the first
Author of so dangerous an Innovation, which entirely takes off the Security,
which the Proprietor ever had, and absolutely required of his former Deputies,
that nothing should be transacted by them with any Assembly, but with the joint
Concurrence and Approbation of his Friends in the Council. Therefore for Remedy
of this Grievance, it is required,

That thou advise with the Council upon every Meeting and Adjournment of the
Assembly which requires any Deliberation on the Governor's Part; that thou
make no Speech, nor send any written Message to the Assembly, but what shall be
first approved in Council; that thou receive all Messages from them in Council,
if practicable at the Time, and shall return no Bill to the House, without the
Advice of the Council, nor pass any whatsoever into a Law, without the Consent
of Majority of the same.

That the Minutes of Council be regularly kept, and those of the preceding
Council be read and approved at the next Meeting, and shall always remain in
the Possession of the Clerk of the Council.

I ought to have taken more Notice than I shall do of the last Letter I ever
received from thee, being of the 5th of July, 1722. But as I looked upon it
only as the Effect of some warm Resentment, I shall for diverse Reasons choose
to say no more of it here. I must however further observe, that James Logan
since his Arrival here, has to our Surprise on all Occasions refused the Title
of Secretary of that Province, which upon Inquiry into the Cause, I find is
owing to thy appointing by thy Commission under the Great Seal, another Person
(an entire Stranger to u^) to (...) as Secretary of the Government in all Cases
where any Profits arise, as well as Clerk of the Council. Upon which I cannot
but tell thee, that my Husband the late Proprietor and Governor, after a full
Experience of his Probity, Fidelity and Capacity for that Employment, appointed
him not only Secretary of the Province, but entru^^ed him particularly with the
Management of his Affairs, as his Receiver General, and continued the same
Confidence in him so far as to name him to be one of the Tru^^ees of his last
Will. And I m^^^ do him the Justice to say, That we have had long Experience of
his many faithful Services, and of his constant Care and Zeal to promote and
support our Interest in that Country. We have seen the Ju^^ness of his
Accounts, which have been carefully examined since his coming over, and such an
Instance of his Fidelity in making of our Returns (whereby we have been
benefitted many Hundreds of Pounds by saving the Exchange) as can leave us no
room to suspect his Integrity in the Management of any of our Affairs that have
been under his Care; and therefore I should very much wrong both him and my
self to look upon him in any other View than that of a very honest and capable
Man, and my true and faithful Friend. It Is therefore what we could never have
expected, that a Gentleman who obtained that Government by my Husband's
Commission, and still holds it on the Foot of the same Appointment, should
without any Notice to, or Direction from us, and without ever advising with his
Council (as his Instructions enjoin him in such Cases) take upon him to
displace such an Officer. It is therefore expected and required, that all
Commissions invalidating those to him shall be forthwith be made void.

That the Lesser Seal of the Province be re-delivered to him, and remain in his
Custody, as it ever was from his Arrival there to thy Accession to the
Government; That he, by himself or his Deputy shall exercise all the Parts of
the Secretary's-Office; That all Instruments and Writings signed by the
Governor, excepting Military Commissions and Licenses for Marriage be done in
his Office, and sealed with the Seal of the Province. That only he, or such
Persons as he shall appoint with the Approbation of the Council, be Clerk of
that Board, and that all the Minutes of the Council shall remain in his
Keeping. In all which I desire and expect that there be no Hesitation or Delay;
and that for the future all Means be used to cultivate and preserve a good
Understanding between you, for the public Peace and General Good of the
Province and my Family.

As to the Acts for a Paper-Credit, though the Merchants here inveigh very much
against them and the Manner of passing them, has given us Reason to be
dissatisfied, and might have tempted us to have had them repealed (which was
easily practicable) yet upon a mature Deliberation we have resolved to suffer
the passing them, yet with this full Expectation that all possible Care be
taken to support their Credit by any farther Acts that may be necessary for
that Purpose, and all other Means that may conduce to that End. But we hope and
expect that thou will never give thy Assent to the passing any Law for the
creating any more such Paper-Credit.

We have been very much pleased with the happy Event of the Treaty at Albany,
after the unfortunate Death of the Indian that lost his Life in the Province;
and we cannot but approve the Conduct of the Government in that Affair, and
acknowledge not only the Care of the Governor himself, but also of those
Gentlemen who undertook so fatiguing a Journey for the Service of the Public.
And we hope and desire the same Care of those poor People the Indians may still
be continued, that the same Measures my Husband first established with them may
be constantly pursued, and that on all Occasions of Moment, the Council,
especially those Members of it, who are entrusted with the Affairs of Property,
may be consulted, and that all Treaties with them may be managed with their
Concurrence and Approbation.

We have had lately a Meeting with Lord Baltemore upon the settling the
Boundaries; and though we cannot yet come to an Agreement therein, yet his
Lordship seems no less disposed than we are to determine that Dispute some Way
or other, as soon as possible, which we hope may be done within the Time agreed
upon for a mutual Cessation. However we desire thou will use the same
Vigilance, which J. Logan tells us, thou have always exerted to defend the
Province, against all Encroachments, if any should be attempted by the
Marylanders.

To these I shall only add, that as thou were chosen in the Time of my
Husband's Weakness, by the Means of his Friends only to that important Trust,
it would be with some Regret should we be obliged to make a Change before our
final Settlement with the Crown, though the Means are ready at hand: We therefore
earnestly desire that thy Skill and Abilities may be employed to render thy
Continuance yet grateful to us, which can be no other way effected, than by thy
strict Observation of thy former and these present Instructions.

To conclude, I recommend to thy utmost Care to promote and encourage Virtue,
Sobriety, Peace and Love among all the Inhabitants; to reconcile all
Animosities and Factions for thy own Honor, the Reputation of the Country, and
our Satisfaction; a speedy Account of which will be most acceptable to us. And
in this I earnestly desire the Lord may bless thy Endeavors, from whence the
most solid Comfort will arise to thy self, and a very great one to

Thy real well-wishing Friend, HANNAH PENN.

The Printer through Mistake, Haste, and not having any one at that Juncture, to
compare the Copy with the Proof, left out the following Words in page 2. after
line 39. of a former Impression, [That thou receive all Messages from them in
Council,] which Words were in the Copy, as may be seen at the Printer's, who
through Mistake too hastily printed it off, before ever the Gentleman who
entrusted him with the Copy so much as saw it in Print. N. B. Those few wrong
ones disposed of, will be changed by the Printer, if desired.


