Two SERMONS Preached at Rutland, September 8th. 1723. After the Indians had
been there, and Killed the Reverend Mr. JOSEPH WILLARD, With Two of Mr. JOSEPH
STEVENS's Children, and Captivated other Two.

By Israel Loring, M.A. Pastor of a Church of CHRIST in Sudbury.

BOSTON: Printed by S. Kneeland, for D. Henchman, and Sold at his Shop. 1724.

Sermon I.
JOB I. 21. The LORD give, and the LORD has taken away, blessed be the Name of
LORD.


I Shall not now spend my time in inquiring who Job was, in what time, and
where he lived. Let two or three things be observed of him. (1.) That he was a
very good Man, and had as he deserved a high Character and Commendation
bestowed upon him. He was perfect and upright, one that feared God and eschewed
evil. (2.) Observe that this good Man met with heavy Afflictions, of which we
have a Catalogue in this Chapter, ver. 14, 15. There c^m^ a messenger unto Job,
and said, the Oxen were ^lowing, and the Asses feeding beside them; (...) ^e
Sabeans fell upon them, and took them away; (...) ^ey have slain the Servants
with the edge (...) sword, and I only am escaped to tell (...) ver. 16. While
he was yet speaking, there (...) ^lso another, and said, the fire of God is
fallen from Heaven, and has burnt up the Sheep, and the Servants, and consumed
them, and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. ver. 17. While he was yet
speaking, there came also another, and said, the Caldeans made out three hands,
and fell upon the Camels, and have carried them away, yea, and slain the
Servants with the edge of the sword, and I only am escaped to tell thee.ver.
18, 19. While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, thy Sons
and thy Daugthers were eating and drinking in their eldest brothers house; And
behold there came a great wind from the wilderness, and smote the four corners
of the house, and it fell upon the young men, and they are dead, and I only am
escaped alone to tell thee. Thus did deep call unto deep, so did this good
Man's Afflictions (like waves of the Sea) came rolling in upon him, one after
the other. The last of which was the heaviest and greatest of all. Let any one
that knows what it is to be a Parent, lay his hand upon his Heart, and consider
his own Bowels, and he will acknowledge, that the loss of Children is one of
the sorest outward Afflictions that a Man can m^ (...) withal in this World.
And here I w^ (...) make this Observation, (...)

THAT a Man may be very near and dear to God* and yet meet with heavy
Afflictions in this World.

WE see this in the Example of Job, and in several others of God's dear
Children whose Names are on record in the sacred Pages. Never was there a
Person so near and dear to God as the Lord Jesus Christ was, yet he was a Man
of Sorrows and acquainted with Grief. Now this teaches us not to judge of Men's
Conditions, that they don't belong to God, because of their present sorrowful
Visitations. We must judge of Persons by their Conversation toward God, not by
God's Dispensations toward them. The greatest Sufferers are not always the
greatest Sinners. Luke 13.2, 3. And Jesus answered, and said unto them, Suppose
ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans, because they
suffered such things? I tell you, Nay, etc. ver. 4, 5. Or those eighteen, upon
whom the Tower of Siloam fell, and slew them, think ye^ that they were sinners
above all men (...) ^n Jerusalem? I tell you, Nay, etc. (...) here fall alike
to all. A sudden (...), a violent Death, as it comes (...) Men, so it may come
upon the (...) ^n. (3.) We may take notice of Job's Carriage and Behavior
under his sharp Afflictions, ver. 20. He arose and rent his mantle, and sha^e^
his bead and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped. (1.) He had a deep
sense of, and a just sorrow for the heavy hand of God, and was humbled under
it, He arise and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the
ground. Note here, that to take a due notice of the Hand of God in Afflictions,
and to be humbled under them, is what highly becomes a Christian. Indeed, to be
excessively dejected, and cast down under Afflictions, so as to impair our
Health, and incapacitate us for the Duties either of our particular or general
Calling, is what Christians should endeavor against, and earnestly beg Grace
of God to overcome. The Exhortation is, My son, faint not when thou art rebuked
of him, Heb. 12.5. But then not to be concerned, not to grieve, not to be
humbled under Affliction, is to be condemned, My son, despise not thou the
chastening of the Lord, forequoted, Heb. 12.5. When God is correcting to say, I
do not regard it, Let God take all, if he will; If my Estate must go, let it
go; If my Children die, let them die; this is to despise the Chastening of the
Lord; and God cannot bear it, that we should bear it thus lightly. The Contempt
of God's Judgments are very displeasing and provoking to him. To see Men merry
and jocund, when God is angry, or to set light by his Corrections. Isai. 22.12,
13, 14. And in that day did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping, and to
mourning, and to boldness, and to girding with sackcloth; and behold joy and
gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing Sheep eat-flesh, and drinking wine; Let us
eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. And it was revealed in mine ears by
the Lord of hosts, surely this iniquity shall not be purged from you, till ye
die says the Lord God of hosts. Surely, the displeasure of God in Afflictions
and Judgments, ought to be laid to Heart. Is it a small matter to have God's
frowns and displeasure? Amos 3.6. Shall a trumpet be blown in the City, and the
people not be afraid? shall there be evil in a City and the Lord has not done
it? When Moses was a suitor for his sister Miriam, he received this Answer from
the Lord, Numb. 12.24. If her father had pit in her face, should she not have
been asha^ed seven days? The face is the Table and (...) eat of beauty and
honor; but when (...) is ^^it upon it is made the sink of Shame. ^^ad her own
Father spit upon her Face, when she had displeased him, would she not have gone
aside as one ashamed by such a Rebuke, and not have showed her face to him
again in seven Days? How much more should she take it to heart and be sensible
of this Rebuke of mine, who have filled her face with leprous Spots, the signs
of my displeasure against her? Surely God will be ashamed of those, that are
not ashamed nor humbled, when he rebukes them. It is not Magnanimity, but
Stupidity to make light of God's Corrections. And for this the afflicted are
smartly taxed, Jer. 5.3. Thou have stricken them, but they have not grieved;
thou haste smitten them, but they have refused to receive Correction. (2.) Job
Worshipped. His heavy Afflictions did not make him cease from praying to God
and worshipping. It Is very sad when they do so. Let us carefully see to it,
that our Afflictions how sadly circumstanced, or aggravated soever they be,
don't drive us from Prayer. Affliction is a praying season, Prayer is a Duty
never out of season, but never more (...) than in and under Affliction. Jan^
(...) any among you afflicted? Let him p^ (...) we shall find a Prayer penned
o^ (...) for the afflicted, when he is over^^ (...) See, Psalm 102. This was
Davi^ (...) and constant Way, who was a Man of Afflictions, Psalm. 142.2, 3. I
poured out my complaint before him, I showed before him my trouble; when my
spirit was ^verwhe^med within me, than thou knew my ^a^h. This will ease and
allay our Troubles. Griefs are eased by groans, and Heart pressures by
Utterance. It Is some relief when in Distress, we can pour out our Trouble into
the Bosom of a wise or faithful Friend; ^ow much more, when we leave our
Complaint before the gracious, wise and faithful God. Let the sinking, drowning
Soul by earnest Prayer run to its high rock, and this will keep the head above
water.

I am come now to the Verse containing my Text, And Job said, naked came I out
of my mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the
Lord has taken away, and blessed be the Name of the Lord. The Lord gave, etc.
the sense of which Words is this, what he has taken is his own, and only lent
me for a while; therefore I have no reason to murmur, or complain of God, but
much cause to bless him, both for those Mercies, which I have had so long, and
others which I yet enjoy.

DOCTRINE. GOD's Children and People have no reason to murmur and complain of
him, under the Bereavemnts with which he afflicts them; but contrary-wise great
Reason to bless his Name.
THERE are two Propositions contained in the Doctrine. [1.] That God's Children
and People have no Reason to complain of him under their Bereavements. [2.]
That they have great Reason under their Bereavements to bless his Name.

PROP. I. GOD's Children and People have no Reason to murmur and complain of
him under their Bereavements, with which he is afflicting them. Two Things I
will instance in here to illustrate this Truth. [1.] They have no Reason to
complain, because of their Sins which they have been guilty of. [2.] Because
God reserved the supreme Dominion and Disposal of what was given in his own
^^ands.

1. Then, GOD's Children have no (...) to complain of him under afflicting
(...) ^ments, because of their Sins. Lam. 3.39 (...) sore does a living man
complain, a man (...) punishment of his Sins. We are Sinners, and Afflictions
are our Wages, our Due, and there is no reasonable Man, that will repine at
just and equal Dealing. One great Reason which makes Men apt to complain, that
God's ways are unequal, is because they don't consider that their own are so.
In the Place but just now cited, Lam. 3.39. where the Prophet disswades from
murmuring and repining, he does in the very next Verse exhort to
Self-Examination; Let us search and try our ways; implying, that he who rightly
understands his own Sinfulness will find little Reason to repine at Sufferings.
Every Sin is a great Wrong to God. Sin is an horrible injury unto God. Sin is
Rebellion against God. Sinning is the casting off the Yoke of God. Sinning is
an Insurrection of the Soul against God. In Sin there is also great Contempt
cast upon God. Sin is a vilifying and slighting of God. Sin is also Enmity
against him: In all Obedience there is Love, in all Disobedience there is
Hatred. Sinners strike at God, when they sin. Now (...) ^nly considers thus the
Evil of Sin, (...) ^s justify God under the Evils he (...) ^^d instead of
entertaining hard (...) of God, as if he dealt too severe^ (...) ^im, Say as in
Psalm. 103.10. He has not dealt with us after our Sins, nor rewarded us
according to our Iniquities. And with the Church, in Lam. 3.22. Its of the
Lord's mercies that we are not c^nsumed.

2. GOD's Children and People have no Reason to complain under afflictive
Bereavements, because God reserves the supreme Dominion and Disposal of what
was given in his own Hands. We read in general, that the Earth is the Lord's
and the fullness thereof, Psalm. 24.1. And more particularly in Ezekiel. 18.4. God
there challenges a right in all Persons. All Souls (says he) are mine, as the
soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine. He has made all Things
and from thence, has an unalterable right in them, and Dominion over them. He
does not give away his right, when he gives Men the Comforts of this Life, nor
does he make them absolute Lords of them; but rather lends them, and allows
them the Use and Comfort of them, during his good Pleasure. Hence when he takes
them away, he takes but his own. Takes that which was lent; and shall we
complain of this? It Is ingratitude to complain of that as an Injury, which is
but (...) Restitution of what was freely lent. Since God's Dominion is
absolute, his Disposals should be acceptable to us. It was so to good Eli, Sam.
3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. And it was so to David,
Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou did it. And so it
was to holy Job, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the
Name of the Lord. We pass now to the second Proposition contained in the
Doctrine, viz.

PROP. II. THAT God's Children and People have great Reason to bless his Name
under all their afflictive Bereavements.

And here,

1. THEY have Reason to bless God for Afflictions themselves: Since they are
designed for their Benefit, Heb. 12.10. And shall promote it, Romans 8.28. These
Benefits may be considered under three Heads. [1.] Those that respect Sin. [2.]
Those that respect the opposites of it, Grace and Holiness. [3.] Those that
regard Comfort and Joy.

[1.] AS to Sin: Afflictions are serviceable to discover it, and give us a
sense of it. This (...) ^^ed by that great Sufferer, Job, (...) and in fetters,
and be holden in (...) ^ion, then shows them their (...) ^ir transgression
that they have (...) 36.8, 9. Afflictions open these (...) had shut, and remind
them of their Follies, and causes them to reflect on them with remorse and
repentance. Art thou come to call my sins to remembrance? said the sorrowful
Widow to the Prophet, under the doleful Apprehension of her Child's Death, 1
Kings 17.18. Now when her hopeful Son was taken away, she remembered her too
great Fondness and Indulgence toward him, or the bad Example she gave him, or
she reflects on some other Delinquencies, and is deeply touched with a sense of
them. Again,

THE Afflictions of this Life are not only serviceable to discover Sins past,
but to hinder the commission of them for the Future. Before I was afflicted
(says the Psalmist) I went astray, Psalm. 119.67. God's Children and People are
sometimes wandering, going astray; but Providence arrests them by some signal
Calamity and Distress, and brings them back again. By this (says the Prophet,
i. e. by this severe Chastisement) shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and
this is all the fruit to take away his sins, Isai. 27.9. And it is fruit
enough, it is ample and large Success. God is our good Physician; Affliction is
the Medicine he prescribes and prepares for us; it is bitter indeed, but
wholesome, for it is useful to purge the Depravity of our Nature, and the
Visiosity of our Manners.

[2.] AS to Grace and Holiness. Afflictions are very serviceable to increase
Grace. Affliction yields the peaceable fruits of righteousness, unto them which
are exercised thereby. This fruit is various and manifold, which may be seen
briefly in these ensuing Particulars.

(1.) THE genuine Effect of Affliction is Faith in God. I have heard of thee
(says J^b) by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee, Chap. 42.5.
In Trouble and Distress, the Eye of Faith is opened and cleared, so that the
Man is able to behold those Things which he could not discern by the Eye of
Sense and common Apprehension. Now God's People arrive to a firm and steady
Belief of the Promises. We now embrace them when we stand in need of them. We
confide in Jesus the Author of them, and rest our Souls upon him, as our only
support. When all outward Enjoyments are withdrawn, then by Faith we take a
prospect of Heaven and Happiness, and those eternal Pleasures which are at
God's right hand. This we see in David, he was taught to fly unto God, and
trust in him, in the Day of Distress and Calamity, and never did his humble
Confidence rise to the highest Pitch, till he was brought low, and worn out
with Trouble and Misery; as we may observe in his excellent Psalms.

(2.) REPENTANCE is another fruit of that Righteousness, which is the product
of Affliction. Therefore we may observe, that it immediately follows in that
above cited Chapter of Job, ver. 6. I abbor my self and repent in dust and
ashes. With Faith is joined true Repentance, and both are the blessed fruits of
sanctified Troubles. When Manasseh was in Fetters and Chains, then he humbled
himself for his Idolatry, and other gross Offenses, and turned unto the Lord.

(3.) A Spirit of Prayer and Supplication is another fruit of Affliction. Isai.
26.9. With my spirit within me, will I seek thee early: for when thy judgments
are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world will learn righteousness. Hos.
5.15. In their affliction they will seek me early. Psalm. 130.1, 2. Out of the
depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord! Lord hear my cry: Let thine ears be
attentive to the voice of my supplications. What dull an^ (...) ^ly Prayers do
we put up in our Pr^ (...) How faint and cold are our Suppli^ (...) How frozen
our Devotion? But A^ (...) blow up the sparks into a flame, (...) see in holy
David, Psalm. 116.3, etc. The sorrows of death compassed me, the pains of hell
gat hold upon me, I found trouble and sorrow: Then called I upon the name of
the Lord, O Lord I beseech thee deliver my soul. And those of his Psalms which
are most expressive of his devotion, and composed of earnest petitions and
supplications, were indicted when he was in great trouble and distress. It Is
this adverse and afflictive state, that has extorted prayer from the most
profligate Sinners. Particularly it is recorded of Manasseh, that when he was
among the thorns, and bound in fetters, he besought the Lord his God, and
prayed unto him, 2 Chronicles. 33.11, etc.

(4.) THE next Grace which Affliction is very serviceable to promote, is
Humility. It Is the wise design of Providence to exercise Men with Afflictions,
that they may learn not to be proud and presumptuous. David said in his
prosperity, I shall never be moved, Psalm. 30.6. which is the language of pride
and self confidence: but it follows, Thou did hide thy face, and I was
troubled. His prosperous state was changed into another of a quite different
nature: which was very well for him, to check the growing Insolence of his
spirit. It is particularly, recorded of Manasseh whom I mentioned before, that
when he was in affliction, he humbled himself greatly before the God of his
fathers, 2 Chronicles. 33.12.

(5.) HEAVENLY MINDEDNESS is greatly promoted by Afflictions. These make us
pant after a better state: these make us cry out with the Psalmist, Woe is me,
that I soj^urn in Mesech, etc. O that I had the wings of a dove, that I might
flee away, and be at rest! Whom have I in heaven but thee. And Affliction does
this, by convincing us o^ the Worlds vanity, emptiness and uncertainty.

[3dly,] and lastly. ANOTHER Spiritual advantage which attends Affliction when
sanctified, is J^y and Comfort. As the Sufferings of Christ abound in us, says
the Apostle Paul, so our Consolation abounds by Christ, 2 Cor. 1.5. God has
Comforts for his People, which far transcend the comfort of Children, or any
other outward Enjoyment. These some have ^ound, when their Children have been
cut off from them, and that in so eminent a degree, that they have little
valued their comfort in Children, in comparison of this Comfort. I have read of
an holy Man, who one day after a sharp Trial, having his only Son suddenly
taken away by Death, re^i^ed alone for several hours; and when he came forth
did look so cheerfully, that to those who asked him the reason thereof, and
wondered at the same in such a Time; he told them, He had got that in his
Retirement with the Lord, that t^ have it afterward renewed, he would be
content to lose a Son every day. Oh what a sweet exchange had he made! Surely
he had Gold for Brass, a Pearl for a Pebble; a Treasure for a Trifle; for so
great, yea and far greater is the disproportion ^etwixt the sweet light of
God's Countenance, and the faint dim light of the best Creature Enj^yments.

THESE now are some of the precious Benefits of sanctified Afflictions, of
sanctified Bereavements, and therefore God's People should bless him even for
them.

2. THEY have reason to bless God under afflictive Bereavements for the Mercies
they yet enjoy. Holy Job notwithstanding his great Afflictions, yet blesses
God, because of remaining Mercies. The setting of some Comforts did not cloud
and be ^ight all the rest, as too often it does. No, he sees what was left, and
blesses God for them. Let the afflicted, bereaved Christian go and do likewise.
Y^u have lost Children, well but still you have a Wife, a Husband, and other
Children; bless God for them, Health of Body, an Estate remaining, an
Habitation and Reputation remaining, and Friends to sympathize with you in your
sore Affliction, to pity and pray for you; bless God for these, and all other
great and undeserved Mercies. It Is highly reasonable you should so do. To
despise and slight all our other Mercies and Enjoyments because we have lost
some, is vile Ingratitude, and the way to lose all.

USE and IMPROVEMENT.

AND now, Let what has been said be directed to afflicted bereaved ones.
Particularly to our Christian Friends here among us, who are mourning for the
Loss of their dear Children, and ready to say as in Job 29.2, 5. O that I were
us in months past, when my Children were about me. Your Trial is is indeed very
sharp, your Afflictions very sore and sad, and demands the pity of your
Friends, Have pity, have pity upon we, O ye my friends for the hand of God has
touched me, so cries Job, Chap. 19.21. We are come to mourn with you, to pity
and pray for you, and would willingly afford you all the help we can to enable
you both to bear it and improve it aright. You must bear it with Silence and
Submission. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I
will not offend any more. He is the sovereign Lord of all, and may do with us
and ours as he pleases. The Lord gave, etc. Job acknowledges God in all. And
after all, this is it (dear Friends) that must satisfy you under this sad
Providence, That the Lord has done it; and the same Will that ordered the
Thing it self, ordered all the Circumstances of it; and who are we that we
should dispute with our Maker: Let the potsherds strive with the potsherds of
the earth, but let not the thing formed say to him that formed it, why have
thou made me thus? The supreme Being must needs be an unaccountable, and
uncontrollable Being. It is said, 2 Samuel 3.36. That whatsoever the King did
pleased all the people. And shall any thing the Lord does, displease you? He
can do no wrong. If we kill a Lamb for our Food, or crop a Flower for our
Pleasure, we do no wrong, because the original of 'em was for our Use, and they
had their Life and Nourishment and pleasing. Qualities for our Support and
Delight; and what wrong does God do, who has taken away (...) ^ear Lambs in
their Bloom and Blossom? (...) for his Pleasure they are and were cre^ (...)
and made. It was Mercy that you had (...) ^hildren, which now alas! you have
(...) and that you had so much Comfort in them so long: It Is Mercy that you
have one another, and other Children, that they are not all gone. Bless God for
these and be not unthankful, that will make way for another, and perhaps
sharper Stroke.

AS for the Improvement of this Afflistion, (which I hope both of you earnestly
desire, for it is a great loss to lose such a Providence, and not be made
better by it) there are the following lessons which it should teach you, and
they are good lessons, and should be well learned, for the advantage of them is
unspeakable.

(1.) IT should forever imbitter sin to you. You know what she said to the
Prophet, 1 Kin. 17.18. Art thou come to call my sin to remembrance, and to stay
my son? It Is Sin, that is the old kill-friend, and the Jonah that has raised
this storm, the A^han that has troubled your house; then how should you grow
in your hatred of it, and endeavors against it? that you may be the death of
that which has been the death of your Children; I say the death of it, for
nothing less will satisfy the true penitent than the death of such a melefactor.

(2.) IT should put an edge upon your Prayers, and all your other holy
performances. Job fell down, but it was to worship. Let this sore Affliction
bring you more than ever upon your Knees. Pour out your Hearts before him, in
free, full and broken hearted Confessions of Sin: Judge yourselves worthy of
Hell, as well as of this Trouble. Justify God in all his smartest Strokes, beg
him to sanctify it to you, and in this Distress to put under the everlasting
Arms. Entreat one smile, one gracious look to enlighten your Darkness.

(3.) YOU must learn by it as long as you live, to keep year Affections in due
bounds toward Creature Comforts. How hard is it to love, and not to overlove,
to delight in Children, and not over-delight; now God is a jealous God, and
will not give his Glory to any other; and our Excess this Way does often
provoke him to remove that Mercy from us, which we do thus make an Idol of; and
our Duty is to labor when he does so, to get that matter mended, and to
rejoice in all our Enjoyments with trembling, and as if we rejoiced not.

(4.) IT should be a means of drawing your Hearts upwards and Heaven-wards. You
should be looking oftener than before into the other World. I shall go to him
(says David) when his little Son was gone before. It is but a little while,
'ere long the things of Time shall be swallowed up in Eternity; in the midst of
Life, we are in Death: What manner of Persons ought we to be?

NOW our LORD JESUS CHRIST Himself, and GOD, even our Father, be your Support
under, and do your Souls good by this Dispensation, and sorrowful Stroke, so
will you have great Reason to bless his Name.

Sermon II.
MATTHEW IX. 38. Pray ye therefore the LORD of the Harvest, that he will send
forth Laborers into his Harvest.


THESE Words which I have now read unto you, together with the two preceding
Verses, are a Preface or Introduction to the account which we have in the
following Chapter, of Christ's sending forth his Disciples. When he saw the
multitudes, he was moved with Compassion on them, because they fainted, and
were scattered abroad as Sheep having no Shepherd. Then said he unto his
Disciples, the harvest truly is plenteous, but the Labour^ (...) ^ew. Pray ye
therefore the Lord of (...) ^est, etc. John the Baptist, and (...) ^ad now been
preaching for some (...) God inclined the Hearts of great (...) ^es to follow
both the one and the (...) There was a great People prepared for the Lord. Mat.
11.12. From the days of John the Baptist, the kingdom of heaven had suffered
violence, and the violent took it by force. Men were fond of hearing the
Gospel, the People desired good preaching, the harvest was plenteous, the
fields were white to the harvest, as our Savior expresses it in another
place, John 4.35. But the misery of it was, the Laborers were few. There were
few that would faithfully deliver the mind of God; there were abundance of idle
Pharisees, and Scribes, and Priests, that spent their Time in teaching People
their Rites, and Ceremonies, and Traditions; but they fainted for all this. For
what spiritual Health, and Life, and Vigor can there be in those Souls, that
are fed with Husks and Ashes, instead of the Bread of Life. They were scattered
abroad as Sheep having no Shepherd. The Expression is (as one observes)
borrowed from 1 Kings 22.17. And sets forth the sad Condition of those who are
destitute of faithful Guides to go before them in the things of God. No
Creature more apt to stray than a Sheep, and when gone astray, more helpless,
shiftless, and exposed; nor more unapt to find the way home again: Sinful Souls
are as lost Sheep, they need the Care of Shepherds to bring them back. The
Teachers of the Jews had pretended to be Shepherds, yet Christ says, they had
no Shepherds: For they were worse than none, idol Shepherds, that led them away
instead of reducing them, and fleeced the Flock instead of feeding it. This
moved the Bowels of Christ, his Heart yearned toward the People, when he saw
the lamentable Condition they were in. And for the remedying it, he puts his
Disciples on to pray for them. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the Harvest, that
he will send forth Laborers into is Harvest.

THE Direction which Christ here gives to his Disciples, is a standing
direction to others. So that the Doctrine to be insisted upon from the Words is
this.

DOCTRINE. THAT it is a Christan People's Duty to pray to the LORD of the
Harvest, to send forth Laborers into his Harvest.
THIS Doctrine may be spoken to, under the following Heads or Prop^sitions.

1. THAT GOD is the LORD of the Harvest. 2. That faithful Ministers are, and
all should be Laborers in GOD's Harvest. 3. It is GOD's Work to send forth
Laborers into his Harvest. 4. And lastly, It is a Christian People's Duty to
pray to the LORD of the Harvest to send forth Laborers into his Harvest. I
shall speak to these Heads in their Order.

PROP. I. GOD is the LORD of the Harvest. My Father (says Christ) is the
Husbandman, Joh. 15.1. He orders every thing concerning the Harvest as he
pleases. When the Laborers shall work, and where, and how long they shall
continue so to do. And as it is for him, and to him, his Service and Honor,
that the Harvest is gathered in, so it is from him. Ye are God's Husbandry, ye
are God's Building, says the Apostle, speaking to the Corinthians. See 1 Cor.
3.9. Their Conversion and Edification was from God. Ministers indeed are
dignified with the Title of Laborers together with God, as in the forequoted
place. And of Co-workers with God, 2 Cor. 10.4. But they, even the best and
brightest of them are nothing, neither can they do any Thing without God. I
have planted (says the Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 3.6, 7.) Apollos watered: bu^ (...)
God that gives the increase. God ho^ (...) me (says the Apostle) to preach the
(...) among you, and blessed my preach (...) convert you to Christ, then I left
you (...) los staid behind, and he watered (...) planted, daily preaching among
you. He further was a means to build you up in faith and holiness, but God
increased, or gave the increase; God gave the power by which they brought forth
fruit. The similitude is drawn from Planters, either Husdandmen or Gardiners,
they plant, they water, but the growing, the budding, the bringing forth
flowers, or fruit by the plant, does much more depend upon the Soil in which it
stands, the influence of Heaven upon it, the beams of the Sun, and the drops of
the Dew and Rain, and the internal virtue, which the God of nature has created
in the plant, than upon the hand of him, that planteth, or him who uses his
watering-pot to water it. So it is with Souls, one Minister is used for
Conversion, or the first changing of Souls; another is used for Edification or
further building up of Souls; but both Conversion and Edification are
infinitely more from the New Heart and New Nature, which God gives to the Soul
from the influence of the Sun of Righteousness by the Spirit of Grace, working
in and upon the Soul, than from any Minister, who is God's Instrument in those
Works. So that look as it is in earthly Plantations, God has the greatest
influence upon the growth and fruitfulness of the Plant, and the Husbandman or
Gardener is nothing in Comparison of God, who has given to the Plant planted
its life and nature, by which it shoots up, bu^deth and brings forth fruit,
and makes ^is Sun to shine, and his Rain to fall upon it. So it is in the
Spiritual Plantation, God is the principal efficient Cause, we are little
instrumental causes in his hand* nothing in comparison with God. If we see a
Soul changed, or grow, or make any spiritual proficiency, we must say, Nor unto
us, O Lord! not unto us, but unto thy Name be given the glory. God has done
the main work, we have done nothing in comparison of Him.

PROP. II. THAT faithful Ministers are, and all should be Laborers in GOD's
Harvest. The Ministry is a Work, and must be attended to accordingly. It Is
Harvest Work, which requires Diligence to do it thoroughly. The Office of the
Ministry, however easy it may be looked upon, by those that are ignorant of the
nature of it, and the duty required in it, is painful and laboriou^ For the
clearing up of this Proposition let it be considered.

1. THAT the Appellations and Titles given to the Ministers of the Gospel,
shows that their Work is attended with Labor. They are called Ministers,
Pastors, and Shepherds, Bishops and Overseers, Stewards, Builders and Planters,
Soldiers, Watchmen and Rulers, all which Titles bespeak Service, Care,
Watchfulness and Diligence.

2. IT will appear that the Ministerial Work is a painful and difficult Work,
if we consider what the Work of the Ministry is. And here,

(1.) A principal Work belonging to a Minister of the Gospel is to feed the
Flock by diligent preaching of the Word. It Is a Promise ^elating to the
New Testament, that God would give unto his Church Pastors according to his own
heart which should feed them with knowledge and understanding. This is done by
preaching the Word. The Care of preaching the Word was committed to Peter, and
in him ^o all the Pastors of the Church under the name of feeding. Joh. 21.15,
16. Feed my Lambs, feed my Sheep. Now this is a Work attended with Labor, and
Pains, when performed as it ought to be. There is much con^ (...) that
apostolical Charge and In^ (...) 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach the word, be in^ (...)
season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and
doctrine. The Lord said to the Prophet, Cry aloud, spare ^ot, lift up thy voice
like a trumpet. It condemns a cold, dull, lifeless way of preaching. Ministers
are enjoined (...), to labor to the utmost of their Strength they have
therein. 1 Timothy 5.17. It Is required of Ministers, that they instruct the People
in the whole counsel of God, and that they keep back nothing that is profitable
to them. See Acts 20. As good Stewards they are to give every one their portion
in due season, to give unto all Persons belonging to their Charge what is
profitable, proper and seasonable, as their spiritual States and Occasions do
require. Now a little or common measure of Knowledge in the Truths of the
Gospel will not be sufficient to these Ends. No, an eminency of divine
Knowledge and substantial Learning is required. Hence they must as the Apostle
exhorts Timothy, in 1 Timothy 4.15. Give attendance to reading, -- Meditate upon
these things, give themselves wholly to them, that their profiting may appear
to all. They must study to show themselves approved unto God, workmen that need
not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth, 2 Timothy 2.15. To search the
Scriptures is every Christians Duty, Job. 5.39. But it is the Ministers Duty in
a special and peculiar Manner, whose Office it is to open and apply them.
Search them (...), the Word is metaphorical taken from such as use to search
into Mines for Silver and Gold. There are rich Mines in the Scripture, there is
what is better than Gold in those Mines, but Ministers must dig deep, (a Work
of Labor) that they may come at the Treasure. The Labors of a Minister in his
Pulpit is great, and so are his Labors in his Study, and Preparations for the
Pulpit. The Labor of the Head and Heart is most tiresome; therefore the wise
Man says, Much study is a weariness of the flesh, Eccl. 12.12.

(2.) ANOTHER Part of a Ministers Work is to rule and govern the Church. Heb.
13.17. Obey them that rule over you in the Lord, etc. Their Power is not
secular, but spiritual, their Authority is not legislative, but executive. They
are to govern not by their own Will and Humor, but by the Laws of Christ,
according to the Orders he has appointed for the Edification of the Church,
and the Preservation of it, in Purity, Holiness, and Obedience. This also is a
laborious Work. All kind of Government is burdensome. The Government of the
Church is so in a peculiar Manner, Heb. 12.15. Looking diligently lest any Man
fail of the grace of God, lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you,
and so many be defiled. Rev. 2.2. I know thy works, and thy labor, and thy
patience, and how thou can not bear them that are evil. The Rule which lies
on the Pastors of the Churches calls for a great Measure of Wisdom and
Knowledge. Mat. 24.25. Who is that faithful and wise servant, whom his Lord
has made ruler over his household to give them their meat in due season. There
is great need of Labor and Diligent study to prepare themselves, for this Part
of their Work, that they may know how to behave themselves in the Church of the
living God, which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth. To manage aright the many
difficult, thorny and perplexing Cases that will come before them, is a Work of
Pains and Difficulty.

(3.) ANOTHER Part of a Minister's Work lies in making pastoral Visits to the
Families of his Flock, to know their State, and to instruct, advise, admonish
and comfort, as their is Occasion. Paul taught publicly and from house to
house. Especially it is a Duty incumbent upon them to visit the Sick, to pray
with them, and to help them to prepare either for a fruitful Life, or an happy
Death.

(4.) IT is the Duty of Ministers to ca^ (...) the Children of the Flock, and
in that way (...) them the first Principles of the Oracle of God. Other
Instances of their Work, might be mentioned, but these may suffice to show,
that the Ministry is truly a laborious Work.

3. IT must be shown, that the Work of Gospel Ministers is a laborious Work,
from the Oppositions which they meet withal. The Work of the Ministry has a
direct Tendency to the subversion and demolishing of Satan's Kingdom; hence the
Devil bears Christ's faithful Ministers the greatest Malice, who are engaged to
do him the greatest Damage, and he will be improving to the utmost his Policy
and Power to molest Christ's faithful Laborers and obstruct them in their
Work. Hell and Earth too are joined in a cursed Combination to ruin their Work,
and what Pains, Courage and Resolution is eno' to vanquish this Opposition, and
carry on the desired Work to Success? Sure, the Work will be left undone,
unless God's Servants are patient, unwearied in their Labors.

PROP. III. THAT it is GOD's Work to send forth Laborers into his Harvest.
Christ makes Ministers. Particularly,

1. THE Office is ^f his appointing. Jesus Christ the Head and King of his
Church has ordained* and set therein (besides the Apostles (...) ^dinary
Officers that are now ceas^ (...) and Teachers. These are enumerated in the
List or Catalogue of those Church Officers which are of divine Institution. God
set (or put, or constituted) some in the Church, first Apostles, secondarily
Prophets, thirdly Teachers, etc. 1 Cor. 12.20. Those are some of the Triumphant
Gifts and Trophies of Chr^st's Ascension, Ascending up on high, he led
Captivity Captive, and gave gifts to men -- and he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 1.8.11. The
Apostles and Evangelists ordaining Pastors and Teachers; (called also
Presbyters and Elders,) the Qualifications of such laid down in the Scripture;
the Duties incumbent upon them; the Names and Titles given to them; the Charge
which Christ gives their Flocks and People to know them, love them, obey them,
submit unto them, honor them, maintain them; do all proclaim, that they are
His O^dinance. Thus Christ has instituted the Office of the Ministry.

2. MINISTERIAL Gifts and Qualifications are of God's Working. Jam. 1.17. Every
good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the father
of lights. The Graces of Sanctification proceed from the Spirit of Christ, Gal.
5.22. and so do the Graces of Edification, 1 Cor. 12.7. The manifestation of
the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. The Holy Spirit of Grace is
poured out on the Church for that end, to furnish some for the Edification of
others, and by their Ministry to bring in the Elect to believe and be saved.
Christ the Head of all glorious Influences Qual^fied and furnished the Apostles
for their Service, and so he does ordinary Ministers for theirs to the Worlds
end. Only it must be here remembered, that we look not to receive Gifts by
immediate infusion, as in the infancy of the Church. That Manna was only for
the Wilderness, when other common ways could not be made use of: But now the
Church is grown up to the estate of manhood, and is possessed of the Land, God
does now expect that we should plow, and eat the fruit of the Earth in the
sweat of our brows. Gifts for the Ministry are to be expected in the use of
ordinary Means, Study, Industry, Meditation and Prayer.

3. AN Inclination of Heart to the Work of the Minstry is from God also. There
is a variety of Callings among Men, and God (who has the Hearts of all Men in
his Hands, and can turn them as the Rivers of Water are turned) does in
infinite Wisdom and Goodness variously incline and dispose them, some to one
Calling and Course of Life, and some to another; and some to the Sacred Calling
of the Ministry. Besides Gifts and Abilities for this holy Service, there is
requisite an Inclination of Will, to use them therein. 1 Pet.2.5. Feed the
Flock of God which is among you, taking tbe oversight thereof, not by
constraint, but willingly. Accordingly God spirits some for this Work. They are
inwardly moved by the Holy Ghost to take upon them the Office of serving in the
sacred Ministry of the Church. Not but Persons upon a due Meditation of the
greatness of the Work, and the many Difficulties which attend it, and from an
humble Sense of their Weakness, may for some time find a Reluctance in their
own Hearts thereto, and be ready to say as Moses, Send I pray thee by the hand
of him, whom thou will send, Exodus 4.13. And with the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer.
1.6. Ah, Lord God, behold I cannot speak, for I am a Child. And with the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 2.16. Who is sufficient for these things. But God overcomes
their unwillingness, and thrusts them forth. He strengthens them against
Discouragements, and gives Courage and Resolution to enter upon this work. Thou
art stronger than I (says the Prophet) and have prevailed, Jer. 20.7:

4thly, and lastly, IT is Christ who invests Men with Ministerial Power and
Authority. This (...) does not immediately by himself, but by (...) Choice and
Election of a Christian Church and P^^ple, with solemn Separation by Imposition
of Hands and Prayer, to which Fasting is to be joined. Act. 14.23. And when
they had ordained them Elders in every Church, and had prayed with fasting they
commended them to the Lord on whom they believed. I Tim. 4.14. Neglect not the
gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of
the hands of the Presbytery. Let men's gifts and graces be never so admirable,
they ought not to take this honor to themselves, until set apart therefore, and
as well empowered to the work of the Ministry by an outward Mission, as enabled
to it, by their gifts and qualifications. But thus for the Third Proposition;
So God sends forth Laborers into his Harvest.

PROP. IV. and Last. THAT it is a Christian Peoples Duty, to pray to the Lord
of the Harvest, to send forth Laborers into his Harvest. Our Obligation to
this Duty is evident,

1. FROM Scripture Precepts. The Text is a plain rule and standing Law to us in
this case. And when our Savior was pleased to leave us a directory for Prayer,
one of the first petitions in it is, Thy Kingdom come. Under which ^etition
various things lie couched, and this among others, that God would send forth,
more, skilful, faithful, wise, industrious Laborers into his Harvest. That he
would raise up such as he will own in the Conversion of Sinners, and the
Edification of Saints, would spirit them for the work, call them to it, and
succeed them in it. Again,

2. Consider, GOD promises this mercy unto his Church. Jer. 3.15. I will give
you Pastors according to mine own heart, which shall feed you with knowledge,
and understanding. This is an obligation as well as an encouragement to Prayer.
What God promises, that he would have us pray for. Ezekiel. 36.37. Thus says the
Lord, I will yet for this be enquired for, by the house of Israel to do it for
them. God had often repeated his promise to his people to return them from
captivity, to re-build, and multiply them, yet ^ays God, they shall know it is
their duty to entreat it, to wait on me, and then I will give a merciful
answer, and do it.

3. THE Glory and Honor of God our Savior call for this Duty from us. God is
greatly glorified in the Churches prosperity. Hallowed be thy Name, the Kingdom
come. Now faithful and laborious Ministers are means and instruments in God's
Hands of advancing his Kingdom and Interest in the World, and so his honor and
glory. Besides, when Men behold such burning and shining lights, and observe
their gifts, graces, and labors, and holy Conversations, they will be ready to
magni^ (...) Lord, who has given such Grace to Me (...) your light so shine
before men (says our S^ (...) to his Disciples) that they may see your (...)
works, and glorify your father which is in he^ (...) Mat. 5.16. Since it is
then for the honor of God, that Laborers be sent into his Harvest, therefore
should we pray, that it might be so.

4 and lastly, THE Salvation of the precious and immortal Souls of men calls
for this Duty. The Corn will shed and spoil, and rot upon the ground, if
Laborers be wanting; but if they are thrust out, there is likelihood then,
that the Harvest will be gathered in. If faithful Ministers are wanting in the
Church, there is just grounds to fear, that multitudes of Souls will perish
eternally. But if God raises up wise and faithful Ministers, and sends them
forth, it is a hopeful sign, that Sinners will be thereby converted, and Saints
edified, and built up in knowledge, faith and holiness unto Salvation. Out of
tender compassion then to the Souls of men, we should pray the Lord of the
Harvest, to send forth Laborers into his Harvest. Thus for the Propositions
under the Doctrine; we proceed now to the Use and Improvement of them.

USE. I. IS God the Lord of the Harvest, This then may direct both Ministers
and People to Whom to look for fruit. Ministers in their Preparations for the
Pulpit must study such truths, as are most proper and suitable to work upon the
hearts and consciences of men, study with the royal Preacher to find out
acceptable words; Eccl. 12.10. But they must not depos^^ upon their most
elaborate Sermons, if they ^o, it is a thousand to one, but they find themselves
disappointed. Neither must a People rely on the Gifts and Abilities of their
Ministers how great soever they be; but both must depend upon God, and seek to
him by Prayer and Supplication for success, for it is God only that can give it.
And the more there is this way attributed unto Grace, the more is the Grace of
God like to be communicated. Again,

2. WHAT has been said under the First Proposition, may teach such as have
received benefit by the Laborers in the Harvest to Whom to ascribe praise and
glory. Have you been Converted and Edified by the Ministry of the Word Give God
all the Glory. Don't set the crown upon the head of Instruments, but upon the
head of Christ. Ministers say in this case Not unto us, not unto us, but unto
God be glory. They are no more than Instruments, it is God who is the efficient
of all spiritual saving good. You are God's Husbandry. To God only then must
you abscribe Praise.

2. IS the Ministry a Laborious Office. (1.) Le^ such of us then as have entered
upon it, discharge it with all diligence. We should take heed unto the
Ministry, which we have received of the Lord, that we fulfill it. Let us very
gladly spend and be spent in this work. Not counting our lives dear unto us, so
that we may finish our course with joy, and the Ministry which we have received
of the Lord Jesus Christ, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God.
Harvest-work is painful work, but it is pleasant work; they reap in joy; and
the joy of the Preachers of the Gospel, is like the joy of Harvest. Isai. 9.22.
And he that reapeth recieveth wages. The hire of the Labors that re^p down
God's field, shall not be kept back, as theirs was, Jam. 5.4. No, in due season
we shall reap, if we saint not. I might have said,

(2.) THAT faithful Ministers ought honorably to be suspected by their People.
They are Laborers, and our Savior has said, Luke 10.7. That the labourer is
worthy of his hire.

3. IS it God's Work to send forth Laborers into his Harvest, A People then
that are favored with such, may be hereby directed Whom to bless and praise.
We of this Land have been, and yet are, exalted in this regard above most other
People in the World. How many faithful Witnesses have we had, and have we yet,
which have testified unto us, the Gospel of the Grace of God? How many bright
Stars shining in our Firmament to give us the knowledge of Salvation from on
high, to guide our feet in the way of Peace? Let us look upon them, as the
Ascension-Gifts of our exalted Jesus, fruits of his care, and love to his
Church, and bless his holy Name. And let us bless God for the College, that
great School of the Prophets, from whence have issued such Streams, which have
made glad the City of God, the holy place of the Tabernacles of the most High.

4. and lastly, IS it our Duty to pray the Lord of the Harvest to send forth
Laborers into his Harvest, Let us then be Exhorted hereunto in our Prayers.
Let us have a Regard to he whole Church of God the World throughout, and pray
that God would send more skilful faithful, wise and industrious Laborers into
it. Such as he will own in the Conversion of Sinners and the Edification of
Saints. Particularly* Let us pray that a converted and converting Ministry may
be granted to the Churches o^ this Land from Generation to Generation. More
particularly yet, Let the People of this Town pray that God would send forth a
Laboure^ into this Part of his Harvest, even One of Wisdom and Prudence,
Courage and Resolution, full of Zeal for the Glory of God and of Compassion to
the Souls of Men. You need such an One O cry to God for such a Gift. And here
by Way of Direction.

PRAY humbly and penitently for such a Mercy* Be deeply sensible of your own
unworthines^ of receiving from God so great a Gift. Ask with true Humiliation;
it is a Tempter that highly becomes sinful Creatures as we all are. Again,

PUT up your Prayers in the Name of Jesus Christ. It Is Christ who has
purchased such Blessings for his People, and you must plead his Merits and
Mediation with God for the bestowment of such an One upon you.

FURTHER, Pray in Faith. Know that Christ has received Gifts to bestow them
upon his Church. He Gifts Men to give them to His People. Turn the Promise
which God has made of giving Pastors after his own Heart into Petitions, and
strengthen your faith therefrom.

ASK with Fervency and Importunity! This is a Blessing of very great
Concernment to the Welfare and Spiritual Prosperity both of you and your
Posterity. It Is that which if you obtain, will be your crown and glory. I add,
your safety. 2 kin. 2.12. My Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel, and the
Horsemen thereof. They are the words of Elisha, concerning Elijah, who did more
for the defense and preservation of Israel, than all their Chariots, or other
Warlike Provisions. Pious Ministers are a People's Safeguard, as they are God's
special Favorites, most nearly related to him, peculiarly beloved, for whose
^^kes he bestows many a been (so to speak) upon the So^ictio^ they live among.
They are a People's Safety, as they improve their Interest with God for a
People, they stand in the Gap, make up the Hedge. Ezekiel. 22.30. Interceed with
God for a People, that they may not be destroyed. They are a People's Safety,
as they are a means many (...) the Current of Wickedness, which is ready (...)
Judgments upon a People, and to bring (...) ^estruction upon them.

(...) a Paragraph of a Sermon, entitled, The (...) advance a People's
Happiness and Pros^ (...) ^ed by the Reverend Mr. Breck, most wor^ (...) ^ited
among you. God has (says he) made a remarkable Distinction in New England,
between those Places that have had Churches gathered, and Pastors settled over
them, and those that have been destitute. For in all these Wars wherewith this
poor Country has been almost continually harrass'd and distressed for above
thirty Years past by a barbarous Nat^on, which have broken up many Towns and
Plantations, and laid them waste, yet not o^e of them, where there has been a
Church of Christ, an ordained Pastor, have they been able to prevail against.
These Churches of Christ being built on a Rock, those Forces and Powers of Hell
have not been able to prevail against them. God has as it were set there as
boundaries to the swelling Rage and Fury of these inhumane Creatures (who broke
in upon other Places as a Flood) that hitherto they may come and to further;
this is the Lord's doing and it is mavelous in our Eyes. This is (says he)
worthy of a serious Remark, and ought to be improved to quicken our new
Settlements to procure a Settlement of the Gospel among them; specially our
Frontier Plantations that so they may have God with them. It God has this
Favor for you, as to give you a Pastor after his own Heart, as you may hope on
your earnest Prayers and Desires and in the use of regular proper Means, he
will; it will not on^^ conduce to build up your Souls, but your Estates too and
will be greatly to your Honor, It Is the ready way to advance your temporal
Interest, as well as your spiritual and eternal, which is the more valuable.

SINCE then it is so great a Blessing, you should not pray for it coldly, but
servently, importunately. So pray and there is Hopes, that you will obtain. God
is a God hearing of Prayer. The rewarder of those that diligently seek him.
Prayer is the way to win any thing that we need from God. The effectual servent
Prayer of a righteous Man avails much. Such a Gift as we are now speaking of,
was always meant to be sought and obtained by Prayer.

FINIS.

