THE CASE Of the People called QUAKERS In the Province of PENNSYLVANIA, With
respect to the Forms of Declaration of Fidelity to the King, and of
Affirmation, lately granted to their Friends in Great Britain and Ireland, etc.
by Acts of Parliament, briefly stated and humbly offered to the Consideration
of the Governor and Council of the said Province.
THAT the late King Charles the Second favoring the good Purpose of our late
Proprietary William Penn, and having Regard to the Memory and Merits of his
deceased Father, in diverse Services, was pleased by his Royal Charter to grant
and confirm this Country, with certain Privileges and Jurisdictions requisite
for the good Government thereof, to him the said Proprietary and his Heirs for
ever; Whereupon an ample Colony of honest, industrious and wealthy Persons,
removed themselves and Families into this Province, and by the great Favor and
Blessing of Divine Providence upon their Endeavors, made this considerable
Addition to the English Empire, without any Charge to the Crown, hoping to
enjoy not only the Franchises and Immunities granted them by the said Charter,
but such further Rights and Privileges, as may best suit their Circumstances,
as differing in some Points from other Protestants, particularly in the Case of
Swearing, which the said Proprietary and first Purchasers (some of whom were
not Quakers) on the Fifth Day of the Month called May, Anno Domini 1682 in
London, did conclude should be supplied by Solemnly Promising to speak the
Truth, etc. And at the first General Assembly, held at Chester, for this
Province and the Counties annexed, on the Seventh of December in the said Year
1682, the same passed into a Law; and on the Tenth Day of the Month called
March 1682-3, it was by the Proprietor, with the Advice and Consent of the
Freemen of this Province and Territories, declared to be a Fundamental Law of
this Province and Territories, not to be altered or repealed without the
Consent of the Governor, and Six Parts in Seven of the Council and Assembly:
And afterward when Col. Fletcher was Governor, under the immediate Direction
of the Crown, the same Form of Affirmation by a Solemn Promise was established
here, and confirmed at Home in the Year 1694, instead of an Oath; and so it was
and practiced in all Cases after our Proprietary was restored to his Government
in the Year 1696, which was since the Statute that first enacted the
Affirmation in England.

After the Proprietary's reassuming his Government, the Laws were revised in
1700 and 1701, and this about the manner of giving Evidence, with diverse
others, were remitted to the Queen and Council in 1705, and was referred to the
Consideration of Northy, then Attorney General, who did not object to the Form
of Words, or legal Effect of Solemnly Promising, etc. instead of an Oath, or
other Affirmation, but his Opinion was to repeal the said Act, because the
Punishment of Wilfully Falsifying that Solemn Promise, was extended further
than the Law of England required, which thereupon was repealed accordingly.

Our Friends continued in the Enjoyment of this Fundamental Right for above
Twenty Years with good Success, until the said Repeal; since which we have
labored under many Difficulties, and diverse Essays have been made for reviving
the aforesaid Privilege, which hitherto have proved ineffectual: And now
understanding that our Representatives in Assembly, have laid before the
Governor a Bill relating the Forms of Affirmation, etc. lately granted to our
Brethren in Great Britain and Ireland, and the said Bill being framed, as we
concieve, agreeable to the Governor's own Proposal, and the Circumstances of
this Province, We humbly entreat that he will be pleased to pass the said Bill,
now before him, into a Law, whereby we may all be rendered useful, not only to
each other, but to others our Neighbors who may stand in need of our Evidence,
etc.

For however it may be objected by some, that they are not sufficiently secured
in submitting the Trial of their Lives and Estates to a Qualification, wherein
the Name of God is not mentioned; we account it a sure Rule that the Chief
Motives in a Christian to speak Truth, are, first the Fear of God in his Heart
and Love of Truth, or secondly, the Fear of Punishment.

And it is evident, that the King and Parliament of Great Britain are of the
same Opinion concerning us in this Case, otherwise after an Experience of
Twenty-five Years, they would not so generally accept our Solemn Promise in so
important a Matter as a Test of our Allegiance and Fidelity to the King, and
for abjuring the Pretender, at a Time when new Engagements are required of
other Subjects in the same Cases; And therefore, we hope our Fellow Subjects
will Acquiesce in the same Security, and not affect a great Diffidence than our
Superiors. And ^ince the Act of the Eighth of King George was made for the
Ease of the People called Quakers, we conceive less can be said in Opposition
^o the Bill now petitioned for, especially considering it is only to restore ^o
us a discontinued Right, so Solemnly settled and vested in us as above set
forth, which the first Purchasers and Adventurers into this Province expected
to enjoy, as inviolably as the Lands they bought.

Philadelphia: Printed by Andrew Bradford. 1724.


