THE Ruling and Ordaining POWER OF Congregational BISHOPS, OR PRESBYTERS,
Defended. Being Remarks on some Part of Mr. P. Barclay's PERSUASIVE, lately
distributed in New England.

By an Impartial Hand. In a Letter to a Friend.

BOSTON: Printed for Samuel Gerrish and Sold at his Shop near the Brick
Meeting House in Cornhill, 1724.

The Ruling and Ordaining POWER OF PRESBYTERS, DEFENDED In a LETTER, etc.
SIR,
I Now return the Book you were pleased, the last Week, to leave with me; and
together with Thanks, I send you my Remarks, upon some Part of it, in
compliance to your Desires. Upon perusal of the Book, I find the main Body of
it is in defense of Forms of Prayer, and the English Liturgy; which being
Things that have not so immediate Reference to the Controversy now o'foot among
us, I think it best at present to pass them over, and to confine my self
entirely within those Pages that relate to EPISCOPACY. I remember your Proposal
was, that this Reply to Mr. Barclay should be managed so as to serve for an
Appendix to the late Letter of Sober Remarks on the Modest Proof; which put the
Dispute wholly on a Scripture-Fost. For this Reason, although what my Author
has offered from the Fathers, would admit of an easy Answer, yet I will take
little or no notice of his Testimonies from Them; but shall limit my self to
the Arguments he pretends to draw out of the BIBLE; which a famous Episcopalian
Chillingw.
well calls the Religion of Protestants. And here I don't intend to make
Observations upon every little thing liable to Exception in my Author: and as
to Things Mateterial, which I find have received a just Answer in the Letter of
Sober Remarks, I design but briefly to touch upon 'em: unless perhaps some new
Thoughts may occur to me, proper to be added; which the Writer of that Letter
did not see fit to take any Notice of.

Mr. Barclay's Discourse, which is now to come under Examination, begins at the
78th Page of his Book. Where, in the first place, he lays down this,
Proposition, viz.

"THAT the Government of CHRIST's Church was left by himself, and managed for
the first Three Centuries by some Gospel Ministers of the Word and Sacraments,
exercising Authority and Jurisdiction over others, who were Likewise Ministers
of the Word and Sacraments".

HERE not to take notice of any Solecisms in Grammar, or any thing else liable
to Exception, in the Proposition it self, I will come immediately to consider
the Arguments he brings to support this Assertion.

IN the first place, I find him harping on the old threadbare Argument from
the 12 and the 70. Though here he seems to yield to Presbyterians the Dispute
about the Superiority of the 12 to the 70, during our Savior's Lifetime. At
least, (he says to us, to take you in your own way; a Phrase I shall have
frequent occasion to borrow from him) he will for once suppose that they were
equal. But then he adds, page 79. If we can find a Second Superior Ordination
given by our Savior to the Eleven, which the Seventy did not receive. I hope it
will appear that the Eleven were of a higher Order, and had a greater Degree of
Power in the Church than They. Now to evidence this, he turns us to Job. 20.21.
As my Father has sent me, so send I you, etc: which (he judges) does imply a
new Commission, vesting the Eleven Apostles with the Power of Ordination, or of
sending others; for (he argues) unless CHRIST gave 'em that Power, he did not
send them as his Father sent him. Here I might observe, There are other and
better Interpretations of this Text; but being willing to take the Gentleman in
his own way, I will for once suppose his Construction to be the best and
truest: yet of what Service it will be to him, in the present Argument, I
cannot imagine. Surely it is a wild Conclusion he draws, viz. Then it is evident,
that our Savior left his Church with a Set of Gospel Ministers vested with
different degrees of Power and Authority. For this Inference is grounded on a
false Hypothesis, viz. That CHRIST at his Ascension left other Ministers in
Commission besides the Eleven; which is a point he has not said one word to
prove: Certainly this Gentleman must have a fine Talent in Controversy; since
he has taken so much pains to prove what no body denies, viz. That the Eleven
were vested with a power of Ordination; and then has taken for granted one of
the main Things in Question, viz. The Continuance of the Seventy in Office in
the Church. All Anti-Prelatists agree with him in asserting the former, but not
the latter. We unanimously affirm the Temporeity of the Seventy. If then the
Gentleman would have (as he promised to do) taken us in our own way, He should
have supposed this; and this notwithstanding, proved an Imparity of order among
Gospel Ministers. Now that He might well suppose (with us) the 70 to be
temporary, every one I believe will readily grant, who reads impartially what
is said on this Subject in the Sober Remarks (Edit. 2. Page 29. etc.) So that I
need say nothing on it here. But he silently slides over this, as if it were a
point not disputed, or were foreign to the Argument; when he knows it is a
matter of Debate, and that not a little depends upon it. For, if the Commission
of the Seventy was but temporary, and not renewed after CHRIST's Resurrection,
then He left only one Order of Gospel Ministers, viz. the Eleven; and those
vested with equal Power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, by the new Commission
they received at His Ascending.

WE may safely therefore grant our Author, That the Eleven Apostles received a
Power by this last Commission, which they had not before, and which none of the
Seventy did then receive: and yet it will not follow from hence, That our
Savior left his Church with a Set of Gospel Ministers vested with different
degrees of Power and Authority.

HOWEVER, to take this Gentleman in his own way, I will for once suppose the
Commission of the Seventy (recorded Luke 10.) was not temporary, but standing
and perpetual: yet this will not certainly infer the Divine Appointment of two
different Orders of Gospel Ministers, in the Gentile Churches, with whom it is
we are concerned. For (as it is argued in the Sober Remarks, page 31, 32.) the
Commission of the Seventy was confined to the Circumcision; and we never read
of its being extended by CHRIST, to the Uncircumcision. It is of no Obligation
then upon the Gentiles. Supposing it did continue, and was obligatory to the
Jewish Christians; yet the Gentile Churches are not at all concerned with it.
Whether therefore that Commission was temporary, or whether it was standing, it
is alike incapable of serving this Gentleman's Purpose.

BUT now leaving the Commissions, He comes to argue from FACT, Page 80. Where
He tells us, The Apostles did (de facto) exercise Jurisdiction over all other
Gospel Ministers in their Time. -- This I will for once suppose to be true; for
I Am willing still to take the Gentleman in his own way: but yet I believe, It
will not afford any Argument for Diocesan Bishops, if we consider things
impartially.

HE tells us, The Apostles exercised Authority over the Rest of the
Gospel Ministers, In making Laws. What then? Does this argue, that there must
be a standing Order in the Church to make Laws, and prescribe Rules to
Ministers? No, by no means. The Church was in its Infant-State then, and the
Canon of Scripture not perfected; the Apostles were therefore extraordinarily
inspired, to reveal the Mind and Will of CHRIST, unto his People and Ministers
See the Sober Remarks, page 33. etc. Edit. 2.
. But, as there is no need of any such infallible Guides now, since the Canon
of the New Testament is completed; So, that the Apostles, who were divinely
inspired, and under an infallible Conduct, did prescribe Rules and Laws to
Churches and Pastors, This certainly is no Warrant, to Men not so qualified, to
presume to do the same thing, It Is not a Legislative, but an Executive Power,
that belongs to the ordinary Governors of the Church. They have Authority only
to execute the Laws of CHRIST, contained in the Holy Scriptures. And I know of
no Laws or Orders there, but what ordinary Pastors have the Execution of,
committed to them.

Again, HE tells us, The Apostles Authority over other Ministers appears from
their Ordaining to Ministerial Offices: which work (he says) was always
performed by Them.

TO prove this, He observes to us, in the first place, That the Apostles
ordained the Deacons, Act. 6.

I answer; Good Reason there was, that they should do it. The Apostles were the
only proper Persons to perform that first Ordination; for it was an appointing
a New Office in the Church, which none else had Power to do, and unto which (no
doubt) they were directed by the Holy Ghost. If any then will infer from this
Instance, that Bishops only have Power to ordain Deacons; they may as
colourably argue from it, That Bishops have Power to institute new Officers and
Ministries in the Church.

AGAIN, The Gentleman observes to us; That St. Paul and Barnabas ordained
Elders in every City, ( Church, it should be.) Act. 14.23. To which I Will reply,
in the Words of Another "Good Reason why; Because They were new Churches that
had no Ministers in them till constituted by the Apostles. Presbyters could not
ordain before they had a Being. Besides by the way, it may be observed: "They
ordained Presbyters; not Diocesan Bishops. It Is evident from this Instance,
that the Apostles left the Churches under the Government of Presbyters, without
Superior Bishops. How came the Apostles not to ordain such Bishops in every
Church! If they had been necessary, doubtless they would have done it".

BUT further, The Gentleman observes, There is one Instance, from which this
Apostolical Superiority appears plainly; for when Philip baptized the Converts
in Samaria Act. 8.12. Yet they could receive no Imposition of Hands from him:
but the Apostles at Jerusalem sent St. Peter, and St. John to lay hands on
them; that is, for Confirmation and Ordination. To which I answer; His Argument
is lost, if he has mistaken the Design of that Imposition of Hands. And it
seems he has done so. For it is highly probable, 'Twas only for conferring the
extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost; which was a Power and Honor peculiar to
the Apostles. (See Act. 8.15, 18.) That this was the Primary End, at least, we
have the general Concurrence of the best Expositors. And if this was the End,
it is what was not only out of Philip's power, but out of Bishop Timothy's too;
and had He been at Samaria then, there would have been the same Occasion to
send down the Apostles thither. -- However, to take the Gentleman in his own
way, I will for once suppose, that this Imposition of Hands immediately and
only referred to Confirmation and Ordination: yet I do not see how Philip's not
being capable of performing these works, can afford any Argument to his
purpose: for, according to him, Philip at that time was but a Deacon; and a
Deacon's being incapable, is no Argument that a Presbyter (an higher Officer)
must be so too. To make his Reasoning here any thing tolerable. He must allow
Philip was a Presbyter: but then the mischief is, This will be to contradict
himself; since he expressly calls him a Deacon, ( page 93.) and it will
unhappily overthrow his great Plea there, [from the Instance of Philip] for
Preaching and Baptising Deacons.

IN the next place, The Gentleman observes. It is Objected, That mere
Presbyters ordained St. Timothy* from 1 Timothy 4.14. The laying on of the (...)
the Presbytery. But (says he) this Text does not at all prove that Presbyters
(in our (...) of the Word) ordained Timothy. I reply, We don't pretend it does.
For we know of no Ministers in Scripture, that were Presbyters, in the modern (
Church of England) sense of the Word. We deny any such Officer in the Church,
us a mere Presbyter, that is, a Minister of the Word, destitute of Episcopal
Power over the Flock. The Elders, or Presbyters, we read of, 1 Pet. 5.1. were
Bishops. Such Bishops we are For, and such Elders; but we know of no
Institution for Elders that do not rule over the Flock, or for Bishops that
rule over Elders. We are for Congregational Bishops; and such we conclude, were
the Presbyters that ordained Timothy. -- But the Gentleman adds, If mere
Presbyters did lay hands on him, it was only in Conjunction with St. Paul: for
he says expressly, (2 Timothy 1.6.) that Timothy was ordained by the laying on of
His Hands.

NOW to this I reply.

1. THE Imposition of Paul's Hands might be at a different Time, and upon some
other Occasion.

IT is most probable, Paul's laying on of Hands was not for the ordination of
Timothy to any Office, but only for conferring the extraordinary Gifts of the
Holy Ghost upon him. This might be the whole Design, for ought that appears to
the Contrary; and so Paul might have no hand at all in Timothy's Ordination.
But that might be done by ordinary Presbyters at some other Time; as Paul
himself, who received his sight by the laying on of the Hands of Ananias, and
was filled with the Holy Ghost, yet afterward was separated to his Ministry
among the Gentiles, by the laying on of the Hands of certain Prophets and
Teachers, or Presbyters, at Antioch. (Act. 13.1, 2, 3.)

BUT I would again take the Gentleman in his own way, and therefore will for
once suppose, That Paul's laying on of Hands was for Timothy's Ordination; yet
it is possible it might not be in Conjunction with the Presbytery, but at a
distinct Time, if what our Opponents plead for, was then practiced, viz.
Reordination. How knows this Gentleman but that Timothy might be ordained first
a Presbyter by the Presbytery alone, and afterward a Bishop by Paul only. Some
of his Brethren I know seem to be of this Mind. Well for once suppose this was
the Case; so much then at least follows, that Presbyters have power to ordain
Presbyters: and this is all we at present demand. As for Diocesan Bishops, and
their Consecration, we will contentedly leave our Opponents to enjoy their
Opinion about 'em; if we may but enjoy ours without Disturbance.

BUT now to come closer to our Author, --

2. I will for once suppose, that Paul's laying on of hands, and the
Presbytery's, were both at the same Time, and in Conjunction; yet I cannot see
how this Concession will give him any Advantage. The Gentleman observes, If
Presbyters did lay on hands in Timothy's Ordination, it was only in Conjunction
with St. Paul, [yes verily, and if St. Paul laid on hands, it was only in
Conjunction with the Presbytery] And so is agreeable to our Practice at this
day, as may be seen in the Rubric of the Office for ordaining Priests. -- But
here I inquire; How is it agreeable? Do Presbyters of the Church of England join
in laying on of Hands in the Consecrating of a Bishop, such as Timothy is
supposed by Episcopalians to be? No, I trow not. It Is only the Archbishop, and
Bishops present, that join in this Act; as may be seen in the Rubric of the
Office for the Consecration of Bishops. Either then it must be confessed,
Timothy was not a Bishop; and so one of the great Arguments for Prelacy will be
dropped. Or at least it must be supposed Timothy was not ordained Bishop at that
time, when Paul and the Presbytery joined together in imposing hands on him:
however he might be afterward, by Paul alone; which I think will supersede the
common Pretenses for Timothy's Episcopacy, from the first Epistle to Him. Or
else the Church of England must confess, She Deviates from the primitive
Pattern, in excluding Presbyters from joining in the Ordination of her Bishops:
and so far She must appear not Primitive and Apostolical; and her Prelates must
be owned not regularly consecrated; because their Ordinations are without the
Concurrence of the Presbytery. -- One of these three, I think, must necessarily
be granted: and let the Gentleman choose which he likes best.

BUT now, supposing there were no such Difficulties arising on the Head of
Timothy's Character, and allowing that Paul's associating with him the
Presbytery in Timothy's Ordination, was but like the Bishop's taking the Hands
of some Presbyters with his, (as is the practice of the Church of England) in
the ordination of a Presbyter; what Advantage will our Opponents be able to
make of such a Concession? I think, none at all. For it seems to me, nothing
more can be hence collected, but that as the Apostles did not appropriate to
themselves the Power of Ordination, so neither does the Church of England allow
her Bishops to arrogate to themselves the sole Power in this matter. The
Practice of the Church of England, as well as of the Apostles, seems to argue
for an inherent Power of ordination in Presbyters; which is all we at present
plead for. Imposition of Hands is what our Opponents account a very essential
Rite in Ordination. That they judge is put for the whole Ministerial Work of
Ordination, in 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay Hands suddenly on no man: and hence they urge
this place, in favor of Timothy's ordaining Power. Now if Imposition of Hands,
when performed by Timothy, was an ordaining Act, and imported an ordaining
Power inherent in him; why might it not have the same Signification, when
performed by the Presbytery? And if Ordination was the End and Import of Paul's
laying on of Hands; why not also of the laying on of the Hands of the
Presbyters, that joined with him? To say, That the Presbyters laid on hands
only as Witnesses, and to express their Consent, and Approbation of the
Apostle's Act, (as some pretend) is but a filly Evasion. When was the Ceremony
ever used for such an End? And might not the Presbyters as well have expressed
their Concurrence, by saying AMEN to the Apostle's Prayer over Timothy, or in
some other way; without joining with the Apostle in Imposition of Hands, which
would seem to bespeak an ordaining Power in them, as well as in him, and so be
likely to prove an Occasion of Error (...) Sin in future Times, by leading
Presbyters to claim to themselves the power of Ordination; their right
whereunto they might with good Color argue from this primitive Example! It
cannot be reasonably supposed, that the Apostle (who was such a wise
Master Builder, and was so sollicitous that Ministers might know how to behave
themselves in the House of God) should be so overseen in the management of
Timothy's Ordination, as to lay a foundation for Mistakes in a matter of such
Importance, as this of Ordination. We may well think the Apostle would not have
admitted the Presbytery to lay on hands with him, if they had not been vested
with a Right to ordain, seeing it was like to prove such a Snare to After-ages;
as it manifestly has been, if Presbyterians are in the Wrong.

WELL but for once we will suppose, that the Presbytery did not lay on hands as
Ordainers, but the whole Efficacy of the Ordination was from the Imposition of
Paul's Hands; yet how will this tend to serve our Author's Cause? Will this
infer, that Bishops may assume to themselves the whole Power, exclusively of
the Presbyters joining with them? No, not at all. I will make it out thus. Paul
laid on hands, either in his ordinary, or extraordinary Capacity. Now if the
whole Efficacy of the Ordination was from HIS Imposing of Hands, It could not
be in his ordinary Capacity, that he ordained; because an Apostle in his
ordinary Character was but a Presbyter, (as I think is fully proved in the
Sober Remarks, to which I must refer the Reader for satisfaction) and upon this
view of them, there can be no solid Reasons assigned for so essential a
Difference (in the Virtue and Meaning) between the Act of Paul, and the Act of
the Presbytery, in Timothy's Ordination. Hence therefore it must be in his
extraordinary Capacity, that Paul ordained; and if so, then I ask, what Warrant
Paul's having the sole ordaining Power, exclusively of the Presbytery, will be
to Bishops, for confining the Power of Ordination wholly to themselves? Are
they Successors to the Apostles, in the extraordinary parts of their Character?
Have our Bishops the Gift of Infallibility? Have they the Power of discerning
Spirits? Or can they confer the Holy Ghost by the laying on of their Hands?
Verily, show us Bishops so qualified, and we shall be tempted to leave the work
of Ordination wholly to Them, wherever they come! But till we can see such
Bishops (at least till then) we must be allowed to assert the Presbyters Claim
to the Power of Ordination. And indeed the moderate Assertors of Episcopacy (as
one observes) do acknowledge that the Presbyters lay on hands with the Bishop)
as Ordainers. So Dr. F^lk, Dr. Forbes, the Archbishop of Spalato, and others.
Even Dr. Cave (whose Authority, with the true Sons of the Church, is become
almost indisputable) says, That Imposition of Hands was constantly used as the
Rite of conferring Ordination upon the Ministers of CHRIST.

NOW therefore, if Presbyters lay on hands with the Bishop, as Ordainers,
either They have an equal Power, or not. If they have an equal Power, then in
the Ordination of a Minister, there is as much to be attributed to the
Presbyters laying on of Hands, as to the Bishops: and hence it will follow,
that Ordinations performed by Presbyters, without a Diocesan Bishop, are no
more null and void, than ordinations performed by such a Bishop, without the
concurrence of the Presbytery. -- But if any shall say, Presbyters have not an
equal ordaining Power, with the Bishop; I then ask, How this appears? If their
Power be unequal, it must arise, either from unequal Commissions, or from
unequal Qualifications. It cannot be owing to any difference of intrinsic
Qualifications and Gifts. For if we consider the Nature of Ordination, we shall
find that the ordinary Gifts of Presbyters are proportionable to all the
outward Acts of it. What is Ordination, but a solemn Dedication or Separation
of a suitable Person to God for the Ministry, by Fasting and Prayer, with laying
on of Hands? Now what is there in all this, above the Capacity of a mere
Presbyter? What does the Bishop do more in his conferring the Ministry? Is it
in any Moral Act, or in the Physical Contact only, that the Bishop exerts more
of an ordaining Power! Is there any secret Virtue in the Touch of a Prelate's
Hand! If so, from whence should it spring? From his Superior Gifts, or from his
exce^^ing Sanctity? Which of 'em, I pray! -- But I believe our Opponents will
not so much ground the Distinction here. If then there be an Inequality of
ordaining Power, in Bishops and in Presbyters, it must arise from the
Difference of their Commissions. But this cannot be; because the Commission for
ordination is one, and no more. An ordaining Power is included in the Apostles
Commission, Mat. 28.19. Go teach all Nations, baptising them, etc. Or, (if it
will please our Author better in his own Text) Joh. 20.21. As my Father has
sent me, even so send I you. And they that pretend to the power of ordination,
must claim it by this Commission, as Successors to the Apostles in the standing
parts of the Gospel Ministry. Hence then, if Presbyters have any degree of
ordaining Power, it is equal and the same with the Bishops, without any the
least Disparity or Distinction. I think there cannot be a clearer Consequence.
If therefore my Lords the Bishops will claim a superior Power to Presbyters;
They must either produce some new Commission for it: or prove that Presbyters
do not derive what ordaining Power they have, from the Commission
abovementioned: or else that the ministerial Powers given the Apostles in this
Commission, might be transmitted to their Successors in unequal Degrees. One of
these things they must do before we can become their Profelytes, and let them
undertake which they please, I Am afraid they will fail in the Attempt and
Confusion will cover 'em, -- Thus I have fully considered the Gentleman's first
Answer to our Plea for Ordination by Presbyters, from 1 Timothy 4.14.

HE adds another Evasion. page 81. saying, But indeed many eminent Divines are
of opinion, that the word (...), which is rendered Presbytery, signifies the
Office, to which Timothy was ordained; not the Persons who laid hands on him.
And because he supposes that would be of greatest weight with as, he produces
the Testimony of Calvin, in favor of this Opinion. -- Now I freely confess, I
honor Calvin highly: His Testimony has no little weight with me: I think it is
as good an Authority as any. But I never set up Calvin for an Oracle, nor
counted him Infallible. That He was not so, appears, in that he saw fit
afterward to alter his Mind in the very Point we are upon. It is out of
Calvin's Institutions, (which He wrote when he was a young Man) that our Author
has taken his Testimony: but if he intended to deal ingenuously, he should have
consulted Calvin's Commentaries on the first Epistle to Timothy (which He wrote
twenty Years afterward, when he was more capable of judging, and had
considered the matter more maturely) and there He would have found this great
Man expressing a different Apprehension, and giving it as his Judgment, That
they who understand the word Presbytery in a collective sense, as meaning the
College of Presbyters, are in the Right Presbyterium: Qui hic collectivum nomen
esse putant, pro collegio Presbyterorum positum, RECTE. SEN. TIUNT MEO JUDICIO.
. And truly I wonder how Calvin, or any Body else could ever come into the
other Construction; it seems so harsh, so forced, and scarce reconcilable with
common sense. What, the laying on of the HANDS of the Office of Presbyters!
Very uncouth and barbarous Language methinks! I always imagined that Hands were
the Property of Persons; and laying on of Hands, an action not applicable to
Offices.

HOWEVER, because I Am willing as much as possible to take our Author in his own
way, (a way the least liable to Cavils) I will for once suppose, it is only the
Office of Presbyterate, that is here spoken of: Yet I doubt not, this Sense will
make the Text as little improvable to his purpose, and as much serviceable to
the Presbyterian Cause, as the other, although he could not, or would not see it.
For from hence it will follow, that Bishops and Presbyters are the same, and
not two Orders. Here consider, It would be absurd to suppose, when the Apostle
was exhorting Timothy to a faithful and diligent Discharge of his Office and
Work at Ephesus, that He should put him in mind only of his Ordination to the
Office of a Presbyters; if he had been by any second and superior ordination
advanced to the Office of a Diocesan Bishop. Hence then we must in Reason
conclude, that at the writing of this first Epistle, Timothy was not a
Diocesan, but a Presbyter. And yet in this very Epistle (as our Author observes
to us, page 83.) St. Paul tells Timothy, That his design in leaving him at
Ephesus was, That he might charge some that they preach no other Doctrine. And
he gives Directions for his exercising spiritual Censures, and managing the
business of Ordination. Now if Timothy, while yet a Presbyter, was empowered to
do these things, the Consequence is unavoidable, That the powers of Government
and Ordination do belong to Presbyters: and so Bishops and Presbyters must
necessary be of the same Order.

THUS it appears, The Gentleman is under a great mistake, and triumphs too
soon, when he draws up that boasting Conclusion; So that the word (...), in
what sense you will, will be of no service to the Presbyterian Cause. I leave
it to the Reader's Judgment.

AND now it were as easy to show the Vanity and Weakness of another Motion,
which he hints at as the Opinion of Dr. Hammond, and other great Divines, viz.
That bay the Presbytery here is understood the Apostles: for both St. Peter and
St. John call themselves Presbyters.

TO this I reply, first, They could not be a College of Apostles, that ordained
Timothy; because (if I may bring an Argument ad (...)) Paul seems to speak of
the Ordination of Timothy, as if the whole Virtue and Efficacy of it lay in the
Imposition of his Hands. Our Author observed to us just now, That St. Paul says
expressly, 2 Timothy 1.6. that Timothy was ordained by the laying on of HIS Hands.
Now then either the Gentleman has put a wrong sense on this (last) Text, and so
it can be of no force against the Presbyterians, (...) he applied it before. Or
else it must be of force against Dr. Hammond's Notion, which be here mentions,
That the Presbytery in the former Text meant a number of Apostles; for it does
not seem consistent with the Modesty and Humility of Paul, so to express
himself as if He was the SOLE ordainer of Timothy, when the other Apostles
joining with him, had equally the Power of ordination.

BUT now should we for once grant, that they were Apostles only, that laid on
hands in Timothy's ordination, I cannot see how our Author will be able to
serve his Cause by it. For nothing can be more evident than that, whoever
ordained Timothy, they did it as a Presbytery: They acted in the Quality of
Presbyters. (...) the Apostle's giving the ordainers a common (...) only, it
seems they acted only in their ordinary Capacity. And here the Dispute returns,
whether or no Presbyters do succeed the Apostles in their (...) ordinary
Capacity. And I think this very Text we are upon, may serve to decide it in the
Affirmative. For, it is granted by our Adversarys, That they are true and
complete Successors of the Apostles, who succeed them in the Power of
Ordination: and now that Presbyters do succeed them in this Power, seems a
plain Consequence from the Apostles assuming no other than the Character of a
Presbytery, in the ordaining of Timothy: [supposing the ordainers were
Apostles.] At least there is so much Color for this Conclusion, that if it had
been said, By the laying on of the Hands of the Episcopacy, or Consistory of
Bishops, I doubt not our Opponents would have presently boasted the Text was
decisive, and have made very harsh Reflections upon us, if we had presumed to
question it. -- But I shall say no more here, seeing our Author seems not ford
of Dr. Hammond's Notion, because he does not take it to be very plain and
obvious: and he do'sn't insist upon it (he says) because he has neither Leisure
nor Inclination for Dispute. A very fine excuse truly, when he finds in the
Dispute he is like to be pressed with insuperable Difficulties! And I should
have charitably thought the Man had been sincere, if he had not filled his
Pages with so many Cavils already.

WELL but however that Notion be, plain or not; one thing he thinks is very
plain, viz. That there is neither Precept nor Example in holy Scripture for
Presbyters, without a Superior, to ordain a Presbyter. Page 82.

HERE, in answer,

1. I deny this to be very plain and obvious: and rather think the contrary is
so. To clear this we must note, that our Author confines the Power of
Ordination to the Apostles only, and their Successors, which he supposes
Diocesan Bishops to be. He told us, page 80, We find it always performed by the
Apostles: And then, page 90. He tells us, the Power which our Bishops of Right
exercise, is the same with which our Blessed Savior vested the Eleven
Apostles. Hence by the Superior, which our Author here talks of, as presiding
in all the ordinations mentioned in Scripture, must be understood an Apostle,
or a Diocesan Bishop. Now then if there can be found an Instance of Presbyters
ordaining, without the Presidency, either of an Apostle, or such a Bishop, I
hope the Gentleman will see his mistake. And for such an one, I refer him to
Acts 13. -- where he will find Paul and Barnabas separated to their special
Ministry among the Gentiles, by the Hand of certain Prophets and Teachers at
Antioch, who were neither Apostles nor Diocesans. -- Upon which one thus
argues; Either this Ordination is a Precedent to us, or not. If not, how can we
be sure that those of Timothy and Titus, or any other be so? If it be a
Precedent, then Presbyters have power to ordain; and that without Superior
Bishops, or Apostles, to preside. -- But it may be, our Author will demand a
Precept as well as Example, for Presbyterian ordination. Now for this let him
consult the same Place, and he will find, That the HOLY GHOST said unto those
Presbyters, Separate me Barnabas and Saul, for the work whereunto I have called
them. Here is an express Commission to those Presbyters to ordain, and this is
Warrant enough for others to do it. Here is an Example of Presbyters ordaining,
by the Authority of the Holy Ghost: and such an Example must have the Force of
a Precept. If any now object, That that Commission to the Presbyters, was a
special and extraordinary one, (being received by immediate Inspiration) and
therefore not to be argued from: I answer, By the same Rule, we may say that
(Bishop) Timothy's ordaining Power was extraordinary. For as this Gift was
given him by Prophecy, at his ordination; So it was by the Inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, that Paul gave him that Direction, 1 Timothy 5.22. by which our Author
says, He empowered Him to ordain others. ( Page 83.) Either then our Opponents
must give up their Argument for Episcopal Ordination, from the inspired
Instructions given to (Bishop) Timothy about the Exercise of his ordaining
Power. Or else they must allow our Plea for Presbyterian ordination, from the
inspired Commission, or rather Direction, given to the Presbyters at Antioch.

I HAVE not so much as mentioned the Instances of Timothy and Titus, who I
think were neither Apostles, nor Diocesan Bishops; and yet ordained Presbyters
without a Superior: because their Character is controverted, and I would urge
nothing but what I take to be very plain and obvious.

BUT now, --

2. SUPPOSING this Answer were not absolutely conclusive, and granting for
once, That there is no Example, in Scripture times, of the ordination of a
Presbyter, by Presbyters, without a Superior: yet this will be no valid
Objection against the practice of Presbyterian ordination now. We will for once
suppose, That Presbyters in the Apostles time, never ordained but under the
Presidency of some Apostle: yet this will not infer any necessity of a Superior
Officer to preside in future ordinations. 'Twas but sitting that the Apostles
should have the Direction of such Affairs, wherever they came; and that
ordinary Ministers should pay a mighty Deference to such extraordinary Men as
they. The ordinary Presbyters did in a manner continually need the Conduct of
some such inspired Men, till the Canon of the New Testament was completed;
which being done, the use of those extraordinary Directors was superseded, by
the standing Guide or Rule; a Rule given by Inspiration of God, and profitable
for Doctrine, etc. that the Man of God may be perfect, thorou^ly farnished were
all good works, (2 Timothy 3.16, 17.) The Reason of Things is altered, There are
now no such inspired Men is the Apostles; not is there any such need of them
now, as there was at first.

IN fine, The supposed Presidency of the Apostles in the Ordinations in their
time, can be no more an Objection against Ordination by Presbyters alone, than
by Bishops alone. For either there were no such Men as Diocesan Bishops then;
or admitting there were, the Apostles had a Superiority over them, and Bishops
could no more ordain without an Apostle, than Presbyters could. Let our
Adversaries produce either Scripture Precept, or Scripture Precedent, for
Diocesan Bishops ordaining without a Superior: or tell us how the Presidency of
the Apostles can make for the Presidency of Bishops, in the ordinations of
Ministers: or show us any Divine Prohibition of Presbyters ordaining without a
Superior. Let 'em do any one of these three things, and we shall take it very
kindly at their hands. But till then, they must allow us to insist upon it,
That ordination by Presbyters, without a Bishop, is valid and regular. -- And
thus I have done with our Author's second Instance of the Apostles Power over
the Rest of the Ministers in their Time.

I shall but touch upon the Hint be gives next, viz. As to the Power of
censuring Offenders exercised by the Apostles, it is plain from 1 Cor. 4.21. 1
Cor. 5.3. 1 Timothy 1.20. -- In answer to this, it may be observed, That as to the
Power of censuring Offenders exercised by Presbyters too, it is equally plain
from 1 Cor. 5. 5, 7, 12, 13. 2 Cor. 2.6. 1 These. 5.12. 1 Timothy 3.4, 5. Heb.
13.17. -- And it is but a just Consequence from their having the Power of
Absolution. For the Power of Binding, and the Power of Loosing, are connected,
and given in the same Commission, Joh. 20.23. So that they who are vested with
one of those Powers, have an equal Claim to the other. Now our Author himself
(in his 93d page) expressly ascribes to Presbyters the Power of absolving
Offenders upon their Repentance; which Power (he tells us) is no other than
what they have exercised for these 1700 years. -- And I find in the Church of
England Form of ordaining Priests, the Bishop first takes a Promise of the
Presbyter, to be ordained, That He will give his faithful Diligence always so
to minister the DISCIPLINE of CHRIST, as the Lord has commanded: And afterward
at the Imposition of Hands, the Bishop says to him, Whose Sins Thou do
forgive, they are forgiven; and whose Sins Thou do retain, they are retained.
Which are the very words of the Apostolical Commission, Joh. 20. -- And the
same is repeated at the Consecration of Bishops. So that it should seem, the
Church of England supposes her Bishops and Presbyters to be equally vested with
the Power of Discipline, according to the Word of GOD; and what difference
there is in the Exercise of it, must be grounded on Civil Constitutions: as
indeed seems to be hinted to us when the Bishop at his Consecration, promises,
to correct and punish the Criminous within his Diocese, according to such
Authority as he has by GOD's Word, and as to him shall be committed by the
ordinance of this Realm.

BUT to proceed with our Author; -- He concludes his first Head, with replying
to an Objection. The only Answer (says he) that I know to this Argument, taken
from the Apostles using these Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction, is* --
That the Apostles were extraordinary (...); and therefore though they exercised
those Superior Powers, it is no Argument for the continuance of them in some
above others.

THIS he is pleased to call a begging of the Question: and demands of us,
Wherein the extraordinariness of the Apostolic Office did consist! Among other
Particulars mentioned by him, he queries whether it consisted in their being
sent by CHRIST: and says upon it, So were the Seventy. -- Grant it: but then
their Mission was but occasional and temporary, as I think is fully proved in
the Sober Remarks. So that for him to argue from the Seventy here, I Am sure is
so far a begging of the Question. However, it is not their immediate Mission
alone, nor yet their itinerant State, and Power of working Miracles only (which
is all our Author mention's) wherein we place the extraordinariness of the
Apostles: but in the power of discerning Spirits, the power of conferring the
Holy Gho^^, the Gift of Infallibility, and the peculiar Conduct of the Divine
Spirit they were under, etc. Things which our Author very prudently omits; for
he must needs know that these were the more eminent Signs of an Apostle; Things
by which the Apostles were especially distinguished, and on the account whereof
they were extraordinary Men, not only with respect to us, but also with respect
to the others who lived in their own Time. (Which I hope will satisfy our
Author.) -- So that if the Extraordinariness of the Apostles ( suppose it real)
could be any valid Objection against the Continuance of Apostolical Superiority
in some over others, the Presbyterians must needs gain their Point, since it
appears so plainly that the Apostles were indeed extraordinary Men. And now,
that it would be a valid Objection, is evident, in that the Apostles
Superiority took its Rise from those Things, for which they were extraordinary.
Thus in revealing the Will of GOD in certain Laws and Canons, to bind the
Church, and in determining matters of Faith, and the like, They did not act in
the Quality of Church-Governors, so much as of Men extraordinarily illuminated,
and inspired, infallibly to deliver the whole Counsel of GOD to the World. As
to any Supremacy of Office, this must be derived from some Commission: which
Commission must be either ordinary or extraordinary, If it was extraordinary,
then it is ceased; and so there can be no Argument formed for Prelacy, from the
Apostolical Superiority. And extraordinary it must be, if the Apostolical
Superiority was properly ex officio, strictly Authoritative. For I know of no
ordinary Commission they received, which contained any thing more than the
ordinary Ministerial Powers, common to others with them. And I know of nothing
the Apostles did or acted, but what Presbyters might do as well as they;
suppose 'em in the same extraordinary Circumstances, indu'd with the same
extraordinary Qualifications, and under the same extraordinary Conduct of GOD's
Spirit. And indeed, I know of no Authority Paul exercised over Presbyters, more
than what he exercised over Timothy, the supposed Bishop of Ephesus! Nay,
perhaps no more than what He exercised toward Peter, (though an Apostle, equal
to himself,) when he withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed
Gal. 2.11.
; or than what other Apostles at Jerusalem exercised, when they sent Peter and
John (two of their own number) down to Samaria, upon news of the Gospel's being
received there Act. 8.14.
. In a word, whatever Superiority the Apostles had over Presbyters, I cannot at
present but be of Opinion, that it was a Superiority of Dignity, in respect of
peculiar Abilities and Privileges, (which gave them a peculiar Influence, and a
kind of Authority over Men's Consciences,) rather than a Superiority of ruling
Power, in respect of any peculiar Office they sustained. And of this Opinion I
must remain, until our Opponents can prove that the Apostles received some
other Commission from their risen Lord, besides that in Mat. 28. and Joh. 20.
-- or prove that the Commission for the Gospel Ministry is more than one;
either by demonstrating that the Commission of the Seventy is of force still,
and that with respect to the Gentiles; or by producing some new Commission for
Presbyters ( subject-Presbyters.) given by CHRIST, or his Apostles. All which I
despair of their being ever able to do.

IT is then a very bold and ignorant Consequence, which our Author draws from
his preceding Discourse, viz. That whosoever asserts the Apostolical
Superiority was only temporary, may as well say, that the Sacraments were
confined to the Times of the Apostles: and indeed the Quakers (who say so) have
as concluding Reasons for their Assertion, as the Presbyterians have for the
other. I shall make no particular Remarks on this wild Passage; because I
believe the Folly of it will be manifest to all Men, that impartially weigh the
Reasons that have been given to support the Presbyterian Assertion. But if any
desire a more direct Reply, they may find one in the Sober Remarks, toward the
End.

OUR Author comes now to his second Argument for Prelacy, from the Apostles
deriving the Apostolical Power over Clergy and Laiety, to (...) in the several
Churches which they planted. -- That the Apostles did de facts delegate their
Power to others, is want be affirms. And of this, says he, I shall name only
two Instances, Timothy and Titus, who were ordained or consecrated Bishops of
Ephesus and Crete by St. Paul. (Page 83.)

TO this, much might be said in Reply, but I shall wave it all, and refer you
to the Sober Remarks; where, that the Apostles did not desire the Apostolical
Power and Superiority unto others, and that Timothy and Titus were not Diocesan
Bishops, are both made evident, I would say, beyond contradiction (to borrow
some of our Author's Phrases) but that Demonstration may be opposed when People
(...) mind to wrangle. Enough and enough I think, is there said to convince any
(...) but him that is resolved not to be convinced, that the Bishops do take
were Power to themselves, under (...) of a Succession from the Apostles, than
St. Paul gave to Timothy and Titus: So that if they are tried by St. Paul's
Epistles, I Am very well satisfied They must be condemned and as to what Power
they take to themselves, not under such a Color, but as the King's Ministers,
I must leave them to (...) Author's Vindication.

I might say something here upon the Argument from the Angels of the seven
Churches, mentioned in the next place; but that I am in some measure prevented
by the Sober Remarks, and am willing (with our Author) to avoid as much as
possible being (...).

I might also here consider our Author's Quotations from the Fathers, which
follow next: and I think it might easily be made appear, that none of them do
establish the Diocesan Bishop; but on the contrary, some of them do very
plainly make against Him. However, it being my Design (for Reasons already
mentioned) to confine my self at present to Scripture-Evidence, I shall not
enter into that Argument.

BUT I will now proceed to the Author's last general Head, Page 90. Where he
proposes to consider the Names given to the several Gospel Ministers, by the
Church of England in her Litany, viz. bishops, Priests, and Deacons.

UNDER this Head He first speaks of the promiscuous use of the Names, Bishop
and Presbyter, in the holy Scriptures, and says he thinks that will be no
Argument for the Identity of the Office. -- To which I shall say nothing, since
this Argument is so copiously vindicated in the Sober Remarks. Only one word,
as to our Author's Exception against it, from the Apostles Superiority to the
rest of the Clergy. In which I think there is nothing of weight. For, does not
this Gentleman pretend there were Diocesan Bishops in the Apostles time? And
will he not own his supposed Bishops were subject to the Apostles as well as
the Presbyters? Does not the style of Paul's Epistles to Timothy and Titus,
carry in it an Air of Authority, as much as his Charges to the Elders of
Ephesus, or any other? And now if the Bishops were subordinate as well as the
Presbyters, will not this make all Reasoning from the Superiority of the
Apostles, of no force? What Argument can be drawn from hence, till it be proved
that Bishops do succeed the Apostles in this Superiority? And how can it be
pretended, that they do succeed the Apostles in this Superiority, till it be
made appear, either that Bishops were originally an Order of Men distinct from,
and above Presbyters: or that they are indu'd with Apostolical Abilities? Let
our Adversaries prove one or the other of these Things: or else we cannot believe
that Bishops have any rightful Claim to Apostolical Superiority over Presbyters.

OUR Author says nothing here to support the Episcopal Claim, save what may be
contained in that odd and surprising Passage, Page 91 Since they who in the
times of the Apostles were called by the Name of Apostles, and immediately
after their Death distinguished by the Title of Bishops; since they, I say,
were the Persons to whom the Apostles dying or departing, derived their
Commission; then it necessarily follows that they (who in the Apostolic Age
were called Apostles and soon after Bishops) had by virtue of that Commission
the full Plenitude of the Apostolic Power derived to them from CHRIST: and by
the same Authority they to whom they delegated their Commission, received the
same Power, and so down through all the succeeding Ages of the Christian Church
to this day. -- As to the Truth of this wonderful Passage, I shall not at
present make any Inquiries, because it chiefly relates to matters of Fact, not
in Scripture-History: and as to the Grammar and Sense, I leave those to clear
it up, that have a better Knack at criticizing, and solving Paradoxes, than I
can pretend to.

BUT there is one thing I Would take notice of, that the Gentleman says, which will
very much hurt and perplex his Cause; viz. If it is not by virtue of this
Commission given to the Apostles by our Savior, that ALL Gospel Ministers are
authorized and ordained, I desire any one to show what Authority they have, and
where it is given. If it is by virtue of this Commission that any Man is an
authorized Minister, then it can come by no Hands but the Apostles, and them to
whom the Apostles gave it.

THESE are notable Lines indeed; but I doubt our Author has very much wounded
his own Cause by them, and contradicted himself.

For,

1. HE here relinquishes the Argument from the Seventy, and so runs counter to
the Beginning of his Discourse. There he sat up the 70 as Officers in the
Gospel Church, and supposed them to subsist upon a distinct Commission from
that of the Eleven Apostles. But now in the End of his Discourse, he gives up
his Plea from the Seventy, and owns but one Commission, viz. That given to the
Eleven, by virtue of which any man is an authorized Minister: -- Unless perhaps
he meant that none could be invested in the Commission of the Seventy, but by
Apostles and Bishops; and so all would be ordained [in a sense] by virtue of
the Commission given to the Eleven. But that could not be his meaning, because
he is here speaking of the Apostles delegating their Commission, and gives it
as his Opinion, "That it was "delegated to some superior to others; that is,
(as we must explain him from what he says, page 93.) it was derived to their
Successors in unequal Degrees; to some, viz. Presbyters, in Part; to others,
viz. Bishops, in Whole. And (says he, in the last mentioned page) whatever part
of the Apostolical Authority any Minister of the Christian Church duly or
validly exercises, it is by virtue of a regular Delegation from the first
Apostles or their Successors.

Moreover,

2. BY the forementioned Assertion, our Author has defeated all his Arguments
besides, and in effect given up his whole Crase. For, if what he affirms be
true, viz. That by virtue of this Commission given to the Apostles, ALL
Gospel Ministers are authorized; then he has put it out of his own Power, to
prove that there is any such Order of Men as Bishops, distinct from and
superior to Pastors or Teachers. To set this in a clear Light, I argue thus.
Whosoever is authorized by virtue of that Commission, must derive his Authority
from it, either mediately and by some distant Consequence, or immediately and
by a direct Investiture. Now, if ordinary Pastors and Presbyters are authorized
at all by virtue of that Commission, it must be by immediate Investiture. The
Deacons indeed have a more remove and mediate or consequential Reference to
that Commission: because either their Office was originally implied in it, but
the Apostles (by the (...) of the Holy Ghost) instituted a new and (...) Order
of Men to sustain that (...) of the Commission; or else a new Office, distinct
from that of the (...) was instituted, by virtue of that Commission. -- But now
as to the Presbyters, their Case is vastly different. For the Presbyters
Authority is more immediately founded in that Commission, and is not a
secondary Thing. The Ministerial Commission is but one. I know of no Commission
to preach the Word, and administer Gospel-Sacraments, but that which was given
to the Apostles, in Mat. 28. And no man may pretend to do those Things, but by
virtue of that Commission, devolved upon him. To allude to some of our Author's
own Words before quoted; If it is not by virtue of [a direct and proper
Investiture in] this Commission given to the Apostles by our Savior, that ALL
Gospel Ministers are authorized, I desire any one to show me what Authority
they have, and where it is given. In short, let our Opponents produce any
Commission that the Apostles have given, by virtue of that Commission granted
to them, instituting an Order of Gospel Ministers or Presbyters, not having
Episcopal Powers; and we will yield the Cause. Or let 'em prove that the
Successors of the Apostles had Authority to constitute a new order of mere
Presbyters or Subject Pastors; and it will do as well. But till they can
perform one or other of these Things, they must indulge our Weakness, if we
still adhere to the Opinion, That all Gospel Ministers are in a direct and
immediate Way authorized by the Apostles Commission, or (in other words)
actually invested with it.

AND now, if it be thus, it must need follow, that Presbyters and Bishops are
of one and the same Order and Degree; inasmuch as their Claim to the Powers
contained in that Commission, is equal and the same. So much Truth is there, in
that Observation of our Author's, [ page 91.] That whatever Power the Apostles
had by virtue of that Commission, Those to whom they derived that Commission,
must necessarily be vested with the same; -- and had by virtue of that
Commission the full Plenitude of the Apostolic Power, derived to 'em from
CHRIST. Hence then, seeing All Gospel Ministers or Teachers] are authorized
immediately by that Commission, They must be vested with the whole ordinary
Power therein contained: and Bishops can pretend to no more. Therefore Bishops
and Presbyters are the same.

I can see no Foundation in the world, for that Distinction our Author makes,
in his 93d page, viz. That the Apostles gave to some All their Power; but to
others they only gave Part of their Power. He makes this Distinction, in Reply
to an Objection. If any (says he) ask how Presbyters can exercise those Powers
[namely, of preaching, and administering Gospel-Sacraments, and of absolving
Offenders upon their Repentance] without being Apostles or Bishops, since our
Savior gave that Commission only to the Apostles as such: I answer, It is true
our Savior gave those Powers only to the Apostles; but he gave them Authority
to delegate that Power to whom they thought fit and worthy; and they gave to
some all their Power (and so they were as much Apostles as the first Eleven
were) but to others they only gave Part of their Power; viz. To preach, and
administer the Sacraments. -- This is his Answer: but I think it will no way
solve the Difficulty, nor serve his cause.

IN the first place, I deny his Distinction here, to have any Foundation in the
Word of God. For the Ministerial Commission is but one; and they that are
ordained to the Office of the Gospel Ministry instituted in that Commission,
are invested with all the Powers that belong to that Office by Divine
Institution --. Observe, our Author himself confesses, that these Powers were
at frst given only to the Eleven Apostles: and to them, they were given
Equally. Hence then, such as succeed Them, must be likewise Equal Sharers in
all those Powers, and the Ministerial Commission must belong to them alike, in
its full Extent See the Sober Remarks, (upon Matthew. 28.19, 20.) where this
Point is more largely debated.
* unless the Apostles in CHRIST's name have made some Limitations. And the
Proof of this is what we demand. This Gentleman peremptorily asserts, that the
Apostles gave their Power to some only in Part, and with Restrictions. But this
is sooner affirmed than proved. I shall only say here; Had the Apostles
conveyed their Ministerial Powers unto others, in various Degrees, (to some
All, to others only a Part) they would necessarily have set up a new and
distinct Officer in Him that had only a Part: and if there had been a distinct
Officer set up by them, they would doubtless have given him some distinguishing
Name to be known by, and have stated his peculiar Qualifications to regulate
the Choice of him, and have introduced him into his Work by a distinct
Ordination or Consecration etc. But we find no Footsteps of these Things in the
sacred Records. The Names of those that the Apostles ordained to the
Gospel Ministry in every Church, [such as Bishops, Presbyters, Pastors,
Teachers, etc.] are promiscuously applied: and the same Qualifications are
indifferently required of them all. And their Ordination is universally the
same: and their Work the same. Where then is there any Scripture Ground for our
Author's Distinction? Surely it can be nothing but a mere Fiction, to help a
lame Cause, that needs such Assistences! And whatever pretended Sanction it may
receive from human Authority and Custom, this will never warrant such a
Distribution and Separation of the Powers and Parts of a Divine Commission. We
may properly enough apply here that saying of our Savior, What therefore God
has joined together, let not Man put asunder.

HOWEVER, to take our Author once more in his own way, I will suppose, that the
Apostles actually did derive their Power to others with a Difference, to some
All, and to others only a Part. I will suppose there are Elders, who have no
Power of Rule, but are emphatically Teachers, having only Power to preach, and
administer the Sacraments: Yet I cannot see at present how our Author can
improve such a Concession to serve his Cause. For this will not necessarily
infer a Subordination among the Ministers of the Gospel. I Will give two Reasons
why I think so.

1. THE Episcopacy that belongs to Ecclesiastical Rulers, is over the People,
and not over the Teachers of the People. It Is called an Oversight of the FLOCK,
Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. -- It Is called A taking Care of the Church of God, 1 Timothy 3.5. And, what is more, Ministers are expressly forbidden to usurp
Authority over their Brethren in the Ministry, Mat. 20.25. etc. [See the Sober
Remarks, on this Text, page 99. Edit. 2.]

2. CONSIDER, Government imply's nothing in its Nature, that should be a Ground
of Superiority in the Rulers of the Flock, over those (supposed) mere Teachers.
The Key of Church Discipline and Government is represented, by some Judicious
Divines, as inferior in its Nature to the Key of Doctrine. Bishop Burnet thus
expresses himself; Since I look upon the Sacramental Actions, as the Highest of
sacred Performances, I cannot but acknowledge those who are empowered for them,
must be of the highest Office in the Church Confer. page 310.
. -- That preaching and administering Sacraments, are the principal Parts of the
Ministerial Office, seems to be intimated, in that these only are recited in
the Commission given the Apostles, Mat. 28. -- And the inspired Doctor of the
Gentiles seems, in several places, to intimate the same to us. How highly does
he magnify his Office, as a Preacher of the Gospel, a Steward of the Mysteries
of Religion, an Ambassador of Christ, and a Worker together with GOD! And what
superior Respects does he require to be paid to Gospel-Preachers, as such! 1
These. 5.13. Esteem them very highly [the same word is rendered Ephesians. 3.20.
Exceeding abundantly] in Love for their Work's sake. Yea and he makes that
Distinction, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that rule well, he counted worthy of
double Honor; especially they (...) labor in the Word and Doctrine. Upon
which Text, it may be remarked --.

HERE are Elders that rule, and Elders that labor in the Word. If these Elders
are the same and one, here is a Comparison between the several Parts of their
Office, Ruling and Teaching; and the Preference is given to the Latter. -- Or,
If here are two Kinds of Presbyters, one Ruling, and the other Teaching, the
Precedence is given to the Teaching Presbyter. -- So that, take it in which
sense you will, by the Apostle's Rule, the Key of Doctrine, and the Subjects of
it, cannot be inferior to the Key of Order or Jurisdiction, and its Recipients.
Suppose Presbyters, and Bishops, to be different Orders, yet Bishops are not a
superior Order. For, Government and Ordination are those things, wherein
Bishops are supposed to differ from Presbyters: And these things cannot be any
Grounds of Superiority; because they are inferior [at least not superior] to
those Ministerial Powers, which Presbyters themselves are vested with. If they
be not superior in Dignity, how can they be a just Foundation of Authority; of
Authority in Bishops, over Presbyters as such? -- Besides, it must be
remembered, the Apostle requires that distinguishing (...) be paid to the
Elders that labor in Doctrine, above the Elders that labor in Rule: which he
would not have done, if the Elders that rule (you, and rule well) had been more
honorable than their Brethren. -- In a word, I commend this Text to the sober
Consideration of our Opponents, and desire 'em to show me how they can
reconcile the Apostolical Canon here, with their Scheme of Things, particularly
as laid down in the Modest Proof, and the Persuasive. If any Man will do this,
and make sense of the Text, [to borrow again some of our Author's words, page
90) He will have a better Knock at solving Paradoxes then I can pretend it.

AND here I finish my Remarks upon what our Author has advanced in Proof of
the Divine Right of Prelacy.

I might now make some Observations upon what he says under the head of
DEACONS. But this Part of the Controversy between us, is so fully considered,
and to so good purpose, in the Sober Remarks, that I shall not trouble you with
any long Talk upon it. Whether it is plain from the Instance of Philip, that
the Deacons were Preachers and Baptizers, -- I believe every one will doubt,
who impartially weighs what is said on that Case in the Sober Remarks. Yea, our
Author himself seems to grant that they were not such at their first setting
up. For he says; I don't deny but the first Institution of that Order in the
Church, was to take Care of the Poor and the (...) of the Church, [as for his
Fling here in a Parenthesis The Parenthesis is, (and perhaps that, viz. taking
Care of the Poor, and the Alms of the Church, would be a more considerable part
of their Office at this day than it is made, if the unhappy Divisions that are
among us would suffer the Discipline of the Church to take place.)
if it was levelled at the Presbyterians, it is as senseless as it is ill-natur'd]
but (he adds however) at the same time they are Gospel Ministers, (...) with a
Power of doing several purely ministerial Acts; such as preaching by the
Bishop's License, baptizing, and administering the Cup to the People in the
Lord's Supper. -- But how does he prove they are Gospel Ministers and vested
with power to do these Things? Why; By their Ordination, by the Example of
Scripture-Deacons, and the long Practice of the Church. As to the Practice of
the Church, how ancient soever, that can be of no Weight, if it be against a
Divine Institution. And as for the Example of Scripture-Deacons, it is all but
a Pretense. There is no such Example in Scripture. It Is not to be found either
in Philip, or Stephen. Stephen did no more than what any private Man might do,
in the like Case, being filled with the Holy Ghost. As for Philip, though he
preached, he did not do it as a Deacon, but as an Evangelist (Act. 21.8.) And
(as one observes) if he had done otherwise, it is but what was usually done by
gifted Men in those extraordinary Times. Grotius quotes Act. 11.20. for private
Persons preaching in those times of Persecution. [on Acts 8.5.] Apollos seems
to be a plain Instance of this. Take it in Dr. Hammond's words, (on Act.
18.25.) This Apollos had been instructed in the Gospel, and though not so
perfectly, yet being very zealous in the way wherein he was entered, he began
[publickly] to Preach the Gospel among them out of the Prophets, and this
before he was baptized with the Christian Baptism, being only received by John
to the believing in him that was to come: and by consequence, not then ordained
by the Apostles. We have other Instances in the 12 Ephesian Disciples, who had
not received the Holy Ghost, nor gone any farther than John's Baptism, at the
time of Paul's coming to them. ( Act. 19. begin.) Dr. Hammond speaks of them as
Christian Professors publishing the Gospel at Ephesus; and that without having
given them (of the Holy Ghost) Authority or Gifts for the Work of the
Ministry. And now if private Persons, without having received ordination to
the Ministry, did thus preach the Gospel, in times of extraordinary necessity,
why might not Philip, (when driven from Jerusalem, and so ceasing to perform
his Deacon's Office there) preach the Gospel at Samaria, and yet not do it as a
Deacon? Supposing Philip to be as yet no more than a Deacon, his preaching does
not any more argue that Deacons may ordinarily be Preachers, than that private
Persons may be so. -- But perhaps some will object, That Philip baptized as
well as preached. To which I answer; In such an extraordinary Case, He might
baptize as lawfully as preach. And such an extraordinary Effusion of the Holy
Ghost, and Power of working Miracles, as He had, would justify any Man's doing
both, in such a Case. The words of the late excellent Bishop Burnet (...). on
Psalm. 144 15 ( page 23.) preached (...).
are remarkable; Has not every Christian, in cases of necessity, a Right to
teach another, and persuade him to be a Christian? And therefore, though it is
a very just Part of the Order of the Church, that none but Persons initiated
into holy Functions should baptize and preach, yet Necessity is above all
Rules: In such a Case they may baptize as well as preach. The Faith of the
Trinity gives every Man a Right to baptize: and this has been the constant
sense of the Church for above fourteen hundred years, etc. There is no force
then in the pretended Example of Scripture-Deacons, to prove that Deacons as
such, and in ordinary Cases may preach and baptize. But says our Author they
are vested with Power to do this, by their Ordination. By which he must mean
either the Apostolical Ordination, or the Church of England-Ordination. I think
He could not mean the Former; because in the beginning of the same Paragraph,
he owns that the first Institution of that order in the Church, was to take
Care of the Poor: and indeed He must have been strangely blind or wilful, if he
had denied this. For nothing can be more evident from the Institution ( Act.
6.) than that Deacons originally were Overseers of the Poor, and ordained to
serve Tables, which the Apostles would not leave the Word of God to do. But in
process of Time, (says one) when the Revenues of the Church were enlarged, the
Case was greatly altered: the Bishops affected to be Guardians of the Poor, and
to make the Deacons Amends admitted them to preach and baptize. The Bishops
omit Preaching, and become servants of Tables: and the Deacons from serving of
Tables step up into the Pulpit and become Preachers. Agreebly the Church of
England allows her Deacons to be Preachers and Baptiser. And most probably it
might be Her Ordination, which our Author referred to when he said that Deacons,
are by their Ordination, vested with a power of preaching by the Bishops
License. But then I ask, What Authority has the Church to alter Divine
Institutions? If the Institution (in Acts 6.) does not give Deacons such a
Power, I desire our Author to show me what Commission the Church of England
has to give it them: and if he cannot produce any Commission to warrant the
Church's giving it them, than the Bishop's License is but Vanity and
Presumption, and the Episcopal Deacons are condemned out of our Author's own
mouth, in that passage, [ page 93.] Whoever pretends to exercise any part of
the Ministerial Office, without a regular Delegation or Mission, is an Intruder
into the Priests Office, and every Act of his is Null and Void, and in the
Scripture-style an abomination to the Lord. -- We may borrow a few more words
from him (out of the next page) and say to Him and his Brethren, Therefore I
beseech you to look to it; for though you may amuse your selves, and the world,
with a Legal Establishment, I shall take the Liberty to say (with all due
Regard and Submission to the Civil Power) that what our Blessed Savior has
commanded, [or instituted] No Power on Earth can make void: and what He or his
Apostles have either by express words, or necessary Consequence forbidden, No
Law of Man can make (...). -- I Will add here, those words in the Modest Proof,
(page 30 ^^.) You know what a dreadful Curse is pronounced against them who
either add to, or take away from, the Institutions of Jesus Christ, in Rev.
(...), 19. -- This is to pretend to be wiser (...) Christ. -- How then are
Prelatical Churches to be condemned, that so confound and jumble together the
different Orders instituted by Christ, and set up a new Model different from
what he established: -- in which the Deacons are made half Priests, and the
Priests but half Ministers and mere Curates to the Bishops: while the Bishops
have an overgrown Power; part whereof they commit to Lay-Officers, who take
Care generally to employ it upon the Inferior Clergy and People with a
wholesome Severity, so far as this will make for their own Interest.

I shall now dismiss my Author with a word or two, upon the Conclusion of his
(...) Proof, which is as full of Ill Nature, and foolish Bigotry, as his
preceding Discourse is (...) of Truth and Honesty. I have (says he to us)
insisted the longer upon these three Orders of Gospel Ministers, to show you
(if possible) your Error, in setting up Ministers to your (...) who have no
Mission, -- and of the Danger you are (...) for want of Gospel Ordinances. Then
follows this fatal Climax, If you have no Ordination, you can have no lawful
Ministers; if you want lawful Ministers, you can have no Baptism; and without
Baptism, you have no Title to the (...) of Grace, in God's ordinary way of
dealing with us. -- Is this the Result, this the End of our pretended Error? We
thank the Gentleman then for the Charity of his Persuasive: but we thank God
more, that we know it is (...) a pretended Error, we are charged with, and only
a supposed Danger, we are in. This we know and are sure of by the Scripture
Evidence we bring for the Truth and Goodness of our Cause: and from the Success
of the Ministry in our Churches; which has been such, for its Degree and its
Constancy, as (to speak modestly) has hardly ever been paralleled in any
Episcopal Church on the face of the Earth. This is a Consideration that will
weigh much with serious thinking People and will weigh down a thousand Cavils
against our Ministry and Churches.

BUT I Will now finish with some remarkable Lines out of two or three famous
Authors. End, Bishop (...) in his Sermon before quoted [ page 22,] speaking of
the Papists, observes; -- They condemn without Mercy all who differ from them:
They damn them first, and then persecute them without Bowels. They think their
Communion is the one Church, out of which there is no Salvation. He adds; I
wish none of their Leaven may be fermenting among Us: In this Last Particular,
a Notion begins to be spread among us, that goes further even than their
Uncharitableness. They only deny that those who are not of their Body are
Catholics: but there is a Conceit lately got in among us, that denies all who
are not baptized among Us [that is, in the Church of England] to be Christians,
shuts them out of CHRIST's Covenant, and thinks them no better than Heathens. A
Notion that though it once got into some Churches, who thought that the Baptism
of Heretics was of no Value, and ought to be repeated upon their Coming into
the Church, yet was solemnly condemned and rejected by all the Churches of God
now for above Fourteen Hundred Years. In Popery the Midwives generally baptize:
yet, though this is against an express Rule of the Apostles, That a Woman ought
not to speak in the Church, none of the Reformed ever thought of rebaptizing
the Persons so baptized: Nor did our Church at the Restoration ever entertain
the least Motion of this sort. But now this is received by many, among the
other wild Conceits of the Corrupter of our Faith and Church, who broached
this, with many other monstrous Errors, which he has carried so near Atheism,
as to deny the Immortality of the Soul, and to put the Immortalizing Virtue in
a Baptism given by Persons Episcopally ordained.

THE common Topic (adds the Bishop) for supporting this wild unheard of
Paradox, is, that the Commission to preach and baptize was given to the
Apostles, so that none but their Successors can pretend to it. But has not
every Christian, in cases of necessity, a Right etc.

(The Rest you had before.)

THIS is not the only step some are making toward Popery; but with so little
Knowledge and Consideration, that it is to be hoped they do it ignorantly*
misled by a great Name and a show of Learning; which many seem more willing to
admire in others, than diligent to arrive at it themselves.

WHAT a Deluge of Infidelity has overrun the Land! And how great a Contempt of
holy Things does appear every where bare faced, even among those who as far as
Heat and Fury go, show a Zeal, I had almost called it a Rage, for our Church;
though their Behavior is a Disgrace, and their Lives a Reproach to it!

Thus the Bishop.

MY next Author is the Celebrated Monsieur Claude, who has such Words as these
upon the matter. To speak my Thoughts freely; this Fierce Opinion (of the
absolute necessity of Episcopacy) which would make all Religion depend on a
Formality, of no other than human Institution, cannot be looked on otherwise
than as the very worst Character, and a Mark of the grossest Hypocrisy; a piece
of Pharisaism all over, that straits at a (...), when it swallows a Camel. And
I cannot avoid having at least a Contempt of those kind of Thoughts, and a
Compassion for those that fill fill their heads with them.

IN fine, says an Author of our own Seasonable Inquiries etc. page 9, 11.
. What are they doing [O vain Men, what are you doing?] who after the WORD of
GOD in the sacred Scriptures does so plainly and loudly condemn the Usurpation
of a Diocesan Episcopacy, will for the sake thereof renounce the Ministry and
Communion of all the Protestant Churches in the World, except a very little
Party on two Islands, which have so little Distinction of pure and undefiled
Religion to invite a serious Christian over to it! And will unite with the
Papists, our common Enemy [at such a time as this!] in the most compendious and
effectual way of destroying the Reformation, and set up a Captain, under whom a
Return to Egypt may be soon accomplished!

THESE borrowed Passages must conclude my Reply to Mr. Barclay, and this hasty
Letter to my Friend. I beg your Candor, as to the many Imperfections you may
see in it. And pardon me that I have detained you so long. Accept my hearty
Salutes: and always think of (...), as,

Dear SIR, Your Brother And Servant.
April 3. 1724.

