Mr. John Barnard's SERMON On II Kings II.14.

Elijah's Mantle.

A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF That aged and faithful Servant of GOD, The
REVEREND Mr. Samuel Cheever, Pastor of a Church of Christ in Marblehead; Who
deceased, May 29, 1724. AEtatis Suae, 85.

By John Barnard, A. M. His Colleague Pastor.

With long Life will I satisfy him, and show him my Salvation

Ps. XCI.16. BOSTON Printed: Sold by S. Gerrish, near the Brick Meeting House,
in Cornhill 1724.

A Funeral Sermon Upon the Reverend Mr. Samuel Cheever.
II. King. II.14. And he took the Mantle of Elijah, that fell from him, and
smote the Waters, and said, Where is the Lord God of Elijah?


FAMOUS is the History of Elijah, the renowned Prophet of the God of Israel;
his Zeal for the Lord of Host, his Fidelity and Courage in his Masters Service,
the Miracles which he wrought, and his triumphant Ascension into Heaven, in a
Chariot of Fire, make a considerable Figure in the sacred Story. Nor less
illustrious is Elisha, whom God had ordered Elijah to anoint his Successor, to
be a Prophet of the Lord in his room* Though Elijah is jealous of the Name (...)
Honor of the God of Israel, yet is he not jealous of his own Name and Honor;
but, while he is yet alive, takes his Successor under his Patronage, does what
he can to furnish him for his Work, to raise him in the Esteem and Affections
of the People, and rejoices that he is like to leave the work of the Lord in
such able Hands, ready to sing his nunc dimitti^, now Lord let thou thy
Servant depart in Peace.

THIS Chapter where my Text is, contains the History of Elijah's Translation;
(for God honored him at his Death, that he went an unusual road to Glory) and
Elisha's entering upon the prophetic Function. Elisha was apprised of the
glorious Exit his Master was about to make, and resolves to keep close to him,
that he might loose none of the advantages of his Instruction and Converse, and
that he might have his own Faith in the invisible World strengthened by the
opening of such a bright Scene of Glory.

ELIIAH having made his last visit to the several Colleges of the Prophets, and
taken his leave of them, now bids Elisha ask what he shall do for him, e're he
departs from him.

GREAT the Request which Elisha makes; which showed his Mind intensly fixed
upon his Work, and that he desired nothing more than to be thoroughly furnished
for it. Let (says he) a double Portion of thy Spirit be upon me; double to the
rest of the Sons of the Prophets, that he might be acknowledged his Successor,
and worthy the Dignity.

ELIIAH grants his Request, upon Condition of his seeing him when he ascended,
if he continue faithful to him to the last. And God said Amen ^o it.

ANON the illustrious Scene appears, the bright Seraphs take Elijah in their
flaming Chariot, conduct him through the Devil's Territories, and give him a
quick, safe* and easy passage to Glory, and Elisha saw it. Upon which,

HE first pays his last Homage to his endeared Predecessor, drops a Tear at his
Departure, bright almost as the Chariot the Prophet rode in, celebrates his
Worth, expresses his just esteem and veneration for him, and groans out his
Sorrows, in strains as weighty almost as his Lo^^, My Father, my Father, the
Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof.

AND then, he immediately applied himself to the business of his Function: he
saw Elijah ascend, and he lays hold on the promise made him, and takes up the
Mantle of the Prophet, the Badge of his Office, as a sure pledge left him, of
his succeeding him in his Office, and of a double portion of his Spirit resting
upon him; and returns directly to the School of the Prophets at Jericho, to
show the tokens of the Divine Presence with him, have his Office recognized,
and begin his Charge. In his way thither, the River Jordan interrupted his
Passage, and affords the first Proof of his Mission, and the Spirit of God
resting upon him, as it was the last of Elijah's* Which brings me to my Text*

AND he took the Mantle of Elijah, etc. He had I. King. XIX.19, 20.
formerly felt the sacred Force the wondrous Power of it, when Elijah first
cast it over him, and now he is willing to try whether it will be as mighty in
its Operations, in his Hands, as it had II. King. 12.8.
lately been in the Hands of the old Prophet.

AND he smote the Waters, so he had seen his Master do before him, and now that
he succeeded him, he is ready to tread in his Steps, and use the like Means
that the departed Prophet had done, to manifest his Authority, and fulfill his
Ministry.

AND said, Where is the Lord God of Elijah? Not as doubting His Being, or his
Omnipresence, but it is an earnest putting in suit the promise Elijah had made
him, in the Name of his God. Elijah indeed is gone, but Elijah's God remains,
and so long the promise is sure. Where is the Lord God of Elijah? It Is an
earnest but humble Address to God to be with him, as He had been with Elijah,
sufficiently to authorize and furnish him to his Work, to remove every
Difficulty which lay in his way, to own him in his Office, and crown him with
Success.

AND God heard the Request of Elisha, immediately gave Answer, and evident
Proof of Elijah's Spirit resting upon him. For no sooner had he smitten the
Waters, but the obedient Waves, as though they were conscious of the Divine
Energy that accompanied the stroke, flee before Elisha's God, and make way for
his return to Jericho; where the Sons of the Prophets, convinced by the
dividing of the Waters, that the Spirit of Elijah rested upon him, came and did
him Reverence, bowed down to him, and acknowledged him their Head.

HOW entertaining the History! and how full of Instruction!

To resume my Text, And he took the Mantle of Elijah that fell from him, that
is as was noted the badge of his Office: So Elisha becomes possessed not only
of the Mantle, but of the same Character and Office of Elijah, of his Authority
and Dignity, of his Care and Charge. So God takes care to raise up his
Prophets, to supply his Church and People, as their wants call for; Elijah
dies, but the Office dies not with him.

Whence I note,

Ob. I. THAT when God calls home His Elijah 's, He will raise up Elisha 's to
succeed them. God always will have work to do in this World, so long as the
present frame of it shall continue, and therefore He will always find fit
Instruments to do His Work; He improves one Instrument where, and so long as
seems good to Him, and then He lays that by, and makes use of an other, as He
pleases, and still is but carrying on His great Work and Design by them.

1. GOD is often calling home His Elijah's to Himself. The Ministers of
Religion have no more pretentions to Immortality than their Neighbors, but
alike are they laid in the dust, and the worm shall cover them. For the
Prophets of the Lord are but Men, clothed with Flesh, liable to Casualties,
Diseases and Death with other Men; and their very Make and Constitution will
not suffer them to continue here always. For no Man living is in Strength so
great that he should still live for ever, and not see the Pit; the Grave is the
House appointed for all the living, nor can any plead an exemption therefrom;
we see that wise Men die, as well as the fool and the brutish Person. Zac.
1.5. Your Fathers where are they? and the Prophets do they live for ever? no
not as to their abode in Flesh, and residence in this World. Nor would they
choose to continue here always; the blessed Hope of the glorious Rewards of
their faithful Services, makes them willing rather to be absent from the Body,
that they may be present with the Lord. Nor will their gracious God continue
them always in a state of Labor and Peril. God may sometimes spare them to the
World, as Blessings in it, even unto a great old Age, yet He will not suffer
them to be always in this World; but will in due time, as seems good to Him,
who is Lord of Life and Death, call them home to Himself, to the blessed Rest
he has provided for them, whither they retire when they are dismantled of their
Flesh, even to an House not made with Hands, eternal in the Heavens; they rest
from their Labors and their Works follow them, and they shall be ever with the
Lord.

THEY live for ever in the superior Regions of Light and Joy, otherwise God
would not have been the God of Elijah when he had left the Earth; but rather
than they shall live for ever here, God will take an uncommon Method to fetch
them home; He Will make a visible descent of flaming Ministers of His, who shall
take them under their strong Convoy, and cause them triumphantly to leap the
Ditch where Mankind usually falls, and ascend directly to their native Skies.
So Elijah went up as by a Whirlwind and a Chariot of Fire into Heaven, v. 11.

2. BUT when God so removes His Prophets by Translation, or in the more common
road to Death, He will take care to provide others, to raise up Elisha's, to
fill their Place, and perform their Labors among His People. When He says to
Moses go up and die, He will say to Joshua arise thou. Here,

1. GOD always had, and always will have a People in the World, till the final
consummation of all things; and accordingly He always will have His Prophets,
or an Order of Men, to minister in holy Things; to publish his Laws, declare
His Threatenings, and proclaim His Promises, and direct His People in the path
of Life.

FROM the Beginning the right of instructing seems to have resided in the head
of the Family; but when God had called a Nation to be a peculiar People to
Himself, He then constituted one of the twelve Tribes to be the keepers of His
Laws, and the Ministers of His Altars, the Stewards of His House, and the
Instructors of His People.

AND so has he authorized and commissioned, by His Son Jesus Christ our Lord, a
standing Order of Men in the days of the Gospel, (though not confined to a
particular Family or Tribe) to be as His ordinary Prophets, attending
continually to this very thing; to represent the Person of His Son, the great
Head of the Church; as Ambassadors for Christ, to negotiate the grand Affairs
of Peace and Reconciliation between God and Man.

BEFORE the Canon of the Sacred Scripture was completed, God raised up His
extraordinary Prophets, who under the immediate inspiration of the Holy Ghost,
^^edicted Futurities, and revealed the Mind of God in things as yet not known;
but since the Son of God in His own Person, and His Apostles immediately from
Him, have perfected the Rule of Faith and Manners, so that there remains
nothing more to be added to the Sacred Code, there seems to be no further
occasion for such extraordinary Prophets; and therefore the ordinary Preachers
of the Gospel are the only remaining standing Order of Prophets, to whom God,
by His Son, has committed the Oversight Care and Charge of His People, to
divulge His Laws and Ordinances, lay open His Covenant, lead Men into the
Blessing, and apply the Seals of the Covenant to them, and to debar and cut off
the visibly profane and unholy from meddling with His hallowed Institutions.

WHEREVER God has provided Himself a Church, there He will also take care to
provide such as shall minister to them in holy Things, to gather together His
Elect, and fill up the Body of His Church, the fullness of Him who fills all
in all. Hence it is we read, Ephesians. IV.11 -- And he gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
Body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the Faith, and Knowledge of
the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ.

2. TO these His ordinary Ministers, He commits the sacred Badge, as the Mantle
of Elijah, the Divine Commission, Authority and Power, of the Guides,
Overseers, and Rulers of His Church; and will continue to raise up of the same
Order of Men, invested with the same sacred Office* Power and Betrustment, even
to the worlds end. Hence our Savior said to His Apostles, when He delivered
their full Commission to them, with an eye to them that should succeed them
throughout all Gene^ations, Lo I am with you always, to the end of the World
Math. XXVIII.20.
. It Is very evident, by the mode of Speech, that our Savior engages to be with
His Ministers to the end of Time; always, and to the worlds end, being
necessarily to be understood in a literal Sense, and are explanatory one of an
other: and since the Apostles did not continue always to the end of the World,
but died like other Men, it is very evident therefore that our Savior, when He
says, I will be with you, meant not only with you my Apostles, but with all my
Ministers that shall come after you, whom I invest with this same Commission
which I now bestow upon you: And this necessarily supposes that there shall be
such an Order of Men to the end of the World.

THE Institution was not Temporary, and to endure only for a Season, so song as
our blessed Savior and His Apostles were upon Earth; but as the Conversion of
Sinners, the Confirmation of Saints, and the Regimen and Government of the
House of God renders the Reason of their Office the same, to the end of World,
so God will take care to raise up a succession of Ministers, a supply to His
Church of Men in sacred Order, that shall wear the Character, and perform the
Office of His Ministers unto His Church, till Time shall be no more.

To return,

HE, (Elisha) took the Mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and smote the
Waters. So he had seen Elijah smite the Waters with this very Mantle but a
little before; and it was with the same strong Faith in God, and Spirit of
Devotion toward Him, Elisha smote the Waters, that Elijah was acted with; and
when he also had smitten the Waters, they parted hither and thither, and Elisha
went over.

From whence I note,

II. Ob. THAT it highly becomes those whom God puts into the Ministry, as much
as may be, to tread in the laudable Steps, and be acted by the same good Spirit
of those venerable Fathers, whom they have seen go before them in their Work
and Service. How nearly does Elisha follow Elijah; he lays his Copy before him,
and transcribes exactly after it: and the same Spirit that acted the one acted
the other also. For surely it ever becomes the Prophets and Ministers of the
Lord, as far as in them lies, to prevent all soloecism in Rule, incongruity of
Parts, and discord in the Harmony of the divine Precepts, Institution, and
Worship. Here,

1. THEY should tread in the same laudable Steps their venerable Fathers have
gone before them in. They that rise up in the ministerial Order, in all their
Services in the Temple, should be careful to walk Phil. III.16.
by the same Rule, and mind the same things, therein imitating those Men of God
that go before them, so far as is consistent with Truth and Holiness. For we
are not so tied up to the Example of others, as to be obliged to copy their
Errors, in case they should introduce any in their Doctrine or Worship, but may
very justly and laudably dissent from them in our practice therein; but so far
as we see them walking in the way the great Head of the Church h^^h laid out,
so far we should endeavor a c^ose adherence to them. This was the apostolical
Direction, 1 Cor. XI.1. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ. If
therefore their Predecessors were faithful in the House of God, strictly
adhered, as they were able, to the Divine Institutions, approving themselves
able Ministers of the New Testament, nourished up in the words of Faith and
good Doctrine; so too should they, that rise up as in the room of their
Fathers, hold fast the form of sound Doctrine, which has been delivered to
them; to the Law and to the Testim^ny, speaking, and acting according to the
best Light they can receive therefrom.

ON the one hand, they must not basely betray the Cause and Interest of their
God, give up the Rights, Dignity, and Authority of their Office and Station, to
every capricious, ignorant and bold Intruder; but take the Mantle and wear it,
and make such Improvement of it, as may be necessary to smite the Waters, to
remove the Obstacles that lie in the way of their Masters Service, or gently
cast the skirt of it over the willing and obedient.

ON the other hand, they must take heed of setting up for themselves, as though
all were their own, and they were Lords of the Heritage; they must neither add
to, nor detract from the sacred Injunctions, but carefully observe the Pattern,
and Form, the outgoings and incomings of the House of God, which those who
introduce them into the sacred Order have been faithful in, and make over to
them as a sacred Depositum committed to their trust. They must feed the Flock
of God with the same Bread and Water of Life, the same Word and Doctrine,
minister the same Seals and Discipline, and maintain the same Inspection Care
and Watch over them, or if possible greater; that in all things they may
approve themselves faithful Stewards in the House of God, not suffering His
Ordinances to be evaporated into into Smoke on the one hand, nor loaded with
thick Clay on the other.

2. AND then, as he is to tread in the same regular Steps, so is he to be acted
by the same good Spirit, of his venerable Fathers. What will the Mantle of
Elijah avail without the Spirit of Elijah? He may ^ear the Badges of the high
Office, and come into the room of an other local^y as a piece of Lumber, but
neither rationally nor morally, as becomes a reasonable and religious Creature,
unless he is acted by the same good Spirit, without which he will never make
good the Ground, nor discharge the Duties of his Character. It was the Spirit
more than the Mantle of Elijah that divided the Waters.

HE must therefore make it his first care, that the Spirit of God and Glory
rests upon him; that he is awfully sensible of the unsported Holiness and
Purity of the Divine Majesty; the sacredness of the Character he takes upon
him; and the real inward Holiness, and purity of Manners which b^comes those
that bear the Vessels of the Sanctuary; and accordingly must be careful to
serve the Lord in the holiness all the days of his Life, in the frame and
temper of his Mind, in the duties of his Function, and in his whole
Conversation.

Again, HE should endeavor after a like Spirit of Humility and Meekness,
Sobriety and Gravity, Righteousness and Temperance; manifesting a low Opinion
of himself, without being abject and servile; be ea^y of acc^ss, without a
trifling Familiarity, which issues in Contempt; be ready to overlook personal
Injuries, and condescend to the meanest, and lay aside all Levity without
Morosness; always do to others as he would that they should do to him; stand
fast in his Christian Liberty, wherein Christ has made him free, and yet not
use his Liberty for an occasion to the Flesh.

Again, HE should endeavor after the same Spirit of Zeal, Courage and
Fidelity. He must be zealous for the Lord of Host, even burn with an holy
Ardour of Soul, to advance the Name, Interest, and Kingdom of God in the World;
and with a fervent Indignation make head against the torrent of Vice and
Immorality, which threatens to deluge all Religion, both Name and Thing; and
against all Impostors that set up their Altars against Gods Altar, and would
lead or force us to enquire of the God of Ekron, instead of the God of Israel.
And his Zeal must be well directed, guided by Prudence, and tempered with
Moderation; lest while in his pretended Zeal he call for Fire from Heaven, it
prove but the result of his own Passion, and a strange Fire before the Lord.

HE must be courageous in the Cause of God, and not fear the face of Man, nor
the wrath of a King, his Captains and their Fifties; but boldly, as becomes
his Office, speak the Mind of God, declare His Counsels, utter His Warnings,
give forth His Orders, bear Testimony against their evil Manners, and reprove
the Disorders and Sins of the greatest, the most haughty, wealthy, and
Supercillious, as well as the meanest under his Charge; whatsoever God shall
command him, that must he speak.

Finally, AND in all he must be Faithful, diligently attending to his Master's
Business, and that continually; showing all good Fidelity, as becomes a Steward
in declaring the whole Counsel of God; dealing to every one their Portion in
due Season, instructing the Ignorant, convincing Gainsayers, strengthening the
Weak and Feeble, comforting the Disconsolate, resolving the Doubting,
recovering the Wandering, censuring the Incorrigible, extending his Care to the
poorest Lamb in his Flock, as well as the fattest and well-fleeced Sheep, and
in all things doing nothing by partiality.

THUS should those whom God raises up to sustain the Character of His
Ministers, tread in the Steps, and be acted by the same Spirit which they see
in their venerable Fathers in the sacred Order.

Once more;

AND he said, Where is the Lord God of Elijah? It argues his entire Dependence
upon God for Assistance to the discharge of the Duties, and for the success and
rewards of his Office.

HE takes the Mantle, lifts it up, but smites not till he had called upon
Elijah's God, to be with him, as He had been with Elijah. So he humbly and
earnestly asks the fulfillment of his Master's Promise, that a double portion of
his Spirit should rest upon him.

NOT the Spirit essential to him as a Man; this was impossible: Elijah's Soul
was gone away into the heavenly World. Nor the Spirit and Temper that was
accidental to him, arising from his Constitution, and temperament of Body; this
was insufficient: but the Spirit of God that rested upon Elijah* and by His
powerful In^luences carried him th^^ his Work* wrought so mightily in him, and
by which also he ascended. This is the great Request.

THE Words therefore are a Prayer. That Elijah's God would be with him*
authorize him to his Work, prosper him therein, and reward him.

From whence I note two things* viz.

Note I. THAT the wh^le of the mini^terial Functi^n, in a^l the Powers, D^ties,
(...), and Rewards of it, originall^ (...) from God. Elijah was a Man of G^d,
sacred to Him, by his Character and Station, as His Office^ and Minister; and
Elisha being about to enter upon the same Office, calls upon Elijah's God to
derive all th^se Powers, Qualifications, Virtues and G^aces, Assistance and
Success, to him* which He had favored Elijah with: by which he also might
become a Man of God.

ALL of the ministerial Function, whether extraordinary, as the Prophets and
Apostles, or o^dinary, as the Tribe of Levi under the Law, and the Ministers of
Religion in the Days of the Gospel, flows originally from God; but mediately
through the Lord Jesus Christ the Head of the Church, who having ascended up on
high has received such Gifts, that He might bestow them upon Men: Not of Man,
nor by Man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, Gal. I.1.

Thus,

1. ALL the ministerial Powers, Authority, and Qu^l^fications are from God.

THE ministerial Order it self is from God, who has appointed it in the World*
even from the beginning of Time to the end thereof. But of this we have said
eno' already.

THUS, they derive their Commission, Power and Authority from God. They are
God's Ministers, appointed by Him to this very End; and who should empower
them, vest them with Authority, and give them a Commission to act in that
sacred Office of His Ministers, but that God alone, who has designed them
thereunto. For no man takes (ought or may take) this honor to himself, but he
that is called of God, as was Aaron. Heb. V.4 God of old more immediately
separated the Family of Aaron, and the Tribe of Levi to the Priesthood; and in
like immediate manner raised up, commissioned and inspired His ancient
Prophets; and so too Jesus Christ His Son immediately called and authorized His
Apostles, and sent them forth to evangelize the World; yet this hinders not but
that the same God and Savior does now empower (though in a more mediate way) all
that are regularly invested with the ministerial Authority.

FOR how shall they go, unless they are sent? and who should send them but God?
Though they derive their Authority now more mediately, yet is it nevertheless
from the Original and Fountain thereof: whatever allowed Channel it passes
through, it still flows from the original Head.

NOR need we to lay any great stress upon a lineal uninterrupted Succession
from the Apostles, the immediate Followers of our Lord; which seems not
absolutely necessary on the one hand, nor alone sufficient on the other: But
God furnishes Men for His Service, disposes them to engage in His Work, opens
the Door to them, and fixes them in their Office, by those who have already
received a Power from Him to convey ministerial Betrustments to them.

AND thus, God qualifies for the work of the Ministry. From Him comes all Gifts
and Endowments of the Mind, both natural, acquired, and spiritual.

IT IS He that furnishes Men with their various natural Powers and Capacities of
Mind I^b XXXII.^. Exodus XXXVI 1.
; and of Him is all their sufficiency to Think or Speak, who prepares the
Heart, and gives the Answer of the Tongue Prove. XVI.12
.

FROM Him too is derived the Tongue of the learned, who it is assists and
strengthens the Powers of the Mind, by Study and Labor, Reading and
Meditation, to attain to the various degrees of good Literature which He sees
meet for them. And as there were of old the As at (...), Bethel, and Jerusalem,
etc.
Schools of the Prophets, where the Youth were trained up in those Exercises
which prepared the way for their after Serviceableness; so now is the same Care
and Pains requisite for the fitting of Youth for future Service in the Church
of God, and indeed so much the more now, by how much, under the present
Circumstances of the World, an unlearned Ministry would scarce be able to
produce sufficient Credentials to their being sent of God.

AND from God are they endowed with that spiritual Wisdom, and Understanding in
Divine Things, and those measures and degrees of Grace, which are necessary to
render them faithful, and able Ministers of the New Testament. Hence says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. XII.4. There are diversities of Gifts, which he reckons up, --
and adds upon them, v.11. But all of these works that one and self same
Spirit, dividing to every Man severally as He will.

THUS it is God that spirits and inclines them to undertake so heavy a Charge.
When they consider the Majesty of the Person whom they are to represent, the
sacredness of the Character they are to sustain, the weight of the Task they
are to undergo, and the Difficulties they are to encounter with in their way;
well may they be ready to shrink back, and cry out who is sufficient for these
things; Lord I am but a Child and cannot speak. But God overrules their
Spirits, moves their Inclinations, presses them into His Service, thrusts them
forth into His Harvest, and says to them, as to Jeremiah, Ier. I.7. But thou
shall go to all that I (...) thee; and all that I command thee, (...) speak.
When God thus calls them, commands them, and moves their Hearts, they say with
Samuel 1 Samuel III.10.
, Speak Lord, for thy Servant bears, and with Isaiah Isa. VI.8.
, Here am I, send me.

THUS again, God opens the Door for them, shows them what part of the Vineyard
they are to labor in, and acquaints them with their several Duties. He moves
the Hearts of a People to invite them, ^^ying to them as the Macedonians to
Paul, Act. XVI.9. Come over, and help us. He has appointed to every one their
Station, marked out their Work, and shown them what He requires of them.

FINALLY, From God they derive all their Strength and Ability, to perform their
Duties, and bear up under their Burdens. He inspires them with a zeal for the
Honor of His Name; fills them with a tender Compassion for immortal Souls;
helps them in their Labors Night and Day, in their Studies, Prayers, and Cares.

IT IS the presence of Elijah's God with Elisha enables him to wade through the
River* and overcome the Difficulties in his way; to bear Reproaches and cruel
Mockings, and preserves him in the midst of Perils and Dangers. And if they are
sent upon Isaiah's Message, to harden Hearts, and blind Eyes, and are made to
g^oan under the melancholy prospect, that they labor in vain, and spend their
Strength for naught; how would their Hearts utterly fail them, and their
Spirits be dried up like a Potsherd, and they go mourning under the heavy
Pressure? did not the Lord sustain them.

2. FROM God flows all the Success of their Ministry. What are we? but earthen
Vessels, to whom it has pleased the Lord to commit His Treasure, that the
Power may more evidently appear to be of God,

IN vain will the Waters be smitten; Elisha's Arm, and Elijah's Mantle, the
best Accomplishments and the highest Character will not be sufficient to part
the Stream, unless Elijah's God be present. Man speaks only to the hearing of
the Ear, but God to the Heart. He causes our Doctrine to drop as the Rain, and
our Speech to distill as the Dew, as the Rain and Snow from Heaven, which
accomplisheth the End for which it was sent. He makes the Word preached to
become the Power of God unto the Salvation of all them that believe. At His
Commandment we spread the Nets of Salvation, and He fills them more or less, as
pleases Him. For a Paul may plant, and Apollos water; but God only gives the
increase. 1 Cor. III.6, 7.

3. And lastly; FROM God they receive the Rewards of their Fidelity to His
Service. For He will not keep back the Hire of His Laborers, that have reaped
down His Corn; but He will certainly distribute to every Man his Penny, when
they shall rest from their Labors; their Work (the Rewards of it) shall follow
them. He will overlook the Frailties and Infirmities of his faithful Ministers,
blot out their Transgressions, and say to them, Well done good and faithful
Servants, enter into the Joy of your Lord. And though they may not ascend with
equal Triumph, yet they shall with equal Safety with Elijah, into the Heavens
prepared for them.

THE greater too their Labors have been, the heavier their Burdens, the more
their Sufferings in the Cause of God, so much the more glorious shall be their
Reward; for one Star differs from another in Glory.

YEA, though Israel be not gathered by their Means, yet shall they be glorious in
the Eyes of the Lord; whether the People will hear, or whether they will
forbear, they shall be a sweet Savor unto God, who accepts them, not
according to their Success, but their Fidelity: And when Christ the chief
Shepherd shall appear, then shall they also appear with Him in Glory.

N. II. I should pass to a second Observation upon Elisha's saying, Where is
the Lord God of Elijah? viz.

THAT it is the Duty of those that are entering upon the Ministry to pray, that
the God of their venerable Fathers would be with them also. But all that has
been said under the former Observation* and much more that might be added to
it, are strong Arguments to enforce this Duty; for since they are to derive
their Power, Qualifications, Success and Rewards, from God only, to whom th^n
should they go, but to Him only therefore? and this necessarily leads them to
give themselves unto Prayer, as well as to Reading and Meditation, that they
may answer the great Ends of the Gospel Ministry. This is so obvious, that I
need to say no more upon this head; but hasten to make a few Reflections upon
what has been said, by way of Application.

I. HENCE learn what abundant Cause there is for Thankfulness to God. Does God
take care of, and furnish His Church with His Ministers, to break the bread of
Life unto His People, surely then they that are thus favored of the Lord, are
under strong Bonds of Gratitude, to present their thankful Acknowledgments to
God, for His compassionate Regards to them herein.

THE Ministers of the Lord, faithful to Him, to the common Interest of
Religion, and the immortal Souls of their People* are a great Blessing wherever
they are; and so God intends them, by bestowing them upon a People. How soon
else would a Land be overrun, not only with Atheism, and Infidelity, which
would necessarily involve them under everlasting Miseries, for where the Vision
fails, the People perish Prove. XXIX.1^.
; but even all manner of Barbarities, Rudeness, and ill Manners, which would
soon strip a People of their outward visible Glory, and lay wast all their
pleasant Enjoyments.

BUT has God, in His abundant Goodness, and care of a People, furnished them
with full Supplies of so rich a Blessing, as His Gospel Ministers? surely then
His Saints should shout aloud for Joy; He has not dealt so with every Nation,
prais^ y^ the Lord Psalm* CXLVII.20.
.

REMEMBER, Unthankfulness for such a Mercy will be found very provoking to God,
and prove the most dangerous Method to strip you of so great a Blessing.

II. HENCE then a People may learn their Duty to their Ministers* If the
ministerial Order be of Divine Appointment, and they that are in it derive
their Authority, and all that belongs to it from God, this plainly speaks the
Duty of their People to them, and that in several respects. As,

1. THIS shows, That you ought to give a constant and diligent Attendance upon
their holy Ministration. For does God send His Ministers to you, to declare His
Message, and in His Name to warn you of your Danger, and show you the true way
to Life and Happiness? then I am sure it concerns you to give the most constant
and diligent Attendance upon their Ministry. Are they, not to neglect the Gift
that is in them, but to be instant in Season and out of Season, to preach the
Word, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and Doctrine? And is it not
equally your Duty readily and cheerfully, with Seriousness and Devotion, to
attend to all that Doctrine, Reproof and Exhortation, which they bring unto
you, not in their own, but in the Name of their and your great Lord and Master?

WHEREFORE forsake not the assembling of your selves together, as the manner of
some is, who are ready to think a very slight matter, such as would scarce keep
them from going as far to gain three pence, a sufficient Excuse for their
staying away from the House and Worship of God. Is this the Reverence you owe
to God* to His Word, to His Ordinances, and to the Ambassadors of Jesus Christ?
Remember, God demands it of you, to receive the Law at the Priests Lips Mal.
II.7.
, and He will demand it of you an other Day, how you dared to turn your Backs
upon His Ambassadors.

LET nothing therefore, but Necessity detain you from the House of God; and
while you are there, give diligent heed to the things that are spoken to you in
the Name of the Lord. Come not into this sacred Place, to allow your selves in
Sleep, or to carp at the Preacher, much less to sport and drol upon the Word
spoken to you; and ever esteem it, as you one day will, but the lees of Wit,
which is the greatest Folly, to ridicule the Minister of the Lord, and the
Message he brings to you in his Masters Name.

BORE your Ears to the Posts of Wisdom's Gate, as having purposed to dwell in
the House of the Lord so long as your Days shall be, and open them wide to
receive the Instructions of the Word, that you may be made wise unto Salvation.
Hear as not knowing but it may be the last time you may ever be spoken to in
the Name of the Lord.

HOW any can pretend Conscience, in their utter refusal to attend upon the
authorized Ministers of God delivering His Message, is beyond my Skill to see
the Reason of; and no wonder if they are forced, first to deny even the sacred
Institution, and then deny all Ordinances, to support their Practice; but with
what face, or pretense to Christianity, I know not. My Soul, come not thou into
their Secret, with their Assembly mine Honor, be not thou united.

SURE I am, that the Gospel Ministry and Ordinances, are of Divine Appointment,
and they that neglect them, do it at their utmost p^ril. Wherefore, remember
the Words of Christ, Luke X 16. He that bears you, bears (...); and he that
despises you, despises me. And, Mat. X.14, 15. Whosoever shall not receive
you nor hear your Words, -- it shall be more tolerable for the Land of S^d^^
and G^morrah, in the day of Judgment, than for that City.

2. THIS shows, That you ought to submit your selves to their ministerial
Teaching and Government. For if they are the Ministers of the Lord, then ought
you to submit your selves to them, as unto the Lord.

THEY come to you, not in their own Name, they claim no civil Authority over
^ou, no temporal Jurisdiction over your Pers^ns, nor demand any Obedience and
Submissi^n to their own Laws; but they come to you in the Name, with the
Authority, and at the Commandment of the great God, who sends them ^orth, to
demand Obedience to His Laws: And therefore their Commission is to be
acknowledged, and their Inst^uctions complied with.

WHILE we preach to you, not ourselves, but Jesus Christ the Lord, we demand it
of you in His Name, and at your Peril, that you not only hear us, but that you
obey us.

SEARCH the Scriptures, and see, if what we decl^re unto you is not agreeable
to the Mind of God: If it be not, then reject what we say, and regard it not;
but if we only deliver our Lords Errand, if we declare only His Counsel, and
publish His Royal Will, then surely it concerns you to be the doers of the
Word, and not the hearers only; then ought you to believe what we speak to you,
to practice all the Duties we req^ire of you, and to avoid all the Sins which
we forbid unto you, in the Name of that Lord, whose Servants we are. For this
is the true Character of a religious People, That they have obeyed from the
Heart, the form of sound Doctrine, which has been delivered to them. Romans VI.17.

BUT this is not all, you must also submit your selves to the Rule and
Government of your Ministers. Not that they are Lords of the Heritage, or have
dominion over your Faith, but they are the helpers of your Joy. Their
ministerial Watch, Guidance and Discipline, as Stewards in the House of God,
entrusted with the Keys, and Treasures thereof, must be duly acknowledged, and
submitted to: For thus you are called upon, Heb. XIII.1^. Obey them that have
the Rule over you, and submit (...) selves to them, for they watch for (...)
Souls, as they that must give an Account, that they may do it with Joy, and not
with Grief, for this is (...) for you. Without this acknowledgement of, and
submission to them, however humanely you may entertain them, you do not receive
them as becomes Christians.

3. THIS shows, That you o^ght to bear a high Veneration, Esteem, and (...) for
your Minister. For if he receive his Authority and Office from God, if he is to
minister in holy things, to consult your best Interest, and aim at your eternal
Salvation* then su^ely he deserves an interest in your Affections, and ought to
be highly valued and reverenced by you.

IT IS true, he is but a Man, subject to like Passions with you: so Elijah was,
and liable to Infirmities; God treats not with you now by the Ministration of
Angels, but by a Man, your f^llow Creature, and it is His great Condescension
and Goodness, that He does so; you are not therefore to look for Perfection in
him* but to overlook his humane Weaknesses, and cast a Mantle over his
Infirmities. You are to consider him, not so much what he is in himself, liable
to Frailties and humane Infirmities; but what he is in his Character, the
Station God has placed him in, and the Power He has invested him with, as your
Minister; and while it is his care to live up, in some good measure, to his
Character, to discharge the Duties of his Post, and exert his Authority, for
the advancement of his Masters Glory, and your best Good* you ought to maintain
a just Veneration and Esteem for him.

BRETHREN, We mean not by this to assume great Titles to our selves, and big
swelling Words of Vanity; but we beseech you to know them which l^b^ur among
you, and are over you in the Lord, and esteem them very highly in love, for
their (...) sake. 1 Thessalonians. V.12, 13. Know them to be but Men, and as such* pity
their Weaknesses* bear with their Infirmities, put the best Construction upon
their Actions, and overlook their ^railties; but know them also, in their
sacred Character, to be over you in the Lord, and so hold them in Reputation,
and let them have a room in your good Affections, at least for their Works
sake. If you do not give a good Entertainment to them in your Affections, if
you do not uphold a venerable Opinion of them, and sincerely love them, it will
be very unlikely, next to impossible, that you should receive the benefit of
their holy Ministration.

THEIR Office is high and honorable, in the sight of God, their Commission
more immediately from God, than any temporal Rulers, and therefore when they
are placed as at the Feet of the People, are contemned and reviled, and Terms
of Disgrace and Reproach are fastened upon them, God will resent the Indignity
done to His Ambassadors, as in some sort done to Himself; he that despises you
despises me. Remember the Children that mocked Elisha.

4. THIS shows, That they ought h^n^ur^bly to be supported. For if they are
God's Ministers, appointed by Him, to this very Service, and are to attend
continually hereunto, then ought you to take care that they are well provided
for, and comfortably supported in their Labors. Count those worthy of double
honor that rule well, especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine. (1 Timothy V.17.) Not only your Love and Esteem, but an honorable Maintenance is
due unto them.

BRETHREN, We do not ask it as a Favor, that your Minister be comfortably
supported; no, it is a Debt of Justice due both to God and your own Souls.

I confess it is both irksome and grievous to me* as beneath the ministerial
Character, and the Duty of a People, that Ministers are ordinarily forced to
contract with their People, for their Support; or that they should be put upon
asking for it: I am sure this ought to be taken care of sufficiently, without
the Ministers being concerned about it. For God Himself has provided for His
Ambassadors, to bear their Charge and Expense, and laid the (...) you to pay it
in to them; even to (...), unto him that teaches, in all good things: Gal.
VI.6. For so has the Lord ordained, that they which (...) the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel. 1 Cor. IX.14.

AND though I don't say, that there ought to be the same Allowance to them, as
was to the Levitical Priesthood, under the Law; Yet, sure I am, it is not left
to the caprice and humors of any Man, living under the Gospel, whether, or how
much he shall contribute toward the Charge of the House and Ordinances of God:
But the Minister of the Lord ought to live, (far from a state of want and
dependace upon the humors of a People) so as to be an Example to the Flock in
Charity and Hospitality.

AND surely they that think to save any thing, by witholding more than is meet,
will find their sovereign Lord will highly resent their denying Him His
Tribute, and make such Distraints upon them, as will greatly tend to impoverish
them* and keep them low.

YOU owe this Duty, as to God, so to your own Souls; for how can it be expected
they should grow fat and flourishing in the House of God, while your Minister
shall be kept meager and in straits? Though for this we may be reproached, with
the Term of Hirelings, yet I know who it is has said, The Labourer is worthy of
his Hire. Luke X.7. I might add,

5. THIS shows, That you should do all you can to strengthen and encourage your
Minister to his Work. He is God's Minister, but it is for your good; and how
much then sh^^ld you make it your care, to strengthen his Heart and Hands to
his Labor? Many will be his Discouragements, strong his Temptations from
within, and he may expect to meet with hatred and opposition from abroad, and
therefore will need all the Encouragement you can give him, to keep him from
fainting under the heavy load. Let nothing in your Carriage add to the weight,
and increase his Griefs upon him; but do what you can to make all sit light and
easy, help to bear his Burdens, sympathise with him in his Afflictions, and be
not ashamed of any Suffering he may meet with, in the Cause of God, from
unreasonable Men; let him see in you the travel of his Soul, the fruit of his
Labor, you and your Children walking in the Truth; his Joy and Comfort here,
and the earnest of his Crown of rejoicing hereafter,

6 To conclude, IF all Help, Assistance and Success flows from God, then he had
need of your Prayers, as well as his own; that the Lord God of Elijah would be
with him. His Work will be great and Difficult, and his Shoulders unequal to
the Burden, without the Divine Assistance; and therefore it concerns you to
carry him in the Arms of your Prayers, and earnestly implore the divine Aids
may be afforded to him. The holy Apostle Paul, with all his Advantages, saw his
need of an interest in the peoples Prayers, and therefore once and again
urgently demands it of them, as, Ephesians. VI.19. Praying always, -- and for me,
that Utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my Mouth ^oldly, to make
known the mystery of the Gospel. So Romans XV.30. Now I beseech you, Brethren,
for the Lord Jesus sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that you strive
t^gether with me, in your Prayers to God for me. And again, 2 Thessalonians. III.1.
Finally, Brethren, pray for me, that the word of the Lord may have free course,
and be glorified.

THUS I do bespeak your earnest Prayers on my behalf, who stand in the room of
my departed Father; helping together by your Prayers for me* without which, how
can you expect the Divine Blessing on my Labors among you?

THIS is to be your daily Task, each one for himself, in his Retirement,
calling upon the Name of the Lord, to carry your Minister, as he will and does
you, in the Arms of your Prayers, earnestly entreating that a double portion of
the Spirit of God may rest upon him, more abundantly furnish him with all
necessary Gifts and Graces, own him in his Labors, and crown him with Success;
that under his holy Ministry, you may become a truly religious and happy
People, that you may be mutual Comforts to each other, and come together in the
fullness of the blessings of the Gospel of Peace.

3. HENCE when it pleases God to remove any of His Servants, His Ministers from
among a People, the departure of such should be duly laid to Heart. Shall an
Elijah, the Prophet of the God of Israel, be taken away, as our Master from our
Head, and the People have no sorrowful sense of their Loss therein? Surely God
expects it of us, that we lay to heart such awful Providence, that we see His
hand therein, and duly humble our selves under it, and in a sense of our Loss,
cry out, as Elisha did, v. 12. My Father, my Father; the Chariot of Israel, and
the Horsemen thereof! Able and faithful Ministers are the beauty and strength
of the place where they dwell; they are as Lights to their People, and the Salt
of the Earth; their Labors among a People are productive of their best Good,
their Example influential to their common Advantage, their Instructions
directive to their true Interest, and their earnest Prayers, and interest in
the Court of Heaven, are often the ordinary means of diverting the divine
Judgment from falling heavy upon their People, and they as often pull down a
Blessing upon them: So that though they should live to be past all their other
Labors, yet so long as they are capable of interceding at the Throne of Grace
for their People, so long they are truly a Blessing to them; and therefore
cannot be parted with without sorrowful Reflections.

AND this leads me into the mournful Theme which this day calls for, occasioned
by the removal of that Man of God, the Aged, Reverend Mr. SAMUEL CHEEVER from
among us.

IT pleased God, from whom comes down every good and perfect Gift, to furnish
him for the Work of the Ministry, with no small Abilities, both natural and
acquired, being owner of a solid Judgment, a copious Invention, and a tenacious
Memory, which were improved in him, by a due application of himself to Reading,
Meditation and Prayer.

GOD brought him among you some time in November, 1668, from which Time, those
of you that are advanced in Years, know how much he has been a common Father to
the whole Town, in the many temporal Advantages which you have received from
him; he truly went about doing good, and serving you in all your Interests.

BUT as preaching is peculiarly the Ministers Work, so he was well fitted
herefor, by an uncommon Knowledge in the holy Scripture, being an excellent
Text-man, and carrying a Body of Divinity in his Head, which he would often say
to me, it was good for a Divine to be well fornished withal.

IN his public Discourses to you, he endeavored to preserve the truth,
purity, and simplicity of the Gospel, teaching you the Truth as it is in Jesus:
He made it his great care to show you your Sin, and Danger, and where your only
Remedy lies; that you might be directed to flee from the wrath to come, and lay
hold on the Hope set before you. And as he aimed at the winning of Souls to his
great Master, so he sought not to pleass your Fancy, and tickle your Ears with
studied Elocution and formal Periods, but delivered the Mind of God to you with
such plainness, and cogency of Argument and Persuasion, as becomes the Gospel
of Christ; and he shunned not to declare unto you the whole Counsel of God.

AND how fervent was he in treating with your immortal Souls, delivering
himself to you with that flame and heat, that earnestness and vigor as well
showed his sincere Zeal in his Master's Service, and his hearty desire that you
all might be saved: He plainly showed the lively Impressions of the Truths he
preached to you, upon his own Heart, while the fervency of his Voice pierced
your Ears, that the united Light and Heat might strike the more forcibly upon
your Minds, and gain the more ready Compliance with the great Truths that were
delivered to you.

AND he was as constant and assiduous as fervent and zealous a Preacher of the
Word of God among you; so that, if I mistake not, from his first coming among
you, until the time that Age had worn him out, you never were, more than once,
without the constant Entertainments of your Sabbaths, your stated Feasts, and
your New Moons; though he was alone for about 48 Years: God so graciously
confirmed his Health, that for more than 50 Years, he never was hindered from
coming to you in the Name of the Lord by any Sickness.

INDEED the infirmities of Age obliged him to take leave of his public stated
Exercises in October 1719. which he did from those Words of our Savior, John
IX.4. I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day; the night
c^^eth when no man can work. And yet about a Year after this, upon a special
Occasion, he entertained us with a short, but plain and fervent Excitement, to
be zealous of go^d Works.

WHILE his strength and vigor continued, he was a very just and methodical
Preacher, (and doubtless had he been fixed in a politer Place, he would have
made a brighter Figure) though in his latter days, he gave more into an
expository way of treating the several Texts that occurred in his preaching:
and to the last he could make no public use of Notes, but delivered all
memoriter.

AND yet after Age had laid him aside from public Labor, he was still at his
Work, and his Mind so intensly set upon it, that I scarce ever came into his
Company at any time, without finding him at his Study, or his Mind taken up
with the public Duties of the Sabbath, and he would be continually expressing
his concern, lest he should not be able to do any thing of it, and desiring me
to prepare for all the Day, lest he should not be able to come out; which
plainly showed the hearty Delight he took in his Work.

HE was a Man of Peace, of a catholic Mind, and extensive Philanthropy and
good Will to all Men, without confining Religion to a particular Sect; a great
Peacemaker among his contending Neighbors, and never made, or excited
Parties, or so much as joined himself to any, (that I can learn) but those that
were for God and Religion, against Vice and Immorality.

HIS Conversation was grave, yet pleasant, suitable to a steady composure of
Mind, which he usually enjoyed; though at proper Seasons, he knew how to be warm.

HIS Life among you has been the Life of a Christian, and the whole tenor of
it a manifesting an entire Submission to, and Satisfaction in the disposing
Providence of God; and you your selves are Witnesses how holily and unblameably
he has behaved himself, walking before you in the paths of serious Godliness;
a plain and a humble Man.

WHEN you called me to the pastoral Office, with him, a few Years ago, though his
own Delight in the work of the Lord among you, made him not so forward as some
might have expected, to have an Assistant joined with him, yet he evidenced to
you an entire Satisfaction in your Proceedings; and I have cause to acknowledge
the goodness of God to me herein, that as a Son with a Father, so he received
me, repeating the Words of good old Simeon, upon his return to his House from
my public Ordination, Now, Lord, let thou thy Servant depart in Peace.

IT was a signal and uncommon Favor of God to him* that though he lived to the
Age of fourscore and almost five, yet he had so settled a Constitution, and
firm a Health, as to be able to say, that he never was Sick in all his Life; a
days Indisposition, and some small touches of the Sciatica, he has sometimes
known: And as his Health was firm, so at upwards of fourscore, he could read
without the help of Spectacles, and had his Hearing quick as Youth, to the last
week of his Life; but the Powers of his Mind, for some few Years before he
died, failed, especially his Memory, whereby he was greatly unfitted even for
common Conversation; and yet his constant Family Prayers were orderly, and
regular; so did Grace shine in the decays of Nature.

AND while the decays of Age laid him by from public Service, how exemplarily
Patient was he under such a Rebuke? He would often say to me, Age is too heavy
for me, but I must bear it; I cannot die when I would, I must patiently wait
God's Time, my Times are in His Hands, I rejoice to see that God has provided
for His People before I go; God has satisfied me with long Life --.

THUS continued he at Work, and patiently submitting to the Will of God, till a
few days ago his Senses wholly left him, and the Night before last he died, and
truly died; his Lamp of Life fairly burning out, without b^ing put out; for he
felt no Sickness nor Pain to the last, nor showed any the least tokens of them
even in his expiring Moments.

SO, while by the Grace of Christ in him, he was secured against the Terrors
of the second Death, through the Favor of God to him, he knew nothing of the
usual ghastly Harbingers, nor the shocking Terrors of a natural Death; but as
he was always calm, and easy, in the possession of a comfortable Hope, without
strong emotions of Joy, or the distress of of anxious Fears, so he quietly fell
asleep in Jesus, and is gone to receive the Rewards of his long and faithful
Services.

I will only add, that the little Time I have had, will sufficiently apologize,
that I have given no better Account of this aged, and faithful Servant of Jesus
Christ; and yet such as it is, I know his humble modest Tho'ts of himself,
would not have been easily prevailed upon to have allowed it; for I well
remember, that about a Month or two ago, upon my asking him a Question, which
he happened to misunderstand, he replied to me, with some warmth, Prithee,
don't go about to flatter me; it is eno' that I stand to my own Master; my
greatest care is to be accepted of him.

AND now may the God of all Grace and Consolation, afford his most
compassionate Regards, unto the devout and meek Handmaid of the Lord, who has
been the Companion of his Days for about fifty four Years; comfort her under
her Sorrows, and give unto her an happy and endless meeting with him in Glory.

MAY God be a Father unto the mourning Children, and more abundantly enrich
them with the Blessings of Goodness, and return into their Bosom the many
Prayers their ascended Father has laid out for them.

MAY God take care of this bereaved Town, and Flock of His, and always shower
down of the Gifts and Graces of His Spirit upon it; and especially may I take
hold of Elijah's Mantle, and say, Let a double (...) of (...) Spirit rest upon
me.

MY Brethren, call to Mind the Things which you have heretofore heard and
learned, from your deceased Pastor, and so let aged Samuel, now dead, yet speak
unto you; and ^e you followers of him, wherein he followed Christ: And may God
reward your Kindness* and the good Will of the Town, in the Support, which to
their Honor, they have continued to afford to him, notwithstanding his being
called off from public Usefulness for some Years part.

NOW make your earnest and daily Prayers for your surviving Pa^t^r, that he may
be strengthened to his Work, and succeeded therein.

AND let it be the care of us all so to live, that we may die in Peace, like
him that is now gone before us; that when our Dust returns to its Dust, our
Spirits may ascend to the Lord God of Elijah; that we and our departed Father,
may have a happy meeting at the Right Hand of Christ, that we may be a Crown o^
Rejoicing to him in the Day of the Lord, and he may be able to say concerning
us, Behold I, and the Children which God has graci^usl^ given to me; and we may
mutually be employed in the everlasting Services of the Redeemer, and be
together unspeakably and for ever happy in the possession of the Crown of
Glory, which fades not away.

NOW the God of Peace which brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Bl^od of the everlasting Covenant, make
you perfect in every good Work, to do His Will, working in ^^u that which is
well pleasing in his sight; through Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory for ever and
ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

