PARENTATOR. MEMOIRS OF REMARKABLES IN THE LIFE AND THE DEATH OF THE
Ever-Memorable Dr. Increase Mather. Who Expired, August 23. 1723.

2 King. II. 12. My FATHER, my FATHER. BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for
Nathaniel Belknap, at the Corner of Scarlets Wharff. 1724.

To the Illustrious UNIVERSITY, OF GLASCO.
Honorable, Venerable, and much Esteemed.
IT was not possible for me to be long undetermined, unto whom I should apply
my self, in doing the part of a PARENTATOR, when I Remembered what
Acknowledgments I owe, to the Learned Body, before which I am now appearing.
Unto whom can I so agreeably present my FATHER as to my MOTHER; even to that
Ancient and Famous University, whose Favors have so Cherished me, that they
have rendered me as, A man whom his MOTHER Comfort?

It is no small Intimation, how much the Truth which is according to Godliness
is acknowledged in the Exemplary Church of SCOTLAND, That the Name and Worth of
an OWEN is considered in it as it is, and his Writings are so much Recommended
unto your Students. And, I hope, ANOTHER, who was of his Evangelical
Principles, Exhibited in the History of his Life and Death, will also find some
Regards with you. Yea, there have been some very Expressive Testimonies of His
having already done so. And if you now see me helping my Aged Parent into the
Senate of Illustrious Men, you would no more tax it as a Fault in me, than you
would in an Antoninus. But yet I have done it in such a manner, that after the
first Paragraph I drop the Relation, and speak not only in the Style but also
with the Faith, of an unrelated and Uninterested and Unbiassed Historian;
putting on the Historian, I act the part of the Honest Levite, who said of his
Father, I have not seen him.

The Renouned Church of SCOTLAND, in which I cannot but believe, that the
Glorious Lord Looking down from Heaven, the Habitation of His Holiness and of
His Glory, upon it, beholds those things that are very pleasing to Him, is
doubtless an House of His Glory; and as he has Glorified it, so He will do it
yet more abundantly.

A CHURCH which does Rejoice in this Distinguishing Blessing of Heaven unto it,
That it made a more Thorough Work, and stopped less than others at halfing of it
in the Reformation, at the entrance of Antichrist into his last Half-Time, and
more thoroughly come out of the Romish Babylon; And has ever since been in
singular Conflicts to hold fast that which it has Received, and let no Man take
away its Crown. It Is Motto has been, With great Wrestlings have I Wrestled, and
I have prevailed!

A CHURCH, which after it has undergone a Finishing Stroke of Persecution with
such Barbarous and Inhumane Cruelties, for Four times Seven Years together, as
were hardly ever equalled among all the vile things done under the Sun, the
Burning Bush has not been Consumed; but the Professors of the Truth have after
all been found more Numerous and more Powerful than they were before, and able
to bring about a Revolution, which was indeed the Lords Doing, and ought
forever to be Mavelous in our Eyes! The Persecutors are by a mighty Hand of
GOD Wondrously turned out of Doors; And the Historical Pen of a Meritorious
Woodrow, following what has been done by the Polemical Pen of an Astonishing
Jameson (who has pulled a Temple down like another Sampson) it may be hoped,
has clapped an Eternal Bolt upon them.

A CHURCH, wherein the Excellent Wisdom found in the Servants of GOD, which
upon just occasions knows how to Bury in Oblivion the lesser Differences
arising on Various Temptations, and coalesce in the Common Cause of all True
Protestants, has in it something that is Great and Just and Generous, and not
every where to be met withal, Where is the place of such understanding, which
is hid, from the Eyes of almost all the Living.

And where is the Church under Heaven that can show a MINISTRY, more Faithful,
more Painful, more Zealous, or under a Stricter Government? Unto which
doubtless, the Abdication of an Uninstituted and Unwarrantable Oversight, and
of that whereof our Wickliff long ago declared, That it was not only contrary
to the New Testament; but also the Effect of Imperious Pride, may, (as it has
done in other places also that have Dethroned that Idol) more than a little
Contribute.

A CHURCH, which that so nothing that would add unto the Perfection of its
Beauty may be wanting, improves continually in a Spirit of kind Forbearance,
and sweet Charity, and Brotherly Affection toward Dissenters in smaller
matters, while Genuine PIETY is Conspicuous in them: and goes further than some
others who boast they have need of nothing, in Conforming to that Golden Rule,
To Receive all that CHRIST receives to the Glory of GOD. Indeed, what can be
more Unexceptionable than a Sanctuary measured by the Golden Reed, which knows
no other Measures for Admission, but only that PIETY, which Qualifies for the
Kingdom of GOD, and wherein all the Children of GOD are United Brethren!

Where is the CHURCH, in which the Sabbath of the Lord's Day is more Carefully
and Suitably Celebrated? The Sabbath, of which the Power of Godliness is kept
or lost according to the Celebration? The Rest of GOD is Glorious in it, and
will make it Glorious!

A CHURCH wherein the SOCIETIES formed for the Propagation of Religion, do
fairly serve the cause of Pure and Undefiled Religion; and their Wisdom dwells
with the Prudence, which finds out the Knowledge of Well-Advised Inventions to
do the Best Good that can be done unto and among the Sons of Men; and such
things are done, as may give a full Satisfaction unto those who send in their
Bounties from all parts unto their Treasury, that their Money is not
Misapplied, but that their Bountiful Oblations will be such Sacrifices as GOD,
through His CHRIST, will be Well-Pleased withal; and their Substance never better
Bestowed, than in this way of Laying up good Bills of Exchange for the time to
come. Their Missionaries have the right Spirit of the Gospel, and not of a
party in them: and are the Angels that carry the pure Maxims of the Everlasting
Gospel with them.

To do any Service for such a CHURCH, though the doer of it should be ranked
among the lowest Netbinims, were an Honor, which I know one, who is as
Ambitious as he is Unworthy of. And if the little Book which now goes over to
you, -- Alas, That he who sends it, cannot go with it! -- may be so Honored, as
to be in any sort useful to the best Interests among you, I am in the glad
Circumstances of the Man who sees his Desire Accomplished.

Among those who Compass the Camp of the Saints, and are as Disaffected unto
you, as Good Men are Well-affected, there is a set of Strange Men who assault
you and insult you, with Imagining a Vain Thing, wherein the Reformed Churches
in these Parts of America, and on the whole Continent of Europe have aequally
with You, an Attempt made upon them; The Men who try to shake the Minds of the
Faithful, with Cavils at The Validity of a Presbyterian Ordination: The Men who
crying up the Necessity of an Episcopal Ordination, do as your Worthy Champion
Willison Expresses it, advance a most Unmerciful Opinion, which Unchurches
almost all the Protestant Churches in the World, and which does the greatest
Service that can be done to the Church of Rome, and the Kingdom of Satan;
Inviting People to turn Papists, or Hardening them in their Vices and
Immoralities. What these Men mean at This time of the Day, -- It Is
Unaccountable? -- In the mean Time, we are not left Uninformed, That even about
the Beginning of the present Century, very Notable Treatises Published in
Germany, Complain of Emissaries creeping in among the Churches there, who upon
the Intention of carrying people back to Rome, do hold forth unto them, That
the Protestant Ministers are mere Laymen for the want of Episcopal Ordination;
and as the Acute Voigtius expresses it, Multis etiam illustribus animis
persuadere Conati sunt, non esse Legitimos quos haberemus Ecclesioe Ministros.
To stop the Mouths of these gainsayers, whom they call, -- What I will not say?
-- we find such Eminent Persons as a Joachim Hildebrande, a Seckendorf, a
Bebelius, an Osiander, and other great Men within these very few Years,
appearing, to Allow indeed, that they have not Bishops of a Distinct order from
their Presbyters; but then to Maintain that they do not Want them, and that the
Sacred Scriptures know nothing of them, and that the Primitive Churches were
Strangers to them; and that none but, Pontificij, et Hierarchici in Anglia, do
Dispute the Validity of our Presbyterian Ordination. But this is not altogether
so Unexpected, as it may be to find, that even in France it self, the Doctors
of the Sorbon have lately Published Instruments, Decrying and Condemning of
Episcopacy, declaring it an Usurpation, and asserting in strong terms the old
Aerian Hoeresy, as it was called, and all that Jerome writes upon it. The
Translators Dedicate these things to the Archbishop of Canterbury; assuring
him, that very many of His Clergy are come into the same Sentiments, and
Admiring at it, that in France those who are yet called Roman Catholics, are
gone further from Rome, than some who go by a better Name, after a Struggle of
Two Hundred Years to get rid of Popery. And yet this is not altogether so
Unexpected, though it may be owned also somewhat Unuccountable! For though the
very Life and Soul of the Papacy be in its Prelacy, yet the Force of Truth has
brought a Confusion of Tongues on the Builders of it and extorted sometimes
from the Papists themselves those Confessions which many that call themselves
Protestants may be Confounded at. You know what their Master of Sentences has
Pronounced on the Identity of Episcopus and Presbyter; and the Original and
occasion of the former. And you know where to find it expressly asserted even in
the Canon Law it self; That there are no more than Two Offices in the Church,
the Presbyterate, and the Diaconate. But now, besides the many Rational
Confutations given to the folly of these Men, it may be hoped, there will be a
very Sensible one, from our Glorious Lord Owning and Crowning the Ministry of
His Appointment in His Churches, with a Success that shall be Remarkable! And
when it is Observed, that the Good Men, full of the Holy SPIRIT, shall have the
Hand of the Lord with them, and many shall be by the Blessing of GOD upon their
Labors Turned unto the Lord, their Call and their Character will no longer
made a Question of. Such will more and more Issue from the Happy Nursery of
Glasco: Yea, Great will be the Army of them that shall go forth from thence
with Sufficient Authority as well as Capacity to Publish the Word which our
Ascended Lord has given for us.

But will you give me leave Humbly to Propose, that by Writing, as well as by
Speaking, they may do more of the Good Work, which their Hand finds to do!

I am not the only Person that have said it, and so it will be the less
Presumption in Me to say it; I have often thought it a Loss unto the World,
that the Incomparable Pastors in the Church of Scotland, have their Pastoral
Employments lying so hard upon them, that they have not much Liesure for the
Writing of Books, for which there are so many of them, whose Talents are
Extraordinary. And, if I may Presume to say so, I cannot but think, that it
would be Richly worth the while, for Ways and Means ^o be found out, that more
of your Pens may be Employed for the Enlightening of a World, which is yet a
Dark Place* and greatly need Illuminations; And that your Admirable Boid, and
Calderwood, and Rutherford, and Dickson, and Durham, and Galaspy, and
Hutcheson, and Ferguson, and some others Stars of their Magnitude, may never
want Equal Successors among you.

We in these American Colonies, are under the same Disadvantage: -- Which yet
hinders not, but that we now and then do some little matter, at the Writing of
Books, and some small things do by the Press pass from us into the World. Among
these Essays, there is one that now Humbly Prays for a kind Reception with you:
And this the rather, because it is from the Distance of a great and wide Sea,
that the Fruits of the Land are brought as a Present unto you. Mean Things
brought from a far distant Country, are Usually Well-accepted on the mere
account of their being so: and as Well-esteemed as Great Things produced nearer
Home. I suppose an Ear of our Indian Corn, or a string of our Indian Peag,
would find some Acceptance with the Curious among you. And if this Composure be
never so Mean, yet you will cast a benign Aspect upon it, for This very cause,
It is American: And it comes from a Thousand Leagues beyond your Ultima
Thule.Yea, I Promise my self, that there is yet a more considerable Thing, to
Bespeak some Hospitality to the Stranger: It is Christian: And it is Calculated
for the Meridian of that Real, Vital, Solid Christianity, by which you Live,
and in which is the Life of your Spirit.

The World is Appris'd of and may be justly Surpised at, the Methods taken and
Studies followed at the Frederician University in the Lower Saxony, and the
Divine Appearances there, which are so Miraculous, that whosoever is Wise, will
Observe those Things. The Glascuan University will also be (as the Glauchian) a
Pattern to the rest of the World in which the Recovery and Regulation of
Schools to Answer their Chief End in Living to GOD, and Knowing of CHRIST, and
being made Wise unto Salvation, is one of the most Important Things that can be
Wished for. And Heaven will so Smile upon that Mother in Israel, that after an
Arrival to near Six Hundred Years of Age, O Daughter of GOD, Thou shall
continue as Fruitful as ever. Yea, The Children which thou shall have shall say
again in thine Ears, The Place is too strait for me. The Glascuan University
shall be a River, the Streams whereof shall make Glad the City of GOD, as long
as the Cluyde shall Comfort and Adorn the Beloved City of Glasco. With such
Prayers and Hopes here now Subscribes,

Your most Obliged Cotton Mather.
BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND, October 1, 1723.
Introduction.
ALL the World allows a SON, to Erect a Monument for, and Preserve a Memorial
of, his Departed FATHER. Antiquity proceeded so far in this Concession, that it
Produced the Teraphim, wherein People kept the Images of their Ancectors, and
Wickedly Consulted their Manes by them. At the same time there is an Allowance
also given, that the Splendour of the Monument, and the Value of the Memorial,
should bear a Proportion to the Merit of the Subject. If the Parent be a Man of
Worth, it is on all Hands Agreed, that the Commemoration may be Proportionable.

This is what Legitimates, and even Encourages, that which is now a doing. And
yet I Solemnly Declare, That my Pen should not have been Employed on this
Occasion, if I had not been verily persuaded, That it would be a Thing
Acceptable to the Glorious GOD, and Serviceable very many ways unto the cause
of PIETY, to Exhibit the Conduct of His Providence in the Life of a Good Man,
and the Exemplary Methods taken by such a Man, to do Good in the World. THIS is
the Mark I would perpetually Aim at; And if it has been Determined, That the
Name of an Historian shall be, Virtues Secretary, I know not how the Pen of an
Historian can be better Employed, than in Reporting the Virtuous Tempers and
Actions of the Men that have therein shown forth the Virtues of our Blessed
REDEEMER, and been the Epistles of CHRIST unto the rest of Mankind. Nor indeed
has Mankind generally found any sort of History more Useful and more Grateful,
than what has been given in the Lives of Men that have been distinguished by an
Excellent Spirit. The Best of Books does very much Consist of such an History!

For the Sincerity and Veracity with which the History which we are now going
to, is carried on, I am Responsible to HIM, whose Eye I have Remembered, I hope,
Constantly upon me, while I have been Writing of it. But I have also Vouchers
in my Hands, for every one of the Articles, which any one shall be Welcome to
see, whenever he Pleases.

I confess, It is a Lamentation, and it shall be for a Lamentation, That so
much False History is Imposed upon the World. Many others, besides Vopiscus,
have Detected it and Bewailed it, That among all the Celebrated Historians, it
may be proved, Neminem non esse aliquid Mentitum; Or, as it had been said long
before him, All are Liars. The Old Gentleman whom they call, The Father of
History, may (notwithstanding Harry Stephen's unluckly Apology for him) as
truly be called, The Parent of Fable. But what a Fabulous Generation have come
after him?

No Man has with more Justice Complained of the Iniquity Chargeable upon
Historians, especially upon a Black-sould Heylin and his Brethren on both sides
the Alps, than our Venerable Baxter; And no Man could more truly say, I Hate
and Abhor Lying, than he. But yet even He himself was taxeable with some Wrong
Representations in his, History of his Life and Times: Among which, what he
gives of Dr. Owen, has been Happily Corrected, and should be Forgotten.

How many Excellent Men, and more Precious than the Golden Wedge of Ophir, have
been strangely Sambenito'd by Partial, Prejudiced, Passionate Historians, and
handed down unto Posterity in Vile Characters, which will never be wiped off,
until the Resurrection of the Just! Such I really take M^ntanus as well as
Origin, to have been among the Ancients. But among the Moderns, there has been
an exceeding great Multitude, which no Man can Number. Indeed Luther and
Calvin, and some other Buffeted Hero's, have had their Vindicators: But who
dare appear in the Vindication of -- or so much as to say, It Is Pity that they
are not Vindicated! Who is there I beseech you, Syrs, Who so Hardy or so
Honest, as to take the Athenoe Oxonienses, of a Wood, and so take the Poison
out of the Lamprey, that the Books being Freed from the Spiteful Scoffs and
Lies which he forever Loads the Best of Men withal, may be Read with Safety and
become (as without them they might be) an Useful Performance? This Author I may
the more particularly mention, because Dr. Mather was the Person from whose
Generous and Communicative Goodness, he Obtained very much History of those
Brave Men, whom he forever Skorakizes; and therein basely Deceived and Defeated
the Expectations of the Gentleman whose Communications he so much Subsisted on.
But O great Burnet, Give thou the Character of the Scribler; tell what a Tool
of Rome, he appears to be!

It is not more Shameful than Certain, That Historians very Commonly Write as
Tools of a party, to which every one may see, they are as much Addicted, as
Fabius and Philimus the two Opposite Writers of the Carthaginian War, were to
Theirs. What a Credible Writer of History, was Paulus Jovius, a Bishop; with
whom the Execrable John Bosilovitz is cried up as A Good and Devout Christian;
and of whom they tell us, that he bragged he had one Pen of Gold, for his
Friends, and another of Iron, for them that had not purchased his Favors; and
the more impartial Thuanus affirms, Ad Gratiam et in Odium Scripsisse, et
Venalem Calamum babuisse, fere Omnibus persuasum est. But how many more may
this be Affirmed of? If the Reformed in France might once make their just
Remonstrances, against such Historians as a Florimond de Remond, or a Varillas,
I am sure, their Brethren the Non-Conformists in England, may make the same
concerning some English Histories, that must pass for Uncontradictable Things.
The True History of a Lucian, has as much Truth in it as they have, when some
Affairs and Persons come in their way! The Motto to be Inscribed on them is,
Omnia pro Tempore, nihi! pro Veritate. The Time and not the Truth, Governs the
Pen in all the Motions of it. And of these I know some that will Venture to
say, Many have done vitiously, but thou Eachard, in some things Excellest them
all: Except a Collier may be a Rival to thee. In the mean time, would not the
Dissenters be more Wise for their Generation, if more Effectual care were
taken, to transmit more Faithful Records unto Posterity? Consider of it, take
Advice, and speak your Minds!

The History now before us, is not like much in the Life of a Cyrus, a feigned
Pourtraiture of, A Man to be wished for, but Written, Ad fidem veroe Historioe.
And though people have usually a Pardon ready, for the Liberty taken by Josephus
as well as Livy and others, to form Speeches and Harangues, which never were
any where but in the Imagination of the Historians, yet so much Liberty as
That, would be a Crime in the Apprehension, of him that is at Work in what is
now a doing: I have kept close to matter of Fact, just as it was: I am not more
fond of Obtaining any Testimony than that. Thou do Faithful whatsoever thou
do.

I am no Pretender to what some have been Commended for, The Art of good
Narrative And therefore, as for the Style of this Narrative, I will make no
Excuses, till you, Gentlemen-Criticks, first can show your Patent for your
Criticizing, and who Constituted You to be Censors for the rest of Mankind; and
until you are better agreed among yourselves, upon the Rules of Criticizing;
for I cannot Learn that there are any Two of you, but what are Intolerably
Severe and Cruel in your Censures upon one another. I acknowledge, That I am
too liable to an Infirmity, of Salting my Sentences now and then with short,
Instructive, and Unforced Intermixtures of something or other that I have Read
of; but as I was upon Reforming it, I stumbled upon a Passage in a Letter of
Monsr. Tournefort unto the Lord Pontchartrain, You gave me leave to insert some
touches of Erudition, to heighten the Subjects treated of* And I fancy such
Additions will, make them the less tiresome: And this a little hardened me.
However, having Exhibited the Lives of about Seventy Ministers, all Published
in one Volumn, and the Characters of near Twenty more, at several times in more
Separate Publications, it cannot well be expected, that I should be very Liberal
in dealing out those intermixed Embellishments, which make a Narrative less
Tedious to the Sons of Erudition: or have my Speech Seasoned with so many
Grains of Salt as it use to be. And yet I can truly say, I have Studiously laid
aside that Care of Embellishing: I have dropped a World of what some would count
Ornaments, which while I was Writing Offered themselves unto my Mind; Resolving
upon a Plain, Simple, Honest Narrative of ma^ters, which alone would by being
so Remarkable afford a continual Feast unto the Readers. And indeed there is a
Truth in what Pliny says Honest factis Veritas Sufficit.

But having mentioned a Book (that is to say, The Magnalia CHRISTI Americana,)
whereto this may pass for an Appendix, I think I have here a proper Occasion to
take some Notice of the Fate which it has met withal. For the very same thing
in the Heavens above us, is by some called, The Milky Way, and by others
called, The Crooked Serpent.

The BOOK being Written with a Variety of Projection and Contrivance, to serve
that Real, Vital, Solid PIETY, which seems now almost wholly to have left the
Earth, [O Glaucha, Do thou yet retain it!] and give some Account of Men and
Things, which cannot be given without Exposing the Persecuting Spirit of some
that Hate to be Reformed; I could not be so weak, as to Imagine, That Impious
People, or such as are no better than mere Formalists in Religion, would
forbear their Invectives against it, and their endeavors to bring all possible
Contempt upon it. The Introduction to the History Sufficiently foretold it, and
also Signified how much the Breast of the Author, Trebly Oak'd and Brass'd, was
prepared for it.

I cannot but Wonder at the kind Reception which that Work has found in
Scotland, and in Ireland, and in many parts of England; And the Complements
which I have received upon it, (even equal to what a Salust could have had from
his Milton) from as Competent Judges of Writing as any of them, whose Malice
against the Design of the Work has disposed them to decry it. It would be a
Trespass upon the Laws of Modesty in me to recite them: And I must ask Pardon,
(...) I do so far Trespass, as to let the World know, just this one little part
of my Buckler; That the Famous and Acute Mr. Alsop, in an Assembly of
Ministers, when some were Proposing to make an Abridgment of that History, said
upon it: It is a very Improper Proposal; It Is Impossible to Abridge it! You
Injure it, if you go to do it. There is nothing Superfluous in it: Instead of
talking about Epitomizing of it, go do as I have done; Read all of it no less
than twice over: No man that has a Relish for Piety or Variety can ever be
weary of Reading it. I would not have said so much, if Bad Neighbors had not
forced me to it! The Apology will be made for me, that was made for Lubbertus,
when some of his Adversaries Compelled him to notify the Public with a little
part of what Regards had been paid him, Effroenis Adversarij Maledicentia
Modestissimoe Animoe Expressit.

But it is no wonder at all to me, that the Poor Book has met with some that
have thought it proper to let the World see, that they look upon it as an
Object for their Enmity. And among these none has more Signalized the Enmity,
or more put the Third Chapter of Genesis in Execution, than one John Oldmixon,
in a Book Entitled, The English Empire in America.

Though I have had first and last, such a Number of Pamphletts thrown at me, that
if I had been Vulnerable, I might appear stuck as full of Darts as the man in
the Signs of the Almanac; yet, upon considering the sorry and filly Stuff
which they have Consisted of, and the Despicable and Stercoreous Quality of the
Scriblers, and Remembering that Lies have no Legs, and what I had Learnt about
the Treating of Insolent men with Humility, and Angry Men with Meekness; I have
still though it, the Twenty-sixth of the Proverbs and the Fourth, a full Answer to
them: Sile, et funestam dedisti Plagam! I have had so much Better Work to spend
my Precious Time in, that I don't call to mind, I have ever once yet, Published
a Direct and Formal Answer to any of them all, but instead thereof and once for
all, I gave to the Public my, True Way of Shaking off a asper. Yea, and I would
now also have Excused Oldmixon too, (with as much Disdain as I have done, a
Dirty and a Drunken STREET, or a Whiting that can spawn a Volumn of Lies at
once without Blushing at them; Or the rest of the Unregardable Sons of
Darkness) if the Venerable Person for whom I am now doing an Act of Piety, had
not been Assaulted by him with such rude and coarse Indignities, that I must
have been a very Dumb Son indeed, if I did not break my Silence upon it.

What the Scorner more Particularly bestows his Flouts upon, is Dr. Mathers
PREACHING. Strange! His PREACHING! Of all things, -- His Preaching! -- Yes He
says, This Mather, Preached often in Dissenters Meetings in London; His Style
was more Affected and Quaint than those of the Nonconformist Teachers, who are
most Famous in that Way; and would Confirm all that has been said [ which was
with Derision enough] of the Harvard-Eloquence, if any of his Sermons had been
Printed. What is this, but Folly in the Exaltation of it! So many Scores of of
his valuable Sermons, which it is true, have more of the Bible [A Book not so
much for thy Relish, Oldmixon!] than of the Stage Play in them, have been
Printed, that it is not in the Power of any Allatrations to depreciate them.

And, Since a late Publisher of some Venomous Things, which he calls Laconicks,
has been so kind unto the Dissenters, as to make this Observation, The
Presbyterian Divines have been observed of late, to preach after the manner of
the Church of England Men: But without setting up for a Prophet (says he) I
dare Venture to affirm, that this will be their Ruin; I will take leave to
say, ( and Venture to Advise) That if the Nonconformists would more Preach
after the manner of Dr. Mather, and ^e so Affected and Quaint (if it must be
called so,) as to have much of the Sacred Scripture well Explained and well
Applied in every Paragraph of their Sermons, and the State of Souls reached
with Skilful and Pungent and Adapted Searches into it: It would be no
Disservice to the Kingdom of GOD.

After such a FATHER has been so Insulted and Abused, it will be rather an
Honor than otherwise unto the SON to bear him Company. Oldmixons Chief Rage is
at the Church History of a Country, which also Dr. Mather was in some Regards,
much of a Father to. And of this ChurchHistory, to pass by his Grin, that the
Book is crammed full of -- Acrosticks; Whereas, Reader, if thou find so much as
one Acrostick in all the Book -- Let the Book be treated as The English Empire
in America, is like to be! -- I say, to pass by this, the Accuser would have it
Believed, That the Church History is very Trivial in the matter of it, Yes, by
all means! The Mavelous Works of GOD in Producing and Maintaining and
Afflicting and Relieving of Colonies in a Matchless manner Formed upon the
Noble Intentions of Pure and Undefiled Religion: The Wise Measures taken by the
Best of Men, to Establish that Religion, and the bright Patterns of Living up
to it, seen in the Lives of such Men; and as choice Materials as a
Church History can be composed of; These are Trivial Matters! Come then, let us
go to Master Oldmixon for Important Matters. It is a Trouble unto me, to
descend unto any thing so Ludicrous; But it is he and not I, that must Answer
for it. In his History, wherein he rails at ours, you shall find whole Pages
Consecrated unto Long, Long, Tiresom Relations, of some that he singles out as
the more Curious Events; He calls'em so. These Curious Events are, That a
couple of Starved Indians (at Hudsons-Bay) went a Fishing -- and then, a
Hunting, -- and met with only two Moose, -- and -- how it was -- and how the
Geese flying away to the Southward, in October, the People there [ such their
Segacity!] knew that hard Weather was Approaching; -- and in November, [O
Mavelous!] it Snow'd. -- And then, -- a Long tedious Narrative, how they
catched Partridges, [not Wood-cocks!] yea, [ An Exploit that should be told
unto future Generations] Four Men in a Weeks Time killed Six and Twenty. -- And
then [ A terrible Thing happened, as much to be Remembered as the Sicilian
Earthquakes:] in December, a Boy had his Feet hurt with the Frost. -- And an
Hundred more such Curious Events, is this History set off withal. These it
seems are the Important Matters, that are most worthy of a Room in History. A
Church History furnished as aforesaid, has only Trivial Matters for you!

But I shall be truly guilty of Trivial Matters, if I make thus free with the
Patience of the Reader; and I shall only detain him from far Better Matters, if
I go on to Answer the Rest of this Man's Impotent Cavils at a Work, for which
after all, I have little to say but this! That it is a well meant Essay to do
some Good in the World; And, if the World will not Accept it, I am not at all
Disappointed: The Essay is made, and, surely, my Judgment is with the Lord, and
my Work is with my GOD!

Nevertheless, Concerning the Work of him who thus turns aside, I owe so much
Duty to Truth, and Service to Men, as to let the World be Apprised of it, That
as Antonius Augustinus Affirms of Guevara, who was Historiographer to the
Emperor Charles V. Ea Comminiscitur quoe nec visa nec Audita mortalibus: He is
always Inventing things that no Mortal but himself ever dreamed of; This I do
affirm concerning this Historiographer to Sir Some body else; He is for History
another Guevara And I do here publicly make this Declaration;

In Reading Eighty six Pages of what this Wretched and worse than Careless
Writer has given us about New England, I noted down with my Pen, the more
Gross, Evident, and Notorious Falsehoods -- which I Observed in it, Omitting
many lesser matters which cannot be Justified: And upon casting up the Number,
of these Falsehoods I found them to be above the Number of Eighty-seven. These
Falsehoods are many of them the more Inexcusable, because the History of
New England which he decries with so much Foolish Malignity, had in those very
points given him a Truer Information. And for many of them, it is Impossible for
him to find any Author, but his own Romantic Brain. O Paloephatus, Thou have
nothing so Incredible. Unhappy Collection! In which there are so often more
Lies than Pages! Miserable Age! How do thy Historians put upon thee!

I suppose this is that Oldmixon, who wrote a Play called, Amyntas, whereof the
late Writer of, The History of the more Celebrated Play-Writers, has left this
upon lasting Record; It met with Ill Success. And it is pity, he should succeed
any better in Writing of English Empires. I am not alone in my Complaints of
this Miserable Romancer, who even in a Old Irish Family of Quality would scarce
have been thought worthy to Supply the Office of a Story-Teller. The Ingenious
Beverly in his Well-Composed History of Virginia, Declares that he found
Oldmixon's Account of that Country (just as I found his Account of New England)
so very Faulty, that he laid aside all thoughts of Correcting it; it being Bad
beyond all Possibility of Amending it. He Stigmatizes him as a Faithless and a
Fruitless Historian; And says, It would make a Book Larger than his own to
Expose his Errors And indeed, as he has dealt with New England and with
Virginia, so his Dealings with New York are such, that when any Gentleman of
that Province will Please to Oblige their Country with a True History of it, he
will certainly join with Us, in just Castigations upon such a Wretched
Scribbler. But I have now done with him!

Reader, I am Heartily Sorry, that thou should find such a Creature Chained
at the Porch; when thou art Entering into a Structure, where Thirty Four
Articles like so many Apartments, will afford thee, I hope, some agreeable
Entertainment; My Parentalia will be the Banquet unto which thou have here my
Invitation.

Let us lose no more Time; There are some REMARKABLES Waiting for us.

REMARKABLES OF Dr. Increase Mather.
ARTICLE I. The SUBJECT of the History.
THE Church of God is now to be Entertained with an History of a MAN, whose
Life had in it many Memorable Things, which are Worthy to be Recorded and
Reported, and have the Memory of them kept alive, by a more Qualified
Historian, than he whose Pen is now Employed upon it. But if since the Days of
Josephus, the World has more than once allowed an Eminent Person to Write his
Own Life; and better Men than a Cardan, even a Junius, an Hall, a Baxter, to
say nothing of a Thuanus, have unexceptionably done it; (an Austin too has even
almost done so:) and had a Goodwin and an Owen done so, we had been furnished
with some Antidote against some of the Lies, that Croak in our English
Chronicles; Most certainly, it may now be allowed a Son, to Write the Life of
his Father. I shall before I have done, find such a Pattern of a Son Writing
the Life of his Father; as will raise my Action, if it be at all well done,
unto the Honor of being some Reward of a Sons doing so. In the mean time, I
think it enough to say, my dear Friend Mr. Matthew Henry did it. I never heard
any Blame cast on the Greek Lady, who used her Pen, to tell the Story of her
Father; nor does any Body that I know of, blame Nazianzen, for his Panegyric
upon his Father; But I may single out him the rather to be Mentioned on this
occasion, because the Term of a Patriarch, (afterward Applied unto an
Ecclesiastical Dignity, and Station, which the Gospel knows not, and which
Introduced what we all know in the West,) was first Innocently used in an
Oration of Nazianzen upon his Deceased Father: and it was with the same
Innocence that the very Term was commonly used in the Language of our People,
whenever Dr. INCREASE MATHER was at any time in his latter Years Discoursed of.

The Place Distinguished by the Birth of this Eminent Person, was Dorchester,
of New England; the Wilderness where his Father flying with his Family from the
Face of the Dragon, Arrived Four Years before. The Time was, June the
Twenty-first, One Thousand Six Hundred Thirty and Nine. His Father was Mr.
Richard Mather; A Reverend and Renoumed Minister, (in Lancashire, before the
Transplantation to New England) and one of the greatest Instruments in
Explaining and Maintaining those Principles of Evangelical Piety and Purity and
the Congregational Church Discipline, on which the Churches of this Country
were first Established. His Life being published in the Church History of this
Country, as well as in Clark's Collections, I shall here say no more concerning
him.

His Mother was Mrs. Katharine Holt; a Gentlewoman. Honorable for her Descent;
but much more so, for her Virtue; and that for which a Woman is most of all to
be Praised. She was a Woman of Uncommon Devotion, and in her Importunate
Prayers for this her Son, she (like another Monica) became Twice a Mother to
him. She sometimes told her Son, while he was yet scarce more than an Infant,
but very much her Darling, That she desired of the Glorious GOD only two Things
on his behalf; the one was, The Grace to Fear and Love GOD; the other was, the
Learning that might Accomplish him to do Service for GOD; both of which it was
her strong Persuasion (She told him) that GOD would bestow upon him. Child,
said she, If GOD make thee a Good Christian and a Good Scholar, thou have all
that ever thy Mother Asked for thee. As the Lad grew up she Taught him, (as her
Lemuel) all that was Good. But among her Instructions, it is to be Remembered,
That she mightily Inculcated the Lesson of Diligence upon him, and often put
him in Mind of that Word, See thou a man Diligent in his Business: He shall
STAND BEFORE KINGS; he shall not stand before mean men. I said, It is to be
Remembered; and e're long you will see the Reason of my saying so. When he was
about Fifteen Years Old, she Died Marvellously Triumphing over the Fear of
Death, which through all her Life she had been Afraid of; and with that Word in
her Mouth, Eye has not seen, Ear has not beard, nor has entered into the
Heart of man, the things which GOD has prepared for them that Love Him. On her
Deathbed, she Earnestly Exhorted him, to Resolve upon Serving of CHRIST in the
Work of the Ministry: and Advised him often to consider on that Promise, They
who turn many to Righteousness, shall shine as the stars forever and ever:
Which left a great Impression upon him; and the Remembrance of the Invaluable
Mother that gave him the Advice, was Precious to him all his Days.

If a pretty late Abortion might have Passed for a Birth, it might have been
said of this, Gentlewoman, she was a Mother of Seven Sons. But without That,
and allowing one of the Seven to have so disappeared, the Number of the Sons,
which GOD bestowed on this Happy Pair, amounted unto six: Whereof one Dyed in
his Childhood; and Four Proved Useful, and Faithful and Famous Ministers of the
Gospel. INCREASE, was the Youngest of them; Whom his Father called so, not with
Regard unto any of the Celebrated Names sakes in Antiquity, whereof though there
were some no better than they should be, yet One at least, who is mentioned in
the Conclusion of the second Epistle to Timothy, has a good Reputation in the
Church of God; but because of the never-to-be-forgotten Increase, of every
sort, wherewith GOD favored the Country, about the time of his Nativity. And
if he might have had an Hebrew instead of an English Name, I suppose it must
have been a Joseph, which is of the like Significancy. Had he been Indisputably
a seventh Son, yet he would not have Countenanced the Foolish, Profane, Magical
Whimsey of the silly People which furnishes the seventh Son, with I know not
what Uncommon Powers; It Was among the Vulgar Errors always derided with him.
However, we shall hear of Strange Things done by him, and for him. I am apt to
think, some Readers will anon say, We have seen Strange things to Day.

ARTICLE II. An Early Conversion to Serious PIETY.
IF it might be allowed unto Dr. More, to say it of himself, That he had as a
Fiery Arrow been shot into the World, and be hoped, he had hit the Mark: Such
an xpectation may be Allowed now to be raised for Dr. Mather; and we shall see
how the Arrow Flies and Shines and Speeds in its Motions.

While he might yet but pass for a Namesake to Ma^herellus, he was a Lad, that
Loved his Play well enough; and yet there was no Lad in the School of his Age
that could hold pace with him for his Book: He was (with his Brother Eleazar
who was two Years Older than he) Admitted into the College at the Age of
Twelve. After he had Lived about a Year at the College, his Parents fearing
that some things there might not well suit his Weakly Constitution, (for so
they took it:) and willing to have him under a more than Ordinary Inspection
and Instruction, sent him to Live with the Famous Mr. Norton, at Ipswich; and
with him he removed unto Boston A. C. 1653. continuing several Years a Pupil
under him.

He had been hitherto, a Lad (though free from any Scandalous Outbreakings of
Immorality, yet) nothing more than outwardly Moral; One Walking in the Vanity
of his Mind; and a Stranger to the Dispositions of Serious Piety; one Alienated
from the Life of GOD, and Unmindful of the Great Work and End, which they that
Live unto God, must have their Mind above all things concerned about. But the
Glorious GOD having made him a Chosen Vessel, and intended him for His
Instrument in Turning many to Righteousness, made an Early Siezure on him, and
betimes took him under the Sanctifying Operations of His Holy SPIRIT. That
Sincere and Thorough Turn to GOD, and Righteousness, was now Produced him,
which made a Conspicuous Change upon him, and fixed him in the Ways of PIETY
all the rest of his Days: Yea, the Work, diverse from the Life of Nature, when
it came to the Age of Threescore Years and Ten, so far was it from Enfeebled
and Impaired, that it was then in its brightest Vigor, and most near unto
Perfection. The Words of our Famous Perkins, will be a very Agreeable Preface
to what we are going to be Entertained withal. It is meet, that they who are to
Convert others should be Effectually Converted themselves. John must first E^t
the Book, and then Prophesy. The Ministers of the Gospel must first themselves
Ear the Book of GOD; which is indeed done, when they are not only in their
Minds Enlightened, but their Hearts are Mollified, and brought into Subjection
to the Word of CHRIST. Unless CHRIST be thus Learned Spiritually and Really,
Divines will speak of the Word of GOD, as Men Speak of Riddles, and as Priests
in former times said their Matins, when they hardly knew what they said. But
now Behold, our Mather, under the Work which was to fit him for Service here,
and for Heaven hereafter!

I shall choose to give his own Relation of it.

THe great Care of my Godly Parents, was to bring me up in the Nurture and the
Admonition of the Lord; Whence I was kept from many Visible out-breakings of
Sin, which else I had been Guilty of; and whence it was, that I had many good
Impressions of the Spirit of GOD upon me; even from my Infancy. Nevertheless, I
swam quietly in a Stream of Impiety and Carnal Security for many Years
together, till it Pleased the Lord in the Year 1654. in Mercy to Visit me with
a sore Disease, [We shall hear no more of This, until -- ]
which was Apprehended to be the Stone: out of which (perhaps the Strangury) I
was quickly Recovered. For this Happy Sickness I have many a time blessed the
Lord; and I hope, I shall Bless him forever. For He made it the Means of the
first Saving Awakenings to my Soul. I was brought now to have Real Thoughts of
Death, and see Eternity before my Eyes; And then I could Remember what I had
many a time heard from the Word of GOD, concerning such Sins as I had not yet
thoroughly Repented of. After I was Recovered, the Arrows of GOD still stuck
fast in my Heart, and I was followed with sore and grievous Troubles in my Mind
for several Months together; that what in the World to do with myself I knew
not: But the Terrors of GOD were so heavy upon me, that I Resolved I would no
more Live in any known Sin; and Examining my own Heart, I could not find any
Sin, which I was not Heartily willing to part with: And I set upon the Practice
of Duty, and that Constantly, and that in Secret Devotions too, which before
these Distresses of my Soul, I had not made Conscience of. Nevertheless my
Wounded Conscience Remained with me; and GOD set my Sins in Order before me,
and brought unto my Remembrance many Sins that I had forgotten, with all their
Circumstances and Aggravations. He showed me the Vanities of my Childhood, and
made me to Possess the Iniquities of my Youth, in such a manner that my Heart
sometimes was even Sinking and Dying at the sight of it. I resolved, that I
would Afflict my Soul, and seek unto GOD, by Fasting as well as by Praying,
that He would Pardon all the Sins that were brought unto my Remembrance, and
all the other Sins that I had been Guilty of. This course I took, [at
Dorchester, shutting myself up in my Fathers Study, when he was gone abroad
upon a Public Occasion, and not to Return for a Day or Two:] and I wrote down
those Particular Sins which lay most of all upon my Conscience, and spread them
before the Lord in Secret, after the manner of Hezekiah Spreading the Blasphemy
of Rabshakeh before the Lord; and I begged of GOD, that he would Pardon them.
At this time I thought with myself, that if all the World were mine, I would
freely part with it, to have my Hard Heart taken away from me: And I pleaded
hard with GOD that Promise, which says, That He will take away the Heart of
Stone, and give an Heart of Flesh. But I still thought, my Heart was (...) a
Stone. Thus my Soul Continued in the New Birth, And very sore were the Pangs of
it. Sometimes I was afraid, I was Guilty of the Unpardonable Sin. But upon
Discourse with my Father about the Nature of that Sin, I became Satisfied, and
found that I had never been Guilty of the Great Transgression. And I thought my
Sins were too Great to be Pardoned. But Reading a Book of Mr. Hooker's,
Entitled, The Doubting Soul drawn to Christ, I was Induced to believe, That my
Sins were Capable of a Pardon, and that the Greatness of Sin could not hinder
the Mercy of GOD. [Psal. XXV. 11.] I was brought not to doubt of GOD's Ability
to Save and Pardon me. But still I did much doubt of His Willingness to do it.
And I was foolishly ashamed to Acquaint any Body with my Troubles; I was loath
to let any one know, that my Iniquities were gone over my Head, and as an heavy
Burden too heavy for me: Till at last, not being Able to hold or bear any
longer, the Hand of GOD Pressing me so sor^, I Acquainted my Father with some
of my Soul-Distresses, and (Living at Boston) I wrote unto him, how it was with
me, and Begged him to Pray for me. I Resolved upon setting apart another Day,
to be Spent in Secret Prayer with Fasting before the Lord; and the Lord made it
an Happy Day unto me; A Day I shall never forget while I have any Being! On the
Day of our Anniversary Election, the Greatest Anniversary Solemnity of the
Country, the Scholars which Boarded at Mr. Nortons, being all Abroad on their
Diversions, I took this Opportunity of a Private Chamber; and shutting the Door
I spent all the Day, in Pouring out my Complaints unto the Lord. Toward the
close of the Day, being full of Extremity of Anguish in my Soul because of my
Sin, it was put into my Heart, that I must go and throw myself down at the Feet
of my Savior, and see whether He would Accept of me or no; Resolving, that if
He would Accept of me, then I would be His; but if not, then I would Perish at
His Feet. So I came before Him with those Words of Esther, If I Perish, I
Perish. Yet, (I said) Lord, if it must be so, I am resolved to Perish at the
Feet of thy Mercy. It is true, I am a Dog, and indeed unworthy of so much as a
Crumb; I have been a great Sinner; Yet I am resolved, I will not Offend any
more, but be Thine, and be Thine only, and be Thine forever! And while I was
thus Praying and Pleading, those Words of CHRIST were darted into my Mind, Him
that comes unto me I will in no wise Cast out: Which Promise I Pleaded with
the Lord. After that, I had some Comfortable Persuasion that my Sins were
Pardoned, and that the Lord would show me Mercy. And thus I went on Comfortably
and Walked with GOD! But after some time, Mr. Norton showed, That a Man might
Forsake his Sins, and have been in some Sorrow of Heart for them, and yet not
he truly Converted unto GOD. This Word stuck deep into me; And I was afraid,
that though I had been in Unspeakable Sorrow for my Sin, and thence had
Forsaken it, yet my Conversion might not be Sound. But then, hearing my Father
Preach on that, The whole have no need of a Physician, but the Sick, I thought
the Sermon was Preached wholly for myself. My Father showing, That where there
was New and True Obedience, and where the Heart was Changed from the Love of
Sin to the Love of God, it Argued Conversion; Examining myself, I thought it
was so with me, My Father also Answered a Scruple that was in my Heart: For I
feared, my Faith was not Right, because it was not so much some Word Preached,
but Affliction that was the first means of my more Effectual Awakening. He
showed how the Conversion of Menasseh was Accomplished. Sometime after this,
Mr. Mitchel Preaching on Joh. 1 47. Behold, An Israelite indeed: He Presed much
to Self Examination! Laying down several Characters of Sincerity: As, When GOD
in CHRIST is become the Rest of the Soul; And when there is no known Sin Lived
in, or Duty Neglected; And when the Heart is for GOD Chiefly, Wholly,
Universally. I set myself upon Serious Examination by these Marks, and found
that my Heart went along with the Word. So I went on cheerfully in the Ways of
GOD; And if in any thing I have been Overtaken with a Fault, the Lord has given
me to see it, and Mourn for it, and Turn from it.

O Nicodemus, don't Laugh and Scoff at these things. This Fanaticism, as you
call it, Verily, it is That which brings into the Kingdom of GOD! Such a Thing
there is, as Regeneration, and a thing it is of the Greatest Consequence in the
World, though you should not find the Term in the Dictionary.

Behold, the Preparation of the Sanctuary, with which a Young Man was Prepared
for the doing of Good Work about the House of his GOD! Young Men who rush into
the Evangelical Ministry, taking it up only as a Trade which they are to Live
by, while they have no Experience of a Sanctification for as well as by the
Truth upon them; what are they but the Miserables to whom (as in the Fable of
Origin) the Sixteenth Verse of the Fiftieth Psalm, is the first of the Texts
which might justly occur unto them to be Preached upon! The Words of Dr. Josiah
Woodward, Writing an Account of his Excellent Father, are not Unworthy to be
Cited for the Period. That Mouth ought to be well Purified with the Coals of
the Altar, which is to be the Mouth of the People unto GOD! And that Breast
ought to be Purified seven times, which is to bear the Names of the People of
GOD in the Presence of GOD, and turn away the Wrath of GOD from them, through
the Lord Jesus Christ, the Chief Shepherd. Until this step be made Good in any
Church, there will be Infinite Disorders, and no Effectual Reformation.

Seventy Years after the Good Work thus begun upon him, Dr. Mather caused his
Grand-sons to Transcribe this Relation of it, and he made the Perusal of it,
and the Remembrance of this his Early Consecration to GOD, a Rich Cordial to
him, in his Lingering Passage through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, which
he was then called unto.

ARTICLE III. First Appearances.
WHen the Year Arrived, wherein he should have Proceeded Batchelour of Arts,
there was for I know not what Reasons of State, an Order Procured, That the
Class whereto he belonged, and some others also, should be detained a good part
of a Year longer at the College, than of right they should have been. This gave
so great a Dissatisfaction, that no fewer than Seventeen of the Scholars
withdrew from the College without any Degree at all; Some of whom nevertheless
proved afterward very Considerable in the Service of the Churches. However the
Father of this Young Man (though greatly Troubled, as diverse others of the
Overseers were, at this Hardship on the Students,) would not have him take his
Name out of the College-Register, which had been done by others. And when he
afterward Traveled with a Testimonial, which Expressed the Year of his
Admission, and not of his Graduation, and elsewhere Claimed the Next-Degree, he
found some Reward of his Patience. In the Year 1656. he took his First Degree;
At which time the Praesident, who was deep in the Dark Principles with which
the Stagyrite has for so many Ages Tyrannized over Humane Understanding, upon a
Dislike of the Ramoean Strains in which our Young Disputant was carrying on his
Thesis, would have out him Short; but Mr. Mitchel Publicly Interposed, Pergat,
Quoeso, nam-doctissime disputat. But in the Year, 1657. he took a Greater; For
on his Birthday, he Preached his First Sermon, at a Village belonging to
Dorchester. And on the next Lord's Day he Preached in his Fathers Pulpit at
Dorchester: When the whole Auditory were greatly Affected with the Light and
Flame, in which the Rare Youth Appeared unto them: Especially was his Father
so, who could scarce Pronounce the Blessing, for the Tears which from the
Blessing he had himself now so Sensibly Received, he was thrown into.

ARTICLE IV. A Voyage to Europe; With various Occurcences in several parts of
it.
AT this Time, his Eldest Brother, Mr. Samuel Mather, (that great Man, whose
Life makes a very considerable Figure in the Magnalia CHRISTI Americana,) being
one of the Principal Ministers in Dublin, wrote unto his Father, to Encourage
his going over unto him. He had a strong Inclination that way; and Obtained his
Fathers Acquiescence in it. At his going away, his Venerable Father Wept over
him abundantly, (and the S^n also did not want for Tears on the Occasion) and
with much Solemnity Blessed him, and Advised him to Remember his own Sermon
which he had Preached the Lord's Day before; adding, That if he Heard well of
him, and if he Proved Faithful to CHRIST, the Joy of it would lengthen out his
Life, who was now Sixty One Years of Age. At his going off, many Gracious and
Generous People in Dorchester, Assisted him with Private Presents, for his
Voyage; of whose Names and Gifts he kept an Ingenuous Record, which afterward
he sent unto his Father, with desires that the Thanks of both might be returned
unto them. At this time, taking his leave of our Incomparable Mitchel, he had
this Advice from him for his Farewell; My Serious Advice to you is, that you
keep out of Company, as far as Christianity, and Civility, and Occasions will
give you leave; take it from me, The Time spent in your Study you will
generally find spent, most Profitably, most Comfortably, and most Accountably.
Father Austin would no doubt have given the same Advice, with whom it was a
Maxim, Non erit bonus Clericus qui non suit Bonus Monachus. When our SAVIOR
would make One a Good Speaker, He first of all takes him aside from the
Multitude.

He sailed from New England, July 3. 1657. and in Five Weeks reached England.
On August 24. he went from London for Lancashire: Where his Fathers old Friends
received him, with a Singular and Mutual Satisfaction. In September, he Sailed
from Liverpool to Dublin, and in Twenty four Hours arrived there. His Brother,
who had not seen him for Seven Years, found it Necessary to be Convinced by the
Letters he brought with him, and by Questions of Infallible Discovery, that he
was indeed what he was. But now he became also as a Father to him: And on his
Advice he Entered his Name in Trinity-College. In October he fell Sick of the
Measles; at which very time, his Brother Eleazar, with whom he had always been
brought up, as with a TwinBrother, lay Sick of the same Disease, at a Thousand
Leagues Distance from him: And the Month after, the Smallpox Arrested him,
from which it Pleased GOD Graciously to Recover him. In the Year, 1658. June
24. When he was Nineteen Years of Age, he Proceeded Master of Arts in
Trinity-College; having first Performed the Exercises required by the Statutes
of that University. The Proctor and some of the Fellows, who were Prelatically
Disposed, gave him all the Discouragement they could, or durst; because of his
being what they called, A Proecisian. Nevertheless the Scholars were so Pleased
with the Wit and Sense and Polite Learning brillant in his Exercises, that they
Publicly Hummed him; which being a Complement that he had never heard Paid
unto any one before, at first had like to have given too much Surprise unto
him, All the Seriously and Piously Disposed Scholars in the College Loved him;
And none more than the Memorable Doctor Winter, who was the Provost of the
College, and who had a son (Mr. Josiah Winter) that was unto him as a Jonathan
unto his David. By the Influence of the Provoct, he was chosen a Fellow of the
College: but he did not Accept it. Motions came to him from diverse Places, to
come and Preach the Gospel unto them; and the Lord-Deputy and Council
particularly Assigned him to Marahfelt; Whither being on his Travel, he was
taken so very Sick on the Road, that he was forced back to Dublin. The Irish
Air proved so Disagreeable to his Constitution, that he resolved for England;
though the Lord Deputy very kindly assured him, That he should not go over to
England for want of Encouragement in Ireland, while he should be in any Power
there. I will take the Occasion to say: This was that Admirable Man, the Lord
Henry Cromwell, who in the time of his Government acquitted himself with so much
Wisdom and Justice, and Goodness, and a Conduct so Unexceptionable, that when
he Voluntarily retired unto his own Estate in England, upon the Changes coming
on, he was not known to have one Personal Enemy in the World. Mr. Mather had
also an Invitation to Sedwells in Exon, (Procured by another Elder Brother Mr.
Nathanael Mather, then a considerable Minister in those Parts,) by which his
Resolution for England, were Confirmed: Where he Arrived in July. 1658.

At London, he became Acquainted with that Man of a Thousand, Mr. John How, who
was then a Chaplain to the Lord-Protector; and not only then, but also Thirty
Years after, gave to Mr. Mather such a Character of that Mighty Man, as was
altogether the Reverse of what some Histories and Chronicles, have given of
him. He now persuaded Mr. Mather to lay aside his purpose for Sedwells, and go
to Great Torrington in Devonshire, where he had formerly himself Resided and
Labored. So he spent the following Winter there, Preaching the Gospel to a
great Assembly and with a great Acceptance; only he spent One Month with his
Brother Mr. Nathanael Mather who was then a Preacher greatly Admired at
Barnstable. On the Death of the LordProtector, Mr. How returned unto his Old
People at Great Torrington; At which time Colonel Bingham, then Governor of
Guernsey, sent him an Invitation to become a Chaplain unto the English Garrison
there. He went thither in April, 1659. Where he Preached every LordsDay in the
Morning at the Castle, in the Afternoon at the Town, called Peters-port, where
many of the French people who understood English, were his Auditors. Here he
set himself to do good; And particularly, Observing the LordsDay to be much
profaned, he Preached on the Fourth-Commandment, with such Power and Success,
that it Produced a considerable Reformation in the Island.

It was not long before his Friends in England pressed his return thither. A
Church in Sandwyche sent him an Invitation with all their Names unto it;
requesting him to Accept the Pastoral Charge of them. This he Declined for some
Reasons; whereof one was, That the Congregational Church in the City of
Gloucester, where that Excellent Man Mr. James Forbes was now shining, procured
for him a Legal Title to a place called, St. Mary's. Thither He that holds the
Stars in his Right Hand, brought him in Decemcember, 1659. And there he
Preached in the Forenoon at St. Mary's; in the Afternoon at the Cathedral.

He was willing to have settled there. But he saw a Change of Times at the
Door. Yea, as Young as he was, he then very Publicly Declared, [from Rev. XI.
2.] that further Sufferings for the Faithful Witnesses of CHRIST were to be
looked for. In this View he returned unto Guernsey; where he had not been many
Weeks before King Charles II. came in; And, what came in with him, every Body
knows. When the King was Proclaimed, he openly Refused and Rebuked the
Paganizing Rite of Health-dringing, which threatened on that occasion to drown
all Sobriety: And anon, the King himself being by those whom he had Ensnared,
Prevailed withal to Publish a Proclamation against that Practice, it Proved an
Advantage unto this Young Reprover, and put some stop to Insults upon him. At
this time the matchless General Monk, sent a Demand upon all Commission
Officers in those parts, to Subscribe a Paper, wherein they were to Declare,
That they Believed the Times NOW were and would be Happy. But while some Old
Men Dreamed Dreams, this Young Man saw a true Vision of the Times. He Declined
a Subscription to the Vain Paper; and thereupon the Deputy Governor, who
greatly Valued him and Admired him, did so too. The Chaplain of Jersey, (one
Ashton) who had the Character of a Naughty Person, Informed the Duke of
Albemarle, that the Reason why there did not come such Complements from
Guernsey as there did from Jersey, was, Mr. Mather being there. The Duke was
violently Incensed, and in his Rage told the Governor, (Colonel Weaver, who
was then at London,) that Mr. Mather should be sent for. But the Governor,
though he was one of Monks appointing, and one that Mr. Mather had never seen,
yet had his Heart so Disposed from above, that by his Means the Threatened
Storm was diverted.

While he was in Guernsey, the Salary Allowed him was One Hundred and Twenty
Pounds Sterling a Year: and every one thought, he would now lose his Arrears,
which were above One Hundred Pounds: the rather, because one Sharp, a Vile
Hypocrite and Apostate (who had once been a Member of Mr. Griffiths Church) was
become the Deputy Governor, and Secretly did him all the Mischief he could,
and returned the MusterRoll without his Name in it. But when the matter was
brought before the Commissioners at London, (where one Difficulty Pretended
was, Crescentius, forsooth, could not be the same with Increase!) a Gracious
Providence ordered it, that one Monsieur Martin, a Deacon of the French Church
at Peter's port^* hearing of the Question made about it, Appeared and Affirmed,
that unto his most certain Knowledge, Mr. Mather was Officiating in Guernsey at
the time then spoken of; and offered his Oath unto it. The Issue was, that this
Faithful Servant and Seeker of GOD, was paid his Arrears before any other Man
belonging to the Garrison. I will by'nd by tell, of what Use this Occurrence
was unto him.

Sr. Hugh Pollard now being made the Governor of Guernsey, Mr. Mather must
either Conform to the Revived Superstitions in the Church of England, or leave
the Island. So he took his leave of that Island, March 1. 1660. and the next
Day came to Weymouth. For four Months he abode partly in Weymouth, partly in
Dorchester, Preaching in many places, where he was desired; yea three or four
times in a Week; but without any Maintenance, or any Recompense. His Friends in
Dorset-shire, much pressed his Continuance with them there; but he foresaw what
was a coming. He was offered a Living of no less than Four Hundred a Year, if
he would Conform, and Read the Common Prayer. This he could not; he durst not.
Several Gentlemen urged him to Travel with them, into the Continent of Europe;
And Mr. Samuel Bellingham obtained a Promise from him to Accompany him in such
a Travel: But a sudden Emergency drove that Gentleman over to Holland, before
the Time agreed for; which Released him from his Engagement.

In fine, all things Conspired for the moving of the Star, to Illuminate the
Western Haemisphaere.

ARTICLE V. A Return to New England; and the Station assigned there.
MR. Mather hoped for some shelter to be had, and service to be done, in his
own Country, and proposed what once the^e had been little Hope for; To see his
Invaluable Father before he Died. Wherefore on June 29 1661. he sai^ed from
Weymouth, in a Vessel Bound for Newfoundland. He Arrived there in August: And
staying there no more than Ten Da^^, a Vessel bound for New England Opportunely
Presented, in which he reached thither by the first of September. He came to
Dorchester, very unexpected on a Saturday Evening; But the Tears of Joy
mutually poured out, at his first Interview with his Father! -- His Brother
Eleazar was also just come thither, from a Remote place where he was now
S^ationed in the Country; And the Comforted Old Patriarch, sat Shining like the
S^^ in Gemini, and hearing his two Sons, in his own Pulpit entertain the People
of GOD, with Performances, that made all People Proclaim him, An Happy Father.

He had now Invitations to as many places as there are Signs for the Sun in the
Zodiac, all Coveting of him, as one of the Bests Gifts that could be bestowed
upon them. In the first Winter after his Arrival, he Preached Alternately the
one Lord's Day with his Father in Dorchester, the other to the New Church in the
North-part of Boston, which anon swept away the prize from the Twelve
Competitors.

On March 6. 1662. he came into the Married State; Espousing the only Daughter,
of the Celebrated Mr. John Cotton; in Honor to whom, he did (as Dr. Lightfoot
had before done in Honor to a Patron of the same Name) call his Firstborn Son
by the Name of COTTON. She was a Gentlewoman of much Goodness in her Temper; a
Godly, an Humble, and a Praying Woman, and one that often set apart whole Days
for Prayer and Secret Interviews with Heaven. When she Died, which was Fifty
two Years after, her Eldest Son did as much of Justice to her Memory, as her
Inhibitions of all Embellishments upon her Character would Permit him, and
Published it under the Title of, Maternal Consolations. But of him, there is no
more to be Written. It Is the Writer.

Their second Son, was Mr. Nathanael Mather, who Died at the Age of Nineteen,
an Instance of Uncommon Seize in Religion and Erudition: deserving the
Epitaph upon his Grave at Salem; The Ashes of an hard Student, a good Scholar,
and a great Christian. His Life, Entitled, Early Piety Exemplified, has had
the Respects of three or four Editions paid unto it; and this Addition thereto,
that no little part of the first Edition was bought by that Good Man. Mr.
Philip Henry to give away; and the second Edition had a Praefatory and
Panegyrical Attestation of that Bright Man Mr. Matthew Mead set before it.

Their third Son was Mr Samuel Mather, at this time a Faithful and Useful
Minister of the Gospel at Witney in Oxfordshire: A Writer of several Valuable
Treatises; among which, his, Vindication of the Doctrine of the Trinity; and
his, Vindication of the Deity of the Holy Spirit; and his, Vindication of the
Sacred Scriptures; do shine with a particular Luster, and challenge a Room and
a Name for him, among, The Blessings of the Age. They had also Seven Daughters,
all of which, Liv^d to be Mothers, except one which Died in its Infancy.

And they had herewithal that Rare Felicity, of Hearts made glad with Hoses,
that they saw all their Children Choosing the Things that Please GOD, and laying
hold on His Covenant.

The North-Church in Boston, had a Struggle of diverse Years, before they could
Obtain a Conquest over his Aversion, to the Consummation of his Desired
Settlement: Which was Principally Occasioned by some Views he had of greater
Service elsewhere. At last, the Brethren of the Church kept a Day of
Supplications unto Him who has all Hearts in His Hands, to Pray that GOD would
Incline him, and Persuade him, to Accept the Invitation which they had given
him. From This Day, he felt another Biass on his mind, and soon Comp^ied with
their Desires; and on May 27. 1664 he did with a great Solemnity, wher^in his
Father Publicly gave him his Charge, Accept the Pastoral Care of the Flock;
with which, (Them and their Children,) he Continued Serving the Lord, with many
Tears and Temptations, and keeping back nothing that was Profitable for them,
for more than Threescore Years together.

ARTICLE VI. Grievous Temptations Conquered.
TEmptations were just now Mentioned. And the first Thing I will now Observe,
shall be This. As when the Danite Hero was first entering upon his Public
Actions, a Lion roared upon him: So Mr. Mather had not long made his entrance
upon his Public Services, before he felt singular Assaults from the Lion which
goes about seeking whom to fall upon. Our SAVIORS Ministry begun with a Storm
of Grievous Temptations upon Him; And many of His Faithful and Useful Servants
have in their Condition, this Conformity unto His: In the Beginning of their
Ministry they suffer Grievous Temptations from their Grand Adversary. Mr.
Mather did so. The more Early Years of his Ministry were Embittered unto him,
with such Furious and Boisterous Temptations unto Atheism, as were Intolerable
to him, and made him Cry out like Peter in the Tempest. Vile Suggestions and
Injections, tending to question the Being of the GOD, whom he Feared, and
Loved, and was continually Praying to, where shot at him as Fiery Darts from
the Wicked one, and caused him to go Mourning because of the Oppression of the
Enemy. His Holy Soul suffered an Unutterable Anguish from this Blast of the
Terribles upon him From his Vehement Abhorrence of these Thoughts, and from his
Groans for a Deliverance from them, and from the Cries of a Chaste Soul under a
Rape, which he made, when his Pious Mind was Affronted with them, (as well as
from the Time and Way of the Vexations,) it was Plain, They were none of his
own; they were plainly of a Satanic Original. But yet, the Trouble they gave
him, was, what Satan intended him; Inexpressible and Insupportable. His great
SAVIOR indeed, who forever holds all the Fiends of Darkness in a Chain, had
Wise and Good Ends in Permitting them to bring such a Fiery Trial upon him: And
no doubt, This among the rest. He was a Young Man every where Admired, and
Applauded, and Accepted, and Flocked after, and Uncommon Regards were from all
Quarters paid unto him. Now these Colaphizations were of notable Advantage, to
prevent all undue and unsafe Elations; and keep him Humbly Wondering that the
People of GOD should have any esteem for a Person, who felt in his Heart Cursed
Motions toward that Horrible Thing, A Denial of the GOD that is above. I
cannot Learn, that under these Temptations he found much Benefit by Disputing
with them: though he took Delight in Reading Fotherby's Atheomastix, and others
who have shown what they could Speak on GOD'S behalf. Indeed, it puts too much
Respect upon a Devil, to Argue and Parley with him, on a Point which the Devil
himself B^li^ves and Trembles. It is too much of Complement, if not
Complaisance, unto Atheism, to Pour in Elaborate Confutations upon it. When we
prove any thing, we prove something that is less known by something that is
m^re known. But is there any Thing more known, than the Existence of that FIRST
CAUSE, who in forming the Spirit of Man within him. has left upon o^r Spirit an
Impression for a Return to Him: and be sure then for an Owning of aim (...) It Is
a First Principle; and we are as soon Conscious of a GOD, as Conscious to our
Self. Mr. Mather found the Cudgel, the most Proper Logic for these
Temptations; and the best way of Answering them, to be by Rejecting them and
Repelling them with all Possible Detestation as Infinitely Unworthy to be
listened to: and with a most flat Contradiction of them, to form Thoughts that
still carried in them, the devoutest Acknowlegements of a GOD, and Applications
to Him. Thus he tired out the Adversary; and the Devil being so Resisted, anon
fled from him. As to a Rational Satisfaction, the most that he received was
this; As he Employed Incessant Prayers on this Occasion, so the Evident and
Mavelous Answers of his Prayers; which he had seen in some other matters, did
also help to bring him some Answers unto these. The Glorious GOD in some
Strange Instances, (and the Relief o^ his Guernsey Distress was one of them,)
had Enabled him to say, This Poor Man Cried, and the Lord Heard him: And for
him now to doubt the Existence of a GOD, whom he had found so nigh and so kind
unto him, -- it appeard unto him such a Monstrous Ingratitude, that he could
not be Guilty of it! Yea, once I find him, as one Resolved upon throwing every
Stone he could find, at the Head of the Dragon, recording such a Passage as
this. Being thoughtful about some heavy Afflictions upon me, I resolved that I
would seek Help from GOD. This very thing serves me as an Help against Atheism;
For if we have a Conscience, which in a Time of Distress, Directs us to go unto
GOD for Help, surely, there must be a GOD for us to go to; [Jer. II. 27.] In
Remembrance of the old Wormwood and Gall, he much more than half an Hundred
Years after, Published a little Discourse Entitled, There is a GOD in Heaven.

ARTICLE, VII. Further Temptations Encountered.
BUt since we are upon Temptations, here will be Perhaps as fit a place as any,
to Introduce more of those things whereof Luther would say, They made up, with
Meditation and Supplication, the Three Things which a Finished Divine must find
his most Instructive and Effectual Tutors. The Temptations which we have spoken
of, were no sooner gone off, but another sort were brought on, to keep the
Servant of GOD in a Continual Warfare, and Enduring what a good Souldi^r of
JESUS CHRIST must be called unto The Churches of New England are not the only
Reformed Churches, that have been Chargeab^e with the Crime of Ingratitude unto
their Minin^st^^s The French Synods complained of it, as a Sin too R^se among
them; Yea, they Declared, that the Ingratitude of People refusing to Contribute
unto the Subsistence of their Ministers, threatened the Churches with a Total
D^ssipation; which, alas, is now come upon them. No sooner was Mr. Mather got
under the Engagements of a Settlement with his People, which they esteemed
Sacred and Unreleasable and Indissoluble, but Presently they that had the
Ordering of those things grew very slack in Answering their Engagements to
support him with a Tolerable Maintenance. The Deacons of the Church were not
Spirited like some that have Succeeded them; and the Leaders of the more Honest
People also, were Men of a low, mean, sordid Spirit: By which means he was
Reduced unto Wants and S^raits, and such hard Circumstances as ought by no
means to be Related, and if they were could scarce be Credited. For one of his
Education, and Erudition, and Gentlemanly Spirit, and Conversation, to be so
Creepled, and kept in such a Depressing Poverty! -- But, O thou Angel of the
Church, We know who said, I know thy Poverty, but thou art Rich! -- In these
Distresses, it was to little p^rp^se for him to make his Complaint unto Man! If
he had, it would have been basely Improved unto his Disadvantage. He Writes
upon it; I had no other way, but to go unto the Lord JESUS; and make my Moan
before Him, who I knew was willing that I should be Supported in His Service.
By these Temptations there was a strong Trial made, of his Patience, and of his
Prudence, and of the Principles which Acted him in his Ministry; but being
tried he came forth as Gold. He had offers of a Settlement, where he might have
mended his Condition in the World; But he generously refused them, from a Fear
le^t the Way of Truth should be Evil spoken of. In the mean time, it was a
wonder, that by having a Spirit broken with Unkind Usages, he was not perfectly
killed; or at least, unhinged and unfi^ted for the Duties of his Ministry. It
is a Reflection which I find fa^ling from his Pen under this Oppression; Little
do People think, how much they Wrong themselves, when they have Ministers among
them, whose Hearts are set upon nothing but their Studies, and Spiritual
Employments, that nevertheless shall not be Suitably Provided for, as to their
outward Subsistence, and that Food and Raiment which while on Earth, they need
as well as other Men. But now, see what can be Done, and what Born, and how, by
PIETY Assisted from Above! See after what manner Unkind Usages are to be
Encountered with! It may be of some use unto many Holy witnesses of the Lord
Prophesying in Sackcloth, to Read the Conduct of this their Fellow Sufferer
under these Grievous Temptations, as I find himself Relating it.

On a certain Day he wrote, Perplexed and Hindered much in my Studies, with the
Sad and Sinking Consideration of my outward Wants; and that though they put me
on more Expense and more Labor than formerly, yet there is not an Heart in
Sundry of my People to consider it. The Lord Help me through my Temptations,
enable me to Finish His Work, and hasten me to Himself. -- Nevertheless, there
are some of them that Respect me Dearly, and do much for me.

On another Day, thus. Extremely Grieved and Distracted in my Studies, with the
Thoughts of my Debts, and the Consideration of my People (some of them) not
caring for my deep Sorrows in that Respect. Methinks, I could be Content to be
Poor, I care not how Poor, so as I may be in a Capacity to Serve GOD without
Distraction. But to be in Debt, to the Dishonor of the Gospel, is a Wounding,
Killing Thought to me; Yea, so Grievous as that if it be not Remedied, in a
little time it will bring me with Sorrow to my Grave. O Lord JESUS, pity a
Poor, Sinful, Wretched Creature, lest Dishonor come to thy Dear Name.

On another Day, thus. Spent in Prayer with Fasting in my Study. I closed all
with this Resolution. Lord, If thou will Provide for me, and Answer my Prayers,
I will Love thee, and Thank thee, and Serve thee. And, if thou will not Provide
for me, I will yet Love thee, and Bless thee, and Serve thee. If thou will cast
me off, I will not cast thee off. I deserve that thou should cast me off,
but Thou Lord, never Deservedst Ill at my Hands.

On another Day, thus. Miserably Perplexed with the sad Thoughts of my Deb^s,
and the Unworthy Spirit, which is in some of my People that have no Heart to
Relieve me in these my Sorrows, and that think every thing too much for me. So
that I lose (which Kills me) much Precious Time, and am exceedingly hindered in
the Work of the Lord. The Scripture Directs Ministers, to show themselves
Patterns of Patience and Long-Suffering. Conscience of that has made me bear
thus long. But now I can bear no longer, my Grief is so Extreme. Oh! That the
Lord JESUS, who hears my Complaints before Him, would either give an Heart to
my People to look after my Comfortable Subsistence among them, or, if He has
any further Service for me to do (who Desire Life only that so I may do
something for Him who has done so much for me!) remove me to another People,
who will take care of me, that so I may be in a Capacity to attend His Work,
and Glorify His Name in my Generation; or give me a Sufficiency of Grace, that
these Sinking Evils and Discouragements may not Overwhelm me: or, Hasten me to
Himself, where no Temptation shall keep me from Serving Him with Freedom of
Spirit* O Dear Lord JESUS, For thy Names sake, Pity, Hear and Help. Amen, my
Lord and my Redeemer, Amen.

After some time of Waiting upon a GOD of Judgment, who was all this time
Waiting that He might be Gracious, there arrived a Day, in which he Wrote thus.
This Day pouring out my Complaints into the Bosom of the Lord JESUS, I begged
of Him, that He would not Punish any of my poor People, because of their
Neglects of me, but Pardon them and Bless them; And that He who heard my
Complaints before Him, and knew the Sorrows of my Heart, yea, and knew that I
was therefore Grieved at my outward Wants, because I was thereby hindered from
doing Him Service, and from Glorifying His Name, and the Name of the Father,
and because I lose Precious Time, of which I would not lose any Particle, would
pity me when the World would not. After this, my Heart was at Ease; and I
Believed, that the Lord JESUS heard me; only I Professed before Him, that I was
Content to be Poor, and in Debt, and laid aside as a broken and useless Vessel,
if He would have it so; Yea, to be any thing that CHRIST will have me to be.
Now I am Satisfied; The Will of the Lord be done!

And NOW arrived the time of his Deliverance! The Glorious ONE who knew the
Works, and the Service and the Patience of this Tempted Man, ordered it, That
several Gentlemen of good Estate, and of better Spirit, were become the Members
of his Church; Among whom a Remembrance is particularly due to Sr. Thomas
Temple; as fine a Gentleman as ever sat foot on the American strand. These
Persons were moved with a very just and generous Concern, when they understood
how Unworthily their Meritorious Pastor had been dealt withal, and they took
Effectual Care, that it should be so no more. It came to pass, that at length,
he found such Filial Usages from his Church, as took away from him all room of
Repenting, that he had not under his Temptations Prosecuted a Removal from
them. Yea, they Supported his Family, when he, who once could scarce tolerably
Cloth himself, made an handsome Appearance in the Courts of KINGS for Four
Years together, and often did and got considerable Things for the Support of
others that were Necessitous, and even relieved Parsons of the Established
Church seeking to him in their Necessities. And in his latter Years, his
Church, with a neverto-be-forgotten Gratitude, continued unto him his whole,
and a large Salary for several Years together, while he much Intermitted his
Public Labors, and in the last of his Years he wholly ceased from them: And
at the same time, they advanced considerably, for Gratuities to Reward the
Labors of many Candidates who occasionally Supplied the Pulpit for him. They
did also another thing, which will be told, at the End of our story; Yea,
wherever this Book shall be Read, what they have done shall be spoken of, with
a Memorial of them. It may be, I have been too long upon this Article. And yet,
it shall not, it may not go out of my Hands. till I have Observed one thing
more upon it; which is, That in the midst of these Distresses, I find him
sometimes keeping of Thanksgivings; and the sense of some Sorrows did not so
Embitter his mind, as to make him Insensible of the many Comforts which he also
Received at the Hands of GOD; and on those Days he drew up Catalogues of the
Favors which a Gracious GOD had bestowed upon him.

ARTICLE VIII. The Diary of a Time-Saver.
THe Reader having been entertained with some, and likely to be with more,
Passages Transcribed from his Diary, I will before I go a step further, give
some Account concerning the Diary; and relate the In^entions and Ingredients of
it; Glad, if it may be Dir^ctive unto any, with whom, The way of keeping a
Diary, may be a matter of some enquiry.

Briefly then; The Diary, which he kept from the time of his Return to the
New-English, to the Time of his withdraw to the Heavenly World, consisted for
the most part of none but very Brief Touches, on things which it might be of
some Consequence for him afterward to look upon. A main thing in it, was an
Hint in two or three Words, how he spent his Time; and being of the Opinion
that Large Records of that matter would be but a Mispence of Time, he would not
ordinarily employ more than two or three Words upon it. And for the same cause,
he kept not so large Records in his Elder as he did in his Younger Years. He
noted sometimes particularly, what Books he Read, and sometimes only more
generally Varios Authors. Sometimes he noted only, Sermon, -- and sometimes
added the subject of it. Sometimes he noted, Visits given but not always To
whom. Sometimes he noted Visits received; but often Complained of the
Interruptions he suffered by them. Sometimes he has Pathetically Written, Eheu,
Maximam Diei partem perdidi! He noted, when and where he Preached, and who
Preached for him, or with him. Sometime he noted Grievances he met withal;
which (if the Manes will forgive me,) I would venture to say had better been
wholly forgotten. Unto the Diary there belonged Three Articles more, which I
think will deserve to make Three Paragraphs in our History.

There shall no more belong to this, but only, the Projection which he formed,
for the spending of his Time; and which he set down in such Terms as these.

O Dear Lord JESUS; Thou that know my Works: Help! Help! Help a poor
Creature, I earnestly Beseech thee, so to Improve his Time, as shall be most
for thy Glory, the good of thy People, and t^^ Rejoicing of his own Soul, in
That Day, when I shall see Thee my Lord, and Speak with Thee Face to Face.
Amen! Amen! Amen!

My Purpose ( by Thy Help, O Lord!) is to Spend my Time every Day as follows.

I. Day of the Week. Besides me Public Labors, attend Catechizing, and
persona^ Instruction in my Family.

II. A. M. Read Comments. Study Sermon. P. M. Read some Authors. Study Sermon.

III. A. M. Read Comments. Study Sermon. P. M. Endeavor to Instruct Personally
some or other; (at least in the Summer Time.) Read Authors.

IV. A. M. Read Comments. Study Sermon. P. M. Read Authors. Sermon.

V. A. M. Read Comments. Study Sermon. After Lecture Endeavor among the
Ministers, to Promote what shall be of Public Advantage.

VI. A. M. Read Comments. Study Sermon. P. M. Read Authors, Sermon.

VII. Read Comments. Prepare for Sabbath: [Committing Sermons to Mem^ry.]

Only Allowance must be given for Visitatitions, and Necessary Avocations,
which cannot be foreseen.

I am not willing to allow my self above Seven Hours in Four and Twenty, for
Sleep; but would spend the rest of my Time in Attending to the Duties of my
personal or general Calling.

Afterward he Wrote; In this Course I continued for some Time, but at la^^,
through man unforeseen Things coming in upon me, I was forced to alter the Method
of my Studies, as to some Particulars here set down; For I never intended to
bind myself unto these Rules any longer than I should find myself capable of
Attending thereto, or until I should know a better Method.

ARTICLE IX. HEARTY Piety.
WHat I said about, the Three Articles, cannot be forgotten.

I am in my Readers Debt, for Three Paragraphs, which the Diary just now
mentioned has bound me to; And I will go no further till I Pay what I Owe. Nor
can I so well go on to Observe, as I design, the Order of Annal in our Story,
till I have done with some Things, that were Incorporated all along into it.

One of them was This. An Heart Serious, was one of the Main Strokes occurring
there. When that Great Man, [who might on many Accounts be justly called]
Grotius, had his Death Approaching, one asked him, what was the best Advice
which one of his great Erudition and great Experience, could leave with a
Surviver? His Answer was, Be Serious. Dr. Mather was an Uncommon Follower of
that good Advice; and though he knew how to be Pleasant in such Company as he
might safely use a Facetious and an Innocent Freedom withal, yet he maintained
a Serious Temper of mind, and such a Gravity as made all sorts of Persons,
wherever he came, to be struck with a Sensible Awe of his Presence, as much as
any ever were of a Roman Cat^'s; Yea, If he Laughed on them, they believed it
not. It was Commonly thought of him, He was a Man of GOD, and his Countenance
was like the Countenance of an Angel of GOD, very Venerable! And it was
Commonly said, It was a very Edifying Thing, only to see him in our Public
Assemblies; His very Countenance carried the Force of a Sermon with it. And
this was not a Forced and a Starched Appearance, and a Tartuff cover to a mind
at the same time abandoned unto Levity: But the Guard which he kept upon his
Heart, and which was an Infallible Effect and Symptom of his having the true
Fear of GOD planted there, was that which produced the Serious Aspect which had
that Wisdom so shining in it. I cannot say, how many Thousands of Times, I find
in his Diary, that Clause concluding the Hints of what he did, and where he
was, in the Day; Heart Serious* By Heart Serious, he meant, an Heart which kept
alive a Sense of his having the Eye of GOD upon him, with a Dread of Sinning
against the Holy One; and an Heart Proposing an Obedience to GOD; Studious to
Know and to Do, the Will of His Heavenly Father; and an Heart in a proper Frame
to Entertain, all that the Glorious GOD should order to befall him. When he
found his Heart remit in the Vigor of these Dispositions, he Wrote, Heart
Various. When he found his Heart considerably otherwise than he would have it,
with a Sorrowful Heart he Wrote so. Yea, I find this among his other Entries.
Heart in a Serious Frame, till toward Evening, when a Gentleman that made
himself too much an Object of Ridicule called me to Visit Sr. Thomas Temple;
and by being in Company, though good Company, I lost the Good Serious Frame of
my Spirit, and much Precious Time also. It is good, and no more than needs, to
be always^ Watchful. Anon his Heart became so Established in (...) due Frame of
Piety, that in his latter Years, his Diary left off taking any further Notice
of it.

ARTICLE, X. Jejunator, or, Days of Devotion.
I Have briefly dispatched one of the Promised Articles. The next is to report,
that one of the most Copious Entrie^ in the Diary, was upon what concerned the
Days of Prayer, and more soaring Interviews with Heaven, which he kept with
Fasting (even with Rigid Fasting) usually once in a Month, (and sometimes
oftener) as part of his Preparation for the Monthly Celebration of the
Eucharist. Of which Days I find his Pen once dropping this Testimony, I would
not for all this Worlds Good, be without the Answer of those Prayers! On these
Days, his manner was, one while in Papers wholly assigned unto that purpose, to
note on One Column, Causes of Humiliation; on the Adverse Column, Matters of
Supplication. Afterward, he entered them, only in his Diary, without any
Distinct Columns for them; and he never entered any where else, the like
Enumeration, which he always made, of Matters, and Causes, for the Public Days
also, which he kept in Conjunction with the People of GOD. And what he did for
Fasts, he also did for Thanksgivings: For some such Days he kept also in Secret
before the Lord; Affecting himself with the Various Mercies of GOD unto him,
and Contriving special Returns of Obedience, wherein he was desirous to Glorify
GOD. In these Registers one finds the very Spirit of PIETY in the true
Breathings and Pulses of it. But the Public Spirit Conspicuous in them, and his
generous concern for others as well as himself, and for the Town, and Land, and
the whole Church of GOD, was highly agreeable to the large Heart which GOD had
Crowned him with.

Besides these Things, he sometimes writ down what Hopes he had of having
succeeded in his Prayers, and what Grounds he had for his Hopes. Of this it may
be I shall tell you more another Time: At this Time, I will Illustrate it, with
Transcribing of only Two or Three Passages.

At one Time; In the close of the Day Especially, my Heart was moved to
Believe, that GOD would Accept and Answer my poor Prayers. First, because I
drew nigh to Him; Therefore His Blessings will draw nigh to me. Secondly;
Because the Things which I asked, and the Ends why I asked them, were for the
Glory of GOD: Not for my own Sake, but for GODS'S Sake. Thirdly; For the Hon^ur
of His Son JESUS CHRIST. Fourthly; Because nothing but my Sins which I this Day
Confessed before the Lord, can hinder the Answer of my Prayers; But these
cannot hinder, because they are done away in the Blood of CHRIST, who has Loved
me, and given himself for me; which I know, for that I feel my Heart Loves
Him. Fifthly; Because there never was any Creature, who did Humbly seek unto
the Lord for such Blessings as this Day I Prayed for, that was denied by Him:
And surely I shall not be the First whom GOD will deny! O Blessed forever be my
dear GOD in JESUS CHRIST, who hears Prayer!

At another time. Some Fervency and Faith in the Performance of the Duties of
the Day; so that I now Wait upon the Lord for a Gracious Answer, with a Spirit
much Revived. I put the Answer of my Prayers, upon the Sincerity of my Soul
before GOD; saying before the Lord, O my GOD, If I do not Sincerely Desire to
Glorify thy Name, then Deny my Requests, and let me have no Answer of my
Prayers: But if I do in sincerity Desire to Serve and Glorify Thee, then have
Compassion on me, and Deny me not, I pray thee. Upon these Terms let me go
either with an Answer, or with a Denial. Therefore GOD will Answer me
Graciously in His own Time. O my Soul, Wait thou on the LORD.

How he felt sometimes on these Days, I will Employ but one Passage more, to
Intimate.

May 8. 1672. I set apart this Day to Humble myself in Secret, as for other
causes, so in special on the account of the Death of my dear Brother Samuel,
the Tidings whereof came lately to me.

In the Beginning of the Duty, the Lord melted my Heart; especially in the
second time of my failing down on my Knees before Him. As I was Praying, that
the Lord would Remember the Prayers which my Precious Brother had put up for
me, when he was living in the World, and that He would give much of that Spirit
unto me, which he caused so Eminently to rest on my now Blessed Brother; as I
was thus Praying, my Heart was exceedingly melted, and methoughts, I saw GOD
before my Eyes in an Inexpressible Manner, so as that I was Afraid I should
have fallen into a Trance in my Study.

ARTICLE XI. An Entrance into the Holiest of all.
I am still in Arrears, for the Diary: and I am thus to Answer them. I remember
that Gregory Nazianzen, Speaking of the Prayers, which his Father poured out at
the Celebration of the Eucharist, says nothing of a Lifeless Liturgy, but says,
They were Dictated by the Holy Spirit of GOD. The Prayers made by mine, on the
Eucharistical Occasions often were most certainly so! And now and then in the
more Early Years of his Ministry, he made a short entry of such Flights as his
melted Soul was transported to. You shall have a Scantling.

On a certain Day, he Writes. I was this Day much Affected in Administering the
Supper of the Lord: Especially in the last Prayer, saying, Now Dearest Lord, If
ever there were poor Creatures in the World, that had cause to Love and Bless
the Lord, we are they! We have done thee Infinite Wrongs; But thou have
forgiven us all those Wrongs, and dealest with us, as with thy Friends this
Day. How can we but Mourn for the Wrongs that we have done unto thee! If we had
Wronged an Enemy, and that in a small matter, we should be Grieved for it: But
we have Wronged the Son of GOD; Wronged our SAVIOR; Yea, we have killed Him.
He had never come to the Cross, had it not been for our Sins, as we are the
Elect of GOD. But the Blood that we have shed, has Procured our Pardon; as it
did for the Jews that killed Him; So many of them as belonged unto thine
Election. Yea, CHRIST Prayed for them, saying Father, Forgive them! And so thou
know, He has done for us. CHRIST has said before thee concerning us,
Father, Forgive them! If Children much Offend their Father, yet when any of
them come and say, I am sorry for what I have done; I Will do so no more; Father,
Be Reconciled unto me! Will not a Father then Forgive them? O our Father, we
have sinned against thee; but we are sorry for it, and would do Iniquity no
more; Father, Forgive us! Thou know our Hearts; Thou know, that we could
be glad if we might never have so much as one sinful Thought in our Hearts, nor
Speak so much as one Unprofitable Word more, whilst we Live? Yea, This is the
Thing that we would beg of Thee! If ever thou will hear the Cries of Poor
Creatures, oh! Deny us not this Request. It is, O Lord, Let thy Holy Spirit
Sanctify us Wonderfully!

On another Day, thus. I was this Day much Affected at the Table of the Lord,
saying in Prayer unto Him there; Lord, we shall never Perish! They that Believe
on thy CHRIST shall never Perish: And thou know, that we Believe on Him.
Though have brought us to the Blood of Sprinkling; and therefore thou will
bring us to JESUS, the Mediator of the New Covenant, and we shall behold His
Glory. We shall see our Joseph, our JESUS, in all His Glory, we shall behold
our King Solomon, in all His Glory, yea, Solomon in all his Glory was not
arrayed like our JESUS. We shall see that Glory; yea, sit down with Him on the
Throne of His Glory.

On another Day, thus. I had some Quickenings at the Lords Table; Especially in
Praying for much of the SPIRIT of CHRIST, and saying, Lord, we have one
Argument to Plead with Thee; and it is a great one; yea, it will be a
Prevailing Argument. It is, thy own dear Name, and the Glory of it. If thou
will give us much of the Spirit of CHRIST, thy Great Name will then have much
Glory from us.

On another Day, thus. I had some Quickenings at the Table of the Lord;
Especially in the last Prayer, Saying; O Heavenly Father, and our GOD in our
Lord JESUS CHRIST; we have Avouched Thee to be our GOD; And now we know that
thou have Avouched us to be thy People: Because thou have given us thy Son, and
thou will with Him give us all things: Father, We humbly expect from thee, that
according to thy Covenant, even the New Covenant, thou will Forgive us our
Iniquities. Such is the Grace of thy Covenant, that thou will not Impute our
Infirmities to us, if they be our Burden. And thou know that they are so. We
put the Answer of our Prayers upon That, and are willing to be Denied if it he
not so. But thou that searchest all our Hearts, know that thou have Created
such a Spirit within us. We are willing to be Delivered from all Sin, and we
are willing to yield Holy Obedience to all thy Commands, though how to Perform,
we find not. Father, Father, Deal with us as with thy Children.

On another, thus. Quickened at the Lords Table; Especially in Praying, that
GOD would Remember His Covenant with our Children, saying before the Lord;
Lord, Our Fathers, and our Mothers (as for many of us we may say it) are now in
Glory; and thou will bring us to be with them; and so thou will our Children
after us. They, and We, and our Children shall together be Employed in thy
Praises to all Eternity. In Speaking of This, Tears gushed from me before the
Lord. I Trust, Prayer and Faith shall not be in vain. Oh! I have Prevailed, and
I have Obtained Mercy for my Children. Amen, Lord JESUS.

On another, thus. Quickenings at the Lords Table, especially in Praying for
our Children, that GOD would Remember His Covenant with them: and saying, O
Heavenly Father, Did not JESUS CHRIST make His Soul an Offering for the sins of
our Children, as well as our sins? Did not He Die, for our Children as well as
for us? Therefore let thy CHRIST see His Seed; Let our poor Children be
Converted unto Thee, that they may Glorify GOD with us in the World that is to
come, and World without End.

Indeed the Prayers, and the earnest and mighty Pleadings, with which on the
Sacramental Occasions, he commonly Wept before the Lord, on the behalf of his
own, and his peoples Off spring, were such as carried Evident Marks of an
Heavenly Afflation in them.

In his latter Years, he did not Record so many of these Heavenly Afflations,
because they grew so frequent with him. And he also found a Truth, in what some
Candidates of Heaven, Approaching to the Courts of the Lord, have Observed;
That the Flights of a Soul rapt up into a more Intimate Conversation with
Heaven, are such as cannot be exactly Remembered with the Happy Partakers of
them. The Sublime Conceptions, and the flowing Expressions, of the Soul in such
Heavenward Salleys are presently lost; and though the Feasted Soul would give
never so much to recover them, they can by no means do it. The Spirit that made
them, once being Retired, the very Remembrance of them cannot any more be
Recovered.

O Disciple of Epicurus, Let not a Vain Philosophy tell thee, That such
Heavenly Afflations are nothing but a melting of the Brain by chance happening
in a Warm Temper; and that they who Speak of GOD shining out upon them, only
happen to be under Heats of the Brain, that rise and flow Copiously more at
some times than at others; and so by Consequence, that the case of a Troubled
mind Complaining of Desertious and Aridities, is to be laughed at, as the
Whimsey of a Brain happening to be under a Cloudy Vapor. It is true, Bodily
Dispositions do often affect the mind; and Ministers are applied unto, when
Physicians would be more properly and effectually called for. But they who
laugh at all Spiritual Operations upon the mind, are Ignorant, and Shortsighted
Men, sensual, not having the Spirit; And the many Volumns about such things
Written by men of Renown in the Congregation of GOD, have not been all
foolishly thrown away on a mere Mechanical and Chymoerical Business, not
concerned in them.

ARTICLE XII. Second Thoughts on the Synod, in 1662.
THere is now nothing to retard the Progress of our History: But having settled
Mr. Mather in the Pastoral Charge of the North Church in Boston, and exhibited
the Dispositions and Exercises, of a more General Application, which he had,
not only in the First Years of his Ministry, but also pretty far into it, we
may now proceed unto some Remarkable Affairs and Actions of his Life, in the
Order wherein we shall find them occur unto us.

At the time of his Return to New England he found the Country, deeply engaged
in a Disputation, about The Church State of their Posterity; wherein it is no
wonder if the Political as well as the Ecclesiastical concerns of a Country
founded on the Bottom of Religion, were affected. The Country soon became
sensibly divided into Synodalian; and Antisynodalian; and Mr. Mather from his
Youth making a Figure wherever he came, he now did so on the Antisynodalian
side. If I venture to say, He was in the Wrong, I shall anon show so good
Authority for my saying so, that He and the World, will Pardon me. The case was
This. When our Churches were come to between Twenty and Thirty Years of Age, a
numerous Posterity appeared, among whom there were Multitudes of well-disposed
persons, who professed themselves desirous to Renew their Baptismal Covenant,
and Submit unto the Church Discipline, and so have their Houses also marked for
the Lords: but yet they could not come up to that Experimental Account of their
own Regeneration, which would Sufficiently Embolden their Access unto the Table
of the Lord; and which the Churches required of them. Now for the Churches to
make no Ecclesiastical Difference between these hopeful Candidates and
Competants for the Eucharist; and Pagans who might happen to Hear the Word of
GOD in our Assemblies; This was judged an Unwarrantable strictness, which would
quickly abandon the biggest part of the Country unto Circumstances by no means
to be wished for. But on the other side, it was feared, that if all such as had
not yet Exposed themselves by censurable Scandals found upon them, should be
admitted unto all the Privileges in our Churches, a Worldly Generation of Men,
might before we are aware carry all things into such a course of Proceeding, as
would be too Disagreeable unto the Kingdom of Heaven which the Church is to
represent unto the World. The Thing became a Considerable Controversy. On this
Occasion, there was by the Direction of the General Court, a Synod of the
Churches Convened at Boston, in the Spring of the Year, 1662. Who Agreed upon
certain Propositions concerning the Subjects of Baptism, and Consociation of
Churches, which being presented unto the General Court, an Order was there
passed for the Publication and Commendation thereof unto all the Churches. The
fifth of these Propositions, and what was most contested was, That Church
members who were admitted in Minority, understanding the Doctrine of Faith, and
Publicly Professing their Assent thereto, nor Scandalous in Life, and Solemnly
owning the Covenant before the Church, wherein they give up themselves and
their Children to the Lord, and Subject themselves to the Government of Christ
in the Church, their Children are to be Baptized. But there were several
Eminent Persons in that Venerable Assembly, who were Jealous lest the Sacred
Ordinance of Baptism should come to be Applied unto such Unmeet Subjects, as
would in a while put an End unto New Englands Primitive and Peculiar Glory of
Undefiled Administration: And some of these made very Public Exceptions, to the
Synods Decisions. One of these was the President of the College, the Learned
Mr. Charles Chauncey; who Published a Treause, Entitu^ed, Antisynodalia
Americana; Which was Answered by the Worthy Mr. John Allin. On the same side,
with his praesident, was Mr. Mather; who had (with his Generous, Magis amica
veritas) the Infelicity at the same time to Dissent from his own venerable
Father: However such was the Wisdom and Goodness on both sides, that there was
no Diminution of their Delight in one another. The Famous Mr. Davenport wrote
in Opposition to the Synod, what he called, Another Essay for Investigation of
the Truth. But it was Accompanied with An Apologetical Proeface, Written by Mr.
Mather; wherein every one Confessed, the Best was done that could be done, on
the side so Appeared for. They said, -- Si P^rgama Dextra Defendi poterant,
etiam hac (...) fuissent. Now, to Answer Mr. Davenport, they Appointed Mr.
Mather the Elder; who did it, like himself Solidly, Nervously, and with such a
Resp^ct^ul Usage of his Antagonist, as to be, what I have heard my Good Old Mr.
Higginson remark upon it, A Pattern for all Ansibe^ers to the End of the World.
But as a Match for Mr. Mather the Y^unger, they pitched upon that Ma^chless Mr.
Mitchel, of whom our Great Baxter said, That if there could be Convened an
Occumenical Council of the whole Christian World, that Man would be worthy to
be the Moderator of it: And he did his part also, like himself, incomparably.

An Abridgment of what was offered both by the Apologist, and by the Answerer,
is exhibited in our, Magnalia, and is too long to be now Repeted. But the
Effect of the Disputation is now to be Related: And my Good Authority for my
saying what I did a while ago, is to be Produced, Mr. Mather found the Truth so
Victoriously cleared by Mr. Mitchel, that he not only Surrendered himself a g^ad
Captive thereunto, (which Mr. Mitchel had the Unspeakable Satisfaction to know
before he Died) but also Obliged the Church of GOD by Publishing unto the
World, a Couple of Unanswerable Treatises, in Defense of the Synodical
Propositions: In which he Expresses very much of his Inexpressible Value for
his Excellent Opponent and Conqueror, and uses about him the Words that Beza
uses about Calvin, Since Mitchel is dead, Life is less Sweet, and Death will be
less bitter to me. And Pathetically Addressing and Advising his Antisynodalian
Brethren, to be more Jealous of their Apprehensions, he uses these Words.
Brethren, I was once of your Persuasion; But Study, and Prayer, and much
Affliction has brought me to be of another Belief than Once I was. The
Sen^imen^s he fixed on, were, That we are to Distinguish between a Particular
Church, as it is more Strictly taken for a Particular Corporation of
Covenanting Believers, Entrusted by our Lord with the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven; and as it is more Largely taken for that Special part of our Lords
Visible Church, which does subsist in this or that Particular place; And that a
Membership of the Catholic Church, discovered by a Relation to a Particular
Church, not in the ^ormer but in the latter sense, is the formal claim to
Baptism; And so, the Qualifications in the Fifth Proposition give a Right unto
it. Upon the whole, I shall only Repeat the Words of our Church History on this
Occasion. If the Apologist were one who so Signalized a Modest sense of Second
Thoughts unto the World, it can be reckoned no Disparagement unto him; until
the Humility of Austin in his Retractations, or the Ingenuity of Bellarmine in
his Recognitions, come to be Accounted their Blemishes; or until Bucers, yea,
and Luthers, change of their Opinions about Consubstantiation, and the Recovery
of Zuinglius from Inclinations to Antipaedo-baptism, shall be Esteemed the
Disgrace of those Renouned Men or, until Mr. Robinson shall be blamed for
Composing his Weighty Arguments against the Rigid Separation, which once he had
zealously Defended. In fine, I will to this occasion apply the Words of the
famous Dr. Owen to the froward Mr. Cawdry, to take off the charge of
Inconstancy laid upon him, for his Appearing on the behalf of the
Congregational Church Discipline: He that can Glory, that in fourteen Years he
has not altered nor Improved his Conceptions of some things, of no greater
Importance than that mentioned, shall not have me for his Rival

ARTICLE XIII. A Second Instance of Second Thoughts.
BUt that I may a^ once rid my Hands of All (if Two may be properly called All,
for there were no more) Instances, wherein he found himself Obliged unto a
Change of Sentiments, I am willing to do Justice unto the Cause of Truth, in
one Article more; Which I may the ^ather do in this place, because it will be
no great Anticipation or Dislocation in the Chronology of our Story.

The great Light of Africa, was once of the same Judgment with the Antenicene
Fathers, (who expressed a just Abhorrence for the vile Method of Enforcing
Religion by Persecution; But, being willing to Justify some Violences, which
the Catholics of those Days thought it necessary to Employ against the
Donatists, his Judgment warped unto the Persecuting side, and gave a Wretched
Proof, that the Second Thoughts are not always the Wiser. What an Horror of
Dependence on mere Humane Conduct must it Produce in our Souls, when we
consider (what Le Clerc has related,) That the most Faithless and Bloody Tyrant
that ever was in the World, could not be brought over to rescind all his Edicts
in favor of the most Loyal Subjects upon Earth, until the Epistles of so great
a Saint as Austin, unto Bonifacius and Vincentius, were shown unto him! And yet
in those, and the other Epistles Published by the Archbishop of Paris, to
justify the most Infandous Persecution that ever was acted under the Sun, how
Childishly does the Father argue? How trifling, how shallow, what little other
than straightened Metophors, are his Arguments? How little of Austin in them! And
then anon, Conscience bestowing Rebukes upon him, how Importunate was he for
the stopping of those Violences which he had Encouraged, and how Sollicitous to
obtain Merciful Retrenchments and Abatements for them! Yea, in his Answer to
CRESCONIUS, he Expressly owns, No Good Man in the Catholic Church allowed the
Punishment of Heretics with Death.

A Perfect Reverse hereof, the Second Thoughts of Mr. Mather. New England being
a Country Planted by a People, whose Design it was to maintain, The Faith and
Order of the Gospel, in Evangelical Churches, and therewithal transmit the same
with all possible Purity down to their Posterity; And their Common Wealth being
looked upon, as an Institution of GOD for the Preservation of their Churches,
and the Civil Rulers looked upon as both Members and Fathers of them; there
were Laws made which inflicted Punishments on the Broachers of Pernicious
Errors, and on such as made Invasions and Infractions upon the Ecclesiastical
Constitution, which was esteemed the grand Glory and Interest of the Country.
The Zeal of the Good Men mightily urged for the Civil Magistrates using his
Power, in Coercive Ways, to restrain all Attempts of Evil minded Men to
Introduce any Apostasies or Deviations from the Religion, which was the
Professed End of the Plantation. Toleration was decried, as a Trojan Horse
profanely and perillously brought into the City of GOD. Plausible Outcries were
made about, Antichrist coming in at the Backdoor of Toleration. It was a Maxim
often Cited (but by none more, than them whose Resolution it was, to Tolerate
next to nothing,) To Tolerate all things and Tolerate nothing, are both alike
Intolerable. Now, though Mr. Mather never went unto the Extremity that some
carried the matter to, but greatly Disliked the Bitter Spirit he saw in some
that carried all before them; and little Approved some Unadvised and Sanguinary
Things that were done by them who did all; particularly, the Rash Things done
unto the Quakers, And indeed, it is a Thousand pitties, that the Unhappy Laws
made in the Colony in those Days, ever should stand upon Record any where, when
Some of them were never Executed, and All of them, were Disclaimed, and
Renounced, and Repea^ed more than Thirty Years ago! Nevertheless, he joined
with the Good Men, who did not care to hear of a Toleration for Seducers; and
was for the Civil Magistrates Exerting his Power, as a Master of Restraint upon
them. For this purpose, he wrote an Essay full of Erudition, and said all that
could be said, on The Power of the Civil Magistrate; which yet he never
Published. And it was well he did not! For, anon, he became fully Satisfy^d, in
the Declared Will of our SAVIOR, That the Tares must have a Toleration: And
indeed there was a Time, when Austin himself could say, about the Exterpation
of the Tares, -- Nec quenquam Ecclesiae Filium debere arbitrari ad se ^oc
Officium Pertinere. He knew the Principle that generally Obtained among all
Christians till the Days of Constantine, and was Asserted by many of the
Fathers after him: Greatly decrying the Nonsense and Folly of Converting People
with Penalties. He saw, That the Man who is a Good Neighbor and a Good
Subject, has a Right unto his Life and the Comforts of it; and that it is not
his being of This or That Opinion in Religion, but his doing of something which
directly tends to the Hurt of Humane Society, by which this Right can be
forfeited: And therefore, Blasphemies and Attempts to Poison People with
Atheism and Profaneness, which Destroy the Ligaments of Humane Society, cannot
Sue for a Toleration. He saw, That a Good Neighbor and a Good Subject, has a
Claim to all his Temporal Enjoyments before he is a Christian; And he thought
it very odd, that the Man should lose his Claim, from his Embracing of
Christianity, and because he does not happen to be a Christian of the Uppermost
Party among the Subdivisions. For an Uppermost Party of Christians, to Punish
Men, in their Temporal Enjoyments, because in some Religious Opinions they
Dissent from them, or with an Exclusion from the Temporal Enjoyments which
would justly belong unto them, is a Robbery, whereof he could not but say, It
appears to me Unreasonable. It became Evident unto him, That all the Sacrifices
of Men unto GOD, not Proceeding from a Conscience Persuaded, that He does
Command them, and will Accept them: All Acts of Religion produced merely by
External Violence, are Detestable Things. He thought it not Enough to say, That
such Sacrifices are no more Acts of Homage unto GOD, than a Log of Wood
happening to fall before a Statue; but he though it them rather Acts of Contempt
upon His Infinite Majesty: For a Man to Do, in Religion, what his Conscience
does not Approve, is for him to Deny the GOD that is Above: The most notorious
among the French Persecutors themselves, have upon Occasion Confessed so! He
became sensible, That the Example of the Israelitish Reformers inflicting
Penalties on False Worshippers, would not Legitimate the like Proceedings among
the Christian Gentiles. For the Holy Land of Old, was by a Deed of (...), from
the Glorious GOD, Miraculously and indisputably Granted unto the Israelitish
Nation, and the Condition on which they held it, was their Observation of the
Mosaic Institutions. To Violate them, was what carried a Rebellion in it, and
was an High Treason against the King of the Theocracy; An Iniquity to be
Punished by the Judge! At the same time, Sojourners in the Land, were not
Compelled unto the keeping of those Laws and Rites, which Moses had given to
his People. Nay, and the Israelites themselves fell many of them into the worst
of Hoerisies; yet, while they kept the Laws and Rites of Moses, the Magistrate
would not meddle with them. The Hoerisies of the Sadduces then stuck at the
Foundations of all Religion; yet we do not find that our SAVIOR blamed the
Pharisees for not Persecuting of them as they could have done. The Christian
Religion brings us not into a Temporal Canaan; It knows no Designs; it has no
Weapons, but what are purely Spiritual. Finally; He saw, that until Persecution
be utterly Banished out of the World, and Cain's Club taken out of Abe^s Hand,
as well as out of Cain's, it is Impossible to rescue the World from Endless
Confusions: He that has the Power of the Sword will always be in the Right, and
always assume the Power of Persecuting In his latter times, he therefore looked
upon it, as one of the most Hopeful among the Signs of the Times, that People
begun so much to be Ashamed of a Practice, which had been A Mother of
Abominations. He came entirely into that Golden Maxim, Errantis Poena d^ceri.

Now, Instead of Distinguishing (for Instance,) between, a Simple Anabaptism to
be Tolerated, and (what the Angry Disciples would call) a Schismatical
Anabaptism, which (it seems) might not be Tolerated, he went, and bore his part
in Ordaining a Pastor to a Church of Baptists, in the Neighborhood. And if he
had seen any plead for the Persecution of Dissenters in yet greater Matters
than those wherein these Brethren differ from us, Good Old Martin himself could
not have appeared more earnestly, than he would have done, to Discourage the
Ithacian Spirit.

ARTICLE XIV. Sober Chiliasm.
ABout the Year, 1665. the World was Alarmed with Rumors of Motions among the
Jews in several Parts of the World, that made some who were Waiting for the
Consolation of Israel, to hope, that the Lord was going to set His Hand again
the second time, to recover the Remnant of His People, and assemble the
Outcasts of Israel, and gather together the Dispersed of Judah. Mr. Mather
Preached a Monthly Lecture, whereof all his Reward here was, that a
Subscription was made and paid for the Support of a Godly Gentleman, an Elder
of his Church, that lay some Years Confined and Languishing under a Palsy: And
he took this Occasion, to give his Auditory some Elaborate and Judicious
Lectures on that Mystery; Romans XI. 26. All Israel shall be Saved. In those
Lectures, he Declared, That he verily Believed the Motions then talked of would
come to nothing; and that the Time for Favor, the sat Time, would not yet come
on. But he maintained, That a Time would come, when the Israelitish Nation
should be Converted from their Infidelity, and Restored unto the Possession of
their Promised Land, and have a Glorious Kingdom of GOD erected among them, and
thorough them Extended unto the Gentiles. These Lectures were quickly
afterward Published in London; and they were not only Accompained with
Praefatory Recommendations from such Eminent Persons as Mr. Davenport, and Mr.
Greenhil, and Mr. Hook; but also, though he were but a Young Man of about Six or
Seven and Twenty, the Renoumed Mr. Caryl, when he Read the Book, passed that
Judgment upon it, That it was a Rare Thing to find any where a Conjunction of
so much Learning and so much Piety, as there was in the Author of that
Incomparable Treatise. And it was a little Diverting unto him, above Twenty
Years after, to meet with Gentlemen in London, who Complemented him, as having
long ago read an Incomparable Treatise, Written (as they Supposed) by his
Learned, and Pious, and Excellent Father, upon, The Mystery of the Salvation of
Israel

But having Entered thus far into the Delectable Study of the Prophecies, he
must proceed a little further; and finding all the Prophets as with one Mouth,
Declaring, what the Protevangelium in the v^ry Head o^ our Book, has given us
the Comfort of; That after a long War between the Messiah and the Serpent, of
which War our Earth is the Seat, the Messiah shall be Victorious over the
Serpent, and, as in every Victory, the Vanquished must Leave the Field in the
Possession of the Conqueror; Finding also, that such a Belief* was Maintained
by All the Orthodox before the first Nicene Council, and the Fathers of that
Famous Council also, set their Seal in Strong Terms unto it; And it was not
Condemned, until Damasus the Bishop of Rome, toward the End of the Fourth
Century, did his best that the Kingdom of CHRIST might be forgotten, as the
Kingdom of ANTICHRIST was coming on; (the Spes Fidelium was lost, as well as
Tertullians Book of such a Title!) he now found himself under a Necessity to
become a Sober Chiliast. When he considered, That IMMEDIATELY AFTER the long
Tribulation under which the Jewish Nation is now Languishing, THEN the Son of
Man comes in the Clouds of Heaven with Power and Great Glory; And, That at the
Arrival of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven given to the People of the Saints
of the most High, at the Expiration of the Fourth Monarchy, THEN the Thrones
are Pitched, and the Appointer of Times appears on His Throne, and a Fiery
Stream issues from it, and the Judgment is set and the Body of the Romish
Beast* is given to the Burning Flame; And, That our SAVIOR is to destroy
Antichrist with the Brightness of His COMING; And, That there will be a
Resurrection of the Dead, when the Time, and the Times, and the Half-Time,
allowed for the Reign of Antichrist is Expired, or at the End of the Four
Monarchies; And, That when the Seventh Trumpet Sounds, which next follows on
the ceasing of the Turkish Hostilities upon Europe, there comes on the Time of
the Dead, when they shall be Judged, and a Reward shall be given to them; and
This is the Time when the Kingdoms of This World shall be the Lords; And, That
the First Resurrection foretold in the Holy Oracles can be no other than (what
every one owns the Second is) a Literal and a Corporal Resurrection: He saw
himself shut up unto the Faith of it, and Compelled unto the Persuasion, That
the SECOND COMING of our SAVIOR will be at the BEGINNING of the Happy State,
which is to be Expected for the Church upon the Earth in the latter Days. And
about the Year 1668. he wrote in Latin, a Book Entitled by him, Diatriba de
Signo Filii Hominis, et de Secundo Messioe Adventu; Which was afterward
Published in Holland: wherein he maintains the genuine Doctrine of the
Millennium; and had he then so fully studied the Distinction between the New
Heavens and the New Earth, as he did afterward, a Golden Key to Open many of
the Things hard to be understood, there had been a bright Addition to his Good
Performance. But by Studying the Prophecies, he found, as many Holy Servants of
GOD have done, a Communion with the Lord GOD of the Holy Prophets to be
Sensibly Assisted and Advanced, And by Meditations on the Paradisian State of
Things, which there will be at the Restitution of all Things, he sailed so near
to the Land of Promise, that he found the Balsamic Breezes of the Heavenly
Country upon his mind, which, where they come, usually Refine and Sweeten, and
Marvellously Purify the Souls that are Favored with them.

I find, that on his Days of Prayer about this Time, he mightily looked up to
Heaven for Direction and Assistence, in the Composing of this Book; and in all
his Enquiries into the Characters and Approaches of the Holy Kingdom. And I
take this Opportunity to Remark it once for all; That still when he had any
Book upon the Anvil, his Days of Prayer made it a considerable Article, That
the Glorious Lord would be with him in the Writing of that Book, and give it
Acceptance among His People, and make it useful to the Purposes for which it
was designed. We all saw, how Acceptable the Books generally Proved, and how
Servicea^^e, and with what a Quick Dispersion the Impression went off; and how
sensibly the Prayers were Answered.

ARTICLE XV. Chastened Sore, but not Given over to DEATH.
IN the Month of April, 1669. His Father, being Moderator of a Council met at
Boston, and Lodging at his House, was taken so very Ill, that he was Obliged
thereupon to Accompany him in the Conveyance of a Coach to Dorchester; Where
the Venerable Old Man; after little more than a Weeks Torture from that Scourge
of Students, from which he had hitherto Suffered very little, but now bore a
Terrible Assault from it with Incredible, and Incomparable Patience, (in the
Intervals reading Dr. Goodwins little Book, Of Patience) resigned his Holy Soul
into the Hands of his Redeemer: and there was this odd Circumstance in his
Malady, that there did come from him, and were found in him, just as many
Stones as there were Years of his Age, which were Seventy Three. He did with
all Filial Affection Attend and Comfort and Strengthen his Afflicted Parent in
his Agonies; and received from him those Instructions relating to the State of
Religion in the Churches, which afterward he Published unto them. And then,
after the Death of his Father, he gave the People of GOD, a Taste of what he
Lived upon, in a Sermon on those Words; Phil IV. 20. GOD -- our Father

Quickly after this; that is, on July 24, he felt a Soul so on the Wing for
Heaven, for a Night and a Day together, as he had scarce felt in his Life
before; He wrote at the Time, how strangely his Heart was Moved and Melted
within him, from the Thoughts of Heaven Working there. On the Third Day after
this, Messengers brought him the Heavy Tidings, that at That very Time, the
Soul of his Brother Eleazar (above an Hundred Miles off,) which had been strung
so much to an Unison with his, Actually took Wing for the Heavenly World.

The Death of his Brother Obliged him in the latter End of the Next Month, to
take a Journey unto Northampton, for the Assistence of the Desolate Widow and
People there. But there, on the Second of September, a Violent and a Dangerous
Fever siezed him; and he became Sick, nigh unto Death: But he comforted
himself, that he was, as the Sick Epaphroditus of Old, a Minister on a Journey
and on his Duty. Being in Extremity of Pain, some of the Godly Brethren there,
set apart a Day to Pray for his Deliverance; and while they were yet Praying,
he was Delivered. But the Fever continuing, there were on the following Week,
no less than Three Days of Prayer kept by the Good People in the Town, for the
Preservation of his Precious Life. His Church at Boston also kept a Day of
Supplications for it; and sent him likewise a Physician, to use the best means
for his Recovery. After Thirteen Days his Fever left him; and as soon as he was
able to Write, he Wrote this brief Account of his Inner Man, under the
Visitation. GOD was Wonderfully Gracious to me. He did not leave me to Doubts
and Fears concerning my Eternal Estate; but caused His Face to Shine upon me. I
felt His Love, and saw that Jesus Christ gave Himself, even for me. I could not
think of any Sin I had been Guilty of, but my Conscience, and I think the Holy
Spirit of GOD with my Conscience, told me, that It, and all my Sins though Many
and Great, were Repented of, and done away in the Blood of CHRIST. I found
myself very Willing to Die. When I thought of my Wife and Children, my Heart
gave them up unto GOD, firmly believing, that he would take Care of them: And I
had as much Quiet in my Mind, as if I had neither Wife nor Children to Care
for. When I thought of that Blessedness, which is to be Enjoy d in Another
World, I longed to be there. Oh! The Presence of GOD! Oh! The Presence of GOD!
Oh! The Presence of GOD: It is sweeter than Life it self. My Soul knows it!
-- But when I thought of doing Service for JESUS CHRIST, I became desirous to
Live yet a little longer. --

Before Winter came on, he returned unto Boston: But under such Languishments,
especially from that Comprehensive Mischief which they call, The Hypocondriac
Affection, that he lay confined all the Winter; and his Recovery to any
Service, was by many very much Despaired of. That which added unto his
Affliction* was a grievous and little short of Mortal, Molestation from the
Ephialtes; which indeed ever now and then Afflicted him, all the rest of his
Pilgrimage.

While he lay yet very Low, he Wrote, Some Considerations, which make me ready
to Believe, That GOD will continue me, to do Him Service in the World. 1.
Because much Prayer has been put up in many Places, that my Life might be
Spared. 2. GOD has returned me Home, through Wonderful Hazard and Hardship. He
that has done thus much will do more. 3. When I lay Sick at Northampton, there
was a Strong Persuasion on my Spirit, That GOD would spare my Life; Which I
then told my Sister; Desiring her to read, Psalm. CXVIII. 17, 18. 4. I am apt to
hope, that GOD has some Special Service for such a Poor Sinful Creature as I
am, to do with Reference to the Rising Generation, and the Establishment of
these Churches, upon foundations of Truth, Order, and Purity. This I am the
more apt to Believe, because of my Fathers Dying Counsil to me. 5. There is
Faith in the Hearts of many of my Christian Friends, concerning this matter.
They Believe, That GOD has more Work for me to do. 6. There is an Alteration
on my Spirit since my Sickness, For I am not so Desirous to Die as I have been,
but more Desirous to Live, that I may Glorify GOD in my Lord JESUS CHRIST.

He was after all, By Faith out of Weakness made Strong. And Prayer to the Lord
our Healer, the Glorious GOD of our Health, had its Efficacy very Conspicuously
Signalized in the matter. I will single out one Passage from his Diary to
Illustrate it, Written while he was yet under his Confinement. -- I Pleaded
with the Lord for my Life and Health, and my Heart was raised in some Measure
to Believe, That GOD would Restore me to His Service, and to my former Strength
again. The Grounds of my Persuasion, were such as these. 1. I had Considered
the Poor, GOD therefore Will Preserve me Alive, and Bless me upon Earth. 2.
GOD'S Name and Truth is a little Concerned in my Restoration; For some say,
That my Sickness is come upon me, for my being an Apostate from the Truth, and
that I shall never Preach again. 3. GOD has begun Mercy toward me; and His
Works are Perfect. 4. GOD has stirred up the Hearts of His Servants to Pray
for me; and my own Heart also to Pray for my Recovery. 5. The Reason why I
desire my Health again, is not that so I might Enjoy Honors and Pleasures in
this World, but that so His Name might be Glorified by me. Now seeing I have
Prayed for such Ends and from Such Grounds, My Desires will be fulfilled. 6. My
Heart does Trust in GOD for His Salvation. Therefore He will Save me out of
this Distress. 7. Because of His Covenant, and because of the Blood of the
Covenant. Zech. IX. 11. And, because I have Humbled myself under the Hand of
GOD. 1 Pet. V. 6.

In the Spring of the Year, 1670. he returned unto his Beloved Pulpit: And made
his first Sermon on those Words: Psalm. XCIV. 12. Blessed is the Man, whom thou
Chastnest, O Lord, and reachest out of thy Law. But being still under feeble
Circumstances, and having a Strong Impression on his Mind, that the Drinking of
the Mineral Waters might be of use to him, he took a Lodging at Lyn, where he
might repair every Morning, to a Spring there, which was then Famous through
the Country. I will Transcribe a Passage or two from his Diary, which he wrote
in the Time of his being there.

One is this. At the Waters, retiring myself under the Trees, I poured out my
Soul before the Lord, and there met with Him. I did humbly and believingly
(through the Lords Grace toward me) betake myse^f unto GOD, and unto JESUS
CHRIST, for the Healing of my Bodily Distempers. I Believed, Because, though
Sin had brought these Distempers on me, yet GOD had accepted the Sacrifice,
which CHRIST has offered for my Sin. Because also GOD had formerly heard my
Prayers. And because CHRIST has Redeemed my Body as well as my Soul. CHRIST
intends to bestow Eternal Glory on my Body as well as on my Soul: And therefore
He will not deny unto me so small a matter as Bodily Health, which is nothing
in comparison of Eternal Glory. Finally, Because I desire Health, for the
Lord's Sake, and not for my own; Even that I may do Service for Him. After
Prayer, I went away Inwardly Rejoicing, because, I have Prevailed! I have
Prevailed I have Prevailed for Mercy!

Another is This. At the Waters. There again the Lord Enabled me with Tears,
and Persuasion of a Gracious Answer, to pour out my Desires before Him, for
both Bodily and Spiritual Healing to be vouchsafed unto me. My dear GOD in
JESUS CHRIST, will certainly accept of some Service from me; Blessed be His
Glorious Name forever and ever! Amen! Amen!

It was not long before the Lost Jewel was restored unto him. Nevertheless, in
the way to it, he met with many grievous Pangs of Overwhelming Melancholy: of
which he also says, I found the Prayer of Faith to be the best Remedy against
it. But of this also, I will from his Diary, only note a Couple of Passages.

One is this; As I was returning home from Lyn, at the end of the Town, a poor
Godly Woman (whose Name is Mansfield) desired those that Rode with me to go
forward, for she must needs speak with me. When I stopped, O Sir, (said she,
with much affection, and many Tears) I am troubled at my Condition. I am
afraid, that I grieve the Good Spirit of GOD, by not being so cheerful as I
ought to be. I am Dejected, and my Soul is Disquieted; and when I meet with
Afflictions, I lay them too much to Heart; and I doubt, I herein offend so
Gracious a Father, as GOD has been unto me; a GOD who has done much for me, and
and sometimes Manifested Himself unto me. I was astonished to hear her speak,
and see her come thus to me for some Relief in such Temptations. I concluded,
that this poor Woman (who little thought so herself) was a Messenger sent from
GOD unto me; For she spoke to my very Condition, as if He that knows all things
had put Words into her Mouth. Oh! Let the Great Physians of Souls (said I then)
Look upon me, and let Him Heal me, and give me Power of Grace to be more than a
Conqueror over my Special Infirmities.

Another is This. I was in much Distress and Anguish in my Spirit. lest all my
Faith should prove but Phansy and Delusion. In this Distress, I betook myself
to CHRIST, and wept before Him, saying Lord JESUS, let me be Destroyed, if thou
can find in thy Heart to Destroy, a poor Creature, who desires above all
thing to Glorify thy Name. Here I am before Thee; Do (...) me and with me, what
thou will, If thou will Glorify thyself in my Confusion, thy will be done; I
have deserved that it should be so: But, Oh, that thou would pity me! After
I had thus fled and cried unto the Rock that is higher than I, I was revived.
But Anxiety returning the next Day, and being hurried with Temptations, I
professed before the Lord JESUS, That if the Tempter did fall upon me, to
destroy me, he should find me at the Feet of CHRIST; and will CHRIST suffer him
there to destroy me? I therewith Promised before the Lord, that if He would
bring me out of my Distress, I would endeavor in all Respects a better
Carriage before Him. After this, I had some Persuasion, That GOD heard my
Prayers, and beheld my Tears, as he He did those of Hezekiah, and the Weeping
Jacob.

And so it Proved. Health and Peace returned unto him; And though the Labors
of the Pulpit now became near Twice as much as they were before, yet he
Comfortably went through those and all his other Labors: and Opportunities to
do Good, grew upon his hands continually.

By way of Gratitude unto Heaven, and as an Effect and Symptom of a Perfect
Recovery. One of the first Things he did was TO WRITE THE LIFE OF HIS FATHER:
which as I told you before, was Transcribed into Clarks Collections. He also
Published the last Sermons of his Brother Eleazar, who was led from the Dying
Words of his Father about care for the Rising Generation just before, to Preach
diverse Lords Days on those Words, 1 King. VIII. 57. The Lord our GOD be with
us, as He was with our Fathers. He likewise Prepared for the Press, a very
Savoury Book, Entitled, Some Important Truths about Conversion, which was then
quickly Printed at London, (and fifty Years after, he saw it Reprinted in
Boston,) with a Preface of Dr. Owen unto it, who gives the Author something of
his Deserved Character; saying among other things, It is known unto all, to
whom he is known, that he is a Person of Singular good Learning, and Reading:
And here -- a Workm^n that need not be ashamed.

In fine, from an Heart now more than ever set upon doing for GOD, he now
Wrote; Jun. 11. 1670.

The Threefold Wish of the Chief of Sinners. I Wish! I Wish! I Wish!

1. That I may do some Special Service for my dear GOD in JESUS CHRIST before I
leave this World.

2. I would fain Leave Something behind me, that may be doing of Good upon
Earth, after I shall be in Heaven.

3. After I have finished my Doing Work, I would fain Suffer for the Sake of my
dear GOD, and for JESUS CHRIST.

ARTICLE XVI. What Occurred in the Approaching and Finishing of the Indian War.
ON the Entrance of the Year 1674. Observing the Sins of the Times, and
therewith Discerning the Signs of the Times, he had a sad and strong Impression
on his mind, and a Spirit that could not rest until he had Publicly Declared
it, That a Time of grievous Trouble was quickly coming on the Country; yea,
that a Sword should quickly be drawn, which would bring a dark and dismal Time
upon it. Under this Impression, he delivered on a Day of Prayer kept in his own
Congregation, What the Learned Mr. Oaks in his Praeface to it, calls A solid,
Succinct, Comprehensive Discourse, on Ezekiel. VII. 7. The Day of Trouble is near;
Which was by the Ordering of the Divine Providence immediately Published and
Scattered through a Country, Warned thus to flee from the Wrath to come. The
Country was then in all possible Tranquillity and Security. But the Next Year,
was the most Bloody one that ever New England saw; from the Indians, whom King
Philip Seduced into a War, that filled the Land from one end unto the other
with Desolations.

In the Time when the Sword of the Wilderness was Devouring what it had its
Commission to fall upon, he Employed the growing Opportunities which were now
put into his Hands, especially in Sermons Preached in the Audience of the
General Assembly, to bear the most Public Testimonies against the Miscarriages,
which he thought had incensed Heaven against the Land; and particularly procure
Wholesome Laws against such Provoking Evils, as might properly fall under the
Cognizance of the Civil Magistrate. At the same time, there being a Prospect of
Poverty coming in like an Armed Man, and very many Poor People driven to
extreme Necessities, he did by his Letters, procure a whole Ships load of
Provision, from the Charity of his Friends in Dublin, and a considerable Sum of
Money, and much clothing, from the like Charity of his Friends in London, to be
distributed among the Indigent.

But the Armies of Prayers, with which he did in this Calamitous Time, Coelum
tundere^et Misericordiam Extorquere! The Land had then many true Sons of Jacob
in it, who Wept and made Supplication; But this Israelite indeed made a bright
Figure among them. And the Success of the Prayers were so very Remarkable, (and
the Blessed Calvin's cry, Nunquam irritas fore Preces! -- which occurs an
Hundred times over in his Comm^ntaries on the Psalms, was in so strange a
manner Verified;) that when the War was over, he made a Collection of them,
which he Published under the Title of, An Historical Discourse Concerning the
Prevalency of Prayer. In this History, there is not the least Notice taken of
his own share, in the Prevailing Prayers: But I myself Remember those things,
which enable me to say, Certainly no Man had a Greater Share. On each of the
Articles in the History, he had himself some Remarkable Experience. But I will
Single out one Instance, that had something Singular in it. He found his
Prayers animated with a Singular Importunity, That King Philip, the First Mover
and Grand Actor, in the War, might be reach d by the stroke of Heaven, that
should cut him off. At length, he set apart a Day in a Study often Perfumed
with such Days, wherein he noted this down, for one of his Humble and Earnest
Requests unto Heaven That GOD would deliver up Philip, the Principal Enemy of
His People here. In Two or Three Days, less than a Week, after This, the Thing
was Accomplished! And there was this also a little Singular. He had for diverse
Lords Days, made the Death of that Miserable King, a Petition which in his
Public Prayers he somewhat Enlarged upon But on one Lords (...) Day he quite
forgot it: for which Forgetfulness I well Remember, that I heard him wondering
at, and Blaming of, himself in the Evening. However, he was more Satisfied,
when a few Hour; after, there came to Town the Tidings, That before That
Lord's Day, the Thing was Accomplished. It was a great Maxim with him, Homine
prob^ Orante nihil Potentius: A Prayerful Man, is a Potent Man. O mighty Man,
What greater Proofs than thy own Prayers, need be Produced for it!

ARTICLE XVII. Strange Impressions and Predictions.
IN the Year, 1676. he had a strange Impressision on his mind, that caused him,
on Nov. 19. to Preach a Sermon on those Words, Zeph. III. 7. I said surely thou will fear me, thou will receive Instruction; So their DWELLING SHOULD NOT BE
CUT OFF; and Conclude the Sermon, with a Strange Praediction, That a Fire was a
coming, which would make a Deplorable Desolation. After he came home, as he was
Walking in his Study, he was Exceedingly moved and melted in such a Soliloquy;
O Lord GOD, I have told this People, that thou art about to cut off their
Dwellings; but they will not believe it. Lord, who has believed! Nevertheless,
O Lord GOD, I beseech ^hee to Spare them: If it may stand with thy Holy
Pleasure spare them, Spare them! So did he walk Weeping before the Lord! At the
same time, he Earnestly urged upon his Consort, a Speedy Change of Habitation;
which could not be Accomplished. On the next LordsDay, he Preached, [ Not aware
of its being so!] a Farewel-Sermon, on those Words, Rev. III. 3. Remember how
thou have Received and Heard. And the Conclusion of the Sermon was, That
Proedictions of Evil to come ought to be Remembered; And, that when the Lord
JESUS is about to bring any heavy Judgment upon His People, He is wont to stir
up the Heart of some Servant of His, to give Warning of it; which Warning
should be Remembered, that so People may be ready to entertain what must come
upon them. His last Words were, People will not Remember, nor Mind these Things.
But, as Jehu said unto his Captain, Remember how the Lord laid this Burden, so,
when the Evil is come, you will Remember what you heard concerning it. The very
Night following, a Desolating Fire broke forth in his Neighborhood. The House
in which he with his Flock, had Praised GOD, was Burnt with the Fire. Whole
Streets were Consumed in the Devouring Flames, and laid in Ashes. His own House
also took a part in the Ruins: But by the Gracious Providence of GOD, he lost
little of his Beloved Library: Not an Hundred Books from above a Thousand; Of
those also he had an immediate Recruit, by a Generous Offer which the
Honorable Mrs. Bridget Hoar made him, to take what he Pleased from the Library
of her Deceased Husband. In less than Two years also, he became Owner of a
Better House; And though his Flock was now Scattered, for several Months, GOD
made it an Opportunity for him to Preach every Lord's Day, in the other
Churches, and Entertain Successively the whole City, with his Enlightening and
Awakening Ministry.

I will not here Theologize, much less will I Philosophize upon the Original
and Operation of those Proesagious Impressions about Future Events, which are
often Produced in Minds, which by Piety and Purity and Contemplation, and a
Prayerful and Careful Walk with GOD, are made more Susceptible of them I am
only to Observe, that this Holy Man of GOD, was no Stranger to them; and that I
may dispatch at once all the Instances, that I think proper to mention until
some while hence I foresee I shall be compelled unto some further Notice of
them, I only add what in the Order of our Story should be Introduced here. He
did no less than three Times as the Year, 1678. was coming on, very Publicly
Declare, That he was verily Persuaded, a very Mortal Disease would shortly
break in upon the place; and the Slain of the Lord would be many. Some of his
Friends were troubled at him, for it. But when the Year 1678. was come on we
saw the Mortal Disease. The Smallpox broke in, which proved a Great Plague
unto the Country and never did Boston see so Fearful a Mortality: The Cry of
the City went up to Heaven!

The famous Dr. Henry More, who is not Ordinarily numbered among Fanatics, has
a Passage that may a little Solve some of these Appearances. Though the Spirit
of Prophesy in some sense be ceased, yet GOD has not hereby Precluded His own
Power, nor yet that of His Ministering Spirits from Visiting and Assisting of
His Servants as He pleases. And there are some Pious Persons to whom it must
not be Denied, that very Unusual Things of one sort of another, have sometimes
happened.

ARTICLE XVIII. The Reforming Synod.
THe Man, with whom the First Born of his Wishes, was, not for the Great or
Sweet Things of This World, but that he might be Employed in the Doing of
Special Service for the Kingdom of GOD in the World; Behold, what the King of
Heaven will do for the Man who so Delights to Honor Him, and whom He Delights
[as He ever will for such!] to Honor!

Mr. Mather was one excellently Prepared for Special Service; And GOD made him,
all along so Significant and Conspicuous, but by'nd by (and Now) so placed him
at the Head, in all the Considerable Affairs relating to Religion, in a Country
whereof the main concern was Religion, that one can scarce Write the History of
his Life without Writing the History of his Times, and it will be the History
of his Country for Threescore Years together. But That having been already
done, I know not whether This may not be under a Necessity of Suffering some
Amputations: They shall be however as few as may be.

I am arrived now to a Stage, and the Year, (1679) wherein a Synod of all the
Churches in the Colony, whereof Mr. Mather was esteemed a great part, even that
which was called, The Reforming Synod, appears Convened. It is an Awful
Observation, which the Excellent Comenius has concerning his famous Bohemian
(which were in many things like the New-English) Churches; That they were
nearer to the Sanctuary than other Churches, and therefore when some Apostasy
was found among them, CHRIST Expressed His Displeasure against them in most
Swift and Severe Dispensations. New England was not become so Degenerate a
Country, but that there was yet Preserved in it, far more of Serious Religion,
as well as of Blameless Morality, than was Proportionably to be seen in any
Country upon the face of the Earth. Nor were they overgrown with the Vices
which are Enumerated by Cyprian as Abounding among the Primitive Christians,
for which he said, Vapulamus itaque ut meremur. Nevertheless, the Spirit of the
World began so far to Operate, that there was a Sensible Decay of Real and
Vital PIETY, and the Power of Godliness began sensibly to suffer some
Abatements: Watchful, and Fruitful, and Prayerful Christians, and Humble
Walkers with GOD, were not so many as they had been, among a People greatly
Multiplying; and the Holy GOD might also say, There are found Wicked Men among
my People. In the Time of the War, there were noble Essays in the Churches,
(especially in the way of Renewing their Covenants,) to recover out of these
Declensions; and the Success of them was Admirable and very Memorable. But the
Country saw a Succession of Heavy Judgments: and still upon the Relaxation of
Calamity there was an Augmentation of Iniquity: so that Good Men thought it
high time to enquire with all possible Solemnity into the Grounds of the
Controversy, which it appeared that the Glorious GOD had with the Country; and
this the rather, because many did not Enquire Wisely concerning the matter.
Indeed, as our SAVIOR has no where Promised a Temporal Prosperity, unto a Life
of Piety; but bid us look for the Discipline of the Cross, and has told us,
That through much Tribulation we must enter into the Kingdom of GOD: So if a
whole People were made up of such as led a Life of Piety, yet a Promise of all
Temporal Prosperity could not be claimed for them. If every Individual Believer
be still Obnoxious to the Things that are not Joyous but Grievous, how can a
People consisting of such, look for an Exemption from them? It is true, the
Israelites had a Promised Land, wherein they might hope for a Temporal
Prosperity, while they kept the Condition of the Covenant by which they held
it. But the Christian Church, is got out of that Minority. Nor has our SAVIOR
Promised His Church any Land flowing with Milk and Honey in this Present Evil
World. We actually see this, in every Generation; That the most Reformed People
of GOD (the Vaudois for That!) have been harassed with Persecutions, as well as
they that by Sinking into Criminal Corruptions have Provoked the Holy JESUS to
say, I have something against thee; At the same time, they that Work
Wickedness, have not wanted for Exaltation. Yea, let us look where we will at
this Day; The People among whom the Covenant of the Gospel is most adhered
unto, see much more Temporal Adversity, than many People who pay very little
Regard unto it. Nevertheless, it will be the Wisdom of any People under Heavy
Judgments of Heaven, to Apprehend Loud calls unto Repentance in them; and
Confess and Forsake their Sins, that they may find Mercy with the Lord: They
make a very Ill use of the Divine Dispensations, and run the Hazard of being
dealt withal as the Refractory and Incorrigible, it they do dot so. Yea, they
have cause to be Apprehensive, that the Heavy Judgments, may come to manage a
Special Controversy, and be Inquisitive, what and where it may be, and be
Sollicitous for the Removal of it. Be sure, the Prayers of such a Reforming
People, under their Distresses, will be the most likely to be Prevailing ones:
GOD has also Wondrous Rewards for the Encouraging of Piety, and Equity and
Sabbatizing and Almsgiving, even in the Life that now is. And good Order
Flourishing among any People, has a Natural Tendency to befriend many Points of
their Temporal Prosperity; Righteousness will Exalt a Nation.

Wherefore upon a Motion of Mr. Mather in Conjunction with others excited by
him for it, the General Court called upon the Churches to send their Delegates
for a Synod in Boston; To consider, What are the Evils that have Provoked the
Lord to bring His Judgments on New England. And, What is to be done that so
those Evils may be Reformed? The Churches having first kept a General Fast,
that a Gracious Direction might be Obtained of GOD in what was now to be done,
the Synod met at Boston Sept. 10. 1679. The Synod also kept a Day of Prayer
with Fasting; in which Mr. Mather was chose for one of the Preachers, when the
Venerable Old Mr. Cobbet was chose for the other. Several Days were then Spent
in free Discourses on the Two Questions; and at last, a Result with a Preface,
were agreed unto, which were of Mr. Mathers drawing up. On the Day, when a
Committee of the Ministers Presented it unto the General Court, Mr. Mather
Preached a very Potent Sermon, on the Danger of not being Reformed by these
Things: And the General Court thereupon Commended it unto the Serious
Consideration of all the Churches and People in the Jurisdiction.

GOD made this Instrument a Special Service to the cause of PIETY. Especially
in that the Faithful Ministers throughout the Country, were Directed and
Strengthened, in Lifting up their Voice like a Trumpet, against the Provoking
Evils. But the most notable Effect was, the Renewal of Covenant, which was
attended by many Churches, in Pursuance of the largest Article among the
Reforming Expedients, which the Synod had Recommended. The Churches under the
Conduct of their Pastors, having on Previous Days of Prayer set apart for that
purpose, considered what Heaven Expected from them, were willing Anew to
declare their most Explicit Consent unto the Covenant of Grace, and most
Explicitly to Recognize their Obligations to those Duties of it, in which the
Singular Temptations and Corruptions of the Day called for their Excited
Vigilance. When their Praeparatory Church-Meeting had produced a Concurrence in
this Resolution, they Publicly Devoted a Day for this Holy Intention; and with
Suitable Prayers and Sermons, there was Read their Covenant, whereto their
Assent was expressed by the Brethren lifting up their Hands, and the Women only
standing up. The Church whereof Mr. Mather was the Pastor, was a Pattern to
many others, in this Religious Action; And as there was usually a vast
Confluence of People on these Occasions, thus, there were Thousands of
Spectators who testified, that they never saw what may be called, A Special
Presence of GOD our SAVIOR, more gloriously Discovered, than in those awful
Solemnities.

As a sort of Parenthesis unto these Designs, of PIETY, it may not be amiss
here to Observe, that Mr. Mather being a Person Polished with an Erudition
beyond what was Ordinary, among other Symptoms and Effects of it, a little
after this, he formed a Philosophical Society of Agreeable Gentlemen, who met
once a Fornight for a Conference upon Improvements in Philosophy and Additions
to the Stores of Natural History; From which the Learned Wolferdus Senguerdius
a Professor at Leyden had some of the Materials, wherewith his Philosophia
Naturalis was Enriched; And in part from their Collections also One that had a
share in that Combination, and is now Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY in London,
afterward transmitted Communications thither. But the Calamity of the Times,
anon gave a fatal and total Interruption to this Generous Undertaking.

ARTICLE XIX. Another wholesome Fit of Sickness.
THe last Parenthesis being so dropped, we may go on, where we left off before
it, in our History.

On May. 12. 1680. The Synod had a Second Session at Boston; When Our
Confession of Faith was agreed upon. Though there were many Elder, and some
Famous, Persons in that Venerable Assembly, yet Mr. Mather was chosen their
Moderator. He was then Ill, under the Approaches and Beginnings of Fever; but
so Intense was he on the Business to be done, that he forgot his Illness; and
he kept them so close to their Business, that in Two Days they dispatched it:
and he also Composed the Proeface to the Confession.

On this he immediately took his Bed under a dangerous Fever; which anon left
him under an Ague; and this was attended with a Cough, which carried the
Symptoms of a Consumption with it; so that he was brought very low, and his
Life was much despared of. But GOD stirred up the Hearts of many Godly and
Worthy People, to be much in Prayer for him. His own Church expressed their
Love to him, in keeping of no less than Three Days of Prayer that his Life
might be prolonged, and his Health restored. On one of those Days, the
Venerable Old Mr. Eliot Preached a Sermon on those Words, Joh. XI. 3. Lord,
Behold, he whom thou Love is Sick. And after the Sermon, that Man of GOD
returning to him, said, Blessed be GOD! Brother, you are ours; we have Obtained
you from GOD; you shall yet continue with us. And Mr. Mather himself also,
being asked by some of his Friends, Whether he did himself think, that his Time
was now come to Die? He Replied; I am not at all Careful about that matter, I
have the Satisfaction, that I have endeavored to Walk before GOD with a
Perfect Heart, and to do that which is Well-Pleasing in His Sight.
Nevertheless, I do not think, that I shall Die at this Time; For I have not yet
Suffered for my Lord JESUS CHRIST, so much as I have Desired. He Recovered; and
that he might Express the purpose of his Life after his Recovery, his First
Sermon upon it, was on Phil. 1. 21. To me to Live is CHRIST. His Church also
did him the Uncommon Honor, of keeping a Day of Public THANSGIVING to GOD for
his being Restored unto them. Soon after which, the Death of his Pamphilus, the
Excellent Praesident of Harvard-College, Mr. Urian Oaks, opened a New Field of
Special Service for him; Whereof -- more hereafter! -- I will Remember my
Obligations.

I will here take notice only of one point, wherein the Restored Servant of
GOD, grew yet more Abounding in the Work of his Lord. Good Old Mr. Eliot, as
long ago, as not long after the Death of Mr. Mitchel said unto Mr. Mather:
Brother, The Lord has Blessed you with a Leading Spirit, as he did Mr. Mitchel,
who is gone unto Him, Certainly it is no little Notice, that is taken by our
Holy Lord, of what is done in the Meetings of His Ministers. I pray, Brother.
Lead us, in our Meetings: Bring forward as much Good in them as you can.
Accordingly Mr. Mather made it one of his Particular Studies, from this Time,
unto the End of his Pilgrimage; to make the Weekly (and other) Meetings of the
Ministers Profitable. How much Special Service he did in them, and how many
Good Motions, he brought forward, there is no Record kept, except in that Book
of Remembrance, which our GOD has Written before Him, for them who Think upon
His Name.

ARTICLE XX. The Charter appeared for.
BUT you said, Sir, Not Suffered so much for my Lord JESUS CHRIST, as I have
Desired! Never doubt; Sufferings will come on fast enough: Satan is not Asleep:
His Children and Factors, every where, as of Old, Fill the Country. But then,
though the Persecutors will Perfidiously Invent and Pretend other Causes, for
the Sufferings which they Inflict upon the Faithful, and will not own, that it
is directly for such and such Points of Religion, that they molest them, yet if
the True Cause that lies at the Bottom of all the Molestations which their
Adversaries give them, really is, Their Godliness and Usefulness, and their
Significant Appearance as Witnesses for GOD and CHRIST, and Instruments of his
Kingdom, they THEN Suffer for the Lord JESUS CHRIST, in all that is done unto
them. Now, Come on, Sufferings; We are Prepared for you!

In the latter end of the Year, 1683. there arrived a Declaration from King
Charles II. with a Signification to the Country, That except they would make a
full Submission and entire Resignation of their Charter to his Pleasure, a Quo
War^^^^ against it should be Prosecuted. The Question was offered unto Mr.
Mather, whether the Country could without a plain Trespass against Heaven, do
what was Demanded of them; and in his Elaborate Answer to it; he Demonstrated,
That they would act neither the part of Good Christians, nor of True
Englishmen, if by any Act of theirs they should be Accessory to the Plot then
manageing to produce a General Shipwreck of Liberties. Communicating his Answer
to several of the Magistrates, the Copies thereof came into many Hands; and
with so much Efficacy, that the Country was preserved from a Mean Compliance
with the Vile Proposal. Great was the Rage of Adversaries on this Occasion; and
Mr. Mather was by them called and spited as, The Mahomet of New England. He
felt it; but yet so Satisfied in the Good Work, that when the Freemen of Boston
met on Jan 23. that they might give Instructions to their Deputies for the
General Court, and the Deputies with others, desired him to be present, and
give them his Thoughts on the Case of Conscience before them; he made a short
Speech in the Town House; and This was it, as I find it in his own Copy of it.
As the Question is now Stated, Whether you will make a full Submission and
entire Resignation of your Charter and the Privileges of is, unto his
Majesty's Pleasure, I verify Believe, We shall Sin against the GOD of Heaven if
we Vote an Affirmative unto it. The Scripture teaches us otherwise. We know
that J^phthah said, That which the Lord our GOD has given us, shall we not
Possess it! And though Nabath ran a great Hazard by the Refusal, yet he said,
GOD forbid that I should give away the Inheritance of my Fathers. Nor would it
be Wisdom for us to Comply. We know, David made a Wise Choice, when he chose to
fall into the Hands of GOD rather than into the Hands of Men. If we make a full
Submission and entire Resignation to Pleasure. we fall into the Hands of Men
Immediately. But if we do it not, we still keep ourselves in the Hands of GOD;
we trust ourselves with his Providence: and who knows, what GOD may do for us?
There are also Examples before our Eyes, the Consideration whereof should be of
Weight with us. Our Brethren hard by us; what have gained by being so Ready to
part with their Liberties, but an Acceleration of their Miseries? And we hear
from London, that when it came to, the Loyal Citizens would not make a full
Submission and entire Resignation to Pleasure, left their Posterity should
Curse them for it. And shall We then do such a Thing? I hope, there is not one
Freeman in Boston, that can be guilty of it! However I have Discharged my
Conscience, in what I have thus Declared unto you.

Would such a Speech have been made by a Danish or a Swedish Clergyman? -- Upon
this pungent Speech, many of the Freemen fell into Tears; and there was a
General Acclamation, we Thank you, Sir! We Thank you, Sir! The Question was
upon the Vote carried in the Negative, Nemine Contradicente; And this Act of
Boston had a great Influence upon all the Country. But could some Folks have
had their Will on Mr. Mather, they would at least have John^onized him.
However, Sufferings are coming on!

ARTICLE XXI. A Variety of Sufferings.
IN the Year, 1684. he was under a Third Visitation brought very nigh unto
Death, from a Dangerous Fever; under which there were (as formerly) many
Prayers put up to Heaven for him. And he enjoyed (as formerly) a calm Serenity
of a Mind Rejoicing in the Hope of the Glory of GOD. After some some Weeks of
Confinement, he was Restored unto his Flock; whom, at his first coming abroad
(on the Twenty fourth of August,) he Entertained with an agreeable Sermon, on
Isa. XXXVIII. 18, 9. The Grave cannot Praise thee, -- The Living, The Living,
He shall Praise thee, as I do this Day: Insisting on This; That the Servants of
GOD, whilst Living in this World have many Opportunities and Advantages to
Glorify GOD, which the Saints in Heaven have not: Of which he proposed That as
the last Article; The Servants of GOD, while they are in this World, may Suffer
for Him. And now, we must expect, Sir, that you will Confirm your Doctrine.

I said, Sufferings are coming on. Some Wicked Men, whereof the Principal was
one Randolph, the Tool whom the Court sent over with the Demand of the Full
Submission and Entire Resignation which we have been Speaking of: Perpetrated
an Uncommon Villainy, which brought the very Life of Mr. Mather, as the Ahabitic
Times then went, into no little Danger. Having in their way, that is to say,
Basely, Circumvented some Innocent Letters of his, to an Eminent Person in
Amsterdam, which Enabled them to Imitate his Hand in Subscribing of his Name;
They forged a large Letter of Three Pages in Folio, full of not only
Ridiculous, but also Treasonable Expressions, whereof not one Sentence was his;
and with a Date of, Boston, 10. m. 3. d. 1683. they Subscribed his Name unto
it. This Letter was Read before the King and Council, and Motions were made for
Mr. Mather, to be fetched over, and made a Sacrifice: a Sidney, or a Cor^ish;
or as afterward they would have done, a Rosewel. The Advice of this, gave no
little Trouble to Mr. Mather, and his Friends; and what he wrote upon it was;
That which Troubled me, was, that I was like to Suffer as an Evil-doer, through
the Malice and Falsehood of Wicked Men. Might I have Suffered for any Truth,
which I had born Witness to, I could have rejoiced in it; But now, GOD was not
like to have Glory by my Sufferings. This was (...) very sad Thought unto me.
Methinks [ If I may say so,] He did not Comfortably enough consider, That his
Testimonies to Truth and Right, and the Figure he made in Serving the Churches
of GOD, lay at the Bottom of all, and Procured him what he was now Suffering
from the Malice and Falsehood of Wicked Men; and their Contrivances to Represent
him as an Evil-Doer, were but Aggravations of the Suffering. But it may be, he
will by'nd by, after the AEstuation is a little spent, come to a just
Reflection. --

However much Prayer to GOD on the behalf of His Persecuted Servant, was made
not only by his own Flock, but also by many other Pious People up and down the
Country. He himself also made his Vows, That if GOD would Save him from the
Evil! Designed against him, he would (His CHRIST helping of him) endeavor to
do yet more for His Glory, than he had yet ever done in his Life before. And at
the Bottom, he Wrote; My GOD has Saved me.

A Gracious GOD Overruled the Spirits at Whitehall. The Thoughts of giving any
further Trouble to Mr. Mather were laid aside, for the Present. Probably the
Forgery might appear too plain unto them. They might have a View of a more
Effectual way by'nd by to take him off. Randolph missed of this Bloody Purpose.
Wretch, I shall have a further Occasion to mention thee!

However, that Father of Lies, (as one styles him) the Infamous Le Strange, did
in several of his Execrable Observators Publish as much as he thought fit of
that Forged Letter, with his wretched Annotations upon it, that so Mr. Mather
might have the Honor of Cruel Mockings all over the Nation. And, I Pray, what
is there in Death itself more uneasy to a Great Mind,than what he feels in the
Indignities under which he must Complain, They Laugh me to Scorn! And Sr.
Richard Dutten, with the Satisfaction proper to such Spirits, brought a Copy of
it unto Barbados, and scattered it all over the Caribbee Islands, that so Mr.
Mather might be made the Song of the Drunkard, and have a further share in the
Allatrations, which the Bright Wits of those Islands use to treat him with. He
Observed, That now the Book of PSALMS, was what he could more feelingly, and
with more Application than ever in his Life, Converse withal. Such Passages,
as, Princes have sat and spoke against me. -- I am filled with the Contempt of
them that are at Ease. -- The Proud have had me greatly in Derision. -- They
have forged a Ly against me. -- They have dug Pitts for me. -- The Wicked
have Waited for-me to Destroy me. -- Deliver me not up to the Will of my
Enemies. -- False Witnesses have risen up against me, and such as br^ath out
Cruelty. These and Innumerable other Passages in the Psalms, he now could Read
over and Pray over ( he said) so as he never could in his Life before. By'nd
by, when the Storm was over, he was able to Write this Reflection. The Lord has
had Respect unto all the WISHES, Written down before Him; on Jun. 11. 1670. --
Yea, He had so far Gratified my Desires of Suffering for Him, that my Name has
been cast forth as Vile and Wicked Men in England Scotland, Ireland, Barbados,
and the Leeward Islands, and elsewhere, have been Speaking all manner of Evil
of me falsely. And the Ground of these my Sufferings has been, because I have
desired to Approve myself Faithful unto the Lord JESUS, and unto His Kingdom
and Interest.

But what shall we say, if all these Humiliations of this Great Man, were only
to Prepare him for Mavelous Exaltations: and if these Things which thus
Mortified him, were only to make way for the Accomplishment of that Word; Zeph.
III. 19 I will get them Praise and Fame, where they have been put to shame!

ARTICLE XXII. Strange Deliverances.
JUdgment was entered against the MassachusettCharter: and the Court was full of
Indignation against the Country. The Religion of the Country was enough to
render It Obnoxious to the Rage of such a Generation as then carried all before
them. The Fidelity of the Country to Legal, Constitutions rendered it yet more
Liable to an Exemplary Vengeance. In a very Singular manner, Mr. Mather had
nothing but the Roaring of a Lion to look for. To Execute the Tragedies which
were intended for New England, that Cruel, and Horrid, and Hideous Tigre, whose
Barbarous Cruelties Committed quickly after in the West, have rendered him
Famous to all Succeeding Ages, had a Commission for it, and was coming over,
with a Regiment of Myrmidons, in Quality of Governor. Had this Kirk arrived,
what Barbarities must this People have Expected; even like those worse than
Gallic Immanities, under which their Brethren in Scotland, at this time were
Languishing; whereof my most Valued and Learned Brother Mr. Woodrow, has given
us an Edifying History? Be sure, Mr. Mather had fared no better, than a Mr.
Guthry. In the Time of this Doubtful Expectation, as a Man of Desires, he kept
many Days of Prayer;

And at last, On the SIXTH Day of FEBRUARY (as the Year One Thousand Six
Hundred and EIGHTY FIVE was coming on,) which he set apart for Supplications,
what a Messenger came unto him? He has noted in his Diary. THIS DAY, as I was
Praying to GOD for the Deliverance of New England, I was very much Moved and
Melted before the Lord, so that for some time, I was not able to speak a Word.
But then, I could not but say, GOD will deliver New England! GOD will deliver
New England! GOD will deliver New England! So I rose from my knees, with much
Comfort and Assurance, that GOD had heard me. These things, I hope, were from
the Spirit of GOD. Before I Prayed, I was very sad, and much dejected in my
Spirit; but after I had Prayed, I was very Cheerful and Joyful. I will then
Wait for the Salvation of GOD! Thus he wrote on the Sixth of February. --

-- And on the Fourteenth of April following, there arrived the Tidings, that
on THAT VERY DAY, there fell out THAT, which happily diverted and entirely
defeated, the coming of Kirk with his commission for the Government of
New England, and the horrible Slaughters, which the Roaring Lion and Ranging
Bear, would have made among the Best of the People; and which indeed brought
those Quick and Strange Revolutions upon the Nation, that gave such a Man as
Mr. Mather, Opportunities to Appear at Whitehall, in Circumstances that could
little have been Imagined. New England never saw a more Astonishing
Deliverance! --

ARTICLE XXIII. New Troubles on the Country.
IN the Year 1686. New England saw it self delivered into the Hands of Sr.
Edmund Andros, whom K. James II. made the Governor of the Country, with as
Arbitrary, (and one may say Treasonable) Commission, as ever any part of the
English Nation was abused withal, a Commission by which the Governor, with
three or four more Unreasonable Men, whereof none were Chosen by the People,
had power to make what Laws they would, and Levy Taxes according to their own
Humors upon the People; and he himself had power to send the best Men in the
Land more than Ten Thousand Miles out of it, as he Pleased. The Case of poor
New England was now, what Old Wendover tells of the Time, when Strangers
domineered over Subjects in England; Judicia committebantur Jujustis, Leges
Exlegibus, pax Discordantibus, Justitia Jujuriosis; and Foxes were made the
Administrators of Justice to the Poultry. It would make a Long and a Black
Story, to tell a Tenth Part of the Vile Things done, by that Scandalous Crew
which then did what they would in the Administration of the Government: even
Randolph himself who was then their Secretary, Confessed in a Letter of his,
which anon came to Light; They were as Arbitrary as the Great Turk. But the
Awakened and Alarmed People in the English Nation, began to take notice in
their Public Remonstrances, of what was doing at New England, as an Essay of
the French Government, whereunto England was then hurrying with a Phae^ontic
Praecipitation. The Administration, was almost entirely a Complication of
Shameless and Matchless Villianies. The Honest Gentlemen in the Council were
Overlooked and Browbeaten, and rendered Insignificant. Three or Four Finished
Villians did what they Pleased: There was no Controling of them. Among other
Instances of the Vile Things in it, there was This Comprehensive One; The
Banditi gave out, that the Charters being lost, all the Title that the People
had unto their Lands was lost with them; (for which small Defect in the Legal
and Public Settlements of them, was Presented:) and therefore they began to
Compel the People every where to take Patents for their Lands. Accordingly
Writs of Intrusion were Issued out against the Chief Gentlemen in the
Territory; by the Terror whereof many were driven to Petition for Patents, that
they might Enjoy the Lands, which had been Fifty or Sixty Years in their
Possession: But for these Patents there were such Exorbitant Prizes Demanded,
that Fifty Pounds could not Purchase for its Owner an Estate not Worth Two
Hundred: nor could all the Money and Movables in the Territory have Defrayed
the Charges of Pattenting the Lands at the Hands of these Crocodiles; Besides
the Considerable Quitrents for the King. Indeed, the Brutish Things done by
these Wild Boasts of the Earth, are too Many to be Related, and would be too
Brutish to be Believed. Guess what was to be Expected, from a Parcel of Hungry
Wretches, who had cast off all sense and all Face of Honesty, and who Publicly
told the Poor People, They must not think that the Privileges of Englishmen
would follow them to the Ends of the Earth; And, They had no more Privileges
left but This, that they were not Bought and Sold for Slaves. In short, All was
done, that might be Expected from a Kirk, Except the Bloody Part. But That was
coming on. The Lives of the Best Men began to be Practiced on. The Learned,
Pious, Peaceable Mr. Morton for That! And Mr. Mather stood far, for that from
which he thought he had been Delivered.

In this Time, you may be sure, Mr. Mather had not forgot his Old Stroke. I
find him still at Prayer as much as ever: And still under the like Impressions!
Take a Touch or two. As 1687. was coming on, I find him Writing, on one Day,
thus. After I came home from the Public Labors of the Lords Day, as I was
alone in my Study Praying for Good Tidings out of England, I was Exceedingly
Melted before the Lord. On another Day, thus. I sought unto GOD in Secret with
Tears, that He would send Reviving News out of England: And I could not but
Believe that He will do so. He had them Immediately.

ARTICLE XXIV. Whitehall, after many Obstructions Repaired unto.
THe King in the beginning of that Year, [Just Three Years and an Half, after
-- ] Published his, Declaration of Indulgence; which the Protestant Dissenters
had abundance of Reason to be Thankful for; inasmuch as it brought them out of
their Graves: And if it assumed an Illegal Power of Dispensing with Laws, yet
in Relation to Them, it only Dispensed with the Execution of such Infamous Laws
as were ipso sacto Null and Void before: Laws contrary to the Laws of GOD, and
the Rights and Claims of Humane Nature. Be sure, the NewEnglish Protestants,
found the Benefit of the Declaration; for it rescued the Maligned Churches of
New England out of a Devourers Talons, when he was just on the point making
many violent Invasions upon them. The Ministers hereupon at Mr. Mathers motion,
made an Address of Thanks to the King, for the Benefit which they enjoyed by
his Declaration; and it Proved a considerable Service to the Country. But then
he Moved, that the Churches, as well as their Pastors, might come into such an
Action; which also was readily complied withal. The Adversary was enough
Enraged at these things; And when the Ministers of Boston agreed with their
Congregations upon keeping a Day of Thanksgiving to Heaven, for the Shelter
which their Brethren as well as themselves found be the Declaration, Sr. Edmond
Andros with many Menaces forbad their Proceedings, and Particularly threatened
that he would set Guards of Soldiers on their Church-Doors, if they Attempted
what they Pretended to.

The Superior Gentlemen in the Oppressed Country, thought, that a
Well-qualified Person, going over with the Addresses of the Churches to the
King, might, by the Help of such Protestant Dissenters as the King began upon
Political Views to cast a fair Aspect upon, Obtain some Relief to the Growing
Distresses of the Country; And Mr. Mather was the Person that was pitched upon.
Being in Distress about this Important Affair, he did as he use to do. In the
Day of Prayer which he kept upon it, he put it upon this Issue; That he might
know the Direction of the Glorious GOD, by the Inclinations of the Church he
belonged unto, when the matter of his going for England, should be Proposed
unto them. The next Day, the matter was proposed unto the Church; and he said
unto them, If you say to me, Stay, I will Stay: But if you say to me, Go, I
will cast myself on the Providence of GOD and in His Name I will go. I know not
how to discern the Mind of GOD but by your Inclinations. To his Wond^rment,
They that at another time would have almost as soon parted with their Eye, as
have parted with him no were willing to it; They Unanimously Consented. They
Feared what would quickly be done by Bloody and Crafty Men, if he did not in
this Honorable way get unto some Distance from them. And they Hoped that he
might be an Instrument of some Deliverance for a Land like to be Desolate and
Overthrown by Strangers. What should be made of the Political Views in the
Court at this Time, Who can say? Upon the Numbering of the People, it was then
Reckoned, there were about One and Thirty Hundred Thousand which at Present
Professed Adherence to the Established Church: About Eleven Hundred Thousand,
Protestant Non-Conformists, of several Denominations; And about Ninety Thousand
(if so many) Roman Catholics. Though the Non-Conformists might for a while fly
to a Tree that gave them some Shelter from their Idumoean Unreasonable
Persecutors, yet they were Discrete and Honest enough to have kept their Stops;
and it could never enter into the Kings Mind, that they would go so far as to
Assist the RomanCatholicks in gaining the Power, with Foreign Aids, to Devour
them all. Nor could it enter into Their Mind, that a King, whose Sword was
Steel, his GOD was but a Wafer, and who could not keep in any Terms with the
Church whereof he was but a Vassal, if he did not as soon as he could, Order all
that would not Worship his Idol to be thrown into the Fiery Furnace, could be
their Hearty Friend, or could long forbear to Harass them with Perfidious, and
Barbarous, and Inhumane Cruelties. Indeed, I know to whom it was, that King
James in a Private Conference, Expressed an Horror of the French Kings Horrid
Cruelties, and said, I Wonder what Almighty GOD will do to him! Nevertheless,
was not King James too a Roman Catholic? He was a Son of the Church, and he
must Obey! Or, What better was the State of the Protestants in Ireland, under
Him than that of the Hugonots in France, under his Brother?

But yet, Mr. Mather might hope at least for some Temporary Advantages for his
Country, and such as might be worth seeking for, from the Present Posture of
Affairs.

Let it not be cavi^led, That he was now going, Extra Theologioe Sphoeram A
Public Distress, a Common Danger, is enough to Legitimate his Listing for the
Service. Yea, The Life of Churches was now at Stake. Churches were to be
Served. -- New England knows how to take its Ministers upon occasion, and use
them as Instruments of doing what none else could have done, to serve its
Interests. Yea an Eminent Writer Propounds it, That the Reformed Churches ought
always to have some or other of their Ministers, res^dent in the Courts of
Princes, that so their Interests may not suffer, but be Preserved and Promoted
there.

A sort of Panic Terror fell now upon the Adversary. Something must be done to
stop the Intended Voyage. Randolph must be the Tool. A copy of his Forged
Letter, being sent over hither, Mr. Mather in a Letter to the Person that
received it, Intimated some Reasons he had for a Suspicion that Randolph (with
a Brother of his) might be one Author of the Forgery. Though the Villian knew
himself to be so, and his Good Fame was not worth half a Farthing; yet he now
Arrested Mr. Mather in an Action of Defamation, and Five Hundred Pounds Damage.
And it was a thing little short of Miraculous, that considering the Tricks and
Frauds, wherewith every thing was then Managed, the Point was not gained. But
the Good Old way was taken; much Prayer was made unto the Glorious Lord from
whom every Man has his Judgment: and the Day whereon the Court sat, was a Day
of Prayer with some Societies of Christians, for a Good Issue of the Perplexing
matter. Behold, The whole Jury cleared Mr. Mather, and ordered the Plaintiff to
Pay Costs of Court.

Mr. Mather went on with his Praeparations for his Voyage; and had his Mind
more and more Irradiated with a Strong Persuasion, That GOD would give him to
find Things in England, in such (...) State, as that he should have an
Opportunity to do Special Service for His People here. Yea, he went so far in
it, as to Write these Mavelous Words upon it; -- I know, it will be so; For
Thou, O Lord GOD, have told me, that it will be so! And the Truth is, if he had
not had some such Faith as this, to have Inspired him with an uncommon Courage,
a Person of his Prudence would never have Exposed himself, as he did on a
Thousand Accounts in his present Undertaking.

He Waited on Sr. Edmond Andross, the Governor and Oppressor of New England;
and acquainted him, That he designed a Voyage for London. He also gave the
Country notice of his Voyage, in a Sermon at the Great Lecture; on Ex^d.
XXXIII. 15. If thy Presence go not with us, carry us not up from hence.
Hereupon Randolph again, Assisted by one 'Pothecary Bullivant, a Memorable
Justice [and something else!] Privately sent an Officer to Arrest him once more
( such the Equity of those Times!) upon the former Action of Defamation. But it
fell out, that he was just then under the Operation of a more wholesome Physic,
than what that 'Pothecary had sent him; and so the Officer was Ignorantly
denied Admittance. The 'Pothecary as Ignorantly reported, That Mr. Mather was
Arrested; and the Report flying like Lightening about the Sollicitous Town, it
soon reached Mr. Mathers Ears; who then kept upon his Guard.

Of Randolph I said a good while ago, That I should have farther Occasion to
mention him. I have now done it; And that I may never mention him any more, I
will here take my Eternal Farewell of him, with Relating, That he proved a
Blasted Wretch, followed with a sensible Curse of GOD wherever he came;
Despised, Abhorred, Unprosperous; Anon he Died in Virginia, and in such
Miserable Circumstances, that (as it is said) he had only Two or Three Negro's
to carry him unto his Grave.

Mr. Mather withdrew Privately from his House, in a Changed Habit, unto the
House of Colonel Philips in Charlstown; In which withdraw, it is Remarkable,
That a Wicked Fellow, whose Name was Thurton, and who was placed as an
Undersheriff, to Watch him, and Sieze him, if he stirred abroad, now saw him
and knew him, and yet found himself struck with such an Enfeebling Terror, that
he had no power to meddle with him. From thence, he was by certain
well-disposed Young Men of his Flock, transported unto Winnesimmet; And from
thence, he went aboard a Ketch, which lay ready to assist his Voyage: From
which he was on Apr. 7. 1688. gladly received aboard the Ship (called, The
Proesident,) on which he had at first Shipped himself, and so bore away for
England.

After the Ship had made the Land, in a Foggy Day, they narrowly escaped
Perishing among the Rocks of Silly. And some very Wicked Fishermen of St. Ives
also after That gave them false Advice, on purpose to have Shipwrecked 'em;
which they again Escaped by Mr. Mathers taking one of the Sharks aside, and
hiring him with Four Half Crowns to tell the Truth. But on May 6. a Weymouth
Boat coming by the Ship, he (with his Youngest Son whom he carried over with
him) went ashore, at Weymouth, which was the last Town he had Lodged in, when
he left England, Seven and Twenty Years before; And he had the Satisfaction,
which he had Exceedingly desired, of seeing his old Friends yet Surviving in
Dorset-shire, who now received him with the Greatest Joy Imaginable, and even
as an Angel of GOD.

ARTICLE XXV. An Admission into the Closet of K. James. II.
BUt Mr. Mather, willing to lose no Time, hastened up to London, where he
arrived, May. 25. 1688. And he found Things in such a state, as that he had
Opportunity to do Special Service for his People; Even beyond what he could
have Imagined. An Eminent Person often at Court, Informed King James, of his
coming with Addresses to His Majesty from New England: And upon May 30. which
was the Time the King had ordered for it, he attended on his Majesty, in the
long Gallery at Whitehall. Offering to kneel, the King forbad that Posture to
him: whereupon Presenting the Address, he said, Sir, Your Majesty's most Loyal
Subjests in New England, with all Possible Veneration, Present this Address of
Thanks to Your Majesty, for Your most Gracious Declaration of Indulgence unto
them and their Brethren. The king replied, Read it Sir; which he did, and added
the Number of the Ministers who had Subscribed it, in the Name of their several
Congregations. The King then received it out of his Hand, and said, I am glad
my Subjects in New England are sensible of any Ease and Benefit by my
Declaration: And it shall Continue. I hope, by a Parliament to Obtain a Magna
Charta for Liberty of Conscience. He then Presented an Address to the King from
Plymouth; to which His Majesty replied, I kindly accept of this Address also,
and I say again, as I said before; You shall have a Magna Charta for Liberty of
Conscience.

Two Days after this, Mr. Mather was Admitted into the Kings Closet; and there
said unto him: Sir, Your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects in New England think,
they can never be sufficiently Thankful to GOD, and to Your Majesty, for the
Benefit they have received by Your most Gracious Declaration of Indulgence. The
King Replied; I am sure, they that are truly Conscientious, are Pleased with my
Declaration; As for those that are not Satisfied with it, they are Men that
have little Designs of their own; [LIBERTY OF CONSCIENCE! Can the Ethiopian
Change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spots! THEN! -- ]
and their Tricks are well known to the World. I was for Liberty of Conscience
before I was King: And I Thank GOD, that since I was King I have been able in
that matter to give some ease unto my Subjects. He then said unto the King;
Sir, Your Subjests in New England are a People that were Persecuted thither on
the mere Account of Religion. I^asmuch as Your Majesty has Delivered them from
the Fear of a future Persecution, they are Transported with Joy; and there are
great Numbers, Desirous that I shall report their Dutiful Affection unto your
Majesty. The King thereupon asked him, whether Sr. Edmond Andros gave good
Satisfaction to his Subjects there.

The Dialogue went on in these Terms.

Mather. Sir, If he would but duly attend to Your Majesty's Declaration, the
People there would be better Satisfied


KING. Does he not do That?


Ma. There have been some of Your Subjects Fined and Imprisoned, because from a
Tenderness of Conscience they Scrupled, Swearing by the Book. I brought an
Address of Thanks to Your Majesty, from a Number of our Congregations. I
believe all the Congregations in the Country would have Concurred in the
Address, had not the Ministers been Discouraged by Sr. Edmond Andros, who in a
menacing way, bid them, have a Care what they did; And One of the Council with
him there told us, we should make no Addresses to the King without their L^^ve.
The Ministers of Boston proposed unto their Congregations, that they might keep
a Day of Thanksgiving, to Bless GOD for what they have enjoyed by Your
Majesty's Declaration. But he sent for them, and bid them keep the Day at their
Peril, and assured them, that if they did, he would clap a Guard on their
Persons and their Churches too; so that the intended Thansgiving was Diverted.


KING. I wonder at it; For in other Plantations, the Governors themselves have
sent me Thanks for my Declaration.


Ma. All the Hope under GOD, that your Subjects in New England have, is in Your
Majesty. They cannot but hope, that the Great GOD in whose Hand is the Heart of
Kings, will incline Your Royal Heart to relieve them, when once you shall truly
and fully be Informed how it is with them.


KING. [who seemed Pleased,] No Man shall be more ready to relieve them then I
will be. Do you therefore bring to me in Writing, the things which Trouble you.


Upon this, Mr. Mather kneeled, and the King Offering his hand unto him, he
Kissed it; and for this Time took his Leave.

Mr. Mather Immediately got ready, not only a Memorial of the Grievances which
filled his Country with the Cry of the Oppressed, but also a Petition for a
Redress of them, in several Proposed Instances. Indeed, he could not now
propose the Restoration of the Condemned and Vacated Charter; But he did
Propose (what the King himself had Instructed him to call) a MAGNA CHARTA, for
an Everlasting Liberty of Conscience to the Churches, to the Religion whereof
no less than an utter Extinction was intended and eagerly pursued by the Sons
of Strangers who now Lorded it over them. He did therewithal Propose, a
Confirmation of the Peoples Title to their Lands, which had been brought under
such an Abominable Contestation. He did also Propose, a Liberty for an
Assembly. But he had nothing more at Heart than the Interest of the College;
whereof he was now the Rector: (and his appearing in that Quality was no little
Advantage to him in his Present Agency:) but the Ruin whereof was evidently in
the View of the Persecutors. Having prepared the way for it by Private
Applications, to the Lords of the Kings Privy Council, and the Chief Ministers,
he again Waited on His Majesty, ( July 2.) and was Admitted into his Closet;
where he Presented kneeling his Memorial and Petition. The King put forth his
Hand to take him up and said, You shall not kneel, Sir: and therewithal
received the Papers out of his Hand; saying, I suppose these Papers concern
New England, and are about the same things, which you had some Discourse with
me, not long since upon: And then putting them into his Pocket he said, He
would take care about it. Mr. Mather was accompanied with Two Gentlemen whom
the King treated, (not to say, Cheated) as his Favorites* Both of whom
Declared unto his Majesty, That if he showed Favor to New England it would
have a Good Influence on the whole Body of Dissenters in England; Whereto the
King Replied, I believe so, and it shall be done! And Mr. Mather then added,
That his poor Subjects in New England, very much Desired he should be
Acquainted with their Condition: But he said, The Obligation will be beyond
Expression great, if your Majesty, will Please to grant them a Charter for
their College. Certainly, Sir, they may think it hard that the College built by
NonConformists, [What? King JAMES himself declare so!]
should be taken from them, and put into the Hands of Conformists. The King
Replied, It is Unreasonable, and it shall not be!

On Sept. 26. Mr. Mather again waited on the King in his Closet; and there said
unto him; Sir, I count it my Duty, most Humbly to Thank Your Majesty, in that
you were Pleased some time since to give Assurance, that you would Confirm to
your Subjects in New England, their Liberties and Properties, and the Benefit
of your Gracious Declaration. The King Replied, I will take the same Care
ofNew-England, as of England; And you may be sure, they shall have what I have
Promised. Mr. Mather went on, I Humbly Pray, Sir, that the matter may be
Expedited. Your Majesty's Affairs here may feel some Advantage from it. The
Kings Answer was; Trouble yourself no farther; I will take Care, that the thing
shall be done with Expedition.

But, -- Quid Verba audiam, quum sacta non Videam? -- There was nothing
Effectually Performed of all that had been Promised.

Mr. Mather made as many Friends as he could: And it was Remarkable to him,
That not only the Lord-Proprietor of Pensylvania, (then a Great Man at Court)
treated him with much Civility, but even the Goggle-Ey'd Monster too who used
no other Man so, treated him with some Humanity, and the Roman Catholics
themselves used him very Courteously. It often made him think on that Word,
They shall take up Serpents, and it shall not burt them: The Serpents were so
far from Hurting him, that they Extremely Caressed and Flattered him. He had
something better than a Staff of Laurel for his Preservative! When he was in
the midst of these Dangerous People. Among these, Nevil Pain told him, That
Father Peter's would gladly speak with him, and was willing, [ Pray, Master
Apella, can even you Believe a Word of this?] to do Good Offices for
New England. But Mr. Mather did not see cause to trust him; nor did he ever
Exchange Ten Words with him; though Reports were spread by some Spiteful Persons
of his maintaining an Intimacy with him; and he was once in Eminent hazard of
losing his Life, by a Mob, which from some Resemblance of Stature and Habit
mistook him for the most contrary Thing in the World. Some that were Friends to
New England strongly advised him to seek an Acquaintance with that Gentleman,
and use his Interest with the King; but he always declined it and said, It was
next to going to the Devil for Help and he could never find in his Heart to do
it. Some others, he did more freely Apply to; and especially, the
Lord-Praesident and the Earl of Melfort; who both still Promised Fair. He also
hoped, That the Distress and the Terror of the impending Revolution, would
compel the Doing of something: And for this purpose, he attended on the King,
once again in his Closet, on Oct. 16. who then Positively told him, That
Liberties, and Properties, and the College, and all that he had Promised,
should be Immediately Confirmed: And it seemed indeed on the point of being
Executed. But upon the false Rumor o^ a Diversion given to the Prince o^
Orange's Expedition, there was a Demur put upon it; Whereupon Mr. Mather said,
in his own Mind I will see thy Face again no more. He thought he had heard Good
Words enough; and saw, They were All he was like to be put off withal. And
indeed, what were the Dark Purposes of the Court about poor New England at that
Critical time of Isaac on the Alter; whether not something little short of a
Total Extirpation for Colonies that were so Distinguished for the Reformed
Religion in the greatest Purity of it! -- Unriddle me, those Two Things. The
one; That in the Account of the State of the Protestants in Ireland, which no
Protestants make any Question of, One Article of the Suggestions made by the
Irish Catholics to King James, was, That if any of the Irish cannot have their
Lands in Specie, but Money in Lieu, some of them may transport themselves into
America, particularly near New England, to check the growing Independents of
that country. The other; That in a letter sent from King James to his Holy
Father at Rome, the Published Copy of which every Body looks upon as Genuine
that Intoxicated Prince, declares his full purpose to set up the Roman-Catholic
Religion in the English Plantations of America. However, Blessed be the Lord,
who has not given us as a Prey to their Teeth; Our Soul is Escaped as a Bird
out of the Snare of the Fowlers; the Snare is broken we are Escaped.

ARTICLE XXVI. The History of the NEW CHARTER.
LET my Reader, I beseech him, now be armed with abundance of Patience. I am
entering into a Story, which I wish I could manage with the Dispatch of the
He-Goat in the Visions of Daniel. But it is a Story that should and must be
told: and I foresee, it will prove a long Chapter, let me do what I can. Of the
Poets, whereof it is Remarked the one knew what to say, the other knew what Not
to say, I am Confident, even the latter, (and he who has made his Eneids, as we
now have them, twenty times as short as they were in the first Composing of
them) could not give it much more Concisely than what shall be now endeavored.

But, Reader, if thou art not in a Time or a Frame, for the Reading of Civil
matters, Turn over a few Leaves, and Skip the Chapter.

Perhaps, the Partitioning of the Story into Sections may give the Reader some
necessary Breathing-Spaces.

1. England made and saw an Happy REVOLUTION. And New England upon, (and almost
before) the Advice of it, made as Just and Fair an One, in Conformity to it;
and not Resisting an Ordinance of GOD, but Restraining a Cursed Violation of
His Ordinance, Imprisoned Sr. Edmond Andros, and his Accomplices.

In the mean time, the Prince of Orange Arriving to London, and he with the
Princess, being soon after, Chosen and Crowned, KING and QUEEN, of the British
Empire, Mr. Mather had a New Field, and a Large one, for special Service
offered him.

The Prince of Orange, having declared, the Restoration of Charters to be one
Intention of his Expedition into England, Mr. Mather immediately used his Most
Vigorous Endeavors, That the Charters of New England might be Restored as well
as those of England. The good Old Lord Wharton, whose Memory ought forever to
be Precious unto New England, went with Mr. Mather to Wait on the Prince of
Orange, at St. James's; and on Jan. 9. then Presented the Petition for it unto
His Highness. That noble Person, with a great Zeal told his Highness, That if
he were sure to Die the next Day, he would as he now aid this Day, appear on
behalf of New England, and Solicit His Favor to that Religious Country. He
said, That they were a Godly Conscientious People, and there were
Proportionably more Good Men in New England, than in any part of the world. He
said, They did not Petition for Money, nor for S^uldiers, nor any other
Succors under their heavy Difficulties; but for their Ancient Privileges. His
Highness replied. That His Purpose was, to take the Best care he could about
it; and He would give order to His Secretary Mr. Jepnson! concerning it. My
Lord then carrying Mr. Mather to Mr. Jephson, said, Cousin, (for such he was)
Observe this Gentl^man; and whenever he comes to you, Receive him, as if I came
myself.

And Mr. Mather soon had something to do with Mr. Jephson! For by the
Procurement of some old Courtiers and Jacobites, a Circular Letter was drawn up
unto all the Plantations, and unto New England among the rest, Confirming all
their Old Governors until further Order. Mr. Mathers Vigilance, got the
Knowledge of this Letter, from the Secretary: But what a concern did it give
him! Had this Letter come to New England, and the Pounded Rulers taken the
Advantages of it, as they would have done, to have resumed the Government,
Boston, would have been a Shambles. Mr. Mather Effectually Remonstrated it unto
the Secretary, who carried his Remonstrance unto the Prince; and he then gave
Order that the Letter to New England should be stopped; but the rest proceed.
This one Special Service was well worth his voyage to England for it!

. 2. It is Commemorated among the Memorable Things in the Prudentia Veteris
Ecclesioe; That the People Antioch having by some rash doings, exceedingly
Incensed the Emperor Theodosius, and Fearing his Vengeance upon them, Composed
very Mournful Hymns, which they sang in their Public Devotions. Upon which
they also sent their Pastor, even the most Eminent Minister in the City, as an
Agent for them, to the Imperial Court; who Prevailed with the Young Men that
were Singers at the Emperors Table, to Sing those Mournful Songs: At the
hearing whereof the Emperor, when he understood the Original and Intention of
them, was Dissolved into Relenting Tears and showed Mercy to the City.

New England had not so far Incurred the Royal Displeasure; though some
Displeasing Things had been Unwisely done in the Country. Mr. Mather being in
an Agency for them, like his Predecessor Flavian, thought it no Imprudence to
let the King hear something of what passed in the Public Devotions of the
People for which he was concerned.

On March 14. 1689. The Lord Wharton introduced him to King WILLIAM; and Mr.
Mather knowing that the king desired none but very short Speeches, only said, I
Congratulate your Majesty's happy Accession to the crown, and I Humbly Implore,
your Favor to New England.

KING. You may rest Assured, that I will show them all the Favor, which it is
in my Power to do.


Ma. I may Humbly and Freely Speak it; The very Prayers of that People, will be
of some Service to Your Majesty. They are a Good and a Praying People.


KING. I Believe, they are a Good People; But I doubt, there have been
Irregularities in their Government.


Ma. I durst Engage, that they shall at the first Word Reform any
Irregularities they shall be Advised of.


Ld. Wharton. -- And I Will be their Guarantee, and here is Mr. Mather the Rector
of the College there, shall be the other. We Two will stand bound for
New England, that they shall act Regularly for the Future.


KING. I Will forthwith give Order, that Sr. Edmond Andros shall be removed
from the Government of New England, and he called unto an Account for his
Maladministration. And I will direct, that the Present King and Queen shall
be Proclaimed by their former Magistrates.


Ma. Sir. They will do it with the Joyfullest Hearts in the World.


. 3. This true New-Enland-Man considering how Wonderfully New England had
Prospered under the Old Charter, and how Desirous the People for whom he was
now concerned, were to have it Restored; he Advised with the Wisest Friends he
could find, about this Momentous Affair. Their Concurrent Judgment was, That
the best course would be to Endeavor for a Reversion of the Judgment against
the MassachusetCharter by an Act of Parlaiment; and afterward Petition to the
King for the Additional Privileges. Without which the Old Charter would not
answer the Occasions, and Necessities of the People. Mr. Mather hereupon made
most Indefatigable Applications unto the Principal Men in that Convention
Parliament; The Effect of which was, That in the House of Commons the Charters
of New England were expressly put into the CharterBill: It was Voted. That the
taking of them away, was a Grievance, and that they should be Restored. And a
great interest was also made in the House of Lords. that when the Bill should
come up to them, for their Concurrence, New England might be there also
Favored. At the same time, [ July 4. 1689.] Mr. Mather was again Introduced by
the Lord Wharton unto the king at Hampton Court: and said,

Ma. I Presume your Majesty had been Informed of the Great Service, which Your
Subjects in New England, have done for your Majesty, and for this Nation, and
for the Protestant Interest, in Securing that Territory for King WILLIAM.


KING. I have seen some Letters that speak of it, and I kindly accept of what
they have done.


Ma. If Your Majesty would Please to Command that Your kind Acceptance of what
they have done shall be Signified unto them, it will be a great Encouragement.


KING. I will give order to the Secretary of State, that a Letter be Written to
them, to let them understand, that what they have done is Acceptable to me.


Ma. Your Majesty may, by the Assistence of New England. whenever You Please,
become the Emperor of America. I durst engage, that Your Subjects there, will
readily venture their Lives and Estates in Your Service. All that is Humbly
Desired on their behalf, is only that they may Enjoy their Ancient Rights and
Privileges.


KING. I do assure you, I will do all that it is in my Power to do, that it may
be so.


Mr. Mead being with him, told the Kind, that he could not possibly do any
thing more grateful to his Dissenting Subjects in England, than in being kind
unto New England in the Restoring of their former Privileges. The King had them
rest Satisfied, That it should be done.

But behold, while the Charter Bill was Depending, the Convention-Parliament
was Unexpectedly Prorogued, and then Dissolved; and Mr. Mather found the
Sisyphoean Labor of a whole Year come to nothing.

. 4. The Disposition of the next Parliament soon appeared such, that nothing in
the Favor of New England was to be Expected there. Mr. Mather then made some
Essays, to see if by a writ of Error in Judgment, the case relating to the
Massachuset-Colony might be brought out of Chancery into the Kings Bench; but
this Attempt also was Defeated by so Surprising a Providence, that Mr. Mather
Declared upon it; Never did I see a more Signal Hand of Heaven in any matter,
than in Disappointing all Hopes, for the Obtaining the so much Desired full
Restitution of all our Charter Privileges, by a Reversion of the Judgment
Entered against them.

All Hopes of Obtaining the Restoration of the Old Charter being at an End,
there was no way left, but a Flight unto the Royal Favor; For though it was
not in the Kings Power to Reverse the Judgment against the Old Charter, yet His
Majesty had power to Re-incorporate his good Subjects there, and grant them a
NEW CHARTER, that should contain all the Old, with New and more Ample
Privileges; Without which, the Old would not have seen Sufficient.

Mr. Mather, with Two other Agents, which the Massachuset Colony had then
joined with him, now Signed, a Petition to the KING, for such a NEW CHARTER:
which Petition the Right Honorable Earl of Monmouth Condescended so far, as to
deliver with his own truly Noble Hand. Whereupon Mr. Mather Obtained the
intercession of a great Personage, which Prevailed with the king to refer the
Affair of New England unto the Consideration of the Two Lord Chief Justices,
with His Majesty's Attorney and Solicitor General: All of whom had by Mr.
Mathers Powerful and Assiduous Applications been brought into the New English-
Interests. They met Three or Four Times, and kindly gave him leave to be
Present with them at all their Consultations. The Heads of the Massachuset OLD
CHARTER, and Sr. Ferdinando Gorges, were Presented in Writing, together with
such Additional Privileges, as were then Prayed for: And they all judged, there
was nothing Unreasonable, or Prejudicial to the Kings Interest in what was
Proposed. They were Presented unto the King, by the Lord Chief Justice Holt;
and the King Ordered him to Present them unto the Conncil; who did accordingly;
and from thence they were transferred unto the Lords of the Committee for Trade
and Plantations.

. 5. Immediately upon this, the King took his Voyage for Holland: and before
his Return, there was no more to be done. But still Mr. Mather would be doing
of something for the good of his Country. He published, Reasons for the
Confirmation of charter-privileges, granted to the Massachuset-Colony, which he
Dispersed among the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable PrivyCouncil; and
Personally Addressed himself unto the most of them; humbly Praying their
Lordships Favor to New England, in a matter that appeared so Equal. His Maxim
was, That in all Affairs, a Few did All; and his Method was, To find out the
most Potent Leaders in all Affairs, and make sure of them. If he knew any N. C.
Minister, who had an Interest in any Person of Quality, he would engage that
Minister to Employ his Interest on the behalf of New England; One way of
engaging him, was by Preaching for him: And, This also Introduced him into the
same Acquaintance. There were several Noblemen, who likewise, brought him into
the Knowledge and Favor of others. But none did more for him that way, than
that Cordial and Constant Lover of all good Men, the Aged Lord Wharton, who was
the last Surviving Member of that Famous Assembly of Divines at Westminster.
Among those Eminent Persons, who Admitted him to be Familiar with them, I will
particularly mention Two that were of an Ecclesiastical Character, for the sake
of the Good that was done to New England by his Acquaintance with them. The one
was Dr. Ti^lo^son, the Archbishop of Canterbury: who did at his Desire, often
concern himself to do kind Offices for the Country, and Pray, both the King and
Queen to put Marks of their Favor on their Faithful Subjects there; and once
he went so far as to tell the King, It would by no means do well for him to
take away any of those Privileges from the People of New England, which K.
Charles I. had granted them. And indeed Mr. Mather often spoke of the Catholic
Spirit, with which the Arch Bishop of Canterbury blamed the Conduct of his
Predecessor Land, in his Discourses with him. The other was, Dr Burnet, the
Bishop of Salisbury: who besides many Real and Weighty Expressions of his
kindness for the Country, told him, That he would on the first Opportunity
declare Openly in the House of Lords, That there was a greater Sacredness in
the Charter of New England, than in those of the Corporations in England;
Because those were only. Acts of Grace, whereas the Charter of New England was
a Contract between the King and the first Patentees: They Promised the King to
Enlarge his Dominions, on their own Charges, Provided, that they and their
Posterity might enjoy such and such Privileges: They had Performed their part;
Now for the King to Deprive their Posterity of the Privileges therein Granted
unto them, would carry a Face of Injustice in it. A Lord great in the Court,
then told Mr. Mather, That his having Engaged the Bishop of Salisbury to appear
for New England, was the best Jobb he had done these Seven Years.

. 6. But a Greater than any of these, must not be left Unsollicited. Mr. Mather
was by Madam Lockart Introduced unto the QUEEN, on Apr. 9. 1691. and she left
him alone with her Majesty, that he might the more freely represent the case of
New England unto her.

The Discourse was, as follows,

Ma. I do most Humbly pray Your Majesty's Favor to your Good Subjects in
New England. There are none in the World more in Your Interest than they; nor
any that do with greater Devotion Pray for Your Long and Happy Reign. They have
indeed been Exposed unto great Troubles on the account of their Loyalty unto
your Majesty. For the French at Canada, who have invaded them, and have
Destroyed several of their Plantations, gave that as the Reason of what they
did; Because the People there have Declared for King William and Queen Mary.
They now only Pray, that they may be Resettled in the Enjoyment o^ those
Privileges, which they were Possessed of, until the last Year of King Charles
II.


QUEEN. That matter has been a Long Time before the Council. I would have that
which is Just done for them; and not only to, but that something of Favor
should be shown to them.


Ma. I most Humbly Thank Your Majesty, for the Kind Words which Your Majesty
was Pleased to Speak to my Lady Southerland about New England.


QUEEN. Mr. Mather, I have had a great Character of you, from my Lady
Southerland. I have spoken to the King on the behalf of New England. He told
me, the matter was before the Council.


Ma. It has been referred unto the Two Lord Chief Justices, with the Attorney
and Sollicitor-General; we only Pray, that the Articles Approved by them, may
be Allowed and Confirmed to us*


QUEEN. That seems Reasonable; and I doubt not, but it will be done for you.


Ma. I Humbly beg, That your Majesty will Please to Speak so Kind a Word unto
the King upon his Return. You will thereby bring the Blessing of the Prayers of
a Good People on Your Royal Person and Government.


QUEEN. I shall be willing to do all I can for them.


Ma. I have Reason to Believe, that Your Good Subjects there have been
Misrepresented unto Your Majesty. Some that bear them Ill Will, have Printed
many Reflections on them.


QUEEN. I have not seen all the Pamphlets.


Ma. Sr. William Phips has with many of Your Majesty's Subjects, endeavored to
enlarge Your Majesty's Dominions; and they are willing again to expose
themselves in your Majesty's Service.


QUEEN. Are they Able to do it? I hear they are but in a Bad Condition.


Ma. They are in a Bad Condition; But One year Reason of it is, because their
Government (...) Unsettled.


QUEEN. That I Believe; It must needs be so*


Ma. If by your Majesty's Favor, they shall be Restored unto their former
Privileges, they will Revive, and become able to Serve Your Majesty's Interest.


QUEEN. I doubt, there have been Differences There, as well as Here, about
Church Government.


Ma. In New England they are generally those that are Called Non-Conformists:
But they carry it with all due Respect unto others: We Judge some of them to be
better Men than ourselves. This Nation has cause to Bless GOD, for the KING,
and for Your Majesty, in regard of that Act of Indulgence, and the Liberty of
Conscience, which through Your Majesty's Favor we now enjoy.


QUEEN. It Is what I am for. It is not in the Power of Men to Believe what they
Please; and therefore I think, they should not be forced in matters of
Religion, contrary to their Persuasions and their Consciences. I WISH ALL GOOD
MEN WERE OF ONE MIND; HOWEVER IN THE MEAN TIME, I WOULD HAVE THEM LIVE
PEACEABLY, AND LOVE ONE ANOTHER.


O mentis Aure^ Verba bracteata! My Ink, Too Vile a Liquor art thou, to Write
so Divine a Sentence!

. 7. Before the Month was out, the King returned from Holland; And though he
staid but a Fortnight in England, Mr. Mather twice had the Honor of waiting on
Him. The first time he only Presented an Address from the General Court at
Boston, with a Petition from a considerable Number of Merchants in London,
Praying that Charter-Privileges might be Restored unto New England. But Mr.
Mather was desirous once more to Plead with him for Favor to his Country: and
therefore by the Mediation of the Duke of Devonshire, he was, on Apr. 28.
Admitted a second time, and it was now into the Kings Bedchamber: Where what
then Passed was, as follows.

Ma. I most Humbly Thank Your Majesty, in that you were Graciously Pleased to
signify unto my Lord Dev^nshire, that I might have leave to wait on your
Majesty on the behalf of New England. None of Your Subjects, are or can be more
in Your Interests than They; None Pray more Heartily for Your Long Life, and
your Happy Reign, and the Success of Your Arms.


KING. Sir, What do you Desire, that I should do for them!


Ma. May it Please Your Majesty, That they may be Restored unto their Ancient
Privileges; and that their Settlement may be Expedited. They have an Humble
Confidence, that through Your Majesty's Goodness, they shall be made Happy, in
having their Ancient Privileges Restored unto them; which will Oblige Your
Subjects there to be Your Servants forever. Your Majesty has been Graciously
Pleased to refer the Consideration of this Affair to the Two
Lord-Chief-Justices, with the Attorney and Solicitor General. We only Pray
Humbly, that what they have thought Reasonable for us to Desire, may be Granted
by Your Majesty.


KING. I Expect within two or three Days, to have a Report from the Lords of
the Committee for Trade and Plantations; and then shall see what may be done.


Ma. Your Majesty's Subjects have been willing ^o Venture their Lives that they
may enlarge Your Dominions: And are willing to do the like again, if Your
Majesty Encourage them. Will Your Majesty Please, in Your Great Wisdom, to
consider the Circumstances of that People; as in Your Wisdom you have
considered th Circumstances of England and of Scotland. In New England they
differ from other Plantations; They are such as are called Congregational and
Presbyterian. So that such a Governor will not suit with the People of New
England, as may be very Proper for the other English Plantations.


Having so spoken, he bowed unto the King; who then retired into his Closet

Two Days after this, the Lords of the Committee Proposed unto the KING,
whether he would have the People of New England, make what Laws, and Appoint
what Officers They Pleased? Or, Whether He would not Appoint a Governor of His
own, that should have a Negative Voice on all Acts of Government? The King was
very Inquisitive to know, whether he might without any Breach of Law, set a
Governor over that Colony? Diverse Lords of the Council, and some of the
Judges, answered, That whatever might be the Merit of the Cause, inasmnch as
the Charter of the Massachuset-Colony stood Vacated by a Judgment against it,
it was in his Power to put them under what Form of Government he should think
best for them. The King then said, That he was Desirous to Promote the Welfare
of New England as well as of England; and that he Believed it would be for the
Advantage of the Subjects in that Colony to be under a Governor appointed by
himself: but that he would have the Agents of New England Nominate a Person
that should be Agreeable to the Inclinations of the People there: And that
notwithstanding This, he would have Charter-Privileges Restored and Confirmed
unto them.

. 8. The next Day, the King began his Voyage to Holland: but an Order of
Council was drawn up, [ Who can tell, How, or Why?] for a Charter to be
Prepared, with something in it, very Disagreable to Mr. Mather; who immediately
waited upon Four or Five Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council
with his Remonstrances; Every one of which Declared, that in their Opinion, it
was not worded according to His Majesty's Intentions. He also caused a Copy of
the Order to be transmitted unto One of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries of
State then with Him in Flanders; Praying, That if that Order were not according
to the Kings Mind, His Majesty would Graciously Please to Signify His
Disapprobation thereof: But no such Signification ever came. In the mean time,
the Attorney General, Prepared a Draught of a Charter according to what he took
to be the Kings Mind, as Expressed when His Majesty was last in Council. In
this Draught, the Freemen (and not all Freeholders) had Power to choose the
Deputy Governor, and the other General Officers; And the Kings Governor had
not a Negative Voice in any case allowed unto him. The Draught being presented
at the Council Board, it was by some Objected, That by such a Charter as this,
the Kings Governor would be made a Governor of Clouts: And Order was given
for other Minutes to be Inserted, which Deprived the Massachuset-Colony of some
very Considerable Privileges in their former Charter. The Secretary gave Mr.
Mather a Copy of them, with an Order from their Lordships, That if the Agents
for the Massachuset-Colony were not Satisfied, they should bring in their
Objections to Mr. Attorney General. Mr. Mather on this occasion Expressed his
Dissatisfaction, to the Attorney General, with a Pathos, that upon Reflection
he thought might be too Extraordinary: Earnestly Protesting, That he would
sooner part with his Life than Consent unto such Minutes, or unto any thing
that might Infringe any Liberty or Privilege that justly belonged unto his
Country. The like Declaration he made unto several of the Chief Ministers; who
all replied, That no body Expected or Desired his Consent: for they did not
look on the Agents from New England, as Plenipotentiaries from another
Sovereign State; But that if they Declared, they would not Submit unto the
Kings Pleasure, His Majesty would settle the Country as He Pleased, and They
were to take what follow. However, Mr. Mather drew up Reasons against the
Minutes Proposed; and particularly urged, That Charter-Privileges might with as
much (if not more) of Justice, be witheld from the Corporations in England,
which were never legally Restored, as from New England: with several other
Arguments. These Reasons he Delivered in Writing to the Kings Attorney General,
who Presented them unto the Lords at the Council Board; and he also caused a
Copy of them to be sent unto the King in Flanders; Procuring some Great Persons
at the same time, to solicit by Letters, the Ministers of State with the King,
that they would use their Interest with His Majesty, to prevent any thing that
might be, grievous to His Good Subjects in New England. Some thought, that if
the King were in England, there might be more likelihood of Stopping the
Disagreable and Undesireable Minutes; and the Queen was therefore Prevailed
withal, to Write unto the King, requesting him, That He would Graciously
Command, that the Charter should pass as the Attorney General had prepared it,
or else that it should be deferred until His Majesty's coming over. Mr. Mather
taking it for granted, That he might get some Liesure to recover his Health,
which had been greatly Impaired, by his Neglect both of Rest and Food in his
close Attendance to the Service of his Country, made a short Recess unto the
Waters. But he was quickly surprised, with Notice, That the King had signified
His Approbation of the Minutes, and His Royal Pleasure that the Charter should
be accordingly forthwith proceeded in. His Majesty's Principal Secretary of
State showed Mr. Mather the Letter, wherein the King also Declared, That he did
by no means Approve of the Objections, which had been offered. When there could
no more Good be done, what remained was to stave off Harm as far as might be;
and in Pursuance of This, he Presented a Petition, That no Property belonging
to the Colony, or to any therein, might by the New Charter be taken from them,
nor any Privileges which they had a Right to; That the Province of Main might
be confirmed, and Nova Scotia added unto the Massachusetts: (Both of which were
obtained against much Opposition:) And, That Hampshire might be under that
Government: (But This was refused, because it was declared, That the People
there had expressed a great A version for it.) Just at this Time, he received
Letters from the General Court of Plymouth-Colony, which Thanked him for his
Preventing their being annexed unto New-Tork, which had been above a Year
before if he had been out of the way; and Prayed, That if they might not be
confirmed as a Distinct Government among themselves, he would, for the Lords
sake, endeavor to get them annexed unto Boston; And This was accomplished.
When the New Charter was finished, and had been Read before the Lords, he
prayed, that he might see it; because there might be some Clauses in it, which
their Lordship might upon a Suggestion of Reasons for it, think proper to
alter; and perhaps there might be something Added for the Good of the People,
which their Lordships might also be Pleased withal; which Request was granted,
with a Limitation of Three Days for the Return of the Copy Upon his motion, the
Phrase of Corporal Oath was altered, that so no Snare might be laid for any who
might Scruple Swearing on the Book. A clause was added, Confirming all Grants
made by the General Court not withstanding any Defect that might attend the
Form of Conveyance; that so men's Titles to their Lands mig^t not be
Invalidated, only for that the Laws which gave them their Right, had not passed
under the Public Seal in the Time of the former Government. Some other
Alterations he prayed or; but could not Obtain them. Thus was the New Charter
Finished!

. 9. NOW came on a Strange Question: Whether the Agents for the Country should
Submit unto this NEW CHARTER? Or, in hopes of Obtaining at some time or other a
Reversion of the Judgment against the OLD CHARTER, Signify to the Ministers of
State, that they had rather have NO CHARTER at all, than such an one as was now
Proposed!

On this occasion, Mr. Mather advised with as many Unprejudiced and Judicious
Persons as he could; wi^h Nobl^men, Gentlemen, Divines, and Lawyers; and with
the Best* Friends New England had in the World. They ALL agreed, That it was a
Duty, to accept of the Offered CHARTER; And some greatly wondered at them that
should make any Question of it: and were almost ready to say of them, as Plato
in his Philebus does of some who made a Question of another matter; Let them be
Committed unto the Care of some Learned Physician, who by wholesome Physic may
restore their Heads unto a better Temper.

A Peremptory Refusal, would have brought a Fatal Ruin on the Country; and the
Blame would have been laid on those, who when they could not Obtain all they
would have, would Refuse what they might have had.

The Lawyers declared, That a passive Submission here, had nothing of a
Surrender in it; for here was nothing of Hand and Seal in the Case. Besides,
Judgment was already Entered and Recorded against the Old Charter. And a taking
up with the New Charter, did not render the Colony incapable of recovering
their Old Privileges if there should be a favorable Opportunity to Solicit
for it.

At present, there was no Possibility of getting a Reversion of the Judgment
against the Old Charter.

Yea, and it was considered, That the Old Charter was on more Accounts than
One, so very Defective, that without a Grant of Additional Privileges, it would
have left the Colony under Insupportable Infaelicities.

By it, the Massachuset-Government had no more power than the Ordinary
Corporations have in England; But those Corporations have no power in Capital
Cases. Though Corporations have Power given them in Criminal, yet they have not
in Capital Cases, except it be Expressly Declared; which it was not here.

The Old Charter directed not an House of Deputies, or Assembly of
Representatives.

Nor did it give Power unto the Governor and Company to Impose Taxes on any
but the Freemen.

And it knew not Courts of Admiralty; So that if the New Charter have them not,
it is not the Loss of the Old One that has Lost them. Yea, The D^ficiencies
were so many, That the Kings Attorney General declared, the Two
Lord-ChiefJustices and Solicitor General Concurring with him; That Supposing
the Judgment against the Massachuset-Charter to be Reversed, yet, if the
Government should exert such Powers as before the Quo Warranto against the
Charter they though it it necessary to do, there would now be a Writ of Scire
facias issued out against them in Westminster Hall, and their
Charter-Privileges would undoubtedly be taken from them.

It was moreover Considered, That if the Judgment against the Old Charter had
been fully Reversed by Act of Parliament, (which Mr. Mather had so much
Labored for,) the Massachuset-Colony would, for all that, have been reduced
into Miserable Circumstances.

The Province of Main, as to the Government, would have been taken from them.
Hampshire and Plymouth would have been put under a Governor sent from England.
This Governor would have had the Power of the Militia, as well as the Courts
of Admiralty, in the Massachuset-Colony.

How much of its Trade had Boston Lost? What an Insignificant Atom had the
Colony been Squeez^d into! If they had Exerted Powers, without which they could
not have Comfortably or Tolerably Subsisted, Perpetual Complaints would have
been made against them. Its probable They would have been at more Charge every
Year, to answer Complaints, than they would have been to Support their
Governor. And how long must they have lain under their Impotency, Saying, Sir,
I have no Man to help me!

Besides all this; If the Agents of the Colony, had signified unto the
Ministers of State, that they had rather have No Charter at all, than This
which the King had now granted, Who would have been Immediately made the
Governor? Who the Lieutenant-Governour? Who the most of the Counselors? And
the Governor would have had Power, as in the other Plantations, to Appoint
General Officers. What the Consequence of This at that Angry Time? Dica^
Neo-Eb^racum!

There were also Persons* who were seeking Patents for all the M^nes, and Gums,
and some other Valuables, in the Country; whose Expectations, nothing but the
New Charter gave a De eat unto.

But, Let us come to the NEW CHARTER, THIS grants Great Privileges to the
People of New England; and some Greater than what they formerly Enjoyed.

They have all English Liberties Restored unto them. They can have no Laws
Imposed, nor Taxes Levied on them, without their own Consent, by
Representatives chosen by themselves.

Religion is forever Secured; A Righteous and Generous Liberty of Conscience
^^^ablished. And the General Assembly may by their Acts, give a Distinguishing
Encouragement unto that Religion, which is the General Profession of the
Inhabitants.

They may still have their Judges as at the first, and their Counsel^ours as at
the Beginning, if the Fault be not their own. As long as their Principal
Majestrates, and Justices, favor and express Piety, and abhor and punish
Wickedness, it is to be hoped, Religion will be kept in Heart. And if they have
not such, the Fault will not be in the New-Charter, but in Themselves. Behold,
A wall of Defense about the Vineyard!

Now the Massachuset-Colony is made a Province, the General Assembly has, with
the Kings Approbation, a Power in New England, like what the King and
Parliament have in England; and may do abundance of Important Things, which
could not be done by virtue of the Former Charter: And the Country may also
look for more Protection and Assistence from England, than under That. --

Suppose a Stork should get a Commission for the Government; What can such a
Governor do? He cannot, without the Consent of the Council chosen by the
Representatives of the People, appoint Sheriffs to pack Juries for him, o^
Judges that will Displease GOD rather than him. He cannot give any Man any
Disturbance for his Religion, without Violating the Magna Charta of
New England. He cannot exert any of the Violences, under which there were heard,
The Groans of the Plantations in the Days of K. James, II. When, the People of
New England would have given, who can say, how many Thousands of Pounds, for
such a Charter as they now have before them?

The Kings Governor has indeed a Negative in all Acts of Government; (And
indeed all Government forever implies a Negative:) which renders the Government
of New England, less Democratical than once it was. Nevertheless, the People
have a Negative upon him: In which respect, New England is by the NEW CHARTER
more Privileged, than Ireland, or than any other English Plantation, or than
even England itself.

Appeals to England are allowed in the NewCharter, but only in Personal, (not
at all in Real or Mixed) Actions, where the matter of Difference, is of above
Three Hundred Pound (...) in Value: So that as to Titles of Land, there cannot
be any Appeals to England: They have a Final Determination in Courts of
Judicature among themselves.

The Laws Enacted by the General Court, are, it is true, to be transmitted unto
the King for His Royal Approbation: But those Laws, when made, are in Force,
as soon as they are made; and until such Time as they are Disallowed by the
King: And if within the space of Three Years the Kings Disapprobation be not
Signified, the Laws are Perpetual until the General Court shall Repeal them.
Now by the Old Charter, the Governor and Company might not make any Laws
Repugnant unto the Laws of England; and the Laws which have Reason and Justice
in them, under the New Charter, need not fear losing the Royal Allowance, if
the People be not Egregiously wanting to themselves.

Upon the whole, The Persons of the most Consummate Wisdom that Mr. Mather
could consult withal, agreed in This; Take your NEW-CHARTER and be Thankful for
it! The most sensible Men added, That as Poor a Charter as wanton and froward
Minds might think it, if any People of Sway in the Country should be so under
the Sting of an Hornet as to do those Rash and Mad Things, which may procure
the Loss of the Privilege^ which it brings unto them, the rest of the People
will certainly have little Honor for the Memory of the Unhappy Men, who have
been the Instruments of bringing such Mischeifs upon them. Among the rest, that
Sagacious and Ingenious Person Praesident Bond of Barbados (then at London)
said unto him: What would not we in our Islands give for such a Charter as
yours And the famous Mr. Matthew Mead then wrote! unto the Person who is now
Writing about the Faithful Agent, If Men Reward not his Great Work, and Labor
of Love, I am sure, GOD will. What he has done has not been without the Counsel
and Advice of the Best Friends New England has: Parliament Men, Lawyers and
Ministers.

. 10. Wherefore, not only on Oct. 23. upon the Kings Return to England, the
Earl of Notingham introduced him, only to kiss the Kings Hand, and bid him,
Welcome to England again: when the King at the first sight of him, smiled on
him, and steping aside unto him, said, I am very glad to see you, Sir! But also
on Nov. 4. the same Noble Person Introduced him again to His Majesty, the Earls
of Devon and Portland* being also Present. He then said, I do on the behalf of
New England most humbly thank your Majesty, in that you have been Pleased by a
CHARTER to Restore. English Liberties unto them; To Confirm then in their
Properties; and, To grant them some singular Privileges. I doubt not, but that
your Subjects there will de mean themselves with such a Dutiful Affection and
Loyalty toward your Majesty, as that You will see cause to enlarge Your Royal
Favors toward them. And I do most humbly Thank your Majesty in that You have
been Pleased to give leave unto those that are concerned for New England, to
Nominate their Governor. Sr. William Phips has been accordingly Nominated by
us at the Council Board: Who has done a Good Service for the Crown by enlarging
Your Dominions, and reducing of Nova Scotia to Your Obedience. I know, that he
will Faithfully Serve Your Majesty to the utmost of his Capacity; And if Your
Majesty shall think fit to confirm him, in that Place, it will be a further
Obligation on Your Subjects there. The KING replied, I shall take that Colony
under my Protection, and I shall do what is in me for their Encouragement, and
I shall take what concerns the Government there into my Consideration.

. 11. And now, Mr. Mathers Agency for his Country in the Court of England is
drawing toward its Period, it will be time to enquire, whether his being so
Plunged into a Conversation with Great Men, and with all Sorts of Men, and his
Overwhelming Solicitude about Civil Interests [ In Ordine ad Spiritualia; For.
The Care of the Churches, was what lay at the Bottom of all!] did not Interrupt
those Interviews with Heaven, which he had formerly been used unto; and
Incommode that course of Real, Vital, Watchful PIETY, which he had formerly
Maintained? Far from it^ But above all, that Breath of PIETY, his Old strokes
of Incessant PRAYER, was kept in its Unintermitted Respirations with him.

It is a little Observable That though Homer, by first Introducing the Gods as
having the same Vicious Characters, and Actions with miserable Mortals, Proved
one of the Greatest Apostles the Devil ever had in the World; yet the
Testimonies born to many Points of Morality in his Famous and Wondrous Epic
Poem, are numberless. But there is nothing more worthy of Observation in the
Iliad, than This; That he will Recommend Prayer to Heaven as a most necessary
Preface unto all Important Enterprises: and he never Speaks of any Prayer, but
he brings in a Gracious Answer to it. I have seen the Quill of an High-flyer
Scoffing at Homer for this* as making his Hero's to be of the same Religion
with the Dissenters in our Nation. And yet, what has Homer done, but Justified
the Wisdom in the Maxims of our Holy REDEEMER, with a Confession from that
Natural Conscience, which such Scoffers of the Last Days have Silenced? Let
them Scoff on, if they Please; while I go on to relate, That I find Mr Mather
still in his Good old way, of Setting apart whole Days for Secret Supplications
to the Glorious GOD; Especially, when Critical Hours for our Affairs were
coming on. In these Days, I find him sometimes, under those Afflations from
Heaven, which assured him, That be should Return to New England, with Good
Tidings for the People there. When he saw his Designs Crossed, and his Labors
Lost, in his pursuit of the Old Charter, it greatly Perplexed him to see what
looked unto him, as if his Prayer and Faith were Baffled. But GOD was
Graciously doing better than he Imagined, for him, and for his People, whom the
Old Charter, (as it was) would not have near so well Accommodated (as things
go) as what is now Obtained for them. Nor was he without his whole Days for
Secret Thanksgivings, when GOD had Remarkably smiled upon him. And he would
sometimes (after a well-known Pattern in the Bible,) prevail with his Friends
to meet, and Fast and Pray, when he was to go in unto the King: Or when our
Affairs had any dark Obstructions upon them. Yea, such was the Sanctity and
Purity of his Good Conversation in CHRIST, that wherever he Lodged, the
Families felt Piety Practically and Powerfully Commended unto them Among other
Instances of this; The Young Gentlewoman that waited on him, at Mr. Whitings in
Copt-hall Court, was by what she saw in him, and heard from him so brought home
to GOD, that afterwar^s, when she was Married; she gave the World a lasting
Testimony of her Gratitude, in the Remembrance of the Good which her Converted
Soul had received from him. He likewise rarely Omitted Preaching on the
Lords-Days: for which in Honor to his Country he would accept of no
Gratuities; but Obliged the Ministers to do Good Offices for his Country. Once
a Month, he Preached with Dr. Bates, at Hackney: who though he were a Person of
so Catholic a Spirit, had one of the Smallest and Purest Churches about the
City; with which he chose to have his more Constant Communion at the Holy
Table: And the Doctor told his People, That if Mr. Mather might be detained in
England, he had rather have him joined with him in the Pastoral Charge, than
any man in the World.

. 12. But, shall we go on to enquire, whether the People of New England, were
the only People, that were served by him? No, There was a Special Service, of a
greater extent, wherein His Glorious Lord Employed and Honored him. There was
an Happy UNION accomplished between those Two Religious Parties, which go under
the Names of Presbyterian, and Congregational; and which had through Devices of
the Great Adversary, kept at more of a Needless Distance from each other than
they should have done. Dr. Ann^sley and Mr. Vincent and others, often Declared,
That this Union would never have been Effected, if Mr. Mather had not been
among them; and they often therefore Blessed GOD, for bringing him to England,
and keeping him there. He had Thanks from the Country, as well as the City on
that Account: And among the rest, a General Assembly of Ministers in Devon,
sent up to London this Instrument.

Junij. 23. 1691. Agreed, That the Reverend Mr. John Flavel, Moderator of this
Assembly send unto the Reverend Mr. Matthew Mead, Mr. John How, and Mr.
Increase Mather, and give Them, and such Others as have been Eminently
Instrumental in Promoting the Union, the Thanks of this Assembly, for the great
Pains they have taken therein.

And since it is Proper to be mentioned somewhere, why may I not bring in the
mention of it Here? While Mr. Mather was in London, he Cultivated a singular
Friendship and Freedom, with that very Great Man, Mr. Baxter, who treated him
with a Deference, which he paid unto few other Men. In this Acquaintance, Mr.
Baxter not only made this Generous Request unto Mr. Mather, Sir, If you find
any Errors in any of my Writings, I request you to Confute them, after I am
Dead; But also made unto him a very Respectful Dedication of a Book, which he
Published a little before he Died. I find in Dr. Bates's Funeral Sermon for Mr.
Baxter, a mention of the Visit which he with Mr. Mather made unto Mr. Baxter
the Day before his Expiration, (which was, Dec. 8. 169^.) when the last Words
of Mr. Baxter to Mr. Mather were, I Bless GOD, that you have Accomplished your
Business; The LORD Prolong your Life!

. 13. The Business being so Accomplished, there yet remains One Enquiry more;
How was he Subsisted for the Expenses of his Agency.

In the Year, 1691. while he was yet in London, he wrote these Words, in a
brief Account of his Negotiation, which he sent over to the Government.

Besides what was sent to me out of New England, I Expended upwards of Two
Hundred Pounds of my own Personal Estate, out of Love to that People. And I did
for their sakes, borrow of a Merchant in London, above Three Hundred Pounds
more, which it was Tow Years before Care was taken for the Repayment of it. The
last Year, some who were hearty Well-wishers to New England, wrote thither,
That they must consider, how much depended on a suitable Supply; yet for more
than a Twelvemonth, not one Penny was returned; so that I was necessitated,
either to suffer a Ruin to come upon the Country, or else must borrow Money
again to Serve them; which I did, and engaged all the Estate I have in the
World, for the Repayment thereof.

Some time after this, there was Published a Venomous and Malicious Libel, by a
mean Hand, instigated in part from the Invisible World, and well worthy to be
Recommended unto the Rebuke of the Lord, which was Entitled, More Wonders of
the Invisible World. The Conscience of Duty to the Ninth Commandment of my GOD,
as well as the Fifth, obliges me to Declare, (which I hope, I may d^ without
any Railing Accusation) That the Book is full of Gross, Base, Notorious LIES;
and has been Unanswerably Convicted of being so; and they who take their
Accounts of New England from it, follow but an Ignis fatuus. On the occasion of
the Slanders uttered in that foolish Book, Mr. Mather gave under his Hand unto
some Honest Men, who Published a Victorious Answer to them, an Instrument,
which had these among other Passages.

I am also told, that his great Friends Complain, That I spent the Country a
great deal of Money, during my Agency in their behalf. These little Men know
not what it is, to attend in the Courts of Kings for Four Years together: if
they did, they would not make that Objection And sure I am, that when I did, at
the desire of many Principal Persons in the Country, undertake a Voyage for
England, in April. 1688. People in this Province would have given Ten times
more than what I Expended in their Service, on condition they might have
Restored and Confirmed unto them, what they now Enjoy; yea, if it had been but
in One Article of it. But besides this, I may truly affirm, that in Effect I
served the Country on Free cost. For I never demanded the least Farthing as a
Recompense for the Time I spent in attending on their Affairs; but instead
thereof, I procured in Donations for the public (besides the Privileges of the
Charter itself, which, though not so great as I would have had, and as I would
gladly have parted with all I have in this World for to have purchased, are
greater than what any other Plantations besides New England enjoys: I say,
Besides these Things. I procured in Donations to the Province and the College)
at least Nine Hundred Pounds more than all the Expenses of my Agency came to.
This being plain Matter of Fact, which the whole General Assembly once had
before them, I suppose, all Reasonable men will own, That Reproaches cast on
me, for my Expensiveness in the Public Service are most Ungrateful and
Unworthy.

But here, this Long Chapter shall have a Period; and, I hope, a Pardon. Only
it seems I must again ask a Pardon also for the Agent, whose Actions I have
been telling of. Some who have been vexed at good Things done by Ministers of
the Gospel, have made mighty Clamours against Ministers having any thing to do
in Secular Affairs. But the Scripture which forbids Ministers to Entang^e
themselves with the Affairs of this Life, or be so taken up with them, as to
neglect the Duties of their Ministry, does belong to other Vocations as well as
to that of Ministers. A Physician, an Husbandman, a Merchant, may not so meddle
with State Affairs, as to neglect the Personal Business which GOD has called
them to. We may as well forbid Ministers, to Write any Books, but those of Pure
Divinity, as forbid them all Cognizance of Secular Affairs on some Great and
Just Occasions. A Speech of an Eminent Person once in the House of Lords
observed, That no Reformed Church in the World, held that Ministers may not
Intermeddle in Secular Affairs. He particularly mentioned Calvin and Beza,
whose Influences very much governed the Council of State at Geneva: Brentius
and Scultet, and Du moulin, and Rivet; and others who were Privy Counselors to
Princes. It Is true, Ministers usually have enough to do in attending to their
Pastoral Charge; and the Ordaining of them to That, is a Filling of their Hand.
They must Watch for Souls as those that must give an Account. But when without
Injury to That, they do upon Public and Pressing Emergencies, apply their
Superior Talents to some things of a Secular Importance, they do but what
Honest Men ought to do. Opportunities to do good, not only Legitimate the
Application of their Capacities to do it, but also Oblige them and Require them
to do it.

Hence it is among the sayings of the great Seldom: It Is a foolish Thing to say,
A Minister must not meddle with Secular matters, because his own Profession
will take up his whole man: May be not Eat, or Drink, or Walk, or Learn to
Sing? The meaning is only, That be must Seriously attend his Calling. This Mr.
Mather did, even in the midst of his greatest Avocations.

ARTICLE XXVII. The Returning Dove.
IT is now high Time to be Looking Homewards.

As far backwards as the Year, 1689. Things were in such an hopeful tendency
toward an Happy Settlement of the Country, that Mr Mather, in his Chamber at
London, (in Copthall Court, Throgmorton Street) set apart several whole Days,
to Acknowledge the Favors of GOD Hitherto Assisting and Succeeding of him. So,
having obtained a Letter from the KING [Dated, Aug 12. 1689.] unto those who
were now in the Government here, Signifying His Approbation of what had been
done by them in Re-assuming of the Government, and encouraging them to go on
until an Orderly Settlement for His Service and their Satisfaction, should be
Accomplished; And the Bill for the Restoring of Charters, and particularly
those of New England, having passed in the House of Commons; and there not
being then any apparent Hazard, but that it would be carried on unto
Perfection; he thought he might Return to New England with Comfortable Tidings.
He took his leave of his Friends at London; and on Aug. 20 went as far as
Graves-End; and the next Day to Deal, where the Ship lay on Board of which he
took his Passage. Here he lay Windbound, until Sept. 3. when his Youngest Son,
then with him, was taken so Dangerously Sick of the Small Pox, that it was
Impossible to leave him in that Condition. The Ship went away without him; and
he (with his Restored Son) returned unto London, in the Beginning of October;
where it was not long before he found such a Turn of Affairs, as fulfill^d what
his Friends told him, when they welcomed him upon his Return, That the Gracious
GOD had stopped his Voyage in great Mercy to his Country. We have now seen the
Great Mercy intended in it: And all things being finished, which concerned the
Settlement of the Country, the Earl of Nottingham introduced him once more to
the KING at Whitehall, Jan. 3. 1691, 2. in the Evening. After he had Kissed the
KINGS hand, His Majesty said to him, Are you going to New England? He answered,
With Your Majesty's Leave, I am so. If in any thing I may Serve Your Majesty's
Interest there, I shall count myself Happy, that Your Majesty will Please to
lay Your Commands upon me. The KING replied, Sir, I Thank you; I Wish you a
Good Voyage. He then said, There is one thing, which I would humbly put Your
Majesty in mind of. We have in New England a COLLEGE, where many an Excellent
Protestant Divine has had his Education. The KING said, I know it! He thereupon
added, If Your Majesty will cast a favorable Aspect on that Society, it will
yet Flourish more than ^ver. The KING returned, I shall willingly do it. -- And
so Ended the Final Conference.

Mr. Mather, upon a Review of his Agency, was now able to use those Words, As
Day and Night have seen it; so I can and do Appeal to Heaven and Earth, that I
have Served the People of my Country, with all Fidelity, and unto the Very
utmost of my Capacity. And so, with an easy mind in himself, but great
Expressions of Affection in his Friends at his taking his ultimum Vale of them,
he left London, on Mar. 7. 1692. and Sr. William Phips, then having received
the Royal Commission for the Government of New England fetched him in a Yacht
from Southampton, to Cowes in the Isle of Wight, where the Ship lay in which he
was to take his Passage There ^e Preached both parts of the Day; which he
afterward had Opportunity to do in Dartmouth, and in Plymouth.

On Mar. 29. 1692. he with the Companions of his Voyage, left Plymouth; and had
a Comfortable Passage for New England, under the Convoy of the Nonesuch
Frigate. Instead of their falling into the Hands of their Foes, which was much
feared by their Friends a French prize fell into their Hands. And they had also
a notable Deliverance from what they commonly call, A Tartar: For spying some
Ships which they took for French Merchantmen, their Convoy made away for them;
until contrary Winds compelled them to leave the chase. But on the Day
following, a French Vessel which they took, informed them, That they were Four
French Men of War, which were bound home for France, from the Island of
Martinico.

On May 14. he arrived safe to his House and Flock, at Boston. And soon after
the first Great and General Assembly of the Province was Convened; unto whom he
repaired, and Reading over the Instructions he had received from the Government
he upon each of them Demonstrated unto the Satisfaction of the whole Assembly,
that he had unto the utmost of his Power Punctually observed them. After some
Days, and upon the most mature Examination and Deliberation, the Speaker in the
Name of the who^e House of Representatives, returned him Thanks for his
Faithful, Painful, Indefatigable Endeavors to serve the Country; and added,
That they were willing to Reward his Meritorious Endeavors; but by reason of
the Expensive War under which they were Laboring, they were at present unable
to do any thing Proportionable to his Merits: To which Mr. Mather answered,
That he Sought not Theirs but Them, in all that he had Endeavored, and for his
Recompense, he was willing to expect it in Another World. However, he had in
This World, so much as This comes to; That the Great and General Assembly,
appointed a Day of Solemn THANKSGIVING to Almighty GOD, through the Province,
for Granting a Safe Return to His Excellency our Governor, and the Reverend
Mr. Increase Mather, who (as the order expressed it) have industriously
endeavored the Service of this People, and brought over with them a Settlement
of Government, in which their Majesty's have Graciously given us Distinguishing
Marks of their Royal Favor and Goodness.

He was fortified with diverse Letters from Eminent Persons, Testifying and
Celebrating his Indefatigable endeavors for the Good of the Country, and
adding, While some with you may perhaps Wonder, that he has Obtained no more,
we here, who have the Advantage of a better Prospect, wonder that he has done
so much. But I shall Supersede all Citations from them, with only Producing a
Copy of a Letter, Prepared by the Venerable Dr. Bates, and Signed by Twelve
more; all of them Eminent Ministers in London; and such as the Doctor chose for
that purpose. This was a Thing, which Mr. Mather, had never Desired or
Propos^d, but that Great Man did it, and had the Names of Ten Ministers to it,
before ever Mr. Mather spoke one Word unto any of them about it: not could any
Two of them ever be Prevailed withal to suspect any overdoing in any one
expression of it.

The Letter is worth Preserving, if it were only for the Excellent Hand that
Composed it; For, Caelum est Quicquid tam Docta Manus condidit. This it is.

To the Much Honored General Court Assembled at Boston in New England.
Much Honored Gentlemen.
THe Restoring of your Charter, upon which the Security and Public Good of Your
Colony Depends, We Congratulate with as Joyful Affections, as with Tender
Resentments, We Condoled the Deprivation of it. When Your and Our State was in
Appearance Desolate beyond Humane Power and Counsel to redress, Then
Deliverance came from above: And in our Deep Darkness, the Day Spring from on
High visited us. We must humbly Admire and Adore the Glorious Author of that
Blessed Work: And we cannot but Pay our Grateful Respects, and Dutiful
Subjection to His chosen Servant, our Sovereign, the Happy Instrument of it.
All the Colors of Language are not Lively and Grateful enough to express His
Benefits to us. He has the Honor of Establishing our Religion at Home, and
gives us Hopes of Restoring it abroad, in places from whence it has been
Unrighteously and Cruelly expelled.

Some among You may Wonder, there has been so long Delay before Your Charter
was fini^ht, but if you consider the Torrent of Affairs in Court after the Late
Revolution, it will Lessen the Wonder.

The Truth is, Your Affairs were so Difficult, and Thorny, that the Rare Union
of the Wisdom of the Serp nt, and the Inno^ence of the Dove, was requisite in
the Commissioners manageing of it. A Peremptory Refusal of any Charter, but of
an Uniform Tenor with the First, had been like too Strong a Medicine, that
Exasperates the Disease instead of Curing it. In Affairs of great Importance,
it is Wisdom Maturely to Deliberate, and consider Conditional Events, and by the
foresight of Inconveniences that will otherwise follow, to accept of such
things as are Best with respect to their Circumstances. We must therefore give
this True Testimony of our much Esteemed and Beloved Brother, Mr. Increase
Mather That with Inviolate Integrity, excellent Prudence, and Unfainting
Diligence, he has Managed the great Business Committed to His Trust. As he is
Instructed in the School of Heaven, to Minister in the Affairs of the Soul, so
he is furnished with a Tal^nt to Transact Affairs of State. His Proceedings
have been with that Caution and Circumspection, as is Correspondent to the
Weight of his Commission; He with Courage and Constancy has Pursued the Noble
Scope of his Employment, and understanding the True Moment of Things, has
preferred the Public Good to the Vain Conceits of some, that more might have
been Obtained if Peremptorily Insisted on. Considering open Opposition and
Secret Arts, that have been used to frustrate the best endeavors for the
Interest of New England, the Happy Issue of these things is Superior to our
Expectations. Your Present Charter secures Liberty and Property the fairest
Flowers of the Civil State: And which is Incomparably more valuable, it secures
the Enjoyment of the Blessed Gospel in its Purity and Freedom. Although there is
a Restraint of your Power in some things that were granted in the Former
Charter, yet there are more Ample Privileges in other things, that may be of
Perpetual Advantage to the Colony.

We doubt not but Your Faithful Agent will receive a Gracious Reward above: And
we hope his Successful Service will be Welcomed with your entire Approbation,
and Grateful Acceptance. We now with ardent Affections recommend our Dear
Brother to the Divine Mercy, that through such Dangerous Seas he may safely
arrive at his desired Place. And We earnestly Pray, that the Blessings of
Heaven may be always upon Your Colony; that by the Light and Power of the
Gospel, the Prince of Darkness may be Expelled from his Ancient Dominions; and
the Kingdom of our Savior, may be Established and Enlarged, by the Accession
of the American Heathen to ^e His Inheritance. Much Honored Gentlemen,

We are, Your very Humble, and Faithful Servants, William Bates. Matthew Mead.
Matthew Barker. Richard Stretton. Vincent Alsop. John How. Thomas Woodcock.
John James Samuel Annesly. George Griffith. Richard Mayo. Isaac Chancy. John
Quick.

LONDON, Oct, 17. 1691.

There needs no more.

-- Except I should now add, That I have at this Moment before me, a Letter
from Dr. Bates to this his Friend, which has these Expressions in it; I am
truly sensible of the Ungrateful Returns of Some in your Country for all your
Prudent Conduct, your Unwearied Patience, and Happy Success, in the Management
of their Affairs. But as your Aims were above their Poor Acknowledgments, so
your Reward will be in the Acceptance of Him who Judges Righteously.

ARTICLE XXVIII. Troubles from the Invisible World.
ONe born to do Special Service for his People, arrived unto them, at a Time,
when Scores of poor People had fallen under a Prodigious Possession of Devils,
which it was then generally thought, had been Introduced by Witchcrafts, or the
Arts and Acts of such as had made Compacts with Demons, to annoy their
Neighbors The Devils, who had been perhaps by the little and foolish
Sorceries, or Magical Tricks, of too many rash People, played withal, were
Permitted now by the Irritated Vengeance of Heaven to break in upon the
Country, with an Horrible Tempest. Some Scores of People, first about Salem,
and then in several other Places, were Arrested with many Preternatural
Vexations upon their Bodies, and a Variety of Tortures, which were Indisputably
Inflicted from the Demons of the Invisible World. The People that were
Infected and Infested with such Demons, in a few Days, arrived unto a Sight,
wherein they Imagined that they saw their Tormentors: a Devil of a little
Stature and a Tawny Color, attended still with Specter that appeared in more
Humane Circumstances. These Tormentors tend^ed unto the Afflicted, a Book,
requiring them to Sign it, or to Touch it at least, in token of their
Consenting to be listed in the Service of the Devil; which they refusing to do
the Specter under the Command of the Black Man, as they called him, would
apply themselves to Torture them with Unaccountable Molestations. They would be
Pinched Black and Blue, Pins would be run into their Flesh; They would be kept
Fasting for whole Weeks together; and not to mention a Thousand other Things
which would be Incredible unto others, but are not so to us, who saw them, and
are Infallibly sure that we were not Imposed upon, I'^ mention but one more,
that -- Crimine ab uno, -- the rest may be Judged of. The Miserables (some of
them) Exclaimed, of Branding Irons heating at the Fire on the Hearth to mark
them. Now though we the Standers by could see no Irons, yet we could see
Distinctly the Print of them in the Ashes, and smell them too as they were
carried by the Unfeen Agents, unto the poor Creatures for whom they were
intended; And these poor Creatures were thereupon so Stigmatized with them,
that they will bear the Marks of them to their Dying Day. These Afflicted
people, vehemently Cried out upon several Persons in several Places; that the
Specter which Afflicted them did exactly Resemble Them; until the Importunity
of the outcries, with the Calamity of the Accusers, compelled the Magistrates
to Examine them. When the Accused came upon their Examination, it was found,
that the Demons had unto the Afflicted People, exactly Represented them, and
it was found, that the Accused but casting their Eye on the Afflicted the
Afflicted though their Faces were never so much another way, would fall down,
and ly in a sort of a Swoon, wherein they would continue, whatever Hands were
laid upon them, until the Hands of the Accused came to touch them, and then
they would revive Immediately. And it was found, that Various kinds of Natural
Actions, done by the Accused in or to their own Bodies, as, Leaning, Bending,
Turning awry, or Sq^ezing their Hands, or the like, were presently attended
with the like Things Preternaturally done on the Bodies of the Afflicted,
though they were so far asunder, that they could not Possibly Observe one
another. It was also ^ound, that the Flesh of the Afflicted was often bitten at
such a rate, not that only the Print of Teeth would be left on their Flesh, but
the very Slaver of Spittle too: And there would appear just such a Sat of
Teeth, as was in the Accused, even such as might be clearly distinguished from
other Peoples. And usually the Afflicted went thorough a deal of seeming
Difficulties from the Tormenting Specter, and must be long waited on, before
they could get a Breathing-Space, from their Torments to give in their
Testimonies.

Now many Good Men took up an Opinion, That the Providence of GOD would not
Permit an Innocent Person to come under such a Spectral Representation; and
that a Concurrence of so many Circumstances would prove an Accused Person to be
in a Confederacy with the Demons thus Afflicting of the Neighbors. Diverse of
the Accused People were brought upon their Trial, while this Opinion was yet
Prevailing in the Minds of the Judges and the Juries; and though against many
of the Tried, there was brought in some other Evidence, yet several were
Executed mainly upon This, which was called The Spectre-Evidence. And it
happened, that some of the Accused coming to Confess themselves Guilty, their
Shapes were no more seen by any of the Afflicted, though the Confession of the
former had been kept so Secret that the latter knew nothing of it: But instead
thereof, these Accused ones fell under the same Vexations with the Afflicted;
This Confirmed many in their Opinion. The Apparitions of Ghosts, which Declared
themselves Murdered by the Accused, (and were some of them also seen by some
Others besides the Afflicted,) and some of the Murders thereupon Confessed by
some of the Accused; These also added unto the Zeal of the Proceedings. And
Wiser Men, than those Flas^y and F^eering Witlings, who at a Distance think a S
cornful S coff to be a Sufficient Solution for these things, had they been on
the spot, could not but have been extremely Puzzled with them. On the other
part, there were many very Wise Men, who from the Beginning, were very much
Dissatisfied at what was adoing; and feared that in the Extraordinary Descent
of Wicked Spirits from their High Places upon the Country, such Principles, and
so such Practices, might be taken up, as would cause the Righteous to Perish
with the Wicked. It Affected them to see, that the more the Afflicted were
Hearkened to, the more the Number of the Accused was Increased; until at last,
many Unquestionably very Good People were Cried out upon. The Neighboring
Ministers of the Province, exhibited unto the Government, an Instrument
Composed by the same Hand, that under a Desire to have a stop given unto Legal
Prosecutions, in a case too hard for us who dwell in Houses of Clay, and only
the Methods of Religion and of Devotion kept unto, offered, that if the
Afflicted might be Separated, he would singly Provided for the Accommodation of
six or seven of them, that the Success of Extraordinary Prayer with Fasting
might be on this Occasion waited for. In that Instrument, here was a Disswasive
against Credulity for Things only received on the Devils Authority; and against
using any Test for the Trial of the Suspected, the Lawfulness whereof may be
doubted among the People of GOD; and against Convicting any upon such Feeble
Evidence, as the Representation of the Accused unto the Afflicted; Inasmuch as
it is an Undoubted and Notorious Thing, that a Demon may by GOD's Permission,
appear even unto Ill purposes in the shape of an Innocent, yea, and a Virtuous
Man; Nor can Alterations made in the Sufferers by a Look or Touch of the
Accused, be an Infallible Token of Guilt, but frequently Liable to be abused by
the Legerdemains of the Devil. It concluded so; We know not, whether some
Remarkable Affronts given to the Devils, by our Disbelieving of those
Testimonies, whose whole Force and Strength is from Them alone, may not put a
Period unto the Progress of a direful Calamity begun upon us, by the Accusation
of so many Persons, whereof, we hope, some are yet clear from the Great
Transgression laid unto their Charge.

Mr. Mather Concurred unto this Instrument. But what gave the most Illumination
to the Country, and a Turn to the Tide, was the Special Service which he did,
in Composing and Publishing his very Learned, Cases of conscience concerning
Witchcraft: In which Treatise he did with Incomparable Reason and Reading,
Demonstrate, That a Devil may Appear in the Shape of an Innocent and a Virtuous
Person, to Afflict those who Suffer by Diabolical Molestations, and that the
Ordeal of the Sight and the Touch is not a Conviction of a Covenant with the
Devil, but liable to great Exceptions against the Lawfulness as well as the
Evidence of it. Upon this, the Governor Pardoned such as had been Condemned;
and the Spirit of the Country ran Violently upon Acquitting all the ^ccused.
The Confessors came also as out of a Dream wherein they had been Fascinated:
And the Afflicted grew many of them Easy. It was likewise a very strange
Occurrence, That some of the most Fierce Assertors of the Opinion, That the
Devils could not Afflict in the shape of a Good Man, were terribly Confuted, by
having their own Shapes, and the Shapes of their most intimate and valued
Friends thus Abused. Upon which it is my Duty to Remark, That an Insinuation
which I have somewhere seen, that a Godly and Gracious Relative of Mr. Mathers
was at last one of the Accused, and some occasion to the stop of Prosecutions,
has not one syllable of Truth in it. The first Publisher (the Lover, and it is
probable, the Maker) of that LIE, was a Quaker, who did not so hearken to his
Conscience as he should have done; And surely, such Scribblers do not afford
fit Materials for an Historian to rely upon.

I would willingly write this History with a due Regard unto the Admonition,
with which Master Richard of Abkond begun every Paragraph, Sicsine Fell pius.
But yet what is done by one Dr. ^utchinson, in what he calls, An Historical
Essay concerning Witchcraft, requires to have some Notice taken of it. The
Gentleman might have served the good Cause, (as Mather the elder d^d) of
rescuing the Lives of Innocent People from such Ungrounded Prosecutions for
Witchcraft, as the World has too often run into, without such a Weak, and Ra^h,
and Unfair Way of Representing Things, as he has used in this mean Performance.
He had also shown himself a B^tter Christian, if he had Recommended (what
Mather the Younger still insisted on) the Methods of PIETY, which are the True
and Best, and oftentimes the Only Ones, to be taken under the Diabolical
Obsessions which often pass for Witchcraft: but he appears rather disposed for
the Ridiculing of these. Had he been upon the Spot, and Seen the Things which
he has Written of, as We have done, he had been better Qualified for a Writer
of them; he would not have treated some things as He has done, and thought a
few Doggrel Rhimes of his Precious and Beloved Hudibras, enough to make a Dead
Weight against Ocular Demonstration: or imagined, that the most Incontestible
Histories, are Sufficiently Answered, and Arguments refuted, by Nibbling here
and there at the Edges of a few Pages, and leaving a few Excrements upon them.
The Nouvelles de La Republique des Lettres, mentions a Terrible sort of
Logician, who denied a plain matter of Fact, after this manner, I have
Undeniable Reason against it, and it is more Probable that the Eyes are
mistaken than the Reason. Such an Unreasonable Man is Dr. Hutchinson. And after
all, for him to make Mr. Baxter and the Two Mr. Mathers, the Causes of the
Troubles which the Country Suffered from the Invisible World; -- it is a piece
of Baseness, to be expected no where, but in a party, which he belongs unto. He
Observes, what every Doctor of Theology would not have expessed so, That St
James has taught us to Speak with more Guard than St. Paul has done; about the
Doctrine of Justification; And I will Observe, that one who Writes not with
more Guard than lie, will be in danger of such Works as cannot themselves be
Justified; and therefore, I am sure, will not Justify the Doer of them. In the
mean time, the Cain and Abel stroke with which he treats the Persons and
Prayers of the Dissenters, and his Abominable Exhibition of The Surey
Daemoniac, would make one wonder what sort of Dissenters they should be, that
can applaud a Book, so liable to be by them at least Complained of. These few
Strictures are what a just Regard unto the Ashes of a Wronged Parent have
Compelled me to. And I will make so bold with the Gentleman who has given the
occasion for them, as to take my Farewell of him, in the Words of Jerome;
Imperitiam tuam nemo Potest fortius accusare, quam Tu ipse dum Scribas.

ARTICLE XXIX. A Good President.
I Remember my Obligations. It was as long ago, as the Year, 1681. that I began
to mention the Care of HARVARD-COLLEGE Devolved upon Mr. Mather, and the
Opportunities for Special Service, with which His Glorious Master therein
favored him.

He Discharged his Trust, with a Diligence, and a Discretion, and a Fidelity,
in his Weekly Visits to the Society, which found a General Acceptance; and the
Commencements he also Managed, as became a decent Orator and a Learned
Moderator. His Commencement- Performances, were always indeed very much
Admired! His Church refusing to Relinquish the Right they had in him, he
Declined for a while, to do the part of a Praesident, and got another chosen;
upon whose Death in the Year, 1684. the Overseers with the Fellows of the
College again Devolved his former Care upon him; Desiring him to act as,
Praeses pro Tempore, till a further Settlement could be Procured.

In that Station he was ^ound, when the Charter of the Colony was Destroyed;
but they into whose Hands the Government of the Territory fell, Changing his
Title from that of Praesident into that of Rector, continued him in the
Government of the College; where he set himself to Prevent all Disorders, and
Encourage Piety, and Industry, and Erudition.

When he went over to England, he carried his Care of his beloved College with
him. Among other Expressions of it (whereof some have been related,) he
Procured some valuable Donations to it. Yea, it was His Acquaintance with, and
His Proposal to, That Good-Spirited Man, and Lover of all Good Men, Mr. THOMAS
HOLLIS, that Introduced his Benefactions unto that College; to which his
Incomparable Bounty has anon flowed unto such a Degree, as to render him the
Greatest Benefactor it ever had in the World.

Upon his Return to New England, one of the first Things he did, was to Obtain
from the General Assembly of the Province, (what he was in England advised
unto, when he began there to move toward Obtaining a Charter from the King for
that purpose) An Act for the Incorporation of the College, upon a larger
Foundation than the Former Settlement. By this Act, The College was enabled
among other Things, to Confer Degrees, which could not by its former Charter be
pretended to; and Particularly, to Create Batchelours, and Doctors of Theology.
At this Time, and while that Act was yet in Force, this University (as now it
was) thought it their Duty to Present unto their Praesident, a Diploma for a
Doctorate, under their Seal, with the Hands of the Fellows annexed; which being
the First and the Sale Instance of such a Thing done in the whole English
America,

I shall here Transcribe it.

Quum Gradus Academcos tam in Theologia quam in Philosophia pro more
Academiarum in Anglia Conferendi potestas, ab Amplissimo Gubernatore, et a
Summa Massachusettensis Curia, Secundum Serenissimi Regis ac Reginae Gulielmi
et Mariae illis Concessum Diploma, sit nobis Commissa; Et quoniam Vir
Clarissimus D. CRESCENTIUS MATHERUS Collegij Harvardini in Nova Anglia Praeses
Reverendus, Libros quam Plurimas tam Anglice quam Latin edidit, Omnigena
Literatura refertos, Multisque Praeterea Modis non Solum in Linguis et in
Artibus Liberalibus peritissimum, verum etiam in S. S. Scriptures, et in
Theologia se Ostendit Versatissimum; atque per Studia et Merita vere
extraordinaria, non tantum apud Americanos, sed et Europaeanas Ecclesias
Commendatissimum se reddidit; propterea dictum D. CRESCENTIUM MATHERUM.
Doctorali Cathedra dignum judicamus; Eumque pro Authoritate nobis Commissia, S.
S. Theologiae DOCTOREM, nominamus ac renunciamus. In cujus Re^ Testimonium
Academiae Sigillum ^isce Literi^ affiximus; Nos quorum ^ic sun^ Subscripta
Nomina. Datum Cantabrigiae Nov Anglorum, Die Novembris Septimo; Annoque Domini
Millesimo, Sexcentesimo, Nonagesimoque Secundo.

The Fate of the College after this, belongs not unto our Story. The Care which
the Doctor took of it will. He required a Conforming to the Statutes of the
College, with a Stedy Government, and Faithful Discipline. He gave the Students
his Directions about their Studies! He advised them what Books they should
chiefly Converse withal, and cautioned them against such as might Poison their
Young Minds, and give them a Taint which they must Sweat out if ever the
Churches of GOD had any Real Service from them. He kept alive the Disputations
of the Batchelours, in which he Moderated; and assigned them especially such
Questions as I d them to an Establishment in the Truths which the Temptations
of the Day rendered most needful to be Defended. He usually Preached unto the
Scholars every Week, Sermons on such Subjects as he thought most useful for
them, and in a manner, Calculated for the Instruction of such as would of him
Learn to be True Preachers of the Gospel. And sometimes he Illuminated the
College-Hall with Elaborate Expositions. It was also a frequent Custom with
him, and how worthy of Imitation! -- to send for the Scholars one by one into
the Library, and there confer with them about their Interior State, and
Quicken their Flight unto their SAVIOR, and invite them into the Dispositions
and Resolutions of Serious PIETY; and lay the Solemn Charges of GOD upon them
to Turn and Live unto Him; and sometimes bestow Pious Treatises upon them. Some
of them will Bless GOD all their Days, for these Admonitions; and will never
forget the Words that Quickened them. Thus Dr. Mather did continually!
Doubtless it was needful, and much for the Welfare and Honor of the College,
to take it out of the Hands of such a Praesident!

There were some Disaffected Men who for some Reasons, [ GOD knows, what they
were,] were willing to have the College taken out of Dr. Mathers hands. To
accomplish it, they Obtained a Vote of the General Assembly, which appeared of
a Plausible Aspect; That no Man should act ^s Praesident of the College, who
did not reside at Cambridge. The leaders in this Vote, knew very well, That the
Doctor, would not remove his Habitation from a Loving People at Boston, to
reside at Cambridge, while the College was, -- as then it was. But yet his
Abdication was after all brought about, I will but Softly say, Not so fairly as
it should have been. I think, there are Thanks due to me, for my forbearing to
Tell the Story. This was in 1701. Twenty Years after his beginning to serve
that Society in Quality of a PRAESIDENT. And I think, It will do no Hurt for
me, to mention a Passage which he wrote on this Occasion; I have received more
Discouragement in the Work of GOD from those whom I have laid under the
greatest Obligations, than by all the World besides. Let not my Children put
too much Confidence in Men. It may be, such as they have laid under the
greatest Obligations of Gratitude, will prove the most unkind unto them. I have
often had Experience of it.

ARTICLE XXX. Good Advice to Ministers.
WHen the Doctor was upon the Resignation of his Charge, which was in general
much to the Dissatisfaction of the Country, he Preached Jun. 29. 1701. unto the
Scholars, a Farewel-Sermon on, Col. III. 11. CHRIST is ALL. And in the
Conclusion Addressed this EXHO^TATION to them: This Adlocution.

Unto YOU that are Students in the College, and especially unto such of You as
are (what most of you are) Designed for the Work of the Ministry; The ADVICE
which I now, Leave, is This.

First, Let the Glorifying of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and not any Worldly
Considerations, Induc^ you to Devote yourselves unto the Evangelical Ministry
which you have before you. It Is true, It Is an Honorable Calling which you are
Entering upon. To be Ambassadors of CHRIST who is the King of Kings, is to be in
an Honorable Station. The greatest Persons on Earth, have not thought it
Beneath them, to Preach the Word of the GOD of Heaven. The King in Jerusalem,
and as Great a King as ever they had, is called, The Preacher. Ecclesiastical
Writers Affirm, Titus to have been one of a Noble Extraction among the
Cretians. And since the Reformation, what was George the Prince of Anhalt? What
was the Lord of Chandieu, who goes under the Hebrew Name of Sadeel? What was
John Alasco? Yea, and greatly Enriched is that Man, whose Business it is, To
Preach the Unsearchable Riches of CHRIST! But you must not propose the Honors
of This World, in what you undertake. No, but expect rather to be Despised and
Rejected of Men; rather to have all manner of Indignities heaped upon you. As
little may you Propose the Riches of This World. The low and mean Intention of,
Getting a Living, must not be the Chief Thing in your Eye. You may, no doubt,
gain much more Wealth, by betaking yourselves to some other Employments. Yea,
^^verty, Narrow and Humbling Circumstances, and Grievous Defraudations from an
Unthankful People; are what you must look for. You must count it Honor enough,
and Riches enough, if CHRIST may have Service from you. Your Special Advantages
to Serve CHRIST, which Ministers have above other men; Here let there be the
Honor and the Riches, that your Hearts will be mainly set upon.

Secondly. Let your Sermons be as full of a CHRIST as may be. Sermons full of
Self; and made for the Ostentation of your own Learning; Are these the
Sacrifices, that GOD will be well-pleased withal? The Sermons of the Apostles
were not such! No, They could say, We Preach not our selves but CHRIST JESUS
the Lord. What were the Pauline Sermons! We read, He Preached those things
which concern the Lord JESUS CHRIST. Alas, There are Preachers in the World,
who have little of a CHRIST in their Sermons; A Morality without the Gospel of
CHRIST, is all that is to be found in their Sermons: Nothing higher than what
is to be met withal in a Cicero, a Seneca, an Epictetus, or a Plutarch, is to
be found in their Sermons. Nomen CHRISTI non est ibi! Nay, They count it a
Disparagement unto their Sermons, to have the Name of CHRIST often mentioned in
them. How unlike are such, unto that Servant of the Lord, who has the Name of
CHRIST, no less than Ten Times in the Ten first Verses of his first Epistle to
the Corinthians? CHRIST! How Copious the Subject! How Sublime! There is matter
enough in it for your Meditation all the Days of your Lives. Do not Neglect by
any means to Preach on the Glories, the Person, the Offices, the Actions, and
the Benefits of CHRIST; and the Interest which He indeed has in Every Article
of our Holy Religion. Know the Truth as it is in JESUS! Wherefore,

Thirdly, Have an Eye still on a CHRIST, even when you are Preaching on other
Subjects. We may not think, that if a Man Preaches on Subjects wherein CHRIST
is not Immediately referred unto, CHRIST and the Gospel is not Preached in
them: But This I will say unto you. Other Subjects are to be Preached on; and
yet still in all, a CHRIST is to be Repaired unto. The Evil of Sin is to be
Preached upon; The Misery of Man fallen by Sin, is to be Preached upon. But it
must be to Lead the Hearers unto the CHRIST, who is the Mighty and Only SAVIOR
of Sinners. The Moral Law is to be Preached upon as the Rule of our Obedience
to GOD. The Duties of Piety, and Equity, and Charity are to be Preached upon.
But the Example of a CHRIST Observing the Law, and a Manuduction to Him for our
Assistence and Acceptance in all we do, is always to Accompany it. Remember,
The Life of your Preaching will be according to what there is of a CHRIST, who
is, The Life, shining in it.

If you do thus Glorify CHRIST, GOD even His Eternal FATHER, will take it
kindly from you. For there is nothing so Dear to HIM, as that Son of His Love.
His CHRIST is Dearer to Him than all the Men on Earth; Dearer to Him than all
the Angles in Heaven; Dearer to Him, than all the Worlds, which are the Works
of His Hands; yea, it is for HIM that He has made them all. He Delights
exceedingly to see His CHRIST Glorified; and if this be what your Hearts are
set upon, He will Reward you Wonderfully! You will have this Glorious Reward
among the rest; That you will have His Holy SPIRIT Powerfully and Marvellously
Breathing in your Ministry. An Eminent Scotch Divine, hearing a Young Minister
Preach an Elaborate Sermon; when he Commended the Sermon, yet Complained of it;
I wanted one Thing; I wanted the SPIRIT of GOD, that was not so sensible and
apparent in it. You will take an Excellent way, [ Behold, I show unto you an
Excellent way!] to escape this Complaint upon your Services. The SPIRIT of
Truth will Glorify me, Says our SAVIOR. That Holy SPIRIT will sadly withdraw
from the Ministry that has not a CHRIST animating of it. No doubt, This may be
the very cause, why an Unsuccessful Ministry is become so generally a matter of
Observation and of Lamentation.

And now, My Children, what shall I say more unto you? I hope, that as to many
of you, [ Oh! That it might be All of you!] I shall meet you with Joy, at the
Right Hand of CHRIST, in the Great Day of His Appearing and His Kingdom, when
both you and I shall Rejoce, that ever He brought and placed me among you. But,
if any of you, who are the Students in the College, prove so Miserable, as to
Die in your Sins, and in a Christless Condition, I earnesty Protest unto you
this Day, that I shall Testify against you before the Lord JESUS CHRIST in That
Day, that I have called upon you both Publicly and Privately, to make sure of
an Interest in Him. I am now Pure from the Blood of your Souls; If any of you
(which Mercy Prevent!) shall Die in your Sins, your Blood will be upon your own
Unhappy Heads. I have done the part of a Faithful Father to you!.

It were to be wished, that such Words might be Translated into as many
Languages, as Grotius's Book, De Veritate. But --

The Words of Dr. Mather, acting as the Praesident of Harvard-College, are
Ended.

-- I will ask the Leave to Clench them, with some Symphonizing Words, of my
excellent Bro-Mr. Isaac Watts, lately Published. Let us Ministers consider how
little has been our Success, in Comparison of the Multitudes Converted by our
Fathers in the Day of their Ministry. Now it is worth our Enquiry, whether it
may not be Ascribed unto the Abscence of CHRIST in our Sermons. And what Reason
indeed can we have, to expect the Presence and Influence of the SPIRIT of
CHRIST, if we leave His Person, His Offices, His Grace, and His Gospel out of
our Discourses, or give but a slight and casual Hint at these Glorious
Subjects, which ought to be our daily Theme!

And that I may, yet Repeat the stroke, and make it yet more Thorough, and
Cogent and Effectual, I will Transcribe the Words which Dr. Mather himself has
in his Preface to a Book he Published about Three or Four Years before he Died.
I often think of, (and I wish Young Preachers would think of it!) the Advice of
the Famous Dr. Sibs to Young Thomas Goodwin, (who afterward proved a no less
famous Doctor than the other,) Young Man, (said he,) If ever you would do Good,
you must Preach CHRIST, and Free Grace.

ARTICLE XXXI. The Lattter-Days.
THe Doctor still had many Opportunities for Special Service continued unto
him, and he approved himself a Prudent and Faithful Steward of his Talents. He
grew in the Exercises of Repentance and of Patience, and of all PIETY, and
Communion with GOD; and in the Painful Discharge of his Ministry; and
Watchfully laid hold on all Opportunities to bear Testimonies for the Cause of
GOD, and of His People, as the matter might Require. But if I cut the Chapter
into little Sections, it may add something to the Relish of it.

. 1. His Purpose and manner of Life, is Exactly Described, in a Book about
Holiness, which was Written by him, Twenty Years before he Died. In that Book
he offers Admirable Rules for Growth toward a Perfection of Holiness in the
Fear of GOD: which he Introduces with saying, I shall not set before you
Directions impossible to be followed, or heavy Burdens which I would be loathe
myself to touch. No, we saw his Rules Livelily Exemplified. But his Daily
Course may be enquired after. Besides his Patient Continuance, in that stroke
of Well-doing, which lay in his course of setting apart whole Days for the
Religion of the Closet, and which he continued until the last Year of his Life
was coming on: His Daily Course was This: And what a Grateful Spectacle to
Angels in it!

In the Morning repairing to his Study, (where his Custom was to sit up very
late, even until Midnight, and perhaps after it) he deliberately Read a
Chapter, and made a Prayer, and them plied what of Reading and Writing he had
before him. At Nine a Clock he came down, and Read a Chapter and made a Prayer,
with his Family. He then returned unto the Work of the Study. Coming down to
Dinner, he quickly went up again, and begun the Afternoon with another Prayer.
There he went on with the Work of the Study till the Evening. Then with another
Prayer he again went unto his Father; after which he did more at the Work of
the Study. At Nine a Clock he came down to his Family-Sacrifices. Then he went
up again to the Work of the Study; which anon he Concluded with another Prayer;
And so he betook himself unto his Repose.

In the Prayers of the Day, what there fell short of the Number, in the Hundred
and Sixty fourth Verse of the Hundred and Nineteenth Psalm, was doubtless made
up with Numberless Ejaculations. -- Of such Ejaculatory Prayers, no doubt, is
to be understood, what Antiquity reports of the Apostle Bartholomew, That he
Prayed one Hundred Times in a Day; and of one Paulus, That he did it Three
Hundred Times. I cannot say, That this our Eusebius had so many Ejaculatory
Prayers as these come to, But he was the Happy Man, that had his Quiver full of
them!

He commonly spent Sixteen Hours of the Four and Twenty, in his Laborious Hive!
Being very much of Thomas Akempis his Mind, Nusquam Requiem invenio nisi in
Libro et in claustro. He was There, some thought even to a Fault. More of his
Pastoral Visits were wished for.

. 2. Unto a Good Man there once came that Message from Heaven; Thy Prayers and
thy Alms are come up for a Memorial before GOD. This Good Man's did so! His
Devotions toward GOD, were accompanied with his Benignities toward Men; And
these Two, filled his Life with Sacrifices; and assured him a share in the
Royal Preisthood. It was the Doctors Persuasion, That though our GOD is to have
our All used for Him, there was a Special Portion of his Revenues, which was
more Immediately and more Explicitly to be Devoted unto Pious Uses: A S pecial
Portion to be so set apart for GOD, and be so the Lords, that it would be a
Sacrilege to Spend it in any other than those which may be called, Pious Uses.
Concerning this Portion of GOD it was his Persuasion, That a Tenth Part of his
Revenues, was the least, that could go for the Portion. He thought, That since
there is a Part which is the Lords, it is but proper, that the Determination of
what part it shall be, should be left unto the Lord. It was his Opinion, That
our own Carnal Heart, is no Competent Judge, to Determine What and When the
Revenues which our GOD has given us, are to do for Him. Now, if GOD ever did
fix any part, it was plain to him, that nothing lower than a Tenth was ever
fixed by Him. As with out Time, it was not left unto our Arbitrary Fancy, to
take our own Time for the Worship of our GOD, but He Himself Determined, I will
have a Seventh Part of your Time Entirely mine; So it is with our Wealth: It is
not left unto our own Humor, to say, How much He shall have. He has
Determined, A Tenth Part of the Wealth flowing in upon you shall be mine. It
seems, the Good GOD, who with a Seventh Day will be owned as the Creator, will
with a Tenth Part be owned as the Possessor, of all things. He was aware, That
even the Light of Nature taught the Ancient Pagans to Decimate for Pious Uses.
He could levy a whole Army of Authors, to carry this cause; Decima quaeque
Veteres Diis Suis Offerebant. And he thought it strange for Christians to do
less for our GOD, than Pagans did for theirs. They built upon This; A Tenth is
the least part in any Division of Numbers: The lowest is that of Unites; and
less than a Tenth is less than what all Nations make the least. And he thought,
shall not our GOD have so much as the Least of the Revenues, whereof we owe so
much unto Him? The Light of Scripture was that which further and fully
Satisfied him. Our Father Jacob said, The Lord shall be my GOD, and of all that
thou shall give me, I will give the Tenth unto Thee. He thought, one way of his
owning the Lord for his GOD, and approving himself an Israelite indeed, would
be, To give the Tenth unto Him. Yea, when he considered, That our Father
Abraham did pay unto Melchizedek, the Tenth of all; And that our Lord JESUS is
a Priest forever after the Order of Melchizedek; he felt the Force of this
Argument upon it. The Rights of Melchizedek, belong to our Blessed JESUS, the
Royal High Priest concerned in the Heavens for us: The Tenths were the Rights
of Melchizedek; Therefore the Tenths belong to our JESUS. I have heard the
Doctor say, That he looked upon this as an Argument that could not be answered!
Accordingly, he Conscienciously and Constantly Devoted a Tenth Part of his
Income to Pious Uses. But this was the least: He often did much more than so. I
find in one Paper of his Accounts, [For he kept unto the Maxim, Noli Decimas
dare per Conjecturas:] That in One Year, he laid out upon Pious Uses, no less
than Twenty four Pounds above the Tenth Part of his whole Income that Year,
taking in Donations as well as his more Stated Salary. Besides which, the
Generous Things which he often did for the Widows and Orphans of Ministers, by
ordering them to be the Receivers of the Gratuities, which the Bereaved
Churches on whom he bestowed his Labors would have Presented him withal, times
that cannot be numbered; and by Remitting what was owing to him from such, when
the College allowed him some of their Debts, for a Recompense of his Labors
there; These are Things that never came into his Reckoning. He knew, who is they
would one Day come into! He had a Bountiful Eye, a Liberal Soul, a Tender
Compassion for the Miserable. A Noble Demonstration did he give, That they who
do Good Works BECAUSE they are already Justified, will not come short of those
who do Good Works THAT THEY MAY be Justified; and, That they who Renounce all
Pretense to Merit by their Good Works, will more abound in Good Works than the
greatest Merit-Mongers in the World.

. 3. It is Required of a Bishop, That he be, A Man of Good Behavior. Our Dr.
Goodwin thinks, part of the meaning may be, that a Minister must not be
Slovenly, not of such an Unmannerly Carriage as may bring his calling into
Contempt. He must avoid all the Rudeness, that uses to flow from Ill Nature, or
Ill (...); but be of such a Modest, Comely, Pleasing Behavior, as to render
him fit for the Company of any Gentlemen. Indeed, he should not be too
Complemental, or affect the Gesticulations of the Dancing-School; or any Airs,
that shall trespass upon Gravity: But yet his Behavior should have no
Incivilities committed in it. -- Our Dr. Mather was one so Distinguished, for
his Answering this Character; and it was a Remark which I have heard so often
made upon him; that I could not well avoid just a Touch upon it; That he was
one of a very Gentlemanly Behavior; full of Gravity, with all the Handsome
Carriage, as well as Neatness, of a Gentleman; and though his Conversation lay
sometimes with Persons of the First Quality, he was never Charged with an
Indecency. He was at the same time a great Enemy to, and Censurer of,
Loquacity. His Words were Few, as Wise Men's use to be; and much on the Guard,
(Bis prius ad Limam quam semel ad Linguam;) Pertinent, and Ponderous, and
Forcible. It may be, I am upon too small a matter, and so my Words also shall
be but Few upon it.

. 4. But what? Am I Describing one of them whose D welling is not with Flesh? I
don't pretend unto it. Sr. Henry Wotton, when he mentioned his Father commonly
did it in those Terms, That Best of Men my Father. None Faulted him. And yet I
durst not come up to those Terms. Let us then hear of all his Humane Frailties.
Nay, No occasion for That neither! But some tell me, That a Life which only
flourishes on the Virtues and Praises of the Person Written of, and shows only
the Bright side of the Object, is not so Edifying or so Acceptable, or so
Comfortable, as a more Impartial Story, and a fair Confession of Infirmities.
Well, Then, you shall have something of it, and as much as it is fit for me to
give you of it. An Hundred witty Speeches of our Celebrated Ward, who called
himself, The Simple Cobbler of Agawam, [and over whose Mantle-piece in his
House, by the way, I have seen those three words Engraved, SOBRIE, JUST, PIE,
and a Fourth added, which was, LAETE:] have been reported; But he had one Godly
Speech, that was worth 'em all: which was, I have only Two Comforts to Live
upon; The one is, in, The perfections of CHRIST; The other is in The
Imperfections of all CHRISTIANS. And verily, There is Abundance in the latter
as well as in the Former Article. If then it will be at all Comfortable to you,
I will tell you; Dr. Mather had his Imperfections. But must I Exhibit them, and
Represent them, and Amplify upon them? Suppose, I did not see them, as another
might. Or, If I did, am not I very finely Circumstanced for the Relation of
them? I Pray, which among the Sons of Noah, would afford me a Name, if I should
Proceed unto it? And yet, that other Servants of GOD, Mourning under their
Deficiencies and their Miscarriages, may be Comforted, you shall be Informed,
That I find this Good Man in his Diaries, often taxing himself, as Guilty of
Indiscretion; and of sad Mispence of Time; and of not keeping his Heart under
such a Government as he should have done. And when his Days of Humiliation
arrived, he constantly noted with his Pen, Grounds of Humiliation before the
Lord. Here, he still deeply Charges himself with, Remaining Iniquities. Among
these he still Bewails, Great Unfruitfulness. It Occurs Times without Number.
Sometimes it is; How Unfruitful am I; Alas, How do I even Cumber the Ground? He
often Laments? Pride, (...) Vain Glory, and, Selfishness, and, Sensuality, and,
Earthly Mindedness, and, Ungoverned Passions. To these he adds Lamentations
over, Grievous Defects in Gifts as well as Graces; and, Much Unfitness for
Service to the Kingdom of GOD: and, Misbehaviours in all Relations. These
Remainders of Indwelling Sin were such a Constant Sorrow and Burden to him,
that they Exceedingly Reconciled him to the Dying Hour; which he always
mentioned, with a Sensible Transport, when that Advantage of it came to be
mentioned, Never SIN any more! -- The Hour upon which he was Particularly
Pleased with Dying Dr. Goodwins way of Expressing it! My Corruptions, I shall
now shake them off! Those Croaking Toads, I shall never any more be Infested
with them!

Know it, O Soul pressing after a Perfection of Holiness in the Fear of GOD,
and with Unutterable Groans Complaining under the Want of it; There are Saints
now in the Paradise of GOD, (and one, whose Life is now before thee,) whose
Lives were all along filled with the same Complaints, with which thine is now
Embittered.

From one more Quoted than he deserves to be, I will yet now make one
Quotation: Damibi quemcunque vis Magni Nominis Virum, dicam quid illi oetas sua
ignoverit.

. 5. Whether it will be thought any Retainer to the former Paragraph, I know
not: But I have a Paragraph before me, about which I have a Thousand Struggles
in my mind, whether I shall proceed in it, or no. If I do, it will be an
Effectual Demonstration of the Impartiality, the Fidelity, the Integrity, with
which our History is carried on. But That which finally Determines me to do it,
is, The Regard which I Owe, and which, I hope, I shall ever Pay, to that more
Substantial PIETY, which we are forever to insist upon.

What, what is the meaning of that Particular Faith, about Future Events, with
which the Prayerful Servants of GOD, sometimes find their Minds Irradiated, and
Marvellously persuaded and Comforted, in their Prayers before Him? There is a
Praying in Faith, which is the Duty of every Christian in all his Prayers; An
entire Satisfaction in the Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness, and Faithfulness of
the Glorious GOD, and in the Mediation of the Blessed JESUS; and so an Hopeful
Expectation of such Blessings as our Advocate in the Heavens will please to
Procure and Order for us. But then, there is a Particular Faith, which is not
so much the Duty, as the Comfort of them that have it; and which is Granted,
but here and there, but now and then, unto those whom a Sovereign GOD shall
Please to Favor with it. The Devout Believer cannot cause himself to Believe
What and When he will; but under the Energy of some Superior Cause, when he is
on his knees, [or Perhaps, Prostrate in the Dust,] before the Lord, there is a
Strong Impression made upon his mind; which Dissolves him in a Flood of Tears,
and Assures him, Thou shall have the Petition which thou Desire of thy GOD.
The Impression is born in upon his mind, with as clear a Light, and as full a
Force, as if it were from Heaven Angelically, and even Articulately declared
unto him; The Lord has given thee, thy Petition which thou have asked of Him.
Upon the Voice of the Weeping which he finds himself melted into, he cannot but
say, The Lord has heard my Supplication; the Lord will receive my Prayer. It
may be, he was of a Sorrowful Spirit before, and full of Anxiety about the
matter, but now he is no more sad. The Impression at the same time fills him
with all Holy Dispositions, and Holy Resolutions, and Produces an Heavenly
Temper, and leaves him with the Luster of an Excellent Spirit upon him.
[Reader, I am only carrying on the History now on the Anvil, in all of this!]
It were perhaps as easy for me to give unto a Man born Blind, an Idaea of
Light, and of the Colors made by it, as for me to Describe in Words unto the
Understanding of a Stranger -- How it is! But you may have some Illustration of
it in what our Martyrology has related concerning that Blessed Martyr, Mr.
Holland. After Sentence was Read against him, he said, -- And now I tell you,
that GOD has heard the Prayer of His Servants, which has been Poured forth
with Tears, for His Afflicted Saints, which you daily Persecute. This I dare be
bold in GOD to Speak; and I am by His Spirit moved to say it: That GOD will
shorten your Hand of Cruelty: For after this Day in this place, there shall be
no mor put unto the Trial of Fire and Faggot. Which accordingly came to pass;
He was the last that was Burnt in Smithfield. You may see it a little further
Illustrated in the Strange Afflations, which have Enabled and Impelled many
Confessors of CHRIST in the Renoumed Church of Scotland, sometimes to break
forth into Passages that might be Expected from none but such as have Illapses
of the Prophetic Spirit upon them.

-- I Enquire, [ But not of Thee, O Natural Man; For, thou art no Competent
Judge of the matter!] what is the Meaning of this Operation? Whence comes it?
Who gives it? How far is it akin to the Faith of Miracles? or, is it all a mere
Delusion?

Verily, It looks very like an Operation of the HOLY SPIRIT, wherein His ANGELS
may be His Ministers and His Instruments. However, it may Remonstrate, The
Proud have greatly had me in Derision.

But then, what shall we say, about the Disappointments, that ( as they say)
have sometimes made this Particular Faith to appear no other, than an
Overheated Fancy, and left the Subjects of it, in Distresses and Confusions
that must needs be very uneasy Ones? I make no doubt, that there have been
Relations of such Disappointments, which have had little Foundation for them. I
know very well, That when a Person has been Praying for a Complication of
Blessings, and in the Ardours of Supplication, there have dropped from him only
some Words of this Importance, Our GOD has graciously heard us, and will surely
do us Good; the Unwary (and it may be, some of them worse than merely Unwary)
Hearers have run away with a Notion, and made a very Formal and Punctual Story
upon it; That the Person Declared himself Assured of having Obtained All and
Each of the Blessings that have been asked; and one of them failing, all the
whole Particular Faith remains only to be Laughed at. This was doubtless the
very case, in a Formal and Punctual Story, which some of our English Histories
employ their Banter and Burlesque upon. Yea, I am ready to think, That
sometimes the Supplicants themselves have procured some Distresses and
Confusions to themselves by not Attending well to the Terms of the Impression
made upon their Minds, and carrying the Interpretation beyond what they should
have done, or what was Necessary.

It is now Time for me to Observe, That the Instances of a Particular Faith,
wherewith Dr. Mather was Distinguished, were very Various and Wondrous. Of
these I have told Some in the foregoing History; [and if I had not, the caution
of this Paragraph, had not been so Needful to be Introduced:] And I could
insert Many more, if it were Proper to treat the Public, with such Personal or
Domestic Matters: And, All Accomplished! --

-- But One; -- And that was This. After his last Return to New England, he had
a Strange Impression on his Mind, That he should yet have an Opportunity to do
Special Service for CHRIST in England. The Impression was many times very
strongly made upon him, for diverse Months together; And even at such times as
one would suppose least Obnoxious to Satanic Illusions. But yet, -- He never
saw England any more. Now, what shall we make of This? Will it be enough to
say, That he Misinterpreted his own Impression, when he thought it must needs
imply, his own going in Person to the other side of the Atlantic? But that this
very Book may sufficiently Accomplish the Praediction? Or, shall we say, what
he himself wrote upon it; As for the Impression, I have had concerning my Doing
Service for GOD in England; I know not what to think of it. Such Things are
often from Angels: And I sometimes think, that Angles may be Ignorant of some
Future Events; but may cause Motions on the Spirits of Men, according to what
will in Probability come to pass. I am Desirous to Die where I am. No quaestion
but Jacob thought, that he should return again to the Land of Canaan; and that
Joseph should outlive him there. [ Genesis XLVI. 4.] Whereas, the Promise was made
Good, when his Body was Buried in that Land, and his Posterity returned
thither. However it shall be as to myself, I hope, my Son Samuel will do
Service for the Name of CHRIST in England; which is in some sort as if I did
so: And Books of mine Published there, will be Serviceable to the Kingdom of
GOD. One thing which a little Emboldened, that stroke about the Angels, was,
that about the Time, when the Impression was in its Liveliest Operation, [
October 1694.] there was among some in his Neighborhood, a strange Descent of
Shining Spirits, that had upon them great marks of their being such Angels as
they Declared, themselves to be. [What they were, GOD knows!] And from these
there was that Message (and, no more!) directed unto him; He is much Exercised
in his Mind about his going for England; but he need not and should not be so;
For GOD will bring to pass That which will be most for His Glory and Service;
And the Angels of GOD will attend him, wheresoever His Providence may dispose
of him. I might say This more upon it. No less than Thrice Seven Years after
this Impression, and after a long Sentence of Death had been Written upon it
(as there generally is for a while, upon every Thing that a Particular Faith
has laid hold upon) he had an Opportunity to Return for England, and there to
do Special Service for CHRIST, Surprizingly thrown into his Hands. The
Ministers of the Province, by their Delegates met at Boston, [April. 1715.] and
Unanimously desired him, to take a Voyage for England, with an Address from
them, to our Lawful and Rightful King GEORGE, whose Accession to the Throne
gave an Universal Joy to a Country Proportionably fuller of Subjects
wellaffected unto Him, than any part of His Dominions; as also to Establish and
Cultivate a Good Correspondence between the Churches of this Country, and the
United Brethren on the other side of the Great and Wide Sea, And there was a
Provision made, for the Expenses of the Voyage. But, ^he himself now Declined
it.

After all, I will freely Confess what I most of all choose to say. There might
be Danger, lest some Inconsiderate Christians, when they Read the Life of Dr.
Mather, might be as many have been, when they have Read the Life of Dr. Winter
unawares led into, an Indiscrete Affectation of Extraordinaries, and
Singularities, in the Course of their Devotions. This is a Thing that may have
Perilous Consequences! Whereas now, if they find such a Man as Dr. Mather,
once Plunged into such Difficulties and Perplexities, in the Affair of a
Particular Faith, as left him very much in the Dark about it, and Compelled him
to say, I know not what to think of it: This Affection will be so Discouraged
in them, that they will suffer no Danger from it.

If I may be thought Worthy to offer my Advice upon the whole, I would humbly
say; Christians, Reproach not a Particular Faith as if there never were a
Gracious Work of Heaven in it. But yet he Cautioned against laying too much
stress upon it, lest you find yourselves incautelously Plunged into an Hope
that will make ashamed. A Particular Faith may be a Work of God; But the
Counterfeits of this Jewel are so very fine, that it will require a Judgment,
almost more than Humane to Discern them. It is best not being too fond of
Enthusiasms, that may carry you beyond the Dispensation of the Day. It is best
that you should be Content with the Ordinary Satisfaction of Praying and so
Waiting for the Blessings of GOD in such Pious Resignations to His Will, and
Annihilations of your own, as an Uncertainty about Issues would most properly
lead you to.

ARTICLE XXXII. The Period of the Pilgrimage.
Omnes, Nescio quo Desiderio, ad Suprema horum qui Virtute aliqua Excelluerunt,
trahimur aut properamus. Heins:
ANd now the Time draws nigh, in which Dr. Matther is to Die.

He grows Old, yet what a Green Olive Tree in the Preseucha of his GOD! -- nec
tarda Senectus Debilitat vires Animi, mutatve Vigorem.

Old Age came on. But what an one? How Bright! How Wise! How Strong! And in
what an Uncommon Measure Serviceable! He had been an Old Man while he was yet a
Young Man; I can quote a Rabby for it Sapiens appellatur Senex, Etiamsi Diebus
sit Exiguus. And now he was an Old Man, his Public Performances had a Vigor in
them, which it is a rare thing to see a Young Man have any thing aequal to.

How did the good People far and near, Discover even a growth of their
Appetite, for the Enjoyment of as much as might be Obtained from him! The
Churches would not permit an Ordination to be carried on without him, as long
as he was able to Trayel in a Coach unto them.

Though in the Praefaces of the useful Books which he now Published, he
Repeated an Ungrantable Request unto his Friends, No longer to Pray for his
Life; They only Prayed the more for it. When he had finished Forty nine Years
of his Public Ministry, he Preached a Sermon full of Rare and Rich Thoughts
upon, A Jubille; And he requested for a Dismission from any further Public
Labors. His Flock Prized them too much, to hear of That: But anon, when they
saw the Proper Time, for it, that they might render his Old Age as easy as
might be to him, they Wisely and Kindly Voted it, That the Labors of the
Pulpit should be expected from him, only when he should find himself able and
inclined for them. -- It would be no strange thing, if while he wanted yet some
Years to reach Fourscore, there should be found some little thing that might
carry something of Senile Weakness in it. But, he held it unto Four score in a
Wonderful Exercise of his Intellectual Powers, and with Public Ministrations to
very Great Congregations, which his Ministry continued still to give the
greatest Satisfaction to. A Treatise, which he Published about this Time,
concerning An Hoary Head found in the Way of Righteousness, notably Described
what he was himself, and as notably Declared, what he was yet able to do. He
continued Preaching to vast Assemblies; and such well-composed Sermons, that
the Notes taken by some Ready Writers after him, when Communicated unto the
Public by the way of the Press found their Acceptance in the Churches: Among
which Ready Writers, we owe our particular Thanks to a Virtuous Gentlewoman,
whose Exquisite Pen helped several of his Treatises into the World: in some
sort as the Excellent Lady Rich did the most Valuable and Admirable Book of Mr.
Strong, on, The Covenant. Yea, and even After Fourscore the old Prophetic
Strain had not forsaken him.

In September 1720. he Preached an awful Sermon [from Amos III. 7.] on this
Doctrine; When GOD has an Holy purpose to Visit His People with Great
Judgments, He uses to give them Notice and Warning of it before Hand. In the
Conclusion he exprestly foretold, First, That an heavy Judgment was Impending
over Boston, that would speedily be Executed. And then, That the Churches of
the Country were near to some shaking Dispensations. He added; My Brethren, I
take no Pleasure in Testifying unto you of Evil Days. But when the Word of the
Lord is like a Fire in a Man's Bones, there must be something said, that may
Awaken you out of your Security. Now, within a few Months after this, the
Smallpox was brought into Boston, and within as few Months more the Besome of
Destruction swept away near a Thousand People. And how Strangely was way made
for the Destroying Angle to do his Execution!

But let me not Anticipate. I am saying, That until Four score the Doctor held
it unto Admiration! And on the Day of his Attaining to Fourscore, he Preached a
Sermon full of Light and Life, on those Words, Ezekiel. XVI. 5. The Day when thou
wast Born. They that wrote after him, have Printed it. The, Men's et Ratio et
Consilium, which are by Cicero mentioned as the Praerogatives of Old Age, were
found in him to an uncommon Degree. On very many Accounts he might have said,
as old Georgias did, Nihil habeo propter quod Senectutem meam accusem; Yea, as
a Better Man, Old Drusius did, Senectus mihi melior quam ipsa Juventus. But
that which most of all gave him a Comfortable Old Age, was what Calvin who did
not Live to Old Age, well pitches on, as the chiefest Comfort of Old Age:
Tenendum est, proecipuam partem Bonae Senectutis, in bona Conscientia, Animoque
sereno ac Tranquillio consistere: A Good Heart, filled with the Love and Peace
of GOD, and the Soul of an Abraham.

In consideration of this EYTAPIA, it was not amiss for a Grandson, upon the
Birth Day on which he entered Fourscore, thus to Complement him.

To my most Honored GRANDFATHER, on the Day of his entering the Eightieth Year
of his Age.
To my GRANDFATHER in all Good so Great,
His Nephew does his Age Congratulate.
It Is not enough, Sir, that you Live to see
Such Years; We hope, you'^ our True Ne or be.
We wish the Years in which you Live and Preach,
To those of a Methaselah may reach.
It Is true, in common Reckoning we suppose
You want Eight Hundred Eighty Six of those.
But measuring Life by Works and not by Tears,
Your Age Nine Hundred Sixty Nine appears.
Methuselah had a Bright Father too;
A Walker with his GOD; Sir, such as YOU.
If You and We must have a Parting Day.
Death, strike not! -- Let him go in Enochs way.
And, Sir, if Prophets may n't forever Live,
May you in Grandsons left by You Survive.
But it is now time for me to tell that after Fourscore the Report of Moses did
no longer want Confirmation with him; he BEGAN to be more sensible of those
Decays, which not only caused him to recite the Verse of the Roman Satyrist;

O Quam continuis, et quantis plena Senectus Longa Malis! --

but also caused him several times to say to me, Be sure, you don't pray, that
you may Live beyond Fourscore! Yet Now, he Preached nobly on, An Old Disciple:
as well as many other Subjects.

And NOW, He that had wished for, Sufferings FOR the Lord, must be content
with, Sufferings FROM the Lord. Even These born with the Faith and Patience of
the Saints have a sort of Martyrdom in them, and will add unto the far more
exceeding and Eternal Weight of Glory.

On Sept. 25. he did with an Excellent and Pathetic Prayer, in a mighty
Auditory, Conclude a Day of Prayer kept by his Church, to obtain a Good Success
of the Gospel, and the growth of Real and Vital PIETY, with Plentiful Effusions
of the Good SPIRIT, especially upon the Rising Generation. Within Two Days
after This, he fell into an Apoplectic sort of Deliquium; (very much
occasioned, as it was thought, by too extreme a concern of his Mind on some
late Occurrences at New Haven:) out of which he Recovered in a few Minutes; but
it so enfeebled him, that he never went abroad any more.

However, His Wisdom yet remained with him. And while it was yet in its
unexceptionable Displays, there were a few Questions put unto him, whereto his
Answers were immediately written down; and shall he now Produced. Homer
ascribes to a Dying Man, (...). A Prudent and a Pungent Speech on something of
the Last Importance.

Reader, Let such a Speech now have thy Best Attention.

It was asked; What he thought about the Controversy agitated between our
United Brethren in England?

He answered; I wish they would agree upon some effectual Method, that the
Regards of Brethren in CHRIST, may be withdrawn from them who deny the GOD HEAD
of the Lord that bought us; Lest they unawares Betray the most Glorious CAUSE
in the World. They will but Assert and Preserve the Sacred Scriptures, and keep
close to them in making a Reasonable Provision, to Reject the Heretics, who
under the Color of Scripture Terms, hold and broach Damnable Hoeresies.

It was asked; What he thought about the Country, and the Condition it might
come to?

He answered; The Country has yet such a number of Godly People in it, that GOD
will not yet utterly cast off this People. CHRIST has an Interest here that
shall not yet be lost.

It was asked; What he thought about Boston, and the things that are impending
over it?

He answered; There is yet a number of Godly People in the Town; They may be
brought low, But the Town shall be yet Preserved If the MINISTERS continue
Faithful, and carry on the Work and Cause of GOD well together, the Town will
yet have Things go well in it.

It was asked; What he thought of them among us whose late Renouncing of their
own Ministry, and that of almost all the Protestant Churches in the World, was
an extreme Trouble to him?

He answered; It is a very Evil and Grievous Thing, which they have been guilty
of. But GOD may so Over rule their Folly and Impiety, that the cause of Truth
may anon be a Gainer by it.

It was asked; What he thought of the Times in General?

He answered; There will be no settled Good Times, I suppose, till the second
coming of the Lord. I suppose, His coming will be at the Beginning of the Good
Times Promised by the Mouth of all the Prophets. His Kingdom takes not place,
nor is the Israelitish Nation restored, until His Appearing.

It was in this Time, that among other Acts of Special Service which he
continued still to do for the Churches of GOD, he signed with much wise
Deliberation upon them, several Instruments of Consequence, which were to be
transmitted unto London; whereof one was an Address from the United Ministers
of Boston, unto our Lawful and Rightful Sovereign King GEORGE, expressing the
Just Abhorrence in Them, and All their People, for the Conspiracy then lately
Discovered.

But that which his Heart was most of all set upon, was, To bear his Part, with
A Faithful Testimony to the CAUSE and WORK of GOD, in the Churches of
New England; Left by the Memorable Mitchel, the Venerable Higginson, and the
Honorable Stoughton; and now Published under the Title of, Elijahs Mantle. Dr.
Mather having Perused and Pondered the Testimony of those Three Worthies, did
with much Alacrity direct the Addition of his own unto it: And Express a deep
concern upon his Mind, at the Attempts to introduce, A Lifeless Religion, and
an Irreligious Life, into a Country that had been once famous for Better
Things. It shall be here inserted; In perpetuam Rei Memoriam.

I am now in the Eighty-fourth Year of my Age, and under a Feebleness in the
Valley of the Shadow of Death, wherein the Lord is yet a light unto me, and
makes it but a Shadow of Death; and I am every Hour waiting and longing for my
Dismission to a Better World.

In these very singular Circumstances, I am willing to add my TESTIMONY; and I
do Declare, That the PRINCIPAL DESIGN upon which these Colonies were at first
Planted was to Profess and Practice, and Enjoy, with. Undisturbed Liberty the
Holy RELIGION of GOD our SAVIOR, Exhibited in the Sacred Scriptures, and
Rescued from the Inventions and Abuses which the Man of Sin has introduced;
And, more particularly, To set up CHURCHES, [even of the Aboriginal Natives, as
well as of English Christians,] for our Lord JESUS CHRIST, that shall keep
themselves Loyal to Him, their Glorious KING, in His Word giving Law unto them;
and faithful to the Religion of the SECOND COMMANDMENT; and free from those
Offensive Things, from which our UNITED BRETHREN, of the Presbyterian and
Congregational Denomination in the English Nation have withdrawn themselves;
and which our Honored and Beloved BRETHREN in the Renowned Church of Scotland,
have abolished and abandoned.

It was aequally designed by those Followers of the Lord into the Wilderness,
when it was a Land not Sown, That the Pure and Undefiled Religion delivered
unto us in the Sacred Scriptures, (and exhibited afterward in our Confession
of Faith,) should be continually Preached, and our Doctrines of Grace
particularly asserted; by MINISTERS of Good Abilities, and exemplary Godliness
and Watchfulness, freely and fairly Chosen by the Churches whereof they are to
be the Pastors.

And it also belongs unto the Glory of these Churches, to be so Constituted, as
Livelily to exhibit the Kingdom of Heaven unto the World; Both Debarring from
their Communion, such Ignorant and Scandalous Persons (who cannot or will not
Examine themselves) as are to be shut out from the City of GOD; And Admitting
of all those (though in different Persuasions about lesser points) of whom it may
be Judged, That CHRIST has received them to the Glory of GOD. Our Foundation is
in these Holy Mountains!

It is now the DYING WISH, of one that has been about Threescore and Six Years,
after a poor manner, but I hope, with some Sincerity, Serving the Best of
Masters, in the Blessed Work of the Gospel; That the CHURCHES may stand fast in
the Faith and Order of the Gospel, and bold bold fast what they have received,
and Let no man take away their Crown: And, That the PASTORS would more
distinctly from time, and with proper Inculcations, acquaint the Churches with
their True Interest, and those Things which will be their Beauty and their
Safety.

And considering the Relation which I have heretofore sustained, as a
Proesident, for Twenty Years, it is highly proper for me to leave it as also my
more particular Desire, that the Tutors in our COLLEGES, from whence the
Churches expect their Supplies, would see to have the Students well informed in
the Points, which they must Know and Serve, that so the WORK of GOD among us
may not be marred, by falling into Unskilful and Unfaithful Hands.

Indeed, I cannot but go away Rejoicing in it, That the means which are
indefatigably used, for the drawing of Unwary Poople into the Things that will
not Profit them, have had so little success; and that the Body of the more
Sober People throughout the Country (so far as I understand) generally continue
to discover such a Conspicuous Aversion to the Things, from the Face whereof
their Fathers fled into the Wilderness: though at the same time, too general a
Decay of REAL and VITAL Godliness, which is to be the MAIN INTENTION of all, is
greatly to be bewailed. But there may be danger of Another Generation arising,
which will not Know the Lord, nor the works done by Him, and for Him, among His
People here.

'And therefore from the Suburbs of that Glorious World, into which I am now
entering I earnestly Testify unto the Rising Generation, That if they Sinfully
Forsake the GOD, and the Hope, and the Religious Ways of their Pious Ancestors,
the Glorious LORD will severely Punish their Apostasy, and ^e Terrible from His
Holy Places upon them.

NOW, The Lord our GOD be with you, as He was with your Fathers; Let Him not
leave you nor forsake you. LORD, Let thy Work appear unto thy Servants, and thy
Glory unto their Children.

Increase Mather.
Nov. 10. 1722.

In the Biography that has Enbalmed Ramus and Calvin, and some other Great Men,
for the View of Posterity, something of their last Will and Testament has been
inserted. We have as good as done this for Dr. Mather, in our offering of this
Instrument. NEW ENGLAND, Behold and Receive thy Legacy!

The Sovereign Disposer of all things, would not allow us now to say, Sortitus
est facilem exitum, et qualem semper Optaverat. However, I will not proceed now
with such Punctual Relations, of the Doctors last Sickness, as the Funeral
Orations on the Professors beyond Sea, use to be stuffed withal. But for the
sake of what follows, I will Relate this: It was not long after this, that
among other Infirmities, he was extremely tortured and enfeebled, with an
obstinate Hicket, which would sometimes hold him a Week or perhaps a Fortnight,
without Intermission, and then Intermit a little while, but return with the
former Violence, to such a Degree that it was at last found, His Diaphragm
Suffered a Corrosion from it. Under the Uneasy and Incessant Malady, and the
Vapors which produced it, and were produced by it, he grew at sometimes very
Forgetful, and even Delirious: And In the Minutes of the Darkness wherein he
lay thus feeble and fore broken, he sometimes let fall expressions of some Fear
lest he might after all be Deceived in his Hope of the Future Blessedness. His
Holy Ministry having very much insisted on that Point, That no care could be
too much to prevent our being Deceived in that Important Matter; it is no wonder,
that as the Dark Vapors which assaulted and fettered his Intellectual Powers,
broke in upon him, his Head should run much upon the Horror of being Deceived
at the last. Yea, had there not been any thing at all of a Natural Debilitation
and Obnubilation in it, yet it were a very Supposeable thing, and not at all to
be wondered at, if the Serpent be let loose to vex a Servant of GOD in the Heel
of his Life; and if the Powers of Darkness, Knowing the Time to be short, fall
with Great Wrath on the Great Opposers of their Kingdom, and make a very Dark
Time for them just before the Break of the Eternal Day upon them. And how
justly might it awaken the rest of us to Work out our own Salvation with Fear
and Trembling, When we see such a Man as Dr. Mather, concerned with so much
Fear and Trembling, lest he should be Deceived at the last? But in the midst of
his greatest Obtenebrations, he still discovered such an Holy Solicitude, that
he might not in any thing Dishonor the Glorious GOD, nor lose his Hold of the
Blessed JESUS, and such an Holy Resolution to stand by the Choice which he had
made Seventy Years before, and which above all things he did now with
unspeakable Consolation look back upon; as were indeed Preferrible to those
Joys of Impulse that some are Transported withal. The best Judges of Things
have agreed in this Judgment; That going to Heaven in the way of Repentance, is
much safer and surer than going in the way of Ecstasy. After all, it is to be
declared, That the Doctor often saw the Scattering of these Accidental Clouds,
and we saw him Rejoicing in the Hope of that Glory of GOD, which they were to
Praepare him for. He not only very often said, The Infinite Mercy in GOD, and
the Infinite Merit in CHRIST, keeps me above all Discouragement: But he kept
continually feeding, on those Words of our SAVIOR, Where I am, there shall my
Servant be: upon which he would add, CHRIST is in Heaven; and if I am a Servant
of His (which I am sure I am,) then I shall be There! In this Time, his
Complaints, That he was laid by, and now did no good, were more Frequent and
more Grievous, than any that we heard from him about any of his Complicated
Maladies: And he would say, For what Sin is the Holy One thus Chastising me! I
have Examined myself, and I cannot find what it is! Yea, in a deep Abyss of
Humility, there was utterly Absorbed with him all Sense of his ever having done
any good at all in the World. He chose to Forget all, to Renounce all, and cry
out, as he did numberless Times, Lord JESUS, I will make mention of thy
Righteousness, even of thine only. And he would often have the Seventy First
PSALM read unto him. He still expressed his Delight in Prayer, and would call
for much of it: scarce let me Leave him without something of it. If he were
asked what he would have us Pray for, he often Answered, That I may do Good
while I Live, and that I may Honor CHRIST in my Death. One Day telling him,
that his Excellent Friend Mr. Thomas Hollis in his Letters to me, was
Inquisitive whether he were yet in the Land of the Living; He replied, No, Tell
him, I am going to it; This Poor World is the Land of the Dying; It Is Heaven
that is the true Land of the Living!

At last, he began to fall into the Torments of the Wheel broken at the
Cistern: Which yet became not Intolerable, and forced no Ejulations from him,
till about Three Weeks before be Died. Under these, about Three Days before his
Expiration, coming out of a Dark Minute, he said, It is now Revealed from
Heaven to me, That I shall quickly, quickly, quickly be fetched away to Heaven,
and that I shall Die in the Arms of my Son. After this, he kept very much
calling for me; till Friday, the Twenty Third of August, 1723. in the Morning
perceiving the Last Agonies now come upon him, I did what I could after my poor
manner, that he might be Strengthened by such Quickening Words as the Lively
Oracles of our GOD have provided for such Occasion. As it grew toward Noon, I
said unto him, Sir, The Messenger is now come to tell you; This Day thou shall
be in Paradise. Do you Believe it, Sir, and Rejoice in the Views and Hopes of
it? He Replied, I do! I do! I do! -- And upon those Words, he Dyed in my Arms.
--

-- But when the Physicians came to the Evisceration of the Dead Body, how
astonished were they to find, what cause there had been for the Complaints of
the last Three Weeks before he died; and it added unto all our Astonishment
that they were no Earlier! They found, besides a Polypus on his Bladder, no
less than Six Large Stones in it, on several uneven Shapes, and some of them
above an Inch Diameter, the least of which was big enough to have made a Giant
roar. Some of the Stones being broken, were found Collections of loose pieces
of Gravel, which had a thin shell grown over them. -- Animus meminesse horret
Luctuque refugit.

I have said, It was on the Twenty Third of August; A Day so near to the Black
Day, of which it may be said, There never had been a Day in any Nation under
Heaven, wherein so many such Lamps of Heaven were at once extinguished; that it
puts me in mind of Observing, That, I suppose, Dr. Mather now brought up the
Rear in that Illustrious Army of Confessors, who go by the Name of The ejected
Ministers; and on whose Ill usage, I am sorry the Writers of Mr. Doolittel's
Life, have newly seen sad cause to make this Reflection; Such an Invasion upon
the Kingly Office of CHRIST -- was an Act that calls for greater Signs of
Repentance than have yet appeared, Or than the Present Generation shows any
Disposition to.

But the Storm that is to shake sandy Foundations is coming on; And men will
then see their Errors.

On the Seventh Day after this, he was laid in the Cave of the Treasure, and
GOD Honored him with a Greater Funeral, than had ever been seen for any
Divine, in these (and some Travelers at it, said, in any other) parts of the
World. The Honorable, William Dummer, Esquire who was then Lieutenant Governor
and Commander in Chief; and his Honorable, Ancient, Cordial Friend, Samuel
Sewall, Esquire the Chief Judge, of the Province; with the Praesident of the
College, and Three of the Principal Ministers, were they that held the Pall;
before which, One Hundred and Threescore Scholars of the College, whereof he
had once been the Proesident, walked in Order; And there were Followers of
every Rank, (among which about Fifty Ministers) and Spectators that could not
be numbered: All with an Uncommon sadness in their Countenance, and a most
Serious aspect: concurring to the fulfillment of the Text, on which ONE whom he
greatly Loved, and in the Prospect of whose proving a very Faithful and Useful
Instrument of Good in the Churches he greatly rejoiced; [Mr. Thomas Foxcroft]
on that Day entertained a great Auditory with a very acceptable Sermon: [2 Chronicles. XXIV. 15, 16.] He was full of Days when he died; and they Buried him --
Honorably, -- because he had done Good in Israel. Indeed he might on many
Accounts be called, The JEHOJADA of New England!

And now, at the End of the Story, according to my Engagement, I am to tell;
His Church with a noble Gratitude bore the Expenses of his Funeral GOD Reward
them!

Immediately after this, the Pulpits throughout the Country were filled with
Funeral Sermons on him. The other United Ministers of Boston also Successively
for Nine or Ten Weeks together, with excellent Sermons in his own Pulpit, after
a most Agreeable and Acceptable manner expressed their Condolence with his own
Flock on the sad Occasion.

And indeed, as those Valuable Servants of GOD concurred in their Veneration
for the Father now taken from their Head; and he had the Faelicity of the Old
Man Celebrated by Callimachus, whom (...) The Young Men Love, and Prize, and
help as a Father to them; So he left them with a Joy Unspeakable upon it, that
the Glorious Lord had betrusted His Churches here, with such Pious, Painful,
and every way Desirable Hands. He saw a set of Young Ministers happily
Introduced into the City, whom he Esteemed as more Precious than so many Golden
Wedges of Ophir; and the Reverse of the Ancient Calamity which Substituted
shields of Brass when the shield of Gold were carried off.

When we saw given to the Churches of the City, a Sewall, a Prince, a Webb, a
Cooper, a Foxcroft, all singularly endeared unto him, and saw others of an
hopeful Character coming on after them, (of whom the last Ordained by him, was
a Waldron) it is inexpressible, with what Joy. he saw these as his Children
Walking in the Truth, and Pleading for it: but he expressed a little of it, in
his Proeface to their Lectures of Early Piety in which the Voice of the Lord
Remarkably Cried unto the City, just before the Destroying Angel broke in with
a Besom of Destruction wherein some Hundreds of our Young People were carried
off.

ARTICLE XXXIII. The Preacher; How and What he Preached.
WE cannot part with such an Able Minister of the New Testament as Dr. Mather
so; but we must look back upon the Performances of His Holy Ministry. Though
the Preacher, have been, what all Flesh is, as Grass; and the Glory Wherein he
shone, prove like the Flower of the Field; yet what he brought, and his way of
bringing, the Living Word of GOD, may and should Abide with us.

Though I never knew a more Candid Hearer, yet Thousands and Thousands have
concurred in saying, They never knew a more Complete Preacher. He was indeed
the Rabbi Hadarsan of NewEngalnd! and one of whom very Competent Judges would
say, He never Preached a Sermon but what was worthy of the press. -- And there
was nothing more Common then for People, when they would give the Highest
Applause unto a Preacher, to say, He Preaches like Dr. Mather. A very
Accomplished Person, Dedicating to him a Disputation full of Erudition, De
CHRISTI Descensu ad Inferos, Printed in Holland, 1702. very justly Saluted him,
as, Theologorum et Philosophorum onnium, per totam, qua late patet, NovAngliam,
facile Princeps. Being such a Price of Preachers The Manner and the Matter of
his Preaching, will certainly deserve to have some Notice taken of it.

He much despised what they call Quaintness, but affected a Plain and therefore
a Short sort of a Style. Though he were such a Scholoer, yet his Learning
hindered not his Condescension to the Lowest and Meanest Capacity: aiming to
shoot not over the Heads, but into the Hearts, of the Hearers. He was very
careful to be understood, and concealed every other Art, that he might Pursue
and Practice that one Art of Being Intelligible. With Luther, he said, he
counted him the Best Preacher. Qui Simplicissime docet. A Simple Diet, he
counted the most Wholesome Diet.

It was his perpetual endeavor therewithal to Preach very Scripturally, and
like an Hildersham, to back every thing he spoke, with some agreeable Sentence
of the Sacred Scriptures Confirming of it. His Judgment was, That the Word of
GOD is the Food of Souls; and the more there is of That pertinently Produced,
the Better Fed are the Flocks under our Feeding. He judged also, That in the
Word of GOD, there is that Voice of the Lord, that is Powerful and full of
Majesty. Nor did he think, that any Language could aequal it, for the Beauty of
it. I am sure, I ought never to Forget a Passage he had in the Sermon he
Preached at my Ordination; [On Act. XIII. 2.] Since the SPIRIT of GOD is
concerned so much in the Separation of Persons to the Work of the Ministry, how
much does it concern them, to be very Spiritual in their Ministry! Let it be
their Care to Live Spiritually, and be Spirituallyminded Men, and not Grieve
the Holy Spirit of GOD by any Irregularities. But let them also so Preach
Spiritually; and therefore Preach Scripturally, The Word of GOD is the Sword of
the Spirit; and they must Have and Quote much of That in their Sermons, if they
would have the SPIRIT of GOD breathing in them. It may be added, That he had a
notable way now and then, to bring in a Pertinent Passage of ChurchHistory,
which mightily Awakened the Attention of the Auditory, and made his Words the
more Pungent Goads unto them.

His Delivery had something Singular in it. He spoke with a Grave and Wife
Deliberation: But on some Subjects, his Voice would rise for the more
Emphatical Clauses, as the Discourse went on: and anon come on with such a
Tonitruous Cogency, that the Hearers would be struck with an Awe like what
would be Produced on the Fall of Thunderbolts: He was our Farel, than whom,
Nemo tonuit fortius!

He used no Notes in his Preaching to the very Last. Though in Committing to
his Memory, the Sermons which he wrote in Quarto-Volumns, he would write an
Octavo-Page or two, of Texts and of Words, which he carried in the Beginning of
his Bible, to help him in case he were at a loss, yet he never looked upon it.
Once in his Old Age he did; but presently wrote a Remark upon it, as a Symptom
of a Decay, which told him, he was to Die immediately. He was indeed a Friend
unto the Using of Notes in Preaching: [The Roman Orator himself did sometimes,
De Scripto recitare:] But he Distinguished That from the Reading of Notes. He
wished, there were more Speaking, and less Reading, in our Sermons: and would
have had the Preacher to be more of a Speaker; even so much, that the Necessary
Vigor and Address, of proper Preaching, might not be lost, with any that were
at all Capable of Preserving it.

I may not pass it over, That his Ministry was carried on, with continual
Supplications over it. On his Days of Prayer, a common Article of Petition with
him, was, Direction what Subjects to Preach upon. He perpetually went from his
Knees unto the Pulpit, and before his going forth to Preach a Sermon, the last
Thing with him, was, A Secret Prayer for a Gracious Presence of GOD with him,
in the Work before him. And when he came home, the First Thing with him was, A
Secret Prayer, to give Thanks for the Help he had enjoyed, and ask a Blessing
on the Truths Delievered. I find him sometimes Importunate in these Prayers.
Once particularly when he was a very Young Preacher, I find this Passage in his
Diary; After I came home, in my Study I was much affected and carried out, in
Prayer for the Conversion of some of those Young Merchants that usually hear me.

And with what Leading of Heaven granted unto it, would a Ministry so filled
with Visits to Heaven, be likely to be befriended!

Let one Instance instead of many Illustrate it. The Doctor felt once upon his
mind, a strong Impression, to Preach a Sermon about the Crime of Self-Murder;
but he resisted, he declined, he laid it aside.

He then wrote in his diary. This Day my former Thoughts about Preaching on the
Evil of Self-Murder, returning upon me again; I looked up to GOD, and as I was
lifting up my Heart to him, then walking in my Garden, I was most strangely
moved and melted. I could not speak a word for some time. Tears gushed from my
Eyes. And it seemed as if it were said to me, Preach on that Subject, and thou
shall Save Bodies and Souls from Death. The Lion is among thy Flock; Resist him
with the Sword of the Spirit, and the Sheep Committed unto thy Charge shall be
rescued out of his Bloody Hands. What the meaning of this is, I know not; but
wonder at it. There may be something of Heaven in it, more than I am aware of.

The next Lord's Day, he Preached the Sermon [On, Act. XVI. 27, 28.] And behold,
soon after it, there came such to him, as informed him, That at that very Time,
the Temptations to Self-Murder were impelling of them with an Horrible Violence
But GOD had Blessed that Happy Sermon for; their Deliverance! They afterward
joined to his Church.

But that the Account of Dr. Mathers Ministry, may be given in the most
Affectuous as well as the most Expressive way, We will here insert what was
given of it; in a Sermon to his Flock, a few Days after his Expiration.

On Sep. 8. 1723. there was a Sermon Preached unto the Old North-Church;
whereof the Beginning was This.

My Design this Day is, to preach over some Thousands of Sermons; and yet I
design but one Short Sermon for you. My Design this Day is, to Preach over the
Sermons of another Man; and yet the Sermon shall be honestly and entirely my
own. My Design is, if it be possible, to give a little Pungency unto a
Ministry, whereof our GOD has now deprived us; and apply over again the Goods,
which the late Master of our Assemblies had used upon us, or to clench the
Golden Nails, which he has for more than Threescore Years together been driving
into us. I remember, the Ingenious Rosenbergius, in his Rhodologia, mentioning
that Quality of the Rose, That it soon withers, and feels the Blast of Death
upon it; and being thereby led unto Thoughts on that Epigram.

[ Humanum in Terris nihil est quod non sit humandum;
Avolat hinc Animus, Coetera Sarbet bumus:]
He cannot forbear a long Digression, by way of Parentation for his Deceased
Father; On which he employs near Thirty Pages of Lamentation. As he Reverse of
This, having in the Decease of mine, beheld, That all Flesh is Grass, and all
the Glory of Man, as the Flower of the Field; I would no more insist on That;
but fly away to think on, The Word of the Lord which endures forever; and
particularly endeavor, that the Word of the Gospel, as he Preached it unto
you, may, endure for ever in your Affectionate Remembrance of it; yea, and be
Remembered, yet further than so, by being in the Hands of your Children after
you. The Advice given to the Church of Sardis, may be a very proper
Introduction to my Undertaking;

Rev. III. 3. Remember, how thou have received and heard. This Doctrine, That
People ought to Remember What they have heard in the Gospel Preached unto them,
and Remember How they have Received it;

Having been then spoken to; the Conclusion of the Sermon was this.

I hasten to transfer the Admonition into what the Congregation has Heard; and
particularly call upon this Assembly of Zion, to Remember how they have
Received and Heard, in the bright Ministry of the Gospel, which GOD has now
brought unto a Period.

It is a Memorable Passage, 1 These. II. 19. What is our Hope, or Joy, or Crown
of Rejoicing? Are not even ye in the Presence of our Lord JESUS CHRIST at His
Coming? It is here Sufficiently insinuated, That people who have been by their
Pastors brought home untoGOD, will afford a mavelous and mutualSatisfaction
to one another, in the World to come; when it shall be enquired, How we have
Received and Heard the Gospel which has been Preached unto us? Our Deceased
Father, and Pastor, and Patriarch, we shall see him again in the World to Come:
And it will then be Remembered, How we have Received, what we have Heard, from
him. If we have Received it as becomes the Oracles of GOD, we shall Rejoice
together, and our Joy in one another, and in the Lord, will be Wonderful. If we
have Refused and Rebelled, we shall give up our Account with Grief and not with
Joy: Yea, we shall be Destroyed; The Mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

The Pastor, who This Day Sixty Two Years ago, Preached his First Sermon to the
North-Church in Boston. has of latter Years, ever spoken of you, as a Loving
People. The Expressions of your Love to him, were Notable, and were Numberless,
and were such as greatly Comforted him. What you expressed in the Last Years of
his Life, and especially after he became an Emerited Soldier, and singularly
at his Departure, is what I know not that any Church has ever aequalled. In a
very Public manner I now do, and in a more public manner, I hope, I AGAIN SHALL
render you the Thanks, which are to be expected on the occasion. But I am now
to tell you, That the most Significant way of Expressing your Love, will be, To
Remember how you have Received and Heard, in the Ministry of that Burning and
Shining Light, wherein ye Rejoiced for so long a Season.

It is pressed, Heb. XIII. 7. Remember them who have spoken to you the Word of
GOD. But then surely, we should Remember what they have spoken to us from the
Word of GOD; Remember how we have Received and Heard; Yea, Remember it, after
we have seen the end of their conversation. Ecclesiastical History mentions
one, who having word brought him. That his Father was Dead, made this Answer,
Desine Blasphemias loqui, Pater mous est Immortalis. No, Sir, My Father is one
who never can Die. Upon the Death of him who was the Father of my Flesh, I
desire to take the Great Consolations of GOD, that I have in Him who is my
Immortal Father, and with whom the Fatherless find Mercy. But at the same time
you will allow me to do what I can, to Immortalize the Memory, and above all
things, to Immortalize the Ministry of the Father, who is not suffered by
reason of Death, to continue with me.

In the Ministry of our Departed Pastor, there were some Articles of a more
frequent and cogent inculcation, whereof you shall allow me to be this Day, a
Remembrancer unto you. Though he Preached over the whole Body of Divinity, in
the Amesian method among you; and went over the Epistles to the Seven Churches;
The Ten Commandments; And the Lord's Prayer; The Parables of the Builders; And
of the Sower; And of the Tares; The Second Chapter of the Epistle to the
Eplusians; The Eighth Chapter to the Romans; The Seventeenth Chapter of John;
The whole Spiritual Armor; The Temptations of our SAVIOR; The Chain of Graces
in the Second Epistle of Peter; And other Portions of the Scriptures; And
Occasional Subjects without Number; Yet there were all along some Articles,
which in the Fulfilling of his Ministry, he pressed with a Peculiar Flame; And
I hope, you will apprehend him Speaking to you, in my short Recapitulation of
them. It was mentioned as a Fault; Heb. XII. 5. Ye have forgotten the
Exhortation. O Dear People, on whom his Doctrine dropped as the Rain, and his
Speech distilled as the Dew as the small Rain on the Tender Herb, and as the
Showers upon the Grass; Let not this Fault be what you shall be Charged withal.

1. Remember how you have Received and heard, That Sin is an Odious and a
Dangerous Evil. Your Pastor began his Ministry here, (which, Does any Living
Remember?) with several Sermons, on Lam. V. 16. Woe is unto us, that we have
Sinned; wherein he Discoursed on, The Woeful Effects of Sin. Few now Alive
Remember That! But This you may all of you Remember; That the unknown, and the
too much Unregarded and Unlamented Evil of Sin, was what his Ministry did
exceedingly mind you of. What Pains did he take, to Convince you, That none but
Fools make a Mock of Sin; That it is a most Vile thing by Sin to Deny the GOD
that is Above; That the Sinner cannot look to go Unpunished (How Vehemently did
he, with the Hammer which breaks the Rocks to Vieces drive this home upon you,
That no Sin is to be Indulged and Harbored, nor so much as a Sinful Thought
with Allowance Lodged within you? How often, How often, has he Declared it unto
you, That any one gross, Known Sin Lived in, is incompatible to a state of
Salvation; but will be Leak enough to Sink the Soul; that persisted in it! What
mighty Thundrings did you hear from this Pulpit, as from a flaming Mountain,
against those things for which the Wrath of GOD comes on the Children of
Disobedience? What warnings did he therefore give against the Particular Sins
by which he saw the Souls of Men Endangered?

But when the Wrath of GOD was Revealed from heaven against all Ungodliness and
Unrighteousness of Men, in his doing the part of a Reprover, there was
especially One Sin that he singled out for his Frequent Fulminations; That was,
The Sin of Drunkenness; Brutish, and Baneful, and Woeful Drunkenness;
Intemperance in Drinking; A Slavery to the Bottle. Of this, with what Vehemence
did he warn the Tippling Tribe, That at the last! At the Last! At the Last! it
will Bite like a Serpent, and Sting like an Adder! His, Woe to Drunkards, has
been twice Printed among us.

Oh, Remember these things, and from the Words of his Lips, which came from the
Lips of GOD, Learn to keep yourselves from the Paths of the Destroyer. Afraid
of the Wounds whereof he forewarned you, if you do so, oh! Let none of you go
on still in your Trespasses!

II. Remember how you have Received and heard, That a Real, and Thorough, and
Sound Conversion to GOD, is the ONE THING that is of all the most Needful for
you. The Sermons which your Pastor Preached, and which have been more than
Twice Printed, on Mat. XVIII. 3. Except ye be Converted, ye shall not enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven; These were not the only Sermons, in which he
pressed upon you the Necessity of Turning and of Living unto GOD. The
Alienation from GOD, which our Fall has brought upon us, was a Thing so
Grievous unto him, that the Necessity of a Regenerationappeared unto him a
Thing that could not be too frequently or too earnestly pleaded for. With what
loud calls and peals did he Thunder it over you; That you must have a Good Work
of Grace wrought in you, and an Holiness without which no Man shall see the
Lord; That you must have the Experience of a NewBirth, or else it had been Good
for you that you had never been Born; That you must become New-Creatures, or
else He that made you will not have Mercy on you, and He that formed you will
show you no Favor?

And though he continually asserted the Humane Impotency and would have you
sensible, That you cannot Convert yourselves; Yet he urgently dehorted you from
siting still Profanely, as if you had nothing to do; urgently directed you to
make that Cry unto the Glorious One, Turn thou me and I shall be Turned;
urgently Charged you to make yourselves a New Heart, by seeking unto GOD, that
He would bestow a NewHeart upon you.

But then, like the Angel, that Hastened the Lingerers out of Sodom, how
Zealously, how Terribly, did he call on the Delaying Sinner, Fly for thy Life!
The Word with him, was To Day; To Day! To Day! -- Can you forget the Piercing
Sound of it? The uncertain Approaches, and Surprizals of Certain Death, and the
Hazardous Madness of Disobliging the Holy SPIRIT, whose Influences your
Conversion depends upon; how powerfully for this purpose, were you minded of
them!

Hence, as he had been himself a Pattern of Early Piety, and in the close of
his Days, there was no one thing that so much Comforted him, as This; I gave
myself up to GOD in my Youth! So he was a most fervent Preacher of it. Early
Piety, how Mightily, how Ardently, and with how Frequent Excitations, did he
Solicit for it! His Printed Essays upon it, are in your Hands, Children, may
your Hearts feel the Efficacy of them. Oh, Remember these Things; And know that
you are deaf to Thunder, if you continue in your Unregeneracy.

III. Remember how you have Received and Heard, That Persons may go very far,
and seem very fair, in a Profession of Religion. And after all, be Hypocrites
and Castaways. It was with a singular Agony, that your Pastor many Years ago,
Preached several sermons, on Job XXVII 8. What is the Hope of the Hypocrite?
But how often, how often, and in how many Sermons, and with what an
Unparalled Solemnity, did he tell you; That many seem to be Religious, whose
Religion is Vain? That many flatter themselves with vain Expectation to be
found among the Good whom GOD will do Good unto, who yet after all shall be Led
forth with the Workers of Iniquity? That many pass through Convictions, and
Contributions, and Awakenings, and come to some Reformations, and some
Consolations, and for want of closing with a CHRIST in all His Offices, and for
keeping some Lust from which they are not willing to be Divorced by Him, and
for Him, they find themselves Miserably Deceived at the Last? A Deceived Heart
has turned them aside! How Pathetically would he Bewayl the Fate of these Poor
Self Deceivers!

Oh, Remember these things; and let us Beware that we be not found the Sinners
in Zion and the Hypocrites thereof! What, what, will be our Portion, if it
should be so!

IV. Remember how you have Received and heard, That to Pray with all manner of
Prayer, is the Best way to all manner of Good. Your Pastor, not only Preached
what you have on your Shelves, oh! may it be also in your Minds! -- on Psalm.
XXXII. 6. Every one that is Godly will Pray: But in his Preaching you heard it
more than a Thousand Times over from him; That, Behold he Prays! is the first
Note of a Soul Returning to GOD, and capable of Good: That without Prayer there
is nothing to be done, and no Good can be looked for; That Prayer is the Main
Engine with which all Good Purposes are to be carried on. Prayer, Prayer was
that which he used with an unceasing Assiduity; And he Preached it as he used
it. He saw amazing Answers of Prayer; The Prevalency of Prayer was Demonstrated
and Exemplified unto Admiration in what he had himself met withal; And this,
also added flame to the Fervent Heat, with which he would have Melted you to
run into the like Devotions, and have Prevailed with you to Go and do likewise.

How Potently have you heard Secret Prayer Commended to you, Demanded from you,
as a Thing which it is Impossible any Child of GOD should be a Stanger to? How
forcibly, and with what an Arrest upon the Conscience, have you heard Household
Prayer called for; And with what Flashes of Lightning have you heard that Voice
of the Lord uttered among you; The Fury of GOD Poured out on the Families that
call not on His Name!

Oh, Remember these Things; and let none of you be the inexcusable Workers of
Iniquity, which call not upon GOD!

V. Remember how you have Received and heard. That the Table of the Lord, is to
be Seriously and Thoughtfully Prepared for, and not Unworthily Approached unto.
It was a Grief unto your Pastor, to see so many turn their backs upon the Table
of the Lord; so many which openly Proclaimed, that after all the Means used upon
them, they have left the Case of their Souls yet in a Wretched Uncertainty. He
pressed the plain Command of our SAVIOR, Do This, and could not see, why we
should be so Afraid of Disobeying the Command of coming Suitably, as to shake
off all Fear of Disobedience to the Command which bids us to come as well as we
can. But yet he strongly urged the Preparation of the Sanctuary in all that
came unto the Holy Table there. He did not look on the Supper of the Lord as
designed for a Converting Ordinance; He thought, the Bread there belonged unto
none but the Children, and the Living. Though he did not judge it necessary,
that a Communicant should have a Full assurance of his being sincerely
Converted, yet it was his Judgment, that he should be one who upon Trial might
not have cause to Pronounce himself, an utter Stranger to the Work of GOD; and
find that he did not Heartily Consent unto the Baptismal Covenant. How
Powerfully did he Preach, on Mat. XXII. 12. How came thou in hither, not
having a Wedding Garment? A Process of Repentance, to be first gone through;
This he forever insisted on.

And then he proposed an Actual Preparation, like what should be in People
Advertised, That at such a Time GOD would come down unto them. He would say,
when it is Propounded on the Lords Day before it, The next Lord's Day the Holy
Supper is to be Administered, it should be even almost as if it were said, You
shall Die the next LordsDay; Prepare to show forth your Lords Death, in some
Respects as if you were to meet with your own. His own Custom accordingly it
was, for Threescore Years together, to spend a whole Day in Secret Interviews
with Heaven, and Praying and Fasting, before the Celebration of the Encharist.

Oh, Remember these Things; and let none of you Ear and Drink Judgment unto
yourselves, by Unworthy Approaches unto the Table of the Lord.

VI. Remember how you have Received and heard, When the ETERNITY into which we
are all hastening, has been Declared unto you, Displayed before you. What was
there, that your Pastor did with a Countenance like that of an Angel of GOD,
more mind you of, than ETERNITY! Eternity! Eternity! He often told you, The
Word ETERNITY, is enough to Break the Heart of any one, that will with any
Attention look upon it! He often told you, That if you would spend one quarter
of an Hour in thinking on ETERNITY, he doubted not, but it would have an happy
Consequence! With what Anticipations of the Last Trumpet was it, that he
Preached on, Heb, IX. 27. After Death the Judgment! How Solemn was he in it,
when, The Judgment of the Great Day, and The Eternal Judgment, was to be spoken
of? And how often was it spoken of?

You saw him Opening the Bars of the Pit, and setting before you the Second
Death in the most Lively Colors, and bringing up the Damned Spirits from the
Place of Torment, into the view of the Living, and showing you the everburning
Lake, and the Smoke of the Torment Ascending forever and ever. He removed the
Skreen, and gave you a sight of the Fire that never will be quenched; the Fire
which the Unfruitful Trees are to be thrown into. This he did, that so, knowing
the Terror of the Lord, you may be Persuaded into the way of Understanding, and
not go down to the Congregation of the Dead.

You saw Heaven Opened, in the Discoveries which he thence brought unto you,
concerning the Worship of GOD, by Myriads of Angels, and the Spirits of the
Righteous, with JESUS the Mediator of the New Covenant at the Head of them,
carried on in the True Temple above: Discoveries of the Rest from the Days of
Evil, and Fullness of Joy and Pleasures forevermore, to be enjoyed in the
Blissful Mansions. He drew aside the Veil, and showed you what is to be seen in
the most Holy place; to be seen without Presumption or Profaneness; but with
the greatest Advantage for a Progress toward Perfection of Holiness in the
Fear of GOD. Thus he Invited you to accompany him in the way to Zion, with your
Faces thitherward; He said, Come, let us join ourselves to the Lord in a
perpetual Covenant; and go to the City of the Living GOD.

Oh, Remember these things, Remember and Flee from the Wrath to come: Remember,
and Lay Hold on Eternal Life!

VII. Remember how you have Received and heard, Concerning a Glorious CHRIST,
and the Matchless Glories of the Lord-Redeemer the Infinite SON of GOD,
Incarnate and Enthroned, in our JESUS. Your Pastor knew very well, how to
Preach, and he did it more than once, on Col. III. 11. CHRIST IS ALL. In his
Ministry, he made Him so: Yea, Determining to know nothing but a CHRIST, in his
Discharging of it. You never saw him so much in his Flement as when the Glories
of His Precious CHRIST, were to be set before you. The Preaching of CHRIST, was
the Grand Thing to which he advised them who would be the Preachers of the
Gospel; The Reverse of what he with Grief saw advised by some Celebrated
writers, in our Unhappy Days, wherein -- Actum est de Religione CHRISTI apud
Anglos. And he took the Advice for his own Ministry, in a manner well worthy to
be Imitated. Remember how clearly you have had, The Mystery of CHRIST,
explained unto you. Remember what you have Heard about the Importance, of
Accepting a Glorious CHRIST with all HIS Benefits, as Offered in the Gospel, to
be Preached unto every Creature. And, Remember what you have Heard, about the
way of Living on a Glorious CHRIST, in all that you have to Do, and in all that
you have to Bear, while you are in this Dying World: and the way of Living to
Him, which you were told must be your Study, if you would be able to say, For
me to Die, shall be my Gain. And, oh! Let the Remembrance of these Things make
you Well Established Christians.

After all this, you will not think me to have done, if I should leave it
wholly Unmentioned; That though the Ministry which has now left you, did
principally insist upon such Indisputable Matters, yet it had now and then in
it, very Solemn Admonitions unto you, To keep Inviolate the Religion of the
Second Commandment, which brought our Fathers over into this Wilderness, and
was the Love of our Espousals, and will be the perpetual Test of our Loyalty to
our SAVIOR: And to keep close unto the Faith and Order of the Gospel, which
they that went before us, have left as a most Precious Legacy unto us. These
Charges you have Received and Heard; And they must not be Forgotten with you!

But,

I have now done. The Sermon that I have this Day Preached unto you, must be
called, A Sermon to bring to Remembrance. It will not be an Unuseful Sermon, if
they are made Pure Minds, that are stirred up to and by this Remembrance,
Verily, more than a little depends upon it!

One Article more, and the Testimony is Finished!

ARTICLE XXXIV. Dead Abel, yet Speaking.
THE PREACHER, who sought out the Acceptable Words we have heard of, was One
who wrote as Obscure an Hand perhaps, as his Admired Ramus, of whom Naucellus
Complains, That a Stranger would ask a deal of Time to spell out as much 'as
Two or Three Lines of his Writing; or a less worthy to be Honored Lipsius, of
whose Writing Bonclarius makes the very same Complaint: and herein also he was
not unlike to Bucer, who wrote an Hand so bad that the Printers could not read
it: and Erasmus's too, it seems was bad enough:) Yet his Pen may say to the
World, Have not I Written unto thee some Excellent Things? Which he has dropped
for us, as the prophet his Melota when he was Ascending to the Heavenly World.
Thus does he Leave something behind him, that may be doing of Good upon Earth,
after he is gone to Heaven.

Behold, the Catalogue! -- Without any mention of the Learned and Useful
Pr^^faces, which the Publishers of many Books Obtained from him, as a Beautiful
Porch unto them; and which Collected, would make a considerable Volumn.

1669. The Mystery of Isreal's Salvation. 1670. The Life and Death of Mr.
Richard Mather. 1673. Woe to Drunkards. 1974. The Day of Trouble near. Important
Truths about Conversion.
1675. The First Principles of New England. A Discourse concerning the Subject
of Baptism, and Consociation of Churches. The Wicked Man's Portion. The Times of
Men in the Hands of GOD.
1676. An History of the War with the Indians. With, An Exhortation to the
Inhabitants.
1677. A Relation of Troubles of N. E. from the Indians, from the Beginning. An
Historical Discourse, on the Prevalency of Prayer. Renewal of Covenant, the
Duty of Decaying and Distressed Churches.
1678. Pray for the Rising Generation. 1679. A Call to the Rising Generation.
1680. The Divine Right of Infant Baptism. The Great Concernment of a
Vovenant People. Heavens Alarm to the World.
1682. Diatriba de Signo Filii Hominis. Practical Truths. The Church a Subject
of Persecution
1682. Cometographia. Or, A Discourse concerning Comes. 1684. Remarkable
Providence. The Doctrine of Divine Providence.
1685. An Arrow against Profane and Promiscuous Dances. 1686. The Mystery of
CHRIST. The Greatest of Sinners Exhorted. A Sermon on the Execution of a Poor
Man for Murder.
1687. A Testimony against Superstitions. 1688. De successu Evangelii apud
Indos; Epistola. 1689. The Unlawfulness of using Common Prayer; And, of
Swearing on the Book. 1690. Several Papers relating to the State of
New England. Besides, A Relation of the State of New England. The Revolution
Justified. 1693. The Blessing of Primitive Counselors. Cases of Conscience,
concerning Witchcraft. An Essay on the Power of a Pastor for the Administration
of Sacraments.
1695. On the case, whether a man may Marry his Wifes own Sister. Solemn Advice
to Young Men.
1696. Angelographia. A Treatise, of Angels. 1697. A Discourse on Man's not
knowing his Time. The Case of Conscience, concerning the Eating of Blood.
School. David Serving his Generation A Funeral Sermon. 1699. The Surest Way to
the Highest Honor. A Discourse on Hardness of Heart. The Folly of Sinning.
1700. The Order of the Gospel Vindicated. 1701. The Blessed Hope. 1702.
Remarks on a Sermon of George Keith. Ichabod; Or, The Glory Departing. The
CHRISTIAN Religion the only True Religion. The Excellency of a Public Spirit.
1703. The Duty of Parents to Pray for their Children. Soul Saving Gospel
Truths.
1704. The Voice of GOD in Stormy Winds. Practical Truths, to Promote Holiness.
1705. Meditations on the Glory of CHRIST. 1706. A Discourse concerning
Earthquakes. A Testimony against Sacrilege. A Dissertation concerning Right to
Sacraments.
1707. Meditations on Death. A Disquisition concerning the State of Souls
departed.
1709. A Dissertation concerning the Future Conversion of the Jews, Confuting
Dr. Lightfoot and Mr. Baxter. 1710. A Discourse concerning Faith and Prayer,
for the kingdom of CHRIST. A Sermon on, Be very Courageous. At the
Artillery-Election. Awakening Truths Tending to Conversion.
1711. Meditations on, The Glory of the Heavenly World. A Discourse concerning
the Death of the Righteous. The Duty of the Children of Godly Parents.
1712. Burnings Bewailed. Remarks upon an Answer to a Book against the Common
Prayer. Meditations on Sanctification of the Lords Day.
1713. A plain Discourse showing who shall, and who shall not enter into
Heaven. The Believers gain by Death. A Funeral Sermon for his Daughter in Law.
1714. Resignation to the Will of GOD. On the Death of his Consort. 1715. Jesus
CHRIST a Mighty Savior. And other Subjects. 1716. A Disquisition concerning
Ecclesiastical Councils. There is a GOD in Heaven. The Duty and Dignity of Aged
Servants of GOD.
1718. The Duty of Praying for Ministers. A Sermon at the Ordination of his
Grandson. Sermons on the Beatitudes. Practical Truths plainly delivered; --
with an (...) Sermon. Five Sermons on several Subjects. One of them on the
Authors Birth Day.
1721. Advice to Children of Godly Ancestors. A Sermon concluding the
Boston-Lectures on Early Piety. Beside several small Sheets to justify and
recommend the happy practice of saving Lives, by Encountering the Smallpox in
the way of Inoculation.
1722. A Dying Pastors Legacy. Elijahs Mantle.

As they noted of such a Writer as Bartholinus.

Libros Authoris quicunque recenset et Annos,
Annos tot poterit, quot numerare Libros.
Revelation XIV.13. They Rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow
them. Epitaphium. CRESCENTIUS MATHERUS
Magnum RICHARDI, quo gaudebat NOV-ANGLIA
Patre ac Patrono semper Memorando,
Incrementum:
NOV-ANGLIAE Indigena,
Ornamentum et Munimentum;
Sed
Patre ac Patria sua Notior;
Quem novit fere tota Gens Christiana;
norunt et Antipodes.
A teneris Annis Very Bonique Studiosus;
eoque potitus atque politus:
Cui in Pueritia nil Praeter aetatem fuit Puerile;
Vir quem nulli unquam aliter
quam ut Virum aspexerunt:
Quem Juvenem Senes admirati,
Quem Senem Juvenes amplexati:
Insigni Gravitate, Comitate, Autoritate preditus:
In cujus Vultu vere Venerabili una sedebant,
Majestas et Amor:
Angeli Facies, et Hominis.
Collegii Harvardini
Annos per Viginti Praeses;
Ecclesiae Bostonenfis,
Annos per plusquam ter Viginti Pastor:
Quot Animas Deo lucrifecit?
Quot Modis ac Mediis Orbi benefecit?
Academiae diu Praefuit ac Profuit;
Non rantum Lapides dolavit,
sed et Architectos fabricavit:
In Fidelium Caetibus Ministrum agens,
Minister Verbi, Hoc egit:
Omnesque semper velut Orientalium Sydus,
duxit ad CHRISTUM;
CHRISTI Amore animatus et inflammatus,
pro CHRISTO Vitam erogavit;
imo et Mortem anhelavit;
CHRISTUM amavit,
Plusquam suos, plusquam sua, plausquam se,
A CHRISTO doctus,
Nil tanquam CHRISTUM discere,
Nil praeter CHRISTUM docere,
Voluit:
Sacras SCRIPTURAS
Assidue Legens, Accurate Scrutans,
Acutissime Enucleans,
Cordi suo habuit apt inscriptas:
Et cordibus Auditorum Clavos Aureos
reliquit alte infixos:
Cui Mysteria S. S. Scripturarum reconditiora,
Quae Rimari nequaquam licet,
Que Mirari quam maxim decet,
Credere et Vivere,
Summa semper fuit Religio.
Cui Peccatum, vel Minimum quod sic,
imo vel ipsum illius umbraculum,
Nunquam fine Dolor admissum,
Nunquam fine Odio pervisum;
Summo semper cum zelo percussum
Erga Pie lugentes Barnabas;
Erga Impie degentes Boanerges;
Concionator Eximius
Cujus-Facienda Faciendo Praedicantis,
Non Magis in Voce audivimus,
quam in Vita Spectavimus.
potentissimas Conciones:
Fulmina in Sermonibus resonantia et
Fulgura in Moribus Coruscantia,
Attoniti una Observavimus.
Fide sola Justificari
Sperans ac Solbens
Fidem vero Solitariam
as ima ipsa Tartara damnans ac trudens.
Cum Gaudio in Salutis aternae Obsignatione Securus;
Cum Tremore de Salutis propriae Operatione Sollicitus;
Laetabundus Fidelissmum Salvatorem,
Tremenbundus cordis perfidias, contemplatus.
Eccelesiasticae Disciplinae,
Verbo Divino Conformatae et Confirmatae,
accerrimus Vindex;
Nosuit leges Divinas Mutari,
aut AEdes nutari:
Cui Ecclesias evertendi vel perverrendi
Conatus nefarios retundere;
Turrisque demoliendae Linguas confundere;
Et in Fide Cultuque Evangelico
Stabilitas Ecclesias defendere, ac Erigere;
Cura suit perpetua.
Helluo Librorum
Locupletissimam in mente sua instruxit
Bibliothecam;
Et in ejus Alvea^io,
Equo oracula produxit melle dulciora,
nullus Otio Dies periit.
Generosus, et fere ad prodigium Liberalis,
Qui nullius rei novit praeter honestam,
Temporis parsimoniam.
In Caeteris Artibus peritus;
In Art Deo Vivendi Peritissimus;
Multijuga Eruditione floretissimus;
In Corona Eruditorum Gemma
quam nitida! Quam lucida!
In Cathedra Doctorali stella fulgidissima,
Primaeque Magnitudinis;
Ad Sublimiores et Invisibiles jam
Caelitum seeds,
E Terrestrium Conspectu subducta.
Coram REGI^US Mortalibus
pro Populo suo variis oppressionibus Vexato,
Orator
Prudens, Fidus, Indefessus,
Et Exorator faelicissimus;
Apud REGEM etiam IMMORTALEM.
Supplicibus votis accedens,
Orationnibus,
Et Caelum tundere et misericordiam extorquere
Solitus:
Cujus Preces et lacrymae
Tua, O Nova glia, fuerunt Arma,
Et, Castra Everterunt Exterorum.
A REGE REGUM
Eundem ad Populum Legatus,
Diu ac Been in Legatione fungenda
Commonratus et Occupatus,
Ad Caelestia Palatia,
Terrenis Omnibus multo Splendidiora,
jam revocatur.
Quod corpus mortui tegit Monumentum
Exiguam habet Sancti in Terris partem;
et ipsum sane Morietur.
Per Opera et Merita insignia
sibi Vivus paravit Monumenta.
Quae post mortem, et mortis nescia,
per omnia durabunt Saecula.
Optimo Monumento non indignus,
Nullius Monumenti indigens;
In quo Laudando, Fama
non potest esse Loquax,
nec timet esse Mendax.
Annos habuit, et libros Edidit,
(In quibus, et in Parentato^e Typis Excuso ac Emisso, eos et multo plures
adhuc Annos habebit)
Octuaginta Quinque.
Cui Nato Dorcestriae, Jun. 21. 1639.

Sibi optabiliora advenere Natalitia, Bostonae, Aug. 23. 1723.

An Totus Recessit? Non Reliquit -- SAMUELEM.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THough One among the Learned has proposed, That unto the Three Things which
were by the Ancients, reckoned. Things never to be met withal, there should be
added for the Fourth. A Book Printed without Errata; Yet there was a famous
Printer at Paris, before the middle of the XVI Century, so Exact in his
Press-Work, that sometimes a Book in Folio of his Printing, had no more than
Two Errata Observed in it. The Name of such a Printer deserves to be Celebrated
and Immortalized! His Name was Christian Wechel. My Young Printer, the Nephew
of him whose Name stands in the Title page, though this be the First Book, that
has entirely passed through his hand, has bid pretty fair toward the Exactness
of that Honest and Careful Christian. And I will not complain of his
Performance as Jos. Scaliger did unto Cosaubon of a Book then in his hands, Qui
norunt Eos qui Excuderunt, rantum abest, ut Errata mihi objiciant, ut potius
mirentur et frequentiora et graviora non esse admissa. We have upon a Review
hardly any but a Few Literals, to ask the Corrective Pains and pens of the
Readers to be Employed upon: and for these, it is I who am chiefly to be Blamed,
who Examined the Sheets too hastily and heedlesly. Here Is the most of 'em.

Dedi. page VII. Line last r. be made. Book. p. 37. 1. 14. r. some times. p.
46. 1. 20. f. Though r. Thou. p, 60. 1. 12 r. Struck. p. 72. 1. 26. r.
Physician. p. 91. 1. 28. after, have, add, They. p. 95. 1. 23 r. Wits. p. 145.
1. 19. r. stroke. p. 149. 1. 5. r. 1691. p. 163. 1. 22. f. 163. 1. 232. f. not
that r. that not. p. 171 1. 29. r, Americanas. p. 172. 1. 1. r. Commis^a p.
196. 1. 13. r. Proseucha. p. 197. 1. 11. r. Jubilee. p. 205. 1. 14. dele. hold.
p. 233. 1. 12. r. shields.


