REMARKS UPON The POSTSCRIPT to the DEFENSE Of a Book lately Reprinted at
BOSTON, ENTITLED,

A Modest Proof of the Order, etc. IN A LETTER of THANKS to the Author.

By Jonathan Dickinson, M.A.

Minister of the Gospel at Elisabeth-Town, N. Jersey.

Jonah IV. 4. Do thou well to be angry?

Pro. XIV. 17. He that is soon angry, deals foolishly.

1 Cor. XIII. 5 Charity does not behave it self unseemly; is not easily
provoked.

BOSTON N.E. Printed for D. Henchman, and sold at his Shop, over against the
Brick Meeting House in Cornhill, 1724.

A LETTER of THANKS To the Author of the Postscript, etc.
SIR,
I AM not willing to add the Guilt of Ingratitude, to the many Crimes you are
pleased to charge me with; and therefore thus publicly manifest my grateful
Resentments of the good Service you have done the Presbyterian Cause, by the
Postscript to your Defense of the Modest Proof, etc.

WHATEVER were your Views, in that truly admirable Performance; it would be
Stupidity not to apprehend, and Forgetfulness not to acknowledge, the
Obligations we are thereby laid under, I shall therefore briefly take Notice of
some of the special Favors, you have vouchsafed us in that Dissertation; and
depend upon your usual Candor, for Pardon of my necessary Defects in that
Attempt.

'TWOULD have been inexcusable Insensibility, to have overlookt the rare
Imbellishments of your Style, and the fine Flowers of Billingsgate-Rhetorick,
which make up the Substance of that Discourse. I had though it to have presented
you with a Nosegay of these Flowers; but upon a Review could find no room for
Choice: ( Impotent Malice, Venom, Disordered Brain, Petulance and Ignorance, an
Empty Skull, Falsehood, Profane Ribaldry, Saucy, Puny Scribler, etc. being the
common Epithets, you are pleased to favor me with) And you will excuse me the
Trouble of transcribing the whole Discourse, since you cannot be at a loss where
to find it; nor can your value for, and esteem of it, suffer it to be long out
of your Hands -- I shall therefore only take notice of the particular
Advantages arising to our Cause, from this Treatment. And

1. THIS gives us a just Idea of the Spirit of our Adversaries; and will give
every Body full Conviction, how far they are from being Followers of the Prince
of Peace, and how far from that Meekness and Moderation which the Gospel
requires, who so charitably damn by the lump, our Ministry, Ordinances, and
precious Souls. -- Can it ever enter into the Minds of any serious and well
disposed Persons, that the only way to Heaven, is to commit their Souls, to the
Direction of such wrathful and furious Guides?

2. THIS is a plain Indication of the badness of that Cause, which must be thus
defended with Swords and Staves. And (to use your own Words) This offers it
self an Evidence, that the Book you impugn, is not so contemptible, as you
would represent it. For what Cause of these tragical Outcries, if you were not
wounded with the Arguments? Why do you flounce at this rate, if not taken in
the Toils? -- Truly Sir, your substituting Anger for Argument, has rendered your
Discourse a very harmless Piece. -- And now I proceed, to offer you my
Acknowlegements, for your Remarks upon my Preface.

And,

First, It Is very kindly done, plainly to inform us, to what Party you herd
your self: And (to use a Phrase of your own) distinguish your Squadron by its
proper Ensign. There can be nothing more plainly expressed by Words, than that
it was the HIGHCHURCH-Party and no others, whom I styled an Upstart Sect. You
tell us, that it is the best and brightest Part of the Catholic Church, to whom
I gave that Character: The Consequence therefore makes it self, that we have a
TORY to deal with. And thence (by the way) we may give over our Admiration at
your manner of Address, so peculiar to your own Party.

BUT you will pardon my Diffidence, if I cannot yet believe the Church of England
so far degenerated, that the HIGH-CHURCH-Party, (a Faction not heard of till
Archbishop Laud's time, and no more a Part of the established Church, than a
Wen, or such like Excrescence, is part of a Man) are ten times so numerous, as
all the other Sects in the Nation.

You Will be pleased to wait a little, for the Returns due to your abounding
Charity, in denying all that want Ministers Episcopally ordained, to be any
part of the Catholic Church; for so your Words must be understood, if made
consistent with the rest of your Discourse: Being yet to meet with more flights
of the same kind, I hope to account with you for all together.

BUT I Will not delay to offer you my Acknowlegements, for the succeeding
Paragraph, that The Government will doubtless resent the advancing that
seditious Position, That the Doctrine of Passive Obedience and Non-Resistence,
whereon is founded its own Security, are Jacobite Principles, and ought to be
exploded. Is it a seditious Position, to call the Doctrines of Passive
Obedience and Non-Resistence, (as proposed in the Modest Proof, without any
Limitation) Jacobite Principles? Be pleased Sir, to read the Trial of your late
Brother Dr. Sacheveril, and you will find by the Suffrage of the Supreme
Judicature of the Nation, that the direct contrary Doctrine is Seditious; that
the Prince of Orange did actually make Resistance; and that the present most
happy Establishment is founded on the just Resistance then made to King James.
-- Is the Security of the Government founded on Passive Obedience and
Non-Resistance? Is it not a Fact notoriously true, and obvious to all the
World, that all the Rebellions and Seditions that have been raised, during the
happy Reign of our present most Excellent Sovereign King GEORGE, have had their
rise from that Doctrine, as unlimitedly proposed in the Modest Proof, and in
this choice Discourse of yours! Be pleased Sir, to inform me in your next, (for
you can doubtless tell) what is the unhappy Choak-Pear, that sticks in the
Consciences of our Jacobites, and prevents their Swearing to the present
Government, if this be not the Obstacle!

Thus having in some measure discharged the Debt, due for your Remarks on my
Preface, I Will now proceed to take notice of the peculiar Favors received from
your Animadversions on the Book it self. -- And

THE first thing that bespeaks my Gratitude, is your necessary Evasion of that
plain Demonstration offered in my Defense, that the little History with which
the Modest Proof begins, is not only false in Fact, but egregiously
Self-inconsistent. First, I have proved, that it was a gross Mistake to say,
that there was little or no Noise made for above 1400 Years, about this Point
of Church Government. I have brought in Jerome plainly asserting the Identity of
Bishops and Presbyters: I have produced the Confession of a Number of our
Adversaries themselves, that St. Ambrose, Augustine, Sedulius, Chrysostom,
Theodoret, Oecumenius, and Theophilact, were all of 'em of the same Mind. I
have observed that the Waldenses, and Wicklef in England, with his Followers,
were persecuted for this very Doctrine, before that Period. I have shown you,
that there was a great Noise made about Prelacy long before that Time; that
prelatic Power and Superiority, when it did obtain, had been the dreadful
Source of tumultuary Uproars, and bloody Massacres in the ancient Church;
whence Gregory Nazianzen wished there had been no Prelacy, nor Prerogative of
Place in the Church of Christ. Secondly, I have proved that Author guilty of
manifest Contradiction, in saying, that there was little or no Noise made about
the Point of Church Government, for 1400 Years; And yet that it was at length
invaded and suppressed by the Roman Papacy. I Am sure, there is no Proposition
in Euclid more demonstrable, than that he is pleading for the Roman Hierarchy,
according as it was established in that Synagogue of Satan, before the Year
1400; when there was no Noise made about this Point of Church Government; or
else that according to him, there was no Roman Papacy before that Time, since
the Government he propugns, was invaded and suppressed by the Roman Papacy,
when it did arise. You might have had your Choice of these Consequences, which
(once more to use your own Phrase) do necessarily make themselves. But what
have you said in Answer to all this? Might we not have reasonably expected (if
I might yet use your own Dialect) some lisps upon this Head? But your Caution
and Prudence are very praiseworthy, in choosing rather a safe Retreat under a
mean Evasion, than to rush upon the Pikes of such glaring Evidence; and thereby
rather to justify the Cause you pretend to oppose, (for which I thank you) than
to expose your self in so dangerous a Field.

BUT perhaps you will think your self neglected, if these Evasions (how mean
soever) are not taken Notice of. And truly Sir, I have such an innate
abhorrence to Ingratitude, that I cannot overlook these Favors.

YOU tell me, that in your Reply to the Remarker, you have given the Sense of
those venerable Persons on the Case, whose Voices I have had the Assurance to
solicit. I have carefully read what you there offer, and cannot find the least
hint from any one of those Fathers, or from all of 'em together, that there is
by Divine Right, a Disparity between Bishops and Presbyters; but plain
Suggestions to the contrary might be remarked, even from your own Quotations.
But had they been ever so full and clear to your Purpose, how would that have
proved, that there was no Noise about this Point of Church Government? Unless
setting Jerome and St. Hierom, Augustine and the Bishop of Hippo, etc. together
by the Ears, be an evidence that there was no Noise about it. Dare you pretend
to deny, that St. Jerome in his Epistles to Evagrins and to Oceanus, and in his
Commentary on Titus, has fully and clearly asserted the Identity of Bishop and
Presbyter, and largely proved it from Scripture? Have not Numbers of your own
Party, Iren. Part 2. Chap. 6. Sect. 13. Aug. Epis. 19. Bp Jewel's Apol. Part 2.
Chap. 3. Div. 5. Amb. Com. in 4 Cap. ad Ephesians. and 1 Timothy Cap. 3. Sedul. Com in
Tit. I. Primas. in 1 Timothy 3. Chrysoft. in Prior. Epist ad Tim. Hom.11. Theodor.
in Prior. Epist. ad Tim. Cap. 3. Theophil. in Phil. I. I don't swell my
Discourse with a particular recital of the Doctrine of these Fathers, as laid
down in the quoted Places; because we neither found our Faith upon their
Authority, nor put the present Controversy upon that Issue. But I mention them,
to show the Vanity of these Men, that not only pretend to establish the Divine
Right of Prelacy upon these Authors; but would also persuade us, that there was
no Opposition made to their Episcopacy, save only by Aerius, for 1400 Years.
besides Dr. Stillingfleet, acknowleged, that upon the strictest Enquiry,
Medina's Judgment will prove true; that Jerome, Austin, Ambrose, Sedulius,
Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret, and Theophilact, were all of Aerius his
Judgment, as to the Identity of both Name and Order of Bishops and Presbyters,
in the primitive Church? Nay, will not you your self, when you have taken the
Trouble to to read the Places quoted in the Margin, be forced to acknowledge the
same thing?

BUT you have further obliged us by your usual Candor, in saying that the
Reason why the Dissenters are so fond of Aerius, seems to be, that he being
branded for an Arian, as well as Schismatic, they are willing to pay a
Deference to his Opinions in Doctrine, as well as in Discipline. To which it is
Answer sufficient, Thou shall not bear false Witness against thy Neighbor. And
I shall only add, that there has been a great deal more said, to purge Aerius
from the Charge of Arianism, than you, or all your Party can say, to fix that
Imputation upon him. But be that as it will. You appear a very merciful Enemy
to the Cause you oppugn, (for which I thank you) while equipt with no other
Armor, than Railery and Calumny.

YOUR next Evasion is equally obliging. Did the Author of the Modest Proof
pretend, to show the difference between Popery and Presbytery? Could you
publish such a Story, where that Book is in every Body's Hands? Did he allege,
that the Episcopal Rights were early usurped upon by the Papal Hierarchy? Does
he not plainly assure us, that they were not early usurped upon at all, in that
there was no Noise made about it for 1400 Years; but the goodly Order and
Government instituted by Christ, stood firm for many Ages; and was at LENGTH
(i.e. after 1400 Years) invaded, etc! -- Did I infer, that because there were
Usurpations upon that Order, therefore Presbyterian Government was set up ot
Rome, before that period? Was there any thing like this in my Defense? No Sir!
the plain truth is, you were willing to say something, but the Cause would
admit of nothing to the Purpose.

I am next to acknowledge your Favors, in so peaceably allowing, that all the
Foreign Churches, were at the Reformation, established upon Presbyterian
Principles. I don't mean by this, that you have not ventured to contradict this
flagrant Truth; but that all you have offered against it, serves but to confirm
and establish it. Which friendly Office I Will now particularly take Notice of.

YOU first inform us, that it will not follow, that there are no real Bishops
in the Northern Kingdoms, though Bugenhage was improved as an Instrument of the
Reformation in Denmark, where we are assured there are two Archbishops, and
thirteen Bishops. -- What do I hear! Will it not follow, although Bugenhagius,
a mere Presbyter, ordained the first seven Superintendents in Denmark, from
whence flows all their Episcopal Succession to this Day, that there are no real
Bishops there? I Am sure then it does follow,

1. THAT Presbyters have Authority to Ordain Bishops. And thus you have, with
one friendly Stroke, knocks out the Brains of your darling Prelacy; that it is
hopeful we are to hear no more of the Necessity of Episcopal Ordination.

2. IT also follows, that there may be a true Ministry, without Episcopal
Succession. Adieu therefore for ever, to that infrangible Chain.

YOU subjoin, that it is contrary to known Fact, and the truth of History, that
there were no Superintendents in Scotland, where Knox was improved as a like
Instrument. -- To which I make the same Reply. Was Knox a Bishop! How then came
he by Authority to Ordain Superintendents? The Consequence again makes it self,
that Presbyters may Ordain Bishops, though they have no Power to propagate their
own Kind and Order. But since you're pleased to mention the Superintendants in
Scotland, as an Argument to prove, that the Reformation there was first
established upon a Prelatic Foundation; give me leave to consider the Case a
little.

WHAT can more plainly discover the Minds of the Reformers, than their Book of
Discipline, made the first Year of the Reformation? In the Sixth Head of which,
as Calderwood History of the Church of Scotland, p. 26. Edit. 1678.
informs us, they give a Reason, wherefore they make a Difference at this time
among Ministers, some to be Superintendants, and some to be Ordinary Ministers;
not because Superintendants were of Divine Institution, or an Order to be
observed perpetually in the Kirk; but because they were forced only at this
Time, to make the Difference, lest if all the Ministers should be appointed to
make continual Residence in several Places, when there was so great a Rarity of
Preachers, the greatest Part of the Realm, should be destitute of the preaching
of the Word. Thus he.

AGAIN, Did they not very early Approve, and Ratify, the latter Confession of
Helvetia Ibid. p. 41.
, excepting only against some Holy Days? Which Confession has these remarkable
Words, The Power that is given to the Ministers of the Church, is the same and
alike in all; in the Beginning the Bishops, and Elders, did with a common
Consent and Labor govern the Church, no Man lifted up himself above another. I
will only add, --

THAT the continued Subjection of these Superintendants, to the Presbyterian
Assembly in Scotland, makes 'em appear but very Whiggish Bishops. -- You have
not added one Word more against what was offered in my Defense, on this Point;
and have therefore very fairly given up the Cause: For which I renew my Thanks;
and hope the Gentlemen of your Party, will not be so profligate of their
Reputation for the future, as to Publish to the World such a ridiculous Story,
that the greatest and most considerable Part of the Reformed Churches, founded
the Reformation upon Prelacy.

AND now I Am come to pay you my Acknowlegements, for your Remarks upon what I
offered on the FIRST HEAD.

I hope the severe Correction you have given the Remarker, has not so maimed
and disabled him, but that he may yet defend his own Cause, without a Second; I
shall therefore only take Notice of what you say to me.

I need not enquire, why you were so angry at my citing a Passage from Mr.
Sage, the Cause is manifest: That Passage utterly destroys all your fine
Scheme, taken from the Imparity of the Twelve and Seventy: And Losers we know
must have liberty to speak -- Nor need I enquire, why you did not attempt an
Answer to Mr. Sage's Arguments, whereby he irrefragably proves, that the
Seventy's Commission did not constitute 'em standing Officers in the Christian
Church. The Reason of this is also obvious. These Arguments were too hot for
your Fingers. And, Nemo tenetur ad impossibilia. However, I must still thank
you for giving up that Cause.

AND now I Will consider your Queries, and hope I shall consistently Answer 'em,
without being far removed from, and preaching another Gospel than that of
Christ. -- Yor first Query is, Might not Believers in the Messiah, the Lamb of
God, come to take away the Sins of the World, especially when baptized in that
Faith, be accounted Members of the Gospel Church? I must take liberty to Answer
this Question in the Negative. And when you have heard and answered my Reasons,
I Will submit to what Censure you're pleased to impose.

1. THEN it is a plain Case, they could not be Members of the Gospel Church,
before there was such a Church. Members they were indeed of Christ's Mystical
Body, and so Members of the Catholic Church; but so likewise were even the
Godly Ante-diluvian Patriarchs. -- And this also may serve for Answer to your
Second Query. For, though our Savior's Ministry was so succesful, as to gain
many Converts to this Article, That he was the Lamb of God, come to take away
the Sins of the World; yet not to this, That he he had actually abrogated the
Jewish Economy, and established the Christian Church upon its Ruins.

2. THAT there was no Gospel Church at this Time is manifest from this, that
our blessed Lord himself was actually a Member of the Jewish Church, under the
Laws and Government of the Old Testament Dispensation. And accordingly we find
him submitting, not only to the Government, but to all the Ordinances
pertaining to that Pedagogy; as Circumcision and the Passover, the Jewish
Sabbath, with all their other Festivals, and c. And I hope you will not pretend,
that both these Dispensations did de jure subsist together.

3. IT IS clear as Light, that the Christian Church was founded upon Christ's
Death. In that all the Jewish Sacrifices, and other bloody Rites, were Typical
of his Death. And until the Substance (thereby typified) was come, the Shadows
could not be done away. (See Heb. IX. and X. per totum.) And equally certain it
is, that this glorious Dispensation must have been founded on Christ's
Resurrection, since it is the grand Article of the glad Tidings revealed in the
Gospel, that as Christ was delivered for our Offenses, so he was raised again
for our Justification. Romans IV. 25. To which I may add, the Apostle himself
assures us, that the New Testament could not exist, and consequently not the
New Dispensation therein revealed, before the Death of the Testator, Heb. IX.
16, 17. For where a Testament is, there must of necessity be the Death of the
Testator. For a Testament is of force after Men are Dead, otherwise it is of no
strength at all, whilst the Testator lives. Whence it yet appears with a
Meridian Luster, that as there was no Christian Church, when the Seventy
received their Commission, they could not be Officers in that Church, nor have
any Successors. -- And so I Will pass to your Third Query, which is,

WERE not those, who in so many Words are said Luke IX. 6. to have went through
the Towns preaching the Gospel, Ministers of the Gospel? I Answer, They were
Preachers of the Gospel, and so were Adam and Noah, with all the Prophets, and
other Orthodox Ministers, in the Jewish Church. But if by Ministers of the
Gospel you intend Officers in the Christian Church, (as they must be understood
in this Controversy) I must yet Answer in the Negative, for the Reasons above
alleged. Nor will your mere Opposition afford contrary Conviction.

IF it be demanded, what was the End of the special Mission and Commission of
the Twelve and Seventy, Luke IX. and X? I Answer in the Language of your own
Brokesby Histor. of the Govern. of the Prim. Church.
, They were sent as Forerunners before the Face of Christ, to the Places
whither he would come, to prepare the People to entertain him. I add, They were
to preach the glad Tidings, that the Messiah was already come, to take away the
Sins of the World, that he would quickly bring in a new and better
Dispensation. And to confirm their Doctrine, by undoubted Miracles. -- Thus
Sir, you see how much we are obliged to you, for offering nothing but these
trifling Queries, to prove the Seventy to be Officers in the Christian Church;
and thereby leaving your tottering Fabric, without any Foundation, having not
so much as one Prop, to support it.

BUT it is time to offer you my Thanks, for your learned Pains to prove, what
never any Body questioned; that 'twas the Deacon's Office, to serve the Table
of the Lord, as well as of the Poor. But, good Sir, what follows from hence?
Are they therefore Preachers and Baptizers; because they are to serve both
these Tables? Aye, but Ignatius tells us, that they are not Deacons of Meat and
Drink; but Ministers of the Church of God. I shall not now give you the Trouble
of those ungainsayable Evidences, you have been so often told of, that Ignatius
knew nothing of these Epistles. But only take the boldness humbly to enquire,
whether the Apostles did not constitute them Deacons of Meat and Drink? Be
pleased to read Acts VI. 1. and see if the first Occasion of instituting this
Order, was not a murmuring of the Grecians against the Hebrews, because their
Widows were neglected in the daily Ministration. Did these Widows want no Meat
and Drink? Be pleased also to read v. 2d. where it is proposed as their whole
Business to serve Tables: And tell me in your next, whether Tables are not to
be furnished with Meat and Drink? But if you prefer this supposititious
Ignatius to the Twelve Apostles, will you not (if I may be allowed a Phrase of
your own) believe your dear self, who tell us, That the Deacons were to serve
those Tables where the Eucharist was celebrated? And are not the Elements in
the Eucharist, Meat and Drink? -- Who now can be so ill natured, as to deny
your Conclusion from this invincible Argument, that Deacons were ordained for
the superior Offices of Preaching and Baptizing?

BUT it may be you would salve the Reputation of your spurious Ignatius, by
supposing his Meaning to be, that they are not ONLY Deacons of Meat and Drink;
but Ministers of the Church of God. Be it so. Your Champion nevertheless
militates against the Apostolical Institution, which makes it their whole and
ONLY Business, to serve Tables; as I have shown in my Defense, unto which you
have not vouchsafed any Answer. -- You have indeed given us a notable Specimen
of your Learning, by criticizing upon the Word Evangelist, which you tell us,
is the Greek of the English Gospeller; and that to say that the Deacons
preached as Evangelists, is a plain Tautology, and no more than they preached
as Preachers. -- How greatly have you obliged your Reader, by this useful piece
of Instruction! When for the future he shall hear the four Evangelists
mentioned, he will thereby understand four Preachers. When he reads Ephesians. IV.
11. he will understand, that Christ has given for the Work of the Ministry, not
only some Apostles, some Prophets, some Pastors and Teachers; but some
Preachers also. -- By the same way of Reasoning from the Grammatical
Construction of Words, I can prove to you, that your Footboy, when sent on an
Errand, is an Apostle; that an Overseer of the Negroes in the West Indies, is a
Bishop; that your Servant, when he brings you good Tidings, is a Minister of
the Gospel. And a great many more such pretty Consequences might be thought of,
by a Gentleman of your profound Learning, so well acquainted with the English
of Greek Words. But the worst on it is, I must after all, take liberty to inform
you, that the Word Evangelist, or Gospeller, as you English it, and Preacher,
are not Terms synonymous: For Preaching is not the only Means to Gospellize the
World. Private Instruction, the Ordination of Ministers, Administration of the
Sacraments, writing of Epistles, etc. are useful, and have been improved to
this Purpose. And thus your fine Criticism is quite lost. -- And now it is time
you should be paid the Acknowlegements due, for leaving your preaching and
baptizing Deacon to shift for himself, without one Word in his Favor; save
that excellent Saying of your counterfeit Ignatius, and this learned Descant of
yours upon the Word Evangelist.

THOUGH I have thus particularly considered these weighty Arguments, I Will for
the Reader's sake, take the liberty of a short Digression, to desire him to
read the Sober Remarks upon this Head, 2d. Edit. from p. 18. forward; and my
Defense, p 13, 34, 35. where he will find this Matter set in a true Light, and
strongest Evidence offered, that Philip preached as an Evangelist; and was
therefore no Instance of a preaching Deacon: as well as that Evangelists were
(during the Infant-State of the Church) a distinct Order in the
Gospel Ministry. Unto all which, this Gentleman did not find himself capable to
make any Reply. -- But I return to our Author.

AND now Sir, that dreadful Posture in which you appear, armed Cap-a-pe, with
Hercules Club in your Hand, threatening my poor empty Skull, might have filled
me with such Surprise, that I could have meditated nothing but Flight, were it
not for your merciful Disposition, (for which I thank you) which has by a new
Piece of Military Skill, provided me a Shield for a Headpiece; and directed
all your terrifying Blows, against the empty Air. -- You begin your Attack with
this Syllogism.

THEY are bold and insolent Intruders, into the Enclosure wherewith our Lord
Jesus has fenced his Vineyard, who usurp the Ministerial Function, without
being ordained to it by a Successor to the Apostles, etc.

But Jonathan Dickinson was never ordained by any such Successor; Ergo Jonathan
Dickinson is a bold insolent Intruder, and c. -- Is it not now high time for
poor Jonathan to hide his Head, from the dreadful Weight of this invincible
Argument; That none but the Successors to the Apostles have Power of
Ordination, (the Point debated, and that should have been proved) because they
are insolent Intruders into the Work of the Ministry, who are not ordained by a
Successor to the Apostles? Very strongly argued!

IN my Defense I offered this Argument.

THEY that are authorized by the same Commission, have the same Office and
Authority.

BUT all the Ministers of the Gospel, have the same Commission. -- And all you
pretend in Answer, (besides this notable petitio principii before cited) is,
That there were several Things contained in the Commission, and several Offices
warranted by it. -- That Deacons by virtue thereof did Preach and Baptize, but
not consecrate the Lord's Supper, nor meddle with the Powers of Absolution and
Censures, which Presbyters did; but not Ordain, because not vested with the
Episcopal Powers of Ordination and Jurisdiction.

WAS it ever heard of before, that Commissions might be thus crumbled into
Parts? And that Men authorized by a Commission, might exercise but a Part of
the Authority thereby conferred upon 'em? Suppose his Majesty should honor you
with the same Commission, which he gives to the Governors of the Plantations,
(a Dignity well becoming so GREAT a Man) would you take it kindly, to be denied
the Exercise of a Governor's Powers, and to be acknowleg'd only in the Quality
of a Justice of the Peace? -- Truly Sir, this frightful Spectre (as you call
it) will still haunt you, and all your Party, till you can find some better
Method to lay it.

BUT it is high Time to return you my Thanks for so quietly giving up the
Argument for Episcopacy from the Jewish Priesthood; and not venturing to
advance one Syllable, in the Defense of so celebrated a Plea. And you have more
especially merited Thanks, for bringing this Controversy to so happy an Issue,
by telling us, that the very Thing you contend for, is a Bishop of a
Congregation, Ruling Elders and Deacons. (For these were the Offices mentioned
from Dr. Burnet, with which you seem so well satisfied) And if these will
satisfy, we may mutually Seal general Releases, from all Strife and Debate in
this Controversy, from the Day of the Date of these Presents.

AS for your Reasoning with the Remarker, wherein you pretend to have fully
replied to what is offered by me under the Third Head, I have carefully perused
it, and must profess I can find no Strength at all in it. I have consulted you
upon the several Texts, made use of in my Defense, as 1 Pet. 5. 2. Mat. 28. 19.
etc. and cannot perceive you have said any thing to take off the Force of the
Remarker's or my Reasonings upon them. They therefore yet stand good against
you, both in the Remarks and my Defense. You have left 'em safe in our Hands,
for which I thank you. -- I have further to acknowledge your Favor, in one
peculiar Stroke, wholly new, which is all you have offered in answer to me;
wherein you charge me with Denying St. Paul the honor of being an Apostle: for
(say you) before his Conversion he had not seen our Lord; and the Defender
expressly says, None could be admitted into the Apostolate, but such as had
seen Jesus before his Death. -- Wonderful that you should pitch on this single
Passage in all my Discourse under the 3d. Head, to make your Exceptions
against: and surely you were not very happy in the Objection you offer. For it
is plain from the Text cited by me, ( viz. Act. 1. 21, 22.) that none could be
admitted to succeed Judas, in the Apostolate, but such an one as had seen Jesus
before his Death, as well as after his Resurrection. And that This was one
stated Qualification of an Apostle, seems evident, not only from that Text, but
also from 1 Cor. 15. 8. where St. Paul speaks of himself as an Abortive, and
hardly meet to be numbered among the Apostles. His Words are, Last of all He
was seen of me also, as of one born out of due Time. By which it appears He had
that necessary Qualification for the Apostolic Office, A Sight of Jesus Christ:
though this Vision of Christ, and his Mission then to be an Apostle, were LATE
and MIRACULOUS. Wherefore St. Paul being so late, and in such an extraordinary
manner, added to the Twelve, He looked upon himself as one born out of due time.
-- And now judge you whether we are not much obliged to you, that you have
offered nothing but one lean and pitiful Exception against all my Discourse
upon the Temporeity of the Apostolate.

THUS, Sir, I Am prepared to offer you my Acknowlegements, for your so
favorably handling the Fourth Head.

YOUR first Attempt is, to prove from Scripture, Reason, and Authorities, that
James was Bishop of Jerusalem: But you have been so kind as not to offer one
Word from Scripture, but what I had before largely considered in my Defense; to
which I refer you, for a full and particular Answer. -- You have indeed brought
St. Jerome and Chrysostom for Vouchers, that James was Bishop of Jerusalem. And
have also quoted Eusebius. Lib. 7. Cap. 14. to the same Purpose; but I must tell
you, that I have carefully perused the Place referred to, and cannot find there
one Word of that Nature: though he does indeed tell us Lib. 2. Cap. 1. That James
is SAID to be the first, that occupied the Bishops See at Jerusalem. But upon
the whole, I have these Things to propose to your Consideration.

1. THAT your own Dodwell, Paranes. Sect. 37. p. 176. Non long ut opinor
aberrabimus, si annum constituti Episcopatus primordialem statuamus CVI, us
scilicet fuerit Auno illo paulo Antiquior vel Recentior.
who pretends to much earlier and better Authority, assures us, that Episcopacy
did not obtain, before the Year 106. or thereabouts. And who is to be credited
in this Case?

2. YOU have not made it appear, that these Fathers meant ought by James's
Episcopacy, but his tarrying some considerable Time at Jerusalem, to well
establish and build up the Faith in that important Place; and to satisfy the
Difficulties of those who came from all Parts of the World, to consult that
Church. -- I Am sure it cannot be very good Sense, in them or any body else, to
talk of an Apostle's being a Diocesan Bishop; or in other Words, of his being
sent to propagate the Gospel through the World, and yet confined to a particular
City.

3. THE Authors you quote, are much too late to determine this Matter. They
living in an Age wherein there was so much Uncertainty, Obscurity, and childish
Debate, about Apostolic Practices and Traditions.

4. NONE acquainted with Antiquity can be ignorant, how little the Authority of
these Fathers is to be depended upon, in any Doctrinal Point. And this is
always acknowleged by the most eminent of your own Party. Hear two of them. The
first is the truly excellent Chillingworth. Prot. Rel. a safe Way. Chap. VI.
Sect. 56.
I for my part, (says he) after a long, and (as I verily believe and hope)
impartial Search of the true Way to eternal Happiness, do profess plainly, that
I cannot find any Rest for the sole of my Feet, but upon this Rock, viz. the
Scripture: I see plainly, and with my own Eyes, Councils against Councils; some
Fathers against others, the same Fathers against themselves, a consent of
Fathers of one Age, against a consent of Fathers of another Age; and the Church
of one Age, against the Church of another Age. -- The Second is Dr. Sherlock,
who tells us, Preser^^t. against (...) Part 1. Chap. 2. Sect. 3.
The Scripture is all of a Piece, every Part of it agrees with the rest; the
Fathers many times contradict themselves, and each other: And that it has often
made him smile, with a Mixture of Pity and Indignation, to see what a great
Noise the Roman Disputants made among Women and Children, and the meanest sort
of People, with Quotations out of the Fathers and Councils, whom they pretend
to be all on their Side. -- And thus you see how much we are beholden to you,
for those trifling and inconclusive Reasonings of yours.

AND now I Am come, to offer you my Thanks, for your wonderful flights of Wit,
Satyr and Merriment; the only Arguments by which you would establish Timothy's
Episcopacy. -- It must be confessed, you have acted not only safely for your
self, but friendly to us, in taking the Poet's Advice, Blackmore Creat.
To --

No more at Reason's solemn Bar appear,
Hardy no more Scholastic Weapons bear, --
Nor shake your bulrush-Spears; but swift repair
To your strong Place of Arms, the Scoffer's Chair.
I proved to you (in my Defense) from Timothy's Peregrinations, recorded in the
Scriptures, that if he was a fixed Bishop at any Place, he was a Pattern of
Non-residency: And that this Bishop of Ephesus had the whole World for his
Diocese. To which you Answer, Will it follow, that because Timothy had been
with Paul in several Places, that he was not afterward settled at Ephesus? The
meaning of your Question is plainly this: Whether the Apostle did constitute
Timothy Bishop of Ephesus, after he took his last leave of that Church,
committing the Care of that Flock, to the Oversight of other Bishops, Acts XX.
25, 28. and after he had written his Epistles to the Romans, to the
Corinthians, to the Philippians, to the Colossians, to Timothy, and to the
Hebrews? For by all these, I have proved him an itinerant Minister. To which I
Answer, What should hinder, but Timothy's Ordination to that Diocese, might be
the last Work the Apostle performed in the World? Or who can tell, but this
Charge was a Legacy left him by the Apostle, in his last Will and Testament?
Certain it is, he was an Evangelist, and as such traveled from Nation to
Nation, as long as we have any Account of Things from the Apostle, in his
Epistles to the Churches. But we must believe (we may take your Word for it)
that he was nevertheless, afterward Bishop of Ephesus.

AS for what follows upon this Head, be pleased in your next to explain it, and
make it intelligible.

WE might have reasonably expected from your former Promise, a few Words at
least, in favor of the Archbishop of Crete; but you are not pleased to
vouchsafe one Word of Proof upon that Point; nor a Syllable in Answer to the
Objections against the Episcopacy of Titus. And therefore however his Grace
might merit your Neglect, you have certainly merited my Thanks, (which I freely
offer) for giving up that Cause.

AND now I must enter the Lists with the Asiatic Angels, if you can either for
Love or Money, engage 'em on your Side. But from what appears, I need be in no
great Terror, from the Expectation of this Conflict. For what I offered in my
Defense, does yet remain Demonstration, and will ever do so, (notwithstanding
what you have said, or can say) that these Angels must be taken in a collective
Sense, as including not only the Ministers of the Churches, but even the whole
Churches themselves. -- You tell me, that the singular Number is used ten times
to one of the Plural. Be that so. There are nevertheless plural Expressions
enough to make it evident, that these Epistles could not be directed, only to
particular Persons. -- You justly take Notice, that in Scripture Language an
Anallagy Enallage, it should be; though the learned Corrector of the Press, bids
us read it Analogy.
of Numbers is observable. But is it agreeable to Scripture Language, to say to
a single Person, The Devil shall cast some of YOU into Prison, that YE may be
tried, as Rev. II. 10? Or that, My faithful Martyr was slain among YOU, as in
v. 13? Is it agreeable to Scripture Language, to call a Bishop a Church, and to
conclude an Epistle to a single Bishop, with this Epiphonema, He that has an
Ear to hear let him hear, what the Spirit says unto the CHURCHES? Be pleased
Sir, in your next, to give us Examples of this kind. -- It Is sufficient Answer
to your Quotations, that there are as many Divines, no less Considerable than
those mentioned by you, that are clearly and fully on our Side. But since all
Appeals to Human Authority on either Side, serve only for Ostentation, and not
for Evidence, I shall save my self the Labor, and you the Trouble of any
Collections of that kind. -- Besides it does not appear by your Quotations,
that any of the mentioned Divines esteemed these Angels to be Diocesan Bishops,
or had any other Notion of this Word Angel, than that it primarily implied,
either the Moderator of the Presbytery, or Pastor of the Church, and by him the
whole Church. And thus two of 'em, viz. Parens and Beza, do expressly declare
themselves, in the very Places by you quoted.

BUT after all were it plain to a Demonstration, (as the direct contrary is)
that these Angels were single Persons; is there the least hint in all the
Epistles, that these single Persons had the sole Power of Ordination and
Jurisdiction, or were in any thing superior to other Presbyters? Nay is there
any thing said to them, that might not have been with greatest Propriety
spoken, even to mere Presbyters, of the Episcopal kind? Do not you your self
allow, even to these, Authority to bear Testimony against false Doctrines; and
to censure the Publishers of 'em? which is the highest Act of Authority you can
with any Justice pretend to found upon these Epistles! Where then shall we find
my Lord the Bishop?

THUS I Have considered (and thank you for) your successless Arguments, to engage
these Angels to be Guardians to the Episcopal Cause.

I Am next to acknowledge your Kindness, in so judiciously explaining the Word
Coordinate; the meaning of which, you tell me, I was before ignorant of. But
alas Sir, I must confess my self so dull a Scholar, as not to be susceptible of
your learned Instruction. For I cannot for my Life understand, why two Persons
authorized by the same Commission, and vested with all the same Powers, are not
Coordinate; or why Ministers of the same Order, have not the same Office, and
the same Power. But it is true my Dullness is none of your Fault, you have acted
your Part faithfully.

YOU next make some Pretenses, to Answer the Arguments I offered against
Prelacy; but you prudently take Time to consider of it; and find it the safest
way, to defer your Answer, until latter Lammas next. -- You say indeed, that I
affirm it to be just arguing from a Community of Names, to a Co-ordination of
Powers: But I affirm, that there is not one Word of that Nature in my Defense;
and you did not want for Assurance, in publishing such a Story to the World. --
My Argument was proposed in these very Words.

IF the Scriptures ascribe not only a Community of Names, but also of OFFICE
and Order, to Bishops and Presbyters; they are necessarily Coordinate.

BUT the Scriptures do ascribe a Community both of Names and OFFICE, to Bishop
and Presbyter -- And it is not very difficult to account for your Conduct, in
dividing this Argument, the whole was too heavy for you; And why should you
take up such a Weight, as would break your Back? Besides, had you considered
the whole Argument, you had lost the Advantage, of favoring the (...)orld with
a Specimen of your Logical Skill, and (...) (...)iscovering your pretty knack
at Syllogizing, by (...) you can prove every thing from every thing, (...) any
thing from nothing.

AS for the other five Arguments, you have implicitly acknowleged their Force,
(for which I renew my Thanks) in not adventuring upon a Word of Answer.

AND now I Will remember my Promise, of offering you my Acknowlegements for your
abounding Charity, in mercifully Damning all the Protestant World, but your own
Party. You tell us. p. 55. that they who have no proper Ministers and
Sacraments never were, nor are they now, any Parts of the Catholic Church. And
that we may be at no loss who you mean, you inform us, p. 60. that they are
bold and insolent Intruders, and c. who usurp the Ministerial Function without
being ordained to it, by a Successor to the Apostles. i.e. by a Diocesan
Bishop, as you all along pretend to prove. And thus at one Stroke, all the
Protestants in the World, but the Church of England, are cut off from the
Catholic Church, and Mystical Body of Christ. And lest we should not yet take
Warning, you leave it as your last Testimony, That it as much concerns every
one, as his Salvation amounts to, to be well assured, that he is within the
Pale of the true Church: -- And that at the great Audit, he shall be owned by
Christ, to have been a Member of his Mystical Body upon Earth. -- Thus we see
what to expect, were you to determine our final State: But blessed be God, we
have a more Righteous and Merci(...) Judge to appear before, who will at last
let all (...) World know, that all other Seize wit(...) (...) Charity,
are but as sounding Brass, or a tinkling (...), 1 Cor. XIII. 1. -- And in the
mean Time, our Cause is not like to suffer much, by great Words, and weak
Arguments; nor will the World be easily persuaded to believe, that the infinite
Fountain of Love and Mercy will eternally damn his Creatures, for not
submitting to an Ecclesiastical Government, whereof (by the Confession of the
most Considerable of your own Party) there is not one Word in the Divine
Oracles.

I find nothing more in your incomparable Discourse, that calls for particular
Notice. I therefore conclude, with only desiring your Acceptance of this
grateful Acknowlegement,

From Your most obliged Humble Servant, Jonathan Dickinson.
Elisabeth-Town, October. 20. 1724.
FINIS.

