A Call to the Tempted

A SERMON On the horrid CRIME OF Self-Murder, Preached on a Remarkable
Occasion, by the Memorable Dr. Increase Mather

And now Published from his NOTES, for a Charitable Stop to Suicides.

Non est Licitum alicui seipsum Occidere, in aliquo eventu; Neque ob vitandum
peccatum, neque ob defendendam pudici^iam, neque ob Vitanda Mal^ hujus Vitae,
neque ob Fidem vel Religionem, vel Virtutem tuendam; neque ob Salutem aliorum.

Alsted. Theol: Cas: BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, Sold by Samuel Gerrish, at
his Shop near the Brick Meeting House in Cornhill. March 12 th. 1723, 4.

THE Occasion of the Publication.
AMONG the Remarkables in the Life of the Memorable Dr Increase Mather; there
is this Passage. p. 217.

THE Doctor felt once upon his Mind, a strong Impression, to Preach a Sermon
about the Crime of Self-Murder; but he resisted, he declined, he laid it aside.
He then wrote in his Diary: This Day my former Thoughts about Preaching on the
Evil of Self-Murder, returning upon me again; I looked up to GOD, and as I was
lifting up my Heart to him, then walking in my Garden, I was most strangly
moved and melted. I could not speak a word for some time. Tears gushed from my
Eyes. And it seemed as if it were said unto me, Preach on that Subject, and
thou shall Save Bodies and Souls from Death. The Lion is among thy Flock;
Resist him with the Sword of the Spirit, and the Sheep Committed unto thy
Charge shall be rescued out of his Bloody Hands! What the meaning of this is, I
know not; but wonder at it. There may be something of Heaven in it, more than I
am aware of. The next Lord's Day, he Preached the Sermon [On, Act. XVI.27, 28.]
And Behold, soon after it, there came such to him, as informed him, That at
that very Time, the Temptations to Self-Murder were impelling of them with an
Horrible Violence; But GOD had Blessed that Happy Sermon for their Deliverance!
They afterward joined to his Church. --

A Religious and Honorable Person, upon the Reading of this passage, hoping
that the Sermon might be again Blessed [more than Forty Years after the first
Preaching of it,] made enquiry, whether the Notes of the Sermon could be
Recovered: And here is all that could be Recovered. The Venerable Author, who
in the Sixty Six Years of his Ministry, did not use his Notes in the Public,
did not so write his Notes, as to have all the Lively, Instructing, Affecting
Amplifications of the Pulpit in them. The Reader will perceive something of
this, in the Minutes of the Sermon here Exhibited; and the Transcriber durst
not make any Unjustifiable Interpolations: But his Inserting sometimes the
Words of the Texts that are quoted, may be allowed him.

THE Design of the Worthy Gentleman who demanded this Publication, is the same
now, that has been in many others, to which he has generously Contributed; That
is, To Do Good. And if any one poor Tempted Soul, be rescued from the hands of
the Destroyer, by what is here offered, I am sure, he will count his Expenses
richly reimbursed: It may also comfort him, to have such a Token for Good; that
as Dr. Mather has his Friend United with him in the Services of the Kingdom
now; so they will be hereafter United in the Glorious Enjoyments of it.

Do thyself no Harm.
ACTS XVI.27, 28. HE would have killed himself; -- But Paul cried with a loud
Voice, saying, Do thyself no Harm.


IN the Context, the Evangelist gives an Account concerning, the Imprisonment
of Paul and Silas, for Preaching the Gospel of JESUS CHRIST; and a most
Remarkable Occurrence happening thereupon, which proved the Conversion of the
Jailer, who had dealt very cruelly with them. We have herewithal a Relation of
what proved the occasion of that strange Conversion. It was brought to pass, by
means of a Miraculous Earthquake which happened at Midnight. The Jailer being
by this Earthquake frightfully waked out of Sleep, was full of Distress and
Consternation. While he was thus distressed in his Mind, the Devil took
advantage to fall upon him with horrid Temptations.

TWO Things are noted in the Words before us. First. There is noted, The Evil
which the Jailer was Tempted unto; To wit, Self-Murder. He drew his Sword, and
was just ready to sheath it in his own Wretched Bowels. Secondly. There is
noted, That which was the happy means of diverting him from the Evil; To wit,
The Apostles speaking to him. He cried with a loud Voice; Very Earnestly. And
it was Time to be in Earnest. It was a matter of Life and Death!

INDEED, he used the most Effectual Argument that could be, to dissuade him
from persisting in his Attempt of Self-Murder. He convinced him, that the
Temptation which hurried him on to the Barbarous and bloody Fact by him
designed was a mere Needless Fear. He was afraid, the Prisoners were gone; and
therefore the Magistrates who Committed them to Prison would put him to Death,
for letting them escape. Therefore Paul says, We are all here. How the Apostle
knew, that this was his Temptation; This is not expressly declared. Probably,
the Jailer might utter some words to that purpose. However, He was distressed
with a Causeless Fear: And yet this Distress did through the Instigation of
Satan prevail so far, that he was just upon the point of making himself away.
Such is the Subtilty of Satan, and his great power over the Minds of Men; when
GOD shall see meet to let him loose; as that he can from mere Imaginary Fears
put them upon no less an Evil than Self-Destruction: It was with the Jailer so;
and the Temptation had prevailed, if Paul had not earnestly cautioned him from
heark'ning to it.

DOCTRINE.

PEOPLE distressed with Temptation, had sometimes need to be Earnestly
Cautioned against the Sin of SELF-MURDER.

THERE are Two Things to be now spoken to; First. What the Distresses and
Temptations are, that put Men upon the Sin of Self-Murder: And then, The
Reasons why they that are so Tempted should be Earnestly Cautioned against this
Evil.

Quest. 1. THE Distresses and Temptations that often put Men upon the Sin of
Self-Murder: What are They?

I. SOMETIMES Men are Tempted unto this Evil, that so they may not fall into
the hands of those, that they think, will put them to a Miserable Death. This
was the Temptation of the Jailer now before us. According to the Law among the
Romans, if the Jailer let his Prisoner go, he was to suffer the same Punishment
which the Prisoner should have undergone. Hence, Act. XII.18, 19. When Peter
escaped, the Soldiers that were set for his keepers, Herod ordered them, to be
put to Death. Sinful Creatures think with themselves, that if they Live a while
longer, they shall be put to a more Miserable Death; and therefore it may be
said of them, Sin have thou chose rather than Affliction! They will Destroy
themselves, rather than stay for other Men to do it. We have several Instances
of this in the Sacred Scriptures. Saul, Bloody Saul, was one of them: He will
Die by his own hands rather than the Philistines. Achitophel was another of
them. He might well conclude, when his Counsel was not hearkened to, that David
would prevail, and then he must needs Die for his Treasons. What is it that we
read of Zimri? 1 King. XVI.18. When he saw the City was taken, and he must fall
into the hands of his Enemies, he burnt the Kings House over him, and he died.
Humane History gives us many other Instances. Among the rest, Hannibal poisoned
himself, that he might not fall into the hands of his Enemies. Demosthenes did
the like. The Wicked Jews Blasphemously imagined, that the Holy Son of GOD, the
Blessed JESUS, would have killed Himself, for fear of falling into Their hands:
Joh VIII.22. Then said the Jews, will He kill Himself!

II. THE Fear of Disgrace in the World, puts Men upon it. There was This also
in the Temptation of the Jailer: He thought it a Disgraceful Thing to be put to
Death in a way of Judicial Proceeding, and with a Public Execution: And
therefore! -- Sometimes a Proud Spirit had rather Commit the Greatest Sin
against GOD, than undergo a little Disgrace from Men. This was the Temptation
of Abimeleck to Murder himself, or (which is the same) desire another to kill
him: Judge. IX.54. Slay me, that men say not of me, A Woman slew him. There have
been some, that when they have Committed foul and shameful Sins, have through
fear of Punishment and Disgrace among Men, destroyed themselves. To a Proud
Spirit there is nothing so Bitter as Disgrace and Infamy. When this Temptation
overcomes them, they will choose Death rather than such a Misery. And thus also
it is, when Men for fear of Want shall desperately Destroy themselves: They
think, it will be a Disgraceful Thing, to be beholden unto others for their
Subsistence; and, it may be, to be brought unto a morsel of Bread, and Live
like a Beggar! such a Temptation is too hard for them; and therefore they think
to be eased of it by a Self-Destruction.

III. DISTRESS of Conscience is that from which the Devil does many times, take
occasion to Tempt Men unto the Sin of Self-Murder. Saul was in Distress of
Conscience, as well as otherwise Distressed; and therein he would have Starved
himself to Death. See 1 Samuel XXVIII.15, 22, 23. -- Judas is in Distress of
Conscience; And Then! -- he flies to the Halter, that he may let out his
wretched Soul. The Burden of a Guilty and a Wounded Conscience, it is
Intolerable. It is said, Prove. XVIII.14. Who can bear it? Poor Creatures having
such a Wounded Spirit, and being under the strong Delusions of Satan, often
think to obtain some ease by ruining of themselves. Especially when Inward and
Outward Troubles meet together, (as oftentimes they do) Miserable Creatures are
in danger of becoming Guilty of this Crime; Satan takes this Advantage to Tempt
them unto it. It seems, as if Job were thus Tempted; though he had the Grace to
Resist and Conquer the Temptation. He was in Affliction upon Temporal Accounts;
At the same time he thought, GOD was his Enemy; He felt the Terrors of GOD in
his Soul. GOD suffered Satan to terrify him with frightful Dreams. He was
Tempted hereupon to choose the most Ignominious Death, rather than be in such
Misery. He says, Job VII 15 My Soul chooses Strangling, and Death rather than
Life. But the Mercy of GOD Preserved him from laying Violent Hands upon
himself! --

Quest. 2. FOR what Reasons, are they that are so Tempted, earnestly to be
cautioned against Complying with the Temptation?

I. TEMPTATIONS to Self-Murder. SATAN is in them! Such Temptations are not from
the Holy and Blessed GOD. Let no man say, when he is thus Tempted, I am tempted
of GOD! -- Jobs Wife tempted him, to Commit such a Sin, as would bring a quick
Death upon himself. Curse GOD, and Die! She was an Instrument of Satan: It was
the Devil that put her upon giving that Cursed and Bloody Counsel to her
Husband. The Devil would persuade Men to think of getting out of Affliction by
Sin; -- yea, and to Die Sinning; -- that the last Act which they do before they
go out of the World, should be to Commit some Great Sin against the Glorious
GOD. He knows, This will render them, unfit to Die! -- Thus the Devil says,
Murder, and Die! -- Stab thyself, -- Shoot thyself, -- Choke thyself, -- and Die!
The Devil is therefore said to be -- Joh. VIII.44. A Murderer. Yea, Satan has a
most peculiar Hand in the perpetration of this Crime: As is evident from the
strange manner, how sometimes it is accomplished: -- by Drowning, in a small
Puddle of Water; -- Hanging, upon a small Twig not enough to bear the weight of
a Man; -- or, with Knees resting on the Ground. Satan must needs have a great
hand -- the Invisible World is most sensibly at work, in such things as these!
--

II. Self-Murder is a very Great Sin. Murder is the greatest Sin against the
second Table of the Law. It Is a great Provocation in the sight of GOD. Hence is
that expression in the Scripture, concerning a most Abominable Thing, -- Isa.
LXVI.3. It is as if he killed a Man It Is a Sin that Cries to Heaven for
Vengeance! -- See Act. XXVIII 4. -- But Self-Murder is the worst kind of
Murder. -- It Is the most Unnatural! -- For a Man to Murder a near Relative, it is
worse than for him to Murder another. And the nearer the Relation is, the
Greater the Sin, -- Therefore -- It Is a most Complicated Sin?

THE Self-Murderer Sins against the Glorious GOD, in defacing of His Image; and
in dishonouring of His Name. -- especially, if he be a person that has made any
pretenses to Religion. --

HE Sins against Himself -- against his own Body, as if hating his own Flesh;
-- And it may be said unto him, Thou have Sinned against thy own Soul. His
Reputation also is forever destroyed.

HE Sins against his Relatives; To whom he causes the greatest Grief, and the
greatest Dishonor, that can be. --

III. A Wilful and Impaenitent Self-Murderer, cannot be saved! We are taught, 1 John III.15. Ye know, that no Murderer has Eternal Life abiding in him. Then,
most certainly, no Self-Murderer -- without Repentance; -- which, in many
cases, how can it be supposed!

ITS true, The Elect of GOD may be grievously Tempted unto this Sin. The Jailer
was one of those. -- Yea, many of the Elect have been so, in the pangs of the
New Birth, at their First Conversion unto GOD. And some have been so, after
their Conversion. The Best of Saints upon earth, may be so. Of Job, I have told
you. I may tell you, of Luther, -- And of many more -- when the Devil has no
hope of prevailing, yet he will Tempt unto this Crime. He will do it, only to
vex and molest the faithful Servants of GOD! -- He therefore Tempted our
Blessed JESUS Himself unto it. See Mat. IV.6. --

BUT, except it be in case of Distraction; it is a rare thing for Satan thus to
prevail over any that belong unto GOD. If he do, yet the Execution cannot be so
dispatched, as to leave no space of Repentance. Therefore, it is very
observable, that though we read of some of the Elect of GOD in the Scripture,
that have been Tempted unto this Crime, yet none were left actually to Commit
it, but such as we have cause to look upon as Reprobates, Were a Saul, an
Achitophel, a Zimri, and a Judas, any other?

AS for Secret Things, and Extraordinary Cases, we must leave them with GOD.
Nevertheless, It is a clear Scriptural Principle, That an Impenitent Murderer
cannot be Saved. There are some sins, that an Elect Person shall be preserved
from: Such particularly is, The Unpardonable Blasphemy against the Holy SPIRIT.
And such is, Final Impenitency. Therefore it concerns them that have the use of
Reason, and know what they do, to beware of this Sin, as they bear any Respect
unto the Salvation of their Precious and Immortal Souls.

IV. LIFE is a great Mercy. Men should be cautioned against Despising, and
wilfully casting away the Mercies of GOD. Life in this World, is an Invaluable
Mercy: Because, whilst there is Life, there is Hope: Eccl. IX.4. To him who is
joined unto all the Living, there is Hope. As long as Persons are Alive, there
is an Hopeful Possibility, that they may Repent, and Turn, and Live unto GOD:
-- That they may obtain an assurance of an Interest in JESUS CHRIST; -- That
the Pardon of their Sins may be secured. But when Life is at an end, there is
no Hope of Repentance, or of getting a Part in CHRIST, or of getting Sin to be
forgiven. We are told, Heb. IX.27. After Death the Judgment. If those things be
not made sure of, before the Soul of a Man is out of his Body, and his
Probation-time is over, it will be too late for ever. So we read; Isa.
XXXVIII.18. -- They that go down to the pit cannot hope for thy Truth.

USE 1. WE may here take notice of the Folly and Unreasonableness of those
Temptations, whereby Sinful Creatures are sometimes put upon Self-Destruction.
-- As particularly, -- That Fear of Disgrace in the World; -- For any man to do
himself Harm for fear of That, is mavelous Folly! A man cannot more Disgrace
himself than by Committing such a Sin. He leaves an Everlasting Blot upon his
Name, as long as he shall be spoken of in the world. And there is besides, an
Everlasting Contempt, which such persons Dying Impaenitently, must at the Last
Day be exposed unto: when, besides all their other Sins, there shall be This
alleged against them, That they were guilty of the most Unnatural Wickedness
in the World. Is it not Folly for men to bring upon themselves an Eternal Shame
and Confusion world without end, that they may escape a Temporal!

THUS, when Men shall do Harm unto themselves for the Fear of Want: It is
unspeakable Folly and Madness in the Children of Men to do so: Because they do
by That Act, [without Repentance!] throw themselves into that place, where they
shall want every good Thing; and, Psalm. XLIX.19. They shall never see Light. In
Hell there is the Want of every Thing. No Spiritual Blessings are there; No
Sabbaths, nor any means of Grace, are there. No, nor any Earthly Comforts
neither: Not so much as a Drop of Water, to relieve a Tongue in Torments there!

THERE is another poor Creature thus Tempted of the Devil. I am a Reprobate,
and I am sure I shall not be saved; and therefore, if I destroy my self, I
shall have less punishment in Hell, than if I lived longer in the World. I
Answer; Thou can not know thy Reprobation. It is not GOD, but Satan, who
tells thee, That thou art a Reprobate. Thou art not sure, that thou shall not
be Saved. The Lord says no such thing unto thee; but says, Isa. XLV.22. Look
unto me, All the ends of the Earth, and be ye Saved. Be it how it will with
thee, Do thy self no Harm: Thou may, for ought any one can say, yet be Saved
for ever. Nor is this true, that thy Damnation will be the less, if thou
Destroy thy self. For Damnation and Punishment in Hell will be the greater, and
the deeper, according to the Aggravations of the Sins which have brought the
Sinner thither. Now Self-Murder is a Sin so heinous and Aggravated, that if
thou Die Impaenitently under the guilt of it, thy Damnation will doubtless be
the greater for it.

IT may be said; I will Repent, and Pray for the Pardon of my Sin, before I do
it. I Answer; What a Delusion of Satan! I have read indeed of a Philosopher,
who called upon his Gods, and so threw him self into the Fire to his own
Destruction. But can thou think, That GOD will hear such Prayers? No, --
Psalm. LXVI.18. If I regard Iniquity in my Heart, the Lord will not hear me. If
thou come before GOD, with bloody Resolutions in thy Heart, GOD will not
accept of thy Prayers. He says, Isa. I.15. When you make many Prayers, I will
not hear; your hands are full of Blood. Nor can this be called, Repentance: For
a man to Confess a Sin, and be Resolved still upon the Commission of it! No,
It Is he who Confesses and Forsakes, that shall find Mercy.

USE 2. HENCE it is an EVIL THING to SPEAK FAVORABLY, either of Self-Murder,
or of Self-Murderers. There have been those who have undertaken to justify
Self-Murder in some cases. [See Voet. vol. 4. Disp. de laesione sui-ipsius.]
Pagan Philosophers taught, That it was lawful for Persons to Murder themselves,
that they might save their Reputation; or prevent falling into the hands of
their Enemies. -- Famous the Story of Lucretia. --

IN what we call, The Second Book of the Maccabees, we find celebrated an
Action of one Rasis, for which the Jews cry him up as a Martyr; but Austin
censures him for a Criminal Self-Murderer, with Reasons that cannot be answered.

YEA, some Christians have cried up those, who to save their Chastity, and so
themselves, from Disgrace, have destroyed their own Lives. And the crying up of
such a Fact, has given occasion unto many others, to become guilty of that
Horrible Thing: that Unnatural Sin. But, must Readiness Self-Murder be lawful too?

TO extol the Persons of Self-Murderers to Heaven, is an Evil and a Dangerous
Practice. We should rather leave Secret Things unto GOD, and unto the
Discoveries of the Great Day! Indeed, if a Man's Life and Conversation were as
becomes the Gospel, we are not positively and absolutely to say, That he is
Damned, though he killed him self: Bccause we know not but that he might be at
that Time under some Distraction: And it is not Impossible, but that GOD may
suffer Satan to Possess, and Torment, and Kill the Bodies of some, whose Souls
may yet be Saved in the Day of the Lord. Yet on the other hand; If there were
no sign of Distraction, appearing before they went to Destroy themselves, nor
any Evidence of Repentance after such attempts; we should not say, Such Persons
are gone to Heaven: Lest by being Over-Charitable to the Dead, we become Cruel
to the Living. The saying, Such Persons are Saved, may Occasion and Encourage
others to do the like, and the Everlasting Destruction of Bodies and Souls
follow upon it.

USE 3. BEWARE of this Iniquity.

ONE would think, there should be no great Need of such an EXHORTATION; To call
upon men, To do themselves no Harm! Since there is in every man, a Principle of
Self-Preservation. Yet there is too much Occasion for it. One Self-Murder makes
way for Another. Saul's did for that of his Armor Bearer. --

IT is a Lamentable Thing, that in a Place of so much Light, and Profession as
This, it should be said unto a Self-Murdering Devil; -- Thou shall Persuade,
and Prevail also! -- That in such a Place, there should be any Need of
insisting on such a Subject! -- Yet there has been so; and there is! Above four
Years ago, I saw Occasion to insist on a subject of this Importance, because
within the space of but Five Weeks, there had been Five Self-Murders! The Lord
Knows how many others may be Tempted at This Time, unto the like. I am not
without Apprehensions, That the Bloody Lion, who goes about seeking whom he may
devour, may be let loose among the Flock; And therefore I thought it my Duty to
withstand him, with the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of GOD; Not
knowing, but that I may by such means rescue Poor Creatures out of his hands!

MY Advice on the Occasion is This.

First. BE Humbled in the sight of GOD. Be Humbled for All thy Sins. -- And be
Humbled under Temptations to This Sin. -- Be Humbled, as long as thou have a
Day to Live. Because they have not been Humbled, Satan has been let loose upon
some with greater Violence. When a Sin has been Repented of, there will not now
be so much Danger of that Sin, as there was before.

Secondly. BEWARE of such Sins as may Provoke the Holy and Righteous GOD, to
leave thee unto This most Horrid Evil.

BEWARE of Pride. When Men will rather not be at all, than be what GOD would
have them to be; What Cursed Pride is that!

THIS Produces Murmurings at the Providence of GOD; and causes People to say; 2
King. VI 33. What should I Wait for the Lord any longer?

BEWARE of Self Confidence. Be sensible of thy Weakness; Let him that Stands,
take heed lest he fall Be not Confident of thy own Strength to Encounter the
Adversary. If GOD should let Satan loose upon thee, he will be too hard for thee.

BEWARE of an Heart glued unto the World. When the World is a Man's Idol, he
will rather part with his very Life, [with his own hands give it away!] than
part with the World.

BEWARE of Unbelief. -- Distrust not the Fatherly Care of thy Heavenly Father

BEWARE of Despair; 1 These. V.8. Putting on for an Helmet, the Hope of
Salvation. Say not, The Day of Grace is over with me. -- Say not, I have Sinned
Unpardonably! -- Vain Imaginations.

BEWARE of the more Heinous Crimes; which are in a special Manner GOD-Provoking
Evils. The Sins against Nature are so. Some that have been Guilty of such Sins,
in Secret, and have not Repented of them; GOD has for such Things left them to
This, which is a Sin against Nature too! [See Voetii Disp. ubi supra.]

THERE are other Atrocious Crimes; whereof This has been the Consequence. --
Judas and Pilate, are two fearful Examples of it! --

Finally; BEWARE of Backslidings from GOD, and from good Beginnings in
Religion. Remember that Word; Hos. VIII.3. He has cast off the thing that is
Good; the Enemy shall pursue him. Some have left off Prayer in their Families;
Left off their Attendence on Lectures; Left off Godly Exercises which they have
been used unto. Therefore the Enemy of their Souls is let loose upon them; and
he Pursues them, even to Self-Destruction.

Thirdly. RESIST the Tempter. It Is the Counsil; Jam. IV.7. Resist the Devil, and
he will flee from you.

-- How, Resist Him? Do it by Crying to GOD. -- If the Avenger pursue thee, fly
to a CHRIST, as the City of Refuge. Resist the Devil! -- the next Words are,
Draw nigh to GOD.

BUT then, Employ the Word of GOD, for the Resisting of the Temptation. -- It
was Luthers Method. -- Yea, our JESUS has given us a Pattern of it; -- It is
Written!

DO one thing more, Discover the Temptations of the Devil. Make a Discovery,
not unadvisedly unto all the World; but unto some Faithful Minister, or unto
some other Able Christian. One that cut his own Throat a while ago, said before
his Expiration; O! That I had Told, how I was Tempted! If I had, I believe I
should never have come to This!

Fourthly. ABOVE All, a True Faith is to be Labored for. By Faith Embrace an
offered SAVIOR; This will keep thee from the Destroyer. Being by Faith, safe
in the Hands of thy Savior, the Devil shall not pluck thee out of those hands.
It Is directed; Ephesians. VI.16. Above all, take the shield of Faith, wherewith ye
shall be able to quench all the fiery Darts of the Wicked One. As by Faith we
obtain a Victory over the World; [1 John V.4.] So we obtain a Victory over
Satan too. He has not such Power over a true Believer, as he has over others.

ACT Faith on the Victory of thy SAVIOR over Satan; Hoping and Looking for a
share in That!

AND by Faith, Look up unto thy SAVIOR, as unto one who knows how to Succor
the Tempted. --

Boston, 23. d. V. m. 1682.
FINIS

