THE Last SERMON Heard by Certain PIRATES: And a CONFERENCE with them*

The Converted Sinner.

The NATURE of a CONVERSION to Real and Vital PIETY: And the MANNER in which it
is to be Prayed and Striv'n for.

A SERMON Preached in BOSTON, May 31. 1724.

In the Hearing and at the Desire of certain PIRATES, a little before their
Execution.

To which there is added, A more Private CONFERENCE of a MINISTER with them.

Jam. V.20. He who Converteth the Sinner from the Error of his way, shall save
a soul from Death.

BOSTON: Printed for Nathaniel Belknap* and Sold at his Shop the Corner of
Scarletts-Wharff. 1724.

The OCCASION.
A Generation of Pirates, have of late Years, been an Uncommon Terror of them
that haunt the Sea* O! may our Sea faring People duly consider the Growing and
Grievous Judgments of GOD upon them! And the Sea no longer say, Wisdom is not
with me!

BUT a strange Blast of Heaven has followed that Generation of Sea Monsters. We
know of several Thousands, that in a little Time have Perished Wonderfully! And
no where more Wond^^fully than on the Coast of New England, where the Prayers
against them, have Distinguishing Ardours.

A little knot of Sea-Robber^, under the Conduct of one Philips (and Satan) had
in about half a Years time, done incredible Mischiefs. In this Time they robbed
no less than four and thirty Vessels, and offered most Abusive and Barbarous
Usages to the People that were so unhappy as to fall into their Hands: yea,
some they Murdered.

ON the Eighteenth of April, 1724. Andrew Harradine of Gloucester and John
Philmore of Ipswich, with Six others detained Prisoners by this Philips* formed
a Resolution and Combination, if GOD should please to help them, to deliver
themselves with the Destruction of the Pirates. And Heaven did help them to
accomplish it! At once, conveniently stationing themselves for the Enterprise,
they threw the Master overboard; they cut down the Captain with an Adds; they
dispatched the Boatswain with a Broad Axe; and found a like ^ay to send the
Gunner out of the way. The Four Officers being thus brought into Desolation as
in a Moment, the rest fell into such Terrors, that they Surrendered themselves
Prisoners to the brave Conquerors, which were a minute before their Prisoners.

THE Pirates being brought into Boston, received their Trial on May 12. Many of
whom were ^ound Forced Men, and Cleared. Several received Sentence of Death,
whereof Two, (whose Names were, Archer, and White) were Executed on Iun. 2.
Ensuing.

IT was the Request of These, that produced a Sermon* to a Great Auditory, [oh!
that with as Great Efficacy!] from One, who has formerly more than Ten times,
had fetched from him into the Public, Discourses Occasioned by Capital
Exeecutions; And one sometimes they say; among the Pirates a little Spoken of.
It is among the Admirable Works of the Divine Providence, that the Glorious GOD
fetches Good out of the Greatest Evil, and makes the Sins and Woes of the
Wicked, an Occasion of Benefits unto His Chosen.

A Repenting Ephraim.
It is Written, in Jeremiah XXXI.18. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself thus, -- Turn thou me, and I shall be turned, For thou art the Lord my
GOD.

WHAT fitter Language, What bette^ Advice, for those who are now hearing the
Last Sermon that ever they shall hear in the World! They are bem^aning
themselves. Oh, Let them ^earn how! May they be heard thus bemoaning
themselves! -- Yea, but at the same time, Hear this, O all ye People, every one
of you; For there is not one of you All, but for ought he knows this may be the
Last Sermon Rema^kably Confirmed within a Few Hours. -- A Young Man of Twenty
Three, who as little as any expected that the Sermon of this Afternoon would be
the Last, the next Morning about Six ^'clock, fell from the Top of a Mast, and
Lost his Life.
he shall ever hear in the World* A Short Prayer* this; But a very Great Prayer
it is. A few Words: and an Abundance of Important Matter Contained in them.
Some very Ignorant Ones are at a loss how to Pray. Especially, Our Little
Children are to have their Ignorance relieved, in our Teaching them, how to
Pray. There are some Sentences in our Bible, easy to be Remembered, easy to be
Repeated If those brief Sentences were well Understood, and well Improved, they
would be mighty Prayers, when well uttered before the Lord. There is a Pathetic
Prayer, in that Sentence, O Lord, I beseech thee to deliver my Soul! There is a
Powerful Prayer, in that Sentence, GOD be Merciful to me a Sinner! There is a
Comprehensive Prayer in that Sentence, I am Oppressed, Lord, Undertake for me.
Such Ejaculations may prove Arrows in the hands of a mighty Faith; Happy the
Soul that has a Quiver full of them. The ^hole Bible is of use, especially our
Psalter, to ^^ll the Quiver. But of all those Arro^s, methinks, there can be
none more Significant, than that which we are now to take into our Hands. Yea,
the poor Dying Offenders, I hope I may say, Penitents, now in the Auditory,
have expressed their Desires, That This may be the Text, which they shall now
hear treated on; A Text from a Paragraph of the Bible, which since their
Condemnation to Die, they have much Lived upon. Oh! That this Prayer may be
often heard going up from us, before the lord! Yea, It Is a Prayer which the
smallest of us, and they that are least acquainted with Prayer* least furnished
for Prayer, may yet send up unto the Lord. Lord, Turn thou me, and I shall be
turned, for thou art the Lord my God.

IF the Prayer were to be interpreted, for the Return of the Israelites from
their Captivity; even such a lower Interpretation would bring Instruction with
it unto us. It would ^nstruct us, That if we would see any Happy Turn upon our
Condition, we should look up to our GOD for it. When we find our Affairs
Plunged unto Difficulties we wish for an Happy Turn upon them. Our whole
Condition is at the Disposal of the Glorious GOD. If GOD please to Turn it, we
shall have our Sickness turned into Health, our Straits and Wants turn^d into
Plenty, our Unsettlements turned into more Settled Circum^^^nces; and such a
Turn as that on the Psalmist; Lord, Thou have turned for me my Mourning in^o
Delight; thou have (...) off my Sackcloth and girded me with Gladness. (...)
recourse to GOD for it, O al^ you that (...) ^ishing for such a Turn. But then,
my Friend, (...) sure, that the Glorious GOD be thy GOD; and ^^^^efore make
Choice of Him for thy GOD. Hopeful^^ may thou say, Turn thou me; if thou
can ^^^cerely say, Thou art the Lord my GOD. (...) Great GOD will deny no
Good Thing unto those whom He is a GOD unto. If this GOD be our own GOD, He
will Bless us; He will Bless us Wonderfully!

THIS Meditation must be superseded by One of yet more Importance. The
Conversion of a Sinner unto GOD, is the Thing, which our Eye must here be most
upon. Of this Conversion* we have two very Remarkable Things intimated unto us,
in the Text now before us. First. We have the Way wherein a Conversion to GOD,
is to be Expected and Obtained. A Petition to GOD for it, is the way wherein a
Conversion to GOD is to be looked for. It is, Turn thou me and I shall be
Turned. Secondly We have the Act* wherein a Conversion to GOD is to be
Expressed and Assured. The (...) of GOD is to be laid hold upon; and so (...)
Conversion to GOD is accomplished. It is in coming to this, Thou art the Lord
my GOD.

ACCORDINGLY, We have Two Doctrines before us. The Latter Rain, shall tell us,
what we have to do in our Conversion to GOD. The For^er shall tell us, what we
have to do, that we may attain unto it. And we will not forget a large
Declaration, why all this must be done.

The First of our Doctrines, is this.

THAT the Glorious GOD may be Savingly Turned unto, (...) is to be Seriously
Sought un^^.

A Conversion to the Gracious GOD, is a Blessedness ^or which the GOD of all
Grace is to be Prayed unto. We must Pray to GOD for His Converting Grace; Pray,
Turn thou me; that so we may indeed be turned unto Him.

MY Discourse must be all carried on, with the Style of Application. There is
nothing to be now spoken (...) it is o^ so Practical an Aspect, and so worthy
(...) down in the Flaming Fire of GOD, (...) may well be applied with all the
Closeness (...) imaginable.

THE First (...), which the Hearers must attend unto; -- (...) Let them give
Attention as for Eterni^y, -- It Is this*

WHAT is the Turn to GOD, for which w^ should make our Prayer to GOD! The
Nature* the Meaning* the Intention of a Conversion to GOD* Souls, When you
Pra^, Turn thou me! It Is a Chang^ ^^ the Heart, with a New Disposition, and a
Chang^ ^^ the Li^e, with a New Conversation, that is t^ be asked for; A Change,
that shall turn the Si^^ner into a New Creature; A Change that shall d^ that
Great Thing? Jam. V.20. Convert a Sinne^ from the Error of his way.

Y^U must be Turned. And the Term from which you are to Turn, is your Sin. Your
Turn is to b^ from that way of Sin, which by your Fall from GOD, you naturally
run into. The call to you i^ that; Jer. XXV.5. Turn ye now every one from his
evil way. You are to be Turned from thos^ Idols, which your Evil Heart in
Departing from the Living GOD, Setts up in the Throne of the mos^ High. Self
must be dethroned, and be brough^ into a due Subordination unto GOD. Created
Ob^jects must be no longer depended on, but yo^ Dependence for all Good must be
upon GOD Your Sinful way has been to aim at nothing bu^ the Pleasing and
Serving of a Corrupt Self; and to Se^k unto none but Created Objects for the
Sa^tisfac^^on of your Self. This Evil Way must b^ Turned from. Yea, you must be
able to say, I ha^^ every False Way.

YOU must be Turned; And the Term to which you are to Turn, is the GOD whom you
forsake and affront, and offend, in your Sin. Your Tur^ is to be to the
Infinite GOD, as having your Fa^^licity laid up in Him. You are called unto
that Deuteronomy. IV.30. Turn to the Lord thy GOD, (...) be Obedient unto His Voice.
You are to be Turned into the way of Obedience unto GOD. Your way must be to
Acknowledge GOD in all your Ways, and rely on your Savior that you may be
Assisted and Acc^p^ed in your Acknowledgments of GOD. You must Live unto GOD,
and Love GOD above all, (...) Live by the Faith of the Son of GOD.

Briefly, CONVERSION lies in an Holy Change upon the Heart and Life of a
Sinner: A Change of a Carnal Heart into an Holy Heart? A Change of a Vicious
Life into an Holy Life. It Is a Renovation upon a Sinner: his Arrival to New
Abilities and New Inclinations, for the Service of GOD. Conversion is the same
with ^ffectual Calling. A Sinner is Turned, when the call of the Gospel becomes
Effectual to him. The Call of the Gospel ^s, Lo^b all sin, Leave all sin, Walk
with GOD in Observing the Rules of a Godly, and a Sober, and a Righteous Life.
The call of the Gospel is, Make thy Flight unto a JESUS, as thy on^y savior*
and ^^ok to Him for Wisdom, and Righteousn^ss, and Holi^ess, and R^d^mption. A
Sinner enabled and inclined for the Doing of what the Gospel calls him to, is ^
Converted Sinner. Sinner, Change thy Mind. Abandon thy Ungodly Vanities. Fall
down before GOD, and sincerely say, Lord, thou shall be ^y All: the
Alsuffic^ent and Everlasting Portion of ^y Soul Fall down before His CHRIST,
and ^incerely say, Lord, Be thou my Sacrifice, and my Advocate, and the ^eph^rd
of my Soul. This Day Conversion is come to that Soul. This is a Turn^d Soul.
This is asked for, when we Pray, Turn ^hou me.

BUT there is a Second Thing which you must hearken to; And what will bring on
a thick Repetition of the most Flaming Thunderbolts.

SUCH a Turn to GOD, Why must we make our Prayer to G^D for It?

Oh! LET the R^^s^ns awaken you; the Thunders bring you down upon your Knees
before the Lord.

First. THERE is an Absolute Necessity, a Tremendous Necessity, of your Turning
unto GOD. Concerning this, it must be said unto you, Necessity is laid upon
you, and Woe un^o you, if you do it not. You read, Luke X.42. There is One Thing
that is needful. A Turn to GOD, is that One Thing By Departing from GOD, you
are brought into such a Dep^orable State, that there can be nothing, Verily
nothing so Necessary for you, as a Recovery from that State, by a Conversion to
GOD. In your Departure from GOD, you are in those ways that lead you down to
the Chambers of Death; Destruction and Misery are in your ways. You can
apprehend a Necessity for nothing, if you do not apprehend it Necessary to
relinquish th^se ways.

Oh! COME to such Sentiments as those; Psalm. LXXIII.27, 28. Lo, They that are
far from thee, shall perish, O Lord. But it is good for me to draw near unto
GOD. The Commandment of GOD, has made it Necessary for you to Turn unto Him.
How often do you find your selves Commanded of GOD? As in Ez^k. XVIII.32. Turn
your selves and Live ye* And, Hos. XIV.2. Turn unto the Lord, say unto him,
take away all Iniquity. And, Act. III.19. Repent, and be converted, that your
Sins may be blotted out. This is indeed the Voice of the Glorious G^D in all
His Edicts; It Is the sum of all that is enjoined upon us; It Is the ^hole Duty of
Man. But that which renders it the more sensibly Necessary for you to Turn unto
GOD, is the Confusion to which you are Obnoxious, till you comply with what He
has Commanded you. It is thus inculcated, Ezekiel. XVIII.30. Repent and turn from
all your transgressions; So Iniquity shall not be your Ruin. Your Iniquity
horrib^y ruins you, undoes you, until you turn unto GOD. Oh! That you were
aware of this. Until your Turn to GOD, you ly under the Curse of GOD. Until
your Turn to GOD, you have the Wrath of GOD abiding on you. Until you Turn to
GOD you serve diverse Lusts: You are Led captive by Satan to do his will: You
are in the worst of Slaveries. Except you Turn to GOD, your Souls will always
be out of Order, ever Languishing in grievous Distempers; be in the perpetual
tort^re of Raging Appetites that will never be Satisfied. There is in another
World, a strange Punishment reserved for the Workers of Iniquity. You may be
sure, The Wicked shall not go Unpunished! Hear ye Rebels, Your High-handed and
Multiplied Rebellions, wherein you have denied the GOD that is Above, shall not
go Unpunished. Ah! Souls in Peril; without a Turn to GOD, you cannot escape
that place of Torment. Except you Turn to GOD, and Live to Him, you shall Die in
your Sins; And if you Die so, it had been good for you that you had never been
Born. Until you Turn to GOD, you continue in an abominable Enmity to Him. And
what can the Enemies have, but a Fearful Expectation of a fiery Indignation to
devour them? Fool-^ardy Ones, What can you look for, when you fall into His
Hands: What, But that it will be a fearful Thing to fa^l into the Hands of the
Living GOD? This is a thing that cannot be doubted of. Lord thy Hand shall find
out all thine Enemies; thy Right Hand shall find out th^se that hate thee. Thou
shall make them as a fiery Oven in the time of thine Anger. In fine, our Great
Redeemer has prepared Spiritual Blessings in Heavenly Places, for His Chosen
People; There is a Rest, which remains for the People of GOD. But the Holy One
will allow none for His People, but such as Turn unto Him. Unto all the rest,
He will say, I know you not, ye Workers of Iniquity. Our Great Redeemer has
given that Warning unto us; Matthew. XVIII 3. Except ye be Converted, ye shall
not Enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. An Everlasting Life in the Fruition of
all good, is intended for the Elect; But none shall see that Life, who do not
with a Conversion here begin to Live unto GOD. GOD has laid up this Great
Goodness, for none but those that Fear Him. There is a World, wherein the Elect
shall Inherit all things: But unless a Conversion to GOD bring us into an
Adoption from Him, we can have no claim to that Inheritance. None but Sons of
GOD, shall be Heirs of GOD. The City of GOD, has that Motto, upon the strait
Gates of it; Heb. XI^.14. Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord. Oh! That
this Ponderous Truth, might be fel^ in the vast Weight of it, on every one of
your Minds. By our Apostasy from GOD, our Souls naturally have an Aversion for
GOD; and Aversion for the Things that are Holy, and I^st, and Go^d. This
Aversion, must be cured by a Conversion to GOD. If our Death find it not cured,
but reigning in us, it will become f^xed in us. What can follow, but Eternal
Weep^ng, and Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth? What but an Horror of Darkness
forevermore? O Unconverted ones; Were it pos^^ble for you, to be taken into
Heaven, while you are Unprepared for it: before a Turn to GO^ has fitted you
for the ^mployments and Enjoyments of the Glorious World; -- Alas, Heaven it
self would be no Heaven to you. Unregenerate, Should^st thou carry thy Venomous
Nature into Heaven with thee, Heaven would soon spue out such a loathsome
Wretch; Yea, thou would find thy own Expectations ^alked in that Holy Place
at such a rate, that thou would thyself leap down headlong rather than
continue there. As Uzziah, when he appeared in the Temple, with the Le^rosy in
his Forehead, the Priests thrust him out of the Temple; Yea, he himself hasted
to go out! In Heaven, thou woul^est be out of thy Element. Thy Heart would be
full of Antipathy against the Holiness of Heaven. Paradise would be a ^urgatory
to thee. No Snakes or Toads can subsist in so pure a Climate Oh! May the Result
of this Meditation be; My turn to GOD, it is the most Necessary thing that I
have to be concerned about! -- But if it be so Necessary, it is then to be Prayed
for. O Tu^n thou me! No Prayer, no Prayer so very Necessary.

Secondly. YOUR Turning to GOD, will be found as Desirable, as it is Necessary.
Your Turn t^ Godliness, you will find Profitable to all things, having the
Promises of the Life that now is, and (...) that which is to come. We read, 2
Pet. 1.4. Of* Exceeding Great and Precious Pr^mises, belonging t^ those who are
Partakers of a Divine Nature. ^ Conversion to GOD makes you partakers of
another Nature, than what you have in the Depravations that your Original Sin
has brought upon you; a Nature of a Divine Resemblance, a Divine Tendency. But,
Oh! the Exceeding Great and Precious Promises, which upon such a New Nature,
you will have a Title to! It may be said unto the Convert; Li^t up thine Eyes
now, and look over all the Sacred Scriptures; It is full of excellen^ Promises,
which contain in them all the Good that thy Soul can desire. Walk through it in
(...) ^engt^^ of it, and in the Breadth of it; For a ^^^ntiful GOD will give it
all unto thee. We read, Ephesians. 1.18. Concerning, The Riches of the Glory of that
Inheritance, which is for the Saints. O Incomparable Riches! O Incomprehensible
Riches! To which the Turn to GOD, which will render you Saints, will
immediately entitle you! The Riches which are the Desire of all Nations, have
nothing in them to be desired, if weighed in the Balances against the Riches,
which your Turn ^o ^OD will invest you with all! Soul, Turn to GOD, and the
Graces which thou will receive in thy doing so, will be Riches more valuable
than Ingotts, than Mountains of Gold; Will be Jewels of great Price, and will
make thee to be such. Turn to GOD and the Unsearchable Riches of Christ will
belong unto ^ee; CHRIST is All; and this Christ shall thou ^e an O^ner of. Turn
to GOD, and the Infinite ^OD Himself is thy GOD; thy exceeding great ^eward.
But if the Infinite GOD be thine, what ^ill thy Ric^es be short of that
Account! Rev. ^XI.7. He shall Inherit all things, and I will be his ^OD. The
Stor^house of Infinite Goodness and Mercy, is from this Joyful Moment open to
thee!

THE Children of Men do no sooner Turn unto GOD, but the Declaration made unto
them, is that, 1 Cor. III 21. All things are yours. When^ver you Turn to GOD,
there is forthwith a Joy (...) Heaven over you. Oh! That you would with ^earty
Resolutions to Turn, at this Hour make that Joy! But surely then, your own Joy
upon it, may be Wonderful, will be Wonderful! You may ^ast a Joyful Eye upon
every thing that is about ^ou, and s^e nothing but a fresh matter of Joy in
every thing. You may then look upon GOD, and ^o fully say, This is my Father,
my Savior, my Quickner; the strength of my Heart, and my Portion forever. You
may look up to the Mansions above, (...) may Joyfully say, I have a place
prepared for (...) there. You may look down to the place of Dragons, and may
Joyfully say, This lowest Hell is that from whence GOD has delivered my Soul!
You may look upon your Past Sins, and may Joyfully say, T^ese are all Pardoned.
You may look upon the Pious Breathings of your Souls, and may ^oyfully say,
Th^se are the Beginnings of Everlasting Life. You may look upon your Comforts,
and may Joyfully say, GOD has granted me these things in Love to my Soul. You
may look upon your Crosses, and may Joyfully say, GOD has (...) all these unto
my Good. You may look upon Angel^ and may Joyfully say, These are my Tender
(...) Watchful Guardians. You may look upon Devil^ and may Joyfully say, My
Jesus has rescued (...) from the Iaws of those roaring Lions. Yea, Loo^ upon
all the Blessings of Goodness, and Joyfull^ say, I have all these ensured unto
me!

TO say no more. Certainly SALVATION ha^ in it all that can be de^ired.
Salvation, Salvation Who can declare the Blessings that are comprize^ in it!
But then, my Friend, Thy Conversion i^ as much to be desired. For Salvation
will be the Consequence of Conversion. We read about the Conversion of a
Sinner, Jam. V.20. It saves (...) Soul from Death. A Faithful GOD has promised
Salvation to the Converts of Zion. He has pro^mised, When a Wicked Man Turns
from his Wickedness, he shall save his Soul alive. He has pro^mised, Because he
considers, and turns awa^ from all his transgressions, he shall Live, he
shall no^ Die. Do thou Believe? It is promised, Tha^ thou shall receive the
End of thy Faith, the Salvation of thy Soul. Do thou Repent? It is promised*
That it shall be a Repentance unto Salvation. For a Soul to ly under the
Distressing Rebukes of GOD, with the ugly Image of Satan upon it, and be (...)
forlorn Companion with Satan and his Angels* and this forever, forever,
forever: In a Torment* the smoke whereof shall ascend ^orever, and ever
Certainly, A Salvation from this is to be de^ired. For to have a Soul
Reconciled unto GOD; a Soul wherein GOD will forever dwell as in a most
agreeable Temple; and be enrolled in the General Assembly and Church of the
Firstborn, writ^en in Heaven! Certainly, such a Salvation is to ^e desired. O
Heart hardened by deceitful Sin, and d^sperat^ly Wicked, that will not melt and
break, and mightily desire to Convert, upon the prospect of so great Salvation!
Thy Conversion is then to be desired. But the Desire for it, must be expressed
in a Prayer for it; This Prayer, O Turn thou me!

Thirdly. NO man will Turn unto GOD, until GOD shall please to Turn him. We may
well say, Turn thou me, and I shall be Turned; For we must say, Except thou
Turn me, O Lord, I never shall be Turned. In the Grand concern of our
Conversion unto GOD, we are told, Phil. II.13. GOD ^orks in us, b^th to will
and to do, of His own good Pleasure. It Is very true, That GOD Commands us to
Tu^n unto Himself; And there is an unspotted Justice, a mavelous Wisdom, in
His Commanding of it. But it is also True, that we are unable to Tu^^
ourselves. Yea* How can we expect Him to look favorably upon us, until we are
made sensible of our being unable? We must Subscribe to that Article; Ephesians.
II.8. By Grace are ye Saved, ^^ro' Faith, (...) that not of your selves, it is
the Gift of GOD. And that; Joh. VI.44. No man (...) come unto the Son, except
the Father draw him. (...) the Conversion of a Sinner, GOD first enlightens
(...) Understanding to see such Things, as are not (...) in their Tr^^ Light,
until He shall give a ^piritual Discerning of them. Nor is this enough; But GOD
S^n^tifies the Will of the Sinner* at the ^^me time that H^ Sa^i^fies his
Understanding. The will of a Sinner is poisoned with Sin, and full if a Cu^^ed
^rejudic^ against the Service of GOD. The hate Proposals of the Gospel, will
not persuade the will of a Sinner to accept of them. The Conversion of a
^inner, is from an Efficacious and Supernatural Work of GOD, wherein He not
only lays Moral Persuasions before men, but also gives a New Biass unto the
will, and Quickens and Inclines the will, to choose the Things that please Him.
We are Dead in Trespasses and Sins; and we shall remain with the Chains of
Death upon us* until GOD please to bestow that Grace upon us, that shall Turn
us unto Himself. The Natural Freedom of the will, is not extinguished, in the
Conversion of a Sinner, and yet the Sinner Turn^ not unto GOD, until the will
be led Captive by Victorious Grace, by Verticordious Grace. Indeed, so little
can a Sinner Turn himself, that he cannot so far Dispose himself to Turn, that
GOD should be obliged by his well-Improving of Common Grace, to bestow Saving
Grace upon him. No, It Is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but
of GOD who shows Mercy. Then it is plain; GOD is for this to be sought unto.
Since none but GOD can Turn us; Our Prayer to GOD becomes very suitable, O Turn
thou me!

Fourthly. YOUR seeking to GOD, and asking of Him to Turn you, is the Turning
Point. Your Turn to GOD, is upon its Crisis, in your coming to make this
Prayer, O Turn thou me! The Demand upon you, is, Turn ye, and Live; why will ye
Die (...) There can be nothing more positively demanded. The Reply of the
slothful Sinner is, I cannot Turn. Indeed, there is in the Wicked, such a way
^^ Lyving, that they are always contradicting of themselves. When they put off
their Turn to GOD, until the Time, which they say, they will take for it, they
do in effect say, That it is in their own Power to Turn when they please. But
now he says, I cannot Turn. Indeed there is too much Truth in the Reply. And
yet, there is no excuse for a Wicked sl^th in it. For, First; Why do you not
now fal^ down before the Lord, with such a Supplication as this; O Turn thou
me, and I shall be Turned. In the Conversion of a Sinner, you say, GOD is to do
all. Well, But then, why don't you cry mightily unto GOD, that He would please
to do, what is to be done in you and for you? Why are you not Restless, until
you can say, -- Isa. XXVI.12. Lord, Thou have wrought all our Works in us! Do
not say, you cannot Pray. What would you do, if you were (as here some are)
certainly informed, That you were to Die in a few days, and had received a
Summons to appear this Week before the Tribunal of GOD? Surely, you would not
fit in the Posture of the Sluggard, and say, I cannot Pray. No; you would cast
yourselves prostrate in the Dust before the Lord, and wrestle with Him, Oh!
Help me to Pray! Oh! Give me a New Heart! Almighty Spirit of Grace, Work thy
Good Work in me. Oh! Turn thou me! Do not leave me to Perish in my ^ins! And
why cannot you now do so? You cannot Abhor your Sin. But then, why don't you Beg
it of GOD? Lord, enable me to Abhor my Sin. You cannot Embrace your Savior.
But then, why don't you Beg it of GOD? Lord, enable me to embrace my Savior.
That which makes yet more for your Prayer, O Turn thou me; is this. Here is the
Critical P^int, which brings on your Conversion to GOD; An Hearty Consent that
GOD should Help you to do, what He does Call you to do. The Sinner is actually
Turning to GOD, when he is Heartily Crying to GOD, O Turn thou me! Many an One
is Turned unto GOD, who has not first long Prayed unto Him for it. No rare
thing that; Isa. LXV.1. I am found of them that sought me not. But when it can
be said of a Sinner* B^hold, He Prays! and he does Heartily, Earnestly,
Urgently make this Prayer, O Turn thou me; -- This is a Sinner that has begun
to Turn. As the Fear of GOD is the Beginning of Wisdom, so the Beginning of the
Fear of GOD is our Hearty Prayer for it, that we may indeed Fear Him. We read,
Neh. I.11. They are the Servants of GOD, who Desire to Fear His Name. Ah,
Returning Souls; you Begin to Believe, when you are Heartily Praying for this;
O Turn thou me, and, Lord, Assist me to Commit myse^f unto the Conduct of my
Redeemer. Oh! That I may close with Him in all His Offices, for all His
Benefits. You Begin to Repent, when you are Heartily Praying for this; O Turn
thou me; and Lord, Cause me to Bewayl all my Sin; to Decline every Sin; Let my
sweetest Sin be made bitter to me. You Begin to be Holy* when you are Heartily
Praying at this rate; O Turn thou me; Lord, make me thy Servant. Oh! Let me
Dedicate my self and my All unto thee! Oh! Let a Respect unto all thy
Commandments be kindled in my Soul! How notably are you invited now, to make
this Prayer; O Turn thou me! A Turn is hopefully Beginning in your making of it.

THIS, This is the Thing which you are now Exhorted to.

THERE is an EXHORTATION to be now prosecuted, which is the most Practicable,
and yet the most Profitable, but therewithal the most Reasonable, that ever you
were addressed withal. You never were exhorted unto a Thing, upon which every
Conscience will sooner Pronounce, Thou art Inexcusable, O man, if it be not
presently complied withal. It Is this; Oh! Let this Prayer now go up to the
Glorious GOD from your Awakened Souls, Turn thou me, that I may be Turned. May
there be sent up, with a Cry that shall pierce the Heavens, the Prayer got
ready for your Indigent Souls; Psalm. LXXX.3. Turn us again O GOD, and cause thy
Face to shine, and we shall be Saved.

WE long, oh! how we long! for the Conversion of our dear People unto GOD. May
we not say, -- How cheerfully could we Die this very day, and leave all that we
enjoy in this World, and such things as are more precious to us than all this
World, if our Death might bring our People to Live unto GOD! Ah Lord, How long,
How long shall it be, ere we see our dear people, more Generally, more
Thoroughly Converted unto thee! But, oh! our dear People, If this One most
unexceptionable Thing might be gained, it would be a fair step toward all that
can be wished for. May you be found upon your knees before the Lord, earnestly
making this Prayer unto Him, O Turn thou me, that I may be Turned! -- THIS is
what we Request o^ you: Deny not this Rational Request; Oh; Deny it not, as you
will answer it unto GOD!

IN the Vision of the Dry Bones, it was Demanded, Can these Bones Live? But the
Prophet of GOD, was to Prophesy upon the Bones; and it followed, Exek.
XXXVII.5. Thus says the Lord GOD unto these Bones, Behold, I will cause Breath
to enter into you, and ye shall Live. Our Concern for the Dead Souls among us,
makes this Demand, Can the Souls Live? But the Souls are to be Prophesied over:
and, O ye Dead Souls, Hear the Word of the Lord. The Word of the Lord, which,
oh! that it may prove the Word of your Life, is this; To Prayer, poor Souls, To
Prayer before the Lord; And th^^ Prayer, O Turn thou me, that I may be Turned*
Now, oh! if we could perceive that Breath were entered into you! -- Might it be
perceived, that you were Breathing after a C^nversion to GOD. Might there be
perceived in you, a Soul Breathing after this, Oh! That I might Live unto GOD!
Oh! when shall I Live unto GOD! -- This Breath would be some sign, that you
were indeed beginning to Live.

METHINKS, you have heard Reasons enough, and enough, to Conquer all Objections
against your Immediate Compliance, with the Exhortation which now calls upon
you. But the Arrows are not all spent.

CONSIDER this One thing, and, oh! Consider it, as being shortly to appear
before your Judge. To ask of the Glorious GOD that He would please to Turn you;
It Is a Thing which you will not pretend, that you are unable to do such a Thing.
The Counsil is; Go alone, and from the Depths whereinto your Sins have plunged
you, Cry unto the Glorious GOD, O Turn thou me, that I may be Turned. Now, you
will not pretend, that you cannot. As the Servants of Naaman said unto him; 2 King.
V.13. My Father, If the Prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou
not have done it? How much rather then, when he says unto thee, Wash and be
clean So may I say, My Ne^ghbour, If some Great Thing were Imposed on thee, to
bring about thy Conversion to GOD, would thou not have done it? Yea, Verily;
It would be a thing worth all the Labor, and all the Travail, that can be
imagined. Could all the Severities, with which the Deluded Bigots among the
Pagans, or Papists, (...) Mahometans, Afflict themselves, be of any avail ^or
this purpose* none of them all would be too much to be undergone for such a
purpose. How much rather when the Prophet only says unto thee, Go, and Pray,
and Weep unto the Lord. O Turn ^hou me, that I may be Turned! -- How m^^^
rather ought this to be hearkened unto! You will none of you make this
pretense, I cannot go before the Lord; I cannot say unto Him, O Turn thou me!
-- If you will not hearken to it, you have no pretense, but that shameful one,
that horrid one; Jer. XLIV.16. As for the word that thou have spoken unto us in
the Name of the Lord, we will not ^earken unto thee. But, Oh! Forlorn Soul;
shall it come to this? What? will thou then plainly say, I will not so much as
ask it of GOD, that He would please to Turn me unto Himself? How can thou
answer for this profane Contempt of Heaven, before the Tribunal of GOD?

CERTAINLY, It cannot be imagined, That any of our dear Neighbors and
Children, will be as Deaf-Adders unto the Charms of Heaven thus used upon them.
It must be imagined, that this Prayer is now ascending before the Glorious GOD,
from a multitude of People ^ir^ving to enter in at the Sir it Gate: O Turn thou
me, that I may be Turned.

WHAT rema^^^ will be some Direction how the Prayer is to be managed; how the
ca^se, to be pleaded Now*

F^^st Oh! What Importunity, oh! what I^port^nity, ought this Prayer to be made
withal; Turn thou ^e, O GOD, that I may be Turned! How I^portunate, O perishing
Souls, ought you to be in the Supplication? Wherefore,

First; BLOW up the Flames of an agreeable Importunity, in your Pray^r for the
Grace that shall Turn you unto GOD. Let this Fire of the Sanctuary, be blown up
with most Affecting Meditations, on the Worth of the Blessing you are to Pray
for. (...) till you Prize this Work of GOD and of Grace; till you look on it as
the most Precious thing that can be thought upon. Give not over your
Meditations, till you come to these Apprehensions; Prove. III.14, 15. The
Merchandise of it is better than the merchandise of Silver, and the gain
thereof than fine Gold. It is more precious than pearl, and all the things thou
can desire, are not t^ be compared unto it. Meditate on, Meditate still Muse
till the Fire Burns. Meditate until the Wisdom of a Solomon shall in this thing
be yours When the profer was made unto Solomon, Ask wha^ I shall give thee, he
chose Wisdom, rather than al^ the Great Things of this little World. The profe^
is by the GOD of all Grace made unto you; Soul* Ask what I shall give thee. Oh!
Become so affected, that you shall make this Wise Choice; Lord Give me the
Grace, to Turn unto thee with all my Heart; the Grace to Love the^, an^ Serve
thee, and Live by and to my Savior; Oh! Rather this Grace, that any thing in
this W^rld! Apprehend thus; The Grace to Turn to GOD, and to delight in Him, ^s
better than all sensual Delights. To be Enriched with the Grace, by which we
Turn to GOD, is better than to heap up any Temporal Riches. The Grace whereby
one so Turns to GOD, as to become a Child of the Lord Almighty, and a Governor
of ones self, is better than the highest Pre^erments and Employments in this
lower World. Yea, The Grace to Turn to GOD and Live Holily, is better than Life
it self. There have been Miraculous Gifts, with which the Holy Spirit sometimes
has ^ndued some among His People. But you (...) to Apprehend. That the Work of
Grace wherein men Turn unto GOD, is ^ore valuable than all the Miraculous Gifts
by which any Men of GOD have ever been distinguished. Will you take up such
Sentiments? The Tongue of one Tu^^ed unto GOD, being always Bridled by the Law
o^ Christ, and used in His Praise, it is a more Glorious Thing, than to Speak
with the Tongue of Men and Angels, the Tongue of Men possessed by Angels. To
have a Soul Turned unto GOD, and Healed of the Diseases that Sin has brought
upon is, is a more Glorious Thing than to have the power of Healing all
Diseases. To Turn to GOD, and See the Mystery of Christ, and Wa^k with Him, is
a more Glorious Thing than to h^^p the Blind and the ^ame. To Turn to G^D, and
be Acquainted with our own Heart, is a more Glori^u^ Thing than to Discern
Spirits, or have the Visi^ns of Angels. (...) to GOD, and Live to Him* and
leave (...) is a more Glorious Thing than to Raise the Dead. To Turn to GOD and
Repel the Temptations of the Devil to forsake Him, is a more Glorious Thing,
than to cast a Legion of Devils out of an Energumen. To Turn to GOD, and lay up
a Good Foundation for the time to come, and be ^eady for whatever is to come,
this is a more Glorious Thing, than the Ability to Foretell Things to come. A
man may taste of those Powers of the World to come, and after all be abhorred
and Banished from GOD in the World to come. Oh! but let a man Turn to GOD, and
he has that Spring of Living Water in him, which will infallibly, flow, and
run, and spread into Everlasting Life. Soul^, Are you not Inflamed by such
Meditations! Doubtless you must be so. (...) ^ow,

Secondly; EXPRESS your Importunity; Exert your Importunity. Pray and Plead
Importunately; Lay Hold on the Words, wherewith a Gracious GOD has furnished
you, that you may turn them into Plea's before Him. You shall now be put in
mind of certain Words, for this vast Occasion; And having these words with you,
oh! now Order your Cause before the Lord, and fill your Mouths with Arguments.
You have that Word; 1 John V.14. If we ask any thing according to His Will, He
hears us. Go and Plead this word, at this rate; Lord, when I ask for the
Grace to Turn unto thee, I ask, what is according to thy Will. It is according
to thy Will, that I Turn unto thee, and that I seek a Conformity unto thy Will.
And now, oh! will thou Hear me! oh! will thou Turn me! You have that word; Jam.
I.5. If any of you lack Wisdom, (...) him ask of GOD, that gives to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not. Go and plead this word at this ^ate; Lord* The
Grace to Turn unto thee, is the Wisdom that I lack: And now at thy Bidding I
ask this Wisdom of thee. But now, oh! shall it be Given to me! oh! wilt tho^
Turn me! Humbly Expostul^te it with the (...) ^racious GOD, whether He ever
denied such a ^rayer as this, when it was most Hearti^y made unto Him. Surely,
He never did! He never did! You shall be supplied with one word more; and it is
a word worth a World. It is that word, Luke XI.13. Your Heavenly Father will
give the H^ly spirit unto them that ask Him. O fall down before the Glorious
GOD, and thus Plead this word: O Heavenly Father, None but thy Holy Spirit can
Turn me to thee; Then and only Then, shall I be Turned* if He undertake to Turn
me. How Happy am I, if thy Holy Spirit shall Turn me to thee; How undone, if He
do it not! Oh! what Glory will come to thy Name in my Turning to thee, if thy
Holy Spirit be given to me! It Is a Gift promised for them that Ask thee* Lord, I
Ask thee, I Ask thee! Never did I Ask any thing with so much of Agony! Oh! Deny
me not! Ah! Soul wandering in Darkness: thy Savior says unto thee, as to that
Poor Child of Sorrow in his Darkness; Mar. X.51. What will thou, that I should
do unto thee? Now, with all possible Importunity make this Answer to Him: Lord,
Open my Eyes, to see the Errors of my way, and give me the Grace to Turn from
every Evil way. Oh! Turn me, with a Work of thy Grace upon me, that shall cause
me to Love my S^viour, and Hate my Sin, and Slight this World, and lay hold on
Eternal Life. Certainly, He will do it for thee! Certainly, He will fill a
Soul, so Hungry, so Thirsty, so Importunate, after the Righteousness of a Soul
Turned unto GOD.

Secondly. PRAYER must not go alone. It must not be the Desire of the slothf^^^
and the Prayer of one whose Hands Refuse (...). The means of Grace must be
used, that yo^ (...) be Turned unto GOD. Now among all the means of Grace, the
principal is, The WORD of GOD. Concerning the Word of GOD, we read, Psalm.
XIX.7. I^ Converts the Soul. Wherefore, It must be on^ Advice to you; Read the
Word of GOD. Let not one day ordinarily roll away, without Reading a Portion in
your Bible. But let the Reading be with Attention, with Reverence, with Lessons
fe^ch'd out of it, which you will turn into Wishes before the Lord. Especially
let it be with some such Hope as this; Oh! That by the Word of GOD, I may be
Turned unto Him. It must be a further Advice unto you; Hear the Word of GOD.
Neglect no Opportunities for Hearing the Gospel of your Salvation. Know you
not, That Faith comes by Hearing? Oh! Come to Hear, in Hope, that the Faith
which will Turn you to GOD may now be given you. Come in Hope, that the Word
will be mixed with the Faith which will Turn you to GOD. Come with Hope, that
it will be with you* as it was with Peter's Hearers, and that the Holy Spirit by
whom you shall be Turned unto GOD, will fall upon you in your Hearing. And like
him who said, Psalm. XXVII.8. When thou said, seek my Face, my Heart said, Thy
Face, Lord, I will seek. So, while you are Hearing the Word of GOD, form
suitable Acts of Compliance with it. Comply as far as you can with what you
Hear. Especially when you Hear those Joyful Sounds of the Gospel, wherein a
Turn to GOD, is more peculiarly called for, Try whether GOD has not Enabled you
to Comply with them. When you hear such a word as that; seek the Lord ^hile He
may be fo^nd, call upon Him while He is near; Try whether you cannot Comply,
and say, Lord, I will seek thee from this Time, I will call upon thee as long
as I Live! When you hear such a word as that, Put away the Evil of your Doings
from before mine Eyes; Try whether you cannot Comply, and say, Lord I will from
this time have done with all Evil doings. When you hear such a word as that;
Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out; Now Try whether you cannot
Comply, and say, O my Savior, I come unto thee! Acts of Compliance formed in
the Soul, when Acts of Piety are called for, will suddenly surprise you into a
Turn unto GOD. In such a way of Hearing the Word of GOD, and of Trying to
comply with it, a Turn to GOD is to be looked for.

I hope, you are by this time abundantly sensible, of what is pr^s^ed upon you.

BUT will it not be a sweet Assistenc^ unto you, in the work which you are to
go upon, if I show you in One Word, what is the Turn to GOD, which you are to
be brought unto? What you are to do, when you Turn unto GOD?

THERE yet remains the Second of our Doctrines, to be your Monitor upon it.

A Conversion to GOD, lies in a laying hold on the Covenant of GOD.

A Soul Turning to GOD, soon discovers it by saying to Him, Thou art the Lord
my GOD. The Conversion of a Sinner is th^^ described; Isa. LVI.^. They choose
the Things that please (...), and they take hold of my Covenant. It is to be
supposed, that you are Praying to the Glorious GOD, O Turn thou me! You are now
to be told, what you will ^ome to if your Prayer be heard; if the Lord have not
turned away your Prayer, nor His Mercy from you. You will take hold of His
Covenant.

A Right Notion of this matter shall be set before you.

KNOW then, That GOD the Father has made a Covenant with His Eternal Son, about
the Saving of a People, whom for that purpose, and with an Eternal purpose of
Good unto them, He Commits unto Him. It Is because of this Covenant, that GOD the
Father is called, The God of our Lord Jesus Christ. And because of this
Covenant, there is mentioned unto us, A Volumn of a Book, that is to say, A
Contract or Compact, wherein such a thing is Written of. In this Covenant of
Redemption, GOD the Father engages to Allow and Accept what our Savior shall
do for the People that are given unto Him. GOD our Savior engages to Glorify
his Father, by answering the Demands of His Law, on the behalf of His People,
and by such Operations of His Grace* upon them, as will terminate in His
Presenting them Fau^tless before the presence of His Glory with exceeding Joy.
But then know, The ^ovenant of GOD is with His People too. O Church of the
Lord, It is THY Covenant. And the Covenant of Redemption, becomes the Covenant
of Reconciliation, in this Application of it unto the Faithful. The Distinction
between these two Ex^ibitic^s of the Covenant must be Remembered; but yet the
Relati^n between them should never be Forgotten. O Converting ones, This, This
is what is now to be expected from you; To say unto GOD, Thou art the Lord my
GOD. That is to say, Ask and Hope to be brought home unto GOD, according to the
Agreement between GOD the Father and GOD your Savior. Mind this; It is
propounded unto you, whether you are willing to be Saved, and Led, and Ruled,
in those Methods of Grace, which GOD the Father and GOD your Savior have
established for the bringing of many sons unto Glory. You must see a Day of
Power, wherein Sovereign Grace will Quicken you, and Incline you, and make you
Willing to be so dealt withal. Your Consent, Your Consent, unto the Methods of
arriving unto Happiness, under the Conduct of an admirable JESUS, even of GOD
Incarnate and Enthroned in an amiable JESUS; the (...), of whom His Almighty
Father says, I have given thee for a Covenant of the People: This must be
^^^tained. Oh! shall it be now Obtained! The (...) of this, brings you actually
into the Covenant of the Lord your GOD. Will you now mind the most concerning
Proposal, that ever was made; that ever was heard! It is proposed* unto you;
Are you Willing that the Christ of GOD should bring you home to GOD? Are you
willing, That the Sacrifice which the Holy JESUS has offered unto GOD, should
be your Atonement: Are you willing to have the Holy JESUS Plead your Cause with
GOD, in the Quality of your Advocate, as having put His Righteousness upon you?
And, Are you willing, that the Holy JESUS take Possession of you by His Holy
Spirit; and as in a Glorious Temple forever Inhabit you; and produce the Lively
Image of GOD upon you; and fill you with His Love, and cause you to Love His
Law, and ano^ Raise you from the Dead, and bring you to the Inheritance of the
Saints, after He has in His own way (and by the Cross* if He will have it so)
prepared you for it? A Soul ^onquered by the Offer o^ this Grace, and Complying
with it, is brought into the Covenant. O my Hearers, What is now urge^ for, and
waited for, is this Answer of your Souls O my Savior, I am willing to be
Thine; Do tho^ make me willing. I commit myself and my All into thy Hands. O
let thy Blood cleanse me from all m^ Sin. O do thou work in me, all that is
Well-pleasi^^ in the sight of GOD.

I remember, that our Savior having Preache^ a long Sermon unto His Disciples:
(...). XIII.5* Jesus says unto them. H^ve ye understood all th^s^ things; They
say unto Him, yea, Lord. Our Ser^mon shall now expire with this enquity; Have
you Relished all these Things? Oh! That you might answer to the Lord. Yea Lord.
An Obedi^nt, Yea Lord; Oh! That it may be the Return to Tw^ Questions, which I
am now to conclude withal.

Q. I. ARE you Desirous, to be Turned unto GOD* And will you ask it of Him?

Q. II. ARE you Desirous to have the Great GO^ for yours? And is this the
Choice and Voice of (...) Souls before Him, Thou art the Lord my GOD? Man you
say, Yea, Lord.

WHAT has th^s been said unto All, has be^ more especially said [And, surely,
they have sen^sibly felt it so! unto those PoorMen who here stand Bound in
Affliction and Iron, because they have rebelled against the Word of GOD; They
are Assured that this is the last Sabbath which they shall see in the World,
wherein they have Despised and Profaned so many; But they have entreated that
they may hear a Sermon wherein they might wait and look for those Visits of
Grace unto their Souls, that may accomplish their Conversion to GOD, which is
ALL, ALL* that they have now to think upon. It may be they have been
accomodated with what has been somewhat Proper, -- Oh! may our Good GOD make it
useful! -- to them. And may they be those Prisoners of Hope, of whom it may yet
be ^oped, that though they are Delivered unto the Executioner, for the
Destruction of their Flesh, their Spirits yet shall be Saved in the Day of the
Lord!

POOR Sons of Death, -- I am to tell you, There is yet Hope in Israel for you!
-- HOPE, That though your Sins have been so horribly multiplied, and complicated,
and Aggravated, yet you may repair ^o the Blood which cleanses from all Sins:
In the blood of your SAVIOR, you have a Fountain set ^p^n for you* O Hear it
with an agreeable Astonish^^nt! -- Your SAVIOVR most Graciously Invites ^ou;
His Invitation to you is Come unto me, and I will give you Rest: It is Look
unto me and be ye saved! ^f He help you to make your Flight unto Him, ^or all
the sure Mercies of His Covenant, you that ^ow Die before your Time for having
been Wicked Overmuch, yet shall in a Life Eternal enjoy His ^avours. The
Villia^ies, the Robberies, the Mur^^rs, wherewith you have Obliged Men to Chase
^ou from among the Living on the Earth, being Repented of, will not keep you
out of that Holy Blessedness, to which the Blood of our SAVIOR Obtains
Admission for the Souls that are Sprinkled with it. But, oh! how much, how
much* will you now L^ve that Glorious One, by whom you have had so much
Forgiven to you!

-- WE will now all seasonably join with our uplifted Cries to Heaven, That it
may be so! --

A Conference Between a MINISTER, and the two Pirates, ( Archer, and White,)
the Week before their Execution.
M. Stands for, Minister. A. for Archer. W. for White. P. P. when Both made the
same Answer.

M. IT IS with unspeakable Sorrow and Pity that I behold your miserable
Circumstances. -- But if a Poor Sinful Man, have any Dispositions of Mercy for
you, they are but what a Gracious GOD has produced in him; and they are but a
very mean and faint Shadow of the Mercy in the Glorious GOD; For as the Heaven
is High above the Earth, Such a Superiority there is in the Mercy of the
Glorious GOD. And, Oh! Do you make such an use of the Compassion for you, which
you see working in any Servants of GOD, as to infer from it; What Compassion
you shall find in the Infinite GOD, if you Return to Him; A GOD, who is now
waiting that He may be Gracious*


P. P. We thank you, Sir; and we desire to do as you direct us; and we entreat
that we may have your Directions.


M. The Best, and indeed the Whole of what I can do for you, -- I suppose, you
want for no Temporal Reliefs or Supplies, --


P. P. We are well provided for, as to That.


M. -- It is to assist your Preparation for the Death, -- Ah! Poor Young Men,
(one of you no more than Twenty Seven, the other no more than Twenty two Years
old!) The Untime^y Death! which is the next Week Unavoidably to Overtake you.
-- We read in the Gospel, concerning a Pae^itent Thief, to whom our most
Merciful REDEEMER assigned a Portion in His Paradise. I do not Apprehend, that
the First Bestowal and Beginning of his Repentance, was when he came to the
Place of Execution. My Apprehension is, That he was a Paenitent before he came
thither; and came thither Praepared for the Death which was then Inflicted on
him. You have had some Weeks of Time, since you were in Chains, to Think upon
your Ways, (and to do as another Great Sinner, whom you have heard of, did, --
M^nassch in his Chains!) And now you have one Week more to which you know, Your
Days are determined. With what Solicitude ought you to Redeem this Time! Every
Minute of this Time (...) certainly to be Precious with you. You must not throw
away a Minute of this Time, in any thing that shall divert you, from the Main
Work, which cannot b^ done in the Gr^ve, whither you are hastening! Children,
An Eternity, an awful Eternity depends upon it! -- But, I pray, How do you
Spend your Time?


P. P. In Reading, and in Praying.


M. You are furnished, I know, with proper Books of PIETY. But above all, your
BIBLE* your ^IBLE! -- Read that Holy Book, most Attentively, most Affectuously!
-- make a Pause upon every Verse. Think with yourselves, What is it that the
Glorious GOD here speaks unto me? And thereupon, with an Ech^ of Devotion do
you send up some suitable Request unto GOD. Particularly on every Praecept say,
Lord, Help me to do this go^^ thing! On every Promise, -- Lord, Grant this go^^
thing unto me! What an Intercourse with Heaven are you now thus Invited to! You
that have ru^ and hid from the Glorious GOD; and hithert^ lain in the Belly of
Hell all your* Days.

I advise you in a singular manner thus to em^ploy the LI Psalm.


P. P. Sir, We do often Read that Psalm.


M. It Is well; And form your suppli^^tions from it. So do, from the X^XII Psalm;
and from the XXV Psalm. Make the Bible your Prayer Book No Prayer Book like to
That.

I also recommend the Eighteenth, and the two following Verses in the XXXI
Chapter of Jeremiah, to your Consideration.


P. P. We hope, Sir, we shall Remember your Advice.


M. I am now to tell you; The ONE THING NEEDFUL for you, is. To (...) and Live
unto ^OD. There is a Conversion to GOD, whereof ^ou must have an Experience; or
else an Eter^al ^anishment from GOD must be your Portion. This is what, I
suppose, you make no Question of.

^ pray, What are your Thoughts about this Conversion? What is it?


A. It Is to Repent of all my Sins.


W. It Is to leave off all my Evil Ways.


M. It Is a mighty Change wrought in the Mind, (and thereupon in the Life) of One
who has a Departed from GOD: A New Biass given to the Soul, Soul is becomes as
a New Creature upon it. The which Inclined now, and Quickened from above, no
longer to set up Self in the Throne of GOD* but aim at the Serving and Pleasing
of GOD, as it has aimed at the gratifying of Self heretofore. The Soul now goes
to GOD, for that Satisfaction, which it has heretofore vainly expected from
Lying Vanities. GOD now Reigns in the Soul, and the Changed Heart says* What
have I any more to do with Idols? The Voice of GOD is now more powerful to the
Soul, than the Enticements of the Flesh, the Enchantments of the World, the
Temptations of the Devil The Awakened Soul, flies to a CHRIST, ^^at it may find
Acceptance with GOD, and be strengthened for Obedience to Him. Continual
Flights to a CHRIST, with H^pes to be bro't by Him into the Enjoyment of GOD,
now fill the ^ife of the Convert. He knows of no Sin, but what he can truly
say, It Is to me an abominable Thing; My Soul hates it. When he finds himself to
fall into Sin (as he often man!) he does Confess it, Bewayl it, and R^new his
Recourse to the Open Fountain in the Blood of CHRIST for the Pardon of it. The
Remainders of Indwelling Sin in him, do wonderfully Grieve him. He is engaged
in a perpetual Warfare, and Struggle, for the Suppression and Extinction of it*
The most bitter Things, that promote a more Perf^^t W^rk of Repentance in him,
are welcome to him. He so Realizes the Eye of an Omnipresent GOD upon him, that
he keeps his Heart with all diligence, and will not give to any vile Th^ughts a
Lodging and an Harbor there. And at the same time, he has a si^cere L^ve to
his Neighbor, sweetning and swaying of him; To wish well to all about him, and
lay a Re^traint on all Evil Disp^si^i^ns toward them.

Hearken to me; If anon your Souls go away, without this Good W^rk produced in
them, you are beyond all Imagination mis^rable. You Die ^^pardoned, and an Holy
GOD will deal with you as H^s Enemies: But, Can your Hearts endure* (...) c^n
your Hands be (...)* When He shall so de^l with you! Verily, (...) are S^re
P^^gues, and of long continuan^e, in tha^ (...) Punishment which you will find
^eserved for y^u. You ^ill be thrown into a Place of Tor^ent; ^^d be chained up
in Blackness ^f Darkness, forever; where the Dev^ls* to who^ (...) have bee^
(...) and Va^^a^s* will insult you, will torture you, will ^e ver^ uneasy
Compan^^ns to you. And what will be yet more Intol^^able, the Infinite GOD
Himself will with Im^ediate (...) of His Wrath like flashes of Lightening sh^t
into your g^ilty (...) cause you to feel an (...)* which (...) here can com^ up
un^^. (...) any Torment, when the (...) or scorched while it is lodging in the
Body it is the Glorious GOD as an Universal cause always executing the Laws of
Nature, which He has established, who does produce that sense in the Sufferer.
But this Almighty GOD, will more Immediately dispense to a Wicked S^ul gone
down to the Pit, the sense of all such Torment, as it could have ever felt by
the Mediation of the most exquisite Afflicters here. Our GOD will Himself be as
a Distressing Fire unto them. Verily, It will be found a Fear^ul thing to fall
into in the Hands of the Living GOD!

-- Yea, If you are not well Renewed in the Spirit of your Mind, You will Die
unqualified for the Kingdom of GOD. A Soul cannot go into Heaven, till Heaven
be first come into the Soul. If it were possible, ( as it is not,) for a Soul,
with the Enmity of a Carnal Mind against GOD, unsubdued in it, with its Vicious
and Uncured Appetites, to enter into Heaven, it would not bear to be The^e:
Heaven itself would be so Disagreeable as to be Uncomfortable unto such a Soul.
A most Horrible Thing This! But most certainly True. So that there can be
nothing so Necessary for you as This; That an Holy Change be made upon you! A
New Birth, without which, it had been Good for you that you had never been ^orn!


P P. Sir, We believe this; And we are in Distress about it


M. But are you sensible, That you cannot Change your own Heart! or, give to
yourselves that New Heart, which you must have, or Perish Wonderfully*


P. P. We thought we could. But we now sadly fi^d we cannot!


M. And yet, your case is not That, which the Pr^^ane Scof^^rs (whom it may be,
you have me^ with,) do say we make it; You are chain^d in a Prison, which is on
a light Fire over your Heads: [That's True*] And Almighty GOD now Mocks you^
with bidding you, shak off your Chains, and come out of the Flames. No, No; He
says to you, Why don^t you (...) unto me, to take off your Chains, and ^^uck
you ^ut o^ the Flames? If once you made an H^^rty Cry unto the GOD of all
Grace, t^ Quicken and Strengthen your Flight from the Wrat^ to come, whereof He
has Warned you; Verily, this very Thing would be a Token for Good upon you;
That the Spirit of Life from GOD has Begun to Quicken you and Strengthen you;
your Fligh^ is Begun: It Is Begun in an Hearty Cry for Help (...) make it. -- And
yet, Remember; One Ingredient of the Hearty Cr^ must be a Confession, Tha^ as
you are Unable to Turn unto GOD, So, you ar^ Unworthy that GOD should Enable
you.

I pray* What are your Thoughts of This? I^ ^ou should no^ Employ your Prayers
and Pain^ for a Turn to GOD, and the ^ov^reign GOD should ye^ wi^hold his Grace
from you, and leave you (...) Die in your Sins, could you complain of any
I^^justice in Him?


P. P. No, sure. We ar^ not worthy of the lea^ Favor from Him. And much less
can we be worth^ of so great a Favor, as there would be in a Ne^ Heart
bestowed upon us.


M. Th^n Provision ^eing made, that Free-Grac^ may have its Glories, Let us
Proceed. -- Unt^ a man that had a Withered Han^, our SAVIOR gave His Command,
Stretch out thy Hand. This was what he was of all things the most unable to do.
But he Tried; he Tried! And he found a Power accom^any the Command; upon a
Trial, he found he was Ena^led. I will now suppose you, like that poor Man,
Trying to Do what I am to Sp^ak* And I will hope, for such Influences from
Above upon you, as may bring the Li^e ^f GOD into you -- Say now; Do you see,
that you have Sinned grievously; that your Lives have been full of Sins: that
in your Sins you have broken all the Laws of the Glorious GOD!


P. P. Oh! There Is no number of our Sins! we have ^ever done any thing else but
Sin against our Maker, ^ll our Days.


M. -- I pray, Of all your Miscarriages, and Enormities, which are now upon
Reflection most grievous to you? Which does your C^nscience most Scourge you
for?


A. My Profane Swearing, and Cursing and Blaspheming the Name of the Bl^ssed
GOD; and my Sabbath-breaking, and my Rebellious ^ad Carriage to my Parents, and
my -- Uncha^tity: and what l^d to all, my Drunkenness.


W. My Blaspheming the Name of GOD, and Swear^ng and Cu^sing, -- and my
Pr^^aning the Sabbath -- and my r^^ning away from my Friends; and my being le^
^side by Wicked Company. -- GOD has kept me from the Sins, ^o ich this man la^t
mentioned. But my Drunk^nness has ruined me. --


M. But, the Crimes which you are now Condemned for; the Crimes which the Sword
of Jus^ice is now striking you for* the Crimes (...) which Mankind agrees, to
treat you as the Common Enemies of Mankind, and hurry you out of the World;
Your Piracy! The many Robberies you have Committed; -- And the Abuses you have
offered unto the Persons of Travelers, that fell in your way. All the Base
Bl^ws you have given to them, should now with a sad Rebound be given to
yourselves. You should feel them all yourselves, from your own Hearts now
miting of you.

Yea, you are Murderers. There have been Murders Committed by your Crew. If
your Hands were not actually Embrued in the Blood, yet you have your share,
with the rest of the Crew, in the Guilt of the Murders.


P. P. It Is all True. Be sure, we have done very Wickedly, to Stea^ and Spoil as
^e have done, and abuse those that fell into our Hands. We fully deserve all
that is now done to us. We cannot Complain of any Hardship. We must own, that
we are justly dealt wi^hal.


A. And I have this further to say. I was one of Teaches Crew; But came in upon
the Act of Graces And yet falling again into the Hands of the Pirates, I was
easily drawn into the old Trade again; and spen^ one half Year more in Piracy,
till GOD would ^ear no longer with me.


M. All the Abominable Things that you have done, are but the Streams, whereof
you have the Spring, in an Heart that is Desperately Wicked, and a Mother of
Abominations. What sense have you of This! Do you with a vast, self-ab^or^enc^,
behold, That you were Born Sinners; and that under the Condemnation which the
Sin of your Fir^^ Parents brought on Mankind* you have Contracted a Venomous
Disposition to Sin against the Glorious GOD, and an Inclination to all manner
o^ Sin; So that if GOD had not wi^^eld you from ^inning against Him, there is
no manner of Sin but what you would have run into! -- An Heart always Departing
from the Living GOD.


P. P. We now see it; But we had not such a sight of it, when you first Visited
us, as GOD has now brough^ us to.


M. And what is the Punishment that is (...) due ^o yo^ for your Sins?


P. P. Death.


M. What mean you by Death?


P. P. Damnation! An Hell after Death.


M. True. Whenever you have Sinned, you have done an Horrible Thing. You have
Denied the GOD that is Above. You have trampl^d on His Authority, and shaken
off the Government of your Maker. You have de^ied His Infinite Power; you have
derided His Infinite Wisdom; you have despised His Infinite Goodness; you have
opposed His Infinite Holiness; you have Stabbed the SON of GOD; you have
Grieved the SPIRIT of G^D; you have Disobliged the Angels, and have gratified
the Devils. You have Wounded yourselves, and Wronged your own Souls; and
Forfeited Eternal Enjoyments, and Incurred Eternal Confusions, for the sake of
a ^ew Mean, Base, Temporal Gratifications, which are no more than the Crackling
of Thorns under a Po^. The Law of GOD is armed with a Penalty. The Horrible
Thing you have done in breaking the Law, deserves all that is in the Penalty.
It Is what you have done times without Number. Now, what have you to plead, why
the Penalty of the Broken Law, should not be Executed on you? If you must
undergo the Execution of it, you are beyond all Expression, all Conception,
Miserable. -- But, what plea have you to make, That you may be Released from
your Deserved Punishment?


P. P. We can Plead nothing but the Blood of our SAVIOR!


M. And That plea, will do. -- How much, How much, ought this Con^ideration to
melt and break your Hearts within you? Can your Souls be any other than
Surprised, Amazed, Ravished, when you consider it? The Eternal SON of GOD,
united the Man JESUS unto Himself: having engaged unto His Eternal FATHER, That
he would undergo the Punishment, which would become du^ for the Sins of the
People committed unto Him (...) and become a Sacrifice to Divine Justice for
them. Our SAVIOR came according to His Engagement; and He underwent the
Punishment of ou^ Sins, in the Day when GOD laid on Him the Iniquities of us
all: and after many Distresses. H^ Dyed upon the Cross. All that you have now
to do, is, To ly in the Dust before the Glorious GOD, Mourning for your Sins
against Him, and Afraid o^ what they Expose you to; and there to Plead (...)
Lord, Let me not be punished for my Sins; my SAVIOR has been Punished for
them. Lord, Let my Sins be Pardoned; my SAVIOR has made Sa^isfaction for them.
Lord, Let not thy Vengeance come upon me for the Debts which I owe unto (...);
my SAVIOR has paid t^em all. Thus are you to Plead, with (...) Good Hope through
Grace, that GOD has allowed you^ Plea, and has Forgiven you. Conclude; L^^d,
(...) ^ill Pr^ise thee; for th^ugh thou wast Angry with ^e, thine A^ger is
turned away, and thou do Comfort me.

Will you take this Course?


P. P. We hope, we shall; and we thank you, Sir, for showing it so plainly to
us.


M. But I must make it yet a little Plainer. -- It is not enough, that you be
Forgiven, but you must be Righ^eous too. You cannot have a Claim to Blessedness,
if you be not Owners of a Righteous^ess wherein the Law of GOD shall be fu^ly
answered; a Complete, Exact, Perfect Righteousness. But, how will you come at
such a Righteousness? If you could now spend the Last Week of your Lives, in
Spotl^ss Perf^rmances* what would that Signify for the p^st Years of Lives a^l
spent in Wickedness? A F^r^hing paid, where Talents were owed? But even This is
what you will not, you cannot come unto. Your Best Work^ will have their Blemishes.
The very Tears of your most Savoury Devotions will want washing. Your H^ly
Things will not ^^e without their Iniquities.

What will you do?


P. P. We know not what to do. G^^d Sir, s^^w (...); What shall we do?


M. Mind what I say to you; and give Earn^st Heed unto it.

A Glorious CHRIST has mad^ Himself a Debtor to the Law for us: and He that
made the Law put Himself under it, that GOD might be Glorified with an
Obedience imp^ssible to be equalled by what could come from any Creature. Our
Surety has by His most Thorough Ob^^i^nce to it, Magnified the Law and ^ade it
Hono^rable. In His Holy Heart, and His Holy Walk, there was the fullest
Co^^or^ity to the Law that ever was Exhibited. Infinite Holiness could find in
it no Deficiency, tax it with no Impurity. Here was a Righteousness! The
Heavens themselves could show nothing to be Compared with it. Now, This
Righteousness is what your SAVIOR has wrought out, and brought in, for us
Ungodly Ones, that we may stand in it before GOD, and so be Justified. A most
Gracious GOD allows the Merits of this Righteousness, unto those, who have none
of their own, and who Renounce all Dependence on their own, and who Desparing
in themselves make mention of This Righteousness, even of This only. The
Righteousness of a CHRIST Believed on, GOD will ^eckon it unto you for the
Righteousness, wherein you shall be Justified before Him. Let the Prayer of
your Faith be This; Lord, I am utterly destitute of any Righteousness; All my
Right^ousnes^ is but Fil^^iness: But Oh! Accep^ me among thy Righteous Ones,
because my JESUS has fulfilled all Righteousness, and, I hope in Him, that He
will do the part of an Advocate, and show His Righteousness for me, that I may
be delivered from go^ng d^wn unto the Pit. Now you shall have the Benefit o^
this Righteousness, and be received among the Righteous upon it.


P. P. This is very strange* But (...) such ^ile Sinners as we are, Ven^ure to
Plead at This rate?


M. Yes. And your Vileness must no^ hinder it. You must come as recommended by
nothing but your Vileness. The Vilest of Sinners are welcom^ to the Use, and
the Faith, of this wonder^ul Righteous^^s^* You love i^, if you are Emboldened
from a vain Dream of any worth in yourselves, to lay Hold on it. It is now
thrown out unto you, as a Cord unto a ^rowning Man; and (that I may speak to
you in your own way) Take fast Hold. And, Hold fast* Hold fast, that you may
not sink, Drowne^ in Perdition!


P. P. This is Wonderful! Thanks be to GOD, that He has brought us, where we
are taught such things as these!


M. But, This is not all; you have not yet had the whole Counsil of GOD. I must
go on to tell you, The Faith which thus carries you to your SAVIOR, that you
may be Justified, has other Errands, upon which it will Repair unto Him. If
this Faith be not a Counterfeit, or if it be any other than the Hope of the
Hypocrite, it will be ma^vellously desirous, to obtain those Influences of
Grace from your SAVIOR, that shall heal all that is amiss in your Souls, and
make all Sin lothsom to you, and fill you with the Love of GOD, and of your
Neighbor, and cause you to bring forth much of that Fruit, by which our
Heavenly Father is to be Glorified. If you ^^ve look^d upon sin, as an Evil,
for which nothing less than the Blood ^f the Son of GOD can make exp^ation, you
cannot but have an unspeakable Horror of it, and be unspeakably Loath to
continue in Sin. An Heart that shall take Delight in the Service of GOD; and a
Will mortified, and rectified, and reduced into Obedience to GOD, and swallowed
up in the Will of GOD; This must be in your Apprehension as precious a ^avour
as any that you seek to your SAVIOR (...). If the Blood of your SAVIOR be
Sprinkled ^n your Souls, and become effectual for your Pardon, there will come
a Li^e with it, and from it, that will Enliven you to keep continually
Breathing and Pressing after those Intentions of your SAVIOR in shedding of
His Blood; That His People may be Purified ones, and Ze^^ous of Good Works, and
a peculiar People.

Now, Do you Heartily Desire, That your SAVIOR would make you perfect in every
Good Work, and Work in you that which is well-pleasing in the sight of GOD?


P. P. We hope, we do.


M. This is indeed, the Concep^ion which I would have you take up, of the
Conversion, which is of the last Importance for you. It is the Application of a
Ruin^d Soul to a Glorious CHRIST, for the whole of His Great Salvation. You
must be desirous to be recovered out of that Ruin, in which you may see
your^elves Perishing at a Distance from GOD. You must behold a Glorious CHRIST,
Able and Willing to Recover you. You must expect from what has been offered for
it by your SAVIOR, a Reconciliation to GOD. But then, you must expect from the
SPIRIT of your SAVIOR, to find the Second Adam, Quickening of you, as you have
had the First Adam Corrupting of you. Your way of doing any thing to purpose,
in Living unto GOD, must be This. Own it; Lord, I am Dead; I am Nothing; I
Avail Nothing, I Deserve Nothing! But see a CHRIST proposing to Enter you, and
Possess you, and by His Good SPIRIT become a Principle of Life in you for
Living unto GOD. With a glad Heart Accept the Proposal. Think, Though I can do
nothing, a CHRIST can do every Thing. Though I can bear Nothing, a CHRIST can
bear every Thing. I ^^all now Live unto GOD, if it be no longer I, that Live,
but CHRIST that Lives in me. Lord, Let me ^ad it so! This is the way of it. How
little understood in the World!


P. P. Be sure, we have understood nothing of it!


M. And then, This One thing more must not ^e forgotten. Your Hatred for Sin,
and your Value for CHRIST, must appear in This; That every thing that promotes
it, must Therefore and so far be Welcome to you. Those Chains which you ^ave
now upon you, if they Contribute unto This Work, must be better than as massy
Chains (...) Gold unto you.

Upon the whole; Tell me now, what Frame of Mind it is that I leave you in?


P. P. We heartily give Thanks to GOD, in that (...) has not permitted us to go
on in our Sins; and that also He has not Suddenly cut us off in ^ur Sins; and
that He has not Ordered our Im^risonment to be in a Place, where we should not
^ave had such Instructions bestowed upon us, and ^^ch Pains taken for the Good
of our Souls. We ^hank you, Sir; and we desire you to continue ^our Prayers for
us. We know, you will do us ^ll the Good you can, though we have little enough
^o say why you should do so.


M. I wish, I wish, that you had been former^^ ^ore Instructed in the
Principles of Religion; ^ our Ignorance has been a wretched Circumstance and
Encumbran^^ in our Dealings with you. ^he Chains of ^gnorance, which keep the
Truths of the Gospel from at you, are worse than those (...) Iron which now
hinder your Motions. And ^et, your Crimes have not been Sins of Ignorance. We
have done what we can, with drop afte^ drop Distilled upon you, to instruct you
(...) your coming hither. May the Glorious GOD say, Let there be Light, and
there will be a (...) Creation begun upon you. But, Oh! may He go on, to send
forth His Good SPIRIT, and you will be Created over again; Yea, He will Renew
the Face and the Choice of your Souls before Hi^. In short, Come as the Syrians
did with Ropes on their Heads, to him of whom they heard, he was a Merciful
King; So come to the Merciful King of Heaven; and see what His Mercy will do
for you!

I have now only this further to say unto you. There are so many False
Appearances in the Devotions of People under the Terrors of Death, and they are
often, often, such Deceitful Bows in their Seeming Bents upon Repentance, that
I cannot with too Sollicitous an Importunity Entrea^ you, to Beware of
Hypocrisy. Oh! Be you Sollicitous, above all things for this; That you may have
an Heart Sound in the Statutes of GOD, and an Hope that that will not make
ashamed.

We will now look up to GOD our SAVIOR!


On Iun. 2. P. M. these Poor Men were Executed; and they Dyed with such
Expressions of Repentance, as were greatly to the Satisfaction of the
Spectators; -- who after all, must leave Secret Things, (and the Hearts of Men,
which are Such) unto GOD.
THEY accepted the Punishment of their Crimes, without the least Murmur at it.

THEY bewayl'd the Errors of their Lives, with Floods of Tears.

THEY especially set a Brand upon the Sin of Drunkenness, as what led unto all
Sin, and would quickly Drown People in all Perdition.

THEY charged all who might be so Unhappy as to be taken by the Pirates, rather
to suffer any Death immediately, than hearken to them, and Comply with them.

IT is reported, That one of them, under^tanding that his Dead Body was to be
kept and Hung in Iron in a Gibbet, Said upon it; Now a Righteous GOD is going
to fulfill that Word; THE EYE WHICH DESPISES TO OBEY A MOTHER, THE RAVENS OF THE
VALLEY SHALL PICK IT OUT, AND THE YOUNG EAGLES SHALL EAT IT.

BUT after all, they expressed Comfortable Hopes to find Mercy with a GOD Ready
to Pardon; and find the Blood of their SAVIOR to Cleanse them from all Sin.

FOR which their Prayers, were evidently the Prayers of the Soul, and full of
Agony.

MANY Entertained Apprehensions, That the Pains that had been taken, with these
Prisoners, [A Charity and Compassion in which New England, by the Report of
Strangers, comes not behind any Country!] were not Lost upon them; and that
these Poor Men may after all, be found among the Elect of GOD, in this Wondrous
way ^^^ught home unto Him.

FINIS.

