STIMVLATOR. OR, The Case of a SOUL Walking in DARKNESS Awfully and Suitably
Considered. AN ESSAY, To Awaken People out of the LETHARGY which disposes them
to continue IN A Dark Uncertainty About their FVTVRE STATE, in the World, which
is not seen, but is Eternal.

Eccl xii. 2 The Words of the Wise are as GOADS.

Gen xix. 16. And while he lingered, the Men laid hold upon his hand, -- The
LORD being Merciful unto him. -- --

NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. Green, 1724

STIMVLATOR. OR, The Case of a SOUL in the Dark.
JOHN XII. 35. He that walks in Darkness, knows not whither he goes.


A MOST Unhappy Condition it is, that is now Described unto us! May the
Describing of it, help our Avoiding of it.

It is threatened, as a very Unhappy Condition, Deuteronomy. XXVIII. 66. Thy Life shall
hang in doubt before thee, and thou shall fear day and night, and thou shall
have no Assurance of thy Life. And yet in this very Unhappy Condition, what
Multitudes are Languishing! Alas, It Is but here and there as it were One of a
City, Two of a Tribe, that is not Languishing in it. Yea, The Li^e which hangs
in doubt before the Children of men, and whereof they have no Assurance, is not
merely that Life in this World, which a man would give all that he has, to have
it Assured. But the thing which they are in the Dark about, is, Whether that
Favor of GOD in another World, which is Better than Life, shall not be denied
unto them; And whether they shall not after Death pass into those Torments in
another World, whereof the most Intolerable Things here are but a Metaphor.
They are Walking on, but in such a woeful Darkness that they know not whither
they are going. They do indeed know, That the Grave is a place, whither they
are going. But it is only their Bodies that are going thither. Their Souls
which are the Immortal part of them; Do they know whither these are going?
Every one may say, I know, that GOD will bring me to Death. But where are they;
how few, how few are they, that Know, what the Glorious GOD will do with them
after Death? Yea, They Know, that when their Dust returns to the Earth as it
was, their Spirits will Return to GOD who is the Father of Spirits. But know
they how the Glorious GOD will then dispose of their Spirits, and what
Receptacles whether Good or Bad, He will order for them? On all accounts Hidden
Receptacles! I make an awful Appeal unto my dear Neighbors in this Great
Assembly, for whom, O Lord, Thou see my Agony; My Friends I Appeal to you; If
the Angel of Death were this day to Execute his Instructions upon you, do you
know what your Future State would be, whether a Blessed State or a Wretched
State? If it should be your Portion like Ananias and Sapphira, to fall down
Dead in the Assembly, do you know, that you shall not have a portion with
Ananias and Sapphira after Death, assigned unto you? The Days of the Dead are
called, The Days of Darkness. But alas, while we yet Enjoy the Light of the
Living, we are generally still in Darkness, and much in the Dark about that
GRAND PO^NT what our Many Days will be, whether Good or Bad after we are Dead.
Let it not be thought Uncharitable or too censorious, when I say unto you; I
Doubt, I Doubt, there are not many among you, that can cheerfully Entertain the
Messengers of Death, and can with more Pleasure than Horror, hear the Roaring
of the Lion, and say, My Friend, Thou art Welcome to me. I know, that my
Redeemer Lives, and thou art come to fetch me into the Paradise, where I shall
see His Face with Joy Unspeakable and Full of Glory! At Least, I Fear, I Fear,
there are many of you, who, if the Arrest of Death were laid upon them, the
Terror of Death alone would be Enough to kill them; and they would chatter like
a Crane or a Swallow, and mourn like a Dove going to be pulled out of their
nest; and cry out, Oh! I am in the Dark, I am in the Dark; and for ought I
Know, I am going down to Eternal Darkness. When I behold, the amazing
Uncertainty about the GRAND POINT wherein our dear People allow themselves to
continue Unresolved, and how Commonly and Easily People continue all their
Days, Uncertain, and altogether in the Dark, what shall become of them in an
awful ETERNITY before them; I am Afflicted, I am Distressed, I am Astonished.
It is a CASE that calls for the most Awakening Expostulations.

And as a Foundation for them, I take the Solemn Words of our SAVIOR, which
are now before us. Words, wherein our SAVIOR Laments the Unhappy condition of
them, who walk in Darkness, and know not whither they are going. Words, which
give this DOCTRINE unto us, Very Unhappy, Very Unhappy, is the condition of
them, who walk so much in the Dark, that they know not whither they we going;
but are very much in the Dark, what shall become of them at the Last.

There is a Double, But, Oh! what a Dreadful Darkness, in which the poor
Children of Men, are frequently found Walking and Know not where it Leads them,
or how it will Terminate.

I. There is the Darkness of a False Religion, which makes a very Unhappy
Condition for Multitudes in the World; Multitudes who walk in Darkness, and
Know not whither they are going. Man is, Animal Religiosum, a creature
naturally disposed unto Religion; He must lay aside his Nature, if he be not of
some Religion. But man has by his Fall from GOD, so Enfeebled, yea, so
Corrupted and Poisoned his mind that his Understanding being darkened, a False
Religion is now most agreeable unto him. Having also resigned himself up unto
the Dominion of those Evil Spirits, which are by the wrath of GOD now become
the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, these conspire as much as may be by
their Devices to hold him in the chains of a False Religion. It Is now come to
pass; Darkness covers the Earth, and Gross Darkness the People. The most of
Mankind are by the Unsearchable Judgments of GOD, now so abandoned, that they
are in the Unhappy Condition of the Jews, who sought unto Egypt for the
Succors which were to be found from GOD alone; Jer. XIII. 16. Your Feet
Stumble on the Dark Mountains, and when ye look for light, it is turned into
the Shadow of Death, and made a Gross Darkness The only True Religion, in which
alone Man can Return unto GOD, it is but a little part of Mankind, that is
Enlightened with it. Our Gospel is hid from the most of Men; and so they are
still Walking in Darkness. They are always in the Dark* what to do that GOD may
be Pleased with them; in the Dark, about the Methods of paying unto GOD an
Acceptable Service. They do not know the Way of peace, nor know the Way to the
City of GOD. In the Greatness of their Folly they Wander from the Way of
Understanding. They are as much in the Dark, whether what they do be at all
pleasing to GOD: in the Dark, what will be the Issue of all their Service. They
have on Reasonable Expectations of a Joyful Harvest, for their Devotions. All
is cloudy with them; all Dubious They have no clear Knowledge of those things
which to know is Life Eternal; And by the Look of it, they are Destroyed; How
Lamentably, How Deplorably! As they Live, so they Die, All in the Dark. In this
Unhappy Condition, alas, the most of Men are perishing.

But then, O ye Inhabitants of a Goshen, How Thankfully ought you to adore the
Sovereign Grace of GOD, in granting you the Light of His Gospel, when so much
of the World, is yet Lying in Egyptian Darkness! My Friends; Let our Thankful
Souls, wisely Improve the Light with which we are favored: and so Walk in the
Light, that no False Religion may ever Darken us, We Enjoy the Oracles of GOD,
in His Written Word; Oracles of so Sublime and so Sacred a character, that they
carry an Incontestible Evidence with them, of their being, of a Divine
Original. In these Oracles we have a Light for our Feet, a Lamp for our Paths.
We are safe, and we shall do well, if we Take heed unto this word, as unto a
Light Shining in a Dark place. It will infallibly give Light unto them that sit
in Darkness, and guide their Feet in the Way of peace. But then in these
Oracles we have a CHRIST Revealed unto us: A CHRIST who is the Light of the
World; A CHRIST who is the Sun of Righteousness. Oh! Let us be under His
Conduct; and by His Light we shall Walk through Darkness. Now we Walk in the
Light, and we Know whither we are going, we take Right steps, and we Know that
we have Eternal Life. My Friends, that you may not walk in Darkness and see no
Light, the Counsel to you, is This; Fear the Lord, as His word has taught you,
Obey the Voice of your SAVIOR, who has appeared as the Servant of GOD. Then
may you Trust in the Lord, and Stay upon your GOD that you shall not be
deceived.

Christian, Steer thy course by the Holy Scriptures, which are Able to make
thee wise unto Salvation, and let thine Eyes be continually unto thy SAVIOR;
Then may thou certainly Know whither thou art going. Now, Know for certain,
Thou art Going in the Way of Life. Know for certain, Thou art Going to the
Inheritance of the Saints in Light. Go on* and go Singing the Songs of thy Holy
Pilgrimage; Go on, and let me bear thee Company.

II. But this is not the Darkness, which my Neighbors are in much Danger of.
You have all the Demonstrations which a Reasonable Mind can ask for, That you
are not under the Dark Delusions of a False Religion. You are delivered from
that Unhappy condition, by a JESUS in His BIBLE Evidently set forth before your
Eyes. It Is another Darkness which makes an Unhappy condition for us, who have
the True Religion illuminating of us. It Is the Darkness, of our own Uncertainty
about our own Condition, in that Future State unto which all of us are
hastening; The Darkness wherein we walk, Not knowing whither we are going: Our
Not knowing whether our Future State will be in the Glorious Rest which our
SAVIOR will give to those that come unto Him, or whether our Future State will
be in the Fiery Furnace which the Things that offend, and they which do
Iniquity, shall be cast into. Our present State is a State of Probation. And
according to our Behavior, in the Time of our Trial here, we shall when this
Time is come, and it quickly comes unto an End, we shall be Judged unto a
Future State which will be either a State of inexpressible Bliss or a State of
unutterable We, that will never have an End. Now This is the Unhappy condition
of the most among us: We so poorly Behave our selves, in the Time of our Trial,
that we know not what State we are going into; Whether it will be a Blissful
State, or whether it will be a Woeful State, wherein we are even to all
Eternity, to have our Lodging assigned unto us. We are not in the Dark about
the Event of Godliness or of Wickedness, in the Future State. We Know very
well, That the Godly are going to a State, wherein they shall find Fullness of
Joy and Pleasures forevermore. We Know very well, That the Wicked are going to
a State, wherein they shall find a Strange Punishment reserved for the workers
of Iniquity. But the Darkness wherein we are Walking, is, that we know not our
own share in the matter; For the most part, we know not, whether it be the
portion of the Godly, or whether it be the portion of the Wicked, that we are
going unto. It Is no wonder, that a pagan Emperor, when he felt himself a dying,
should cry out, [ Animula -- quae nunc abibis in Loca!] O my poor Soul,
Whither, whither, art thou now a going. But that we, who are in the Christian
Profession, should any of us, Walk in such Darkness, that if we were to Die this
Day, we must cry out, Oh! My poor Soul, I don't know whither it is going! O
Unhappy Condition! A famous Apostle of Irreligion and Impiety in our Nation,
when he felt himself a Dying, it is reported that he used those words, I am going
to take a great Leap in the Dark. But now, for them that have done Many things
required in Christianity still to Walk in such darkness, that if their Death
were now to come upon them, it must be, A Great Leap in the Dark! O Unhappy
Condition!

There are Two Things that shall now be Enquired, and briefly Answered, about
it.

We will Enquire, First; Whence it comes to pass, that so many are in the
Unhappy Condition; to be in the Dark, how it shall fare with them in the Future
State! Now,

First The Earth with its Bars, is about them forever. The Enchantments and
Amusements of This World keep the most of us from that Religion in Earnest,
which alone will settle Good Terms with Heaven for us. It Is nothing but Religion
in Earnest, and a Seeking the Favor of GOD with our whole Heart, that will
assure us of our being in His Favor. Would we be assured of our Entering in at
the Straight Gate? Our SAVIOR has insisted on this Direction; Luck* XIII. 24
Strive, and be in Agony for it. Now, This World so Bewitches us, and the
Business of This World so Engages us; that we afford no room for this Agony.
Our Agony is upon, What shall I Eat or Drink, and wherewithal shall I be
Clothed? This Extintinguishes the due Agony upon, What shall I do to be Saved?
The Ancient complaint may be renewed in every Generation, There is none who
Stirs up himself to take hold on GOD. What hinders? It Is This World; The
Affairs, and the Hurries, of This World, Engross our Spirits, and weaken our
concern about Another World We are so Swallowed up in the cares to make sure of
This World, that we foolishly forget, shamefully neglect, the Needful
Endeavors to make sure of a part in a Better World* We are always Grinding for
This World; and let Satan alone to keep always filling the Hopper for us. Hence
it is, that we have truly No Heart, and then falsely pretend that we have No
Time, to Stir up our selves, that we may lay Hold on Eternal Life.

Secondly. People generally go to Settle Good Terms with Heaven, on the Terms
of the old Covenant. The Invitation of the Gospel, is, O chief of Sinners, come
Immediately unto thy SAVIOVR. Let thy Heart with His Help consent unto it, That
thy SAVIOVR should make thee Righteous and Holy. Upon this consent then take up
a comfortable persuasion, that thy SAVIOVR will surely do thee Good. People
through the Pride of a carnal Mind have an Aversion for this Way of GOD. They
will go on, it may be all their Days, doing some Duties, which they know
themselves bound unto. Yea, They will take Pains in the Duties. But what are
their Aims in all the Pains? They Aim at making themselves a Righteousness; or
at least, they Aim at those Seize, which may Qualify them for, and
Recommend them to, a kind Reception with their SAVIOR. They durst not come to
their SAVIOR, or be well persuaded of His Receiving them, until they have gone
through a course of Duties, and led such Regular Lives as may bespeak a kind
Reception with their SAVIOR for them. This Preposterous Proceeding has too
much of the Old Covenant in it: And yet even some that have the Fear of GOD
really in their Hearts, may have the Spirit of the Old Covenant working too
much in them Now of this Old Covenant we shall still find, what we read; Gal.
IV. 24. It genders unto Bondage. It begets nothing but a Fear of Death, and of
Wrath, which will hold us in Bendage all our Days. It Is nothing but the Covenant
of Grace, wisely Understood, and Embraced, and Applied, that will speak Peace
unto us. People don't come off Entirely from the Covenant of Works into the
Covenant of Grace. And they can do no other than Walk in Darkness, while they
have the Covenant of Works in any operation upon them.

Thirdly. Many are Patient and Easy, while they do not Settle Good Terms with
Heaven, under a Slothful pretense of waiting till GOD shall please to give some
Assurance of His Love unto them. It Is true, we shall not know our selves to be
the Children of GOD, until that Privilege be granted us; Romans VIII. 16. The
Spirit bears witness with our Spirit, that we are the Children of GOD. But
then, How is this Witness to be waited for? Surely, not with the meet Desire of
the Sluggard, refusing to Labor for it: Not with a Soul that can be Quiet
without it; Not counting it enough with a faint, mean, melancholy Tone to say,
Ay, It is a good Thing, if one could Attain to it. It is well for them that can
Attain to it. I must wait until it please GOD that I shall Attain to it! And is
this all that you have to say, ye Sluggard? It must be waited for! But, How
waited for? Syrs, It must be Groaned for; It must be Wrestled for, it must be
Earnestly Labored for. The GOD who waits to be Gracious, will be waited for.
But in our waiting on Him, to Satisfy us with some Glimpse of His Law unto us,
our Importunity must be Vehement, be Violent, be Unpacifiable. The cry must be,
O Satisfy us Early with thy Mercy! Yea, the cry must be, Hear me Speedily, O
Lord, my Spirit fails: Hide not thy Face from me. About a matter of some
weight, it was of old said, The Man will not be at Rest until he has finished
the Thing. A matter infinitely more weighty, is that of getting into this Peace
of GOD: And it should be said of him that is waiting on GOD for it; The man
will not be at Rest until the Thing is finished. Few, Few, are such Importunate
waiters. Many* content themselves with a Liftless, Lazy, Drowsy waiting. And
they Speed accordingly.

Fourthly. Even they that are truly Turned from Darkness to Light and from the
power of Satan unto GOD, may be liable to this Unhappy Condition: But
Frequently, yea, Commonly their Darkness is a Chastisement from GOD upon them.
GOD is herein for their Miscarriages Chastising of them Indeed, there may be
sometimes a Display of Sovereignty in it. The Glorious GOD may hide his Face
from them who are the Dearly Beloved of His Soul: and then how Great the
Darkness! The Best man Living in the World, may be left unto such Darkness, as
to conclude, GOD counts me for His Enemy! But yet for the most part, the
Children of GOD may Thank Themselves for it, when they are in the Dark about
it, whether GOD will own them for His Children. For the Iniquity of their
Covetousness, I hide My self, and am wroth with them, says the GOD, who will
not let them know that He has Loved them. We are advised Ephesians. IV. 30. Grieve
not the Holy Spirit, whereby ye are Sealed unto the Day of Redemption. We are
Sealed by the Holy Spirit of GOD, when we are filled by Him, with an Hopeful,
Joyful, Sanctifying Assurance, That our GOD has Loved us with an Everlasting
Love, and that He will give us to see a Day of Redemption from all that is a
Trouble unto us. But we Blot our Evidences for Heaven, by our Manifold
Irregularities. By not Maintaining a Watchful, Fruitful, Humble Walk with GOD,
We Grieve the Holy Spirit of GOD By our Indulging our selves in carnal
Passions, and by too Eagerly Minding of Earthly Things, We Grieve the Holy
Spirit of GOD. By our Inordinate fondness for Creatures and Lightly Esteeming
the Rock of our Salvation, We Grieve the Holy Spirit of GOD. The Grieved
Spirit, who should be our Comforter now departs from us. And, Woe to them, when
I depart from them, says the Lord. His withdraw makes a Dark Time with us.
Desertions which Leave an Horror of Darkness upon us, these are some of the
Punishments which the Grieved Spirit inflicts on His own, when He will Visit
their Iniquity with Stripes, though He do not utterly take away His Loving
kindness from them. The Holy One offended at His faulty Children, Says upon it,
I will punish them, with such Darkness upon them, that they shall not be able
to Read their Names written in the Book of Life; not be able to See, that I
have any purposes of Mercy for them. So does the Unhappy Condition come upon us.

We will Enquire, Secondly; What is the Unhappiness of this Condition; For
People to be in the Dark, whether their Future State, must be in a Glad, or in
a Sad Eternity.

Now,

First; A Darkness on our Minds, whether we are in Good Terms with Heaven, or
no, it must needs bring a Weakness on our Essays to Love GOD, and Live unto
Him. It was a lust Remark; Neh VIII 10. The Joy of the Lord is your Strength.
The Joy of a Soul Reconciled unto GOD, and knowing, yea, feeling it self Bound
up in the Bundle of Life, Oh! how it would Strengthen us to Walk with our GOD,
Yea, How would it Enlarge our Hearts to Run in the Ways commanded of GOD! This
Joy would be the Life of our hand, in doing the Works of GOD which our Hand
finds to do, and would cause us to Sing in the Ways of the Lord. When we Hear
our GOD saying to us, Be comforted, Thy Sins are Forgiven thee! Nothing will
have such a Tendency to render all Sins Bitter and Hateful unto us. GOD
Speaking Peace to us, this more than any thing will keep us from Returning to
Folly any more. When it is testified unto us, That GOD has made us Heirs of the
Kingdom which He has promised for them that Love Him, there will soon be
Testimonies, How Holily, and Righteously, and Unblameably, we shall behave our
selves. Did we know that we are Bound for Heaven, and that we have all the
Spiritual Blessings of the Heavenly places reserved for us, what Heavenly
Tempers would be thereby produced in us! How should we have our Conversation in
Heaven while we are on the Earth: and Soar, and Fly, and Mount up as with the
wings of Eagles thither! All the Delights of Earth, and all the Troubles of
Earth, how Mortified, how Indifferent, should we be unto them all? But now,
while you Walk in Darkness, O ye Feeble Folk, How is it possible for you to
Walk with GOD, and be Stately in your Goings? While you cannot Rejoice, how
Weak, how Dull, how Low, will be all your Actions in Working of Righteousness?
How poorly will the Love of GOD be flaming in you, while, for ought you know,
you have the Wrath of GOD Lying on you! Will you Love GOD, while you have a
Suspicion, That He is your Adversary, and that your King has of old Ordained a
Tophet for you! How Sorrily will you Live to GOD, while you are Jealous, that
you have never yet passed from Death to Life; Jealous, that after all the
Sparks you have kindled you must Ly down in Sorrow: It will be found, That a
Great occasion of it, why there is to be seen so little of Godliness in the
power of it among us, and we are mostly such Feeble, Meagre, Minor Christians,
it is this; People are too willing to Walk in Darkness, and can go on from year
to year without Knowing whither they are going. Though there is also a
Reciprocation of it; Because there is no more Godliness in the Power of it,
Therefore it is that we have so much Darkness upon us. Ah! Frozen Souls, in what
an Unhappy Condition are you?

But then, Secondly; My Brethren, while you have a Darkness, on your Minds,
whether you are in Good Terms with Heaven, or no. How can you Die? Nay How can
you Live? which way can you keep off Anguish from your Minds, which if a Spirit
of Slumber had not Poisoned you, would be indeed, Intolerable? One that seems
at a Loss, whether GOD would be Favorable to him, or not cast him off forever,
cried out, Psalm. LXXVII. 24. My Soul refuses to be comforted; Thou hold mine
Eyes waking: I am so Troubled that I cannot Speak. Indeed, If you could say, I
know that my Redeemer Lives, and I know that He is indeed mine, and has Loved
me, and has died for me; How comfortably might you Pass the Time of your
Sojourning here in the Fear of GOD, but without the least Fear of any Evil!
Yea, Look where you will, all objects would conspire to Speak unto you, as the
Lord unto the Angel in the Vision, with good words, and with comfortable words.
The Great GOD says to you, I am thy GOD; Thy Father, and thy Savior, and thy
Leader; and I will bring thee to Inherit all things. The Angels in the
Multitude of the Heavenly Host, say to you, We are thy Guardian All Creatures
offer themselves unto you saying, We are thy Servants. The most Afflictive
Things that befall you, say unto you, GOD has Meant us and Sent us for thy
Good. But how can you bear to Walk in such a Darkness, as This; That for ought
you Know, you are among the Abhorred of the Lord; among the Enslaved of the
Devil; and some of those who are going down to that Burning Lake, from whence
the Smoke of their Torment ascends for Ever and Ever? Methinks, you should have
a Soul refusing to be comforted with any thing here. Methinks, your Eyes may be
held Waking, with the Flames that are before them. This you do Know, That it is
Appointed for men once to Die. Death has a commission to Seize upon you; and
Every day that passes, you don't Know, but that This Day he may bring the
Bowstring, and the Sentence may be Executed. But at the same time, there is
another Thing which you do not know: Whether your Death will not be a
Trap-door, that must let you down to Hell, and so you sink down into the
Horrible Pit: This is what you do not Know. If you should This Day have the
Summons of Death served upon you, would not the Groans as of a deadly Wounded
Man be heard from you? Oh! I know not what will become of me! I know not what
world I am going to! I know not whether I am going up to the Rest which remains
for the People of GOD, or going down into the Devouring Fire, and the
Everlasting Burnings! And how can you bear to Live in Circumstances, that are
so full to Dangers and perils infinitely to be trembled at? O Unhappy
Condition! That Man thought himself in an Unhappy Condition who sat at a full
Table, but had a Sword with the point thereof directed unto him, hanging by a
slender Thread over his Head, the breaking whereof, and his Dying by it every
moment was to be looked for. Soul in Darkness, Every Time of thy sitting down
at the Table, thou may have this Terror upon thee, For ought I know, while my
meat is in my mouth, the Wrath of GOD may come upon me, and hurry me away to
Endless gnashing of Teeth. Wherever thou art, and whatever thou do, a
Destruction from GOD impending over thee, may be a Terror unto thee. Every
Morning thy Terror may be, For ought I know, Hell may open its mouth for me
before the Evening. Every Evening thy Terror may be, For ought I know, I must
have my Bed in Hell before the Morning. Every time one in this Darkness mounts
an Horse, he may be terrified with such a Reflection as This; For ought I know,
This Beast may throw me down into the place of Dragons! O Unhappy Condition!
One would not wonder, at it, if a person in such Darkness, were a, Magor
Missabib a Terror unto himself, and unto all about him It Is a wonder that such
an one can Enjoy himself, in any thing, and that his continual Terror, of what
his Death may bring him to, do not Spoil and Pall every Comfort of his Life:
that he can have any Comfort of his Life! They who Die in their Sins, must go
into a very Unhappy Condition. To be Banished from the Blessedness of the Holy
City, and feel an Almighty GOD, as a Consuming Fire, torturing the Soul with
Immediate and Everlasting Impressions from His Vengeance upon it; This cannot
but be a very Unhappy Condition. And surely then, they who do not know any
other; but that they are yet in their Sins, and shall Die in them; These are
therefore and so far in a very Unhappy Condition too To be in such a Darkness,
that O man, Thou know not whether thou art not one of those, for whom is
Reserved Blackness of Darkness forever! If this be not an Unhappy Condition,
what can be so? When Darkness came upon Egypt, We read, GOD cast the Fierceness
of His Anger in Trouble upon them, and sent Evil Angels among them. Art thou
not in a worse than Egyptian Darkness? But, Oh! the Trouble; when for ought
thou know, thou art in the Hands of the Evil Angels; a Prey to those
Terrible ones!

Thirdly. Certainly, A Distracted Condition, is a very Unhappy Condition. We
all pity them, who have the powers of Reason broken or ^ozed in them. We pray,
GOD pity them! Now the People, who are not Sollicitous to Settle Good Terms
with Heaven, but can go on contentedly without knowing whither they are going;
These People act as if there were a Distraction upon them; they act as if the
powers of Reason were no Longer Exercised with them. It Is a Madness that keeps
them in their Darkness It is a Sorrowful Account that is given concerning the
Children of Men: Eccl. IX. 3. Madness is in their Heart while they Live, and
after that they go to the Dead. But the Madness appears not in any thing more
than in this, That they Walk in Darkness, and know not how they shall fare when
they are gone to the Dead; and how they shall after Death be disposed of. My
Neighbors, let me Reason with you before the Lord. While you can bear to be in
the Dark, about the GRAND POINT, whether you have Everlasting Life, or, have
the Wrath of GOD abiding on you: I must convince you, That you are Mad: you
have laid aside the common use of Reason; There is a most pitiable Madness upon
you. And if you will not be convinced of it, it only shows, that it is a more
confirmed, a more Desperate Madness that Enrages you. Hear Two Demonstrations
of it.

First; You don't Act so Madly about the concerns of This World, no not about
the Least concerns in the World; as to leave them with an Uncertainty upon
them. It was complained of; Luke XVI. 8. The children of This World, are wiser
in their Generation, than the Children of Light. My Complaint is, That in the
Affairs of This World, you deal not so Foolishly, as you do in those* wherein
you should Approve your selves the Children of Light; and not always Walk in
Darkness. For the Enjoyments of This World, you are loathe to be left at an
Uncertainty. But it seems, you can leave all the Enjoyments of the Heavenly
World at the Greatest Uncertainty! When there is any Thing of This World, which
you propose the least Advantage by the Knowledge of, you put it out of Doubt,
as far and as fast as ever you can. And, what? Not put it out of Doubt, that
you are Born of GOD, and are Turned to Him? When you look for any Thing in This
World, you are willing to understand what you have to Trust to. And what? For
what you are to look for at the Hands of GOD for ever, be careless about
Learning what you have trust to! A little Interest in This World; you secure a
Title to it. And what? Secure no Title to the Pleasant Land that is Promised
unto the Righteous, the only Land of the Living? Let your Title to This, always
ly at an Uncertainty! O Foolish people, and Unwise! Is GOD, and CHRIST, and a
Soul, thus to be dealt withal?

Secondly. May we not say? It Is your own Fault, and, Oh! It Is utterly a Fault, if
the Eternity that is before you, be left still at an Uncertainty. It was urged;
2 Cor. XIII. 5. Know ye not your own selves; Except ye be Disapproved [or,
Blame-worthy] ones? Verily, If you do not know your own selves, Know what you
Are, and what you Do, and whither you Go, it is a Blameable Thing in you; and the
Blame of it Lies upon Your selves. The Unregenerate and Impaenitent, These may
know, that they are such, and know what will be the Doom of them that go on
still in their Trespasses. The Spots, open them are so Black and so Plain, that
they must Marvellously Deceive themselves, if they do not Perceive, this, That
they are not the Children of GOD. But then, O You that Follow after
Righteousness; The GOD of all Grace, is Ready to Discover unto You Himself, and
His will, and what You are, and how He purposes to deal with You. The Father of
Lights will bring You out of Your Darkness, if You will with a due Ardour seek
unto Him. Look Inward, and Look Upward, as you ought to do, and GOD your
SAVIOR will show you whereabouts you are. You say, GOD has not yet brought you
out of your Uncertainty, whither you are Listed among the Heirs of Salvation or
no, But, O Wanderers in the Dark: Have you ever been in such a Distress about
it, as to set apart a Day, or but an half of a Day, on purpose, to go through a
process of conversion to GOD; And have you ever from the Depths cried unto the
Lord, Lord, I cannot bear, I cannot bear, to ly in the Dark. I cannot rise off
my Knees, till thou shine upon me! I will say, but this one thing unto you.
What would you do in order to your Eternal Welfare, if you were informed, that
your Life is come unto a Period, and that you have but one week longer to Live?
Such Things you can do, if you will. It Is Nonsense to say, you cannot! Well; But
let such things be done, and your Uncertainty about Your Eternal Welfare would
soon be over with you. You would give no Sleep to your Eyes, nor Slumber to
your Eye lids, till it be over with you. How can you then Excuse the Folly of
Leaving undone such things as these! Oh! In a most Unhappy Condition are you!

It is time for us to bring in the Corollaries, wherein these Admonitions are
to terminate And wake some Use of our Melancholy Propositions. It shall be
done, with several Assertions which now must be received as MAXIMS, and whereof
I am to affirm unto you, These are Things that cannot be spoken against.

The First Assertion.
It is as clear as the Light, and there are Epidemical Manifestations of it,
That People very commonly are in that Unhappy Condition, to Walk in Darkness,
and know not whither they are going: and Good Terms with Heaven are not yet
Settled and certain with them. We read of some, Their Folly shall be Manifest
unto all Men. The Greatest Folly in the World is for Men to be always in the
Dark about the World unto which they are going. But this Folly in the most of
Men, is Manifest unto all Men that shall take any cognizance of them. And though
they are told of it, yet they will Proceed further in it. It was a Problem of
old, As for Darkness, where is the place thereof? Alas, How many of us may lay
our Hand on our Heart, and say, Here is the place of Darkness. It Is an Heart
always in the Dark, about the place to which I am going. And so my walk is full
of Darkness; I know not whither I am going. It was the Grief of Job, Chap. XIX.
8. He has set Darkness in my Paths. Truly, There is a Multitude of People,
who may speak that Grievous thing. There is Darkness in their Paths; and they
know not whither their Paths will carry them. And yet I must bring this also
into my Remonstrance; The Darkness is not so Grievous to them, as it ought to
be. It was threatened as a very Direful Curse upon the Enemies of GOD, and His
CHRIST; Psalm. XXXV. 6. Let their Way be Dark and Slippery. How many are under
this Curse, and yet how little are they affected with it? Their Way is all in
the Dark; they know not whither they are going. And yet is it such a Slippery
Way, that they are Every moment in danger of Slipping and falling down into the
Land, where they never see Light, but where the Light it self is Darkness.

It Is a Thing as Vnquaestionable as Unaccountable; That People have heard many
Hundreds of Sermons, wherein the Things that accompany Salvation have been set
before them, and they have been Exhorted over and over again to get into the
Experience of those Necessary Things. But after all, they still Walk in
Darkness, not knowing whither they are going. People have been at Hundreds of
Burials; Yea, and followed such as have been younger than Themselves with the
Mourners walking about the Streets at Funerals: and seen how needful it has
been for them to put off no longer the doing of what they have to do that they
may not be found Unprepared. But after all, they still Walk in Darkness, not
knowing whither they are going. We read of a Vial poured out upon the Seat of
Antichrist, whereupon, His Kingdom is full of Darkness. But is not many a Soul
among us, as if it had such a Vial poured out upon it; A Soul that is full of
Darkness?

For the Proof of this Hard Saying, I entreat of you to save me the pains. Do
you your selves Every one of you take the pains, to bring your selves unto the
Test. It is the Command of GOD unto you; 2 Cor. XIII. 5. Examine your selves,
whether you be in the Faith; Prove your own selves. O Soul, upon the Brink of
Eternity, Prove thy own self. Do thou know, what will become of thee to all
Eternity? Put it hard and home upon thy self; If This Night my Soul should be
required of me, do I know what Hands it would fall into! For my own part, I
cannot say, who among you has his Heart Established with the Grace of GOD, and
who has not. But there is a Preacher, who can do much toward it. I will
consign the work over to that flaming Preacher. You cannot run away from him.
It Is the Conscience, which is in Every Man the Candle of the Lord. O CONSCIENCE,
Do Thou go to work upon them that are under thy Inspection: and force them to
tell, whether they have ever done what must be done by Every one, before they
can know, that they shall be Saved. Verily, If the censures of Conscience might
be heard among us, there would be, Oh! how many whose Hearts would be heard
Condemning of them, Thou Fool, Thou art in Hourly danger of Death, and thou
know not how thou shall fare Eternally after Death.

But, if you will compel Me to Prove, what so many cannot but own; and if my
Justifying of my Assertion be yet insisted on, I will freely tell you, The Next
Lords Day will give you an Occular Demonstration of it. I pray, What can be the
cause of it, why there are so few Communicants appearing at the Table of the
Lord! Our Lamentations are almost those; Lam. I 4. The ways of Zion Mourn,
because none (comparatively to what ought to be) come to the Solemn Feasts.
When the Supper of the Lord is going to he administered, what Shoals, do we see
as it were escaping from it? And what a Thin Appearance is Left at the Holy
Table? Be Sure, Not Half of the Congregation! But what is the Cause of This?
The True Cause why People do not come unto the Table of the Lord, is because
they Dare not come. They are Suspicious, That they have not yet put on the
Wedding Garment, and that they shall not be found among the Worthy partakers
Though they have been so many Years under the Invitations of the Gospel, they do
not know that they have ever yet Heartily and Really answered them. When we see
so many Hundreds withdrawing from the Table of the Lord, may it not be justly
and sadly Bemoaned; Behold, There are so many People, who are still destitute
of Assurance, that their Sins are Pardoned: So many People that never yet had
the Electing, Redeeming, Pardoning Love of GOD Sealed unto them: Did they know
themselves to be United unto their SAVIOR, they could never forbear the
communion to be had with Him at His Holy Table. If they had Secretly, but
Heartily and Really given themselves up to GOD in His Covenant, What hinders
them from coming to do it Openly? My Friends, I must needs tell you, Did you
know, that GOD had forgiven your Sins, and cleansed you from all
Unrighteousness, it would be impossible for you to keep at a Distance from His
Holy Table, and Slight the Interviews you might have with Him there, and go on
in what you cannot but know to be a Sinful Omission of a thing plainly
commanded by your SAVIOR. You could no more do it, than you could throw your
selves into the Fire, or tear your own Flesh to pieces. O you Absenters from
the Holy Table, Allow a little plain Dealing with you. If you had made so much
Preparation to meet with your own Death, as might Rationally be Expected from
every man living, who knows that he must Die, and knows not how soon he may Die,
you would not have been so Unprepared as you are, to show forth your Lord's
Death, according to His Institution. So then, The next Celebration of the
Eucharist, will Publish and Proclaim the Unhappy Condition of many among us;
For whom you now hear the Cries of a Minister, in Pains like those of a Travail
upon him.

The Second Assertion.
If People would bestow Suitable Thoughts on the World, unto which they are
going, one would think, it could not be possible for them to remain in that
Unhappy Condition, to Walk in Darkness, and know not whither they are going,
and have Good Terms with Heaven, to be still not Settled and Certain with them.
For them that can with any Composed Mind continue in this Unhappy Condition,
one would think, Either they Believe nothing at all of a World to Come; or,
they never trouble themselves to Think much about it, or about their own
Relation to it. But the Experiment was made; Psalm. XXXIX. 3. My Heart was hot
within me; while I was musing, the Fire burned. Certainly, If People would
ponder duly, What there is in those Two Eternal Worlds, one or the other of
which they are going to, while they are musing of those things, their Hearts
could not but be Hot within them; they could not but feel a Fire burning there:
they must needs be Inflamed into the uttermost Impatience of knowing, In which
of those Worlds they must have their Portion. Did People Believe, what the
Worlds are which the Dead must go into, and that they are very quickly to go
into one or the other of them, they could not continue in their darkness about
it, without saying, I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go mourning all
the day long, I have Roared by reason of the Disquietness of my Heart.

Wherefore, first, O Man, Show thy self a Man, and in an affectuous Meditation,
take the Wings of the Morning, and fly up to the Heavenly World. Meditate on
the Glorious Things that are spoken about the City of GOD, and what is to be
Enjoyed there. Walk about that Zion, the City of the Living GOD; Go round about
her; Consider her Palaces; And see what is done by the Great GOD there for
them, who have Him for their own GOD, and their Guide unto Death, and beyond
it. Think, If I go up to that World, I shall see a Perfect Rest from every
thing that can be grievous to me here; I shall have no Sorrow there, but all
Tears will be Wiped from my Eyes. Think again; If I go up to That World, I
shall find in the Alsufficient GOD, all that is Relishable or Valuable in any
creatures here, and inconcervably more; and an Admirable CHRIST will fill me
with all the Fullness of GOD* Think once more, If I go up to that World, I shall
Reap a full Harvest of all my Patient Continuance in well-doing, and let me now
never so much abound in the work of the Lord, I shall then find my Labor not
in vain for the Lord: But then let thy Meditation mind thee of the Eternity
which That World will be Brightned and Sweetened withal: The Eternal Glory
whereto the GOD of all Grace does call us by CHRIST JESUS. Think, If I come to
be Comforted in that World, it will be with an Everlasting Consolation. The
Fountains of Living water whereto I shall be led, will be running forevermore.
My Knowledge will be Eternally Progressive; My delight eternally Varied. After
I have been satisfying my self in the Eternal GOD, for as many Millions of Ages
as there are now Beam of Light in the World, I shall be no nearer to the End of
my Satisfaction, than I was the First Moment of my Entering into the Joy of my
Lord. Can Thou think thus, and not wish, Oh! That I knew this to be my
Portion!

And then, Let thy Meditation remove the Bars of the Pit, and uncover the
dismal Vault, and Look down into the Infernal World. Meditate on the tremendous
Things which are inflicted on the Prisoners in that place of Torment. Visit the
gloomy and howling Regions, where GOD sets them in dark places, who have been
Dead of old: GOD hedges them about, they cannot get out: GOD makes their chain
heavy: Also when they Cry and Shout, He shuts out their prayer. GOD is as a
Lion unto them in the secret Places: He pulls them in pieces, and makes them
Desolate. GOD causes the Arrows of His Quiver to enter into them, and He fills
them with Bitterness: Think, If I must go down to that World, I shall carry
thither with me the Raging Desires of the diverse Lusts which I am now serving
of; But they will only help to Torture me; I shall not have so much as a Drop
of water to gratify them. I shall be hardly bestead, and hungry, and fret my
self, and curse GOD, and look upward. And when I look back unto the Earth, and
Remember the Good, things I received there, Oh! the Dimness of the Anguish I
shall have upon me, finding my self driven into Darkness! Think again, If I go
down to that World, all the painful Things, that ever I did or could Suffer, by
the mediation of my senses here, I shall have without them, dispensed unto me
there, in very Tormenting Sentiments which a Provoked GOD will compel me to;
And all those pains little enough to punish my Crimes in Denying the GOD that
is above. Think once more; If I go down to that World, an Almighty GOD Himself
will take me into His own Hands, and make me feel such Scalding Strokes, of His
Wrath as no Tongue is able to Express, no Heart able to Conceive. Immediate
Emanations from an Offended, Omnipotent, Omniscient and Omnipresent GOD, will
penetrate like Hot Lightning into my Soul: immediate Coruscations from GOD
acting as a Consuming Fire. GOD Himself will fight against me, with a Strong
Arm, even in Great Wrath. And can my Hands be strong, or can my Heart endure,
when GOD shall deal with me? But then, let thy Meditation mind thee of the
Eternity which renders That World, yet more Terrible: The Everlasting
Punishment, which the Wicked shall go away into. Think; If I come to be
tormented in that World, I know not of any Period for my Torment. An Aching
Tooth for one Month, how grievous would it be unto me here! But if I must ly
down among the damned, I must undergo much worse Griefs than That: and after as
many Millions of Years, as there are Leaves on the Trees, or Drops in the Sea,
or Sands on the Shore, I have no prospect of any Period. When the Mediator
delivers up the Kingdom to His Father, I shall be left still under the
Vengeance of GOD. And how can I hope for a Deliverance, when there will be no
Mediator for me! When GOD lays me in the lowest pit in Darkness, in the Deeps,
I shall be shut up, and cannot come forth any more. Can thou think thus, and
can thou bear the Horror of the Hazard of such a Portion: Oh! That you would
all Retire; and come into such Meditations! How, How could you after this be
willing to Walk in Darkness, not knowing whither you are going?

The Third Assertion.
Were People got out of that Unhappy Condition, to Walk in Darkness and know
not whither they are going, and had Good Terms with Heaven fairly Settled and
Certain with them, we should soon see PIETY flourishing in its Verdure and
Vigor among us; a Fruitful Christian, would not be so much as it is a Rare
Sight among us. It is a thing too notorious to be denied, That a Fruitful
Christian is not so often to be met with as were to be wished for. They that
have been most conspicuous for bringing forth much Fruit, are most of them
gone. Of them that remain, it may be said, as in Isa XVII. 6. Some Gleaning
Grapes are left; or, they are as the Shaking of an Olive Tree, two or three
Berries, in the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in the outmost
fruitful Branches thereof. But whence does this come to pass? Truly, them that
are Barren and Unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, you shall
still find in the Unhappy Condition, of Uncertainty for Eternity And indeed,
how should they be otherwise? But it is this Uncertainty that very much keeps
them so Barren and Unfruitful. Nothing would so animate all PIETY in you, nor
would any thing so render you Full of Goodness, as the Knowledge of this: My
Lord JESUS CHRIST has taken me into His Gracious Hands, and nothing shall ever
pluck me out of them. You will find, that an Assurance of Good Terms with
Heaven, is no Enemy to Holiness: No, it is the Strongest Incentive to it in the
World. PIETY cannot find such another Quickener! Had you the Assurance of it,
that you have the Promises of GOD, all belonging to you; The Heritage of those
that fear His Name; O Dearly Beloved, you could not but cleanse your selves
from all Filthiness of the Flesh and of the Spirit, and carry on Holiness to
perfection in the Fear of GOD. Could you Read your Names written in Heaven, you
could not but have your conversation in Heaven. Could you call your selves the
Children of GOD, you could not but be Followers of GOD, as Obedient Children.
Did you know that your Many Sins are Forgiven you, how much would you Love Him
that his Forgiven you so Much, and how loathe would you be to Sin against Him
any more? Had you an Undoubted Assurance of it, That you shall one day Walk in
White Robes among the Priests of GOD, and be the companions of His Angels, in
His Holy places, what Noble Sacrificers would this Assurance tender you? And
how much would you scorn to do a Dirty, or a Little Thing? And how Holy would
you be in all manner of Conversation? What is a Fruitful Christian? A Fruitful
Christian is one, whose Chief End it is to Honor and Obey and Enjoy the
Glorious GOD; and Chief Care to do the Things that please Him: And one who
behaves himself as having the Eye of GOD always upon him; and therefore he
watches over his very Heart, that there may not be in it so much as a Frame, or
a Thought, offensive unto GOD. A Fruitful Christian is one who Lives by the
Faith of the Son of GOD; and cannot Live without a continual Recourse unto his
lovely SAVIOR. Yea, A CHRIST is All unto him; and the views of a CHRIST, by
these things he Lives, and in these is the very Life of his never dying Spirit.
A Fruitful Christian is a Diligent Redeemer of Time; He divides his Time with
Discretion, between his Two Callings. And he is one who studies to carry it
well in all Relations wherein GOD has placed him: Studies to be a Blessing in
all Societies he belongs unto; Studies to do Good unto all about him, and
wherever he comes. Man, Get Assurance of Good Terms with Heaven, and this will
soon make such a Fruitful Christian of thee.

The Fourth Assertion.
If People will do, what they may do, they might soon get out of this Unhappy
Condition; They should no longer Walk in Darkness, and not know whither they
are going; But GOD would so help them, that Good Terms with Heaven would be
Settled and Certain with them. It is a very black Indictment, which is laid
against some that remain much in the Dark, how it shall go with them, 2 Pet.
III. 5. They are willingly Ignorant. But for this Grand Point, How we shall
fare in the Day of the Lord, which will come as a Thief in the Night, for
People to be willingly Ignorant! Surely, it is to be very culpably Ignorant. But
if People might come out of their Ignorance by doing but what they ought to do,
and they will through their own Sluggishness continue in it, are they not
willingly Ignorant? O Sluggish Souls, how can you be Excused, in this Criminal
Ignorance, this Affected Ignorance: But what is it, that we may do, to get out
of it? O Souls Bound for Eternity: Know you not that there are some Good
Things, which are styled, Phil. I 28. The Evident Tokens of Salvation? Come
now, commune with your own Hearts, and let your Spirits make a diligent Search
in your selves, whether you have ever yet had any Experience of those things.
If the matter appear Doubtful to you, put it out of Doubt, by such Acts of
PIETY, as must be done by all that shall be Saved, and can be done by none but
those that shall be Saved. When you see such Tokens for Good upon you, then you
may be Sure of GOD saying to you, I will Surely do thee Good. Now Do these
things; Do them till you see them; Do them till you Feel that you have done
them.

First; Have ye forgotten the Exhortation that speaks unto you? 2 Pet. I. 10.
Give Diligence to make your Calling and Election sure. Were you Sure, that you
are Effectually Called, you may be Sure, that you are Eternally Chosen, of GOD!
You have the Call of the Gospel brought unto you. From the time that you give a
Proper and an Hearty Answer to the Call, you may be Sure of This; Whom He has
Predestined, them He Called. You are among the Elect of GOD, of whom you are
sure, It is not Possible they should be Destroyed. Hearken, Hearken then, unto
the Call of your SAVIOR. The Call of the Gospel is, Abhor that which is Evil,
and thy self also for Doing it, and for Departing from the Living GOD. Most
Heartily Answer, Lord, I Abhor it. The Call of the Gospel is, Embrace the Great
Salvation which a JESUS brings unto you; and be glad of the Wisdom, and
Righteousness, and Holiness, and Redemption, which He has to bestow upon you.
Most Heartily Answer, Lord, I Embrace it. The Call of the Gospel is, Resolve on
a Return to GOD, and a Godly and Sober and Righteous Life before Him. Answer
most Heartily, Lord, I Resolve it. My Friend, If this be thy Answer, and if thy
Heart be in the Answer, thou art then among them that are partakers of the
Heavenly Calling: And thou shall not miss of the Heaven which thou art Called
unto Do thou say, I do give the Answer, but I don't know whether my heart be
in it? Then Repeat the Answer; carry on the Repetition of it, until thou do
know, that thy Heart is in it. This Answer of a Good Conscience, will Baptize
thee, tor a Deliverance from the Wrath to come.

Again; All turns upon your Compliance, with the Three Illustrious Articles of
PIETY, which all that Fear GOD and work Righteousness are united in. There are
Three Illustrious Articles, wherein all the People of our SAVIOR are One, as
He has Interceeded that they may be. There have been many large Discourses
upon, The Trial of a Good State: And sometimes after the Thing has been Largely
Discoursed on, it is left in as much obscurity and perplexity, as it was before.
But the most Weighty Question in the World, will be soon determined by these
Three Enquiries.

Enquire, first. Is it my principal and perpetual Study to Glorify GOD in doing
the Things that please Him? And am I always afraid of Every Thing, which the
Light of GOD in my Soul condemns as an Evil Thing?

Enquire, nextly. Do I come and look to a Glorious CHRIST, for all the
Blessings of an Holy Redeemer; and do I long for nothing so much, as to be what
He would have me to be?

Enquire, lastly. Do I heartily wish that my Neighbor may have with me a share
in all the Blessings of Goodness; Pleased with his Welfare; Grieved at his
Trouble; not harboring any evil Disposition toward Him?

Soul, If thou art come to these Things, thou have the Marks of GOD upon thee;
Thou art of the Righteous Nation, which the Gates of the Holy City forever
stand open to. Oh! let nothing pacify thee, till thou find thy self thus Marked
of, and for the Lord.

Thirdly. There are various Acts of a Believer Living unto GOD. The Doing of
any such Acts will help to show it, and a course Abounding and persisting in
such Acts, will indisputably show it, that you are to Live Eternally. As now,
To do the part of a Sacrificer, in Patiently and Cheerfully Submitting to the
Will of GOD, as often as he does with Afflictive Dispensations Perform the
Thing that is appointed for us: Willingly to offer up our Sacrifices, when our
Desirable Things are taken away with a Stroke; Devoutly to find in a CHRIST all
the Good which we fondly sought in the things that we have Sacrificed: This
will determine it, that we have a part in the Royal Priesthood; and we shall
one day come to serve GOD in His Temple which is Above.

Again; To Realize the Eye of GOD upon you in all your ways; to be by the Aw
thereof Restrained from Evil ways, and Forwarded in Good ways; by this Thought,
GOD sees me; GOD knows what is done in the most secret places! To keep a Guard
on the very Motions of your Hearts, because GOD Looks upon them! This is the
way of none but the upright in Heart; the Good ones, whom GOD will do Good unto.

Moreover, To welcome any Bitter Thing, whereby Sin may be Embittered; and this
Because of its being so! To prefer a Sanctified Adversity, before a Secure,
Senseless, Carnal Prosperity: To be Thankful for a Way hedged with Thorns,
wherein you are kept from Walking in the vanity of your Minds! This is not the
way of the Hypocrite

Soul, Here are Symptoms, that thou have the Life of GOD begun in thee But if
thou do indeed feel thy self Living to GOD, thou may argue from it, Now I
see that the Sentence of Death passed on me for my Sin, is taken off, and my
Sin is all forgiven. Go on, and argue at this rate; The Life of GOD thus begun
in me, will never Die: No Death can Ever Extinguish it!

I will add one thing more. Christian, Do thou feel the Blood of thy JESUS
running warm in the Veins of thy Soul? That is to say: Does thy Soul close with
the Intentions on which the Blood of thy SAVIOR has been shed for His people,
to Purify for Himself a Peculiar People? Does thy Soul wish and long and groan
for it, that the Spirit of thy SAVIOR, would make thee Like unto Him, and
bring thee to Hate Wickedness and Love Righteousness and always do the Things
that please the FATHER? Do thou Die to Creatures, and as this Death goes on,
is a CHRIST more endeared unto thee; nothing but a CHRIST left Alive unto thee?
Now it is no longer to be questioned, Thou art most certainly one of those whom
thy SAVIOR has Died for. The Blood of thy SAVIOR has been most certainly
Sprinkled upon thee. The Holy of Holies is open for thee.

Fourthly. Yea, The Speaking of ONE WORD, if the Word be but Heartily Spoken;
This may determine it, That you have an Inheritance in the Heavens reserved for
you. Such a Word as That; Psalm CXIX. 94 Lord, I am Thine! This, This ONE WORD
will go very far toward it. ONE WORD, O Soul sollicitous to know whither thou
art going, ONE WORD, that shall Declare thee to be among the Willing People of
thy SAVIOR; This will determine it. The Experiment shall be made only in Two
Instances.

First. The Covenant of Grace, wherein a Glorious CHRIST is the Head of His
People, is Proposed unto thee. It is Proposed by GOD, Art thou willing that thy
SAVIOR should make thee both Righteous and Holy, and both Restore thee to the
Favor of thy GOD, and Restore to thee His Image; and make thee to be all that
He will have His chosen to be? Now, Heartily Reply this ONE WORD; Lord Make me
willing* Thou have Made me willing! Then have thou Laid Hold on the Covenant;
and thou art Bound up in the Bundle of Life.

Secondly. There is made unto thee a Proposal of an Espousal unto a Glorious
CHRIST, who says, I Marry My self unto thee. The Proposal of thy SAVIOR, is;
Art thou willing, That I should make thee Mine, and by my Spirit Entirely take
Possession of thee; and Feed thee, Cloth thee, Instruct thee, Protect thee,
bring thee to My Fathers House, and Rejoice in thee forevermore? Now, Heartily
Reply this ONE WORD; Lord, Make me willing; Thou have Made me willing; Then art
thou come into an Espousal with a Lord who hates putting away. In Faithfulness
forever has He Bethrothed thee unto Himself; and He will no more part with
thee, than the Apple of His Eye. Oh! Go home Rejoicing; Oh! Carry away with you
the Great Consolations of GOD. Be not now the Soul that will Refuse to be
Comforted. Assertion

5. There are many who Walk in Darkness, and yet may Know whither they are
going: Do know, that Except they do Recent they must perish, and go down to
Eternal Darkness! But yet, this also must have some Limitation upon it; None
knows, but that they may yet Repent. I may use the Language of the Apostle;
Many Walk, Of whom I have told you Often, Their End is destruction Are there
any, who make a Practice of those Things for which the Wrath of GOD comes on
the Children of Disobedience? Any that abandon themselves to Tippling, to
Swearing, to Whoring, to Stealing, to Gaming, to Lying, and such flagrant
Abominations? Any that are Children of Belial, and break the Hearts of their
Parents by their Vicious courses? Yea, my Children, Are any of you Strangers to
the Religion of the Closet; or such as never made the Flight of a Distressed
Soul unto your only SAVIOR? Ah, Blind Children of Sorrow. Don't say, That you
don't know what is like to become of you. As Blind as you are, yet you do know
whither you are going. You do Know; for GOD has told you; 1 Cor. VI. 9. Know ye
not, that the Unrighteous shall not Inherit the Kingdom of GOD. You do Know;
for GOD has told you; Heb XII. 14. Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord.
O Unhappy Condition! Others that are better than you, do not know, but they may
Perish. But you do know, that you must Perish; and your Souls cannot be saved
from Death, if you be not Converted from the Error of your way. You do know,
That if you Die as you are, it had been Good for you that you had never been
Born. Young man, Thou do know, That GOD will bring thee into Judgment But a
Judgment, which is to be Trembled at. Thou art worse than a Pagan if thou
Tremble not!

And yet none of these forlorn Children are utterly to be despaired of. The
worst of you all, may not Conclude, I am a Reprobate! Thou do not know, but
that the Powerful and Victorious Arm of the Lord, may yet after all, Turn thee
about, and make a New Creature of thee. No one Knows, that these forlorn
Children shall go down to the horrible Pit, which they appear bound unto, For
there may be a Month in which the Sovereign and Victorious Grace of God may yet
find 'em, and there may be Reserves of Mercy for them. We will go and Weep unto
the Lord, that it may be so.

FINIS.

