THE Defects OF Preachers REPROVED IN A SERMON Preached at Northampton, May
19th. 1723.

By Solomon Stoddard, Pastor of N. Hampton.

NEW LONDON: Printed and Sold by T. Green, 1724.

To the READER.
THE Conduct of Divine Providence in bringing to pass the Publication of the
following Sermon, was thus; One that heard it Preached, asked the Reverend
Author for a Copy, who expressed his willingness to grant it. He that heard it
Preached was soon after in the Company of several Ministers and Deacons, unto
whom upon Representation made of said Sermon, and proposal for a Collection for
the Printing of it, It was complied with; whereupon Address was made to the
Worthy Author for a Copy and obtained it of him. The Lord in mercy Reward the
Author according to his pains and good will for Public Good thereby; and the
Persons at whose expense the Impression was made, having expended of their
Substance in so good Another Remark that I will make to you of the Ensuing
Discourse, is, that it Imitates the Method that CHRIST our great Shepherd took
for the Reforming the Seven Churches of Asia, which was that John should write
to the Angels or Pastors of the Churches, That they might first see their own
Defaults and be awakened to amend themselves, and thereupon be prepared and
animated to Reprove, to Reform their People. Ministers being Orthodox and
Fervent in Preaching, Prudent in their Conduct, and Exemplary in their
Conversation, are Excellent Blessings to a Place. Have you plenty of Good
Preaching? You are highly favored of God, you have the means of making the
best Gains; Bless GOD for it, and Esteem your Preacher highly in Love for his
Works sake, If you are under Dull Preaching, take heed of a froward Mouth and
wrangling Carriage. Consider your Preacher is such as God's Providence has
carved to you; and remember that GOD is able to give to you help in that
matter. Lament it before GOD, and Pray Night and Day for your Preacher, that
the LORD will enlarge him with Grace and Ministerial Gifts; and do what you can
to Advantage him in his great Work.

It man (...) his Abilities are clouded, his Spirit is sunk and ^ow by
Refractory Persons of his Flock, or by his low Maintenance for himself and his
Family. In order to his encouragement (in case of disorders by Stubborn
Persons) say to him, as Shechaniah did to Ezra, Ezra 10.4 Arise, for this
matter belongs unto thee, we also will be with thee: be of good Courage --
And look into his Outward state, if it be low, disadvantagious, sow more
Liberally of your Earthly things, in order to his help and in order unto and in
hope of Reaping more plentifully of his Spiritual good things. Moreover,
Entreat him as a Father, to strive and Pray for Enlargement in his work. Don't
entertain such low tho'ts of him as to neglect to improve him as your Spiritual
Counselor and Guide, to help in difficult and darksom Cases, and to Spiritual
Fruitfulness and to the pleasure of Piety. Try what Improvements will do, to
your own and his advantage, As the Improvement of a Bodily Physician is the way
of increasing his Skill, so is the Improvement of a Spiritual Physician. Look
that in your Converse or Visits, you be not too prolix or tedious, so as to
occasion his or your mispence of and loss of Time.

If by the Reading a Passage in the Ensuing Sermon to this purpose, That it is
frequent with Persons that have attained to Conversion, to know the Time of
their Conversion; Your Soul should be cast into a darksom dejected Case,
because although you have thought you had been Converted, now you fear you was
deceived, because you don't know the Time of your Conversion. Then

1. Don't hang in doubt about the Life of Grace that you are called unto. Don't
quiet your self with a thinking that it is Likely that you are Converted. But;

2. Commune with your self. Search your Heart, Try your state; that you may
find whether there has not been the acting of Faith, of Repentance, Love to
God and Christ, and love to Fellow Christians. Consider whether you have not
experienced that God has shed abroad His Love in your Heart by His Holy
Spirit. And if after your Care to find a reason for a Good Hope, you are
doubtful whether your Reason thereof be good, get the Judgment of an
Experienced Minister, whether the reason of your Hope is good. If you can find
no sign of Grace, but do find reason to believe, and do verily believe, that a
Saving Change has never been wrought in you. Then

1. Lament, bewail your Case before GOD, saying, Oh! Wretched Person I am, who
shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? I am Miserable, Poor, Blind and
Naked.

2. Observe that your help is to be found in GOD. He tells you, Thou have
destroyed thy self, but in Me is thy help found.

3. Pray earnestly that the Holy Ghost may come unto you and Convince you of
Sin, Righteousness and Judgment; that he will make the Law your Schoolmaster:
That shows to you your Condemned Accursed state. The want of a thorough Work
of the Law is the unhappiness of a great part of Professors. You must earnestly
Employ your self in Reading or Hearing and Meditating of the Doctrine of God's
Righteous Law, and in making particular Application of the Sentence and Curse
of it to your self. Read and Meditate of the Doctrine of the work of the Holy
Spirit preparatory to Faith Seek for the Enlightening and Powerful Operation of
GOD to attend the means of Convincing you of your Sinfulness, Vileness and
Nothingness, as to Meriting Favor from GOD.

4. Watch, Pray and Wait, Night and Day, that GOD will make His Mercy known to
you, in pouring into you His Spirit of Grace and Supplication. Patiently wait
upon Him in His appointed ways, to know a Time of a Lively Faith on CHRIST, a
Time of Repentance or of Love to GOD, and to Fellow Christians, so as to know a
Time of your Conversion.

Whereas the Use of Notes in Preaching, is disapproved by such a worthy Father
in our Israel; I wish it may extend to Correct or Prevent the use of Notes so
as to carry along the Finger with the Line, as has been Practiced by some, a
despicable way, like Learners in Spelling. And it will be well Improved by
others that do use Notes in a less Degree, by their being led to an Examination
of their Practice, and to a faulting themselves, if it be through a want of
Care and Pains; but if the Use of Notes be from a being Conscious of a weakness
of Memory, by their being led to an humble Use of them, and an Observation of
the necessity thereof, that their Hearers may not lose much of the benefit of
their Studying for them. If Notes must be used, let there be a due Care not to
depend so on them as to hinder Gesture in Preaching and an holy Inspection of
the Congregation: Let there be Endeavors to attain in a good Degree, to the
scope of our Reverend Leader and Father, viz. the Emendation or Bettering of
our Preaching. Our Indebtedness to him for the ensuing Discourse and other
Fruits of his Labors, Extant for Public Benefit, is to be acknowledged: May
we Thankfully Receive and well Improve them, and he Receive answerable Reward.

My Desire and Prayer is, that the Blessing of CHRIST may attend the following
Labor of his Servant, to advancement of the Spiritual Prosperity of his People
and the Honor of his Name, viz. of CHRIST our Glorious Redeemer; and that he
will be with his Ministers of his Gospel always even to the End.

Yours in Gospel Bonds, Salmon Treat.
Preston, January 28. 1723, 4.
The Defects of Preachers Reproved.
MATTHEW XXIII.2, 3. The Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses seat.

All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do. --


IN these Words is a Direction given by Christ unto the People: Where we have

First, The Foundation of the Rule, The Scribes and Pharisees sit on Moses
Seat. Some take this as spoken of the Sanhedrim, who were the Successors of
Moses and the Seventy Elders of Israel. Possibly that may be a mistake, for
several of the Sanhedrim were not Pharisees. Act. 23.3. For the chief Priests
did belong to that Society, Act. 4.6. And they are said to be Sadducees; but by
Scribes and Pharisees I understand the Principal Teachers among the Jews. The
Priests and Levites were more especially Devoted to the study of the Law; Deuteronomy.
33.10 They shall teach Jacob thy Judgments, and Israel thy Law --. Yet others
that were Learned in the Law, were made use of to Instruct the People, and were
chosen to be Rulers of the Synagogues. The Pharisees were of any Tribe, Paul
who Was of the Tribe of Benjamin was a Pharisee by Education, as he tells Act.
23.6. -- I am a Pharisee, the son of a Pharisee.

Secondly, Here is the Rule given, What they bid you observe, that observe and
do. This must needs be understood with that Limitation, when they Teach
according to the Mind of God. Sometimes they taught for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men, and then it was Sinful and Dangerous to observe their
Directions. If the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall into the ditch, Mat.
15.14. The Doctrine is,

DOCT. There may be a great deal of good Preaching in a Country, and yet a
great want of good Preaching.

It is a felicity to a People when there is good Preaching in the Land, yet
there may in the same Land, be great want of good Teaching. Some things that
are very useful may be plainly and fully taught, and other things that might be
as useful may be Neglected; many sound Principles in Religion may be Taught,
and other things that are of great Concernment unto Souls may be omitted.
Ministers don't sufficiently do their Duty, if they Preach many sound Truths,
and do it convincingly and with good affection, if they do it with great
clearness and evidence, provided they neglect other things that are needful to
Salvation. And so it falls out sometimes that men that make many good Sermons,
are very defective in Preaching some other things that they ought to Preach.

I shall clear this in Three Instances.

1. Of the Scribes and Pharisees in Israel. They taught the People that there
was only One God the Maker of all things; and were great Enemies to the
Idolatry that their Fathers were guilty of, before the Babylonish Captivity; as
the Scribe owned to Christ, Mark. 12.32. Well, Master, thou have said the
truth: for there is one God, and there is none other but he. They taught many
Moral Duties, that men must love God and believe his Word; that they must be
Just and Chaste and men of Truth, and were very strict in the Observation of the
Sabbath: They limited men how far they might go on the Sabbath. Acts 1.12. We
read of a Sabbath days Journey. They taught truly the Doctrine of the
Resurrection of the Dead: Act. 23.7, 8. The Pharisees dissented from the
Sadducees, the Sadducees say there is no Resurrection, nor Angel nor Spirit,
but the Pharisees confess both. They taught that the Messiah was to come; the
Samaritans themselves received that Doctrine, Joh. 4.25 They were very punctual
in teaching Circumcision and the Ceremonies of the Law of Moses, about
Sacrifices, Tithes, and Legal Uncleanness.

But they were very faulty in Preaching in other particulars: They were
ignorant of the Doctrine of Regeneration, So Nicodemus, Joh. 3.4. he says, How
can a man be born when he is old? They taught that the first motions of Lust,
if the Will did not consent, were not Sins. As we may gather from Romans 7.7.
Paul says, I had not known Lust, except the Law had said thou shall not Covet.
And from Mat. 5.27, 28. It was said by them of old time, thou shall not commit
Adultery. But I say whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has
committed Adultery in his heart. They taught also that dangerous Doctrine of
Justification by Works, Romans 10.3. They went about to establish their own
Righteousness. Romans 9.2.3 They sought it as it were by the works of the Law:
They taught the People that in case they devoted their Estates to the Temple,
they need not relieve their Fathers or Mothers, Mat. 15.4, 5; 6. And above all
they taught that JESUS of Nazareth was not the Messiah, brought many Objections
against Him; As that He came out of Galilee, was a Gluttonous man and a Wine
bibber, Mat. 11.19. A friend of Publicans and Sinners: They Reproached Him that
by the Devil he cast out Devils: and they were very dull in their Preaching,
Mat. 7.29.

2. Of the Papists. They teach the Doctrine of the Trinity truly, and the
Attributes of God: So the Doctrine of the Incarnation of CHRIST, and that He
died for our Redemption and is at the Right hand of God: They teach the
Doctrine of the day of Judgment, of Heaven and of Hell, and many Moral Rules.

But they Preach a multitude of false Doctrines with these Doctrines, that are
pernicious to the Souls of men: They teach men to seek the pardon of their Sin
by afflicting their Bodies, by Pilgrimage and paying a sum of Money: They teach
many horrible things with respect to their Pope, that he has power to forgive
Sin, to dispense with incestuous Marriages; that he has power over all the
Churches and may dispense with the Laws of GOD; that he is infallible: They
teach the Doctrine of Image Worship, abolishing the Second Commandment* They
teach Prayer to Saints departed, the Unlawfulness of Priests Marriages, the
Doctrine of Purgatory, Justification by Works, a conditional Election, the
power of Free Will, falling from Grace, and Hundreds of other Erroneous
Doctrines: They do indeed subvert the Faith of Christ.

3. Of the Arminians. Many of them Preach very profitably, about GOD and the
Person of CHRIST, about Justification by Faith and Universal Obedience, about
the Day of Judgment and of Eternal Rewards and Punishments.

But there is a great deal of want of good Preaching among them: They decry all
absolute Decrees of Election and Reprobation, making the Decrees of God to
depend on the foresight of Repentance or Impenitence; they assert Universal
Redemption, as if Christ died to make all men Salvable: They deny the
Propagation of Sin, saying men become sinners by Imitation: They hold a Power
in Man to withstand the Grace of GOD; that after GOD has done His work, it is
in the power of Man to refuse to be Converted: They don't acknowledge the
servitude of man to Sin, but has power with that assistance that God affords,
to Convert himself: They deny the Doctrine of Perseverance. These things draw a
great train of Errors after them.

The Reason of the Doctrine is, Because some Preachers are men of Learning and
Moral (...), and they have drunk in some Errors, and they want Experience.
Learning and Morality will qualify men to make many good and profitable
Sermons, much for the Edification of the Hearers. Learning qualifies men to
clear up many Principles of Religion; and a Moral disposition may fit men
zealously to Reprove vicious Practices: But men may be Learned men, yet drink
in very Corrupt Doctrines. Learning is no security against Erroneous
Principles: The Pharisees and Sadducees were men of Liberal Education, yet
leavened with many false Principles: Mat. 16.6 Beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees and Sadducees. and ver. 12. Then understood they that he bid them not
beware of the leaven of bread; but of the doctrine of the Pharisees and of the
Sadducees. Learning will not cure those distempers of the Heart that do expose
men to false Opinions; Learning will not cure the Pride and Conceitedness of
men's Hearts. Men of Learning may lean too much to their own Understanding. Men
of Learning may be led aside by Reading Erroneous Books. Learned Education will
not deliver men from Carnal Reason: Men of corrupt Affections are very
inclinable to imbibe bad Principles: Men of Learning may be blind men. Christ
says of the Pharisees, They be blind, leaders of the blind, Mat. 15.14. Most of
the Errors in the world in matters of Religion, have been hatched by men of
Learning. Arius, Socinus, and Arminius, and Pelagius were Learned men: Errors
in Religion have been generally the Offspring of great Scholars, have been
propagated by them. And men may be Moral men that have no experience of the
work of God upon their hearts. Men may be Zealous men against Drunkenness and
Whoredom, that have no Saving Knowledge of Christ. Many Moral men have no
Communion with God; no Experience of a Saving Change in their own Souls. Men
may be very Moral and have no experience of a work of Humiliation, or being
bro't off from their own Righteousness, or a work of Faith; of the difference
that is between the Common and Special work of the Spirit; of the difference
between Saving and Common Illumination, of the working of the heart under
Temptation, of the way wherein godly men are wont to find Relief. Every Learned
and Moral man is not a Sincere Convert, and so not able to speak exactly and
experimentally to such things as Souls want to be instructed in. It is as with
a man that has seen a Map of a Country, or has read a great deal about it; he
cannot tell the way between Town and Town, and hundreds of particular
Circumstances, as a man that has Traveled or Lived there is able to do.
Experience fits men to Teach others. A man that has himself had only a common
work of the Spirit and judges it saving, is very unfit to judge of the State of
other men. Men Would not put their Lives into the hands of an unskilful
Physician, or trust their Ship with an unskilful Pilot, or an intricate Case
depending in the Law with an unskilful Lawyer.

USE, I. Of Examination, Whether it be not thus in this Country? It is
notoriously known by those that are acquainted with the state of the Christian
World, that though there be many eminent Truths taught, yet there is a great want
of good Preaching; whence it comes to pass, that among Professors a spirit of
Piety runs exceeding low. But it is proper for us to take notice how it is
among our selves; and though it be very evident that there is a great deal of
good Preaching in the Land, and the way of Salvation is Preached with a great
deal of plainness and power, and many men are very faithful to declare all the
Counsel of God; yet there may be cause of Lamentation, that there is a great
deal wanting in some places: Some may be very much to blame in not Preaching as
they ought to do.

1. If any be taught that frequently men are ignorant of the Time of their
Conversion, that is not good Preaching. Some are of that Opinion, and its like
they may drink it in from their Ministers. This is a delusion, and it may do
them a great deal of hurt; it hardens men in their Natural Condition. Paul knew
the time of his Conversion; At Midday, O King, I saw a Light from Heaven, above
the brightness of the Sun, Act. 26.13. Men are frequently at a loss whether
their Conversion were true or not; but surely men that are Converted must take
some notice of the Time when God made a Change in them: Conversion is a great
change, from darkness to light, from death to life, from the borders of despair
to a spirit of faith in Christ. As for the outward Conversation, there is
sometimes little difference; men might carry very well before: But as to the
frame of men's Hearts, there is a very great difference. Formerly they were
under the reigning power of Objections against the Gospel, when Converted they
receive it as a Divine Truth; before they were Converted they were under a
sentence of Condemnation, now they have Peace with God through Jesus Christ.
Men are generally a long time seeking Conversion, laboring to get an interest
in Christ; and it would be much if when God reveals Christ to them, they should
not take notice of it when the change is made; Ten to one but Conscience will
take notice of it. When a Seaman comes into the Harbor, when a Prisoner is
pardoned, when a Victory is obtained, when a Disease is broke, it would be much
if men should take no notice of them. Conversion is the greatest change that
men undergo in this world, surely it falls under Observation. The Prodigal knew
well enough the time of his return to his Fathers house: The Children of Israel
knew the time of their passing over Jordan.

2. If any be taught that Humiliation is not necessary before Faith, that is
not good Preaching. Such Doctrine has been taught privately and publicly, and
is a means to make some men mistake their condition, and think themselves happy
when they are miserable: For men must be brought off from their own
Righteousness before they be brought to Christ. Men that think they have any
thing to appease the Wrath of God and ingratiate themselves, will not accept
the Calls of the Gospel in Sincerity. While People have a Foundation to build
upon, they will not build upon Christ. A Self-righteous spirit is quite
contrary to the Gospel: If men be Self-righteous men, they will not judge it
fair for God to cast them off. Men that depend upon the Justice of God, will
not depend upon the mere Mercy of God. Men that lay claim to Heaven from their
own Works, will not depend on that Plea that Christ has given his life a Ransom
for many, and has Redeemed us from the Curse being made a Curse for us.
Multitudes of men are ruined by building upon a Sandy Foundation. Men must see
their Malady, before they see their Remedy. Men must be led into the
Understanding of the badness of their Hearts and the strictness of the Law,
before they will be convinced of the Preciousness of Christ. Men that can heal
their own Consciences, will not come to Christ for healing. Men must be driven
by necessity indeed before they come to Christ. Though men feel great terrors and
live a tormented Life, yet they will not come to Christ, till driven out of
themselves. Men must feel themselves dead in sin, in order to their Believing;
Romans 7.9. Sin revived, and I died. Men must see themselves poor and miserable,
wretched and blind and naked, before they receive that Counsel of buying of
Christ gold tried in the fire, and white raiment, Rev 3.17 18.

3. When men don't Preach much about the danger of Damnation, there is want of
good Preaching. Some Ministers Preach much about moral Duties and the blessed
Estate of godly Men, but don't seek to awaken Sinners and make them sensible of
their danger; they cry for Reformation: These things are very needful in their
places to be spoken unto; but if Sinners don't hear often of Judgment and
Damnation, few will be Converted. Many men are in a deep Sleep and flatter
themselves as if there was no Hell, or at least that God will not deal so
harshly with them as to Damn them. Psalm. 36.2. He flattereth himself in his own
eyes, until his iniquity be found to be hateful. They need to be told of the
Terrors of the Lord, that they may flee from Wrath to come: A little matter
will not scare men, their hearts be as hard as a stone, as hard as a piece of
the nether millstone, and they will be ready to laugh at the shaking of the
Spear. Ministers must give them no rest in such a condition: They must pull
them as Brands out of the burnings. It is well if Thunder and Lightning will
awaken them; They had need to fear that they may work out their Salvation with
fear and trembling. Ministers are faulty when they speak to them with
gentleness, as Eli rebuked his Sons. Christ Jesus often warned them of the
danger of Damnation: Mat. 5 ^9, 30. It is better that one of thy members should
perish, and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell. Mat 7.13. Broad
is the gate and wide is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be
that go in thereat. Mat. 13.42 The Angels shall cast them into a furnace of
fire, there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. So also, Mat. 22.13. Mat.
25.41, 46. This for our imitation. Christ knew how to deal with Souls, and Paul
followed His Example. Men need to be terrified and have the arrows of the
Almighty in them that they may be Converted. Ministers should be Sons of
Thunder* Men had need have Storms in their hearts, before they will betake
themselves to Christ for Refuge: When they are pricked at the Heart, then they
will say, What must we do to be Saved? Men must be fired out of their
worldliness and sloth: Men must be driven as Lot was out of Sodom. Reason will
govern men in other things; but it is Fear that must make them diligently to
seek Salvation: If they be but thoroughly Convinced of their danger, that will
make them go to God and take Pains.

4. If they give a wrong account of the nature of Justifying Faith, that is not
good preaching. Justifying Faith is set forth in the Scripture by many
figurative Expressions; Coming to Christ, Opening to Him, sitting under his
Shadow, flying to Him for Refuge, building on Him as on a Foundation, feeding
on Him, etc. These Expressions do imply not only an act of the Understanding,
but also an act of the Will, accepting of Him, depending on Him. This Doctrine
is despised by some, and Faith in Christ is said to be only a Persuasion of the
truth of the Christian Religion. This is the way to make multitudes of Carnal
men secure, and to flatter themselves as if they were in a good Condition: They
say they are no Heathens, nor Turks, nor Papists, nor Jews, but they believe
that Jesus Christ is the Eternal Son of God, they hope they are Believers; but
multitudes of People have such a Faith that will fall short of Eternal Life:
Joh. 2.23, 24 Many believed in his name, when they saw the miracles that he
did; but Jesus did not commit himself unto them. Joh. 12.42, 43. Among the
chief rulers many believed on him, but because of the Pharisees they did not
confess him. The Faith of some men is only a Persuasion from their Education:
As Heathens do receive the Religion of their Forefathers by Tradition, so
these do receive the Christian Religion from Hearsay. But Justifying Faith is
wrought in men by the mighty Power of God; 2 Thessalonians. 1.11. That he would work in
you, the work of faith with power. Ephesians. 1.19, 20. And what is the exceeding
greatness of his power to usward who believe, according to the working of his
mighty power; which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead? By
Justifying Faith, men answer the Calls of God, relinquishing their own
Righteousness, place their Dependence only on the Mediation of Christ; Heb.
6.18 They flee for refuge, to lay hold on the hope that is set before them.
Justifying Faith is a living Principle that Sanctifies men; Act. 15.9.
Purifying their hearts by faith. Many men have a common Persuasion of the truth
of the Gospel, that are utterly destitute of Holiness: But true Justifying
Faith is always accompanied with an Holy Life. Where there is Faith, there is
every other Grace: Act. 26.18. Sanctified by faith that is in me.

5. If any do give false Signs of godliness, that is not good Preaching. Signs
of Grace are of two sorts: Some are Probable, and they must be spoken of only
as Probable; a Score of them may make the thing more Probable, but don't make
it Certain: Probabilities make no Demonstration; Probable Signs are not
Conclusive. There are two Errors in laying down Signs; one is when those things
that may flow from Common Principles, as natural Temper, natural Conscience,
fear of Hell, false Imaginations, are given as sure Signs of Grace: But those
things that may flow from Common Principles, don't truly distinguish between
Saints and Hypocrites; As a good Conversation, savoury Discourse, zeal against
Sin, strong religious Affections, sorrow for Sin, quietness under Afflictions,
delight in Ordinances, suffering for Religion, etc. From such loose Signs
People are in danger to take up a false Persuasion of their godliness. Such
Signs are full of Delusion; and many men do bless themselves who are in a
miserable Condition. Such probable Signs may be, where there be certain Signs
of the contrary. Men are apt to flatter themselves, and when they hear such
Signs, they are strengthened in their carnal Confidence. There is no infallible
Sign of Grace, but Grace. Grace is known only by intuition: All the External
Effects of Grace may flow from other Causes. Another Error is when men are too
strict in their Signs; As when they give that as a Sign, that there is a
constant care to glorify GOD, and a continual living upon JESUS CHRIST, and a
constant watchfulness against the workings of Corruption. There is no godly man
but has at times ill frames of spirit: David and Jonah and Peter had so. When
David committed Adultery, he had not a due care to glorify God; nor Jonah when
he was in a Fret, nor the Psalmist when he was as a Beast before God, nor Paul
when he was led into Captivity by the law of sin that was in his Members. There
is no godly man that can comfort himself with such Signs as these: It is well
if godly men do see now and then the workings of a spirit of Grace: Grace is
many times under Hatches and invisible.

6. If any teach men to build their faith about the Divine Authority of the
Scripture upon Probable Signs, that is not good Preaching. There be many
probable Arguments for the Authority of the Sacred Scriptures; As the Eminency
of the Penmen, and they have had a mighty Efficacy to make a change in the
Hearts of men; it is said there were many Miracles wrought for the confirmation
of the Doctrine of them; there has been an accomplishment of many of the
Predictions in them. These Arguments are preponderating and do outweigh all
Objections that are brought against the Authority of them: These Considerations
may well strengthen the Faith of the People of God; but these things cannot be
the Foundation of our Faith: it is only the certain Knowledge of their
Authority, that can be the foundation of Faith or any other Grace. Men cannot
believe them to be infallibly true upon probable Arguments: Probable Arguments
must be looked on but as Probable and not Convincing. Men must have infallible
Arguments for loving God and believing His Word; the foundation of Believing
the Divine Authority of the Scripture, is the manifestation of the Divine Glory
in them. There is a Self-evidencing Light in the Works of God: The Creation of
the world shows God's Power and Godhead, Romans 1.20. It is impossible that the
World should be made by any but an infinite God. So there is a Self-evidencing
light in the Word of God; there are such things Revealed there as can be made
known by none but God: 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has
it entered into the heart of man to conceive what God has prepared for them
that love him. Those Eternal Rewards that are spoken of in the Scripture, those
perfect Rules that are laid down there, those accounts that are given of the
Mercy of God, and the Justice of God, manifested in the way of our Salvation,
would never have entered into the Heart of Man to conceive, if it had not been
Revealed by God; Men would never have thought of such a way of Salvation, if it
had not been declared by God.

7. If men preach for such Liberties as God does not allow, that is no good
Preaching. There are many licentious Liberties that are taken by Men, in their
Apparel, in their Drinking, in their Dancing and other Recreations, and in
their Discourses upon the Sabbath, and in their Dealings with one another; and
if Ministers either vindicate or connive at them, they don't Preach as they
ought to do. Some men are but lax Casuists, and they take too great a Liberty
themselves, and so do their Wives and Children, and they are afraid to anger
men by Reproving some particular Evils that men are addicted to, that do
prevail in the Land: The Pharisees were such Casuists; Mat. 5.43. Ye have heard
it has been said of old, thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy.
Men should be solemnly Warned against all evil Carriages; and if this be
omitted, it gives great increase to Sin in the Land. God complains of ill
against Teachers for not Reproving Sinners; Isa. 56.10. They are ignorant and
blind, dumb dogs that cannot bark. If men were duly Reproved for their
Extravagancies, that would be a means to Reclaim them: Jer. 23.22. If they had
stood in my counsel I had caused my people to hear my words; then they should
have turned them from their evil way and from the evil of their doings.
Faithful Preaching would be beneficial two ways; one way as it would cut off
occasions of anger, and prevent those sins that bring down the Wrath of God on
the Land; we should enjoy much more Public Prosperity: The other is, that it
would deliver men from those Vicious Practices that are a great hindrance to
Conversion. As long as men live in ways of Intemperance, Injustice, and
unsuitable Carriages on the Sabbath, it will be a great impediment to a
thorough work of Conversion. There may be Conversion though men are not broken
off from sins of Ignorance, but as long as they tolerate themselves in
Immoralities, that will be a mighty Bar in the way of their Conversion.

8. If men preach for such Ceremonies in Worship as God does not allow, that is
not good Preaching. There be those that plead for Humane Inventions in Worship;
that would if they could, defend the Ceremonies of the Church of England, that
would retain some Jewish Ceremonies that are abolished, and practice other
Humane Appointments. Jeroboam was Condemned not only for Worshipping the Calves
of Dan and Bethel; but for appointing a time of Worship in his own heart, 1
King. 12.32, 33. So it is noted as an imperfection, in the Reformation of Asa,
Jehoshaphat and Manasseh: That the high Places were not taken away. This is
spoken of as a great sign of Hypocrisy; Isa. 29.13. This people draw near me
with their mouth, and honor me with their lips; but have removed their heart
far from me: and their fear toward me is taught by the precept of men. When
men impose such Ceremonies, they usurp a Power that God has not given them. It
is God's Prerogative to appoint in what ways we shall Worship Him: And men
therein go quite beyond the bounds of their Authority: Men therein impute
imperfection and defect to the Ordinances of God, as if they could teach him
how it is fit that he should be Worshipped; and they presume on a Blessing
without a Promise: Mat. 15.9. In vain do they worship me, teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men. This is a way to make men Formal in their
Worship; the multiplying of Ceremonies eats out the heart of Religion, and
makes a People Degenerate. Men that multiply Ceremonies, are apt to content
themselves with the Form without the Life.

Quest. Is the late Practice of some Ministers, in Reading their Sermons,
Commendable?

Answ. There be some Cases wherein it may be tolerable. Persons through Age may
loose the strength of their Memories, and be under a Necessity to make use of
their Notes; but ordinarily it is not to be allowed.

Consider 1. It was not the manner of the Prophets or Apostles. Baruch read the
Roll that was written from the Mouth of Jeremiah; but Jeremiah was not wont to
read his Prophesies. It was the manner of the Jews to read the Scriptures in
the Synagogues; but after that it was their way to Instruct and Exhort men, not
from any written Copy: Act, 13.15. After the reading of the Law and the
Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue sent to them, saying, Men and brethren,
if ye have any word of Exhortation for the People, say on. This was according
to the Example of Christ, Luke 4.17, 20. It was ordered in England in the Days
of King Edward the Sixth, That Ministers should Read Printed Homilies in
Public: And there was great necessity of it, for there was not One in Ten,
that were able to make Sermons But it has been the manner of worthy men both
here and in other Places, to deliver their Sermons without their Notes.

2. The Reading of Sermons is a dull way of Preaching. Sermons when Read are
not delivered with Authority and in an affecting way. It is Prophesied of
Christ, Mic. 5.4. He shall stand and feed in the Strength of the Lord, in the
Majesty of the Name of the Lord his God. When Sermons are delivered without
Notes, the looks and gesture of the Minister, is a great means to command
Attention and stir up Affection Men are apt to be Drowsy in hearing the Word,
and the Liveliness of the Preacher is a means to stir up the Attention of the
Hearers, and beget suitable Affection in them. Sermons that are Read are not
delivered with Authority, they savor of the Sermons of the Scribes, Mat. 7.29.
Experience shows that Sermons Read are not so Profitable as others It may be
Argued, that it is harder to remember Rhetorical Sermons, than mere Rational
Discourses; but it may be Answered, that it is far more Profitable to Preach in
the Demonstration of the Spirit, than with the enticing Words of man's wisdom.

USE, II. See the Reason why there is so little Effect of Preaching. There is
much good Preaching, and yet there is want of good Preaching. There is very
good Preaching in Old England, yet there is great want of good Preaching,
especially among the Conformists: And there is very good Preaching in
New England, and yet there is some want of good Preaching; especially in some
places: And this is one Reason that there is no more good done. There is a
great fault in Hearers, they are not studious of the mind of God; they are
Enemies to the gospel: And when Christ Himself Preached among them, many did
not Profit by it. Yet some Preachers are much to blame, and though they do Preach
profitably many times, yet they have great cause to be Humbled for their
Defects.

1. For hence it is that there is so little Conversion. There is great
Complaint in one Country and in another, that there be few Converted; it is
apparent by men's Unsanctified Lives and their unsavory Discourses. This is one
Reason, there is a great deal of Preaching that does not much Promote it, but
is an hindrance to it. To tell men that they may be Converted though they don't
know the time: To teach that there is no need of a work of Humiliation to
prepare them for Christ; and that Faith is nothing else but a Persuasion that
the Gospel is true, is the very way to make many Carnal men hope that they are
Converted. It makes other Preaching very ineffectual: It makes them think that
it is needless to strive for Conversion. Such Preaching hardens men in their
Sins: The want of dealing plainly with men is the reason, why there is seldom a
noise among the Dry Bones. In some Towns there is no such thing to be Observed
for Twenty Years together. And men continue in a senseless condition, come to
Meeting and hear Preaching, but are never the better for it. In some Towns
godly men are very thin sown. Most of the People are in as bad a condition as
if they had never heard the Gospel: Go on in a still way, following their
worldly Designs, carry on somewhat of the Form of godliness, but mind little
but the World and the Pleasures of this Life. The Scribes did not Preach with
Authority, Mat. 7.29. And they entered not into the Kingdom of God themselves,
and they that were entering in they hindered. Such Preaching is not mighty to the
pulling down of strong Holds. Conversion-work will fail very much where there
is not Sound Preaching.

2. Hence many men that make an high Profession, lead Unsanctified Lives: They
are not dealt Plainly with; and so though they Profess high, they Live very Low:
They are not dealt Roundly with; and they believe they are in a good Estate,
and Conscience suffers them to Live after a Corrupt manner. Some of them live a
Proud and Voluptuous Life, and they are not Searched as they should be. If they
were told their own, that would keep them from saying that they were Rich and
increased in goods, and had need of nothing: If they were rebuked Sharply, that
might be a means to make them Sound in the Faith, Tit. 1.13. It might make them
not only to Reform, but lay a better Foundation for Eternal Life, than ever yet
was laid. Paul was very thorough in his work, and wherever he came he had the
fullness of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ, Romans 15.29.

FINIS.

