TELA PRAEVISA.

A Short ESSAY, ON Troubles to be Looked for. A WISE Expectation of, AND
PREPARATION for, Troublesome Changes, Recommended unto the Strangers and
Pilgrims in this Present Evil World.

By COTTON MATHER D. D. and F. R. S.

Matthew. XXIV. 44. Therefore be ye also Ready.

BOSTON in New England: Printed by B. Green, for Thomas Hancock, and Sold at
his Shop in Ann-Street, near the Drawbridge. 1724.

An ESSAY on Troubles to be Looked for.
BOSTON, October. 4. 1724.
JOB III. 25. The Thing which I greatly Feared, is come upon me.


THIS present Evil World, is full of Troubles; has in it a World of Evil. Every
Day will bring a Sufficient Evil with it. All Sublunary Things are full of
Changes. A Great part of our Duty, and Prudence in this World, is to be always
ready for the Changes which may come upon us: There are Unknown Changes of
Adversity to come upon us. It Is of mighty consequence, that none of those
Changes find us wholly unprovided for them: That our Changes may not so
surprise us, as to find our Spirits altogether unable to Encounter them; That
when our Changes arrive, our surprised Souls may not say, I never thought of
such a Thing as this! I am wholly unable to grapple with it!

OF this Piety, the Holy Job was a Notable and Glorious Example. There was of
Old a Tradition in the Church of GOD; we find it in Origens Commentaries, that
it was found, In Antiquorum dictis, that Moses presented the Book of Job, to
the Israelites in their Egyptian Captivity; that they might read it in their
Families, and encourage their Hearts in GOD under their Distresses. We are yet
more sure, that in the Primitive Days of Christianity they Publicly read the
Book of Job, on sorrowful occasions, and privately carried it also to one
another on all such occasions. I do well at this Day, to take a Text from it.
Job is afraid, That Piety would signify little to bring him out of Trouble;
inasmuch as it had not prevented his coming into Trouble. The Piety of Job,
while he was yet in his Prosperity, is thus described unto us. He was not
Secure; He did not fall into a Sleep of Security; He did not fall asleep with a
vain Dream, that no Changes of Adversity would ever overtake him. He now saw
Miserable Changes: But the Changes did not come altogether Unlooked for. The
Thing which I greatly feared; This pious Fear of Job, was not such an Anxious
and such a Tormenting Fear, as to take away his Easy, Pleasant, Thankful
Enjoyment of his Comforts. To live always in such a Disquieting Fear of losing
what we enjoy, as to lose all comfortable Enjoyment of it, while we have it:
this were no virtue in any Man; it were a sore Judgment of GOD upon a Man. But
the Fear of Job, was a Fear of Caution; a Fear that put him upon Sacrificing to
GOD every Day; a Fear that caused him to entertain the Changes that came upon
him, with a Ready Resignation, and upon them to say, Blessed be the Name of the
LORD! He could not foresee the particular Changes that happened unto him: It
was enough, That in the midst of his Prosperity he often thought, I do not know
what may happen: And he did Fear the worst that could happen.

THE Lesson of Piety to be now recommended unto us, is this; WE have Reason to
Live in a continual Expectation of Troublesome Changes; and make such a
Religious Preparation for them, that we may be able suitably to bear all the
Troubles of our Changes.

IT will be our Wisdom, to be always Ready for sorrowful Changes: to be in such
a Readiness for them, as may abate the Sorrows of the Changes. We may be at
present in Prosperity; or at least we may have many Comfortable Possessions
about us. Well, but we should have a Fear, that some Changes may be near unto
us, a Devout Fear, that things will not continue long just as they are; an Holy
(...) which may produce in us a Temper, that shall entertain what befalls us,
with all due composedness of Mind, and Resignation. We should be so
Apprehensive of all sorts of Changes, that whatever befalls us, we may be able,
with some Quietness of Soul to say; It Is no other than the Thing which I
feared, that is come upon me; I am not surprised at it; It is no worse than
what I have long been looking for.

OUR Duty and Interest is disposed into Two Articles; An Expectation of
Changes, and a Preparation for Changes. But these, as our Duty and Interest
themselves, are sweetly Incorporated. They are very near to each other; They
always go together; They are one and the same: Though they may be distinctly
considered.

I. WE have Reason to Live in a continual Expectation of Troublesome Changes;
To Fear Changes, as things that are very likely to come upon us.

WE will Enquire; First, What Reason have we to Live Expecting of Troublesome
Changes? The First Answer shall be; Where do we Live? Indeed, if we were got
safe to Heaven, we were then got beyond all Troublesome Changes. Of them that
are got out of this World, into a better, we read, Rev. XIV. 13. They Rest from
their Labors. Even so, They Rest from then Changes. When Death, which is our
great Change, has come upon a Child of God, he shall find it his Last Change;
that is to say, the last that will have any Trouble in it. It is true, There is
a Change to be Expected after Death; The Resurrection of the Dead, will be a
wondrous and an Happy Change upon them. It is of that Change, that we read; Job
14.14. I will wait until my Change come. But the Saint shall never see any
Troublesome Change after Death. In the mean time, while we Live in this World,
we are in a World full of Changes. Nothing in this World is Constant, but the
Inconstancy of the World. In the Natural World, there are continual Changes. We
read; Psalm. LXXIV. 16, 17. Day and Night, Summer and Winter. And the Political
World, has as many Changes. The Vicissitudes in the World are admirable. All
things are in Motion. Things cannot continue long in one Posture. The condition
of Things in this World, is compared unto that of Wheels. In the Visions of the
Prophet Ezekiel, we have Wheels assigned unto all the Four Empires of the
World; and all the Four Quarters of it. All Things are upon Wheels; Nations
find it so; And Persons find it so. It is the Fate, both of Crowns and of
Spades. The Victorious King of Egypt had his Chariot drawn by Four Captive
Princes. One of them kept looking very Attentively on the Wheels of the
Chariot, and when the King Sesostrys, asked him, What he saw there; Sir, said
he, I see, that what is now uppermost soon becomes undermost! I see, it is a
Rolling sort of a World that we live in! Indeed, who sees it not? It is not
until the World to come, that we shall Receive the Kingdom that cannot be
moved. While we are in such a World, we are mad, if we don't Expect Changes
every Moment! Where is there any one Person free from this Common Lot of the
World! The Experience of all the Men in the World, cries aloud unto us: Behold,
Changes! Changes upon all the World! In this universal Experience, we may see
Reason enough to Expect Changes upon us. Man, Why should thou Expect an
Exemption from the Common Lot of the World!

BUT then, Secondly. Our Sin, makes us Deserve Troublesome Changes; it makes us
worthy of all sorts of Troubles. Man was at first created a Changeable
Creature: It was fit he should be so. This was the occasion of his first
Falling into Sin. Since our Fall into Sin, we are now obnoxious to all kinds of
Troublesome Changes. Our Changes are part of the Death, which is the Wages of
Sin. It it because we have Sinned, that we make that Complaint, Job X. 17.
Witnesses against me, -- Indignation upon me, -- Changes against me. Our
Changes are oftentimes Witnesses of the Divine Indignation against us, for our
Follies We do Change our Gl^^^. We Forsake the Unchangeable GOD. We pursue a
Satisfaction in Objects, which are so liable to Changes, that they cannot
Satisfy. We must Expect that we shall be Punished with Changes. Changes with
Troubles, how proper a Punishment are they for us! We are attended with no
Comforts, but we are too Unthankful for them, we are too Unfruitful with them,
we grievously Forfeit them. We may justly Expect Changes every day, to take
away those Comforts, which we don't improve to the Glory of GOD, as we ought to
do.

Thirdly. TO Expect Changes, is the way to Prevent Changes, that they shall not
come, or to Sweeten Changes, when they come. It is often so, That the
Expectation of Changes, proves our Deliverance from them. Though the World
usually proves worse than we hope, yet it usually proves also Better than we
fear. It Is true, Job could say, The Thing which I greatly feared, is come upon
me. But then, he speaks of the case, as a Rare case; he wonders at it, that it
should be so. It Is most frequently otherwise; The Changes which we most Expect,
are those that we most frequently Escape. It may be, our Fear puts us on those
Methods of Safety, that save us from our Feared Changes. If we were upon the
Stroke of Prognostication, would we most probably Prognosticate, what Changes a
Man shall have befalling of him? I know not a more probable Rule of Conjecture
than this; What is the Man's greatest Point of Security? The Thing that a Man
does least of all Fear, it is greatly to be Feared, that this is the Thing that
is to come upon him. We read, Psalm. XXX. 6, 7. I said, I shall never be moved,
-- Thou hiddest thy Face, and I was troubled. What is the Thing that a Man has
least apprehension to see Moved? It is very likely, That is the very Thing,
which he shall see moved and changed, and be Troubled. Or, if Expectation will
not keep off our Changes, but the Thing which we greatly fear must come upon
us, yet it will moderate and mollify our Troubles, in our Changes. Tela
Praevisa minus feriunt. By being Fore-warned of our Changes, we are Fore-arm'd
for them. Our Spirits being aforehand a little Familiariz'd unto our Changes,
will be when they come, the less Affrighted at them. We less complain of those
things, which we know, are to be looked for. The Wound is the less, when the
Dart was Looked for. The Expectation of Changes will fortify us, with Patience
to bear them the more easily and handsomely. The Messenger of Death put the
famous Martyr into no Disturbance, for, said, he, This is no other than what I
have been this long while Daily Looking for!

WE will Enquire, Secondly; What are the Troublesome Changes, which we must
Live in a daily Expectation of! The Answer to this must be very General. Of all
in General; Because no body can tell what in Particular. The Servant of GOD
could say; Act. XX. 22, 23. -- Even so may we say, I know not what shall befall
me, but it is very sure Afflictive Changes do abide me. The Contingencies of
this World cannot be Numbered. And what is there in this World, that is not
subject unto them? We read; Eccl. IX. 11. Chance happens to all. Let us be so
Extensive in our Expectations, as that whatever our changes may be, we may be
able to say, I was a little Aware of this. And yet we will a little
particularize.

WHATEVER our Estates may be, do not presume, That it is impossible for us, to
be stripped of these Estates. A Job, a Rich, and a Great Man, may soon be Poor to
a Proverb. Though we may swim in Riches, yet we must live in this Expectation;
These Riches may soon take themselves wings, and flee away. We are guilty of
Trusting in Uncertain Riches, if we lay aside all such Expectation. Of all
Riches on this side Heaven; we are advised unto what they are obnoxious; Matt.
VI. 19. Moth and Rust, and Thieves. Suppose, that the Fair House may be laid in
Ashes, or a Stranger may become the Owner. Suppose, that the most boarded Cash,
may become Running Cash, and Run quite away from the Owner. When we are sending
any Interest abroad, suppose it may come short home; and the Sum Total of the
Gains of the Voyage, may be that; Hag. 1.9. Ye Looked for much, and, lo, it
came to little. Suppose all that we have to be liable unto Innumerable
Casualties. All the Elements may prey upon us; and Enemies may have a
commission to sieze upon what we have. We shall not be the first, if we must
come to say, I was full, I am Empty; the Almighty has Afflicted me.

AGAIN; Whatever our Honors may be, Let us not imagine, our Mountain to be so
string, that we never can be Degraded, never Disgraced; we read, Psalm. XLIX.
12. Man in Honor abides not. Let them that stand on High Places, remember
they stand on Slippery Places. How many Monarchs have been dethroned in our
Time! And Mighty Men without Number have been broken in pieces; and others been
set in their head. If the cry be, Hosanna, to day, Expect, It may be, Crucify,
to Morrow!

ARE we in Health? Let us live in Expectation of Sickness. No constitution so
strong, as to be Sickness-proof. No Tabernacle of Clay, so strong, but that it
may be shaken.

WE have our Desirable Relatives Don't think, It Is impossible for them to Die.
I hope, the Relatives are not such, that you hope for their Death. Pe they what
they will, GOD forbid, you should indulge that Hope. Yet such a Fear of their
Death, you should have, that if it arrive before your own, you may truly say.
The thing which I greatly feared is come unto me. Consorts, Expect a
Parting-Time. Children, your Parents will be gone; you Father and your Mother
will forsake you. Parents, your Children may be soon taken from you: The
Flowers may be cropped in their Minority. If the Dearest Friend in the World
should be taken from you, Let there not be cause for you to say, I never
thought of this! I always though, this Friend had been an Immortal one.

THERE is one Change more to be Expected. And though I mention it the Last, yet I
would pray my Hearers to Expect it the First of any. Death, Death, is the
Change I mean. Oh! let us Live in a continual Expectation of Death. It is an
awful Admonition, Prove. XXVII. 1. Thou know not what a Day may bring forth.
When we go to sleep in the Evening, it should often be with such an
Apprehension; It may be, this Night my Soul will be required. When we get up
and go out in a Morning, it should often be with such an Apprehension; It may
be, my Sun will set before Sunset When we part with a Friend, it should often
be with such an Apprehension, It Is possible, this may be the last Time of my
Speaking to him. And when we hear a Sermon, why should it not be with such a
Meditation? For ought I can tell, This may be the Last Sermon I shall hear
throughout Eternal Ages.

BUT thus we are to manage the First Part of our Work. This is to be our
Expectation; That we have nothing here, but what may soon be cut off. We
proceed unto the Second Part of the Work. And certainly, Every one will readily
grant it.

II IT IS Reasonable for us to make a Religious Preparation for Troublesome
Changes! To Fear Changes only with a Design to get into a fit posture for them.
See, Psalm. LV. 19. We will Explain this Frame of Christianity.

1. OUR Fear of Changes, must not be a Torturing Fear, that shall Kill or Spoil
our Blessings. We read of a Miserable Thing; Eccl. VI. 2. A Man has not power
to taste his own Enjoyments. Very dreadful is the Wrath and Curse of GOD, upon
the Children of Men, when they are given up to such a Fear, as deprives them of
all Relish in the Blessings, which He bestows upon them. When the Fear of
Losing our Blessings, takes away our Sense of the Blessings, the Lord then
fulfils that fearful Threatening upon us; I will curse your Blessings. Our Fear
of our Changes, it should not hinder our Joy in our Blessings; What can there
be better for a Man, than that he should eat and drink, and make his Soul enjoy
good in his labor? It would be a froward and foolish Ingratitude unto GOD, for
us to threw away our Blessings, before GOD shall please to take them away. To
Live in Bondage, through Fear, of what is coming upon us.

2 BUT yet, by our Fear of Changes, we should come to sit more loose from all
our Comforts. We are thus advised; 1 Cor VII. 29, 30. The Time is short: -- Be
as though not --. Even so; since we may Expect Changes, let this Expectation
produce in us, a due Mortification. We should grow very Mortified and
Indifferent unto all our Comforts in this World; because we may fear Changes a
coming on our Comforts. We should Hold nothing too fast. Why, we know not how
soon every thing may by some Deadly Changes be snatched and fetched away from
us. Write upon all our Enjoyments, Uncertain Things! Vanishing Things!
Departing Things! And let this Lower the price of them. Of those Enjoyments for
which we have most of Tenderness, let us Remember, They will not stay with us!
When any thing is getting too far into our Affections, Let us cool our
Immoderate and Inordinate Affections, with this consideration; I do not know,
what Changes may come, and how soon these Enjoyments may be taken away. Oh! let
your Moderation in every thing, be known unto all Men; A Change is at hand.

3. SINCE we may Fear Troublesome Changes, Let this Fear awaken us to get into
such a condition, that we shall Suffer no real Damage by any of our Changes.
Oh! happy condition, in the midst of all Troublesome Changes! Oh! Beneficial
Changes, the Fear whereof shall drive us into such a condition. Let us heartily
consent unto the Covenant of GOD, and of Grace, in all the proposals of it. Let
us Accept of our Lord JESUS CHRIST as our Savior, and Leader, and Ruler, and
of GOD in Him, as our Portion. Let us with Souls Renouncing all the ways of
Sin, and Repairing to the CHRIST of GOD, cry out, Lord, I am Thine, Save me!
Then we need Fear no Changes. For, whatever Changes now come upon us, we need
not be afraid of any Damage from them. The Voice of the Good GOD unto us, now
is that; Jer. XXV. 6. I will do you no Hurt. All the Changes that now pass over
us, will be Serviceable to us; They will only bring us nearer to GOD, only make
us Fitter for Heaven. That Promise will be fulfilled unto us; Romans VIII. 28.
All things shall work together for Good. And whatever be taken from us in any
of our Changes, yet now we have Lest unto us, what will make up the want of all
that is taken from us; what is infinitely better than all that is taken from
us. GOD is ours, CHRIST is ours, Heaven is ours. Oh! Changes! Do your worst, we
are Happy, we are Happy, you cannot Rob us of our Happiness.

WE Expect Changes, we know not what Changes; Let us commit all our concerns
into the Hands of a Faithful GOD, that He may order all our Changes in very
Faithfulness. It was acknowledged, Psalm. XXXI. 15. My Times are in Thy Hands.
The Times of all our Changes, and all the Changes that are to pass over us in
our Times, are in the Hands of GOD. Let us leave all in those Glorious Hands.
The Psalmist could say, Psalm. LVI. 3. At whatsoever Time I am afraid, I will
put my Trust in Thee. Are we Afraid of Changes? Let us cheerfully Trust GOD
with all our concerns; and put our Trust in Him, that He will permit no Changes
but what shall be Good for us, to befall us in any of our concerns. Humbly put
over all into the Hands of a Glorious CHRIST, who is the Governor of the
World, who disposes all the Affairs of Providence with His Almighty Hands; and
say to Him; O my GOD; Great is thy Compassion; Great is thy Faithfulness; I put
over all my Interests into thy precious Hands; There I cast them; There I leave
them: Oh! Let thy mavelous Compassion, thy infinite Faithfulness, order all
the Changes that are to come upon me!

CHANGES are coming on; Let us be mightily satisfied in the Conduct of GOD, the
Wisdom, and Goodness of that Conduct, which manages all our Changes. We greatly
Fear many Changes. We may be greatly assured, that not the least of those
Changes can befall us, without the will of GOD. We read, Matthew. X. 29, 30. Not
a Sparrow falls without the will of our Father; -- The very Hatrs of our Heads
are numbered. All our Changes are under the conduct of GOD. And anon when the
Great change of Mortality comes upon a Man; Lord, Thou changest his
countenance, and sendest him away. But Oh! Let us be deeply affected with the
Wisdom and Goodness of this Conduct.

Think; Changes are coming upon me; but they are such as the All-wise GOD sees
Fit for me. It is fit, It is fit, that I should leave all to His Determination.
Lord, Thy Understanding is infinite!

Think again; Changes are coming upon me; but they will be no other than GOD
has meant unto Good. The Good GOD knows that it is my desire to Seek Him, and
Serve Him: He is my Father, and will not let any thing befall me, that shall do
me any real Harm in my Serving of Him.

WE are to meet with Changes, and look for Changes; But let us own the Favor
of GOD in it, that He keeps us Ignorant of what hanges we are to meet withal.
It is an Useful Ignorance: an Wholesome Ignorance; If we should certainly Know
aforehand, what particular Changes are appointed for us; how uneasy should we
be! Our Troublesome Changes, would give us as much Trouble before they come, as
when they come. Every Trouble would be a Thousand. It was most Excellent
Advice; Matthew. VI. 34 Take no Thought for to Morrow. -- Sufficient for the Day
is the Evil thereof. Thus, Be not sollicitous to know, what hanges may befall
you to Morrow. The Changes will bring Troubles enough with them, when they come
to Morrow. Sufficient for the Day are the Troubles thereof. Wherefore, Oh! Do
not Sin against that Favor of GOD, which we Enjoy in this our Ignorance. Do
not Sin against it by seeking after a Forbidden Knowledge. Do not Sin against
it by a Criminal Curiosity, Enquiring after a Knowledge that is not convenient
for us. Here, it is no Fault, to be willing to be Ignorant; It were a crime to
be otherwise. Let us mind, what is Revealed unto us; It is Revealed unto us,
that we ought to prepare for Changes. But, the Changes themselves are Secret
Things; The Secret Things let us cheerfully leave unto the LORD.

LEAVE nothing undone, that should be done before our Feared Changes come upon
us; nothing that we shall too late wish to have done, when we are overtaken
with our Changes.

THIS matter ought to be a little Illustrated.

WHEN Changes and Losses are come on our Estates; We shall then wish; Oh! That
while my Talents were yet in my hands; I had more improved them for the Honor
and Service of GOD, and honored the LORD, and Succored His People, with my
Substance! Then, Sirs, Do this before the Changes come upon you.

WHEN our Friends are by Changes taken from us, we shall then wish; Oh! That I
had made more Use of, Oh! That I had done more Good to, my Friends, while I yet
had them with me! Then, Sirs, Converse with your Friends, as profitably as you
can, before you are by Mortal Change bereaved of them.

WHEN we come to Die, and are under the Arrest of our Grand Change, then it will
not only be our Advantage to have our Temporal Affairs all settled, and
therefore, Let that be done Seasonably, be done Importance, that our Spiritual
and Eternal Affairs be then found well-settled. Oh! Therefore Immediately Turn
to GOD, Immediately Close with CHRIST, Immediately lay hold on Eternal Life.
Let not That work be to do, when the Grand Change is just siezing upon you. Oh!
That you were wise; that you understood this; that you would Consider your
latter End!

COROLLARIES.
1. THERE are Some Things, which are greatly Feared by many who certainly will
never see the Things come upon them: And they should not be Afraid of such
Things; Fear not, but Rejoice in the Hope of what a Gracious GOD will do for
them. There are the Devout Ones, who say of some Things, This is the Thing that
I have greatly seared. But, O let the Fear of GOD in you, assure you, That
these things will never come upon you. I beseech you, let not the Rod of the
wicked be found in the Lot of the Righteous, and let not the Brand of the
Wicked be in any Degree found in you who are the Righteous, which no Evil shall
happen to; That is to have it said of you, There they were in great Fear, where
no Fear was.

More particularly,

First; By some Souls Returning to GOD, and Repairing to their SAVIOR, this is
a Thing that is Greatly Feared; My SAVIOR will not Receive such a Sinner. But
be not Afraid, O Soul, flying to thy SAVIOR. This is a thing that will never
come upon thee. The First Sinners were Afraid, as soon as they began to Reflect
on what they had done. Ever since it has been so; Guilt will fill Sinners with
Fear. They that see their Sins to have been Many, and Heinous, and Long
persisted in, are often Afraid, That they cannot find a Favorable Reception
with their SAVIOR. But as the Angel said unto the Shepherds, Luke II. 10. Fear
not, for unto you there is born a SAVIOR: So may it be said unto all Sinners,
even unto the chief of Sinners; Fear not, but come to your SAVIOR, and you
shall be welcome to Him. O comer to thy SAVIOR; Do thou Fear, that if thou
come to thy SAVIOR, and Ask of Him, and Lean on Him, to make thee Righteous
and Holy, and bring thee home to GOD, He will reject thy Prayer, and make thee
Ashamed of thy Hope? There is no Fear of it; This is a Thing that will never
come upon thee; A LORD who is Good unto the Soul that seeks Him, never dealt
so, with any that in Earnest sought unto Him. Have thou not the word of thy
SAVIOR for it, Joh. VI. 37. Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast
cut? And can thou be Afraid, that He will not be True to His Word? It is a
most Heart-melting Thought, with which thou may be comforted. When our
SAVIOR underwent all the Sorrow of the Things that were done unto Him, in the
Day wherein He was (...) from the fierce Anger of GOD, What was it that His
Blessed Soul then Travailed for? No little part of the Joy set before Him, was
this fruit of His Horrid Sufferings; That He should see the Children of Men
come unto Him for His Mercies. Ah, Distressed Sinner: When thy SAVIOR sees
thee come unto Him for His Mercies, He sees what His Blessed Soul Travailed
for, and what He Joyfully Esteemed a Recompense of His Bitter Sufferings. And
can thou be Afraid, That He, will not Receive thee, in thy coming to Him? Oh!
Fear it not. A Rejection from thy SAVIOR, is a Thing that cannot come upon
thee. No; Be thy Sins, of never such a Scarlet and Crimson Aspect, it cannot
come upon thee.

Secondly. BY some Souls, desirous and studious always to Live by the Faith of
the Son of GOD, it is a Thing that is Greatly Feared, I shall meet with such
Things as will be too Hard for me. But, be not Afraid, O Soul Trusting in thy
SAVIOR. This is a Thing that will never come upon thee. A Good Man has before
now said, Job IX. 28. I am afraid of all my sorrows. The Children of GOD, and
they who walk Humbly with their GOD, are sometimes Afraid, that they shall
never get well thorough what they may be called unto. But, Fear not; yea, O
Anxious Mind, Thy SAVIOR says to thee, Fear thou not, for I am with thee; Be
not dismayed, for I am thy GOD; I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee,
yea, I will uphold thee. One gives way to this; I am Afraid, I shall not hold
out unto the End, in a course of Obedience to GOD. My Corruptions will be too
strong for me. I shall not be able always to Resist the Tempter. Another gives
way to this; I am Afraid, I shall not be able to bear the painful Things that
may be ordered for me. I shall sink, I shall sink, under my Loads. There are
yet more that gives way to this; I am Afraid, I shall not be able to look Death
in the Face with any Courage; I am Afraid, my Dying Agonies will be
Intolerable. But, Oh! Be not Afraid with any Amazement concerning such Things
as these. Keep hold on thy SAVIOR; Go up out of the Wilderness Leaning on Him,
as the Beloved of thy Soul. Then, Fear none of those things which thou shall
suffer. For none of these things will be found among them. It Is enough, that,
Heb. XIII. 5. He bath said, I will never leave thee, nor for sake thee.

Thirdly; BY some Souls that have the Evident Tokens of Salvation upon them, it
is a Thing that is Greatly Feared, I shall Miscarry after all, and my Portion
will be that of the Hypocrites. But, be not Afraid, O Soul always doing and
showing the Things that accompany Salvation; This is a Thing that will never
come upon thee. Our SAVIOR said unto some, Luke XII. 32. Fear not, little
Flock; It is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. This is what
He speaks unto the Souls that follow hard after Him. Search into thy self, O
Soul, with the Candle of the Lord See; Have thou Begun to Live unto GOD, and
aim at the Serving and Pleasing of GOD, above all things, and behave thy self
as under the Eye of GOD, and feel the Will of GOD ever giving Law to Thine?
Then, Be not Afraid. Here is that Life of GOD begun, than never can Die. Have
thou the Good Work produced in thee, which disposes thee above all things to
Love GOD, and Prize CHRIST, and Hate Sin, and Live Godlily, and Soberly, and
Righteously, and bear Patiently and Fruitfully Every thing appointed for thee;
and Suppress all Evil frames toward thy Neighbor? Then, Be not Afraid. Thou
art a Temple of GOD, and such a Workmanship of His, as the Everlasting Fire
could never be intended for. O Soul, Set on a CHRIST, and Full of a CHRIST; Be
not Afraid. Thou art in His Hands; Nothing will be able to pull thee out. Thou
shall certainly be with Him, and Behold His Glory.

II. THERE are some Things which are the worst of Evils; and the Uncertainty of
Escaping them, renders things Greatly to be Feared: Such a Fear of these
things, as may prevent them, is to be commended unto us. To Fear those Things
is the way to Escape them. And with regard unto such Things, it is the
Direction of Heaven to us, 1 Pet. I. 17. Pass the Time of your Sojourning here
in Fear. Nay, If the Fear be such as to set Prayer to GOD into a proper
Exercise; This will infallibly prevent them. And so it may be said; Prove.
XXVIII. 14. Happy is the Man that fears always.

First. LET all of us, even the very Best of us, Look upon this, as a Thing
that is greatly to be Feared; That we may be drawn into Sin against the
Glorious GOD, by the Snare laid for us in the Earth. It is enjoined upon us;
Phil II. 17. Work out your own Salvation with Fear and Trembling. Sin is a
Fearful Evil; a Fearful Evil! Nothing to be so Feared. We have these Ensnaring
Things continually about us, which threaten to draw us into Sin. Our Hearts are
Treacherous, and from their Inclinations we are Easily Ensnared. Oh! Let us
Fear, and Watch, and Pray mightily, that we be not Led into Temptation. This
Fear will be our Preservative.

Secondly. LET all that have not their Vocation and Election yet made sure to
them, look upon this as a Thing that is Greatly to be feared; That they Die in
their Sins, and fall into those Hands, which, it is a fearful Thing to fall
into. O you, that have never yet made thorough work of Turning to GOD, Is it
not a dreadful Thing, -- How greatly to be feared, such a Thing; -- To Perish
and Languish under the Wrath of an Infinite GOD! Let the Sinners in Zion be
Afraid, when they think, and Oh! that they would oftener, and more seriously and
affectuously Think on, the Devouring Fire, and Everlasting Burnings which they
are Exposed unto. Fear, Fear, O Souls in Darkness, lest you come short of
Entering into the Rest, which is Promised in the Gospel. Be afraid, lest by
Delays you so provoke the Holy Spirit of GOD, that He depart from you. -- Be
afraid, lest you be overtaken (...) a Damnation that slumbers not. It is a
dismal lord, Prove. X. 24. The fear of the wicked shall come upon him. The
Wicked has a secret fear many times, that it will go Ill with him. His
Conscience causes him like Faelix, to tremble in the ^^oughts of a Judgment to
come. O wretched Man, Does not thy Conscience tell thee what will be the
Consequence of thy Evil ways? Oh! make Haste unto thy SAVIOR, -- that thou
may not say That which I feared, but was not enough afraid of is come unto me!

FINIS.

