SOME Remarks and Observations by Way of ANSWER, To a small Book called, A
Lecture SERMON Preached at New-Millford by John Graham, necessitated (as he
says) by the Growth and spreading of Quakerism (as he calls it) in that Place.

Wherein our Religion (which he and others scornfully call Quakerism) is
briefly proved to be True Christianitys and several Particulars which he calls
Errors and strange Doctrines, are plainly proved to be True Christian Doctrine,
by the sayings and Writings of Christ and his Apostles, as we find them
Recorded in the Holy Scriptures of Truth.

By EDWARD BURLING.

Prove all Things, hold fast that which is Good, 1 These. 5.2^. Printed and Sold
by William Bradford in New York, 1724.

A Short ANSWER TO John Graham's SERMON.
I Observe, first, that John Graham takes for his Text, Heb. 13.9. Be not
carried about with diverse and strange Doctrine etc. And in his first Page,
says, the main Defects of Wit are Error and Ignorance. Answer, I think it would
have been much more proper for him to have said, Religion than Wit, seeing his
Discourse is concerning Religion, bu^ I shall let that pass without further
Notice, and shall freely own, that Error and Ignorance are both very bad in
Religion, and very often are found together, one being, as it were the Effect
of the other; for when People are kept in Ignorance by their Teachers, and are
not allowed, (nor do not take the Liberty themselves) to search and try for
themselves, nor to prove all things, that so they may discern Truth from Error,
they are often, nay, generally kept in Error as well as Ignorance, and often
made believe, that Error is Truth, and Truth Error. Therefore it behooves us all
to consider well what is Error and what Doctrines are Strange Doctrines, which
I conclude all to be, that are contrary to the true Doctrines of Christianity
taught by Jesus Christ and his Apostles. And to John Graham goes on preaching
against Error and Ignorance, exhorting his hearers to beware of it, and warning
them against conversing wi^^ ^he People called Quakers, or reading their Books,
pretending they are Guilty thereof, which if it were so, I should allow his
Cautions to be needful; but if on Trial and Examination it should prove quite
otherwise, and that the Quakers and their Books are Sound and Orthodox, and
himself and his Book guilty of Error, Ignorance and strange Doctrines, as I
doubt not but I shall plainly prove, and that by the Testimony of Holy
Scripture, which he, though improperly, calls the Word and would have all
Spirits tried by it.

Ans. I am willing that our Doctrines, Principles and Practices, and his too,
should be brought to the Test of Holy Scripture, and that which is not
consonant and agreeable thereto, should be condemned, and that which is, to be
approved; and when that is done, I make no Question, but it will plainly appear
that we are clear and himself guilty, so I advise his ^^^rers and all others to
Search and Try for themselves like as the Noble Bereans did in Days of Old who
when Paul preached to them, that which some then called strange Doctrines, as
Acts 17.20. for thou bring certain strange Things to our Ears, etc. They
searched the Scriptures to see whether these things were so, and did not to
take their Teachers Words for it, that all is Error and Heresy that they call
so; for that is the way to be kept in Ignorance and Darkness, as some whole
Nations are at this Day, by harkening unto and following their Blind Guides,
who call every Appearance of Light and Truth, by the Name of Heresy and Error,
and if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the Ditch, Mat. 15.14.

Therefore I desire all to see for themselves and try whether they be in the
true Faith or not, seeing we must all give an Account every one for himself,
before God, and then it will not be a sufficient excuse to say, our Teachers
told us that the Truth was Error and Heresy, and we took their Words for it,
without further Trial. So I shall pass over the most of the fore part of his
Book, which is in general levelled against Error and Heresy, and those that
Teach it, seeing we are not such (though by him intended) that I may come to
those Particulars that seem chiefly to concern Us, and our Doctorine, and prove
them, even all that we Hold and Teach to be neither Error nor Heresy, but
Gospel Truths, and that he is Guilty of Ignorance and Error, by opposing and
speaking Evil of Truth, and those that profess it, and walk therein, and
thereby prove and make appear, that we are none of those that are carried about
with diverse and strange Doctrines, neither is the Light that is in us Darkness,
but the light of Christ, that lights every Man that comes into the World,
with the light of Life, See John 1. for that is the light that we speak of and
bear Testimony of, and the Spirit of Truth that Christ said his Father would
send in his Name to lead true believers into all Truth.

IN Page 14. John Graham comes to particularize those strange Doctrines, that
he had before preached against in general, and says, he shall mention Eight,
the first, he says, is to deny the Morality of the fourth Commandment, and then
says, there are a Sort of Creatures arisen up who in open Defiance to God and
all good Order, live in the constant Breach of an Express Divine Law, by
denying the Morality of the fourth Commandment.

Ans. Barely denying the Morality of the fourth Commandment is not living in a
Breach of any Divine Law, for that Law was only given and commanded unto the
Children of Israel, as the rest of the Mosaical Law was, and therefore not
moral and perpetual, nor binding to us, because then commanded and written on
Tables of Stone, and put into the Ark; but was ended in Christ, who is the true
believers Rest, and is the Anti-tipe of the Jewish Sabbath; for that was but a
Tipe, Sign and Shadow, therefore not Moral and Perpetual, See Ezekiel 20.12.
Coll. 2.17. but John Graham says, that all the Laws given in the Old Testament,
are to be distinguished in regard of their continuance, into these two sorts,
1st, Perpetual, bindding all Men in all Ages, 2 dly, Temporary, binding only
such as lived before the Resurrection of Christ, and then concludes this to be
of the first Sort; but that I deny; and though he has pretended to prove it,
yet falls short in his Proof; for though he says, This Precept was given to
Adam in innocence, and for his Proof quotes Genesis 2.2. Yet there he is much not
beside the Matter; for that Scripture relates matter of Fact, how that God made
all things in Six Days, and rested the Seventh, but is no command at all,
neither to Adam, nor any of this Posterity, neither is there any command for
the keeping of a Sabbath, to be found in all the Scripture given to any People
but only to the Children of Israel, and therefore not binding to any other
People; for what the Law says, it says to them that are under the ^aw. Romans
3.19 but we are not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans 6.14. But he says, it
was one of the Ten Commandments, and therefore concluded it must be binding as
well as the other Nine etc. To which I say, the other Nine, are not binding to
us, because then commanded to the Children of Israel, etc. but because they are
naturally Moral and Righteous Precepts, and belong to the Christian Religion,
and without the Observance of which we cannot be good Christians, but we may
without keeping the Jewish Sabbath or Seventh Day of the Week, which was the
Sabbath commanded by that Law or Ten Commandments. Now though J. G. says in
Page 15. that it is binding to all Men in all Ages, yet in Page 29. He says,
because the Jew^sh Sabbaths were then annulled. See how contradictory this is,
so that now we may say, that he himself has denied the Morality and Perpetuity
of the fourth Commandment, but his Shift for this is, that it was altered from
the Seventh to the First Day of the Week after Christ's Resurrection, but can
prove no such thing, although he strives hard for it, yet when he has done all
he can, he only proves, that after Christ's Resurrection the Apostles and
pr^mitive Believers met together on the First Day of the Week for the Worship
of God, etc. And so do we, and more than that, we refrain from Bodily Labor;
and what does J. G. and his Brethren more? So what does he cavil at? we keep
the same Day as he does, and to the same Ends, so that he might have spared his
Pains and long Stories on that Score from Page 14 to 35. most part of which is
not worth reading, so I shall say no more to those two of this strange
Doctrines, seeing if they are so, he is guilty as well as we. His 3d strange
Doctrine is to deny the Old Testament, the Ten Commandments, etc.

Ans. We do not deny the Ten Commandments nor any other Part of the Old or New
Testament, but highly esteem them, as the Apostle said, to be profitable for
Doctrine, Reproof, Correction and Instruction in Righteousness, and we do
frequently give good Proof thereof by Quoting them in our Writings and
Preachings, as will plainly appear by our Friends Books, etc. Therefore this is
a wrong charge and Reflection on us, undeserved.

His 4th strange Doctrine is to assert the Spirit or Light within, in
Opposition to the Scripture, to be the only Guide.

Ans. We do not so Assert, for we know and Assert that the Scripture proceeded
from the Spirit or Light within, for Holy Men of God spoke and wrote them as
moved by the Holy Spirit, see 2 Pet. 1.20. 21. So they are a good Secondary
Rule and Guide, but the Holy Spirit is the first and best, seeing it was before
the Scripture, and the Scriptures proceeded from it, therefore must be
inferior to it, but J. G. Argues very strangely in Page 36 where he says, we
are enjoined to try the Spirits by the Word, by which I understand he means the
Scriptures, though they are no where so called in the Scripture; but on the
contrary, Christ is called the Word in diverse Places, as John 1.1.2.3. Rev.
19.13. Is it not very improper to give the same Name or Title to the
Scriptures, as is given to Christ the Son of God, who by way of Excellency is
called the Word of God? And though J. G. says, the Light the Heathens had in
them was Darkness, yet I cannot agree to that, neither does Ephesians. 4.18. prove
any such thing, only that some of the wicked Heathens had their understandings
darkened, and that was for want of taking heed to the Light and believing in it,
whilst it shined into their Hearts, and would have manifested the Deeds of
Darkness; but he says, the Light within is every Man's pretense, and in most a
false Light, and in one contrary to another.

Ans. The Light of Christ which we pretend to and bear Testimony of is not a
false Light in any, but is the Light of life in all and is not in one contrary
to what it is in another, but is one and the same in all and in full Unity, and
makes manifest the Deeds of darkness in all that take heed unto it; and the
Primitive believers did take heed unto it, and were therefore Commended by the
Apostle, and I desire that we may also take heed unto it when it Shines into
our Hearts, which are by Nature Dark. His Fifth strange Doctrine is to hold a
State of sinless prefection attainable in this Life.

Ans. If this be Strange Doctrine then Christ himself and his Apostles held and
taught Strange doctrine as well as we, and so we have good Company, for Christ
taught his Disciples Prefection, be ye therefore perfect as your Father that is
in Heaven is Perfect Mat. 5.4, and the Disciple is not above his Master, but
every one that is perfect shall be as his Master, Luke 6.4. and the Apostles in
many Places, exhorted the Believers to be perfect, and declared they were
perfect etc. as 1 Cor. 26.2. Cor 13.11. Ephesians 4, 12.13. Col. 1.28. and 4.12.2.
Tim. 3.17. Heb. ^.19. and 12.23. and 13.21. Jam. 1.4. and 3.2, 1. Pet. 5.10.
These with many more Scriptures that might be mentioned, do very plainly prove
that Christ and his Apostles held the Doctrine of sinless Perfection attainable
in this Life, and that they did experience it, and yet J G. has the confidence,
to say, that it is contrary to the daily Experience of the most Holy Men alive,
etc. Neither did Paul ever disclaim Perfection, though there was a Time when he
had not attained it, nevertheless, he then followed after and did afterward
attain it; nor does he declare Perfection to be reserved to a future State, as
J. G. says, quoting for his Proof 1 Cor. 13.9, 10, 12. Which Place speaks
nothing of any other future State then in this Life.

His 6 th strange Doctrine is to hold total and final Apostasy from true Grace;
by which I understand, he means to hold, that good Men that have received true
Grace, may fall from it, loose it, and become wicked, and so be lost or cast
away.

Now if I cannot plainly prove this by plain Scripture Testimony, then I shall
be contented to own, that I have hitherto held strange Doctrine, but if I do
prove it to be true Christian Doctrine, it will follow, that he holds strange
Doctrine, in holding the contrary. The first Scripture that I shall mention, is
Ezekiel. ^.8. where God by his Prophet expostulates largely with his People, and
shows the Equality of his ways over and over, by declaring, That the Wicked
shall die for his Sin, and the Righteous shall live by his Righteousness, and
that the Son shall not bear the Iniquity of his Father, and verse. 24. says but
when the Righteous turns away from his Righteousness, and commits
Iniquity, and does according to all the Abominations that the wicked Man does,
shall he live? All his Righteousness that he has done shall not be mentioned,
in his Tresspass that he has Tresspassed, and in his Sin that he has Sinned,
in them shall he die, And verse. 26 is to the same purpose. And John 15. Christ
calls himself the true Vine, and his Father the Husbandman, and his Disciples
the Branches, and says, Every Branch in me that bears not Fruit, he takes
away. Now certainly those Branches that are in Christ, have true Grace, and
when they are taken away, they loose it. This the Apostle Paul also confirms,
in the 11th Chap. to the Romans, where he says, verse. 6. For if the first Fruit
be Holy, the Lump is also Holy, and if the Root be Holy, So are the Branches.
So that those that are Branches in Christ, the heavenly Vine, the Root of
David, the bright and Morning Star, are in a State of Grace, or have true
Grace; and when they are taken away, they loose it, even by departing from the
Faith, and making Shipwreck of it, and of a good Conscience, as Hymeneus and
Alexander did, 1 Timothy 1.20. See here is matter of Fact proved, Hymeneus and
Alexander had Faith and a good Conscience, which none can have but by the Grace
of God, and they had fallen from it. This appears further by what the Apostle
says, in his Comparison concerning the Olive Tree, and being Grafted into it,
and taken away again, and Romans 11. v. 20. Well because of Unbelief they were
broken off, and thou stand by Faith, be not highminded, but fear; for if God
spared not the natural Branches, take heed lest he also spare not thee: Behold
therefore the goodness and severity of God; to them which fell Severity, but
toward thee Goodness, if thou continue in his Goodness, otherwise thou also
shall be cut off: And they also, if they bide not still in Unbelief, shall be
graffed in; for God is able to graff them in again.

^y all which it is very plain that Men may have true Grace, and may fall from
and loose it, through Sin, Unbelief and Unwatchfulness, and afterward may,
through Repentance and turning from Evil, and forsaking it, come into a State
of Grace and Favor with God again. And this will further appear by Heb. 2.15.
25. Where the Author exhorts to diligence lest any Man fail of (or fall from)
the Grace of God; therefore he thought it possible to fall from true Grace; for
the Grace of God is true Grace; otherwise that Exhortation had been needless
And Heb. 6.4, 5.6. and 10.26, 29. with many more Scriptures, hold forth the
same Doctrine very plainly. So that it is no strange Doctrine, but a true
Christian Doctrine; but the contrary Doctrine, i. e. Once in Grace, and ever in
Grace, is indeed a very strange Doctrine, and quite contrary to the whole
Tenor of the Scriptures, from one end to the other, and to the Teachings of
Christ and his Apostles; for Christ Taught his Disciples to Watch and Pray,
least they should enter into Temptation, which would have been needless, had
there been no danger; he also exhorted them to abide in him, and that his Word
might abide in them; and much more to the same Purpose.

But J. G. says, Whom God loves, he loves to the end. Very true, if they
continue in his Love, in his Fear, in his Doctrine, John 15.4.6, 7, and none
can pluck them out of his Hand, but if they forsake him, he will forsake them;
for it is only those that hold out to the end that shall be saved. Therefore it
is good for all to be watchful and careful, even such as have attained to a
good Estate in Grace, and in the Love and Favor of God, and not be
presumptuous, thinking it is impossible to fall away; for the Apostle Paul
supposed it possible for him, when he said I keep under my Body, and bring it
into Subjection, lest that by any means, when I have preached to others, I my
self should be a cast away, 1 Cor. 9.27. And undoubtedly he was in or had true
Grace,

His 7 th Strange Doctrine, is, to hold that human Learning is not a necessary
Qualification for a Gospel Minister.

Ans. If humane Learning were a necessary Qualification for a Gospel Minister,
how came Peter and John to be such good Ministers, who had it not? For we read,
that they were unlearned and ignorant Men, not only before they were called and
sent forth to be Ministers, but also after Christ's Resurrection, as we may see
Acts 4.13. So that they had not humane Learning in an ordinary, nor
extraordinary Way neither; for the pouring forth of the Holy Ghost on them,
Acts 2. was not humane Learning. So it is plain, God did not only employ one
Person without it, but many; and I cannot find that it was ever counted
necessary by Christ nor his Apostle, did not Christ say, I thank thee O Father,
Lord of Heaven and Earth, because thou have hid these things from the Wise and
Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes, Mat. 11.25. And did not Paul say,
that God had made Foolish, the Wisdom of this World, and that the World by
Wisdom did not know God. Neither is it any Reflection on the Wisdom of God, but
much exalts it; and the contrary is rather a Reflection on the Wisdom of God,
as if he could not Qualify and fit his Ministers for his Work and Service, by
his Holy Spirit, without being beholden to Men to teach them Humane Learning;
yet we do not decry Humane Learning altogether, for we know it is good and
useful for many things, but not for making of Gospel Ministers, for they must
be called, sent forth, qualified and assisted by Christ, or they can do
nothing; for so Paul declares, he was made a Minister; and although he had
humane Learning before, yet he slighted and despised it, Phil. 3 7, 8. Gal. 1.1.

His 8 th strange Doctrine is, for private Persons to hold it Lawful for them
to preach and Administer the Sacraments of the New Testament.

Ans. As to administering the Sacraments, we pretend to no such thing, we not
finding the Word Sacrament in all the Scripture; neither do we find any command
from Christ for his Ministers to Administer that which they now call
Sacraments, nor any thing, like them; but for private Persons to preach the
Gospel, if by private Persons he means, such as are not trained up in Humane
Learning and ordained by Men, (as I suppose he does) then, I say, such may very
Lawfully preach the Gospel, provided they are commissionated by Christ; so that
we do not deny the necessity of a (...) and Commission from God himself, but
hold it to be absolutely necessary, even the Call of Christ by his Grace and
Holy Spirit; and this is, in one Sense, no extraordinary call neither, being
the same that true Ministers always had. So we have no need to give
extraordinary Testimonies and Confirmations of it, to gratify the vain minds
of carnal Men, but we are willing to recommend our selves to eveey Man's
Conscience, in the Sight of God, and to his Witness; and the Measure of his
Grace in all Men.

Thus I have briefly answered his Eight particulars, which he calls strange
Doctrines, and denied that which we do not hold, believe nor practice, and
Justified that which we do hold, by some plain Scripture Proofs; and many more
I could produce, if I were minded to Enlarge; but if any are desirous of
further Information concerning our Principles and Practices, I refer them to
our Friends Books, particularly Robert Barclays Apology, and William Pens Key,
yet shall take some Notice of his Application and Conclusion.

In page 40. he says, that the People of God, have no need to think it strange
when Errors and Here^^^ spr^ng up in the Church.

Ans. I am of the same Mind, and that it was foretold (as he says,) in the
Apostles Days, and was then begun, and abundance did spring up in the Time of
the Apostasy from the true Faith, when the true Church was fled into the
Wilderness for 1260 Days or Years, and many of those Errors and Heresies are
still held and pleaded for by the several Sorts of professed Christians, who
some of them pretend to much Reformation, and to be come out of the Wilderness,
but it is but in part, and I desire that they may come further, even out of
Babylon, and her Suburbs, and deny all her Merchandise. And I would have it be
the great care of Gods People to stand up in Defense of the Truths of the
Gospel, and to oppose Error wherever they meet with it; and it is my concern
at this Time, in this undertaking, to oppose, and expose the Errors I find in
J. G's Sermon Book, and to contend for the Faith once delivered to the Saints,
which gave them the Victory by which they overcame the evil one, and by which
their Hearts were purified and were made free from Sin, and became the Servants
of Righteousness, and brought forth Fruit unto Holiness; for if the Son make
you free, then shall you be free indeed, John 8.36. but he that commits Sin,
is the Servant of Sin, and so not made free; and no wonder that such plead for
Sin and against Sinless perfection, and call the Doctrine of Perfection a
strange Doctrine.

In page 44. J. G. speaks of the Errors of the Antinomians, who, as he says,
look upon themselves above all Ordinances, and free from all Law, etc. But this
is nothing to us, we are no Antinomians, neither do we hold any such things as
he there sets down, for we submit to all the Ordinances of God and Christ,
though not to the Inventions of Men, falsely called Ordinances of Christ. We
also submit to the Ordinances and Laws of Men, either actively or passively,
and always have done so. Neither do we seek to overthrow any Civil or sacred
Orders of Men, Magistrates nor Ministers; it is very wrong to charge these
things on us, or to apply them to us.

I also would have all People beware of Conversation with such Persons and
Books as are Eronious, and then they must b^ware of John Graham and his Sermon
Book, for some part of it is very Eronious and contrary to the Scriptures, as
is above proved.

I desire also that People would not call Truth, Error, nor Light, Darkness,
but own and believe in Christ the Light of the World, who enlightens every Man
that comes into the World with the Light of Life, and be sure to be diligent in
reading and hearing read the Holy Scriptures, and in living up to what they
direct to, and what the Grace of God teaches, even to deny all Ungodliness,
and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly; for that is the Way to be Perfect,
as Christ commanded his Disciples to be; also, to try false Spirits by the
Spirit of Truth, which all true Believers have received.

I observe that at last, J. G. desires that People may be made Perfect; then
surely they will not call the Doctrine of Sinless Perfection a strange
Doctrine, as he has done.

FINIS.

