Religious Societies. PROPOSALS For the REVIVAL of Dying Religion, BY WELL
ORDERED Societies FOR THAT PURPOSE. With a brief DISCOURSE, Offered unto a
RELIGIOUS SOCIETY, on the First Day of their Meeting.

1 Thessalonians. V. II. Edify one another.

BOSTON: Printed by S. KNEELAND, for JOHN PHILLIPS, and Sold at his Shop over
against the South Side of the Town House. 1724.

PROPOSALS CONCERNING Religious Societies. Humbly Offered unto GOOD MEN, in the
several Towns of the Country: For the REVIVAL of DYING RELIGION.
IT has been proposed, as a Thing that might be attended with many good
Consequences, To Animate and Regulate PRIVATE MEETINGS of Religious People for
the Exercises of Religion.

A Decay coming upon them, in many Places, it is thought proper to Reprint what
was Published in a Treatise of, Essays to Do Good, more than Ten Years ago.
Which is in such Terms as these. --

IT is very certain, That where such Private Meetings under a good Conduct,
have been kept alive, the Christians which have composed them, have like so
many Coals of the Altar kept one another alive, and kept up a lively
Christianity in the Neighborhood. Such Societies have been tried, and strong
Engines, to uphold the Power of Godliness. The throwing up of such Societies,
has been accompanied with a Visible Decay of Godliness, The less Love to them,
the less Use of them, there has been in a Place, the less has Godliness
flourished there; the less there has been of the Kingdom of GOD.

THE Rules observed by some, ASSOCIATED FAMILIES may be offered on this
Occasion with some Advantage. They will tell us what Good may be done by such
Societies in a Neighborhood.

I. IT is to be proposed, that about a Dozen Families, more or less, of a
Vicinity, agree to meet (the Men and their Wives) at each others Houses, once
in a Fortnight, or a Month, at such a Time as may be agreed upon, and spend a
convenient quantity of Time together, in the Exercises of Religion.

II. THE Exercises of Religion for a Meeting, are; For the Brethren to Begin
and Conclude with PRAYERS in their Turns; for PSALMS to be Sung; and for
SERMONS to be Repeated.

III. IT were desirable, for the Ministers now and then, to afford their
Presence at the Meeting, and pray with them, and Instruct them, and Exhort
them, as they may see Occasion.

IV. THE Candidates of the Ministry may do well, to perform some of their First
Services here; and here shapen and mould themselves for further Services.

V. ONE special Design of the Meeting, should be, with United Prayers, to ask
the Blessings of Heaven on the Family, where they are Assemble, as well as on
the rest: That with the wondrous Force of United Prayers, Two or Three may
agree on Earth to ask such things, as are to be done for the Families, by our
Father which is in the Heavens.

VI. SUCH a Meeting should look upon themselves as bound up in one Bundle of
Love, and count themselves obliged, in very close, and strong Bonds, to be
serviceable unto one another.

IF any One in the Society shall fall into Affliction, all the Rest should
study presently to Relieve and Support the Afflicted Person in all the ways
imaginable.

IF any should fall into Temptation, the Rest should watch over him, and with
the Spirit of Meekness, with the Meekness of Wisdom, endeavor to recover him.

IT should be like a Law of the Medes and Persians to the whole Society, that
they will upon all Occasions, lovingly Give, and as lovingly Take mutual
Admonitions of any thing that they see amiss in one another.

VII. AND it is not easy to reckon up the good Offices, that such a Society may
do to many others as well as to the Members whereof it is itself composed. The
Prayers of such well disposed Societies may fetch down mavelous Favors from
Heaven on their Pastors, whose Lives may be prolonged, and Gifts augmented, and
Graces brightned, and Labors prospered, in answer to the Supplications of such
Associated Families; and the Interests of Religion may be mightily preserved
and promoted in the whole Flock, by their Fervent Supplications, and the Spirit
of Grace mightily poured out upon the Rising Generation. Yea, All the Land may
fare the better for them.

VIII. ESPECIALLY, when a Society, shall set apart, whole Days for Prayer with
Fasting before the Lord, as it may be proper for them to do now and then upon
some Occasions: The Success of such Days has been sometimes very mavelous:
And the Savor of them left on the Minds of the Saints, who carried them on,
has been such as notably to prepare them, to show forth the Death of the Lord
at his Table; Yea, to meet with their own Death; when GOD pleases to Order it.

IX. IT is very sure, the Devotions first, and then after them the Conferences
carried on in such a Society, will not only have a notable Tendency to produce
the Comfort of Love in the Hearts of Good Men toward one another; But also
their Abilities will be thereby sharpened and quickened; they will be rendered
more Able, to serve many valuable Interests.

X. UNEXPECTED Opportunities to Do Good, will arise unto such a Society: But
especially if a Practice of this Importance were once taken up; That the Men
who compose the Society, would now and then spend half an Hour together by
themselves, in considering on that Question, What Good is there to be done?

More particularly;

WHO are to be called upon to do their Duty in coming to special Ordinances?

WHO is in any special Adversity, and what shall be done to comfort them?

WHAT Contention or Variance may there be among any Neighbors, and what may be
done for the healing of it?

WHAT open Miscarriages do any live in; and who shall be desired to carry
faithful Admonitions unto them?

Finally; WHAT is there to be done for the Advantage and Advancement of our
Holy Religion?

IN the Primitive Times of Christianity, there was much use made of a saying
which they ascribed unto Matthias the Apostle; (...). If the Neighbor of an
Elect, or Godly Man Sin, the Godly Man has also Sinned. The Obligations of
Neighbors watchfully to Admonish one another, were what that Saying intended.
Oh! How much may Christians Associated in Religious Combinations, do by
watchful and faithful Admonitions to prevent being Partakers in other Men's Sins!

THE Man that shall produce, and promote such Societies will do an unknown deal
of good in the Neighborhood.

AND so will he, that shall help forward another sort of Societies; Namely,
those of YOUNG MEN ASSOCIATED.

THESE duly managed, have been incomparable Nurseries to the Churches, where
the faithful Pastors have countenanced them. Young Men are hereby preserved
from very many Temptations, rescued from the Paths of the Destroyer, confirmed
in the right Ways of the Lord, and prepared mightily for such Religious
Exercises as will be expected from them, when they come themselves to be
Householders. I will make a tender of some ORDERS, which have been observed in
some such Societies.

I. LET there be two Hours at a Time set apart; and let there be two Prayers
made by the Members of the Society, in their Turns; between which let a SERMON
be repeated; and there should be the Singing of a PSALM annexed.

II. LET all the Members of the Society Resolve to be Charitably watchful over
one another: never to Divulge one another Infirmities; always to inform and
advise one another of every thing that may appear to call for an Admonition,
and to take it kindly, when they are Admonished.

III. LET all who are to be admitted, as Members of the Society, be accompanied
by two or three of the rest, unto the Minister of the Place, that they may
receive his holy Counsels and Charges, and that every thing may be done with
his Approbation; and so let their Names be added unto the Roll.

IV. IF any Person thus enrolled among them, fall into a Scandalous Iniquity,
Let the Rebukes of the Society be dispensed unto him, and let them forbid him
to come any more among them, until he bring suitable Expressions and Evidences
of Repentance with him.

V. LET the Lift be once a Quarter called over; and then, If it be observed,
that any of the Society have much absented themselves, Let there be some sent
unto them, to inquire the Reason of their Absence; and if no Reason be given,
but such as intimates an Apostasy from good Beginnings, Let them upon
obstinacy, after loving and faithful Admonitions, be Obliterated.

VI. ONCE in three Months, Let there be, if need be, a Collection, out of which
the necessary Charges of the Society shall be defrayed, and the rest be
employed upon such Pious Uses as may be agreed upon.

VII. ONCE in two Months, Let the whole Time of the Meeting be devoted unto
Supplications for the Conversion and Salvation of the Rising Generation in the
Land; Particularly, For the Success of the Gospel in that Congregation, whereto
the Society belong.

VIII. LET the whole Society, be exceedingly Careful, that their Discourse
while they are together, after the other Services of Religion are over, have
nothing in it, that shall have any Taint of Backbiting or Vanity, or the least
Relation to the Affairs of the Government, or to things which do not Concern
them, and do not serve the Interests of Holiness in their own Conversation. But
let their Discourse be wholly on Matters of Religion, and those also, not the
Disputable and Controversal Matters, but the Points of Practical Piety. They
may propose Questions upon this Intention, and every one in an orderly manner,
take his Liberty to answer them, or they may go through the Catechism, and one
at one Time, another at another, heat all the rest Recite the Answers thereof.
Or they may be otherwise directed by their Pastors, to spend their Time
together Profitably.

IX. LET every Person in the Society, look upon it, as a Special Task incumbent
on him, to look out for some other hopeful Young Man, and use all proper Pains
to engage him in the Resolutions of Godliness, until he also shall be joined
unto the Society. And when a Society shall be in this Way increased unto a fit
Number, Let it swarm into more; who may hold an useful Correspondence with one
another.

THE Man, who shall be the Instrument of setting up such a Society in a Place,
cannot comprehend unto what a long and Rich Train of Good Consequences, he is
become Instrumental.

AND they that shall in such a Society together carry on the Duties of
Christianity, and the Praises of a Glorious CHRIST, will have upon themselves,
a Blessed Symptom that they shall be together Associated in the Heavenly City,
and in the Blessedness that shall never have an End.

Pure and Peaceable Wisdom. Delivered unto a RELIGIOUS SOCIETY, On the First
Day of their Meeting.
SHOULD our Gracious GOD open our Eyes to Discern and incline our Hearts to
Regard, the Good Things of His House and Kingdom, wherewith He abundantly
satisfies us, and the Waters of the Sanctuary, which run into our very Doors,
we could not without a Prodigy of Ingratitude and Stupidity do any other, than
lift up our Hands to Heaven, and say concerning this Place, Happy art thou, O
people; Who is like unto thee! We are this Day entering on the Enjoyment of
Advantages, which many desire to see and cannot; Advantages to improve in
PIETY, and Edify one another; Advantages to do those Things which may reader
our Lives Useful and our Deaths Gainful But because we read of some who know
not the Day of their Visitation, I have chosen those Words of GOD our SAVIOR
for our Admonition.

LUKE XIX. 42. If thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy Peace.

WHO spoke these Words, and of whom, and when, and why, is well known unto us.
What I am immediately to endeavor, is to answer Three QUESTIONS upon them.
First, What are the Things that belong unto our Peace? Then, What it is for us
to know these things? And lastly, When it may be said, that a Day for that
Purpose is vouchsafed unto us?

WE are to Consider,

I. WHAT are the Things that belong unto our Peace:

PEACE is a very comprehensive Word. It may in the Notation of it be somewhat
Narrow. The English Word, Peace, as the Latin Pax, comes [ a Pactione] from a
Word that signifies, Covenanting. The Greek Word, [(...), a Connectendo,]
strictly taken intimates no more than a Knitting together. But in the
Acceptance of it, it is exceeding Broad. It comprehends all manner of Good.
The most comprehensive Salutation the Holy Language can find, is, Peace be to
you.

IN One Word, then, Whatever Tends to promote our Present and Future Welfare,
is to be reckoned among the Things that belong unto our Peace.

YOU shall hear what the chief of them are.

THE First is, FAITH. GOD and the Unbeliever, are in Ill Terms with each other.
As the Carnal Mind is Enmity against GOD, so, GOD is angry with the Wicked
every Day. Yea, such is His Anger as to Swear in His Wrath against him, [Heb.
III. 18.] if he continue so. The Unbeliever, if he continue such, is indeed as
sure of Damnation, and of a Wrath unto the Uttermost, as if he were already
fast bound in the dark Fetters and imprisoned in the Tophet ordained of old.
When CHRIST is offered, then a Peace is offered. The offer of a CHRIST, is an
offer of Peace, to unbelieving Rebels. When a CHRIST was born, the
Morning-Stars that sung for Joy, triumphed in the mention of, Peace on Earth,
upon it. Our JESUS is indeed, Isai. IX. 6. The Prince of Peace. And He is
called, Ephesians. II. 14. Our Peace. Because, I will not say, When the Assyrian
comes into our Land, but, when the Almighty comes down in the black Garments of
His Vengeance, with the Keen Darts of Justice in His Hand, ready to strike and
tread us down in the Place of Dragons. Then! This Man (who is more than a Man)
shall be our Peace! Now by Faith it is, that we get an Interest in a CHRIST,
and in the Peace which He has wrought; an Interest in Peace with GOD; For, Romans
V. 1. Being justified by Faith, we have Peace with GOD, through our Lord JESUS
CHRIST. This infers Peace of Conscience; For, Faith and a Good Conscience go
hand in hand. Most certain it is, the Aversion of GOD for us, would have been
Irreconcilable; His Wrath against us Irremediable and Unappeasable; and the
Never-Dying Worm, would be an Ever-gnawing one: But, FAITH, Faith, is that
which brings all to Peace; And it may be said of the Believer, as it was of
Solomon, He has Peace on all sides round about him. If a Soul become in this
way a Son of Peace, then Peace will rest upon it. But if it be not so, then
shall be heard a Voice of Trembling and Fear, and not of Peace. I conclude this
Article as Peter concludes his Epistle: Peace be with all them that are in
CHRIST JESUS.

THE Second is, REPENTANCE. It Is our League with Sin, that produces a War
between GOD and Man. Your Iniquities have separated! Indeed, the Sinner blesses
himself, saying, I shall have Peace. But what an Alarm of War has GOD sounded
against him? [See Deuteronomy. XXIX 19, 20.] Where Joram said unto Jehu, Is it Peace,
Jehu? He answered, What Peace as long as the Whoredoms and the Witchcrafts are
so many? So may it be said unto the Impenitent Sinner, What Peace, as long as
thy Indulged Impieties are so many? And that Peal may be rung in his Ears; Isai
XLVIII. 22. There is no Peace, says my GOD, unto the Wicked. Indeed, Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unjust man his thoughts; and All shall be well.
But, If be turn not, the Almighty has what a Sword, and bent a Bow; and
prepared for him the Instruments of Death. Every Impenitent Sinner, is a
Desperado of that Number, [Act. V. 39.] They are found even to fight against
GOD; Yea, That stretch out their hand against GOD, and strengthen themselves
against the Almighty, and run upon Him, even upon His Neck, upon the thick
Bosses of His Buckler. Alas, The way of Peace they have not known.

THE Sinner Fights against Heaven, so long as he Sins against the GOD of
Heaven. The Arms of his Rebellion are the Weapons of Unrighteousness. Now
Repentance, this lays down those Arms of Rebellion; and like the Man in the
Gospel, the Sinner seeing that he cannot grapple with the Almighty, and is not
stronger than He, he humbles himself, and he desires Conditions of Peace. One
Sin unrepented of will issue in the Confusion of the Soul. Had Zimri Peace, who
slew his Master? So, Shall that Man have Peace, who transgresses the Law, and
who tramples on the Authority of his Master, a Master that is his Maker too,
and his GOD? He alone is at Peace with GOD, who is at War with Sin.

THE Third is, HOLINESS. An Holy Life. It is said, Prove. XVI. 7. When a Man's
Ways please the Lord, his Enemies shall be at Peace with him. Yea, Now not only
the Hosts of the Lord, but the Lord of Hosts Himself, will become his Friend;
and his Exceeding great Reward. We read, Romans VIII. 6. To be spiritually-minded
is Peace. Yea, all the ways of Wisdom are paths of Peace; And at Last, Behold
the upright man, for the End of that man is peace. Peace, is a silken Thread,
strung through the Actions of an Holy Life. Though without a Reliance on the
Righteousness of our SAVIOR for our Acceptance with GOD, our most Splendid
Services will give no other Peace, than that which will be like the Crackling
of Thorns under a Pot, and they who warm themselves with the sparks of their
own kindling must lie down in Sorrow: Alas, the Ragged and Sordid Garments of
our own Righteousness, will never shelter our naked Souls from the Storms of
Divine Vengeance; Yet I may say, The Peace of a Believer, arises not only from
his Justification, but from his Sanctification also. Thus we see the Lord
owning the Generation of them that seek Him, with many Soul quieting
Dispensations of His Providence. The Light of GOD shines on the Tabernacle of
the Godly Man. The preserving of his Garments undefiled, keeps him from the
Horrors and Sorrowful Reflections of a Guilty Mind. And Lastly, A Good Days
Work meets with a Good Evenings Wages. And he sees the Blessing which the
Saints of GOD in the ancient Days highly Prized; Even, To go to the Grave in
Peace. Of all this I may say, This is the Heritage of the Servants of the LORD.

WHO can express the Sweet Quiet of Heart, and ravishing Comfort of Soul, which
a Life led in all Godliness and Honesty is attended withal: There is a
Sweetness in the Work it self; such, that the Servants of CHRIST have thought
their very Work to be their Wages, There* is a Joyful Serenity of Soul, that
flows in and from a Course of Obedience to GOD. A Conscience void of Offense
toward GOD and toward Man, how peaceable is it! Let the Christian, who through
Carelessness has fallen from GOD, and through an Evil Heart of Unbelief departed
from Him, declare how much Salt Water, and how deep Humiliations it has cost
him, to obtain a recovery. Verily, Isai. XXXII. 17. The work of Righteousness,
it shall be peace. To be daily beating down our Corruptions, and striving
against the Sins that easily beset us; Daily Endeavoring to Grow in the Grace
and Knowledge of our Lord and Savior, getting on from Strength to Strength;
Daily maintaining an Intimate Communion with GOD; Shall not the Fruit of this
be, Peace, Peace? And, Is not this to know me, says the Lord! To Endure
Hardness as good Soldiers of Jesus CHRIST; and Work out our own Salvation; and
be always doing the Will and Work of our Heavenly Father; Is not this the way
of Peace? Yea, Great Peace have they (O Lord,) that Love thy Law!

WE are to consider,

II. WHAT it is for us to KNOW the Things that belong to our Peace.

Now,

First; THE Nature of the Things; we must have a Right Knowledge of That. So we
read about, Knowing the Grace of GOD. Ignorance is indeed the Mother of
Destruction. The Blind fall into the Ditch. The way to Heaven is a Narrow way;
And though it be said, The wayfaring men, though Fools, shall not err therein; yet
foolish Man, who is born like the wild Asses Colt, must have a CHRIST for his
Prophet, and in that way be made Wise unto Salvation, or else he will Err, and
be for ever a Stranger to the way of peace. O Ignorant Creature, The Darkness
of thy Mind, will bring thee down to the Darkness of the Pit. Ignorance, Ah,
Bloody Cur-throat unto Millions of Precious and Immortal Souls! How should
People be Saved, without Knowing the way of Salvation; or, Enjoy Peace without
Knowing the way to the Jerusalem? The Gospel of Peace is therefore such an
inestimable Jewel; Because we have the means of Knowledge in it.

IT was once prescribed, Acquaint thy self with GOD, and be at peace. Even so,
Let People Acquaint themselves with Faith, and with Repentance, and with
Holiness, if they would seek peace and pursue it.

THERE are Mysteries in Faith. People often delude themselves with an
Historical Faith, as if it were enough to yield some Kind of Assent unto the
Truth; or with a presumptuous Faith, taking it for granted that their Sins are
pardoned, whether ever they have with a distressed Soul sought for it, or no;
or with an Imperfect Faith, receiving a CHRIST in some of His Offices, but not
in all of them. So, forsooth, now they have Commenced Believers.

REPENTANCE has Mysteries in it. Hence People fancy, and harbor Conceits, that
now and then, a, Lord, Forgive me! Or, A few slight Convictions of what they
have done when they have Sinned; Or the Reluctancies of an Heart smiling of
them, and roaring terrible things upon them, and compelling them to fall down
on their Knees, and come to some Good Resolutions never to Offend in the like
sort again; or some Terrors of the Law, which are like the Flashes of Hellfire
already singeing of them; -- are the Repentance not to be Repented of.

HOLINESS has Mysteries in it. Hence People take and mistake, a few Formal
Duties, or such Things as are the mere Bark or Shell of Religion; A Partial
Obedience; or some notable Works done, but then vainly trusted in, (and so, but
Splendid Sins after all!) -- -- To be the Obedience of Faith, and the Godliness
which has the Promise.

MANY hear much about Faith, and Repentance, and Holiness, who never arrive to
any other, than a Superficial Knowledge of these Things; They have no real
Insight into them. They lie, Multitudes, multitudes, in the Valley of
Perdition; And if the Enquiry be, Who has done this? The Reply must be that;
Hosea IV. 6. My People are destroyed for the lack of Knowledge.

Secondly, THE Things are to be Prized, Valued, Esteemed; There must be seen an
Excellency in them. To Know is to know the Worth of them. Faith is to be
Prized, as, 2 Pet. I. 1. Precious Faith. Repentance is to be Prized, as, 2 Cor.
VII. 10. Not to be Repented of. Holiness is to be Prized, as, 1 Timothy IV. 8.
Profitable unto all Things. Indeed, The Brutish Man knows not, neither does the
Fool understand this. The Blind, and Hard, and Sottish Hearts of Sinful Men,
don't Think of these Things. Jerusalem did not think, that if she Reverenced
the Son of GOD, and Repented of the Evil of her Doings, and Hearkened unto GOD,
and Walked in His Ways, then her Peace would have been as a River, and her
Righteousness as the Waves of the Sea. The Antitype of David would have prayed
for the Peace of Jerusalem, yea, have given Peace to it. His GOD and Father,
would have said, Peace be within thee! But not knowing the Things that belonged
unto their Peace, not Knowing or Thinking how much they should find their
Account in those Things, the Lord of the Vineyard came, and destroyed the
Wicked Men.

THUS it is, with a World of Men and Women in the World. Cumbered with many
Things, they will not see, that the coming to a CHRIST is the One Thing that is
needful for them. A Laodicea can do well enough without the Gold, and Garment,
and Eye Salve of her SAVIOR. Many say, The Stolen Waters are Sweet. Many say,
What is the Almighty that we should Serve Him, and what profit should we have
if we pray unto Him? To have this (...) removed, and the Scales drop from our
Eyes; and have a New, Clear, Strong, Sight of the Estimate which is to be made
of the Things which are not seen, and which affect our Eternal Happiness; This,
This is to Know the Things belonging to our peace. They who have studied the
Style of the Scripture, tell us, Words of Knowledge imply Affection. So when
our SAVIOR says to some, I never knew you, He means, I never liked you. Which
is what He will say to them, who know not what we are now speaking of.
Reprobate Silver, the Lord has Rejected them.

Thirdly, THE Things are to be Closed withal. To know Sin, [Isaiah LIX. 12.]
is, to be a Sinner; To know the only True GOD, and JESUS CHRIST whom He has
sent, is to Cleave unto Him. To know Faith, is to be a Believer. To know
Repentance, is to be a Penitent. To know Holiness is to be Obedient, and Holy
in all manner of Conversation. It Is an Experimental Knowledge in these things,
that is the only profitable Knowledge. They are like the New Name whereof we
read, Rev. II. 17. No man knows it but he that HAS it. The Christian must have
[an, Intus Existens] a, Something within; Some Divine Sparks of a Supernatural
Knowledge, that give him other Visions of these Heavenly Things, than what
those have, who can only talk like Parrots of them. Regeneration must be known
and felt by us, in another manner than by a Nicodemus, Faith, and Repentance,
and Holiness must be known with a sensible Experience of those things. It must
be an Impressive Knowledge. There must be such an Impression of those things
upon us, as to give us a very Lively Apprehension of them. To Know them, is to
Taste them; to Taste these powers of the World to come; To Live them, and so
have the Life of GOD within us.

WE are to Consider,

III. WHEN may it be said, That we have OUR DAY Vouchsafed us to Know the
Things belonging to our Peace.

THE true and proper Limits of our DAY, will be found in the Motions of the
Holy SPIRIT upon us. But then there are some Other Things, which so far make
Our Day, that before Our Day is done, when they are gone; though it may also be
done before it.

First. DAY Lasts as long as Life lasts.

IN this, the Children of GOD have Their Day. They are therefore so instructed;
John IX. 4. I must Work while it is Day; the Night comes in which no Man can
Work. Our Time of Living, is our Time for Working. As the Fourth Commandment
has it, Six Days shall thou Work and Rest the Seventh: So GOD sends us into the
World, and says, I have some Work for thee to do; some Glory to be brought
about by thee in the World; Thou have but a little Time to do it in. What thy
Hand finds to do, do it with thy might. I have betrusted thee with some
Talents. Improve them Faithfully, Prudently, Diligently. And when I send my
Messenger DEATH to call thee, thou shall find a Crown reserved for thee.

YEA, and in this they lie still Dead in their Trespasses and Sins, have Their
Day too* GOD is all their Days Calling on them* Stretching out His Hands unto
them all the Day long. Earnestly Calling, How long, ye Fools; Will you hate
Knowledge? But when the Term of Life is just Expiring, and the last Sand in the
Glass is running, and He has continued inviting them into His Vineyard, until
the Eleventh Hour be out, and the Last Hour be upon them; and their Destruction
comes as a Whirlwind, GOD then laughs at their Destruction, and leaves them in
the Dimness of the Anguish of Death, and the Griping Talons of a dreadful
Eternity. The Living, The Living, They may Praise GOD, and get into Peace with
GOD. But they that go down into the Pit cannot Hope for any more. The Things of
our Peace have taken an Eternal Farewell of them.

Secondly, THE Means of Grace, help to make Our Day for us. The Old World,
whose Foundation was overflown with a Flood, enjoyed a Day, while they had
Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness among them. This Preaching was no sooner
over, but their Day was done. Cries to Heaven for Succor were now to little
Purpose. The Ark being now shut, the Ear of GOD was also shut upon them. Sodom
had a Day, whilst Righteous Lot was beating his Testimonies there. But when he
is gone, their Day goes with him. The Vengeance of Eternal Fire seizes them.
They sadly found, when the Mouth of GOD leaves off Speaking, his Ear leaves off
Hearing too. When the Means of Grace are gone from a People, Their Day is ^^er
with them. It is often so, that upon the Death of an Excellent Minister, the
People that had his Light for a Season, but would not be brought home to GOD,
have Their Day brought unto a Period. GOD leaves them under an Everlasting
Obduration. He Resolves, They shall never taste of my Supper! Never Enter into
my Rest!

Thirdly, OUR Day is Enlightened, when it is accompanied with many
Opportunities to make sure of The Things belonging to our Peace. A Peaceable
Time with us, and a Prosperous Condition, makes a Day to shine upon us. A Day
of Prosperity, Oh! how much is it to be improved with us! We generally allow,
that Adversity has a Voice in it: GOD Speaks to us by our Afflictions. But in
Prosperity our Fat Hearts are insensible of any thing spoke to us: As if Mercy
were a very Dumb Thing indeed! Whereas, Jer. XXII. 21. I spoke to thee in thy
Prosperity, says the Lord. The Still Voice of Prosperity is not so plainly
heard, as the Thunder and the Tempest and the Whirlwind of Calamity: Yet there
is the Voice of GOD in it And what is the Voice but This; Oh! That this man
would now know the Things of his Peace, at least in this his Day! What but
This; Oh! That this man were wise, and would consider his latter End. How
pittyable the Case of Jerusalem? Lam. I. 7. Jerusalem remembered in the days of
her Affliction and of her Miseries, all her pleasant things that she had in the
days of old! So it is; Many a Man lives in the Enjoyment of pleasant things; If
he will Now Turn and Live unto GOD, there shall be nothing to disturb him,
nothing to divert him. He loiters the Time away; His Lusts like noisome
Insects, do but multiply by the Sune-shine. At last, a provoked GOD comes with
heavy Blows, with bitter, blasting, ruining Strokes of His Indignation; Strips
him of all his Comfortable Advantages; and now the poor Man cannot Serve GOD as
once he could; His Way is every where hedged up with Thorns; and he has
nothing left, but a grievous Reflection on his Expired Opportunities.

A Man's Prosperous Time is often his Probation Time. If he be not NOW brought
home to GOD, he shall never be so. Saul Exalted and Victorious, falling into a
Remarkable Disobedience, never sees a Good Day after it.

HENCE it is, that Early Religion is to be Commended unto us. Children, If ever
you would Serve GOD with Comfort, Begin Betimes to do it; Betimes, before the
Evil Days come, whereof you will say, I have no pleasure in them.

Fourthly. THE Holy SPIRIT of GOD at work upon the Soul; This constitutes Our
Day in the fairest and brightest Appearance of it. The other Circumstances give
Time to us; This does invest us with Opportunity. The Opportunity to approach
and address the Master of the House must be before, Luke 13.25. He has risen
up, and shut to the Door. Men may sit under the Gospel all their Days; But they
will not come into the Peace of GOD, except they seek Him while He may be
found, and call upon Him while He is near. There is a Time when our SAVIOR
says. Rev. III. 20. Behold, I stand at the Door and knock. The Soul which Then
does Open to Him, is an Happy Soul. But, thy Delays, O Dilatory Soul, may
render thee like Esau, who Afterward, when he came, and would have Inherited
the Blessing, missed of it, though he Sought it carefully with Tears. We should,
as we say, Strike while the Iron is hot. The Godly themselves may pay dear for
their Neglect of doing so. My Beloved has withdrawn Himself and is gone! -- may
be the Consequence. But this is that which above all issues in the Perdition of
Ungodly Men. The SPIRIT of GOD visits them with His Motions. He does it in
Sermons; He does it in Troubles; He does it in various Methods. He stirs up
Affections in them, for the Things that are Holy and Just and Good. They have
such an Opportunity to enter the Strait Gate, as the Israelites had for an
Entrance into the Land of Promise. They neglect it; And now, when they come too
Late, and Weep unto the LORD, the LORD will not hearken to them. The Door is
now shut, and if they come with the Foolish Virgins, and cry, Lord, Lord, Open
to me! the cry avails nothing; He answers, I know you not.

FOR this Cause it is, that the Bible does insist so much upon present
Obedience. Thus, Eccles. XII. 1. Remember NOW thy Creator. Thus, Jer. XXV. 5.
Turn ye NOW every One from his Evil Way. Thus, 2 Cor. VI. 2. Behold, NOW is the
Acceptable Time, NOW is the Day of Salvation. q. d. This is all the Day you are
sure of; Lose this NOW, and you shall never have another. Look into the Third
Chapter to the Hebrews; It Is urged there, To DAY if you will hear His Voice.
And over and over again it comes, To Day! To Day! To Day! As if the taking of,
To Day, were that which Eternity depended on.

AND now, My Brethren; Will you Know the Things of your Peace? O Unregenerates,
Defer not a Moment the Things that Accompany Salvation. Yea, Let none remain at
all Unacquainted with the Things which must be done by all that would be Saved.
If you do Know something of them, Take that Advice, Hosea VI. 3. Follow on to
Know. Perhaps, My Friend, Thy Faith, and Repentance, and Holiness, may be yet
but at the best, as a Grain of Mustard Seed. Yea, The best of us all have need
of more Grace than we have. You are not yet come to Perfection. Certainly, You
need more Weanedness from the World, more Heavenly-Mindedness, more Fervency of
Spirit in Serving the Lord; a more United Heart in Fearing of His Name; a more
Self-Abasing, and CHRIST-Exalting Disposition. May not the best of us Complain,
My Leanness! My Leanness! Yea, May they not come into the Herd with Pharaoh's
Lean Kine; which though they had Eaten much, it could not be known, that they
had Eaten at all! Truly, When our GOD comes to look upon us, He may say, Be
astonished, O ye Heavens! Is this the people whom I fed so daintily? Fed with
my Word and Sacraments; yea, Fed with my Son! Are these the Persons, whom I
made to sit down at my Table, sit down at a Feast of Fat things full of Marrow,
of Wines on the Lees well-refined. O Ephraim. What shall I do unto thee? O
Judah, What shall I do unto thee? Oh! That the Things of our Peace were better
Known among us! But then, The Day of our Peace must be so too. In the Day for
that Purpose bestowed upon us, Let us Press after the fullest Knowledge of
these Necessary Things. The Time we now spend in the Exercises of Religion, be
assured, O Traveller toward another World, It will be no grief of Mind unto
thee another day. Religion, It Is thy Business, Make it so; and Mind not thy Inn
more than thy Home. Soul Bound for Heaven, In thy Opportunities to Know the
Things of thy Peace, and make sure of Everlasting Peace, What a Price is there
put into thy Hand? Oh! Let it not be in the Hand of a Fool. My Friends, Our
Formation this Day into a RELIGIOUS SOCIETY brings the Things of our Peace near
unto us* and gives us a Day to know those Things; and furnishes us with
Uncommon Advantages for the getting and the doing of Good. As Moses of old
wished. Oh! that they were Wise: Give my Strammering Tongue leave to say; Oh!
That we knew the Day of our Visitation; and so Numbered our Days as to apply our
Hearts unto Wisdom! Oh! That the Day of our Peace were duly perceived and
observed with us, and highly accounted of, and so husbanded, that we may give a
good Account of it! Oh! That we may to Improve our Inestimable Opportunities,
to Converse with our SAVIOR, and become Full of Goodness, and build up our
selves and one another in the most holy Faith, as that when we are to be taken
from these Opportunities, we may be found so doing, and hear it said,
Well-done, Good and Faithful Servant, Enter into the Joy of thy LORD.

FINIS.

